 
ELIAS 15 
  
The Impact of Adjuvant Liquid Alginate on Endoscopic Ablation Therapy of Complicated Barrett’s 
Esophagus: A Pilot Study  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Docume nt Date: 12/05/2018   
 
ELIAS 16 
 RESEARCH PLAN  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   
 
The Impact of Adjuvant Liquid Alginate on Endoscopic Ablation Therapy of Complicated Barrett’s 
Esophagus: A Pilot Study  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
• Puja Elias, MD, MPH 
 
CO-INVESTIGATORS:  
• Mark M. Brodie, MD, Kevin Batte, MD, Brenda Hoffman, MD , Donald O. Castell, MD , B. Joseph 
Elmunzer, MD  
  
COLLABORATORS : 
 Peter W. Dettmar Ph.D, Kent E. Armeson, MS  
 
Background 
 
Barrett’s esophagus (BE) is a pre -cancerous condition in the esophagus that results from constant acid 
exposure and is a precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Surprisingly, EAC rates continue to 
rise despite efforts aimed at addressing BE.  Patients with dysplastic BE are at increased risk for 
developing EAC and in high grade dysplasia (HGD), this risk can be as high as 6% per year. For these 
reasons, these patients are candidates for ablation therapy, either with cryotherapy, endoscopic mucosal 
resection (EMR), and/or radiofrequency ablation (RFA). In patients receiving ablative therapy, 3 -5 
treatments are typically r equired before there is resolution of all Barrett’s epithelium while patients remain 
on twice daily proton pump therapy29. A recent case study by the current authors demonstrated initial 
failed response of BE with HGD to RFA and subsequently cryotherapy. Only after initiation of a liquid 
alginate solution (Gaviscon Advance - UK formulation) was there a subsequent rapid and complete 
response to therapy. This case suggests that liquid alginate provided additional esophageal protection 
allowing mucosal healing and an overall enhanced response to treatment.  This finding is mechanistically 
plausible given existing evidence demonstrating the carcinogenic properties of bile acids and injurious 
activity of pepsin in non -acid refluxate, and liquid alginate’s unique ability to control these components 
and inhibit acid reflux1,2,5,6,7,8,10,16,18,21,25,26,34.  We feel further investigation is warranted in studying the role 
of adjunct liquid alginate solution in patients undergoing treatment for BE.  
The ingredient of int erest in is alginic acid (alginate), a polysaccharide found i n the cell walls of brown 
algae. Alginates are unique in their ability to form a protective layer above gastric contents upon 
exposure to gastric acid, thus limiting exposure of esophageal epithelium to gastric acid, bile acid, 
pepsin, and other parts of the gastric contents . Concurrently , the bicarbonate in alginate -based solutions 
forms carbon dioxide in the presence of gastric acid, which converts the gel into foam which floats to the 
surface of the gastric contents. Hence, alginate solutions form “rafts” which provide a physical barrier to 
acid reflux, as well as a pH -neutral substitute which refluxes preferentially over gastric acid12,13,17. 
 
It is noteworthy that Gaviscon Advance, which is approved for over -the-counter use in Europe by the 
European Medicines Agency (EMA) but not FDA approved in the U.S., is qualitatively and quantitatively 
different from U.S. Gaviscon formulations in terms of alginate composition.  Gaviscon Advance, but not 
American Gaviscon, has demonstrated superiority to placebo, non- inferiority to proton pump inhibitors 
(PPIs), and  efficacy  as add- on therapy in patients already on PPI with regard to relieving symptoms of 
GERD4,15,22.  Furthermore, only the UK version of dual action antacid (antacid with alginate) has been 
shown to be superior to antacids alone in reducing post -prandial esophageal acid exposure in GERD 
patients19. Finally, as Dettmar et al. have demonstrated in a comparison of raft characteristics  between a 
range of alginate/antacid formulations, Gaviscon Advance forms alginate rafts more quickly than other 
 
ELIAS 17 
 formulations (most notably U.S. Gaviscon formulations), and these rafts are more coherent, have more 
complete flotation, and are of greater res iliency, weight, strength and volume than regular and extra 
strength Gaviscon (USA)30. 
 
Hypotheses & Specific Aims  
 
H1 (primary):  Adjuvant treatment with liquid alginate solution in addition to proton pump inhibitor  (PPI) 
therapy will result in complete endoscopic  eradication of complicated Barre tt’s esophagus (BE)  more 
rapidly  than endoscopic treatment  on PPI therapy alone.  
 
H2 (secondary):  Adjuvant treatment with liquid alginate solution in addition to PPI therapy will r esult in 
fewer endoscopic treatment  sessions  necessary to achieve complete eradication of complicated BE 
compared to treatment with PPI alone.  
  
SA 1 (primary):  Eradication rate at one year will be compared between current recruits (i.e. study 
patients on adjuvant liquid alginate) and historical controls Patients will be matched by type of therapy, 
and to the best of our ability, length of Barrett’s.  
 
SA2 (secondary ): To compare the duration of treatment required to achieve complete endoscopic 
eradication of BE in patients treated with  the combination of PPI and liquid alginate solution vs. those 
treated with PPI alone.  
 
SA 3 (tertiary): To compare the number of treatment sessions required to achieve endoscopic 
eradication of BE in patients treated with  the combination of PPI and liquid alginate solution vs. those 
treated with PPI alone.  
 
 
Study Design  
 
This is a  pilot prospective cohort study at a single tertiary care center.  Patients with BE and proven 
dysplas ia (high or low grade) or risk of other abnormality  presenting to our tertiary care center interested 
in endoscopic treatment will be asked to participate in the study. Participation will involve taking 1 0 mL of 
Gaviscon Advance four times daily along with twice daily PPI during the treatment duration.  The control 
group will be a historical cohort of Barrett’s  esophagus patients treated in the last 5 years by  the same 
endoscopists  using similar approaches —these are patients who were prescribed twice daily PPI therapy 
alone during treatment .  
 
Eligibility Criteria  
 
Patients who are already scheduled for treatment of their dysplastic Barrett’s esophagus  or risk of other 
abnormality  who are planning to undergo EMR, or ablation therapy with cryotherapy  (spray or balloon)  
and/or RFA (with or without EMR) will be eligible for enrollment.  
 
Inclusion criteria ( all must be present):  
(1) Age ≥18 
(2) Patients already previously scheduled for treatment of complicated Barrett’s esophagus  
(3) Long Segment Barrett’s (> 3cm)  
 
 
Exclusion criteria:  
(1) Moderate to s evere renal impairment, as defined by eGFR< 6 0 for 2 consecutive readings  
(2) Lack of capacity for decision- making  
(3) Allergy to hydroxybenzoates    
 
ELIAS 18 
 (4) Patients with uncontrolled hypertension or decompensated heart failure  
(5) Pregnancy - patients of child-bearing potential will be tested.  
(6)  Patients with elevated calcium or potassium on screening laboratory testing (labs completed within 
the last month)  
 
 
Enrollment  
 
Eligible patients who provide informed consent will be included in this prospective study and asked to 
take the alginate solution in addition to their twice daily PPI therapy.  If patients are on concurrent H2 
blocker therapy, this will be stopped after  enrollment in the study. Subjects will be primarily recruited in 
the office setting, following decision to undergo ablation therapy.  Upon the start of ablation therapy, 
patients will start taking 10ml of Gaviscon Advance 30 minutes after every meal and a t bedtime  (4 daily 
doses, after breakfast, lunch, dinner and before bed) .  This will begin on the day of the first endoscopy, 
after the ablation treatment. PPI therapy will continue as previously prescribed.   
 
Endoscopic treatment  
 
Standard guidelines will be followed for patients undergoing EMR, RFA or cryotherapy  or RFA, up to 8-
10 cm can be treated during one session and sessions are scheduled every 10- 12 weeks. For 
cryotherapy, approximately the same area can be treated (8 -10cm) during one session, and sessions are 
scheduled every 8- 10 weeks. When initial EMR is performed, follow -up endoscopic ablative therapy will 
be scheduled approximately 8 weeks later. The decision of which therapy to implement depends largely 
on anatomy and patient preference and will be determined by the endoscopists involved in the study —
Dr. Puja Elias (PI), Dr. Brenda Hoffman, or Dr. B. Joseph Elmunzer.  Furthermore, all decisions 
pertaining to the need for repeat procedures to address inadequate treatment or incomplete tissue 
sampling, or the decision to refer for the alternate procedure, will be dictated by the above endoscopists.  
As mentioned previously, number of sessions to achieve complete eradication of Barrett’s varies by 
length, but on average can take anywhere from 3 -5 sessions, depending on initial length of BE as well as 
existence and size of hiatal hernia31.   
 
Follow -up Assessments 
 
All enrolled subjects will be followed until resolution of Barrett’s is achieved, as confirmed  by biopsy and 
endoscopic visualization.  A measur ement  system referred to as the Prague classification32 will be used 
to document areas of the esophagus with Barrett ’s and to assess improvement from one endoscopy to 
another. This system allows the endoscopist to record t he area of Barrett’s involved by describing the 
area involved that is circumferential in nature and the area that is patchy. Decrease in surface area 
involved will help guide the aim for the study. During treatment  sessions , pertinent clinical and 
endoscopic data will be collected (see Appendix A). Immediately prior to each treatment visit, an office 
visit will take place at the MUSC Gastroenterology endoscopy/ outpatient clinic with study personnel 
including the PI, research coordinator, and/or fellow/resident participating in the study, which will serve to 
collect data regarding blood pressure, surveillance serum chemistries, treatment experience, adverse 
events to the drug, or any other issues (see Appendix B).  Adherence to the medication regimen will be 
done by asking patients to bring in all used and unused bottles. IDS will assist in calculating how much 
drug has been taken and this data will be recorded at each visit.  
These data will then be entered into a coded  RedCap database.  At approximately six w eek intervals, the 
study research coordinator will call to verify medication regimen adherence as well as any adverse 
events associated with the study drug.  
 
From the time of biopsy proven remission, patient medical records will be reviewed for up to 2 years to 
evaluate recurrences rates.  
Outcomes  
 
ELIAS 19 
  
Eradication rate of  intestinal metaplasia ( complete remission of intestinal metaplasia –  CRIM)  at one year  
will be the primary outcome. The length of time to eradication and the number of endoscopic procedures 
required for CRI M will be the secondary and tertiary outcome s.  CRIM will be  defined as visual 
endoscopic evidence of neo- squamous epithelium occupying previous area of Barrett’s epithelium 
combined with biopsies showing normal squamous esophageal epithelium without intestinal metaplasia.  
 
When endoscopic  eradication is observed, tissue biopsies of the GEJ and previously treated epithelium 
will be taken according to the Seattle protocol which recommends biopsies in a four quadrant fashion 
every 1 cm for a history of high grade dysplasia and ever 2 cm for a history of low grade dysplasia33. For 
areas of mucosal irregularity,  targeted biopsies will also be t aken.  Patients who have achieved 
eradication but on subsequent biopsies have recurrence of Barrett’s will undergo ablation treatment 
again until eradication is once again achieved.  The presence of dysplasia on any one specimen will 
prohibit a claim of er adication.  
 
The endoscopic footage from  each study procedure will be video recorded. After quality assurance of the 
footage and removal of all identifiers, videos may be reviewed by a blinded and independent panel to 
confirm potentially subjective outcomes, such as the presence and extent of residual Barrett’s epithelium. 
De-identified videos may be distributed to reviewers electronically, or may be reviewed during in- person 
sessions.  
 
Adverse events related to the study drug  will be defined according to standard consensus guideline 
documents published in the gastroenterology literature.  
 
 
Sample Size Calculation and Statistical Consideration  
We will compare the time to complete BE eradication/resolution (CR IM) between the prospective and 
historical cohorts using Kaplan- Meier time-to-event (time -to-CR) curves. The historical data maintained 
by the PI have  n= 32 patients treated under similar conditions (e.g. faci lity, physicians) as the study 
patients who will be prospectively treated. As the purpose of this pilot study is to estimate the time to 
CRIM  with the addition of liquid alginate for approximately 20 enrolled patients, no hypothesis testing will 
be perform ed to compare the distributions (hence, no power calculation). Comparisons will be descriptive 
only. Time -to-CR is assumed to be exponentially distributed and we will use the maximum likelihood 
estimate to estimate the rate parameter each cohort. Patients who do not reach CR by the end of the 
study will be censored at that time. The difference in the rate parameter between cohorts will be 
calculated with a 95% confidence interval. Median time to CR will be estimated based on these 
parameters. Median time to  CR under current treatments is about 22 months 27. If median time to CR with 
liquid alginate solution is sufficiently improved (e.g. to < 18 months), we will have high- quality  pilot data 
with which to  estimate a sample size for a more definitive  randomized trial. Additionally, we will tabulate 
the number of treatments required to achieve CR and compare descriptively between cohorts as a 
secondary endpoint. Analyses above will also be stratified according to important  covariates , such as 
disease grade and t ype of treatment (RFA or Cryotherapy).   
 
Data Collection, Management, and Quality Control Procedures  
 
Data entry will occur through RedCap, which will allow for study data to be directly entered into the 
database by the site via a secure internet connection. In addition to use of passwords and other security 
measures, all documents containing identifying information on individuals or physicians are considered 
confidential materials and will be safeguarded to the greatest possible extent.  No inform ation identifying 
a specific person, hospital, or physician will be released to or discussed with anyone other than study 
staff members. Appendix C shows the data points that will be collected from both the clinical and 
endoscopic visits.  
 
 
ELIAS 20 
 Study Sites and Timeline  
 
This is a single center study which will be conducted solely at MUSC  Patients will be monitored with a 
telephone call every six weeks  as mentioned above and they will be provided  with inf ormation to get in 
touch with the study team  if they have p roblems between their visits. .  Enrollment will be ongoing until an 
adequate number of subjects have been recruited.  Thus, we anticipate that the study can be completed 
within 2 years.  
 
 
Monitoring  
 
All study data will be monitored routinely for completeness, timeliness, and consistency by the project 
manager. Data accuracy will be verified on a quarterly basis by the project manager and principal 
investigator.  Due to a relatively small “n”, all subj ects’ data will be reviewed.  Discovered discrepancies 
between recorded study data and information found in medical records will be addressed through 
discussions between the PI and research coordinator.  Subjects may be withdrawn from the study if they 
are lost to follow up, or if they endorse lack of compliance with liquid alginate solution and/or PPI therapy.  
 
 
 
Safety  
 
Gaviscon Advance is considered a very safe medication with a very mild side effect profile. It is widely 
available in the UK but not avai lable in the US. An FDA IND application has been filed for its use for this 
study.  Gaviscon Advance will be purchased directly from the pharmaceutical company, Reckitt 
Benckiser. Each 10 mL oral suspension contains 1g sodium alginate and 200 mg potassium h ydrogen 
carbonate (active ingredients).  The formulation also contains calcium carbonate, carbomer, sodium 
saccharin, sodium hydroxide, and so any patients who have been advised to restrict their diet from any of 
these substances should consult a doctor before taking Gaviscon Advance.  Patients who suffer for have 
suffered from significant kidney or heart disease should speak with a physician before taking Gaviscon.  
Finally, the formulation includes methyl and propyl para -hydroxybenzoates which may cause allergic 
reactions (less than 1 in 10,000 patients), including skin rash, itching, difficulty breathing, dizziness, or 
swelling.  Overdosing of the medication may cause bloating.  Please see summary of product 
characteristics – Appendix D).    
 
Any adverse ev ent, either related to Gaviscon Advance or not, will be recorded in pre- treatment clinic 
and/or treatment visits, and will be evaluated by a safety review committee (see below).  
 
Safety Review Committee 
 
A safety review committee will be assembled for this clinical study. This committee will be composed of 3 
persons who are not study  investigators. The overall goals of the committee will include the following: 1) 
identify unacceptably slow rates of accrual , 2) identify high rates of ineligibility, 3) identify protocol 
violations that suggest clarification of changes to protocol are needed, 4) identify unexpectedly high 
dropout rates that threaten the trial’s ability to produce credible results, 5) ensure the credibility of the 
study, 6) ensure the validity of study results, and most importantly, 7) protect the safety of trial 
participants. The safety review committee will meet quarterly. If irregularities are identified in any of the 
goal areas listed above,  the committee will propose changes to the protocol or study infrastructure in 
order to remedy the problem. In the event of a severe problem, the committee may advise termination of 
the study.  
 
 
 
 
ELIAS 21 
 Potential Problems and Pitfalls  
 
There are several potential pitfalls that may affect this study.  However, if these are anticipated and 
managed appropriately, we believe they will not significantly impact the validity of the findings.   
 
 
We have been conservative with the estimate of  the anticipated number of subjects during the funding 
period.  There are typically only several patients at MUSC’s GI clinic per month that present with 
dysplastic Barrett ’s (or Barrett’s with IMC) who are naïve to treatment. Therefore, we are proposing a 
pilot study with a conservative initial enrollment goal of 20  patients. This number can be increased  to 
compensate for subjects who are potentially withdrawn or LTFU. If th is pilot study proves to be 
informative , a multicenter initiative would be the next step.  
 
Another challenge will be ensuring subject compliance with both PPI and liquid alginate therapy.  This is 
particularly salient in patients who experience improvemen t in symptoms, and feel that they don’t need to 
take medicine anymore, especially since the recommended dose  of the study drug  will be four times a 
day. We will contact the patients  in between each 2- 3 month visit,  via telephone call  and routinely 
reiterat e the importance of medication compliance.  We will also accurately record adherence, as 
mentioned above, by asking patients to bring in all bottles (used and unused) that were dispensed to 
them.  Moreover, in the cases that prompted this line of research, we observed benefit associated with 
only twice daily dosing of alginate, making it feasible that our hypotheses could be met even if half the 
recommended dose is taken 
Lastly, the small sample size will limit the validity and generalizability of our observ ations. The numbers 
may be further be limited as patients undergoing RFA and cryotherapy will be analyzed separately. As 
mentioned above, this is intended to be a hypothesis -generating study that may inform the design of a 
larger multi -center initiative.  
 
 
References  
 
1.  Attwood SE, Smyrk TC, DeMeester TR, Mirvish SS, Stein HJ, and Hinder RA.  “Duodenoesophageal reflux and the 
development of esophageal adenocarcinoma in rats.”  Surgery 111.5 (1992): 503- 510.  Web.  
 
2. Boni, L., A. Benevento, S. M. Shimi, and A. Cuschieri. "Free Radical Production in the Esophago -gastro -duodenal Mucosa 
in Response to Acid and Bile." Diseases of the Esophagus Dis Esophagus  19.2 (2006): 99- 104. Web.  
 
3. Castell, Donald O., Christine Bo ag Dalton, David Becker, Jane Sinclair, and June A. Castell. "Alginic Acid Decreases 
Postprandial Upright Gastroesophageal Reflux." Digest Dis Sci Digestive Diseases and Sciences  37.4 (1992): 589- 93. Web.  
 
4. Chiu, C. -T., C.- M. Hsu, C. -C. Wang, J. -J. Chan g, C. -M. Sung, C. -J. Lin, L. -W. Chen, M. -Y. Su, and T.- H. Chen. 
"Randomised Clinical Trial: Sodium Alginate Oral Suspension Is Non -inferior to Omeprazole in the Treatment of Patients with 
Non-erosive Gastroesophageal Disease." Alimentary Pharmacology & The rapeutics Aliment Pharmacol Ther  38.9 (2013): 
1054 -064. Web.  
 
5. Debruyne, Philip R., Matthew Witek, Li Gong, Ruth Birbe, Inna Chervoneva, Tianru Jin, Claire Domon –Cell, Juan P. 
Palazzo, Jean –Noel Freund, Peng Li, Giovanni M. Pitari, Stephanie Schulz, and Scott A. Waldman. "Bile Acids Induce Ectopic 
Expression of Intestinal Guanylyl Cyclase C Through Nuclear Factor -κB and Cdx2 in Human Esophageal Cells." 
Gastroenterology  130.4 (2006): 1191- 206. Web.  
 
6. Dettmar, Peter W., Vicki Strugala, Chris Tselepis, a nd Janusz A. Jankowski. "The Effect of Alginates on Deoxycholic -acid-
induced Changes in Oesophageal Mucosal Biology at PH 4." Journal of Biomaterials Science, Polymer Edition 18.3 (2007): 
317-33. Web.  
 
 
ELIAS 22 
 7. Dvorak, K., C. M. Payne, M. Chavarria, L. Ramsey, B. Dvorakova, H. Bernstein, H. Holubec, R. E. Sampliner, N. Guy, A. 
Condon, C. Bernstein, S. B. Green, A. Prasad, and H. S. Garewal. "Bile Acids in Combination with Low PH Induce Oxidative 
Stress and Oxidative DNA Damage: Relevance to the Pathogenesis of B arrett's Oesophagus." Gut  56.6 (2007): 763 -71. Web.  
 
8. Fein, Martin, Jeffrey H. Peters, and Tom R. Demeester. "Carcinogenesis in Reflux Disease—In Search for Bile -specific 
Effects." Microsurgery  27.8 (2007): 647- 50. Web.  
 
9. Goldberg HI et al.  “Role of acid and pepsin in acute experimental esophagitis.”  Gastroenterology  1969; 56: 223- 230.  Web.  
 
10. Jenkins, G. J. S., J. Cronin, A. Alhamdani, N. Rawat, F. D'souza, T. Thomas, Z. Eltahir, A. P. Griffiths, and J. N. Baxter. 
"The Bile Acid Deoxycholic Acid Has a Non -linear Dose Response for DNA Damage and Possibly NF - B Activation in 
Oesophageal Cells, with a Mechanism of Action Involving ROS." Mutagenesis  23.5 (2008): 399- 405. Web.  
 
11. Johnson, Lawrence F., and John W. Harmon. "Experimental Esophagitis in a Rabbit Model." Journal of Clinical 
Gastroenterology  8 (1986): 26 -44. Web.  
 
12. Malmud, Charkes , Littlefield, Reilley, Stern, Rosenberg, and Fisher.  "The Mode of Action of Alginic Acid Compound in 
the Reduction of Gastroesophageal (G -E) Reflux Using the G -E Scintiscan." International Journal of Nuclear Medicine and 
Biology  5.4-5 (1978): 203. Web.  
 
13. Mandel, Daggy, Brodie, and Jacoby. "Review Article: Alginate- raft Formulations in the Treatment of Heartburn and Acid 
Reflux." Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics Aliment Pharmacol Ther  14.6 (2000): 669- 90. Web.  
 
14. Nehra, D., P. Howell, C. P. Williams, J. K. Pye, and J. Beynon. "Toxic Bile Acids in Gastro- oesophageal Reflux Disease: 
Influence of Gastric Acidity." Gut 44.5 (1999): 598 -602. Web.  
 
15. Reimer, C., A. B. Lødrup, G. Smith, J. Wilkinson, and P. Bytzer. "Randomised Clinical Trial: Alginate (Gaviscon 
Advance) vs. Placebo as Add -on Therapy in Reflux Patients with Inadequate Response to a Once Daily Proton Pump 
Inhibitor." Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics Aliment Pharmacol Ther  43.8 (2016): 899- 909. Web.  
 
16. Reynolds, Johnv, Mohamed Mahmoudm Abdel -Latif, Hiroyasu Inoue, and Dermot Kelleher. "Factors Regulating Nuclear 
Factor -kappa B Activation in Esophageal Cancer Cells: Role of Bile Acids and Acid." J Can Res Ther Journal of Cancer 
Research and Therapeutics  12.1 (2016): 364.  Web.  
 
17. Rohof, Wout O., Roel J. Bennink, Andre J.p.m. Smout, Edward Thomas, and Guy E. Boeckxstaens. "An Alginate -Antacid 
Formulation Localizes to the Acid Pocket to Reduce Acid Reflux in Patients With Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease. " Clinical 
Gastroenterology and Hepatology  11.12 (2013): 1585- 591. Web.  
 
18. Roman, S., A. Petre, A. Thepot, A. Hautefeuille, J.- Y. Scoazec, F. Mion, and P. Hainaut. "Downregulation of P63 upon 
Exposure to Bile Salts and Acid in Normal and Cancer Esophagea l Cells in Culture." AJP: Gastrointestinal and Liver 
Physiology  293.1 (2007) Web.  
 
19. Ruigh, A. De, S. Roman, J. Chen, J. E. Pandolfino, and P. J. Kahrilas. "Gaviscon Double Action Liquid (antacid & 
Alginate) Is More Effective than Antacid in Controlling Post -prandial Oesophageal Acid Exposure in GERD Patients: A 
Double -blind Crossover Study." Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics Aliment Pharmacol Ther  (2014) Web.  
 
20. Salo, J. A., V. - P. Lehto, and E. Kivilaakso. "Morphological Alterations in Experiment al Esophagitis." Digest Dis Sci 
Digestive Diseases and Sciences  28.5 (1983): 440- 48. Web.  
 
21. Strugala, Vicki, Jeanine Avis, Ian G. Jolliffe, Lesley M. Johnstone, and Peter W. Dettmar. "The Role of an Alginate 
Suspension on Pepsin and Bile Acids -  Key Ag gressors in the Gastric Refluxate. Does This Have Implications for the 
Treatment of Gastro -oesophageal Reflux Disease?" J Pharm Pharmacol Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology  61.8 (2009): 
1021 -028. Web.  
 
22. Sun, J., C. Yang, H. Zhao, P. Zheng, J. Wilkinson, B. Ng, and Y. Yuan. "Randomised Clinical Trial: The Clinical Efficacy 
and Safety of an Alginate -antacid (Gaviscon Double Action) versus Placebo, for Decreasing Upper Gastrointestinal Symptoms 
in Symptomatic Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD) in China." Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther  42.7 (2015): 845- 54. Web.  
 
ELIAS 23 
  
23. Sweis, R., E. Kaufman, A. Anggiansah, T. Wong, P. Dettmar, M. Fried, W. Schwizer, R. K. Avvari, A. Pal, and M. Fox. 
"Post -prandial Reflux Suppression by a Raf t-forming Alginate (Gaviscon Advance) Compared to a Simple Antacid 
Documented by Magnetic Resonance Imaging and PH -impedance Monitoring: Mechanistic Assessment in Healthy Volunteers 
and Randomised, Controlled, Doub." Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics Aliment Pharmacol Ther  37.11 (2013): 1093 -
102. Web.  
 
24. Tobey, N. "The Role of Pepsin in Acid Injury to Esophageal Epithelium." The American Journal of Gastroenterology  96.11 
(2001): 3062- 070. Web.  
 
25. Tselepis, C. "Upregulation of the Oncogene C -myc in Barrett's Adenocarcinoma: Induction of C -myc by Acidified Bile 
Acid in Vitro." Gut  52.2 (2003): 174- 80. Web.  
 
26. Zhang, Tao, Feng Zhang, Yong Han, Zhongping Gu, Yong’An Zhou, Qingshu Cheng, Yifang Zhu,  Chuanshan Zhang, and 
Yunjie Wang. "A Rat Surgical Model of Esophageal Metaplasia and Adenocarcinoma -Induced by Mixed Reflux of Gastric 
Acid and Duodenal Contents." Dig Dis Sci Digestive Diseases and Sciences  52.11 (2007): 3202 -208. Web.  
 
27. Gupta, M., I yer, P., Lutzke, L., Gorospe, E., Abrams, J., Falk, G., Ginsberg, G., Rustgi, A., Lightdale, C., Wang, T., 
Fudman, D., Poneros, J., Wang, K.  “Recurrence of Esophageal Intestinal Metaplasia After Endoscopic Mucosal Resection and 
Radiofrequency Ablation of Barrett’s Esophagus: Results From a US Multicenter Consortium Recurrence of Barrett’s 
Esophagus after EMR and RFA.”  Gastroenterology 145.1 (2013): 79- 86. Web.  
 
28. Shaheen, N., Greenwald, B., Peery, A., Dumot, J., Nishioka, N., Wolfsen, H., Burdick, J., A brams, J., Wang, K., Mallat, 
D., Johnston, M., Zfass, A., Smith, J., Barthel, J., Lightdale, C.  “Safety and efficacy of endoscopic spray cryotherapy for 
Barrett’s esophagus with high -grade dysplasia.” Gastrointestinal Endoscopy 71.4 (2010): 680- 685. Web.  
 
29. Shaheen, N., Overholt, B., Sampliner, R., Wolfsen, H., Wang, K., Fleischer, D., Sharma, V., Eisen, G., Fennerty, M., 
Hunter, J., Bronner, M., Goldblum, J., Bennett, A., Mashimo, H., Rothstein, R., Gordon, S., Edumndowicz, S., Madanick, R., 
Peery, A., Muthusamy, V., Chang, K., Kimmey, M., Spechler, S., Siddiqui, A., Souza, R., Infantolino, A., Dumot, J., Falk, G., 
Galanko, J., Jobe, B., Hawes, R., Hoffman, B., Sharma, P., Chak, A., Lightdale, C.  “Durability of Radiofrequency Ablation in 
Barrett’s Esoph agus with Dysplasia.” Gastroenterology  141.2 (2011): 460 -468. Web.  
 
30. Hampson, F.C., Farndale, A., Strugula, V., Sykes J., Jolliffe, I.G., Dettmar, P.W.  “Alginate rafts and their 
characterization.”  International Journal of Pharmaceutics 294 (2005): 137- 147. Web.  
 
31. Korst RJ, Santana -Joseph S, Rutledge JR, et al. Effect of hiatal hernia size and columnar segment length on the success of 
radiofrequency ablation for Barrett's esophagus: a single -center, phase II clinical trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2011; 142:1168 –73. 
 
32. Alvarez Herrero L , Curvers WL , van Vilsteren FG , Wolfsen H , Ragunath K , Wong Kee Song LM , Mallant -Hent RC, van 
Oijen A , Scholten P , Schoon EJ , Schenk EB , Weuste n BL , Bergman JG .  Validation of the Prague C&M classification of 
Barre tt’s esophagus in clinical practice.  Endoscopy 45.11 (2013): 876- 82. Web.  
 
33. Peters FP, Curvers WL, Rosmolen WD, et al. Surveillance history of endoscopically treated patients with early Barrett’s 
neoplasia: non -adherence to the Seattle biopsy protocol leads to sampling error . Dis Esophagus  2008; 21:475 –9. 
 
34. Brodie, M. Elias PS, Castell DO. A Favorable Response of Dysplastic Barrett’s Refractory to Ablation Therapy Only After 
the Initiation of an Alginate Solution as Add -on Therapy. Case Repor t. Digestive Disease and Sciences . March 2017, 
Submitted  
 
 