 
 
 
 
 
 
Project SUPPORT  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clini caltrials .gov  ref#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Principal Investigator: Tracy A. Battaglia, MD MPH  
Project SUPPORT Statistical Analysis  Plan                                                                             Clini caltrials r ef#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
1 
 Patient -Centered  Outcomes   
Revised 02/07/18  
 
Aim 1 -To measure the impact of patient navigation enhanced by MLP intervention on patient -reported 
outcomes: distress, needs, and satisfaction  
 
Patient Reported Surveys are:  
 Distress Thermometer (DT) 
 Communication and Attitudinal Self Efficacy -Case Cancer (Case Cancer ) 
 Cancer Needs Distress Inventory  (CaNDI ) 
 Patient Satisfaction with Interpersonal Relationship with Navigator (PSN -I) 
 
Analysis  
The proposed analysis for patient centered outcome s will be used to compare the intervention and control 
group with regards to  changes in patient -reported distress and psychosocial needs at follow up. And also 
examine the intervention effects on questionnaire total scores.  
 
Study population   
The primary analysis will include only those study participants who have legal issues at baseline screening 
(defined by responding positively to one or more questions on the baseline I -HELP general legal screening 
questionnaire, which will take place withi n one month of new diagnosis).  Patients who have withdrawn 
consent are excluded from the analysis.   
 
 
1.1  DISTRESS THERMOMETER (DT)  
 
 
Description of the Measure  
 Collected at Baseline, 3, 6 & 12 months  
 A one -item m easure of global distress; rate distress levels during past week  - this one item instrument 
utilizes a figure and asks individuals to rate distress levels during the past week.  
 Main measure: Could be treated as either a continuous or categorical measure  
 Measured on a 10-point scale  ranging from 0 (none) to 10 (extreme distress).  
 It can be categorized as an ordinal categorical variable as:  0 -4: no or low levels of distress , 5-6: 
moderate levels of distress, 7 -10: distressed  
 It can be dichotomized as 0-4 as not distressed and 5 -10 as  distressed  (will need to justify choice of 
dichotomization before viewing the data  
 We will stratify all of the proposed analysis below by cancer site ( lung/br east) . 
 
  Dependent Variable  Distress Thermometer  
Independent Variable  intervention and control  
  
Hypothesis/Outcome  Navigation that aims to reduce socio legal barriers to care and facilitate timely 
care may mitigate distress.  
Project SUPPORT Statistical Analysis  Plan                                                                             Clini caltrials r ef#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
2 
 Analysis of Distress Thermometer  
 The analysis will be used to compare intervention and control  groups on changes in distress at 
follow up at 3, 6 and 12 months .    
 Summary statistics:  (the following points could be separated into a separate section, since it is the 
first part of the analysis).  Using the 10 point scale for the DT: Univariate summary statistics:  mean 
and standard deviation, median and inter -quartile range (IQR) overall and for each of the 
interventio n and control  group s.   
 Examine histograms  of the distress thermometer values at each time point for each study group  for 
normality .  If non -normal (skewed and/or with outliers), it is better to report median and inter -
quartile range (IQR) than the mean an d standard deviation, or both.  
 If DT scores  are dichotomized or categorized , we can calculate the number and percent in each 
category . We can  also compare between the intervention and control  groups using a chi -squared 
test.  
 
 
 
 
Models and covariates  of interest  to be use as a reference for all PCO  
 
Model 1:  
A simple linear regression model to test whether there is an association between the intervention group (covariate - 
0=control, 1= intervention) with the distress thermometer (outcome) at the primary endpoint (six months)   
We adjust for baseline DT (at T ime 0)  
Repeat using DT at three  and 12 months as a secondary outcome s 
 
Model 2:  
A multivariate regression model to test whether there is an association between the intervention group (covariate - 
0=control, 1= intervention) with the distress thermometer (outcome) at the primary endpoint (six months)   
In this analysis we will adjust for the effects of the same set of covariates as for the clinical outcomes.  See Table ** 
below  
 
Model 3:  
Linear mixed model with each patient having a random effect value.  All data is included at all -time points, even 
those patients missing some data a t one or more time points.   Intervention group is the key covariate, baseline 
Distress Thermometer as a covariate. Time points included as separate fixed covariates.  
 
Model 4:  
As for model (3) and also including the same covariates as for the clinical outcome. A plot showing the mean Distress 
Thermometer at each time point for each interventi on group.  
 
  Analysis (a)  Analysis (b)  Anal ysis (c)  
Simple linear regression to examine association 
of intervention with the change in D istress  from 
baseline to primary endpoint at 6 months  A multivariate 
linear regression  Longitudinal modeling of Distress 
Thermometer (DT outcome measured at 
0, 3,  6 and 12 months).   
Project SUPPORT Statistical Analysis  Plan                                                                             Clini caltrials r ef#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
3 
  
Covariates  Categories  Reference Group  
Intervention group  Intervention/Control  Control  
Age-group  Continuous  NONE  
Insurance Status:    Public/Private   Private  
Race  White/Hispanic/Black/Other (where Other combines Asian and 
Other).  White  
Cancer stage  0,I, II, III, IV.  Stage 0  
Health literacy  Adequate/Not adequate (which combines inadequate and 
marginal literacy)  Adequate  
Note: language is a collinear variable with race and wil l not be used as a covariate. Can be included in a stratified analysis to see if 
there is a difference since language can affect literacy.  
 
 
 
 
1.2 CASE Cancer  Communication and Attitudinal Self Efficacy  
 
Dependent Variable  CASE-Cancer  questionnaire score  
Independent Variable  Treatment ( intervention and control ) group  
Hypothesis/Outcome  Navigational intervention that targets socio -legal needs will reduce 
perceived needs overtime.   
 
The Communication and Attitudinal Self -Efficacy (CASECANCER) instrument me asured each participant ’s perception  
of his or her ability to fulfill three treatment related roles: understanding and participating in care, maintaining a positi ve 
attitude, and seeking and obtaining information.  
 
Description of the Measure  
 Measure of patient’s confidence in understanding and participating, maintaining a positive attitude 
and seeking and obtaining information surrounding their cancer care  
 Collected at Baseline, 6 & 12 months  
 12 items ( each measured on a scale 1  to 4).  For each item a score of 1 means a low score while a 
score of 4 is a high score  
 A total score of 48 is the maximum score representing best positive attitude and strong self -
efficacy,  while the minimum score is 12 representing poor self -efficacy  
 3 Sub domains  (For each subd omain: minimum score = 4, maximum score = 16) :  
 - Domain A: understanding and participating in care  (includes items 1 -4) 
 - Domain B: maintaining a positive attitude  (includes items 5 -8) 
 - Domain C: seeking and obtaining information  (includes items 9 -12)  
 Add responses to create score for each subscale; higher score=higher self -efficacy  
 We will conduct analyses for the total score and for each of the three subdomains.  
 
 
 
 
Project SUPPORT Statistical Analysis  Plan                                                                             Clini caltrials r ef#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
4 
  
 
 
See Table One above for Regression models and plot  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis (a)  Analysis (b)  Analysis (c)  
Simple linear regression to examine 
association of intervention with the change in 
CASE -cancer Total score to primary endpoint 
at 6 months  A multivariate 
linear regression  Longitudinal modeling of CASE -cancer T otal 
score outcome measured at baseline , 6 and 
12 months .  
Project SUPPORT Statistical Analysis  Plan                                                                             Clini caltrials r ef#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
5 
 1.3 CANDI  Cancer  Needs Distress Inventor y- CaNDi  
 
Dependent Variable  Cancer Needs Distress Inventory  
Independent Variable  Treatment ( intervention and control ) group  
Hypothesis/Outcome  Navigational intervention that targets socio -legal needs will reduce 
distress  
 
Description of the Measure  
 Collected at Baseline, 6 & 12 months  
 CaNDI is a self -report ed cancer -needs assessment instrument  
 Validated 39 items survey : One question (#34) removed, thus a total of 38 questions will be 
included.  
 Each item measured o n a scale from 1 (not a problem) to 5 (very severe problem)  
 Items are summed to c reate a total distress score  - with a minimum score of 38 and a maximum 
score of 190   
 Patients rate the extent of their concern in the past two weeks  
 Two sub -scales:  
 - Anxiety (questions 30,31 with a minimum score of 2 and maximum score of 10)  
 - Depression sub -scales (question s 29, 32, 33, 36 with a minimum score of 4 and maximum score of 
   20) 
 Questions range a cross the 2  domains (healthcare,  and  practical ).  
   
  HEALTHCARE= item # 5, 11, 13, 15  
  PRACTICAL= item # 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 14  
   
 Item scores were summed to create a n average total distress  score. Items with responses of  ‘Prefer 
not to answer ’ and ‘Do not know ' were coded as missing . 
  Total scores were calculated  as a mean of the sum of completed items. Subscales for depression 
(four items) and anxiety (two items) were computed in the same manner   
 Higher score  = Higher distress  
 
 
See Table One above for Regression models and plot  
 
  Analysis (a)  Analysis (b)  Analysis (c)  
Simple linear regression to examine 
association of intervention with the change in 
CANDI  Total score to primary endpoint at 6 
months  A multivariate 
linear regression  Longitudinal modeling of CANDI  Total score 
outcome measured at 0, 6 and 12 months).  
Project SUPPORT Statistical Analysis  Plan                                                                             Clini caltrials r ef#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
6 
  
1.4   Patient Satisfaction with Interpersonal Relationship with Navigator (PSN -I) 
 
 
Dependent Variable  Patient Satisfaction with Interpersonal Relation with Navigator 
score  at 6 and 12 months  
Independent Variable  Treatment ( intervention and control ) group  
Hypothesis/Outcome  Navigational intervention that targets socio -legal needs will reduce 
perceived needs overtime.   
 
 
The Patient Satisfaction Survey, PSN -1  
A validated tool that indicates the extent to which patients healthcare experience match their expectations 
which has been linked to health status, quality of life and adherence to recommended treatment.  
 
Description of the Measure  
 9-item questions  
 Response is summed to create total score ( min score =12, max score= 45)  
 Higher score = higher satisfaction  
 
Analy sis (a)  Analysis (b)  
A simple linear regression model  A multivariate linear regression  
 
 
 
 
 
Project SUPPORT Statistical Analysis  Plan                                                                             Clini caltrials r ef#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
    7 
 Clinical Outcomes   
Revised 0 1/28/18 
Aim 2 : To measure the impact of patient navigation enhanced by MLP intervention on clinically relevant 
outcomes: initiation of timely and quality cancer care  
 
1.1 MAIN CLINICAL OUTCOME  
Receipt of timely treatment  within 90 days of date of di agnosis , (Dichotomous y es=1 /no=0) 
 
Hypothesis  
Compared to study participants receiving standard navigation, study participants receiving enhanced navigation 
will be more likely to initiate their cancer treatment in a timely manner.  
 
Study population   
The p rimary analysis will include only those study participants who have legal issues at baseline screening (defined 
by responding positively to one or more questions on the baseline I -HELP general legal screen ing questionnaire , 
which will take place within one  month of new diagnosis).  Patients who have withdrawn consent are excluded 
from the analysis   
 
Primary analysis   
Assess the impact of the navigation intervention on the receipt of their primary treatment.  The clinical ly relevant 
outcome  will be  based on t he metric of timely initiation of the primary treatment, a dichotomous  outcome  
(1=yes,0=no) . The clinical outcome will be derived from the participant’s medical record . 
 
Model 1. 1a 
A univariate logistic regression to examine the association between interv ention and control groups (enhanced 
legal patient navigation versus standard patient navigation).   
The binary outcome measured on each patient is whether treatment was initiated within 90 days after patient's 
date of tissue diagnosis  (1=yes,0=no).  
Model 1.1b 
1. We will conduct a multivariate Cox regression model, which follows a similar approach to Model 1 .1a, where 
we adjust for clinically relevant covariates . ( see below)  
 
Table 1.1.1 LIST OF COVARIATES FOR THE MULTIVARIATE MODEL WITH REFERENCE GROUPS  
Covariates  Categories  Reference Group  
Intervention  group  Intervention/Control  Control  
Age-group  Continuous  - 10 Year increments  NONE  
Insurance Status:    Public */Private   
*Including Public Medicare, Medicaid and other.  Private  
Race  White/Hispanic/Black/Ot her (where Other combines Asian and 
Other).  White  
Cancer stage  0,I, II, III, IV  & missing stage  Stage 0  
Health literacy  Adequate/Not adequate (which combines inadequate and 
marginal literacy)  Adequate  
Note : Will not include gender , mari tal status or p rimary language . 
 
Cancer Site: this analysis will be done on breast. But we  will conduct an exploratory analysis on the lung data.  
 
 
Project SUPPORT Statistical Analysis  Plan                                                                             Clini caltrials r ef#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
    8 
 1.2 SECONDARY CLINICAL OUTCOME  
Time to initiation of first treatment ( Continuous, number of days ).  We will conduct a survi val analysis to assess 
the impact of the navigation intervention on the time to first treatment.   
 
Hypothesis  
Compared to study participants receiving standard navigation, study participants receiving enhanced navigation 
will be more likely to initiate th eir cancer treatment in a timely manner.  
 
Study populatio n  
As defined above.  
 
Primary Analysis  
We consider the start date to be the date of tissue diagnosis (clinical diagnosis).  The date that a patient 
experiences their first treatment  is their "event" date (event = 1). This can take any value from 0 days to 365 days 
(study period).  Once a patient experiences their first treatment we no longer need further data on them for this 
particular analysis.  
 
Model 1 .2a 
1. A univariate Cox regression model, which u ses the time from start date until the time of event or 
censoring as the outcome for each patient.  
2. The only covariate of interest will be intervention group (control or intervention).    
3. We will get a hazards ratio to describe the increased (or decreased)  "hazard" of experiencing timely 
treatment in the next short time interval for the intervention group (compared to the control or 
reference group). In our setting, a hazard ratio greater than 1 is a good result.  
4. We will also draw Kaplan -Meier curves and co nduct a log -rank test (with p -value) to show and compare 
the differences between the control and intervention groups in their times to first treatment over the 
course of the study. These approaches take into consideration the censoring that some patients w ill 
experience (see Table 1.1 below  for details)  
 
Model 1.2b  
2. We will conduct a multivariate Cox regression model, which follows a similar approach to Model 1, where 
we adjust for clinically relevant covariates . ( see below)  
 
Table 1.2.1 LIST OF COVARIAT ES FOR THE MULTIVARIATE MODEL WITH REFERENCE GROUPS  
 
Covariates  Categories  Reference Group  
Intervention group  Intervention/Control  Control  
Age-group  Continuous - 10 Year increments  NONE  
Insurance Status:    Public*/Private  
*Including Public Medicare, Me dicaid and other.  Private  
Race  White/Hispanic/Black/Other (where Other combines Asian and 
Other).  White  
Cancer stage  0,I, II, III, IV  & missing stage  Stage 0  
Health literacy  Adequate/Not adequate (which combines inadequate and 
marginal literacy)  Adequ ate 
Note : Will not include gender, marital status or primary language  
*We will conduct an exploratory analysis on the lung data . 
 
 
Missing Data and Survival Analysis Guidelines  
 
Project SUPPORT Statistical Analysis  Plan                                                                             Clini caltrials r ef#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
    9 
  
Missing Data   
The following guidelines are for the clinically relevant bina ry outcome for the timely initiation of the primary 
treatmen t, within 90 days  from the date of tissue diagnosis. Ensuring  the correct code is used in all the 
likely scenarios listed below . The clinical binary outcome will be derived from the participant’s medical record.  
 
For primary binary outcome:  
Timely= Yes (1) 
Not timely = No (0)  
Unable to verify treatment= Missing  (m) 
Table 1.0  
Scenario s of clinically verified treatment  
If a Person:  Timely 
Outcome  Code  
Died    
Received treatment within 90 days  1 
No timely treatment within 90 days  0 
during the first 90 days on study and receive no treatment  m 
Transferred Care   
If it is clinically verified  from either BMC or at their transfer institution that they received 
treatment  within 90 days  1 
If it is cl inically verified that they did not initiate care within 90 days  0 
If unable to confirm clinical verification of treatment receipt  within 90 days  m 
Withdr ew 
(Among those who withdrew from the EMR review portion of the study )  
Anyone who does not give EM R review consent  m 
Lost to Follow -up (LTFU)   
If it is clinically verified that they received  treatment within 90 days  1 
If it is clinically verified that they did not initiate care within 90 days  0 
If unable to clinically verify receipt of treatment  within 90 days  m 
* Note: Participants have the option to withdraw from 3 different parts of the project. (Survey  completion , patient 
navigation services and access to medical record s.) If they withdraw from everything except medical records  
review the afore mentioned  would apply.  
 
^ This could happen if patient transferred and we are unable to obtain patients permission or medical records 
from another institution.  
 
 
 
 
Project SUPPORT Statistical Analysis  Plan                                                                             Clini caltrials r ef#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
    10 
  
Missing Data and Survival Analysis Guidelines  
  
Survival A nalysis   
The following guideline s are for the clinically relevant continuous outcome for the timely initiation of the 
primary treatment  from 0 days to 365 days (study period).   
The following scenarios are applicable to participants for whom to verif ication of treatment  initiation 
was no t possible or “event date”,  requiring a censor date for the analysis.   
 
Table 1.1  
If a person  Censor  Date * 
Died  
Without initiating treatment (clinically verified)  The d ate of death  or 365 days, whichever is earlier  
Transferred Care   
If unable to clinically  verify receipt of treatment  at 
BMC or outside  institution  The date  of transfer   
 
If clinically  verified NO treatment was received at 
BMC or outside institution  365 days, whichever is earlier  
Withdr ew*  
Data dropped from analysis  No censor date   
 Lost to Follow -up (LTFU)   
If unable to clinical ly verif y receipt of treatment  
prior to LTFU  Last known clinical contact (any documented clinical 
personnel  visit or call ) or 365 days, whichever is earlier  
*The censor date will be adjusted to 183 days fo r PCORI analysis and 365 for ACS . 
*Anyone who withdraws from the study and emr abstraction their clinical data will not be included in the analysis.  
 
Note:  
All study participants who  we are unable to clinically verify initiation of  treatment by the end of  a) 183 or b) 365 
days , they will have a censored date of 1 year . Otherwise  (if less than 1 year) , their censoring date is the date of 
last known clinical contact  
The date that a patient experiences their first treatment  is their "event" date (event = 1).  This can take any value 
from 0 days to 365 days (study period).   