 
 
Version dated March 2017 –  Aspire IRB   
 
STUDY APPROVAL NOTIFICATION  
 
 
The effect of intradialytic resistance exercises  using resistance bands with exercise 
physiologist consultations on the physical function of people undergoing hemodialysis: a proof 
of concept study  
 
 
Sponsor:      Satellite  Healthcare  
 
Protocol Number:     SH066IDEX  
     November 19, 2018  (inclusive of Amendment No. 1)  
 
 The new study listed above was reviewed and approved through expedited review on December 5, 
2018 by Susan M. Abramson, MD, CIP , Aspire IRB Board Member.   
 
This study was approved at that time with the following conditions:  
 
• Informed Consent revised for readability and clarity purposes and to ensure all applicable required elements of consent are satisfied.  
 
The above- referenced conditions have been met and t his study received unconditional ap proval 
on December 10, 2018.  
 
Charles Diskin , MD was approved to conduct this study at the following locations:  
 
Satellite Healthcare, Inc.  
300 Santana Row, Suite 300  
San Jose, CA  95128   
 Satellite Healthcare Milpitas  
1860 Milmont Drive 
Milpitas , CA  95035  
 
You must use the enclosed approved consent documentation stamped with "Aspire IRB Approved" 
located at the bottom of each page.        
 
• Informed Consent Document dated December 5, 2018  
 The IRB has determined that your study is  Minimal  risk.    It has been assigned an approval period of 
Annual  review.  Your approval period ends December  04, 2019 ; as a reminder, you will recei ve a 
Research Status Report Form approximately sixty days prior to this date.  
 
The Principal Investigator is responsible for providing the IRB with the necessary materials for re -
approval by the due date provided on the form. This form must be received by the due date to allow 
ample time for adequate review prior to the study’s expiration date.   Missed submissions are the 
Version dated March 2017 –  Aspire IRB  responsibility of the Principal Investigator regardless of whether or not the IRB notifies you.   
The continuation of research after expi ration of IRB approval is a violation of the regulations 
governing research.   
 
Please be aware that while your study has now received IRB approval, FDA approval to proceed is still 
required (if applicable) .  It is your responsibility to ensure that you have a valid FDA approval/clearance, 
before you move forward with study procedures or subject recruitment.   It is your responsibility to notify 
Aspire, if the FDA or any other regulatory agency delays or puts a hold on your research.  
 
It is required that Asp ire IRB  be notified of:  
 
o All amendments or changes to the protocol  
o Changes to the protocol that are implemented without prior IRB approval to eliminate an 
apparent immediate hazard to subjects (must be reported within 24 hours of implementation)  
o Unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others (within 10 calendar days of discovery) t his includes protocol deviations that fit the criteria for an unanticipated problem.  
o All material used to recruit study subjects (prior IRB approval is required before use)  
o Any other changes in the research activity  
 
The Principal Investigator may not make any changes in the research, without prior approval of Aspire 
IRB, except when necessary to eliminate immediate risk to study subjects.  In addition, it is the 
responsibility of the Principal Investigator to uphold the following three ethical principles outlined in the 
Belmont Report during the conduct of this study:  
 
o Respect for persons: individuals should be treated as autonomous agents, and persons with 
diminishe d autonomy are entitled to protection.  
o Beneficence: maximize possible benefits and minimize possible harms.  
o Justice: benefits and burdens of research should be distributed equally.  
 
Aspire IRB is duly constituted and has written procedures in compliance wi th requirements defined in 
21 CFR Parts 50 and 56, 312, 812, 45 CFR 46 and ICH Guidelines relating to Good Clinical Practice.  
Aspire IRB’s mission is to ensure that research is conducted ethically according to the principles of the 
Belmont Report and in c ompliance with federal regulations, international regulations, ICH Guidelines for 
Good Clinical Practice, applicable state and local laws, Aspire IRB Standard Operating Procedures, 
and that the rights and welfare of human subjects are protected.    
  
Since rely, 
 
 
Aspire IRB  
AFD 
 
Protocol Number: SH066IDEX                                                                                        Initials: ______  
Version Date: December 5, 2018                                                                                                     Page 1 of 6 
APPROVED  
December 5, 2018  
Aspire IRB  CALIFORNIA EXPERIMENTAL SUBJECT’S BILL OF RIGHTS  
 
Any person who is requested to consent to participate as a subject in a research study  
involving a medical experiment, or who is requested to consent on behalf of another has  
the right to:  
 
(a) Be informed of the nature and purpose of the experiment.  
(b) Be given an explanation of the procedures to be followed in the medical experiment and 
any drug or device to be used.  
(c) Be given a description of any attendant discomforts and risks reasonably to be expect ed 
from the experiment, if applicable.  
(d) Be given an explanation of any benefits to the subject reasonably to be expected from 
the experiment if applicable.  
(e) Be given a disclosure of any appropriate alternative procedures, drugs, or devices that 
might  be advantageous to the subject, and their relative risks and benefits.  
(f) Be informed of the avenues of medical treatment, if any, available to the subject after the experiment or if complications should arise.  
(g) Be given an opportunity to ask any ques tions concerning the experiment or other 
procedures involved.  
(h) Be instructed that consent to participate in the medical experiment may be withdrawn at any time, and the subject may discontinue in the medical experiment without prejudice.  
(i) Be given a copy of a signed and dated written informed consent form when one is required.  
(j) Be given the opportunity to decide to consent or not to consent to a medical experiment without the intervention of any element of force, fraud, deceit, duress, coercion or undue influence on the subject's decision.  
 
   
Signature of adult subject capable of  consent .  Date  
 
Protocol Number: SH066IDEX                                                                                        Initials: ______  
Version Date: December 5, 2018                                                                                                     Page 2 of 6 
APPROVED  
December 5, 2018  
Aspire IRB  RESEARCH SUBJECT CONSENT FORM  
 
Title:  The effect of intradialytic resistance exercise s using resistance 
bands with exercise physiologist consultations o n the physical 
function of people undergoing hemodialysis: a proof of concept 
study  
 Protocol No.:  SH066IDEX  
 Sponsor:  Satellite Healthcare  
 
Investigator:  Dr. C. Dyer Diskin  
 300 Santana Row, Suite 300  
 San Jose, CA, 95128  
 USA 
 
 Satellite Milpitas  
 1860 Milmont Dr, Milpitas, CA 95035  
 Daytime Phone Number:  605-404-3667 
24-hour Phone Number:  605-404-3667  
 You are being invited to take part in a research study.  A person who takes part in a research study  is called a research subject , or research participa nt. Please take your time to read over 
this informed consent document to decide if you would like to participate in this research study.  
 What should I know about this research ? 
• Someone will explain this research to you.  
• This form sums up  that explanation.  
• Taking part in this research is voluntary. Whether  you take part is up to you.  
• You can choose not to take part.  There will be no penalty or loss of benefits to which 
you are otherwise entitled.  
• There will be no change in your physician or dialysis care.  
• You can agree to take part and later change your mind.  There will be no penalty or loss 
of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled.  
• If you don’t understand, ask questions . 
• Ask all the questions you want before you decide.  
 Why is this research being do ne? 
The purpose of this research is to measure the effect of an exercise program , support ed by an 
exercise professional, for people receiving hemodialysis , compared to people who are 
receiving hemodialysis who do not take part in the exercise program .  
50 subjects will take part in this research . 
 How long will I be in this research?  
We expect that your taking part in this research will last  three months.  
Protocol Number: SH066IDEX                                                                                        Initials: ______  
Version Date: December 5, 2018                                                                                                     Page 3 of 6 
APPROVED  
December 5, 2018  
Aspire IRB  What happens to me if I agree to take part in this research?  
All patients who agree to take part in thi s research will be asked to take a few quick physical 
function tests at the start of the study and at the end of 12 weeks.  These measures will consist 
of sitting and standing from a chair for 30 seconds, walking 8 feet while being timed, and 
testing your grip strength. At the start of the study, y ou will also be asked some questions 
about your energy  level and physical activities.  These function tests and questions will occur 
before the start of your dialysis session and should take less than 5 minutes.  
 You will then be placed randomly (like flipping a coin) either into the control group (no exercise 
program) of the study or the exercise group.  You have a 1 out of 2 chance (50% chance) of 
being placed in the intervention group which receives the exercis e program. You cannot 
choose your study group.  Your study doctor cannot choose whether you are in the exercise 
group or the control group.  
 For the patients who are randomized to the exercise group of the study , they will be visited by 
an exercise profes sional weekly over a period of 12 weeks .  These meetings will occur  during 
your three times weekly in- center  hemodialysis sessions . During the initial visits the exercise 
professional will develop an individualized exercise for you. At subsequent visits they will ask you about how the exercises are going and may alter your regimen based on your answers.    At the end of the study the exercise program you can continue to exercise however this will not 
be formally supported by the study  or the center . All par ticipants  will be provided with a 
summary of the study results at the end of the study.   
 What are my responsibilities if I take part in this research?  
If you take part in this research, you will be responsible to:   
• Perform 3 physical function tests (1 mi nute each) at the start and at the end of the 
study.  
• Answer a short questionnaire about your level of energy and physical activity at the start of the trial.    
• If you are placed in the exercise group, you will meet  with an exercise professional on 
the days of your regular ly scheduled hemodialysis sessions  over a period of 12 weeks . 
These meetings may be before you go on dialysis or while you are on dialysis . 
 Could being in this research hurt  me? 
If you are in the exercise program group, starting an exerc ise program could result in an injury 
or side effects. Please inform the study doctor or exercise professional if you have any muscle aches, stiffness or joint pains. These symptoms may vary from mild to severe depending on how much exercise your body is used to.  
 Another possible risk of this study is the disclosure of your private information. All efforts will be made to de- identify your data (surveys and physical function scores) as soon as possible to 
decrease this risk.  
 If you are a female, y ou cannot participate in this research study if you are pregnant.  
There may be risks to taking part in this research that are currently unknown.  
Protocol Number: SH066IDEX                                                                                        Initials: ______  
Version Date: December 5, 2018                                                                                                     Page 4 of 6 
APPROVED  
December 5, 2018  
Aspire IRB  Will it cost me money to take part in this research?  
There will no costs of being in this study and you will not recei ve payment for participating in 
the study.  
 
Will being in this research benefit me?  
We cannot promise any benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. However, possible benefits to you include improved physical function (strength and/ or 
movement) if you are randomized into the intervention group.  Possible benefits to others 
include the success of this study resulting in increased exercise programs for people receiving 
hemodialysis.   
 What other choices do I have besides taking part i n this research?  
This research is not designed to diagnose, treat or prevent any disease.  Your alternative is to 
not take part in the research.  
 What happens to the information collected for this research? Your private information and your medical record w ill be shared with individuals and 
organizations that conduct or watch over this  research, including:  
• The research  Sponsor  
• People who work with the research  sponsor  
• Government agencies, such as the Food and Drug Administration and the Department 
of Health and Human Services  
• Aspire Independent  Review Board (IRB) that reviewed this research  
 We may publish the results of this research. However, we will keep your name and other 
identifying information confidential.  
 We protect your information from disclosure to others to the extent required by law. We cannot 
promise complete secrecy.  
 A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.  
Data collected in this research will be de- identified and may be used for future research or 
distributed to another investigator for future research wi thout your consent.  
 Who can answer my questions about this research?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think this research has hurt you or made 
you sick, talk to the research team at the phone number listed above on the first page.  
This r esearch is being overseen by Aspire Independent  Review Board (“IRB”). An IRB is a 
group of people who perform independent review of research studies. You may talk to them at 1-877-366-5414 (toll -free), email@aspir e-irb.com
 if: 
• You have questions, concerns, or complaints that are not being answered by the research team.  
• You are not getting answers from the research team.  
• You cannot reach the research team.  
• You want to talk to someone else about the research.  
Protocol Number: SH066IDEX                                                                                        Initials: ______  
Version Date: December 5, 2018                                                                                                     Page 5 of 6 
APPROVED  
December 5, 2018  
Aspire IRB  • You have questions about your rights as a research subject.  
 
What if I am injured because of taking part in this research?  
If you are injured or get sick because of  being in this research, call the study doctor 
immediately. The study doctor will provide emergenc y medical treatment. Your insurance may 
be billed for this treatment. The sponsor will pay any charges that are not covered by insurance policy or the government, provided the injury was not due to your underlying illness or condition and was not caused by  you or some other third party. No other payment is 
routinely available from the study doctor or sponsor.  
 Can I be removed from this research without my approval ? 
The person in charge of this research can remove you from this research without your approval. Possible reasons for removal include:  
• It is in your best interest  
• You have a side effect that requires stopping the research  
• You need a treatment not allowed in this research 
• You become pregnant  
• The research is canceled by the FDA  or the sponsor  
• You are unable to keep your scheduled appointments  
 We will tell you about any new information that may affect your health, welfare, or choice to stay in this research.  
 What happens if I agree to be in this research, but I change my mind later?  
If you decide to leave this research, contact the research team so that the investigator can 
describe the procedures for orderly termination by the subject.  
Protocol Number: SH066IDEX                                                                                        Initials: ______  
Version Date: December 5, 2018                                                                                                     Page 6 of 6 
APPROVED  
December 5, 2018  
Aspire IRB  Statement of Consent:  
I have read and understand the information in this consent form. I have had an opportunity t o 
ask questions and all my questions have been answered to my satisfaction. I voluntarily agree 
to participate in this study, until I decide otherwise. I do not give up any of my legal rights as a research subject by signing this consent form. I will recei ve a copy of this signed consent form.  
 
Your signature documents your consent to take part in this research.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Printed name of adult subject capable of consent    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Signature of adult subject capable of consent   Date  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Printed name of person obtaining consent    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Signature of person obtaining consent   Date  
   