Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 1 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Randomized  trial on Expectations  and Pain control  Advancement  In surge Ry: The 
REPAIR Trial  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Tasha  Serna -Gallegos,  MD 
Assistant Professor  
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology 
University  of New  Mexico  Health  Sciences  Center  
VERSION  NUMBER:  
Version 8 
DATE:  
February 17, 2023  
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK:  
Please  indicate all  that apply:  
 
 
 DOD  (Department of Defense)  
 
 DOE (Department  of Energy)  
 
 DOJ (Department of Justice)  
 
 ED (Department of Education)  
 
 EPA  (Environmental  Protection Agency)  
 
 FDA (Food and  Drug Administration)  
 
 HHS  (Department of Health  and Human Services)  
 
 VA 
 
 Other:  
 
Is this a clinical trial under  ICH-GCP E6?    Yes   No 
If yes, please  confirm  that the research  team  is familiar  with and agrees  to comply 
with the investigator requirements cited in ICH -GCP E6.   Yes  No 
ICH-GCP E6 can be accessed by copying and pasting this URL into your 
browser:  http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Guidances/ucm073122.pdf  

Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 2 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 Table of Contents  
1. Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  4 
2. Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  4 
3. Study  Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  4 
4. Inclusion  and Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ..................  4 
5. Number  of Subjects ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 4 
6. Study Timelines  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  5 
7. Study Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  5 
8. Research Setting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  5 
9. Resources Available ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 5 
10. Prior Approvals  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  6 
11. Multi -Site Research  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 6 
12. Study Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 7 
13. Data Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  8 
14. Provisions  to Monitor the  Data to Ensure  the Safety of Subjects  ............................  8 
15. Withdrawal  of Subjects  ................................ ................................ ............................  8 
16. Data Management/Confidentiality  ................................ ................................ ............  9 
17. Data  and Specimen Banking  ................................ ................................ ..................  10 
18. Risks to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 11 
19. Potential  Benefits  to Subjects  ................................ ................................ .................  11 
20. Recruitment  Methods  ................................ ................................ .............................  11 
21. Provisions  to Protect  the Privacy  Interests of Subjects  ................................ ..........  12 
22. Economic  Burden to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................  12 
23. Compensation  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  13 
24. Compensation  for Research -Related Injury  ................................ ...........................  13 
25. Consent Process  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 13 
26. Documentation  of Consent  ................................ ................................ .....................  16 
27. Study  Test Results/Incidental  Findings  ................................ ................................ .. 16 
28. Sharing Study Progress or Results with Subjects  ................................ ..................  17 
29. Inclusion  of Vulnerable Populations  ................................ ................................ ...... 18 
30. Community -Based  Participatory  Research  ................................ ............................  19 
31. Research  Involving American  Indian/Native Populations  ................................ ..... 19 
32. Transnational  Research  ................................ ................................ ..........................  19 
33. Drugs or Devices  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 20 
Checklist  Section  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  21 
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 3 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 1. Objectives  
There are two specific objectives . First, assess and incorporate patients’ post -operative 
pain experiences related to pelvic floor surgeries and identify what patients feel is 
important regarding pain experiences and expectations, their management and pre - 
operative education. Second, based  on patient identified themes, assess the impact of 
patient -centered pre -operative education on 1) post -operative narcotic use and return to 
activities and function 2) patient preferences regarding amounts of post -operative 
narcotics prescribed and 3) to a ssess the impact on patient satisfaction and preparedness. 
The central hypothesis  is that the development of patient -centered, pre -operative 
education specifically addressing pain issues and narcotic prescribing practices will 
decrease post -operative narco tic use without curtailing return to normal activity or 
function.  The rationale  for this hypothesis  is that existing  evidence -based,  post-operative 
pain guidelines lack requisite patient input and that aligning patient and surgeon goals 
prior to surgery wi ll help manage post -operative pain expectations, reduce number of 
opioids prescribed, decrease risk of opioid dependence and improve patient satisfaction 
and preparedness. Obtaining proof that this approach is clinically feasible and beneficial 
would posit ively influence patient care. The central hypothesis will be tested with the 
following specific aims:  
Specific Aim 1. 1a: To identify patient post -operative pain concerns surrounding pelvic 
floor surgery utilizing qualitative methodology through focus group sessions. 1b: To 
develop and implement pre -operative patient education based on the domains identified  
in specific a im 1a. Patient -centered education will address concerns regarding post - 
operative pain expectations and preferences regarding the amount of opioid prescribed at 
hospital discharge. Hypothesis: Patients are concerned and apprehensive about post - 
operative p ain related to surgery. The conceptual themes regarding pain issues can be 
incorporated  into pre-operative  patient  education,  expanding  the patient  role in decision - 
making regarding narcotics supplied at hospital discharge.  
Specific Aim 2. 2a: To randomiz e women undergoing pelvic floor surgery to standard 
pre-operative education versus patient -centered education (as determined by Aim 1) and 
evaluate whether patient -centered education, compared to routine education, decreases 
narcotic  consumption  without  interfering  with return  to regular  activity  following  hospital 
discharge. 2b: To test whether patient -centered education decreases the quantity of 
narcotics prescribed and/or increases patient satisfaction and preparedness. Hypothesis: 
Patients exposed to pa tient-centered pre -operative education that includes pain 
expectations and patient preference, will decrease quantities of post -operative narcotics 
consumed and prescribed without interfering with return to activities, improving patient 
satisfaction and pr eparedness for surgery.  
Expected  outcomes : Investigation  of post-operative  pain experiences  in women  who have 
undergone pelvic floor surgery will allow creation of patient -centered pre -operative 
educational material and allow inclusion of patients in the s hared decision -making 
process. The resulting positive impact  will be an improved approach to pre -operative 
education and management of post -operative pain in women undergoing pelvic floor 
surgery.  
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 4 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 2. Background  
Opioid use disorder has reached epidemic proportions in the United States. Opioid 
prescriptions per capita increased 7% from 2007 -2012, with concomitant increases in 
narcotic associated emergency room visits and opioid -related deaths.1 A Center for 
Disease  Control (CDC) review reported that long -term opioid use disorder was 
commonly associated with narcotics prescribed for acute pain and that greater quantities 
at initial exposure were associated with greater risk of long -term use. Based on these 
findings,  the CDC  recommended  limiting  narcotic  use for acute,  non-surgical  pain to ≤ 3 
days.1 
There is currently no clear consensus regarding how narcotics should be prescribed for 
pain, including post -operative pain, which has resulted in over 800 pain -management 
guidelines.2 Among  these  are two comprehensive,  evidence -based  documents  cited  by the 
CDC1 that specifically address post -operative pain management.3,4 Those guidelines 
emphasize judicious post -operative narcotic prescribing practices, discouraging opioid 
misuse while encouraging return to function. The Washington Medical Directors Group4 
provides particularly useful recommendations (Table 1). Perhaps the most important of 
which are 1) thorough pre -operative counseling, including setting realistic pre -opera tive 
expectations regarding post -operative pain and activity, and 2) optimizing non -narcotic 
analgesics allowing use of the lowest narcotic dose for the shortest duration of time 
(usually < 14 days).  
There  has been  an absence  of significant  improvement  in opioid  prescribing  practices 
despite increased attention to pain addiction issues.2,5 The large number of proposed 
guidelines and lack of consensus regarding their use, may contribute to inconsistent 
implementation of post -operative pain protocols in clini cal practice.6,7 As surgeons, 
urogynecologists routinely prescribe narcotics for post -operative pain control.  
Consequently,  we can play an important  role in curbing  the opioid  epidemic  in the 
patients we serve.  
Urogynecologists lack a standardized approac h to post -operative pain management. The 
ideal method to develop a standardized approach would be to bridge the gap between 
existing  post-operative  pain management  options  using  a patient -centered  approach.  Our 
overarching goal is to provide pragmatic and replicable methods for post -operative pain 
management that can be disseminated for use by the urogynecologic community with 
potential use by the surgical community at large.  
3. Study Design  
This is a single -site mixed  methods  (qualitative  and quantitative  components)  comprised 
of patient focus groups as well as a randomized control trial.  
Aim 1 - Substantive  data are lacking  regarding  patient  experience  and recommendations 
surrounding post -operative pain. In instances where little literature exists, utilizi ng 
qualitative methods can help identify and address patient concerns. We will create a 
semi -structured interview guide based on existing literature with known and perceived  
gaps.  We will then conduct  a minimum  of four focus  groups,  recruiting  patients  who have 
undergone pelvic reconstructive surgery in the past 6 months to a year. Given our patient 
population, we will plan for 2 -3 focus groups conducted in English and 1 -2 focus groups 
conducted in Spanish. Based on internal practice data, approximately 15%  of our patients  
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 5 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 are primarily Spanish speaking. Including Spanish -speaking patients will improve the 
generalizability of this study since approximately 25% of Spanish -speakers in the US 
report that they speak minimal to no English.19 Based o n prior experience we will recruit 
enough  women  to ensure  each focus  group  has 5-10 participants  per session.  Our research 
team is bilingual with vast experience conducting and completing qualitative work.  
Qualitative Analysis. According to the principals of grounded theory methodology, 
focus groups should be iterative, conducting additional sessions until saturation is 
reached. Saturation is met when no new concepts or themes are identified.  Based on 
these principals and our pas t qualitative work, we will conduct a minimum of 4 focus 
group sessions and will continue to conduct sessions until saturation regarding post - 
operative themes is reached.20-22 We will audio record each session. The recordings will 
then be de-identified,  transcribed,  reviewed,  and coded  to identify  key words  and phrases, 
which will then be grouped to form preliminary themes. Following each focus group 
session, the transcript will be reviewed and analyzed to identify additional themes and 
emerging concepts. We will revise the  interview guide  as needed prior to each successive 
focus group to ensure that all significant patient themes are identified and explored.  
Following  completion  of the sessions,  identified  themes  will be organized  into domains 
and used to create patient -centered education for Aim 2.  
Aim 2 - This clinical trial will randomize women undergoing pelvic floor surgery to 
standardized routine pre -operative education versus standardized patient -centered pre - 
operative  education  (as identified  in Aim 1) and will compare  group  differences  for the 
following:  
Outcome Measures  
Primary Outcome : 1.Opioid Consumption -- Opioid consumption determined by pill 
counts and translated into Morphine Milligram Equivalents (MMEs), within 2 weeks of 
hospital discharge. Patients will be required to bring their narcotic medications for pill 
counts at their routine 2 -week follow -up ap pointment, since this is the most reliable 
method  for checking  opioid  use. A medication  diary  will document  pattern  of opioid  and 
non-narcotic  use and may potentially  serve  as a behavioral  modification  tool for narcotic 
consumption.  
Important  Secondary  Outcomes:  1. Opioids  prescribed  at hospital  discharge  and Opioids 
consumption at 6-week follow -up. 2. Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement 
Information Systems (PROMIS)29 Physical Function SF & Pain Interference 
Questionnaires -- at baseline, 2 and 6 week follow -up. These validated questionnaires 
(available  in English  and Spanish)  measure  patient -reported  physical  activity  and pain in 
the preceding  7 days.30 Raw scores  are translated  into standardized  scores;  mean  T-score 
represent s the average score of the general population and a difference of 10 points 
represents 1 SD away from the mean.  
Other  Secondary  Outcomes:  Patient  Satisfaction  and Preparedness  for Surgery:  We will 
administer Global Questionnaires assessing (1) satisfaction with pre -operative education 
and care and (2) assessing patient’s perceptions regarding preparedness for surgery.  
These  will be administered  to both Spanish  and English  speaking  patients . Questionnaires 
will be scored on a 1 -5 Likert scale (Strongly disagree to Strongly agree). (Other 
validated post -operative satisfaction and preparedness questionnaires are not readily  
available in Spanish ; existing Spanish questionnaires are condition -specifi c -- general or 
urogynecologic post -operative questionnaires are not currently validated .) 
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 6 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
  
4. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
We will recruit women cared for by the University of New Mexico Urogynecology 
practice at UNMH Women’s Care Clinic or  Sandoval Regional Medical Center 
undergoing  pelvic  floor  surgery.  Patients  who have  elected  to proceed  will be offered 
study enrollment if they meet the inclusion and do not meet the exclusion criteria.  
The inclusion criteria are: 
1. Subjects are  ≥ 18 years of age 
2. English  or Spanish speaking  
3. Patient  scheduled for pelvic floor surgery  
Exclusion  criteria are as follows:  
1. Unable  to speak  English or Spanish  
2. Using  long acting opioids (e.g. MS Contin, Fentanyl  patch)  
3. Primary  or Pain Healthcare  Provider  recommends  against  study  participation 
(eg. If the patient has a history of opioid use disorder or other confounding 
problems, we will contact the Primary Care Provider or Pain Healthcare 
Provider for their recommendations regarding study participation)  
4. Undergoing  surgeries  that involve:  Neuro/Interstim,  Cysto/hyrdro  distension, 
vaginal botox, mesh excision/complications  
 
Special  populations  such as adults  unable  to consent,  individuals  who are not yet adults, 
pregnant women, and prisoners will not be included in this study.  
We will be excluding women who are unable to speak and understand either  
English or Spanish. The justification for this is the satisfaction surveys are only 
available  in English  and Spanish  and include  the majority  of the patients  care by our 
group. Because these are our secondary objectives, it is important to use these 
standardized  surveys.  Additionally,  we can only conduct  focus  groups  in English  or 
Spanish given our qualitative te am is bilingual only in English and Spanish.  
 
5. Number of Subjects  
This a qualitative  and randomized  control  trial at a single  site – the University  of New 
Mexico’s Urogynecology department.  
Up to 60 participants  will be recruited  for the focus  groups  and up to 198 people  will be 
recruited for the randomized controlled trial at UNM.  
Power  Calculation  & Statistical Analysis : 
Based on our prior qualitative experience; approximately 10 -12 participants must be 
recruited  to have  6-8 attend  the focus  group.  We plan to conduct  4 focus  groups;  and 
need to recruit 48 subjects.  Given it is possible thematic saturation will not be 
achieved after 4 focus groups; we will recruit additional subjects and complete 
additional focus group until saturation is obtained.  Although a few studies describe  
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 7 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 opioid  prescribing  practices  following  Ob-Gyn surgery,  we could  not find any studies 
that reported opioid consumption following gynecologic or urogynecologic surgery. 
In order to perform the power calculations necessary for Specific Aim 2 (comparing 
opioid use between groups), because the actual number of opioids consumed 
following urogynecologic surgery is unknown, we wi ll assume that patient -centered 
pre-operative education will result in a 33% decrease in narcotic consumption 
following hospital discharge compared to the control group. If we assume that 
controls consume a mean of fifteen 5 mg oxycodone pills (SD of +/ -11 pills), and if 
we assume that the patient -centered group consumes 33% fewer pills (i.e. 10 pills in 
the modified education group), we would need a total of 152 participants (76 per 
group) to complete treatment and follow -up for a two -tailed t -test to have  80% power 
at α=0.05. Assuming approximately 30% of patients will cancel surgery after 
randomization  (including  medical  or insurance  issues  or change  their mind)  or will be 
lost to follow -up; we would need to enroll up to 198 women (99 per group) or until 
our designated  power  is met. We will perform  between  group  comparisons  using  Chi- 
squared tests for categorical variables and t -tests for continuous variables. We 
anticipate  that specific  covariates  (e.g. baseline  questionnaire  results,  and narcotic  use 
in last 3 months)  may be confounders  and that multivariable  analyses  will be required 
to evaluate the between group differences in outcomes. Note 1: When studies involve 
consent, an individual is considered a research subject once they have provided 
consent.  If the research includes screening procedures after consent, please indicate 
the number of subjects that need to be recruited and the number that will actually 
participate in the research post -screening.  
6. Study Timeline  
Subjects in Aim 1 will participate i n one focus group.  Subjects in Aim 2 will 
participate  up to the 6 week  post-operative  visit.  This could  occur  within  a window 
up of up to 8 weeks past their surgery.  
We will be able to complete  this project  within  the planned  timeframe  outlined  below. 
The UNM Urogynecology Division performed approximately 230 major pelvic floor 
operations last year (average of 19/month). We will create the database, standardize 
current pre -operative sessions, and prepare the manual of operations and focus group 
script for Specific Aim 1 over the next 3 months. We will identify patients for 
enrollment in the focus groups during this initial period. This preparation will then 
allow us to successfully execute specific Aim 1 over the subsequent 3 months. We 
will have biweekly to weekly focus group meetings during the start -up period of the 
grant cycle. This allows 8 -10 weeks to review our findings and develop a patient - 
centered educational plan. We  will then enroll  up to 198 women or until  our specified 
power is met o ver the next 1 -4 years given the halt of all elective surgeries with the 
Covid pandemic(averaging 11 participants/month). We anticipate finishing 
recruitment by October 2021 and follow up for those randomized by December 
2021We, thus, expect to meet our re cruitment goals. The last 3 months of the grant 
cycle will be dedicated to statistical analysis and abstract and manuscript preparation.  
As all patients  receive  pre-operative  education  and have  scheduled  2 and 6-week 
post-operative visits, we anticipate th at the vast majority of our patients will be  
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 8 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 willing and able to participate  in this study. Experience indicates that our patients 
have  willingly  participated  in previous  RCTs  with high retention  rates.  We expect 
that this pattern will contin ue. We will continuously evaluate our recruitment 
numbers.  
 
 
 
Timeline  March -May 
2018  June -August  2018  Sept  2018 -December  2021  
(3 years,  3 months)  December  2021 - 
February  2022  
IRB submission,  Database  creation, 
Focus group recruitment planned, 
Standardize patient -centered pre - 
operative education   
    
Conduct focus group sessions, 
Standardize  patient -centered  pre- 
operative education    
 
   
Recruit  & follow  180 patients  until 
6-weeks after surgery     
  
Data  analysis,  manuscript 
preparation      
 
 
7. Study Endpoints  
Investigation  of post-operative  pain experiences  in women  who have  undergone  pelvic 
floor  surgery  will allow  creation  of patient -centered  pre-operative  educational  material 
and allow inclusion of patients in the shared decision -making process. The resulting 
positive impact will be an improved approach to pre -operative education and 
management of post -operative pain in women undergoing pelvic floor surgery.  
Primary Ou tcome : 1.Opioid Consumption -- Opioid consumption determined by pill 
counts and translated into Morphine Milligram Equivalents (MMEs), within 2 weeks of 
hospital discharge. Patients will be required to bring their narcotic medications for pill 
counts at their routine 2 -week follow -up ap pointment, since this is the most reliable 
method  for checking  opioid  use. A medication  diary  will document  pattern  of opioid  and 
non-narcotic  use and may potentially  serve  as a behavioral  modification  tool for narcotic 
consumption.  
Important  Secondary  Outcomes:  1. Opioids  prescribed  at hospital  discharge  and Opioids 
consumption at 6-week follow -up. 2. Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement 
Information Systems (PROMIS)29 Physical Function SF & Pain Interference 
Questionnaires – at baseline, 2 and 6 week follow -up. These validated questionnaires 
(available  in English  and Spanish)  measure  patient -reported  physical  activity  and pain in 
the preceding  7 days.30 Raw scores  are translated  into standardized  scores;  mean  T-score 
represent s the average score of the general population and a difference of 10 points 
represents 1 SD away from the mean.  
Other  Secondary  Outcomes:  Patient  Satisfaction  and Preparedness  for Surgery:  We will 
administer Global Questionnaires assessing (1) satisfaction with pre -operative education 
and care and (2) assessing patient’s perceptions regarding preparedness for surgery.  
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 9 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 These  will be administered  to both Spanish  and English  speaking  patients . Questionnaires 
will be scored on a 1 -5 Likert scale (Strongly disagree to Strongly agree). (Other 
validated post -operative satisfaction and preparedness questionnaires are not readily  
available in Spanish ; existing Spanish questionnaires are con dition -specific -- general or 
urogynecologic post -operative questionnaires are currently unavailable .) 
 
8. Research  Setting  
The study  will be performed  at the University  of New  Mexico  (UNMH)  Women’s  Care 
Clinic and Sandoval Regional Medical Center (SRMC). Potential subjects will be 
recruited in the UNMH and SRMC clinics. After recruitment, they will undergo the 
consent process (written or verbally), and fill out initial questionnaires in the  outpatien t 
offices, by phone, email link to REDCap or HIPAA compliant zoom, whichever works 
best for the participant.  There  are no laboratory  tests in this trial other  than what  would 
be routinely collected for standard of care. There will be no involvement of any 
community advisory board. There will not be any research conducted outside of the 
UNM HSC.  
9. Resources Available  
The previous PI, Dr. Jeppson joined UNM in 2013 with an im pressive pedigree and 
research  experience  from  his residency  at Cleveland  Clinic  and his FPMRS  Fellowship  at 
Brown University in Providence.  During his tenure at UNM he has already significantly 
contributed to the scientific knowledge in our field.  As his CV and publication record 
demonstrate he is clearly committed to an academic research career.  He has led and 
conducted a wide variety of research, including systematic reviews that have fostered 
changes  to medical  practice  with high quality  evidence.  He is skilled  at leading  a research 
team and is meticulous with deadlines.  He is extremely committed and gets things done. 
This study is a natural extension of his work to improve patient care and clinical 
outcomes.  Dr. Jeppson  is an astute,  driven,  clinical  researcher  who is already  becoming  a 
leader in our field.  
Dr. Jeppson’s  research  proposal  will pragmatically  study  and implement  an educational 
intervention to decrease post -operative narcotic use. This research augments his 
experience and interest in improving clinical care and patient education. Dr. Jeppson’s 
thesis project during fellowship, “Improving patient knowledge about sacral  nerve 
stimulation using a patient based educational video” (published in the Journal of 
Urology), clearly demonstrates his commitment to patient education. Although that 
research study evaluated different outcomes, it is similar to this study in that it w as a 
mixed methods project that incorporated patient preferences into educational material.  
Dr. Tasha Serna -Gallegos will take over as PI as this was her thesis project as a fellow 
and Dr. Peter  Jeppson  has lowered  his FTE with UNM  as he has moved  to a practice  out 
of state.  
The University of New Mexico (UNM) urogynecology division operates at two main 
locations.  UNMH  Women’s  Care  Clinic  located  in northeast  Albuquerque  provides  a full 
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 10 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 range  of services  for women  with pelvic  floor  disorders.  The clinic  consists  of eight  exam 
rooms and two treatment rooms.  Our second location is at Sandoval Regional Medical  
Center (SRMC) , a community based facility located in Rio Rancho, New Mexico, a large 
suburb located outside of Albuquerque.  
Research Experi ence:  The Urogynecology Division at UNM has a strong history of 
conducting  high quality  research  and collaboration  with other  investigators  in the US and 
abroad and has consistently met or exceeded recruitment goals on time. We were 
members of the NICHD -sponsored PFDN in the last grant cycle, and have met 
recruitment goals with high rates of follow -up and accurate data collection.  
 
Our group  is well versed  in the importance  of adherence  to protocols,  timely  completion 
of regulatory requirements, effective r ecruitment strategies, and the importance of the 
inclusion of minority subjects. Research is integral to all aspects of Divisional work; 
importantly, all members of the clinical team participate in research efforts.  There are 
weekly research meetings to discuss the progress of the ongoing studies within the 
department, and it is an excellent forum to ensure that all involved are adequately 
informed of their duties, of the protocol, and of the procedures.  
We do not ant icipate that emergency care will be needed for this study, however the 
urogynecology  physicians  are available  on a 24-hour basis,  7 days per week  for their 
patients requiring emergency care.  
10. Prior  Approvals  
There  will not be any approvals  obtained  prior  to commencing  the research.  The study 
was presented for approval by the Department Chair or Vice Chair of Research. The 
signed Departmental Review form can be found in the “supporting documents”.  
This study  does not include  any ionizing  radiation,  biologic  specimens,  or drugs. 
Medications prescribed to participants will be part of their standard of care.  
11. Multi -Site Research  
N/A this is not a multi -site study or a FDA regulated trial. 
12. Study Procedures  
The only procedures subjects will undergo are those that are needed as part of their 
routine  preoperative,  intraoperative  and postoperative  care.  There  are no procedures 
related to the study.  
All surgeries will take place at UNM Main, OSIS or SRMC operatin g rooms. 
Questionnaires and data collection will occur in the Urogynecology clinics at UNM or 
SRMC,  by phone,  HIPAA  compliant  Zoom  or email  link to REDCap,  whichever  is best 
for the participant.  All data will be collected prospectively.  
Participant  Flow th rough the  Study:  Figure 1  (N range pending funding)  
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 11 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 
Surgery  
Pre-Op NSAID, Acetaminophen, & Gabapentin (Unless contraindicated)  
Post -Op Hospital: Encourage Oral Opioids  Pt Centered  Pre-Op Education  (N=45 -99) Routine  Pre-Op Education  (N=45 -99) Enroll  Patients  Scheduled  for Pelvic  Floor  Surgery  (N=90 -198)  
Baseline:  Demographics,  Opioid  History,  Physical  Function  & Pain  Questionnaires  
Randomize  to: Enroll  Patients  in a One -Time  Focus  Group  (N=40 -60) 
6 Week  Post -Op 
Medication Diary, Physical Function &  
Pain Questionnaires, Opioid Pill  
Counts, Preparedness for Surgery &  
Satisfaction  Questionnaires  6 Week  Post -Op 
Medication Diary, Physical Function &  
Pain Questionnaires, Opioid Pill  
Counts, Preparedness for Surgery &  
Satisfaction  Questionnaires  Discharge  
Modified  # Opioid  (Pt Preference -See 
Text) & Non -Opioid Medications  Discharge  
Routine  # Opioid  & Non -Opioid  
Medications   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Week  Post -Op 
Opioid  Pill Counts  & Medication  Diary,  
Physical Function & Pain  
Questionnaires  2 Week  Post -Op 
Opioid  Pill Counts  & Medication  Diary  
Physical Function & Pain  
Questionnaires  
 
 
 
 
13. Data Analysis  
Power Calculation & Statistical Analysis : Although few studies describe opioi d 
prescribing practices following Ob -Gyn surgery, we could not find any studies that 
reported opioid consumption following gynecologic or urogynecologic surgery. In order 
to perform the power calculations necessary for Specific Aim 2 (comparing opioid use 
between groups), because the actual number of opioids consumed following 
urogynecologic surgery is unknown, we will assume that patient -centered pre -operative 
education will result in a 33% decrease in narcotic consumption compared to the control 
group. If  we assume that controls consume a mean of fifteen 5 mg oxycodone pills (SD  
of +/ -11 pills), and if we assume that the patient -centered group consumes 33% fewer 
pills (i.e. 10 pills in the modified education group), we would need a total of 152 
participant s (76 per group) to complete treatment and follow -up. Assuming 
approximately 30% of patients will cancel surgery after randomization or will be lost to 
follow -up; we would  need  to enroll  198 women  (99 per group).  We will perform  between 
group comparisons using Chi -squared tests for categorical variables and t -tests for 
continuous variables. We anticipate that specific covariates (e.g. baseline questionnaire 
results, and narcotic use in last 3 months) may be confounders and that mu ltivariable 
analyses will be required to evaluate the between group differences in outcomes.  
 
14. Provisions  to Monitor the  Data to Ensure  the Safety of Subjects  
Subjects will participate in focus groups and then receive preoperative education and 
shared decis ion making on quantity of opioid prescribed postoperatively.  Therefore the 
risks inherent to participation in the study are only minimal.  As this is a minimal risk 
study, our Data Safety Monitoring Plan will entail the review of data monthly by staff 
and the PI or a mentoring  co-investigator.  We will assess  for harm  such as over treatment  
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 12 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 of pain,  which  is highly  unlikely  as we are complying  with our standard  of care.  It would 
be unlikely  that the study  would  require  suspension  as patients  in the intervention  arm are 
actually  having  less exposure  to harm  than the standard  of care arm. Specific  findings  we 
will be looking for are adverse events, serious adverse events and reportable new 
information.  
15. Withdrawal of Subjects  
Any participant may withdraw from the study at any time without penalty and will 
continue to receive the clinical standard of care. A subject may be withdrawn from the 
study without her consent at the discretion of the physician and study staff if they believe 
she no longer m eets study inclusion criteria or if she meets exclusion criteria, or if they 
believe that it is not in her best interest to continue study participation. Investigators may 
withdraw a subject if the subject is not following the study protocol. If a woman is  
withdrawn from the study either at her own discretion or that of the research staff, she 
may continue with the planned surgical procedure performed in the usual fashion.  
To minimize withdrawal from the study, patients will be randomized at their pre - 
operative visit. According to the 2010 CONSORT guidelines, we will analyze all 
participants assessed for eligibility within the study. We will document reasons for 
withdrawal from the study including failure to meet eligibility criteria or participant 
declinin g enrollment into the study. We will report eligibility criteria not met or reasons 
for declining  participation  in the study.  The withdrawal  procedure  is clearly  documented 
in the study consent.  
16. Data Management/Confidentiality  
Randomization assignment will  be generated by a computer based randomization table 
and assigned by a research coordinator.  Assignments will be kept in sealed opaque 
envelopes numbered sequentially, and on the day of the patient’s pre -operative visit, the 
surgeon  will call a research  coordinator  who will open  the next envelope  in the sequence. 
All data collection sheets and questionnaires will contain the subject number and day of 
the clinic visit or day of completion. No other patient identifiers will be collected.  PHI 
including patie nt name, date of birth, phone number, and medical record number will 
need to be collected to track for appointments.  
The data collection,  HIPAA  and consent  forms  will be maintained  in a locked  file cabinet 
in the OBGYN administrative area. A separate folde r will be designated for each 
participant. The offices have the additional security of being badge -access only for 
OBGYN department employees. A key matching study number to subject’s name will be 
in a spreadsheet secured on a password protected computer.  
The only PHI collected  will be patient  name,  date of birth,  medical  record  number  and 
telephone number for site use only and to ensure patient follow up. This will not be 
entered into the database, but it will be kept with the other identifying information . 
The data does not include  sensitive  information  or information  requiring  additional 
protection.  
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 13 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 Electronic data entry will be performed in the OBGYN administrative offices, using the 
de-identified subject study number.  The electronic data will be encrypted, password 
protected, and stored on the secure UNM OBGYN department server. This server’s 
electronic security is monitored / maintained by the Health Sciences Library and 
Informatics Center (HSLIC). A REDCap database wi ll be created to collect, store and 
manage  the data.  REDCap  databases  are reposed  securely.  The REDCap  database  is only 
accessible using a individual unique login and password and access is only provided to 
co-investigators.  Access is restricted to co -investigators and will be protected using the 
unique REDCap login and password provided to each co -investigator.  
Access to the files and REDCap will be restricted to research personnel and Investigators 
and will be locked  or protected  using  the unique  REDCap  login and password  provided  to 
each co -investigator. The data will be stored for 5 years after completion of analysis and 
then will be destroyed.  
A Certificate  of Confidentiality  will not be used to protect  data from  forced  release.  No 
data will be transported to outside locations or shared with external institutions. Focus 
groups will be audio -recorded; the transcriptions will be de -identified and the original 
audio -recordings  will be destroyed  following  manuscript  publication.  There  will be no 
video recordings or photographs taken.  
17. Data and Specimen Banking  
As stated above, the data collection, HIPAA and consent forms will be maintained in a 
locked file cabinet in the OBGYN administrative area. A separate folder will be 
designated fo r each participant. A key matching study number to subject’s name will be 
stored on a password protected computer on a secure UNM OBGYN department server. 
In order to further ensure patient confidentiality, the identifying information will be kept 
separate ly from the numbered study files in a locked cabinet. The data will be maintained 
for 5 years after completion of the study and then destroyed.  
 
No specimens will be archived for future use. Additionally, this is neither a multi -center 
study nor will any information be banked or archived elsewhere.  
18. Risks to Subjects  
Focus groups by their nature cannot be anonymous.  However, participants will be ask ed 
to keep what was discussed in the focus groups confidential and will be asked to use their 
first names only.  The focus group transcripts will be de -identified.  Risks of enrollment 
in the study include the risk of breach of confidentiality. We will take every measure to 
try to ensure the security and confidentiality of participants. This may result in 
stigmatization or hardship. Participants will be recruited in a private room and will have 
ample time to consider whether they want to participate in the st udy. Also, locked filing 
cabinets will be used to protect patient consent information and collected data. The link 
identifying patients and their study numbers will be also be stored on a password 
protected computer on a secure UNM OBGYN department server.  There are risks of 
stress, emotional distress, and inconvenience.  
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 14 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
  
Pregnant  women will not be included in the  study, so there  is no risk to embryos/fetuses.  
19. Potential  Benefits  to Subjects  
Participation in this study may provide information t hat may help other people who have 
a similar medical problem in the future.  
 
20. Recruitment  Methods  
We will recruit women from  our urogynecology clinical practice  at UNM and SRMC.  
The urogynecology clinics at UNM and SRMC have a large referral population of 
patients who undergo pelvic floor surgery. Participants will be identified in the clinics at 
UNM/HSC and Sandoval Regional Medical Center by investigators. All patients 
scheduled for surgery will be approached for recruitment for the RCT portion of this 
study. The focus group participants will be identified through previous study consents  
that said they would be willing to be contacted for future research.  Additionally, the 
urogynecolgy division keeps a computer record of the patients that had urogynecologic 
surgery over the past year as part of our standard care and scheduling.  These patients 
may also be contacted by their surgeon to see if they are interes ted in participating in a 
focus group.  Subjects are encouraged to consult with family, friends, and primary health 
care providers, as well as communicate any questions they may have before beginning  
the consent process.  
 
If a woman is withdrawn from the st udy either by her desire or that of the research staff, 
or does not desire to participate, she will be offered the same treatment options.  
There  will be  no other  additional materials  to recruit subjects.  
21. Provisions  to Protect the  Privacy Interests  of Subjects  
Focus groups by their nature cannot be anonymous.  However, participants will be asked 
to keep what was discussed in the focus groups confidential and will be asked to use their 
first names only.  The focus group transcripts will be de -identified.  
Privacy concerns are taken into account with every patient seen at the UNM and SRMC. 
Participants approached and/or interviewed in the clinic setting will be in private offices 
or examination rooms in the UNM or SRMC clinic, where all staff, including resea rch 
staff, are well -versed in sensitive health care discussions and procedures. Telephone 
interviews for recruitment and study data gathering are conducted in the research staff 
area or private physician offices, where all staff have received CITI Training . The office 
area designated for the entire urogynecology research staff is isolated from the clinical 
administrative staff area, providing protection for participants and potential participants 
during screening, recruitment, study -designated calls, and da ta entry.  
 
All study sheets  used to collect  patient information  will be de -identified.  
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 15 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 At all times throughout the clinical investigation confidentiality will be observed by all 
parties involved. All data will be secured against unauthorized access. Privacy and 
confidentiality  of information  about  each subject  will be preserved  in study  reports  and in 
any publication. Each subject participating in this study will be assigned a unique 
identifier. HIPAA authorization is within the consent. All d ocuments containing personal 
health information (screening logs, consent documents, data forms) are maintained in 
locked file cabinets with access available only to research staff and investigators. Data is 
entered into a password -protected system. No indi vidual identifiers are entered into the 
system. The sole link with personal information is maintained by the research team on a 
password protected computer on a secure UNM OBGYN department server with access 
limited to authorized research staff and investi gators. This information is only to be used 
at the study center.  
22. Economic  Burden  to Subjects  
 
 
 
Research Procedures  Number of 
Samples/Procedures  Responsible  Party  
Study  3rd Party  Payer 
or Participant  
Focus  Group – Aim 1 1   
Demographic  Form  1   
PROMIS  Physical Function SF 3   
PROMIS  Pain Interference  SF 3   
Patient  Satisfaction  and Preparedness  for 
Surgery Questionnaire  1   
Medication  Diaries  2   
Opioid History  1   
 
  
   
 
Standard of Care  Procedures  Number of 
Samples/Procedures  Responsible  Party  
Study  3rd Party  Payer 
or Participant  
Urogynecology  Clinic  Visits  pre-op, 2 & 6 
week post -op 3   
Pelvic  Floor Surgery  1   
Pain medication post -op Varies  per patient    
 
  
   
 
  
   
 
  
   
 
  
   
 
  
   
23. Compensation  
Pending funding - For enrollment in Aim 1, participants will receive a $50 merchandise 
card for their participation  in one focus  group.  For enrollment  in Aim 2, participants  will 
receive  a $10 at their initial  visit,  $20 at their 2-week  post-operative  visit and $20 at their 
6-week post -operative visit for a total of $50 in merchandise cards for their participation 
in the study. This incentive will offset the cost of subject’s time and transportation while 
participating in the study.  

Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 16 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 24. Compensati on for Research -Related Injury  
If participants are injured or become sick as a result of this study, UNM HSC or SRMC 
will provide  emergency treatment  at the study  participant’s cost. No  commitment  is made 
by the University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center to provide free medical care or 
money for injuries to participants of the study. Reimbursement for treatment for all 
related costs of care will be sought from the participant insurer, managed c are plan, or 
other benefits program. The participant will be responsible for any associated co - 
payments or deductibles required by the insurance. Participants will be asked to report 
any illness or injury they believe to be related to the study to the inv estigator or research 
staff. Participants will be given telephone contact information for the urogynecology 
office for the purpose of asking any questions or stating any concerns about the study or 
treatment as a research subject. They may also be directed  toward the HRPO. This 
language will be stated in the consent document and reviewed during the informed 
consent process. There is no additional risk to participate in this study.  
 
25. Consent Process  
Patients will be approached about the research study at the urogynecology clinics at 
UNM and SRMC, as well as on phone and by HIPAA compliant Zoom, after the patient 
has decided to have surgery. The study consent will be obtained by one of the research 
team  members.  Verbal  consent  will be noted  on the updated  conse nt form  with a space  to 
also sign if the patient has an office visit in person.  Due to the pandemic, research 
coordinators are mainly working from home and going through the consent with 
participants by phone for the safety of everyone.  Privacy is still ma intained as the 
coordinator ensures they have a place they can talk privately by phone.  Additionally, 
care will not be withheld if they decide not to participate.  
They  will have  multiple  opportunities  to ask any questions  that they may have,  and they 
will also be provided with the clinic’s contact information to get in touch with research 
investigators to address any additional questions or concerns.  
Subjects  will be reassured  that participation  is completely  voluntary  and does not affect 
their treatment,  their relationship  with their providers,  or the university  to minimize  the 
possibility of coercion or undue influence.  The patients will be asked that they 
understand the opportunity to participate and their complete freedom to decline.  This 
will also be a sked if they understand and if they have any questions.  There is no 
minimum time period needed between informing the patient of the study and time of 
consent.  Subject will be encouraged to take as much time as they need.  
This study will obtain HIPAA author ization prior to enrollment. HIPAA authorization is 
embedded  within  the study  consent  form,  which  will be reviewed  with all participants  by 
the physician  or research  coordinator  obtaining  consent.  Specific  information  that will be 
obtained includes prior medical history, surgical history, reproductive health history 
including child bearing, drug allergies, age, and ethnicity. This information will be 
obtained by health care providers, not research coordinators, as deemed necessar y for a  
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 17 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 more  complete  and accurate  medical  history  of the patient  and is part of the standard  of 
care during preoperative assessment.  
Spanish  speaking  patients  will be included.  We will submit  the translated  documents 
once the study is approv ed by the IRB.  
Cognitively  Impaired  Adults  will not  be included  in the study.  
All subjects  will be 18 years  of age or older.  No infants,  children  or teenagers  will be 
enrolled in the study.  
26. Documentation of Consent  
We plan to document consent, and the Consent form is attached. We do not plan on 
collecting/storing  tissue  samples.  We will have  the option  to consent  verbally.  We will 
not be using a script, information sheet, or other mechanism.  
 
27. Study  Test Results/Incid ental  Findings  
We do not intend to share study test or procedure results with study participants. 
Additionally, we do not anticipate that the research being conducted will result in 
incidental findings. Every patient will receive the practice’s standard of  care regarding a 
pre-operative  work  up, which  may include  different  laboratory  tests and imaging  studies, 
as determined by their other active medical issues. These results are not part of the 
research being conducted and will hence be disclosed to the pat ient as appropriate for 
standard of care.  
 
28. Sharing Study Progress or Results with Subjects  
The patients  will not be masked  to their study  arm. We do not intend  to seek out study 
participants to disseminate information once the study is complete. Women who are 
interested  in the results  will be provided  the information  where  to read the manuscript 
once it is published. Study results for individual participants will not be shar ed. 
29. Inclusion of Vulnerable Populations  
There  will not be any vulnerable  populations  included  in this study.  Those  electing  for 
surgery  will not be coerced  into doing  so, nor will they be coerced  into participating  in 
this trial.  
 
30. Community -Based  Participatory  Research  
NA. There will be  no involvement  of the community in this research.  
31. Research  Involving American  Indian/Native Populations  
NA. This research  does not specifically  target  this population.  If a Native  American 
woman is a candidate for t his study, she will be offered participation . 
Randomized  trial on  expectations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 18 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
  
32. Transnational Research  
NA. This study is not transnational.  
33. Drugs or Devices  
NA. This research does not involve drugs or devices.  
Randomized  trial on  expec tations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 19 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 Checklist Section  
This section  contains  checklists  to provide  information  on a variety  of topics  that require  special 
determinations by the IRB.  Please complete all checklists relevant to your research.  
 
I. Waivers  or Alterations  of Consent, Assent,  and HIPAA Authorization  
A. Partial  Waiver of Consent for Screen ing/Recruitment  
We are not requesting a  partial waiver of consent  
Partial  Waiver of HIPAA Authorization for Screening/Recruitment  
We are requesting  a partial  waiver  of HIPAA  authorization  to prescreen  participants. 
Investigators  will review  the medical  records  of potential  participants  in PowerChart 
to determine if they are a good candidate for participation. They may review 
information such as medical history including surgeries and medications.  
The protected health information will not be reused or dis closed to any other person 
or entity,  except  as required  by law, for authorized  oversight  of the research  study,  or 
for other research for which the use or disclosure of protected health information for 
which an authorization or opportunity to agree or obj ect is not required by 45 CFR 
164.512.  
We will be using PowerChart to screen potential participants who have already had 
surgery at UNMH or SRMC.  We will review their medical records through 
PowerChart to ensure they meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria. PHI that will be 
reviewed in PowerChart will include information such as date of birth, gender 
identity,  and diagnoses.  The only PHI that will be stored  will be the patient’s  name, 
MRN, and the reason they were not approached or included in the study.  This 
spreadsheet  is an encrypted  document  and will be destroyed  at the conclusion  of the 
study.  
 
References  
1. Dowell  D, Haegerich  TM, Chou  R. CDC  Guideline  for Prescribing  Opioids  for Chronic 
Pain—Unites States, 2016. MMWR. 2016;65(1):1 -48. 
2. Lamvu  G, Feranec  J, Blanton  E. Perioperative  pain management:  an update  for 
obstetrician -gynecologists. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2018 Feb;218(2):193 -9. 
3. American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Acute Pain Management. 
Practice  guidelines  for acute  pain management  in the perioperative  setting:  an updated 
report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Acute Pain 
Management. Anesthesiology 2012:116:248 -73. 
4. Washington State Agency Medical Director’s Group. AMDG 2015 interagency 
guideline on prescribing opioids for pain. Olympia, WA: Washington State Agency 
Medical  Directors’  Group;  2015.  http://www.agencymiddirectors.wa.gov/guidelines.asp  
5. Victor  TW, Alvarez  NA, Gould  E. Opioid  prescribing  practices  in chronic  pain 
management: guidelines do not sufficiently influence clinical practice. J. Pain 
2009;10(10):1051 -7. 
Randomized  trial on  expec tations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 20 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 6. Graham  B. Clinical  practice  guidelines:  what  are they and how should  they be 
disseminated? Hand Clin. 2014;30(3):351 -5. 
7. Grismshaw  JM, Schunemann  HJ, Burgers  J, et al. Disseminating  and Implementing 
Guidelines. Article 13 in Integrating and Coordinating Efforts in COPD Guideline 
Development. An Official ATS/ERS Workshop Report. P roc Am Thorac Soc. 
2012;9:298 -303. 
8. Substance  Abuse  and Mental  Health  Services  Administration.  Results  from  the 2013 
National Survey on Drug Use and Health: summary of national findings, NSDUH. 
Rockville,  MD:  Substance  Abuse  and Mental  Health  Services  Administration,  2014.  
9. Srikrishna  S, Robinson  D, Cardozo  L, Cartwright  R. Experiences  and expectations  of 
women with urogenital prolapse: a quantitative and qualitative exploration. BJOG 
2008;115(11):1362 -8. 
10. Lawndy  SS, Withagen  MI, Kluivers  KB, Vierhout  ME. Between  hope  and fear: 
patient's expectations prior to pelvic organ prolapse surgery. Int Urogynecol J. 
2011;22(9):1159 -63. 
11. Mamik  MM,  Rogers  RG, Qualls  CR, Komesu  YM. Goal  attainment  after treatment  in 
patients with symptomatic pelvic organ prolapse. Am J  Obstet Gynecol. 2013 
Nov;209(5):488.e1 -5. 
12. Thompson JC, Qeadan F, Komesu YM, Jeppson PC, Cichowski SC, Dunivan GC. 
Trends  in Postoperative  Opioid  Prescribing  Practices  and Route  of Hysterectomy  in the 
United States from 2003 -2014. Abstract accepted for podium presentation at the 
Society of Gynecologic Surgeons Annual Meeting, Orlando FL, March 2018.  
13. Kenton  K, Pham  T, Mueller  E, et al. Patient  preparedness:  an important  predictor  of 
surgical outcome.  Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2007;197:654.e1 -654.e6.  
14.  Baskayne  K, Willars  J, Pitchforth  E, Tincello  D. Women’s  expectations  of prolapse 
surgery: a retrospective qualitative study. Neurourol Urodynam. 2014;33:85 -89. 
15. Sawhney  M, Watt -Watson  J, McGillion  M. A Pain Education  Intervention  for Patients 
Undergoing  Ambulatory  Inguinal  Hernia  Repair:  A Randomized  Controlled  Trial.  Can 
J Nurs Res. 2017;49(3):108 -117. 
16. van Dijk JFM,  van Wijck  AJM,  Kappen  TH, Peelen  LM, Lalkman  CJ, Schuurmans  MJ. 
The effect of a preoperative educational film on patients’ postoperative pain in relation 
to their request for opioids. Pain Manag Nurs. 2015;16(2):137 -145. 
17. Wilson RA, Watt -Watson J, Hodnett E, Tranmer J. Individualized Preoperative 
Education  Intervention  for Symptom  Management  After  Total  Knee  Arthroplasty. 
Orthopedic Nurs. 2016;35(1):20 -29. 
18. Levit:  Committee  on Improving  the Quality  of Cancer  Care:  Addressing  the Challenges 
of an Aging Population; Board on Health Care Services; Institute of Medicine; Levit  L, 
Balogh  E, Nass  S, et al., editors.  Delivering  High -Quality  Cancer  Care:  Charting  a New 
Course  for a System  in Crisis.  Washington  (DC):  National  Academies  Press  (US);  2013 
Dec 27. 3, Patient -Centered Communication and Shared Decision Making. Available 
from: ht tps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ books/ NBK202146.  
19. https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?src=bkmk  
. Accessed February 2 2, 2018.  
Randomized  trial on  expec tations and  pain control  advancement  in surgery: REPAIR  
Page 21 of 21 Version  Date: 2/17/2023   
 20. Corbin  J, Strauss  A. Basics  of qualitative  research:  techniques  and procedures  for 
developing grounded theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2008.  
21. Krueger,  R. Focus  groups:  A practical  guide  for applied  research  (4th edition). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2008.  
22. Emmel,  N. Sampling  and choosing  cases  in qualitative  research:  A realist  approach. 
London, UK: Sage Publications, 2013.  
23. Westfall  J, Mold  J, Fagnan  L. Practice -based  research  – “Blue  Highways”  on the NIH 
roadmap. JAMA. 2007;297:403 –6. 
24. Trochim  W. Translation  won't  happen  without  dissemination  and implementation:  some 
measurement and evaluation issues. 3rd Annual Conference on the Science of 
Dissemination and Implementation. Bethesda, MD: 2010.  
25. Steinberg  A, Schimpf  MO, White  AB, Mathews  C, Ellington  DR, Jeppson  P, Crisp  C, 
et al. Preemptive analgesia for postoperative hysterectomy pain control: systematic 
review and clinical practice guidelines. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2017;217(3):303 -13. 
26. Baruch  AD, Morgan  DM, Dalton  VK, Swenson  C. Opioid  Prescribing  Patterns  by 
Obstetrics and Gynecology Residents in the United States. Subst Use Misuse. 
2018;53(1):70 -76. 
27. Osmundson  SS, Schornack  LA, Grasch  JL, Zuckerwise  LC, Young  JL, Richardson 
MG. Postdischarge Opioid Use After Cesarean Delivery. Obstet and Gynecol. 
2017;130:36 -41. 
28. Prabhu  M, McQuaid -Hanson  E, Hopp  S, Burns  SM, Leffert  LSR,  Landau  R et al. A 
Shared Decision -Making Intervention to Guide Opioid Prescribing After Cesarean  
Delivery. Obstet Gynecol. 2017;130(1):42 -6. 
29. Cella  D, Riley  W, Stone  A, Rothrock  N, Reeve  B, Yount  S, et al. The Patient -Reported 
Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) developed and tested its first 
wave of adult self -reported health outcome ite m banks: 2005 -2008. J Clin Epidemiol 
2010;63:1179 -94. 
30. PROMIS  (Patient -Reported  Outcomes  Measurement  Information  System).  Available 
at: www.nihpromis.org.  Accessed February 2, 2018.  