GALLIUM-IP-13 Statistical Anal ysis Plan - CONFIDENTIAL 
 1GALLIUM-IP-13 
Final Re
port 
PROTOCOL NUMBE
R:  GALLIUM-IP-13  
PROTOCOL TITLE: A Phase 2, Multi-Center, Randomized, 
Placebo-Controlled St udy of IV Gallium 
Nitrate in Patients with Cystic Fibrosis 
PRINCIPAL 
INVESTIGATOR:  Christopher H. Goss, MD MSc 
University of Washington 
FUNDING AGENCIES:  National Institutes of Health/National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) 
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
Study drug obtained from: Cystic 
Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics 
(CFFT) 
PREPARED BY: CF Therapeutics Development Network Coordinating Center:  
Sonya Heltshe, PhD 
V
a l e r i a  B e c k e t t ,  M S  
Michelle 
Skalland, MS 
RELEASE DATE:  October 6, 2016 
 
GALLIUM-IP-13 Statistical Anal ysis Plan - CONFIDENTIAL 
 3OVERVIEW 
 
Study Rationale and Design 
 Much attention has been focused on the need for ne w antibiotics.  One reason for this is that 
heavy antibiotic use has greatly increased resist ance due to genetic mutations.  But new agents 
are also needed because conventional antibiotics work poorly in chronic infections, even when 
the organisms are sensitive when tested ex vivo .  These chronic infections resist treatment in 
large part because the organisms live in biof ilms.  Biofilms are communities of bacteria 
associated with surfaces and encased in a pol ymeric matrix making the bacteria far more 
resistant to killing than they are in the free-living (p lanktonic) state.  Exampl es of biofilm infections 
include cystic fibrosis (CF) lung infections, endo carditis, osteomyelitis, wound, sinus, and device 
infections.    
We are pursuing a novel approach that uses t he metal gallium (Ga) to disrupt intracellular 
bacterial iron metabolism.  Gallium has a nearly identical ionic radi us as iron, and many biologic 
systems are unable to distinguish gallium from ir on.  Gallium disrupts iron dependent processes 
because Ga
3+ cannot be reduced and redox cycling is crit ical for iron's biological functions.  
Importantly, gallium is already approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for 
intravenous (IV) use.  Our data shows that gallium kills Pseudomonas aeruginosa  (P. aeruginosa;  
including antibiotic resistant strains), is active  against biofilms, and treats three different animal 
models  P. aeruginosa  infections.  In our phase 1b study, we demonstrated that IV gallium was 
both safe and had favorable pharmacokinetics in CF  patients.  We also found suggestions of 
preliminary efficacy.  We will study the prelimin ary efficacy as assessed by both lung function and 
sputum microbiology of IV gallium in CF  adults.  We will also  continue to assess 
pharmacokinetics (PK) an d safety of IV gallium in CF patients. 
 This is a phase 2, multi-center, randomized, plac ebo-controlled trial in adults with CF chronically 
infected with P. aeruginosa .  The study will evaluate the safety and  clinical efficacy of a five-day 
infusion of IV gallium nitrate (IV gallium).    
The primary objective of this stud y is to assess the efficacy of  IV gallium to improve pulmonary 
function as measured by a 5% or greater relative  improvement in forced expiratory volume in one 
second (FEV
1) from baseline to Day 28. The secondary objectives are: 
 
 To assess the efficacy of IV gallium in improv ing measures of lung f unction including relative 
change in FEV 1, absolute change in FEV 1, and forced vital capacity (FVC) 
 To assess the efficacy of IV gallium in reducing P. aeruginosa  in the lungs of CF patients 
based on quantitative cultures of sputum  
 To assess the efficacy of IV gallium in impr oving respiratory sympto ms as measured by the 
CF Respiratory Symptoms Diary – Chronic Re spiratory Infection Symptom Severity Score 
(CFRSD-CRISS) 
 To assess the sputum PK profile of IV gallium  
 To assess the rate of acquired resistance of P. aeruginosa  to gallium 
 To explore the anti-inflammato ry properties of IV gallium 
 To explore the efficacy of IV gallium in reducing the use of ant ibiotics for an acute indication 
 
Interim DSMB Reviews  
 
Oversight for this trial is provi ded by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) Data Safety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB; Chair, Wayne Morgan, MD). The monitoring committee has been selected by the 
DSMB Chair to monitor this trial. Dr. Susan B anks-Schlegel, PhD, Senior Scientific Advisor of 
Airways Biology and Disease Branch NHLBI, se rves as the point of contact for NHLBI. 
 
 
GALLIUM-IP-13 Statistical Anal ysis Plan - CONFIDENTIAL 
 4Summary reports tabulating SAEs by treatment group are provi ded on a quarterly basis to the 
DSMB. Comprehensive safety interim reports is provided twice yearly to the DSMB and includes 
an overview of enrollment by site, detailed summaries of all SAEs, AEs, withdrawals, drug 
discontinuations, hospitalizations, protocol violations, laboratory parameters and other clinical 
safety endpoints.   
All the summaries are presented by treatment group in a semi-unblinded fashion (A or B 
corresponding to Treatment or Placebo groups). Th e unblinded treatment code is available to the 
DSMB at any time upon request.    Report Generation 
 The final report will be generated using the data fr om the final locked database comprised of all 
study visits from XX randomized and treated subjects.  All anal yses will be performed using SAS 
9.4 and R 3.3.X software.    Definition of the Analysis Populations  
Intent-to-Treat Population (ITT): all randomized pa rticipants who were star ted on the study drug. 
The ITT population is analyzed for the primary and secondary endpoint analyses and comprises the safety population used for all safety analyses. 
 
Per Protocol Population (PP): all participant s in the ITT population who have no protocol 
violations, received no bisphosphonates or inhaled ch ronic antibiotics from 7 days prior to Day 1 
through Day 28, and received gallium infusion for at  least five sequential days. The PP population 
is used in the sensitivity analyses of  the primary and secondary endpoints. 
   
 
GALLIUM-IP-13 Statistical Anal ysis Plan - CONFIDENTIAL 
 5PLANNED  ANALYSES 
 
Enrollment and Study Visit Completion  
 Figure 1.1 shows participant disp osition and Figure 1.2 the actual and projected enrollment over 
time. Table 1.1 displays an overview of enro llment and study completion by site. Table 1.2 
summarizes the screen failures. Table 1.3 details  the number of enrolled participants completing 
each study visit.   Withdrawals and Drug Discontinuation 
 
Table 2.1 displays a summary of the reason s for withdrawal, and Table 2.2 summarizes 
participants who discontinued study drug early, and reasons for study drug discontinuation. Table 
2.3 summarizes drug compliance based on partici pant diary information and unused study drug 
bags returned.  Demographics 
 Table 3.1 summarizes demographic and base line characteristics at randomization. 
 
Adverse Events  
 
Table 4.1 presents the total number of serious adverse events (SAEs), Figure 4.1 displays a 
histogram of SAEs by treatment  group, and Figure 4.2 and Tabl e 4.2 show SAEs by system 
organ class. Table 4.3 displays the incidence of SAEs by relati on to the study drug and Table 4.4 
summarizes the incidence of SAEs  by severity. Table 4.5 present s the total number of adverse 
events (AEs), Figure 4.3 displays a histogram of AEs by treatment group, and Figure 4.4 and 
Table 4.6 show AEs by system organ class. Ta ble 4.7 displays the incidence of all adverse 
events by relatedness to the st udy drug and Table 4.8 displays the incidence of all AEs by 
severity. 
 
Laboratory Parameters 
 
Tables 5.1 and 5.2 summarize clinical hematology  and chemistry results by visit and as a change 
from screening value. Table 5.3 shows urinalysis  results by visit. Tables 5.4 and 5.5 summarize 
normal, abnormally high, abnormally low, and clin ically significant hematology and chemistry 
results at each visit. Table 5.6 summarizes clinic ally significant abnormal urinalysis results.  
 
Figures 5.1-5.4 summarize the values of serum cr eatinine, calcium, ionized calcium, and BUN as 
boxplots at each study visit. Also  displayed are changes in from screening for each analyte. 
 
Figures 5.5-5.8 show emergent high and emer gent low hematology and chemistry results. 
 Hospitalizations  
 
Table 6.1 provides a summary of hospita lization events and hospitalization days. 
 
Primary Endpoint and Stopping Boundaries  
 The primary endpoint resu lts will be summarized in relationship  to the stopping boundaries in the 
second and third interim reports (at approximate ly 50% and 75% of accrual). The final primary 
endpoint analyses will be adjusted for the interim reviews. 
 
 
GALLIUM-IP-13 Statistical Anal ysis Plan - CONFIDENTIAL 
 6Table 7.1 summarizes the primary endpoint, the difference between treatment groups in 
proportion of participants in ITT population experienc ing a 5% or greater relative improvement in 
FEV 1 (L) from baseline to Day 28.  The final primary endpoint analysis adjusted for the interim 
reviews is summarized. Table 7.2 repeats the primary endpoint analysis using the PP population. 
 Figure 7.2 show the relative change in FEV
1 (L) by visit and Table 7.3 shows the results of the 
MMRM model for relative change from baseline in FEV 1 (L) using the ITT population. Table 7.4 
shows the results of MMRM model using the PP population.  Spirometry  
 
Figures 8.1-8.5 show changes from baseline over time in FEV
1 (L), FEV 1 (% predicted), and FVC 
(L). Table 8.1 summarizes spirom etry results from baseline and through the end of study, along 
with changes from baseline.    
Tables 8.2-8.6 summarize the results of the MMRM models for changes from baseline in FEV
1 
(L), FEV 1 (% predicted), and FVC (L). 
 CFRSD-CRISS  
Table 9.1 summarizes CFRSD-CRISS at each study  visit, along with changes from baseline. 
Figure 9.1 shows changes from baseline in CFRS D-CRISS at each point of diary completion. 
Table 9.2 summarizes the results of MMRM mode l for changes from baseline in CFRSD-CRISS. 
 
Inflammatory Markers 
 
Table 10.1 summarizes the names, abbreviations, uni ts and source of inflammatory and oxidative 
markers analyzed in this report, while Table 10.2 provides the lower and upper limits of detection. 
Table 10.3 shows the inflammatory marker result s by visit, along with changes from baseline to 
Day 28 and Day 56 when blood was collected for cytokines and chemokines. Table 10.4 
summarizes the results of MMRM models for chan ges from baseline in in flammatory markers. 
 
Bacterial Density and Emergence  
 
Table 11.1 shows the avai lability of culture resu lts and incidence of P. aeruginosa  and other CF 
pathogens at Day 1, 28 and 56 when sput um was collected for microbiology. 
Table 11.2 shows quantitativ e cultures results for P. aeruginosa density and changes from 
baseline to Day 28 and Day 56 when sputum was collected for microbiology.  Table 11.3 
summarizes the results of MMRM model for changes from baseline in P. aeruginosa .  
Figure 11.1 show s quantitative P. aeruginosa  density by visit, whereas Figure 11.2 displays 
changes from Baseline to Day 28 and Day 56 when sputum was collected for microbiology.  
Table 11.3 summarizes emergence of P. aeruginosa  and other CF pathogens from baseline and 
through the end of study.  
Additional tables and figures showing quantitat ive changes in sputum density of other CF 
pathogens, such as B. cepacia, A. xylosoxidan,  S. maltophilia, S. aureus, and H. influenza  will be 
shown if sufficient data is present for these isolates. 
 
Antibiotics  
Table 12.1 provides a summary of the usage of acute oral, inhaled, and IV antibiotics initiated 
during study. 
 
Appendix A 
 
GALLIUM-IP-13 Statistical Anal ysis Plan - CONFIDENTIAL 
 7 
Listing A.1 shows protoc ol violations and exceptions and Listing A.2 provides SAE narratives 
from the clinical tracking spreadsheet.  
 
 