APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  1 of 29
                   
                                   
HRP-503B – BIOMEDICAL  RESEARCH  PROTOCOL  
(2017-1)
Protocol Title:  Smartband/smartphone-based automatic smoking detection and real time 
mindfulness intervention
Principal Investigator: 
Kathleen A Garrison
1 Church Street  #730
New Haven CT 06510
(203) 737-6232
kathleen.garrison@yale.edu
Version Date: 7/6/2021
Clinicaltrials.gov Registration  #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
INSTRUCTIONS
This template is intended to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes  all of the necessary information 
needed by the IRB to determine whether a study  meets approval criteria.  Read  the following instructions 
before proceeding:
1.Use this protocol  template for a PI initiated study  that includes  direct interactions with research 
subjects. Additional templates for other types of research protocols are available in the system  Library.
2.If a section or question does not apply  to your research study,  type “Not Applicable” underneath.
3.Once completed, upload your protocol in the “Basic Information” screen in IRES IRB system. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  2 of 29SECTION  I: RESEARCH  PLAN
1.Statement  of Purpose:  State the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested.  
Smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease, disability  and death  in the US [1]. Although 
68% of smokers want to quit, only 7.4%  achieve  this annually [2], thus more  effective treatments 
are urgently  needed.  Recent work  suggests  that mindfulness training  may be an effective treatment 
for smoking  by lessening  the association between  craving and smoking [3-5]. Mindfulness is the 
practice of paying  attention in the present moment, on purpose  and nonjudgmentally  [6]. 
Mindfulness training  may help smokers learn  to pay attention to cravings as they arise  and ride 
them out rather than to react by smoking  [7]. An initial clinical  trial by our group indicated that 
mindfulness training  reduced smoking  rates compared with control [3] and lessened  the association 
between craving  and smoking  across treatment [8]. More recently,  a randomized controlled trial by 
our group found  that mindfulness  training was feasible to deliver  by smartphone,  and smartphone  
app-based mindfulness training again  reduced the association between craving and smoking 
across treatment [5]. Smartphone-based treatments for smoking have gained popularity  due to 
multiple advantages over in-person  treatment, including that apps are more  accessible, cost-
effective and scalable, and can be used to standardize treatment and as a means for users  to track 
their progress [9]. Moreover,  smartphones  get treatment into the hand of the user in the real world 
to intervene in real time [9]. However,  existing apps have not thus far exploited their unique 
potential advantages to aid smoking cessation  [10, 11]. Notably, none of the available  apps  utilize 
wearable technologies – devices that can be worn on the body and include sensors and an internet 
connection – to monitor and intervene in smoking. The projected growth of the wearable market [12] 
implies that apps that exploit this technology would have  wide population reach in the near future. 
Furthermore, all current apps  require users to self-report smoking , which depends on one’s 
memory, motivation and other personal and situational factors and can be unreliable  [13]. Finally,  all 
existing apps only supply  the user with tools to intervene in smoking but do not deliver the 
intervention contingent upon  smoking . The ability to deliver interventions  for smoking at the critical 
moment when craving or smoking occurs may significantly boost  efficacy. Therefore, this trial will 
test the feasibility of using  a smartband/smartphone  app to detect  and track smoking and deliver 
brief mindfulness exercises  to intervene with craving and smoking in real time. This trial tests a 
three-step intervention  to reduce smoking, in which smokers first become aware of their smoking  
and triggers by tracking smoking; then gain a clear  recognition of the actual effects of smoking by 
“mindful smoking”; and finally learn to work mindfully  with cravings rather  than smoke.  Briefly,  daily 
smokers will wear a smartband to detect and notify them of smoking for 21 days and obtain 
individual smoking profiles; detected smoking will then trigger  a “mindful smoking”  exercise for the 
next 7 days leading up to their quit date at 30 days; after which  another  mindfulness exercise 
(“RAIN”: recognize,  accept, investigate and note cravings rather than smoke) will be delivered prior 
to each predicted smoking episode according to their individual smoking profile  for 30 days  post-
quit. This study  builds  on our prior findings that: (1) smoking can be detected by smartband  [14]; (2) 
tracking smoking by smartband reduces smoking [14]; (3) mindfulness exercises are feasible to 
deliver by smartphone [5] and (4) lessen the association between craving and smoking [3, 5], 
suggesting a target  for treatment. The goals of this feasibility trial are to establish that treatment can 
be delivered per protocol,  participants will adhere  to treatment, and treatment  will be acceptable,  
prior to a larger clinical efficacy  trial. Feasibility  measures are based on guidelines [15] and prior 
work [16].
Aim 1. To determine  treatment  fidelity for a smartband/smartphone-based mindfulness  
intervention. Fidelity measures will be: (1) percent of smoking episodes correctly  detected  and rate 
of false alarms; (2) percent of “mindful smoking” exercises correctly  triggered by smoking and rate 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  3 of 29of false alarms; and (3) users’ real time ratings  of how timely “RAIN” was delivered to predicted 
smoking episodes,  measured  as % of participants  and score  range (very low, low, moderate, high, 
very high), with feasibility  determined by 75% of participants rating timeliness as moderate or 
higher. We expect to replicate previous findings of >80% detection and negligible  false  alarms [14] 
and to find moderate or higher timeliness ratings.  These and other aspects of treatment fidelity will 
be reported according to recommended guidelines [17].
Aim 2. To determine  adherence to a smartband/smartphone-based  mindfulness intervention.
Adherence measures  will be: (1) percent  of time spent wearing the smartband;  (2) percent of 
smoking notifications  answered;  (3) percent of ecological  momentary assessment (EMA) ratings 
(e.g., timeliness, helpfulness, craving,  affect)  answered; and (4) percent of mindfulness exercises 
completed. We expect  high response  rates based  on our earlier studies of smartband-based 
smoking notifications  [14] and EMA  of craving and other factors  [5]. Adherence cut-offs  (e.g.,  time 
spent wearing the smartband) will be 80%. Adherence was high in pilot work (90%  of participants 
answered 80% of smoking notifications[14]).
Aim 3. To determine  the acceptability of a smartband/smartphone-based mindfulness 
intervention.
Acceptability measures  will be: (1) users’ helpfulness ratings  after each mindfulness exercise, 
measured as % of participants and score  range (very low, low, moderate,  high, very high),  with 
feasibility determined by 75% of participants rating an item as moderate or higher; and (2) from 
feedback on the User  Experiences Questionnaire[15] which includes rating  mindfulness  exercises  
(useful, timely, dose,  overall timeline); satisfaction  (likability, enjoyment,  visual appeal, speed, 
functionality); burden (perceived  effort  required to participate); intent to continue  to use (use or tell 
friends to use outside of the study); and technology (video, sound, image content, functionality, 
misuse, suggested improvements). Average  responses  for a given factor  (e.g., satisfaction) on the 
User Experiences Questionnaire will be tested similarly to ratings, and qualitative analysis of open-
ended questions will be used to further evaluate acceptability.
2.Probable Duration  of Project: State the expected duration of the project,  including all follow-up and data 
analysis activities.  
5 years
3.Background: Describe  the background information  that led to the plan for this project.  Provide  references to 
support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.
A.Significance
The alarmingly high rates of illness and mortality associated with tobacco smoking and the huge 
financial costs make the reduction  of smoking a primary worldwide objective. Despite many years  of 
continued academic and clinical  attention to the problem and government investment in large-scale 
efforts to reduce smoking, the efficacy of clinical interventions for smoking cessation remains  
surprisingly low [18]. A potentially impactful new way to aid smoking  cessation  is by providing 
psychological and behavioral interventions via smartphone apps, which  have important advantages that 
could make them a major  player in the efforts to reduce smoking globally [9-11, 19]. While there are 
presently more than 400 smoking cessation apps on the market,  only one has been tested in a 
controlled pilot efficacy trial [20]. Furthermore, reviews of existing apps report  that they have  not thus 
far exploited  their unique  potential  advantages  to aid smoking  cessation  [10, 11]. In particular:  (1) no 
available smoking  cessation apps utilize wearable technologies; (2) all current  apps require users to 
self-report smoking; and (3) no available  apps deliver real time interventions contingent upon smoking 
episodes. To address  these deficits,  this study  will test the feasibility of a combined smartband-based 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  4 of 29automatic smoking  detection and real time smartphone-based  mindfulness  intervention  to reduce 
smoking.
A.1. Advantages of smartphone-based interventions for smoking
Smartphone-based interventions for smoking and other health behaviors are rapidly  gaining  popularity 
due to multiple advantages over in-person treatment. Smartphone-based treatments are more  
accessible, cost-effective and scalable,  treatment can be standardized and users  can track their own 
progress [9]. Smartphone-based interventions additionally offer unique benefits  such as providing  
smokers with direct access to tools for self-management  or real time support, and getting  treatment  into 
the hand of the user in real world context and potentially  just in time [9]. Smartphone use is already an 
integral part of our daily routine. Smartphone ownership rates  are high at 77% of U.S. adults [21], and 
an estimated 80% among adult  smokers  motivated to quit [22]. Sixty-two  percent of smartphone  owners  
have used their phone in the past year to look up information about  a health condition  [23]. Sixty-seven 
percent of mobile  phone  users check their device for messages, alerts or calls without  being  prompted 
by a notification, and 44% of mobile phone users sleep with their phone  next to their bed to avoid 
missing calls, messages  or updates [24]. This intensive daily use makes it possible to dramatically  
increase the number of points of care from the clinic to nearly any time and any place an individual 
needs support  [25]. Such real time support may be especially useful in the treatment of smoking, which 
is influenced by context-related cues and affective  states [26]. Multiple  content  analyses of smartphone-
based treatments  for smoking cessation  conclude,  however, that most available  apps only provide 
simplistic tools such as calculators and manual smoking trackers,  and fall short  of adhering  to clinical  
practice guidelines [10, 19, 27-30]. Another  concern is that smartphone-based  interventions  for 
smoking cessation are typically multi-featured apps and it can be difficult to distinguish efficacious 
components and control for multiple factors in clinical trials. Despite these shortcomings, there  is 
preliminary evidence  that smartphone-based treatments can help smokers quit. A recent randomized 
controlled pilot trial compared smartphone app-based  acceptance  and commitment  therapy with the 
National Cancer Institute’s QuitGuide app (N=196), and found that treatment  could be effectively 
delivered by smartphone, and smoking abstinence  rates were  promising  at 13% for the experimental  
app and 8% for the comparator [20]. Other initial studies support that delivering treatment for smoking 
by smartphone app is feasible and can reduce smoking [31-35]. This study aims to address the gap 
between the urgent need to reduce smoking,  the dissatisfactory  success of current interventions  and 
the limitations of current smoking cessation  apps,  by testing  the feasibility of a smartband/smartphone-
based smoking detection and mindfulness  intervention.
A.2. Leveraging wearable technology for smoking cessation
A unique  feature of mobile  technology  not yet integrated into available smoking cessation apps is data 
from wearables. This study will use SmokeBeat (now called SafeBeing), a novel smartband app that 
utilizes data from wristband sensors to detect the characteristic hand-to-mouth gestures associated  
with smoking a cigarette and differentiate them from similar hand  gestures. Many behavioral treatments  
for smoking  teach smokers to self-monitor their smoking habits including when,  where and how often  
they smoke, in order to learn  to identify their smoking patterns and triggers  (e.g., “Pack Tracks” in the 
American Lung Association’s Freedom from Smoking program).  SmokeBeat  advances current  tracking  
methods by automatically monitoring  and detecting smoking and notifying smokers of smoking 
episodes in real time.  This feature of SmokeBeat alone was found to reduce smoking  as compared to 
control in a pilot trial [14], a finding  consistent with early studies indicating  that self-monitoring of 
smoking behavior alone could reduce smoking [36] particularly  among smokers motivated to quit [37]. 
The ability to accurately track smoking  is a critical issue as smokers tend to underestimate or deny 
smoking [38] and discordance between detected and self-reported smoking rates  can negatively impact  
clinical trials as well as population studies  that are used  to allocate resources and set health  priorities  
[13]. This study  will further utilize SmokeBeat’s automatic smoking detection to trigger real time 
interventions contingent  upon  detected  smoking episodes. No other  available  smoking cessation app is 
able to automatically trigger treatment contingent  upon smoking. Finally, SmokeBeat  uses a backend  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  5 of 29platform for storage  and analysis of big data from wristband  sensors and applies machine learning 
techniques to these data to generate individualized profiles of smoking behavior, for example the 
average times each  day of smoking episodes. Individual differences  in smoking  behavior in daily 
smokers can be characterized by regular patterns of smoking  frequency [39] driven by nicotine  
dependence and other affective and situational factors [40, 41]. This trial will use SmokeBeat to track 
smoking and characterize  individualized smoking  profiles in order  to deliver  real time interventions  
targeted to predicted smoking  episodes. Overall, this study will use SmokeBeat  (now  called SafeBeing)  
to: (1) automatically monitor and detect smoking,  (2) deliver  real time interventions  triggered  by 
smoking episodes  and (3) deliver  treatment targeted to predicted  smoking  episodes  according to 
individualized smoking profiles.
A.3. Mindfulness  interventions for smoking cessation 
This trial combines smartband  and smartphone technology to deliver brief mindfulness interventions for 
smoking. Mindfulness has been  defined as the awareness that arises  when  paying  attention  in the 
present moment,  on purpose and nonjudgmentally [6]. Mindfulness  has been operationalized  in 
research to include: (1) maintaining attention  on one’s immediate experience and (2) cultivating an 
attitude of acceptance or nonjudgement toward one’s experience  [42]. Mindfulness training typically  
involves the practice  of attention regulation, body awareness and emotion regulation [43]. A growing  
body of evidence  supports  testing mindfulness training for the treatment of substance use disorders. 
Recent reviews report that mindfulness-based interventions  are associated with reduced consumption  
of substances of abuse as compared  with several  active and inactive control  groups [44-46]. 
Furthermore, in several studies, mindfulness training led to reduced craving and increased mindfulness, 
suggesting a potential mechanism for clinical outcomes. Limitations of these studies  were  also 
identified, including  small sample sizes and lack of reported methodological details [47]. Nevertheless, 
overall findings suggest that mindfulness training  may be an effective  treatment for addictions  including  
smoking. For smoking cessation,  mindfulness training may help smokers learn to work mindfully  with 
cues, cravings and affective states that trigger smoking. Smokers learn to become aware of cues  and 
triggers and pay attention to cravings  as they arise, and to accept their experience  and learn to ride out 
the cravings rather than to react  by smoking [7]. Specifically, mindfulness  training  has shown utility in 
reducing cigarette  craving and withdrawal [48, 49], aiding in smoking  cessation  [3, 50] and in supporting 
recovery from lapses following a quit attempt [51]. A clinical  trial by our research  group  randomized 
subjects (N=88) to mindfulness training or the American Lung Association’s Freedom from Smoking 
program [3]. Intent-to-treat analysis indicated that participants randomized to mindfulness training had a 
significantly greater reduction in smoking  post-treatment  that was maintained  at 4-months follow-up 
(F=11.11, p=.001). Mindfulness training also showed significantly greater 1-week  point prevalence 
abstinence post-treatment (36% vs. 15%,  2=3.5, p=.06) and at 17-weeks follow-up (31%  vs. 6%, 
2=6.3, p=.01). Notably,  although both groups reported home practice  as part of their assigned 
treatment, only the mindfulness  training group showed significant correlations between  home  practice 
(i.e., meditation) and smoking outcomes, suggesting a specific  effect of mindfulness training. We found 
that home practice  significantly predicted  a reduction in smoking (daily meditation: β =-1.21, p=.007; 
informal on-the-go practices:  β =-1.52, p<.0001) and moderated  the relationship between craving and 
smoking (β =.515,  p=.026) [8]. In other words, the more an individual practiced mindfulness exercises, 
the less they smoked, and the amount of practice  predicted a reduction in the association  between 
craving and smoking.  These findings  suggest  preliminary efficacy of mindfulness  training for smoking 
cessation, and that the association between craving and smoking may be a plausible  mechanistic 
target for treatment. Overall, recent  reviews  and our own work support mindfulness training as a 
candidate for smoking cessation treatment, and that “high-quality adequately powered RCTs should be 
conducted” [47].
A.4. Smartphone-based mindfulness  interventions for smoking cessation 
Despite these promising  findings, in-person mindfulness training is challenged by the need  for 
experienced therapists, significant  time and cost demands, limited  access to treatment and lack of 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  6 of 29standardization, among other challenges [9]. One way to overcome these limitations  is to deliver  
mindfulness treatments by smartphone apps. In addition  to the general advantages of smartphone-
based treatments  for smoking discussed  above,  mindfulness interventions  may be particularly suitable 
for the mobile  platform as a means  to access and bring careful attention  to present moment experience 
[52] and because mindfulness  is considered a state-like, context-dependent and dynamic mental  
behavior [42, 53]. Smartphone-based mindfulness  interventions can be accessed any time a user 
encounters a cue, craving or affective state that increases the urge to smoke, can be triggered  by 
smoking episodes,  or can even be pushed to the smoker to bring awareness to triggers and cravings in 
advance of predicted smoking  episodes as in this proposal. Getting mindfulness  into the hand of the 
user may help bring awareness  to the moment-to-moment body sensations,  emotions and thoughts that 
constitute cue-reactivity, craving and affective states, to work with these experiences mindfully  rather 
than react by smoking. We have recently completed  a full-scale  randomized  controlled trial (N=505) of 
a smartphone app, Craving to Quit, that delivers  mindfulness training for smoking cessation [4, 5]. We 
found that mindfulness training was feasible to deliver via smartphone  app and although  there were no 
significant differences in smoking abstinence  rates at 6 months compared with a control  app, we found 
that only mindfulness training lessened the association between  craving  and smoking across treatment. 
These findings suggest the utility and feasibility of delivering mindfulness interventions for smoking  via 
smartphone app.
A.5. Craving is a plausible target for mindfulness  interventions  
As mentioned above, findings  from both our randomized controlled trials of in-person and smartphone-
based mindfulness training for smoking  cessation  indicated that mindfulness lessens the association 
between craving  and smoking.  Although  the centrality of craving to smoking is disputed [54], craving is 
nevertheless a common concern among smokers who are trying to quit and one of the primary 
symptoms that smokers seek to alleviate through treatment [55]. However, few smoking  cessation 
interventions target the association between craving  and smoking. Quit smoking  medications 
(buproprion, varenicline,  nicotine patch)  have  been found to reduce background craving  but not to 
prevent or alleviate craving induced by cues,  thoughts or affective states [55]. Nicotine replacement 
therapies (nicotine  gum, lozenge) have been  found  to provide relief from acute craving only once it has 
been triggered [55, 56], a substitution strategy  (gum for cigarettes) that may not break  the link between  
craving and smoking  [7]. Only behavioral treatments that target reduced craving have been found to 
lessen the association between craving and substance use [57]. For example, targeted  approaches of 
monitoring urges and “urge-surfing” were found to reduce the relationship between negative  mood  and 
alcohol craving, which predicted a reduction in drinking frequency in response to negative mood [58]. 
Similarly, Mindfulness-Based Relapse Prevention was found to reduce the relationship between 
negative affect  and craving,  which  predicted  a later reduction in substance  use for drugs of abuse 
including alcohol,  cocaine/crack, methamphetamine  and polydrug use [59]. Finally, in a study  of web-
based acceptance and commitment therapy for smoking cessation, the difference in smoking quit rates 
versus control were mediated by increases in noticing and not acting on urges  to smoke [60]. From a 
mechanistic perspective, mindfulness training targets craving  by teaching smokers to become aware of 
cravings as they arise  and investigate what they feel like in the body, emotions and thoughts, however 
uncomfortable or unpleasant, in order to learn to tolerate the physical sensations, emotions and 
thoughts and “ride out” cravings rather than react by smoking [7]. Instead  of changing, suppressing,  
resisting or avoiding cravings, mindfulness  helps  individuals recognize, accept and investigate cravings 
and learn how to extinguish them rather than smoke  [61]. In line with this, a recent review of 
mindfulness and craving studies suggested  that mindfulness may lead to reductions in craving by 
extinction rather than suppression [62]. Mindfulness training has been found to reduce reactivity to 
craving cues [63] and stressors [64] among other changes [43] that may help lessen the association  
between craving  and substance use. Cravings may continue to arise, as is evident by a comparable 
level of craving reported by experimental and control  groups in our clinical trials, yet the positive 
relationship between craving  and smoking  may be reduced with mindfulness training. This suggests 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  7 of 29that craving is a promising  target  for mindfulness interventions, particularly when mindfulness is 
delivered via smartphone to intervene  with cravings  in the moment.
A.6. Brief mindfulness interventions for smoking cessation 
A major challenge  for mindfulness interventions is the time required for training and practice. Time 
intensive treatments  for smoking are generally  underutilized,  especially among minority, younger, and 
lower socioeconomic groups [65]. Most smokers make unaided  quit attempts, thereby limiting the public 
health impact of smoking cessation treatment [65]. Similarly, attrition from treatment due to time burden  
has limited the clinical  impact of mindfulness interventions [66]. Smartphones  can greatly reduce this 
burden by enabling delivery of brief mindfulness interventions. Brief mindfulness practices may be more 
efficient, accessible and feasible to learn [53]. Brief mindfulness interventions for smoking (~2-10 
minutes) have been associated with significant  reductions in negative  affect,  cravings, withdrawal 
symptoms and smoking behavior [48, 67] and with significant increases in mindfulness [53], and have  
been correlated with outcomes as a component  of larger mindfulness training  programs  for smoking 
cessation [8]. For example, a brief “urge-surfing” intervention – in which  smokers attend  to cravings and 
observe changes over time rather than smoke  to alleviate craving – was found to reduce cigarettes per 
day at 1-week compared with control [67]. A brain  imaging study reported that in-the-moment mindful 
attention reduced  self-reported craving upon exposure to smoking  cues  and reduced functional 
connectivity between  craving-related  brain regions [63]. In another  study,  EMA  data totaling  nearly  
2000 assessments indicated  that a brief mindfulness  exercise compared with control  reduced  negative 
affect, reduced craving immediately post-mindfulness practice and reduced cigarettes per day over time 
[68]. However, none of these studies provided brief mindfulness interventions  at the moment  of craving 
or smoking.  The ability to deliver brief mindfulness  exercises in context, to provide a short intervention 
at the critical moment of cues,  cravings  or affective states that trigger  smoking, may significantly boost 
the efficacy of mindfulness interventions for smoking  cessation. Therefore, this trial will test the 
feasibility of delivering brief mindfulness exercises by smartphone, triggered by smoking or pushed  to 
the user in anticipation of cravings  to smoke.
A.7. The approach in this trial
First, daily smokers will wear a smartband  to monitor and detect smoking and will be notified of 
smoking episodes  in real time. As discussed  above,  smoking can be habitual  and “mindless” and self-
monitoring of smoking behavior  alone  may reduce smoking [14]. Next, a “mindful smoking” exercise will 
be triggered by smoking  episodes.  Mindful smoking  builds  on the recognition  of one’s smoking  behavior  
enabled by smartband-based monitoring and notification  by bringing specific awareness to the present 
moment effects of smoking  –the physical sensations, emotions and thoughts that result  from smoking  
[52, 69]. Through mindful smoking, one gains a clear recognition  of the present moment effects of 
smoking. A clear and nonjudgmental recognition of one’s experience is considered to be a critical step 
for lasting  habit change [69]. A thorough evaluation  of the one’s experience  of smoking  reveals that 
smoking is not necessarily as gratifying  as once perceived, and this begins  a process of 
disenchantment with smoking [52, 70]. Finally , a mindfulness exercise to help cope with cues, cravings 
and affective states will be delivered to the smoker prior to each predicted smoking episode according 
to their individualized smoking profile. This exercise teaches smokers  how to work  mindfully  with 
triggers to smoke using RAIN  [52]: Recognize, Allow, Investigate,  Note/Not-identify. Smokers  learn  to 
(1) Recognize cues, cravings or affective states  that trigger smoking; (2) Allow and accept their 
experience, however pleasant or unpleasant, without trying  to change it; (3) Investigate what  the 
experience feels  like in the body, emotions and thoughts; and (4) Note/not-identify with what  is 
happening from moment to moment. By openly  investigating one’s present moment  experiences  of 
craving in a nonjudgmental way, one learns that cravings are physical sensations,  thoughts and 
emotions that will subside. RAIN practice was shown to directly  moderate the dissociation of smoking  
from craving in our in-person trial of mindfulness training [3] and was associated with reduced craving 
to smoke in our trial of smartphone-based mindfulness training [4, 5]. Overall , this trial tests  a three-
step intervention  in which smokers become aware  of their smoking behavior and triggers  by tracking 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  8 of 29smoking; gain a clear  recognition of the actual effects of smoking by mindful smoking;  and learn to work  
mindfully with cravings and triggers rather than smoke using RAIN.
4.Research Plan: Summarize the study  design and research  procedures  using non-technical language that can 
be readily understood  by someone outside the discipline. Be sure to distinguish between standard of care vs. 
research procedures when applicable, and include any flowcharts of visits  specifying  their individual  times  and 
lengths.  Describe the setting in which the research will take place.
D.1. Overview
This study  will test the feasibility of a smartband/smartphone-based  smoking detection and brief 
mindfulness intervention  (Fig 1), described in detail below. An initial pilot study will be run using the 
same approach (N=10). First, smokers will wear a smartband for 21 days  to automatically monitor and 
detect smoking and will be notified of smoking episodes  in real time to bring attention to their smoking 
behavior. Their smoking data from this time will be used to develop  individualized smoking  profiles. 
They will be instructed to smoke as much or as little as they like [68] but will set a quit date at 30 days.  
This timing was chosen to balance motivation to quit with time to collect enough smoking tracking data 
to predict smoking  behavior. All subjects will be encouraged at study onset  to utilize  quit smoking 
medications to help cope with nicotine withdrawal, to meet clinical guidelines [71] and as in our prior 
work [72] by directing them to the medications  and nicotine replacement  therapy pages of 
http://smokefree.gov. Next, they will be provided with information  on how mindfulness could be useful to 
smokers and will be introduced to the brief mindfulness exercises as part of an online mindfulness  
training (15 min). The “mindful smoking” exercise  will then be triggered by any detected smoking  
episode for 7 days prior to their quit date,  to bring awareness to the present moment  effects  of smoking.  
Finally, for 30 days post-quit, the RAIN exercise will be delivered to smokers  prior to each predicted 
smoking episode  according to their individualized smoking profile,  to help them  cope with cravings.  
They will continue to wear the smartband  to monitor for smoking,  and any detected  smoking episode 
(i.e., relapse) will trigger  the mindful smoking  exercise. More  generally, smokers can “delay”  or “skip” 
any mindfulness exercise and will be compensated for wearing the smartband  as described below. 
Additionally, the mindfulness exercises  will be accessible in their previous text messages for the 
smoker to use any time they have a craving  to smoke. All interactions with the smartband app will be 
time stamped including onset/offset of mindfulness exercises. This trial will test the feasibility of the 
intervention including treatment fidelity, adherence and acceptability,  to inform a larger  randomized  
controlled efficacy trial.
Figure 1. Smartband/smartphone-based  mindfulness  intervention overview. Daily smokers will wear  a 
smartband for 21 days to automatically detect and notify them of smoking  episodes and to obtain individualized 
smoking profiles. They will set a quit date at 30 days. For the 7 days  prior to quitting,  a “mindful smoking”  exercise 
will be triggered by smoking. Finally,  for 30 days post-quit, the “RAIN” exercise will be delivered to the smoker  
prior to each predicted smoking  episode according  to individualized  smoking profile.  Study  surveys (S) will be 
conducted at baseline and days 21, 30 and 60 (end of study). Participants will wear the smartband throughout  the 
study to detect and notify them of smoking  episodes. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  9 of 29D.2. Participant flow 
As previously [4, 5], online advertisements  will link individuals  to a dedicated study website offering 
smartband/smartphone-based treatment  for smoking. Interested individuals  will fill out a short online 
screening survey to determine eligibility and if eligible complete the online consent form to participate. 
Individuals will be excluded for making more than one attempt to complete  the screening  survey,  as 
identified by matching  contact information or IP address.  They will then provide their contact and 
shipping information.  They  will be shipped a smartband and will be provided a “fake phone number” 
(i.e., download code) for the study  app. 
D.3. Onboarding 
Upon receipt of their smartband, participants will take part in a zoom/online  training during which they 
will be provided with step-by-step instructions  on how to utilize  the technology (i.e., onboarding). 
Onboarding involves instructing the user on how to pair the smartband  with their smartphone, 
demonstrating how to wear and use the smartband  and app, and reviewing the study  procedures.  
Participants will receive $10 for onboarding.  A researcher will be available throughout the study  for 
support with any technical problems. Any technical support will be conducted using text, phone, email 
and/or Zoom and Skype for Business  which have  been approved for use with high risk data by Yale.  
After the onboarding session, participants  will complete a baseline survey to assess  demographics and 
other factors (see “Assessments”).
D.4. Outcomes
Quit is defined based on proposed standards [73] as 7 day point  prevalence abstinence and continuous 
abstinence (<5 cigs since quit date).  E-cigarette use will not constitute a relapse but will be monitored  
and reported.  Ratings (Likert items, e.g., timeliness) will be evaluated as % of participants and score 
range (very  low, low, moderate, high, very high),  with feasibility determined  by 75% of participants 
rating an item as moderate or higher  (Aim 1,3). Average responses for a given factor  (e.g., satisfaction) 
on the User Experiences  Questionnaire will be tested similarly, and qualitative analysis of open-ended 
questions will be used to further  evaluate acceptability  (Aim 3). Adherence  cut-offs (e.g.,  time spent  
wearing the smartband) will be 80% (Aim 2). Adherence was high in pilot work (90% of participants 
answered 80% of smoking notifications[14]). 
D.5. Assessments  
Participants will be provided links to online surveys  at baseline, 21 days, 30 days and 60 days  (end of 
study) to measure smoking and other domains (Table 1) and to provide study instructions including  
initial mindfulness training  (15 min). All surveys  will be hosted on Yale Qualtrics  secure survey software 
(https://yalesurvey.qualtrics.com) and optimized  for delivery on mobile  devices. The baseline survey  will 
be automatically provided to eligible participants  upon completing the screening survey and providing  
informed consent.  All following surveys  will be automatically emailed to the participant at each time 
point. For non-completed surveys a reminder  text message will be sent at 1 and 2 days, followed by a 
phone call at 3 days. Demographics and smoking characteristics will be evaluated using standardized 
PhenX Toolkit protocols.  Smoking status  will include one-week point prevalence abstinence and 
continuous abstinence [73], cigarettes per day, and other tobacco use (e.g.,  e-cigarettes). All are 
standardized measures with documented psychometrics. In addition,  across treatment, ratings are 
delivered as EMA after each mindfulness  exercise and include helpfulness, timeliness, craving  and 
affect. At the end of the study,  active participants may be asked to take part in an optional  debriefing  to 
provide feedback about their experiences in the study.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  10 of 29Table 1. Assessments. 
Instrument Name Domain assessed Baseline Day 21 Day 30 Day 60
Demographics Demographics X
Smoking status [73] Smoking X X X X
Time Line Follow Back  [74] (since last 
survey)Daily smoking X X X X
Medication use questionnaire Medications used X X X X
Fagerström Test for Nicotine  Dependence 
[75]Nicotine dependence X X X X
Minnesota Nicotine Withdrawal Scale [76] Withdrawal symptoms X X X X
Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire [77] Mindful awareness X X X X
User experience  questionnaire* User feedback, acceptability X X X
Optional debriefing phone call User feedback, acceptability X
*The User Experiences  Questionnaire [15] includes rating mindfulness exercises (useful,  timely, dose, 
overall timeline); satisfaction (likability, enjoyment, visual appeal, speed,  functionality); burden 
(perceived effort required  to participate);  intent  to continue to use (use or tell friends  to use outside  of 
the study); and technology (video,  sound, image  content, functionality, misuse,  suggested 
improvements). 
D.7. Smoking monitoring, detection and notification 
SmokeBeat (now  called SafeBeing) uses a proprietary machine-learning algorithm to identify the hand-
to-mouth gestures that characterize smoking  a cigarette and differentiate these  from other similar hand 
gestures for a given individual. Briefly, raw data are collected from the accelerometer and gyroscope 
sensors, and following  data stabilization and noise  filtering, the algorithm determines which movements 
being performed  by the individual signify smoking. Upon smoking detection  (3 puffs)  the user is asked 
to confirm or deny  smoking (Fig 2). If confirmed, the algorithm learns about the individualized 
parameters for that smoker. If it turns out to be a false positive, the algorithm learns that as well. In 
case of misses, the user can report any undetected  smoking episode (“Have you smoked,  and we 
didn’t notice?”). This allows the algorithm to learn smoking gestures for the individual  smoker  and 
integrate those  into a user configuration file, which is continually  updated. In this trial, participants will 
wear a smartband on the hand used for smoking  during  waking hours for 60 days total. They  will 
receive a notification on their smartband  and smartphone when smoking is detected and will be asked 
to confirm or deny  smoking. The notification will remain until the user responds.  As stated, they can 
additionally report any missed smoking episodes. Finally, users can actively  search the app for 
statistical information regarding their smoking  patterns, but this information  will never be pushed to the 
user. 
D.8. Brief mindfulness interventions 
a. Mindfulness  instructions 
Study instructions will be provided  via the survey for each study time point (Fig 1). After an initial  21 
days of smoking monitoring, detection and notification [14], users will receive  by email a link to a brief 
(max 15 min) online mindfulness training, including information on how mindfulness could be useful to 
smokers and an introduction to the mindfulness  exercises (as previously  [4, 5]). They will be reminded 
of their quit date in one week and will be instructed to “smoke  mindfully”  for the next week  by 
completing the mindful smoking exercise that will be triggered by detected  smoking episodes  and self-
reported smoking or can be accessed  any time from the app home  page.  They  will be reminded that 
after one week (i.e., after their quit date), they will be pushed  the RAIN  exercise  at each time each day 
that they typically smoke  a cigarette,  to help them cope with cravings, for 30 days. They will be 
reminded that the mindful smoking exercise  will continue to be triggered any time they smoke. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  11 of 29Additional instructions will be provided about  how to delay or skip an exercise. Finally, they will be 
reminded of the upcoming surveys  and of the compensation  for completing the surveys, wearing the 
smartband, and of the study bonus.
b. Mindful  smoking exercise 
For the next 7 days, upon detection and confirmation or self-report of smoking, a mindful smoking  
exercise will be automatically  delivered  to the user via the smartphone app. They will first be asked to 
confirm or deny smoking. Next, the mindful smoking  exercise will be delivered as a 2-minute audio-
guided mindfulness  practice with subtitles. After completing the mindful smoking  exercise, they will be 
asked “How helpful  did you find this exercise?” (visual analog  scale  [VAS] “very helpful” to “not at all”). 
c. RAIN exercise  
For the subsequent 30 days, the RAIN exercise will be automatically delivered  to the user via the 
smartphone app prior to each predicted smoking  episode according to individual  smoking profiles 
obtained as described below. They will first be asked to rate their craving (“How much are you craving a 
cigarette?” VAS “very much” to “not at all”) and affect (“How are you feeling?” VAS “very bad” to “very 
good” 105). Next, they will be prompted to complete the RAIN exercise, also delivered as a 2-minute 
audio-guided mindfulness practice  with subtitles.  After completing RAIN, they will be asked  “How 
helpful did you find this exercise?” (VAS “very helpful” to “not at all”); “How was the timing of this 
exercise?” (VAS “too early” to “too late”); and to again rate their craving  and affect. 
D.9. Individualized  smoking profiles 
Individualized smoking profiles will be obtained  using smartband  data tracking  smoking across the first 
21 days of the study, based on the maximum information possible: (1) average times each cigarette is 
smoked each day; (2) average times each cigarette is smoked  on weekdays versus  weekends; (3) 
average time between  cigarettes; (4) average wake/sleep  time; and (5) average cigarettes per day 
each day. Less  predictable smokers will have less data to inform  the prediction algorithm. At the very 
least, their waking hours will be divided by the number of cigarettes smoked per day and a prompt will 
be sent at random times in each interval.  How much  smartband tracking data is needed to adequately 
develop an individualized smoking  profile  is a main question in this feasibility trial. We will use this data 
to then deliver RAIN to the user for 30 days after their quit date. RAIN will be delivered 5 minutes prior 
to each predicted smoking episode during waking hours. 
D.10. Adherence  
Adherence to wearing the smartband will be monitored daily and participants will be sent automated 
reminders and/or text message  reminders if their smartband is not active  for 12-24 hours, followed by a 
phone call if their smartband is not active for 2 days.  As an incentive,  participants will be paid $1/day to 
wear the smartband  during waking hours (≥12 hours/day;  current  smartband battery life is 3 days).  
Mindfulness and RAIN exercise completions  will also be monitored daily, and participants will be sent 
either a rewarding text message if there  is at least one completion from the day before,  or an 
encouraging text message if the participant  did not complete any exercises the day before. Additionally, 
to encourage  participation in mindfulness  training, we will add $10 for completing the initial  mindfulness 
instructions. Finally, there  will be a study  completion bonus of $50. 
To improve adherence, study compensation will be: $10 upon completion of the zoom/online training, 
$20 upon completion of the second study  survey, and $10 upon completion of the third study  survey.  At 
the end of the study, they will be paid $1 per day for each day of the 60-day study that they have worn 
their smartband for 12 waking hours  (up to $60).  At the end of the study, they will also be paid $10 for 
the end of study survey, and a $50 bonus  payment  if they have completed  all parts  of the study. Total 
study payment  will be up to $160  (up to $40 paid upon each survey  completion,  up to $120 paid at 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  12 of 29the end of the study). Please note that all study equipment  (smartband,  CO-monitor, if applicable)  must  
be returned before the final study payment. Finally,  they may be invited to take part in an optional  
debriefing at the end of the study,  for which they will be paid an additional  $10.
5.Genetic Testing   N/A ☒
6.Subject Population: Provide a detailed  description  of the types of human  subjects  who will be recruited into 
this study.
Participants (N=110: n=10 for the pilot study, n=100 for the feasibility trial): Inclusion criteria: (a) at 
least 18 years of age; (b) daily smokers (≥5 CPD); (c) for at least  2 years;  (d) own an Android  phone 
or iPhone; (f) fluent in English as content is only available in English*;  and (g) motivated  to quit 
smoking, as indicated by ≥ 18 of 20 on the Action  subscale of the Readiness to Change  Questionnaire 
[78] as previously  [4, 5]. Exclusion criteria: (a) e-cigarette use (some days/every day) because the 
smartband technology is not yet able to distinguish e-cigarette use. Recent reports  indicate that 
10.6% of current cigarette  smokers had used e-cigarettes in the past 30 days and 3.6% regularly use 
e-cigarettes (≥20 of the past 30-days) [79]. Therefore, we do not expect dual use to negatively  impact 
recruitment. Other tobacco  product use including e-cigarettes will be monitored  at each time point 
(see “Assessments”). No other  exclusion criteria. Possible confounds  include concurrent use of quit 
smoking and other psychotropic medications. These will be monitored for confounding  effects using 
our medication use questionnaire.
*Materials will be developed in Spanish  during the course of this research, however only English-
speaking individuals  will be currently enrolled.
7.Subject classification:  Check off all classifications of subjects  that will be specifically recruited for enrollment in 
the research project. Will subjects  who may require additional  safeguards or other considerations be enrolled 
in the study? If so, identify the population of subjects requiring  special safeguards and provide a justification  
for their  involvement.
☐Children ☐ Healthy ☐Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus
☐Non-English Speaking ☐ Prisoners ☐Economically  disadvantaged  persons
☐Decisionally Impaired ☐ Employees ☐Pregnant women  and/or fetuses
☐Yale Students ☐ Females of childbearing potential
NOTE: Is this research  proposal  designed  to enroll children who are wards of the state  as potential subjects?
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
8.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: What  are the criteria  used to determine  subject  inclusion or exclusion?
Inclusion criteria:  (a) At least  18 years  of age; (b) daily smokers (≥5 CPD); (c) for at least 2 years; (d) 
own an Android phone or iPhone; (f) fluent in English as content is only available  in English; and (g) 
motivated to quit smoking, as indicated by ≥ 18 of 20 on the Action subscale of the Readiness  to 
Change Questionnaire 90 as previously  [4, 5]. 
Exclusion criteria: (a) e-cigarette  use (some days/every day) because the smartband technology is 
not yet able to distinguish  e-cigarette use. Recent  reports indicate that 10.6% of current cigarette 
smokers had used  e-cigarettes in the past 30 days and 3.6% regularly use e-cigarettes  (≥20 of the 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  13 of 29past 30-days)  [79]. Therefore, we do not expect dual use to negatively impact recruitment. Other 
tobacco product  use including  e-cigarettes  will be monitored at each time point  (see “Assessments”). 
No other  exclusion  criteria. Possible confounds  include concurrent  use of quit smoking and other  
psychotropic medications. These will be monitored  for confounding effects using our medication use 
questionnaire at each study time point.
9.How will eligibility be determined,  and by whom?  Write here
As previously [4, 5], online advertisements  will link individuals  to a dedicated study website offering 
smartband/smartphone-based treatment  for smoking. Interested individuals  will fill out a short online 
screening survey to determine eligibility and if eligible complete the online consent form to participate. 
Individuals will be excluded for making more than one attempt to complete  the screening  survey  as 
indicated by duplicate  contact information  or IP address. 
10.Risks: Describe the reasonably  foreseeable risks, including risks to subject  privacy, discomforts, or 
inconveniences associated with  subjects  participating in the research. 
This study  involves wearing a smartband  to monitor, record  and reduce smoking;  with additional 
notifications, mindfulness  exercises and app-based questions (i.e., confirm/deny smoking, rate quit 
smoking messages) and surveys at each time-point. All study procedures are mobile/online. The 
alternative to participation  is not to participate.  The potential risks are minor.
1.Research measurements  – Smoking monitoring, smoking self-report,  app-based notifications  
and ecological  momentary assessments (i.e., ratings), and study  surveys.  All are noninvasive 
and should add no risk. The major disadvantage  is the time taken to complete them  and that 
they may disrupt other activities.
2.Loss of confidentiality  – Data at risk for loss of confidentiality include online  survey data and 
app-based data.
3.Nicotine withdrawal – Subjects  may experience nicotine withdrawal such  as craving cigarettes, 
mild anxiety, restlessness, irritability, difficulty concentrating,  loss of energy and excessive 
hunger. These are normal symptoms that people get when they do not smoke, and they can be 
uncomfortable but are not life threatening. They are minimal compared to the health  risks of 
continued smoking.
11.Minimizing Risks: Describe the manner in which the above-mentioned  risks  will be minimized.
(i)Research measurements: Our past experience with these and related measures indicates that 
they are acceptable to subjects.
(ii)Confidentiality:
i.Limits to confidentiality: Participants will be informed that the research material collected  will 
be for research purposes  only. All participants will be specifically told that we will not reveal 
any personal  information collected as part of the research procedures,  including  their 
reported substance use. However, there is always the possibility that participation in this 
study may make others, such as friends and family members,  aware of their information.  
They will be told that if they do not feel comfortable  with this, then they should not 
participate. However, they will be told that if they report  any information to us about abuse  or 
homicidal or suicidal behavior,  we will be required to report this information to the 
appropriate authorities. They will be informed that their de-identified data will be shared with 
NIH. All limits to confidentiality will be explained to all participants. Specifically, they will be 
told that we will protect  the participant’s  confidentiality  and that we will not share any 
personal information. This will be clearly stipulated in the consent forms.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  14 of 29ii.Data collection  and storage: Data collection  and storage will be conducted according to 
standardized protocols.  All research data collection and storage will be managed by Yale 
personnel who have  received  the proper  training  by Yale to ensure that research is in 
compliance with the current applicable  laws, regulations  and Yale’s  policies and procedures 
in support of the protection  of research participants. All research personnel  are required to 
participate in and document  training in protection of human subjects and the responsible  
conduct of scientific  research.  Only authorized research  personnel will have access  to the 
information gathered in this study. All study data will ultimately reside  on Yale encrypted  
computers. Quantitative data will be entered into a password-protected SPSS database. 
The organizational structure used to ensure  quality of data in this study  include:  (a) 
preliminary review  of all data for completeness  and coding errors  by the PI; and (b) 
utilization of error-  checking  statistical procedures. All information will be identified  by code 
and will not be linked  to personally-identifying  information.  Patient names or other identifiers 
such as social  security number,  initials, birth date will not be used to identify any records.  
Only a code  number  will identify  the individual research records.  The code number will not 
be based on any information  that could  be used to identify the subjects (for example, social 
security number, initials, birth date, etc.). The master  list linking names to code numbers will 
be kept separately from the research data on Yale encrypted  computers. Only approved  
members of the research team will have access to personally-identifying  information (e.g., 
phone numbers, addresses). This information  will be stored separately on Yale encrypted 
computers. 
iii.App data: App data is collected,  managed and stored according to standardized protocols at 
Somatix, Inc. Data is collected from the smartphone app to the Somatix  backend platform 
and to the database running over Hypertext Transfer Protocol  for secure  communication  
(HTTPS). All data is stored on Amazon Web Services  (AWS)  - Cloud Computing, Relational  
Database Service  (Amazon  RDS) for MySQL,  secured using Amazon’s advanced 
capabilities. Any personal-identifying  information (e.g.,  location)  will be encrypted in the 
database. Only authorized  Somatix,  Inc. personnel  will have access to this database. The 
database will only be accessed by Somatix’s  password-protected computers. The participant  
will be identified  only by a fake phone number in Somatix  database. Somatix will not have 
access to the key linking a participant’s  personal  information  (real phone  number)  to this 
fake phone  number. Only the fake phone number will be associated  with the participant’s 
data in the Somatix database.
(iii)Nicotine withdrawal:  Nicotine withdrawal can be uncomfortable  but is not life threatening and the 
risks are minimal  compared to the health risks of continued smoking. Subjects will be provided 
information on how to best tolerate their withdrawal symptoms.  Subjects will be encouraged  at 
study initiation to use nicotine replacement therapy and quit smoking medications, by referring 
them to medications  information on https://smokefree.gov. 
(iv)The involvement of Somatix  Inc. does not engage them in human subjects research, therefore 
human protection training is not required by Yale. To ensure that the company securely maintain 
the study data,  we have obtained  the required Security Design Review  (SDR) by Yale’s 
Information Security Department and establish a Business  Associate Agreement  between  Yale’s  
HIPAA Privacy Office  and Somatix Inc. The SDR process  ensures  that the security and 
application of systems  are in line with best practices  and standards at Yale.
12.Data and Safety Monitoring  Plan:  Include  an appropriate Data and Safety  Monitoring  Plan (DSMP) based  on 
the investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HIC will make the final determination of the risk to 
subjects.)
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  15 of 29a. What is the investigator’s assessment of the overall  risk level for subjects  participating in this 
study? 
Minimal  risk
b. If children are involved, what  is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for the 
children participating  in this study? 
NA
c. Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan. Examples of DSMPs are  
available here  http://your.yale.edu/policies-procedures/forms/420-fr-01-data-and-safety-
monitoring-plans-templates for
i.Minimal risk
ii.Greater than minimal
A formal Data and Safety  Monitoring Plan has been  made for this study  in line with NCCIH guidelines  
(see attached).
Briefly, the Principal Investigator (Dr. Garrison) will be responsible  for assuring protocol compliance and 
conducting quarterly  safety reviews which will be provided for review to the Independent Study 
Monitoring Committee. During  the review process, the Principal Investigator  will evaluate whether the 
study should continue unchanged, require modification/amendment, or close  to enrollment.
 
This monitoring will be consistent with NIH policy regarding the protection  of human subjects in 
research, and FDA guidance on statistical practices  for clinical trials (ICH E9) and good  clinical  
practices (ICH E6). In general, the data to be reviewed will include screening data, baseline data, 
efficacy data, and safety data. 
This project  presents minimal risks to the subjects and adverse events or other problems are not 
anticipated. The Principal  Investigator  will conduct  a review of all adverse events and determine the 
attribution and grade  of severity of the adverse  event by using  the following scales:  
Attribution of Risk Categories: 
Definite: Adverse event(s) will clearly be related to investigational  agent(s) or other intervention 
Probable: Adverse event(s) will likely  be related to investigational agent(s)
Possible: Adverse event(s) may be related  to investigational agent(s)
Unlikely: Adverse event(s) will doubtfully be related to investigational agent(s) 
Unrelated: Adverse event(s) will clearly not be related to the investigational agents(s) 
Grades of Risk: 
0:  No adverse  event  or within normal limits 
1:  Mild adverse event  
2:  Moderate adverse  event 
3:  Severe adverse  event  resulting in hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a 
persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect 
4:  Life-threatening  or disabling  adverse event  
5:  Fatal adverse event  
This process  is described in more detail in the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (attached).
In the unlikely event that such events occur, serious  and unanticipated and related adverse  events  or 
unanticipated problems  involving risks to subjects or others  will be reported immediately (if possible),  
followed by a written report within 7 calendar days of the Principal Investigator  becoming aware of the 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  16 of 29event to the Yale IRB, Independent Monitoring Monitor(s), and NCCIH. Any other unanticipated 
problem will be reported to the IRB, Independent  Safety Monitor(s),  and NCCIH within  14 days  of the PI 
becoming aware of the problem. 
To ensure that the design, conduct, and reporting  of research for this project is free from bias resulting 
from Investigator financial conflicts of interest, the project  will be conducted in accordance with NIH 
Financial Conflict of Interest (FCOI)  regulation, Responsibility  of Applicants for Promoting Objectivity in 
Research for which PHS Funding is Sought (42 CFR Part 50 Subpart F), applicable to grants and 
cooperative agreements (2011 Revised Regulations) and Yale University  Policy on Conflict of Interest. 
 
13.Statistical Considerations: Describe the statistical  analyses that support the study design. 
Overview: Quit is defined based  on proposed standards [73] as 7 day point prevalence  abstinence and 
continuous abstinence (<5 cigs since quit date). E-cigarette use will not constitute  a relapse but will be 
monitored and reported. Ratings (Likert  items,  e.g., timeliness) will be evaluated as % of participants 
and score range (very low, low, moderate,  high,  very high), with feasibility determined  by 75% of 
participants rating an item as moderate  or higher. Average responses for a given  factor (e.g., 
satisfaction) on the User Experiences Questionnaire will be tested similarly, and qualitative analysis of 
open-ended questions will be used to further evaluate  acceptability. Adherence cut-offs (e.g., time 
spent wearing the smartband) will be 80%. Adherence was high in pilot work (90%  of participants 
answered 80% of smoking notifications [14]).
Aim 1. To assess treatment fidelity for a smartband/smartphone-based mindfulness  
intervention: (1) Whether we can accurately detect smoking episodes  will be determined by the 
percent of smoking  episodes detected and the rate of false alarms in the first 21 days  of the study 
during which  smokers are wearing  the smartband to track smoking  and upon  smoking  detection are 
asked to confirm  or deny  smoking and self-report any undetected smoking  episodes.  We expect to 
replicate previous findings of >80% detection and negligible rate of false alarms  [14]. (2) Whether we 
can deliver mindful smoking  triggered by smoking episodes will be determined by the percent of mindful  
smoking exercises correctly triggered by detected smoking episodes and the rate of false  alarms in the 
next 7 days of the study during which any detected smoking episode triggers a prompt  that first asks 
the smoker to confirm  or deny smoking  and then launches the mindful  smoking exercise. Again, we 
expect to replicate  previous findings  of >80% detection and negligible  rate of false  alarms [14]. (3) 
Whether we can deliver RAIN to predicted smoking episodes will be measured as average timeliness 
ratings in the next 30 days of the study  during which RAIN is delivered prior to predicted smoking 
episodes and the smoker is asked to rate whether  the exercise was delivered on time. Additionally, we 
will analyze  the craving ratings obtained before participants complete RAIN,  as a proxy  for whether or 
not we have targeted moments of high craving. Ratings (Likert items for timeliness,  craving) will be 
evaluated as % of participants and score  range (very low, low, moderate, high, very high), with 
feasibility determined by 75% of participants rating an item (timeliness,  craving)  as moderate or higher. 
We expect on average  moderate to high timeliness and craving  ratings, suggesting that RAIN was 
delivered in time to help cope with cravings. These and other  aspects of treatment  fidelity  will be 
reported according to recommended  guidelines [17].
Aim 2. To assess adherence to a smartband/smartphone-based brief mindfulness intervention: 
Adherence will be measured  as: (1) percent  of time spent wearing the smartband across the study; (2) 
percent of smoking  notifications answered (i.e., confirmed or denied) across  the study; (3) percent of 
mindful smoking exercises completed; (4) percent of EMA ratings answered; and (5) percent of RAIN  
exercises completed. We expect a high response  rate based on an earlier study in daily smokers 
(12±2.9 CPD)  in which 93% of smartband-based smoking  notifications  were responded to and 90% of 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  17 of 29the participants answered more than 80% of the notifications  [14]. Additionally, in our trial of 
smartphone-based mindfulness  training,  response rates to EMA were high at 3±2 assessments per day 
evaluating craving, smoking and other  factors [4, 5]. Adherence cut-offs (e.g., time spent wearing the 
smartband) will be 80%.  Adherence was high in pilot work (90%  of participants answered  80% of 
smoking notifications  [14]).
Aim 3. To assess acceptability of a smartband/smartphone-based brief mindfulness 
intervention: Immediately following each brief mindfulness exercise, smokers will be asked “How 
helpful did you find this exercise?” Acceptability  will be measured as mean helpfulness ratings,  
separately for mindful  smoking and RAIN.  Helpfulness will be evaluated  as % of participants  and score  
range (very  low, low, moderate, high, very high),  with feasibility determined  by 75% of participants 
rating helpfulness as moderate or higher. Acceptability will additionally be evaluated from feedback  on 
the User  Experiences Questionnaire [15] which includes  rating  mindfulness  exercises  (useful, timely, 
dose, overall timeline);  satisfaction (likability,  enjoyment, visual appeal, speed, functionality);  burden 
(perceived effort required  to participate);  intent  to continue to use (use or tell friends  to use outside  of 
the study); and technology (video,  sound, image  content, functionality, misuse,  suggested 
improvements). Average responses for a given factor  (e.g., satisfaction) on the User Experiences  
Questionnaire will be evaluated similarly to ratings, and qualitative analysis of open-ended  questions 
will be used  to further evaluate acceptability. For example, we will evaluate  the acceptability  of the 
number of notifications/interventions, which are essentially matched to true/predicted cigarettes per 
day. 
Secondary data analysis:  As a secondary  aim, we will evaluate change  in smoking (cigarettes per 
day) and abstinence at the end-of-study survey.  Abstinence will be measured by: 1) self-reported one 
week point prevalence abstinence and continuous  abstinence (> 5 cigarettes since quit date), 2) 
automatic smartband  smoking monitoring and detection for 7 days prior to the assessment, and, 3) a 
random subset of individuals  (50%) who report one-week point-prevalence  abstinence at end-of-study  
will be shipped  carbon  monoxide breath monitors (coVita, LLC),  or saliva  kits (Alere  iScreen OFD  
Cotinine Saliva Test) to confirm abstinence  from smoking (<10 ppm or negative  saliva  test) via video 
chat with a researcher as previously [4, 5] or by submitting a recorded video via email or text. 
Abstinence rates will be reported  for each measure.  These data will be used  to provide preliminary 
evidence about  whether  smartband-based smoking  monitoring  can inform  measures  of abstinence. We 
will use descriptive statistics to inform future studies. Additionally, all interactions with the app will be 
automatically tracked and evaluated related to engagement and secondary  outcomes.
Missing data: In our recent trial [4, 5], most  individuals  dropped out upon enrollment. Treatment 
starters used the app 17±8  out of 22 days and completed ratings  (EMA) on14±9 days. We then had 
53% treatment completers –defined as 60% of treatment.  Retention to the primary 6mo. survey was 
84% despite whether subjects had engaged with treatment. Therefore, we do not anticipate significant  
missing survey data. We are unable to estimate  retention at each step but will measure this. Relevant 
to our aims, other missing data may include smoking data from not wearing the smartband, or ratings 
data. Primary analyses will use missing at random (MAR) assumptions but we will also perform  
sensitivity analyses under  reasonable missing  not at random (MNAR) [80, 81]. For singly-measured 
outcomes we will use multiple imputation  [82, 83] under MAR (primary) and MNAR (secondary 
analyses). For longitudinal outcomes, our primary approach will be full-information  maximum likelihood  
under MAR  [84]. We will fit pattern mixture longitudinal models to test the effect of deviations  from MAR 
[85]. We will compare retained  vs. dropouts on different characteristics to inform the MNAR models.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  18 of 29SECTION II: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS , BIOLOGICS, RADIOTRACERS,  PLACEBOS AND DEVICES
If this section (or one of its parts, A or B) is not applicable,  check  off N/A and delete  the rest of the section.
A.  RADIOTRACERS ☒N/A
B.  DRUGS/BIOLOGICS    ☒N/A
 C.  DEVICES  ☒N/A
SECTION III: RECRUITMENT/CONSENT AND ASSENT  PROCEDURES 
1.Targeted Enrollment:  Give the number of subjects:  
a.Targeted for enrollment at Yale for this protocol: N=110 but we will enroll  N=150  to account for 
estimated high attrition as in our previous  randomized clinical  trial of a smartphone app for 
smoking cessation and other similar trials.
b.If this is a multi-site study, give the total number  of subjects targeted across all sites: Write here
2.Indicate recruitment methods below.  Attach  copies of any recruitment materials that will be used.
☒Flyers ☒ Internet/web postings ☐ Radio
☐ Posters ☐ Mass  email solicitation ☐ Telephone
☐ Letter ☒ Departmental/Center website ☐ Television
☐ Medical  record review* ☐ Departmental/Center research boards ☐ Newspaper
☐ Departmental/Center newsletters ☒ Web-based clinical  trial registries ☒ Clinicaltrails.gov 
☒ YCCI Recruitment database ☒ Social Media  (Twitter/Facebook):  
☒ Other: 
Google, Facebook, Reddit ads
* Requests for medical  records should be made  through JDAT  as described  at 
http://medicine.yale.edu/ycci/oncore/availableservices/datarequests/datarequests.aspx
3. Recruitment Procedures: 
a.Describe how potential subjects  will be identified.  Write here
b.Describe how potential subjects  are contacted. Write here
c.Who is recruiting potential  subjects? Write here
As previously [4, 5], online advertisements  will link individuals  to a dedicated study website offering 
smartband/smartphone-based treatment  for smoking. Interested individuals  will fill out a short online 
screening survey to determine eligibility. Our advertising consultant (Kevin Danaher) will run the online 
advertising recruitment effort that does not involve  any personally identifying  information. Potential 
participants only put PHI into the screening survey accessed only by HIC approved  members  of the 
research team. To meet  our targeted enrollment, we will use demographic and geographic targeted  
advertising, including targeted ads to men, older individuals,  individuals with lower  income and 
education, and specific geographic regions.  We will use guidelines  from the NIH toolkit, "Primary 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  19 of 29Barriers and Facilitators to Participation in Clinical  Research":  1) compensation, 2) short/flexible 
appointments, 3) clear communication in all study materials, 4) good relationships to improve retention,  
5) constant contact through follow-up; and from recent work  on barriers to participation  in mHealth 
research [86]: 6) clear  explanation of the technology, 7) increased  sensitivity  to data privacy  and 
confidentiality, 8) systematic tracking of critical factors such as language preference, country  of origin, 
health literacy and socioeconomic status at screening and enrollment to identify points at which  
underserved communities  are selected  out, to inform the larger trial. If we are not meeting our targeted  
recruitment, additional efforts will be made such as flyers, websites and recruitment databases,  as 
indicated above.
4.Assessment of Current  Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team have a direct existing clinical relationship  with any 
potential subject? 
☐Yes, all subjects
☐Yes, some of the subjects
☒No
If yes, describe the nature of this relationship. Write  here
5.Request for waiver  of HIPAA authorization: (When  requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for either  the 
entire study, or for recruitment  purposes  only.  Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of a phone or email  
screen, you must  request  a HIPAA  waiver for recruitment purposes.)
Choose one: 
☒ For entire  study  
☐ For recruitment/screening purposes only
☐ For inclusion of non-English speaking subject if short form is being used  and there  is no translated  HIPAA 
research authorization form available on the University’s  HIPAA website at hipaa.yale.edu.
i.Describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for use/disclosure of this 
data: Write  here
ii.If requesting a waiver of signed authorization, describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the 
subject’s signed authorization for use/disclosure of this data:  
We are requesting a waiver of signed  authorization  for the entire study. Subjects from across 
the United States will enroll online,  receive treatment via their smartphones,  and perform all 
assessments online. It is impossible-and contrary to the structure  of the study-to meet any of 
the subjects face-to-face.  
The investigator assures that the protected health information for which  a Waiver of Authorization has been 
requested will not be reused or disclosed to any person  or entity other than those  listed in this application, except 
as required by law, for authorized oversight  of this research study, or as specifically approved for use in another 
study by an IRB.
Researchers are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale HIPAA-Covered 
entity must be accounted for in the “accounting  for disclosures log”, by subject name,  purpose,  date, recipients,  
and a description of information provided.  Logs are to be forwarded to the Deputy  HIPAA Privacy Officer.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  20 of 296.Process of Consent/Assent: Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will be obtained, 
including parental permission  or surrogate permission  and the steps taken to ensure  subjects’ independent 
decision-making. 
As previously [4, 5], online advertisements  will link individuals  to a dedicated study website offering 
smartband/smartphone-based treatment  for smoking. Interested individuals  will fill out a short online 
screening survey to determine eligibility and if eligible complete the online consent form to 
participate. Individuals will be excluded for making  more than one attempt to complete the 
screening survey. The informed consent  form will be provided online to subjects in advance of 
participation. The consent form includes a description of the project, describes the study  
procedures, risks and inconveniences,  benefits,  treatment  alternatives, confidentiality, voluntary 
participation and withdrawal, economic considerations, and investigator  contact  information.  A 
subject will encounter the online consent  form when  they are deemed eligible  for the study after 
completing a short  screening survey. Because there will be no one to explain the consent form, it 
will be as short, concise, and clear as possible  for ease of understanding. If a potential subject has 
any questions regarding  the study or consent  form,  they will be able to email or call one of the study 
investigators. Although subjects will not be able to be assessed to ensure their understanding of 
consent procedures,  there  is minimum to no risk in participating in the study and a subject can quit 
at any time by stopping  their participation.  Subjects who wish to participate will click “I accept”.  A 
copy of the consent  form will be automatically  emailed to the subject. We have used this approach 
previously in online/mobile technology-based research studies.
7.Evaluation of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide  Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the personnel obtaining 
consent will assess the potential subject’s  ability  and capacity to consent to the research being proposed. 
A few questions will be included after the online consent form to evaluate whether the subject 
understands the study procedures. They will only be enrolled (i.e., shipped the study smartband) if 
they indicate understanding the study procedures. They will be provided with study contact  
information (text, email)  if they do not understand study procedures.  Although  subjects will not be 
able to be assessed in-person to ensure their understanding of consent procedures there is 
minimum to no risk in participating in the study  and a subject can quit at any time by stopping  their 
participation.
8.Non-English  Speaking  Subjects:  Explain  provisions in place to ensure comprehension for research involving  
non-English speaking subjects.  If enrollment of these  subjects is anticipated, translated  copies of all consent 
materials must be submitted for approval prior to use. 
This study  will not include non-English  speaking  subjects
As a limited alternative to the above  requirement, will you use the short form* for consenting process  if you 
unexpectedly encounter a non-English speaking individual  interested in study  participation and the translation of 
the long  form is not possible prior  to intended enrollment?  YES ☐  NO ☒
Note* If more  than 2 study participants are enrolled using a short form translated  into the same language, then 
the full consent form should be translated into that language for use the next time a subject speaking  that 
language is to be enrolled.
Several translated short form templates  are available on the HRPP website (yale.edu/hrpp)  and translated HIPAA  
Research Authorization Forms are available on the HIPAA website (hipaa.yale.edu). If the translation  of the short 
form is not available on our website, then the translated  short form needs  to be submitted to the IRB office for 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  21 of 29approval via modification  prior to enrolling  the subject.   Please review the guidance and presentation on use of 
the short form available  on the HRPP website.
If using a short  form  without  a translated HIPAA Research  Authorization Form,  please request a HIPAA waiver in 
the section above. 
9. Consent  Waiver: In certain circumstances, the HIC may grant  a waiver of signed consent, or a full waiver 
of consent, depending on the study.  If you will request either a waiver of consent,  or a waiver of signed  consent 
for this study, complete  the appropriate section below.  
☐Not Requesting  any consent waivers 
☒Requesting a waiver of signed consent:
☐ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment,  the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)
☒ Entire Study (Note that an information  sheet may be required.)
 For a waiver of signed consent,  address the following:
Would  the signed consent form be the only  record  linking the subject and the research?  YES ☐  NO ☐ 
Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal  risk to subjects? YES ☐  NO ☐
 
OR
Does the research pose  greater  than minimal  risk? YES ☐    NO☒ 
Does the research include any activities  that would require  signed consent in a non-research  context? YES ☐   
NO ☒
 ☐ Requesting a waiver  of consent:
☐ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment,  the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)
☐ Entire  Study  
 
For a full waiver of consent,  please  address all of the following:
Does the research pose  greater  than minimal  risk to subjects?   
☐ Yes If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot  be granted.  
☐ No
Will the waiver  adversely affect  subjects’  rights  and welfare? YES ☐    NO☐
Why  would the research be impracticable to conduct  without the waiver? Write here
Where  appropriate,  how will pertinent information  be returned to, or shared  with subjects at a later  date?  
Write  here
SECTION  IV: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH  SUBJECTS
    Confidentiality & Security  of Data:
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  22 of 291.What protected health information (medical  information along  with the HIPAA identifiers) about subjects will 
be collected and used  for the research?    
The following  data will be collected from all participants:
1.Demographics, smoking characteristics and contact information (PHI include: name, 
address, email address, telephone number, Internet Protocol (IP) address, year of 
birth, age) – will be collected via the secure Yale Qualtrics  Survey Tool 
(YaleSurvey.qualtrics.com), approved for use with EPI and EPHI records
2.Survey data at each  time-point – additional  survey data (standardized questionnaires) 
will be collected via the secure  Yale Qualtrics Survey Tool
3.Smoking will be measured via smartband and smartphone app, managed by Somatix, 
Inc., and pushed  to Yale using  a coded subject identification number (“fake phone  #”).
4.App notifications questions (i.e., confirm/deny smoking, ecological  momentary 
assessments of craving, etc.) will be collected using a study app.
5.App usage (e.g., onset/offset of mindfulness  exercises) using Yale Secure Qualtrics.
2.How will the research data be collected, recorded  and stored? Write  here
a.Data collection and storage: Data collection and storage will be conducted according to 
standardized protocols. All research data collection and storage will be managed by Yale 
personnel who have received the proper  training  by Yale to ensure that research is in 
compliance with the current applicable  laws, regulations and Yale’s  policies and 
procedures in support  of the protection of research  participants.  All research personnel 
are required  to participate in and document training in protection  of human subjects and 
the responsible  conduct of scientific research. Only authorized  research personnel will 
have access to the information gathered in this study. All study data will ultimately reside 
on Yale encrypted computers. Quantitative data will be entered into a password-
protected SPSS database housed on Yale encrypted computers. The organizational  
structure used  to ensure quality of data in this study  include: (a) preliminary review of all 
data for completeness  and coding errors by the PI; and (b) utilization of error-checking 
statistical procedures. All information  will be identified by code and will not be linked to 
personally-identifying information. Patient  names  or other  identifiers such as social 
security number, initials, birth date will not be used to identify any records. Only a code 
number will identify the individual  research  records. The code number will not be based 
on any information that could be used to identify the subjects (for example, social 
security number, initials, birth date, etc.). The master list linking names to code numbers 
will be kept separately from the research data on Yale encrypted  computers. Only 
approved members of the research team will have access to personally-identifying 
information (e.g., phone numbers, addresses).  This information will be stored separately 
on Yale encrypted computers.
b.App data: App data is collected, managed and stored according to standardized 
protocols at Somatix, Inc. Data is collected  from the smartphone app to the Somatix 
backend platform and to the database  running over Hypertext Transfer Protocol for 
secure communication (HTTPS). All data is stored  on Amazon Web Services  (AWS)  - 
Cloud Computing,  Relational  Database Service (Amazon RDS) for MySQL,  secured 
using Amazon’s advanced capabilities. Any personal-identifying information  (e.g.,  
location) will be encrypted in the database.  Only authorized Somatix,  Inc. personnel  will 
have access to this database. The database will only be accessed by Somatix’s 
password-protected computers. The participant will be identified  only by a fake phone  
number in Somatix database. Somatix will not have  access to the key linking a 
participant’s personal information  (real phone number) to this fake phone  number. Only 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  23 of 29the fake phone number  will be associated with the participant’s data in the Somatix  
database.
3.How will the digital data be stored?  ☐CD  ☐DVD  ☐Flash Drive  ☐Portable  Hard  Drive   ☒Secured Server   
☒Laptop Computer  ☒Desktop Computer   ☒Other AWS
4.What methods and procedures will be used to safeguard the confidentiality and security of  the identifiable 
study data and the storage media indicated  above during and after the subject’s participation in the study? 
Data collection and storage will be conducted  according to standardized protocols. All research 
personnel are required to participate in and document training in protection  of human subjects and the 
responsible conduct of scientific research.  All information will be identified  by code and will not be 
linked to subject  name  except as described  above.  All data analyses will be performed under approved 
HIC protocols. Hardcopies  of the questionnaires  without identifying  information will be stored in a 
locked file cabinet in the study office All storage media will be password protected using Yale approved  
protocols.
To ensure that the Somatix, Inc., securely  maintain the study data, we have obtained the required 
Security Design Review (SDR) by Yale’s Information Security Department and establish a Business  
Associate Agreement between Yale’s  HIPAA Privacy  Office and Somatix, Inc. The SDR  process  
ensures that the security and application  of systems are in line with best practices and standards  at 
Yale.
All portable devices  must contain encryption  software, per University Policy 5100.  If there  is a technical reason a 
device cannot  be encrypted  please submit an exception  request to the Information  Security,  Policy and Compliance 
Office by clicking on url http://its.yale.edu/egrc or email it.compliance@yale.edu
5.What will be done with the data  when the research  is completed? Are there plans to destroy the identifiable 
data? If yes, describe how, by whom and when  identifiers  will be destroyed. If no, describe how  the data and/or 
identifiers will be secured. Write here
Data collected in the study  will reside in our electronic storage mechanism for 7 years. All data 
analyses (deidentified and coded  as described above) will be performed under  approved  HIC protocols. 
6.If appropriate, has a Certificate of Confidentiality  been obtained?
This project has NIH funding (1R34AT010365-01) and therefore a CoC was automatically issued in 
accordance with NIH CoC Policy (NOT-OD-17-109).
SECTION V: POTENTIAL BENEFITS
Potential Benefits: Identify any benefits  that may be reasonably expected to result  from  the research, either  to 
the subject(s) or to society  at large. (Payment  of subjects is not considered a benefit in this context of the risk 
benefit assessment.) 
By participating in this research participants  will receive free smoking  cessation  technology  (smartband,  
smartphone app). By offering free quitting strategies, this study  may help to engage more smokers into 
treatment, thus reducing the enormous health care costs and loss of lives associated with cigarette 
smoking.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  24 of 29         SECTION  VI: RESEARCH  ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC  CONSIDERATIONS
1.Alternatives: What other  alternatives are available to the study subjects outside  of the research? 
Alternatives to treatment in this study are currently approved  over the counter  smoking  cessation  
treatments such as the nicotine patch,  nicotine gum, and nicotine  lozenge. Subjects may get 
prescriptions from their physicians  for varenicline, bupropion, the nicotine nasal spray,  or the 
nicotine inhaler.  Subjects will be recommended  to use quit smoking  medications  while  participating 
in this study.
2.Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe any payments that will be made to subjects, 
the amount and schedule of payments,  and the conditions for receiving  this compensation.
Study compensation will be: $10 upon  completion  of the zoom/online  training, $20 upon  completion of 
the second study survey, and $10 upon  completion  of the third study survey.  At the end of the study, 
they will be paid $1 per day for each day of the 60-day study that they have worn their smartband for 12 
waking hours (up to $60). At the end of the study,  they will also be paid $10 for the end of study survey,  
and a $50 bonus payment if they have completed  all parts of the study. Total study payment will be 
up to $160 (up to $40 paid upon each survey completion, up to $120 paid at the end of the study).  
Please note that all study equipment (smartband,  CO-monitor,  saliva  kit if applicable) must be returned  
before the final study payment. Finally, they may be invited to take part in an optional  debriefing  at the 
end of the study, for which they will be paid an additional $10. Study  payments will be by amazon.com 
gift card.
3.Costs  for Participation (Economic Considerations): Clearly  describe the subject’s costs  associated with 
participation in the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that will be provided at no cost 
to subjects.  
To participate in the study, participants  will be required to already own a smartphone.
4.In Case of Injury: This section is required for any research involving more than  minimal risk, and for minimal 
risk research that presents  the potential for physical harm (e.g.,  research involving blood draws).
a.Will medical  treatment  be available if research-related injury occurs? Write here
b.Where and from whom may treatment  be obtained? Write here
c.Are there any limits to the treatment  being  provided?  Write  here
d.Who will pay for this treatment? Write here
e.How  will the medical  treatment be accessed  by subjects? Write  here
This protocol is deemed to be of minimal  risk. If subjects  develop a mental or physical problem as 
a result of involvement in this study, they will seek their own treatment independently  from the 
study. The subject’s  insurance carrier will be expected to pay the costs of such treatment. No 
financial compensation is available for this treatment.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  25 of 29IMPORTANT REMINDERS
Will this study  have a billable service?  Yes ☐  No☒
A billable service is defined as any service  rendered  to a study subject that, if he/she was not on a study,  would 
normally generate a bill from  either Yale-New  Haven  Hospital or Yale Medical Group to the patient  or the patient’s 
insurer. The service may or may not be performed  by the research staff on your study, but may be provided by 
professionals within either Yale-New Haven Hospital or Yale Medical Group (examples include  x-rays, MRIs, CT 
scans, specimens sent to central labs,  or specimens sent to pathology). Notes: 1. There is no distinction  made  
whether the service is paid for by the subject or their insurance (Standard of Care)  or by the study’s  funding 
mechanism (Research Sponsored). 2. This generally includes new services  or orders placed in EPIC for research 
subjects. 
If answered, “yes”, this study will need to be set up in OnCore, Yale’s clinical research management  system, for 
Epic to appropriately route research  related  charges. Please contact oncore.support@yale.edu
Are there any procedures  involved in this protocol that will be performed at YNHH or one of its affiliated entities?  
Yes ☐  No ☒ 
If Yes, please answer questions a through c and note  instructions below.   
a. Does your  YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific procedure that you will perform? Yes ☐  No  
☐
b. Will you be using any new equipment or equipment that you have not used in the past  for this procedure? Yes 
☐  No ☐
c. Will a novel approach using existing equipment be applied? Yes ☐  No ☐
 
If you answered “no”  to question 4a, or "yes" to question  4b or c, please contact the YNHH Department  of 
Physician Services (688-2615) for prior approval  before commencing with  your research protocol.
IMPORTANT REMINDER ABOUT RESEARCH AT YNHH  
Please note that if this protocol includes Yale-New Haven Hospital patients, including  patients  at the HRU, the 
Principal Investigator  and any co-investigators  who are physicians or mid-level  practitioners (includes PAs, APRNs, 
psychologists and speech pathologists)  who may have  direct patient  contact  with patients on YNHH premises 
must have medical staff appointment and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.  If you are uncertain whether 
the study personnel  meet the criteria, please telephone  the Physician  Services  Department at 203-688-2615. By 
submitting this protocol as a PI, you attest that you and any co-investigator  who may have patient contact has a 
medical staff  appointment  and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.
References
1. World Health Organization. WHO  Global  report: mortality attributable to tobacco . 2012  
04/14/15]; Available from: 
http://www.who.int/tobacco/publications/surveillance/rep_mortality_attributable/en.
2. Centers for Disease Control  and Prevention Quitting Smoking Among  Adults - United States, 
2000-2015. Morbidity  and Mortality Weekly Report, 2017. 65, 1457-64.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  26 of 293. Brewer,  J.A., et al., Mindfulness  training for smoking cessation:  Results from a randomized 
controlled trial. Drug  and Alcohol  Dependence, 2011. 119(1-2): p. 72-80.
4. Garrison, K.A.,  et al., A randomized controlled trial of smartphone-based  mindfulness  training 
for smoking  cessation:  a study  protocol.  BMC Psychiatry, 2015. 15: p. 83.
5. Garrison, K.A.,  et al., Craving  to Quit: A randomized  controlled trial of smartphone  app-based 
mindfulness training  for smoking cessation.  Nicotine & Tobacco Research, (in press).
6. Kabat-Zinn, J., Mindfulness-Based  Interventions in Context:  Past, Present, and Future.  Clin. 
Psychol., 2003. 10(2): p. 144-156.
7. Brewer,  J.A., H.M. Elwafi,  and J.H. Davis, Craving to Quit: psychological models and 
neurobiological mechanisms of mindfulness training as treatment for addictions. Psychology of 
Addictive Behaviors,  2012: p. 366-379.
8. Elwafi,  H.M.,  et al., Mindfulness training for smoking cessation: Moderation  of the relationship  
between craving  and cigarette use. Drug  and Alcohol Dependence, 2013.  130(1-3): p. 222-229.
9. Garrison, K.A.,  et al., Mobile  applications for mindfulness training  in the treatment of substance-
use disorders, in The Oxford Handbook  of Digital Technologies  and Mental Health, M.N. Potenza, K. 
Faust, and D. Faust, Editors.  in press, Oxford University Press.
10. Abroms, L.C., et al., A content analysis of popular smartphone apps for smoking cessation. 
American Journal  of Preventive Medicine, 2013. 45(6): p. 732-6.
11. Hoeppner, B.B., et al., How Smart are Smartphone Apps for Smoking Cessation? A Content  
Analysis. Nicotine Tob Res, 2016. 18(5): p. 1025-31.
12. CCS Insight. Wearables Market to Be Worth $25 Billion by 2019. 2018; Available from: 
https://www.ccsinsight.com/press/company-news/2332-wearables-market-to-be-worth-25-billion-by-
2019-reveals-ccs-insight.
13. Connor Gorber, S., et al., The accuracy of self-reported smoking:  a systematic review  of the 
relationship between self-reported  and cotinine-assessed smoking status. Nicotine Tob Res, 2009. 
11(1): p. 12-24.
14. Dar, R., Effect of Real-Time Monitoring and Notification of Smoking Episodes on Smoking 
Reduction: A Pilot Study  of a Novel Smoking Cessation App. Nicotine Tob Res, 2017.
15. Bowen, D.J., et al., How we design  feasibility studies. Am J Prev Med,  2009.  36(5): p. 452-7.
16. Liebreich, T., et al., Diabetes NetPLAY:  A physical activity  website and linked  email  counselling 
randomized intervention for individuals with type 2 diabetes. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act, 2009. 6: p. 18.
17. Borrelli,  B., The Assessment, Monitoring, and Enhancement of Treatment  Fidelity  In Public 
Health Clinical Trials. J Public Health Dent, 2011. 71(s1):  p. S52-S63.
18. Centers for Disease Control  and Prevention Quitting smoking  among adults --- United States, 
2001 -- 2010.  Morb Mortal Wkly Rep, 2011.  60, 1513 - 1519.
19. Haskins, B.L., et al., A systematic review of smartphone  applications  for smoking  cessation.  
Transl Behav Med, 2017. 7(2): p. 292-299.
20. Bricker, J.B., et al., Randomized, controlled pilot trial of a smartphone  app for smoking 
cessation using  acceptance and commitment  therapy. Drug  Alcohol Depend, 2014. 143: p. 87-94.
21. Pew Research Center. Mobile Fact Sheet. Internet & Technology 2017 12/23/17; Available 
from: http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheet/mobile/.
22. Borrelli,  B., et al., Prevalence and Frequency of mHealth and eHealth Use Among US and UK 
Smokers and Differences  by Motivation  to Quit. J. Med. Internet Res., 2015.  17(7): p. e164.
23. Pew Research Center. The Smartphone  Difference . 2015  April; Available from: 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/01/us-smartphone-use-in-2015/.
24. Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life Project.  The Best (and Worst) of Mobile 
Connectivity. 2012 November 30, 2012;  Available  from:  http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/11/30/the-
best-and-worst-of-mobile-connectivity/.
25. Klasnja, P. and W. Pratt, Healthcare  in the pocket: mapping  the space of mobile-phone  health  
interventions. J Biomed Inform, 2012. 45(1): p. 184-98.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  27 of 2926. Curtin,  J., et al., Implicit and explicit drug motivational processes: A model of boundary  
conditions, in Handbook of implicit cognition and addiction . 2006, Sage Publications, Inc. p. 233-250.
27. Abroms, L.C., et al., iPhone apps  for smoking cessation: a content  analysis. Am J Prev Med,  
2011. 40(3): p. 279-85.
28. Whittaker, R., et al., Mobile phone-based interventions for smoking cessation. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev, 2016. 4: p. CD006611.
29. Ubhi, H.K., et al., Characterising smoking  cessation smartphone applications in terms of 
behaviour change techniques, engagement  and ease-of-use features. Transl  Behav Med,  2016.  6(3): p. 
410-7.
30. McClure,  J.B., A.L. Hartzler,  and S.L. Catz, Design Considerations for Smoking Cessation Apps: 
Feedback From Nicotine  Dependence Treatment Providers and Smokers. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, 
2016. 4(1): p. e17.
31. Buller, D.B., et al., Randomized trial of a smartphone mobile application compared to text 
messaging to support  smoking cessation.  Telemed J E Health, 2014. 20(3): p. 206-14.
32. Heffner, J.L., et al., Feature-level analysis of a novel smartphone application for smoking 
cessation. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse, 2015. 41(1): p. 68-73.
33. Hertzberg, J.S., et al., Mobile  contingency  management as an adjunctive smoking cessation 
treatment for smokers with posttraumatic stress disorder. Nicotine Tob Res, 2013. 15(11): p. 1934-8.
34. Ubhi, H.K., et al., A mobile  app to aid smoking cessation: preliminary evaluation of 
SmokeFree28. J. Med.  Internet  Res., 2015. 17(1): p. e17.
35. Hoeppner, B.B., et al., Smiling Instead  of Smoking: Development of a Positive Psychology 
Smoking Cessation  Smartphone App for Non-daily Smokers. Int J Behav Med, 2017.
36. McFall, R.M., Effects  of self-monitoring on normal smoking behavior. J Consult Clin Psychol, 
1970. 35(2): p. 135-42.
37. Lipinski, D., et al., Influence of motivational variables on the reactivity and reliability of self-
recording. J Consult  Clin Psychol, 1975.  43(5): p. 637-46.
38. Sillett, R., et al., Deception Among Smokers. British Medical Journal, 1978.  2(6146): p. 1185-
1186.
39. Chandra, S., et al., Daily  smoking patterns, their determinants, and implications for quitting. Exp 
Clin Psychopharmacol, 2007. 15(1): p. 67-80.
40. Shiffman, S., et al., Smoking  patterns and stimulus control in intermittent and daily smokers.  
PLoS One, 2014.  9(3): p. e89911.
41. Benowitz, N.L., Nicotine addiction.  N Engl J Med, 2010. 362(24):  p. 2295-303.
42. Bishop, S.R., et al., Mindfulness: A proposed operational definition. Clinical Psychology-Science 
and Practice,  2004.  11(3): p. 230-241.
43. Hölzel, B.K.,  et al., How Does  Mindfulness  Meditation Work? Proposing Mechanisms of Action  
From a Conceptual and Neural Perspective. Perspect. Psychol.  Sci, 2011. 6(6): p. 537-559.
44. Goyal, M., et al., Meditation programs for psychological stress and well-being: a systematic  
review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern. Med., 2014.  174(3): p. 357-68.
45. Oikonomou, M.T., M. Arvanitis, and R.L. Sokolove, Mindfulness  training for smoking  cessation:  
A meta-analysis of randomized-controlled trials.  J Health Psychol, 2017. 22(14): p. 1841-1850.
46. Li, W., et al., Mindfulness treatment for substance misuse: A systematic  review and meta-
analysis. J Subst Abuse  Treat, 2017.  75: p. 62-96.
47. Maglione, M.A., et al., Efficacy of mindfulness meditation for smoking cessation: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Addict Behav,  2017.  69: p. 27-34.
48. Cropley, M., M. Ussher, and E. Charitou,  Acute  effects of a guided relaxation  routine (body  
scan) on tobacco withdrawal symptoms and cravings in abstinent smokers. Addiction,  2007. 102(6): p. 
989-993.
49. Davis, J.M., et al., Randomized trial comparing mindfulness training for smokers  to a matched 
control. J Subst Abuse Treat, 2014. 47(3): p. 213-21.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  28 of 2950. Davis, J.M., et al., A pilot study  on mindfulness based  stress reduction for smokers.  BMC  
complementary and alternative  medicine, 2007.  7: p. 2.
51. Vidrine, J.I., et al., Efficacy  of mindfulness-based addiction treatment (MBAT) for smoking 
cessation and lapse recovery: A randomized clinical trial. J Consult Clin Psychol, 2016. 84(9): p. 824-
838.
52. Brewer,  J.A., H.M. Elwafi,  and J.H. Davis, Craving to quit: psychological  models and 
neurobiological mechanisms of mindfulness training as treatment for addictions. Psychol. Addict.  
Behav., 2013. 27(2): p. 366-79.
53. Luberto, C.M. and A.C. McLeish, The effects  of a brief mindfulness  exercise  on state 
mindfulness and affective outcomes among adult daily smokers. Addict Behav, 2018. 77: p. 73-80.
54. Wray, J.M., J.C. Gass, and S.T. Tiffany, A systematic review  of the relationships  between  
craving and smoking  cessation. Nicotine Tob Res, 2013. 15(7): p. 1167-82.
55. Ferguson, S.G. and S. Shiffman, The relevance and treatment of cue-induced cravings in 
tobacco dependence. J Subst Abuse Treat, 2009.  36(3): p. 235-43.
56. Niaura, R., et al., Comparative efficacy of rapid-release nicotine gum versus nicotine polacrilex 
gum in relieving smoking cue-provoked craving. Addiction, 2005. 100(11):  p. 1720-30.
57. Longabaugh, R. and M. Magill, Recent Advances in Behavioral Addiction Treatments: Focusing 
on Mechanisms of Change. Curr. Psychiatry Rep.,  2011. 13(5): p. 382-389.
58. Witkiewitz, K., S. Bowen, and D.M.  Donovan, Moderating  effects of a craving intervention on the 
relation between negative mood and heavy drinking following treatment for alcohol dependence. J 
Consult Clin Psychol, 2011. 79(1): p. 54-63.
59. Witkiewitz, K. and S. Bowen,  Depression,  Craving, and Substance Use Following a 
Randomized Trial of Mindfulness-Based Relapse Prevention. Journal of Consulting  and Clinical 
Psychology, 2010. 78(3): p. 362-374.
60. Bricker, J., et al., Pilot randomized controlled trial of web-based acceptance and commitment 
therapy for smoking cessation. Nicotine Tob Res, 2013. 15(10): p. 1756-64.
61. Brewer,  J.A., Feeling is Believing: The Convergence  of Buddhist  Theory and Modern  Scientific 
Evidence Supporting How Self is Formed and Perpetuated Through Feeling Tone (Vedanā).  
Contemporary Buddhism, 2018(1-14).
62. Tapper, K., Mindfulness  and craving: effects  and mechanisms. Clin Psychol  Rev, 2018. 59: p. 
101-117.
63. Westbrook, C., et al., Mindful attention reduces neural and self-reported cue-induced craving in 
smokers. Soc Cog Affect Neuro,  2011.
64. Brewer,  J.A., et al., Mindfulness  training and stress reactivity in substance abuse: results  from a 
randomized, controlled  stage I pilot study. Subst.  Abus.,  2009. 30(4): p. 306-17.
65. Shiffman, S., et al., Individual  differences in adoption of treatment for smoking cessation: 
demographic and smoking history  characteristics. Drug Alcohol Depend, 2008.  93(1-2): p. 121-31.
66. Shapiro, S.L. and R. Walsh, An Analysis  of Recent  Meditation Research and Suggestions for 
Future Directions. The Human  Psychologist, 2003.  Spring  and Summer: p. 87-113.
67. Bowen, S. and A. Marlatt, Surfing the urge: brief mindfulness-based  intervention  for college 
student smokers. Psychology of Addictive  Behavior,  2009. 23(4): p. 666-71.
68. Ruscio, A.C., et al., Effect of Brief Mindfulness Practice  on Self-Reported Affect,  Craving, and 
Smoking: A Pilot Randomized Controlled  Trial Using Ecological Momentary Assessment. Nicotine Tob 
Res, 2016. 18(1): p. 64-73.
69. Brewer,  J.A., J.H. Davis, and J. Goldstein, Why is it so hard to pay attention, or is it? 
Mindfulness, the factors of awakening  and reward-based learning. Mindfulness  (N Y), 2013.  4(1).
70. Bodhi, B., In the Buddha's Words:  An Anthology  of Discourses from the Pali Canon. 2005, 
Wisdom Pubns.  p. 192-3.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021 IRB Protocol# 2000025082
Page  29 of 2971. Fiore, M., et al. Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 update - Clinical practice 
guidelines.  2008  Septemer 1, 2015];  101-103].  Available from: 
http://bphc.hrsa.gov/buckets/treatingtobacco.pdf.
72. Garrison, K.A.,  et al., Craving  to Quit: A Randomized Controlled Trial of Smartphone app-based 
Mindfulness Training  for Smoking Cessation.  Nicotine Tob Res, 2018.
73. West, R., et al., Outcome criteria in smoking  cessation trials: proposal for a common  standard.  
Addiction, 2005. 100(3): p. 299-303.
74. Robinson, S.M., et al., Reliability of the Timeline  Followback for cocaine,  cannabis, and 
cigarette use. Psychol Addict Behav,  2014.  28(1): p. 154-62.
75. Heatherton, T.F., et al., The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine  Dependence:  a revision of the 
Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J Addict,  1991. 86(9): p. 1119-27.
76. Hughes, J.R. and D. Hatsukami, Signs and symptoms of tobacco withdrawal. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry, 1986. 43(3): p. 289-94.
77. Baer, R.A., et al., Construct  Validity of the Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire in Meditating  
and Nonmeditating Samples.  Assessment,  2008. 15(3):  p. 329-42.
78. Rollnick, S., et al., Development of a short 'readiness to change' questionnaire for use in brief,  
opportunistic interventions  among  excessive  drinkers.  British Journal of Addiction,  1992. 87(5): p. 743-
54.
79. Levy, D.T., Z. Yuan, and Y. Li, The Prevalence and Characteristics of E-Cigarette Users in the 
U.S. Int J Environ Res Public Health, 2017.  14(10).
80. Little, R.J.A. and D.B. Rubin, Statistical  Analysis with Missing Data. 2014,  New York: Wiley.
81. Molenberghs, G., G. Verbeke, and M.G. Kenward, Sensitivity analysis for incomplete data. 
2009, Boca Raton:  Crc Press-Taylor& Francis Group.
82. Rubin, D.B.,  Multiple Imputation  After 18+ Years. Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, 1996. 91(434):  p. 473-489.
83. Carpenter, J.R. and M.G. Kenward,  Multiple imputation and its application 1st ed. 2013, 
Chichester, West Sussex: John  Wiley & Sons.
84. Molenberghs, G., et al., Handbook  of missing data methodology. 1st ed. Chapman & Hall/CRC  
Handbooks of Modern Statistical Methods.  2015: Chapman and Hall/CRC.
85. Hogan, J.W., J. Roy, and C. Korkontzelou, Tutorial  in biostatistics - Handling drop-out in 
longitudinal studies.  Statistics  in Medicine, 2004. 23(9): p. 1455-1497.
86. Nebeker, C., et al., Acceptance of Mobile  Health in Communities Underrepresented in 
Biomedical Research:  Barriers and Ethical Considerations for Scientists. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, 2017. 
5(6): p. e87.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 7/7/2021