STU00215570  
Version #: 1.1 03/11/2022  
 Page 1 of 9 
HRP -593 / v 03162021 PROTOCOL TITLE:  Comparison of Gastric Volumes by Gastric Ultrasound in Term Parturients 
undergoing Scheduled Elective Cesarean Delivery with and without Metoclopramide  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Jennifer Banayan  
Associate Professor  
Department of Anesthesiology  
312-472-3585  
jennifer .banayan @nm.org  
 
 
VERSION DATE:  V1.1 3/11/2022  
 
  
STUDY SUMMARY : 
 
Investigational Agent(s)  
(Drugs or Devices)  Metoclopramide vs. Placebo  
IND / IDE / HDE  #   
Indicate  
Special Population (s) Children  
 Children who are wards of the state   
 Adults Unable to Consent   
 Cognitively Impaired Adults   
 Neonates of Uncertain Viability   
 Pregnant Women  
 Prisoners  (or other detained/paroled individuals)   
 Students/Employees   
Sample Size   
Funding Source   
Indicate the type of consent 
to be obtain ed Written  
Verbal /Waiver of Documentation of Informed Consent  
Waiver of HIPAA Authorization  
Waiver/Alteration of Consent Process   
Site  Lead  Site ( For A Multiple Site Research Study)  
 Data Coordinating Center (DCC)  
Research Related 
Radiation Exposure  Yes  
 No  
DSMB  / DMC  / IDMC  Yes  
No 
 
OBJECTIVES : 
Our objective is to compare gastric volumes (mL) between women who receive metoclopramide 
versus placebo prior to scheduled cesarean delivery in appropriately fasted patients. If 
metoclopramide is found not to reduce gastric volumes this would inform future practice 
guidelines for obstetric anesthesia , which currently recommends metoclopramide administration 
prior to cesarean deliveries .  
 
 
 
STU00215570  
Version #: 1.1 03/11/2022  
 Page 2 of 9 
HRP -593 / v 03162021 BACKGROUND : 
Aspiration is a rare but potentially serious complication of anesthesia. Pregnancy 
increases the risk of aspiration due to increased intragastric pressure  from the gravid uterus and 
decreased esophageal sphincter tone from increased levels of progesterone. In addition to the 
standard pre -operative fasting times recommended by the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA) Practice Guidelines, the aspiratio n prophylaxis for cesarean deliveries 
recommended by the ASA Practice Guidelines for Obstetric Anesthesia include non -particulate 
antacids, H2 -receptor antagonists, and/or metoclopramide.1-3 With the enforcement of fasting 
times and routine aspiration prophylaxis, as well as the  increased use of neuraxial anesthesia 
and utilization of rapid sequence induction for general anesthesia , maternal mortality from 
pulmonary aspiration with cesarean deliveries  have declined  to almost negligible levels .4 
While metoclopramide , a promotility agent, has previously been shown to be effective for 
intra- and post -operative nausea and vomiting prophylaxis, there have not been any recent 
studies evaluating the utility of metoclopramide for aspiration prophylaxi s in a patient with 
appropriate fasting prior to surgery.5 Given the unfavorable side effect profile, including akathisia 
and dystonic reactions, there may not be any additional benefit in the routine use of 
metoclopramide in healthy parturients undergoing  an elective cesarean delivery who are 
appropriately fasted.6,7 
Gastric ultrasound has been shown as a noninvasive method to evaluate  the risk of 
aspiration of gastric contents in pregnant women.8 It has been validated as an assessment of 
gastric volume co mpared with gastroscopic examination.9 Gastric ultrasound can determine if 
the gastric volume present is consistent with baseline gastric secretions and negligible risk, or if 
it is a higher volume posing a significant aspiration risk.10 Pregnant patients presenting for 
elective cesarean delivery were found by gastric ultrasound to have an empty stomach after 
following conventional fasting guidelines.11 
The objective  of this proposed study is to use gastric ultrasound to evaluate the effe ct of 
metoclopramide in reducing gastric volume prior to elective cesarean delivery. We hypothesize  
that metoclopramide given to women with appropriate fasting prior to cesarean delivery does 
not result in any clinically significant reduction in gastric vo lume  (mL) and therefore does not 
provide any additional benefit for aspiration prophylaxis but may expose patients to 
unnecessary side effects. A secondary objective will be to evaluate if gastric volume is a 
significant predictor of intraoperative nausea and vomiting.  
 
References  
1. Practice Guidelines for Preoperative Fasting and the Use of Pharmacologic Agents to Reduce the 
Risk of Pulmonary Aspiration: Application to Healthy Patients Undergoing Elective Procedures: 
An Updated Report by the American Societ y of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preoperative 
Fasting and the Use of Pharmacologic Agents to Reduce the Risk of Pulmonary Aspiration. 
Anesthesiology. 2017 Mar;126(3):376 -393. PMID: 28045707 . 
2. Mendelson CL. The aspiration of stomach contents into the lungs during obstetric anesthesia. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. 1946 Aug;52:191 -205. PMID: 20993766 . 
3. Practice Guidelines for Obstetric Anesthesia: An Updated Report by the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Obstetric Anesthesia and the Society for  Obstetric Anesthesia 
and Perinatology. Anesthesiology. 2016 Feb;124(2):270 -300. PMID: 26580836 . 
4. Knight M, Bunch K, Tuffnell D, Shakespeare J, Kotnis R, Kenyon S, Kurinczuk JJ (Eds.) on behalf 
of MBRRACE -UK. Saving Lives, Improving Mothers’ Care - Lessons learned to inform maternity 
care from the UK and Ireland Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2016 -18. 
Oxford: National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University of Oxford 2020.  
5. Leus M, van de Ven A. Images in Clinical Medicine. An Acute  Dystonic Reaction after Treatment 
with Metoclopramide. N Engl J Med. 2015 Oct;373(14):e16.  PMID: 26422744 . 
STU00215570  
Version #: 1.1 03/11/2022  
 Page 3 of 9 
HRP -593 / v 03162021 6. Mishriky BM, Habib AS. Metoclopramide for nausea and vomiting prophylaxis during and after 
Caesarean delivery: a systematic review and meta -analysis . Br J Anaesth. 2012 Mar;108(3):374 -
83. PMID: 22307240 . 
7. Paranjothy S, Griffiths JD, Broughton HK, Gyte GM, Brown HC, Thomas J. Interventions at 
caesarean section for reducing the risk of aspiration pneumonitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2014 Feb 5;(2):CD 004943.  PMID: 20091567 . 
8. Carp H, Jayaram A, Stoll M. Ultrasound examination of the stomach contents of parturients. 
Anesth Analg. 1992 May;74(5):683 -7. PMID: 1567035 . 
9. Perlas A, Mitsakakis N, Liu L, Cino M, Haldipur N, Davis L, Cubillos J, Chan V. Validation  of a 
mathematical model for ultrasound assessment of gastric volume by gastroscopic examination. 
Anesth Analg. 2013 Feb;116(2):357 -63. PMID: 23302981 . 
10. Van de Putte P, Perlas A. Ultrasound assessment of gastric content and volume. Br J Anaesth. 
2014 Jul;11 3(1):12 -22. PMID: 24893784 . 
11. Arzola C, Perlas A, Siddiqui NT, Carvalho JC. Bedside Gastric Ultrasonography in Term Pregnant 
Women Before Elective Cesarean Delivery: A Prospective Cohort Study. Anesth Analg. 2015 
Sep;121(3):752 -8. PMID: 26097988 . 
12. Arzola C, P erlas A, Siddiqui NT, Downey K, Ye XY, Carvalho JCA. Gastric ultrasound in the third 
trimester of pregnancy: a randomised controlled trial to develop a predictive model of volume 
assessment. Anaesthesia. 2018 Mar;73(3):295 -303. PMID: 29265187 . 
13. Chen X, Chen  F, Zhao Q, Zhang L, Liu Z. Ultrasonographic measurement of antral area for 
estimating gastric fluid volume in pregnant women. J Clin Anesth. 2019 Mar;53:70 -73. doi: 
10.1016/j.jclinane.2018.06.040. Epub 2018 Oct 18. PMID: 30343226.  
14. Barnes TR. A rating scal e for drug -induced akathisia. Br J Psychiatry. 1989;154:672 -676. 
 
15. Pringsheim T, Gardner D, Addington D, et al. The Assessment and Treatment of Antipsychotic -
Induced Akathisia. Can J Psychiatry. 2018;63(11):719 -729. 
 
 
STUDY ENDPOINTS : 
Primary study endpoints:  
- Change in gastric volume  (mL) before medication and 30 minutes after  
Secondary study endpoints:  
- Rates of intraoperative nausea and vomiting during cesarean delivery and post -
operative nausea and vomiting after cesarean delivery ( correlated to metoclopramide 
administration and gastric volume)  
- Side effects after administration (akathisia, dystonia,  abdominal cramping,  
extrapyramidal symptoms)  
 
STUDY INTERVENTION (S)  / INVESTIGATIONAL AGEN T(S): 
Metoclopramide 10mg (dopamine receptor antagonist, promotility agent) vs. placebo (normal 
saline). Metoclopramide 10mg/mL will be pre -drawn and diluted with normal saline into a 10mL 
syringe and stored with pharmacy. Placebo will be normal saline in a 10mL syringe. Medications 
will be made and stored by pharmacy. Patients will be randomized 1:1 for either drug by our 
anesthesia research nurses, who will request the drug from pharmacy.  
  
PROCEDURES INVOLVE D: 
Study Design:  This project will be conducted as a double -blind, randomized controlled trial 
 
STU00215570  
Version #: 1.1 03/11/2022  
 Page 4 of 9 
HRP -593 / v 03162021 Study procedures:  A baseline gastric ultrasound examination will be performed in the pre -
operative holding area an hour prior to the scheduled cesarean delivery by a study investigator 
trained in the use of gastric ultrasound. All of the investigato rs will have been trained in the use 
of gastric ultrasound by Dr. Banayan, an expert in point of care ultrasonography.  Gastric 
ultrasound will utilize the Sono Site X-Porte Ultrasound System  with a low frequency curvilinear  
probe (C60xp ). 
 
After the initial  examination, the patient will receive either 10 mg IV of metoclopramide or 
placebo according to a computer generated, randomized assignment in a double -blind fashion. 
Thirty minutes after the administration of the study medication, a follow -up gastric ult rasound 
examination will be completed by the same provider. For the gastric ultrasound examinations , 
we will position the patients  in both the supine and right lateral decubitus positioning.  Initially a 
qualitative assessment will be completed to determine  the type of gastric content (empty, fluid, 
or solid content). Then , the cross -sectional area of the antrum will be measured  in the right 
lateral decubitus positioning . This area can then be used to determine the estimated  gastric  
volume  using a mathematical model . There have been multiple models published  specifically for 
third trimester pregnant women  including ones  by Arzola et al. and Chen  et al.12,13  
 
Following the second ultrasound, metoclopramide -related side effects will be assessed using 
the Barnes Akathisia Rating scale, a validated scale for assessing akathisia, and a drowsiness 
scale.14,15 All patients will receive odanstetron (4mg) intravenous and after neuraxial anesthesia 
performed but prior to the start of the surgery  and decadron (4mg) intravenous after delivery , 
which is standard of care. Intraoperative  incidence of patient repo rted nausea and vomiting will 
be recorded along with the administration any rescue antiemetic medications  given 
intraoperatively or post -operatively. The postoperative period will include the time until the 
patient is discharged from the post -anesthesia ca re unit  (PACU) . Anesthesia staff will be able to 
record nausea and vomiting episodes in Epic . Intraoperative and PACU data will be collected 
afterwards by a member of the research team.  
 
Of note, administration of m etoclopramide is considered standard of care for cesarean 
deliveries; at Northwestern Medicine Prentice Hospital, it is usually only given to women who 
have labored prior to cesarean delivery but administration is  recommended to be considered 
according to the ASA practice guidelines. Decision to give metoclopramide to elective cesarean 
deliveries ultimately depends on patient characteristics and provider preference.  
 
Data to be collected:  
Patient 
demographics  Age, race/ethnicity, co -morbidities, GERD with pregnancy  vs. currently , 
NPO time solids and liquids , BMI  
Obstetric data  Gravida/parity, gestational age, number of prior cesarean deliveries, 
indication for cesarean delivery  
Ultrasound data  Time of administration of study drug, time to obtaining ultrasound image  
from study drug administration , type of gastric content (empty, fluid, or 
solid content), cross -sectional area of the antrum and total gastric volume  
in supine and right lateral decubitus positioning  
Anesthesia data  Method of a nesthesia (ie. spinal vs. CSE), dose of neuraxial bupivacaine 
and neuraxial opioids, incision time, delivery time, administration of 
systemic opioids, anti -emetics given  intra-op and in PACU , 
nausea /vomiting episodes  intraoperatively , time from neuraxial 
administration to nausea/vomiting  
Neonatal data  Apgar, need for resuscitation, admission to NICU, umbilical cord gases.  
STU00215570  
Version #: 1.1 03/11/2022  
 Page 5 of 9 
HRP -593 / v 03162021 Survey data  Barnes Akathisia Rating scale, drowsiness score , time of survey  
 
 
 
DATA AND SPECIMEN BA NKING  
All data will be kept for a minimum of 7 years after publication, as required by Northwestern 
University.  
 
SHARING RESULTS WITH  PARTICIPANTS  
Individual results will not be shared with participants.  Final study results will not be shared with 
participants.  
 
STUDY TIMELINES  
Patients w ho are scheduled for an elective cesarean delivery who meet inclusion criteria will be 
invited to participate in the study. We plan to enroll 72 patients ( 36 in each group) in 1 year. 
Primary study analyses will occur in the following 6 months.  
 
INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITER IA 
Pregnant women greater than 37 weeks gestation who have been scheduled for elective 
cesarean deliveries will be screened upon admission via chart review. If patient meets criteria 
for study, the  research team will invite them to part icipate in our study.  
 
Inclusion criteria : Any healthy (ASA Physical Status 2), age >18 years old, non-obese (BMI 
<40 kg/m2), age >18 years old  term (>37 week), non -laboring parturient, single gestation, 
scheduled for a cesarean delivery and appropriately NPO is eligible for inclusion.  
 
Exclusion criteria: Systemic disease such as diabetes mellitus  (type 1 , type 2, or gestational 
diabetes ), multiple gestation, abnormality of upper GI tract, history of  GI tract related surgical 
procedures, use of gastric motility medications, active labor, renal impairment  (creatinine >2) , 
non-English speaking, cognitively impaired, history of QT prolongation, and general anesthesia.  
 
 
VULNERABLE POPULATIO NS 
Pregnant women, see attachment of checklist  
 
PARTICIPANT  POPULATION(S)  
Accrual 
Number : Category/Group : 
(Adults/Children 
Special/Vulnerable 
Populations)  Consented:  
Maximum Number to be 
Consented or 
Reviewed/Collected/Screened  Enrolled:  
Number to Complete 
the Study or Needed 
to Address the 
Research Question  
Local  Pregnant women  80 72 
   
Study -wide    
   
Total:   80 72 
STU00215570  
Version #: 1.1 03/11/2022  
 Page 6 of 9 
HRP -593 / v 03162021  
RECRUITMENT METHODS  
Subjects will be approached and recruited by a member of the anesthesia research team after 
admission for elective cesarean  section on the 8th floor labor and delivery of Prentice Women’s 
Hospital. The study team members will use Dashboard from the Labor and Delivery Unit at 
Prentice Women’s Hospital and obstetric medical histories to identify potential participants. The 
research team will discu ss participation with the eligible patients and obtain written consent if 
amenable to participating in study. Subjects who are willing to participate in the study will 
provide consent on a tablet provided by study staff. Paper consent forms will also be ma de 
available if necessary.  
 
There will be no materials used to recruit participants. There is no need for solicitation or 
advertising for participation in the study.  
 
COMPENSATION FOR PAR TICIPATION IN RESEAR CH ACTIVITIES  
Participants will not receive compe nsation for participation in this study.   
 
WITHDRAWAL OF PARTIC IPANTS  
Participation in the completion of the survey is completely voluntary. Participants can ask to stop 
the ultrasound or surveys at any point. Participants may withdraw from the study at an y time 
without penalty by notifying the research staff that they would no longer like to participate. For 
individuals who withdraw from the study, the data collected prior to withdrawal will be 
maintained  
 
We do not foresee any circumstances which will ca use research participants to be forcibly 
withdrawn from the study without their consent.  
 
RISKS TO PARTICIPANTS  
Risks are minimal but include the side effects of metoclopramide including  abdominal  cramps,  
akathisia, dystonia, and extrapyramidal symptoms. Metoclopramide also can cause QT 
prolongation, which may cause arrythmias in patients with QT prolongation.  The risk of saline 
administration includes  hypernatremia. We feel that these risks are minimal si nce we are only 
administering 10 mL of saline ; metoclopramide is routinely administered as part of clinical care.   
 
In addition, the potential for loss of confidentiality and the feeling of being emotionally 
uncomfortable completing the surveys. We feel t hat this will cause no more than minimal risk to 
the participants. Confidentiality will be strictly maintained throughout the study.  
 
Gastric ultrasonography is safe to use during pregnancy . There are no risks to the mother or 
fetus associated with the performance of two -dimensional ultrasound during pregnancy. The 
participant may experience some discomfort associated with the pressure of the ultrasound 
probe on the skin during the procedure which should resolve upon completion of the 
examination.  
 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS T O PARTICIPANTS  
There is no direct benefit to the participants that is associated with completion of the study. 
Future patients may benefit from the knowledge gained from this st udy, as it will inform practice 
guidelines for obstetric anesthesia.   
 
DATA MANAGEMENT AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
STU00215570  
Version #: 1.1 03/11/2022  
 Page 7 of 9 
HRP -593 / v 03162021 Statistical analysis:  The primary outcome  will be the change in calculated gastric volume. The 
secondary outcomes will be the incidence of intraoper ative nausea and vomiting and side 
effects. Categorical data will be compared using the chi -squared test or Fisher’s exact test. 
Normal distribution for continuous variables will be determined using the Shapiro –Wilk test. 
Normally distributed continuous da ta will be compared using a two -tailed t -test and non -
parametrically distributed data will be compared using the Mann -Whitney U test. The criterion 
for rejection of the null hypothesis will be P < 0.05.  
 
Power calculation:  In an equivalence test of means using two one -sided tests on data from a 
parallel -group design, sample sizes of 36 in the first group and 36 in the second group achieve 
81% power at a 5% one -sided significance level when the reference mean is 50 mL, the 
treatment mean is 40 mL, the standard deviation is 25 mL, and the range of the difference 
between these means that still results in the conclusion of equivalence is -25 mL to 25 mL.  
 
Data Security and Confidentiality:  Each study participant will be assigned  a study ID number 
that will be used to link study data to patient identification information (name and birth date) in a 
separate database. This database will be stored on a secured, password -protected network, 
accessible only by the study investigators.  The completed data forms will be kept in folders with 
only the study ID number as an identifier. These folders will be placed in a secure, locked 
cabinet in the office of the Section of Obstetrical Anesthesiology located in Prentice Women’s 
Hospital 9th flo or.  
 
All surveys will be completed and stored in the RedCAP online survey management system that 
is held in a secured server on the Northwestern University campus.  All surveys will be identified 
with the study ID number and will not include any direct pa tient identifiers.  When the survey is 
closed, all data will be transferred to a secure Northwestern University computer which is only 
accessible to study team members .  
 
Only study team members listed in the eIRB will have access to the data files. Data will be 
password protected using a Department of Anesthesiology dedicated computer which is backed 
up nightly by the departmental server which is located on the 5th floor Arkes Pavilion. The 
access is controlled by key card and password protected by the de partmental data manager. 
Only the study ID number will be used to identify participants during data analysis. The data will 
be stored in the departmental computer until the completion of the study, including the final data 
analysis. Members of the anesthes ia team collecting these data will be educated on the process 
prior to approaching prospective participants.  Under no circumstances will individually 
identifiable data be released to anyone without the written consent of the subject. Results will be 
report ed as group findings only. Seven years after study completion, all data will be destroyed 
using departmental standards and current vendors, in compliance with NU policy.  
 
All ultrasound  data will be de -identified at the time of enrollment with the particip ant’s six -digit 
study ID number. The ultrasound  images will be exported from the ultrasound  machine on 
Qpath, which is a secure and HIPPA compliant ultrasound workflow manager. These images 
will only be accessible to study team members. All data will be st ored on the same computer 
and backed up in the PI’s office . Seven years after study completion all ultrasound  data will be 
destroyed in compliance with NU policy.  
 
All data access will be password protected and only available to study investigators listed on the 
IRB application. Data access will be controlled by the Principal Investigator. All members of the 
study team will have completed Northwestern University requirements for the responsible 
STU00215570  
Version #: 1.1 03/11/2022  
 Page 8 of 9 
HRP -593 / v 03162021 conduct of research including the Collaborative Institutional T raining Initiative (CITI) Training 
Modules  
 
PROVISIONS TO MONITO R THE DATA TO ENSURE  THE SAFETY OF PARTICIPANT S 
A data monitoring committee consisting of the Department of Anesthesiology Director of 
Research, a statistician , and a faculty member from the obstetrics department along with the 
study research personnel will periodically evaluate the data collected to determine whether 
participants remain safe. Safety data and adverse event data will be reviewed using the medical 
record and data collection form. It will be reviewed once half s ubjects (40 patients) are enrolled. 
Any adverse events will be reported to the IRB .  
 
PROVISIONS TO PROTEC T THE PRIVACY INTERE STS OF PARTICIPANT S  
Research subjects will have a few interactions with study team members. First, they will   
discuss the study and the research study team member will obtain written informed   
consent. A second interaction will occur during the first ultrasound and the drug study 
drug administration. The thir d interaction will be an assessment survey for side effects. 
The fourth interaction will be the second ultrasound  scan . Participants may be contacted 
in the PACU after delivery to ask them about any nausea and vomiting they may have 
experienced. The resear ch study team is only to be allowed to view the data sheets of 
the mother and REDCap for selected data within the parameters of the study.   
 
COMPENSATION FOR RESEARCH -RELATED INJURY  N/A  
 
ECONOMIC BURDEN TO P ARTICIPANTS  
N/A 
 
CONSENT PROCESS  
Written consent  will be obtained from all study participants by a member of the study   
team. The consent process will occur prior to delivery. Consent will occur in the 
patient’s  room in the Labor and Delivery Unit, 8th floor, at Prentice Women’s Hospital. 
There is no  waiting period. SOP HRP 090 will be followed. The research study team will 
spend  greater than 10 minutes discussing the study. With each subject ample time will 
be allowed for patient to answer questions regarding the study and the consent 
document.  The subj ect will also be informed that there is no conflict of interest between 
the PI and  the protocol. The PI will not receive financial remuneration nor will the study   
participation affect the subject’s financial charges for their care.   
 
NON -ENGLISH SPEAKING  PARTICIPANTS  
We will only be enrolling English speaking  patients.  
 
PROTECTED HEALTH INF ORMATION (PHI  AND HIPAA)  
For the purposes of this study we will collect the following Protected Personal Health 
Information: participant name, birth date, and zip code.   We also intend to access the medical 
chart of all study participants to obtain relevant information about medical history.  We have 
included a section on HIPAA authorization in our consent form.    
 
WAIVER OR ALTERATION OF CONSENT PROCESS  
STU00215570  
Version #: 1.1 03/11/2022  
 Page 9 of 9 
HRP -593 / v 03162021 Written informed  consent will be required for all patients. There will be no waiver, or alteration of 
the consent process. Only English -speaking, adult patients, who are not cognitively impaired, 
and capable of consenting will be recruited.  
 
QUALIFICATIONS TO CO NDUCT RESE ARCH AND RESOURCES AVAILABLE  
There is allotted time for 44 scheduled cesarean deliveries each week at Northwestern Medicine 
Prentice Women’s Hospital. We hope to recruit 72 patients in 1 year, which should be easily 
achieved, given there could potentially be over 2,000 scheduled cesarean deliveries in one year 
(3.4% recruitment rate). Recruitment can be performed by our research team members and 
research nurses. It can occur any day  anesthesia fellows or investigators  who ha ve been 
trained in gastric ultras ound are present. Any anesthesia staff will be able to care of the patient 
in the operating room.  
 
  