Total30 Sphere Contact Lenses 
 
 
Study  Protocol  and Statistical Analysis  Plan 
 
 
        [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
 
        November  17th, 2022  
 
 
Andrew  Pucker, O.D.,PhD,  Principal  Investigator  University  of Alabama at Birmingham 
Birmingham, AL 35294 
Page 1  of 6
FOR206 Version Date: 10/06/2021CONSENT FORM TO  BE PART OF A RESEARCH  STUDY
Title of Research: Do Total30 Sphere Contact Lenses  Provide a Comfortable Wearing 
Experience All Day?
UAB IRB Protocol #: IRB-300008004 
Principal Investigator: Andrew D. Pucker, OD, PhD
Sponsor: ALCON RESEARCH,  LTD
General Information You are  being asked to take  part  in a research study.  This  research study is 
voluntary, meaning  you do not have to take part  in it.  The procedures, risks, and 
benefits are fully described further in the consent  form.
Purpose The purpose of  the study is  to determine  if Total30 sphere contact lenses provide 
a comfortable  wearing experience all  day.
Duration & Visits You will be in this study for  about 1 month. This study will have 3 in  person visits, 
which will each last about  1 hour. You will also  be asked  to complete text surveys 
outside of  your study  visits. 
Overview of Procedures This study  will include eye  tests, surveys, eye comfort logs,  and the  wearing of  
Total30 sphere contact lenses. You will be asked to wear Tota30 sphere contact 
lenses for at least 16 hours per day. You  will also be asked to complete several 
surveys via text message  designed  to gauge your eye comfort.
Risks The risks  of this study do not exceed that  of a normal  eye exam.  The use of  all 
contact lenses comes with  a risk of eye  irritation  or eye infection;  however, eye 
infections with contact  lenses are  very  rare.
Benefits You may  not benefit directly  from this study, but knowledge gained from this 
study could  potentially help future persons who  have contact lens discomfort.  
Alternatives The only alternative to this study is to not take part in this study and to  continue  
with your regular eye care.
Purpose of the Research  Study
We are  asking you to take part in a research study. Although there has been several soft contact lens 
innovations over the past few  decades such as the  advent of daily  disposable contact lenses, about 20% of  all 
contact lens  wearers drop out of contact lenses annually. The top  reason for  dropping out  of contact lenses is 
eye discomfort, which typically  gets worse  towards  the end of the day. This  study  plans to  determine if Total30  
sphere contact lenses can  provide a comfortable wearing experience all day and for  the one-month  life of the 
contact lens. We plan to enroll a total of 58 subjects  at the University of  Alabama at  Birmingham.
Conflict of Interest Disclosure
Dr. Andrew  Pucker,  the principal investigator  for this study, has  received consulting  fees  from the sponsor and 
from companies other than the sponsor , which may affect his  financial  interests.  If you would like more 
information, please ask Dr.  Pucker.
Study Participation & Procedures
UAB IRB
Approved
29-Oct-2021
Page 2  of 6
FOR206 Version Date: 10/06/2021If you agree to participate, you will be asked to come  in for 3 in person visits over  the course of 1 month, which 
will each last about 1 hour. You will be asked to complete  surveys used  to gauge eye comfort, and you will be  
asked complete the below  procedures.  The  testing listed below is often included in  a typical eye exam. 
Study Visit 1: Baseline
Subject History, Eligibility, Informed Consent: You will  be asked to complete a screening  survey  to verify 
that you  are eligible for  the study. This screening survey  will include  the Contact  Lens Dry Eye-8  
Questionnaire (CLDEQ-8), which is a  contact lens comfort survey. We will also fully explain  this study  to 
you and  let you decide  if you would like to participate. 
Visual  Acuity with Glasses: We will evaluate  your ability to read  the eye chart.
Glasses Prescription: We will determine your glasses prescription with  a machine called a  phoropter, and 
we will determine how well you can read the eye chart with this  prescription.
Slit-Lamp Biomicroscope: We will use a lighted  biomicroscope to document  your  anterior  eye health. 
Contact Lens Fitting: We will fit you in Total30  sphere  contact  lenses, and  we will teach you  how to use  
these contact lenses. We will also  give you  everything you need to  take care  of the contact  lenses.  
Compliance  & Daily Comfort: We will send you a test text message to  make sure  they  you can complete  
our virtual comfort surveys. We  would  like you  to wear your contact lenses at  least  16 hours per day,  and 
we would like  you to start  wearing them between 6:00 AM and 8:00 AM on  the days  that you will be  
completing the text  messaging surveys. You will need to  complete  the surveys  on days 1, 2, 3, 4,  5, 14,  and  
1 day before your  last study visit.  We will  call you to remind you about  the day 14 end last surveys. On  the 
days we ask  you to complete surveys,  you will need to complete a survey before CL application,  directly 
after CL application, and  at 8 hours,  10 hours 12  hours,  14 hours, and 16 hours post lens application. Each  
survey should not take more than  5 minutes to complete. 
Study Visit 2: 1 Week  
Questionnaires: We will ask you  to complete  the CLDEQ-8 questionnaire as well as  an investigator 
designed survey to judge your  contact lens wearing experience,  eye symptoms, and vision. 
Visual  Acuity with Contact Lenses: We will evaluate  your ability to  read the eye chart.  
Slit-Lamp Biomicroscope: We will use a lighted  biomicroscope to document  your  anterior  eye health.
Contact Lens Evaluation:  We will evaluate  the fit  of your contact lenses. Contact  lens adjustments will only  
be made if they improve your vision on the eye chart.  If a contact  lens  adjustment is made, you will need 
to repeat the first  week  of contact  lens wear with a new set of  contact lenses.
Study Visit 3: 1 month 
Questionnaire: We  will ask  you to complete the  CLDEQ-8 questionnaire as  well as an  investigator designed 
survey to judge your contact lens wearing  experience,  eye symptoms, and vision. 
Visual  Acuity with Contact Lenses: We will evaluate  your ability to  read the eye chart.  
Slit-Lamp Biomicroscope: We will use a lighted  biomicroscope to document  your  anterior  eye health.
Completion: You will be compensated for your time, and you  will be released from the study. 
Additional Information:
Your research  data  will be stored in a de-identified  manner (private  information with all identifiers  removed). 
Your de-identified private information may be used for future research studies or distributed to  another 
researcher for future  research studies without additional informed consent.  This is only when there are no 
identifiers associated  with the data.
Page 3  of 6
FOR206 Version Date: 10/06/2021Risks and Discomforts
This study  does not have any inherent risks greater than a normal contact lens exam or  contact lens  wear. 
Contact lens  wearers may  have mild discomfort while  wearing their contact lenses. Contact lens wear may lead 
to red eyes,  uncomfortable eyes, temporarily decreased or permeant  vision loss, or even an eye  infection;  
however, these issues are  very rare if the contact lenses are  worn  correctly. Ask the study doctor if you have  
any questions about wearing contact  lenses. You will also need to use a  contact  lens  care system to clean your 
contact lenses (ClearCare).  This solution contains hydrogen peroxide, which can burn  your eye if you do  not 
use the solution correctly. ClearCare is  only  safe if it is  naturized for 6  or more hours in the provided contact 
lens case. If used corrected, ClearCare is  one of the safest  and  most effective contact lens care systems in the 
market. If  you have any questions about using ClearCare,  please  ask the study  doctor.  
Benefits
You may  not benefit directly  from taking  part  in this study. However, knowledge gained from this  research will 
help the medical community  better  understand if Total30 sphere contact lenses are able  to provide all day 
comfort for contact lens wearers. You will also  get the opportunity  to try a new contact lens. 
Alternatives
Your alternative is  to not  participate in this study. 
Confidentiality and Authorization to Use and  Disclose  Information for Research  Purposes
Federal regulations give  you certain rights  related to your health information. These include the right to know 
who will be able to get the  information and why  they may be able to  get it. The study doctor must get your 
authorization (permission)  to use  or give out any health information that might identify  you.
What protected health information may be used and/or given to others?
All medical information,  including but  not limited to information  and/or  records of  any diagnosis or treatment  
of disease or condition, which  may  include  sexually  transmitted diseases (e.g., HIV, etc.) or  communicable  
diseases, drug/alcohol  dependency, etc.; all  personal identifiers, including  but not limited to your name, social 
security number, medical record number,  date of birth, dates of service, etc.;  any past, present,  and future 
history, examinations,  laboratory results, imaging  studies and  reports  and treatments of any kind, including but 
not limited  to drug/alcohol  treatment, psychiatric/psychological treatment; financial/billing information,  
including but not limited  to copies of your medical bills; any other information related to  or collected for  use in 
the research study, regardless  of whether the information  was collected  for research or non-research (e.g., 
treatment) purposes; records about  any study drug you  received or about  study devices used; and consent 
forms from past studies that might be in your medical  record.
Who may use  and give out  this information?
Information about  your health may be used and given  to others by the study doctor and staff. They might see 
the research information during and after the study.
Who might get this information?
All individuals/entities listed in the informed consent document(s), including but not  limited  to, the physicians,  
nurses and staff and others performing services related to the research  (whether  at UAB or  elsewhere). Your 
information may also be  given to the sponsor  of this research. “Sponsor” includes  any persons or  companies 
Page 4  of 6
FOR206 Version Date: 10/06/2021that are working for or with the sponsor, or are owned by  the sponsor, or  are providing support to  the sponsor 
(e.g., contract research organization).
Information about  you and your health which might identify  you may be  given to:
the Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP)
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) agencies
Governmental agencies in other countries
Governmental agencies to whom certain diseases (reportable diseases) must be reported
 the University of Alabama at Birmingham - the physicians, nurses  and staff working  on the research  
study (whether at UAB or  elsewhere); other operating  units of  UAB, UAB Hospital, UAB  Highlands  
Hospital, as necessary  for their operations; the UAB  IRB and  its staff of UAB and its billing  agents
ALCON RESEARCH, LTD
Why will  this information be used and/or given to others?
Information about  you and your health that might identify  you  may be  given to  others to carry out the  
research study. The sponsor  will analyze and  evaluate  the results of the study. In addition, people from the 
sponsor and its consultants will be visiting the  research site. They will follow how the study is done, and they  
will be  reviewing your  information  for this purpose.
What if I decide not to give permission to use and give out my health information?
By signing this consent form, you are giving  permission  to use and give out  the health  information listed  above 
for the purposes described above. If  you refuse to give permission, you  will not be  able  to be in this  research.
May I review or copy  the information obtained  from me or created about me?
You have the right  to review and copy  your health  information. However, if you decide to  be in this study  and 
sign this permission form, you will not be allowed to look at or copy  your  information until after  the research  is 
completed.
May I withdraw or revoke  (cancel) my permission?
Yes, but this permission will not stop automatically. The use of your personal health information will  continue 
until you  cancel your permission.
You may  withdraw or take away your permission to use  and  disclose your  health information at any  time. You 
do this by sending written notice to the  study doctor. If you withdraw your permission, you will not be  able  to 
continue being in this study.
When you withdraw  your  permission, no new health  information which might identify you will be  gathered 
after that date. Information that  has already been  gathered may still be used  and given to  others.  This would 
be done if it  were  necessary for the  research to be reliable.
Is my health  information protected after it has  been given to others?
If you give permission to give your identifiable health information to  a person or  business, the  information may 
no longer be protected. There is a risk that  your information will be  released to  others. Including others 
outside of  UAB, without  your permission.
Voluntary Participation and Withdrawal
Page 5  of 6
FOR206 Version Date: 10/06/2021Whether or not you  take part in this study is your choice. There  will be no penalty if  you  decide not  to be in it. 
If you decide not to be in the study, you will not lose any benefits  you  are otherwise owed.
You are  free to withdraw from this study at any  time.  Your  choice to  leave the  study  will not affect your 
relationship with this institution. However, you should return to see  the study  doctor for  safety reasons  so you 
can be taken  off the  study drug  and  referred for follow-up care. Contact the study doctor if you want to 
withdraw from the study.
You may  be removed from the study without your consent if  the sponsor ends the study, if  the study doctor 
decides it is not in the  best interest of your health, or if you are not following the study rules.
If you are a UAB student or  employee, taking  part in this research is not  a part of your UAB class  work or 
duties. You can refuse to enroll or withdraw after enrolling  at any time before  the study  is over, with  no effect 
on your class standing, grades, or job  at UAB. You will not be offered  or receive  any special  consideration  if you 
take part  in this  research.
Cost of Participation
There will be no cost  to you for taking part  in this study.  
Payment for Participation
You will be paid $200 via  a Greenphire Clincard at the completion of  this  1-month  study to  compensate you for 
the time  that you devoted to this study.  A $100  dollar bonus is available  to those who complete  at least 90% of  
the text message surveys. If you do not meet the  study’s requirements based upon your  baseline study  visit 
numbers, you will be  compensated $20 for your  time.  The contact lenses and care products (contact lens case  
and contact lens solution) used in this study will be provided at no charge. Ask the study staff about  the 
method of payment that will be used for this study  (e.g., check,  cash,  gift card, direct deposit).
Payment for Research-Related Injuries
UAB and Alcon have not provided for  any payment if you are harmed as  a result of taking part  in this  study. If 
such harm occurs, treatment will be provided. However, this treatment will not  be provided free of  charge.
New Findings
You will be told by the  study  doctor or  the study staff if new information becomes available  that  might  affect  
your choice to stay in the study.
Questions
If you have any questions, concerns,  or complaints about the research or a research-related injury including  
available treatments, please contact the study doctor. You  may contact Dr. Andrew D. Pucker at  (205) 975-
9938 or after hours by emailing him at apucker@uab.edu.
If you have questions about  your rights as a  research participant, or  concerns  or complaints about the 
research, you  may contact  the UAB  Office  of the IRB (OIRB) at  (205) 934-3789  or toll free at  1-855-860-3789. 
Regular hours for  the OIRB are 8:00  a.m. to 5:00 p.m. CT, Monday through Friday.
Page 6  of 6
FOR206 Version Date: 10/06/2021Legal Rights
You are  not waiving any of  your legal rights by  signing this consent form.
Signatures
Your signature below indicates  that  you have read  (or been read)  the information provided  above and agree to  
participate in this study. You will receive a copy  of this signed consent form.
Signature of Participant Date
Signature of Person Obtaining Consent Date
Version 6 
 
Do Total30 Sphere Contact Lenses Provide a Comfortable 
Wearing Experience All Day?  
 
 
Principal Investigator:  
Andrew D. Pucker, OD, PhD, FAAO , FSLS , FBCLA  
 
 
Additional Support:  
Amy Logan, OD  
Terri Call, OD  
Quentin Franklin, BS 
 
University of Alabama at Birmingham  
School of Optometry  
1716 Universi ty Blvd  
Birmingham, AL 35233  
apucker@uab.edu  
(920) 579- 2900  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 6 
I. INTRODUCTION & RATIONALE  
 
Contact lens (CL) discomfort affects most CL wearers with discomfort consistently topping the reasons why 
established CL wearers drop out of CL s.1 In fact, studies have consistently found that the frequency of CL  
dropout is around 20% with this dropout frequency staying relatively stable over the past 20 plus years.1 This 
static frequency of CL dropout is surprising since there have been a number of dramatic soft CL innovations 
during this time frame (e.g., widely available daily disposable CL s, silicone hydrogel CL materials with high 
oxygen transmissibility , new CL surface coatings ).2  
 Another common issues that CL wearers frequently face is that their discomfort symptoms increase towards 
the end of the wear day.
3 This burdensome discomfort can unfortunately cause patients to remove their CLs 
before their  desired wear time .4 While comfortable wear times vary from patient to patient, Terry et al. has 
suggested that patients should be able to comfortably  wear their CLs for at least 12 hours per day for at least 6 
days per week.5 Nevertheless , the literature current ly lacks sufficient data to comment fully  on the full  day wear 
experience, which for many patients may be 16 or more hours per day, especially if they have demanding careers. One CL that has the potential to allow for all day comfort is the Total30 Sphere  CLs, which is a new 
water gradient , monthly CL aimed at delivering all day comfort and visual performance. Therefore, the purpose 
of this study is to map comfort over the full wear day in established, asymptomatic , soft CL wearers who are 
refit in Total30 Sphere  CLs. These data are not only important for judging the performance of Total30 Sphere 
CLs, but they will provide some of the first insights into the full day CL  wearing experience over one month .  
 
II. SPECIFIC AIM  
 We plan to accomplish our goal s by pursuing the following specific aim and testing the associated hypothes is: 
 
Aim 1: Determine if Total30 Sphere  CLs provide a comfortable wearing experience all day. 
Hypothesis  1: Patients who are refit in Total30 Sphere CLs will have a comfortable wearing experience 
after 16 hours as based on visual analog scale ( VAS) scores.  
 
III. STUDY DESIGN  
 
Subjects  
 This one- month , three -visit study will be conducted at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (Birmingham, 
AL, USA). Subjects will be recruited via clinic records, email, and fliers.  Subjects will be screened prior to the 
study visit with an IRB approved phone screening survey. Adult , 18- to 45- year-old, CL wearers who have 
20/20 visual acuity or better and who are minimally symptomatic will be recruited (Contact Lens Dry Eye 
Questionnaire [CLDEQ] -8 ≤10).
3, 6 Subjects will be required to be able to wear Total30 Sphere  CLs, and the y 
will be required to have a smart phone with text messaging capabilities  to be able to answer electronic survey 
questions . Subjects will be  required to have astigmatism better than or equal to -0.50 D in each eye, and they 
will be required to have regularly worn 2 week or monthly CLs within the past 6 months and be a current CL 
wearer . Subjects will be required to provide a glasses prescription that is less than 3 years old. Subjects will be 
required to be willing to start wearing their CLs between 6:00 AM and 8:00 AM and wear their CLs until 11:00 
PM each day text messaging data is collected. Subjects will be excluded if they  are current or past hard CL 
wearers, have known systemic health conditions that are thought to alter tear film physiology, have a history of 
viral eye disease, have a history of ocular surgery, have a history of severe ocular trauma, have active ocular 
infection or inflammation, are currently  using isotretinoin- derivatives  or ocular medications, are currently using 
rewetting drops or artificial tears, or if they are pregnant or breast feeding.7  
 
Sample Size   
 This will be a pilot study to understand CL comfort throughout the day  in monthly soft CL wearers . We estimate 
that 48 subjects  will be enough to gain a general understanding of ocular comfort across the entire day based 
upon past research (40 subjects + 8 subjects to account for attrition and missing data) .
8-10 An additional 10 
subjects are being requested to account for screen fails; however, recruitment will stop when 48 subjects fully 
qualify for this study  (max of 58 subjects) .  
Version 6 
 
Surveys and Clinical Tests  
 
Visit 1 : Baseline  
 
1. Subject History, Eligibility, Informed Consent:  Subjects will be asked to repeat the IRB approved phone 
screening survey at the study visit to verify that they are still eligible for the study.  All subjects  will be screened 
with the  CLDEQ -8 questionnaire regarding their habitual CLs over the past two weeks to verify that they are 
asymptomatic CL wearers . While subjects will be asked to report to the visit without their CLs , they will be  asked 
to complete the CLDEQ -8 as if they are wearing their habitual CLs.  All relevant patient demographics will be 
collected via a questionnaire developed by the investigators. Non- eligible subjects will be dismissed at this time 
or rescheduled depending upon the reason for ineligibility. Eligible subjects will be enrolled, consented, and requested to sign a privacy document .  
 
2. Visual Acuity  with Spectacles : Visual acuity will be measured with a Bailey -Lovie high- contrast chart.  
 
3. Manifest Refraction:  The investigator will determine the subject’s refractive error with a phoropter, and 
binocular balance will be performed if best -corrected visual acuity is equal in between eyes.  
 
4. Slit -Lamp Biomicroscopy: The investigator will use a slit -lamp biomicroscope to document normal and/or 
remarkable findings of the anterior eye structures: eyelashes (blepharitis), eyelids, conjunctiva, and cornea.  
 
5. CL Fitting:  Subject will be fit in Total30 Sphere CLs. The CLs will be evaluated for centration, movement, 
coverage, and CL power adjustments will only be made if they improve Snellen visual acuity. Subjects will be 
given a 1- month supply of CLEAR CARE® CL solution. Subjects will be educated on how to use CLEAR CARE® . 
 
6. Subject Compliance & Daily Comfort:  All subjects will be encouraged to wear their CLs for at least 16 hours 
per day  and to start wearing their CLs between 6:00 AM and 8:00 AM  on days that they will be completing text 
messaging surveys . Subjects will be educated that they will be required to complete Qualtrics surveys on their 
phone. Subjects will be asked to complete a test survey before they leave the first study visit to mak e sure that 
they system is compatible with their phone. These surveys will ask s ubjects about their eye comfort with a visual 
analog scale (slider scale with 0 as neutral comfort, - 50 extremely uncomfortable, and +50 extremely 
comfortable ) at before CL application, directly after CL application,  and at 8 hours, 10 hours 12 hours, 14 hours, 
and 16 hours post lens application on the first 5 day s. This same system will be used to monitor how many hours 
they wear their CLs each day. Subjects will finally  be asked to complete these surveys on day 14 and 1 day prior 
to their 1- month visit  (1 month) to understand comfort over the life of the CLs . Subjec ts will be called the day 
before the day 14 and 1- month surveys to remind them about these surveys.  Subjects will be allowed to schedule 
their day 14 and 1- month surveys within 3 days of these time points to allow for better compliance.   
 Visit 2: 1 Week  
 
1. Visual Acuity with CLs:  Visual acuity will be measured with a Bailey -Lovie high- contrast chart.  
 
2. Slit -Lamp Biomicroscopy:  The investigator will use a slit -lamp biomicroscope to document normal and/or 
remarkable findings of the anterior eye structures: eyelashes (blepharitis), eyelids, conjunctiva, and cornea.  
 
3. CL Evaluation:  The CLs will be evaluated for centration, movement, and coverage, and lens power 
adjustments will only be made if they improve Snellen visual acuity. If a refractive er ror adjustment of more than 
0.25 D is made, the patient will be given a new set of lenses and be required to repeat the 1 -week visit.  
 
Visit 3: 1 Month  
 
1. Visual Acuity with CLs:  Visual acuity will be measured with a Bailey -Lovie high- contrast chart.  
 
2. Slit -Lamp Biomicroscopy:  The investigator will use a slit -lamp biomicroscope to document normal and/or 
remarkable findings of the anterior eye structures: eyelashes (blepharitis),  eyelids, conjunctiva, and cornea.  
Version 6 
 
3. CL Evaluation:  The CLs will be evaluated for centration, movement, and coverage, and lens power 
adjustments will only be made if they improve Snellen visual acuity. If interested, the patient will be given a 
prescription for the CLs upon request.  
 
4. Study Completion:  The subject will be compensated for their time, and they will be released from the study.  
 Data Analysis  
 All data will be analyzed with Stata/IC 15 (StataCorp LLC ; TX, USA). VAS comfort scores will serve as the 
primary endpoint and be reported as percent of patients who are comfortable at each timepoint. C omfort 
comparisons across visits or across the wear day  will serve as exploratory endpoints, and these outcomes will 
be measured with paired t -tests or ANOVA .  
 Training of Study Personnel  
 
Prior to enrolling any subjects all examiners will par ticipate in a training session developed by Andrew D. Pucker, 
OD, PhD. This full investigator meeting will ensure that all study investigators are performing the procedures in 
the same manner. Data from each investigator’s first subject will also be monitored for quality control by the 
study’s coordinator before the investigator is allowed to see additional subjects.  
 
IV. Study Timeline  
 
  2021  2021  2021  2021  2021  2021  
  July Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
Activity  
Contracting         
IRB Preparation             
Data Collection             
Data Analysis        
Final Study Report        
 V. Publication Plans  
 
An abstract describing comfort across the wear day will be submitted  to Academy 2022 San Diego (main 
outcome) , and an abstract will be submitted to Heart of America Eye Congress describing how comfort 
changes over the wear month. A  manuscript  on the same topic s will be submitted to Contact Lens & Anterior 
Eye after the Academy 2022 San Diego abstract is submitted because the Academy requires that abstract 
materials have not been presented/submitted elsewhere.    
VI. Conclusions  
 This project will be among the first to describe the progression of CL comfort throughout the day for Total30 
Sphere CLs. These data are important because they could provide insight into end of day CL discomfort, and 
they will provide data needed for proper patient education.  
   
VII. References  
1. Pucker AD, Tichenor AA. A Review of Contact Lens Dropout. Clin Optom (Auckl)  2020;12:85- 94. 
2. Ngo W, Situ P, Keir N, Korb D, Blackie C, Simpson T. Psychometric properties and validation of the Standard Patient Evaluation of Eye Dryness questionnaire. Cornea  2013;32:1204- 1210.  
3. Pucker AD, Jones -Jordan LA, Marx S, et al. Clinical factors associated  with contact lens dropout. Cont 
Lens Anterior Eye  2019;42:318- 324. 
4. Nichols JJ, Willcox MD, Bron AJ, et al. The TFOS International Workshop on Contact Lens Discomfort: 
executive summary. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci  2013;54:TFOS7- TFOS13.  
Version 6 
5. Terry RL, Schni der CM, Holden BA, et al. CCLRU standards for success of daily and extended wear 
contact lenses. Optom Vis Sci  1993;70:234 -243. 
6. Chalmers RL, Keay L, Hickson- Curran SB, Gleason WJ. Cutoff score and responsiveness of the 8- item 
Contact Lens Dry Eye Questi onnaire (CLDEQ -8) in a Large daily disposable contact lens registry. Cont 
Lens Anterior Eye  2016;39:342- 352. 
7. Sullivan BD, Crews LA, Sonmez B, et al. Clinical utility of objective tests for dry eye disease: variability 
over time and implications for clinical trials and disease management. Cornea 2012;31:1000- 1008.  
8. Duong K, Pucker AD, McGwin G, Franklin QX, Cox J. An Established Soft Contact Lens Wearers’ Awareness of and Initial Experience with Orthokeratology. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt  2021; 41:673 -682. 
9. Maldonado- Codina C, Navascues Cornago M, Read ML, et al. The association of comfort and vision in 
soft toric contact lens wear. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2021;44:101387.  
10. Diec J, Tilia D, Thomas V. Comparison of Silicone Hydrogel and Hydrogel Daily Disposable Contact 
Lenses. Eye Contact Lens  2018;44 Suppl 1:S167- S172.  
 