 
 I. TITLE  
 
Efficacy of a Timolol  Gel in the Care for  Epistaxis in Patients with Hereditary Hemorrhagic  
Telangiectasia: A Double -Blinded, Randomized  Controlled Trial ( ETIC HHT Trial)  
 
II. SITE INVESTIGATORS  
 
Washington University Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT) Center of Excellence  
Jay F. Piccirillo, MD, FACS  
Murali Chakinala, MD  
 
III. Trial Registration  
 
Prior to enrollment of the first subject, the trial protocol will be registered in ClinicalTrials.gov . 
 
NCT : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Date: 11/1/2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
IV. ABSTRACT  
 
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder that progressively 
manifests with telangiectasias, mucosal bleeding, and possibly solid organ hemorrhage within the first few 
decades of life. Epistaxis is the most common presentation of the disease, with the vast maj ority of HHT 
patients developing recurrent epistaxis by the age of 20. Epistaxis alone has been shown to be the biggest 
contributor of morbidity and decreased quality of life in HHT patients. While a variety of medications and 
procedures have been tried to  prevent the bleeding in HHT patients with epistaxis, no standard of care 
exists as each therapy has its own drawbacks. As a result, there is a need to further investigate potential 
therapies to prevent blood loss and iron deficiency anemia, and to improve  the quality of life in HHT 
patients with moderate to severe epistaxis. Propranolol and timolol, nonselective beta blockers, in a topical 
gel form, are promising therapies to reduce epistaxis and reduce the likelihood of systemic side effects. The 
mechanis m of action is proposed to be due to indirect shunting of catecholamines towards the alpha -1 
receptor and possible direct anti -angiogenic effects. Timolol is an available topical therapy in infantile 
hemangiomas and may play a role in the prevention and tr eatment of epistaxis in HHT. Due to 
propranolol’s toxicity to nasal cilia, timolol is the more favorable of the two drugs. Thus, we propose a 
double -blinded, placebo -controlled, 8 -week randomized clinical trial investigating the efficacy of timolol 
gel in the management of epistaxis in adults with HHT.  The Specific Aims are to determine in adults with 
HHT -associated epistaxis:  
1. If topical timolol gel is more effective than placebo in reducing the frequency and severity of 
epistaxis.  
2. If topical timolol gel i s more effective than placebo in improving hemoglobin levels.  
3. The frequency of adverse events, side effects, and safety profile of topical timolol gel delivered to the 
nasal mucosa.  
The study population will consist of: adults with confirmed clinical (meeting at least 3 of the 4 Curaçao 
Criteria) or genetic diagnosis of HHT; Epistaxis Severity Score  (ESS) ≥ 4 and 2 or more nosebleeds per 
week with a cumulative nosebleed duration of at  least 5 (or 10) minutes per week; stable nasal hygiene and 
medical regimen for preceding 1 month; stable epistaxis pattern over the preceding 3 months.  We will 
recruit subjects from the Washington University Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT) Ce nter of 
Excellence, Froedtert & Medical College of Wisconsin Center of Excellence, and The CureHHT Participate 
in Research  website.  The intervention will be prepared and dispensed by Advanced Rx Pharmacy, 
Plymouth Meeting, Pennsylvania.  Timolol nasal gel  0.1% will be prepared with a poloxamer gel and 0.5 ml 
applied to each nostril twice daily. The total daily dose will amount to 2 mg.  Placebo gel is prepared with 
poloxamers and no active ingredients.  Timolol is odorless so the research subjects should no t be able to 
identify the placebo gel from the active gel. The primary outcome will be the difference in the mean pre - to 
post -intervention change in the ESS among the subjects in the two intervention arms.  The 95%CI around 
this effect size will be determ ined to assess the precision of the observed effect and whether a clinically 
meaningful difference is plausible given the observed results. A total sample size of 24 patients is required 
to allow us to detect with 80% power at the 2 -sided alpha level of 0. 05 a difference of 62% or more in the 
percent of subjects who experience reduction of severity of bleeds between treatment groups.  Considering 
a 20% drop out rate, we plan to enroll 30 subjects in the study.   
 
V. STATEMENT OF RESEARCH PROBLEM  
 
BACKGROUND  
 
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an inherited autosomal dominant disorder that leads to 
abnormal formation of blood vessels throughout the body. (McDon ald, Bayrak -Toydemir, and Pyeritz 2011)  
 
 Patient symptoms prim arily consist of bleeding from various mucosal surfaces from telangiectasias 
(dilated capillaries) across the total body to more severe or life -threatening hemorrhage from arterio -
venous malfo rmations (AVMs) in the lung, brain, or liver. The telangiectasias tend to spontaneously 
rupture, most commonly resulting in nasal or gastrointestinal bleeding. Diagnosis of HHT is currently with 
the use of the Curaçao Criteria, which involves a combination  of epistaxis, telangiectasias, visceral lesions 
(AVMs), and a family history of a first degree relative with HHT. Symptoms are age -dependent and 
gradually emerge over time. (Faughnan et al. 2011)   By age 20, more than 75% of patients with HHT have 
developed recurrent epistaxis. (Dheyauldeen, Abdelnoor, and Bachmann -Harildstad 2011)  Epistaxis is the 
leading cause of morbidity and decreased quality of life in these patients . 
 
TREATMENT  
 
A variety of medical and surgical treatments are available for epistaxis. A recent evidence -based review was 
performed to provide treatment information .(Halderman et al. 2018)  The authors used the Oxford levels of 
evidence (Group 2011)  to grade the methodological quality of each article and the strength of the evidence.  
A total of 123 abstracts were reviewed covering systemic hormonal therapy, thalid omide, tranexamic acid, 
and propranolol.  Of the 123 abstracts, 1 8 articles were of su fficient methodological quality to be included.  
Systemic h ormonal therapy  delivered as selective estrogen receptor modulators (raloxifene and tamoxifen) 
and topical estr iol was described in 5 articles. (Albinana et al. 2012; Minami and Haji 2016; Whitehead et 
al. 2016; Yaniv et al. 2009; Yaniv et al. 2011)   The level of evidence for systemic hormonal therapy  was 
rated as Grade C and the authors concluded that hormonal therapy has potential benefits of improvement 
in frequency, severity, and number of epistaxis episodes.  Thalidomide  has antiangiogenic properties and 
has been used to treat epistaxis and gastro intestinal bleeding. The review identified 4 articles that 
described observational studies of the impact of low -dose thalidomide (50 -200 mg/d) on frequency and 
severity of epistaxis. (Fang et al. 2017; Invernizzi et al. 201 5; Lebrin et al. 2010; Peng et al. 2015)  The 
aggregate level of evidence of the four studies was Grade C and the authors concluded that improvements 
in patients’ bleeding without serious side effects were observed at the lower doses. Tranexamic acid (TXA) 
decreases the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin and thus stabilizes blood clots.  The authors reviewed 
5 articles, 2 of which were double -blind ed randomized placebo clinical trials, that examined oral and 
topical TXA. (Fernandez et al. 2007; Gaillard et al. 2014; Geisthoff et al. 2014; Whitehead et al. 201 6; Zaffar 
et al. 2015)   The results of the two clinical trials  of oral TXA failed to sh ow a change in hemoglobin level but 
did show improvements in various epistaxis parameters. The authors concluded that oral TXA is likely 
associated with a reduction in epistaxis without serious side effects, but additional high -quality studies are 
needed.  The one clinical trial  to examine the impact of topical TXA showed no benefit.   
 
 The Use of β-Blockers in the Management of HHT -Associated Epistaxis  
 
β-blockers have several possible biological mechanisms of action to reduce HHT -associated epistaxis and 
several studies in humans to suggest a clinically meaningful effect.  The β -blockers propranolol and timolol 
have been studied the most.  
Propranolol.   The non -selective beta -blocker propranolol is used both topically and systemically 
to treat  superficial and deep infantile hemangiomas, respectively. (Price et al. 2018)   While the precise 
mechanism is unclear, it is likely a combination of vasoconstrictive properties of the drug as well as anti -
angiogenic effects (Storch and Hoeger 2010)  and decreased migration of endothelial cells in vitro. (Albinana 
et al. 2012)  Infantile hemangiomas and HHT have similar pathophysiologic mechanisms, both showing 
dysregulated angiogenesis and high levels of tissue VEGF .(Przewratil, Sitkiewicz, and Andrzejewska 2010; 
Zheng et al. 2013)   For these reasons, oral and topical propranolol has been identified as a treatment for 
HHT -associated epistaxis.  The systematic review identified two small studies (Contis  et al. 2017; Mei -
Zahav et al. 2017)  and the aggregate level of evidence was rated as Grade C.  The one study of oral 
propranolol (Contis et al. 2017)  included 1 0 patients in a retrospective case series and 11 patients in a 
 
 prospective design. In both the retrospective and prospective series, patients reported a significant 
reduction in epistaxis severity and frequency. Only one patient had to discontinue therapy due t o 
hypotension.  In a retrospective case series  of topical propranolol by investigators at the National HHT 
Center in Israel (Mei -Zahav et al. 2017) , clinically significant reduction in frequency and severity of 
epistaxis as measured by the Epistaxis Severity Scale  (ESS)(Hoag et al. 2010)  was reported. In addition, 
the investigators report  improvement in hemoglobin levels. Without a control group, however, it is difficult 
to conclude that the beneficial outcomes were due to the propranolol or to increased moisture from the gel.  
The authors of the systematic review (Halderman et al. 2018)  concluded about the use of propranolol 
“Efficacy, or lack thereof, needs to be determined in large, well -designed studies before further use can be 
promoted”.  
 Recent Study. At the 13th HHT International Scientific Conference (June 13 -16, 2019), t he same 
National HHT Center in Israel investigation team lead by Dr. Mei -Zahav reported on the results of a Phase 
II randomized cli nical trial followed by an open -label study of topical proprano lol gel . The study included 
20 subjects equally divided and randomized to propranolol 1.5% in a topical gel vs. topical gel alone for 8  
weeks. Approximated data (raw data not yet available) from Mei -Zahav  showed that the average within 
subject decrease  in ESS in the propranolol group was 2.03 points (SD=1.7) and in the placebo group it was  
0.48 points (SD=0.8) for a mean difference of 1.55 points (95% CI: 0.30 to 2.80; Cohen’s d = 1.2) in favor 
of prop ranolo l group (Figure 1) .  
 
 
Figure 1. Change in Epistaxis Severity Score  (pre – post) as a Function of Intervention  Arm  
 
In Figure 2, the spaghetti plot shows individual subject change in Epistaxis Severity Score for the subjects 
in the placebo and propranolol gel arms. Of the 10 patients in the propran olol group, 8 (80%) experienced 
a clinically meaningful difference while 4 of the 10 (40%) patients in the placebo group experienced a 
clinically meaningful difference (difference in proportion of 40%; 95% CI -2.3% to 67%).  
 
  
Figure 2. Individual Subject Change  in Epistaxis Severity Score as a Function of 
Intervention Arm  
 
Quality of life, as measured by the SF-12 improved in the propranolol group from 35 ±7 to 41 ±7. There were 
no cardiovascular adverse effects noted in the trial, and the most common side effect was a burning 

 
 sensation on application of the gel to the nasal mucosa. The severity  was usually mild and resolved within 
1-2 weeks in most patients. The other side effect noted was rhinorrhea, which was severe in two patients, 
resulting in withdrawal of the two patients during the open label period. While 13 out of the 16 patients 
that received propranolol have continued to use it topically off label, the  invest igators feel the re is a need to 
modify the drug delivery system  and/or the drug preparation to minimize further the side  effects.  
 Intranasal Propranolol is Not Well Tolerated and is Associated with Adverse Effects on Ciliated 
Epithelium.   Several studies demonstrated that intranasal propranolol is not well tolerated and is 
associated with arrested cilia movement. Van de Donk et al found that doses as low as 0.1% propranolol 
had a deleterious effect on the cilia of chicken and human tissue .(Merkus et al. 2006)   In Figure 3, the 
effect of propranolol on the ciliary beat frequency over time is shown. As can be seen, propranolol 0.1%, 
which is considerably lower than the 1.5% dosage  used in the Mei -Zahav study, arrested ciliary movement 
within 20 minutes .  The authors concluded that the effect was irreversible since movement did not return 
within 2 hours after drug was rinsed away . 
 
Figure 3. The effect of 0.1% propranolol -HCL on the cilia  beat frequency of human 
adenoids . LR – Locke -Ringer solution (control). Reprinted from The Influence of Drugs on 
Nasal Ciliary Movement. (Hermens and Merkus 1987)   
 
 
Duchateau et al studied three different propranolol HCL formulations - oral, sublingual, and intranasal in 
8 heathy male volunteers. (Duchateau, Zuidema, and Merkus 1986)  The 5 -mg intranasal dose was 
administered as a solution of propranolol HCL in 0.2 ml 2% methylcellulose gel, pH 7.4. The authors found 
that propranolol was rapidly absorbed from the nasal cavity but was not well tolerated as its use was 
associated with nasal burning immediately after administration.   The authors conclude d that chronic use of 
propranolol should be discouraged due to local s ide effects of stinging sensation in the nose and 
ciliotoxicity.  
 Timolol. Timolol is a non -selective ß-blocker eliminated by the liver and primarily metabolized by 
CYP2D6. Topic timolol has been used to treat superficial hemangiomas in infants. (Sorrell and Chamlin 
2013)   Timolol has been shown to have vasoconstriction properties, causes endotheli al cell apoptosis, and 
decreases  VEGF expression. (Storch and Hoeger 2010)    
 
In a case report, Olitsky reported on the intranasal use of topical timolol for HHT -associated 
epistaxis. (Olitsky 2012)  The 48-year patient had had multiple procedures and treatments in the past, 
including nasal cauterization and use of intranasal bevacizumab, but was experiencing 3 to 4 nosebleeds a 
day.  The patient was started on one drop of timolol 0.5% ophthalmic solution in each nostril three times 
per day. Significant reduction in the frequency and severity of epistaxis was reported in 3 to 4 days, 
remained after one month, and was not associated with change in blood pressure or heart rate during the 
treatment.   
 

 
 A prosp ective study of the impact of timolol ophthalmic solution (0.5%) delivered as a nasal drop into each 
nostril 3 times daily for 3 months was performed in 1 2 HHT patients who had previously undergone nasal 
dermoplasty. (Ichimura et al. 2016)   The mean score of bleeding intensity and frequency were markedly 
reduced after treatment.  Two patients who had required transfusions before treatment did not need them 
afterward, and patients were generally satisfied with the treatment.  One patient, a 78 -year -old male, 
developed disequilibrium, hypotension, and bradycardia on the second day of timolol. He then developed 
heart failure  and was removed from the study.  
 
A third study reported on the use of intranasal timolol 0.5% ophthalmological solution in a 59 -year -old 
man with a history of HHT -associated epistaxis but no known cardiac conditions. (Ichimura et al. 2016)   He 
had a significant family history of cardiac disease  and developed lightheadedness and sinus bradycardia 
with right bundle branch block within 3 weeks of starting treatment.  The total daily dose of the patient in 
the case study was 6 mg/day, which is not excessive as the typical oral dose is 10 mg twice daily. The  
bradycardia and heart blocked stopped with cessation of timolol drops. Through genetic testing, he was  
subsequently discovered to be an intermediate metabolizer of CYP2D6 enzyme, which was felt to explain 
the bradycardia .  The CYP2D6 gene encodes an enzyme important in the metabolism of many commonly 
used medications. Variation in CYP2D6 is associated with  inter -individual differences in medication 
response, and genetic testing is used to optimize medication therapy.  
 
 Conclusion  
 
The mechanisms of action, published literature, and results of an unpublished study presented at the 13th 
HHT International Scientific Conference suggest a role of β -blockers in the management of HHT -
associated epistaxis.  The work by Mei -Zahav et al suggest propranolol gel may be an effective treatment 
for HHT -associated epistaxis. However, intranasal propra nolol is not well tolerated and is associated with 
arrested cilia movement.   Topical timolol has advantages over propranolol in that it is well -tolerated and 
has been shown to not have an effect on nasal mucosa. (Jagdale, Shewale, and Kuchekar 2016)  Patients 
with certain pre -existing heart conditions or metabolizing variants of the liver enzyme CYP2D6 are at 
increased risk for adverse effects of  timolol ophthalmological solution.   
 
Given our understanding of the pathophysiology of HHT -associated epistaxis, mechanism of action, and 
pharmacokinetics of intranasal timolol, we believe it is now appropriate to conduct a Phase II double -
blinded, placebo controlled randomized clinical trial  to evaluate the efficacy of intranasal timolol gel.  The 
results of this Phase II study will provide additional information on the benefits and risks of intranasal 
timolol, which can be used to inform the design of a definitive Phase III study.  
 
VI. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
The Specific Aims are to determine in adults with HHT -associated epistaxis:  
 
1. If topical timolol gel is more effective than placebo in reducing the frequency and severity of 
epistaxis.  
2. If topical timolol gel is more effective than placebo in improving hemoglobin levels.  
3. The frequency of adverse events, side effects, and safety profile of topical timolol gel delivered to the 
nasal mucosa , and safety profile of topical  timolol  gel delivered to the nasal mucosa of HHT 
patients . 
 
VII. DESIGN  PLAN  
 
Study Type  
 
  
The study will be a multi -site, double -blind, placebo -controlled randomized clinical trial performed at two 
tertiary academic medical center HHT Center s of Excellence.   
 
Blinding  
 
Research participants and the members of the investigative tea m who will have direct subject interaction 
will be blinded to treatment assignment.  The research statistician, Dr. Kallogjeri, will not be blinded.  All 
subject assessments will be performed without knowledge of treatment.  
 
Study Population  
Inclusion Criteria :  
1) Adults ages 18 and older  
2) Confirmed clinical (meeting at least 3 of the 4 Curaçao Criteria) or genetic  diagnosis of 
HHT  
3) Epistaxis Severity S core  (ESS) ≥ 4  and 2 or more nosebleeds per week with a 
cumulative nosebleed duration  of at least 5 minutes per week  
4) Stable nasal hygiene and medical regimen for preceding 1 month  
5) Stable epistaxis pattern over the preceding 3 months   
 
Exclusion Criteria :  
1) Contraindications for systemic β adrenergic blocker administration  
a. Hypersensitivity to β adrenergic blockers  
b. Asthma or bronchospasm  
c. Congestive heart failure  with LVEF <40%  
d. Hereditary pulmonary arterial hypertension  
e. Baseline bradycardia (H R <55  beats per minute ) 
f. Sick Sinus Syndrome  
g. 2nd or 3rd degree heart block, left or right bundle branch block,  or bifasicular block  
h. Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus  (most recent HbA1c >9%)  or diabetic ketoacidosis  
within last 6 months  
i. Hypotension  (systolic blood pressure < 90)  
2) Known hypersensitivity to timolol  
3) Severe peripheral circulatory disturbances (Raynaud phenomenon ) 
4) Known intermediate or poor  metabolizer  variant  of the liver enzyme CYP2D6  
5) Current use of any of the following known strong CYP2D6 inhibitors: fluoxetine  
(Prozac) , paroxetine  (Paxil) , bupropion  (Welbutrin) , quinidine, quinine , ritonavir  
(Norvir) , and terbinafine  (Lamisil)  
6) Current use of the following other drugs known to  pharmacodynamically  interact with 
timolol: diltiazem, verapamil, digoxin, digitalis , propafenone, disopyramide, clonidine,  
flecainide,  or lidocaine  
7) Patients currently treated or who plan to initiate treatment with    β-blockers  
8) Use of any anti -angiogenic medication in the last month prior to  recruitment , 
including bevacizumab, pazopanib, thalidomide, or lenalidomide  
9) Illicit drug use , except marijuana  
10) Known pheochromocytoma  
11) Use of anticoagulants, antiplatelet, or fibrinolytic therapies within the last  month prior 
to recruitm ent, except for low -dose (81 mg or less) of aspirin  
12) Pregnancy or planned pregnancy in the next 6 months or currently  breastfeeding  
13) Inability to read or understand English  
 
 14) Inability to complete 8 weeks of  therapy for any reaso n 
 
Eligibility Determination  
 
To determine potential eligibility for the study, the research team will query the medical record based on 
the following inclusion/exclusion criteria:  
• Age (18 years or older)  
• Medication history to assess current use of a β-blocker (exclusion)  
• Allergy histo ry to timolol  (exclusion)  
• Changes in epistaxis care in the last month (exclusion)  
• Use of illicit drugs  (exclusion)  
• History of unresected pheochromocytoma (exclusion)  
 
For those meeting the selection criteria, we will access name, telephone number, age, sex, and date/time of 
any clinic visits related to HHT and/or epistaxis.  
 
Recruitment and Consent Process  
 
Washington University Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT) Center of 
Excellence.  Adult  HHT patients will be recrui ted from the Washington University Hereditary 
Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT) Center of Excellence  database and the EPIC electronic medical record . 
Advertisements describing the study will be posted in the WU Department of O tolaryngology -Head & Neck 
Surgery  clinic  and the Division of Pulmonary Medicine . We will attempt to recruit minorities through the 
assistance of Ms. Sara Kukuljan, Department of Otolaryngology -Head and Neck Surgery S ubject 
Recruitment Coordi nator.   However, HHT is quite rare in people of African descent and so recruitment of 
African -Americans with HHT -associated epistaxis is expected to be quite low.  
 
Froedtert & Medical College of Wisconsin Center of Excellence.   Research subjects will be 
recruited from HHT patients seeking care from any of the participating physicians at the HHT Center for 
Advanced Care - Froedtert Hospital.  
 
CureHHT Website . Trial information, including inclusion and exclusion criteria, will be posted on 
CureHHT website Participate in Research page [ https://curehht.org/research/participate -in-research/ ] 
 
Eligible patients who present to clinic or respond to advertisements will be approached by a research team 
member to review the informed consent process and thoroughly discuss the research protocol, potential 
benefits, and risks of the study .  The informed consent discussion will take place  with the patient and any 
available family members in pers on. Any subsequent questions or concerns from the potential participant 
and any family members will also be addressed at that time. After discussion, the patient will be asked to 
re-summarize the steps involved in the study to ensure understanding. If inte rested, written consent will be 
obtained. Patients will be reminded that study participation is voluntary and will in no way affect their 
current or future care.  
 
Variables Under Study  
 
Assisted Epistaxis Severity Score ( aESS) . Assessment of epistaxis severity will be obtained by the 
validated instrument, the Epistaxis Severity Score  (ESS).(Hoag et al. 2010)  (Appendix 1)  To complete the 
ESS, patients  are asked to consider typical symptoms over the previous 3 months . However, with the 8-
week  duration of our trial, patients will complete the aESS in reference to their epistaxis over the past 1 
month. The ESS contains 6 items – frequency, duration, and intensity of nosebleeds, whether patient has 
 
 sought medication attention, whether patient is anemic, and whether patient has received a blood 
transfu sion.  The overall score ranges from 0 to 10, with severity of nosebleed based on score graded as 
None  composite  score of 0 -1, Mild  1-4, Moderate  4-7, and Severe  as 7-10.T he minimal important 
difference noticeable by both patients and clinicians in the ESS  scoring system is estimated as a change of 
0.71. (Yin et al. 2016)  
 
HHT Endoscopy Score (HES) .  The HHT Endoscopy Score ( HES ) is an endoscopy staging score 
developed  as a way to quantify the sev erity of the patient’s nasal telangiectasias as seen on physical 
exam. (Reh et al. 2014)  The HES  was sho wn to correlate with the ESS. Its parameters are telangiectasia 
sites, patterns, crusting, location, perforation, density, and relative AVMs. Scoring of the HES is illustrated 
in Appendix 2.  
 
Epistaxis -Specific Quality -Of-Life Questionnaire (EQ QoL ).  The EQQo L measures 13 items that 
focus on the impact of epistaxis on the patient’s physical, functional, and emotional status and quality of 
life.(Ingrand et al. 2011)   The EQQoL  was shown to have satisfactory psychometric properties and when 
combined with the SF -36 measures both disease -specific and gen eral quality of life.  See Appendix 3 for 
questionnaire.  
 
Short Form (SF -36).  The Medical Outcomes Short Form -36 (SF-36) was developed for use in clinical 
practice and research to measure general physical functional and quality of life. (Ware and Sherbourne 
1992)   The SF-36 includes one multi -item scale that assesses eight health concepts: 1) limitations in 
physical activities because of health problems; 2) limitations in social activities because of physical or 
emotional problems; 3) limitations in usual role activities bec ause of physical health problems; 4) bodily 
pain; 5) general mental health (psychological distress and well -being); 6) limitations in usual role activities 
because of emotional problems; 7) vitality (energy and fatigue); and 8) general health perceptions. See 
Appendix 4 for questionnaire.  
 
Patient Satisfaction with Treatment.   The Treatment Satisfaction Questionn aire for Medication  
Version II  (TSQMII ) was  is an 11 -question questionnaire  adapted and validated from the TSQM v. I in 
order to more precisely collect information  (fewer questions and more consistent wording)  regarding four 
general topics of patient satisfaction with treatment: effectiveness, side effects, conveni ence, and overa ll 
satisfaction.  (See Appendix 5  questionnaire) (Atkinson et al. 2005; Atkinson et al. 200 4) 
 
Clinical Global Impression Scale  (CGI) .  The overall response to treatment will be measured with the 
Clinical Global  Impression  (CGI) scale. The CGI Scale measures response to treatment for a number of 
disorders and has good internal consistency and validity. (Dunlop, Gray, and Rapaport 2017)  Upon 
completion of the study, subjects will be asked to answer the  following question: " Overall, how would you 
rate your response to treatment ?" Response  options are: Very Much Improved , Much Improved , 
Minimally Improved , No Change , Minimally Worse , Much Worse , and Very Much Worse . 
 
Epistaxis, Transfusion, and Compliance (ETC) Logs .  Patients will be asked to use the Cure HHT 
app from the online app store if they have a mobile device capable of this feature. It will include a daily 
reminder to track epistaxis frequency and severity, energy levels, if they received a blood transf usion  
and/or iron transfusion , and if they took their medication.  If the patient answers yes to the transfusion, he 
or she will be prompted to describe the details of the transfusion, including quantity  of units received.  The 
app can directly share the information with the study team at the patient’s request.  
 
If patients are not able to use the app for any reason, a text message and/or email will be sent to the patient 
each evening via the REDCap™ (Research Electronic Dat abase) website that will ask questions about the 
frequency and severity of epistaxis  and energy level that replicates the Cure HHT app . The REDCap™  
 
 survey will assess for compliance by asking if the  research subject has used the assigned treatment  that 
day. Once each week, the survey will ask the subject  if he or she received  a blood transfusion that week. 
REDCap™ is a password -protected site that will keep the information confidential.  
 
Methods  
 
Demographic information , including age, gender, and race,  will be collected from each enrolled patient . 
Data will be collected regarding the duration  of each patient’s epistaxis history, previous treatments, and 
estimation of the average number of nosebleeds per day; HHT treatment history ; co-morbid conditi ons, 
such as hypertension, inhalant allergies, and other blood dyscrasias; risk factors, such as cigarette 
smoking, use of CPAP, and use of supplemental oxygen; and medications associated with increased 
bleeding.   
 
At the initial visit, researc h subjects  will complete  the infor med consent process, SF-36, ESS, baseline 
electrocardiogram (ECG), CYP2D6 enzyme allele, blood pre ssure (BP), and heart rate  (HR ). ECGs are to be 
read  by Dr. Murali Chakinala . Subjects will undergo a direct ed otolaryngology physical exam by Dr. 
Piccirillo that will include nasal endoscopy to describe nasal mucosa telangiectasias. Dr. Piccirillo  will rate 
the nasal mucosa telangiectasias using the HES.   Patients will be schedule d for phlebotomy to obtain a 
bloo d specimen to measure  hemoglobin levels prior to beginning therapy. Baseline daily iron 
supplementation will also be recorded and  it will be  recommended  to the patient not to alter their daily 
supplementation  of iron or other treatments , unless indicated by a change in epistaxis frequency .  
 
Upon demonstration that patient does not have the CYP2D6 allele associated with a low or intermediate 
metabolizer of timolol and successful completion of questionnaires, physical examination,  and laboratory 
tests, subjects will be randomized to receive either timolol  gel or placebo.  
 
Pharmaceutical Preparation . The intervention will be prepared and dispensed by Advanced Rx 
Pharmacy, Plymouth Meeting, Pennsylvania.  Timolol nasal gel 0.1% will be prepared with a poloxamer gel 
(combination of poloxamer 188 and 407; pH adjusted to 4.5 -6.5) and  0.5 ml applied to each nostril twice 
daily. The total daily dose would amount to  2 mg.  Placebo gel is prepared with poloxamers a nd no active 
ingredients.  Timolol is odorless so the research subject s should not be able to identify the placebo gel from 
the active gel.  
 
Subjects  will be instructed to apply 0.5 ml to the nasal mucosa of each nostril twice dail y via 20 mL 
syringes. The  gel will be dispensed in an amber vial with an adapter to which the syringe can attach in 
order to draw out the medication for each dose . Patients will be supplied with one syringe per day for a 
total of 56 syringes. They will be given alcohol wipes to cl ean the syringe between the morning and evening 
gel application. When the syringes are distributed, the  research assistants will make sure that the patient 
understands how to apply correctly the medication to the nasal cavity . 
 
BP and HR measurements will be obtained by the subject weekly at home with the use of the blood 
pressure monitor given to them at the beginning of the study and blood pressures will be reported via the 
use of REDCap™ . Subjects  will also be instructed to re port any local or systemic side effects throu ghout the 
duration of the study . Telephone c alls with the study team at the end of Week 1 and again at Week 4  will be 
arranged .  
 
After 8 weeks of intervention , subjects  will be asked to return to clinic  and the physician will perform nasal 
endoscopy and complete the HES  scale .  Subjects  will have blood pressure and heart rate measurements . 
Subjects  will complete the  SF-36, ESS, CGI , EQQoL , and the TSQMII  questionnaire s. To assess the quality 
of the blind, subjects will be asked which arm of the study they thought they were randomized .  Subjects  
 
 will also be asked whether they would recommend the treatment to a friend or family member if they 
suffer ed with HHT -associated e pistaxis .  A follow -up blood draw to measure  hemoglobin and hematocrit 
will be completed .  
 
It will be emphasized to the patient not to change their current nasal hygiene regimen (e.g., nasal saline 
spray) or other chronic treatments ( e.g., tranexamic acid).  
 
Primary Outcome:  
1) Mean change in Epistaxis Severity Score (ESS) between baseline and follow -up. 
 
Secondary Outcomes:  
1) Clinical Global Impression – Improvement (CGI -I) Score  
2) Mean change in hemoglobin   
3) Change in intensity of telangiectasias in the nasal mucosa as determined by  the HHT endoscopic 
scale  (HES)  
 
 
 
 
Summary of Project Design  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIII. SAMPLE SIZE AND PLANNED STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 
Sample Size  
 
Sample size estimate for the proposed study were derived from the single study (Ichimura et al. 2016)  of 
within subject change in severity of epistaxis associated with timolol ophthalmic solution (0.5%) as a nasal 
drop. In that study, 9 of the 11 subjects (82%) experienced a reduction in the severity of bleeds as measured 
on a 5 -point Likert scale . We hypothesize a similar response (82%) in our proposed study among subjects 
randomized to receive timolol gel and a 20% response rate among subjects randomized to placebo gel , 
corresponding to a difference of 62%. 
 
A power analys is was performed using Fisher’s exact test in G -Power 3.1.2.   We estimate that a total sample 
size of 24 patients (ie., 12 in each arm) is needed to allow us to detect with 80% power at the 2 -sided alpha 
level of 0.05 a difference of 62% or more in the percent  of subjects who  experience reduction of severity of   Eligible  
patients  
Baseline  
 
ESS, SF-36, ACE-27, 
HES, energy level, 
EQQoL, CYP2D6, Hb  
Week 1  
Follow -up 
 
ESS, SF -36, ACE -27, 
HES, CGI-I, energy level, 
EQQoL, Hb  
 
Week 8  
 Week 4  
Phone call  
Timolol  
 
Placebo  
 
 
 bleeds  between treatment groups .  Considering  a 20% drop out rate , we plan to enroll 30 subjects  in the 
study . 
 
Statistical Analysis  
 
Standard descriptive statistics will be used to describe distribution of baseline characteristics in each of the 
study groups. The effect of the intervention will be measured as the difference in the within -subject change 
(baseline – 8-week follow -up) in ESS scores between the two treatment groups  calculated as shown below . 
 
1) Within subject difference  with each treatment group  
 
ΔESS Timolol  = (ESS Timolol _base – ESS Timolol_8 -Week) 
ΔESS Control  = (ESS Timolol _base – ESS Timolol_8 -Week) 
  
2) Between treatment difference  
 
ΔESS Timolol  - ΔESS Control  
 
The 95%CI around this effect size will be determined to assess the precision of the observed effect and 
whether a clinically meaningful difference is plausible given the observed results .  
 
An independent sample t -test will be used to compare the change in  scores between the two study groups. 
If potential confounding factors are identified, a mixed model analysis will be employed to compare the 
change in the scores between the two study groups after controlling for potential confounding factors.  
 
Appropria te analyses will be performed for the secondary outcome measures.  
 
IX. EXEMPTION FROM IND REQUIREMENTs  
 
The use of  timolol  in topical nasal gel  is a change in the approved route of  administration. An exemption 
from IND requirements will be requested as the proposed use of  timolol  in this study fulfills  all of  the 
criteria for exemption . 
 
1) Timolol  is lawfully marketed in the United States . 
2) This study is not intended to be reported to the FDA in support of a new indication or  significant 
change  in labeling.  
3) This study is not intended to support a significant change in the advertising for the  drug.  
4) The study does not involve a route of administration,  dose, patient population, or other  factor that 
significantly increases the risk (or decreases th e acceptability of the risk)  associated with the use of  
timolol . 
5) The study will be conducted in compliance with the requirements for review by an IRB  (21 CFR part 
56) and with the requirements for informed consent (21 CFR part 50).  
6) The study is not intended to promote or commercialize  timolol.  
 
X. ASSESSMENT OF TREATMENT SAFETY  
 
Treatment Safety  
 
Treatment safety information comes from three different sources. First, a study was conducted to assess 
the properties of 1% (10 mg) topical intranasal timolol gel and to optimize controlled release in situ nasal 
 
 delivery. (Jagdale , Shewale, and Kuchekar 2016)   The authors studied timolol and Poloxamer 407 polymer 
interaction and were able to show that there was no chemical rea ction between timolol and the 
polymer. (Nieminen et al. 2007; Volotinen et al. 2011)   The authors also demonstrated no histological 
changes to nasal mucosa after the study.  The authors concluded that  the combination  of timolol with 
Poloxamer 407 was associated with  adequate  gelation temperature, mucoadhesive strength, and in situ  
controlled release of timolol.  They concluded that timolol gel is safe for nasal administration.  Second, 
Olitsky studied intranasal delivery of one drop of timolol 0.5% as ophthalmic solution  to each nostril three 
times daily for a total daily dose of 1.5 mg in one adult patient with HHT -associated epistaxis. (Olitsk y 
2012)  The drug was well tolerated with no change in blood pressure or heart rate; no other side effects 
were reported.  Third, timolol 0.5% ophthalmic drops administered intranasally has been associated with 
systemic  side effects, especially in patien ts with CYP2D6 enzyme variants .(Epperla, Brilliant, and Vidaillet 
2014)  Ocular administration of timolol has been associated w ith systemic adverse effects, including 
bradycardia. (Canpolat et al. 2013; Nieminen et al. 2007; Volotinen et al. 2011)  (See Appendix  6 – Adverse 
Reactions ). Among the various symptoms of systematically absorbed ophthalmic timolol, change in heart 
rate is the most frequent and is more l ikely with the 0.5% aqueous rather than the 0.1% hydrogel 
formulation. (Nieminen et al. 2007)  Since the pharmacokinetics of timolol are dependent on t he CYP2D6 
polymorphic enzyme, the individual  patient phenotype for this enzyme will dictate plasma concentrations 
and frequency of adverse events. Four major phenotypes of CYP2D6 metabolizers have been identified: 
Poor , Intermediate , Extensive , and Ultrarapid .(Ingelman -Sundberg and Rodriguez -Antona 2005; Sikka et 
al. 2005; Volotinen et al. 2011)  In one study, it was found that Poor  metabolizers had a 2.5 -fold higher 
plasma concentration than Extensive  metabolizers after application of timolol 0.5% aqueous eye 
drops. (Nieminen et al. 2007) . Timolol eye drops delivered intranasally was associated with greater β -
blockade in Poor  metabolizers as compared with Extensive  metabolizers. Thus, the metabolism of 
systematically absorbed timolol is clearly related to the phenotype of the individual for the CYP2D6 
enzyme.  
 
 
 
Frequency of Different CYP2D6 Alleles in the Population  
 
The frequency of different CYP2D6 alleles and t hus the ability to metabolize timolol was studied in 
population of 104,509 de -identified patient samples from across the United States between February 2015 
and March 2016. (Del Tredici et al. 2018)  The frequency distribution of various phenotypes of CYP2D6 
alleles was observed to be:  ultra -rapid metabolizers (2.2%), normal metabolizers (81%), intermediate 
metabolizers (1 1%), and poor metabolizers ( 6%). Therefore, an estimated total of 1 7% or 5 subjects  
otherwise eligible for the study would be expected to be at increased risk of side effects due to timolol 
compared to the normal metabolizers  and therefore will be excluded.  
 
While ophthalmic solution is readily absorbed into the blood stream, CYP2D6 genetic testing is not 
commonly done for open -angle glaucoma patients prior to  initiati on of  timolol therapy. To prevent 
cardiovascular side effects, it is recommended that glaucoma patients be screened for coexisting conditions 
and consideration of genetic phenotypic CYP2D6 status testing if readily available .(Maenpaa and Pelkonen 
2016)  
 
In this study , all eligible patients will undergo CYP2D6 testing, ECG, BP, and HR readings at initial visit. 
Patients with a CYP2D6 allele that is associated with an intermediate or poor metabolizer or an ECG that 
demonstrates conduction abnormalities, such as second -degree and third -degree AV block and/or 
clinically significant bradycardia will be excluded from the study.  Enrolled patients will be given a blood 
pressure monitor by the study team and taught how to use it at their baseline visit. They will be  instructed  
to take and  report weekly BP and HR to the study team in addition to local or systemic side effects. Patients 
 
 will be called at the end of Week 1 and Week 4 of the study to answer any questions or concerns they may 
have as well as to ask if they have experienced any side effects.  During these phone calls, patients will be 
asked whether they have changed their daily iron supplementation  or blood transfusion pattern from 
baseline.  If patients have an increase in nosebleeds for any reason, they will be as ked to cont act the study 
team or report to  the emergency department, depending on the severity.  
 
Any of the following will be considered an indication to stop the study:  
1) Asymptomatic systolic BP drop to less than 80 mmHg or a drop of 20% from baseline sys tolic BP  
2) Symptomatic blood pressure drop  
3) A drop of HR to less than 50/min  
4) Any clinical signs of heart bloc k  
5) Grade >2 local or systemic side effects , such as local irritation or an allergic reaction to the 
medication  
6) Patient’s request or physician’s determination of continuing the study to be no longer safe  
In the event of a Serious Adverse Event determined by the PI to necessitate the breaking of the  blind, the 
intervention assignment will be revealed by Dr. Kallogjeri to the medical staff doctor caring for the patient. 
In the event Dr. Kallogjeri is unable to be reached in a time needed, to assure the safety of the subject, the 
blind can be broken by  Sara Kukuljan, RN or Dr. Piccirillo and information will be shared with the medical 
staff assuming care for the research subject.  
 
XI.  Data and Safety Monitoring  
 
The specific monitoring plan for this study is based on the potential risk of participation and size and 
complexity of the planned investigation.  Based on these considerations, this study will have a monitoring 
board comprised of Dr. Piccirillo, Dr. Chaki nala, Ms. Kukuljan, and Dr. Kallogjeri, the study biostatistician. 
The monitoring board will meet to review data at least every 6 months.  All reports of a Serious Adverse 
Event (SAE) or an Unexpected Adverse Event will be investigated by the monitoring te am and reported to 
Washington University HRPO  according to the reporting requirements . 
 
 
 
 
XII.  Ethical considerations  
While patients will be randomly selected to receive timolol , an FDA -approved drug, the efficacy and safety, 
including local and/or systemic reactions, are largely unknown when applied in topical gel form. Patients 
will be informed in the informed consent process that they may or may not personally benefit from the  
study and that the data obtained from the study will be used to inform  the future care of HHT patients with 
epistaxis. There will be phone assistance available 24/7 during the study period to report any possible 
adverse reactions. To reduce the risk of br each of confidentiality, a ll data forms with identifying 
information will be kept in locked cabinets and only members of the study team will have access to secured 
files. There are no financial conflicts of interest.  
 
XIII. REFERENCES  
 
 
• Albinana, V., L. Recio -Poveda, R. Zarrabeitia, C. Bernabeu, and L.M. Botella. 2012. Propranolol as 
antiangiogenic candidate for the therapy of hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia. Thromb 
Haemost  108: 41 -53. 
 
 • Atkinson, M.J., R. Kumar, J.C. Cappelleri, and S.L. Hass. 2005. Hierarchical construct validity of 
the treatment satisfaction questionnaire for medication (TSQM version II) among outpatient 
pharmacy consumers. Value Health  8 Suppl 1: S9 -S24.  
• Atkinson, M.J. , A. Sinha, S.L. Hass, S.S. Colman, R.N. Kumar, M. Brod, and C.R. Rowland. 2004. 
Validation of a general measure of treatment satisfaction, the Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire 
for Medication (TSQM), using a national panel study of chronic disease. Hea lth Qual Life Outcomes  
2: 12.  
• Canpolat, U., K.M. Gurses, K. Aytemir, and A. Oto. 2013. Severe bradycardia and syncope due to 
topical ophthalmic timolol. Herz  38: 556 -7. 
• Contis, A., N. Gensous, J.F. Viallard, C. Goizet, C. Leaute -Labreze, and P. Duffau. 201 7. Efficacy and 
safety of propranolol for epistaxis in hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia: retrospective, then 
prospective study, in a total of 21 patients. Clin Otolaryngol  42: 911 -7. 
• Del Tredici, A.L., A. Malhotra, M. Dedek, F. Espin, D. Roach, G.D. Zhu, J. Voland, and T.A. Moreno. 
2018. Frequency of CYP2D6 Alleles Including Structural Variants in the United States. Front 
Pharmacol  9: 305.  
• Dheyauldeen, S., M. Abdelnoor, and G. Bachmann -Harildstad. 2011. The natural history of epistaxis 
in patients wit h hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia in the Norwegian population: a cross -
sectional study. Am J Rhinol Allergy  25: 214 -8. 
• Duchateau, G.S., J. Zuidema, and F.W. Merkus. 1986. Bioavailability of propranolol after oral, 
sublingual, and intranasal administr ation. Pharm Res  3: 108 -11. 
• Dunlop, B.W., J. Gray, and M.H. Rapaport. 2017. Transdiagnostic Clinical Global Impression 
Scoring for Routine Clinical Settings. Behav Sci (Basel)  7. 
• Epperla, N., M.H. Brilliant, and H. Vidaillet. 2014. Topical timolol for trea tment of epistaxis in 
hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia associated with bradycardia: a look at CYP2D6 metabolising 
variants. BMJ Case Rep  2014.  
• Fang, J., X. Chen, B. Zhu, H. Ye, W. Zhang, J. Guan, and K. Su. 2017. Thalidomide for Epistaxis in 
Patients with Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia: A Preliminary Study. Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg  157: 217 -21. 
• Faughnan, M.E., V.A. Palda, G. Garcia -Tsao,  U.W. Geisthoff, J. McDonald, D.D. Proctor, J. Spears, 
D.H. Brown, E. Buscarini, M.S. Chesnutt, V. Cottin, A. Ganguly, J.R. Gossage, A.E. Guttmacher, 
R.H. Hyland, S.J. Kennedy, J. Korzenik, J.J. Mager, A.P. Ozanne, J.F. Piccirillo, D. Picus, H. 
Plauchu, M. E. Porteous, R.E. Pyeritz, D.A. Ross, C. Sabba, K. Swanson, P. Terry, M.C. Wallace, C.J. 
Westermann, R.I. White, L.H. Young, R. Zarrabeitia, and H.H.T.F.I. -G.W. Group. 2011. 
International guidelines for the diagnosis and management of hereditary haemorrhag ic 
telangiectasia. J Med Genet  48: 73 -87. 
• Fernandez, L.A., E.M. Garrido -Martin, F. Sanz -Rodriguez, J.R. Ramirez, C. Morales -Angulo, R. 
Zarrabeitia, A. Perez -Molino, C. Bernabeu, and L.M. Botella. 2007. Therapeutic action of tranexamic 
acid in hereditary ha emorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT): regulation of ALK -1/endoglin pathway in 
endothelial cells. Thromb Haemost  97: 254 -62. 
• Gaillard, S., S. Dupuis -Girod, F. Boutitie, S. Riviere, S. Moriniere, P.Y. Hatron, G. Manfredi, P. 
Kaminsky, A.L. Capitaine, P. Roy, F. G ueyffier, H. Plauchu, and A.S. Group. 2014. Tranexamic acid 
for epistaxis in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia patients: a European cross -over controlled 
trial in a rare disease. J Thromb Haemost  12: 1494 -502.  
 
 • Geisthoff, U.W., U.T. Seyfert, M. Kubler, B. Bieg, P.K. Plinkert, and J. Konig. 2014. Treatment of 
epistaxis in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia with tranexamic acid - a double -blind placebo -
controlled cross -over phase IIIB study. Thromb Res  134: 565 -71. 
• Group, O.C.E. -B.M.L.o.E.W. 2011. The O xford 2011 Levels of Evidence. Available at 
http://www.cebm.net/ocebm -levels -of-evidence/ . 
• Halderman, A.A., M.W. Ryan, C. Clark, R. Sindwani, D.D. Reh, D.M. Poetker, R. Invernizzi, and B.F. 
Marp le. 2018. Medical treatment of epistaxis in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: an evidence -
based review. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol  8: 713 -28. 
• Hermens, W.A., and F.W. Merkus. 1987. The influence of drugs on nasal ciliary movement. Pharm 
Res 4: 445 -9. 
• Hoag, J.B., P. Terry, S. Mitchell, D. Reh, and C.A. Merlo. 2010. An epistaxis severity score for 
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Laryngoscope  120: 838 -43. 
• Ichimura, K., H. Kikuchi, S. Imayoshi, and M.S. Dias. 2016. Topical application of timolol decreases 
the severity and frequency of epistaxis in patients who have previously undergone nasal 
dermoplasty for hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Auris Nasus Larynx  43: 429 -32. 
• Ingelman -Sundberg, M., and C. Rodriguez -Antona. 2005. Pharmacoge netics of drug -metabolizing 
enzymes: implications for a safer and more effective drug therapy. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol 
Sci 360: 1563 -70. 
• Ingrand, I., P. Ingrand, B. Gilbert -Dussardier, G. Defossez, V. Jouhet, V. Migeot, X. Dufour, and 
J.M. Klossek. 2011. Altered quality of life in Rendu -Osler -Weber disease related to recurrent 
epistaxis. Rhinology  49: 155 -62. 
• Invernizzi, R., F. Quaglia, C. Klersy, F. Pagella, F. Ornati, F. Chu, E. Matti, G. Spinozzi, S. Plumitallo, 
P. Grignani, C. Olivieri, R. Bastia , F. Bellistri, C. Danesino, M. Benazzo, and C.L. Balduini. 2015. 
Efficacy and safety of thalidomide for the treatment of severe recurrent epistaxis in hereditary 
haemorrhagic telangiectasia: results of a non -randomised, single -centre, phase 2 study. Lance t 
Haematol  2: e465 -73. 
• Jagdale, S., N. Shewale, and B.S. Kuchekar. 2016. Optimization of Thermoreversible In Situ Nasal 
Gel of Timolol Maleate. Scientifica (Cairo)  2016: 6401267.  
• Lebrin, F., S. Srun, K. Raymond, S. Martin, S. van den Brink, C. Freitas, C. Breant, T. Mathivet, B. 
Larrivee, J.L. Thomas, H.M. Arthur, C.J. Westermann, F. Disch, J.J. Mager, R.J. Snijder, A. 
Eichmann, and C.L. Mummery. 2010. Thalidomide stimulates vessel maturation and reduces 
epistaxis in individuals with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Nat Med  16: 420 -8. 
• Maenpaa, J., and O. Pelkonen. 2016. Cardiac safety of ophthalmic timolol. Expert Opin Drug Saf  15: 
1549 -61. 
• McDonald, J., P. Bayrak -Toydemir, and R.E. Pyeritz. 2011. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: 
an overview of d iagnosis, management, and pathogenesis. Genet Med  13: 607 -16. 
• Mei-Zahav, M., H. Blau, E. Bruckheimer, E. Zur, and N. Goldschmidt. 2017. Topical propranolol 
improves epistaxis in patients with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia - a preliminary report. J 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg  46: 58.  
• Merkus, P., F.A. Ebbens, B. Muller, and W.J. Fokkens. 2006. Influence of anatomy and head 
position on intranasal drug deposition. European Archives of Oto -rhino -laryngology  263: 827 -32. 
• Minami, K., and T. Haji. 2016. Intr anasal topical estrogen in the management of epistaxis in 
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Acta Otolaryngol  136: 528 -31. 
 
 • Nieminen, T., T. Lehtimaki, J. Maenpaa, A. Ropo, H. Uusitalo, and M. Kahonen. 2007. Ophthalmic 
timolol: plasma concentration and systemic cardiopulmonary effects. Scand J Clin Lab Invest  67: 
237-45. 
• Olitsky, S.E. 2012. Topical timolol for the treatment of epistaxis in hereditary hemorrhagic 
telangiectasia. Am J Otolaryngol  33: 375 -6. 
• Peng, H.L., Y.F. Yi, S.K. Zhou, S.S. Xie, and G.S . Zhang. 2015. Thalidomide Effects in Patients with 
Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia During Therapeutic Treatment and in Fli -EGFP Transgenic 
Zebrafish Model. Chin Med J (Engl)  128: 3050 -4. 
• Price, A., S. Rai, R.W.J. McLeod, J.C. Birchall, and H.A. Elha ssan. 2018. Topical propranolol for 
infantile haemangiomas: a systematic review. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol  32: 2083 -9. 
• Przewratil, P., A. Sitkiewicz, and E. Andrzejewska. 2010. Local serum levels of vascular endothelial 
growth factor in infantile hemang ioma: intriguing mechanism of endothelial growth. Cytokine  49: 
141-7. 
• Reh, D.D., L.X. Yin, K. Laaeq, and C.A. Merlo. 2014. A new endoscopic staging system for hereditary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol  4: 635 -9. 
• Sikka, R., B. Magauran,  A. Ulrich, and M. Shannon. 2005. Bench to bedside: Pharmacogenomics, 
adverse drug interactions, and the cytochrome P450 system. Acad Emerg Med  12: 1227 -35. 
• Sorrell, J., and S.L. Chamlin. 2013. Topical timolol 0.5% gel -forming solution for small deep facial 
infantile hemangiomas. Pediatr Dermatol  30: 592 -4. 
• Storch, C.H., and P.H. Hoeger. 2010. Propranolol for infantile haemangiomas: insights into the 
molecular mechanisms of action. Br J Dermatol  163: 269 -74. 
• Volotinen, M., J. Hakkola, O. Pelkonen, H. Vapaatalo, and J. Maenpaa. 2011. Metabolism of 
ophthalmic t imolol: new aspects of an old drug. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol  108: 297 -303.  
• Ware, J.E., and C.D. Sherbourne. 1992. The MOS 36 Item Short -Form Health Survey (SF -36): I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med. Care  30: 473 -83. 
• Whitehead, K.J., N.B. Sautter, J.P. McWilliams, M.M. Chakinala, C.A. Merlo, M.H. Johnson, M. 
James, E.M. Everett, M.S. Clancy, M.E. Faughnan, S.P. Oh, S.E. Olitsky, R.E. Pyeritz, and J.R. 
Gossage. 2016. Effect of Topical Intranasal Therapy on Epistaxis Frequency in Patients Wit h 
Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA  316: 943 -51. 
• Yaniv, E., M. Preis, T. Hadar, J. Shvero, and M. Haddad. 2009. Antiestrogen therapy for hereditary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia: a double -blind placebo -controlled clinica l trial. Laryngoscope  119: 284 -
8. 
• Yaniv, E., M. Preis, J. Shevro, B. Nageris, and T. Hadar. 2011. Anti -estrogen therapy for hereditary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia - a long -term clinical trial. Rhinology  49: 214 -6. 
• Yin, L.X., D.D. Reh, J.B. Hoag, S.E. Mitche ll, S.C. Mathai, G.M. Robinson, and C.A. Merlo. 2016. 
The minimal important difference of the epistaxis severity score in hereditary hemorrhagic 
telangiectasia. Laryngoscope  126: 1029 -32. 
• Zaffar, N., T. Ravichakaravarthy, M.E. Faughnan, and N. Shehata. 201 5. The use of anti -fibrinolytic 
agents in patients with HHT: a retrospective survey. Ann Hematol  94: 145 -52. 
• Zheng, J.W., L. Zhang, Q. Zhou, H.M. Mai, Y.A. Wang, X.D. Fan, Z.P. Qin, X.K. Wang, and Y.F. 
Zhao. 2013. A practical guide to treatment of infantil e hemangiomas of the head and neck. Int J Clin 
Exp Med  6: 851 -60. 
 
 
 XIV. APPENDICES  
 
Appendix 1  
Epistaxis Severity Score  Questionnaire : 
 
 
 
 
Scoring Guide:  
 
 

 
 Appendix 2 . 
 
Scoring of the HHT Endoscopic Scoring System  (HES ). 
 
 
  

 
  
Appendix 3.  Epistaxis -Specific Quali ty-of-Life Questionnaire (EQQoL)  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 4 . 
SF-36: Accessible at https://www.rand.org/health -care/surveys_tools/mos/36 -item-short -form/survey -
instrument.html  
 
 Patient ID_______________________  Date___ _______  
 
HEALTH  
 
 
 
RAND > RAND Health > Surveys > RAND Medical Outcomes Study > 36-Item Short Form Survey (SF -36) > 
 
 
36- Item Short  Form  Survey  Instrument 
(SF-36) 
RAND  36-Item Health  Survey  1.0 Questionnaire  Items  
Choose one option for each questionnaire item.  
 
1. In general,  would  you say your health  is: 
  1 - Excellent  
 2 - Very  good  
  3 - Good  
  4 - Fair 
  5 - Poor  
 
 
2. Compared  to one year  ago, how would  you rate your health  in general  now ? 
  1 - Much  better  now  than  one year  ago 
  2 - Somewhat better now than one  year  ago 
  3 - About the  same  
  4 - Somewhat  worse  now  than  one year  ago 
5 - Much  worse  now  than  one year  ago 

 
 
The following  items  are about  activities  you might  do during  a typical  day. Does  
your health  now  limit  you in these  activities?  If so, how much?  
 
 Yes, 
limited a 
lot Yes, 
limited a 
little  No, not 
limited at 
all 
3. Vigorous  activities , such  as running,  lifting  heavy  objects, 
participating in strenuous  sports    1   2   3 
4. Moderate  activities , such  as moving  a table,  pushing  a 
vacuum  cleaner,  bowling,  or playing  golf   1   2   3 
5. Lifting or carrying groceries    1   2   3 
6. Climbing several flights of stairs    1   2   3 
7. Climbing one flight of stairs    1   2   3 
8. Bending, kneeling, or stooping    1   2   3 
9. Walking more than a mile    1   2   3 
10. Walking several blocks    1   2   3 
11. Walking one block    1   2   3 
12. Bathing or dressing yourself  1 2 3 
 
 

 
 During  the past  4 weeks , have  you had any of the following  problems  with your work  or 
other  regular  daily  activities  as a result  of your  physical  health ? 
 
 
13. Cut down  the amount  of time  you spent  on work  or other  activities  
 
14. Accomplished  less than you would  like 
 
15. Were  limited  in the kind  of work  or other  activities  
 
16. Had difficulty  performing  the work  or other  activities  (for example,  it took extra  Yes No 
 
  
1 2 
 
  
1 2 
 
  
1 2 
effort)  1 2 
 
 
 
During  the past  4 weeks , have  you had any of the following  problems  with your work  or 
other regular daily activities as a result of any emotional problems (such as feeling 
depressed or  anxious)?  
Yes No 
17. Cut down the amount of  time you spent on work or other  activities    1   2 
 
18. Accomplished less  than you would  like   1   2 
 
19. Didn't  do work  or other  activities  as carefully  as usual    1   2 
 
 
 
20. During the past 4 weeks , to what extent has your physical health or 
emotional problems interfered with your normal social activities with family, 
friends, neighbors,  or groups?  
  1 - Not at all 
  2 - Slightly  
  3 - Moderately  
  4 - Quite a  bit 
5 - Extremely  

 
 21. How much  bodily  pain have  you had during  the past  4 weeks ? 
  1 - None  
  2 - Very  mild  
  3 - Mild  
  4 - Moderate  
  5 - Severe  
  6 - Very  severe  
 
 
22. During  the past  4 weeks , how much  did pain  interfere  with your 
normal  work (including  both work  outside  the home  and housework)?  
  1 - Not at all 
  2 - A little  bit 
 3 - Moderately  
  4 - Quite a  bit 
5 - Extremely  
 

 
 
These questions are about how you feel and how things have been with you 
during the past  4 weeks . For each  question,  please  give the one answer  that 
comes  closest  to the way you have been  feeling.  
How much of the time during the past 4 weeks ... 
 
 All of  Most  A good  Some  A little  None  
the of the  bit of the  of the  of the  of the  
time  time  time  time  time  time  
23. Did you feel full of pep?    1   2   3   4   5   6 
24. Have you been a very nervous 
person?    1   2   3   4   5   6 
25. Have you felt so down in the 
dumps that nothing could cheer you 
up?   1   2   3   4   5   6 
26. Have you felt calm and peaceful?    1   2   3   4   5   6 
27. Did you have a lot of energy?    1   2   3   4   5   6 
28. Have you felt downhearted and 
blue?    1   2   3   4   5   6 
29. Did you feel worn out?    1   2   3   4   5   6 
30. Have you been a happy person?    1   2   3   4   5   6 
31. Did you feel tired?  1 2 3 4 5 6 
 
 
 
32. During  the past  4 weeks , how much  of the time has your  physical  health  or emotional 
problems  interfered  with your social  activities  (like visiting  with friends,  relatives,  etc.)?  
  1 - All of the time  
  2 - Most of  the time  
  3 - Some of the  time  
  4 - A little of the  time 

 
 5 - None of the  time  
 
 
 
How TRUE or FALSE is each of the following statements for you.  
 
 Definitely 
true  Mostly 
true  Don't 
know  Mostly 
false  Definitely 
false  
33. I seem  to get sick a little  easier  than 
other  people    1   2   3   4   5 
34. I am as healthy as anybody I know    1   2   3   4   5 
35. I expect my health to get worse    1   2   3   4   5 
36. My health is excellent  1 2 3 4 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABOUT  
The RAND Corporation is a research organization that develops solutions to public policy challenges to help make 
communities throughout the world safer and more secure, healthier and more prosperous. RAND is nonprofit, 
nonpartisan, and committed to the public interest.  
1776 Main Street  
  Santa  Monica,  California  90401-3208
  
RAND® is a registered trademark. Copyright © 1994 -2016 RAND Corporation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  
Appendix 5 . 
Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire for Medication Version II   
(TSQMII ) 
 
Patient ID_________ Date________  
1)  How satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the ability of the medication to prevent or treat your  
condition?  
1 Extremely Dissatisfied  
2 Very Dissatisfied  
3 Dissatisfied  
4 Somewhat Satisfied  
5 Satisfied  
6 Very Satisfied  
7 Extremely Satisfied  
 
2) How satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the  way the medication relieves your symptoms?  
1 Extremely Dissatisfied  
2 Very Dissatisfied  
3 Dissatisfied  
4 Somewhat Satisfied  
5 Satisfied  
6 Very Satisfied  
7 Extremely Satisfied  
 
3) As a result of taking this medication , do you  experience any side effects at all?  
1 Yes  
0 No  
 
4) How dissatisfi ed are you by side effects that interfere with y our physical health and ability to 
function (e.g., strength, energy levels)?  
1 Extremely Dissatisfied  
2 Very Dissatisfied  
3 Somewhat Diss atisfied  
4 Slightly Dissatisfied  
5 Not at all Dissatisfied  
 
5) How dissatisfied are you by side effects that  interfere with your mental function (e.g., ability to 
think clearly, stay awake)?  
1 Extremely Dissatisfied  
2 Very Dissatisfied  
3 Somewhat Dissatisfied  
4 Slightly Dissatisfied  
5 Not at all Dissatisfied  
 
6) How dissatisfied are you by side effects that  interfere with your mood or emotions (e.g.,  
anxiety/fear, sadness, irritation/anger)?  
1 Extremely Dissatisfied  
2 Very Dissatisfied  
3 Somewhat Diss atisfied  
 
 4 Slightly Dissatisfied  
5 Not at all Dissatisfied  
 
7) How satisfied or dissatisfied are you with how  easy the medication is to use?  
1 Extremely Dissatisfied  
2 Very Dissatisfied  
3 Dissatisfied  
4 Somewhat Satisfied  
5 Satisfied  
6 Very Satisfied  
7 Extrem ely Satisfied  
 
8) How satisfied or dissatisfied are you with how  easy it is to plan when you will use the 
medication each time?  
1 Extremely Dissatisfied  
2 Very Dissatisfied  
3 Dissatisfied  
4 Somewhat Satisfied  
5 Satisfied  
6 Very Satisfied  
7 Extremely Satisfied  
 
9) How satisfied or dissatisfied are you by how  often you are expected to use/take the  medication?  
1 Extremely Dissatisfied  
2 Very Dissatisfied  
3 Dissatisfied  
4 Somewhat Satisfied  
5 Satisfied  
6 Very Satisfied  
7 Extremely Satisfied  
 
10) How satisfi ed are you that the good things about this medication outweigh the bad things?  
1 Extremely Dissatisfied  
2 Very Dissatisfied  
3 Dissatisfied  
4 Somewhat Satisfied  
5 Satisfied  
S24 Atkinson et al.  
6 Very Satisfied  
7 Extremely Satisfied  
 
11) Taking all things into account, how satisfied  or dissatisfied are you with this medication?  
1 Extremely Dissatisfied  
2 Very Dissatisfied  
3 Dissatisfied  
4 Somewhat Satisfied  
5 Satisfied  
6 Very Satisfied  
7 Extremely Satisfied  
 
 Appendix 6 . 
Adverse Reaction s. 
 
 
ADVERSE REACTIONS 
From NDA 18086/S-076 
Reference ID: 3969708 
Pages 9, 10 
Obtained from: 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2016/018086s076lbl.pdf 
Accessed: July 23, 2019 
 
 
TIMOPTIC® 0.25% and 0.5% (TIMOLOL MALEATE OPHTHALMIC SOLUTION)  
 
The most frequently reported adverse experiences of timolol ophthalmic solution 
(approximately one in eight patients) have been burning and stinging of the eye upon 
instillation.  
 
The following additional adverse experiences have been reported less frequently with 
ocular administration of this or other timolol maleate formulations:  
 
A. BODY AS A WHOLE. Headache, asthenia/fatigue, and chest pain. 
B. CARDIOVASCULAR. Bradycardia, arrhythmia, hypotension, hypertension, 
syncope, heart block, cerebral vascular accident, cerebral ischemia, cardiac failure, 
worsening of angina pectoris, palpitation, cardiac arrest, pulmonary edema, 
edema, claudication, Raynaud's phenomenon, and cold hands and feet.  
C. DIGESTIVE. Nausea, diarrhea, dyspepsia, anorexia, and dry mouth. 
D. IMMUNOLOGIC. Systemic lupus erythematosus.  
E. NERVOUS SYSTEM/PSYCHIATRIC. Dizziness, increase in signs and 
sym ptoms of myasthenia gravis, paresthesia, somnolence, insomnia, nightmares, 
behavioral changes and psychic disturbances including depression, confusion, 
hallucinations, anxiety, disorientation, nervousness, and memory loss.  
F. SKIN. Alopecia and psoriasiform rash or exacerbation of psoriasis. 
G. HYPERSENSITIVITY. Signs and symptoms of systemic allergic reactions, 
including anaphylaxis, angioedema, urticaria, and localized and generalized rash. 
H. RESPIRATORY. Bronchospasm (predominantly in patients with preexisting 
bronchospastic disease), respiratory failure, dyspnea, nasal congestion, cough and 
upper respiratory infections.  
I. ENDOCRINE. Masked symptoms of hypoglycemia in diabetic patients.  
J. SPECIAL SENSES. Signs and symptoms of ocular irritation including 
conjunctivitis, blepharitis, keratitis, ocular pain, discharge (e.g., crusting), foreign 
body sensation, itching and tearing, and dry eyes; ptosis; decreased corneal 
sensitivity; cystoid macular edema; visual disturbances including refractive 
changes and diplopia; pseudopemphigoid; choroidal detachment following 
filtration surgery; and tinnitus. 
K. UROGENITAL. Retroperitoneal fibrosis, decreased libido, impotence, and 
Peyronie's disease.  
 