TP-013, Rev 03 PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS FOR CLINICALTRIALS.GOV  
HHC-IRB NUMBER: HHC -2020-0086 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 10/13/2020  
 
TITLE  Dislodgment  Infiltration  Phlebitis  Prevention  Eliminating 
Restarts (DIPPER)  
SPONSOR  Lineus  Medical  
FUNDING 
ORGANIZATION  Lineus  Medical  
STUDY START DATE  June  2020  
RATIONALE  Accidental IV catheter dislodgement and other 
mechanical complications (e.g., infiltration, phlebitis, 
infection, and occlusion) in hospitalized patients are very 
common. IV catheter mechanical complications increase 
costs and put patients at increased risk. SafeBreak 
Vascular is designed to separate into two pi eces when a 
certain threshold of force is applied to an IV 
administration line. The purpose of this medical device 
investigation  is to determine  SafeBreak  Vascular’s  impact 
on clinical care (e.g., delay of therapy) and its’ impact on 
other IV catheter mechanical complications when 
compared to a control group of patients not using the 
device.  
STUDY DESIGN  Prospective  randomized  clinical  trial 
PRIMARY OBJECTIVE  The primary  objective  of this study  is to determine  if the 
use of SafeBreak Vascular results in a delay in therapy 
that is non-inferior  to the delay  in therapy  for the control 
group, and if so, if SafeBreak Vascular is superior.  
SECONDARY 
OBJECTIVES  The secondary objective is to estimate the reduction of 
other peripheral IV (PIV) catheter mechanical 
complications  including  dislodgement,  infection,  phlebitis, 
infiltration, occlusion, as well as blood/fluid spillage and 
PIV restarts when compared to the control group.  
NUMBER  OF SUBJECTS  Up to 146 total (73 in each  arm).  This sample  size allows 
for 10% of the subjects to abandon therapy before the 
normal completion of treatment.  
SUBJECT  SELECTION 
CRITERIA  Inclusion  Criteria : 
• All patients  admitted  into the hospital to one  of the 
following units: Neuro, Neuro/Step Down Epilepsy 
Pulmonary, Cardiothoraci, Surgery/Step Down; 
Medicine/Step Down, Vascular Thoracic  
 
 
 
 Surgery/Step Down, B8 - Surgery, B7E – 
Medicine/Step  Down,  B5-Vascular  Thoracic 
Surgery  
• Patients  of any gender  may participate  
• Participants able to provide informed consent or 
have  a legally  authorized  representative  or Next of 
Kin immediately available to provide informed 
consent  
• Patients must have peripheral IV catheter access 
or need and are planned to have peripheral IV 
catheter  access  placed  that is anticipated  to last a 
minimum of 24 hours.  
• Patients must be receiving intermittent or 
continuous  infusion,  or have  immediate  plans  to 
begin an intermittent or continuous infusion  
• The patients must be at least 18 years of age with 
no upper age limit.   
 
Exclusion  Criteria : 
• Unable to obtain informed consent or without an 
available  LAR or Next of Kin to provide  surrogate 
informed consent  
• Age less than or equal  to 17 
• Patient  on comfort  care only  
• Predicted  to have  an IV infusion  that lasts less than 
24 hours.  
• Patient  admitted  from ED refuses  to have  new PIV 
catheter placed by IV team.  
• Patient  has two or more  peripheral  IV catheters  at 
the same time  
• Patient  enrolled  in a subject  drug or device  study  at 
the time of enrollment  
• Investigator  discretion  that patient  is not suitable 
for the study  
• Patient  is COVID -19 positive  
• Patient  is receiving  an IV infusion  with gravity 
tubing  
SUBJECT  DEVICE  / 
INTENDED USE  SafeBreak  is intended  to stop fluid flow and prevent  blood 
loss or fluid spillage in the event of excessive tension (4  
±1 lbs of force)  occurs  across  a peripheral  IV 
 
 
 administration line in adults and adolescent populations 
eighteen  (18) years  of age or older.  SafeBreak  Vascular 
may be used only with electronic pumps for intermittent 
infusion or continuous infusion.  
CONTROL  GROUP  Participants  with current  standard  of care for peripheral 
IVs. 
DURATION  OF SUBJECT 
PARTICIPATION AND 
DURATION OF STUDY  Study  Participation  Duration:  Subjects  in both groups 
will be followed for up to 7 days, or until the patient is 
discharged, or until IV access is discontinued.  
Duration  of the Study:  The study  is expected  to last at 
least two and up to three months.  
EFFICACY 
EVALUATIONS  The primary  and secondary  objectives  address  the 
efficacy of the SafeBreak device.  
PRIMARY ENDPOINTS  The primary endpoint is the time to re -start therapy 
following  a mechanical  complication  with the catheter.  
SECONDARY 
ENDPOINTS  Comparison  of occurrence  of mechanical  complications 
(e.g., dislodgement, infection, infiltration, phlebitis, 
occlusion) as well as blood loss, fluid spillage and PIV 
restarts  
SAFETY EVALUATIONS  The research  team  will evaluate  all enrolled  subjects  at 
least twice daily for all adverse events and safety 
concerns and will document and communicate any 
concerns to the Investigator.  