                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 1 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
RESEARCH SUBJECT CONSENT FORM  
Title:  Arm Motor Rehabilitation, Entertainment and Cognition System for 
the Elderly  
 
Protocol No.:  BCI-10-001 
 
WIRB® Protocol #20101313  
 
Sponsor:  National Institutes of Health (NIH)  
 
Investigator:  Nam H Kim, Ph.D.  
Bright Cloud International Corp  
675 US Hwy 1, Suite B203  
 North Brunswick, New Jersey 08902  
United States  
 
Daytime Phone Number:  1-732-640-0400  
 
24-hour Phone Number:  1-908-420-7010  or 1-206-353-6054  
 
You are being invited to take part in a research study.  A person who takes part in a research  study  
is called a research subject , or research participant .  
 
In this consent form “you” generally  refers to the research subject. If you ar e being asked as the 
legally authorized representative, parent, or guardian to permit the subject to take part in the 
research , “you” in the rest of this form generally m eans the research subject . 
 
What should I know about this research ? 
This consent form may contain words that you do not understand.  Please ask the study the study 
staff to explain any words or information that you do not clearly understand.  You may have an 
unsigned copy of this consent form to think about or discuss with family or friends  before making 
your decision.  
 
In this consent form, “you” always refers to the subject.  If you are a legally authorized 
representative, please remember that “you” refers to the study subject.  
 
You are being asked to be in a research study.  This consent form is part of an informed consent 
process for a research study conducted by Bright Cloud International Corp  and PowerBack (part 
of Genesis Rehabilitation ). This form will give you information that will help you decide 
whether you wish to participate  in this research study.  It will help you understand what the study 
is about and what will happen during the study.  
 
                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 2 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
If you have questions at any time during the research study, you should feel free to ask them and 
should expect to be given answer s that you completely understand.  After all of your questions 
have been answered, you will be given time to think about participating.  If you still wish to take 
part in the study, no later than the following day you will be asked to sign this consent for m. 
 
The study’s principal investigator, Nam Kim, Ph.D., Co-Investigator Jonathan Tapia OT , as well 
as the Supervising Nurse , will also be asked to sign this consent form.  You will be given a copy 
of the signed consent form to keep.  
 
You understand that yo u are not giving up any of your legal rights by participating in this 
research study or by signing this consent form.  
 
Why is this research being done?  
The purpose of this research  is to provide information about :  
 
 Healthy volunteers : the usability of the  BrightArm Compact  (BAC)  experimental systems 
for upper -body rehabilitation, improved cognition (attention, memory, decision making), 
and reduced depression. This usability targets healthy subjects, who are 5 0 to 80 years old  
and is aimed at design evaluat ion and possible improvement recommendations;  
 
 Stroke survivors : the feasibility of BrightArm Compact experimental systems for improved 
arm function, strengthening of the arm and hand, better cognition (attention, memory, 
decision making), and reduced depr ession of early sub -acute stroke population. This targets 
those who suffer ed from stroke very recently (typically one week to 10 days prior) and who 
have been admitted at PowerBack Rehabilitation in Piscataway, NJ . The study aims at 
determining if adding a  dose of virtual reality game rehabilitation to your usual care helps 
your upper body, mind and mood heal better and faster.  
 
How long will I be in this research?  
 Healthy subject s: We expect that your taking part in this research will last 2 weeks ; 
 
 Stroke  survivors : Up to 4 weeks from admission to PowerBack Rehabilitation . 
 
How many subjects will participate?  
 Healthy Subjects : you will be one of the 4 volunteers;  
 
 Stroke survivors : you will be one of the 6 subjects  
 
                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 3 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
What happens to me if I agree to take pa rt in this research?  And wat 
are my responsibilities if I take part in this research?  
 Healthy subjects : You will be asked to play experimental games on the BrightArm™ 
Compact and give your opinion to the study staff.  You will need to come on several days 
to complete the study. Your opinion will be provided using evaluation paper forms that 
will be given to you by the research staff after each evaluation session.  
 
 Stroke survivors : You will be asked questions about your medical  background, 
medications you are taking, your ability to use your arms/hands, your memory, problem 
solving, and attention.  Your intake medical documents will be reviewed by the research 
team. You will also be asked about your ability to do activities of d aily living .  
 
 You will be examined by an Occupational Therapist to measure your arm abilities, and 
by a Psychologist/Researcher to measure you memory, focus, decision making and mood.  
 
 While making sure there is no overlap with the standard sessions in Po werBack, you will 
be brought to the room where the experimental therapy takes place.  This will happen 
every other day, up to 4 times per week , for about  3 weeks.  You will spend less than 1 
hour at each session (including set -up and rest periods).  You will be told what time these 
sessions are, and it is important that you are ready for transport on time .  If you miss a 
session for any reason, you will be gi ven the opportunity for a makeup.  
 
 While in the BrightArm study room, you will be asked to wear custom low -friction arm 
supports, which allow you rest your arms on a table and interact with games  on a large 
TV.  A picture of the forearm support is attached  at the end of this consent form.  You 
will rest your arms on a special low -friction table (BrightArm Compact  picture at the end 
of the form ) and sit in a wheelchair  or chair , facing a TV screen.  The table may tilt for 
some of the exercises, depending on your abilities.  As you get stronger, the table may be 
tilted progressively upwards, to present more resistance to your arm movement and help 
you strengthen your  hands,  shoulder and trunk.  First you will play games with your 
affected arm  for one week , but starting with the second week you will be asked to play 
the games with both arms.  An Occupational Therapist (OT) will be in the same room to 
help you, and you can ask for breaks if you are tired or feel pain.  Sessions will progress 
from 15 minutes of play in the first week to 30 minutes of play  towards the end of this 
experimental therapy . 
 
 While at the table  you will be asked to periodically grasp rubber pears, which are part of 
the forearm supports.  This will allow you to train your grasp strength in games that 
require it and coordinate arm reach and grasp.  It will also train your ability for split 
attention .  You will also do memory games, which will have clues to help you solve 
them.  You will also play games that require your fast thinking, problem solving and 
decision.   
 
                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 4 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
 It is important to understand that these games are medical games that will adapt to you. 
They will help you win, and provide a pleasant experience.  
 
 At the start of each session you will have your blood pressure and pulse measured .  
Then you will be asked to move your arms as far as you can reach comfortably, and 
without pain in all dire ctions while supported by the table, and without leaning.  You will 
look at the screen which will show where your arm went.  You will then be asked to 
squeeze the rubber ball as much as you can, so the computer knows your grasp strength 
that day.  You will  look at the screen to see how hard you squeeze, and you will do so 
three times, while avoiding pain. You will also be asked to strengthen you r fingers as 
much as you can.  You will look at the screen to see how much you strengthened your 
fingers, and you will do so three times, while avoiding pain. The picture of the baseline 
screens is attached to this consent form.  
 
 You will then be asked to play several types of “video game” exercises with one arm and 
then with both arms. In -between playing the games, y ou will rest your arm(s) to r educe 
fatigue.  P ictures of some of the games are attached to the consent form.   
 
 At the middle of the session you will have a mandatory break so your blood pressure and 
pulse are measured again . 
 
 You will play more games, and  at the end of each session you will again have your blood 
pressure and pulse measured.   
 
 While you are exercising, the computer will automatically measure your performance 
(such as game scores, arm movements , grasps, hand strengthening ), and these data wi ll 
be stored in a special database, which is only accessible to the researchers in this study 
and does not store your name.  
 
 At the end of every fourth  session you will be asked to read and answer a questionnaire 
about your impression of the system.  This questionnaire asks for your rating of the ease 
of use, usefulness, and other questions about the BrightArm Compact system.  If you 
have any questions about the questionnaire, you can ask Grigore Burdea, Ph.D. to clarify 
them.  
 
 All or part of the study sess ions may be videotaped so that they can be studied.  
Furthermore, some pictures may be taken of you while using the study device.  A video 
exit interview may be taken of you after completion of the study sessions to find out your 
impression of the system.  These pictures or movies may be used in publications, 
presentations at scientific meetings, for grant pr oposals, company presentations, 
marketing publications and on the company website ( www.brightcloudint.com ).  Your 
identity will be masked, your face will never appear fully in the photo/video, and/or will 
be blurred.  
                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 5 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
 
 The study staff may ask your spouse, care giver or legal representative for photos of 
things you do with your affected arm after you finished t he therapy and went home.  
These pictures are for research purposes and may be used in the same way and with the 
same protection as those taken during your study sessions.  Providing such photos is 
voluntary.  These photos, if provided, will be processed t o mask your face.  
 
Could being in this research hurt me? 
Likely  
You may experience occasional fatigue in your shoulders/arms/fingers during the exercises.  In 
such cases, or if you do not feel well, you need to promptly tell the study staff in the room.  Y ou 
may also feel discomfort when placing your arms in the firearm supports used by the BrightArm 
Compact. In such cases you should limit your movements to a range where pain is manageable. 
Gradually your range of movement may increase. The Senior Occupatio nal Therapist in the room 
may perform some arm/finger stretching at the start of sessions, so to minimize your discomfort.  
 
You may also feel frustrated during the study sessions if the study device does not work properly, 
or if the games seem too difficult. You should immediately tell the study staff, who will attempt 
to change things to make you feel better.  If you become to o upset or angry, and these feelings 
towards the experimental therapy persist,  you have the right to stop your participation in  this study.  
 
Rare  
There is a risk of increased blood pressure when exercises become too difficult or when the 
sessions become lo nger. Your blood pressure will be monitored three times at every session. If the 
trend continues over several sessions and reaches unsafe levels, you understand that your 
participation in the study may be stopped. In addition to the side -effects listed abo ve there is always 
the risk of developing previously unknown side -effects.  
 
In addition to these risks, taking part in this research may harm  you in unknown ways.  
 
Will it cost me money to take part in this research?  
There is no cost to you to receive the experimental therapy on the BrightArm Compact system.  
 
Costs related to your other care at PowerBack depend on your insurance coverage, and are not 
related to this study.  
 
Will being in this research benefit me?   
Benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research  are not guaranteed . However, t here 
may be an increased arm range, stronger grasp strength, straighter fingers, improved attention, 
improved decision making, improved memory, reduced pain, and re duced depression. However 
this is not guaranteed.  Investigators may learn more about the way the brain controls movement, 
and how stroke disease affect s cognition, or how virtual reality intervention soon after a stroke 
may improve recovery .  This informa tion may help to better treat elderly  stroke survi vors in the 
future.  
 
                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 6 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
What other choices do I have besides taking part in this research?  
If you are a short -term resident of PowerBack who has experienced a stroke recently, your 
alternative is to continue w ith the treatment provided by the Rehabilitation Department, without 
the additional experimental game -based therapy.  There are no alternative treatments available 
otherwise.  Your only choice is not to take part in this study.  
 
What happens to the information collected for this research?  
Your private information and your medical record will be shared with individuals and 
organizations that conduct or watch over this  research , including:  
 
 The research  sponsor , 
 People who work with the research  sponso r, 
 Government agencies, such as the Food and Drug Administration , 
 The Institutional Review Board (IRB) that reviewed this research . 
 
In addition to the sponsor and study staff, the following people will be allowed to inspect parts of 
your medical record and your research record related to this study:  
 
 The Western Institutional Review Board® (WIRB®).  WIRB is a group of people who 
perform independent review and oversight of research.  
 Research personnel at Bright Cloud Int’l Corp.  
 Officials of PowerBack Rehabilitation . 
 
There is a risk that your information could be given to others without your permission.  By taking 
part in this study, you should understand that the study collects clinical data, your demographic 
and health information.  This information will  be stored and kept as long as the study is being 
conducted and for 5 years thereafter . 
 
Your personal identity, that is name, address, and other identifiers, will be kept confidential.  
You will have a code number and your actual name will not be used in the study or in resulting 
publications.  Only your study staff will be able to link the c ode number to your name and they 
will keep this information for 5 years . 
 
Your data may be used in scientific publications.  If the findings from the study are published, 
you will not be identified by name.  Your identity will be kept confidential.  The ex ception to 
this rule will be when there is a court order or when a law exists requiring the study investigators 
to report communicable diseases.  In this case, you will be informed of the intent to disclose this 
information to the state agency.  Such a law  exists in New Jersey for diseases such as cancer, 
infectious diseases such as hepatitis, HIV, viruses and others.  
 
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as re quired 
by U.S. Law.  This Web site will not include information that can identify you.  At most, the 
Web site will include a summary of the results.  You can search this Web site at any time.  
                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 7 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
 
We may publish the results of this research. However, we will k eep your name and other 
identifying information confidential.  
 
We protect your information from disclosure to others to the extent required by law. We cannot 
promise complete secrecy.  
 
Data collected in this research  might be de -identified and used for fut ure research or distributed 
to another investigator for future research without your consent.  
 
Who can answer my questions about this research?  
If you have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think this research has hurt you  or made you 
sick, talk to the research team at the phone number listed above on the first page.  
 
This research is being overseen by the Western  Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). An IRB is a 
group of people who perform independent review of research studies. You may talk to them a t 
(800) 562-4789 , help@wirb.com  if: 
 
 You have questions, concerns, or complaints that are not being answered by the research 
team.  
 You are not getting answers from the research team.  
 You cannot reach the research team.  
 You want to talk to someone else about the research.  
 You have questions about your rights as a research subject.  
 
What if I am injured because of taking part in this research?  
If I take part in this study, I will be exposed to certain risks of physical injury. Medical treatment 
will be ar ranged for me by the Principal Investigator for any physical injury that occurs as a 
direct result of my taking part in this study.  My health insurance carrier, managed care provider 
or other third party payer will be billed for the cost of this medical t reatment.  I understand that I 
will be responsible for any part of the treatment cost not paid by my insurance or managed care 
provider.  No financial payment is routinely offered in the event of physical injuries that 
happened as a direct result of my tak ing part in this study. I understand that I will exercise in 
sitting, so as to minimize injury from falls. If you are injured as a result of this study, you do not 
give up your right to pursue a claim through the legal system.  
 
Can I be removed from this r esearch without my approval ? 
The person in charge of this research can remove you from this research without your approval. 
Possible reasons for removal include : 
 
 If it is in your best interest ; 
 You have a side effect that requires stopping the research ; 
 You need a treatment not allowed in this research ; 
                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 8 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
 You become pregnant ; 
 The research is canceled by the FDA  or the sponsor ; 
 You are unable to keep your scheduled appointments . 
 
We will tell you about any new information that may affect your health, welfare,  or choice to 
stay in this research.  
 
What happens if I agree to be in this research, but I change my mind 
later?  
You understand that you may choose not to be in the study.  If you do choose to take part, it is 
voluntary.  You may refuse to take part or ma y change your mind at any time.  
 
If you do not want to enter the study or decide to pull out of the study, your relationship with the 
study staff will not change, and you may do so without penalty and without loss of benefits to 
which you are entitled.  
 
You may also withdraw your consent for the use of your data, but you must do this in writing.  
 
If you decide to pull out of the study for any reason, you may be asked to return for at least one 
additional visit for safety reasons.  
 
At any time, the sponsor o r study investigators can take you out of this study because it would not 
be in your best interest to stay in it, or for any other reason.  Your study investigators can stop 
treatment even if you ar e willing to stay in the study.  
 
Will I be paid for taking  part in this research?  
 Healthy subjects : You will receive a $25 money order at the end of each usability 
evaluation session; If you drop out of the study, you will be paid for the sessions you had 
completed.  
 
 Stroke survivors : You will not be paid for participation in the study.  
 
Statement of Consent:  
If you have any questions about your rights as a research subject  or if you have questions, concerns, 
input, or complaints about the research , you may contact:  
 
Western Institutional Review Board® (WIRB®) 
South Hill Business and Technology Center  
1019 39th Avenue SE Suite 120  
Puyallup, Washington 98374 -2115  
Telephone 1 -800-562-4789 or 360 -252-2500  
E-mail:  Help@wirb.com  
 
                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 9 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
If you have co mplaints about the research, you may contact:  
 
 Rachel Sheeran, CIP   
 Western Institutional Review Board® (WIRB®) 
 1019 39th Avenue SE Suite 120  
 Puyallup, Washington 98374 -2115  
 Telephone:  1 -800-562-4789 or 360 -252-2420  
 E-mail: Help@wirb.com . 
 
WIRB is a group of people who perform independent review of research.  
 
WIRB will not be able to answer some study -specific questions, such as questions about 
appointment times.  However, you may contact WI RB if the research staff cannot be reached or if 
you wish to talk to someone other than the research staff.  
 
You or your Legally Authorized Representative should not sign this consent form unless you 
have had a chance to ask questions and have gotten satis factory answers.  
 
If you agree to be in this study, you will receive a signed and dated copy of this consent form for your 
records.  
 
Consent:  
 
I have read the above information.  Participation in this research study is voluntary.  Involvement 
in this research is not a requirement and will not affect my treatment.  Refusal to participate or a 
decision not to continue participation will involve no penalty or loss of benefit to which I am 
otherwise entitled.  All my questions about the study and my participation in it have been answered.  
I freely consent to be in this research study.  
 
I authorize the release of my medical records, including photos o r video, for research or regulatory 
purposes to the sponsors, the FDA, DHHS agencies, and the WIRB®. 
 
By signing this consent form, I have not given up any of my legal rights.  
 
Consent and Assent Instructions:  
Consent:  Subjects able to provide consent must  sign on the subject line below  
Consent is provided by the Legally Authorized Representative for subjects unable to 
consent  
Assent:    Complete the assent signature block below, as applicable.  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                             
Subject Name (printed)                                                            Subject ID#  
   
                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 10 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
CONSENT SIGNATURES:  
 
 
    
Signature of Subject (if no Legally Authorized Representative is used)  Date  
 
OR 
 
 
    
Signature of Legally Authorized Representative  Date  
 
 
________________________________________________________________________  
Authority of Subject’s Legally Authorized Representative or Relationship to Subject  
 
 
    
Signature of Person Conducting Informed Consent Discussion  Date  
 
New Jersey law requires the signature of an individual who can attest that the requirements for 
informed consent t o the medical research have been satisfied. (The individual cannot be the 
subject, the subject’s guardian or representative, or the researcher).  
 
I confirm that the person obtaining consent verbally addressed each element included in the written 
consent fo rm with the subject's Legally Authorized Representative (LAR).  This verbal 
information was provided in non -technical terms and in a language in which the LAR is fluent.  
 
 
Signature of Supervising Nurse (Witness)    Date:___________  
(for dementia subjects)  
 
ASSENT SIGNATURES, for Subjects with a Legally Authorized Representative:  
 
Assent:  
 
For subjects who have a legally authorized representative, I confirm that:  
 
 I have explained the study to the extent compatible with the subject’s understanding, and 
the subject has agreed to be in the study.  
 
OR  
 
 The subject is not able to assent due to lack of mental capacity.  
                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 11 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
 
 
    
Signature of Person Conducting Assent Discussion  Date  
 
 
Subject ID #:    
 
 
Investigator:    
 
 
Signature:    Date:    
(if different from above)  
                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 12 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
   
Figure 1 BrightArm system and BBG game controller  
 
 
Figure 2: Baseline Screens for grasping and finger extension  

                                                                              
 IRB APPROVED  
 Sep 05, 2018  
 
 
 13 Template Version Date: 1/16/2018r1  
 
Figure 3: Example of therapeutic games  
