University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
  
Protocol  Title:   
“A randomized double  blind cross -over trial of continuous  intrathecal  infusion for 
assessing  patients  with chronic  non-cancer  pain who would benefit  from  treatment  with 
intrathecal  drug  delivery  system  (IDDS)  implant”  
 
ABSTRACT  
2.1 Purpose:   
The purpose  of this study  will be to determine  the efficacy  and the prognostic  value  of a 
continuous  intrathecal  prognostic  infusion test in an in-hospital  setting  for selecting  
patient s who would have  better  long term outcomes  for treatment  with intrathecal  
implantable  devices.   We  will compare the primary  outcomes  [changes  in pain intensity  
score (NRS),  patient  global  impression  of change (PGIC)]  before  and after intrathecal  
infusion of  an admixture  of bupivacaine  and fentanyl  versus  normal  saline.  
 2.2 Research  Design:   
Randomized, double  blind  placebo  controlled cross  over  study  
 
2.3 Methodology /Technical  Approach:    
The study  will include  36 patients  with intractable chronic  low back  pain in the setting  of 
lumbar  post-laminectomy  syndrome  or vertebral  compression fracture  who failed  
conservative  management  and are considered  candidates  for IDDS.  
 As per usual  clinical  care prior  to the implant, the patient s will undergo  an intrathecal  
prognostic  infusion test with an externalized  catheter .  An  intrathecal  catheter  will be 
placed  in the outpatient  procedure  suite  and intrathecal  infusion will be started using  an 
external  pump once  patient  is in the PACU.   The  research  component  is to perform  the 
intrathecal  test with saline  (inactive  placebo  solution)  in addition to a test with fentanyl  and 
bupivacaine (active solution).  Patient s will be  randomly  assigned  to two groups:   
Group  I will be trialed  with continuous  infusion  of intrathecal  bupivacaine  0.625 mg/ml 
and fentanyl  1 mcg/ml at a rate of 0.5-1.0 ml/hr  for approximately  14-18 hours  followed 
by a washout  period of 4-6 hours , before  resuming  intrathecal  infusion for testing  with 
continuous  normal  saline  for another  14-18 hours.  
Group  II will be trialed  with intrathecal  normal  saline  for approximately  14-18 hours  
followed by a washout  period  of 4-6 hours , before resuming intrathecal  infusion with a 
solution of  bupivacaine  0.625 mg/ml and  fentanyl  1 mcg/ml for another  14-18 hours.  
Baseline  numerical  rating  scale  pain scores  (NRS;  an 11-point  pain scale whereby  0 
signifies  no pain and 10 the worse  pain ever)  will be assessed  and documented  on all 
patients  upon admission  to the preoperative  area.  Intrathecal  catheters  will be placed  in the 
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   1 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
operating  room  as per usual  clinical  care at the appropriate  level  for target  dermatomes.   
The needle entry  point  will occur  in the upper  lumbar  spine  and catheter  tip will be  placed  
in the lower thoracic spine  (most  commonly  T7-T11), under  local  anesthesia with the 
patient  awake and with minimal or no sedation. In PACU,  patients  will be started  on an 
infusion rate of 0.5 ml/hr  and titrated  to pain relief  greater  than 50% of baseline or up to 
0.8-1.0 ml/hr  within  6-8 hrs after start of the infusion on the day of the intrathecal  
prognostic  infusion test .  
A clinician  blinded to the treatment  arm will assess  NRS  and PGIC  on the patients  after 
around 12 hours (around  6-7am/ morning  of the following  day).   Assessment  will include  
changes  in pain intensity  score at rest and upon ambulating  or performing  maneuvers  that 
normally  elicit patient’s  low back  pain.  A 4-6-hour washout  period  will be allotted  with 
infusion of  preservative- free normal  saline  at a rate of  0.2 ml/hr,  after which  the physician  
will document  a return  of the NRS  to baseline before  switching  therapies  (cross  over).  
 3. OBJECTIVES  AND  RATIONALE  
Continuous  infusion intrathecal  tests are prognostic  clinical  procedures  routinely  employed  
to select  patients  who would benefit  from  implantable  intrathecal  drug delivery  systems .  
Intrathecal  prognostic  infusion tests are often  criticized  as subjective  and proceeding  with 
an implant after a questionable  intrathecal  test can only lead to frustration  of both patient  
and provider.  C ompared  to normal  saline,  bupivacaine  and fentanyl  actively  function as 
analgesics  and therefore  should reveal  a difference  compared  to preservative- free normal  
saline . 
The objectives  of this clinical  trial would be:  
a) To determine  the benefits  of a continuous  intrathecal  prognostic  infusion test with 
a mixture  of fentanyl  and bupivacaine  for selecting  patient s that will benefit  from  
an implantable  therapy  
b) To examine the long-term effectiveness  as determ ined by satisfaction  and 
improvement  in function of patient s treated  with IDDS  and selected  by a continuous  
infusion intrathecal  prognostic  test. 
4.  MEDICAL  APPLICATION  
 
Targeted  intrathecal  drug delivery  is an established  interventional  modality  in manag ing 
different  chronic  pain conditions, especially  post laminectomy  syndrome , also known as 
failed  back  surgery  syndrome  (FBSS)  and vertebral  compression fractures .  Intrathecal  
delivery  of pharmacological  agents  reduces  systemic  side effects  and the potential  for 
aberrant  medication  use (1). 
  The success  of the treatment  with an implantable  device is strictly  dependent  on patient  
selection.   Currently , there are no unified standard protocols  for intrathecal  tests which  are 
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   2 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
considered  prognostic  procedures  for future  implants  (2).  Previous  clinical studies , but 
also guidelines , consider  accept able single  intrathecal  bolus  placebo  controlled injection  or 
continuous  infusion intrathec al test which  mimic  somewhat  closely  the continuous  
intrathecal  infusion from  an implantable  device.   The proposed study  will clearly  address  
the question of placebo  controlled continuous  infusion tests’  utility  in prognosis  and 
effectiveness  of intratheca l drug  delivery  systems.  
 
5.  BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
  
Chronic  low back  is a major  socioeconomic  burden.  Despite  numerous  treatment  strategies  
including  rehabilitation,  medications,  injections,  minimally  invasive procedures  and 
surgeries,  chronic  back  pain remains  a challenge.  In particular,  patients  with back  pain 
persisting  after previous  lumbar  spine  surgery  (often  referred  to as post-laminectomy  
syndrome  or failed  back  surgery  syndrome -FBSS)  appear  to be most  resistant  to traditional 
treatment  strategies.  Neuromodulation in the form  of spinal  cord stimulation  or intrathecal  
drug delivery, represents  the best option  at providing  effective pain relief  in this 
challenging  chronic  pain population. While  spinal  cord stimulation  has traditionally  been  
more  effective  for persistent  leg pain,  intrathecal  drug delivery  is more  effective  in 
refractory  low back  pain.   Refractory  back  pain following  remote  vertebral  compression 
fracture(s)  is another  clinical  entity  whereby  intrathecal  therapy  is particularl y effective  in 
the absence of alternatives.  Prior to implanting  an intrathecal  drug delivery  system,  an 
intrathecal  prognostic  test is performed.   Despite the agreement  on the importance  of 
intrathecal  testing  before  the implant,  there has been  no consensus  on the method of testing 
due to lack of high-quality  data.  While  some  clinicians  utilize  single  intrathecal  bolus  doses  
of morphine  or other  opioids, others  use continuous  infusions  especially  in the setting  of 
combination therapies  (2). Both  modalities  have  been  employed  with the use of placebo  (3, 
4).  The  value  of intrathecal  testing  has been  questioned, as it is unclear  if it really  predicts  
the long-term success  or failure  of IDDS.  However, it is still advocated  as an important  
initial step  before  the implant  in chronic  non- cancer  pain  (5).  
Most  of the current  data available  are derived  from  prognostic  testing with opioids ; no 
prospective  randomized trials  assessed  the effectiveness  of bupivacaine  combined  with  an 
opioid.  Our  published studies  have  shown  that combination of bupivacaine  with intrathecal  
opioids  results  in sustained  pain relief  and blunting  of opioid dose escalation  (6, 7). 
However,  no studies  have been  published on the efficacy  of prognostic  intrathecal  infusion  
testing  with a combination of bupivacaine  and an opioid.  While  two studies  used placebo  
saline  injections  during  intrathecal  prognostic  testing , both involved only opioid boluses  
(mostly  morphine), one in the setting  of repeat  lumbar  puncture (3) and the other  with repeat  
injections  through an  intrathecal  catheter  (4). 
6.  PLAN  
6.1 New  Investigational  Drugs/  Investigational  Devices  Exemption  Status:   N/A 
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   3 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
 
6.2 Selection  of Subjects  
 
6.2.1 Type  of the Subject  Population  
Patients  with refractory  chronic  low back  pain and previous  back  surgeries  or remote  
compression fractures  who are referred  to the Division  of Pain Medicine at UHCMC  for pain 
management  and who failed  previous  conservative  management  such as physical  therapy,  
spinal  injections  and medication  therapy  with  membrane  stabilizers.  
 
6.2.2 Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria  
 
a. Inclusion  Criteria  
• Age 30 years  or greater  
• Previous  lumbar  or thoracic  spine  surgery  or lower  thoracic/lumbar  vertebral  
compression fracture  
• Intractable pain  of trunk (more  than  limbs)   
• Patient  who  passed  psychologi cal evaluations  as part of the usual  clinical care 
prior  to consideration of  IDDS  and are stable  with  current  pain  condition and 
medications  
• Failed  more  conservative  management.  
 
b.  Exclusion  Criteria  
• Untreated  coagulopathy  or infection . 
• Immune  compromised state  precluding  having  an implant.  
• Allergic  reactions  to bupivacaine  or fentanyl.  
• Pregnancy  
• Patients  using  more  than 30 mg oral equivalents  of morphine  daily  or who are 
unable  to wean  down below  that dosage  for more  than 4 weeks  before the 
prognostic  intrathecal  infusion test . 
• Neurological  deficits  characterized  as weakness  in lower  extremities  with evidence  
of nerve  damage  
• Patients  with cognitive  disorders  who would not be able to provide  meaningful  
outcome  responses  
 
6.2.3 Recruitment  
Subject s will be recruited  from  patients  seen at the University  Hospitals  Pain Medicine  
clinic s by attending  physicians.   Screening  will be done  before  obtaining  consent  by an 
investigator.    If patients  are deemed  appropriate  for an intrathecal  device they will undergo  
normal  procedures  and guidelines  in place prior  to being  considered  candidates  for an 
implantable  device.   No subject  will be  compensated  for participation.   
 
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   4 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
6.2.4 Consent  Process    
Subjects  will be consented by one of the investigators.   An explanation in lay terms  for the 
reason s of the study  and the proposed prognostic  benefits  will be used to promote  patient  
understanding.  
  
If interested,  eligible  individuals  will be  given  the opportunity  to ask and have  all 
questions  addressed  before  signin g the informed  consent  document.  The  procedure  will 
occur  at their  next  visit,  and continued consent  of study  participation  will be  confirmed.  
  
6.3 Study  Design  and Methodology   
 6.3.1 Study  Design  
This is a randomized, double -blind, placebo  controlled cross  over study  comparing  prognostic  
intrathecal  testing with an admixture  of bupivacaine  and fentanyl  versus  saline.   None  of the 
procedures  in this study  deviate from  usual  clinical care that patients  receive at UHCMC  or 
nationally.  Baseline scores  using  the numerical  rating  scale (NRS) for pain (a scale form  0-
10, where 0 signifies  no pain at all, and 10 the worst  possible  pain)  will be recorded,  both in 
the sitting  or supine  position (least pain)  and with ambulation  or standing  (worst  pain).  Patients  
will be given  weight  based  cefazolin  (or vancomycin  if indicated)  prior  to placing  the 
externalized  intrathecal  catheter.   Placement  of the percutaneous  intrathecal  catheter  will be 
done  in the operating  room  with minimal or no sedation  in the prone  or lateral  decubitus  
position under  fluoroscopic  guidance.  Needle entry  will occur  in the mid-upper  lumbar  spine  
and through the needle  an intrathecal  catheter  will be advanced  until its tip is positioned  in the 
posterior  intrathecal  space in the lower  thoracic spine .  The needle is then removed  and the 
catheter  is secured  in place with steri-strips  and a clear  sterile  bio-occlusive dressing  will be 
placed.   Patients  will then be transferred  to the PACU  where they will be initiated  on one of 
two solutions  that will be prepared  for each patient  by the investigational  pharmacy  staff at 
UHCMC.   The  solutions  will be labeled  as “Intrathecal  solution 1” and “Intrathecal  solution  
2” and will be  contained in a sterile  50 ml bag.   Solution 1 and  2 may  contain  either:  
 
a) Preservative -free normal  saline  
b) Fentanyl  1 mcg/ml and  bupivacaine  0.625 mg/ml 
 
The content  of Intrathecal  solution 1 and 2 will be unknown to all investigators  and participants  
in the study  with the exception  of the investigational pharmacy.   The  order  of the Intrathecal  
solution (1 or 2) will be determined  by pharmacy  using  a computer  generated  random  sequence  
allocation.   The  intrathecal  catheter  will be attached  to a pump delivering  solution 1 or 2 at 
around noon time, in the recovery  area on the day the catheter  is placed . A bolus  of 1cc will be 
given  through the  infusion pump at  initiation  of therapy  and the patient  will then  be started  on 
an infusion rate of 0.5 ml/hr.  After 3-4 hours  (around  3-4 pm) hours  and similarly  around 6-7 
pm the rate will be titrated  depending  on patient’s  response  up to a maximum of 0.8-1.0 ml/hr.   
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   5 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
If the patient  has achieved  > 50% pain relief  compared  to baseline,  no up-titration  will occur;  
i.e. the rate will be increased  only if the patient  has not had 50% or more  reduction  in baseline 
pain on the NRS.   The intrathecal  rate will be kept the same provided the patient  had 50% or 
greater  decrease  in pain  scores  or has reached  the 1.0 ml/hr  rate (whichever  comes  first).   The 
rate will be unchanged from  6-7 pm until around 6-7 am the next morning  when  the infusion 
will be stopped and the patient  will be assessed  for pain relief.   In the morning, the patient  will 
be asked  to rate the pain score at rest (in bed or chair)  and with ambulation/standing. The pain 
scores  will be recorded  and the catheter  will be aspirated  at the hub to ensure  continued  
cerebrospinal  fluid  flow and the patient  will be started  on a solution  of preservative- free norma l 
saline  at 0.2 ml/hr  to keep  the catheter  patent.   After 6 hours, around noon time,  the patient  will 
be crossed  over to Intrathecal  solution 1 or 2, depending  on what  she/he had the day before,  
given  1.0 ml of that solution  as a bolus  and then infusion will be started  at 0.5 ml/hr  and the 
same protocol  as the day before  will be repeated  with the patient  discharged  the next morning.   
Patients  who experience greater  than 50% pain relief  (relative  to baseline)  with either 
intrathecal  solution will be offered  the implant of a permanent  IDDS  that will deliver  a 
combination of bupivacaine  and low-dose fentanyl .  Patients  not responding  to both solutions  
with greater  than 50% pain relief  will be considered  to have  failed  the intrathecal  test and 
would not proceed  to implant.  The  patients  will be asked  to pick which  solution provided 
better  pain relief:  solution 1 or solution 2 and responses  will be recorded.    Additionally,  pain 
scores  obtained periodically  as part of patients’  usual  clinical  care vital signs  and recorded  by 
the nursing staff on the hospital  ward  will be collected  throughout  the study.   Un-blinding  for 
patients  who had a successful  intrathecal  prognostic  infusion test with greater  than 50% pain 
relief  will not  occur  until  12 months  have  elapsed  since the  pump implant.  
 
Outcome  measures  will include : 
1- Baseline  prior  to commencement  of the prognostic  infusion test:  Pain intensity  using 
the Numerical  Rating  Scale [NRS],  patient  global  impression  of change [PGIC],  
Oswestry  disability  index  [ODI]  and painDETECT . 
2- At 14-18 hours:  Pain intensity  in Numerical  Rating  Scale [NRS],  patient  global  
impression  of change [PGIC],  complications  and side effects . 
3- Prior to second  infusion:  Pain intensity  in Numerical  Rating  Scale [NRS],  patient  global  
impression  of chan ge [PGIC],  complications  and side effects . 
4- At prognostic  infusion test completion:  Pain intensity  in Numerical  Rating  Scale  
[NRS],  patient  global  impression  of change [PGIC],  complications  and side effects , 
Oswestry  disability  index  [ODI]  and pain DETECT . 
5- At 6 and 12 months  post-implant for implanted  patients  Pain intensity  in Numerical  
Rating  Scale [NRS],  patient  global  impression  of change  [PGIC],  Oswestry  disability  
index  [ODI]  and pain DETECT. 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   6 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
6.3.2 Study  Methodology/Procedures  
The study  will include  36 patients  with intractable chronic  low or mid back  pain due to 
failed  back  surgery  syndrome  or vertebral  fracture  who failed  conservative management  
including  epidural  steroid  injection  and medical  therapy  and were referred  to our practice  
for pain  manag ement.  
 
Patient  will undergo the usual  psychological  and medical  evaluation s before  the initiation  
of the prognostic  infusion test . 
  Patients  who are considered  candidates  for intrathecal  pump implant fulfilling  the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria  above  and who elect  to participate  in the study  will be randomly  
assigned  to receive treatment  in one of two counterbalanced  conditions.  
  
Group  A tested with continuous  infusion of intrathecal  bupivacaine  0.625 mg/ml and 
fentanyl  1 mcg/ml for 14-18 hours  followed by a trial with normal  saline  for another  14-
18 hours.  
Group  B tested with intrathecal  normal  saline  for 14-18 hours  followed  by intrathecal  
Bupivacaine  0.625 mg/ml and  fentanyl  1 mcg/ml for  another  14-18 hours.  
  Note  that drugs  will be delivered  by the pharmacy  to a blinded physician  and labeled  as 
Intrathecal  solution 1 and Intrathecal  solution 2 to be administered  sequentially,  separated  
by a 4-6-hr infusion of  preservative -free saline . 
 Outcomes  will be assessed  and documented on all patients  upon admission  to the 
preoperative  area.   
The patients  will be taken  then to the procedure  room  and a standardized  intrathecal  
catheter  will be placed  under  fluoroscopic  guidance where the tip of the catheter  will be 
placed  at the T7-T11 posterior  intrathecal  interspace.  Patients  will be discharged  to the 
PACU where they  will be  started  on a  rate of  0.5 ml/hr.  
Six to eight  hours  following  initiation  of the infusion, all the patients  will be titrated  to 0.8-
1.0 ml/hr , provided less < 50% improvement  in pain scores  occurs .  A physician  who is 
blinded to  the treatment  will assess NRS  after  approximately  12 hrs  (around 6- 7 am  of the 
following  day).   A 4-6 hours  washout  period  will ensue  with infusion of preservative -free 
normal  saline  at a rate of  0.2 ml/hr  after  which  the physician  will document  a return  of the 
NRS  to baseline before  switching  therapies  or record  the value  at 6 hrs after infusing 
normal  saline  and switch  then to solution 2. NRS  will be reassessed  around 6 am the 
following  morning.   Add itionally,  pain scores  documented  with usual  clinical  care vital 
signs  will be  captured.  
All reported  adverse events  will be  recorded.  
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   7 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
No pain medications  will be prescribed  during the admission.  If such medications  are 
needed,  the patient  will be excluded from  continuing  on with the study  and will be recorded  
as a prognostic -infusion- test failure.  
The intrathecal  catheter  will be aspirated  for confirmation  of free cerebrospinal  fluid  flow 
(about  1 ml)  between  all solution changes  and at the end of the prognostic  infusion test  . 
After  the completion  of the prognostic  infusion test, the catheter  will be removed  and 
patients  will be  discharged  home. 
Only  patients  who report  >50%  reduction  from  baseline  NRS  while  receiving  either  
intrathecal  solution will be considered for intrathecal  drug delivery  system  implant.   It is 
conceivable that some  patients  may get >50%  reduction  in pain scores  with both the active 
solution and saline  or have better  outcome  with the saline  solution.  The patients  will be 
asked  to answer  a binary  question rating  preference to solution 1 vs. solution 2.  P atients  
with pain relief  greater  than 50% will be implanted  with an IDDS  and will receive an 
intrathecal  solution of fentanyl  and bupivacaine.  All subjects  with >50%  pain relief  with 
either  or both intrathecal  solutions  will be implanted.  Even  if the patient  gets >50%  pain 
relief  only from  the saline  solution, or the patient  chooses  the saline  solution over the active 
solution  (when  asked  if #1 vs. #2 was better  relief)  each patient  will receive active drug 
after being  implanted . All patients  will be compared  in long-term outcome  (secondary  
outcome  measures)  at 6 months  and 12 months  versus  the response  to the prognostic  test 
solutions .  Unblinding  of solution 1 and 2 will not occur  until 12 months  have elapsed  since  
pump implant.   The  six and twelve  month visits  will be coordinated with a pump  refill  visit.  
6.3.3 Collection  of the Human  Biological  Specimens:    N/A  
6.3.4 Data  Collection   
Randomization will be performed,  and baseline data will collect  on admission  to the 
preoperative  area.  A physician  or physician  assistant  will obtain all  data.  
Baseline data collected  will include  name,  last 4 digits  of social  security  number, age, sex, 
race,  duration of pain,  treatment  group,  average 0-10 low back  numerical  rating  scale (NRS) 
pain scores  over  the past week  and analgesic medication  consumption.   
 
NRS scores  will be collected  again  around  6am,  noon and 6am of the following  day, as well 
as per regular  nursing  routine  on the medical  floor . Medication  side effects,  satisfaction  [patient  
global  impression  of change -PGIC] , complications  will also  be documented at  the completion  
of each  infusion. 
 At the end of the prognostic  infusion test, patients  will be asked  to specify  which  infusion they 
preferred :  Intrathecal  solution 1 or Intrathecal  solution 2.  An “assessment  of blinding”  
questionnaire  will also be administered.   When  the data is recorded  on the Excel  spreadsheet  
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   8 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
for statistical analysis,  identifying  information will be  deleted.    
 
6.3.5 Study  Time  Line   
 
Assessment  Before 
testing  
procedure  Testing  
Procedure;  
Intrathecal 
Catheter 
Placement  Infusion 
1           
 
14-18 
hours  Wash
out  
          4-6 
hours  Infusion 
2  
 
14-18 
hours          Follow 
Up           
 
6- 
months  Follow 
Up        
 
12- 
months  
Screening 
Informed Consent  
 X       
Randomization; 
Questionnaires; 
Data Collection; 
Medication Dose 
Titration  
  
X X X X   
Data Collection; 
Questionnaires; Adverse Events  
   
X X X   
Long Term 
Outcomes; 
Questionnaires; IT 
Medication Use; 
Adverse Events  
      
X X 
 
6.4.1 Data  Analysis  
For this study,  there will be two within -patient  experimental  groups  in a counterbalanced  
crossover  design , such that all patients  will receive both treatments.  An equal  number  of 
patients  will be randomly  assigned  to receive the intrathecal  solutions  in the order  of 
Treatment 1 followed by  Treatment  2, or  Treatment  2 followed by  Treatment  1.  
The primary  outcome  variable will be the change in pain intensity  score [NRS] 0-10 numerical  
rating  scale  back  pain score  at the end of the intrathecal  prognostic  infusion testing  period 
around 6am between  Intrathecal  solution 1 and Intrathecal  solution 2. That is, the primary  
outcome  will report  the degree of change in NRS  pain scores  between  baseline (pre-treatment)  
and the end of receiving  that treatment  (post -treatment ; approximately  18 hours  after treatment  
initiation ), separately  for Treatment  1 and for Treatment  2. Changes  in NRS  pain scores  will 
be considered  clinically  significant if they result  in ≥ 50% pre-treatment/post- treatment  NRS  
scores  for pail  relief  compared  to baseline,  in either  intrathecal  solution   
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   9 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
Secondary  outcome  variables  will be Oswestry  disability  score, changes  in painD ETECT,  
Patient  Global  Impressio n of Change  (PGIC ) and side effects  (medications)  and complications  
(injections).   These variables  will be recorded  at baseline, at the completion of each phase of 
the prognostic  infusion test , and  at 6 and  12 months  post -implant.  
 
6.4.2- 3 Data  Analysis  and Statistical  Plan  
 
Continuous  or ordinal  data for two groups  or conditions  will be analyzed  using  t-tests for 
paired  or independent  samples.  If the data are non-normally  distributed, variations  of the t-
test for non-parametric distributions  will be utilized:  Mann -Whitney  U test for independent  
samples.  Comparisons  of three or more  groups  will be conducted using a One-Way  
ANOVA with Bonferroni  post-hoc tests to correct  for multiple  compariso ns; alternatively  
if the data are non-normally  distributed  a Krus kal-Wallis  test will be used. Categorical  data 
will be analyzed  using  the chi-squared  test for categorical  data,  or using  Fisher’s  exact  test, 
a robust  chi-square  alternative  that is valid  for all  sample  sizes . 
 
 6.4.4 Sample  Size Estimation   
 To estimate  the sample  size we based  our calculation  on the primary  outcome  which  is 
change  of NRS  score  from  baseline and at 18 hrs and 36 hrs. From the literature  we expect  
50% in absolute  pain score changes  with the treatment  agent  [∆ NRS  1] and that is 
considered  clinically  significant.  Placebo  response  is considered  20-30% [∆ NRS  2]. To 
identify  a true effect  of treatment,  distinguishable  from  a placebo  response,  the power  
analysis  should identify  an absolute  score change  from  baseline of ≥ 30%;  to identify  a 
clinically  significant  change  this score should change by ≥ 50%.  The power  analysis  is 
conducted to  estimate  the number  of patients  required  to identify  this clinically  significant  
change as also statistically  significant.   
  
Power  analyses  are performed  on the primary  outcome  of interest,  the change  in NRS  
scores  from  baseline to post-treatment.  The power  analysis  software  G*Power  was used to 
calculate the  sample  size for a  two-tailed  t-test for matched  pairs,  alpha  0.05, powe r = 0.8, 
difference in means  = 30%,  standard  deviation of within -patient  difference s = 50%. Under  
these parameters  a projected  effect  size of .5 (Cohen’s  d, moderate effect  size)  was 
calculated,  and 29 patients  were required  in total.  Under  the assumption of  a 20%  dropout  
rate, sample  size was estimated  at 36 patients.   
 A total of  36 patients  will enter  this two-treatment  crossover  study.  The probability  is 80 
percent  that the study  will detect  a treatment difference at 95%  confidence that  a 
statistically  significant difference would reveal  a true effect , if the true differe nce 
between  treatments  is 30 units. This  is based  on the  assumption that  the within -patient  
standard  deviation of  the response  variable  is 50. 
 
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   10 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
The final  number  of patient  to be recr uited  for this study  would be  36.  
 
6.5 Reporting  Adverse Events   
 
6.5.1 Expected  Adverse Events  from  Research  Risks  and Reporting  
Adverse  effects  are not expected  from  this minimal intervention. Other  possible  side effect  
would be  poor  pain  control. 
 
All investigators  will take the  same steps  normally  taken  to minimize  adverse events.  
 
6.5.2 Reporting  Serious  and Unexpected  Adverse Events  to the IRB  
Serious  Adverse  Events:  The PI, within  one working  day, will report  all serious  adverse  
events  (SAE)  occurring  in any subject.  This  will be accomplished  by submitting  an adverse 
event  report  memorandum  to the IRB.    
 
Unexpected  (but not serious)  adverse events  which, in the opinion of the PI, are possibly  
related  to participation  in the protocol  will be reported  by the PI within  10 (ten)  working  
days to the IRB using  the same procedure.  
 For all serious  and/or  unexpected  adverse events,  the PI will examine the adverse event  for 
relation  to the study  and report  if needed  to the IRB.  
 6.6 Banking  of Human  Biological  Specimens/Tissue (HBS/tissue):   N/A 
 
*6.7 Subject  Confidentiality  Protection:   All treatments  received  in this study  are usual  
clinical  care.  No data will be collected  that is not relevant  to patient  care (e.g. treatment,  
analgesic usage,  numerical  rating  scale pain  scores  and disability  scores),  and no data  will 
be shared  with any non-investi gator.   In addition to name and date of birth , patien ts will 
also identified  by their place on the randomization table  (e.g. RT 2, PT 3).  This  “code” 
will enable the  transfer  of study  information without  mentioning  patients’  names  
 6.7.1 Certificate of  Confidentiality:   N/A 
 
*6.7.2 HIPAA  Authorization  
i. Are you intending  to collect  subject’s  Protected  Health  Information  (PHI)  and 
any of the following  18 personal  identifiers?  
___ No  – HIPAA  does  not apply  – go to question #iv 
_x__ Yes  – please check  which  ones:  
___ 1. Names  
___ 2. Street  address,  city, count y, 5-digit zip  code  
_x__ 3. Months  and dates  (years  are OK) and ages >89 (unless  all persons  over 89 
years  are aggregated into  a single  category)  
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   11 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
_x__ 4. Telephone  numbers  
_x__ 5. Fax  numbers  
_x__ 6. E -mail addresses  
___ 7. Social  security  number  
___ 8. Me dical  record  number  
___ 9. Health  plan  beneficiary  number  
___ 10. Account  number  
___ 11. Certificate/license  number  
___ 12. Vehicle identification  number  (VIN)  and/or  license plate  number  
___ 13. Device identifiers  and serial  numbers  
___ 14. URLs  (Uniform  Resource Locators)  
___ 15. Internet  protocol  address  number  
___ 16. Biometric  identifiers,  such  as finger  and voice prints  
___ 17. Full  face photographic  images  or any comparable images  
___ 18. Any other  unique  identifying  number, characteristic,  or code such as patient  
initials  
 
ii. Can you limit your collection  of personal  identifiers  to just dates,  city/state/zip,  
and/or  “other  unique  identifier”  (#18 of  the above)?   
___ Yes – then your dataset  may qualify  as a Limited  Data Set – please complete  a 
Data Use  Agreement  and attach  to your protocol. Then  go to question #iv . 
_x__ No  – Go  to question #iii.  
 iii. Is obtaining  patient  Authorization “ impracticable ”?  
___ Yes – Authorization may qualify  to be waived  by the IRB.  Go to 
Section 6.7.3  
HIPAA  Authorizati on Waiver  for the  application.  
_x__ No – Research  subjects  will need  to sign a HIPAA  Authorization. Complete  
the HIPAA  Authorization and  attach  to this protocol.  
 iv. What  precautions  will you take to protect  the confidentiality  of research  source  
docume nts (Case Report  Forms,  questionnaires, etc.),  the research  data file, and the 
master  code  (if any)?  
 A randomization table  will be developed by a computer  generated  random  
number  sequence.   This  “code”  and a copy  of all data collection  sheets  will be 
kept by our research  nurse  (Karen  Arters ) in a room  in that is locked  at night  and 
protected  by computer  passwords  as well as the UHCMC  compounding  
pharmacy  that will prepare  the solutions  labeled  as described .    
 v. When  will you destroy  the research  source  documents,  data file, and the master  
code?   
 
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   12 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
The UHCMC  research  team  in the Pain Medicine Clinic  will keep  the research  
data for up to six years  after the end of the study.  Then  all the information will 
be destroyed.  The master  code  will be destroyed  as soon as all data collection  is 
completed.  
 
vi. Will research  data including  Identifiable  Protected  Health  Information  be sent 
outside  of UHCMC ?  No 
 
6.7.3 HIPAA  Authorization  Waiver:   N/A-  We will obtain signed  HIPAA  authorization 
from  each  patient.   
 6.8 Reporting  Protocol  Deviations  
  Minor  protocol  deviations  (e.g.  minor  changes  in the consent  process,  prolonged 
completion  time  due to deployments)  will be  discussed  with  the investigative  team  and 
reported  to the IRB on a  standard  protocol  deviation sheet.   Any  major  deviations  (e.g.  
unexpected  findings  necessitating  a change in  protocol)  may  require  temporarily  stopping  
the protocol  until  the steps  needed  to rectify  the deviation are cleared  with IRB (e.g.  
change in  protocol).  
 
7.0 Risks,  Benefits,  Alternatives , Withdrawal  
 
7.1 Risks  
 
All of the medication  and equipment  being  used  for this  study  are considered usual  
clinical  care treatment for back  pain.  There is  a risk for increase in  back  pain with  the 
normal  salin e solution. 
 
Questionnaires/Subject  Diaries/Research  
The questionnaires  and subject  diaries  will be  used to  compare the  outcomes  of each  
week  of treatment  and pose  no risk  to the subject.   
 
Possible  minimal risks  include  potential  breach  of confidentiality  of the subject’s  medical  
record  information  and associated  privacy.  This risk will be  minimized  by assigning  each  
subject  a unique  study  number.  This  number  will be  kept  in a locked  area with only  the 
study  team  having  access.  
 
Unforeseeable risks  
There may be risks  or side effects  related  to the study  procedures  that are unknown at this 
time.  Subjects  will be notified of any significant  new findings  that become  known that may 
affect  their  willingness  to continue  in the study.  
 
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   13 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
7.2 Benefits  
Subjects  may  not receive  benefits  from  participating  in this research  study.  The 
information  that can potentially  be gained  from  this study  regarding  their  condition may  
be useful  to those  who  suffer from  the disease,  including  the participants.   
 
7.3 Alte rnatives  
 If a patient  chooses  not to participate,  they  will continue  with  their  current  treatment.   
Any patient  may  withdraw  from  the study  at any time.  
 7.4 Withdrawal  from  Study  Participation  
Subjects  may  withdraw  from  the study  at any time.   Upon withdrawal,  they  will return  to 
their usual, usual  clinical  care treatment  and have their IDDS  prognostic  infusion test  and 
follow  up per  usual  clinical care.  Follow  up will be  per usual  clinical  care per  the 
investigator’s  discretion.  Data prior  to withdrawal  may  be used, but  no further data will 
be collected .  Also,  the investigator  may  choose  to withdraw  the subject  if the 
investigator  deems  it is in the best interest  of the subject's  health  and well -being.  
  
       
           
      
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   14 
 
University  Hospitals  Case Medical  Center  
Department  of Anesthesiology   
Division  of Pain  Medicine 
Short  Study  title: “Determining  the Prognostic  Value  of Continuous  intrathecal  infusion   prognostic  
infusion test” 
 
References:  
 
1. Hayek  SM, Deer  TR, Pope  JE, Panchal  SJ, Patel  VB. Intrathecal  therapy  for cancer  
and non- cancer  pain. Pain  physician. 2011; 14:219-48. 
2. Deer  TR, Prager  J, Levy  R, Rathmell J, Buchser  E, Burton A, et al. Polyanalgesic 
Consensus  Conference 2012:  recommendations  for the  management  of pain  by intrathecal  
(intraspinal)  drug delivery:  report  of an interdisciplinary  expert  panel.  Neuromodulation : 
journal  of the International  Neuromodulation Society. 2012; 15:436-64; discussion 64- 6. 
3. Dominguez  E, Sahinler  B, Bassam  D, Day M, Lou L, Racz  G, et al. Predictive  value  
of intrathecal  narcotic trials  for long-term therapy  with implantable  drug administration  
systems  in chronic  non-cancer  pain patients.  Pain  practice : the official journal  of World  
Institute  of Pain . 2002; 2:315-25. 
4. Hamza M, Doleys  D, Wells  M, Weisbein  J, Hoff J, Martin  M, et al. Prospective  
study  of 3-year follow -up of low-dose intrathecal  opioids  in the management  of chronic  
nonmalignant  pain. Pain  Med. 2012; 13:1304- 13. 
5. Deer  TR, Prager  J, Levy  R, Burton A, Buchser  E, Caraway  D, et al. Polyanalgesic 
Consensus  Conference--2012:  recommendations  on trialing  for intrathecal (intraspinal ) 
drug delivery:  report  of an interdisciplinary  expert  panel.  Neuromodulation : journal  of the 
International  Neuromodulation Society. 2012; 15:420-35; discussion 35. 
6. Hayek  SM, Veizi  E, Hanes  M. Intrathecal  Hydromorphone  and Bupivacaine  
Combination Therap y for Post-Laminectomy  Syndrome  Optimized  with Patient -Activated  
Bolus  Device.  Pain  Med . 2015. 
7. Veizi  IE, Hayek  SM, Narouze  S, Pope  JE, Mekhail  N. Combination  of intrathecal  
opioids  with bupivacaine  attenuates  opioid dose escalation  in chronic  noncancer  pain 
patients.  Pain  Med . 2011; 12:1481- 9. 
  
 
Protocol  Version  4.0 Updated 15MAY2017  
Statistical  Plan  Version  3.0 Updated  13APR2018   15 
 