  
   
 
Protocol UMCC 2011.007 
 
A Phase II Study of Neoadjuvant FOL FIRINOX and FDR-Ge mcitabine with 
Concurrent IMRT in Patients with Bord erline Resectable Pancreatic Cancer  
 
  
 
Principal Investigator:  Mark M. Zalupski, MD 
  Medical Oncology
 
  1500 E. Medical Center Dr. 
3-219 CC / 5934 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5934 Telephone: 734-615-3969 Fax: 734-647-9647  e-mail address: zalupski@umich.edu 
 
 
Co-Investigators:  Vaibhav Sahai, MBBS, Medical Oncology
 
  Joel Greenson, MD, Pathology 
  Kent Griffith, MS, Biostatistics 
  Ravi Kaza, MD, Radiology 
  Theodore Lawrence, MD, PhD, Radiation Oncology 
  Hari Nathan, MD, Surgery 
  Rebecca Minter, MD, Surgery 
  Diane Simeone, MD, Surgery 
Christopher Sonnenday, MD, Surgery 
Oxana Rusher, MD, Medical Oncology 
  
 
 
Version:  1/6/11 
                  2/10/11                   9/28/11                   1/11/13                   8/27/13 
                 2/1/15 
                 10/14/16 
  
 
 
 i 
 SCHEMA  
 
                                                Borderline Resectable Pancreatic Cancer 
Pretreatment Evaluation to Determ ine Eligibility, CT scan, Ca19-9 
Written Informed Consent  
 
4 cycles - FOLFIRINOX  (2 months)  
 
Repeat CT scan, blood draw for Ca19-9 
 
2 cycles - FOLFIRINOX  (1 month) 
 
FDR-Gemcitabine/IMRT 50 Gy (5 weeks) 
 
Rest period 3 weeks 
 
Repeat CT scan, blood draw for Ca19-9 
                                
  2 cycles - Gemcitabine (1 month)  
 
Repeat CT scan, blood draw for Ca19-9 
 
                Surgery 
 
*Note: If patient has evidence of distant dise ase progression at any restaging CT they will be 
removed from protocol treatment 
 ii 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Page 
 
SCHEMA ........................................................................................................................ ................. i 
 
1. OBJECTIVES ................................................................................................................. ...........1 
 2. BACKGROUND .......................................................................................................................1  3. PATIENT SELECTION ............................................................................................................4  4. REGISTRATION PROCEDURES ...........................................................................................6  5. TREATMENT PLAN ............................................................................................................. ...6 
 6. DOSING DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS ......................................................................11  7. ADVERSE EVENTS:  LIST AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS ..................................15   8. PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION ................................................................................19  9. STUDY CALENDAR.............................................................................................................. 24 
 10. MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT ..............................................................................................25  11. DATA REPORTING / REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS .............................................26 
 
12. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS .....................................................................................26  REFERENCES .................................................................................................................... ..........30 
 
 11.0 OBJECTIVES  
 
1.1 Primary Objective 
  
To determine the frequency of achieving an R0  resection using a neoadjuvant regimen of 
FOLFIRINOX followed by IMRT concurrent with  fixed dose rate (FDR)-gemcitabine in 
patients with borderline rese ctable pancreatic cancer. 
 
1.2 Secondary Objectives 
 
 1.2.1 To estimate progression-free survival a nd overall survival as a function of time 
from study enrollment.  
1.2.2 To evaluate tolerability and toxi city of the protocol treatment 
1.2.3 To determine the primary tumor response rate to neoadjuvant chemotherapy alone 
and following combined modality treatment 
 
2.0 BACKGROUND  
 
Pancreatic cancer  
 
There were an estimated 37,680 new cases of pancreatic cancer in the US in 2008 making it the 10th most common cancer. The estimated number of deaths, however, was 34,290 which places pancreas cancer 4th among causes of cancer death
1.  A practical staging system for 
pancreas cancer based on the approach to treatme nt separates patients into four categories: 1) 
resectable, 2) locally advanced unresectable, 3) metastatic disease, and 4) borderline resectable.  
 
Resectable disease  
A small minority of patients fall into the category of resectable disease. Surgical treatment is 
most often the initial treatment and is offered w ith curative intent.  However, median survival 
with surgery alone is only 13-20 months.  Fo llowing resection, patients benefit from the 
addition of adjuvant radiation and/or chemotherapy
2-4.  Even in this most favorable group of 
patients, however, the 5-year survival is less than 30% in single institution series5, 6.  A large 
majority of patients treated with surgery, with or without adjuvant therapy, fail with hepatic 
metastases. 
 
Locally advanced unresectable disease 
 
More often, patients present with disease that is  localized but unresectab le.  This designation 
and frequency at presentation reflects the anatom ic location of the pancreas and specifically 
the proximity to major intra-abdominal blood ve ssels.  Median survival in this group of 
patients averages 6-11 months, with some suggestion of improvement for patients treated 
with combinations of radiation and/or chemotherapy7, 8. 
 
 2Advanced metastatic disease 
 
Patients presenting with evidence of distant metast asis at diagnosis are offered treatment with 
palliative chemotherapy.  Gemcitabine has defined systemic therapy for pancreas cancer for 
most of the past decade. A pivotal st udy randomized 126 patients with advanced, 
symptomatic pancreas cancer to either weekly gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 over 30 minutes or 
weekly bolus 5FU 600 mg/m2 using clinical benefit response (CBR) as the primary 
endpoint9. The study found CBR more commonly in the gemcitabine treated patients (23.8% 
vs. 4.8%, P=0.002).  Gemcitabine also led to im proved median survival (5.6 vs. 4.4 months) 
and 1-year survival (18% vs. 2%) as compared to 5FU. Tumor response was infrequent in both arms (5.4% gemcitabine vs. 0% 5FU).  While  gemcitabine as a single agent in advanced 
pancreas cancer has utility, enthus iasm is muted considering the limited benefit it provides.    
 
Borderline resectable disease 
 
Patients with disease that falls somewhere betw een the first two categories, resectable and 
localized but unresectable, are designated as having borderline resectable  disease.  While not 
clearly unresectable, if surgery is  the initial treatment, there is  a high likelihood of an R1 or 
R2 resection with subsequent local recurrence
10-12.  Consequently, it is rational to provide 
chemotherapy and/or radiation w ith the intent of increasing th e likelihood of a subsequent 
margin negative resection.   
 
Historically, the rate of resection in bord erline resectable pancreatic cancer following 
neoadjuvant treatment is  in the range of 30%13-15.  The variable reported rates of successful 
resection can attributed to the definition of borde rline resectable disease, different approaches 
to combining chemotherapy with radiation, a nd the surgeon’s willingness and ability to 
perform vascular resection +/ - reconstruction.  As compared to R0 resection rates in 
resectable disease with up front surgery ( 60-80%),  in recent studies investigating 
neoadjuvant therapies in resectab le and borderline rese ctable disease, R0 resection rates have 
generally  been reported  in  the range of 90%, suggesting an  improvement in R0 resection 
rates following preoperative treatment 13, 14, 16, 17. Additionally, in locally  advanced borderline 
or unresectable disease, down staging with chemotherapy and radiation permitting resection 
yields survival post-surgery similar to th at achieved in upfront  resectable disease17.  This 
suggests a significant value to neoadjuvant therap y that aides in obtaini ng an R0 resection in 
borderline resectable disease.   
 
There is currently no standard therapy appro ach for borderline resectable pancreas cancer.  
The goal of this study is to improve outcomes in patients with borderlin e resectable disease 
utilizing a planned course of neoadjuvant treat ment designed to optimize R0 resection rate 
and local disease control using chemoradia tion and control of distant disease using 
combination chemotherapy. 
 
Neoadjuvant therapy 
 
In resectable pancreatic  cancer, surgery is most often the initial treatment.  The adequacy of 
that resection is questionable, however, in that a significant mi nority of patients have positive 
margins and some patients have incomplete resection (R 2 resections)18, 19.  Median survivals 
in patients with R 1 or R 2 resections are no different than that observed with non-operative 
 3therapy.  Patients deemed to have borderline resectable disease are at even higher risk for a 
margin positive resection if treated initially with surgery.  A reasonable strategy to address 
this problem is neoadjuvant therapy to try to increase resectability12.  We have successfully 
and safely resected patients following gemcitabine based chemoradiotherapy20-22.  Compared 
with adjuvant therapy, neoadjuvant therapy has the potential advantage of an improved 
tolerance of combined modality treatment preoperatively, and a greater proportion of patients 
receiving all components of multimodality therap y completed over a shorter time interval.  
As many as 30% of resected patients fail to receive post-operative adjuvant therapy because 
of inadequate recovery from su rgery or patient refusal.  Treatment delays following surgery 
may impact efficacy of adjuvant treatment.  In the ESPAC adjuvant trial, the median time to 
initiation of postoperative chemotherapy was 46 days and for combined modality treatment 61 days
4.  Neoadjuvant treatment provides a more timely systemic therapy.  Finally, patients 
that progress during neoadjuvant therapy have biologically aggre ssive disease and are spared 
a major operation which provides no benefit.   
 
There are barriers to neoadjuvant treatment.   These include biliary obstruction with a 
requirement for decompression of the biliary syst em, as well as a need to confirm diagnosis 
prior to treatment.  Practical barriers to neoadjuvant therapy in this diseas e also include 
emotion, a desire by the patient and caregivers to have the tumor removed “before it’s too 
late.” Data do not support the concern of di sease becoming unresectable during neoadjuvant 
therapy. Reports from two consecutive neoadjuva nt trials from MD Anderson describe only 
one isolated local progression in more than 150 patients13, 23.  
 
Optimization of local disease control using chemoradiation  
In order to optimize local control of disease in borderline pancreas cancer, chemoradiation 
can be given neoadjuvantly.  Chemoradiati on for pancreas cancer has historically 
incorporated 5-fluorouracil.  Gemcitabine has gr eater systemic efficacy than 5-fluorouracil in 
pancreas cancer and is a potent radiosensitizer.  Therefore, ge mcitabine has been evaluated in 
combination with radiation therapy using conf ormal radiation techni ques.  Early studies 
using gemcitabine with radiation were hampered by limitations in radiation and or 
gemcitabine dose based on regional toxicity and poor distant disease control due to 
suboptimal doses of gemcitabine
24, 25.  Beginning in 1997, gemcitabine-based chemoradiation 
has been developed at the University of Michig an with a fundamentally different approach.  
Full dose gemcitabine is used to capitalize on maximal systemic efficacy and laboratory data 
that demonstrate maximum radiosensitization when cytotoxic concentrations of drug are 
used26.  Locoregional toxicity has been addressed by limiting the radiation field to the 
primary tumor alone and titrating the radiation do se.  Over the subsequent decade, the advent 
of IMRT has allowed further escalation of ra diation dose delivered to tumor.  We are 
currently nearing completion of a phase I/II trial in patients  with localized unresectable 
disease evaluating escalating dos es of radiation delivered by  IMRT with fixed-dose rate 
gemcitabine 1000mg/m2.  Based on preliminary results of efficacy and tolerability, we have 
selected a radiation dose of 50G y delivered by IMRT in combination with gemcitabine given 
by fixed-dose rate.  Among 50 patients with unres ectable disease treated with this protocol, 
10 were able to undergo resection with a 90% R0 resection rate suggesting significant efficacy in obtaining local control with this regimen. 
 
Fixed-dose rate gemcitabine 
 4 
Gemcitabine has traditionally been given as a rapid infusi on over 30 minutes.  However, 
accumulation of active phosphorylated metabolites of gemcitabine is dependent on infusion 
rate and can be optimized at a rate of 10mg/m2/min27.  Translation of increased active 
metabolite delivered by this fixed dose rate infusion to increased efficacy has been tested clinically.  A phase II tr ial comparison of 1500mg/m
2 gemcitabine delivered by fixed dose 
rate with 2,200mg/m2 given over 30 minutes yielded a median survival of 8 months vs. 5 
months, respectively ( p=.013)28.  A larger phase III trial compared gemcitabine 1500mg/m2 
given at a fixed dose rate with or without oxaliplatin (two sepa rate arms) were compared to a 
single control arm of gemcitabine 1000mg/m2 given over 30 minutes.  Patients that received 
gemcitabine by fixed dose rate had an approximate ly 1-month increase in overall survival but 
this did not reach statistical significance29.   
 
Optimization of distant disease control using chemotherapy 
 
Gemcitabine has been the cornerstone of systemic therapy for pancreas cancer over this past 
decade.  Recently, a combination of 5-fluorouracil, irinotecan and oxaliplatin 
(FOLFIRINOX) was reported to ha ve significant efficacy in a dvanced pancreatic cancer.  
Preclinical data suggests synergy between irin otecan and 5FU as well as between oxaliplatin 
and 5FU.  Results of a phase II trial in adva nced disease were reported in 2005 demonstrating 
a 26% confirmed response rate and me dian overall survival of 10.2 months30.  A follow-up 
phase III trial comparing FOLFIRINOX with gemc itabine for patients <75 years of age with 
advanced pancreatic cancer was presented at  ASCO 2010 revealing improvement in PFS (6.4 
vs. 3.3 months, p=<.0001) and improved dis ease control rate ( CR+PR+SD) (70.2% vs. 
50.9%, p=.0003).  The most notable result was an  impressive improvement in median overall 
survival with FOLFIRINOX compared to gemcitabine (11.1vs 6.8 months, p-value = <.0001, 
HR=.57).  The main toxicity was grade 3/4 neutropenia (45.7% vs. 18.7%, p=.0001) and 
increased risk of febrile ne utropenia (5.4% vs. 0.6%, p=.009)31.  
 
We hypothesize that the combination of the FOLFIRINOX regimen to provide maximal 
systemic disease control and FDR-gemcitabine  with concurrent IM RT to address local 
disease, will achieve a significant improvement R0 resection rate in borderline resectable 
pancreatic cancer and enhance disease free and overall surviv al in this patient population. 
 
3.0 PATIENT SELECTION  
 
3.1 Eligibility Criteria 
 
 3.1.1 Patients must have cytologic or histologic confirmation of carcinoma  
arising in the pancreas.  Patients with neuroendocrine tumors are excluded.  
 3.1.2  Patients must be deemed to have bo rderline resectable disease (as defined  
in Table 1 below, adapted from NCCN  Practice Guidelines in Oncology – 
v.2.2010) with no radiologic evidence of distant metastatic disease prior to 
registration. Specifically, patie nts must have at least one designation of borderline 
resectable and no designati on of unresectable disease. 
 
 3.1.3 Patients must have a life expect ancy of at least 12 weeks, a  
 5Zubrod performance status of < 1 and be willing and medically able to undergo 
surgical resection. 
 
 3.1.4 Patients must have adequate organ function defined as follows: absolute  
neutrophil count of > 1500/mm3, platelets > 100,000/mm3, serum Cr < 1.5 
mg/dl, total bilirubin < 2.0 mg/dl with relief of biliary obstruction if  present (PTC tube or endobiliary stent). 
  3.1.5 Patients must be free of other active systemic malignancy, ongoing  
infection, or any other serious unc ontrolled, concomitant systemic  
disorders or psychiatric condition that  would interfere with the safe  
delivery of protocol therapy. 
  3.1.6 Patients with preexisting peripheral neuropathy > grade 2 are ineligible. 
  3.1.7 Pregnant or nursing women are inel igible and patients of reproductive  
potential must agree to use an effective contraceptive method during  participation in this tria l due to the unacceptable te ratogenic toxicity of  
abdominal radiation and cytotoxic chemotherapy. 
  3.1.8 Patients must be aware of the investigational nature of the therapy and 
provide written informed consent.  
 3.1.9 Patients must have no history of pr evious chemotherapy for pancreatic  
cancer or any abdominal  radiation therapy. 
 
 3.1.10 Patients may not have used any inves tigational agent with in 4 weeks prior  
 to enrollment into the study. 
 
Table 1 
SMV/PV: no contact resectable 
SMV/PV: contact <180 degrees without deformity  borderline 
SMV/PV: contact <180 degrees with deformity borderline 
SMV/PV: contact >180 degrees w/o encasement of nearby arteries borderline 
SMV/PV: vessel occlusion short segment reconstructable borderline 
SMV/PV: vessel occlusion not reconstructable unresectable 
  
SMA: no contact  resectable 
SMA: contact <180 degrees borderline 
SMA: contact >180 degrees unresectable 
   
Celiac axis: (head): no contact resectable 
Celiac axis: (head): any contact unresectable 
    
Celiac axis: (body/tail): no contact resectable 
Celiac axis: (body/tail): contact <180 degrees borderline 
Celiac axis: (body/tail): contact >180 degrees unresectable 
 6   
Hepatic artery: no contact   resectable 
Hepatic artery: contact amenable to resection or reconstructable borderline 
GDA contact > 180 degrees up to hepatic with either short segment 
encasement or direct abutment of the hepatic artery without extension to celiac axis  borderline 
Hepatic artery: contact not amenable to resection or reconstr uctable unresectable 
 
3.2  Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
 
Both men and women and members of all races and ethnic groups are eligible for this 
trial.  
 4.0 REGISTRATION PROCEDURES 
 
To register a patient a copy of eligibility checklist with supporting documents and the 
signed patient consent form will be forwarded to the responsible data manager. The data manager will verify eligibility.  To co mplete the registration process, the data 
manager will assign a patient study number, register the patient on the study and contact the treating investigator to confirm registration. 
 
5.0 TREATMENT PLAN  
 
5.1  Agent Administration 
 
Treatment will be administered on an outpatient basis.  Reported adverse events and 
potential risks for 5-Fluorouracil (5FU), ir inotecan, oxaliplatin and gemcitabine are 
described in Section 7.  Appropriate dose modificatio ns for 5FU, irinotecan, 
oxaliplatin and gemcitabine are described in Section 6.  No investigational or 
commercial agents or therapies other than those described below may be administered 
with the intent to treat the patient's malignancy.   
 
5.2 m-FOLFIRINOX 
 A cycle of treatment is 14 days. Six cycles are intended prior to combined modality treatment, although this may be modified or  shortened based on patient tolerance and 
toxicity experienced.   Starting dose levels as following:   Oxaliplatin 85mg/m
2 intravenously over 120 minutes on day 1. 
 Irinotecan 180mg/m
2 intravenously over 90 minutes on day 1.  
 
  5FU 2,400mg/m
2 infused intravenously as a continuous infusion over 46 hours 
following the bolus 5FU, beginning on day 1.  
 7A cycle of treatment may begin when ANC ≥ 1,000/mm3, platelets ≥ 75,000/ mm3 
and all other treatment related toxicity has resolved to ≤ grade 1.  
 
Dose adjustments for toxicities may be found in Section 6.3 
 
5.3 Gemcitabine during Radiation Therapy 
 
Combined modality treatment will begin approximately 3 weeks after last 
FOLFIRINOX administration provided ANC ≥ 1,000/mm3, platelets ≥ 100,000/ mm3 
and all other treatment related toxicity has resolved to ≤ grade 1.   
 Gemcitabine 1000mg/m
2 infused over 100 minutes on days 1, 8, 22, and 29 during 
the 5-week course of radiation treatment. 
 Dose adjustments for gemcitabine due to to xicity are detailed in section 6.5 and will 
be based on complete blood count the day treatment is due and non-hematologic toxicities experienced in the preceding week(s). If gemcita bine treatment is held for 
toxicity, radiation therapy will also be held and both treatments resumed when resolution of toxicity permits.   
5.4 Gemcitabine following Radiation Therapy 
 
Two cycles (infusions) of gemcitabine alone  are intended to be given, the first 21 to 
28 days following completion of combined modality treatment.  A cycle of treatment is 14 days.   A cycle of treatment may begin when ANC ≥ 
1,000/mm
3, platelets ≥ 100,000/ mm3 and all other treatment related toxicity has 
resolved to ≤ grade 1.  
 Treatment may be delayed for up to 2 weeks from time that a cycle is due, after which time that cycle of treatment will be dr opped and not made up if conditions for 
treatment are not met. 
 
Gemcitabine dosing is as follows:  Gemcitabine 1,000mg/m
2 intravenously over 100 minutes on day 1. Note: If patient 
required treatment interruption and subsequent dose reduction of gemcitabine during combined modality therapy, then starting dose for gemcitabine following radiation 
therapy will be reduced per section 6.4.   
 5.5 Radiation Treatment 
 5.5.1 Radiation Dose 
 The prescribed dose will be 50.0Gy in 2.0Gy per fraction.  Heterogeneity of -5% to 
+10% is permitted provided that normal-ti ssue constraints are met. The minimal PTV 
dose is dictated by the normal-tissue constr aints. A maximal PTV dose of up to +10% 
is permitted provided that normal-tissue constraints are met. The mean PTV dose should be as close as possible to 50 Gy. 
 8 
Intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) will be planned based on a helical CT 
obtained in the treatment position following administration of oral and double-phase 
intravenous contrast. The treatment-planning CT scan will be obtained prior to initiation of the run-in chemotherapy when ever possible. For patients in which IV 
contrast is contraindicated based on severe allergy or decreased renal function, an 
MRI scan of the abdomen or CT wit hout contrast should be performed. 
 
5.5.2 Treatment Volumes 
 The gross tumor volume (GTV) will be the pr imary tumor plus any involved regional 
lymph nodes identifiable on CT scan.  The clinical target volume (CTV) will be defined as the GTV plus 0.5 cm.  The planning target volumes (PTV) will be the CTV plus 0.5 cm.  The normal structures to be contoured ar e: left and right ki dneys, liver, stomach, 
duodenum, small intestine, spinal cord 
  
5.5.3 Breathing and target motion management 
 Management of motion is mandatory. The us e of Active Breathing Control (ABC) is 
preferred. The device should be used during acquisition of images and during treatment to reduce/eliminate breathing motion. Other acceptable methods include tracking or gating using an implanted pancrea tic fiducial. If none of these methods is 
feasible, the Radiation Oncology co-inves tigator, Dr. Edgar Ben-Josef, should be 
contacted to discuss. Rarely, other methods  may be deemed reasonable and would be 
allowed.  
5.5.4 Normal-tissue dose-volume constraints 
 
          
5.5.5 Beam Arrangement 
 The following beam arrangement is recommended.  In our experience, this arrangement results in excellent dose dist ributions that are hard to supersede. 
However, modifications are allowed if they result in a more favorable dose 
distribution. Structure Constraints 
Kidney(L & R) Max dose ≤18Gy; not more than 10% of the volume can 
be between 16 and 18Gy 
Liver Mean dose≤30 Gy; Minimize mean dose or NTCP 
Stomach Small intestine Max dose ≤ 50Gy; 25% of the volume can be between 45 
and 50Gy 
Spinal cord Max dose ≤45Gy 
Duodenum  Max dose ≤ 50Gy; not more than 33% of the volume can 
be between 45 and 50Gy 
 9 
            
5.6   Duration of Therapy 
 
Protocol treatment is defined as six cycles of FOLFIRINOX followed by gemcitabine and IMRT, then two further cycles of ge mcitabine. Surgical exploration and an 
attempt at resection will be offered to all patients unless there is evidence of distant 
metastatic disease.       
       Patients will remain on protocol therapy until completion unless;         Intercurrent illness that pr events further administration of treatment 
 
Unacceptable adverse events(s) despite protocol therapy interruption and dose modifications  
 
Patient decision to withdraw from the study 
 
General or specific changes in the pa tient's condition rendering the patient 
unacceptable for further treatment in the judgment of the investigator. 
 Development of distant metastatic  prior to surgical treatment 
 
5.7 Re-evaluation following 4 cycles  of folfirinox chemotherapy 
                  Patients will undergo rep eat imaging including CT scan (or MRI) to evaluate for 
response/disease progression. It is anticipated that the larg e majority of patients will 
proceed to two additional cycles of ch emotherapy, followed by combined radiation 
and chemotherapy after cycle 6, or if deve lopment of distant metastatic disease, 
patient will be o ff protocol therapy per Section 5.6.    
 
5.8 Re-evaluation following combined chemotherapy and radiation 
Patients will undergo repeat imaging in cluding CT scan (or MRI) 3-4 weeks 
following completion of radiation to eval uate for response/disease progression. 
Patients without evidence of distant progressi on will continue with two more cycles 
of gemcitabine alone.  If distant metastatic  disease is demonstrated, patients will be Couch Angle Gantry Angle 
0 350 
0 90 
0 30 
0 310 
90 20 
90 330 
 10off protocol per section 5.6.   
 
5.9 Re-evaluation following 2 additi onal cycles of chemotherapy 
 
 Patients will undergo repeat imaging incl uding CT scan (or MRI) scan for final 
response  evaluation and resectability.  Patients will be discussed at the multi-
disciplinary tumor conference.  Patients without evidence of distant disease will be offered surgical exploration.  Patients not offered surgery or with distant metastatic 
progressive disease will be off pr otocol treatment per section 5.6. 
 
      5.10 Surgical Therapy 
 
The surgical procedure performed will be that  required for complete resection as per 
the judgment of the operating surgeon.  Generally, surgery should take place approximately 4-6 weeks following last chemotherapy administration. If surgery is delayed, imaging within 28 days of the surger y date will be available as clinically 
indicated, to confirm no dist ant disease precluding cura tive intent resection.  
Information regarding any surgical thera py will be recorded including the operation 
performed, whether vascular resection a nd reconstruction was required, completeness 
of the resection (R
0, R1 or R 2), duration of the operation, bl ood loss, the length of stay 
and the need for re-admission within 30 days of surgery.  
 
5.11 Duration of Follow Up  
 
Following completion of protocol therapy a nd surgery, resected patients will undergo 
surveillance multi-slice spiral CT scans of abdomen at approximately 12, 18 and 24 
months from protocol entry and/or as clinic ally indicated.  Patient s will be evaluated 
with interval history and physical examina tions as well as CA 19-9 measurements at 
3 month intervals to the 24 month assessm ent.  Follow-up beyond two years will not 
be protocol directed but survival and disease free survival information will be collected.  All evaluable patients will be followed until death.  Patients removed from 
study for unacceptable adverse events will be followed until resolution or 
stabilization of the adverse event. 
 6. DOSING DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS  
 
This study will utilize the CTCAE (NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse 
Events).  Version 4.0 for toxicity and Se rious Adverse Event reporting. A copy of the 
CTCAEVersion 4.0 can be downloade d from the CTEP home page 
(http://ctep.cancer.gov ). 
 
6.1 General Considerations – m-FOLFIRINOX treatment  
a. A new cycle of treatment may begin when the ANC is ≥ 1,000/mcl, the platelet 
count is ≥ 75,000/mcl, and any treatment-related GI toxicity is resolved to ≤ 
Grade 1.  
 11b.  If the initiation of a new cycle of trea tment is delayed for > 4 weeks from date 
due secondary to toxicity, the patient w ill be removed from protocol treatment. 
 
c. Doses will not be modified for cholangitis attributable to biliary obstruction/stent 
occlusion unless this occurs in the setting of > grade 3 neutropenia.  
 
d. Dose reductions for the  agents in the m-FOLFIRINOX combination are as 
follows: 
 
 
AGENT INITIAL 
DOSE Level -1 Level -2 Level -3 
Irinotecan 180 mg/m2 140 mg/m2 110 mg/m2 90 mg/m2 
Oxaliplatin 85 mg/m2 70 mg/m2 60 mg/m2 50 mg/m2
5-FU infusion         2400 mg/m2    2000 mg/m2    1600 mg/m2  1200 mg/m2  
   
Note: laboratory abnormalities that are not directly attributable to treatment (i.e., 
hyperglycemia) or not clinically releva nt (i.e., lymphopenia) do not require 
modification of dosing.  
 Efforts to attribute toxicity experi enced to a single component or some 
combination of the cytotoxic agents w ill be made by treating investigator and 
doses of the accountable agent(s) modifi ed according to that judgment. Dose 
adjustments for toxicity will be de scribed in the clinical record.  
 Once doses are reduced for toxicity, they will not be subsequently increased.  
 An agent(s) may be discontinued (i.e., oxaliplatin for neuropathy or 
hypersensitivity) and protocol therapy continue with remaining agents.  
 Agent(s) or FOLFIRINOX comb ination therapy will be discontinued if more than 
three dose reductions for toxicity are needed.  
 
 
6.2 Supportive Care 
 White blood cell colony stimulating factor s will not be administered as primary 
prophylaxis following the first cycl e of FOLFIRINOX administration.  
 Subsequent growth factor us e will be at the discreti on of the treating physician. 
 
6.3 Dose Modifications 
 
a. Dose modifications for t oxicities during FOLFIRINOX 
 
 12i. Hematologic Toxicities 
 
 Dose Modification 
ANC <1000/mm3 And/or Platelets <75,000/mm3 Hold all chemotherapy and re-evaluate weekly. When toxicity permits, treatment will be continued with one level dose reduction of irinotecanand oxaliplatin. 
*Note: for platelets 75,000 – 99,000 continue FOLFIRINOX but reduce 
oxaliplatin one dose level     
 
Febrile Neutropenia If a patient e xperiences neutropenic fever at any 
point in the treatment cycl e, chemotherapy will be 
delayed until ANC > 1,000 and antibiotic treatment 
of the event is completed. When treatment resumes,  reduce agents one level including infusional 5FU if diarrhea and/or stomatitis are part of the adverse event profile 
    *Note: no dose reductions for anemia or lymphopenia      
ii. Diarrhea 
 
Grade Dose Modification 
3-4 Hold all chemotherapy.  When diarrhea resolves to 
<Grade 1, chemotherapy may be resumed with 
reduction in 5FU infusion and irinotecan one dose level.   
*Note: No dose reductions of oxaliplatin for diarrhea.    
   iii. Mucositis 
 
Grade Dose Modification 
3-4 Hold all chemotherapy.  If mucositis resolves to <Grade 1, chemotherapy may be resumed with 
reduction in 5FU infusion and irinotecan one dose level.   
*Note: No dose reductions of oxaliplatin for mucositis.   
 
iiii Neuropathy 
 
Grade Dose Modification 
3-4 Hold oxaliplatin.  If neur opathy resolves to <Grade 
2, oxaliplatin  may be resu med with reduction  of 
two dose levels or discontinued.   
*Note: No dose reductions for 5-FU or irinotecan  for neuropathy.   
 
6.4 Other non-hematologic toxicities attributable to 5-FU, iri notecan, and/or oxaliplatin. 
 13 
For all other ≥ Grade 3 non-hematologic toxicities attributable to treatment and 
not described above, hold all protocol tr eatment and monitor toxicity at least 
weekly. If toxicity resolves to ≤ Grade 1 within 4 weeks, treatment may resume 
with 5-FU, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin at one lower dose level. 
 
6.5 Dose modifications for toxicities during combined modality therapy 
(IMRT/Gemcitabine)  
 
Agent Initial Dose Level -1 Level -2 Level -3 
Gemcitabine* 1,000 mg/m2750 mg/m2600 mg/m2 500 mg/m2
*Note: all infusions by fixed dose rate 10 mg/m2/minute 
Gemcitabine and IMRT may begin when the ANC is ≥ 1,000/mcl, the platelet 
count is ≥ 100,000/mcl, and any treatm ent-related toxicity to folfirinox is resolved 
to ≤ Grade 1. 
 
During combined modality treatment, gemcitabine will be given days 1, 8, 22 and 29 as per UMCC 06.018.   During gemcitabine/IMRT dose of gemcitabine for days 8 and 29  will be based 
on toxicities experienced as follows: 
 
i. Hematologic toxicity - dose adjustme nts of gemcitabine will be made 
based on the ANC and platelet coun ts taken on the day of therapy. 
 For ANC ≥ 1,000 /mm3 and platelets ≥ 75,000/mm3, full dose due will be 
given  For ANC of 500- 999/mm3 and/or platelets of 50,000 to 74,999/mm3, 
50% of the gemcitabine dose due will be given.  For ANC < 500/mm3 or platelets < 50,000/mm3, gemcitabine treatment 
and radiation therapy will be held. Combined modality treatment will 
resume upon recovery to values permitting chemotherapy with one dose level reduction of gemcitabine. 
 
During combined gemcitabine/IMRT dose of gemcitabine for day 22 will be 
based on toxicities experienced as follows: 
 
ii. Hematologic toxicity - dose adjustme nts of gemcitabine will be made 
based on the ANC and platelet coun ts taken on the day of therapy. 
   For ANC ≥ 1,000 /mm3 and platelets ≥ 75,000/mm3, full dose due will be 
given  For ANC of 500- 999/mm3 and/or platelets of 50,000 to 74,999/mm3, 
75% of the gemcitabine dose due will be given. If gemcitabine is dose reduced on this day, this dose will be dose due on day 29 and starting dose 
 14of post-combined modality therapy.  
 For ANC < 500/mm3 or platelets < 50,000/mm3, gemcitabine treatment 
and radiation therapy will be held. Combined modality treatment will 
resume upon recovery to values permitting chemotherapy with one dose level reduction of gemcitabine.   
iii. Non-hematologic toxicity- Dose ad justments of chemotherapy will be 
made following assessment of non-he matologic toxicity on the day of 
therapy.  Chemotherapy will be held for ≥ Grade 3 toxicity in any organ system. If 
gemcitabine is held, radiation therapy will also be held while appropriate 
physical, laboratory, radiologic assessme nts are undertaken to define cause 
and direct supportive therapy. Treatm ent may be resumed upon recovery 
to toxicity < grade 2 at the discre tion of the physician investigator. 
 
iv. If combined modality therapy is interrupted, when resumed, chemotherapy 
will be given on the first day of the next week of radiation therapy with Gemcitabine dose reduced one level to complete the treatment cycle. A maximum of four doses of chemothera py will be given during the course 
of radiation therapy. 
 
6.6 Dose Modification for Gemcitabine following Radiation Therapy 
 There will be no modification of doses fo r these two cycles (infusions). The dose 
level of gemcitabine will be that given on day 22 of combined modality treatment, unless treatment had to be interrupted on or before day 29 for toxicity, in which 
case the investigator may choose to furt her reduce gemcitabine one dose level. 
 A cycle of treatment is 14 days.   A cycle of treatment may begin when ANC ≥ 
1,000/mm
3, platelets ≥ 100,000/ mm3 and all other treatment related toxicity has 
resolved to ≤ grade 1.  
 
Treatment may be delayed for up to 2 w eeks after which time that cycle of 
treatment will be dropped and not made up if  conditions for treatment are not met. 
 Protocol therapy may be shortened and patient may go directly to surgery 
following combined modality therapy in a scenario where toxicities and/or response and resectability suggest surgery as  in the best intere st of the patient.  
 
 7. ADVERSE EVENTS:  LIST AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS   
7.1 Comprehensive Adverse Events and Potential Risks Lists (CAEPRs)  
7.1.1 Adverse Event Lists for Commercial Agents 
 
 15a. 5FU - Please refer to package insert for comprehensive list of adverse 
events.  Side effects include a norexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
gastrointestinal ulceration and bleeding, nosebleed, stomatitis, esophagopharyngitis, alopecia, myel osuppression, maculopapular 
eruptions, dermatitis, fingernail changes, dry skin, hyperpigmentation, photosensitization, palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia  syndrome as 
manifested by tingling of the hands and feet followed by pain, erythema 
and swelling, acute cerebellar syndrom e including ataxia, dizziness, and 
slurred speech; visual changes, lacrimation, uncontrolled eye movements, headache, myocardial ischemia, thrombophlebitis, angina, anaphylaxis, generalized allergic reaction, diso rientation, confusion and euphoria. 
 
b. Irinotecan - Please refer to package insert for comprehensive list of 
adverse events.  Virtually all Phase I and II studies of irinotecan have 
reported neutropenia and diarrhea as the dose-limiting toxicities. It is 
expected that these toxici ties will also be encountered  in this trial. Other 
Grade 2-3 toxicities seen incl ude nausea and vomiting, anorexia, 
abdominal cramping, cumulative asthenia, thrombocytopenia, renal insufficiency, increase in transaminase level and hair loss. Sporadic cases of pulmonary toxicity, manifested  as shortness of breath and 
nonproductive cough, have also been reported. 
 
c. Oxaliplatin - Please refer to package insert for comprehensive list of adverse events.  The most common t oxicities associated with oxaliplatin 
include fatigue, neutropenia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and neuropathy.  An acute, reversible, primarily peri pheral, sensory neuropathy of early 
onset and exacerbated by cold exposure is recognized.  An acute syndrome of pharyngolaryngeal dysesthesia is seen in 1-2% of patients characterized by subjective sensation of dysphagia or dyspnea.  A persistent primarily peripheral, cumulative dose sens ory neuropathy characterized by 
parasthesias, dysesthesias, hypoesthesias  and deficits in proprioception is 
also seen.  Anaphylactic-like reactions  have been reported and may occur 
within minutes of oxaliplatin administra tion.  Fever, pain at the site of 
infusion, dehydration and electrolyte disturbances are not uncommon.  
Much less commonly, pulmonary fi brosis, renal dysfunction, and 
hemolytic-uremic syndrome have been reported. 
 
d. Gemcitabine - Please refer to packag e insert for comprehensive list of 
adverse events.  Myelosuppression is the principal dose-limiting factor 
with gemcitabine therapy includi ng leukopenia, thrombocytopenia and 
anemia.  Non-hematologic toxicities include reversible hepatic enzyme 
elevations, gastrointestinal toxi city (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
stomatitis), fever in the absence of infection, flu-like syndrome, rash, and peripheral edema.  Rarely hemolytic-uremic syndrome, drug-induced pneumonitis and sepsis have been reported.   
 
e. Pregnancy and Lactation: Chemotherapy has been shown to cross the placenta and enter into fetal circula tion in the rat. Administration of 
 16chemotherapy has resulted in increased  resorptions and embryolethality in 
rats. Also, in monkeys, chemothera py results in abortion of embryos 
exposed. Because chemotherapy inhibits DNA, RNA and protein 
synthesis, adverse effects on peri and postnatal development might be 
expected and mothers should not nur se while receiving these drugs. 
 
 
7.2 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events 
 
All serious, unexpected adverse events possibly related to treatment should be reported as 
soon as possible and no later than 7 cale ndar days of knowledge  of the event. 
  
A serious adverse event is one that meets any of the following criteria: 
 
 death 
 initial or prolonged inpatient hospitalization 
 life-threatening 
 severe or permanent disability 
 congenital anomaly 
 is significant or unexpected for other reason  
 
The following adverse events ar e excluded from SAE reporting: 
 
Death > 30 days beyond protocol therapy completion where death of a patient is 
due to progression of the patient's cancer 
 
  Hospitalization under the following circumstances: 
   
  Hospitalization is secondary to expected cancer morbidity:  
- Admission for palliative care or pain management 
- Admission for management of biliary obstruction, or cholangitis 
- Admission for management of deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism. 
   
Planned hospitalizations fo r surgical procedures.  
 
Morbidity or mortality from surgi cal exploration and/or resection.  
 
Common toxicities observed secondary to therapy, progressive disease and events 
secondary to progressive di sease are generally excluded from reporting. However, in 
cases where the specificity or severity of an event is not consistent with the risk 
information, the event should be reported.  
 
 17The University of Michigan will report une xepected, possibly, probably and definitely 
related to treatment SAEs to FDA, as appropriate.  
 
Safety 
 
US Regulations require that a sponsor reports Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) occurring with use of its product in a clinical  trial if it is unexpected, and felt to be related to use of the drug. During 
the conduct of Investigator Initia ted Trials (IITs), all SAEs that  occur will be evaluated by the 
investigator for reportability to FDA. An Adve rse Event should be identified, Serious Adverse 
Event and Expectedness determined and causalit y assessed by the investigator using the 
definitions that follow:  
 
Definitions  
An Adverse Event  is any untoward medical occurrenc e in a patient administered a 
pharmaceutical product and which does not necessari ly have to have a causal relationship with 
the treatment. 
 A Serious Adverse Event is any untoward medical occu rrence that at any dose:  
 Results in death, or 
 Is life-threatening, or 
 Requires in-patient hospitalization or pr olongation of existing hospitalization, or 
 Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or 
 Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or 
 Is a medically important event: 
 Medical and scientific judgment should be exer cised in deciding whether expedited reporting is 
appropriate in other situations, such as importa nt medical events that may not be immediately 
life-threatening or result in death or hospitaliza tion but may jeopardize the patient or may require 
intervention to prevent one of the other outco mes listed in the definition above. These should 
also usually be considered serious.  Examples of such events are intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home for allergic 
bronchospasm; blood dyscrasias, convulsions that do not resu lt in hospitalization, or 
development of drug dependency or drug abuse.  Note: The term "life-threatening" in the definition  of "Serious Adverse Event" refers to an event 
in which the patient was at risk of death at the time of the event; it does not refer to an event that 
hypothetically might have caused d eath if it were more severe. 
An Unexpected Adverse Event is not listed in the current Clinical Investigator’s Brochure 
(CIB) / Package Insert or an even t that may be mentioned in the CIB / Package Insert, but differs 
from the event because of greater severity or specificity.  
For comparative drugs, expectedness is determined by using the pertinent reference text: 
the US Package Insert.  
Causality  is a determination of whether there is a r easonable possibility that the drug may have 
 18caused or contributed to an a dverse event. It includes asse ssing temporal relationships 
dechallenge/rechallenge information, associati on (or lack of association) with underlying 
diseases, and the presence (or absence) or a lack of one or more likely causes. 
 
Pregnancy Guidance 
 
During the course of the trial, a ll female patients of childbearing pot ential should be instructed to 
contact the treating physicia n immediately if they suspect they  might have conceived a child. In 
addition, a missed or late menstrual period shou ld be reported to the treating physician. If a 
female patient, or an investigat or, suspects a pregnancy prior to  administration of study drugs, 
the study drugs must be withheld un til the results of  a pregnancy test are av ailable. If pregnancy 
is confirmed the patient must not receive study medications and must be withdrawn from the 
study.  Throughout the entire pregnancy, additional contact should be made with the patient, and in some cases with the healthcare provider, to  identify spontaneous abortions and elective 
terminations, as well as any medical reasons for elective termination. In addition, the study 
investigator should include pe rinatal and neonatal outcome. In fants should be followed for a 
minimum of 8 weeks.   If a male patient is suspected of having fath ered a child while on study drugs, the pregnant 
female partner must be notified and counseled re garding the risk to the fetus. In addition, the 
treating physician must follow th e course of the pregnancy, in cluding prenatal and neonatal 
outcome. Infants should be followe d for a minimum of 8 weeks.  
 Upon live-birth delivery, minimum information that  should be collected includes date of birth, 
length of pregnancy, sex of infant, major and minor  anomalies identified at birth. Outcomes can 
be obtained via mailed questionnaires, maternal interviews, medical record abstraction, or a 
combination of these methods.  
 
8. PHARMACEUTICAL INFORMATION 
 
A list of the adverse events and potential risks associated with commercial agents administered in this study can be found in Section 7.1.  8.1 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) 
 Please refer to the FDA-approved package insert for additional information.  a. Description – 5-FU is an antimetabolite consid ered to act primarily as an inhibitor of 
thymidylate synthase.   
b. Pharmaceutical Data –  Kinetics: After IV injection, it is distributed widely 
throughout the tissues of the body and diffuses readily across the blood-brain barrier. 
The mean half-life of elimination from plasma is 16 minutes. Drug is primarily 
metabolized by the liver.  Formulation: 5-FU  is a colorless to faint yellow solution 
supplied in 10 ml single use vials. Each 10 ml contains 500 mg fluorouracil. The pH 
is adjusted to approximately  9.2 with sodium hydroxide. 
 
 19c.  Administration –  Intravenous. 
 
d. Storage and Stability - : Store unopened vial s at room temperature and protect from 
light. 
 e. Supplier – 5-FU is commercially available. 
 
8.2 Irinotecan (CPT-11) 
   Please refer to the FDA-approved package insert for additional information. 
 
a. Description –  Irinotecan hydrochloride tri hydrate [CPT- 1 1, (4S)-4, 1 1- diethyl-4-
hydroxy-9-[(4-piperidinopiperi dino) carbonyloxy] -IHpyroano [3',4':6, 7l indolzino [1 
,2-bl quino line-3, 14(4H, l2H) dione hydrochloride trihydrat e] is a topoisomerase I 
inhibitor.  
b. Pharmaceutical Data  – Pharmacokinetics: Several studies describing the 
pharmacokinetic characteristics of irinotecan  (CPT-11) and its active metabolite, SN-
38, when administered alone or in combinati on with other agents (including cisplatin) 
in patients with small cell or non-small cell lung cancer have been reported in 
published literature. CPT- 11 is converted by carboxylesterases to its more active metabolite, SN-38. In vitro, SN-38 is 250 to 1,000 fold more potent than CPT-11 in the inhibition of topoisomerase I activit y. A reversible, pH-dependent hydrolysis 
converts the closed lactone E ring form  of both CPT-11 and SN-38 to the open, 
carboxylate form of each compound. Only the closed ring (lactone) forms of CPT-11 and SN-38 are effective topoisomerase I inhibitors. The mean term inal half-life of 
SN-38 in plasma is slightly longer than  that for CPT-11; 11.5 ± 3.8 hours versus 6.3 ± 
2.2 hours for the lactone forms. Peak plasma concentrations for CPT-11 occur at the end of the infusion. The time to peak fo r SN-38 is highly inter-patient dependent 
occurring at variable times points 30 to 90 minutes after the end of infusion. Murine 
studies suggest that the li ver may concentrate, convert CPT-11 to SN-38, and 
eliminate both compounds as well as the glucuronide conjugate of SN-38 (SN-38G) 
via biliary secretion. In rats, 55% of radiolabeled CP T-11 was excreted unchanged in 
the bile within 24 hours, while 21.7% was transformed to SN-38. It recently was 
demonstrated that plasma concentrations of  SN-38G in patients occur 0.5 to 3 hr after 
the SN38 peak and plasma levels generally exceeded that of SN-38. Overall, 73% of 
the radioactivity could be recovered from th e feces of rats and 25% from the urine.  
Bile concentrations of CPT-11 were 10 to 60 fold higher than plasma concentrations 
in one patient during the first 6 hour s following administration, while bile 
concentrations of SN-38 were 2 to 9 fo ld higher. Renal clearance has not been 
reported to be a major route of elimination for these compounds in humans. Formulation: The drug is supplied as 20 mg/mL solution in 2, 5, 25 mL vials. 
 
c. Administration –  Irinotecan must be diluted prior to administration in D5W (preferred) or 0.9% sodium chloride to a final concentration of between 0.12 to 0.28 
mg/mL. When diluted in D5W, and stored re frigerated (at 2-8C) protected from light, 
the solution is physically and chemically stable for 48 hours. Irinotecan is infused 
intravenously over 90 minutes. Other drugs should not be added to the bag. 
 
 20d. Storage and Stability - Irinotec an vials must be stored at room temperature (15-30° C) 
protected from light. Irinotecan is stable for 24 hours in glass bottles or plastic bags 
after reconstitution with D5W. 
 
e. Supplier – Irinotecan is commercially available. 
 
 
8.3 Oxaliplatin 
  Please refer to the FDA-approved package insert for additional information. 
 a. Description – Oxaliplatin (c is-[(1R,2R )-1,2-cyclohexanediamine- N,N ] [oxalate(2-)- 
O,O ] is an organoplatinum complex in whic h the platinum atom is complexed with 
1,2-diaminocyclohexane with an oxalate  ligand as a leaving group. Oxaliplatin 
undergoes nonenzymatic conversion in physio logic solutions to active derivatives by 
displacement of the labile oxalate liga nd.  Several reactive species are formed 
including the monoaquo and diaquo DACH platinum which covalently bind with 
macromolecules.  Crosslinks are formed between adjacent guanine N7 positions. 
These crosslinks inhibit DNA replication, transcription and repair.  Reactive 
oxaliplatin derivatives are present as a fraction of unbound platinum in plasma 
ultrafiltrate.  The decline of  platinum levels following oxaliplatin administration is 
triphasic, characterized by two short distribution phases (t1/2(alpha) 0.43 hrs, t1/2 
(beta) 16.8 hrs) and a long terminal phase (t1/2 (gamma) 391 hrs).  At the end of a 2 
hour infusion approximately 15% of the ad ministered platinum is present in the 
systemic circulation with the remaining 85% rapidly distributed into tissues or 
eliminated in urine.  The major route of elimination is renal excretion and the renal clearance of ultrafilterable platinum is significantly correlated with GFR.   
 
b. Pharmaceutical Data– Oxaliplatin is supplied as a sterile, preservative free, aqueous 
solution in clear glass singl e-use vials containing 50 mg, 100 mg or 200 mg of 
oxaliplatin at a concentration of 5 mg/ml. Th e solution must be further diluted in 250-
500 ml 5% dextrose for injection and is stable up to 24 hours under refrigeration or for 6 hours at room temperature. Needles or IV infusion sets containing aluminum 
must not be used.   
 c. Administration – Intravenous. 
 d. Storage and Stability –Store aqueous soluti on at 25o C; excursions permitted to 15-
30
oC. Do not freeze and protect from light  (keep in original outer carton). 
 e. Supplier – Oxaliplatin is commercially available 
  
 
8.4 Gemcitabine  
  Please refer to the FDA-approved package insert for additional information. 
 a. Description – Gemcitabine hydrochloride (2’,2’-difluoro-2’deoxycytidine) is a 
deoxycytidine analog with structural and metabolic similarities to cytarabine. 
 21Gemcitabine is metabolized intracellularl y by nucleoside kinases to active di- and 
triphosphate nucleosides.  The active nuc leosides interfere with ribonucleotide 
reductase and compete with dCTP for inco rporation into DNA, respectively, resulting 
in inhibition of DNA synt hesis. Gemcitabine pharmacokinetics are linear and are 
described by a two compartment model.  Half-life varies with age, gender, and 
infusion length; for a short infusion it is gene rally less than 70 minut es.  Nearly all of 
an administered dose is recovered in the urine as active drug (<10%) or inactive uracil 
metabolite.  The maximum plasma concentrations of the inactive metabolite are achieved 30 minutes after discontinuation of  the infusions, and the metabolite is 
excreted in the urine without undergoing fu rther biotransformation.  The metabolite 
does not accumulate with weekly dosing, but  its elimination is dependent on renal 
excretion, and could accumulate wi th decreased renal function. 
 
b. Pharmaceutical Data – Gemcitabine is supplied as a lyophilized powder in sterile vials containing 200 mg or 1 g of gemcita bine as the hydrochloride salt, with 
mannitol and sodium acetate. To reconstitu te, add 5 mL of sodium chloride 0.9% 
injection to the 200 mg vial or 25 mL of sodium chloride 0.9% injection to the 1 g vial to a concentration of 38mg/mL. The appropriate amount of drug may be 
administered as prepared or further dilu ted with 0.9% sodium chloride solution or 
dextrose 5% solution to concentrations as low as 0.1 mg/mL. Gemcitabine 0.1 and 10 
mg/mL solutions diluted with sodium chlo ride 0.9% injectio n or dextrose 5% 
injection are chemically stable for up to  35 days at room temperature or under 
refrigeration when stored in polyvinyl chloride bags.
 Because these solutions contain 
no preservative, they should be used  within 24 hours of preparation.  
 c. Administration – Intravenous  infusion over 100 minutes. 
 d. Storage and Stability – Store at  controlled room temperature. 
 
 
e. Supplier – Gemcitabine is commercially available 
 
 229.0 STUDY CALENDAR  
 
Baseline evaluations are to be conducted within 2 week s prior to start of protocol therapy.  
Scans and x-rays must be done within  4 weeks of start of therapy.   
     
Pre- 
Study  
Cycles 
1-4  
Re-Eval Cycles 
5-6 Chemo 
XRT Re-Eval Cycles 
7-8 Re-Eval  
Surgery Post 
 
Performance Status  
X  
X  
X X X X X X  
 X 
 
History/Physical  
X  
X  
X X X X X X  
 X 
 
CBC,diff, pltsa  
X  
X  
X X X X X X  
 X 
 
Serum Chemistryb  
X  
X  
X X X X X X  
 X 
 
Ca 19-9  
X  
  
X    X  X  
 X 
 
Urine/serum pregnancyc  
X  
  
       
  
 
CT chest/abdomend  
X  
  
X   X  X  
 X 
 
Tumor Measurement  
X  
  
X   X  X  
  
 
  
   
      
  
 Surgery    
      
E  
 
Radiation   
  
   B     
  
5FU, Irinotecan, 
Oxaliplatin   
A  
A     
 
Gemcitabine   
  
  C  D   
  
Toxicity Evaluation   
X X X X X X X  
 X 
 
a prior to chemotherapy administration, at re-eva luation visits and per post treatment follow-up 
b comprehensive chemistry panel to include  albumin, alkaline phosphatase, ALT or AST, 
glucose, total bilirubin, cr eatinine and electrolytes 
c in women of childbearing potential only 
d at intervals post treatme nt noted in section 5.11 
 A  FOLFIRINOX section 5.2 B  IMRT section 5.5 C  FDR-gemcitabine section 5.3 D  FDR-gemcitabine section 5.4 E  Surgical exploration/ resection see section 5.10 
 Post therapy follow-up at 3-month intervals through 2 years. All times are approximate. 
 
 
 2310. MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT  
 
10.1Primary Tumor Response 
 
Diagnostic imaging and RECIST criteria will be used to evaluate and record response 
of the primary tumor as defined below. 
 
Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of  measurable and evaluable disease 
without the appearance of any new lesions. 
 
Partial Response (PR):  At least 30% decrease in the LD  of the primary lesion without 
the appearance of any new lesions. 
 
Progression (PD):  At least 20% increase in the LD of the primary lesion or the 
appearance of one or more new lesions  
 
Stable Disease (SD):  Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor sufficient 
increase to qualify for PD. 
 
10.2 Surgical Data  
 
 The following information regarding any surgical therapy wi ll be recorded.  
 
Operation performed 
             Standard Whipple (pancreaticoduodenectomy) 
            Pyloric-preserving Whipple 
             Total Pancreatectomy   Distal Subtotal Pancreatectomy 
Any of above with vascular resection and reconstruction 
   
Exploratory laparoto my (no resection) 
  With gastric bypass   With biliary bypass   With both  
Duration of operation, Blood loss, Complete resection  
 
Pathologic findings; Tumor size, Grade, Nodal status 
 Microscopic assessment of margins,  including retroperitoneal margin  
(R
0 vs. R 1 vs. R 2 ) 
 
Length of Stay, Need for re-admission within 30 days of discharge 
 
10.3Assessment of Pathologic Response  
 
The surgical pathology slides  will be reviewed at th e Department of Pathology, 
University of Michigan Hospital.  All hist ologic slides from surgical resections 
will be reviewed by a single pathologist and assessment of therapeutic response 
 24will be graded using a system previously described by Evans et al as per the table 
below.  
 
 Grade Histologic Appearance            
 
 I  Characteristic cytologic changes of malignancy are present, 
but very little (<10%) or no tumo r cell destruction is evident 
  
 II  In addition to characte ristic cytologic changes of 
malignancy, 10%-90% of tumor cells are destroyed   
 IIa  Destruction of 10%-50% of tumor cells 
 IIb  Destruction of 51%-90% of tumor cells 
 III  Few (<10%) viable-appeari ng tumor cells are present   
 IIIM Sizable pools of mucin are present  IV  No viable tumor cells are present    IVM Acellular pools of mucin are present  
 
11. DATA REPORTING / REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS  
 
Adverse event lists, guidelines , and instructions for AE reporting can be found in Section 
7.0 (Adverse Events: List and Reporting Requirements). 
 
11.1Study Monitoring 
 
a. Study Forms - University of Michigan will maintain on-study forms, eligibility 
checklists, flow sheets and off-study forms fo r each patient entered in the study database 
 
b. Data and Safety Monitoring Committee 
 
  Composition of the Committee 
This committee will be comprised of the Principal Investigator , co-Investigators (if 
available) and data manager, the Study C oordinator and the prot ocol's Statistician. 
   Scheduled Meetings  
The committee will hold mont hly data and safety monitoring meetings. Participants 
will include, whenever possible, the investig ator(s), data manager, and statistician. 
Minutes from these meetings will be submitted to the Cancer Center DSMB. 
 
12. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
12.1Study Design/Endpoints   
 
 Definition of primary endpoint 
 
Any eligible patient who receives at leas t one dose of chemothe rapy according to the 
protocol will be considered  evaluable for the primary study endpoint.  R0 resection 
will be defined as gross total resection w ith pathology review demonstrating margins 
negative for microscopic disease.  
 25 
12.2Definition of secondary endpoints 
 
Progression-Free Survival: Time from date of  registration to the date of documented 
progressive disease, developm ent of distant metastatic di sease, non-protocol disease 
related therapy, death, or recurrence followi ng surgical resection whichever occurs 
first.  Patients who experience therapy re lated death will be considered to have 
experienced a PFS-event. Otherwise, the pati ent will be considered censored at last 
follow-up. 
 
Overall Survival: Time from date of regist ration to date of  death or last follow up 
whichever occurs first.  Death regardless of  cause will be considered an event.    
Otherwise, the patient will be cons idered censored at last follow-up. 
 
Toxicity: Toxicity encountered during the study will be evaluated using the NCI 
Common Toxicity Criteria Version 4.0.  Patients receiving any treatment will be 
evaluable for toxicity. 
 
12.3Sample Size/Accrual Rate 
 
Thirty-one patients meeting eligibility crit eria will be accrued and treated on this 
clinical trial.  The sample size is based upon the statistical testing of the primary study 
hypothesis, the R0 resection rate follow ing the neoadjuvant treatment regimen.  
Previous clinical experience treating borderl ine resectable pancreatic cancer patients 
with chemotherapy and chemoradiotherapy in  the neoadjuvant se tting yielded a 30% 
R0 rate at time of surgery.  With the addition of the FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy 
regimen, we hope to improve the R0 rate to  55%.  Thirty-one patients are necessary 
to test that hypothesis using a two-sided te st with 5% type I e rror and 20% type II 
error (80% power).   The University of Michigan historically  sees 400 new patient 
consultations for pancreatic cancer per year .  Between 10 and 15% of those patients 
are  deemed to have borderline resectable disease. We therefore anticipate between 40 
and 60 patients per year will be eligible for this protocol.  Due to dismal survival rates 
in this lethal disease and the lack of a widely accepted standard of care, it is our 
experience that patients have strong interest in participati ng in clinical trials.  Given 
that we have no competing trial for this patient population, we anticipate completing 
accrual to this study in 62 months.  
12.4Analysis of Endpoints  
Analytic plan for primary objective:   Since the primary study endpoint will be 
determined in some patients only after several months, halting enrollment for formal interim outcome monitoring will result in  significant gaps in accrual and increase 
total study duration.  We, therefore, plan to  enroll in a single stage, 31 patients 
evaluable for the primary endpoint. The R0 rate and exact 90% binomial confidence 
interval will be reported.    Analytic plan for secondary objectives : Progression-Free Survival and Overall 
Survival as a function of time since enro llment will be estimated according to the 
method of Kaplan andMeier
32. 
 26 
Toxicity - The proportion of treated patie nts experiencing any c linically significant 
(Grade 3 or worse) toxicity will be determin ed; specific toxicities of all grades will be 
tabulated.   
  
12.5Interim stopping rules:  It is  important for the utility of this treatment regimen, that 
neoadjuvant FOLFIRINOX be tolerated, as to  not delay initiating chemoradiation and 
surgery.  Although some chemotherapy treatment related delays are expected, as outlined 
in Section 6, a high proportion of patien ts should complete adjuvant FOLFIRINOX 
chemotherapy on schedule.  We expect, that at  least 2/3 (66.7%) of patients should begin 
cycle 3, day 1 (C3D1) of neoadjuvant FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy between days 29 
and 43 on protocol (days from C1D1).  In order to assess this expectation, we will 
conduct an interim analysis for chemothe rapy delay after 15 patients (approximately 
50% of our required sample size) have been tr eated on trial.  If less than 7 patients have 
received D1C3 by day 43 on protocol, we will cl ose the trial to new accrual.  If 7 or 
more patients have reached the D1C3 treatment milestone, then the trial will continue 
until 31 evaluable patients have  been treated on study.  The stopping-rule is based upon 
the exact binomial confidence interval.  Wh en 6 or fewer patients can reach this 
treatment milestone, the 90% confiden ce interval excludes 66.7%, our minimum 
expectation.  The following table indicates the probability the trial will stop due to this 
rule for various levels for the true probabil ity of reaching the C3D1 treatment milestone. 
 
Probability of patients having C3D1 by day 43 Probability of stopping at interim analysis 
0.35 0.75 
0.40 0.61 
0.45 0.45 
0.50 0.30 
0.55 0.18 
0.60 0.10 
0.65 0.04 
0.70 0.02 
 
12.6Reporting and Exclusions 
 
Evaluation of toxicity - All patients will be evaluable for toxicity from the time of their 
first treatment with protocol therapy. 
 
Evaluation of response - Patients will be ev aluable for the primary endpoint if they 
receive any protocol therapy.  Patients w ill remain evaluable for the primary endpoint 
regardless of any reason for discontinuation from the protocol in cluding but not limited 
to: death, withdrawal due to toxi city, and voluntary withdrawal.   
 
 
 27REFERENCES 
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Can cer statistics, 2008. CA Cancer J Clin 2008;58:71-
96. 
2. Further evidence of effective adjuvant co mbined radiation and chemotherapy following 
curative resection of pancreatic cancer . Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Cancer 
1987;59:2006-10. 3. Klinkenbijl JH, Jeekel J, Sahmoud T, et al. Adjuvant radi otherapy and 5-fluorouracil after 
curative resection of cancer of the pancreas and periampullary region: phase II I trial of the 
EORTC gastrointestinal trac t cancer cooperative group. Ann Su rg 1999;230:776-82; discussion 
82-4. 4. Neoptolemos JP, Stocken DD, Friess H, et al. A randomized trial of chemoradiotherapy 
and chemotherapy after resec tion of pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;350:1200-10. 
5. Spitz FR, Abbruzzese JL, Lee JE, et al. Pr eoperative and postoperative chemoradiation 
strategies in patients treated with pancreaticoduodenectomy for adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. 
J Clin Oncol 1997;15:928-37. 6. Yeo CJ, Abrams RA, Grochow LB, et al . Pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma: postoperative adjuvant chem oradiation improves survival. A prospective, 
single-institution experience. Ann Surg 1997;225:621-33; discussion 33-6. 7. Treatment of locally unresectable carcinom a of the pancreas: comparison of combined-
modality therapy (chemotherapy plus radiotherapy) to chemotherapy alone. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. J Natl Can cer Inst 1988;80:751-5. 
8. Moertel CG, Frytak S, Hahn RG, et al. Th erapy of locally unresectable pancreatic 
carcinoma: a randomized comparison of high dos e (6000 rads) radiation alone, moderate dose 
radiation (4000 rads + 5-fluorouracil), and high dose radiation + 5-fluorouracil: The 
Gastrointestinal Tumor St udy Group. Cancer 1981;48:1705-10. 
9. Burris HA, 3rd, Moore MJ, Andersen J, et al. Improvements in survival and clinical 
benefit with gemcitabine as firs t-line therapy for patients with  advanced pancreas cancer: a 
randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2403-13. 10. Millikan KW, Deziel DJ, Silverstein JC, et al. Prognostic factors associated with 
resectable adenocarcinoma of the head of th e pancreas. Am Surg 1999;65:618-23; discussion 23-
4. 11. Neoptolemos JP, Stocken DD, Dunn JA, et al. Influence of resecti on margins on survival 
for patients with pancreatic can cer treated by adjuvant chemorad iation and/or chemotherapy in 
the ESPAC-1 randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg 2001;234:758-68. 
12. Pingpank JF, Hoffman JP, Ross EA, et al. Eff ect of preoperative chemoradiotherapy on 
surgical margin status of resected adenocarcino ma of the head of the pancreas. J Gastrointest 
Surg 2001;5:121-30. 13. Katz MH, Pisters PW, Evans DB, et al. Bo rderline resectable pa ncreatic cancer: the 
importance of this emerging stage of disease.  J Am Coll Surg 2008;206:833-46; discussion 46-8. 
14. Small W, Jr., Berlin J, Freedman GM, et  al. Full-dose gemcitabine with concurrent 
radiation therapy in patients with  nonmetastatic pancreatic cancer: a multicenter phase II trial. J 
Clin Oncol 2008;26:942-7. 15. Springett GM, Hoffe SE. Borderline resectable pancreatic cancer: on the edge of survival. 
Cancer Control 2008;15:295-307. 16. Brown KM, Siripurapu V, Davidson M, et al. Chemoradiation followed by chemotherapy before resection for borderline pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Am J Surg 2008;195:318-21. 17. Morganti AG, Massaccesi M, La Torre G, et al. A systematic review  of resectability and 
survival after concurrent chemor adiation in primarily unresectable pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg 
 28Oncol;17:194-205. 
18. Ahmad NA, Lewis JD, Ginsberg GG, et al. Long  term survival after pancreatic resection 
for pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Am J Gastroenterol 2001;96:2609-15. 
19. Sohn TA, Yeo CJ, Cameron JL, et al. Res ected adenocarcinoma of the pancreas-616 
patients: results, outcomes, and prognostic indicators. J Gastroin test Surg 2000;4:567-79. 
20. Ammori JB, Colletti LM, Zalupski MM, et al. Surgical resection following radiation 
therapy with concurrent gemcitabine in patients  with previously unresectable adenocarcinoma of 
the pancreas. J Gastroin test Surg 2003;7:766-72. 
21. Kim EJ, Ben-Josef E, Griffith KA, et al . Phase II trial of neoadjuvant full dose 
gemcitabine, oxaliplatin and radi ation (RT) in patients with resectable (R) or borderline 
resectable (BR) pancreatic can cer. In: ASCO GI 2011 Symposium; 2011. 
22. Talamonti MS, Small W, Jr., Mulcahy MF, et  al. A multi-institutional phase II trial of 
preoperative full-dose gemcitabine and concurre nt radiation for patie nts with potentially 
resectable pancreatic carcinom a. Ann Surg Oncol 2006;13:150-8. 
23. Breslin TM, Hess KR, Harbison DB, et al. Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for adenocarcinoma of the pancreas: treatment vari ables and survival dura tion. Ann Surg Oncol 
2001;8:123-32. 24. McGinn CJ, Zalupski MM, Shurei qi I, et al. Phase I trial of  radiation dose escalation with 
concurrent weekly full-dose gemcitabine in pati ents with advanced pa ncreatic cancer. J Clin 
Oncol 2001;19:4202-8. 25. Murphy JD, Adusumilli S, Griffith KA, et al. Full-dose gemcitabine and concurrent 
radiotherapy for unresectable pancreatic can cer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2007;68:801-8. 
26. Lawrence TS, Chang EY, Hahn TM, Hertel LW, Shewach DS. Radiosensitization of 
pancreatic cancer cells by 2' ,2'-difluoro-2'-deoxycytidine. In t J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 
1996;34:867-72. 27. Abbruzzese JL, Grunewald R, Weeks EA, et al. A phase I clinical, plasma, and cellular 
pharmacology study of gemcitabine. J Clin Oncol 1991;9:491-8. 
28. Tempero M, Plunkett W, Ruiz Van Haperen V,  et al. Randomized phase II comparison of 
dose-intense gemcitabine: thirty-minute infusion a nd fixed dose rate infusion in patients with 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2003;21:3402-8. 
29. Poplin E, Feng Y, Berlin J, et al. Ph ase III, randomized study of gemcitabine and 
oxaliplatin versus gemcitabine (f ixed-dose rate infusion) compar ed with gemcitabine (30-minute 
infusion) in patients with pa ncreatic carcinoma E6201: a tria l of the Eastern Cooperative 
Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol 2009;27:3778-85. 30. Conroy T, Paillot B, Francois E, et al. Irinotecan plus oxaliplatin and leucovorin-
modulated fluorouracil in advanced pancreatic cancer--a Groupe Tumeurs Digestives of the 
Federation Nationale des Centres de Lutte C ontre le Cancer study. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:1228-
36. 31. Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, et al . Randomized phase III trial comparing 
FOLFIRINOX (F: 5FU/leucovorin [LV] , irinotecan [I], and oxaliplatin [O]) versus gemcitabine 
(G) as first-line treatment for metastatic panc reatic adenocarcinoma (MPA): Preplanned interim 
analysis results of the PRODIGE 4/ACCORD 11 trial. Journal of Clinical Oncology 
2010;28:4010. 32. The statistical analysis of failure time data. J. Wiley, 2002. (Accessed at    