Page | 1  
 
 
 
  
  Study Name :  
 Urgent Care Manag ement of Respiratory Illness Enabled with N ovel Testing  Pathway  
(URGENT): A Randomized Control Trial of Respiratory PCR versus Standard Care  
  Date:  30-January -2023 
  NCR:  NCR213901  
  Principal Investigator:   
Name :   Andrew C. Meltzer  MD, MS  
Title:     Associate Professor  of Emergency Medicine  
Institution:   George Washington University  
                      
     
Page | 2  
 
 
 
 Background  
 
Over the past two decades, new options have emerged for patients seeking 
acute care such as urgent care, retail clinics, and telemedicine. While visits to 
emergency departments have declined overall since 2008, urgent care facilities have seen a more than 100- fold increase in patient traffic.
6 For patients presenting to urgent 
care centers with acute respiratory illness, early and appropriate treatment is essential in lessening the disease course and preventing its spread. Acute respiratory illnesses account for the largest percentag e of urgent care center visits, however diagnosis of the 
specific pathology of the infection is challenging and reliant on traditional diagnostic tests and physical exams.
7 In evaluating patients for acute respiratory illnesses, clinical 
findings are often  nondescript and laboratory testing is needed for definitive diagnosis.1 
Many of the causative agents of acute respiratory illnesses are tested for using antigen 
detection assays.5 While these assays produce results in approximately 10- 15 minutes, 
they hav e relatively poor sensitivity which can lead to missed diagnoses.3 Viral or 
bacterial cultures can also be used to diagnose acute respiratory illnesses, however, 
they take days to produce results which delays initiation of antiviral or antibiotic therapy and infection control measures.
3  
Rapid diagnosis and precise treatment have become possible with multiplex 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) panels that can identify a variety of causative agents of acute respiratory illnesses such as bacterial and viral infections in one urgent care visit.
4 While real -time PCR is currently used as a standard for diagnosing acute 
respiratory illnesses such as influenza due to its high sensitivity and specificity, it typically takes several hours for results which is unfavorable in the urgent care setting.
2 
Highly sensitive and rapid random -access PCR tests provide the sensitivity and 
specificity needed to both rapidly and accurately diagnose acute respiratory illnesses.2 
Similar PCR panels have been used in previous researc h for the diagnosis of 
gastrointestinal illnesses in the emergency department and point -of-care testing for 
hospitalized adults presenting with acute respiratory illness.1 In this study, we aimed to 
determine if a rapid multiplex PCR test for urgent care p atients with symptomatic upper 
respiratory infections can improve patient and provider -reported outcomes.  
Acute respiratory illnesses cause millions of cases per year in the US and result in 
countless hospitalizations, which the current COVID -19 pandemic h as greatly inflated. 
Most upper respiratory infections are of viral etiology.7 Rapid diagnostics for acute 
respiratory illnesses in urgent care centers would be highly beneficial in improving both 
patient outcomes and care experiences as well as guiding pr ovider course of care. In a 
2010 study, 33.3% of urgent care center visits were found to be due to upper respiratory infections.
7 Furthermore, 41.5% of prescriptions written at urgent care facilities were 
found to be for antibiotics.7 Antibiotic overuse for acute respiratory illnesses is partly 
driven by clinical uncertainty regarding underlying etiology.1 With the increasing threat 
of antimicrobial resistance (AMR), accurate and rapid diagnostics will aid in preventing unnecessary antibiotic prescribing and promote antimicrobial stewardship.  
Introduction of the rapid testing panels for acute respiratory infections in urgent 
care settings will afford clinicians ease in diagnosing the cause of a patient’s illness 
which will in turn lead to better patient out comes. This study utilizes the Biofire® 
Page | 3  
 
 
 
 FilmArray Panel which in previous studies has been shown to be highly effective in 
diagnosing acute respiratory illnesses.    Study Objectives:  
Aim 1 : To asses improvement  in patient -reported outcomes  (PRO) in Urgent Care 
patients with acute respiratory illness who are tested with RP2.1 (EXP) versus  standard 
care (SC).  
 Hypotheses : Improvement in PRO’s in group ( tested with RP2.1 (EXP ) vs. standard 
care (SC)) assessed at Day 0 (i.e., day of test) and/ or Day 7 (call-back).  
 Outcomes  
Primary :  
• Satisfaction with Urgent Care (willingness to recommend urgent care versus 
others). Day 0.  
  
Secondary :  
• Satisfaction with Urgent Care (willingness to recommend urgent care versus 
others).  Day 7.  
• Time isolated  (or recommended to isolate) by patient. Day 0, 7.  
• Time isolated  (or recommended to isolate) by family members / close contacts. 
Day 0, 7. 
• Understanding of current disease process. Day 0 , 7 
• Need for additional diagnostic tests  by patient . Day 7. 
• Need for additional diagnostic tests of family members / close contacts. Day 7. 
• Missed time at wor k. Day 7. 
  
Aim 2 : To determine the difference in Urgent Care provider -reported outcomes  after 
treatment of  patients with acute respiratory illness tested with RP2.1 vs. SC.  Assessed 
by provider survey.  
 Hypothesis : Use of RP2.1 will lead to differences in provider -reported outcomes  
assessed at D ay 0 compared to SC.  
 
• Confidence in diagnosis  
• Recommendations regarding isolation 
• Ability to address patient needs / questions.  
• Recommendations regarding disease course.  
• Follow up recommendations  
 Study Synopsis  
 Stud y Design  
Page | 4  
 
 
 
 Sites  
Two GW Urgent Care sites (McPherson Square, Rhode Island Avenue) - also known as 
Immediate and Primary Care Sites (IPC)  
 
Enrollment times  
7 5 days per week, RA’s s creen for relevant chief complaint related to respiratory 
infection .  
 
• (Estimate 5 hours per day = 25 hours  / week ) at all 3 sites.  Therefore, 5 hours  x 3 
sites = 15 hours per day . Per week,  15 hours x 7 days / week  = 105 hours  / week  
• Follow up and survey = 3 hours per day = 21  hours / week  
• 105 + 21 = 136 RA hours per week  
 
Study Arms  
EXP: RP2.1  result  communicated plus scripted communication of meaning of resu lts.  
SC: Standard communication  
 
Outcome Measures  
Day 0   
RA communicat es results and assessment of Day 0 relevant patient, provider and 
process outcomes.  
 Day 7  
Review of EHR (Allscripts , CRISP ) 
Patient follow -up assessment performed by phone.  
 Processing Samples  
Samples will be collected and processed at  the three  urgent care/immediate primary 
care facilities (IPCs) affiliated with  George Washington University  Medical Faculty 
Associates .  
 
• Testing will occur on site.  Each urgent care performs  CLIA -waived lab tests for 
point of care tests.   
 
• Any Non- RP2.1  testing will be allowed in either group per discretion of the 
provider.  
 
• Standardize script for communication of results provided on same day as testing to providers.  
 Standard care  
Most patients with symptoms of a respiratory illness receiv e testing fo r COVID -
19. The process for suspected COVID is to run a SARS antigen test  initially . Results of 
the antigen tests are available within 15 to 20 minutes.   For anyone with a negative test, 
samples are then sent to LabCorp for a confirmatory PCR test.  The results of the PCR 
test are d ependent on the number of tests LabCorp is  performing  but typically take 
Page | 5  
 
 
 
 between 24 to 96 hours.   All patients with results that are positive receive a phone call; 
for patients with a negative test, no call is made and patients  must access the patient 
portal  to get results.   
 
Our expectation is that the use of RP2.1  will lead to improved satisfaction for 
patient and provider.   
 Inclusion Criteria  
• Age 7-year-old 
• Clinically stable  
• Must present with one symptom of respiratory illness (e.g., cough, sneezing, 
runny or stuffy nose, sore throat, headaches, muscle aches, trouble breathing, shortness of breath, and/or fever).  
 Exclusion criteria   
• Patient is unable to provide informed consent  
• Chronic symptoms (>14 days)  or asymptomatic  
• Unstable (or “too sick” to consent)  
• Prisoner or ward of state  
• Non-English speaker  
 Potential barriers  and solutions  
• Success for the study requires provider buy -in to aid with recruitment efforts .  
Lack of provider buy -in may hind er sample size  ascertainment . Proposed 
solutions include electronic alerts , incentive payments,  and communication aids 
to physicians to discuss results with patients.   
• Successful undertaking of this study requires dedicated research staff to ensure high recruitment goals and fidelity to protocol. We have budgeted for a study coordinator with 25 % effort allocated directly to the project  in addition to 136 
hours of researc h assistant time per week . We currently have several trained 
research assistants who will be assigned to this study allowing for rapid 
implementation of study.  
 Data Analysis and Statistical plan  
We anticipate that we will enroll 30 patients per week for 12 weeks, 360 patients . (Full 
power analysis still forthcoming,)  
 Data Collection  
• Standard demographic information  
• vaccination status  
• insurance status  
• QOL measures  
• health literacy level  
• current symptomatology  
• vital signs  
Page | 6  
 
 
 
 • CPT  
• ICD-10 codes  
 
Analysis Dr. Yan Ma, professor of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics at George Washington 
University, will be our statistician for this project. He has aided in data analysis for previous projects affiliated with BioFire with Dr. Meltzer.   Communication 
• Progress rep orts will be prepared every three months from study initiation to 
completion, including presentation or publication of the study results.  
 
Anticipated start date  
• November 2021  
 Antic ipated  duration of the study ? 
• November 2021- February  September 2022 ( 3 months for study enrollment)  
• March 2022- May 2022 ( 3 months for Data Analysis and Manuscript Preparation)  
 IRB/Ethics Board  Requirements and Status  
 
• Is IRB/Ethics Board Approval  Required?  (Please provide a justification if 
approval is not required) / Yes 
 
• Does the study require informed consent?   Yes  
 
• What is the current status of the approval? Note: A copy of the IRB/Ethics 
Committee decision regarding the study must be prov ided prior to study initiation.  
 
• Currently under review through George Washington University’s IRB.  
 Requested Support  
 We request three rapid testing machines and enough cartridges for a minimum of 360 tests.  
  REFERENCES  
1. Beard K, Brendish N, Malachira A, et al. Pragmatic Multicentre randomised controlled trial evaluating the impact of a routine molecular point -of-care ‘test -
and-treat’ strategy for influenza in adults hospitalised with acute respiratory 
illness (flupoc): Trial protocol. BMJ Open . 2019;9(12). doi:10.1136/bmjopen-
2019- 031674  
Page | 7  
 
 
 
 2. Dugas AF, Valsamakis A, Atreya MR, et al. Clinical diagnosis of influenza in the 
ed. The American Journal of Emergency Medicine. 2015;33(6):770- 775. 
doi:10.1016/j.ajem.2015.03.008  
3. Kim D- K, Poudel B. Tools to detect influenza virus. Yonsei Medical Journal . 
2013;54(3):560. doi:10.3349/ymj.2013.54.3.560  
4. Leber AL, Everhart K, Daly JA, et al. Multicenter evaluation of BioFire FilmArray Respiratory Panel 2 for detection of viruses and bacteria in nasopharyngeal swab samples. Journal of Clinical Microbiology . 2018;56(6). doi:10.1128/jcm.01945- 17  
5. Overview of influenza testing methods. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/diagnosis/overview -testing -
methods.htm. Published August 31, 2020. Accessed October 12, 2021.  
6. Poon  SJ, Schuur JD, Mehrotra A. Trends in visits to acute care venues for 
treatment of low -acuity conditions in the United States from 2008 to 2015. JAMA 
Internal Medicine . 2018;178(10):1342. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.3205  
7. Weinick RM, Burns RM, Mehrotra A. Many emergency department visits could be managed at Urgent Care Centers and retail clinics. Health Affairs . 
2010;29(9):1630- 1636. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2009.0748  
     