 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Health Coaching Support in Technology -based Interventions  
for Meeting Health Goals  
NCT Number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Project ID: PEX 19 -002 
April 2nd, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Background  
Overweight/obesity is strongly linked to mortality from multiple chronic diseases. For health 
disparity -facing populations, including racial/ethnic minority  and low -income communities , 
interventions promoting goal setting and behavioral change for nutrition, physical activity, and weight 
are a national health priority.  There has been a rapid expansion in the use of digital technologies for 
delivering  health interventions, but there is a need for more study of the potential use of these 
technologies among Veterans. This evaluation entails testing an automated SMS texting protocol 
intended to offer Veterans encouragement, tips, and other actionable info rmation to assist in the 
pursuit of physical activity and healthy eating goals .  
 
Research Design/Methods  
We completed the development of materials  and procedures  to support a local, one -site 
evaluation focused on use of VA’s  SMS automated texting system. The texting protocol offered Veterans 
encouragement, tips, and other actionable information over the course of an 8 -week period to assist in 
the pursuit of physical activity and healthy eating goals.  
To test materials and procedures, we recruited one Veter an from a single VA medical center. A 
research assistant called the Veteran to administer a series of baseline survey measures. As part of this 
baseline data collection, the research assistant also led the Veteran through a process of identifying and 
setti ng a goal related to either diet or physical activity. This was achieved by first providing a brief lesson 
about SMART goals (Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time -bound) and then asking the 
Veteran to state their goal. If the goal was too general, the research assistant worked with the Veteran 
to further revise the goal into a SMART goal. This process resulted in the Veteran articulating a goal that 
they wanted to pursue  over the course of their participation. At the conclusion of the basel ine data 
collection, the research assistant then enrolled the Veteran in the 8 -week texting protocol through the 
automated texting system ’s portal  and mailed a welcome letter and FAQ sheet to the Veteran as well as 
a reminder of the goal that was set. The text messages that comprised the protocol were designed 
based on principles of behavioral change and were intended to motivate, support, and spur action 
toward the goals that were self -identified at baseline. Messages included standardized elements to 
encourage behavior change, like self -monitoring, instructions on how to perform specific behaviors, 
action planning, social support, feedback on goals , and problem -solving tips. In addition, we included a 
selection of light -hearted messages to enhance engagement with the texting protocol and assessment 
messages to gauge perceptions of the program. The automated texting system delivered messages daily 
over the course of the 8 -week protocol period.  
At the conclusion of the 8 -week texting protocol, the research assistant again called the Veteran 
to administer a series of follow -up survey measures and to gather open -ended feedback through semi -
structured in terview questions about their experiences with the text messages. At the conclusion of 
follow -up data collection, the Veteran was mailed a thank you letter and a gift card as remuneration.  
 
Results/Conclusions  
We finalized a set of measures  and materials , including baseline and follow -up survey s and a 
semi -structured interview guide , and an 8-week automated SMS texting protocol  founded on  
established principles of behavior change . We enrolled one Veteran to pilot our materials and 
procedures with the inten tion of subsequently enrolling 40 Veterans (N) in a larger evaluation after any 
necessary revisions to the materials and procedures were made; however, these enrollment plans were 
halted because of COVID -19 risks and precautions.  
 The Veteran  with whom we  piloted our materials and procedures  was 81 years old, male, single 
(never been married), white, had completed college /professional training, was not using SNAP 
(Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program)  at the time of participation , and self -reported h aving high 
blood pressure  and treating it with medication. The Veteran set a goal to lose a specific, realistic amount 
of weight during the course of the program.  
We examined scores of psychosocial factors before and after completion of the texting  protoco l. 
This Veteran increased confidence to eat healthfully in a variety of situations (4.1 to 6.4; scale of 0: not 
at all confident to 10: very confident) and be physically active in a variety of situations (3.5 to 6.0 on a 
scale of 0: not at all confident to  10: very confident);  lowered perception of goal difficulty (4 to 3; scale 
of 1: low difficulty to 5: high difficulty); and slightly lowered health confidence (1 to 1.75; scale of 1: high 
health confidence to 4: low health confidence).  
In terms of percepti ons of the texting protocol, this Veteran reported that the number of text 
messages they received was just right , the texts were very useful  in helping meet their health goal and 
would be very likely  to recommend this program to others. The Veteran did not have changes to the 
program to recommend.  
Overall, some positive effects were reported by the Veteran and perceptions of the program 
were positive. These development activities are now complete and preparations for a full evaluation 
may commence at a l ater date.  
 
 