Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
1 
Version: 7/26/17  
1.  Principal Investigator : Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. 
2. Co- Investigators  (including VA and WOC staff): While all research staff are trained to 
provide informed consent, those identified with an asterisk ( *) will provide informed consent for 
this study.   
Co-Investigators: Joel Gelernter, M.D. , *Gerald Valentine, M.D.   
 Kevin Sevarino, M.D.  
Nursing Staff:  *Ellen Mitchell, R .N., Angelina Genovese, R.N  , Elizabeth O’Donnell  R.N. , 
Margaret  Dion -Markovitz, R.N.  
Research Staff:  *Stacy Minnix , BSW,   *Lance Barnes , and *Chris Cryan , * Michael Stephens  
3. Title of the Project  
 Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers   
 4. Purpose, Hypothesis and Key Q uestions  
Specific Aim  #1: To examine the acute reinforcing effects of menthol, a fruit flavor (green 
apple) or a fruit flavor plus menthol , alone or  in combination with nicotine in smokers . Flavor s 
will be administered by inhalation via  electronic cigarettes ( e-cigarettes ) and nicotine will be 
administered intravenousl y. The reinforcing drug effects will be measured with the drug effects 
questionnaire  (DEQ) .  
Hypothesis:  Hypothesis #1A:  Combined f ruit flavor (green apple)  plus menthol will be more 
reinforcing  than m enthol alone or fruit flavor alone.  
Hypothesis #1B:  Fruit flavor plus menthol will be more effective than menthol alone , or fruit 
flavor  alone , in enhancing the reinforcing effects of nicotine. 
Exploratory Aims: To examine if fruit flavor plus menthol will be mo re effective than 
menthol or fruit flavor alone in enhancing nicotine’s effects in a) alleviating urges to smoke, b) suppressing withdrawal severity and c) enhancing cognitive performance.  
 5-6. Background and Significance:  
a) Role of Flavors in Tobacco Addiction  
With  the exception of menthol, all characterizing flavors have been banned from use in 
combustible tobacco cigarettes . However,  flavors are not prohibited from use in other  tobacco 
product  categories where the majority , including e -cigarettes, ci gars and cigarillos,  contain a 
wide variety of f lavor ants. Prior studies with tobacco cigarettes have shown that the addition of 
sweet flavor s increased the appeal of these products , especially among youth (King et al. 2014) . 
Similar recent data for non- combustible tobacco products  has in formed  the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration’s ( FDA ) prioritization of  understanding the  impact of flavors on the appeal and 
use of flavored tobacco products.  
Flavo rs are particularly  ubiquitous in e -cigarette s and refill liquids marketed for use in the 
expanding array of electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) . A recent study estimated that 
there are over 7 ,000 unique e -cigarette flavor s including menthol/mint, fruit, desert/ sweet, 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
2 
Version: 7/26/17 tobacco , coffee/tea, nuts/spices  and alcohol flavors  (Zhu et al. 2014) . Many survey and 
epidemiological studi es found that e -cigarette users, especially youth, prefer e -liquids with 
flavors  (Pesko et al. 2016; Soule et al. 2016) . For example, in one survey  of high school students 
who use e -cigarettes , over 70% reported having experience with flavored e -liquids and over 50% 
prefer using e -liquids with sweet flavors  (Krishnan -Sarin et al. 2015) . In another  study with 
youth from Texas , 95 to 98% reported using flavored e -cigarette as their first e -cigarette, 
compared to 44 % of older adults in nationwide  sample  (Harrell et al. 2017) . The most 
commonly used  flavors were fruit and sweet flavors  and overall , flavors were reported to be a 
common reason for use of e -cigarettes by youth (Harrell et al. 2017) . These studies suggest that 
flavors increase the appeal of e- cigarettes and may therefore contribute to initiation and 
maintenance of e- cigarette use.  
b) Ment hol as a Common Flavor  
Menthol is one of the most intensively studied  flavors  used in tobacco products . It has a well -
characterized cooling and soothing action in the airways that may enhance the appeal of menthol 
cigarettes by reducing the harshness of to bacco smoke (Wise et al. 2012) . This action may be 
particularly significant for youth who are experimenting with combustible tobacco products. For example, in a National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 44.7% of 12 to 17 year -olds smoked 
menthol cigarettes, compared to 30.1% of adults aged 26 or older (Rock et al. 2010) . In addition, 
numerous cross -sectional studies have shown that menthol cigarette  smoking is a risk factor for 
the development of dependence (Collins and Moolchan 2006; Hersey et al. 2006; Muscat et al. 2009; Wackowski and Delnevo 2007) , and a prospective study of smokers aged 17 or younger 
demonstrated that smoking initiation with menthol cigarettes was associated with higher risk of progression to established sm oking, as well as higher levels of nicotine dependence 
(Nonnemaker et al. 2012) . While these studies indicate that menthol plays a role in both the 
initiation and maintenance of tobacco product use, the underlying mechanisms by which menthol 
may facilitate nicotine dependence in humans have not been fully elucidated. 
In a recent human laboratory study , we examined  potential mechanisms  underlying 
menthol’s effects in relation to tobacco addiction (Valentine et al. 2017) . We found that  menthol , 
administered by inhalation via e -cigarettes,  significantly reduced urges to smoke in menthol -
preferring , but not in non- menthol -preferring smokers, suggesting that menthol may have 
negative reinforcing effects by alleviating withdrawal. In addition, menthol -preferri ng smokers 
reported dimini shed positive subjective responses to IV nicotine  and less  severe tobacco 
withdrawal  than did non- menthol cigarette smokers. These findings are consistent with 
menthol’s effects in reducing the rate of nicotine metabolism or clearance, as indicated by a lower nicotine metabolite ratio, a biomarker fo r the rate of nicotine metabolism, in  menthol -
preferring smokers  (Benowitz et al. 2004; Fagan et al. 2016) . These finding s support previous 
data indicating tha t one long -term adaptation to menthol exposure  may be sl owing of nicotine 
metabolism (DeVito et al. 2016; Sofuoglu et al. 2012) . In contrast to such findings for menthol, 
very little is known about the behavioral pharmacology of flavors or their effects on nicotine metabolism.  
c) Research Need for Understanding  the Role of Flavors in Tobacco Addiction  
The i dentif ication of  common mechanism s by which flavors may influence tobacco use and 
appeal is complicated by t he availability of thousands of flavor  combinations  in tobacco 
products, particularly in e -liquids. To reduce the complexity of research on flavored tobacco 
products, there  have been attempts to categorize e -liquid  flavors. For example, one recent survey 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
3 
Version: 7/26/17 suggested that the m ajority of e -liquid flavors used by consumers can be categorized  as either 
tobacco (23.7%), fruit (20.3%), dessert /sweets (20.7%) or menthol /mint (14.8%) varieties 
(Yingst et al. 2017) . However, as  compared to menthol , there is very limited inf ormation about 
the behavioral effects of these other flavor categories . It is important to note that most e -liquid 
flavors were  developed  as food additives (e.g ., watermelon, apple, cherry, cotton candy or 
bubble  gum) , but have not been examined for inhala tion use (Tierney et al. 2016) . For example, 
it is unknown if menthol is uniquely different than other flavors that have been used in tobacco 
products  or if flavors have similar  effects as menthol . Although many commercially available e-
liquid products include a combination of different flavors (e.g., menthol plus fruit or sweet flavors), i t is unknown if different flavors have  additive or synergistic effects as reinforcers.  
Proposed Study  
In this study , we will compare the effects of  flavored e- liquids that contain menthol  alone,  a 
fruit flavor (green apple) , and a  fruit flavor plus menthol , either alone or in combination with 
intravenously administered nicotine . Study outcomes will include  aversive and positive 
subjective effects, withdrawal severity, urges to smoke, cognitive performance and cardiovascular measures . We will enroll only menthol -preferring smokers because in our recent 
study  on the acute effects of inhaled menthol , effects w ere more prominent in menthol -preferring 
smokers  compared to  the non- menthol -preferring sample . We chose to use green apple because it  
represents one of the most commonly consumed e -liquid flavor s. The use of menthol, green 
apple and green apple plus menthol flavors will allow the effects of menthol and fruit flavor to be compared in a systematic way.   
 7. Subjects:  
Young adult male and female smokers will be recruited from the New Haven area through 
newspaper advertisements , radio advertisements, and fliers. Interested subjects will have the 
study described over the telephone , and they will be asked to answer a brief tobacco use history 
and medical screening questionnaire. If subjects pass the telephone screening, they will be invited to come to the West Haven VA clinic for a screening evaluation.  
Inclusion criteria : 1) Female and male mentholated cigarette smokers, aged 18 to 30 years; 2) 
history of smoking for the past 12 months, at least one cigarette per day ; smoking status  is 
verified with ur inary cotinine  levels above 10 ng/ml; 3) not seeking treatment for nicotine 
dependence at the time of study  entry; 4)  in good health as verified by medical history, screening 
examination, a nd screening laboratory tests; 5) for women, not pregnant as determ ined by 
pregnancy screening, nor breast feeding, and using acceptable birth control methods.    
Exclusion criteria : 1) History of major medical illnesses that the physician investigator deems as 
contraindicated for the patient to be in the study; 2) regula r use of psychotropic medication 
(antidepressants, antipsychotics, or anxiolytics) ; 3) psychiatric diagnosis and / or  treatment for 
Axis I disorders including major depression, bipolar affective disorder, schizophrenia or panic disorder  in the past month; 4) abuse of alcohol or any other recreational or prescription drugs  in 
the past 30 days ; 5) any allergy to propylene glycol or menthol ; and 6) aversion to green apple 
flavor .  
 8. Privacy: Participation in research may involve a loss of privacy. To prevent  this, research 
records will be kept as confidential as possible. Only a code number will identify the individual 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
4 
Version: 7/26/17 research records.  The code number will not be based on any information that could be used to 
identify the subject  (for example, social securi ty number, initials, birth date, etc.)  The master list 
linking names to code numbers will be kept separately from the research data. All research information will be kept in locked files at all times.  Subject identity will not be revealed in any reports or publicati ons resulting from this study. Only authorized research staff will have access 
to the information gathered in this study.   
While filling out study forms, or during the psychiatric examination, some participants may feel uncomfortable disclosin g personal thoughts and feelings. Careful efforts aimed at maintaining 
confidentiality have been effective in previous research, and only participants’ code numbers will be recorded on the forms themselves to protect confidentiality.  
 9. Selection: Interes ted subjects will have the study briefly described over the telephone , and if 
interested, they will be asked to answer a brief tobacco use history and medical screening questionnaire. If subjects are eligible for the study based on the telephone screening, they will be invited to come to the clinic for a screening evaluation. The screening evaluation will include the following: a) obtaining informed consent; b) smoking history and assessment of nicotine dependence using the Fagerstrom  Test of Nicotine Dependence (FTND) c) complete physical 
and psychiatric examination including the structured clinical interview (SCID) for DSM -IV; d) 
laboratory examination including complete blood count, liver and kidney function tests, and glucose; e) u rine analysis, drug screen, and for women, urine pregnancy test and f) urine cotinine 
and urine menthol glucuronide levels.  
 
10. Recruitment: A total of 50 smokers will be recruit ed from the New Haven area by 
newspaper advertisements and fliers.  
 11. Rese arch Plan  
A. Overview  
We propose a  double -blind, crossover study  that enrolls  young adult smokers who prefer 
menthol cigarettes. The study will consist of an adaptation s ession and three test sessions. In the 
adaptation session, participants will practice using the e -cigarette by sampling  the flavors to be 
used in the test sessions. The test sessions will be performed following overnight abstinence  from 
tobacco.  Across the three t est sessions, participants will be assigned to a random sequence of the 
three different e- cigarette conditions : menthol, green apple or menthol plus green apple , a 
different flavor condition for each  test session . In each test session, j ust after the assigned flavor 
is delivered via the e- cigarette, participants will receive a random order of one intravenous 
delivery of saline , and two intravenous deliveries of nicotine ( 3.6 mcg /kg and 7 mcg /kg or 0.25 
mg/70 kg and 0.5 mg/70kg) , one hour apart . The test  sessions will be performed at least 24 hours 
apart to minimize car ryover nicotine effects. The  main outcome measure will be subjective drug 
effects  as measured with the Drug Effects Questionnaire (DEQ). Other outcomes include 
cardiovascular measures, cognitive performance, and self -report measures of nicotine withdrawal  
and craving . Cardiovascular measures include heart rate, systolic and diastolic blood pressure. 
Cognitive performance will be assessed with the Stroop test , mathematical processing test 
(MPT), and continuous performance test (CPT). Nicotine withdrawal meas ures will be measured 
with the Minnesota Nicotine Withdrawal Symptom Checklist ( M-NWSC) and the Brief 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
5 
Version: 7/26/17 Questionnaire on Smoking Urges (BQSU ). 
B. Medical Monitoring and Safety  
Subjects will be given a thorough physical examination prior to study entry and a  physician 
will be present at all test  sessions. Subjects will be attached to blood pressure and heart rate 
monitoring device s throughout each  test session  and an IV catheter will remain in place until the 
end of each test session . Subjects will be adminis tered nicotine only if the systolic blood pressure 
is <150 mmHg and heart rate <100 beats/minute. The subject ’s participation  will be terminated  if 
their blood pressure at any time is >170/110 mm Hg, the heart rate is >120 beats/min, or if the 
subjects dev elop signs and symptoms compatible with nicotine toxicity. Subjects will be 
monitored for two  hour s after the last nicotine administration.   
C. Measures  
a) Physiological:  
• Heart rate and blood pressure:  Heart rate and blood pressure readings will be taken at 
screening , and throughout each test  session to measure nicotine ’s effect  on these 
parameters . 
b) Biochemical:  
• Serum estradiol and progesterone analysis (females only):  Serum estradiol and 
progesterone levels will be measured before each test session , and will be used as 
covariates in our analysis because female sex hormones may contribute to sex 
differences in nicotine responses (Lynch  et al , 2010) . 
• Plasma cotinine  and 3-hyroxycotinine (3HC):  Plasma cotinine  and 3- hydroxycotinine  
levels will be measured from blood samples obtained during the three test sessions to 
determine the  nicotine metabolite ratio (NMR). The NMR is the ratio of  3HC  (the 
primary  metabolite of cotinine ) to cotinine , and reflect s the activity of cytochrome P450 
(CYP) 2A6 and therefore , the rate of nicotine clearance (Dempsey  et al, 2004) . NMR 
has been shown to be stable in smokers during ad- lib and reduced smoking (Mooney  et 
al, 2008) . Plasma samples for 3HC will be obtained at ba seline , and the NMR will be 
included as a covariate in our analyses.  
• Plasma nicotine: Plasma nicotine levels will be measured from blood that was obtained 
prior to the first experimental vaping session on each test day  to characterize the 
subject’s smoking  status .  
• Urinary cotinine levels : A semi- quantitative  rapid urine level  of cotinine  will be 
obtained at screening to confirm smoking status at study entry  (NicAlert) .  
• Plasma m enthol glucuronide levels:  Blood samples collected during each test session  will 
also be used to determine the amount of menthol delivered by the e -cigarette. Samples  will 
be obtained just prior to each of the three experimental vaping  sessions (baseline) , at 2 time 
points after each nicotine or saline infusion , and just prior to removing the IV  at the end of 
the study . The p lasma levels of m enthol glucuronide measured at different time points will 
be used to generate concentration- time curves for each menthol delivery  to characterize the 
pharmacokinetics of menthol , and to account  for differing menthol exposure between 
subjects.  
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
6 
Version: 7/26/17 • Alveolar carbon monoxide : CO readings ≤ 10ppm will be used to verify overnight 
abstinence from smoking as recommended by the SRNT Subcommittee on Biochemical 
Verification (Benowitz  et al , 2002) .  
c) Subjective:  
Measures of Dependence:   
• DSM -5 tobacco use disorder items .  
• Structur ed Clinical Interview for DSM -5 (SCID) for Axis I disorders: SCID is a semi -
structured interview based on DSM -IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) and 
will be performed to diagnose Axis I psychiatric disorders.  
•  Fagerstrom Test of Nicotine Dependence (FTND): This self -report meas ure assesses the 
degree of nicotine dependence and has been used widely in smoking studies (Heatherton  
et al, 1991) .  
Measures of Affective State:   
• Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CES -D) scale: The CES -D is a 20 -item 
self-report measure of dep ressive symptoms (Radloff, 1977) . This scale will be used at 
intake to control for baseline differences in depressive symptoms. 
• Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS): The PANAS is a 20 -item scale that 
assesses both negative and positive affective s tates (Watson  et al , 1988) . This scale is 
sensitive to the affective symptoms of tobacco withdrawal and predicts relapse to smoking (Kenford  et al , 2002) .  
Measures of Acute Drug Effects:  
Subjective Drug Effects :  
• Drug Effects Questionnaire (DEQ), adapted from Soria (1996), will be used during each test session to measure acute drug responses including: liking, cooling, irritation, 
strength, feeling, stimulation, good effects, bad effects, head rush, and want more. Each item is rated on a 100 mm scale, from ‘not at all’ to ‘extremely’.  
Measures of withdrawal and negative affect:   
• Minnesota Nicotine Withdrawal Symptom Checklist (M -NWSC): Smokers will be 
asked to rate several nicotine withdrawal symptoms on a 100 mm sc ale, from ‘ not at 
all’ to ‘extremely ’. The items are derived from the M -NWSC (Hughes and Hatsukami, 
1986) and have been used in previous human laboratory studies (Eissenberg  et al , 
1996) . The items include cigarette craving, irritability/anger, anxiety/ten sion, difficulty 
concentrating, restlessness, increased appetite, depressed mood, and insomnia. 
• Brief Questionnaire on Smoking Urges (BQSU): This 10- item scale, originally 
developed by Tiffany and Drobes (Tiffany and Drobes, 1991) , has been found to be 
highly reliable and reflects levels of nicotine deprivation (Bell  et al , 1999; Morgan et 
al, 1999) . This scale will be used to measure changes in cigarette craving.  
d) Measures of Cognitive Performance:  
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
7 
Version: 7/26/17 Cognitive performance will be assessed with 3 tests from the ANAM battery (University 
of Oklahoma): the Stroop test , the mathematical processing  test (MPT), and the 
continuous performance test (CPT). These 3 tests were chosen because of their sensitivity to tobacco withdrawal and nicotine administration (He ishman  et al , 2010; Mancuso et al , 
1999; Myers  et al, 2008) . 
• Stroop Test : This test assesses processing speed, selective attention, and interference 
(Spreen, 1991) . It is a computerized version of the classical Stroop Test (Reeves, 2002). 
The Stroop design consists of one three -minute block of congruent stimuli , and one 
three- minute block of incongruent stimuli.  
• Mathematical Processing Test (MPT):  This test assesses basic computational skills, 
concentration, and working memory.  An arithmetic problem invol ving three single -
digit numbers and two operators is displayed (e.g., "5 -  2 + 3 ="). The subject presses 
buttons to indicate whether the answer to the problem is less than five or greater than five.  
• Continuous Performance Test (CPT):  This test assesses sustained attention, 
concentration, and working memory. A target character is displayed for memorization.  
Then, as  individual characters are displayed in sequence, the user presses a designated 
button only when the displayed character is the target letter.  
e) Other Measures : 
• E-cigarette Questionnaire: This 10 -item self -report questionnaire was developed by our 
research group to characterize the study populations’ experience with, and attitude 
about, e -cigarettes. It will also include a response item that will identify aversion to 
green apple flavor. This questionnaire will be administered during the adaptation 
session .  
• Drug Use History : Self -reports of cigarette smoking and use of other tobacco products, 
alcohol and drugs (coc aine, alcohol, opioids, marijuana, and other illicit drugs) will be 
assessed with Time Line Follow -Back, which has been shown to be a reliable and valid 
method for monitoring substance use and other outcomes in longitudinal studies (Miller 
and DelBoca, 1994; Sobell and Sobell, 1992) . The Time Line Follow -Back will be 
administered at intake.  
• Adverse events: SAFTEE: In order to monitor adverse events from the study 
medications, the SAFTEE will be administered before and after each session. The SAFTEE has been  used in a number of pharmacotherapy trials (Levine and Schooler, 
1986) .  
f) Genetic Markers :  
We recognize the value of banking biological samples for future genetic, epigenetic and biomarker analyses given the care taken to establish clinical phenotypes.  For example, 
results from genetic studies  may confirm the importance of certain TRP -ion channels , or 
sweet taste receptors , in the effects of menthol and sweeteners on initiation and 
maintenance of nicotine addiction . These findings would provide a rationale for examining 
established and novel genetic variants of TRP -channels , and sweet taste receptors , as 
determinants of responses to flavors in the laboratory.  Whenever specific hypotheses are generated in the future that require targeted genetic analysis , this protocol will be amended 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
8 
Version: 7/26/17 to describe the purpose and use of such analyses.  
D. Drugs  
a) Nicotine: Nicotine bitartrate will be obtained from Interchem Corporation, Paramus, NJ 
and nicotine solutions for intravenous  injection will be prepared by U.S. Specialty 
Formulations, Bethlehem, PA. On the morning of each test session, s yringes containing 
5 ml of each infusate will be prepared by the West Haven VA research pharmacy . 
Common side effects of nicotine include nause a, vomiting, heartburn, elevated heart 
rate and increased blood pressure.   
• IV Nicotine Administration: Nicotine will be administered over 30 seconds  using a  
syringe that is attached to an IV catheter located in a forearm vein . We have 
followed these proce dures in our previous studies (Sofuoglu et al. 2005, 2006b; 
2008a, 2009a,b,c)  which were completed without any  serious and unexpected  
adverse effects attributed to nicotine, or with other safety concerns . After the last 
dose, the subjects will stay in the lab for at least two hour s, which has been shown 
to be sufficient for the nicotine -induced changes in heart rate, blood pressure, and 
subjective effects to return to baseline (Sofuoglu  et al , 2005; Sofuoglu et al , 2006) .  
• Justification for the nicotine doses: For this proposal, we chose two dose sequences 
of nicotine  (3.6 mcg/kg and 7 mcg/kg  or 0.25mg/70 kg and 0.5mg /70kg)  with a 
maximum dose of 0.3 mg and 0.6 mg, respectively , regardless of body weight . In 
our previous stu dies, these nicotine doses produced robust subjective and 
physiological responses (Sofuoglu et al , 2009a , Valentine et al , 2017) . However, 
the doses used in this study are much lower than doses used in previous studies with addicted smokers (up to 3 mg per injection). Therefore, we believe that the doses used in this study represent an appropriate balance between being sufficiently high to answer the research questions, but low enough to reduce risks to the study participants.  
E. Ele ctronic Cigarette  
a)  Hardware: A Joyetech eGo, tank -type e -cigarette with a single coil atomizer (2.2 ohm) 
operating at 3.7V (6.2W) will be used as in our previous studies. The e -cigarette will be 
fitted with a 2 ml plastic disposable tank that allows for  loading of the assigned e -liquids 
into the e -cigarette just  prior to each test session.  
b) Flavors : Three different flavored e -liquids: 1) menthol , 2) green apple , and 3) green 
apple chill  will be obtained from the AmericaneLiquidStoreTM, a large internet -based 
vendor  that prepares its products in Wauwatosa, Wisconsin. They claim to be the first e -
liquid manufacturer in the United States to obtain International Organization for 
Standardization  (ISO) 9001:2008 and Current Good Manufacturing practices (cGMP) 
certification. As is common for many large vendors, consumers are able to specify the nicotine level, base liquid mixture and bottle size for each e -liquid product . For this 
experiment, we wi ll specify e -liquids that are  nicotine -free (0.0% nicotine) in a 50%: 
50% base mixture of propylene glycol (PG) and vegetable glycerin (VG ). The West 
Haven VA research pharmacy will prepare sealed, 2 ml aliquots of each e- liquid from 
the stock 132 ml bottl es, and store them in a cool dark location until the morning of each 
test session. These procedures have been successfully deployed in 3 prior e -cigarette 
studies.  
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
9 
Version: 7/26/17  
c) Ingredients:  
Propylene glycol (USP) . PG is the original base liquid for which most e -cigarettes were 
designed and remains the most common ingredient in base liquids. PG is also credited 
with producing a throat sensation (‘throat hit’) that mimics the feel of smoking a cigarette.  
Vegetable glycerin (USP) . VG is commonly included in e -liquid  bases to enhance the 
volume of vapor production, giving a greater sensory illusion of smoking.  
Menthol : Widely used in a range of healthcare products and classified by the FDA as 
compound that is Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS), menthol has mild anes thetic, 
antiseptic and counter irritant properties and is safe for oral ingestion, topical administration and inhalation. 
Justificat ion for menthol doses: The menthol present in the two menthol -containing e -
liquids  is marketed to consumers who prefer light menthol impact. The concentration 
of menthol in these e -liquids will not exceed 2.0% (20 mg/ml), levels well below 
those associated with human toxicity. The concentrations of menthol in the stock 
solutions procured from the Ameri caneLiquidStoreTM will be verified using an assay 
developed by Dr. Peter Jatlow.   
Green apple f lavorant : This proprietary fruit flavor is composed of simple esters and 
aldehydes dissolved in the base liquid for a final flavor concentration of approximately 2% (net wt. %). Green apple flavorants  are commonly used chemicals used in a wide array of 
food and cosmetic products. Although rare, allergic reactions to green apple flavorants can occur , and any subject reporting intolerance to products with green apple flavor or aroma 
will be excluded from study participation. G reen apple flavor cons tituents  are classified by 
the FDA as GRAS.  
Justification for green apple flavor : Although t housands of different flavor 
combinations are currently available to e -cigarette consumers , current evidence 
indicates that second to tobacco flavors , fruit flavors are the most commonly used 
flavor  category  in e-liquids upon initiation of e -cigarette use (Farsalinos et al. 2013) .  
Among fruit flavors, green apple flavor is identified by the AmericaneLiquidStoreTM 
as one of their best selling products ( also confirmed by personal communication from 
Dr. Tony Pace, PEC, Wisconsin).  
F. Genotyping  
DNA Extraction and Genotyping : 
DNA will be extracted from peripheral blood using a commercial kit (Paxgene™; PreAnalytiX Qiagen/BD, Germany). We will  genotype variations that may modulate nicotine 
responses using a 384- well plate format. Briefly, DNA samples w ill be genotyped in 2 µl -
reactions. Each reaction will be prepared with 1 ng genomic DNA, 0.05 µl of 20× (or 0.025 µl of 40×) minor groove binder (MGB) probes and primers (hCV8950074 and hCV26000428) (supplied as pre -validated SNP Assays on Demand, Applied Biosystems) 1 
µl of 2× TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix, and 0.004 µl of 100× bovine serum albumin (New England Biolabs). Reactions will be genotyped for an initial denaturation at 95°C for 10 min followed by 60 cycles of 92°C for 15 s and 60°C for 1 min. Discrimination will be performed using ABI PRISM 7900 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems). All 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
10 
Version: 7/26/17 samples will be genotyped in duplicate. We will also examine messenger RNA  (mRNA)  
levels extracted from the peripheral blood. We are especially interested to examine the 
changes in mRNA levels related to menthol ’s effects (TRP -ion channels)  and to the effects of 
nicotine . About 2.5 ml of blood will be drawn in to the PAXgene tube s at baseline, prior to 
each IV infusion, and at the end of the session . Extracted  mRNA samples will be stored at -
80°C in the Genetics Laboratory.  
 
G. Study Procedures  
For 24 hours prior to each test session , subjects will be asked to avoid using products 
containing menthol such as mint teas, cough lozenges, and mint -flavored gum. A trial- size 
tube of toothpaste that does not contain menthol will be provided for use the morning of each 
test session . Subjects  will be required to abstain from smoking for 10 hours. Abstinence  will 
be verified by expired air CO levels of < 10 ppm ( Benowitz et al. 2002)  measured on the 
morning of testing . Subjects will also be asked to refrain from consuming alcoholic 
beverages and dr ugs during study participation. A bstinence  will be verified by urine drug 
screening and Breathalyzer  measurement s before the test sessions. If results indicate non-
compliance with these study procedures, the session will be rescheduled. Repeatedly non-compliant subjects will be discharged from the study. Subjects will be instructed to drink their typical amount of caf feinated beverages in the morning to minimize caffeine 
withdrawal, which could confound interpretation of study measures.   Subjects will be  given a 
light breakfast  before each test session and a  lunch will be provided at the end of each test 
session.  
a) Adaptation Session:  The goal of this session is to familiarize participants with the study 
procedures including the use of e -cigarettes , and to gather information regarding 
participants’  use and knowledge about e -cigarettes . This session will also allow fo r a 
determination of the participants tolerance of, or aversion to, any of the flavor s prior to 
participation in a test session. Participants will be given an e -cigarette and instructed to 
inhale more softly, but for a longer duration (3- 4 seconds), than is customary for a 
standard cigarette. Additionally, a two -phase inhalation is suggested where the vapor from 
this elongated inhalation is initially  gathered in the mouth (as one might do with pipe 
tobacco) but then further inhaled into the lungs. The e- cigarettes  used in this adaptation 
session wil l be the same as those used in the test sessions. Although the familiarization 
with this technique will occur during the adaptation session , participants will be reminded 
of this inhalation technique during each test session just prior to e -cigarette use. 
Participants will be informed that the schedule of flavor delivery prior to each IV nicotine 
infusion wi ll consist of 6 inhalations  at a rate of one inhalation  every 15 seconds. 
b) Test Session s: Experimental sessions will start around 8:30 AM. As summarized in 
Table 2, blood samples for baseline biochemical measures , including plasma cotinine , 
nicotine , and  for women, estradiol and progesterone levels , will be obtained just prior to 
the collection of baseline subjective ratings and cognitive testing.  Subjects will then start 
inhaling from the e -cigarette with the assigned flavor condition (menthol, green app le or 
menthol plus green apple ), one inhalation every 15  seconds for 90 sec ond as practiced in 
the adaptation session (6 inhalations total (Vansickel  et al , 2012) . The e -liquids used in 
the e- cigarette will be prepared just prior to each test session by th e VA Research 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
11 
Version: 7/26/17 Pharmacy. Each e- cigarette tank will contain 2 mL of the e -liquid and the study 
personnel  will load the tank into the e -cigarette. Just after the last of the 6 flavor 
inhalation s, participants  will then receive the first delivery of the assigned nicotine 
infusion (saline, 0.25 mg/70 kg or 0.5 mg/70 kg nicotine) . Each infusion will be 60 
minutes apart to provide sufficient time for the physiological and subjective nicotine 
effects to return to b aseline. Following each infusion, physiological, subjective, and 
cognitive outcome measures will be obtained.  
c) Medical Monitoring : For all nicotine test  sessions, subjects will be attached to a blood 
pressure and heart rate/rhythm  device  (3-lead EKG) th at will be monitored by the study 
physician . An IV catheter will be in place throughout the session. Subjects will be 
administered nicotine only if the systolic blood pressure is <150 mmHg and heart rate is <100 beats/minute. Subjects will be terminated from the study if the blood pressure at any 
time is >170/110 mm Hg, the heart rate is >1 20 beats/min, or if they develop signs and 
symptoms compatible with nicotine toxicity. Subjects will remain in the laboratory for two  
hours after the last nicotine administration. These procedures have been developed as part 
of our IND application for IV nicotine.  
  
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
12 
Version: 7/26/17 Table 2. Schedule of Events: Experimental Session*    
Time  Measures and Events  
8:00 AM  (Building 36) CO level, urine sample, BAL, and light standard breakfast  
9:00 AM  (Biostudies Unit) blood sample , HR/BP, EKG, M -NWSC, BQSU, SAFTEE, Cognitive 
Testing  
10:00 AM  Flavor (m enthol , green apple or green apple + menthol )  
DEQ  + IV Saline or Nicotine (0.25 or 0.5 mg/70 kg) blood draw  
10:01 HR/BP, DEQ  
10:02  HR/BP  
10:03  HR/BP, DEQ,  
10:05  HR/BP, DEQ  
10:08 HR/BP, DEQ  blood draw  
10:10  HR/BP, DEQ  
10:15  HR/BP, DEQ, Cognitive Testing  
10:30 HR/BP, DEQ  blood draw  
10:45  HR/BP, DEQ  
10:55  HR/BP, DEQ, BQSU  
11:00  Flavor (menthol, green apple or green apple + menthol) DEQ + IV Saline or Nicotine 
(0.25 or 0.5  mg/70 kg) , blood draw  
12:00 Flavor (menthol, green apple or green apple + menthol) DEQ + IV Saline or Nicotine 
(0.25 or 0.5  mg/70 kg) , blood draw  
13:00  
14:00 HR/BP, EKG, M -NWSC, BQSU, SAFTEE , blood draw  
Discharge  
*The s ame measures  will be obtained following saline and each nicotine administration. For 
brevity, only the measures after saline are shown. Abbreviations: CO: Alveolar carbon monoxide; 
HR/BP: Heart  rate/Blood pressure; EKG: Electrocardiogram; M -NWSC: Minnesota Nicotine 
Withdrawal Symptom Checklist; BQSU: Brief Questionnaire of Smoking Urges; DEQ: Drug Effects Questionnaire; SAFTEE: Systematic Assessment for Treatment Emergent Events.  
 12. Data Analysis Methods  
Data analyses : The primary analyses will be intent- to-treat and will include all available data 
on subjects who complete at least one test day. Mixed -effects models will be used to test the 
study hypotheses. These models allow for differen t numbers of observations per subject, use all 
available data on each subject, and are unaffected by randomly missing data . They also provide 
flexibility in modeling the correlation structure of the data. All data will be checked for 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
13 
Version: 7/26/17 normality and transfor mations will be applied as necessary. Significance level of 0.05 will be 
used for the main hypotheses and Bonferroni correction will be applied for post -hoc tests.   
Specific Aim #1: To examine the acute reinforcing effects of menthol, a fruit flavor (green 
apple) or a fruit flavor plus menthol, alone or in combination with nicotine in smokers. Menthol 
and fruit flavor will be administered by inhalation via electronic cigarettes (e -cigarettes) and 
nicotine will be administered intravenously. The reinforcing drug effects will be measured with 
the drug effects questionnaire (DEQ).  
Hypothesis:  
Hypothesis #1A: Green apple plus menthol will be more reinforcing than menthol alone or 
green apple alone. Hypothesis #1B: Green apple plus menthol will be more effective than 
menthol alone or green apple alone in enhancing the reinforcing effects of nicotine. 
The main outcome measures will be the “good effects” and “drug liking” items of the DEQ. 
Mixed effects models  will include the within -subject factors nicoti ne dose (0.25, 0.5 mg ni cotine 
or placebo), flavor (menthol, green apple or menthol + green apple ) and time of measurement 
(+1, +3,+5,+10,+15,+30,+45,+55 minut es) and possible interactions among these factors. We 
will also consider order effects for nicoti ne dose (1, 2 or 3) and session day (1, 2 or 3) and the 
effects of potential covariates (race, sex, baseline plasma NMR, FTND scores). These effects will be included in the final model if significant. Estradiol and progesterone levels will also be consider ed as potential covariates in a secondary analysis of women only. We will consider 
several different correlation structures for the repeated measures within individuals , and will 
select the best fitting one based on Schwartz Bayesian information criterion.  SAS PROC MIXED 
will be used for the mixed -model analyses.   
Rationale for sample size: The study will have 80% power to detect large effect sizes (f=0.4) 
for the interactions of interest in repeated measures analysis for 3 0 subjects at 0.05 significance 
level. Our preliminary data for both outcome measures show larger magnitude effects for the nicotine  effects (all f>0.5) and flavor  effects are expected to be similarly strong (Sofuoglu et al. 
2009a). Applying Bonferroni correction and using an alpha level  of 0.01 we have 80% power to 
detect post -hoc comparisons of medium to large eff ect size d’=0.7 for flavor and nicotine effects. 
Our previous study shows larger effects of nicotine d’>1.0. To account for up to 20% dropout we will recruit 36 subjects  for a target of 3 0 completers.    
 13. Risks and benefits  
Potential risks : 
There are potential risks, discomforts and inconveniences associated with  participation in this 
study. These may be due to nicotine or menthol administration, blood drawing, other study procedures and potential loss of confidentiality.  
1) Common side effects of nicotine include nausea, vomiting, heartburn, and elevated heart rate and blood pressure. Toxic doses of nicotine may cause abdominal pain, hyper salivation , diarrhea, dizziness, confusion, hearing and vision problems, syncope, seizures, 
hypotension, irregular pulse, and death. However, these toxic effects occur at doses 40 to 50 times that which will be used in our study. Other potential risks from this study include administering a  drug that has addictive potential.  
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
14 
Version: 7/26/17 2) Menthol administration produces typical sensory effects in the mouth and throat. The 
doses of menthol that are found in cough drops, ranging 1 to 10 mg are regarded to be safe (Sweetman, 2011) . In spite of ubiquitous use of menthol in a wide range of products, only 
few cases of menthol poisoning has been described in the literature following very high doses of menthol ingestion, 200 mg or more.  Menthol poisoning reported to cause ataxia, confusion, coma, nausea, and vomiting. However, these toxic effects occur at doses 20 to 30 times that which will be used in our study.  
3) Inhal ation of t wo of the e -liquid flavors will contain a fruit flavor. All flavorants and 
sweeteners contained in the fru it flavor are classified by the FDA as Generally 
Recognized As Safe (GRAS). Fruit flavors are commonly used chemicals used in a wide array of food and cosmetic products. Although it is rare, allergic reactions to fruit flavors can occur so if a subject has  a bad reaction or are allergic to products with the 
relevant fruit flavor or aroma, they  will be excluded from study participation for their  
safety.  However, the administrations will be closely monitored for any signs that this unique combination of IV nicotine and inhaled flavorants results in unexpected findings.  
  
4) Propylene glycol and vegetable glycerin are categorized by the FDA as compounds that are Generally Recognized As Safe (GRAS). They are both commonly used ingredients in food products, phar maceuticals and in personal care products. They are also now used as 
the base liquid ingredient for e -cigarettes. Although e -cigarettes are reported to be helpful 
for smoking cessation, the FDA has not approved e -cigarettes for this use , and the long-
term consequences of e -cigarette use have  not been assessed.  
5) Blood Drawing: Subjects will have approximately 260 mL of blood drawn as a result of 
their participation in the study. Blood drawing can cause some pain and may result in bruising.  
6) Study procedures: On the test days, subjects will not be able to smoke for more than 10 hours. During this cigarette abstinence period, subjects may experience symptoms of nicotine withdrawal such as craving for cigarettes, anxiety, restlessness, irritabil ity, difficulty 
concentrating, loss of energy, and excessive hunger. In addition, smokers will be exposed to e-cigarettes and e- cigarette mixtures.  
7) Loss of confidentiality: It is possible that participation in the study may make others, 
including friends or family members, be aware of the participant’s tobacco use status. The potential participants will be told that if they do not feel comfortable with this then they should not participate in the project. Participants will also be told that if they repo rt any 
information to us about abuse or homicidal/suicidal behavior we will be required to report this information to the appropriate authorities. There is also a potential risk of loss of confidentiality due to data sharing.  
14. Protection of Subjects :    
Before initiating any research activity, each subject must give informed consent that will detai l the risks of study participation. They will also be advised of the data sharing plans for 
the study. Eligibility will be determined by the medical and psychiatric history, drug use history, the physical examination, and the laboratory studies done prior to beginning this 
research protocol. This study will enroll young adults between the ages of 18 to 30 because of the high prevalence of use of mentholated tobacco products in this age group (Rock  et al , 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
15 
Version: 7/26/17 2010) . To minimize the risks associated with administer ing a drug that has addictive 
potential, we will only enroll those individuals  with a consistent  history of cigarette smoking  
as verified by a careful history, questionnaires, and urinary cotinine levels . Additionally, we 
will not enroll treatment- seeking smokers.  
As mentioned previously , the most common expected adverse events related to IV nicotine 
administration are nausea, vomiting, heartburn, and elevated heart rate and blood pressure. 
To prevent nausea, subjects will be asked not to eat before the ses sions. In addition, subjects 
will sit i n a comfortable reclining chair during the test sessions that  minimizes heartburn. 
Subjects will also be carefully screened for the presence of high blood pressure or other 
cardiovascular disorders to minimize cardiovascular adverse events.  
During the test sessions, a physician will closely monitor all subjects . Subjects will be 
attached to a cardiac monitor as well as a blood pressure and heart rate monitoring device. An IV catheter will be in place throughout the ses sion. Stopping rules are in place as 
described above (Study Procedures -  Test Session).   
Over the last 6 years, we have administered nicotine intravenously to more than 400 smokers and have not encountered any adverse events attributed to nicotine administ ration. The most 
common adverse events , or reasons for discharges , in these studies include difficulty finding 
venous access, high blood pressure before nicotine administration, the use of drugs of abuse or alcohol during study participation, and adverse e vents attributed to other study 
medications. Similar to our experience, in a genetic study, Gary Swan et al . administered IV 
nicotine to 278 smokers and non- smokers via slow infusion (Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers 
Prev 2007;16(6):1057–64) . This procedure was  also well tolerated in both smokers and non-
smokers , further supporting the safety and tolerability of IV nicotine administration. 
The close monitoring of subjects during the sessions will also help to detect any adverse 
events from menthol or e -cigarette administration.  
Confidentiality will be protected by having records identified by code number only with the master list including names kept in a sealed envelope in a locked file in the Principal Investigator's office and by the pharmacy. Subjects will be  given telephone numbers to call in 
case of emergency, 24 hours a day.  The potential risk of  loss of confidentiality due to data 
sharing will be minimized by creating de -identified  data sets that exclude direct and indirect 
identifiers. In addition, resea rchers requesting data will be required to enter into a data 
sharing agreement.   
In order to participate in a study, each subject must give informed consent. All potential risks will be described in detail to the subjects in the consent form.  The personn el in the 
laboratory have been certified in either Advance Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) or Basic L ife 
Support . If a problem arises, the subject will be treated immediately.        
Confidentiality in this study is of the utmost importance to us. All information obtained will be stored in coded form. The names of the subjects will be used in hospital records.   
The risk associated with participating in this study is moderate, because the nicotine administered may be associated with mild side effects. Serious side effects associated with this treatment are not expected. This project will be monitored by the Center’s Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) because the study involves double -blind treatment of 
smokers with nicotine. This board is composed of persons not otherwise affiliated with the 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
16 
Version: 7/26/17 clinical study who are experienced in various aspects of the conduct of clinical trials for the 
treatment of addictive disorders. The Yale TCORS Independent Data Safety Monitoring Board includes experts in the field of tobacco use behaviors and challenge studies (Chair: Dr. Tony George,  FRCPC, Professor and Co- Director, Division of Brain and Therapeutics, Dept. of 
Psychiatry, U of Toronto; Dr. Thomas Brandon, Professor and Chair, Department of Health 
Outcomes & Behavior,  H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute) and in  statistics 
(Dr. Hanga Galfalvy, Assistant Professor of Neurobiology, Columbia University) . The 
members of the DSMB , and all study Investigators , will complete Conflict of Interest forms 
created by Yale’s IRB in accordance with NIH guidelines.  
We will report recruitment, follow -up, and adverse events to this panel on a bi -annual basis 
with serious adverse events reported within 48 hours. Prior to study initiation, critical 
parameters for collection of side effects and for study discontinuation will be recommended to the DSMB who may use these or other measures to monitor safety of the ongoing trial. The DSMB will be available to convene outside of scheduled meetings, if necessary, due to concerns reg arding a particular subject or due to any troublesome developments in subjects' 
experiences during the study. The DSMB will make appropriate recommendations for changes in the study protocol, if needed.   
This monitoring will be consistent with NIH policy regarding the protection of human 
subjects in research, and FDA guidance on statistical practices for clinical trials (ICH E9) and good clinical practices (ICH E6). In general, the data to be reviewed will include screening data, baseline data, efficacy data, and safety data.   
The Principal Investigator will conduct a review of all adverse events and determine the attribution and grade of severity of the adverse event by using the following scales:  
Attribution of Risk Categories: 
Definite:  Adverse event(s ) will clearly be related to investigational agent(s) or other 
intervention 
Probable:  Adverse event(s) will likely be related to investigational agent(s)  
Possible:   Adverse event(s) may be related to investigational agent(s)  
Unlikely:  Adverse event(s) wi ll doubtfully be related to investigational agent(s)  
Unrelated:  Adverse event(s) will clearly not be related to the investigational agents(s)  
Grades of Risk:  
0: No adverse event or within normal limits  
1:  Mild adverse event  
2:  Moderate adverse event  
3:  Severe adverse event resulting in hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
4:  Life-threatening or disabling adverse event  
5:  Fatal adverse event  
Serious adverse events (SAEs) include any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose results in death or the immediate risk of death, hospitalization or the prolonging of an 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
17 
Version: 7/26/17 existing hospitalization, persistent or significant disability/incapacity or a c ongenital 
anomaly/birth defect. Subjects will be terminated from participation if the investigator feels 
that subjects' health or well- being may be threatened by continuation in the study. Serious 
unanticipated and anticipated adverse events will be report ed within 48 hours to the VA 
Hospital, Yale IRB, the DSMB, and NIH. We will directly report to the FDA, whenever their 
magnitude or frequency exceeds expectations.   
 
15. Informed Consent : Recruitment will be by word -of-mouth, referrals from area programs 
and by advertisement. A research staff member will interview individuals that are interested in 
participating in the study over the phone. If subjects pass the initial screening for the study, they will then come into the clinic for a full screening evalua tion. Upon arrival, research assistant will 
read the detailed consent form and will ask questions to make sure that the subjects understand the procedure, and their rights and informed consent will be obtained. 
 
16. Confidentiality: Only authorized researc h personnel will have access to the information 
gathered in this study. Patient names or other identifiers such as social s ecurity number, initials, 
and birthdate  will not be used to identify paper or electronic records. Only a code number will 
identify th e individual research records.  The code number will not be based on any information 
that could be used to identify the subjects (for example, social security number, initials, birth date, etc.).  The master list linking names to code numbers will be kept s eparately from the 
research data and will be stored in an electronic file behind the VA firewall. All research information obtained will be kept in locked cabinets located on VA property or in electronic files behind the VA firewall. The names of the subje cts will be use d in VA electronic records, CPRS .  
 
17. Location of Study: This study will be conducted in Ward G9W (the Biostudies Unit) located in Building 1 at the West Haven VA Medical Center.   
 18. Payment: S ubjects will be paid $30.00 for attending the screening visit and $30 f or the 
Adaptation Session.  Subjects will be  paid $150 for each of the three Test Sessions. In addition, 
subjects will be paid $20 to cover transportation costs for the Adaptation Session and for each Test Session. Completing a ll components of the study will result in a maximum total payment of 
$590.  In addition, subjects may also earn $20 for referring people they know who also smoke 
cigarettes and are eligible for study participation.  A contingency payment of $20 will be given for transportation if a subject needs to be re -contacted. We will not share any information with 
the subject who makes the referral about the ultimate enrollment status or study outcome of the referred individuals.  
 
      
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
18 
Version: 7/26/17  
Payment Schedule  
Visits  Amount Paid  Total  
Screening Visit  $30.00  $30.00  
Adaptation Visit  $30.00  $30.00  
Travel for Adaptation, and 
Test days 1,2, and 3  $20.00 each visit  $80.00 
Test days 1,2 and 3  $150.00 each test day  $450.00  
 Max Total Payment  $590.00  
Referral  $20.00  $20.00  
 
 
19. Funding Source:  Provided by an NIH Center Grant . 
 20. Duration:  The entire s tudy will take approximately one  and a half years to complete.   
 21. References:  
Bautista DM, Siemens J, Glazer JM, Tsuruda PR, Basbaum AI, Stucky CL , et al  (2007). The 
menthol receptor TRPM8 is the principal detector of environmental cold. Nature  448(7150): 
204-208. 
 Bautista DM, Siemens J, Glazer JM, Tsuruda PR, Basbaum AI, Stucky CL , et al  (2007). The 
menthol receptor TRPM8 is the principal detector of environmental cold. Nature  448(7150): 
204-208. 
Bell SL, Taylor RC, Singleton EG, Henningfield JE, Heishman SJ (1999). Smoking after 
nicotine deprivation enhances cognitive performance and decreases tobacco craving in drug abusers [In Process Citation]. Nicotine Tob Res  1(1): 45- 52. 
Benowitz NL (2008). Clinical pharmacology of nicotine: implications for understanding, preventing, and treating tobacco addiction. Clin Pharmacol Ther  83(4): 531 -541. 
Benowitz NL, Dains KM, Dempsey D, Havel C, Wilson M, Jacob P, 3rd (2010). Urine menthol as a biomarker of mentholated cigarette smoking. Cancer epidemiology, biomarkers & 
prevention : a publication of the American Association for Cancer Research, cosponsored by the American Society of Preventive Oncology 19(12): 3013- 3019. 
Benowitz NL, Jacob PI, Ahijevich K, Jarvis MJ, Hall S, LeHouzec J , et al  (2002). Biochemical 
verification of tobacco use and cessation. Report from the SRNT Subcommittee on Biochemical Verification. Nicotine & Tobacco Res  4: 149- 159. 
Benowitz NL, Lessov- Schlaggar CN, Swan GE, Jacob P, 3rd (2006). Female sex and oral 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
19 
Version: 7/26/17 contraceptive use accelerate nicotine metabolism. Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics  79(5): 
480-488. 
Benowitz NL, Perez -Stable EJ, Fong I, Modin G, Herrera B, Jacob P, 3rd (1999). Ethnic  
differences in N -glucuronidation of nicotine and cotinine. J Pharmacol Exp Ther  291(3): 1196-
1203. 
Benowitz NL, Samet JM (2011). The threat of menthol cigarettes to U.S. public health. The New 
England journal of medicine  364(23): 2179- 2181.  
Benowitz NL, H errera B, Jacob P, 3rd (2004) Mentholated cigarette smoking inhibits nicotine 
metabolism. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 310: 1208- 15. 
 Brauer LH, Hatsukami D, Hanson K, Shiffman S (1996). Smoking topography in tobacco 
chippers and dependent smokers. Addictive behaviors  21(2): 233- 238. 
Caggiula AR, Donny EC, Palmatier MI, Liu X, Chaudhri N, Sved AF (2009). The role of 
nicotine in smoking: a dual -reinforcement model. Nebraska Symposium on Motivation Nebraska 
Symposium on Motivation 55: 91- 109. 
Carchman RA, Southwick MA (1990). Chemical Senses Research a Research and Development Perspective. In: http://legacy.library.ucsf.edu/tid/asz71f00 (ed).  
Coggins CR, Murrelle EL, Carchman RA, Heidbreder C (2009). Light and intermittent cigarette smokers: a review (1989- 2009). Psy chopharmacology (Berl) . 
Collins CC, Moolchan ET (2006). Shorter time to first cigarette of the day in menthol adolescent cigarette smokers. Addictive behaviors  31(8): 1460- 1464. 
Corrigall WA (1999). Nicotine self -administration in animals as a dependence m odel. Nicotine 
Tob Res  1(1): 11 -20. 
Corvalan NA, Zygadlo JA, Garcia DA (2009). Stereo- selective activity of menthol on GABA(A) 
receptor. Chirality  21(5): 525- 530. 
Dempsey D, Tutka P, Jacob P, 3rd, Allen F, Schoedel K, Tyndale RF , et al  (2004). Nicotine 
metabolite ratio as an index of cytochrome P450 2A6 metabolic activity. Clinical pharmacology 
and therapeutics  76(1): 64 -72. 
DeVito EE, Valentine GW, Herman AI, Jensen KP, Sofuoglu M (2016) Effect of menthol -
preferring status on response to intravenous nicoti ne. Tobacco Regulatory Science 2: 317- 328. 
 Donny EC, Caggiula AR, Knopf S, Brown C (1995). Nicotine self -administration in rats. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl)  122(4): 390- 394. 
Donny EC, Caggiula AR, Rowell PP, Gharib MA, Maldovan V, Booth S , et al  (2000). Nic otine 
self-administration in rats: estrous cycle effects, sex differences and nicotinic receptor binding. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl)  151(4): 392- 405. 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
20 
Version: 7/26/17 Eissenberg T, Griffiths RR, Stitzer ML (1996). Mecamylamine does not precipitate withdrawal 
in cigarette smokers. Psychopharmacology (Berl)  127(4): 328- 336. 
Fagan P, Pokhrel P, Herzog TA, Pagano IS, Franke AA, Clanton MS, Alexander LA, Trinidad 
DR, Sakuma KL, Johnson CA, Moolchan ET (2016) Nicotine Metabolism in Young Adult Daily 
Menthol and Nonmenthol Smokers. Nicotine Tob Res 18: 437- 46. 
Farsalinos KE, Romagna G, Tsiapras D, Kyrzopoulos S, Spyrou A, Voudris V (2013) Impact of flavour variability on electronic cigarette use experience: an internet survey. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health 10: 7272- 82. 
Goedeker KC , Tiffany ST (2008). On the nature of nicotine addiction: a taxometric analysis. J 
Abnorm Psychol  117(4): 896- 909. 
Hans M, Wilhelm M, Swandulla D (2012). Menthol suppresses nicotinic acetylcholine receptor functioning in sensory neurons via allosteric modulation. Chemical senses  37(5): 463- 469. 
Harrell MB, Weaver SR, Loukas A, Creamer M, Marti CN, Jackson CD, Heath JW, Nayak P, 
Perry CL, Pechacek TF, Eriksen MP (2017) Flavored e -cigarette use: Characterizing youth, 
young adult, and adult users. Preventive medicine reports 5: 33- 40. 
 Harvey DM, Yasar S, Heishman SJ, Panlilio LV, Henningfield JE, Goldberg SR (2004). Nicot ine serves as an effective reinforcer of intravenous drug -taking behavior in human cigarette 
smokers. Psychopharmacology (Berl)  175(2): 134 -142. 
Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT, Frecker RC, Fagerstrom KO (1991). The Fagerstrom Test for 
Nicotine Dependence: a r evision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J Addictions  86: 
1119- 1127. 
Heck JD (2010). A review and assessment of menthol employed as a cigarette flavoring ingredient. Food and chemical toxicology : an international journal published for the Bri tish 
Industrial Biological Research Association 48 Suppl 2 : S1-38. 
Heishman SJ, Kleykamp BA, Singleton EG (2010). Meta -analysis of the acute effects of nicotine 
and smoking on human performance. Psychopharmacology  210(4): 453 -469. 
Hendricks PS, Prochaska J J, Humfleet GL, Hall SM (2008). Evaluating the validities of different 
DSM -IV-based conceptual constructs of tobacco dependence. Addiction 103(7): 1215- 1223.  
Henningfield JE, Goldberg SR (1983). Control of behavior by intravenous nicotine injections in human subjects. Pharmacol Biochem Behav  19(6): 1021- 1026. 
Henningfield JE, Miyasato K, Jasinski DR (1983). Cigarette smokers self -administer intravenous 
nicotine. Pharmacol Biochem Behav  19(5): 887 -890. 
Hersey JC, Ng SW, Nonnemaker JM, Mowery P, Thomas KY, Vi lsaint MC , et al  (2006). Are 
menthol cigarettes a starter product for youth? Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 8(3): 403- 413. 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
21 
Version: 7/26/17 Hughes JR, Hatsukami D (1986). Signs and symptoms of tobacco withdrawal. Archives of 
general psychiatry  43(3): 289 -294. 
Kenford SL, Smith SS, Wetter DW, Jorenby DE, Fiore MC, Baker TB (2002). Predicting relapse 
back to smoking: contrasting affective and physical models of dependence. J Consult Clin 
Psychol  70(1): 216- 227. 
King BA, Tynan MA, Dube SR, Arrazola R (2014) Flavored- little-cigar and flavored- cigarette 
use among U.S. middle and high school students. J Adolesc Health 54: 40- 6. 
 Krishnan- Sarin S, Morean ME, Camenga DR, Cavallo DA, Kong G (2015) E -cigarette Use 
Among High School and Middle School Adolescents in Connecticut. Nicotine Tob Res 17: 810-8. 
Le Foll B, Wertheim C, Goldberg SR (2007). High reinforcing efficacy of nicotine in non- human 
primates. PLoS One  2(2): e230. 
Levine J, Schooler NR (1986). SAFTE E: a technique for the systematic assessment of side 
effects in clinical trials. Psychopharmacology bulletin 22(2): 343- 381. 
Lynch WJ, Sofuoglu M (2010). Role of progesterone in nicotine addiction: Evidence from 
initiation to relapse. Experimental and clinical psychopharmacology  18(6): 451 -461. 
Mancuso G, Warburton DM, Melen M, Sherwood N, Tirelli E (1999). Selective effects of nicotine on attentional processes. Psychopharmacology (Berl)  146(2): 199 -204. 
Miller WR, DelBoca FK (1994). Measurement of drinking  behavior using the Form 90 family of 
instruments. Journal of Studies on Alcohol  12, supplement : 112- 117. 
Mooney ME, Li ZZ, Murphy SE, Pentel PR, Le C, Hatsukami DK (2008). Stability of the nicotine metabolite ratio in ad libitum and reducing smokers. Canc er epidemiology, biomarkers 
& prevention : a publication of the American Association for Cancer Research, cosponsored by 
the American Society of Preventive Oncology 17 (6): 1396- 1400. 
Morgan MJ, Davies GM, Willner P (1999). The Questionnaire of Smoking Urge s is sensitive to 
abstinence and exposure to smoking -related cues. Behav Pharmacol  10(6 -7): 619- 626. 
Muscat JE, Chen G, Knipe A, Stellman SD, Lazarus P, Richie JP, Jr. (2009). Effects of menthol on tobacco smoke exposure, nicotine dependence, and NNAL gluc uronidation. Cancer 
epidemiology, biomarkers & prevention : a publication of the American Association for Cancer 
Research, cosponsored by the American Society of Preventive Oncology  18(1): 35 -41. 
Myers CS, Taylor RC, Moolchan ET, Heishman SJ (2008). Dose -related enhancement of mood 
and cognition in smokers administered nicotine nasal spray. Neuropsychopharmacology  33(3): 
588-598. 
Nonnemaker J, Hersey J, Homsi G, Busey A, Allen J, Vallone D (2012). Initiation with Menthol Cigarettes and Youth Smoking Uptake. Addiction (Abingdon, England) : doi 10. 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
22 
Version: 7/26/17 Paterson NE (2009). The neuropharmacological substrates of nicotine reward: reinforcing versus 
reinforcement -enhancing effects of nicotine. Behavioural pharmacology  20(3): 211- 225. 
Pesko MF, Kenkel DS, Wang H, Hughes  JM (2016) The effect of potential electronic nicotine 
delivery system regulations on nicotine product selection. Addiction (Abingdon, England) 111: 734-44. 
 
Radloff LS (1977). The CES -D Scale: A self -report depression scale for research in the general 
population. Applied Psychological Measurements  1: 385- 401. 
Reeves D, Winter, K., Kane, R., Elsmore, T., & Bleiberg, J. (2002). ANAM 2001 User's Manual  
National Cognitive Recovery Foundation. 
Rock VJ, Davis SP, Thorne SL, Asman KJ, Caraballo RSCINNTRF, author reply P (2010). 
Menthol cigarette use among racial and ethnic groups in the United States, 2004- 2008. Nicotine 
& tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 12 
Suppl 2 : S117- 124. 
Rose JE (2006). Nicotine and nonnicotine factors in cigarette addiction. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl) 184(3 -4): 274- 285. 
Rose JE, Behm FM, Westman EC, Mathew RJ, London ED, Hawk TC , et al  (2003). PET studies 
of the influences of nicotine on neural systems in cigarette smokers. The American j ournal of 
psychiatry  160(2): 323- 333. 
Rose JE, Corrigall WA (1997). Nicotine self -administration in animals and humans: similarities 
and differences. Psychopharmacology (Berl)  130(1): 28- 40. 
Ruskin DN, Anand R, LaHoste GJ (2007). Menthol and nicotine oppos itely modulate body 
temperature in the rat. European journal of pharmacology  559(2 -3): 161- 164. 
Ruskin DN, Anand R, LaHoste GJ (2008). Chronic menthol attenuates the effect of nicotine on body temperature in adolescent rats. Nicotine & tobacco research : o fficial journal of the Society 
for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 10(12): 1753- 1759. 
Shiffman S, Fischer LB, Zettler -Segal M, Benowitz NL (1990). Nicotine exposure among 
nondependent smokers. Archives of general psychiatry  47(4): 333- 336. 
Sledjeski EM, D ierker LC, Costello D, Shiffman S, Donny E, Flay BR (2007). Predictive 
validity of four nicotine dependence measures in a college sample. Drug Alcohol Depend 87(1): 
10-19. 
Sobell LC, Sobell MB (1992). Timeline followback:  A technique for assessing self -reported 
alcohol consumption. In: Litten RZ, Allen J (eds). Measuring alcohol consumption:  
Psychosocial and biological methods . Humana Press: New Jersey, pp 41- 72. 
Sofuoglu M, Babb D, Hatsukami DK (2003). Labetalol treatment enhances the attenuation of 
tobacco withdrawal symptoms by nicotine in abstinent smokers. Nicotine Tob Res  5(6): 947- 953. 
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
23 
Version: 7/26/17 Sofuoglu M, Herman AI, Mooney M, Waters AJ (2009a). Varenicline attenuates some of  the 
subjective and physiological effects of intravenous nicotine in humans. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl) 207(1): 153 -162. PMCID: 2796376.  
Sofuoglu M, Herman AI, Nadim H, Jatlow  P (2012) Rapid nicotine clearance is associated with 
greater reward and heart rate increases from intravenous nicotine. Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1509- 16. 
Sofuoglu M, LeSage MG (2012). The reinforcement threshold for nicotine as a target for tobacco 
control. Drug and alcohol dependence  125(1 -2): 1-7. PMCID: Pending 
Sofuoglu M, Mooney M (2009b). Subjective responses to intravenous nicotine: greater 
sensitivity in women than in men. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol  17(2): 63 -69. PMCID: 2758775.  
Sofuoglu M, Mourati dis M, Yoo S, Culligan K, Kosten T (2005). Effects of tiagabine in 
combination with intravenous nicotine in overnight abstinent smokers. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 181(3): 504 -510. 
Sofuoglu M, Poling J, Mouratidis M, Kosten T (2006). Effects of topiramate i n combination with 
intravenous nicotine in overnight abstinent smokers. Psychopharmacology (Berl)  184(3 -4): 645-
651. 
Sofuoglu M, Yoo S, Hill KP, Mooney M (2008). Self -administration of intravenous nicotine in 
male and female cigarette smokers. Neuropsychopharmacology  33(4): 715 -720. PMCID: 
17534380. 
Soule EK, Lopez AA, Guy MC, Cobb CO (2016) Reasons for using flavored liquids among 
electronic cigarette users: A concept mapping study. Drug and alcohol dependence 166: 168- 76. 
 
Sorge RE, Pierre VJ, Clarke PB ( 2009). Facilitation of intravenous nicotine self -administration 
in rats by a motivationally neutral sensory stimulus. Psychopharmacology  207(2): 191- 200. 
Soria R, Stapleton JM, Gilson SF, Sampson- Cone A, Henningfield JE, London ED (1996). 
Subjective and ca rdiovascular effects of intravenous nicotine in smokers and non- smokers. 
Psychopharmacology  128(3): 221- 226. 
Spreen OS, E. (1991). A compendium of neuropsychological tests: Administration, norms, and 
commentary.  Oxford University Press: New York.  
Sweetman SC (2011). Martindale : the complete drug reference 37th ed. edn. London ; Chicago : 
Pharmaceutical Press, 2011.  
Tierney PA, Karpinski CD, Brown JE, Luo W, Pankow JF (2016) Flavour chemicals in 
electronic cigarette fluids. Tob Control  25: e10- 5. 
 
Tiffany S T, Drobes DJ (1991). The development and initial validation of a questionnaire on 
smoking urges. Br J Addict  86(11): 1467- 1476.  
Mehmet Sofuoglu, M.D., Ph.D. Effects of Flavors on Nicotine Reinforcement in Smokers  
VA Healthcare System             
24 
Version: 7/26/17 Umezu T (2009). Evidence for dopamine involvement in ambulation promoted by menthone in 
mice. Pharmacology, biochemistry, and behavior  91(3): 315- 320. 
Valentine G, DeVito EE, Jatlow PI, Gueorguieva R, Sofuoglu M. Menthol's effects on nicotine 
reinforcement in smokers (2017). Neuropsychopharmacology  (under review).  
Vansickel AR, Weaver MF, Eissenberg T (2012). Clinical laboratory  assessment of the abuse 
liability of an electronic cigarette. Addiction (Abingdon, England)  107(8): 1493- 1500. 
Wackowski O, Delnevo CD (2007). Menthol cigarettes and indicators of tobacco dependence among adolescents. Addictive behaviors  32(9): 1964- 1969. 
Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of 
positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol  54(6): 1063- 1070. 
Wise PM, Breslin PA, Dalton P (2012) Sweet taste and menthol increase cough reflex 
thresholds.  Pulm Pharmacol Ther 25: 236- 41. 
Yerger VB (2011). Menthol's potential effects on nicotine dependence: a tobacco industry perspective. Tobacco control  20 Suppl 2 : ii29 -36. 
 Yingst JM, Veldheer S, Hammett E, Hrabovsky S, Foulds J (2017) A method for classifying 
user-reported electronic cigarette liquid flavors. Nicotine Tob Res . [Epub ahead of print]  
 
Zhang XB, Jiang P, Gong N, Hu XL, Fei D, Xiong ZQ , et al  (2008). A -type GABA receptor as a 
central target of TRPM8 agonist menthol. PloS one  3(10):  e3386.  
Zhu SH, Sun JY, Bonnevie E, Cummins SE, Gamst A, Yin L, Lee M (2014) Four hundred and sixty brands of e -cigarettes and counting: implications for product regulation. Tob Control  23 
Suppl 3: iii3 -9. 
 
Zins BJ, Sandborn WJ, Mays DC, Lawson GM, McKinne y JA, Tremaine WJ , et al  (1997). 
Pharmacokinetics of nicotine tartrate after single -dose liquid enema, oral, and intravenous 
administration. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology  37(5): 426- 436. 
 
 
 