Protocol: EVO 100-311 EVO100 vaginal gel 
Evofem, Inc. 06 July 2020 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY  Page 1 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS 
TITLE OF CLINICAL TRIAL:  
Phase 3 double -blind placebo -controlled efficacy trial of EVO100 vaginal gel for the 
prevention of urogenital Chlamydia trachomatis  and Neisseria gonorrhea  infection  
INVESTIGATIONAL  PRODUCT(S):  
After a screening period of up to 35  days, women will be randomized to receive either EVO100 
or placebo : 
EVO100 vaginal gel  (previously known as Amphora ) is supplied in indiv idually wrapped 5  g 
single -dose, pre -filled vaginal applicators. EVO100 is a viscous, off white to tan gel of uniform 
consistency. Its active ingredients are lactic acid United States Pharmacopeia (USP), citric acid 
USP, and potassium bitartrate USP.   
Univ ersal placebo gel (UPG ) is an isotonic non -buffering gel, containing 2.7% 
hydroxyethylcellulose, sorbic acid, sodium hydroxide, sodium chloride, and purified water and 
supplied in individually wrapped 5 g single -dose, pre -filled vaginal applicators.  
CLINI CAL PHASE: Phase  3 
CLINICAL TRIAL  OBJECTIVES:  
Primary Objective : 
To evaluate the efficacy of EVO100 vaginal gel in the prevention of urogenital
Chlamydia trachomatis  (CT)  and Neisseria gonorrhea  (GC) infection
Secondary  Objectives : 
To assess impact of EV O100 vaginal gel on overall sexual satisfaction and overall
product satisfaction over the course of the clinical study
To evaluate  the safety of EVO100
Exploratory  Objectives : 
To determine the impact of EVO100 vaginal gel use rate (subject adherence to
instructed use) on the efficacy in the combined infections
To assess other subject satisfaction with EVO100 vaginal gel over the course of the
clinical study
OUTCOME MEASURES:  
Primary: 
A composite endpoint, defined as a comparison between the proportion of  subjects who
are defined study successes vs study failures among the intervention groups (EVO100
or placebo) with success defined as subjects completing the trial to Visit 5 without any
CT or GC infection.
Secondary:  
The secondary outcome s for this study  will be assessing the following proportion of subjects : 
with overall sexual satisfaction using the female sexual function index ( FSFI ) overall  sexual
Protocol: EVO 100-311 EVO100 vaginal gel 
Evofem, Inc.06 July 2020 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY  Page 2 satisfaction question at Visit 5 and not having a CT or GC infection  
with overall sexual satisfaction usi ng the FSFI overall  sexual satisfaction question at visit 5
reporting overall product satisfaction at Visit 5
Incidence of adverse events (AEs)  (descriptive analysis)
Exploratory:  
Exploratory assessments include:  
Comparison of compliance with EVO100 vagin al gel usage vs placebo usage during
study (rate of product use adherence vs placebo)
Subgroup analyses of the primary endpoint (the proportion of subjects who are deemed
success vs failure) will be performed for the following:
oSubjects with 0%, >0% and < 20%, ≥20%, ≥40%, ≥60%, ≥80% and 100%
product use adherence
Descriptive a nalysis of failure components defined as failures  for the primary endpoint
Comparison of PROMIS SexFS Satisfaction, Pain and Lubrication subscales with
EVO100 vaginal gel usage vs plac ebo
Comparison of FSFI Lubrication and Pain subscales with EVO100 vaginal gel usage vs
placebo
Comparison of Patient Global Impression of Change (PGIC) with EVO100 vaginal gel
usage vs placebo
CLINICAL TRIAL  DESIGN:  
This is a Phase 3, double -blind, placeb o-controlled study in approximately 90 sites in the 
United States (US) and European Union (EU) over approximately 16 weeks of use in women 
age ≥13 years who are at risk of urogenital CT or GC infection.  
TREATMENT DURATION:  
After a screening period of up t o 35 days, women will be randomized to receive either EVO100 
or placebo. Each woman will participate in the study until she has completed 16 weeks of 
treatment or observation or tests positive for CT or GC infection . This will include women who 
discontinue  treatment but continue other study assessments to Visit 5. The intervention period 
is defined as Visits 1 to 5. There will be a follow -up visit (Visit  6) 4 weeks after the last 
intervention visit.  Visits 5 and 6 will be combined for subjects who discontin ue the study early. 
These periods are outlined in the Schedule of Assessments ( Table 1). The protocol -defined 
period of observation is 20 weeks.  
SAMPLE SIZE:  
Assuming a two -sided alpha of 0.05, the failure rate fo r control subjects to be 32.5%, and the 
failure rate for the treatment subjects to be 25.5% , a sample of 881  subjects per treatment arm 
is needed (1762 subjects overall)  to achieve 90% power . Anticipating approximately 5% of 
subjects will have non -negative  CT/GC results in enrollment based on the Phase 2B/3 study 
data, this yields a sample size of 1856 women.  
Protocol: EVO 100-311 EVO100 vaginal gel 
Evofem, Inc. 06 July 2020 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY  Page 3 ANALYSIS POPULATION:  
This study will utilize three analysis populations: Intention -to-treat (ITT), modified 
Intention -to-treat (mITT), and safety. Th e ITT population will consist of all randomized 
subjects. The mITT population will be the analysis population for the primary endpoint and 
will consist of all randomized subjects who are negative for chlamydia and gonorrhea at 
enrollment and are provided w ith study product. Lastly, the safety population will be based on 
subjects with documented use of any study product. Analyses using the ITT and mITT 
populations will be performed based on the treatment randomized. Meanwhile, safety analyses 
will be based o n the treatment received . 
STUDY POPULATION:  
Study Sites:  
The study will be conducted at up to 90 clinical sites in the US and /or EU. Subjects will be 
selected for the study according to the eligibility criteria detailed below.  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1.Subject s must meet both of the following criteria:
a.Healthy female subjects at least 13 years of age with a urogenital CT and/or GC
infection (documented in a retrievable medical record) within the 16 weeks prior to
enrollment and one or more of the additional ris k factors included in point ii below:
i. Acceptable documentation will include:
1.Laboratory  report(s) confirming CT and/or GC infection
2.Copy of clinic note from the date of diagnosis confirming CT and/or GC
infection and indicating the date of diagnosis and/or  date of treatment
3.Evidence of dispensed medication (from pharmacy records or clinic notes)
for antibiotic therapy used for treatment of CT and/or GC
ii. PLUS one or more of the following additional risk factor(s):
1.13 to 24 years of age at the screening visit
2.New sex partner within the past 12 weeks (84 days)
3.More than one current sex partner
4.Knowledge that current sex partner has multiple partners
5.Partner with known sexually transmitted infection ( STI)
6.Inconsistent condom use among persons who are not in a mu tually
monogamous relationship
b.If medical record of previous infection cannot be obtained within two weeks of
screening date, following three documented attempts to obtain the medical records,
subjects may be enrolled only if they have two or more of the f ollowing risk factors,
in addition to self-reported  history of infection within 16 weeks prior to enrollment:
i. 13 to 24 years of age at the screening visit
ii. New sex partner within the past 12 weeks (84 days)
iii. More than one current sex partner
iv. Knowledge that current sex partner has multiple partners
v. Partner with known STI
vi. Inconsistent condom use among persons who are not in a mutually
monogamous relationship
Protocol: EVO 100-311 EVO100 vaginal gel 
Evofem, Inc. 06 July 2020 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY  Page 4 2.Ability to understand the consent process and procedures. For minors, the ability to
obtain consent fro m parents/legal guardian and assent by minor subjects as applicable
according to local regulations.
3.Agree to be available for all study visits including Visit 5 and follow -up Visit 6 and
comply with follow -up on staff appointment reminders
4.Negative pregnan cy test
5.Negative CT and GC nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) at screening or positive
CT or GC NAAT and receives standard of care (SOC  according to CDC or World
Health Organization  [WHO] guidelines ) treatment prior to enrollment with subsequent
negati ve CT and GC NAAT testing at enrollment visit
6.Agree to use a woman -controlled method of contraception that is not directly delivered
to the vaginal mucosa (with the exception of a vaginal ring) throughout the duration of
the study, such as oral contracepti ves, birth control implants, intrauterine devices
(IUDs), or tubal ligation. Condom use only is not an acceptable form of contraception
for this study
7.Able and willing to comply with all study procedures, including the use of eDiaries and
reporting of all Adverse Events and concomitant medications.
8.Reports vaginal sexual intercourse with a male partner at least three times per month in
the previous month and anticipates vaginal sexual intercourse regularly for the duration
of the study
9.Agree to abstain from  douching or any form of vaginal suppository use (other than
investigational product) during course of study
Exclusion Criteria:  
1.Participation in any study with an investigational compound or device within 30 days
prior to signing informed consent.
2.Used P hexxi (lactic acid, citric acid, and potassium bitartrate) as a contraceptive
vaginal gel within 7 days prior to enrollment (may be enrolled at a later date if all other
criteria are met).
3.In the opinion of the Investigator, has a history of substance or a lcohol abuse in the last
12 months
4.In the opinion of the Investigator, has issues, conditions, or concerns that may
compromise the safety of the subject, impact the subject’s compliance with the protocol
requirements, or confound the reliability of the dat a acquired
5.Is a close relative of or is an Evofem, approved contract research organization  (CRO),
ICON, or clinical site employee regardless of direct involvement in research activities
6.Pregnant (or actively trying to become pregnant) or breastfeeding
7.Wome n who have undergone a total hysterectomy (had uterus and cervix removed) .
However, women with subtotal hysterectomy with an intact cervix may be enrolled
8.Inability to provide informed consent  or assent
9.Has a history or expectation of noncompliance with m edications or intervention
protocol
10.Has engaged in sexual vaginal intercourse or douching, or used of any form of vaginal
suppository or intravaginal device (with the exception of contraceptive vaginal ring or
tampons) for 24 hours prior to enrollment (ma y be enrolled at a later date if all other
criteria are met)
Protocol: EVO 100-311 EVO100 vaginal gel 
Evofem, Inc. 6 July 2020 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY  Page 5 11.Menstruating at enrollment (may be enrolled at a later date if all other criteria are met)
12.Is currently being treated, or has been treated, for a period of 21 days prior to
enrollment, with any antibiotics . Note: Subjects will not be discontinued from study
treatment post -randomization if treated with antibiotics for an infection other than CT
or GC .
13.In the opinion of the Investigator, has signs/symptoms that indicate persistence of CT
or GC infec tion diagnosed at screening, new interval infection, and/or a failure to
comply with or complete the prescribed treatment regimen following a positive
screening NAAT
14.Women who regularly use douches, vaginal medications, vaginal products, or
suppositories  who do not agree to stop  these products for the duration of the study
15.Women who are currently using contraceptive products that are directly delivered to the
vaginal mucosa (with the exception of contraceptive vaginal ring), such as diaphragms,
spermici des, or any vaginally applied or inserted products containing nonoxynol -9
(N-9) or Phexxi (lactic acid, citric acid and potassium bitartrate)
16.Vulnerable populations, including children <13 years of age, pregnant women,
prisoners, institutionalized pers ons, persons without  decisional capacity, persons
without phone and /or without domicile (homeless).
Protocol: EVO 100-311 EVO100 vaginal gel 
Evofem, Inc. 06 July 2020 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY  Page 6 Figure 1 Schematic Flow of Study Design 
Abbreviations: CT = Chlamydia trachomatis , GC = Neisseria gonorrhea , NAAT  = nucleic acid 
amplification test
Screening 
Visit 0 
Week s -5 to 
0 
Informed Consent  
CT/GC NAA T 
CT/GC NAAT  
Results  
Positive  
 Negative  
Standard of 
Care Treatment  
Enrollment  
Eligibility Criteria 
Visit 1: Assessments/Procedures/CT/GC NAAT 
Randomization  
Intervention 
Period 
Visits 1 to 5  
Week s 0 to 
16 
EVO100  Gel 
N=928  
Placebo Gel  
N=928  
Visits 2  to 5 Assessments/Procedures  
Follow -up 
Visit 6 
Week 20  
Visit 6 Assessments/Procedures  