Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
1  
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention  for Dyspnea  in Patients  with  Advanced  Lung  Cancer 
DF/HCC SOCIAL -BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
PIs: Joseph Greer  & Jennifer Temel  
Massachusetts General Hospital  
ClinicalTrials.Gov: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Version  1.19 
11/15/2021  
 
Section  1: Protocol  Schema  
 
 
 
 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
2  Section  2: Body  of Protocol  
 
Table of Contents  
1.0 INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  3 
1.1 Overview.  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  3 
1.2 Background  and Rationale.  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  3 
2.0 OBJECTIVES ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  8 
2.1 Primary  Aim ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  8 
2.2 Secondary  Aim ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  8 
2.3 Exploratory  Aim ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  8 
3.0 RESEARCH  SUBJECT  SELECTION  ................................ ................................ .................. 9 
3.1 Patient  Eligibility  Criteria ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  9 
4.0 RESEARCH  SUBJECT  ENTRY  ................................ ................................ ........................... 9 
4.1 Patient Screening  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  9 
4.2 Patient  Recruitment  and Enrollment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  10 
4.3 Randomization  and Registration  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  12 
5.0 STUDY  DESIGN  & METHODS  ................................ ................................ .......................... 12 
5.1 Study Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  12 
5.2 Selection  of Instruments.  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  13 
5.3 Description  of Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  14 
5.4 Data  Collection  Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  16 
5.5 Description  of Study  Processes  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  17 
5.6 Adverse  Reactions  and Their  Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 21 
6.0 STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..23 
6.1 Study Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  23 
6.2 Sample  Size and Power Calculation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  23 
6.3 Analysis  Plan ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  23 
6.4 Handling  of Missing  Data................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  25 
6.5 Potential  Problems,  Alternative  Strategies  and Benchmarks  for Success  ................................ ......................  25 
7.0 REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
3  1.0 INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1 Overview.  
At least 50% of patients with advanced lung cancer experience debilitating dyspnea that is associated 
with worse medical and psychosocial outcomes. The purpose of the present investigation is to test a 
brief behavioral intervention for dyspnea, delivered by oncology nurses within the outpatient cancer 
clinic  or virtually  via telephone  or secure  video  visit.  Through  this study,  we seek to increase  access  to 
much needed symptom management for those diagnosed with advanced lung cancers and ideally 
improve patients’ overall quality of life.  
 
The proposed  project  is being  funded  by the National  Institutes  of Health/National  Institute  of Nursing 
Research.  
 
1.2 Background  and Rationale.  
Dyspnea is Debilitating and Highly Prevalent among Patients with Advanced Lung Cancer  
Lung  cancer  remains  the most  commonly  diagnosed  cancer  and leading  cause  of cancer  death  
worldwide.24 Dyspnea, a primary symptom of lung cancer, reflects a subjective experience of distress 
or discomfort related to the sensation of breathlessness.25 The presentation of the symptom may vary, 
with patients  describing  dyspnea  as episodic  in nature,  triggered  suddenly  upon  exertion,  or as 
continuous, occurring even at rest.26 Among patients with advanced lung cancer, approximately half 
report  experiencing  clinically  significant  dyspnea  that interferes  with daily  life activities.1,2,10  Moreover, 
the symptom tends to worsen in frequency and severity as patients approach the end of life.3-5 Several 
studies  have  shown  a strong  association  between  the severity  of dyspnea  and worse  quality  of life, with 
impairments in physical functioning and emotional wellbeing.9-11,27 
 
Dyspnea  is Associated  with  Significant  Symptom  Burden  and Psychological  Distress  
In addition to poor quality of life, dyspnea is linked to increased pain, anxiety, and mood disturbance 
among patients with cancer. In a cohort of 120 patients with early and late -stage lung cancers, 
approximately 87% reported experiencing dyspnea, and those with more severe symptoms also had 
worse pain and anxiety.27 For some individuals, dyspnea is associated with feelings of panic and 
impending death.8 We found in our own investigation of patients with lung cancer that those with 
dyspnea  were  twice  as likely  to have  panic  attacks  compared  to those  without  respiratory  symptoms.28 
Furthermore,  investigators  have  observed  that dyspnea  is related  to depression,  anxiety,  fatigue,  cough, 
and decreased  coping  capacity  in patients  with cancer  receiving  palliative  care services.29 These  studies 
underscore  that the experience  of dyspnea  is multifaceted,  involving  physical  and psychological  factors, 
and requires comprehensive symptom assessment and management.  
 
Dyspnea  is Associated  with  Increased  Service  Utilization  
Compounding the suffering experienced by patients and families, dyspnea is a major cause of 
healthcare utilization among individuals with cancer. Specifically, respiratory distress accounted for 
the greatest number of emergency department (ED) visits in patients with lung cancer (32% of visits) 
in one study  of cancer -related  ED utilization.  Many  of these  patients  were  subsequently  admitted  to the 
hospital after ED evaluation.13 This trend persists throughout the course of disease, as dyspnea is the 
second  most  common  reason  for visits  to the ED in the final two weeks  of life for patients  with cancer.12 
Data  suggest  that the median  survival  for patients  with lung cancer  who present  to the ED with dyspnea 
is only four weeks.30 In the ambulatory care setting, one study showed that over half of patients with 
lung cancer (57%) utilized many services across disciplines, such as pulmonary rehabilitation and 
physical  therapy,  given  their high symptom  burden.31 Thus,  the Quality  Oncology  Practice  Initiative  of 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
4  the American  Society  of Clinical  Oncology  has identified  the assessment  and management  of dyspnea 
as a key measure of quality cancer care.14 
 
Novel  Treatment  Approaches  for Dyspnea  Are Greatly  Needed  
Despite the significant burden dyspnea represents, data are lacking to support effective treatments in 
patients  with cancer.16,17  Opioids  have  the strongest  evidence  base,  though  the medications  tend to have 
modest benefit and carry serious risks and side effects.32 Systematic reviews show no improvement in 
cancer -related dyspnea from either supplemental oxygen or benzodiazepines.18,33,34  Although our 
research team found improvements in quality of life and mood among patients with metastatic lung 
cancer by the early integration of palliative care services, this model of care did not affect anxiety 
symptoms or dyspnea.19 Non-pharmacological approaches for dyspnea have included supportive 
counseling, breathing control, muscle relaxation, coping strategies, energy conservation, and 
acupuncture.17 Few clinical trials of these methods exist, and the resulting data appear to be mixed 
across techniques. Yet, interventions that include behavioral elements, such as breathing retraining 
combined with psychoeducation, have shown some promise and warrant further study.20-22 
 
The management of dyspnea due to advanced lung cancer may be ideally accomplished by a 
multidisciplinary team, given the complex interplay of biomedical and psychosocial factors.35 In fact, 
the National Health Service in the United Kingdom has recently developed an approach for managing 
dyspnea across multiple disease states that includes diverse caregivers: physicians, clinical nurse 
specialists, physical therapists, respiratory therapists, occupational therapists and social workers.36 
Although a well -designed randomized controlled trial of the comprehensive program yielded 
significant improvements in breathlessness mastery and survival, the approach involved numerous 
clinic visits with multiple specialists.37 In the U.S., the lack of professionals trained in behavioral and 
palliative medicine severely limits the dissemination of such complex, comprehensive services.38,39  
Novel models of care that address the medical and psychosocial aspects of dyspnea in a feasible, 
acceptable, and seamless manner within outpatient settings may prove more beneficial and scalable.  
 
MGH Cancer Center Sites/DFCI Are Ideal Clinical Settings for Collaborative and Cross - 
Disciplinary Research  
At the Massachusetts  General  Hospital  (MGH)  Cancer  Center,  we have  gained  considerable  experience 
in multidisciplinary  research  in the oncology  setting.  Our Cancer  Outcomes  Research  Program  consists 
of oncologists, nurses, palliative care physicians, psychiatrists, and psychologists who share their 
respective expertise to inform the development of state -of-the-art clinical interventions to improve 
comprehensive cancer care, symptom management, and quality of life for patients with cancer. In 
addition to establishing highly successful  methods for recruiting and retaining patient participants, we 
have capitalized on our cross -disciplinary collaborations to overcome barriers in communication, 
coordination, and integration of supportive care services into the outpatient oncology setting. With 
external funding from federal and nonprofit organizations, we have conducted numerous studies 
demonstrating  improved  patient  and provider  outcomes  with interventions  such as: early  palliative  care 
services;19 clinician -directed prompts for discussing end -of-life care preferences;40 the adaptation of 
cognitive -behavioral therapy to treat anxiety related to advanced cancer;41 and training of oncology 
nurses in psychological skills to manage stressful patient and family encounters,42 among others.  
 
Recognizing  the limited  availability  of such unique  collaborative  teams  across  cancer  centers,  we seek 
to test novel  models  of care that can be widely  accessible  and feasible  to implement.  We therefore  have 
partnered  with the Dana -Farber  Cancer  Institute  (DFCI)  and their leading  nurse  researcher  in symptom 
management  (Dr. Cooley)  to test our proposed  dyspnea  intervention.  We will train oncology  nurses  at 
both sites to deliver behavioral techniques shown to be effective for breathing retraining and reducing 
distress.  Nurses  are well-qualified  for administering  this type of intervention  as they are integrated  in 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
5  the oncology  care setting,  can assess  both the medical  and psychosocial  factors  associated  with dyspnea, 
and provide expert symptom management.  
 
Theoretical  Basis  of Proposed  Brief  Behavioral  Intervention  for Dyspnea  
The experience of dyspnea involves interactions among physical, psychological, and social factors.43 
We therefore  propose  to test the efficacy  of a brief  behavioral  intervention  to reinforce  adaptive  coping 
responses  to dyspnea.  Leading  investigators  of cognitive -behavioral  therapy  (CBT)  have  posited  that a 
combination of biological factors and stressful  
life events can result in maladaptive distress 
through an interactive cycle of physiological, 
cognitive, and behavioral symptoms. The 
primary  features  of this cycle  include  increased 
autonomic arousal, negative biases in 
perception, and avoidance of threatening 
stimuli.44 Moorey  et al.45 further  elaborated  the 
CBT model to understand the ways in which 
individuals  adjust  to having  cancer.  They  argue 
that cancer and its symptoms (e.g., dyspnea) 
represent a legitimate sense of danger to one’s 
physical and social well -being, triggering 
vulnerability in one’s beliefs about being able 
to  cope   with  this  threat.   Noting   the  bi- 
directional relationships among physiology, cognition and behavior, the theorists suggest in their 
Cognitive  Model  of Adjustment  to Cancer  that schemas  related  to the self (i.e., view  of the self) and to 
survival  (i.e., view  of the disease,  degree  of control  over cancer  and its symptoms)  play central  roles  in 
the maintenance of distress. Given the legitimate threat to survival and changes in self -schema due to 
the symptoms of advanced lung cancer, the dyspnea intervention has been tailored to incorporate 
strategies for managing the complex interplay between the medical and psychological concerns. 
Targeting each domain, the intervention includes 1) psychoeducation to enhance cognitive 
understanding of dyspnea, 2) relaxation practice to reduce physiological stress, and 3) behavioral 
coping skills for managing acute dyspnea.  
 
Summary of Significance  
The proposed  study  is significant  in that it targets  the markedly  prevalent  and burdensome  symptom  of 
dyspnea with a brief nurse -administered behavioral intervention that has potential for cost -effective 
scalability and broad dissemination across cancer care settings. Furthermore, the intervention 
techniques are evidence -based and derived from sound theory, providing significant clinical benefit 
with minimal burden of care to patients.  
 
Preliminary  Studies  
Rate of Dyspnea is High in Patients with Non -Small Cell Lung Cancer and Associated with 
Distress.28 
Our team explored the frequency of dyspnea and the risk of panic disorder and depression symptoms 
among patients with newly diagnosed non -small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Consecutive patients 
presenting for initial consultation at the Massachusetts General Hospital Thoracic Oncology Clinic 
completed  a survey  of current  symptoms,  including  dyspnea,  panic  disorder,  and depression  symptoms. 
Among 624 patients (mean age=63.7; SD=12.1; 52.6% female), 48.1% reported at least moderate 
dyspnea. Dyspnea was independently associated with higher risk of panic disorder symptoms (odds 
ratio=2.19, 95% CI=1.11 -4.31, P=0.02). Younger age and major depression symptoms were also 
associated  with higher  risk (P<0.01).  In conclusion,  almost  half of the patients  with newly  diagnosed  

Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
6  non-small  cell lung cancer  reported  dyspnea,  and patients  with dyspnea  were  more  than twice  as likely 
to endorse panic disorder symptoms relative to patients without dyspnea.  
 
A Tailored Cognitive -Behavioral Intervention Alleviates Anxiety in Patients with Terminal 
Cancer.48 
For this NCI-funded  randomized  trial (R03CA128478,  PI: Greer),  we used mixed  methods  to examine 
the feasibility and preliminary efficacy of cognitive -behavioral therapy (CBT) to reduce anxiety in 
patients with terminal cancers. Based on qualitative feedback from patients, we adapted the CBT 
intervention  by developing  treatment  modules  for relaxation,  coping  with cancer  worries,  and activity - 
pacing. Adults with incurable malignancies and elevated anxiety (Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale; 
HAM -A>14) were then randomized to individual CBT or a wait -list control group. Primary outcomes 
included:  1) the number  of completed  CBT  visits,  and 2) change  in HAM -A scores  from  baseline  to 8- 
week  follow  up per a treatment -blind  evaluator.  Forty  patients  with terminal  cancers  were  randomized 
(CBT n=20, Wait -list Control n=20), and 80% of CBT patients completed at least 5 of the 6 sessions. 
Of the total 109 completed  CBT  sessions,  45 (41.3%)  occurred  either  on the same  day as other  hospital 
appointments (n=25, 22.9%) or during chemotherapy infusions (n=20, 18.3%). Linear regression 
analyses,  adjusted  for baseline  scores,  showed  that those  assigned  to CBT  had greater  improvements  in 
HAM -A scores  compared  to the control  group  (Adjusted  Mean  Difference= -5.42;  95% CI=-10.84,  - 
.001; p=.05), with a large effect size for the intervention (Cohen’s d=.80). Providing CBT tailored to 
the concerns of patients with terminal cancer was not only feasible but also led to significant 
improvements in anxiety.  
 
Nursing Interventions Are Feasible for Symptom Management in Patients Receiving 
Chemotherapy.49 
Drs. Temel and Greer recently completed a RCT of a proactive nursing intervention to improve 
symptom management after chemotherapy administration in patients with early stage lung, breast and 
colon  cancer.  We enrolled  and randomized  120 of 137 eligible  patients  (88%).  Those  in the intervention 
group (n=60) received twice weekly phone calls from an oncology nurse after the patients’ first two 
chemotherapy infusions. Only two patients withdrew from the study and did not complete post -study 
assessments. Although the study showed no differences between groups in the primary outcomes, it 
nonetheless demonstrates the feasibility of enrollment, retention, and collection of patient -reported 
measures within the context of nursing intervention trials.  
 
A Brief Nurse -Administered Intervention Reduces Dyspnea in Patients with Advanced Lung 
Cancer.23 
We examined  the feasibility,  acceptability,  and utility 
of delivering a brief behavioral intervention for 
dyspnea in patients with lung cancer at the point of 
care.  For this single -group  pilot trial, eligible  patients 
included those with advanced lung cancer (stage III 
or IV non -small cell [NSCLC] or extensive stage 
small cell [SCLC]) from the ambulatory care clinic 
who reported at least moderate breathlessness. The 
manualized  intervention  consisted  of two sessions  in 
which nurse practitioners taught participants 
breathing and relaxation techniques within the 
infusion clinic and encouraged home practice. 
Participants completed measures of dyspnea 
(Modified  Medical  Research  Council  Dyspnea  Scale 
[MMRCDS]), QOL (Functional Assessment of  Illustrative  Patient  Quotations  
• “It was convenient because it was during 
the appointments, and it wasn’t too long. I 
thought  it was an excellent  use of time,  and 
it was integrated very nicely with what was 
going on.”  
• “The [breathing  exercises]  helped  me when 
if I started to lose my breath, to really slow 
myself down, instead of taking shallow 
breath to my lungs, I learned to hold all the 
air in and then let it back out and fill my 
lungs faster than taking short little breaths, 
and I found that was the most helpful part 
of the program.”  
• “The nurse was engaging and very good at 
responding  to and expanding  on any kind of 
question I had.”  
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
7   
Cancer Therapy -Lung Trial Outcome Index [FACT -L TOI]), and anxiety and depression symptoms 
(Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale [HADS]) at baseline  and six weeks  post enrollment.  Of the 
32 patients  enrolled  in the study  (56.3%  Female;  Mean Age=63.34, SD=7.96 years), 84.4% (N=27) 
completed all study procedures. Comparing the baseline to  post-assessments,  we found  significant  
improvements  in MMRCDS  (p<.001),  FACT -L TOI (p=.01), and  HADS -Depression  Subscale  
(p<.001)  scores,  with corresponding  moderate  to large  effect  sizes.  In this sample of patients with 
advanced lung cancer, we observed a high completion rate for the two - session intervention. Patients 
also reported improvements in dyspnea, QOL, and distress. Based on participant exit interviews (see 
illustrative quotes), 95.5% of patients rated the intervention favorably for  its convenient location  of 
delivery,  low burden,  effective  coping skills,  and positive  social support.  
 
Measuring Performance Status with Actigraphs Correlates with Dyspnea in Patients with 
NSCLC.47 
Dr. William Pirl recently completed a pilot study to evaluate the feasibility of using actigraphy to 
measure performance status in 42 patients with metastatic NSCLC. Participants wore wrist actigraphs 
for three days prior to completing questionnaires assessing symptoms, including dyspnea, and their 
activity level. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG PS) has a clinically 
meaningful  difference  in scores  based  on whether  a patient  is inactive  for at least half the time they are 
awake. Actigraphy objectively captures the percentage of time a person is immobile but awake. 
Actigraph reports of participants’ percent time spent immobile but awake ranged from 4 -50% 
(Mean=18%, SD=11%). Percent of time awake and spent immobile was correlated with physician 
report of ECOG PS (r=0.44, p=.004). Patient -reported dyspnea on the FACT -L was associated with 
three assessments of physical functioning: physician report of ECOG PS (r= -0.52, p<.001); patient - 
reported walking speed (r= -0.51, p=.001); and percent of time awake and spent immobile (r= -0.36, 
p=.02). Based on our findings, we will use actigraphy as an objective measure of physical activity in 
the current study.  
 
Summary of Preliminary Studies: For the past decade, our team has successfully collaborated on 
numerous  supportive  care studies  for patients  with lung and other  cancers.  The above  studies  highlight 
our accomplishments in demonstrating the need to treat dyspnea; developing and testing behavioral 
interventions in cancer; implementing nurse -administered symptom management trials; and using 
novel technologies for assessment.  
 
Innovation  of Proposed  Study  
The proposed  study is  innovative with  respect to  the 1)  novel model  of delivering  the intervention 
at the point  of care within  outpatient  oncology  setting,  and 2) multimethod  assessment  of patient 
outcomes . Given that patients with advanced lung cancers can be quite ill, the burden of additional 
appointments for behavioral treatment of symptoms represents a significant barrier to accessing 
services. Thus, we propose to address this concern by administering a point -of-care intervention that 
involves cross -disciplinary training and delivery within the flow of oncology care. The PI team is 
uniquely qualified to oversee suc h a program. Drs. Greer, Temel, and Cooley possess expertise in 
behavioral medicine/cognitive -behavioral therapy, thoracic oncology/palliative care, and nursing 
practice/cancer symptom management, respectively. This team will train and supervise the oncology 
nurses in delivering the evidence -based dyspnea management intervention. We elected to develop a 
minimally intensive behavioral intervention that can be easily implemented, involves home -based 
practice,  and avoids  barriers  to scheduling  multiple  outpati ent visits,  especially  for those  suffering  from 
considerable symptom burden. Specifically, we are proposing a streamlined dyspnea management 
intervention, to be completed over two 30 -45minute sessions in tandem with outpatient clinic 
appointments or virtually via telephone or secure video visit. Although recent studies have shown 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
8  benefit  from  more  complex,  multi -component,  intensive  interventions  for dyspnea,37,46  such approaches 
require considerable clinician resources and time, which are neither scalable nor feasible for patients 
with advanced cancer undergoing burdensome treatments. Moreover, we observed in our prior study 
that patients greatly appreciated being able to meet with the nurse interventionists and learn the 
behavioral skills in the infusion clinic rather than having to make extra visits to the hospital.23 Thus, 
providing the brief intervention at the point of care in the outpatient oncology setting or virtually 
represents a new model of  cancer care that is feasible for implementation outside a grant -funded 
environment. Such an approach could be easily deployed to larger populations.  
 
Finally, in addition to measuring self -report outcomes of dyspnea, quality of life, anxiety and 
depression,  we will assess  the effect  of the brief  intervention  on functional  status  using  actigraphy.  We 
have piloted the use of actigraphy in the study population (see Preliminary Studies), observing strong 
correlations  between  self-reported  dyspnea  and objective  activity  levels  in patients  with metastatic  lung 
cancer.  To our knowledge,  no prior  studies  have  incorporated  this multimethod  approach  to evaluating 
dyspnea intervention outcomes, which could serve as a new, state -of-the-art methodology for 
measuring performance status in patients with cancer.  
 
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  
 
2.1 Primary  Aim 
To demonstrate the efficacy of the brief behavioral intervention for improving self -reported dyspnea 
(primary outcome) in patients with advanced lung cancer  
Hypothesis: Participants with advanced lung cancer who are randomly assigned to receive the  brief 
behavioral intervention will report statistically and clinically significant improvements in dyspnea 
compared to those assigned to usual care.  
 
2.2 Secondary Aim 
To demonstrate the efficacy of the brief behavioral intervention for improving patient quality of life, 
mood symptoms, and activity level (secondary outcomes) in patients with advanced lung cancer 
Hypothesis: Participants with advanced lung cancer who are randomly assigned to receive the brief 
behavioral intervention will experience statistically and clinically significant improvements in quality 
of life, mood symptoms, and activity level compared to those assigned to usual care.  
 
2.3 Exploratory Aim 
To explore mediators and moderators of the effect of the brief behavioral intervention on patient - 
reported outcomes  
Hypothesis:  Intervention  effects  on patient -reported  dyspnea  will be mediated  by improved  mastery  in 
managing  breathlessness  and potentially  moderated  by patient  demographic  and clinical  factors  (e.g., 
gender, age, performance status, and disease comorbidity).  
 
 
3.0 RESEARCH  SUBJECT  SELECTION  
 
3.1 Patient  Eligibility Criteria  
 
3.1.1 Inclusion  Criteria  
The patient  eligibility  criteria  will mirror  those  in our successful  pilot study.23 To be eligible  for 
the RCT, patients must have:  
1) A diagnosis  of either  NSCLC,  SCLC,  or mesothelioma,  not being  treated  with curative  intent  
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
9  2) Self-reported  shortness  of breath  (a score  of 2 or greater  on the Modified  Medical  Research 
Council Dyspnea Scale)  
3) Eastern  Cooperative  Oncology  Group  (ECOG)  Performance  Status  from  0 (asymptomatic)  to 2 
(symptomatic and in bed <50% of day)  
4) The ability  to respond  to questions  in English  
5) Primary cancer care at the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) Cancer Center, Dana - 
Farber  Cancer  Institute  (DFCI),  Mass  General  Cancer  Center  at Newton -Wellesley  Hospital,  and 
Mass General/North Shore Cancer Center -Danvers  
6) Age >18 years  
 
3.1.2 Exclusion  Criteria  
Patients  will be  excluded if  they have:  
1) Cognitive  or psychiatric  conditions  prohibiting  study  consent  or participation.  
2) A treating  clinician  who reports  that the  patient  is inappropriate  for the study  
 
 
4.0 RESEARCH  SUBJECT  ENTRY  
 
4.1 Patient Screening  
In our pilot study, we asked clinicians to identify patients with dyspnea by reviewing their clinic 
schedules at the weekly thoracic oncology staff meeting. While we enrolled study participants 
rapidly in the pilot study, this recruitment method required the clinician to have knowledge of 
patients’  dyspnea.  However,  oncology  clinicians  often  fail to recognize  or underestimate  dyspnea.50 
Thus, relying on clinician awareness of patients’ symptoms is unlikely to identify all eligible 
patients for study participation. Therefore, in the current proposal, we will identify patients for 
study participation based upon their self -report of dyspnea using a validated standard screening 
measure (i.e., MMRCDS). We will institute the same patient screening procedures in the 
participating thoracic oncology clinics at Massachusetts General Hospital, Dana -Farber Cancer 
Institute, Mass General Cancer Center at Newton -Wellesley Hospital, and Mass General/North 
Shore Cancer Center -Danvers as we share the same scheduling and health record systems. As a 
point -of-care intervention, we will screen all patients with lung cancer receiving care in the 
outpatient clinics and approach them in person or via telephone. By reviewing the electronic 
scheduling  system  and health  record  module  documenting  cancer  stage,  we will identify  all patients 
with advanced lung cancer who are scheduled for visits in the subsequent week.  
 
A partial  HIPAA  Authorization  will be obtained  for the collection  of protected  health  information 
(PHI) prior to consent. The waiver will allow the study staff to identify potential eligible patients 
to recruit and contact. It will also prevent ineligible patients from being contacted and burdened 
with an in -person or telephone screen for a study for which he or she would be ineligible. 
Additionally,  the waiver  would  allow  patients  to be screened  with the MMRCDS  prior  to consent, 
reducing  any emotional  distress  associated  with consenting  to a study  for which  they are potentially 
ineligible. Having access to PHI will both optimize patient recruitment opportunities, while 
decreasing burden on ineligible patients. The use and disclosure of this information does not 
involve more than a minimal risk to privacy.  
 
The study  staff will review  and collect  information  on the cancer  diagnosis,  stage,  date of outpatient 
oncology  clinic  appointments,  Eastern  Cooperative  Oncology  Group  (ECOG)  Performance  Status, 
age, language, phone number and patients’ self -reported MMRCDS score before administering 
consent. Information collected from screened patients will be stored in a password -protected 
computer file that is stored on a secure, HIPAA -compliant Partners network drive.  Only 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
10  information relevant for contacting and screening the participants will be stored on this database. 
This secure procedure will prevent any improper use and disclosure of PHI.  
 
For patients who screen eligible on the MMRCDS (shortness of breath ≥ 2 on MMRCDS), their 
data will be scanned  and securely  stored  in a secure,  HIPAA -compliant  Partners  network  drive.  For 
patients  who do not screen  eligible  on the MMRCDS,  their data on this measure  will be destroyed 
immediately. For more information on the protection of patient data, see section 5.5.3.  
 
Before  approaching  the patients  meeting  the above  criteria,  the study  staff will inform  the oncology 
health  care team  (i.e., oncologist,  advanced  practice  nurse,  palliative  care specialist  as appropriate) 
of their patient’s potential eligibility for study participation via email or in person. The study staff 
will also notify the cancer care team of their plan to approach the patient regarding study 
participation at the next scheduled visit or via telephone should the team not respond with any 
reservations. Clinicians who express that they do not wish to receive these emails will be 
approached  in clinic  for permission  to discuss  study  participation  with patients.  All other  clinicians 
will be sent an email  containing  the patient’s  name  and medical  record  number  and the request  for 
study  staff to approach  the patient.  A member  of the cancer  care team  will be informed  at least two 
business  days prior  to approaching  the patient  for the first time.  If a clinician  prefers  that we do not 
approach her or his patient for study participation, we will collect the reason for this request. 
Finally, we will state in the email or in person that study participation does not preclude the 
clinicians from medically treating the dyspnea per their clinical judgment.  
 
Once  the oncology  health  care team  has been  informed  and has not refused  study  staff to approach 
their patient, a study staff member will approach the patient in the infusion unit outpatient clinic, 
or via telephone to inquire about their experience with dyspnea. If the patient reports having 
dyspnea, the trained study staff member will explain the study. If the patient indicates interest in 
the study, they will be asked to complete a brief single -item screen to determine if they meet 
eligibility criteria (i.e., shortness of breath ≥ 2 on MMRCDS) for participation. To decrease 
participant  burden,  this brief  screening  measure  will be given  prior  to consent.  For patients  who are 
approached  via telephone,  the MMRCDS  will be administered  verbally,  via mail,  or electronically. 
If the patient screens ineligible, the patient will not be consented and their MMRCDS will be 
appropriately discarded by the study staff using HIPAA -compliant procedures immediately. 
Patients who report shortness of breath score of ≥2 on the MMRCDS breathlessness measure will 
be eligible to continue to the next stage of the study.  
 
For patients who screen eligible on the MMRCDS, the trained study staff member will perform 
consent procedures and administer the baseline assessments. Following the completion of the 
baseline assessments, the patient will be randomized to receive the intervention or standard care.  
 
Otherwise, given that patients with advanced lung cancer develop new symptoms over time, 
patients  with a score  of <2 on the MMRCDS  who agree  to be approached  again  will continue  to be 
screened with the brief measure every three months.  
 
4.2 Patient  Recruitment  and Enrollment  
After the oncology care team has been informed and has not refused study staff to approach their 
patients,  a trained  study  staff member  will contact  potential  participants  in-person  or via telephone 
to explain  the study  and offer  a brief  screen  to confirm  whether  the patient  is eligible  to participate. 
If an oncology clinician reports that the patient is being treated with curative intent or otherwise 
does not meet eligibility criteria, study staff will document the reason. If eligible, the informed 
consent process may be completed through either modality as detailed in this section. Both the 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
11  written and the verbal consent forms describe all study procedures, information about potential 
risks and benefits of participation, and information regarding who they can contact for further 
questions.  The forms  also state that participation  is voluntary,  that participants  can refuse  to answer 
any questions,  that they can withdraw  from  the study  at any time,  and that study  participation  is in 
no way related to their medical care. Study participants who do not provide consent will be asked 
the reason why they prefer to not participate in the study. All willing participants that provide 
consent will then be registered by study staff (see below).  
 
4.2.1 In-Person  Informed  Consent  Process  
Participants will be asked to complete the MMRCDS scale evaluating shortness of breath 
to confirm  that their breathlessness  is sufficient  to participate  (as discussed  in section  4.1). 
All patients  who screen  positive  on the MMRCDS  shortness  of breath  measure  (i.e., a score 
of ≥ 2 on the MMRCDS) will be considered eligible for the study.  
 
After confirming eligibility based on the MMRCDS, the study staff will then perform 
consent procedures by presenting the patient with a detailed, HIPAA -compliant consent 
form to be signed by each participant following the explanations by the study staff.  
 
4.2.2 Verbal  Informed  Consent  Process  
We are requesting an alteration of HIPAA to allow for a waiver of Written 
Documentation of Consent. This study meets the requirements for a waiver as it is a 
Minimal Risk study and all study procedures can be communicated verbally. The verbal 
consent  procedures  can accommodate  external  factors  such as safety  concerns  for patients 
or study staff, hospital guidelines, a lack of clinic space or patient time constraints.  
Patients are coming into the hospital less regularly to receive in -person care, which limits 
our ability to approach them onsite for consent procedures. Remote electronic consenting 
is not feasible for many patients in our population as it requires technology and technical 
skill that some patients lack, potentially leading to a selection bias among enrolled 
participants. Consenting by mail is also not feasible given the patient population has 
advanced  lung cancer  with a poor prognosis  and mailing  the consent  form  to and from  the 
participant would likely create delays in enrollment of several weeks negatively 
impacting enrollment, retention and completion of study procedures. Verbal consent 
reduces patient burden and attrition and allows for greater flexibility while assuring  
patient  safety  in response  to changing  healthcare  practices  due to the COVID -19 
pandemic.  
 
A study staff member will contact the patient via telephone to offer study participation 
and determine  eligibility  using  the recruitment  and screening  script.  Patients  who screen 
positive on the MMRCDS shortness of breath measure (i.e., a score of ≥2 on the 
MMRCDS) will undergo verbal consent procedures using the suggested verbal phone 
script provided within the HIPAA -compliant verbal consent form. All patients who 
provide  verbal  consent  will receive  an unsigned  copy  of the written  informed  consent.  If 
the patient does not answer the phone, the clinician or study staff member may leave a 
voicemail (see appendix 8.11 for suggested language for the voicemail).  
 
 
4.2.3 Baseline Completion  
Patients will be asked to complete the baseline questionnaires in person, via mail, 
telephone,  or electronically.  Once  patients  complete  baseline  questionnaires,  the study  staff 
will provide  them  with a wrist  actigraph  and activity  log. Patients  will be instructed  on the 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
12  proper use of the actigraph and told to wear it and complete the activity log for the 
following 3 days. When this 3 -day period ends, a study staff member will call the 
participant  and notify  them  of their study  group  assignment.  Patients  will either  return  the 
actigraph at their next clinic visit or will mail it back to study staff via FedEx paid for by 
the study.  
 
Using  data from  our electronic  billing  systems,  we estimate  that approximately  480 patients 
with advanced lung cancer receive treatment at the MGH Cancer Center and DFCI per 
year. Although studies show that approximately 50% of patients with metastatic cancer 
endorse some degree of shortness of breath, we conservatively anticipate 30% -40% of 
patients  will report  shortness  of breath  ≥2 using  the MMRCDS  (resulting  in approximately 
140-190 eligible patients per year). Based on the high accrual rates observed in our 
previous  supportive  care studies,  and low patient  burden  for the proposed  trial, we estimate 
60% accrual to this study. Thus, we will be able to achieve successfully our recruitment 
goal of 220 patients during the 4 -year enrollment period.  
 
4.3 Randomization  and Registration  
MGH Biostatistical Core will be responsible for generating one randomization scheme. 
Randomization will be stratified by cancer type (NSCLC versus SCLC versus mesothelioma) and 
study site (Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Centers versus Dana -Farber Cancer Institute).  
 
The registration  and randomization  procedures  are as follows:  
• Obtain  written  informed  consent  or verbal  consent  from  the participant  prior  to the performance 
of any protocol specific procedures or assessments.  
• Complete the protocol -specific eligibility checklist using the eligibility assessment documented 
in the participant’s medical record and/or research chart. To be eligible for registration to the 
protocol, the participant must meet all inclusion and exclusion criteria as described in the 
protocol and reflected on the eligibility checklist.  
• The DFCI  study  staff will confirm  eligibility  criteria  and fax or email  the following  documents 
to the study staff at MGH: deidentified signed consent form/s and a completed eligibility 
checklist.  
• A member of the MGH study staff (independent from study staff who recruit, enroll and 
administer  assessments  to participants)  will perform  randomization  procedures  using  a 
randomization  schema  stratified by  cancer  type and  study site. 
• The MGH study staff will fax or email the information about randomization to the study staff 
at DFCI. The MGH study staff may also call the study staff at DFCI to verbally confirm 
registration and randomization.  
• Both MGH and DFCI will register eligible participants from all sites in the Clinical Trials 
Management  System  (CTMS)  Oncore,  as required  by DF/HCC  Standard  Operating  Procedure 
for Human  Subject  Research  Titled  Subject  Protocol  Registration  (SOP  #: REGIST -101).  This 
must occur prior to the initiation of protocol -specific procedures or assessments.  
 
 
5.0 STUDY  DESIGN  & METHODS  
 
5.1 Study  Design.  
We will conduct  a randomized  controlled  trial (RCT)  of a brief  two-session  behavioral  intervention 
for dyspnea management in patients with advanced lung cancer.  
 
5.2 Selection  of Instruments.  
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
13  We selected instruments based on our theoretical framework of the intervention, which seeks to 
reduce dyspnea sensations (physiological), improve understanding and perceptions of mastery in 
coping  with the symptom  (cognitive),  as well as enhance  activity/performance  status  (behavioral).  
 
Outcome  Measures:  
Modified Medical Research Council Dyspnea Scale (MMRCDS): The MMRCDS is a one -item 
scale with a 5 -point grading system to evaluate patients’ degree of dyspnea.59,60 
 
Cancer Dyspnea Scale (CDS): The CDS is a twelve -item scale that assesses the multidimensional 
nature of dyspnea in cancer patients. 72 
 
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy -Lung (FACT -L): The FACT -L quality of life tools 
assess physical, social/family, emotional, and functional well -being (27 items) and lung cancer 
specific symptoms (8 items) over the past 7 days.61 
 
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS): The HADS assesses symptoms of anxiety (7 
items) and depression (7 items) over the previous week.62 
 
Godin -Shephard  Leisure  Time  Physical  Activity  Questionnaire  (GSLTPAQ):  The GSLTPAQ  is a 
brief  assessment  of the frequency  and the extent  of typical  exercise  during  free time over the course 
of one week (4 items).63 
 
Potential  Mediator  and Moderators  of Intervention Effect  
Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire (CRQ): The CRQ is a validated 20 -item measure that 
assesses  physical  and psychological  aspects  of chronic  respiratory  disease  including  “mastery,”  or 
perceptions of control over the disease, and its effects on quality of life and functioning.64,65 
 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG PS): Study participants will be 
asked to choose the functional rating which best describes their performance status in the past 
week.66 
 
Demographic Questionnaire: Participants will self -report their age, sex, race/ethnicity, marital 
status,  religion,  education  level,  and tobacco  use (both  prior  and current  use) at baseline.   On 
8/20/2017, we amended this questionnaire to include two questions about tobacco use.  For all 
patients  who completed  baseline  prior  to this date,  we will administer  the two tobacco  use questions 
at the next assessment point (week 8, week 16, or week 24).  
 
Objective  Performance  Status  Measure  
Wrist Actigraphs: An actigraph is a portable, wristwatch -sized accelerometer device that detects 
and logs wrist movement over time in the form of activity counts. We will use Spectrum Plus 
(Philips  Respironics  USA),  which  is a watch -sized  device  that can be worn  
comfortably during activities of daily living, including sleeping, bathing, and 
exercise.  Spectrum  Plus detects  and logs wrist  movement  to measure  physical 
activity  and has a light sensor  to determine  day and night  time hours.  Spectrum 
Plus has a rechargeable battery and is fully waterproof. Data from Spectrum 
Plus are retrieved using specialized software. Study participants will also 
receive a 3 -day activity log to complete while wearing the actigraph to 
supplement the recording of their activity level and confirm their sleep/wake 
schedule. Patients will record  the times they  woke up, got  out of bed,  napped,  
went  to bed, and turned  out the lights  each day while  wearing  the actigraph.  All study  participants 

Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
14  will be given  an Spectrum  Plus and activity  log at the time of completing  the baseline  assessment. 
Participants  will be asked  to wear  the actigraph  and complete  the activity  log for two 3-day periods 
during the study, at baseline and week 8. The study staff will explain that the actigraph should be 
worn  on their non-dominant  wrist  continuously  for each 3-day period,  including  while  bathing  and 
exercising. The study staff will contact participants via telephone to remind them when to begin 
using the actigraph and activity log. In our previous study assessing the feasibility of using the 
actigraph in patients with metastatic lung cancer, all study participants wore the actigraph for the 
full 3 -day period and completed the activity log.47 
 
5.3 Description  of Intervention  
 
5.3.1 Clinician  Training  and Supervision  
In our prior pilot study, we created a clinician manual that includes step -by-step 
instructions  for teaching  the behavioral  strategies  for managing  dyspnea.  This manual  was 
developed and partially adapted from an evidence -based cognitive -behavioral treatment 
for anxiety  in patients  with advanced  cancer.48,51  Given  that a primary  aim of the proposed 
study  is to improve  access  to care for patients,  we will train oncology  nurses  (at each study 
site) in the administration of the brief intervention for delivery in the outpatient and 
infusion clinics or virtually via telephone or secure video visit. We will use HIPAA - 
compliant,  hospital -approved  Zoom  videoconferencing.  The study  nurses  will first review 
the manual and then participate in a comprehensive didactic training session with the PI 
team (i.e., Drs. Greer, Temel, and Cooley) to reinforce learning of the intervention 
components as well as to clarify the process for administering the intervention within the 
outpatient  setting  or virtually  via telephone  or secure  video  visit.  The training  sessions  will 
include practicing and role playing the delivery of the intervention with Dr. Greer, who is 
a licensed clinical health psychologist with expertise in developing and testing cognitive - 
behavioral interventions for patients with cancer. Once the randomized trial begins, the 
study nurses will be asked to complete an intervention guide/checklist detailing the 
exercises  for use in session  and to document  administration  of the intervention  components 
with each participant. Drs. Greer, Temel, and Cooley will also hold regular, ongoing 
teleconference calls with the nurse interventionists to provide supervision, address any 
participant concerns that arise, and reinforce protocol adherence. At least 80% of the 
intervention  sessions  will be audio -recorded  to allow  for circumstances  with unexpected  
technological difficulties. We will randomly select 10% for Dr. Greer (or trained study 
staff member) to review to ensure fidelity  
 
5.3.2 Delivering  the Dyspnea  Management Intervention  
Patients assigned to the brief behavioral intervention for dyspnea will participate in two 
sessions. Sessions one and two will be administered in -person, via telephone, or via 
institution approved secure videoconferencing technology.  
 
Session One: The first session of the brief behavioral intervention consists of having the 
patients learn evidence -based approaches for dyspnea management including: 1) 
psychoeducation,  2) relaxation  training  for reducing  physiological  stress,  and 3) behavioral 
techniques for managing acute breathlessness.20 For the psychoeducation component, the 
study nurses will provide participants with a brief overview of the cognitive -behavioral 
model and describe how breathlessness activates the physiologic stress res ponse. 
Specifically,  the nurse  will explore  with the patient  the types  of thoughts  that breathlessness 
triggers (e.g., “I can’t get enough air; my cancer must be getting worse”) and associated 
physiologic (e.g., chest tightness, heart racing) and behavioral responses (e.g., avoiding 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
15  strenuous activity or physically demanding tasks) that perpetuate stress, deconditioning 
and worsening dyspnea. The nurses will discuss in detail the nature of the stress response 
to help the patients understand the physiologic changes in their body as a result of 
breathlessness and to empower them to use coping strategies to calm the body. Next, 
patients  will learn  to manage  acute  breathlessness  with several  evidence -based  techniques 
including pursed -lips breathing,52 use of a battery -operated handheld fan (blowing air 
toward  the face),53 and postural  techniques  to minimize  work  of breathing.54,55  Commonly 
used for chronic obstructive lung disease,56 pursed -lips breathing provides natural 
resistance to lengthen the exhalation phase, strengthen respiratory muscles, and release 
“trapped” air from the lungs. Finally, as a daily practice to reduce overall physiological 
stress, participants will receive training in relaxation exercises, including diaphragmatic 
breathing and guided breathing meditation.57,58  Individuals who are unable to take full, 
deep breaths due to severe lung disease may modify diaphragmatic breathing by focusing 
on slowing the breath and extending the expiratory phase rather than taking deep 
inhalations. The study nurses will instruct patients to practice these relaxation exercises 
every day at times when not experiencing acute dyspnea. Participants will receive 
instructional pamphlets, handheld fans, and audio -recordings of the guided breathing 
exercise  for daily  practice.  Participants  will receive  study  intervention  materials  in-person, 
via mail or email.  Participants with smart phones will be able to download the recorded 
exercises to their phones, while those without this technology will receive MP3 players 
with recordings of the exercises.  
 
Session Two: The second session of the dyspnea intervention will focus on patients’ 
adherence to the study protocol, review of home -based practice of techniques for acute 
dyspnea and breathing exercises, identification and problem -solving of any obstacles to 
practicing the intervention techniques, and reinforcement of information and behavioral 
skills covered in session one. Sessions one and two will take place approximately 2 -3 
weeks apart and will last no more than 30 -45 minutes, as we observed in our prior trial. 
Participants  may complete  this session  in person  or virtually  via telephone  or secure  video 
visit.  
 
5.3.3 Usual Care  
Patients in both study groups may receive any usual care for their dyspnea as deemed 
appropriate by their clinicians. Cancer care clinicians commonly prescribe opioids, 
benzodiazepines and nasal canola oxygen for patients with dyspnea, though these 
interventions tend to have minimal benefit. In addition, some patients may undergo 
procedures  for pulmonary  complications  that can impact  their respiratory  status,  including 
draining pleural effusions and stent placement or radiation therapy for bronchial 
obstructions. MGH and DFCI Pulmonology clinicians will provide consultative guidance 
for the investigative  team  on such cases  in the study,  regardless  of group  assignment.  While 
the study staff will track medical therapies and procedures through the electronic health 
record for patients in both study groups, participation in this study will not impact use of 
these modalities. We do not anticipate the study groups to differ significantly in their use 
of medical therapies, though these factors will serve as control variables in the final 
analyses as necessary.  
 
After completion of the final study follow -up, patients randomized to receive usual care 
will be offered the study intervention materials to be delivered either in person,  via mail 
or email.  They  will also be offered  the opportunity  to meet  with a study  clinician  in person, 
by phone, or via secure video  to review the materials and ask questions. At the time of 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
16  enrollment, patients will be made aware that these resources will be available upon 
completion of the final study assessment.  
 
5.4 Data  Collection  Procedures  
 
5.4.1 Timing of Data Collection  
The following table depicts the assessments, measures and time points for the proposed 
data collection.  
 
 Screening  Baseline  Weeks  8, 
16, 24 Post 
Study  
Chart  review  for eligibility  and baseline  clinical 
characteristics  X    
Modified  Medical  Research  Council  Dyspnea  Scale 
(MMRCDS)  X X X  
Cancer  Dyspnoea Scale (CDS)   X X  
Demographic  Questionnaire   X   
Functional  Assessment  of Cancer  Therapy -Lung 
(FACT -L)  X X  
Hospital  Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS)   X X  
Godin -Shephard  Leisure  Time  Physical  Activity 
Questionnaire (GSLTPAQ)   X X  
Chronic  Respiratory Disease  Questionnaire  (CRQ)   X X  
Self-report  ECOG  Performance  Status   X X  
Actigraph  and activity log  (for 3 days)   X X (week 
8 only)   
Chart  review  for treatment,  medical  orders,  service 
utilization     X 
 
5.4.2 Data  from  the Electronic  Health  Record  
Clinical information regarding tumor type (NSCLC, SCLC, mesothelioma), date of 
diagnosis  of advanced  disease,  previous  cancer  therapies,  current  treatment  regimen,  and 
performance status will be collected at baseline. The post study review of the electronic 
health record (EHR) will include information on disease progression, any changes in 
cancer treatment, and number of emergency department (ED) visits and hospitalizations 
during the study period.  
 
Medical comorbidity will be assessed at the time of baseline data collection with the 
Charlson  Comorbidity  Index  (CCI).67 We will review  health  records  for the presence  of 
(1) pulmonary,  cardiac,  hepatic,  and renal  disease,  (2) current  and other  malignancies, 
and (3) other morbidities (diabetes, cerebrovascular disease, and rheumatologic 
conditions) and assign the appropriate CCI score.  
 
Medical  orders:  We will collect  data on medications  to alleviate  dyspnea  (e.g.,  opioid 
analgesics), supplemental oxygen, and procedures for managing pleural effusions or 
bronchial obstruction.  
 
Dr. Temel  (Co-I), a thoracic  oncologist,  will oversee  the collection  of clinical  information 
from the EHR as well as the review of medical scans to determine whether participants’ 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
17  disease progressed during the study period.  
 
5.4.3 Data Storage  
Study source documents, including but not limited to signed informed consent forms, 
completed eligibility checklists, and participant questionnaires, will remain confidential 
and be scanned and stored on secure Partners computers and in REDCap. Since these 
records necessarily contain patient identifiers, only study staff will have access to them.  
 
Study staff will scan completed source documents, which may include identifiers such as 
participant names, upon their completion. Location, time, and date of the scanning of the 
document will be recorded. After the source document is scanned and the corresponding 
electronic document is confirmed to be legible, it will be collected and destroyed 
immediately. Study staff will destroy the original copy of the source document by 
following MGH procedures of destroying documents with Personal Health Information 
(PHI).  
 
If a patient  requests  to view  his or her data collected  by the actiwatches  (activity,  mobility 
and sleep  statistics),  study  staff can provide  patients  with this data.  Identifiers  such as name 
will only be used during  the initial  data retrieval  process  and can be destroyed  once all data 
records have been obtained and data analysis completed. Data abstracted from the 
electronic health record in Section 5.4.2 will be maintained in REDCap. REDCap 
(Research Electronic Data Capture) is a free, secure, HIPAA -compliant web -based 
application hosted by the Partners HealthCare Research Computing, Enterprise Research 
Infrastructure & Services (ERIS) group. Vanderbilt University, with collaboration from a 
consortium of academic and non -profit institutional partners, has developed this software 
toolset and workflow methodology for electronic collection and management of research 
and clinical study data. Data collection projects rely on a study -specific data dictionary 
defined by members of the study staff with planning assistance from Harvard Catalyst | 
The Harvard Clinical and Translational Science Center EDC Support Staff. The iterative 
development and testing process results in a well -planned data collection strategy for 
individual  studies.  REDCap  provides  flexible  features  that can be used for a variety  of 
research  projects  and provides  an intuitive  interface  to enter  data with real time validation 
(automated data type and range checks). The system offers easy data manipulation with 
audit trails, reports for monitoring and querying participant records, and an automated 
export mechanism to common statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R/S -Plus).  
 
5.5 Description  of Study  Processes  
The following  tables  provide  an overview  of the study  timeline  and the timing  of recruitment, 
enrollment, and participant contact.  
 
Time Point  Study Procedure  
 
Months  0-3 Study Staff Training:  
• Hire and train oncology  nurses  in content  and delivery  of the brief  behavioral 
intervention for dyspnea  
• Hire and train 2 research  assistants  in study  procedures,  recruitment,  enrollment, 
data collection, etc.  
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
18   
Months  4-54 Randomized  Controlled Trial:  
• Enroll and randomly assign 220 patients (110 per study group) to receive either 
the brief behavioral  intervention  for dyspnea  or usual  care across  study  sites (i.e., 
MGH Cancer Center, DFCI, Mass General Cancer Center at Newton -Wellesley 
Hospital, and Mass General/North Shore Cancer Center -Danvers)  
• Complete  8,16,  24-week  post assessments  and data extraction  from  the electronic 
health record  
 
Months  55-60 Analysis  and Submission  of Follow -up Grant  Proposal:  
• Complete  data analyses  and submit  primary  manuscripts  
• Prepare  and submit  grant  proposal  for large -scale  multisite  dissemination  and 
implementation study  
 
Point of Contact  Timing  Study Procedures  
Initial  screen  and 
consent  Upon  clinician 
approval  ▪ Screen  in outpatient  clinic,  infusion  suite  or via 
telephone  
▪ Patients  will self-report  shortness  of breath  (using 
the MMRCDS)  
▪ If MMRCDS score ≥2, study staff will obtain 
informed consent and email oncology 
clinician  to notify  that the patient  screened 
positive for dyspnea  
▪ If MMRCDS  score  <2, study  staff will screen 
patient again in 3 months  
Enrollment  
- Baseline self - 
report  assessment  Upon  confirmation 
of prescreen 
eligibility  ▪ Participant  completes  self-report  battery  of 
questionnaires  
▪ Provide  patient  with wrist  actigraph  and activity 
log with instructions to wear for the 3 days 
following the baseline assessment.  
▪ After  3 days,  study  staff calls and informs  patient 
of randomization  and schedules  session  one for 
intervention participants.  
▪ Participant  returns  actigraph  watch  and activity 
log in -person or mails it back to study staff.   
Randomization 
notification   
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
19   
Session One (if 
randomized to 
dyspnea 
intervention  group)  Within  6 weeks  of 
enrollment and 
baseline data 
collection  ▪ Nurse  interventionist  delivers  Session  One either 
in clinic or virtually by phone or secure video  
▪ Study  staff will contact  participant  to schedule 
Session Two  
Session Two (if 
randomized to 
dyspnea  intervention 
group)  After session 1, 
within  8 weeks  of 
enrollment  ▪ Nurse  interventionist  delivers  Session  Two either 
in clinic or virtually by phone or secure video  
Follow -up – Week  8 
Assessment  8 weeks  after 
baseline  data 
collection  ▪ Participant completes follow -up questionnaires 
either  in person  while  in clinic  or remotely  via 
mail, REDCap email, or telephone.  
▪ Study  staff instructs  participant  to wear  actigraph 
and log activity for the 3 days following the 
completion of their week 8 self -report 
assessments. Study staff collects actigraph and 
activity log from participant via mail.  
▪ For the procedures listed above, the study staff 
member  delivering  the assessment  will remind 
the patient  not to inform  them  of whether  they 
received the intervention for breathlessness.  
Follow -up – Week 16 
and 24 Assessments  16 and 24 weeks 
after baseline  data 
collection  ▪ Participant completes follow -up questionnaires 
either  in person  while  in clinic  or remotely  via 
mail, REDCap email, or telephone.  
▪ For the procedures listed above, the study staff 
member  delivering  the assessment  will remind 
the patient  not to inform  them  of whether  they 
received the intervention for breathlessness.  
 
5.5.1 Instrument Administration  
A study staff member blind to group assignment will administer study assessments at 
baseline and multiple follow -up time points (at weeks 8, 16, and 24) with a +/ - 2 week 
window to accommodate patient schedules. The assessment battery takes approximately 
30 minutes to complete. The baseline and follow up assessments (at 8, 16, and 24 weeks) 
will occur either in clinic, by mail, telephone or online via REDCap. We selected the six - 
month time frame for follow -up assessment to evaluate the long -term impact of the 
intervention  on patient  outcomes  while  recognizing  the limited  life expectancy  of patients 
with advanced  lung cancer.  The self-report  measures  have  strong  psychometric  properties 
and been well validated in previous studies.  
 
If a participant expresses that he or she is not willing or able to complete the self -report 
packet in full, the study staff will offer an abbreviated version containing the primary 
outcome assessments (MMRCDS, CDS, HADS, and FACT -L). This short form will only 
be offered if a patient initially refuses to complete the entire questionnaire packet.  Each 
participant  will receive  the actigraph  at enrollment  and will be instructed  to wear  the 
watch  for the 3 days following  their baseline  assessment.  In preparation  for Week  8 follow - 
up, participants will receive the wrist actigraph either in person in clinic or by mail. 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
20  Patients will be instructed to wear the actigraph device for the 3 days following the 
completion  of their 8-week  self-report  assessment.  After  this 3-day period,  study  staff will 
arrange a FedEx pick -up to retrieve the actigraph device.  
 
If a patient passes away while in possession of an actigraph, we will call the person 
identified as a contact in the Participant Locator Form to offer our condolences. We will 
also explain that we will send a prepaid envelope to them addressed to our study staff, 
and instruct them to place the actigraph in the envelope, seal it, and send the envelope 
back to us  in the mail (USPS). If we cannot reach the patient’s  contact  by phone, we will 
send the prepaid  envelope  along  with a note offering  our condolences  and instructions  on 
how to return the actigraph.  
 
We will call the patient’s contact person up to three times, allowing for at least three 
business  days between each phone call  if we cannot reach the contact person. At the time 
of enrollment, we inform the patient that the contact person is someone who we will call 
if the patient is unreachable. The participant typically lists his/her designated primary 
caregiver or spouse, who usually lives with the patient. On the rare occasion that this 
person does not live with the patient, we will work with the contact person to problem - 
solve how to reach out to someone who lived with the patient or has access to the 
residence in order to retrieve the actigraph and mail it back to the study staff in the 
prepaid  envelope.  If it is not possible,  then we will consider  the data to be lost. We do not 
anticipate this to be a frequent occurrence.  
 
5.5.2 Intervention  Administration  
Patients assigned to the brief behavioral intervention for dyspnea will participate in two 
sessions. The first session will occur at the patients’ next scheduled clinic visit (either in 
the infusion suite or the outpatient clinic) via telephone, or via secure video following 
baseline  data collection.  The first session  must  occur  within  six weeks  of the baseline  data 
collection. Chemotherapy regimens for patients with advanced lung cancer are typically 
administered  every  two to three  weeks.  Thus,  the six-week  window  will allow  all enrolled 
patients to have a scheduled appointment, with additional time should their treatment be 
delayed for any reason (e.g., holidays or low blood counts). In the unlikely event that the 
patient is unable to come to the hospital for the first intervention session before the six - 
week window closes, the patient will be mailed the necessary study materials and receive 
the first session over the telephone or via secure video to remain in window. In the rare 
cases  that the patient  is still unable  to complete  the first session  before  the six-week  window 
closes, the patient will be re -administered their baseline assessments either at their next 
appointment  or by mail,  telephone,  or online  via REDCap.  Study  procedures  will reset  from 
the new baseline assessment.  
 
The second session will occur at the patient’s subsequent clinic visit, over the telephone, 
or via secure video, within eight weeks of the baseline data collection.  
 
Participants in both arms of the study will receive usual care for their dyspnea under the 
care of their clinicians.  
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
21  5.5.3 Special Concerns  
 
Breach of confidentiality is a concern in all studies with human subjects.  Patient 
participants  will be completing  self-report  assessments;  thus safeguards  will be put in place 
to ensure that participant information is kept private and confidential. All electronic data 
will be stored in password -protected computer files and online databases (i.e. REDCap), 
accessible  only to trained  study  staff.  Participants’  data will be identified  by an ID number 
only, and a link between names and ID numbers will be kept in a separate password - 
protected computer file.  Data will not be shared with individuals other than study staff.  
 
5.5.4 Compensation  
Study participants will not receive compensation for participating in this study or for 
completing questionnaires.  
 
5.6 Adverse  Reactions  and Their  Management  
 
5.6.1 Reporting  Adverse  or Unanticipated  Events  
Identification  of adverse  events  may come  through  notification  from  the study  participant, 
caregiver,  clinician,  or from  review  of the electronic  health  record.  In such circumstances, 
the PIs and investigative team will follow the following procedures:  
a. Serious Adverse Events . Given that this study is a randomized trial comparing a brief 
behavioral intervention compared to a usual care control group, we do not anticipate any 
study -related events meeting the FDA definition of a SAE (i.e., any fatal event, 
immediately life -threatening event, permanently or substantially disabling event, event 
requiring or prolonging inpatient hospitalization, or any congenital anomaly). The 
proposed study population is comprised of individuals diagnosed with advanced lung 
cancer who frequently experience disease worsening, high rate of symptoms, and 
hospitalizations  from  the underlying  disease  and/or  side effects  of treatment.  Therefore,  as 
advanced lung cancer is a chronic -type terminal illness, regular fluctuations in cancer - 
related symptoms, disease worsening, hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and 
deaths are to be expected throughout the study, and we will not consider or report such 
events as SAEs in this trial.  
b. Non-Serious  Adverse  Events . The IRB will be provided  with unblinded  summaries  of study 
related non -serious adverse events by treatment group at the continuing reviews. These 
reports  will include  types  of events,  severity,  and treatment  phase.  To date,  the majority  of 
non-serious adverse events in our prior supportive care studies have been due to patient 
discomfort with the study questionnaires.  
 
5.6.2 Anticipated  Reactions  
As this is a behavioral study, there are no ingested medications, and no biomedical 
procedures.  It is unlikely that participants will be at any risk for physical harm as a result 
of study participation.  
 
Participants may find some of the questions asked in the questionnaire to be emotionally 
upsetting,  and may experience  some  fatigue  from  the length  of the assessment  battery.  As 
this is a study targeting symptoms that are debilitating and interfere with quality of life, it 
is possible that some participants will experience depression and one of the major 
symptoms of depression, suicidality.  
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
22  Participants may also find some of the breathing exercises from the dyspnea intervention 
uncomfortable during sessions and during home practice.  
 
5.6.3 Reaction  Management  
Following the explanations by the study staff, participants will either sign a detailed 
consent form or provide verbal consent. The consent process will include all of the study 
procedures,  information  about  potential  risks  and benefits  of participation,  and information 
regarding whom the participant can contact for further questions. It also will state that 
participation  is voluntary,  that participants  can refuse  to answer  any question,  that they can 
withdraw from the study at any time, and that study participation is in no way related to 
their medical care.  The PI will review all informed consents within one week of their 
completion.  All study  staff will complete  the required  human  subjects  training  before  they 
are allowed to work on any human subject aspects of the study.  
 
The need  for further  intervention  and referral  regarding  anxiety  and depression  symptoms 
will be determined by clinical cutoffs on the subscales of the Hospital Anxiety & 
Depression  Scale  (HADS)  and by clinical  assessment  of the trained  study  nurse  should  any 
participant note heightened emotional distress and/or suicidality. Both the anxiety and 
depression  subscales  scores  of the HADS  range  from  0 to 21, with a score  of 11 or greater 
indicating  definitive  anxiety  or depression.  A score  of less than 7 is considered  normal,  and 
a score  of 8-10 on each subscale  suggests  probable  anxiety  and depression.  Study  patients 
whose scores increase from the normal or probably range to the more severe range for 
depression (i.e., > 11) will be called by qualified study staff (e.g., Dr. Greer, a licensed 
clinical psychologist, or similarly trained designee) to determine if the patient requires 
further intervention for his or her mood symptoms. Study staff will also assess for any 
suicidal ideation and ensure that the patient is not at any risk for self -harm. If the patient 
needs further outpatient services for depression, including pharmacotherapy, or is at risk 
for self -harm requiring hospitalization, study staff will make the necessary referrals for 
treatment. For example, for patients who are distressed but in no danger to self or others, 
study staff will refer either to the MGH Oncology Social Work Service or to the MGH 
Ambulatory Psychiatric Services (617 -724-5600), including the Cognitive -Behavioral 
Therapy Program. If suicidality or risk of harm to others is otherwise discovered at any 
study  visit,  the participant  will be referred  to appropriate  services.  Specifically,  in the case 
that hospitalization is required, study staff will contact and escort the patient to the MGH 
Acute Psychiatry Service (617 -726-2995), with the aid of the MGH Police & Security if 
necessary (617 -726-2121). Study staff assessments of patient distress and/or risk will be 
documented in the electronic medical record so that the clinical team is notified of any 
potential need for increased support.  
 
If participants find the dyspnea intervention uncomfortable and/or upsetting during 
intervention  sessions  or during  home  practice,  the participants  or the study  interventionists 
delivering  the intervention  may page  the PI (Dr. Greer)  at any time.  Dr. Greer  is a licensed 
clinical  psychologist  with extensive  experience  delivering  cognitive  behavioral  treatments 
for individuals with advanced lung cancer (see previous clinical studies).  
 
The PI, co-investigator  team,  and the nurse  study  interventionists  will meet  at least monthly 
to review  study  progress,  ensure  proper  implementation  of the intervention,  and review  any 
adverse  reactions  that occur.  The PI and the study  staff for this study  will also meet  weekly 
to review consents and collected data to ensure proper adherence to study protocol.  
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
23  6.0 STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  
 
6.1 Study Endpoints  
 
6.1.1 Primary  and Secondary  Endpoints  
The primary  outcome  is comparison  of the MMRCDS  and CDS  severity  scores  at 8-week 
post-assessment between study arms, controlling for baseline values.  
 
The secondary outcomes will be comparison of quality of life, anxiety, depression, and 
activity level between study groups.  To assess quality of life, we will compare the post - 
assessment  (8-week)  FACT -L scores  between  study  arms,  controlling  for baseline  values. 
To evaluate anxiety and depression symptoms, we will similarly compare the continuous 
scores as well  as rates of depression and  anxiety  symptoms reported per  HADS  score at 8 
weeks between study arms, controlling for baseline values.  To assess activity level, we 
will compare the percentage of time spent immobile but awake on actigraphy and self - 
report weekly leisure -time physical activity score at 8 weeks between study groups, 
controlling for baseline values.  
 
6.2 Sample  Size and  Power Calculation  
Although we observed a large effect size for the brief behavioral intervention on patient -reported 
dyspnea  in our previous  trial (Cohen’s  d=1.0),  we chose  to be conservative  in estimating  the sample 
size to power the proposed RCT given the inclusion of usual care control group, proposed tests of 
mediation  and moderation,  and rate of attrition  observed  in our pilot trial (i.e., 16%).  Therefore,  if 
a total of 2 00 study participants complete this two -treatment parallel -design study, the probability 
is 80% that the study will detect a treatment difference in the primary and secondary outcomes at 
a two -sided 0.05 significance level (if the true difference between treatments is 0.40 times the 
standard deviation (i.e., the lower bound of a medium effect size).  
 
6.3 Analysis  Plan 
 
6.3.1 Aim 1 
Aim 1: To demonstrate the efficacy of the brief behavioral intervention for improving 
dyspnea (primary outcome) in patients with advanced lung cancer.  
Hypothesis 1: Participants with advanced lung cancer who are randomly assigned to 
receive the brief behavioral intervention will report statistically and clinically significant 
improvements in dyspnea (per self -report MMRCDS and CDS) compared to those 
assigned to usual care.  
Analysis:  Analyses  will begin  with descriptive  and graphical  summaries  of the endpoints. 
As the MMRCDS is an ordinal measure, the statistical significance of between -group 
differences  in the primary  outcome  will be assessed  first with the Wilcoxon -Rank  Sum test 
and then with generalized estimating equations (GEE), with appropriate covariates. The 
CDS is a continuous interval measure, and we will assess between -group differences in 
these  scores  using  general  linear  models  (GLM).  All statistical  tests will be two-sided  with 
an alpha level of .05. For these primary outcomes, we will examine between -group 
differences (i.e., intervention versus control) in MMRCDS and CDS scores at the 8 -week 
post-assessment, controlling for baseline values. In the event that the effect of the 
intervention  differs  by cancer  type,  use of opiate  medication  or other  patient  characteristic, 
we will examine these variables as interaction terms in the GEE and GLM analyses. We 
will also evaluate generalized  linear mixed  models of  the longitudinal  data, allowing  us to 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
24  account for dependency among MMRCDS and CDS scores over time and to control for 
demographic and clinical factors, such as disease progression, (as necessary for any 
imbalances in baseline variables) when examining between -group differences in the 
MMRCDS and CDS scores across the multiple study time points (i.e., baseline, 8, 16, 24 
weeks).  Finally,  we will compute  the effect  sizes  and Reliability  Change  Index68 to assess 
practical and clinical significance of the differences in the primary and secondary 
outcomes. The GLM model will generate an effect size estimate, which can also be 
calculated  by hand  (d=Mean  change  score  CBT  group  - Mean  change  score  control  group/SD pooled). Cohen69 
utilizes cutoffs of 0.2 for a small effect, 0.5 a medium effect, and 0.8 for a large effect.  
 
6.3.2 Aim 2 
Aim 2: To demonstrate the efficacy of the brief behavioral intervention for improving 
quality  of life, anxiety,  depression,  and activity  level  (secondary  outcomes)  in patients  with 
advanced lung cancer.  
Hypothesis 2: Participants with advanced lung cancer who are randomly assigned to 
receive the brief behavioral intervention will experience statistically and clinically 
significant  improvements  in quality  of life (FACT -L), anxiety  and depression  (HADS),  as 
well as activity level (per self -report Godin -Shephard Leisure -Time Physical Activity 
Questionnaire and the percentage of time spent immobile but awake on actigraphy) 
compared to those assigned to usual care.  
Analyses: The statistical significance of between -group differences for the continuous 
secondary outcomes will be assessed with general linear models (GLM) and linear mixed 
models, with appropriate covariates and an alpha level of .05. We will examine the 
between -group  differences  (i.e., intervention  versus  control)  at 8-week  post-assessment  for 
each specific secondary outcome (all are continuous variables), controlling for baseline 
values. In the event that the effect of the intervention differs by cancer type, use of opiate 
medication or other patient characteristic, we will examine these variables as interaction 
terms  in the GLM  analysis.  We will explore  independent  improvements  in these  secondary 
outcomes  by adding  changes  in MMRCDS  or CDS  severity  scores  as a covariate.  Finally, 
we will also again estimate practical and clinical significance of these outcomes (using 
Cohen’s  d and Reliability  Change  Index)  and conduct  linear  mixed  models  to examine  the 
trajectory of between -group differences in these variables across all study time points.  
 
6.3.3 Aim 3 
Aim 3: To explore  mediators  and moderators  of the effect  of the brief  behavioral 
intervention on patient -reported outcomes.  
Hypothesis 3: Intervention effects on patient -reported dyspnea will be mediated by 
improved mastery in managing breathlessness and potentially moderated by patient 
demographic  and clinical  factors  (e.g.,  gender,  age, opioid  use, performance  status,  and 
disease comorbidity).  
Analyses: We will conduct bootstrapped tests of mediation to determine whether group 
differences in self -reported dyspnea (outcomes: MMRCDS and CDS) are mediated by 
improved mastery in managing the symptom (mediator: CRQ). Finally, we will create 
interaction terms for the GEE analyses and linear mixed models to examine whether 
differences  in reported  dyspnea  are moderated  by patient  factors  (e.g.,  gender,  age, opioid 
use, etc.).  
 
6.3.4 Exploratory  Analyses  of Service  Utilization  
Although  we likely  will not have  sufficient  power  to examine  statistically  the intervention 
effects on service utilization, we will at a minimum calculate descriptive statistics on  
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
25  rates of ED visits and hospitalizations by study group. Otherwise, if possible, we will 
conduct  Fisher’s  exact  tests and logistic  regression  to explore  differences  in rates  of ED 
visits and hospitalizations between groups, controlling for any confounders as needed.  
 
6.4 Handling of Missing Data  
The analyses will initially focus on the study completers to estimate the effect of the brief 
behavioral intervention in patients with advanced lung cancer who completed the protocol as 
intended  without  imposing  assumptions  about  missing  data.  We will also use the intention -to-treat 
principle with all randomized subjects, conducting sensitivity analyses to explore how various 
assumptions  about  missing  data and differences  between  completers  and non-completers  affect  the 
estimated outcomes. If data appear to be missing at random, we will employ multiple imputation 
methods.  However,  if we find that patients  do not complete  the study  because  of disease  worsening, 
suggesting missing data are not random, we will employ maximum likelihood estimation from 
incomplete data, under the direction of our biostatistician, Ms. Muzikansky.  
 
6.5 Potential  Problems,  Alternative  Strategies  and Benchmarks  for Success  
The potential problems and alternative strategies that we considered in developing this study 
proposal pertain to the selection of interventionists, length of treatment, and nature of the control 
group. Specifically, we recognize that patients with advanced lung cancer may benefit from 
meeting with clinical psychologists and/or social workers with trained expertise in behavioral 
medicine. Although increasing contact with such clinicians may enhance the robustness of the 
intervention,  we are responding  to the present  challenges  that exist  in meeting  the psychosocial  and 
symptom management needs of patients with cancer. Access to supportive care for oncology 
patients  is limited  not only by the inadequate  number  of mental  health  and palliative  care providers, 
but also by insufficient training of existing clinicians with respect to empirically -supported 
techniques, such as cognitive -behavioral approaches.43 In our national survey of community 
oncologists, a majority reported that they lack access to mental health providers for referrals.70,71  
We therefore decided to administer the point -of-care dyspnea intervention, delivered by trained 
oncology nurses, as we observed that this approach was feasible and preferable to patients with 
advanced lung cancer. Similarly, prior studies of comprehensive dyspnea management 
interventions include numerous visits with multiple medical providers across several months.37,46  
Given the disease burden of the patient populations in the proposed study, we chose to keep the 
intervention brief, delivered in tandem with existing outpatient appointments. Despite this short - 
time frame of the targeted behavioral intervention, we nonetheless observed a large effect size for 
self-reported  dyspnea  over time in our pilot study.23 Interventions  that can be integrated  within  the 
flow of care that are minimally resource intensive yet effective have greater potential for broad 
adoption and implementation across diverse cancer care settings. Finally, we elected to conduct a 
RCT  with a usual  care control  group  rather  than employ  alternate  experimental  methods,  such as a 
wait-list crossover or staggered treatment design, because of the shortened life expectancy of the 
study  population.  We also considered,  but ultimately  did not include,  an attention -matched  control 
group  given  the lack of an alternative,  evidence -based  psychosocial  comparator  as well as potential 
ethical considerations of asking patients with advanced disease to meet with a clinician for some 
sort of “sham”  treatment.  Moreover,  no data suggest  that attention  alone  would  influence  dyspnea. 
Otherwise, we will not limit access to usual care but rather examine the effects of the behavioral 
intervention above and beyond usual care.  
 
Benchmarks for success in the proposed study will not simply include a replication of our 
successful pilot study showing significant effects of the brief behavioral intervention on dyspnea 
management.  We also aim to increase  the generalizability  and reach  of the intervention  by training 
oncology  nurses  and including  a second  study  site. Also,  we will consider  clinically  meaningful  
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
26  improvements in quality of life (i.e., >5 point change on FACT -L) and a Reliability Change 
Index >1.96 for the outcomes  as other  markers  for success.  If we do not achieve  these  benchmarks, 
we will utilize  qualitative  methods  to gather  feedback  from  the relevant  stakeholders  (i.e., patients, 
nurse  interventionists,  etc.) to ascertain  ways  to modify  the intervention  content  and/or  delivery  in 
order to maximize its effectiveness and adoption in multiple cancer care settings.  
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
27  7.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. Bruera  E, Schmitz  B, Pither  J, Neumann  CM, Hanson  J. The frequency  and correlates  of dyspnea 
in patients with advanced cancer. Journal of pain and symptom management 2000;19:357 -62. 
2. Dudgeon  DJ, Kristjanson  L, Sloan  JA, Lertzman  M, Clement  K. Dyspnea  in cancer  patients: 
prevalence and associated factors. Journal of pain and symptom management 2001;21:95 -102. 
3. Lutz S, Norrell  R, Bertucio  C, et al. Symptom  frequency  and severity  in patients  with metastatic 
or locally recurrent lung cancer: a prospective study using the Lung Cancer Symptom Scale in a 
community hospital. Journal of palliative medicine 2001;4:157 -65. 
4. Solano  JP, Gomes  B, Higginson  IJ. A comparison  of symptom  prevalence  in far advanced  cancer, 
AIDS, heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and renal disease. Journal of pain and 
symptom management 2006;31:58 -69. 
5. LeBlanc TW, Nickolich M, Rushing CN, Samsa GP, Locke SC, Abernethy AP. What bothers 
lung cancer  patients  the most?  A prospective,  longitudinal  electronic  patient -reported  outcomes  study  in 
advanced non -small cell lung cancer. Supportive care in cancer : official journal of the Multinational 
Association of Supportive Care in Cancer 2015;23:3455 -63. 
6. Tanaka  K, Akechi  T, Okuyama  T, Nishiwaki  Y, Uchitomi  Y. Factors  correlated  with dyspnea  in 
advanced  lung cancer  patients:  organic  causes  and what  else?  Journal  of pain and symptom  management 
2002;23:490 -500. 
7. Chan  SS, Tam MM,  Cheung  NK, Man CY, Rainer  TH. Ultrasonography  of the internal  jugular 
vein in patients with dyspnea. Ann Emerg Med 2005;45:459 -60; author reply 60.  
8. O'Driscoll  M, Corner  J, Bailey  C. The experience  of breathlessness  in lung cancer.  Eur J Cancer 
Care (Engl) 1999;8:37 -43. 
9. Henoch I, Bergman B, Gustafsson M, Gaston -Johansson F, Danielson E. The impact of 
symptoms,  coping  capacity,  and social  support  on quality  of life experience  over time in patients  with 
lung cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage 2007;34:370 -9. 
10. Tanaka K, Akechi T, Okuyama T, Nishiwaki Y, Uchitomi Y. Prevalence and screening of 
dyspnea  interfering  with daily  life activities  in ambulatory  patients  with advanced  lung cancer.  J Pain 
Symptom Manage 2002;23:484 -9. 
11. Tanaka K, Akechi T, Okuyama T, Nishiwaki Y, Uchitomi Y. Impact of dyspnea, pain, and 
fatigue  on daily  life activities  in ambulatory  patients  with advanced  lung cancer.  J Pain Symptom  Manage 
2002;23:417 -23. 
12. Barbera  L, Taylor  C, Dudgeon  D. Why  do patients  with cancer  visit the emergency  department 
near the end of life? Cmaj 2010;182:563 -8. 
13. Mayer  DK, Travers  D, Wyss  A, Leak  A, Waller  A. Why  do patients  with cancer  visit emergency 
departments? Results of a 2008 population study in North Carolina. J Clin Oncol 2011;29:2683 -8. 
14. http://qopi.asco.org . 2011.  
15. Abernethy  AP, McDonald  CF, Frith  PA, et al. Effect  of palliative  oxygen  versus  room  air in relief 
of breathlessness  in patients  with refractory dyspnoea: a double -blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 
2010;376:784 -93. 
16. Dy SM, Lorenz  KA, Naeim  A, Sanati  H, Walling  A, Asch  SM. Evidence -based  recommendations 
for cancer fatigue, anorexia, depression, and dyspnea. J Clin Oncol 2008;26:3886 -95. 
17. McCannon  J, Temel  J. Comprehensive  management  of respiratory  symptoms  in patients  with 
advanced lung cancer. J Support Oncol 2012;10:1 -9. 
18. Ben-Aharon  I, Gafter -Gvili  A, Leibovici  L, Stemmer  SM. Interventions  for alleviating  cancer - 
related dyspnea: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Acta oncologica 2012;51:996 -1008.  
19. Temel  JS, Greer  JA, Muzikansky  A, et al. Early  palliative  care for patients  with metastatic  non- 
small -cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2010;363:733 -42. 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
28  20. DiSalvo  WM,  Joyce  MM,  Tyson  LB, Culkin  AE, Mackay  K. Putting  evidence  into practice: 
evidence -based interventions for cancer -related dyspnea. Clinical journal of oncology nursing 
2008;12:341 -52. 
21. Bausewein C, Booth S, Gysels M, Higginson I. Non -pharmacological interventions for 
breathlessness  in advanced  stages  of malignant  and non-malignant  diseases.  The Cochrane  database  of 
systematic reviews 2008:CD005623.  
22. Lok CW. Management  of Breathlessness  in Patients  With  Advanced  Cancer:  A Narrative 
Review. The American journal of hospice & palliative care 2014.  
23. Greer  JA, MacDonald  JJ, Vaughn  J, et al. Pilot Study  of a Brief  Behavioral  Intervention  for 
Dyspnea in Patients With Advanced Lung Cancer. Journal of pain and symptom management 
2015;50:854 -60. 
24. Stewart  BW, CP W, eds. World  Cancer  Report  2014.  Lyon,  France:  WHO  International  Agency 
for Research on Cancer; 2014.  
25. American  Thoracic  Society.  Dyspnea.  Mechanisms,  assessment,  and management:  a consensus 
statement. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;159:321 -40. 
26. Simon  ST, Higginson  IJ, Benalia  H, et al. Episodic  and Continuous  Breathlessness:  A New 
Categorization of Breathlessness. J Pain Symptom Manage 2012.  
27. Smith  EL, Hann  DM, Ahles  TA, et al. Dyspnea,  anxiety,  body  consciousness,  and quality  of life 
in patients with lung cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage 2001;21:323 -9. 
28. Shin JA, Kosiba  JD, Traeger  L, Greer  JA, Temel  JS, Pirl WF. Dyspnea  and panic  among  patients 
with newly diagnosed non -small cell lung cancer. Journal of pain and symptom management 
2014;48:465 -70. 
29. Henoch  I, Bergman  B, Gustafsson  M, Gaston -Johansson  F, Danielson  E. Dyspnea  experience  in 
patients with lung cancer in palliative care. Eur J Oncol Nurs 2008;12:86 -96. 
30. Escalante  CP, Martin  CG, Elting  LS, et al. Dyspnea  in cancer  patients.  Etiology,  resource 
utilization, and survival -implications in a managed care world. Cancer 1996;78:1314 -9. 
31. Podnos  YD, Borneman  TR, Koczywas  M, Uman  G, Ferrell  BR. Symptom  concerns  and resource 
utilization in patients with lung cancer. J Palliat Med 2007;10:899 -903. 
32. Vargas -Bermudez A, Cardenal F, Porta -Sales J. Opioids for the Management of Dyspnea in 
Cancer  Patients:  Evidence  of the Last 15 Years -A Systematic  Review.  Journal  of pain & palliative  care 
pharmacotherapy 2015;29:341 -52. 
33. Uronis  HE, Currow  DC, McCrory  DC, Samsa  GP, Abernethy  AP. Oxygen  for relief  of dyspnoea 
in mildly - or non -hypoxaemic patients with cancer: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Br J Cancer 
2008;98:294 -9. 
34. Simon ST, Higginson IJ, Booth S, Harding R, Bausewein C. Benzodiazepines for the relief of 
breathlessness  in advanced  malignant  and non-malignant  diseases  in adults.  Cochrane  Database  Syst Rev 
2010:CD007354.  
35. Farquhar  MC, Prevost  AT, McCrone  P, et al. Is a specialist  breathlessness  service  more  effective 
and cost -effective for patients with advanced cancer and their carers than standard care? Findings of a 
mixed -method randomised controlled trial. BMC medicine 2014;12:194.  
36. Bausewein  C, Jolley  C, Moxham  J, et al. Development,  effectiveness  and cost-effectiveness  of a 
new out -patient Breathlessness Support Service: study protocol of a phase III fast -track randomised 
controlled trial. BMC Pulm Med 2012;12:58.  
37. Higginson  IJ, Bausewein  C, Reilly  CC, et al. An integrated  palliative  and respiratory  care service 
for patients with advanced disease and refractory breathlessness: a randomised controlled trial. The 
Lancet Respiratory medicine 2014;2:979 -87. 
38. Kazdin  A, Blase  S. Rebooting  psychotherapy  research  and practice  to reduce  the burden  of 
mental illness. Perspectives on Psychological Science 2011;61:21 -37. 
39. Shafran  R, Clark  DM, Fairburn  CG, et al. Mind  the gap: Improving  the dissemination  of CBT. 
Behav Res Ther 2009;47:902 -9. 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
29  40. Temel JS, Greer JA, Gallagher ER, et al. Electronic prompt to improve outpatient code status 
documentation  for patients  with advanced  lung cancer.  Journal  of clinical  oncology  : official  journal  of 
the American Society of Clinical Oncology 2013;31:710 -5. 
41. Greer  JA, Traeger  L, Bemis  H, et al. A Pilot  Randomized  Controlled  Trial  of Brief  Cognitive - 
Behavioral Therapy for Anxiety in Patients with Terminal Cancer. Oncologist 2012.  
42. Traeger  L, Park ER, Sporn  N, et al. Development  and evaluation  of targeted  psychological  skills 
training for oncology nurses in managing stressful patient and family encounters. Oncology nursing 
forum 2013;40:E327 -36. 
43. Abernethy  AP, Wheeler  JL. Total  dyspnoea.  Current  opinion  in supportive  and palliative  care 
2008;2:110 -3. 
44. Barlow  D. Anxiety  and its disorders:  The nature  and treatment  of anxiety  and panic.  2nd edition. 
New York, NY: The Guilford Press; 2002.  
45. Moorey  S, Greer  S. Cognitive  behaviour  therapy  for people  with cancer.  New  York:  Oxford 
University Press; 2002.  
46. Farquhar  MC, Prevost  AT, McCrone  P, et al. Is a specialist  breathlessness  service  more  effective 
and cost -effective for patients with advanced cancer and their carers than standard care? Findings of a 
mixed -method randomised controlled trial. BMC medicine 2014;12:194.  
47. Pirl WF, Fujisawa  D, Stagl  J, et al. Actigraphy  as an objective  measure  of performance  status  in 
stage IV NSCLC. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical 
Oncology 2015;33 (suppl 29S; abstr 62).  
48. Greer  JA, Traeger  L, Bemis  H, et al. A pilot randomized  controlled  trial of brief  cognitive - 
behavioral therapy for anxiety in patients with terminal cancer. The oncologist 2012;17:1337 -45. 
49. Traeger L, McDonnell TM, McCarty CE, Greer JA, El -Jawahri A, Temel JS. Nursing 
intervention  to enhance  outpatient  chemotherapy  symptom  management:  Patient -reported  outcomes  of a 
randomized controlled trial. Cancer 2015;121:3905 -13. 
50. Hayes  AW,  Philip  J, Spruyt  OW.  Patient  reporting  and doctor  recognition  of dyspnoea  in a 
comprehensive cancer centre. Internal medicine journal 2006;36:381 -4. 
51. Greer  JA, Park ER, Prigerson  HG, Safren  SA. Tailoring  Cognitive -Behavioral  Therapy  to Treat 
Anxiety Comorbid with Advanced Cancer. Journal of cognitive psychotherapy 2010;24:294 -313. 
52. Nield  MA, Soo Hoo GW,  Roper  JM, Santiago  S. Efficacy  of pursed -lips breathing:  a breathing 
pattern retraining strategy for dyspnea reduction. Journal of cardiopulmonary rehabilitation and 
prevention 2007;27:237 -44. 
53. Galbraith S, Fagan P, Perkins P, Lynch A, Booth S. Does the use of a handheld fan improve 
chronic  dyspnea?  A randomized,  controlled,  crossover  trial. Journal  of pain and symptom  management 
2010;39:831 -8. 
54. O'Neill  S, McCarthy  DS. Postural  relief  of dyspnoea  in severe  chronic  airflow  limitation: 
relationship to respiratory muscle strength. Thorax 1983;38:595 -600. 
55. Sharp JT, Drutz WS, Moisan T, Foster J, Machnach W. Postural relief of dyspnea in severe 
chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease.  The American  review  of respiratory  disease  1980;122:201 -11. 
56. Gosselink  R. Breathing  techniques  in patients  with chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease 
(COPD). Chron Respir Dis 2004;1:163 -72. 
57. Yates  P, Zhao  I. Update  on complex  nonpharmacological  interventions  for breathlessness. 
Current opinion in supportive and palliative care 2012;6:144 -52. 
58. Thomas  S, Bausewein  C, Higginson  I, Booth  S. Breathlessness  in cancer  patients  - implications, 
management and challenges. European journal of oncology nursing : the official journal of European 
Oncology Nursing Society 2011;15:459 -69. 
59. Schilling  RS, Hughes  JP, Dingwall -Fordyce  I. Disagreement  between  observers  in an 
epidemiological study of respiratory disease. British medical journal 1955;1:65 -8. 
60. Mahler  DA, Wells  CK. Evaluation  of clinical  methods  for rating  dyspnea.  Chest  1988;93:580 -6. 
Brief  Behavioral  Intervention for  Dyspnea in  Patients  with Advanced  Lung Cancer  
Version 1.19, 11/15/2021  
30  61. Cella  DF, Bonomi  AE, Lloyd  SR, Tulsky  DS, Kaplan  E, Bonomi  P. Reliability  and validity  of the 
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy -Lung (FACT -L) quality of life instrument. Lung cancer 
1995;12:199 -220. 
62. Zigmond  AS, Snaith  RP. The hospital  anxiety  and depression  scale.  Acta  psychiatrica 
Scandinavica 1983;67:361 -70. 
63. Amireault  S, Gaston  G, Lacombe  J, Sabiston  C. The use of the Godin -Shephard  Leisure -Time 
Physical Activity Questionnaire in oncology research: A systematic review. BMC medical research 
methodology 2015;16:30.  
64. Guyatt  GH, Berman  LB, Townsend  M, Pugsley  SO, Chambers  LW. A measure  of quality  of life 
for clinical trials in chronic lung disease. Thorax 1987;42:773 -8. 
65. Puhan  MA, Guyatt  GH, Goldstein  R, et al. Relative  responsiveness  of the Chronic  Respiratory 
Questionnaire, St. Georges Respiratory Questionnaire and four other health -related quality of life 
instruments for patients with chronic lung disease. Respiratory medicine 2007;101:308 -16. 
66. Oken  MM,  Creech  RH, Tormey  DC, et al. Toxicity  and response  criteria  of the Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group. American journal of clinical oncology 1982;5:649 -55. 
67. Charlson  ME, Pompei  P, Ales KL, MacKenzie  CR. A new method  of classifying  prognostic 
comorbidity in longitudinal studies: development and validation. Journal of chronic diseases 
1987;40:373 -83. 
68. Jacobson  NS, Roberts  LJ, Berns  SB, McGlinchey  JB. Methods  for defining  and determining  the 
clinical  significance  of treatment  effects:  description,  application,  and alternatives.  Journal  of consulting 
and clinical psychology 1999;67:300 -7. 
69. Cohen  J. A power primer. Psychol  Bull 1992;112:155 -9. 
70. Pirl WF, Muriel  A, Hwang  V, et al. Screening  for psychosocial  distress:  a national  survey  of 
oncologists. J Support Oncol 2007;5:499 -504. 
71. Muriel  AC, Hwang  VS, Kornblith  A, et al. Management  of psychosocial  distress  by oncologists. 
Psychiatr Serv 2009;60:1132 -4. 
72. Tanaka  K, Akechi  T, Okuyama  T, et al. Development  and validation  of the Cancer  Dyspnoea 
Scale: a multidimensional, brief, self -rating scale. British Journal of Cancer 2000;82:800 -805. 