Official Title: Double -blind Randomized Controlled Trial of Anakinra, Pentoxifylline, and Zinc Compared 
to Methylprednisolone in Severe Acute Alcoholic Hepatitis   
NCT NUMBER: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol approval date: 11/23/2015  
March 13, 2014  The University of Texas S outhwestern M edical C enter at Da llas Institutional Review  
Board 
 
Novel T herapies in Severe Acute Alcoho lic Hepatitis 
 
1. Study S pecific Aims: 
 
Aim 1: E valuate t he effects of co rticosteroi ds versus a combi nation of interl eukin-1 i nhibitor plus 
pentoxifylline pl us zinc supplem ents in patients with MELD≥20. Pati ents will be r ando mized to 
receive 28 days of methylpr ednisolone 32 mg daily OR therapy that i ncludes a combi nation of 
anakinra (interleukin-1 receptor antag onist , IL-1 RA) 100mg by subcut aneo us injecti on daily for 
14 days PLUS pentoxifylli ne 400 mg p.o. thr ee times daily for 28 days PLUS zi nc supplem ents 
(220 mg of zi nc sulfat e) given  orally for 6 m onths. This combi nation strategy wil l treat the acute 
inflammatory component of t he d isease ( anakinra) and protect against devel opment of 
hepatorenal sy ndrome (p entoxify lline), one o f the most frequent causes of death in severe AAH. 
Gut mucosal integrity will be restored (zinc supplem ents) , a critical com ponent in prev enting 
repeat ed episodes of AAH . The primary outcome will be 6 month morta lity rate. Secondar y 
outcomes w ill be measur ed at 30, 90 and 180 days. T hey include change in gut m ucosal 
permeability; chang es i n the levels of serum endotoxi n, IL-1, tumor necrosis factor- 1 (TNF1) 
and other cytoki nes from base line; morta lity; and change in MELD scor e. 
 
Aim 2: Documen t the natural history of se vere alcoho lic hepa titis. Pati ents who decline 
randomizati on will be offer ed the opti on of i nclusion in t he study prospectively for data co llection 
purposes and research st udy procedure s. 
 
Aim 3: Create a data and tissue bior epos itory. This bior epos itory will serve as a national 
resource for al l studies relat ed to acute alcoho lic hepatitis. Ou r research gr oup w ill use t he 
sampl es and share with ot hers for future st udies on biomarkers for AAH severity/ outcome, cos t 
analysis, rati onales for n ew therapies, etc. 
 
2. Backgr ound:  
 
Acute alcoho lic hepatitis ( AAH) is an impo rtant cause of morbidity , morta lity and healthcar e 
costs in t he United States and most Western coun tries. T he 2007 nati onwide inpati ent sampl e 
from the H ealthcare Cost and Ut ilizati on Projec t reported that 56, 809 patients (0.71% o f the 
total) were hospita lized with AH(1). Average hospital costs were $37,769, more t han twice t he 
cost o f myocardial infarc tion. Length of st ay was significantly higher in t hose w ho di ed 
compared to those w ho survived (9.3 vs. 6.2 days). Tot al charg es (~$85,000) were 2.5-fol d 
higher in those w ho di ed than those w ho survived. T he 28- day morta lity of AAH in Denmark 
rose from 12 to 15% , and the 84-day morta lity increased from 14 to 24% betw een 1999 -2008(2) 
with 5-year morta lity of 56%. These data from Denmark are sim ilar to t he 1991 VA C oope rative 
data: 4-year morta lity of 42% with AH alone, and 65% with AH pl us cirrhosis(3). Aggregated 
morta lity of 661 placebo- treated pati ents from 19 trials w as 20% at 30 days and 34% at a 
median of 160 days fo llow-up(4). 
 
Statistics illustrate the grim outcome of AAH despite major advances in critical care and other 
medical interventi ons over t he last 3 decades. Wh ile hepa tic steat osis devel ops in the majorit y 
of heavy drinkers, alcoho li c hepatitis and cirrhosis occur in only 20-25% (review ed in (5)). All 
patients with AAH have a background  of hepatic st eatosis tha t represents a consequence o f 
metabolic and oxidative str ess. T he infla mmatory nature of alcoho lic hepa titis is high lighted 
clinically by elevati on i n white bl ood cell count (W BC) and occasi onally fev er and pathologica lly 
by infiltration of t he liver with neutr ophils. A numb er of st udies have imp li cated the gut flora, i n 
particular gut- derived toxins, as a “second hit ” in the pathog enes is of acute alcoho lic hepatiti s 
and ci rrhosi s. Endotoxin ( lipopo lysacchari de, LPS) bi nds to to ll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), a 
recepto r that plays a k ey role in initiating release of tumor necrosis factor (TNF 1) and other 
cytoki nes by activat ed Kupffer ce lls in ex perimental m odels of alcoho lic liver injury(6-8). 
March 13, 2014  High serum levels of TNF 1 are associat ed with t he clinical severity of alcoho lic hepatitis(9) and 
there is i ncreased pr oducti on of TNF1 in m on ocytes isolat ed  from pati ents with alcoho lic 
hepatitis(10). Other st udies have sugg ested that alcohol i ncreases gut perm eability in animal 
models and in heavy drinkers(11), a potential contri buting factor in how endotoxin or othe r 
bacterial pr oduc ts reach t he liver. E ndotoxemia occurs frequently in patients with ci rrhosis and 
in those with chr onic hepatitis(12, 13) probably due to i ncreased gut bacterial tr anslocati on. 
Furthermore, recent studi es report ed alterati ons in the gut micr obiome in alcohol-f ed animals(14), 
a finding that could also promote increased perm eability of the gut mucosa. We hy pothesize 
that im pairment of gut mucosal int egrity is the unifyi ng “second hit” with poten tial 
contribu ting factors incl uding the microbiom e, nutritional defici encies and direct eff ects 
of alcoho l. 
 
Published data show that several agents are bene f icial in short-ter m treatment of severe AAH , 
but none  has proven to impact 6 month morta lity w hen used as monother apy(15). Combini ng 
therapeutic agents that target different pathways wh ile avoidi ng the risks of infecti on and 
hepatorenal sy ndrome m ay improve morta lit y particularly in t he most severely ill pati ents with 
AAH. Furthermore, no specific interv entions or medicati ons benefit pati ents with m ild to 
moderate AAH(14). The proposed st udy will use specific ag ents to target both im pairment in gu t 
mucosal integrity and pathways involved in inflammati on in patients with the most severe form 
of AAH. The pot ential benefit is to not only improve tr eatment but also to provi de evidence of the 
roles of gut mucosal integrity and inflammati on in the pathog enes is of AAH. 
 
The proposed st udy represents t he culmi nation of a pl anning process involvi ng the mem bers o f 
the proposed Executive Co mmittee and other co-inves tigators . The criteria for selecti ng the 
proposed treatments i ncluded  current FDA approval for other i ndicati ons and a k nown safet y 
profile in other disease stat es so that a beneficial tr eatm ent(s) could be brough t forward for a 
phase III clinical trial and/or tr ansfor m treatmen t for AAH, a conditi on for which t he current 
treatment par adigm is unsatisfactory. The selection of t he medi cations was based  on the 
hypothesis tha t the syndrome of AA H results from inflammati on and release of IL-1, 
TNF1, and other pro-in flammatory cyt okines, trigger ed by gut derived endo toxins and 
other bacterial pr oducts as a consequence o f increased  permeabil ity of the gut m ucosa.  
 
The standard of care (co rticosteroids) is reco mme nded by both t he American Associati on for the 
Study of Liver  Disea ses and the American Co llege of Gastr oenterology in published pr actice 
guidelines(5, 16). A second ag ent, pentoxify lline, provi des protection from development of acut e 
kidney  injury(17). Both agents improve short-term surviva l (28 day) but 6 m onth morta lity remains 
high, 30% – 50%(18). In this c linical trial, co rticosteroi ds (methylpr ednisolo ne 32 mg/d for 28 
days) will be com pared with a drug regim en desig ned to decrease inflammati on (interl eukin- 1 
receptor antag onist for 28 days) and improve gut pe rmeab ili ty (oral zi nc for 6 mont hs). In 
additi on the st udy drug regim en will include pentoxifylli ne to protect again st acute ki dney  injur y 
(AKI, hepatorenal sy ndrome). 
 
3. Concise Summary of the Proj ect: 
 
Our st udy will test t he hypothesis that t he syndrome of acute alcoho lic hepatitis ( AAH) r esults 
from severe inflammation and dysregulat ed cytokines, providi ng t he “seco nd hit ” that causes an 
acute deterioration. We fu rther hy pothesize that gut deriv ed endotoxi ns and other bacterial 
produc ts trigger infla mmati on and are a consequence of i ncreased permeability with alter ed gut 
barrier fun ction. Steroid m onotherapy is not e ffective in all pati ents with A AH. Consequently, ou r 
studies will utilize com pounds  that have the potential to improve gut barri er functi on (both i n 
moderate and severe disease) AND to reduce t he associat ed inflammati on (severe disease ) 
AND to prevent t he development of he patorenal syndrome and other organ fa ilure (sever e 
disease). 
 
We w ill utilize published m odels for pr edicting mo rtality in patients with AAH to stratify pati ents 
March 13, 2014  based on severity . Although previ ous stud ies of treatment for severe AAH ut ilized 30-day 
morta lity as an endpoint , 6-month mo rtality is a more relevant outcome, in part because mos t 
transpl antati on programs require 6 m onths of abstinence before active listing. Furthermore, t he 
number of deaths betwe en 6 and12 mont hs in absti nent patients is l ow com pared to t he number 
in the first 6 months. Pati ents w ill be str atified into those with Model of End-stage Liver  Disease 
(MELD) score < 20 and MELD≥20. Those strati fied into t he moderate gro up are descri bed in a 
separate appli cation. The primary difference betw een t he Maddrey discriminant f uncti on (DF ) 
and t he MELD is that t he latter includes  creatinine. We propose to use t he MELD score to 
stratify for severity but require that pati ents in t he severe gr oup also have a DF > 32, to avoi d 
including patients with chr onic kidney  disease, not hepatorenal sy ndrome. 
 
 
 
 
Specific Aim 1 = Randomized controlled trial for severe acute alcoholic hepatitis: MELD 
≥20 
: Patients with severe AAH wi ll be r andomiz ed eq ually into two arms. Pati ents with MELD 20- 
25, patients with MELD 26-31, and pati ents with MELD > 32 will be r andomiz ed separately int o 
two equal a rms to ensure compar able severity in t he thr ee groups . The trial will also be double- 
blinded by re-packaging all oral m edicati ons into capsul es to ensure that each gr oup receives 
an equal number of capsul es each day for the en tire durati on of t he st udy. 
 
Patients w ill be treated with pentoxify lline 400 mg thr ee times daily for 28 days PLUS zinc 
supplem ents for a total of 6 mont hs (Group A) or methylpr ednisol one 32 mg daily for 28 days 
PLUS placebo capsul es daily for t he remaini ng 5 m onths (Group B). An inj ection of eithe r 
anakinra ( 100 mg) , Group A) or a placebo ( Group B) w ill be given subcuta neous ly each day for 
14 days. Patients, inves tigators and physici ans involved in t he care o f the patients w ill be 
blinded as to the treatment. 
 
The primary outcome w ill be 6-month morta lity. Secondary outcom es will include 30 and 90 
day mortality; chang es in MELD score at 30, 90 a nd 180 days and changes in g ut mucosal 
permeability m easured by serum tests. Serum en dotoxin levels and serum cytoki ne prof iles (IL- 
1, TNF 1, etc.) will also be m easured in both grou ps at base line, 2, 7, 30, 90 and 180 days. T he 
attached t able i ndicat es the timing of sampl es perform ed both for research purposes and for 
insuri ng st andard of care fo r the subjects. 

March 13, 2014  Specific Aim 2 = Natural history of severe acute alcoho lic hepa titis: MELD ≥ 20: 
 
Patients with severe AA H who decline to be randomiz ed but consen t to prospective data 
collection and minimal ri sk non-invas ive st udies (blood drawi ng and uri ne collection). We w ill 
also l ook to enroll subjects with alcoho lic hepatitis/alcoholic liver disease w ho are not e ligible for 
the Drug Trial but w ho are w illing to provi de specim ens and data, val uable informati on regardi ng 
the natural history of alcoho lic hepa titis and the aims noted above.  Sp ecimens including blood, 
urine, st ool, and liver tissue if a liver biopsy is done as part of subj ect’s standard tr eatment , will 
be co llected from subjects pa rticipating in this sub st udy. This w ill be a one-time co llection of 
specim ens to fo llow t he procedure of t he Study Day 0 for all enro lling participants. 
Specific Aim 3 = Subjects w ill be asked for a DNA bl ood draw during t he first day of the st udy. 
All hum an subj ects will be patients with a clinical presentati on consistent with acute alcoho lic 
hepatitis ( AAH). The trial is designed to tes t the hy pothesis that AAH results from inflammati on 
trigger ed by gut derived endo toxins and other bacterial pro ducts as a consequence of i ncreased 
permeability of t he gu t mucosa. Pati ents with AAH will be str atified by disease severity as 
determi ned by the Model for E nd-Stage Liver  Disease (MELD) score and enrolled in one of two 
randomiz ed contro lled trials. 
 
Subject popu lation: The total subject populati on will be 260 patients with alcoho lic hepa titis, 
130 in each disease severity gr oup (m oderate disease is defi ned as MELD < 20 and sever e 
disease as MELD 20-25, MELD 26- 31, and MEL D  > 32) . The age range will be 21 – 70 years 
old. T he health stat us of the populati on will be that of a gr oup with significa nt acute cli nical 
presentati on from alcoho lic liver  disease. 
 
Samp ling plan: The sample size w as calculat ed  based on the analysis of patients wit h 
alcoho lic liver  disease in t he (SRTR) database, accounti ng for dr op-out, lost-to-fo llow-up and 
non-eval uable results and i ncluding a fact or for possible non-representativeness of t he original 
database. In addition, pre liminary data for 114 patients meeti ng criteria were used in t he 
calculati ons and s tratificati on decisions. 
 
4. Criteria for Inclusi on of S ubjects: 
 
a. Ab ility to provi de info rmed consent by subject or a ppropriate fam ily membe r 
b. Age betw een 21-70 years 
c. Recent alcohol consumpti on > 50 g/d for > 6 months, conti nuing within two mont hs 
before enrollment 
d. At least 2 o f the following symptoms or sig ns of acute alcoho lic hepatitis: A norexia, 
nausea, RUQ pain, j aundice, leuk ocytes, hepatomegaly, AND 
e. Elevati on of AST ≥ 50 U/ L, but < 500 U/L at the time of admission or within 3 days of 
baseline visit; AST > ALT and ALT < 200 U/L; total bilirubin >3 mg/dL ANDf. Liver  
biopsy showi ng alcoho lic hepatitis (steat ohepatitis) OR ul trasound o f liver showi ng 
incr
eased echog enicity OR CT scan sho wing decreased att enuati on of liver 
compared to spl een or MRI showi ng fatty liver (decreased sig naling int ensity on T1 
weight ed images).  If the liver biopsy (done within 60 days of inclusion) confirms 
diagnosis of AAH then inclusion e will be waived. 
g. Model for End-Stage Liv er Disease (MELD) ≥ 20 and M addrey > 32 
h. Willingness to ut ilize two re liable forms of contrac eption (both mal es and femal es of 
childbeari ng pot ential) fr om screening through the first six w eeks of t he study 
 
 
 
5. Criteria for E xclusion of S ubjects: 
a. Hy potension with BP < 80/50 after volume r epleti on 
b. Preg nancy; incarceration; i nabili t y to provi de cons ent or lack of app ropriate fam ily 
member 
March 13, 2014  c. Signs of uncontro lled systemic inf ection: Fever > 38 °C and positive bl ood or ascites 
cultur es on appropriate antibiotic ther apy for > 3 days wit hin 3 days of i nclusion 
d. Acute gas trointestinal bleedi ng requiring > 2 units of bl ood transfusion within t he 
previ ous 4 days 
e. Undue risk from immunosuppression: P ositive HBsAg; a positive skin PPD skin t est, a 
positive q uantiferon, or history of tr eatment fo r tubercul osis; history of any malignancy 
except skin cancer but incl uding hepatoce llular carci noma; known HIV infecti on 
f. Treatment with co rticosteroi ds or other i mmunos uppressive m edications i ncluding 
specific anti-TNF ther apy (not i ncluding pentoxify lline), calci neurin i nhibitors for >3 
days within 3 days of inclusion. 
g. Evidence of acute panc reatitis: CT evidence or amylase or lipase > 5 X ULN 
h. Seri ous cardiac, respiratory or neurologic disease or evidence of auto immune hepatitis , 
primary b iliary ci rrhos is, primary sclerosi ng cholangitis, W ilson disease, 
hemochromat osis, secon dary ir on overl oad due to chr onic hemolysis, alpha-1- 
antitrypsin deficiency 
i.
 Acute or chr onic ki dney  injury with serum cr eatini ne > 3.0 mg/dl. 
 
 
6. Study Pr ocedu res: 
 
Aim 1 
 
Patients w ill be scr eened, s tratified as moderate or severe acute alcoho lic hepa titis and 
randomiz ed to one o f two arms for t he clinical trial. R ando mizati on wil l be in blocks of 6 using a 
sealed, opaq ue envelope. T he study procedur es are t abulated and divided into st anda rd of car e 
(“Standard”) and research-specific (“Research” ) studies. Betw een days 2 and 7, betw een days 8 
and 27, at 2 m onths, 4 m onths and 5 mont hs follow-up, clinically i ndicat ed st andard st udies will 
be obtained. St udy proce dures are descri bed in the t able. 
 
Study Procedur es by Study Day: 
A summary of eval uatio ns is locat ed in t he sche dule of even ts table provi ded at the end of thi s 
section. The procedur es and eval uations are outlined below. 
 
Screening: 
Complete scr eening f or eligibility will occur once t he inform ed consent h as been obtai ned as 
descri bed above.  Patients w ill be eval uated on the basis of clinical and l aboratory data durin g 
pre-scr een ing  and  stra tified  into  m oderate  or  sever e  alcoho lic  hepatitis.  Pati ents  w ill  be 
evaluated for entry into the study according t o the stated inclusion a nd excl usion criteria. 
Individuals w ho are i dentifi ed during scr eening as not eligible for t he st udy need not complete al l 
screening procedur es but will be provi ded t he option to enroll in t he natur al history st udy. Th e 
reason for i neligible status will be document ed on the Scr een Failure Log. 
 
The fo llowing procedur es will be obtai ned or performed to eval uate each pati ent’s general 
health and q ualificati ons for partici pation in the st udy: 
• Signed, wri tten info rmed consent 
• Dem ographic information i ncluding gender, date of b irth, race and ethnicity. 
• Medicati on history ov er the past 30 days , i ncluding pr escripti on and non-prescripti on 
over-t he-count er medications, herbal medications, vitami ns and minerals. 
• Alcohol usage in t he past 60 days prior to assessment specifica lly and t he pattern of 
chronic usage. 
• Review incl usion and exclusion criteria 
• Co llection of bl ood for hematology, coagulation, clinical chemistr y to i nclude amylase 
and lipase, a mmonia, and in female pati ents, a pregnancy test. 
March 13, 2014  • Physical exami nation, including height, weight (b ody mass i ndex  will be calculat ed 
based on these vari ables), and vital signs (systo lic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse 
rate, respiratory rate and body  temperatur e) 
• Ultrasound or cross –sectional imagi ng of the abdomen. This is st andard of care i n 
patients hospitaliz ed with alcoho lic hepatiti s. 
 
Study tr eatm ent: 
 
Patients w ill be r andomized to receive 28 days o f methylpr ednisol one 32 mg daily OR t herapy 
that i ncludes  a combi nation of anakinra (interl eukin-1 receptor antag onist , IL-1 RA) 100mg by 
subcut aneous  injecti on daily for 14 days pl us pentoxifylli ne 400 mg ora lly thr ee tim es daily fo r 
one month PLUS zi nc supplem ents ( 220 mg of zi nc sulfat e) given ora lly for 6 months. 
Assessm ents at baseline and during study treatment: 
Study day 0 – base line (within 48 hours of st udy enrollment) 
• Complete co llection of all base line history . Revie w of alcohol use history. 
• Complete co llection of al l indicat ed st andard of care l aboratory eval uations (chemistry , 
hematology, coagulation, urine, micr obiology, viral, and TB t esting) . 
• Ascit es eval uation, if present. 
• Co llection of base line research testi ng to i nclude urine, blood, DNA and stool t esting. 
• Co llect pri or and conco mitant m edications. 
• Clinical assessment to i nclude vital sig ns and physical ex am details. 
• Nu tritional assessment with a hand grip dy namomet er 
Treatment day 1 – time zero (alternativ ely note this as treatment day one with no time and 
above as study day 1 base line) 
• Begin conti nuous  AE review and r eporting 
• Begin subcutaneous inject ed st udy medicati on or placebo inj ection 
• Begin dosing o f oral study m edicati ons (pentoxify lline 400 mg 3 tim es daily PLUS zinc 
sulfate 220 mg once daily)/placebo or or al methylpr ednisol one/placebo pr eparation 
Treatment day 2: 
• Inpatient assessmen t to include: 
• Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of pri or and concomitan t medicati ons 
• Clinical assessm ent including vital sig ns and physical ex am details 
• Co llection of bl ood for c linically i ndicat ed laboratory st udies. 
• Co llection of research la boratory st udies i ncluding urine and blood. 
• Complete 24 hour uri ne collection. 
• Continue subcutaneous inj ection of st udy drug or placebo inj ection. 
• Continue oral st udy medicati ons (pentoxify lline 400 mg 3 tim es daily PLUS zi nc sulfate 
220 mg once daily)/placebo or or al methylpr ednisol one/placebo pr eparatio n. 
• Continuous  adverse event ( AE) r eview and r eporting . 
Treatment days 3-6: 
• If patient remai ns inpatient or has clinica lly indicat ed outpatient visit: 
• Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of pri or and concomitan t medicati ons 
• Clinical assessm ent including vital sig ns and physical ex am details 
• Co llection of bl ood for c linically i ndicat ed laboratory st udies. 
• Continue subcutaneous inj ection of st udy drugs or placebo inj ection. 
• Continue oral st udy medicati ons (pentoxify lline 400 mg 3 tim es daily PLUS zi nc sulfate 
220 mg once daily)/placebo or or al methylpr ednisol one/placebo pr eparatio n. 
• Continuous  AE revi ew and r eporting. 
Treatment day 7 ± 2 days: 
March 13, 2014  • Inpatient assessment o r required outpatient clinic visit to i nclude: 
• Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of pri or and concomitan t medicati ons 
• Clinical assessm ent including vital sig ns and physical ex am details 
• Co llection of bl ood for c linically i ndicat ed laboratory st udies. 
• Co llection of research la boratory st udies i ncluding urine and blood. 
• Nu tritional assessment with a hand grip dy namomet er 
• Continue subcutaneous inj ection of st udy drugs or placebo inj ection. 
• Continue oral st udy medicati ons (pentoxify lline 400 mg 3 tim es daily PLUS zi nc sulfate 
220 mg once daily)/placebo or or al methylpr ednisol one/placebo pr eparatio n. 
• Continuous  AE revi ew and r eporting. 
Treatment days 8-14: 
• If patient remai ns inpatient or has clinica lly indicat ed outpatient visit: 
• Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of pri or and concomitan t medicati ons 
• Clinical assessm ent including vital sig ns and physical ex am details 
• Co llection of bl ood for c linically i ndicat ed laboratory st udies. 
• Continue subcutaneous inj ection of st udy drugs or placebo inj ection. 
• Continue oral st udy medicati ons (pentoxify lline 400 mg 3 tim es daily PLUS zi nc sulfate 
220 mg once daily)/placebo or or al methylpr ednisol one/placebo pr eparatio n. 
• Continuous  AE revi ew and r eporting. 
Treatment day 15: 
• If patient remai ns inpatient or has clinica lly indicat ed outpatient visit: 
• Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of pri or and concomitan t medicati ons 
• Clinical assessm ent including vital sig ns and physical ex am details 
• Co llection of bl ood for c linically i ndicat ed laboratory st udies. 
• STOP subcut aneous  injecti on of st udy drugs or placebo injecti on. 
• Continue oral st udy medicati ons (pentoxify lline 400 mg 3 tim es daily PLUS zi nc sulfate 
220 mg once daily)/placebo or or al methylpr ednisol one/placebo pr eparatio n. 
• Continuous  AE revi ew and r eporting. 
Treatment days 16-27: 
• If patient remai ns inpatient or has a clinica lly indicat ed out patient visit : 
• Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of pri or and concomitan t medicati ons 
• Clinical assessm ent including vital sig ns and physical ex am details 
• Co llection of bl ood for c linically i ndicat ed laboratory st udies. 
• Continue oral st udy medicati ons (pentoxify lline 400 mg 3 tim es daily PLUS zi nc sulfate 
220 mg once daily)/placebo or or al methylpr ednisol one/placebo pr eparatio n. 
• Continuous  AE revi ew and r eporting. 
Treatment day 28 ± 2 days: 
• Inpatient assessment o r required outpatient clinic visit to i nclude: 
• Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of pri or and concomitan t medicati ons 
• Clinical assessm ent including vital sig ns and physical ex am details 
• Co llection of bl ood for c linically i ndicat ed laboratory st udies. 
• Co llection of research la boratory st udies i ncluding urine and blood. 
• Continue oral st udy medicati ons (pentoxify lline 400 mg 3 tim es daily PLUS zi nc sulfate 
220 mg once daily)/placebo or or al methylpr ednisol one/placebo pr eparatio n. 
• Continuous  AE revi ew and r eporting. 
March 13, 2014  • Nu tritional assessment with a hand grip dy namomet er 
Treatment day 29: 
• STOP dosing of oral stu dy drug or or al methylpr ednisolone pr eparati on 
• Continue once daily dosi ng of oral zi nc suppleme nt or oral placebo pr eparation 
• Continuous  AE revi ew and r eporting. 
Treatment days 29 to 2 m onths ± 2 w eeks: 
• Continue once daily dosing of oral zi nc suppleme nt or oral placebo pr eparation 
• Continuous  AE revi ew and r eporting. 
• If patient remai ns inpatient a t treatment month 2 or complet es clinica lly indicat ed 
outpatient visit at tr eatment m onth 2: 
• Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of pri or and concomitan t medicati ons 
• Clinical assessm ent including vital sig ns and physical ex am details 
• Co llection of bl ood for c linically i ndicat ed laboratory st udies. 
Treatment 3 mont hs ± 2 w eeks: 
• Inpatient assessment o r required outpatient clini c  visit to i nclude: 
• Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of pri or and concomitan t medicati ons 
• Clinical assessm ent including vital sig ns and physical ex am details 
• Co llection of bl ood for c linically i ndicat ed laboratory st udies. 
• Co llection of research la boratory st udies i ncluding urine, bl ood and stool. 
• Continue once daily dosing of oral zi nc suppleme nt or oral placebo pr eparation 
• Continuous  AE revi ew and r eporting. 
Treatment 4 and 5 mont hs ± 2 weeks: 
• Continue once daily dosing of oral zi nc suppleme nt or oral placebo pr eparation 
• Continuous  AE revi ew and r eporting. 
• If patient remai ns inpatient  or complet es clinica lly indicat ed out patient visit at tr eatment 
months 4 or 5: 
• Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of pri or and concomitan t medicati ons 
• Clinical assessm ent including vital sig ns and physical ex am details 
• Co llection of bl ood for c linically i ndicat ed laboratory st udies. 
Treatment 6 months: 
• STOP all study and plac ebo m edications. 
• Complete abdominal ultrasound. 
• Inpatient assessment o r required outpatient clinic visit to i nclude: 
• Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of pri or and concomitan t medicati ons 
• Clinical assessm ent including vital sig ns and physical ex am details 
• Co llection of bl ood for c linically i ndicat ed laboratory st udies. 
• Co llection of research la boratory st udies i ncluding urine, bl ood and stool. 
• Continuous  AE revi ew and r eporting. 
• Nu tritional assessment with a hand grip dy namomet er 
 
Follow up of early termi nation: 
A safety fo llow up visit will be perform ed approximately 30 days a fter disconti nuati on of study 
drug f or all patients that disconti nued  without withdrawi ng inform ed consent. Eval uation w ill 
include: 
• Co llection of bl ood for st andard of care labs to i nclude chemis try, hematology and 
coagulati on studies. 
• Clinical assessment to i nclude vital sig ns and physical ex am details. 
March 13, 2014  • Review baseli ne history f or changes. Revi ew alcohol intake history. 
• Co llection of concomitan t medications. 
• AE review and r eporting. 
• Review and recordi ng of reason for early te rmination. 
March 13, 2014 
  
Purpos 
e Test Day 
0 Day 
2 – 6* Day 7 Day 
8 – 27* Day 28 2 
mos *† 3 
mos 
† 4 
mos *† 5 
mos 
*† 6 
mos 
† 
Standa 
rd Clinical assessment x x x x x x x x x x 
 Alcohol intake x x x x x x x x x x 
 Liver pane l (bilirubin, alkaline 
phosphatase, AST, ALT) and GGT x x x x x x x x x x 
 Serum electrolytes, creatinine , BUN x x x x x x x x x x 
 Serum albumin, total protein x x x x x x x x x x 
 Prothrombin time, INR x x x x x x x x x x 
 Complete blood count x x x x x x x x x x 
 Haptoglobin x         x 
 Lipid pane l x         x 
 Amylase, lipase x          
 HIV x          
 HAV Ab, HBsAg, HBcore Ab (total) x          
 HCV Ab x          
 PPD x          
 Blood cultures x2 x          
 Urine culture & urinalysis x          
 24 hour urine (Na, K, creatinine , protein) x          
 Urine toxicology x          
 Ascites for albumin, total protein, cell 
count and differential (if present) x          
 Ascites culture x          
 Stool studies (if diarrhea): C. difficile, 
culture x          
 Complete abdominal ultrasound or cross- 
sectional radiol ogy x         x 
Resea r 
ch Gut permeabili ty studies x ‡    x  x   x 
 Serum zinc, urine zinc x    x    x   x 
 Stool (DNA microbiome) x        x   x 
 Urine (KIM-1) x x 
day2 x  x  x   x 
 Biomarkers = Cytokines x x 
day2 x  x  x   x 
March 13, 2014 
  
 DNA = Pharmacogenomics x          
 Serum micro RNA x  x  x  x   X 
 Monocyte prep (U Mass, U Louisville) x  x       x 
Blood Research total volume = 179 mL 45  30  37  30   37 
 SOC total volume = 208 mL 82 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 
 Combined = 387 mL = 26 tbspns 117 14 44 14 51 14 44 14 14 51 
• * clini cally indicated; † ± 2 weeks ‡ w ithin fir st 28 day s f or non-ICU pa tient s 
March 13, 2014  Sub-Study Pr oced ures 
 
1. Optional Natural History (m inimal risk with urine and bl ood collection): All screened subject s 
meeting i nclusion and exclusion criteria below or dec lining consen t to randomizati on will be i nvited to 
join this st udy of the natural history of severe acute alcoho lic hepa titis. The natural history of pati ents 
with severe alcoho li c hepatitis is not well document ed in t he current era. Prospective co llection of dat a 
in parallel with t he randomiz ed st udy subjects has great pot ential val ue. Every patient who agrees and 
gives consent will be seen in fo llow-up as clinica lly indicat ed. At each visit th at coincides with co llection 
of sampl es for research, or as close as possible to  Baseline, Day 7, Day 28, Month 3 and Month 6 , the 
subjects w ill  be offer ed the oppo rtunity to participate. Patients m ay also 
be asked to participate in t he natural history st udy as a one-time dr aw at the day of consent. 
 
 
4. Criteria for Incl usion of S ubjects for Natur al History S pecimen Collection: 
 
a. Ability to provi de info rmed consent by subject or a ppropriate fam ily member 
b.   Age betw een 21-70 
c.   Suspect ed or proven alcoho lic liver  disease 
 
5.  Criteria for E xclusi on of S ubjects for Natur al History S pecimen Collection: 
 
a. Preg nancy; incarceration; i nabili t y to provi de cons ent or lack of app ropriate fam ily member 
b.   Signs of uncontro lled systemic inf ection: Fever > 38o C; positive bl ood or ascit es cultur es on 
appropriate antibiotic ther apy for >3 days within 3 days of inclusion 
c. Evidence of acute panc reatitis: CT evidence or amylase or lipase > 5 X ULN 
d.   Evidence of other liver diseases such as autoimm une hepatitis, primary b iliary ci rrhosis, 
primary sclerosi ng cholangitis, W ilson disease, biopsy proven  hemochromat osis, alpha-1- 
antitrypsin deficiency 
 
 
Over 
the entire 6 mont hs study period 387 mL of bl ood will be draw n, comprisi ng 208 mL for standar d 
of care tests and 179 mL fo r research st udies. 
 
Optional DNA Blood Sample Co llection: A biorep ository can serve as a national resource for al l 
studies relat ed to acute alcoho lic hepatiti s. A major goal o f the U- 01 conso rtium is to share clinical 
samples. Ou r research gr oup w ill use t he samples and share with ot hers for future st udies on 
biomarkers for AAH severity/ outcome, cost analysis, rati onales for new therapies, etc. Blood and 
tissue sampl es will be co llected as indicat ed in the t able. Sampl es for DNA pr eparati on will be shi pped 
to the Clevel and Clinic a nd specim ens will be shi pped to those tr anslational sit es that are st udying 
biomarkers or pharmac ogenomics ( U Mass, U Louisvi lle). S pecimens will only be identifi ed by the 
unique st udy number . De-i dentifi ed data obtai ned from the various pharmacog enomics, miRNA and 
transcriptosome screens  will be placed on the website of t he U-01 conso rtium and be ava ilable to the 
U-01 inves tigators throug hout the study. 
 
The amount of blood tha t would be co llected is 8 mL (2 tbspns) and it will be stor ed at the Cleveland 
Clinic Foundati on as part of the NIH Tissue and Bior epos itory for Alcoho lic Hepatitis St udies. 
 
7. Sources of R esear ch Material: S pecimens: Blood, urine, st ool 
 
Blood for research purposes w ill be co llected at the same time as blood for c linical care. Uri ne 
specim ens will be co llected either with clinical care sampl es or at special research visits duri ng follow- 
up 
after discharge. All sampl es will only be identifi ed using a uniq ue study number and processed as 
necessary for local storage or shi pping to centr al testing sites. 
 
Stool sampl es will be co llected by giving a co llection ki t to the subjects. 
 
A
 unique study number will be assig ned to each subject. T he unique study number will be assigned 
March 13, 2014  centrally at t he time of ra ndomizati on and used to code all samples. T he study site will be i dentifi ed by 
the first digi t (1 – 4) , the subject by the last 3 dig its and the disease s tratificati on by the total numb er of 
digits (4 fo r moderate alc oholic hepatitis) . This procedure a llows any site to exceed 100 subjects 
enrolled in either st udy. 
 
Data: Any past medical history , fam ily history, social history (i ncluding dietary and occupational 
history) , medications and other ing ested supplem ents pot entially relat ed to etiology or comp lications 
of liver disease and alcohol consumpti on not provi ded in t he electronic m edical records. 
 
Electronic m edical r ecord: Data pertaini ng to curr ent hospitalizati on, past medical history, fam ily 
history, social history (incl uding dietary and occu pational history), m edica tions and other ingested 
supplem ents potentia lly relat ed to etiology or comp lications of liver disease and alcohol consumption; 
physical exami nation. 
 
Standa rd of care l aboratory inv estigations: Resu lts of routi ne blood chemis try tests = bl ood 
electrolytes, renal and liver function tests, pancre as enzymes, lipid panel, uri ne and fluid chemis try; 
hematology = complete bl ood count, coagulati on and hemolysis st udies , fluid cell counts; infectious 
diseases = viral hepatitis serologies, tests for HIV and  tubercul osis; blood, uri ne and fluid cultures; 
stool culture and toxins. Results of routi ne radiology = chest x-ray, complete abdominal u ltrasound. 
 
Data from the results of research st udies: gut perm eability, bl ood and uri ne zinc, bl ood DNA 
(geno mics) and stool DNA (micr obiome) , blood micro RNA , blood and urine inflammati on biomarkers, 
blood mononuc lear ce lls responses. 
 
A measure of nu tritional stat us willbe obtai ned via a hand grip m easureme nt with t he JAMAR 
dynamometer. 
 
A list of st udy patients will be maintai ned in t he electronic m edical record at each site and in no other 
place. T he list w ill be assig ned to one inves tigator at each site. Access to t he list, within t he el ectronic 
medical r ecord, w ill be gr anted to t he other inves tigators and research nurs es at the study site. The 
security of t he electronic m edical r ecord w ill provi de full protecti on to any individually i dentifiable 
private informati on. 
 
8. Recruitment Met hods and Consen ting Proc ess: 
 
Potential patients w ill be i dentifi ed from da ily results o f routine chemis try tests (b ilirubin > 3 mg/dL , 
AST > ALT and > 1. 5x upper limit of normal but < 500 U/L) and screened  for inclusion and exclusion 
criteri a. T he primary physici ans will be approached for pe rmission to mee t the pati ent and will 
introduce t he researchers. 
 
The potential subject will be introduced to t he researcher(s) by provi der(s) on t he hea lthcare tea m 
responsible fo r the hospita lization (inpati ents) or encounter (Emergency Department or outpati ent). 
The study will be discussed in detail, with a tr anslator as needed, and t he consent form explained. 
Subjects will be given a copy of the consent for m to keep, with a S panish fu lly translated versi on as 
needed.  When they have m ade a decisi on, the consent w ill be sig ned and witnessed if t hey are 
agreeable to participating. T he time frame is 7 days from initial i dentification as eligible until study 
enrollment. 
 
Circumstances for consent : Subjects will be approached by one o f the physici an inves tigators, in a 
confi dential envir onm ent with fam ily mem bers present if desired. The informati on provi ded will be al l 
that data in t he IRB-approved consent form, using interpretati on service as needed via hospital 
language lines. T he cons ent document, in Eng lish or S panish, w ill be given  to the subject as 
descri bed above. Aft er agr eemen t to pa rticipate, the for m will be sig ned and witnessed; a complet e 
copy of the entire document will be provi ded to the subject in Eng lish or S panish as required. 
 
If the subj ect’s conditi on is consi dered menta lly unable to provi de informed consent by t he primar y 
managemen t team then a leg al representative will have t he option to sign t he consent form until suc h 
time as t he subjec t regai ns capacity . One of the comp lications of severe alcoho lic hepatitis is hepa tic 
encephal opathy. I f this comp lication is diagnosed clinically, t hen t he leg al representative will be 
March 13, 2014  
requir ed to sign t he consent form unti l the encephal opathy has resolved. 
 
9. Poten tial Ri sks: 
 
Physical risks: 
 
Methylpr ednisolone is the st andard m edical care for severe acute alcoho lic hepa titis. 
Methylpr ednisol one has anti-inflammatory e ffects that can alte r the body’s r eacti on to other injuries . 
Methylpr ednisol one m ay cause some, all or none of t he si de-effects listed below at t he dose and 
duration used in t he study. 
 
 
Side effects Frequent >20% of 
subjects Occasional 2 - 20% of 
subjects  
Rare Less  than 2% of subjects 
 
Serious Infection (1.5 x risk in 
controls)  
Psychos is (5%)  
Peptic ulcer Bone necrosis 
 
Less  Serious  
Weight gain High blood sugar High 
blood pressure  
Muscle weakness  
 
Minor Facial swelling Fluid 
retention Indigestion 
Increased  appetite Difficulty sleeping Mood 
chan ges Eupho ria 
Headache   
Anakinra (study drug ) is another anti-inflammatory treatm ent. It can alt er the body’s r eaction to other 
injuries. Anakinra (st udy drug ) may cause som e, all or none  of the side-eff ects listed below at the 
dose and durati on used in t he st udy. 
 
 Frequent 
>20% of subjects Occasional 
2 - 20% of subjects Rare 
Less  than 2% of subjects 
Serious  Serious and life- 
threatening Infection (2 – 
3%)  
Less  Serious  Low blood count   
Minor Injection site redness   
 
 
Pentoxifylline (study drug) m ay protect your kid neys from damage fo llowing changes in bl ood flow. It 
is used to treat pati ents with blood flow diseases. P entoxify lline (st udy drug) m ay cause some, al l or 
none  of the side-effects listed below at the dose a nd durati on used in t he study. 
 
 Frequent 
>20% of subjects Occasional 
2 - 20% of subjects Rare 
Less  than 2% of subjects 
Serious   Confusion 
Depression 
Seizure 
Hepatitis (rare) 
Less  Serious  Nausea,  vomiting  
Minor Headache  
Dizziness  Indigestion  
 Frequent 
>20% of subjects Occasional 
2 - 20% of subjects Rare 
Less  than 2% of subjects 
 
 
Zinc is an essential nutrient f ound  in hig hest quantiti es in oysters, shellfish, m eat, chick en and fish . It 
is essenti al for the body’s ce lls to function. Wh en given in t ablets, zinc may cause some, al l or none o f 
the side-effects listed below at the dose and duration used in t he st udy. 
 
 Frequent 
>20% of subjects Occasional 
2 - 20% of subjects Rare 
Less  than 2% of 
subjects 

March 13, 2014   
Serious    
Less  Serious Nausea  & vomiting   
Minor Indigestion   
 
 
10. Subject Safety and Data Mon itoring: 
 
Data Safety M onitori ng Board (DSMB) : The DSM B will consist of thr ee ex perienced clinici ans to 
exercise oversight of t he safety o f trial partici pants . It will be chair ed by Dr. Willis M addrey (Professo r 
of Internal M edicine, UT S outhw estern M edical C enter) , revi ew periodic safety r eports pre pared by 
the trial biostatistici an (Dr. Bruce Ba rton), request additi onal data/informati on (if necessary), and 
advise t he trial Executive Commi ttee regarding conti nuati on/disconti nuati on of the study. 
 
The External M edical Safety M onitor (EMSM, Dr . Maddrey) will closely monitor t he incidence rat es of 
all adver se events r eport ed, whether seri ous or not , throughout t he study, and will aler t the DSMB if a 
trend is observed. A summary of al l AEs and SAEs, a su mmary of all r eports, and a coded list of al l 
subjects w ho  were termi nated from the study due to st udy-relat ed adverse event s, will be i ncluded i n 
reports subm itted by the DMSB to t he IRBs. An annual r eport will be sub mitted to t he IRBs at al l 
parti
cipating sites. 
 
Clinical perfo rmance sites wil l report all fatal even ts, unantici pated problems and other serious 
adverse even t s and susp ected adverse r eacti ons to the Data Safety M onitori ng Board ( DSMB) and 
IRB by secure email within 24 hours of f irst knowledge  of the event. Additionally, all cu rrent study 
data for that pa rticular subject w ill be enter ed to allow for timely revi ew by the EMSM, Dr. Willis 
Maddrey. 
 
11. Proced ures to Maintain C onfidentiality:  
 
Any time info rmation is co llected; t here is a potential risk for loss of confid entia lity. Every e ffort w ill be 
made to keep information confi dential; however, this cannot be guar antee d. 
 
Privacy of i ndividuals: The privacy of individuals will be protect ed by using confi dential surr ounding s 
for all comm unicati ons, e liciting and honoring requests for t he inclusion  and excl usion of fam ily 
members a nd pa rtners a nd fo llowing the institutions’ codes for ethical and professional conduct o f 
research and patient-center ed care. 
 
Confidentia lity of data: No persona lly identifi able informati on will be record ed outsi de the electronic 
medical r ecord. Only those i ndividuals with rights to access t he pati ent’s el ectronic m edical record wil l 
know t he identity of t he study subjects. Wh ile no efforts at security are completely free of risk, thi s 
approach is such tha t the risk of acci dental exposure is neg ligible. 
 
12. Poten tial Benefits: 
 
The potential benefits to every subject pa rticipating in t he cli nical trial are relat ed to receivi ng optimal 
patient-center ed care for t heir conditi on. This i ncludes ensuring t he mobilizati on of available resources 
for rehabili tation programs and t he educati on of all involved  patients and their famili es on the possibl e 
conseq uences of alcohol consumption, particularly in high risk sub- populations. Wh ile ideally 
occu rring in t he care of all pati ents with alcoho lic hepatitis, t he study team will provi de patients wit h 
the personal healt hcare navigati on assistance th at is not ava ilable to every i ndividual. 
 
There m ay be immediate additional benefits to those in t he active st udy arms i f the  outcom es are 
favor able. If the outcomes are favor able, all patients with severe alcoho lic hepatitis m ay benefit from 
extrapolati on of t he findings . If the outcom es are negative,  other subjects will be protect ed from the 
risks o f treatment that has no additional benefi t to convey. 
 
There is a potential societal benefi t in the general outcomes o f the clinical trial with respect to alcohol 
consumption, alcoho lism and alcoho lic liver disease. In addition, t he potenti al financ ial benefits of a 
successf ul program are subst antial. 
 
13. Biostatisti cs: 
March 13, 2014  Sample size for study of patients with m oderate acute al coho lic hepatitis 
 
To compare change from base line in t he two gro ups of m oderate AAH pati ents, we fi nd that a two- 
sided two sample t-test of change in MELD score from baseline  (mea n=17.0) to 30 days with an 
overall sample size of 108 patients (54 in each trea tment group) achieves  80% power with an alph a 
level of 0.05 to detect a di fference in m ean c hange of MELD score of 5.0 in t he con trol group 
compared to a m ean change of 8.0 in t he interven tion  (probiotic) group with a comm on estimat ed 
group MELD score st andard deviation of 5. 559 . 
 
Adjusting for a total of 20% wit hdrawal, lost to follow- up or non-eval uable, we have n* = 108/ (1- 0. 20) 
= 108/.80 = 136 pati ents total or 68 patients in ea ch treatment gro up. We expect that , in a multivariat e 
model, we will have t he power to detect sma ller treatment gr oup differences due to t he partition of the 
variance among t he  predictors. 
 
Statistical analysis plan: Our primary analysis of change in ME LD score from baseline  to 30 days 
will be an unadjust ed com parison of change (Day 30 – Base line) using a st andard two- gr oup t-test a t 
a two-si ded al pha level of 0. 05 with appropriate adj ustmen t for unequal v ariances. We w ill also 
conduct secondary analyses to further inves tigate factors that influence the change as well as adjust 
for any im balances in pa tient characteristics and covariat es between tr eatm ent groups . Our initial 
model w ill be an Analysis of Covariance ( ANC OVA) model with change in MELD score as the 
outcome and with treatment gr oup (0=con trol, 1=pr obiotic) and base line MELD score as predictors. 
Additional m odels w ill include patient characteristics such as age, g ende r, time since diag nosis as 
well as other covariat es such as ALT, AST, and other l aboratory m easures at base line. Fi nally, as it is 
likely t hat MELD score c an be calculat ed throughout t he durati on of the study, we will use mix ed 
models to analyze the longit udinal MELD score data. Mix ed (random e ffects) m odels are used t o 
adjust fo r the inherent co rrelati on among t he laboratory ( and, thus, MELD score) m easur es on the 
same pati ent. We w ill consi der treatment as a fix ed effect, but most other f actors as random e ffects. 
The model w ill also i nclude a time me tric, so that , rather t han the change from base line, we can use 
the coefficients o f the times as estimat es of the ch ange from base line (time=0) , adjusted for the othe r 
factors in t he model. S o, for exampl e, if MELD score is calculat ed at Days 0, 7, 14, 21, and 30 , the 
model might look like: MELDt = β0 + β1*tx + β2*gender  + β3*age + β4*Day7 + β5*Day 14 + β6*Day 21 
+ β7*Day 30 w here MELDt = MELD score a t time t (t=0,7,14, 21,30) , β0...β7 = regressi on coefficients, 
tx = treatment (0=control, 1=pr obiotic), gender = patient’s g ender (0=femal e, 1=male) , age= patient’s 
age at last bi rthday, Day7 = MELD score at D ay 7 (0=No, 1=Y es), ..., Day 30 = MELD score at D ay 30 
(0=No, 1=Yes). This impli es that t he base line MELD score is r epresent ed by 
Day7=Day 14=Day 21=Day 30=0. Interpreting this m odel, which makes maxim um use of all ava ilable 
MELD scores, t he coefficient β4 is t he estimate o f the change in MELD score from base line to D ay 7, 
β5 is t he estimate o f the change in MELD score fr om base line to D ay 14, etc. By combini ng al l of the 
information into a single m odel, we can adjus t the MELD score chang es for ot her factors as well as 
test for a di fference in the sl opes  of the changes betw een t he two treatment groups. T he model can, 
of course, be ext ended bey ond 30 days if measur es are availab le. The fit of t he model w ill be 
assessed primar ily through t he likelihood  ratio test o f the fitted model to the intercept only model. Al l 
coeffici ents w ill be t ested for significance at a critical level of p=0.05. 
 
Sample size for study of patients with severe acute alcoho lic hepatitis  
 
Using the Lakat os approach(19) to estimating t he sample size for a log-ra nk test, we find that a two- 
sided l ogrank test with an overall sample size of 130 patients ( 65 pati ents each o f the control and 
treatment groups) achiev es 80.0% power at a 0.05 signifi cance level to detect a haz ard ratio of 
0.4447  when t he pr oportion survivi ng at 6 months in the con trol group is 0.64 and 0. 82 in the 
treatment group. T he total st udy durati on is 2.5 y ears of which subjec t accrual (en try) occurs in the 
first 2 y ears. We assume tha t the accrual pa ttern is unifor m throughout t he accrual peri od and that t he 
proportion drop-out in each gr oup is 0. 10 duri ng the 6 m onths with no treatment cr oss-overs. As a 
sensitivity analysis of these estimates, we used the Lachin- Foulk es approach(20), a slightly less 
flexible approach and, with the same assumpti ons as above, we estimate 53 pa tients in each gr oup, 
reasonably close to t he Lakat os estimates . Thus, to be conservative in our estimates, we will set our 
March 13, 2014  sample size as 130 patients tot al or 65 pati ents in each treatment gr oup. PASS I I (NCSS, Kaysvi lle, 
Utah) was used for all sample size calculations(21). 
 
Statistical analysis plan: Our primary analysis of this outcome w ill be t he unadjust ed log-rank test o f 
the 
Kaplan-Mei er survival estimat es for the two tr eatm ent gr oups  at a two-si ded al pha level of 0.05 
with survival censor ed at  6 months. Secondary analysis will use a C ox proportional hazar ds 
regressi on model (with survival censor ed at 6 months) to adjust t he treatment difference in surviva l for 
pat
ient characteristics (e.g. , age, gende r, time since diagnosi s) and other covariat es (e.g., AL T, AST, 
other l ab measures) . Predictors will be added to t he model usi ng refer ence cell codi ng, as with t he 
mixed m odels above. The C ox model generat es estimat es of the hazard ratio for each f actor 
compared to the referen ce level; e.g. , for male pati ents vs. female pati ents, assuming g ender = 1 for 
male and 0 fo r females, a hazard ratio of 1. 25 indicat es that mal es have a 25% higher pr obab ility o f 
death overall by 6 m onths com pared to females. We can also add time-de pendent  covariat es to the 
model, such as ALT levels at 2 and 4 m on ths, to estimate t heir predictive val ue for morta lity. To 
assess t he fit of the model, we will use Nagelker ke’s R2 cons tructed from the ratio of t he likelihoods 
for the fitted model to the intercept only m odel. As fu rther secondary analysis, we can e liminate the 
survival censori ng 
 
at 6 mont hs and test t he overall survival thr oughout t he durati on of follow-up. 
 
General analysis pl an for expe riments with fold change as the outcome: Initial analyses will be 
descriptive in nature, a llowing for inves tigati on of appropriate normalization approaches . Initial 
comparative analyses of fold-change betw een treatment gr oups  (or betwe en other gr oups  of interest ) 
will be through a standard two-gr oup t-test a t the p=0. 05 lev el with appropriate adjus tment for unequal 
variances. I f the fold change data are l ongitudinal in nature, we will use mix ed (random e ffects) 
models to estimate t he change in fold-change over time. In these m odels, fold-change at each tim e 
point will be t he outcome with treatment (or othe r group i ndicator) and time as predictors. A dditional 
patient characteristics can be added  to the m odel to cr eate adjust ed estimat es of treatment (or other 
group) differences. Mixed m odels can adjus t for the correlati on due to measur es within patients and 
due to repeated microarrays at each time point. 
 
Refer ences  
 
1.  Li angpunsakul S. Clinical C haracteristics a nd Mortality of Hospita lized Alcoho lic Hepatitis Pati ents 
in the Unit ed States. J Clin Gas troenterol. 2011;45(8): 714-9. 
2.  Sandahl TD, Jepsen P, Thomsen KL, Vilstrup H. Incidence and mortality of alcoho lic hepatitis in 
Denmark 1999- 2008: a nati onwide populati on based cohort st udy. J H epatol. 2011;54(4): 760-4 . 
Epub 2010/12/04. 
3.  C hedid A, M endenha ll C, Ga rtside P , French S , Chen T, Rabin L. Prog nostic factors in alcoho lic 
liver disease. VA Coope rative St udy Group. Am J Gastr oent erol. 1991;86( Feb(2)):210-6. 
4.  Yu C-H . Early morta lity of alcoho lic hepatiti s: A review of data from placebo-contro lled clinical 
trials. World Jour nal of G astroenterology. 2010;16( 19):2435. 
5.  O'Shea RS, Dasarat hy S, McCu llough AJ. Alcoho lic liver disease. Hepatology. 2010; 51(1):307- 28. 
6.  Yin M, Wheeler MD, K ono H, Bradford BU , Gallucci RM, Luster MI, et al . Essential role o f tumor 
necrosis fact or alpha in alcohol-induced liver injury in mice. Gas troenterology. 1999; 117(4): 942-52. 
Epub 1999/09/29. 
7.  Uesugi T, Froh M, Arteel GE, Bradford BU, Thurman RG. To ll-like recept or 4 is involved in the 
mechanism of early alco hol-induced liver injury in mice. H epat ology. 2001; 34(1): 101-8. E pub 
2001/ 06/30. 
8.  G ao B, Sek i E, Brenner DA, Friedman S , Cohen JI , Nagy L, et al . Innate i mmun ity in alcoho lic liver 
di
sease. Am J Physiol G astrointest Liver  Physiol. 2011; 300(4):G 516-25. E pub 2011/01/ 22. 
9.  Felver ME, Mezey E, McGuire M, Mitchell MC, Herl ong HF, Veech GA, et al. Plasma tumo r 
necrosis factor al pha predicts decreased long-term surviva l in severe alcoho lic hepa titis. Alcohol 
Clin Exp Res. 1990; 14(2):255-9. E pub 1990/ 04/01. 
10. Gobejishvili L, Barve S , Joshi-Barve S, McClain C. Enhanced PDE 4B expressi on augments LPS- 
induc ible TNF expression in et hanol-prim ed mon ocytes: relevance to alco holic liver  disease. Am J 
March 13, 2014  Physio l Gastrointest Liver  Physiol. 2008; 295(4):G 718-24. Epub 2008/ 08/09. 
11. Szabo G, Bala S. Alcoho lic liver  disease and the gut- liver axis. World J G astroenterol. 
2010; 16(11 ):1321-9. Epub 2010 /03/20.  
12. Fukui H, Brauner B , Bode JC , Bode C . Plasma e ndotoxin concen trations in patients with alcoho lic 
and non-alcoho lic liver disease: r eevaluation with an improv ed chromog enic assay. J H epatol. 
1991; 12(2):162-9. E pub 1991 /03/01. 
13. Lin RS, Lee FY, Lee SD, Tsai YT, Lin HC, Lu RH, et al. E ndotoxemia in pati ents with chr onic liver 
diseases: relationship to severity of liver diseases, presence of esophagea l varices, and 
hyperdy namic circulati on. J Hepatol. 1995;22(2):1 65-72. E pub 1995/ 02/01.  
14. Mutlu E, Keshavarzi an A, Eng en P, Forsyth CB, Sikaroodi M , Gillevet  P. Int estinal dysbi osis: a 
possible mechanism of alcohol-induced endotoxemia and alcoho lic steatohepatitis in rats. Alcohol 
Clin Exp Res. 2009; 33(10 ):1836-46. E pub 2009/08/ 04. 
15. Whitfield K , Ram baldi A , Wetterslev J, C G . Pentoxifylli ne for alcoho lic hepatitis (Review). 
Cochr ane Dat abase of Systematic Reviews. 2009 (4).  
16. McCu llough AJ, O'C onnor JF. Alcoho lic liver disease: proposed r ecommendati ons for the 
American Co llege o f Gastroenterology. Am J Gastr oenterol. 1998; 93(11 ):2022-36. Epub 
1998/ 11/20. 
17. Akrivi adis E, Botla R , Briggs W , Han S, Reynolds T, Shaki l O. Pentoxify lline improves  short-ter m 
su
rviva l in severe acute alcoho lic hepatiti s: a double-b lind, placebo-con trolled trial. 
Gastroenterology. 2000 ;119(6):1637-48. E pub 2000/12/13. 
18. Nguy en-K hac E, T hevenot T, Piquet MA, Benferh at S, Goria O, C hatelain D, et al . Glucoco rticoids 
plus N-acetylcystei ne in severe alcoho lic hepatiti s. N Engl J Med. 2011;3 65(19):1781 -9. E pub 
2011/ 11/11 
19. Lakat os E. Sample siz es based on the log-rank statistic in compl ex clinical trial s. Biometrics. 
1988; 44(1):229-41. E pub 1988 /03/01. 
20. Lachin JM, Foulk es MA. Eval uation of sample size and power for analyses of survival wit h 
allowance for nonuniform patient en try, losses to fo llow-up, nonc ompliance, and stratificati on. 
Biometrics. 1986; 42(3):507-19. E pub 1986/ 09/01 
21. Hintze J. PASS 11. Kaysvi lle, Utah, USA: NCSS, LLC; www.ncss.com ; 2011. 