 
 Institutional Review Board for Baylor College of Medicine and AffiliatedHospitals Protocol Number:    H-49195Status:                        ApprovedInitial Submit Date:  12/14/2020Approval Period:       4/1/2021 - 1/5/2026 Section Aa:  Title & PIA1.  Main Title     FIT24: USING TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE ACTIVITY AND SLEEP IN HISPANIC YOUTHA2.  Principal Investigator      Name:  ERICA SOLTERO NGWOLOPhone:  7137987154     Id:  208468Fax:       Department:  PEDIATRICS: NUTRITIONEmail:   soltero@bcm.edu     Center:  Mail Stn:  BCM320A3.  Administrative Contact     NoneA3a.  Financial Conflict of InterestDoes any member of study personnel (Investigator (including investigator's spouse and/or dependent children)) that areinvolved in the design, conduct, or reporting of the research have a Significant Financial Interest (SFI) that would reasonablyappear to be affected by the research for which funding is sought and/or associated with an entity/business that wouldreasonably appear to be affected by the research?          No Section Ab:  General Information    A4.  Co-Investigators      Name:  TERESIA O'CONNORPhone:  7137986782Id:  128465Fax:  7137987098Department:  PEDIATRICS: NUTRITIONEmail:   teresiao@bcm.eduCenter:  Mail Stn:  BCM320      Name:  DEBORAH THOMPSONPhone:  7137987076Id:  133410Fax:  713 7987098Department:  PEDIATRICS: NUTRITIONEmail:   dit@bcm.eduCenter:  Mail Stn:  BCM320      Name:  SALMA MUSAADPhone:  7137987058Id:  207944Fax:  Department:  PEDIATRICS: NUTRITIONEmail:   musaad@bcm.eduCenter:  Mail Stn:  BCM320      Name:  AYLEEN HERNANDEZPhone:  Id:  234956Fax:  Department:  STUDENT AFFAIRSEmail:   u234956@bcm.eduCenter:  Mail Stn:  7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=4783171/13
      Name:  SANDRA MIHAILPhone:  Id:  235036Fax:  Department:  STUDENT AFFAIRSEmail:   u235036@bcm.eduCenter:  Mail Stn:        Name:  ANNA HSUPhone:  7137987154Id:  244453Fax:  Department:  PEDIATRICS: NUTRITIONEmail:   u244453@bcm.eduCenter:  Mail Stn:  BCM320      Name:  DEBORAH BABALOLAPhone:  Id:  244720Fax:  Department:  STUDENT AFFAIRSEmail:   u244720@bcm.eduCenter:  Mail Stn:        Name:  LIZETTE VILLANUEVAPhone:  Id:  247316Fax:  Department:  PEDIATRICS: NUTRITIONEmail:   u247316@bcm.eduCenter:  Mail Stn:        Name:  MIGUEL CAMEJO FERNANDEZPhone:  7137987154Id:  247445Fax:  Department:  PEDIATRICS: NUTRITIONEmail:   u247445@bcm.eduCenter:  Mail Stn:  BCM320      Name:  ALEXIS RENDONPhone:  Id:  251749Fax:  Department:  GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BIOMEDICAL SCIENCESEmail:   u251749@bcm.eduCenter:  Mail Stn:        Name:  KARINA LOPEZPhone:  Id:  Non-BaylorFax:  Institution:  Baylor College of MedecineEmail:   karina.lopez@uth.tmc.eduAddress:        Name:  MARBELLY PARTIDAPhone:  Id:  Non-BaylorFax:  Institution:  Texas A&M UniversityEmail:   marbelly.03-02_1999@tamu.eduAddress:        Name:  OSAMAH SALIMPhone:  (713) 306-5575Id:  Non-BaylorFax:  Institution:  University of TexasEmail:   osalim@utexas.eduAddress:  2405 Robert Dedman Dr, Austin, TX 78712      Name:  ZABRINA SIDHUPhone:  Id:  Non-BaylorFax:  Institution:  Rice UniversityEmail:   zks1@rice.eduAddress:  6100 Main Street, Houston, TX, 77005      Name:  NATASHA FLORES-ACTONPhone:  Id:  Non-BaylorFax:  Institution:  Rice UniversityEmail:   nf17@rice.eduAddress:  6100 Main Street, Houston, TX 77005      Name:  EMILY NGUYENPhone:  Id:  Non-BaylorFax:  Institution:  University of HoustonEmail:   emily172021@gmail.comAddress:  4211 Elgin Street, Suite 200 Houston, Texas 77204-1011      Name:  ANA RIVERAPhone:  Id:  Non-BaylorFax:  Institution:  Rice UniversityEmail:   asr12@rice.eduAddress:        Name:  JASON MENDOZAPhone:  206-744-95007/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=4783172/13
Id:  Non-BaylorFax:  Institution:  University of WashingtonEmail:   jason.mendoza@seattlechildrens.orgAddress:  325 9th Ave Seattle, WA 98104-2499      Name:  DEBORAH PARRA-MEDINAPhone:  (512) 475-9315Id:  Non-BaylorFax:  Institution:  The University of Texas at AustinEmail:   parramedina@austin.utexas.eduAddress:  The University of Texas at Austin 116 Inner Campus Dr StopG6000 Austin, TX 78712A5.  Funding Source:     Organization:  NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DIABETES AND DIGESTIVE AND KIDNEY DISEASES (NIDDK)A6a.  Institution(s) where work will be performed:     BCM: Baylor College of MedicineHCHD: Harris County Hospital DistrictA6b.  Research conducted outside of the United States:     Country:  Facility/Institution:  Contact/Investigator:  Phone Number:  If documentation of assurances has not been sent to the Office of Research, please explain:A7.  Research Category:     A8. Therapeutic IntentDoes this trial have therapeutic intent?     No A9. ClinicalTrials.gov RegistrationDoes this protocol/trial require registration on ClinicalTrials.gov due to it: meeting the definition of an Applicable Clinical Trial,being required under the terms and conditions of an award, or being proposed to be published in ICMJE journals?     Yes Who will be responsible for registering and maintaining the registration of this Applicable Clinical Trial?     The BCM PI will register the trial because either:     -   the trial is BCM PI-initiated,     -   BCM is the lead site of this multicenter trial, or,     -   the industry sponsor has instructed the BCM PI to register the trial, or,     -   registration of this trail is required as a term and condition of the reward by the funding agency. Study Registry ID: [REMOVED] Section B:  Exempt RequestB.  Exempt From IRB Review     Not Applicable 7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=4783173/13
Section C:  Background Information     Hispanic adolescents are disproportionately burdened by obesity (25.8% vs 18.5% general population) and type 2 diabetes(T2D) compared to non-Hispanic white youth. Disparities in T2D emerge early in life and are driven in part by unhealthylifestyle behaviors including low levels of physical activity (PA), excessive time spent in sedentary behaviors (SB), andshort sleep durations. Given that Hispanic youth are the fastest growing pediatric subgroup in the U.S., developingstrategies to promote healthy lifestyle behaviors and addressing T2D disparities is a public health imperative. Wearableactivity monitoring devices like Fitbits are designed to continuously monitor both wake time and sleep behaviors. Studiesusing wearable devices in conjunction with text-messaging or smartphone applications have been effective in increasingPA in adults; however, less is known about the use of these technology-based tools among adolescents, particularly amonghigh-risk youth like Hispanic adolescents. Therefore the purpose of this study is to examine the feasibility, acceptability, andpreliminary efficacy of a technology-based intervention that uses a Fitbit and text messages grounded in the Self-Determination Theory to promote healthy lifestyle habits and reduce risk for type 2 diabetes among a sample of Hispanicadolescents (14-16 years) with obesity. Section D:  Purpose and Objectives     The purpose of this study is to examine the feasibility of a 12-week goal-setting intervention that utilizes a Fitbit device andtext messages grounded in the Self-Determination Theory (SDT) to promote healthy wake time (PA,SB) and sleepbehaviors in Hispanic adolescents (14-16 years old) with obesity (BMI%≥95th). Section E:  Protocol Risks/SubjectsE1.  Risk Category     Category 1: Research not involving greater than minimum risk.E2.  SubjectsGender:     BothAge:     Adolescent (13-17 yrs)Ethnicity:     Hispanic Or LatinoPrimary Language:     English, SpanishGroups to be recruited will include:     Healthy, non-patient, normalsWhich if any of the following vulnerable populations will be recruited as subjects?     ChildrenVulnerable populations require special protections.  How will you obtain informed consent, protect subject confidentiality, andprevent undue coercion?     Informed consent will be obtained from parents of participating adolescents and child assent will be obtained fromparticipating adolescents. Consent and assent will be obtained electronically by a trained research staff member. In thisstudy, qualitative interviews will be conducted remotely, thus an electronic consent/assent will be sent to the participant viaREDCap, we will schedule a time and day to speak to the participant and his/her parent or legal guardian, at which time wewill review the forms over the phone and answer any questions, and then the participant and his/her parent or legalguardian will electronically sign the consent form and send it back to the research team. For participation in theintervention, the participant and his/her legal guardian will complete the electronic consent/assent form in person. Theresearch staff member will explain all aspects of the study and answer any questions. Whether the participant iscompleting the consent/assent forms remotely or in person, we will ask comprehension questions to ensure that parentsand adolescents understand all study procedures, risks, benefits, and the voluntary nature of this study. We will alsoprovide all participants and parents or legal guardians with a paper copy of the consent and assent forms for their personalrecords.E3.  Pregnant woman/fetusWill pregnant women and/or fetuses (as described in 45 CFR 46 Subpart B) be enrolled in the research?7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=4783174/13
     NoE4.  NeonatesWill neonates of uncertain viability or nonviable neonates (as described in 45 CFR 46 Subpart B) be enrolled in the research?     NoE5.  ChildrenWill children be enrolled in the research?     Yes Section F:  Design/ProcedureF1.  DesignSelect one category that most adequately describes your research:     c) PilotDiscuss the research design including but not limited to such issues as: probability of group assignment, potential for subjectto be randomized to placebo group, use of control subjects, etc.     In collaboration with Hispanic youth (N=30) and an expert panel (N=6), text message content will be adapted and refinedfrom a previously conducted pilot study. A mixed-methods approach (surveys and interviews) will be applied to ensure thattext message content adheres to the SDT and is age and culturally appropriate. A different sample of Hispanic youth(N=48) will be recruited and randomized to the intervention or a wait-list control group. In the intervention, the youth willreceive guidance from the research team on setting weekly steps/day and hours of sleep/night goals, a Fitbit device to self-monitor progress towards goals, and theory-informed text messages that promote autonomous motivation for behaviorchange. At the end of the initial 12-week intervention, youth in the wait-list control group will be invited to participate in theintervention. Feasibility will be evaluated using a priori criteria for recruitment, data collection, intervention implementation,and acceptability.This study will receive assistance from a non-BCM personnel, Marbelly Partida, will assist with the development of projectmaterials, assist with data collection and the implementation of the intervention. Ms. Partida will also assist in conductingliterature reviews and assisting in the lab in basic scholarly work such as creating data tables. Ms. Partida will rely on theBCM IRB for her involvement in this research.Inclusion Criteria:     Participants will be screened using the following inclusion criteria: 1) Self-report as Hispanic 2) obese, defined as bodymass index percentile (BMI%) ≥ 95th percentile 3)between the ages of 14-16 years, and 4) own his or her own cellphone.Exclusion Criteria:     Youth will be excluded based on the following criteria: 1) Taking a medication (i.e. steroids) or diagnosed with a condition(i.e. sleep apnea) that influences activity, sleep, and/or cognition, 2)recent hospitalization or injury that prevents normalphysical activity, 3) pregnant, and 4) currently enrolled in an exercise program or currently using a personal activitymonitoring device like Fitbit.F2.  Procedure     Hispanic adolescents (N=30) will participate in in-depth interviews. Trained interviewers will use an interview script to elicitinformation on:1) personal values, 2) given that social frameworks have demonstrated that multiple levels of influenceaffect health behaviors in high-risk, minority youth we will ask questions as to how to promote wake-time and sleepbehaviors in a manner that is feasible and realistic in the environmental and sociocultural context of Hispanic youth, 3) thetype of goal-setting guidance and feedback desired, and 4) desired frequency and timing of text messages. To protect staffand participants, we will conduct interviews via zoom until it is safe to host interviews in person. In-depth interviews will beaudio-recorded, transcribed, coded by two trained, independent coders, and qualitatively analyzed using NVivo version 9.Thematic content analysis will be used to identify emergent themes to adapt existing text messages. As youth arescreened and participate in interviews, parents will complete a text-based survey, to assess their perceptions of theintervention.An expert panel (N=6) of co-investigators (Soltero, Thompson, Musaad, O'Connor) and consultants (Jason Mendoza,Deborah Parra-Medina) will convene to ensure text messages are age and culturally-appropriate, adhere to the self-determination theory, and use evidence-based strategies to promote healthy behaviors. Consultants will not participate inany data collection or seek IRB Approval from their home institutions. Youth that participated in the interviews will review arevised draft of the text messages and provide feedback via a survey. If extensive modifications are needed an additionalreview by youth and the expert panel will be conducted.To test the feasibility and acceptability of the intervention, we will recruit a new sample of Hispanic adolescents (14-16years) with obesity. Youth will be randomized (1:1) to the intervention or wait-list control .7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=4783175/13
Intervention In the intervention, youth will be given a Fitbit which has shown high validity and reliability (ICC 0.71 - 1.00) forassessing steps/day and sleep in youth. Participants will download the Fitbit app and staff will input individual user heightand weight to improve measurement accuracy. The theory-informed text messages that were previously developed withyouth and the expert panel will be sent 3-5 times/week using a text-message platform called Mosio, which is HIPAAcompliant and secure. We have exacted a Business Associate Agreement with Mosio. At the start of the week, texts willguide participants to set one activity and one sleep goal. Texts will promote autonomy by encouraging youth to developtheir own solutions for achieving their goals. Mid-week texts will emphasize competence, acknowledge progressiontowards goals, and provide tips and evidence-based strategies for increasing health behaviors (competence). Tips andstrategies for increasing physical activity will include suggestions on resources within each participant's neighborhood,which will require the use of their home address. End-of-week texts will provide feedback on goal achievement andencourage participants to connect goal achievement to personal values to build relatedness.Youth in the intervention will also receive assistance in goal-setting as well as need supportive feedback on goalattainment. At the start of week 2, research staff will contact participants via text message to guide them in setting goals forsteps/day and hours of sleep/night based on their weekly averages from the previous week. In successive weeks,participants will be guided to gradually increase their step count and sleep goals to meet or maintain currentrecommendations of ~12,000 steps/day and 8-10 hours of sleep/night. Participants with less than 5,000 steps/day will beguided to increase their average by 600 steps/day each week, participants with 5,000-11,999 steps/day will be guided toincrease their steps/day goal by 10% of their week 1 average in successive weeks, and participants with greater or equalto12,000 steps/day or greater will be instructed to maintain that level of step counts in successive weeks. Achieving greateror equal to 12,000 steps/day is equivalent to meeting PA recommendations of 60 minutes of PA/day. For sleep, participantsthat average less than 8 hours of sleep/night will be encouraged to increase their average sleep time by 30 minutes eachweek and participants with more than 8 hours of sleep/night will be encouraged to maintain that sleep duration. Datacollected using the Fitbit Flex is continuously collected and wirelessly transmitted to a web-based platform called Fitabase.This secure, platform aggregates and analyzes step and sleep data at the daily, weekly, and monthly level, and providescustomized data reports for each participant. These reports will be downloaded and saved for data checks and goalmonitoring. These reports will inform help us develop texts that guide goal-setting and provide feedback on goalachievement.At the completion of the intervention, youth will return the Fitbit Flex to the study team.Wait-list Control Group Youth in the wait-list control group will also receive a Fitbit and a one-page handout with standardhealth information on the importance of PA and sleep to their health. After the 12-week intervention period, youth in thewait-list control group will be invited to participate in the intervention.Assessments Primary Outcomes: Feasibility will be evaluated using a priori criteria: recruitment, data collection, theintegrity of the study protocol, technical issues, internal consistency of measures, and satisfaction. Given this study's highpotential for dissemination in clinical settings, 'Recruitment' and 'Data Collection' criteria will assess the feasibility ofrecruiting and retaining participants from community clinics. 'Integrity of Study Protocol' criteria will be used to identify thefeasible and acceptable `dose' of the intervention. `Technical Issues' criteria will assess the feasibility of using the Fitbitdevice and text messaging as behavior change tools. `Internal Consistency of Measures' criteria will assess theappropriateness of our instruments for Hispanic youth. `Satisfaction' will assess acceptability, which is especially importantfor interventions in minority populations. This will provide information on the availability of high-risk youth in communityclinics and the ability of our recruitment strategies to engage youth from these settings.Secondary outcomes: Physical activity, sedentary behaviors, and sleep will be assessed using a hip-worn wGT3X-BTaccelerometer (Actigraph, Pensacola, Florida). Participants will wear the accelerometer 24 hours a day for 7 days at bothtimepoints. A research team member will review instructions for device wear and will send daily text messages to remindparticipants to wear the device to promote compliance. Accelerometer data will be processed using ActiLife v6.13 software.A valid day of wear will be defined as ≥ 18 hours of wear on 4 days or more, one of which has to be a weekend day.Evenson cut points will be used to analyze and categorize SB (defined as <100 counts per minute) and moderate-to-vigorous PA. The Sadeh algorithm will be used to assess sleep duration. While wrist-worn devices are superior forassessing all sleep characteristics (i.e.sleep efficiency, wake after sleep onset, etc), hip-worn devices provide accuratemeasures of sleep duration and timing. Participants will be asked to complete a wear log to indicate wake and sleep times,which will be used to verify accelerometer data. Data will be reported as average minutes per day spent in PA, SB, andsleep.Tertiary Outcomes: Height and weight will be measured to the nearest 0.1cm and 0.1 kg, using a portable stadiometer andresearch scale to calculate BMI percentile. We will assess waist circumference to measure central adiposity. PsychologicalNeeds will be assessed using the Psychological Need Satisfaction in Exercise Scale (18-items), which has shownacceptable validity and reliability among youth. Autonomous motivation for PA will be assessed using a scale from theBehavioral Regulation in Exercise Questionnaire-2 (23-items), which has acceptable psychometric properties amongyouth. Each participant's social network will be assessed using the interview-administered social network survey to analyzethe social connections or ties of each participant in preparation for the next version of this study, which will allowparticipants to participate and receive support from family members or friends. Information collected via the social networksurvey will be used to calculate descriptive information on the number of ties the participant reports and the strength ofthose ties, which will give us an overall measure of how weak or strong their social network is. This data will be unidentifiedand aggregated. We will only collect first names and will never collect the address, phone number, or any other personal7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=4783176/13
health information on any of the network ties reported by participants. There will be no attempts to identify or collect datafrom any of the ties mentioned by participants.Process Evaluation data will be collected to further evaluate the feasibility, assess the impact of implementation on studyoutcomes, and identify mechanisms by which the intervention impacts health behaviors and BMI. We will use researchteam logs and field notes entered into a REDCap online database to assess the recruitment of participants, resourcesneeded for intervention implementation, maintenance of the participants, implementation fidelity, the dose of interventiondelivered and received, and potential contamination.All assessments will be conducted in a private room at a community center partners like Baker Ripley or at the home of theparticipant. For safety, trained research assistants will travel in pairs for home-based data collection. They will notify theirsupervisor Dr. Soltero of their time of arrival and departure at the participant's home. Additionally, we will providereimbursement for use of uber or other ride-share services.Exit-Interviews. A subsample of participants (N=15) randomized to the intervention will participate in a 1-hour, post-intervention exit interviewData collection for this study has been concluded. The current database includes N-43 participants. To conduct furtheranalysis and maximize the potential knowledge to be gained from this study we will collaborate with students and faculty atRice Unviersity through the Data 2 Knowledge capstone program to conduct high-level analysis to identify patterns of 24-hour physical activity and sleep behaviors and their associations with metabolic health. Data shared through this capstoneprogram will be de-identified and will include demographic information, accelerometer derived physical activity, sleep, andsedentary behaviors, anthropometrics (BMI, heigh, weight, waist circumference), zipcode (not full address) as well assurveys on autonomous motivation. An IRB protocol will be submitted at Rice University and all faculty and studentsworking on this project will be added to the IRB protocol at Rice University. Section G:  Sample Size/Data AnalysisG1.  Sample SizeHow many subjects (or specimens, or charts) will be used in this study?     Local: 98              Worldwide: 98Please indicate why you chose the sample size proposed:     Qualitative interviews will be conducted among 30 adolescents, 20 parents will be invited to complete a parent survey, and48 adolescents will be recruited for participation in the intervention component. A formal power calculation was not used asthe primary purpose of this study is to examine feasibility, which is adequate for estimating feasibility parameters needed toinform a fully powered intervention.G2.  Data AnalysisProvide a description of your plan for data analysis. State the types of comparisons you plan (e.g. comparison of means,comparison of proportions, regressions, analysis of variance). Which is the PRIMARY comparison/analysis? How will theanalyses proposed relate to the primary purposes of your study?     All qualitative in-depth interviews and exit interviews will be audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim using a professionaltranscription service, coded by two trained, independent coders, and qualitatively analyzed using NVivo version 9 (QSRInternational, Cambridge, MA). Thematic content analysis will be used to identify emergent themes on participantsatisfaction and opportunities to improve the intervention.Feasibility and process evaluation data will be collected to further evaluate feasibility, assess the impact of implementationon study outcomes, and identify mechanisms by which the intervention impacts health behaviors and BMI. We will useresearch team logs and field notes entered into a REDCap online database to assess the recruitment of participants,resources needed for intervention implementation, maintenance of the participants, implementation fidelity, the dose ofintervention delivered and received, and potential contamination. Data recorded on the recruitment of participants willinclude staff time, resources, strategies, and number of participants screened and enrolled. Data on resources forimplementation will include staff time, materials, and equipment used for implementation. Data on maintenance ofparticipants will include the number of text messages and calls sent to non-responsive participants and carefuldocumentation of dropouts and reasons for leaving the study. Implementation fidelity, dose delivered, and dose received,will be defined by device wear, the number of technical issues (device or text message malfunction), and text messageengagement (number of text messages delivered, opened, and if participants respond when prompted). Potentialcontamination will be assessed in the exit in-depth interview with intervention participants. Data on environmental factorsthat could impact physical activity will be collected and analyzed using geographic information systems.Analyses of Secondary and Tertiary Outcomes: Comparisons of PA, SB, sleep, BMI, waist circumference, blood pressure,and heart rate between (Mann-Whitney U test) and within treatment groups (pre to post; paired t-tests, signed rank test)will be tested. Cronbach's alpha will be used to assess the reliability of the psychological needs satisfaction andautonomous motivation for PA scales. While clinically significant changes in secondary and tertiary outcomes are not7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=4783177/13
expected, we will examine clinically meaningful effects and estimate the reliable change index. These analyses will guidepower calculations for future trials. Section H:  Potential Risks/DiscomfortsH1.  Potential Risks/DiscomfortsDescribe and assess any potential risks/discomforts; (physical, psychological, social, legal, or other) and assess the likelihoodand seriousness of such risks:     Risks associated with this study are classified as no greater than minimal risk. The primary risks of this study will be loss ofconfidentiality. There is a small risk of causing adolescents or their family anxiety if the adolescent is identified as obeseand at high-risk for T2D. There is also a small risk of feeling discomfort when answering questions in qualitative interviewsor demographic surveys. This study has a small risk for injury or medical problems when youth increase or participate inregular physical activity exercise (similar to a PE class) as they will be encouraged to do in this study. There are threedifferent SOP's in place for different adverse events that can occur to the participant throughout the study.The three SOP'sare for a participant receiving COVID-19 throughout the study, report an injury or if they show signs of psychological orphysical harm. If your child, receives COVID-19 or is injured while participating, we will provide them a sheet that will givethem steps of what to do in those incidents.H2.  Data and safety monitoring plan     Do the study activities impart greater than minimal risk to subjects?          NoH3.  Coordination of information among sites for multi-site researchIs the BCM Principal Investigator acting as the SPONSOR-INVESTIGATOR for this multi-site research?          No or Not ApplicableIs BCM the COORDINATING CENTER for this multi-site research?          No or Not Applicable Section I:  Potential BenefitsDescribe potential benefit(s) to be gained by the individual subject as a result of participating in the planned work.     There may be no direct benefits to the participants. However, lifestyle interventions that promote physical activity and sleephave been shown to improve metabolic health and reduce T2D risk in obese youth. The intervention is designed toincrease psychological needs satisfaction and youth may become more autonomously motivated to make healthy behaviorchanges. These behavior changes may improve their weight status, reduce their body mass index, and could reduce theirrisk for type 2 diabetes and other obesity-related diseases. Youth who participate in the wait-list control group may benefitafter the study ends, by being provided the opportunity to participate in the intervention. However, participants in either armmay gain no direct benefit, as the study has not previously been tested for efficacy.Describe potential benefit(s) to society of the planned work.     In light of the public health goal to decrease health disparities for Hispanic populations, this study has the potential to leadto a program that can reduce obesity-related chronic conditions among Hispanic youth. Identifying novel ways to intervenewith this high-risk group is essential. This study will provide much needed information to society on delivering diabetesprevention interventions to vulnerable Hispanic youth using technology-based strategies. This information is essential fordeveloping and implementing age- and culturally-appropriate diabetes prevention strategies that reach and engage this keypopulation to improve their metabolic health. The long-term trajectory of this work could significantly contribute to thelimited body of literature on evidence-based diabetes prevention interventions for high-risk, minority youth.Do anticipated benefits outweigh potential risks? Discuss the risk-to-benefit ratio.     Potential risks are outweighed by the fact that the information gained will significantly advance the science regarding theeffects of sedentariness in an underrepresented population. This information, will inform the development of future lifestyleinterventions aimed at reducing sedentary behaviors to improve metabolic health in a high-risk, vulnerable population.These intervention shave the potential for scalability and widespread dissemination which has the potential to reachnumerous communities and significantly improve health in the Latino population. Section J:  Consent ProceduresJ1.  Waiver of ConsentWill any portion of this research require a waiver of consent and authorization?     No7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=4783178/13
 J1a.  Waiver of requirement for written documentation of ConsentWill this research require a waiver of the requirement for written documentation of informed consent?     NoJ2.  Consent ProceduresWho will recruit subjects for this study?     PIPI's staffDescribe how research population will be identified, recruitment procedures, any waiting period between informing theprospective participant and obtaining consent, steps taken to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence andconsent procedures in detail.
     Participants will be recruited from community clinics using the following strategies: 1) Monthly provider meetings atcollaborating clinics to encourage physicians to refer patients 2) On-site recruitment at clinical settings 3) Post studyinformation on the Texas Children's Hospital Primary Care Practice and Harris Health Pediatric Clinic social media sitesand inpatient newsletters. 4) Health fairs, immunizations fairs, back-to-school events, and any other community event, torecruit participants in person. 5) Facebook advertising using a BCM approved lab pageMothers or fathers will complete a release of information form at their pediatrician's office or during a health fair where werecruit. We will use this information to contact them to provide more information about the study. If the family is interested inparticipating, a telephone screening with the mother, father or legal guardian will be scheduled. If we cannot schedule aphone screening then a self-screening survey will be texted or emailed to the participant, which will allow us to makedecisions regarding eligibility faster. After the self-screener is complete, a research team member will follow up via phoneto complete eligibility screening. During the screening call, we will use a scripted screening questionnaire that reviews theinclusion and exclusion criteria for their child's participation. If inclusion criteria are met, we will then ask to speak directly tothe adolescent to explain the study, answer questions, and confirm their interest in participating. If the participant is toparticipate in the first aim of the study, which includes an in-depth interview and feedback survey to help us develop text-messages, then we will schedule their interview appointment which will take place in a private room at a public library orcommunity center. At the beginning of the interview appointment, prior to any study activities, informed consent will becompleted by the parent/legal guardian and informed assent will be obtained from the adolescent in English or in Spanish.After the feedback survey we will conduct a (15-20mins) follow up phone interview to clarify survey responses . Due to theaddition of the follow up phone interview, we will call each participant and notify them of the changes to the procedure. Ifthey are interested in participating, we will send them a zoom link and a REDCap link to an electronic short form consent.During the zoom call we will explain all procedures and answer questions. We will obtain their signature prior to conductingthe phone interview.For youth who will participate in the Fitbit intervention portion of the study, they will complete the American College ofSports Medicine 2015 exercise screener as part of their screening call to ensure that it is safe for him/her to engage inphysical activity. Once both the parent and adolescent agree to participate, they will be scheduled for their initial visit at theclinic in which they were recruited to increase the accessibility of the study. At the initial visit, electronic informed consentwill be completed by the parent/legal guardian and electronic assent will be obtained from the adolescent through ourtablet. This will be given in their preferred language in English or in Spanish. Next, we will confirm the participant's BMI%by measuring weight and height. If the adolescent qualifies, the remainder of the baseline data collection will be completedand they will be enrolled in the study. In the consent form, youth will be notified that they must return the Fitbit device uponcompletion of the intervention. For all consents and assents, the research coordinator will explain all study activities andrisks to the families and will ask three comprehension questions to check for understanding. Study information,consent/assent, and data collection will be conducted in English and Spanish.Are foreign language consent forms required for this protocol?     YesWhich of the following ways will you document informed consent in languages other than English?     A full-length informed consent documentJ3.  Privacy and IntrusivenessWill the research involve observation or intrusion in situations where the subjects would normally have an expectation ofprivacy?     NoJ4.  ChildrenWill children be enrolled in the research?     Yes7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=4783179/13
J5.  NeonatesWill non-viable neonates or neonates of uncertain viability be involved in research?     NoJ6.  Consent Capacity - Adults who lack capacityWill Adult subjects who lack the capacity to give informed consent be enrolled in the research?     NoJ7.  PrisonersWill Prisoners be enrolled in the research?     No Section K:  Research Related Health Information and ConfidentialityWill research data include identifiable subject information?     YesInformation from health records such as diagnoses, progress notes, medications, lab or radiology findings, etc.     NoSpecific information concerning alcohol abuse:     NoSpecific information concerning drug abuse:     NoSpecific information concerning sickle cell anemia:     NoSpecific information concerning HIV:     NoSpecific information concerning psychiatry notes:     NoDemographic information (name, D.O.B., age, gender, race, etc.):     YesFull Social Security #:     YesPartial Social Security # (Last four digits):     NoBilling or financial records:     NoPhotographs, videotapes, and/or audiotapes of you:     YesIdentifiable biospecimens     NoWill identifiable biospecimens be stored for future research?     NAIf yes, is the storage of biospecimens optional for subjects?     NAWill identifiable private information be stored for future research?     NAIf yes, is the storage of information optional for subjects?     NA7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=47831710/13
Questionnaire, Survey, and/or subject diary     NAOther:     Yes, as described:We will need participant's home address and phone number. We would also like to take pictures of your child to showothers how the study goes. To do this, we will need you and your child to sign an image consent form. This is not needed toparticipate in this study. Also, in the event that you contract COVID-19 or disclose any evidence of physical orpsychological harm, parents and the appropriate medical and non-medical professionals will be notified and your child maybe withdrawn from the study. The Principal Investigator reserves the right to withdraw a participant for any reason deemednecessary by the research team.At what institution will the physical research data be kept?     Physical research data will be kept at Baylor College of Medicine. Physical Data containing demographic information willbe kept in a locked cabinet in a locked office. Electronic data will be kept in a secure server and will be passwordprotected.How will such physical research data be secured?     Physical Data containing demographic information will be kept in a locked cabinet in a locked office. Only the PI will havedirect access to the physical data.At what institution will the electronic research data be kept?     Electronic research data will be kept at Baylor College of Medicine. Electronic data will be kept in a secure server and willbe password protected.Such electronic research data will be secured via BCM IT Services- provided secured network storage of electronic researchdata (Non-Portable devices only):     YesSuch electronic research data will be secured via Other:     NoWill there be anyone besides the PI, the study staff, the IRB and the sponsor, who will have access to identifiable researchdata?     NoPlease describe the methods of transmission of any research data (including PHI, sensitive, and non-sensitive data) tosponsors and/or collaborators.     Participant's phone numbers will be shared with Mosio, a secure text message platform; however, we will not use theparticipant's name only their unique participant ID# to identify each participant.We will collaborate with students and faculty at Rice University through the Data 2 Knowledge capstone program toconduct high-level analysis to identify patterns of 24-hour physical activity and sleep behaviors and their associations withmetabolic health. Data shared through this capstone program will be de-identified and will include demographicinformation, accelerometer derived physical activity, sleep, and sedentary behaviors, anthropometrics (BMI, heigh, weight,waist circumference) as well as surveys on autonomous motivation. Data will be shared via encrypted files and sentthrough an encrypted email. Only approved individuals will have access to the data. Once the data is at Rice University itwill be stored on a password protected computer on a secure server. Will you obtain a Certificate of Confidentiality (COC) for this study?     NoPlease further discuss any potential confidentiality issues related to this study.     There are no other potential confidentiality issue related to this study. Section L:  Cost/PaymentDelineate clinical procedures from research procedures. Will subject's insurance (or subject) be responsible for researchrelated costs? If so state for which items subject's insurance (or subject) will be responsible (surgery, device, drugs, etc). Ifappropriate, discuss the availability of financial counseling.     The participant's insurance will not be responsible for the costs of the tests/analyses related to this study. There will be nodirect costs to the participants.7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=47831711/13
If subjects will be paid (money, gift certificates, coupons, etc.) to participate in this research project, please note the total dollaramount (or dollar value amount) and distribution plan (one payment, pro-rated payment, paid upon completion, etc) of thepayment.Dollar Amount:     200Distribution Plan:     The participating youth will receive compensation for their time and effort. The funds for compensation will be loaded onto aClinCard which will be given to participants in person. Section M:  GeneticsHow would you classify your genetic study?     Discuss the potential for psychological, social, and/or physical harm subsequent to participation in this research. Pleasediscuss, considering the following areas: risks to privacy, confidentiality, insurability, employability, immigration status, paternitystatus, educational opportunities, or social stigma.     Will subjects be offered any type of genetic education or counseling, and if so, who will provide the education or counselingand under what conditions will it be provided? If there is the possibility that a family's pedigree will be presented or published,please describe how you will protect family member's confidentiality?      Section N:  Sample CollectionNone Section O:  Drug StudiesDoes the research involve the use of ANY drug* or biologic? (*A drug is defined as any substance(other than food) that isused to elicit a pharmacologic or physiologic response whether it is for treatment or diagnostic purposes)     NoDoes the research involve the use of ANY gene transfer agent for human gene transfer research?     NoO1.  Current Drugs Is this study placebo-controlled?     NoWill the research involve a radioactive drug?     No Section P:  Device Studies     Does this research study involve the use of ANY device?          No Section Q:  Consent Form(s)The consent provides information on all research activities, including the risks and benefits, we will use to examine iftechnology-based intervention can improve physical activity and sleep in Hispanic youth.The consent provides information on all research activities, including the risks and benefits, which we will use to develop text-messages that will be used to promote healthy activity and sleep behaviors among Hispanic adolescents.7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=47831712/13
The consent provides information of the brief follow up interviews that we will be conducting regarding the text messagefeedback survey. The purpose of this brief phone interview is to clarify any of the feedback information that is provided via thesurvey to aid in the finalization of our text messages, which serve as the primary tool in the Fit24 intervention. Section R:  AdvertisementsNone 7/22/25, 12:58 PMHuman Protocol Report
https://brain.bcm.edu/esp1/reports/Human/Protocol.asp?protocol=47831713/13