Oxygen for Category II Intrauterine Fetal Resuscitation: a randomized, noninferiority trial  
“O 2C2 Trial”  
Protocol  (November 2, 2016)  
 
 
 
Principle Investigator: Nandini Raghuraman, MD MS 
   Washington University School of Medicine in St Louis  
660 S Euclid Ave  
Maternity Building -5th Floor  
St Louis, MO 63110  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Aims  
 
Maternal oxygen administration for concerning fetal heart rate tracing (FHT) patterns is common practice 
on Labor and Delivery units in the United States. Despite the broad use of oxygen, it is unclear if this 
practice is beneficial for the fetus. Category  II FHT, as defined by the National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development (NICHD), is a broad class of FHT patterns that may suggest cord compression 
and/or placental insufficiency for which oxygen is most commonly administered. Although some ani mal 
and human studies have demonstrated that maternal hyperoxygenation can alleviate such fetal heart rate 
decelerations , this purported benefit has not been shown to translate into improved fetal outcomes, 
particularly in relation to acid -base status. In fact, some studies suggest harm with oxygen use due to 
lower umbilical artery pH and incr eased delivery room resuscitation or increased free radical activity. 
Given the indeterminate evidence for this ubiquitously employed resuscitation technique, there is an 
urgent need to further study the utility of maternal oxygen administration in labor f or fetal benefit.   
We propose a randomized controlled non -inferiority trial comparing oxygen to room air in patients with 
Category II FHT. Our central hypothesis is that room air alone is not inferior to oxygen administration 
with regard to neonatal acid -base status and FHT and may in fact, be a safer option for resuscitation due 
to less production of reactive oxygen species.  
Primary Aim : Determine the effect of maternal oxygen administration for Category II FHT on 
arterial umbilical cord lactate.    
Hypot hesis: Room air, as a substitute for oxygen supplementation, is no different than oxygen in 
altering the acid -base status of the neonate as reflected in umbilical arterial (UA) lactate.  
Fetal hypo -oxygenation, as reflected by decelerations in the FHT, resu lts in metabolic acidosis due to a 
shift from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism in which lactate and hydrogen ion production significantly 
increase causing a decrease in pH. Elevated umbilical cord lactate has been shown to be a surrogate for 
fetal metabolic  acidosis and resultant neonatal morbidity. The primary outcome will be umbilical arterial 
(UA) lactate, and secondary outcomes will be other components of a UA gas.  
 
Secondary Aim #1 : Characterize the effect of oxygen administration on fetal heart tracing  patterns  
Hypothesis: Oxygen administration will be associated with a rate of persistent Category II FHT 
that is not different from those exposed to room air.  
Oxygen is typically administered in response to FHT interpretation. Hence, evaluating the effect  of 
oxygen on subsequent FHT is pivotal to labor management. The primary outcome will be resolution of 
Category II FHT. We will also investigate the effect of oxygen administration on mode of delivery, 
particularly cesarean delivery for non -reassuring feta l status.  
 
Secondary Aim #2 : Evaluate the safety of oxygen administration by measuring reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) in maternal and neonatal blood.  
Hypothesis: Oxygen administration will be associated with increased oxidative stress in maternal 
and neonatal cord blood  as represented by malondialdehyde ( MDA ). 
Over -oxygenation can result in free radical or ROS formation that have detrimental downstream effects. 
The presence of reactive oxygen species results in degradation of lipids in the cell membran e and 
resultant formation of malondialdehyde (MDA) , which has been studied as a surrogate for oxidative 
stress .  
 
  
Background/Significance  
Maternal oxy gen administration for fetal heart rate tracing (FHT) changes is a common practice 
on Labor and Delivery units in the Unites States . Despite the broad use of oxygen for intrauterine 
resuscitation of fetal heart rate decelerations, it is unclear if this practice is beneficial for the 
fetus. In a recent review of maternal oxygen administration in labor, Hamel et al1 concluded that 
there is insufficient evidence for routine oxygen administration for intrauterine resuscitation and 
that such administration may even be harmful via production of free radicals. The 2012 
Cochrane review evaluating mater nal oxygen administration for fetal distress also found limited 
evidence to evaluate the effectivene ss of oxygen for fetal distress.2  
Category II FHT , as defined  by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development 
(NICHD)3, is a broad class of FHT patterns which can include both variable and/or late 
decelerations , represent ing cord compression and placental insufficiency, respectively. These 
decelerations are often thought to be a reflection of fetal hypooxygenation. The underlying 
hypothesis for oxygen benefit and the primary motivation for generalized use in labor is to 
transfer oxygen to the fetus and therefore improve or reverse the percei ved fetal 
hypooxygenation  determined by the FHT .  
Although some animal and human studies have d emonstrated that maternal hyperoxygenation 
can allevia te fetal heart rate decelerations4, 5 and increase  fetal oxygen saturation6-9, this 
purported benefit has not been shown to translate into improved fetal outcomes, particularly in 
relation to acid -base status. For example, a study in primates by Morishima et al demonstrated 
that maternal oxygen administration to those with acidotic h ypoxic fetuses elevated fetal oxygen 
levels and eliminated late decelerations but did not correct acidosis .10   
There are a limited number of clinical trials addressing maternal oxygen administration for fetal 
distress in labor. In 1995, Thorp et al conducted a randomiz ed trial of oxygen versus room air in 
the second stage of labor, and found no benefit to oxygen exposure and in fact discovered that 
the oxygen group had a lower umbilical artery pH. This difference was theorized to be a result of 
fetoplacental vasoconstri ction as a result of prolonged oxygen exposure .11 Similarly, Nesterenko 
et al performed a trial of laboring women randomized to oxygen or room air and found that more 
infants in the oxygen group required delivery room resuscitation .12  Excess oxygen exposure in 
this setting has also been linked with incr eased free radical activity. In a 2002 trial by Khaw et al, 
women were randomized to oxygen or room air during cesarean  delivery . There was no 
difference in umbilical artery pH between groups, however the oxygen exposed group had 
increased free radical act ivity in cord blood samples8. Studies such as these have prompted 
questioning of both the safety and the efficacy of oxygen for Category II FHT and  highlight the 
urgent need for  further investigation , particularly given its wide -spread use .  
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate whether oxygen for i ntrauterine fetal 
resuscitation of Category II FHT affects fetal metabolic acid -base status as determined by 
umbilical cord lactate values. Secondary objectives include analysis of additional cord gas 
parameters used to predict neonatal wellbeing, changes to FHT patterns , and cord blood and 
maternal MDA as a marker of free radical activity. We hypothesize that room air exposure for 
Category II FHT in labor is no different from maternal oxygen administration with regard to fetal 
acid-base status.  
Specific A im 1:  Determine the effect of maternal oxygen administration for Category II 
FHT on arterial umbilical cord lactate.   Fetal hypooxygenation, as reflected by decelerations 
in the FHT, results in a metabolic acidosis due to a shift from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism in 
which lactate and hydrogen ion production significantly increases as a result of glucose 
breakdown and  pyruvate conversion.14 This rise in lactate results in decreased pH or an acidotic 
state. Elevated umbilical cord lactate has been shown to be a surrogate for metabolic acidosis in 
the fetus and is associated with neonatal morbidity.15 It has also been shown to precede pH 
changes in the setting of hypooxygenation.14, 16   
The theorized benefit of maternal oxygen administration is increase oxygen 
delivery to the fetus via the umbilical cord vein (Figure 1) resulting in 
prevention or reversal of anaerobic metabolism and a subsequent 
reflection in umbilical cord artery finding s. This, however, has not been 
substantiated by evidence thus far. We hypothesize that room air, as a 
substitute for oxygen supplementation, is no different than oxygen in altering 
the acid -base status of the neonate as reflected in umbilical cord gas 
parameters. Secondary outcomes will be additional  components of an 
umbilical artery gas.  Figure 1: Fetoplacental circulation  Placenta
Umbilical 
vein
Fetal 
heartSytemic 
fetal 
circulationUmbilical 
arteries
Specific Aim 2: Characterize  the effect of oxygen administration on fetal heart tracing 
patterns  
In clinical practice, oxygen is administered to patients with Category II  FHT in order to 
resuscitate potential fetal hypooxygenation that manifests as heart rate decelerations. Evidence 
thus far shows that Category II FHT are associated with a wide spectrum of neonatal outcomes 
and therefore do not uniformly reflect fetal acid -base status19, 20. Hence, evaluating the effect of 
oxygen on subsequent FHT categorization is pivotal to labor management. The outcome that will 
be investigated is rate of persistent Category II FHT after intervention. We will also evaluate the 
types and frequency of deceleration patterns present both pre and post intervention.  We 
hypothesize that oxygen administration for  Category II FHT will be associated with a rate of 
persistent Ca tegory II FHT that is not different from those exposed to room air.  
 
Specific Aim 3:  Evaluate the safety of  oxygen administration by measuring reactive oxygen 
species in maternal and cord  blood  
In order to safely apply maternal oxygen administration for intrauterine fetal resuscitation, the 
risks of oxygen exposure must be further explored. Over -oxygenation can result in free radical 
formation, downstream effects of which include cell membrane and DNA damage and resultant  
carcinogenesis.21 Although oxygen supplementation is often critical to resuscitation in most 
settings, studies evaluating hyperoxyge nation in adults and animals have shown detr imental 
cardiac22,pulmonary23,and cerebral effects24. Over -oxygenation in neonates has been shown to be 
associated with bronchopulmonary dysplasia and retinopathy1, 25. Furthermore, reintroduction of 
oxygen after a period of hypooxygenation can result in adverse effects as the fetus and newborn 
lack robust antioxidant systems1, 26.  
One of the primary markers of oxidative stress studied in the 
literature is malondialdehyde (MDA).  The presence of 
reactive oxygen species results in degradation  of lipids and 
resultant formation of MDA27which then modifies endogenous 
proteins. MDA levels, therefore, have been studied as a 
surrogate for oxidative stress.28-32 (Figure 2)  
Figure 2: Pathway of oxidative stress  
Oxygen
exposure
Reactive 
oxygen 
species
Lipid 
peroxidation
MDA
Increased MDA levels in the neonate may be consequential and have been associated with 
morbidity including hyperbilirubinemia33 and hypoxic -ischemic encephalopathy34.There is also 
evidence that MDA can be transplacentally transported and thus, both mother and fetus are at 
risk for downstream effects.35 
Prior studies have evaluated the relationship between maternal oxygen administration in labor 
and mar kers of free radical formation8, 12 with mixed results. We hypothesize that maternal 
hyperoxygenation for Category II FHT is associated with increased oxidative stress in the mother 
and fetus. We will measure MDA in maternal and neonatal cord blood samples as a gage for 
oxidative stress and  to assess the relationship between oxygen administration and subsequent 
free radical formation.   
Significant and Potential Impact  
Current practice on our Labor and Delivery is maternal oxygen administration in the presence of 
Category II FHT for the dur ation of labor. This practice is unproven in benefit thus far and in 
fact, some studies suggest harm11, 12. Although it may improve fetal oxygenation, evidence thus 
far does not show an improvement in fetal acid -base status which ultimately correlates with 
neonatal outcomes. Our study has the potential to create a paradigm shift in intrauterine fetal 
resuscitation and has significant clinical implications for the fetus and mother. No prior clinical 
trials in this setting have used cord lactate as a primary outcome. Umbilical cord lactate is an 
established marker of asphyxia and predictor of neonatal morbid ity14 and serves as a useful 
assessment of the benefit, or lack thereof, of oxygen for fetal resuscitation. Prior studies have 
mainly evaluate d cord pH as the primary outcome which not only falls behind lactate as a 
predictor of neonatal outcomes, but also does not serve as an accurate reflection of the degree of 
metabolic acidosis that may be present due to hypooxygenation17. Furthermore, previou s trials 
addressing oxygen administration for similar indications have not employed a similar three -
pronged approach to evaluating outcomes via neonatal acid -base status, FHT patterns , and free 
radical activity.  If our stated hypothesis is proven, room ai r may be an equally efficacious, safer, 
and cost saving alternative to oxygen. Additionally, it would pave the way for further 
investigation into the most effective  strategies  for intrauterine fetal resuscitation.  
 
Strategy  
The aim of this study is to com pare maternal oxygen administration to room air for intrauterine 
resuscitation of Category II FHT in relation to cord gas parameters, FHT patterns , and oxidative 
stress in the fetus and mother. The study will be a prospective, randomized non inferiority tr ial to 
be conducted at Barnes Jewish Hospital.  Current practice at our institution for intrauterine fetal 
resuscitation of Category II FHT include any of the combination of (1) oxygen administration via 
nonrebreather face mask at 10L/min (FiO2 approximate ly 0.80 )36 continued for the duration of 
labor (2) intravenous fluid b olus (3) maternal repositioning (4) discontinuation of oxytocin.  We 
hypothesize that room air for Category II FHT will be no different than oxygen administration in 
reducing the degree of fetal metabolic acidosis.  This study will include term, singleton patients 
admitted to Labor& Delivery for spontaneous labor or lab or induction. Multiple s, fetal 
anomalies, Category III FHT, umbilical artery doppler abnormalities and preterm pregnancies 
will be excluded. Additionally, women will be excluded if oxygen is required for maternal 
indications such as hypooxygenation or card iopulmonary disease. Our primary objective will be 
umbilical cord lactate. Secondary objectives include additional cord gas parameters including 
umbilical artery pH, umbilical artery base deficit, and umbilical vein oxygen saturation; FHT 
categorization an d deceleration patterns ; maternal and umbilical cord blood measurement of 
malondialdehyde.  
Consent will be obtained at time of admission to Labor & Delivery. Randomization to either the 
oxygen group or room air group will be performed when the patient is in active labor (defined as 
regular contractions and  ≥ 6cmcervical dilation) and develops Category II FHT necessitating 
intrauterine resuscitation as determined by the care provider team ( Figure 3) . This will be 
performed via a computer -generated randomiz ation sequence in a 1:1 ratio. P atients randomized 
to the oxygen group will receive the above stated current management of oxygen via 
nonrebreather face mask  at 10L/min  and “per-protocol” defined as receiving the mask for at least 
90% of the remaining duration of labo r including during cesarean delivery . Patients randomized 
to the room air group will not receive oxygen for Category II FHT unless otherwise required for 
maternal indications. Alternative and/or additional intrauterine resuscitation techniques for both 
groups (i.e. fluid bolus, maternal repositioning , and discontinuation of oxytocin ) will be left to 
the discretion of the medical team.   The initial 6 patients consented and randomized will be part 
of a compliance run -in with the same protocol as a bove.  
.  
 
 
 
Specific Aim 1:  Determine the effect of maternal oxygen administration for Category II FHT on 
neonatal cord gas parameters   
After delivery of the infant, a segment of the umbilical cord will be removed with immediate 
collection of umbilical artery and vei n samples by trained providers. These samples will be sent 
to the hospital laboratory for routine cord gas measurements  as is universally practiced on our 
Labor and Delivery unit.   
Specific Aim 2: Characterize the effect of oxygen administration on fetal heart tracing patterns  
The patient’s primary nurse will document the time at which intervention is initiated. A blinded 
investigator will then retrospectively assess FHT categorization and deceleration patterns both 
pre and post intervention.  
Specific Aim  3:  Evaluate the safety of oxygen administration by measuring ROS in maternal 
and neonatal blood   
We will be measuring serum MDA in both cord and maternal blood as a marker of oxidative 
stress. MDA is a byproduct of lipid peroxidation, which occurs as a r esult of oxidative stress. 
Measurement of Thiobarbituric Acid Reactive Substances (TBARS) is a commonly used assay Admission to L&D 
for delivery
Category II FHT in 
active labor:
Oxygen for 
duration of labor 
until delivery  Room air for 
duration of labor 
until delivery  Enrollment  
Figure 3: Flow diagram for randomization and treatment groups  
L&D: Labor and Delivery    FHT: fetal heart tracing  Randomization  
for quantifying MDA30 37 This assay is performed by fluorometrically measuring the MDA -TBA 
complex formed in plasma or serum by the reaction of MDA and TBA.   
Upon delivery of the inf ant, an additional sample of umbilical artery blood will be collected for 
this analysis. An optional sample of m aternal blood will also be drawn  within 60 minutes of 
delivery. Both blood samples will be centrifuged to collect plasma which will then be stor ed at -
80◦C until the TBARS assay is performed.  
Data Collection  
The patient’s primary nurse will perform real -time documentation of oxygen initiation, any 
disruption in intervention, administration of amnioinfusion and additional resuscitation 
techniques  performed (number of times patient is repositioned, total intravenous fluids, 
discontinuation of oxytocin). Study staff will collect data from medical records on:  
1) Antepartum history:  
a. Demographic data: Maternal age, race  
b. Obstetric history: parity, prior cesarean, gestational age at delivery  
c. Medical history: BMI at initial prenatal visit, diabetes, chronic hypertension, 
severe anemia (Hemoglobin <7), tobacco use, illicit drug use  
d. Prenatal course: diagnosis of hypertensive disorders, gestational diabetes, 
abruption, intrauterine growth restriction, oligohydramnios  
2) Intrapartum data:  
a. Indication for admission/induction  
b. Oxytocin (duration, total received dose)  
c. Analgesia  
d. Duration of labor (first and second stage)  
e. Diagnosis of chorioamnionitis  
f. Mode of delivery  
g. Indication for cesarean  
h. Electronic fetal monitoring  
3) Neonatal course:  
a. APGARs  
b. Neonatal weight  
c. Admission to special care nursery (SCN) or neonatal intensive care unit (NICU)  
d. Duration of admission to SCN or NICU  
e. Diagnosis of any of the following: hypoxic isc hemic encephalopathy, respiratory 
distress syndrome, oxygen requirement, requirement of hypothermia therapy, 
seizures, sepsis or suspected sepsis, neonatal death  
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
In addition to principle investigator review of adverse event s, a data and safety monitoring board 
(DSMB) will be established. This board will have three individuals (Dr. Collen McNicholas, Dr. 
Omar Young, Dr. Emily Fishman) not directly involved in the study. The DSMB will meet once 
50% of participants have been re cruited to review any adverse neonatal or maternal events 
among the study cohort and determining safety of continuing the study to completion. The 
DSMB will receive a report of any severe and/or non -severe adverse neonatal outcomes within 
72 hours of occur rence. Reportable severe adverse neonatal outcomes include intrapartum 
stillbirth and neonatal death. Reportable non -severe adverse neonatal outcomes include need for 
hypothermia protocol, seizures, and prolonged NICU stay >72 hours.   
Statistical  Analysis  
Intention -to-treat (primary analysis)  and per protocol analyses will be performed.  Chi-squared 
and Fisher’s exact tests will be used to compare categorical variables as appropriate. Continuous 
variables will initially be assessed for distribution pattern via the Kolmogorov -Smirnov test. 
Normally distributed variables will be compared using Student’s t -tests and non -normally 
distributed variables will be analyzed with the Mann -Whitney U test. These analyses will be 
supplemented by multivariable logistic reg ressions to adjust for confounders.  
Tests with p <0.05 will be considered statistically significant. Analyses will be performed using 
Stata (Stata Corp., College Station, TX).  
For the primary outcome of lactate, 95% confidence intervals (CI) will be calcu lated for the 
mean cord lactate levels in each group. Comparison of the 95% CI in each group will then 
determine non -inferiority or inferiority.  
Additional interaction analyses for the primary outcome will be performed f or the following 
subgroups:   
1) Prese nce of chronic medical conditions ( hypertensive disorder, diabetes)  
a. Patients with hypertensive disorders (chronic hypertension, gestational 
hypertension, preeclampsia)  
b. Patients with diabetes mellitus (gestational diabetes, T1DM, T2DM)  
2) Recurrent late dec elerations pre intervention  
3) Recurrent variable decelerations pre intervention  
4) Prolonged deceleration pre intervention  
5) Fetal tachycardia pre intervention  
6) Fetuses with intrauterine growth restriction  
7) Chorioamnionitis  
8) Within oxygen group: Duration of oxygen exposure  
a. <50% of total duration of active labor (onset of active labor to delivery)  
b. >50% of total duration of active labor (onset of active labor to delivery)  
 
Odds ratios and 95% CI will be calculated for the secondary outcome of persistent Categor y II 
FHT. Kaplan -Meir analyses will be performed for fetal monitoring analyses.   
For the outcome of maternal and cord blood MDA, a fetal MDA will be calculated by 
subtracting umbilical artery MDA from maternal MDA for each sample. The calculated mean 
fetal MDA and maternal MDA values will then be compared between groups using either 
Student t test or Mann Whitney U test.  
  
Sample size analysis  
 A review of previously collected data from our institution of 5182 term singleton pregnancies 
revealed a mean co rd lactate of 3.5±1.6 mmol/L in women with Category II FHT within 30 
minutes of delivery. All of these deliveries were managed using our current protocol of routine 
oxygen administration for Category II FHT. Given the normal mean lactate seen in our 
population of patients with Categor y II FHT, a noninferiority approach was selected to test our 
hypothesis that room air is not inferior to oxygen administration in treating Category II FHT. A 
total sample size of 98 patients will be needed to detect a non -inferiority margin of 30% with 
90% power, using a one -sided two -sample t -test (alpha 0.025) . To accommodate a 15% drop 
out/cross over rate , a total of 114 patients will be needed. We plan on performing an initial  
compliance run -in of 6 patients  making the total enrollment 120 patients. Data analysis will only 
be performed on the 114 patients enrolled after the initial 6 patients enrolled/randomized in the 
compliance run -in/pilot . Previous studies have shown an increased risk for neonatal morbidity 
with cord lactate cut -offs ranging from 3.2 -6.014, 15, 38 -41. The margin of noninferiority was 
therefore set at a lactate cut -off of 4.5, above which there is a clear association with neonatal 
morbidity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
References  
 
1. HAMEL MS,  ANDERSON BL, ROUSE DJ. Oxygen for intrauterine resuscitation: of unproved benefit 
and potentially harmful. American journal of obstetrics and gynecology 2014;211:124 -7. 
2. FAWOLE B, HOFMEYR GJ. Maternal oxygen administration for fetal distress. The Cochrane database 
of systematic reviews 2012;12:Cd000136.  
3. ROBINSON B, NELSON L. A Review o f the Proceedings from the 2008 NICHD Workshop on 
Standardized Nomenclature for Cardiotocography: Update on Definitions, Interpretative 
Systems With Management Strategies, and Research Priorities in Relation to Intrapartum 
Electronic Fetal Monitoring. Revi ews in obstetrics & gynecology 2008;1:186 -92. 
4. KHAZIN AF, HON EH, HEHRE FW. Effects of maternal hyperoxia on the fetus. I. Oxygen tension. 
American journal of obstetrics and gynecology 1971;109:628 -37. 
5. ALTHABE O, JR., SCHWARCZ RL, POSE SV, ESCARCENA L, CALDEYRO -BARCIA R. Effects on fetal heart rate 
and fetal pO2 of oxygen administration to the mother. American journal of obstetrics and 
gynecology 1967;98:858 -70. 
6. BULLENS LM,  VAN DER HOUT-VAN DER JAGT MB,  VAN RUNNARD HEIMEL PJ, OEI G. A simulation mod el to 
study maternal hyperoxygenation during labor. Acta obstetricia et gynecologica Scandinavica 
2014;93:1268 -75. 
7. HAYDON ML,  GORENBERG DM,  NAGEOTTE MP, et al. The effect of maternal oxygen administration on 
fetal pulse oximetry during labor in fetuses with nonreassuring fetal heart rate patterns. 
American journal of obstetrics and gynecology 2006;195:735 -8. 
8. KHAW KS, WANG CC, NGAN KEE WD,  PANG CP, ROGERS MS. Effects of high inspired oxygen fraction 
during elective Caesarean section under spinal anaest hesia on maternal and fetal oxygenation 
and lipid peroxidation†. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2002;88:18 -23. 
9. GARE DJ, SHIME J, PAUL WM,  HOSKINS M. Oxygen administration during labor. American journal of 
obstetrics and gynecology 1969;105:954 -61. 
10. MORISHIMA HO,  DANIEL SS, RICHARDS RT, JAMES LS. The effect of increased maternal PaO2 upon the 
fetus during labor. American journal of obstetrics and gynecology 1975;123:257 -64. 
11. THORP JA, TROBOUGH T, EVANS R, HEDRICK J, YEAST JD. The effect of maternal oxygen administration 
during the second stage of labor on umbilical cord blood gas values: a randomized controlled 
prospective trial. American journal of obstetrics and gynecology 1995;172:465 -74. 
12. NESTERENKO TH, ACUN C, MOHAMED MA, et al. Is it a safe practice to administer oxygen during 
uncomplicated delivery: a randomized controlled trial? Early human development 2012;88:677 -
81. 
13. Practice bulletin no. 116: Management of intrapartum fetal heart rate tracings. Obstet Gynecol 
2010;116:1232 -40. 
14. TUULI MG,  STOUT MJ,  SHANKS A, ODIBO AO,  MACONES GA,  CAHILL AG. Umbilical cord arterial lactate 
compared with pH for predicting neonatal morbidity at term. Obstet Gynecol 2014;124:756 -61. 
15. WESTGREN M, DIVON M, HORAL M, et al. Routine measurements of umbilic al artery lactate levels in 
the prediction of perinatal outcome. American journal of obstetrics and gynecology 
1995;173:1416 -22. 
16. GJERRIS AC, STAER -JENSEN J, JORGENSEN JS, BERGHOLT T, NICKELSEN C. Umbilical cord blood lactate: a 
valuable tool in the ass essment of fetal metabolic acidosis. European journal of obstetrics, 
gynecology, and reproductive biology 2008;139:16 -20. 
17. Executive summary: Neonatal encephalopathy and neurologic outcome, second edition. Report 
of the American College of Obstetricians  and Gynecologists' Task Force on Neonatal 
Encephalopathy. Obstet Gynecol 2014;123:896 -901.  
18. MALIN GL, MORRIS RK, KHAN KS. Strength of association between umbilical cord pH and perinatal 
and long term outcomes: systematic review and meta -analysis. BMJ ( Clinical research ed) 
2010;340:c1471.  
19. CAHILL AG,  ROEHL KA, ODIBO AO,  MACONES GA. Association and prediction of neonatal acidemia. 
American journal of obstetrics and gynecology 2012;207:206.e1 -8. 
20. FREY HA,  TUULI MG,  SHANKS AL, MACONES GA,  CAHILL AG. Interpreting category II fetal heart rate 
tracings: does meconium matter? American journal of obstetrics and gynecology 
2014;211:644.e1 -8. 
21. YONEI S, FURUI H. Lethal and mutagenic effects of malondialdehyde, a decomposition product of 
peroxidized lipids,  on Escherichia coli with different DNA -repair capacities. Mutation research 
1981;88:23 -32. 
22. WIJESINGHE M, PERRIN K, RANCHORD A, SIMMONDS M, WEATHERALL M, BEASLEY R. Routine use of 
oxygen in the treatment of myocardial infarction: systematic review. Hea rt (British Cardiac 
Society) 2009;95:198 -202.  
23. NEW A. Oxygen: kill or cure? Prehospital hyperoxia in the COPD patient. Emergency medicine 
journal : EMJ 2006;23:144 -6. 
24. HELMERHORST HJ, SCHULTZ MJ,  VAN DER VOORT PH, DE JONGE E, VAN WESTERLOO DJ. Bench -to-bedside 
review: the effects of hyperoxia during critical illness. Critical care (London, England) 
2015;19:284.  
25. SOLA A, SALDENO YP, FAVARETO V. Clinical practices in neonatal oxygenation: where have we failed? 
What can we do? Journal of perinatology : official journal of the California Perinatal Association 
2008;28 Suppl 1:S28 -34. 
26. SIMPSON KR. Intrauterine resuscitation during labor: should maternal oxygen administration be a 
first-line measure? Seminars in fetal & neonatal medicine 2008;13:362 -7. 
27. DALLE-DONNE I, ROSSI R, COLOMBO R, GIUSTARINI D, MILZANI A. Biomarkers of oxidative damage in 
human disease. Clinical chemistry 2006;52:601 -23. 
28. PRYOR WA,  STANLEY JP. Letter: A suggested mechanism for the production of malonaldehyde 
during the autox idation of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Nonenzymatic production of 
prostaglandin endoperoxides during autoxidation. The Journal of organic chemistry 
1975;40:3615 -7. 
29. ILHAN N, ILHAN N, SIMSEK M. The changes of trace elements, malondialdehyde levels and 
superoxide dismutase activities in pregnancy with or without preeclampsia. Clinical biochemistry 
2002;35:393 -7. 
30. SUHAIL M, SUHAIL S, GUPTA BK, BHARAT V. Malondialdehyde and Antioxidant Enzymes in Maternal 
and Cord Blood, and their Correlation in Normote nsive and Preeclamptic Women. Journal of 
clinical medicine research 2009;1:150 -7. 
31. LORENTE L, MARTIN MM,  ABREU -GONZALEZ P, et al. Sustained high serum malondialdehyde levels 
are associated with severity and mortality in septic patients. Critical care (L ondon, England) 
2013;17:R290.  
32. LORENTE L, MARTIN MM,  ABREU -GONZALEZ P, et al. Association between serum malondialdehyde 
levels and mortality in patients with severe brain trauma injury. Journal of neurotrauma 
2015;32:1 -6. 
33. BASU S, DE D, DEV KHANNA H, KUMAR A. Lipid peroxidation, DNA damage and total antioxidant 
status in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. Journal of perinatology : official journal of the California 
Perinatal Association 2014;34:519 -23. 
34. KIRIMI E, PEKER E, TUNCER O, YAPICIOGLU H, NARLI N, SATAR M. Increased serum malondialdehyde 
level in neonates with hypoxic -ischaemic encephalopathy: prediction of disease severity. The 
Journal of international medical research 2010;38:220 -6. 
35. ROGERS MS,  MONGELLI M, TSANG KH,  WANG CC. Fetal and maternal  levels of lipid peroxides in term 
pregnancies. Acta obstetricia et gynecologica Scandinavica 1999;78:120 -4. 
36. PARILLO JE. Critical Care Medicine: Principles of Diagnosis and Management in the Adult, Fourth 
Editin. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Inc, 2014.  
37. YAGI K. Simple assay for the level of total lipid peroxides in serum or plasma. Methods in 
molecular biology (Clifton, NJ) 1998;108:101 -6. 
38. RIDENOUR RV, GADA RP, BROST BC, KARON BS. Comparison and validation of point of care lactate 
meters as a repla cement for fetal pH measurement. Clinical biochemistry 2008;41:1461 -5. 
39. WIBERG -ITZEL E, LIPPONER C, NORMAN M, et al. Determination of pH or lactate in fetal scalp blood in 
management of intrapartum fetal distress: randomised controlled multicentre trial . BMJ (Clinical 
research ed) 2008;336:1284 -7. 
40. ALLEN RM,  BOWLING FG, OATS JJ. Determining the fetal scalp lactate level that indicates the need 
for intervention in labour. The Australian & New Zealand journal of obstetrics & gynaecology 
2004;44:549 -52. 
41. LINET T, LAPORTE J, GUEYE H, BOOG G. [Microvolume dosage of lactate in cord blood for the 
evaluation of the neonatal well -being]. Journal de gynecologie, obstetrique et biologie de la 
reproduction 2002;31:352 -7. 
 