Assessment of the accuracy of the manual palpation of surface landmarks 
versus ultrasound for identification of the correct intervertebral space for 
spinal anesthesia in children less than 1 year of age  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
 
July 8, 20 21 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Accuracy of manual palpation vs ultrasound for spinal anesthesia in 
children less than 1 year of age.  
 
 Page 1 of 9  HRP -503  v.12.10.18  PROTOCOL TITLE:  Assessment of the accuracy of the manual palpation of 
surface landmarks versus ultrasound for identification of the correct intervertebral space 
for spinal anesthesia in children less than 1 year of age.   
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Name: Giorgio Veneziano , MD 
Department /Center: Anesthesiology & Pain Medicine 
Telephone Number: 614-722-4200 Email Address: Giorgio.Veneziano@nationwidechildrens.org 
 
VERSION NUMBER/DATE : ver. 3/July 8, 2021 
 
REVISION HISTORY  
 
Revision 
# Version Date  Summary of Changes  Consent 
Change?  
1 3/17/2021  Adding L3 -4 to L4 -5 as the appropriate 
interspace, changing attending anesthesiologist to clinical anesthesia provider (fellow or attending), clarifying research anesthesiologist perfo rming ultrasound, collecting data on years 
of experience for clinical provider, removing lateral position from the conus medullaris 
measurement . No 
2 7/1/2021  Changing the PI from Dr. Dontukurthy to Dr. 
Veneziano , 17.3 - revised the record retention 
detai ls to six years.  Yes 
    
    
    
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Accuracy of manual palpation vs ultrasound for spinal anesthesia in 
children less than 1 year of age.  
 
 Page 2 of 9  HRP -503  v.12.10.18  1.0 Study Summary  
 
Study Title  Assessment of the accuracy of the manual palpation of 
surface landmarks versus ultrasound for identification of the 
correct intervertebral space for spinal anesthesia in children 
less than 1 year of age.  
Study Design  Prospective study  
Primary Objective  The primary objective of the study is to compare the 
accuracy of manual palpation of surface landmarks versus 
ultrasonography for identification of the appropriate 
interspace for lumbar  puncture and spinal anesthesia in 
infants less than 1 year of age.  
Secondary 
Objective(s)  The secondary objective is to assess the level of the conus 
medullaris in infants in the sitting and lateral position . 
Research 
Intervention(s)/ Investigational 
Agent(s)  Ultrasound  
IND/IDE #  N/A 
Study Population  Main OR surgical patients  
Sample Size  50 
Study Duration for 
individual 
participants  Less than 30 minutes total.  
Study Specific 
Abbreviations/ 
Definitions  N/A 
 
2.0 Objectives  
2.1 The primary objective of the study is to compare the accuracy of manual palpation of surface landmarks versus ultrasonography for identification of the appropriate interspace for lumbar puncture and spinal anesthesia in infants less than 1 year of age.  
2.2 The secondary objective is to assess the level of the conus medullaris in infants in the lateral position and also in the sitting position. 
2.3 The hypothesis is that ultrasonography will be more accurate than the traditional method of palpation of surface landmarks in the identification of the appropriate interspace for lumbar puncture and spinal anesthesia in children less than 1 year of age. 
3.0 Background   
3.1  Spinal anesthesia may be used instead of general anesthesia in children for 
lower abdominal surgical procedures. The conus medullaris ends at L3- L4 in 
children less than 1 year of age and therefore the L3-4 or L4- 5 interspace is 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Accuracy of manual palpation vs ultrasound for spinal anesthesia in 
children less than 1 year of age.  
 
 Page 3 of 9  HRP -503  v.12.10.18  suggested as the optimal site for lumbar puncture for spinal anesthesia. 
Manual palpation is commonly performed to identify the correct intervertebral space for spinal anesthesia. Studies in adults and children have shown that manual palpation can be inaccurate in up to 30% of cases.
1-3 
Traumatic needle placement or the administration of a concentrated local  
anesthetic agent into the spinal cord can lead to serious morbidity including neurologic damage and even paraplegia.
2,4 Ultrasonography may be used to 
assess the intervertebral space prior to spinal anesthesia in adults especially in difficult cases and i n children to locate the tip of epidural catheter. 
Introduction of the ultrasound for assessment of the correct intervertebral space for spinal anesthesia may decrease the number of attempts and the possibility the incidence of serious adverse effects. 
 
4.0 Study Endpoints   
4.1 The accuracy of manual palpation of surface landmarks for identification of the appropriate interspace ( L3-4/L4-5) for lumbar puncture and spinal 
anesthesia. 
4.2 The level of the conus medullaris lateral and sitting . 
 
5.0 Study Intervention/Invest igational Agent  
5.1 The only intervention being used that is not normally used in general clinical 
practice is the use of ultrasonography.  The technique is non-invasive and poses no risk. Ultrasonography will be performed by an anesthesiologist with training and experience and will add less than 10 minutes to the anesthetic time.  
 
6.0 Procedures Involved*   
6.1  Anesthetic management will not vary from the standard technique and will 
be at the discretion of the anesthesia team.  The clinical anesthesia provider 
(fellow or attending) who will be performing spinal anesthesia will mark the 
interspace for spinal anesthesia with a marking pen. The study team will record the providers years of experience performing spinal anesthesia.  The research anesthesiologist performing the ultrasound will confirm whether or not the appropriate interspace (L3 -4/L4 -5) has been identified. Also, the 
interspace where the conus medullaris ends will be identified in the sitting position. Spinal anesthesia will be performed at the space confirmed by ultrasound using our standard clinical care.  
 
7.0  Data and Specimen Banking * 
N/A 
 
8.0  Sharing of Results with Subjects * 
Results will not be shared  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Accuracy of manual palpation vs ultrasound for spinal anesthesia in 
children less than 1 year of age.  
 
 Page 4 of 9  HRP -503  v.12.10.18  9.0  Study Timelines*  
• An individual study subject’s participation in the study should last 
approximately 15- 30 minutes total.  
• All study subjects should be enrolled within 1 year of study start. 
• The study should be completed within 2 years of study start.  
10.0 Inclusion  and Exclusion Criteria*  
10.1 Potential subjects will be identified by reviewing the surgery schedule in 
Epic and will be recruited from the Surgery Unit pre -op area prior to their 
surgery.   
10.2 Inclusion criteria:  Patients less than 1 year of age scheduled for spinal 
anesthesia for elective lower abdominal, urologic, or lower extremity surgery at Nationwide Children’s Hospital.  
10.3  Exclusion criteria:   
Parents unwilling for their children to undergo spinal anesthesia for surgery.  Children with known spinal anomalies including sacral dimple. Children with coagulation abnormalities or receiving anticoagulation which precludes the use of spinal anesthesia.  
Children with superficial or deep infections over the spine which precludes the use of spinal anesthesia.  
 
11.0 Vulnerable Populations * 
11.1 This study presents no more than minimal risk as it only involves ultrasound which is non-invasive, will add less than 10 minutes t o the total anesthetic 
time, and written consent is normally not required.  
12.0 Local Number of Subjects  
12.1 50 
13.0 Recruitment Methods 
13.1 Subjects will be recruited from the surgery unit pre- op area.  They will be 
identified by reviewing OR schedules in Epic. 
14.0 Withdrawal of Subjects*  
N/A 
 
15.0 Risks to Subjects * 
15.1 Although not likely, there may be a potential risk for breach of patient health information. There are no study related physical risks to study subjects associated with this study. All study related procedures are non-invasive. 
15.2 Subject information will not be given to any other investigators. Subjects and their information will be closely monitored and guarded by study staff; there will be limited access to patients and their information by trained study 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Accuracy of manual palpation vs ultrasound for spinal anesthesia in 
children less than 1 year of age.  
 
 Page 5 of 9  HRP -503  v.12.10.18  staff; a nd subject information will only be shared and discussed between 
study staff specific to this study. Subject PHI will be stored in a locked 
cabinet, and will be stored and maintained in password protected computer files.  
16.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects * 
16.1 No direct benefit to the subject.  
17.0 Data Management * and Confidentiality  
17.1  A 2 by 2 contingency table with a chi-squared analysis will be performed to 
compare the accuracy of surface palpation versus ultrasonography. Other data including time to perform ultrasonography and level at which the conus medullaris ends will be presented as secondary outcomes in tabular format for descriptive purposes without the need for statistical comparison or analysis.  
17.2 Research records will be stored in a locked cab inet and password 
protected computer.  Only certified research personnel will be given access to identifiable subject information . 
17.3 Once the data collection and analysis are complete and the study results have been published identifiers will be destroyed.  Six years after research is complete, per NCH guidelines as this meets both HIPAA and OHRP regulations, all electronic files will be permanently deleted.  
18.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety  of Subjects*  
18.1 The study will only be monitored by the study investigators. 
19.0 Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
19.1 Subject information will not be given to any other investigators. Subjects and their information will be closely monitored and guarded by study staff; there will be limited acc ess to patients and their 
information by trained study staff; and subject information will only be shared and discussed between study staff specific to this study. Describe the steps that will be taken to protect subjects’ privacy interests. “Privacy inter est” refers to a person’s desire to place limits 
on whom they interact or whom they provide personal information. 
20.0 Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
20.1 None  
21.0 Economic Burden to Subjects  
21.1 None  
22.0 Consent Process  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Accuracy of manual palpation vs ultrasound for spinal anesthesia in 
children less than 1 year of age.  
 
 Page 6 of 9  HRP -503  v.12.10.18  22.1 We are requesting a waiver of informed consent documentation.  
Subjects will receive a complete explanation of the study and will be asked to  consent verbally. Subjects will receive a written summary 
of the research as outlined in the attached written Study Information Sheet.  Subjects will not be asked to sign a consent form.  
23.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing  
N/A 
24.0 Setting 
24.1 Subjects will be recruited from Surgery Unit and all study procedures will take place in the OR after the subject has been anesthetized.   
25.0 Resources Available  
25.1 The department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine has 2 research coordinators and 2 research associates that will be enrolling subjects for this study.  All study staff will be trained on the study procedures. 
26.0 Multi -Site Research * 
N/A 
 
27.0   Protected Health Information Recording  
 
1.0 Indicate which subject identifiers will be recorded for this research . 
☒  Name  
☐  Complete Address 
☒  Telephone or Fax Number  
☐  Social Security Number (do not check if only used for ClinCard) 
☒  Dates (treatment dates, birth date, date of death) 
☐  Email address , IP address or url 
☒  Medical Record Number or other account number 
☐  Health Plan Beneficiary Identification Number 
☐  Full face photographic images and/or any comparable images (x- rays)  
☐  Account Numbers 
☐  Certificate/License Numbers  
☐  Vehicle Identifiers and Serial Numbers (e.g. VINs, License Plate Numbers)  
☐  Device Identifiers and Serial Numbers  
☐  Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints ☐  Other number, characteristic or code that could be used to identify an 
individual 
☐  None (Complete De- identification Certification Form)  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Accuracy of manual palpation vs ultrasound for spinal anesthesia in 
children less than 1 year of age.  
 
 Page 7 of 9  HRP -503  v.12.10.18  2.0   Check the appropriate category and attach the required form* on the Local 
Site Documents, #3. Other Documents, page of the application.  (Choose one.)  
☐  Patient Authorization will be obtained. (Include the appropriate HIPAA 
language (see Section 14 of consent template) in the consent form OR attach the HRP -900, HIPAA AUTHORIZATION form.) 
☒  Protocol meets the criteria for waiver of authorization. (Attach the HRP -901, 
WAIVER OF HIPAA AUTHORIZATION REQUEST  form.)  
☐  Protocol is using de- identified information. (Attach the HRP -902, DE -
IDENTIFICATION CERTIFICATION form.) (Checked "None" in 1.0 above) 
☐  Protocol involves research on decedents. (Attach the HRP -903, RESEARCH 
ON DECEDENTS REQUEST  form.)  
☐  Protocol is using a limited data set and data use agreement. (Contact the 
Office of Technology Commercialization to initiate a Limited Data Use Agreement.  
 
*Find the HIPAA forms in the IRB Website Library, Templates.  
 
Attach the appropriate HIPAA form on the “Local Site Documents, #3. Other Documents ”, page of the application. 
 3.0    How long will identifying information on each participant be maintained? Following publication of study results, research records will be stored for a period of 3-5 years and then will be destroyed by placing in a secure shredding bin. 
 4.0 Describe any plans to code identifiable information collected about each partici pant.  None  
 
5.0 Check each box that describes steps that will be taken to safeguard the confidentiality of information collected for this research:  
☒ Research records will be stored in a locked cabinet in a secure location  
☒ Research records will be stored  in a password- protected computer file 
☐ The list linking the assigned code number to the individual subject will be 
maintained separately from the other research data  
☒ Only certified research personnel will be given access to identifiable subject inf ormation 
 
6.0 Describe the provisions included in the protocol to protect the privacy interests of subjects, where "privacy interests" refer to the interest of individuals in being left alone, limiting access to them, and limiting access to their informati on. (This is not the same provision to maintain the 
confidentiality of data.) 
 Subject information will not be given to any other investigators. Subjects and their information will be closely monitored and guarded by study staff; there will be limited access to patients and their information by trained study staff; and subject information will only be shared and discussed between study staff specific 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Accuracy of manual palpation vs ultrasound for spinal anesthesia in 
children less than 1 year of age.  
 
 Page 8 of 9  HRP -503  v.12.10.18  to this study. Describe the steps that will be taken to protect subjects’ privacy 
interests. “Privacy intere st” refers to a person’s desire to place limits on whom 
they interact or whom they provide personal information. 
 Confidential Health Information  1.0 Please mark all categories that reflect the nature of health information to be accessed and used as part of this research.  
 
☒  Demographics (age, gender, educational level)  
☒  Diagnosis 
☐  Laboratory reports  
☐  Radiology reports 
☐  Discharge summaries  
☒  Procedures/Treatments received  
☒  Dates related to course of treatment (admission, surgery, discharge) ☐  Billing information  
☐  Names of drugs and/or devices used as part of treatment 
☐  Location of treatment 
☐  Name of treatment provider  
☐  Surgical reports 
☒  Other informa tion related to course of treatment 
☐  None 
 
2.0 Please discuss why it is necessary to access and review the health information 
noted in your response above. It is necessary to meet the objectives of the study and to analyze the data.  
3.0 Is the health info rmation to be accessed and reviewed the minimal necessary to 
achieve the goals of this research?  ☒ Yes    ☐ No  
 
4.0 Will it be necessary to record information of a sensitive nature?  ☐ Yes   ☒ No  
 
5.0 Do you plan to obtain a federally- issued Certificate of Confidentiality as a means 
of protecting the confidentiality of the information collected?  ☐ Yes   ☒ No 
 References  
1. Hayes J, Borges B, Armstrong D, et al . Accuracy of manual  
palpation vs ultrasound for identifying the L3- L4 intervertebral space level in 
children. Paediatr Anaesth 2014;24:510-15. 
2. Olowoyeye A, Fadahunsi O, Okudo J, et al . Ultrasound imaging versus palpation 
method for diagnostic lumbar puncture in neonates and i nfants: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. BMJ Paediatrics Open  2019;3:e000412.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Accuracy of manual palpation vs ultrasound for spinal anesthesia in 
children less than 1 year of age.  
 
 Page 9 of 9  HRP -503  v.12.10.18  3. Duniec L,  Nowakowski P,  Kosson D ,  Łazowski T. Anatomical landmarks 
based assessment of intravertebral space level for lumbar puncture is misleading in more than 30%. Anaesthesiol Intensive Ther 2013;45:1-6.  
4. Baxter B, Evans J, Morris R, et al. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2016;101:F448-50
. 
 