  
 
  
 
Protocol version 5/11/15  
 Protocol Title:   A Phase I/II Trial of Pomalidomide and 
Dexamethasone in Subjects  with Previously -Treated AL 
Amyloidosis  
 
STUDY DRUG   Pomalidomide ( CC-4047 ) 
CELGENE REFERENCE 
NUMBER :  PO-AMYL -PI-0024 
VERSION:   5/11/15  
IND:   112758  
NCT:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
The infor mation contained in this document is regarded as confidential and, except to the extent 
necessary to obtain informed consent, may not be disclosed to another party unless law or regulations 
require such disclosure.  Persons to whom the information is discl osed must be informed that the 
information is confidential and may not be further disclosed by them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Confidential  Page 2 of 66  
Pomalidomide                                                                          Protocol: PO-AMYL -PI-0024  
 
Protocol version 5/11/15  PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR SIGNATURE PAGE  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:    
 
   
 Signature of Investigator   Date  
 Printed Name of Investigator   Date  
 By my signature, I agree to personally supervise the conduct of this study 
and to ensure its conduct in compliance with the protocol, informed 
consent, IRB/EC procedures, instructions from Celgene representatives, 
the Declaration of Helsinki, ICH Good Clini cal Practices guidelines, and 
the applicable parts of the United States Code of Federal Regulations or 
local regulations governing the conduct of clinical studies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Confidential  Page 3 of 66  
Pomalidomide                                                                          Protocol: PO-AMYL -PI-0024  
 
Protocol version 5/11/15  STUDY PERSONNEL  
 
Supporter:   Celgene Corporation  
86 Morris Ave,  
Summit,  NJ   07 901 
1-800-742-3107  
 
 
 
Study Location:   Boston Medical Center  
820 Harrison Avenue, FGH -1 
Boston, MA   02118  
Principal Investigator:    
Vaishali Sanchorawala, MD  
 
Co-Investigator:     
David C. Seldin, MD, PhD  
 
Biostatis tician:    
Study Coordinator:  
   
Anthony Shelton, RN  
 
 
 
 Confidential  Page 4 of 66  
Pomalidomide                                                                          Protocol: PO-AMYL -PI-0024  
 
Protocol version 5/11/15  Table of Contents  
Protocol Synopsis…………………………………………………………….   Section 1  
Schedule of Study Assessments……………………………………………….  Section 2  
Background and Rationale……………………………………………………  Section 3  
Study Objectives and End Points………………………………… ……………  Section 4  
Investigational Plan…………………………………………………………….  Section 5  
Serious Adverse Events………………………………………………………..  Section 6  
Response Criteria………………………………………………………………  Section 7  
Protocol Amendments and Deviations………………………………………….  Section 8  
Data Management………………………………………………………………  Section 9  
Biostatis tical Analysis…………………………………………………………   Section 10  
Regulatory Considerations…………………………………………………….    Section 11  
References………………………………………………………………………  Section 12  
Appendices………………………………………………………………………  Section 13  
1.   Pomalidomide Risks of Fetal Exposure, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines 
and Acceptable Birth Control Methods  
Pomalidomide Education and Counselling Guidance Document  
Pomalidomide Information Sheet   
2.  SWOG Performance Status   
3.   NCI CTC AE Version 4.0   
 Confidential  Page 5 of 66  
Pomalidomide                                                                          Protocol: PO-AMYL -PI-0024  
 
Protocol version 5/11/15   
1  Protocol Synopsis  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  A Phase I/II Trial of Pomalidomide and Dexamethasone for the 
treatment of subject s with previously treated AL Amyloidosis  
PROTOCOL NUMBER:  PO-AMYL -PI-0024 
DATE PROTOCOL FINAL:   
STUDY DRUG:  Pomalidomi de (CC-4047 ) 
INDICATION:  AL Amyloidosis  
STUDY PHASE:  I/II 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE:    
AL amyloidosis is a variant plasma cell disorder in which clonal bone marrow plasma 
cells produce immunoglobulin light chains that misfold into fibrils that are deposi ted in 
visceral organs, leading to organ dysfunction and failure.  Untreated, the disease has a 
median survival of only about one year. Oral treatment with melphalan and 
dexamethasone produces improvement in survival, with hematologic remissions and 
improv ement in organ function. Aggressive treatment with high dose intravenous 
melphalan with autologous stem cell transplantation (HDM/SCT) produces complete 
hematologic responses (CR) in about 40% of subject s and partial responses in a similar 
proportion; thes e are frequently accompanied by stabilization or improvement in organ 
function. Unfortunately only about half of referred subject s are eligible for HDM/SCT. 
Furthermore, it has been observed by us as well as other groups that achievement of a 
hematologic c omplete response after treatment with oral melphalan and dexamethasone 
as well as HDM/SCT is associated with improved survival, QOL, and clinical/organ 
response. Thus, we continue to seek more effective regimens for subject s ineligible for 
aggressive treat ment with HDM/SCT or not achieving a complete hematologic response 
to HDM/SCT or other modalities.  
 
The advent of novel agents in the treatment of multiple myeloma has changed the 
therapeutic landscape of plasma cell dyscrasias. Thalidomide has been studi ed as a single 
agent and in combination with dexamethasone for the treatment of AL amyloidosis . 
Unfortunately, thalidomide is poorly tolerated with 50 -65% of subject s experiencing 
grade 3 and 4 toxicities, leading to drug withdrawal in approximately half o f the subject s. 
 
We are concluding a phase II study of lenalidomide alone and in combination with 
dexamethasone for subject s with AL amyloidosis. This study included untreated as well 
as relapsed subject s after HDM/SCT. Interim analysis of the first 34 subjects suggests 
achievement of a complete hematologic response CR in ~30% subject s and of partial 
 Confidential  Page 6 of 66  
Pomalidomide                                                                          Protocol: PO-AMYL -PI-0024  
 
Protocol version 5/11/15  hematologic response in ~40% subject s, with most responses occurring with the 
lenalidomide/dexamethasone combination. A variety of toxicities have been observe d, 
including leukopenia, rash, venous thrombosis, and intolerance to the dexamethasone. 
This report indicated better tolerability than thalidomide, however, 20% of subject s still 
stopped treatment with lenalidomide due to toxicities. We have extended our s tudy to 
subject s on dialysis, using attenuated doses, with good preliminary results. A study using 
lenalidomide in combination with melphalan and dexamethasone is ongoing; this study is 
not suitable for subject s with significant prior exposure to alkylator  agent.  
 
Pomalidomide (CC4047), a 2nd generation immun e-modulatory drug, has shown 
promising activity in phase -2 trial in combination with low -dose dexamethasone for 
relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma and AL amyloidosis. Responses were seen in 
50% of  subjects previously -failing thalidomide and/or lenalidomide  in AL amyloidosis.  
 
Given these promising results of pomalidomide in plasma cell dyscrasia s, we propose a 
study of pomalidomide and low dose dexamethasone in persons with previously -treated  
AL a myloidosis.  
 
STUDY OBJECTIVES:  
Primary:    
 Determine dose -limiting toxicity (DLT) and the maxim um tolerated dose 
(MTD) of pomalidomide combin ed with dexamethasone in p ersons with 
previously -treated light -chain (AL) -amyloidosis.  
Secondary:    
 Determine the following at the MTD : 
 Hematological complete (CR) very good partial (VGPR) and partial 
(PR) rates  
 Response -duration  
 Organ response  
 Time –to-event  
 Survival  
 
Exploratory:    
 To investigate the relationship of changes in the levels of the biomarkers 
BNP and tro ponin  I to frequency of specific adverse events and the 
occurrence of DLT.   
STUDY DESIGN:  
 Phase-I/II dose-escalation study of pomalidomide and dexamethasone in p ersons  with 
previously -treated AL -amyloidosis.  During the Phase I  portion the MTD will be 
determined based on DLT s in the first cycle.  At the MTD an expanded cohort of 12 
subjects will be evaluated to estimate efficacy.  
 Confidential  Page 7 of 66  
Pomalidomide                                                                          Protocol: PO-AMYL -PI-0024  
 
Protocol version 5/11/15  The study includes a screening period, a treatment (dose escalation) period, and a 
follow -up period for survival.  After givin g written informed consent, subject s will be 
evaluated for eligibility for enrollment in the study and baseline evaluations will be 
performed.  Subject s who satisfy all inclusion and exclusion criteria will begin study drug 
treatment with dose escalation.  Standard dose escalation rules will be used.  
Subject s will be monitored every cycle for safety, hematological status, and organ 
function during therapy or until the occurrence of progressive disease (PD).   
Treatment Group Assignments and Subject  Replacem ent 
This is a dose -escalation study and dose escalation will proceed through 3 dose -levels 
according to standard rules in which dose levels are started sequentially after complete 
evaluation of the occurrence of DLT.  Based on the dose escalation scheme, a s many as 
30 subject s could be enrolled in the study.  Subject s who discontinue pomalidomide for 
reasons other than DLT before completing at least 2 treatment cycles are to be replaced.  
Subpopulations  
An additional 12 subject s will be enrolled in an expand ed cohort for analysis of efficacy 
at each schedule studied.  
Subject s in this cohort will be treated at the dose defined as the MTD for that schedule.  
 
Schema : 
Phase -I: 
Pomalidomide 2 mg/day D1 -21 – dose escalation to 4 mg/day by 1 mg units * 
Dexamethasone 10-20 mg D1, 8, 15, 22  
 
* Pomalidomide dosing for Phase I cohorts 1 and 2 given on days 1 -28 of a 28 -day cycle and changed to 
Days 1 -21 of a 28 day cycle with Cohort 3.  
 
This cycle will be repeated every 28 days.  
 
Subject s will take aspirin 325 mg/day to prevent v enous thrombosis whil st on-study.   
A proton pump inhibitor will be used for GI prophylaxis.  
 
Phase -II: 
 
Pomalidomide [MTD] mg/day D1 -21  
Dexamethasone 10 -20 mg D1, 8, 15, 22  
 
This cycle will be repeated every 28 days.  
 
Subject s will take aspirin 32 5 mg/day for prophylaxis against venous thrombosis while 
on study.   
A proton pump inhibitor will be used for GI prophylaxis.  
 Confidential  Page 8 of 66  
Pomalidomide                                                                          Protocol: PO-AMYL -PI-0024  
 
Protocol version 5/11/15  STUDY ENDPOINTS  
Primary:    
 Dose -limiting toxicity (DLT) and maxim um tolerated dose (MTD) of 
pomalidomide in combination with dexa methasone  
Secondary:    
To be determined for MTD:  
 Hematological complete (CR) very good partial (VGPR) and partial (PR) rates  
 Response -duration  
 Organ response  
 Time –to-event  
 Survival  
 
Exploratory :  
 relationship of changes in the levels of the biomarkers BNP  and troponin  I 
compared to frequency of specific adverse events and the occurrence of DLT  
STUDY DURATION:  Treatment may continue until 
subject  experiences unacceptable toxicities or disease 
progression.  Follow -up will take place every 3 months 
until dis ease progression, then annually  for survival . 
Accrual ~24 months  TOTAL SAMPLE SIZE:  30 
subject s 
DOSING REGIMEN(S):  
Phase I portion:  
  
Pomalidomide 2 mg/day D1 -21 –  
dose escalation to 4 mg/day in 1 mg increments in  
phase I *   
Dexamethasone 10 -20 mg D1, 8 , 15, 22  
 
The above cycle will be repeated every 28 days.  
 
* Pomalidomide dosing for Phase I cohorts 1 and 2 given on days 1 -
28 of a 28 -day cycle and changed to Days 1 -21 of a 28 day cycle 
with Cohort 3.  
 
Phase II portion:  
 
Pomalidomide [MTD] mg/day D1 -28  
Dexamethasone 10 -20 mg D1, 8, 15, 22  
 
This cycle will be repeated every 28 days.  STUDY DRUG SUPPLIES:  
Celgene Corporation will 
supply pomalidomide  as  1.0 
mg and 2.0 mg  
Celgene Corporation  Confidential  Page 9 of 66  
         Protocol  
 
Protocol version 5/11/15  2 Schedule of Study Assessments *  
Procedure  Pre-Study 
1 Cycle One*  Cycles 
2,  3 Cycles*  
5, 6, 8,  
9, 11, 12  Cycles * 
4, 7 and 
10 ∞ *30 days of 
discontinuation 
From Study Drug  Follow -Up8 
Phase 
Day 
1 Day  
8 § Day  
15  Day  
22  § Day  
1 Day  
1 Day  
1  Every 3 
months  
Physical examination, vital 
signs, weight  X X   X X  X X X 
SWOG performance status  X X   X X  X X X 
CBC with differ ential  X X X6 X6 X6 X6 X6 X  X 
Pregnancy test 2 X2, 3 X3 X3 X3 X3 X3 X3 X3 X3  
Education and counseling 
guidance 7  X 7    X7 X7 X7   
Sodium, chloride, CO2, 
Glucose  X X X X X X X   X 
BUN, creatinine, 
potassium, Magnesium, 
phosphorous  X X X X X X X X  X 
ALT, AST, albumin, alk 
phos, bilirubin  X X    X X   X 
calcium  X X    X X X  X 
Cholesterol, triglyceride, 
TSH X       X  X 
Total Protein, LDH, INR, 
PTT X X      X  X 
BNP, uric acid  X X X X X X X X  X 
C-reactive protein, Beta 2 -
microglobulin  X       X  X 
IgG, IgA, IgM  X       X  X 
Serum immunofixation 
electrophoresis  X       X  X 
Urine immunofixation 
electrophoresis  X       X  X 
24 hour urine protein  X       X  X 
Free light chain assay  X     X X X  X 
Bone marrow biopsy and 
aspirate  X       X5  X5 
EKG  X       X  X 
ECHO  X       X5  X5 
CXR  X       X5  X5 
Urinalysis  X       X  X 
Celgene Corporation  Confidential  Page 10 of 66  
         Protocol  
 
Protocol version 5/11/15  Dispensement of  Cycle 1 
study drug   X         
Record adverse events    X X X X X X X  
Record concomitant 
therapies/procedures   X    X X X X  
Dispense study drug for  
next cycle   X    X X X   
Perform drug 
accountability   X    X X X X  
* Pre-cycle e valuations may be done up to 7 days 
prior to Day 1 to allow time for results and drug 
distribution.  All other exams may be done + \- 4 
days.  
§  Phase I participants only  
1 All pre -study evaluations to be completed within 
28 days of initiation of therapy except for bone 
marrow, which must have been repeated following 
any previous therapy  > 1 cycle .  ECHO must be 
done within 60 days of first dose of pomalidomide.  
2  A female of  childbearing potential (FCBP) is a  
sexually mature female who: 1) has not undergone 
a hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy; or 2) has 
not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 
consecutive months (i.e., has had menses at any 
time in the preceding  24 consecutive months).  
3   Pregnancy tests must occur 7 days and again 
within 24 hours prior to initiation of pomalidomide.  
FCBP with regular or no menstruation must have a 
pregnancy test weekly for the first 4 weeks and 
then every 28 days while on ther apy (including 
breaks in therapy); at discontinuation of 
pomalidomide and at Day 28 post the last dose of 
pomalidomide.  Females with irregular 
menstruation must have a pregnancy test weekly 
for the first 4 weeks and then every 14 days while 
on therapy (in cluding breaks in therapy), at 
discontinuation of pomalidomide and at Day 14 and 
Day 28 post the last dose of pomalidomide (see 
Appendix 1:  Pomalidomide Risks of Fetal 
Exposure, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines and 
Acceptable Birth Control Methods ).   4 If clinically indicated   
5 If needed to confirm response.  
6 CBC to be done weekly for the first cycle  or until on a stable dose of 
pomalidomide , then day 1 of each cycle.  
7 All subjects must be registered into the POMALYST REMS ™ program of Celgene 
Corporation,  which provides education and counseling on the risks of fetal 
exposure, blood clots and reduced blood counts.  Counseling must be provided by 
the according to the POMALYST REMS™ program prior to each new prescription . 
See Appendix 1:  Pomalidomide Risks o f Fetal Exposure, Pregnancy Testing 
Guidelines and Acceptable Birth Control Methods and Appendix 1:  Pomalidomide 
Education and Counseling Guidance Document.  
8 For responders, follow -up exams should take place every three months until 
disease progression.  Following disease progression, follow -up evaluations should 
take place annually.  
∞ Evaluations to be done every three cycles while on study drug.     
 
           Page 11 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  3 Background and Rationale  
3.1 Introduction  
The dependence of tumor growth and metastasis on angiogenesis has been well 
characterized and has led to exploration of the role of anti -angiogenic  drugs (both small 
molecules and monoclonal antibodies) in the treatment of solid tumors.  Such agents have 
shown promise in both animal models and in preliminary studies of solid carcinomas in 
humans – including SCLC and non -SCLC [1,2].  Among these studie s, three sets of 
investigators have performed preliminary evaluations of thalidomide (an anti -angiogenic 
drug in the IMiD class) in combination with conventional induction chemotherapy and/or as 
mono -therapeutic, post -induction maintenance therapy in subje cts with newly diagnosed 
SCLC [3,4,5].  In each of these studies, some benefit with thalidomide use was detected – an 
increase in median survival (about 3 months overall) and/or 1 - and 2 -year survival relative 
to either parallel administration of or histor ic institutional control using equivalent 
conventional induction chemotherapy alone.  
Recently, the relative roles of enhanced expression/production of the inflammatory 
cytokines, including both cyclooxygenase -2 (COX -2) and tumor necrosis factor -alpha 
(TNF -alpha), in the up -regulation of lung cancer growth, the stimulation of metastasis, the 
inhibition of apoptosis and in the occurrence of paraneoplastic syndromes have been 
identified and investigated [6,7,8].   As a result of in vitro  and in vivo  studies on  lung and 
other carcinomas, inhibition of TNF -alpha and COX -2 have been identified, along with 
inhibition of angiogenesis, as therapeutic targets for limiting the growth, metastasis and 
neuro -endocrine complications of various solid carcinomas.  
The emergen ce of immunomodulatory agents , such as thalidomide, lenalidomide and more 
recently CC -4047 (pomalidomide), as effective therapies has altered the therapeutic 
paradigm for multiple myeloma (MM). Following the approval and establishment of 
thalidomide -contai ning regimens, such as melphalan, prednisone and thalidomide (MPT) 
and Thal/Dex, as the standard first -line therapy for newly diagnosed MM (NDMM), 
lenalidomide in combination with standard high -dose dexamethasone (RD) was approved 
for the treatment of subjects with previously treated MM. However, even with the newly 
approved agents including thalidomide, lenalidomide and proteasome inhibitor such as 
bortezomide, MM remains an incurable disease and most subject s will eventually relapse 
and progress after mul tiple lines of different therapeutic regimens.  
 
In addition, thalidomide, especially when combined with a corticosteroid, is effective in 
other diseases related to AL -amyloid including Waldentrom s macroglobulinemia, 
Castleman disease and POEMS (polyneurit is, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M -protein 
and osteosclerosis) syndrome.  Substantial data indicate thalidomide combined with a 
corticosteroid with or without an alkylating drug is active in newly -diagnosed and 
progressive AL -amyloidosis with responses ra tes of 20 -75 percent.  Preliminary data 
indicate lenalidomide and corticosteroids are active in AL -amyloidosis i ncluding subjects 
failing melpha lan (at all doses) and corticosteroids and also thalidomide and corticosteroids.  
 
           Page 12 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15   
3.2 Pomalidomide  
Pomalidomide , a thalidomide analogue, is an immun e-modulatory agent that , among other 
anti-tumor properties, on an equimolar basis in vitro , displays equivalent anti -angiogenic 
activity, about 8 -fold greater activity in stimulation of apoptosis, at least 10 -fold greater 
activity in inhibition of cellular COX -2 production and over 4,000 -fold greater activity in 
inhibition of cellular TNF -alpha production relative to thalidomide [9,10].   Pomalidomide  
has also been shown to stimulate antibody -dependent cytotoxic T -cell acti vity (ADCC) [9].   
At tolerated doses (MTD = 2 mg QD and 5 mg QOD), pomalidomide  has been shown to be 
active in subjects with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma (MM) (study CC -4047 -00-
001) [9,11,12].  In 45 subjec ts who received doses of pomalidomide  ranging, by cohort, up 
to 10 mg daily, the most commonly occurring dose -limiting toxicity (DLT) was reversible 
neutropenia.  As with other IMiDs administered to subjects receiving concomitant systemic 
steroids, deep vein thrombosis (DVT) was seen (in 1subj ect each in this study and in its 
subsequent named subject  supply rollover program) [9,13].  
Recently, preliminary efficacy and safety data from an ongoing phase II study, led by 
Martha Lacy, et al, at Mayo Clinic, were published [14].  Sixty subject s with relapsed or 
refractory multiple myeloma were enrolled.  Pomalidomide (CC -4047) was given orally at a 
dose of 2 mg daily on days 1 -28 of a 28 -day cycle and dexamethasone was given orally at a 
dose of 40 mg daily on days 1, 8, 15, 22 of each cycle.  Subject  also received aspirin 325 mg 
once daily for thromboprophylaxis.  The study endpoints were the response rate in subject s 
taking pomalidomide plus dexamethasone including subject s with lenalidomide resistant 
refractory multiple myeloma, and safety of pomalid omide plus dexamethasone. Responses 
were recorded using the criteria of the International Myeloma Working Group. Thirty eight 
subject s achieved objective response (63%) including CR in 3 subject s (5%), VGPR in 17 
subject s (28%), and PR in 18 subject s (30%) .   The CR + VGPR rate was 33%.  Grade 3 or 
4 hematologic toxicity occurred in 23 subject s (38%) and consisted of anemia in three 
subject s (5%), thrombocytopenia in two subject s (3%) and neutropenia in 21 (35%).  
Among those that developed grade 3/4 neutro penia, all first experienced the neutropenia in 
cycle 1 -3; no new subject s experienced grade 3/4 neutropenia in cycle 4 or later.  The most 
common non -hematological grade 3/4 toxicities were fatigue (17%) and pneumonia (8%).  
Other grade 3/4 non -hematologi cal toxicities that occurred in less than 5% included 
diarrhea, constipation, hyperglycemia, and neuropathy.  One subject  (1.6%) had a 
thromboembolic event of deep vein thrombosis.   
Similarly , pre-clinical data and the prior experience with thalidomide an d lenalidomide in 
the treatment of subject s with myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia (MMM) provide the 
rationale for the use of pomalidomide in subject s with MMM. This is further supported by 
the results of a Celgene sponsored trial (MMM -001) which indic ated that pomalidomide 
therapy at 0.5 mg or 2 mg/day +/ - an abbreviated course of prednisone is well tolerated in 
subject s with myelofibrosis and active in the treatment of anemia  [15]. 
 
 
           Page 13 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Pomalidomide  has been studied in AL  amyloidosis at the Mayo clinic. Thirty -one subjects 
with previously -treated AL amyloidosis are enrolled and the data on 29 evaluable  subject s 
were presented at ASH meeting in December 2010. Overall hematologic response rate is 
38% with 8 subject s achieving PR and 3 VGPR, including subjec ts failing prior 
lenalidomide and/or thalidomide. One year overall and progression free survival are 77% 
and 56% respectively. Twenty one of 29 subject s experienced > grade -3 AEs possibly 
attributed to treatment. The conclusions were that pomalidomide cou ld provide a safe and 
effective therapy in previously treated subject s with AL amyloidosis, including those failing 
lenalidomide and/or thalidomide.  
Complete and updated adverse events are available in the Investigational Drug Brochure and 
the IND Safety Letters.  
3.3 Rational e 
AL amyloidosis is a variant plasma cell disorder in which clonal bone marrow plasma cells 
produce immunoglobulin light chains that misfold into fibrils that are deposited in visceral 
organs, leading to organ dysfunction and failure.  Unt reated, the disease has a median 
survival of only about one year. Oral treatment with melphalan and dexamethasone 
produces improvement in survival, with hematologic remissions and improvement in organ 
function. Aggressive treatment with high dose intraveno us melphalan with autologous stem 
cell transplantation (HDM/SCT) produces complete hematologic responses (CR) in about 
40% of subject s and partial responses in a similar proportion; these are frequently 
accompanied by stabilization or improvement in organ function. Unfortunately only about 
half of referred subject s are eligible for HDM/SCT. Furthermore, it has been observed by us 
as well as other groups that achievement of a hematologic complete response after treatment 
with oral melphalan and dexamethasone  as well as HDM/SCT is associated with improved 
survival, QOL, and clinical/organ response. Thus, we continue to seek more effective 
regimens for subject s ineligible for aggressive treatment with HDM/SCT or not achieving a 
complete hematologic response to HDM/SCT or other modalities.  
 
The advent of novel agents in the treatment of multiple myeloma has changed the 
therapeutic landscape of plasma cell dyscrasias. Thalidomide has been studied as a single 
agent and in combination with dexamethasone for the tre atment of AL amyloidosis . 
Unfortunately, thalidomide is poorly tolerated with 50 -65% of subject s experiencing grade 3 
and 4 toxicities, leading to drug withdrawal in approximately half of the subject s. 
 
We are concluding a phase II study of lenalidomide al one and in combination with 
dexamethasone for subject s with AL amyloidosis. This study included untreated as well as 
relapsed subject s after HDM/SCT. Interim analysis of the first 34 subject s suggests 
achievement of a complete hematologic response CR in ~3 0% subject s and of partial 
hematologic response in ~40% subject s, with most responses occurring with the 
lenalidomide/dexamethasone combination. A variety of toxicities have been observed, 
including leukopenia, rash, venous thrombosis, and intolerance to t he dexamethasone. This 
report indicated better tolerability than thalidomide, however, 20% of subject s still stopped 
treatment with lenalidomide due to toxicities. We have extended our study to subject s on 
dialysis, using attenuated doses, with good prelim inary results. A study using lenalidomide 
           Page 14 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  in combination with melphalan and dexamethasone is ongoing; this study is not suitable for 
subject s with significant prior exposure to alkylator agent.  
 
Pomalidomide (CC4047), a third generation immunomodulatory a gent, has shown 
promising activity in phase II trial in combination with low -dose dexamethasone for 
relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma as well as AL amyloidosis. Furthermore, responses 
were seen in 50% of subject s who were refractory to prior IMiD in AL amyloidosis.  
 
Given these promising results of pomalidomide in plasma cell dyscrasia, we propose a study 
of pomalidomide and low dose dexamethasone in the treatment of subject s with previously 
treated AL  amyloidosis.  
4 Study Objectives and Endpoints  
4.1 Objectives  
4.1.1 Primary objectives  
 Determine  dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) and the maximal tolerated dose (MTD) of 
pomalidomide combin ed with dexamethasone in subject s with previousl y- treated 
light-chain (AL) -amyloidosis  
4.1.2 Secondary objectives  
 Determine the followin g at the MTD:  
 Hematological complete (CR) very good partial (VGPR ) and partial 
(PR) rate s 
 duration of response  
 organ response  
 Time –to-event  
 Survival  
4.1.3 Exploratory study objectives  
 To investigate the relationship of changes in the levels of the biomarkers BNP  and 
troponin  I to frequency of specific adverse events and the occurrence of DLT  
4.2 Endpoints  
4.2.1 Primary Endpoint  
 Maximum t olerated dose  
           Page 15 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  4.2.2 Secondary Endpoints  
 Hematological CR and PR  
 Response -duration  
 Organ response  
 Time –to-event  
 Survival  
4.2.3 Exploratory study Endpo int 
 The relationship of changes in the levels of the biomarkers BNP and troponin  I to 
frequency of specific adverse events and the occurrence of DLT  
5 Investigational Plan  
5.1 Overall design  
 
STUDY DESIGN:  
Phase  I/II dose-escalation study of pomalidomide and dex amethasone in persons with 
previously -treated AL -amyloidosis.  During the Phase I  portion the MTD will be determined 
based on DLT in the first cycle.  At the MTD an expanded cohort of 12 subjects will be 
evaluated to estimate efficacy.  
The study includes a  screening period, a treatment (dose escalation) period, and a follow -up 
period for survival.  After giving written informed consent, subjects will be evaluated for 
eligibility for enrollment in the study and baseline evaluations will be performed.  Subjec ts 
who satisfy all inclusion and exclusion criteria will begin study drug treatment with dose 
escalation.  Standard dose escalation rules will be used.  
Subjects will be monitored every cycle for safety, hematological status, and organ function 
during thera py or until the occurrence of progressive disease (PD).   
Treatment Group Assignments and Subject  Replacement  
This is a dose -escalation study and dose escalation will proceed through 3 dose -levels 
according to standard rules in which dose levels are starte d sequentially after complete 
evaluation of the occurrence of DLT.  Based on the dose escalation scheme, as many as 30 
subjects could be enrolled in the study.  Subjects who discontinue pomalidomide for reasons 
other than DLT before completing at least 2 t reatment cycles are to be replaced.  
Subpopulations  
An additional 12 subjects will be enrolled in an expanded cohort for analysis of efficacy at 
each schedule studied.  
Subjects in this cohort will be treated at the dose defined as the MTD for that schedule.  
           Page 16 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Schema : 
Phase  I: 
Pomalidomide 2 mg/day D1 -21 – dose escalation to 4 mg/day by 1 mg units * 
Dexamethasone 10 -20 mg D1, 8, 15, 22  
 
* Pomalidomide dosing for Phase I cohorts 1 and 2 given on days 1 -28 of a 28 -day cycle and changed to Days 
1-21 of a 28 day cyc le with Cohort 3.  
 
This cycle will be repeated every 28 days.  
 
Subjects will take aspirin 325 mg/day to prevent venous thrombosis whilst on -study.   
A proton pump inhibitor will be used for GI prophylaxis.  
 
Phase  II: 
 
Pomalidomide [MTD] mg/day D1 -21  
Dexame thasone 10 -20 mg D1, 8, 15, 22  
 
This cycle will be repeated every 28 days.  
 
Subjects will take aspirin 325 mg/day for prophylaxis against venous thrombosis while on 
study.  A proton pump inhibitor will be used for GI prophylaxis.  
      
Subject s will have a toxicity evaluation, physical examination, and blood work performed 
according to schedule 2 while on therapy before each cycle. All subject s will return to 
Boston Medical Center prior to each of the first 3 cycles of therapy.  The screening 
evaluation cove rs this requirement for cycle 1. A full disease evaluation will be performed 
at Boston Medical Center after every three cycles to determine response to treatment. 
Following cycle 3, subject s that are stable, may return every three months.  Only one month 
of study drug may be supplied at a time for each cycle.  A complete study calendar can be 
found in Section 2. Interim CBC may be performed locally.  All results will be transmitted 
to the Clinical Trials Office for review.  
5.1.1 Investigational Drug  
5.1.1.1  Pomalidomide  
Pomalidomide , 4-amino -2-(2,6-dioxo -3-piperidyl)isoindoline -1’-one)-1,3-dione, belongs to 
the IMiDs class of compounds.  The Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) registry number for 
CC-4047 is 19171 -19-8.  The chemical structure of the active pharmaceutical ing redient 
(API) is as follows:  
           Page 17 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  
 
Pomalidomide  has an asymmetric carbon atom and can therefore exist as the optically active  
forms S ( -) and R (+).  Pomalidomide  is being developed as a racemate .  
5.1.1.2  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY  
Mechanism of Action:  
Pomalidomide  is an IMiD analogue of thalidomide that, among other anti -tumor properties, 
on an equimolar basis in vitro, displays equivalent anti -angiogenic activity, about 8 -fold 
greater activity in stimulation of apoptosis, at least 10 -fold greater activity in inhibition  of 
cellular COX -2 production and over 4,000 -fold greater activity in inhibition of cellular 
TNF -alpha production relative to thalidomide [9,10].   Pomalidomide  has also been shown 
to stimulate antibody -dependent cytotoxic T -cell activity (ADCC) [11].   
5.1.1.3  Dose and tolerability : 
Pomalidomide was safe at doses of up to 50 mg in a Phase I  single dose study in normal, 
healthy male volunteers and up to 5 mg QOD or 2 mg QD in a Phase I  multidose clinical 
study in subjects with relapsed or refractory multiple myelom a; DLTs seen in subjects 
receiving higher doses were predominantly hematopoetic (i.e., neutropenia), and lower 
grade, self -limited neutropenia was also seen in some of the 1 and 2 mg QD and 5 mg QOD 
recipients. In a multidose, Phase II  clinical study of su bjects with prostate cancer, 2 mg QD 
dosing was well tolerated and, unlike the multiple myeloma subjects who received 1 and 2 
mg QD doses, only an overall shift to lower neutrophil counts was noted. No clinically 
relevant neutropenic AEs were observed, and  no grade 3 or 4 neutropenic events occurred. It 
is, therefore, likely that subjects with solid tumors that do not extensively involve the bone 
marrow will have a higher pomalidomide  MTD than subjects with hematologic 
malignancies.  
5.1.1.4  Supplier(s)  
Celgene Corp oration will  supply pomalidomide . 
5.1.1.5  Dosage form  
Pomalidomide  will be supplied as 1.0  mg and 2.0 mg capsules for oral administration.   
           Page 18 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  5.1.1.6  Packaging  
Pomalidomide  will be shipped to the pharmacy at the study site in individual bottles.   
Bottles will contain a su fficient number of capsules to last for one cycle  of dosing. Study 
drug must be dispensed in the original packaging with the label clearly visible .  . 
5.1.1.7  Labeling  
Pomalidomide  investigational suppli es are dispensed to the subject s in individual bottles of 
capsules.  Each bottle will identify the contents as study medication.  In addition, the label 
will bear Celgene’s name, quantity contained and the standard caution statement as follows:  
Caution: New drug - Limited by Federal law to investigational use. Poma lidomide should 
not be handled by FCBP unless wearing gloves.  All bottles will contain the following 
warning label:  “WARNING: POTENTIAL FOR HUMAN BIRTH DEFECTS.”  
 The study drug label must be clearly visible .  Additional labels must not cover the Celgene  
label.  
5.1.1.8  Receipt of study drug  
The Investigator or designee is responsible for taking an inventory of each shipment of 
study drug received, and comparing it with the accompanying study drug accountability 
form.  The Investigator will verify the accuracy of the information on the form, sign and 
date it, retain a copy in the study file, and return a copy to Celgene or its representative.   
5.1.1.9  Storage  
At the study site, all investigational study drugs will be stored in a locked, safe area to 
prevent unauthorized a ccess.  
The study drug should be stored at room temperature away from direct sunlight and 
protected from excessive heat and cold.  
5.1.1.10  Unused study drug supplies  
Celgene will instruct the Investigator on the return or destruction of unused study drug.  If 
any st udy drug is lost or damaged, its disposition should be documented in the source 
documents.  Study drug supplies will be retained at the clinical site pending instructions for 
disposition by Celgene.  Subject s will be instructed to return empty bottles or u nused 
capsules.   
5.1.1.11  Drug dispensing requirements  
Pomalidomide (POMALYST®) will be provided to research subjects for the duration of 
their participation in this trial at no charge to them or their insurance providers.  
Pomalidomide will be provided in accorda nce with the  Celgene Corporation’s 
POMALYST REMS™  program.  Per the standard   POMALYST REMS™ program 
requirements, all physicians who prescribe pomalidomide for research subjects enrolled into 
this trial, and all research subjects enrolled into this tri al, must be registered in and must 
comply with all requirements of the POMALYST REMS™ program.   
           Page 19 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Drug will be shipped on a per patient basis by the contract pharmacy to the clinic site for 
IND studies. Only enough pomalidomide for one cycle of therapy will  be supplied to the 
patient each cycle.  This is in accordance with the POMALYST REMS™ program.  
5.1.1.12  Dexamethasone (Decadron ) 
 
We will be using the oral formulation, which is available from any pharmacy.  Each 
tablet, for oral administration, contain s 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 0.75 mg, 1.5 mg, 4 mg or 6 mg of 
dexamethasone.  
 
Dexamethasone (Decadron) is a synthetic adrenocortical steroid and is readily absorbed 
from the gastrointestinal tract.  Chemically, dexamethasone is 9 -fluoro -11b, 17, 21 -
trihydroxy -16a-methyl-pregna -1, 4-diene -3, 20 -dione.  
5.2 Screening and Eligibility  
The Investigator is responsible for keeping a record of all subjects who sign an Informed 
Consent Form for entry into the study.  All subjects will be screened for eligibility.  
Screening proced ures are outlined in Section 2, Schedule of Study Assessments and unless 
otherwise specified, must take place within 28 days prior to initiation of therapy.  
Approximately 30 subjects with previously treated AL  amyloidosis  will be screened for 
enrollment a nd must meet the eligibility criteria below.  
 
Pregnancy Testing    
Must follow pregnancy testing requirements as outlined in the POMALYST REMS™ 
program.  
5.2.1 Inclusion Criteria  
Subjects must meet the following inclusion/exclusion criteria to be eligible for the  study.  
Inclusion criteria  
1. Understand and voluntarily sign an informed consent form.  
2. Age 18 years at the time of signing the informed consent form.  
3. Able to adhere to the study visit schedule and other protocol requirements.  
4. Biopsy proven tissue amyloid d eposits or positive fat aspirate  
5. Proof of AL type (either a or b suffices)  
6. Measurable plasma cell dyscrasia ( a or b ) AND  c of the following required:  
a. Monoclonal protein in the serum or urine by immun ofixation electrophoresis  
b. Plasmacytosis of bone marrow (< 30% plasma cells ) with monoclonal 
staining for kappa or lambda light -chain isotype  
           Page 20 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  c. dFLC > 50 mg/L (dFLC=difference in involved and uninvolved serum free 
light-chain levels)  
7. Must have received ≥1 prior treatment for AL amyloidosis, i f it is intensive 
chemotherapy and an autotransplant it must be at least 3 -6 months prior to 
enrollment on this study  
8. Subject s must have recovered from the reversible side effects of any prior therapy; 
permanent and stable side effects/changes are acceptable. Prior treatment for AL 
amyloidosis with chemotherapy, thalidomide, lenalidomide or steroids is not an 
exclusion.  
9. SWOG  performance status of  2 at study entry (see Appendix 2). 
10. Laboratory test results within thes e ranges:  
d. Neutrophil  1.5 x10e9/L ; 
e. Platelet s 100x10e9/L ; 
f. Total bilirubin < 1.5 mg/dL  
g. AST (SGOT) and ALT (SGPT) < 2 x ULN  
h. Serum creatinine < 3.0 mg/dL  
11. Disease free of prior malignancies for  5 years with exception of currently treated 
basal cell, squamo us cell carcinoma of the skin, or carcinoma “in -situ” of the cervix 
or breast .  
12. Females of childbearing potential (FCBP)† must have a negative serum or urine 
pregnancy test with a sensitivity of at least 50 mIU/mL within 10–14 days prior to 
and again withi n 24 hours of starting pomalidomide  and must either commit to 
continued abstinence from heterosexual intercourse or begin TWO acceptable 
methods of birth control, one highly effective method and one additional effective 
method AT THE SAME TIME, at least 28 days before she starts taking 
pomalidomide .  FCBP must also agree to ongoing pregnancy testing.  Men must 
agree to use a latex condom during sexual contact with a FCBP even if they have 
had a vasectomy .  All subject s must be counseled at a minimum of ever y 28 days 
about pregnancy precautions and risks of fetal exposure. See Appendix: 1 Risks of 
Fetal Exposure, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines and Acceptable Birth Control 
Methods, AND also Appendix 1:  Education and Counseling Guidance Document.  
                                                
 † A female of childbearing potential is a  sexually mature woman who: 1) has  not undergone a 
hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy; or 2) has not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 
consecutive months (i.e., has had menses at any time in the preceding 24 consecutive months).  
  
           Page 21 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  13. Able to take as pirin (81 or 325 mg) daily as prophylactic anticoagulation  (subject s 
intolerant to ASA may use warfarin or low molecular weight heparin  or direct factor 
Xa inhibitors or newer anticoagulants, per preference of the patient and investigator ). 
14. All study parti cipants must be registered into the mandatory POMALYST REMS™ 
program, and be willing and able to comply with the requirements of the 
POMALYST REMS™ program.  
5.2.2 Exclusion criteria   
1. Subject s with secondary or familial amyloidosis  
2. Subject s with multiple myeloma  (≥30% plasma cells in a bone marrow biopsy 
specimen or lytic bone lesions)  
3. Cytotoxic chemotherapy or radiation therapy ≤4 weeks of initiation of study therapy.  
4. Subject s with symptomatic cardiac arrhythmias or O 2-dependent restrictive 
cardiomyopathy  
5. Dialy sis-dependent  
6. Subject s with untreated or uncontrolled infections.  
7. Any serious medical condition, laboratory abnormality, or psychiatric illness that 
would prevent the subject from signing the informed consent form.  
8. Pregnant or breast feeding females. (Lact ating females must agree not to breast feed 
while taking pomalidomide).  
9. Any condition, including the presence of laboratory abnormalities, which places the 
subject at unacceptable risk if he/she were to participate in the study or confounds 
the ability to interpret data from the study.  
10. Use of any other experimental drug or therapy within 28 days of initiation of study 
therapy . 
11. Known intolerance to steroids.  
12. Known hypersensitivity to thalidomide or lenalidomide.  
           Page 22 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  13. The development of erythema nodosum if charact erized by a desquamating rash 
while taking thalidomide or similar drugs.  
14. Concurrent use of other anti -cancer agents or treatments.  
15. Known HIV positivity is not an exclusion, unless CD4 counts < 200/mcL and/or 
patient has multi -drug resistant HIV infections a nd/or other concurrent AIDS -
defining conditions.  HIV b -DNA < 75 copies/mL.    
5.3 Visit schedule and assessments  
Screening Assessments and all on study scheduled visits and assessments are outlined in 
Section 2 Table of Study Assessments.  
 
At treatment discon tinuation, subjects will undergo off study evaluations per the Schedule 
of Assessments, Section 2.   In addition, a safety assessment will be done approximately 30 
days post the last dose of study drug.  Follow -Up contact with the subjects should occur at a 
minimum of every 3 months until progression, then annually.  
5.4 Drug Administration  
5.4.1  Treatment assignments  
The Phase I portion of the study will be aimed at determining the safety profile and the 
MTD of Pomalidomide. A 3+3 dose escalation scheme will be  implemented. Subject s will 
receive escalating doses of Pomalidomide orally on D1 -21 in a 28 -day cycle * in the absence 
of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. DLTs will be assessed in Cycle 1 only. 
Dose escalation of Pomalidomide will continue unt il MTD has been identified or a 
maximum planned dose (4 mg/day D1 -21) is determined to be safe.  
 
* Pomalidomide dosing for Phase I cohorts 1 and 2 given on days 1 -28 of a 28 -day cycle and changed to Days 
1-21 of a 28 day cycle with Cohort 3.  
 
The Phase II portion of the study will begin after determination of the MTD and evaluation 
of the safety profile at the MTD in at least 6 subject s. The dose for administration will be 
informed by the results of the Phase I portion of the study. In the Phase II, eligibl e subject s 
will receive Pomalidomide at the MTD or the maximum planned dose from D1 -21.  
Once the MTD is defined  during Phase I, patients currently receiving treatment may discuss  
the option with the treating investigator to continue on their current dose,  or increase to the 
MTD , if they have not achieved a complete response.  
 
5.4.2  Dosing regimen  
The initial planned dose of pomalidomide  for investigation is 2 mg/day, orally on days 1 - 
21 (28 day cycle). *  Dosing will be in the evening at approximately the  same time each day , 
           Page 23 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  either 2 hours before or 2 hours after food ingestion .  Participants will be instructed to avoid 
smoking, as smoking can decrease the efficacy of pomalidomide.  Only enough 
pomalidomide  for one cycle of therapy will be supplied to the subject  each cycle.  
 
* Pomalidomide dosing for Phase I cohorts 1 and 2 given on days 1 -28 of a 28 -day cycle and changed to Days 
1-21 of a 28 day cycle with Cohort 3.  
The planned dose levels of Pomalidomide  are presented below in Table 15-1 table.  
 
Table 15-1 Planned Study Drug Doses  
Dose 
Group  Pomalidomide 
Dose (mg/dose)  Enrollment (Number of Subject s) 
Initial  Additional  
(if 1 of Initial 3 has DLT)  Expanded at 
MTDa 
 
1 2 3b 3 
12 2 3 3 3 
3 4 3 3 
a. Twelve additional subject s are to be enrolled in an expanded cohort for analysis of 
efficacy and treated at the MTD for each dosing schedule.  
b. If the first 2 subject s enrolled experience DLT then this c ohort is closed and further 
subject s will be evaluated at 1mg/day dose and the cohort expanded at that dose.  
The dose escalation rules will follow the standard Fibonacci method . 
           Page 24 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Dose escalation algorithm  
 
At least 3 subject s are to be enrolled in  each dose group, beginning with the 2  mg/dose.  
Within each dose group, 3 subject s are to complete at least 2 treatment cycles.  It is noted 
that if the first 2 subject s in the first cohort develop DLT, then the cohort at the 1 mg/dose 
dose will be define d as the MTD.  
Dose escalation within a cohort is not allowed.  
If after all 3 subject s complete 1 treatment cycle:  
No subject  experiences DLT, then enrollment at the next planned dose level may 
commence.  
One subject  experiences DLT, then 3 additional subjec ts are to be enrolled at the current 
dose level.  
If 1 of 6 subject s experiences DLT, then enrollment at the next planned dose level 
may commence.  
If 2 or more of 6 subject s experience DLT, then the previous dose is declared the 
MTD.   
           Page 25 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Two or more subject s experience DLT, then the previous dose is declared the MTD.   
Dose escalation continues through the 3 dose levels in order to define the MTD 
based on the occurrence of DLT in the first cycle.  Definitions of DLT and MTD 
are as follows:  
DLT  Based on the fir st cycle; toxicity considered by the investigator to be related to 
Pomalidomide; Grade 4 thrombocytopenia or neutropenia;  Grade 3 non -
hematologic toxicity  
MTD  The dose level at which DLT occurs in no more than 1 of 6 subject s (ie, the 
dose level below that at which DLT was established).  
 
Subject s will take aspirin 325 mg/day to prevent  venous thrombosis while on 
pomalidomide .  
A proton pump inhibitor will be used for GI prophylaxis.  
Pomalidomide  capsules should be swallowed  whole , and should not be bro ken, chewed or 
opened.   Pomalidomide should be taken without food, at least 2 hours before or 2 hours 
after a meal.  
If a dose of pomalidomide  is missed, it should be taken as soon as possible on the same  day.  
If it is missed for the entire day, it should  not be made up , rather it should be taken as usual 
at the next scheduled time . 
Subject s who take more th an the prescribed dose of pomalidomide  should be instructed to 
seek emergency medical care if needed and contact study staff immediately.   
Subjects ex periencing adverse events may need study treatment modifications (See section 
5.5). 
5.4.3  Special Handling Instructions  
Females of childbearing potential should not handle or administer pomalidomide  unless they 
are wearing gloves.  
5.4.4  Record of administr ation  
Accurate records will be kept of all study drug administration (including dispensing and 
dosing) will be made in the source documents.   
5.5 Dose Continuation, Modification and Interruption     
Subjects will be evaluated for AEs at each visit with the NCI  CTCAE v4 .0 (Appendix 3: 
NCI CTCAE v4. 0) used as a guide for the grading of severity.  Refer to Sections 6.5.1, 6.5.2 
           Page 26 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  and 6.5.3 for instruction s on beginning  a new cycle of therapy and dose -modifications 
during a cycle of therapy.    
 
5.5.1  Dose -Modificat ion Guidelines  
During the study, the focus of the evaluations is on the assessment of toxicity to document  
the occurrence of DLT. Although DLTs may occur at any point during treatment, only  
DLTs occurring during Cycle 1 of treatment must influence decision s regarding dose -
escalation,  expansion of a dose level, or evaluation of intermediate dose levels. However,  
DLTs occurring in later cycles may be taken into consideration for dose -escalation  
decisions, at the discretion of the investigators. Unless a DLT i s documented  to have 
occurred, no dose modification is allowed during Cycle 1.  
 
In the event that a patient experiences DLT during  Cycle 1, treatment should be held and the 
event will be counted toward the assessment of  MTD for the given cohort. Patients 
experiencing DLTs in Cycle 1 may be restarted  following recovery from toxicity at the 
discretion of the investigator according to the  guidelines provided in Section  5.5.2. If a 
decision is made to restart  study  therapy following a DLT, the pomalidomide  dose must be 
reduced 1 dose level.  The patient will be evaluated weekly for possible toxicities that may 
have occurred after the  previous dose(s). If multiple toxicities are noted, the dose 
adjustments and/or delays  should be made according to the most severe  toxicity guidelines.  
5.5.2  Dose -Reduction Steps  
Dose -reduction steps are below:  
 
Table 1: Pomalidomide  Dose Reduction Steps  for Phase I and II 
 
Starting Dose  MTD (as determined in Phase I portion)  mg 
daily on Days 1 -28 every 28 days  
 
Dose Level – 1 Decreas e by 1  mg daily  from MTD  on Days 1 -21 
every 28 days * 
Dose Level – 2 Decrease by 2 mg daily from MTD on Days 1 -21 
every 28 days * 
Dose Level – 3 Decrease by 3 mg daily from MTD on Days 1 -21 
every 28 days * 
* Pomalidomide dosing for Phase I cohorts 1 and 2 given on days 1 -28 of a 28 -day cycle and changed to Days 
1-21 of a 28 day cycle with Cohort 3.  
 
Table 2: DEXAMETHASONE Dose Reduction Steps  for Phase I and II  
Starting Dose  20 mg QD once weekly every 28 days   
 
Dose Level –1 10 mg QD once weekly ever y 28 days    
Dose Level –2 4 mg QD once weekly every 28 days    
 
           Page 27 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Dosing will be adjusted as needed by study investigators as outlined in the tables in Section 
5.5.3.   If dexamethasone is permanently discontinued, the patient will continue with single 
agent  Pomalidomide.  
 
5.5.3 Instruction s for initiation of a New Cycle  
A new course of treatment may begin on the scheduled Day 1 of a new cycle if:  
 The ANC is ≥ 1,000 /mm³;  
 The platelet count is ≥  50,000 /mm³;  
 Any pomalidomide -related rash, neuropathy or cardiac event  that may have occurred 
has resolved to ≤ grade 1 severity;  
 Any other pomalidomide -related adverse event s that may have occurred have 
resolved to ≤ grade 2 severity.  .     
 
If these conditions are not met on Day 1 of a new cycle, the subject will be evaluated 
weekly and a new cycle of treatment will not be initiated until the toxicity has resolved as 
described above.  If pomalidomide  dosing was held during the previous cycle and was 
restarted with a one -level dose reduction without requiring an interruption for the remainder 
of the cycle, then that reduced dose level will be initiated on Day 1 of the new cycle. If 
pomalidomide  dosing was omitted due t o an attributable toxicity (see table 3) for the 
remainder of the previous cycle or if the new cycle is delayed due to attributable 
toxicity newly encountered on the scheduled Day 1 , then the new cycle will be started 
with a one -level dose reduction  of pom alidomide .  If pomalidomide is permanently 
discontinued, the subject  will be removed from study.   If dexamethasone is permanently 
discontinued, the subject  may continue on single -agent pomalidomide.    
5.5.4  Instructions for dose modifications or interrupt ions during a cycle.  
 
 
           Page 28 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Table 3: Pomalidomide Dose Modification s for toxicities attributable to Pomalidomide   
NCI CTC AE Toxicity 
Grade  Onset Day 2 -14 of Cycle  Onset ≥ Day 15 of Cycle 
Grade 3 neutropenia 
associated with fever 
(temperature ≥ 38.5º C) 
or Gra de 4 neutropenia  ¥  Hold (interrupt ) pomalidomide  
dose.  
 Follow CBC weekly.  
 If neutropenia has resolved to ≤ 
grade 2 prior to Day 21, restart 
pomalidomide  at next lower dose 
level and continue the cycle.   If 
neutropenia is the only toxicity for 
which a dose reduction is 
required. G -CSF may be used 
and the pomalidomide  dose 
maintained  ¥  Omit pomalidomide  for remainder 
of cycle  
 See Instructions for Initiation of a 
New Cycle and  reduce the dose of 
pomalidomide  by 1 dose level.   If 
neutropenia is the only toxicit y for 
which a dose reduction is 
required. G -CSF may be used and 
the pomalidomide  dose 
maintained for the next cycle at 
the investigators discretion. ¥ 
Thrombocytopenia 
≥Grade 3 (platelet count 
< 50,000/mm ³)  Hold (interrupt)  pomalidomide  
dose . 
 Follow CBC weekly  
 Hold prophylactic anticoagulation 
for thrombocytopenia (grade 3 or 
4) or bleeding. Prophylactic 
anticoagulation can be resumed 
when platelet count >50k ( <2 
grade) and no sign of bleeding.  
 If thrombocyto penia resolves to ≤ 
grade 2 prior to Day 21, restart 
pomalidomide  at next lower dose 
level and continue the cycle.  
  Omit pomalidomide  for remainder 
of cycle  
 See Instructions for Initiation of a 
New Cycle and reduce th e dose of 
pomalidomide  by 1 dose level.  
 Hold prophylactic anticoagulation 
for thrombocytopenia (grade 3 or 
4) or bleeding. Prophylactic 
anticoagulation can be resumed 
when platelet count >50k ( <2 
grade) and no sign of bleeding.  
Non-blistering rash  
Grade 3  
 
 
 
 
             Grade 4   If Grade 3 , hold (interrupt) 
pomalidomide  dose.  Follow 
weekly.  
 If the toxicity resolves to ≤ grade 
1 prior to Day 21 , restart 
pomalidomide  at next lower dose 
level and continue the cycle.  
 
 
 
 Discontinue pomalidomide .  
Remove subject  from study.   Omit pomalidomide  for remainder 
of cycle.   
 See Instructions for Initiation of a 
New Cycle and reduce t he dose of 
pomalidomide by 1 dose level.  
 
 Discontinue pomalidomide .  
Remove subject  from study.  
Desquamating 
(blistering) rash - any 
Grade   Discontinue pomalidomide .  
Remove subject  from study.   Discontinue pomalidomide .  
Remove subject  from study.  
Neuropa thy 
 
Grade 3 
 
 
 
 
Grade 4  
  Hold (interrupt) pomalidomide  
dose.  Follow at least weekly.  
 If the toxicity resolves to ≤ grade 
1 prior to Day 21 , restart 
pomalidomide  at next lower dose 
level and continue the cycle.  
 
 
 
 Discontinue pomalidomide .  
Remove subject  from study.   Omit pomalidomide  for the 
remainder of the cycle.  
 See Instructions for Initiation of a 
New Cycle and reduce the dose of 
pomalidomide  by 1 dose level.  
 
 Discontinue pomalidomide .  
Remove subject  from study.  
           Page 29 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Table 3: Pomalidomide Dose Modification s for toxicities attributable to Pomalidomide   
NCI CTC AE Toxicity 
Grade  Onset Day 2 -14 of Cycle  Onset ≥ Day 15 of Cycle 
Venous 
thrombosis/embolism  
≥ Grade 3   Hold (interrupt) pomalidomide  
and start anticoagulation; restart 
pomalidomide  at investigator’s 
discretion (maintai n dose level).   Omit pomalidomide  for remainder 
of cycle. See Anticoagulation 
Consideration (S ection 5.6.1.2 ) 
other non -hematologic 
toxicity ≥ Grade 3   Hold (interrupt) pomalidomide  
dose.  Follow at least weekly.  
 If the toxicity resolves to ≤ grade 
2 prior to Day 21 , restart 
pomalidomide  at next lower dose 
level and continue the cycle.   Omit pomalidomide  for remainder 
of cycle.   
 See Instructions for Initiation of a 
New Cycle and reduce the dose of 
pomalidomide  by 1 dose level.  
 
Hyperthyroidism or 
hypothyroid ism  
≥ Grade  2  Omit pomalidomide  for remainder 
of cycle, evaluate etiology, and 
initiate appropriate therapy.  
 If the toxicity resolves to ≤ grade 
1 prior to Day 21, restart 
pomalidomide at next lower dose 
level and continue the cycle.   Omit pomalidomide  for rem ainder 
of cycle, evaluate etiology, and 
initiate appropriate therapy.  
 See Instructions for Initiation of a 
New Cycle and reduce the dose of 
pomalidomide  by 1 dose level.  
Any attributable or non -
attributable 
hospitalization or 
toxicity grade < 2  Pomalidom ide may be held or 
continued at the discretion of the 
treating investigator.   
 
 Once resumed , maintain dose 
level.  Pomalidomide  may be held or 
continued at the discretion of the 
treating investigator.   
 If held , see Instructions for 
Initiation of a New Cyc le and  
maintain  dose level.  
 
¥ As stated in the table, pomalidomide should be held for occurrence of grade 3 
neutropenia with fever or grade 4 neutropenia  attributable to Pomalidomide . Follow 
CBC weekly.  
If neutropenia has resolved to ≤ grade 2 prior to  Day 21, restart pomalidomide at next 
lower dose level and continue the cycle.   If neutropenia is the only toxicity for which a 
dose reduction is required, G -CSF may be used and the pomalidomide dose can be 
maintained. In case of second occurrences of Grad e 4 neutropenia or Grade 3 
neutropenia with fever in the setting of GCSF, pomalidomide will be held and if 
neutropenia has resolved to ≤ grade 2 prior to Day 21, restart pomalidomide at next 
lower dose level with addition of G -CSF 
 
Dose Modifications for D examethasone  
Table 4: Non -hematological toxicity attributable to dexamethasone  
 Grade 1 -2 Grade 3 -4 
Dyspepsia /  GI Start H2 -blocker or Proton Pump 
Inhibitor if not already on one of 
these.  Hold dexamethasone and start H2 -
blocker or Proton Pump Inhibitor if not 
already on one of these. Once toxicity 
has decreased to Grade 0 -2, resume 
Dex at one dosing level lower with 
continued H2B or PPI. If Grade 3 -4 
toxicity persists for more than 14 
           Page 30 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  days,endoscopy or other UGI 
evaluation is encouraged.  
Edema  May add d iuretic  Decrease dex by one dosing level, and 
add diuretics  
Confusion/Mood Alteration  For Grade 2, decrease 
dexamethasone by one dosing 
level without holding dose  Hold dex until severity decreases to 
Grade 0 -2, then resume dex at next 
lower dosing level.  
Myopathy  For Grade 2 -4, decrease dexamethasone by one dosing level without 
holding dose  
Hyperglycemia  For Grade 2, add oral  
hypoglycemic agents and/or  
insulin to control blood sugar. If 
hyperglycemia not able to be 
easily controlled, decrease 
dexamethaso ne by one dosing 
level without holding dose.  Add oral hypoglycemic agents and/or 
Insulin, and decrease dosing level by  
one. 
 
Other  For Grade 2, decrease 
dexamethasone by one dosing 
level without holding dose  Hold dex until severity decreases to 
Grade 0 -2, then resume dex at next 
lower  
 
 
5.5.3  Treatment compliance  
At all times, when dispensing study drug, research center personnel will review the 
instructions, printed on the packaging, with subjects. Subjects will be asked to maintain a 
diary to record the drug administration. Subjects will be asked to bring any unused study 
drug and empty study drug containers to the research center at their next visit.  Research 
personnel will count and record the number of used and unused study drug capsules at each 
visit and reconcile with the subject  diary.   
5.6 Concomitant therapy    
5.6.1  Recommended concomitant therapy   
Subjects should receive full supportive care, including transfusions of blood and blood 
products, antibiotics, and antiemetics when appropriate.  
 
5.6.1.2  Anti-coagulation Consideration   
Pomalidomide  increases the risk of thrombotic events in subject s who are at high risk or 
with a history a thrombosis, in particular when combined with other drugs known to cause 
thrombosis.  
Subjects will take aspirin 325 mg/day to prevent venous thrombosis while on 
pomalidomide.  Low molecular weight heparin may be utilized in subject s that are intolerant 
to ASA. Coumadin should be used with caution and close monitoring of INR.  
5.6.2  Prohibited concomitant therap ies 
Concomitant use of sargramostim  (GM -CSF), other anti -cancer therapies, including 
radiation, thalidomide, or other investigational agents is not permitted while subjects are 
           Page 31 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  receiving study drug during the treatment phase of the study.   G-CSF is not allowed during 
Phase I, Cycle 1 while evaluating for DLT.  However, G -CSF is allowed  for Phase II 
participants or following cycle 1 for Phase I participants . 
5.7 Discontinuation of Study -Treatment  
Treatment will continue until the occurrence of any of the following events.   
 Disease progression   
 Adverse event(s) that, in the judgment of the Investigator, may cause severe or 
permanent harm or which rule out continuation of the treatment regimen . 
 Major violation of the study protocol.  
 Withdrawal of consent  
 Lost to follow up  
 Death  
 Suspected pregnancy  
 
5.8 Follow -Up   
Subjects who discontinue treatment for any  reason, will be followed every 3 months until 
disease progression, then annually  for survival , as clinically indicated . At treatment 
discontinuation, subjects will undergo a safety assessment app roximately 30 days post the 
last dose of study drug.  In addition off study evaluations per the Schedule of Assessments, 
Section 2 will be done.  
6 Adverse events  
6.1 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Definition  
A serious advers e event is one that at any dose  (includi ng overdose):  
 Results in death  
 Is life -threatening 1 
 Requires in -patient hospitalization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization  
 Results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity 2 
 Is a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
 Is an important medical  event 3 
           Page 32 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15   Suspected positive Pregnancy  
 
 1“Life -threatening” means that the subject was at immediate risk of death at the time of the serious 
adverse event; it does not refer to a serious adverse event that hypothetically might have caused death 
if it were  more severe.  
2“Persistent or significant disability or incapacity” means that there is a substantial disruption of a 
person’s ability to carry out normal life functions.  
3Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether expedited re porting is 
appropriate in situations where none of the outcomes listed above occurred.  Important medical events 
that may not be immediately life -threatening or result in death or hospitalization but may jeopardize 
the subject  or may require intervention t o prevent one of the other outcomes listed in the definition 
above should also usually be considered serious.  Examples of such events include allergic 
bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or 
convulsi ons that do not result in in -patient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.  A new diagnosis of cancer during the course of a treatment should be considered as 
medically important.  
6.2 Adverse Drug Reaction Reporting  
Toxicity wi ll be scored using CTCAE Version 4.0 for toxicity and adverse event reporting .  
A copy of the CTCAE Version 4 .0 can be downloaded from the CTEP homepage 
(HTTP://CTEP.INFO.NIH .GOV ).  All appropriate treatment areas should have access to a 
copy of the CTCAE Version 4.0.  All adverse clinical experiences, whether observed by the 
investigator or reported by the subject , must be recorded, with details about the duration and 
intensity of each episode, the action taken wit h respect to the test drug, and the subject ’s 
outcome.  The investigator must evaluate each adverse experience for its relationship to the 
test drug and for its seriousness.  
 
The investigator must appraise all abnormal laboratory results for their clinical  significance.  
If any abnormal laboratory result is considered clinically significant, the investigator must 
provide details about the action taken with respect to the test drug and about the subject ’s 
outcome.  
 
AEs and SAEs will be reported from the firs t dose of study drug through 30 days after 
administration of the last dose of study drug or the start of subsequent therapy for 
amyloidosis, whichever occurs first. All SAEs should continue to be monitored until they 
are resolved or are clearly determined to be due to a patient’s stable or chronic condition or 
intercurrent illness(es).   
 
Pregnancies  
Pregnancies occurring while the subject is on pomalidomide  or within 4 weeks after the 
subject’s last dose of pomalidomide are considered expedited reportable events.  If the 
subject is on pomalidomide , it is to be discontinued immediately and the subject is to be 
instructed to return any unused portion of pomalidomide  to the Investigator.  The pregnancy 
must be reported to Celgene Corporation Worldwide Drug Saf ety Surveillance (WWDSS) 
within 24 hours of the Investigator’s knowledge of the pregnancy by phone and facsimile 
using the SAE Form.  
 
           Page 33 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  The Investigator will follow the subject until completion of the pregnancy, and must notify 
Celgene Corporation Worldwide Drug Safety Surveillance (WWDSS) of the outcome as 
specified below.  The Investigator will provide this information as a follow -up to the initial 
SAE.  
 
If the outcome of the pregnancy meets the criteria for immediate classification as a SAE 
(i.e., spontane ous abortion [any congenital anomaly detected in an aborted fetus is to be 
documented], stillbirth, neonatal death, or congenital anomaly), the Investigator should 
follow the procedures for Expedited R eporting of SAEs to Celgene (i.e., report the event to 
Celgene Corporation Worldwide Drug Safety Surveillance (WWDSS) by facsimile within 
24 hours of the Investigator’s knowledge of the event).  
 
Any suspected fetal exposure to pomalidomide  must be reported to Celgene within 24 hours 
of being made aware of the event.  The subject  should be referred to an 
obstetrician/gynecologist experienced in reproductive toxicity for further evaluation and 
counseling.  
 
All neonatal deaths that occur within 30 days of birth should be reported, without regard to 
causality, as S AEs.  In addition, any infant death after 30 days that the Investigator suspects 
is related to the in utero  exposure to pomalidomide  should also be reported.  
In the case of a live “normal” birth, Celgene Corporation Worldwide Drug Safety 
Surveillance (WWDS S) should be advised as soon as the information is available.  
 
6.2.1  Celgene Drug Safety Contact Information:  
 
Celgene Corporation  
Worldwide Drug Safety Surveillance (WWDSS)  
86 Morris Avenue  
Summit, N.J. 07901  
 
Toll Free:   (800) -640-7854  
Phone:  (908) 673 -9667  
Fax:   (908) 673 -9115  
e-mail:  drugsafety@celgene.com  
 
 
6.3 Investigator Reporting Responsibilities  
The conduct of the study will comply with all FDA safety reporting requirements.   
 
IND Annual Reports  
If the FDA has granted an IND number, it is a requirement of 21 CFR 312.33, that an annual 
report is provided to the FDA within 60 -days of the IND anniversary date.   21 CRF 312.33 
provides the data elements  that are to be submitted in the report.   The Annual Report should 
           Page 34 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  be filed in  the study's Regulatory Binder , and a copy provided to Celgene Corporation as a 
supporter of this study as follows.  
 
 Celgene Corporation  
 Attn: Medical Development  
 86 Morris Avenue  
 Summit, NJ  07901  
 Tel: (908) 673 -9000  
 
All adverse experience reports must include the subject  number , age, sex, weight, severity 
of reaction (mild, moderate, severe), relationship to study drug (probably related, unknown 
relationship, definitely not related), date and time of administration of test medications and 
all concomitant medications, and medical  treatment provided.   The investigator is 
responsible for evaluating all adverse events to determine whether criteria for “serious” and 
as defined above are present.  The investigator is responsible for reporting adverse events to 
Celgene as described bel ow. 
6.3.1 Expedited reporting by investigator to Celgene  
Expedited reporting by investigator to Celgene  
Serious adverse events (SAE) are defined above.  The investigator must inform Celgene in 
writing using a Celgene SAE form or MEDWATCH 3500A form of any SAE wi thin 24 
hours of being aware of the event.  The written report must be completed and supplied to 
Celgene by facsimile within 24 hours/1 business day.  The initial report must be as complete 
as possible, including an assessment of the causal relationship be tween the event and the 
investigational product(s), if available.  Information not available at the time of the initial 
report (e.g., an end date for the adverse event or laboratory values received after the report) 
must be documented on a follow -up report .  A final report to document resolution of the 
SAE is required.  The Celgene tracking number (PO -AMYL -PI-0024 ) and the institutional 
protocol number should be included on SAE reports (or on the fax cover letter) sent to 
Celgene.  A copy of the fax transmi ssion confirmation of the SAE report to Celgene should 
be attached to the SAE and retained with the patient records.   
Report of Adverse Events to the Institutional Review Board  
The principal Investigator is required to notify his/her Institutional Review B oard (IRB) of a 
serious adverse event according to institutional policy.   
6.3.2 Investigator Reporting to the FDA  
Adverse drug reactions that are Serious, Unlisted/unexpected, and at least possibly 
associated to the drug,  and that have not previously been repor ted in the Investigators 
brochure, or reference safety information document should be reported promptly to the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) in writing by each investigator/physician engaged in 
clinical research.  A clear description of the suspected reaction should be provided along 
with an assessment as to whether the event is drug or disease related.   
 
The investigator/physician shall notify the FDA by telephone or by fax of any unexpected 
fatal or life threatening experience associated with the us e of the drug. As soon as possible, 
but no later than 7 calendar days after the sponsors initial receipt of the information.    Each 
           Page 35 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  phone call or fax shall be transmitted to the FDA new drug review division in the Center for 
Drug Evaluation and Research o r the product review division in the Center for Biologics 
Evaluation and Research that has responsibility for review of the IND if applicable.  
6.4 Adverse event updates/IND safety reports  
Celgene shall notify the Investigator via an IND Safety Report of the fo llowing information:  
 
 Any AE associated with the use of study drug in this study or in other studies that is 
both serious and unexpected.  
 Any finding from tests in laboratory animals that suggests a significant risk for 
human subjects including reports of mutagenicity, teratogenicity, or carcinogenicity.  
 
The Investigator shall notify his/her IRB/EC promptly of these new serious and unexpected 
AE(s) or significant risks to subjects.  
 
The Investigator must keep copies of all AE information, including corresp ondence with 
Celgene and the  IRB/EC, on file (see Section 11 .4 for records retention information).  
7 Response -Criteria  
Efficacy assessments are scheduled to occur every three months while on therapy.  
  
7.1 Hematologic Response Criteria  
 
CR Negative serum and  urine immun ofixation electrophoresis, normal serum free light 
chain ratio  
 
VGPR  dFLC <40 mg/L, dFLC = difference in involved and uninvolved serum free light -
chain  levels  
 
PR dFLC reduction >50%, dFLC = difference in involved and uninvolved serum free 
light-chain  levels  
 
SD Meets neither criteria for CR, VGPR, PR or PD  
 
PD From CR, a n increase in serum M -protein to >  0.5 g/dL, an increase in the urine 
M-protein to >  200 mg/day, or an increase in the serum monoclonal free light 
chain by > 10 mg/dL (100 mg/L) . From V GPR, PR or SD, an increase in the serum 
M-protein from the lowest level by >  50%, as long as the absolute magnitude of 
this increase is > 0.5 g/dL; or an increase in the urine M -protein from the lowest 
level by 50%, as long as the absolute magnitud e of this increase is >  200 mg/day; 
or an increase in the serum or urine monoclonal free light chain by >  50% from the 
lowest level, as long as the absolute magnitude is >  10 mg/dL (100 mg/L).  
 
Measurable disease to enter on the clinical trial  
           Page 36 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15   dFLC of 50 mg/L, dFLC = difference in involved and uninvolved serum free light 
levels  
 
7.2 Organ Response -Criteria:  
 
A subject  will be said to have had an organ response in an involved organ if any of the  
following criteria are met, and none of the criteria in Section 10 .4 are met.  
 
Kidney: 50% reduction in 24 -hour urine protein excretion in the absence of progressive  
renal insufficiency (defined as a 25% increase in serum creatinine, as long as that is  > to an 
absolute increase of 0.5 mg/dL). In the case of nephrotic syn drome: a  decrease in proteinuria 
to < 1g/24h and an improvement in one of 2 extrarenal features – normalization of serum 
albumin or resolution of edema and/or discontinuation of diuretics  in response to 
improvement in edema.  
 
Heart : ≥ 2 mm reduction in the  interventricular septal (IVS) thickness by echocardiogram,  
improvement of ejection fraction by ≥ 20% (echocardiogram must be performed at the  same 
institution), or decrease in 2 NYHA classes without increase in diuretic need (see  Appendix 
E for class defi nitions).  
 
Liver: ≥ 50% decrease in normalization of an initially elevated alkaline phosphatase level  or 
reduction in the size of the liver by at least 3 cm (determined by US or CT).  
 
Neuropathy: While neurotoxicity is acceptable for determining organ invo lvement, it will  
not be adequate for assessing organ response; organ response will be indeterminable for  
subject s in which neurotoxicity is the only site of organ involvement.  
 
Gastrointestinal Tract: While GI involvement is acceptable for determining orga n 
involvement, it will not be adequate for assessing organ response: organ response will  be 
indeterminable for subject s in which GI is the only site of organ involvement.  
 
8 Protocol Amendments/Deviations  
8.1 Protoco l amendments  
Any amendment to this protocol mu st be agreed to by the Principal Investigator and 
reviewed and approved by Celgene.  Amendments should only be submitted to IRB/EC after 
consideration of Celgene review.  Written verification of IRB  approval will be obtained 
before any amendment is impleme nted.   
           Page 37 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  8.2 Protocol deviations  
When an emergency occurs that requires a deviation from the protocol for a subject, a 
deviation will be made only for that subject.  A decision will be made as soon as possible to 
determine whether or not the subject (for whom t he deviation from protocol was effected) is 
to continue in the study.  The subject’s medical records will completely describe the 
deviation from the protocol and state the reasons for such deviation.  In addition, the 
Investigator will notify the IRB  in wr iting of such deviation from protocol.  
Non-emergency minor deviations from the protocol will be permitted with approval of the 
Principal Investigator.  
9 Data Management  
9.1 Analyses and Reporting  
Data will be analyzed and reported after study is completed or me aningful endpoints are 
reached. All subsequent data collected will be analyzed and reported in a follow -up clinical 
report.   
9.2 Data Monitoring Committee  
Toxicity and accrual monitoring will be performed on a routine basis by the study 
investigators as well a s the multidisciplinary members of the Amyloid Treatment and 
Research Program at Boston University, which has over 40 years’ experience in the 
treatment of AL amyloidosis.  Subject s will undergo toxicity assessment, performance status 
assessment and labora tory tests before beginning each new cycle.  Response assessment will 
be conducted every three cycles.  The clinical status and laboratory reports of the study 
participants will be reviewed routinely by the co -investigators at the weekly  meetings of the 
Stem Cell Transplant Program and reviewed by the Amyloid Program at weekly  meetings.  
Dose modifications/interruptions or discontinuation will be implemented according to 
Section 5. 5.  
 
In addition, the BMC  Cancer Center ’s Internal Data and Safety Monitoring  Committee 
(DSMC) will review the protocol, and will determine review frequency based on level of 
risk.  The protocol will be reviewed at least annually by the DSMC. Please see full DSMB 
Charter in Appendix 4.  
 
 
           Page 38 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  9.3 Study monitoring and auditing  
9.3.1  Investigator responsibilities  
Investigator responsibilities are set out in the ICH guideline for Good Clinical Practice 
(GCP) and in the US Code of Federal Regulations.  
Investigators must enter study data onto CRFs or other data collection system.  The 
Investi gator will permit study -related monitoring visits and audits by Celgene or its 
representatives, IRB/EC review, and regulatory inspec tion(s) (e.g., FDA, EMEA, TPP), 
providing direct access to the facilities where the study took place, to source documents, to 
CRFs, and to all other study documents.  
The Investigator, or a designated member of the Investigator’s staff, must be available at 
some time during monitoring visits to review data and resolve any queries and to allow 
direct access to the subject’s reco rds (e.g., medical records, office charts, hospital charts, 
and study related charts) for source data verification.  The data collection must be completed 
prior to each visit and be made available to the Celgene representative so that the accuracy 
and comp leteness may be checked.  
10   Statis tical Plan  
10.1 Overview  
This is a P hase I/II study . Responses and toxicity will be compared informally to th ose 
reported lenalidomide  and dexamethasone combin ed. 
 
The Phase I portion of the study will be aimed at determ ining the safety profile and the 
MTD of pomalidomide . A 3+3 dose escalation scheme will be implemented. Subject s will 
receive escalating doses of pomalidomide orally on D1 -21 in a 28 -day cycle in the absence 
of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. * Pomalidomide has been safely given to 
persons with relapsed/refractory myeloma subject s at 2  mg/day continuously  in a small 
Phase II study. Therefore, the estimated safe starting dose of pomalidomide will be 2 
mg/day continuously . DLTs will be assessed i n Cycle 1 only. Dose escalation of 
pomalidomide will continue until MTD has been identified or a maximum planned dose (4 
mg/day continuously ) is determined to be safe.  
 
* Pomalidomide dosing for Phase I cohorts 1 and 2 given on days 1 -28 of a 28 -day cycle and changed to Days 
1-21 of a 28 day cycle with Cohort 3.  
 
           Page 39 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  10.2 Datasets to be analyzed  
Data for safety analysis will be obtained utilizing the NCI Common Terminology Criteria 
for Adverse Events v 4.0. 
DLT  Based on the first cycle; toxicity considered by th e investigator to be related to 
pomalidomide ; Grade 4 thrombocytopenia or neutropenia; > Grade 3 non -hematologic 
toxicity  
MTD  The dose level at which DLT occurs in no more than 1 of 6 subject s (ie, the dose 
level below that at which DLT was established).  
Data to be included in the analysis for the hematologic  response endpoint include evaluation 
of serum free light chain assay, monoclonal protein in serum or urine by immunofixation 
electroph oresis, percentage of plasma cells and presence of clonal dominanc e of kappa or 
lambda isotope on bone marrow biopsy.    
Data for the secondary endpoint of organ response will include creatinine and 24 hour urine 
protein, liver span and liver function tests, mean left ventricular wall thickness, NYHA heart 
failure class,  orthostatic vital signs and symptoms, GI symptoms and evaluation of 
peripheral neuropathy.  
Data for the exploratory endpoint include BNP and troponin I levels . 
10.3 Statis tical Methodology  
Determination of Sample Size  
Based on the dose escalation scheme, as many as 30 subject s may be enrolled in this study.  
 
The number of subject s enrolled will depend on the outcome of the actual dose escalation process.   
The dose -escalation phase consists of 3 cohorts, each with 2 to 6 subject s enrolled depending on 
when DLT  occurs.  Therefore, a minimum of 2 and a maximum of 18 subject s will be enrolled in 
this phase.  
 
An additional 12 subject s will be enrolled in an expanded cohort for efficacy at each 
schedule.  Therefore, an additional 12 subject s could potentially be enrolled.  
 
It is expected that approximately 30 patients will be enrolled in the phase I/II portions of this 
study.  The endpoints measured in the protocol will be overall response rate (ORR) 
determined by either CR, VGPR or PR and response of one or more organs.    It is estimated 
by the principle investigator’s approximate frequency of response in 18 patients (6 patients 
will be dosed at the MTD during the phase I portion of this trial plus the additional 12 
patients at this MTD dose during the phase II p ortion).   Using the adjusted Wald’s 
confidence interval for the proportion and the corresponding point estimates for hypothetical 
data, it is expected that if 6 out of 18 have ORR then the estimated response rate would be 
35.57% with a 90% confidence inte rval between 18.21% and 52.81% with similar estimates 
for organ response.  
           Page 40 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15   
Randomization and Stratification  
This is not a randomized study.  
 
Populations for Analysis  
The safety population will include all subject s who received at least 1 dose of study dru g. 
 
The additional 12 subject s enrolled in the expanded cohort for efficacy will comprise the efficacy 
population.  
 
Procedures for Handling Missing, Unused, and Spurious Data  
No imputation of values for missing data will be performed.  Standard clinical mo nitoring and data 
management practices will be used to ensure the integrity of data.  
 
General Methodology  
In general, summary tabulations will be presented by dose group showing the number of 
observations, mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, and max imum for continuous variables, 
and the number and percent (calculated using non -missing values) per category for categorical data.  
 
Safety Analysis  
 
 Determination of MTD  
 
The determination of MTD  will be achieved by the results of a deterministic algorithm ; thus, 
statis tical hypothesis testing is not intended.  
 
The evaluation of MTD  will be based on data from subject s who receive pomalidom ide and whose 
data are interpretable in the context of study drug -specific toxicity (ie, subject s should have had 
suffic ient safety assessments performed to determine whether DLT  occurred and should not have 
received alternate antineoplastic therapies through cycle  1).  Subject s who are withdrawn from the 
study for reasons other than DLT  before completing cycle  1 and are re placed consequently will not 
be included in the analysis of MTD .  Subject s will be analyzed according to the dose actually 
received.  
 
Pharmacokinetics/Pharmacodynamics  
Not applicable.  
 
Efficacy Analysis  
The efficacy analysis will be based on confirmed hema tological response and confirmed organ 
response.  The analysis of response data at the MTD  will be descriptive, consisting of 2 -sided 90% 
confidence intervals.  
 
Additional analyses of efficacy data at the MTD  will consist of evaluations of time to hematolo gic 
response, duration of hematologic response, and time to worsening of hematologic and/or organ 
function.  These analyses will also be descriptive in nature.  
 
           Page 41 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Analysis of the rates of responders for each of the other dose levels will also be presented, w ithout 
calculation of confidence intervals.  
 
Exploratory Analysis  
An exploratory analysis will be conducted to investigate the relationship of changes in the 
levels of the biomarkers brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and troponin I to the frequency of 
specif ic AEs and the occurrence of DLT.  Additionally, the benefit, if any, of using these 
measures in addition to routine monitoring by ECG and echocardiogram will be explored.  
The frequency of conversion in immunofixation results from positive to negative wil l be 
explored and the disappearance of free light chain.  Efficacy at additional doses may be 
explored for potential use in future Phase II clinical trials.  
 
Interim Analysis  
Interim analyses will be performed following each cohort during the Phase I porti on of the 
study.  No interim analysis is planned for the Phase II portion.  
10.4 Safety evaluation  
Data from all subjects who receive any study drug will be included in the safety analyses. 
Subjects who entered the study and did not take any of the study dr ug(s) and had this 
confirmed, will not be evaluated for safety.  
The severity of the toxicities will be graded according to th e NCI CTCAE v4 .0 whenever 
possible.  
10.5 Interim analyses  
10.5.1  Interim analysis strategy  
Accrual will be placed on hold during interim analyses during the Phase I portion while 
cohort toxicities are evaluated.  
10.5.2  Efficacy  
If none of the first four subject s treated at the MTD experience a response, consideration 
will be made to terminate the study.  Accrual will not be placed o n hold during efficacy 
evaluation.  
10.5.3  Safety  
Interim analysis will be performed following each cohort during the Phase I portion of the 
study.  
           Page 42 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  10.6 Sample size and power considerations  
11 Regulatory Considerations  
11.1 Institutional Review Board/Ethics  Committee approval  
The protocol for this study has been designed in accordance with the general ethical 
principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki.  The review of this protocol by the 
IRB/EC and the performance of all aspects of the study, includi ng the methods used for 
obtaining informed consent, must also be in accordance with principles enunciated in the 
declaration, as well as ICH Guidelines, Title  21 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), 
Part 50 Protection of Human Subjects and Part 56 Ins titutional Review Boards.  
The Investigator will be responsible for preparing documents for submission to the relevant 
IRB/EC and obtaining written approval for this study.  The approval will be obtained prior 
to the initiation of the study.  
The approval fo r both the protocol and informed consent must specify the date of approval, 
protocol number and version, or amendment number.  
Any amendments to the protocol after receipt of IRB/EC approval must be submitted by the 
Investigator to the IRB/EC for approval.  The Investigator is also responsible for notifying 
the IRB/EC of any serious deviations from the protocol, or anything else that may involve 
added risk to subjects.  
Any advertisements used to recruit subjects for the study must be reviewed and approved by  
the IRB/EC prior to use.  
11.2 Informed consent  
The Investigator must obtain informed consent of a subject or his/her designee prior to any 
study related procedures as per GCPs as set forth in the CFR and ICH guidelines.  
Documentation that informed consent  occurred prior to the subject’s entry into the study and 
the informed consent process should be recorded in the subject’s source documents.  The 
original consent form  signed and dated by the subject and by the person consenting the 
subject prior to the su bject’s entry into the study, must be maintained in the Investigator’s 
study files.  
11.3 Subject confidentiality  
Celgene affirms the subject’s right to protection against invasion of privacy.  In compliance 
with United States federal regulations, Celgene r equires the Investigator to permit Celgene’s 
representatives and, when necessary, representatives of the FDA or other regulatory 
           Page 43 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  authorities to review and/or copy any medical records relevant to the study in accordance 
with local laws.  
Should direct access  to medical records require a waiver or authorization separate from the 
subject’s statement of informed consent, it is the responsibility of the Investigator to obtain 
such permission in writing from the appropriate individual.  
11.4 Study records requireme nts 
The Investigator must ensure that the records and documents pertaining to the conduct of the 
study and the distribution of the study drug, that is copies of CRFs and source documents 
(original documents, data, and records [e.g., hospital records; clini cal and office charts; 
laboratory notes; memoranda; subject’s diaries or evaluation checklists; SAE reports, 
pharmacy dispensing records; recorded data from automated instruments; copies or 
transcriptions certified after verification as being accurate copi es; microfiches; photographic 
negatives, microfilm, or magnetic media; x -rays; subject files; and records kept at the 
pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at medico -technical departments involved in the clinical 
study; documents regarding subject treatment a nd study drug accountability; original signed 
informed consents, etc.]) be retained by the Investigator for as long as needed to comply 
with national and international regulations (generally 2 years after discontinuing clinical 
development or after the las t marketing approval).  The Investigator agrees to adhere to the 
document/records retention procedures by signing the protocol.  
11.5 Premature discontinuation of study  
11.5.1 Single center  
The responsible local clinical Inve stigator as well as Celgene has  the right to discontinue 
this study at any time for reasonable medical or administrative reasons in any single center.  
Possible reasons for termination of the study could be but are not limited to:  
 Unsatisfactory enrollment with respect to quantity or qua lity. 
 Inaccurate or incomplete data collection.  
 Falsification of records.  
 Failure to adhere to the study protocol.  
11.5.2    Study as a whole  
Celgene reserves the right to terminate this clinical study at any time for reasonable medical 
or administrative r easons.  
           Page 44 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Any possible premature discontinuation would be documented adequately with reasons 
being stated, and information would have to be issued according to local requirements (e.g., 
IRB/EC, regulatory authorities, etc.).  
           Page 45 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  12 References  
1. Yano, S., Muguruma , H., Matsumori, Y., et al.; “Antitumor vascular strategy for 
controlling experimental spread of human small -cell lung cancer cells with ZD6474 
in natural killer cell -depleted severe combined immunodeficiency mice”; Clin. 
Cancer Res. 11 (24 pt. 1): 8789 – 8798, 15 Dec. 2005.  
2. Johnson, DH, Fehrenbacher, L, Novotny, WF, et al. “Randomized Phase II Trial  
Comparing Bevacizumab plus Carboplatin and Paclitaxel with Carboplatin and 
Paclitaxel Alone in Previously Untreated Locally Advanced or Metastatic Non -
Small -Cell Lung Cancer”;  J. Clin. Oncology 22 (11): 2184 – 2191; 1 June 2004.  
3. Lee, SM, James, LE, Mohamed -Ali, V, et al. “A phase II study of carboplatin / 
etoposide with thalidomide in small cell lung cancer (SCLC)”; ASCO 38th meeting, 
2002; abstract # 1251 in Proceedings of the American Society of Clinical Oncology 
21: 313a, 2002.  
4. Cooney, M, Subbaya, S, Chapman, R, et al.  “Phase II trial of maintenance daily oral 
thalidomide in patients with extensive stage small cell lung cancer (ES -SCLC) in 
remission”; ASCO 41st meeting, 2005; abstract # 7166; Proceedings of the 
American Society of Clinical Oncology, 2005.  
5. Pujol, J, Breton, J, Gervals, R, et al.; “A prospective randomized phase III, double -
blind, placebo -controlled study of thalidomide in extended -disease (ED ) SCLC 
patients after response to chemotherapy (CT)”; 11th World Conference on Lung 
Cancer; 3 -6 July 2005, Barcelona, Spain; Lung Cancer 49 (supplement 2):  S54, July 
2005; abstract O -159. 
6. Sheski, FD, Natarajan, V and Pottratz, ST; “Tumor necrosis factor -alpha stimulates 
attachment of small cell lung carcinoma to endothelial cells” J. Lab. Clin. Med. 
133(3): 265 – 273, March 1999.  
7. Haley, KJ, Patidar, K, Zhang, F, et al.; “Tumor necrosis factor induces 
neuroendocrine differentiation in small cell lung cancer  cell lines”; Am. J. Physiol. 
275(2 Pt. 1): L311 – L321, 1998.  
8. Han, S, Sidell, N, Roser -Page, S and Roman, J; “Fibronectin stimulates human lung 
carcinoma cell growth by inducing cyclooxygenase -2 (COX -2) expression”; Int. J. 
Cancer 111(3): 322 -331, 1 Sept.  2004.  
9. Data on file: Celgene Corp.; Summit, NJ.  
10. Payvandi, F., Wu, L., Haley, M, et al.  “Immunomodulatory drugs inhibit expression 
of cyclooxygenase -2 from TNF -alpha, IL -1 beta, and LPS -stimulated human PBMC 
in a partially IL -10-dependent manner”; Cell Imm unol. 230(2): 81 -88, Aug. 2004.  
11. Schey, SA, Fields, P, Bartlett, JB, et al.  “Phase I study of an immunomodulatory 
thalidomide analog, CC -4047, in relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma”; J. Clin. 
Oncol. 22(16): 3269 -3276, 15 Aug 2004.  
           Page 46 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  12. Suppiah, R, Srkalovi c, JG, and Hussein, MA. “Immunomodulatory analogues of 
thalidomide in the treatment of multiple myeloma”; Clin. Lymphoma Myeloma 6(4): 
301-305, Jan. 2006.  
13. McCarthy, DA, Macey, MG, Streetly, M, et al. “The neutropenia induced by the 
thalidomide analogue CC -4047 in patients with multiple myeloma is associated with 
an increased percentage of neutrophils bearing CD64”; Int. Immunopharmacol. 6(7): 
1194 -1203, Jul. 2006 (Epub 29 Mar. 2006).  
14. Lacy, MQ, et al. “ Pomalidomide (CC4047) Plus Low -Dose Dexamethasone As 
Therapy for Relapsed Multiple Myeloma.” Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2009 Aug 
31: Epub ahead of print.  
15. Tefferi, A, Verstovsek, S, Barosi, G, et al. “ Pomalidomide Therapy in Anemic 
Patients with Myelofibrosis: Results from a Phase -2 Randomized Multicenter 
Study,”; Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts), Nov 2008; 112: 663.  
 
 
           Page 47 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  13  Appendices  
 
           Page 48 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Appendix I  
           Page 49 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Pomalidomide Risks of Fetal Exposure, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines and Acceptable 
Birth Control Methods  
Risks Associated with Pregnancy  
Pomalidomide was found to  be teratogenic in a developmental study in rabbits.  
Pomalidomide is an analogue of thalidomide.  Thalidomide is a known human teratogen that 
causes severe life -threatening human birth defects.  If Pomalidomide is taken during 
pregnancy, it may cause birt h defects or death to an unborn baby.  
Criteria for females of childbearing potential (FCBP)  
This protocol defines a female of childbearing potential as a sexually mature woman who: 
1) has not undergone a hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy or 2) has not  been naturally 
postmenopausal (amenorrhea following cancer therapy does not rule out childbearing 
potential) for at least 24 consecutive months (ie, has had menses at any time in the 
preceding 24 consecutive months).  
Counselling  
For a female of childbeari ng potential, pomalidomide is contraindicated unless all of the 
following are met (ie, all females of childbearing potential must be counselled concerning 
the following risks and requirements prior to the start of pomalidomide study therapy):  
 She understa nds the potential teratogenic risk to the unborn child  
 She understands the need for effective contraception, without interruption, 28 
days before starting study treatment, throughout the entire duration of study 
treatment, dose interruption and 28 days aft er the end of study treatment  
 She should be capable of complying with effective contraceptive measures  
 She is informed and understands the potential consequences of pregnancy and 
the need to notify her study doctor immediately if there is a risk of pregnan cy 
 She understands the need to commence the study treatment as soon as study drug 
is dispensed following a negative pregnancy test  
 She understands the need and accepts to undergo pregnancy testing based on the 
frequency outlined in this protocol  
 She acknow ledges that she understands the hazards and necessary precautions 
associated with the use of pomalidomide  
The investigator must ensure that females of childbearing potential:  
 Comply with the conditions for pregnancy risk minimization, including 
confirmatio n that she has an adequate level of understanding  
 Acknowledge the aforementioned requirements  
For a female NOT of childbearing potential, pomalidomide is contraindicated unless all of 
the following are met (ie, all females NOT of childbearing potential mus t be counselled 
concerning the following risks and requirements prior to the start of pomalidomide study 
therapy):  
           Page 50 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15   She acknowledges that she understands the hazards and necessary precautions 
associated with the use of pomalidomide  
The effect of pomalidomi de on spermatogenesis is not known and has not been studied. 
Therefore, male subject s taking pomalidomide must meet the following conditions (ie, all 
males must be counselled concerning the following risks and requirements prior to the start 
of pomalidomid e study therapy):  
 Understand the potential teratogenic risk if engaged in sexual activity with a 
pregnant female or a female of childbearing potential  
 Understand the need for the use of a condom even if he has had a vasectomy, if 
engaged in sexual activity  with a pregnant female or a female of childbearing 
potential.   
Contraception  
Females of childbearing potential (FCBP) enrolled in this protocol must agree to use two 
reliable forms of contraception simultaneously or to practice complete abstinence from 
heterosexual contact during the following time periods related to this study: 1) for at least 28 
days before starting study drug; 2) while participating in the study; 3) dose interruptions; 
and 4) for at least 28 days after study treatment discontinuation.  
The two methods of reliable contraception must include one highly effective method and 
one additional effective (barrier) method. FCBP must be referred to a qualified provider of 
contraceptive methods if needed. The following are examples of highly effect ive and 
additional effective methods of contraception:    
 Highly effective methods:  
 Intrauterine device (IUD)  
 Hormonal (birth control pills, injections, implants)  
 Tubal ligation  
 Partner’s vasectomy  
 Additional effective methods:  
 Male condom  
 Diaphragm  
 Cervica l Cap  
Because of the increased risk of venous thromboembolism in subject s with multiple 
myeloma taking pomalidomide and dexamethasone, combined oral contraceptive pills are 
not recommended. If a subject  is currently using combined oral contraception the subject  
should switch to another one of the effective methods listed above. The risk of venous 
thromboembolism continues for 4−6  weeks after discontinuing combined oral contraception. 
The efficacy of contraceptive steroids may be reduced during co -treatment with 
dexamethasone.  
           Page 51 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Implants and levonorgestrel -releasing intrauterine systems are associated with an increased 
risk of infection at the time of insertion and irregular vaginal bleeding. Prophylactic 
antibiotics should be considered particularly in subjec ts with neutropenia.  
Pregnancy testing  
Medically supervised pregnancy tests with a minimum sensitivity of  25 mIU/mL must be 
performed for females of childbearing potential, including females of childbearing potential 
who commit to complete abstinence, as  outlined below.  
Before starting study drug  
Female Subject s: 
FCBP must have two negative pregnancy tests (sensitivity of at least 25 mIU/mL) prior to 
starting study drug.  The first pregnancy test must be performed within 7 days prior to the 
start of study  drug and the second pregnancy test must be performed within 24 hours prior to 
the start of study drug.  The subject  may not receive study drug until the study doctor has 
verified that the results of these pregnancy tests are negative.  
Male Subject s: 
Must practice complete abstinence or  agree to use a condom during sexual contact with a 
pregnant female or a female of childbearing potential while participating in the study, during 
dose interruptions and for at least 90 days following study drug discontinuat ion, even if he 
has undergone a successful vasectomy.   
During study participation and for 28 days following study drug discontinuation  
Female Subject s: 
 FCBP with regular or no menstrual cycles must agree to have pregnancy tests 
weekly for the first 28 da ys of study participation and then every 28 days while 
on study, at study discontinuation, and at day 28 following study drug 
discontinuation. If menstrual cycles are irregular, the pregnancy testing must 
occur weekly for the first 28 days and then every 1 4 days while on study, at 
study discontinuation, and at days 14 and 28 following study drug 
discontinuation.   
 At each visit, the Investigator must confirm with the FCBP that she is continuing 
to use two reliable methods of birth control.   
 Counselling abo ut pregnancy precautions and the potential risks of fetal exposure 
must be conducted at a minimum of every 28 days.  
 If pregnancy or a positive pregnancy test does occur in a study subject , study 
drug must be immediately discontinued.  
 Pregnancy testing and  counselling must be performed if a subject  misses her 
period or if her pregnancy test or her menstrual bleeding is abnormal.  Study 
drug treatment must be discontinued during this evaluation.  
 Females must agree to abstain from breastfeeding during study p articipation and 
for at least 28 days after study drug discontinuation.  
           Page 52 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Male Subject s: 
 Counselling about the requirement for complete abstinence or condom use 
during sexual contact with  a pregnant female or a female of childbearing 
potential and the potent ial risks of fetal exposure to pomalidomide must be 
conducted at a minimum of every 28 days.   
 If pregnancy or a positive pregnancy test does occur in the partner of a male 
study subject  during study participation, the investigator must be notified 
immedia tely. 
Additional precautions  
 Subject s should be instructed never to give this medicinal product to another 
person and to return any unused capsules to the study doctor at the end of 
treatment.  
 Subject s should not donate blood during therapy and for at leas t 28 days 
following discontinuation of study drug.  
 Male subject s should not donate semen or sperm during therapy or for at least 90 
days following discontinuation of study drug.  
 Only enough study drug for one cycle of therapy may be dispensed with each 
cycle of therapy.  
 
           Page 53 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15    Pomalidomide Education and Counselling Guidance Document  
To be completed prior to each dispensing of study drug.  
Protocol Number: ____________________________________________  
 
Subject  Name (Print): __________________ DOB: _____/ _____/_____ (mm/dd/yyyy)  
(Check the appropriate box to indicate risk category)  
Female:  ⁯  
If female, check one:  
⁯ FCBP (Female of childbearing potential): sexually mature female who: 1) has not 
undergone a hysterectomy (the surgical remova l of the uterus) or bilateral 
oophorectomy (the surgical removal of both ovaries) or 2) has not been naturally 
postmenopausal (amenorrhea following cancer therapy does not rule out 
childbearing potential) for at least 24 consecutive months (ie, has had men ses at any 
time during the preceding 24 consecutive months)  
 NOT FCBP  
Male:  ⁯ 
 
Do Not Dispense study drug if:  
 The subject  is pregnant.  
 No pregnancy tests were conducted for a FCBP.  
 The subject  states she did not use TWO reliable methods of birth control 
(unless practicing complete abstinence of heterosexual contact) [at least 28 
days prior  to therapy, during therapy and during dose interruption].  
FCBP:  
1.    I verified that the required pregnancy tests performed are negative.  
2.    I counselled FCBP regarding the following:  
 Potential risk of fetal exposure to pomalidomide:  If poma lidomide is taken 
during pregnancy, it may cause birth defects or death to any unborn baby.  
Females are advised to avoid pregnancy while taking pomalidomide. The 
teratogenic potential of pomalidomide in humans cannot be ruled out.  FCBP 
must agree not to become pregnant while taking pomalidomide.  
 Using TWO reliable methods of birth control at the same time or complete 
abstinence from heterosexual contact [at least 28 days prior  to therapy, during 
therapy  , during dose interruption and 28 days after discon tinuation of study 
drug].  
 That even if she has amenorrhea she must comply with advice on contraception   
           Page 54 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15   Use of one highly effective method and one additional method of birth control 
AT THE SAME TIME. The following are examples of highly effective and 
additional effective methods of contraception:    
 Highly effective methods:  
o Intrauterine device (IUD)  
o Hormonal (birth control pills, injections, implants)  
o Tubal ligation  
o Partner’s vasectomy  
 Additional effective methods:  
o Male condom  
o Diaphragm  
o Cervical Cap  
 Pregna ncy tests before and during treatment, even if the subject  agrees not to 
have reproductive heterosexual contact.  Two pregnancy tests will be performed 
prior to receiving study drug, one within 7 days and the second within 24 hours 
of the start of study dr ug. 
 Frequency of pregnancy tests to be done:  
 Every week  during the first 28 days of this study and a pregnancy test  every 
28 days  during the subject ’s participation in this study if menstrual cycles are 
regular or  every 14 days  if cycles are irregular.    
 If the subject  missed a period or has unusual menstrual bleeding.   
 When the subject  is discontinued from the study and at day 28 after study 
drug discontinuation if menstrual cycles are regular.  If menstrual cycles are 
irregular, pregnancy tests will be d one at discontinuation from the study and 
at days 14 and 28 after study drug discontinuation.  
 Stop taking study drug immediately in the event of becoming pregnant and to 
call their study doctor as soon as possible.  
 NEVER share study drug with anyone else.  
 Do not donate blood while taking study drug and for 28 days after stopping study 
drug.  
 Do not breastfeed a baby while participating in this study and for at least 28 days 
after study drug discontinuation.  
 Do not break, chew, or open study drug capsules.  
 Return unused study drug to the study doctor.  
3.     Provide Pomalidomide Information Sheet to the subject . 
           Page 55 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  FEMALE NOT OF CHILDBEARING POTENTIAL (NATURAL MENOPAUSE 
FOR AT LEAST 24 CONSECUTIVE MONTHS, A HYSTERECTOMY, OR 
BILATERAL OOPHORECTOMY):  
1. I counsell ed the female NOT of childbearing potential regarding the following:  
 Potential risk of fetal exposure to pomalidomide (Refer to item #2 in FCBP)  
 NEVER share study drug with anyone else.  
 Do not donate blood while taking study drug and for 28 days after stop ping study 
drug.  
 Do not break, chew, or open study drug capsules  
 Return unused study drug capsules to the study doctor.  
2. Provide Pomalidomide Information Sheet to the subject . 
MALE:  
1. I counselled the Male subject  regarding the following:  
 Potential stud y drug fetal exposure to pomalidomide (Refer to item #2 in FCBP).  
 To engage in complete abstinence or use a condom when engaging in sexual 
contact (including those who have had a vasectomy) with  a pregnant female or a 
female of childbearing potential,  whi le taking study drug, during dose 
interruptions and for 90 days after stopping study drug.  
 Males should notify their study doctor when their female partner becomes 
pregnant and female partners of males taking study drug should be advised to 
call their heal thcare provider immediately if they get pregnant  
 NEVER share study drug with anyone else.  
 Do not donate blood while taking study drug and for 28 days after stopping study 
drug.  
 Do not donate semen or sperm while taking study drug and for 90 days after 
stopping study drug.  
 Do not break, chew, or open study drug capsules.  
 Return unused study drug capsules to the study doctor.  
2.    Provide Pomalidomide Information Sheet to the subject . 
Investigator/ Counsellor  Name (Print): ____________________   
 (circle appli cable)  
Investigator/ Counsellor  Signature: _______________________  Date: 
_____/_____/_____  
(circle applicable)  
**Maintain a copy of the Education and Counselling Guidance Document in the subject  
records.**  
           Page 56 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Appendix Ib:  
           Page 57 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Pomalidomide Information Sheet  
FOR P ATIENTS ENROLLED IN CLINICAL RESEARCH STUDIES  
Please read this Pomalidomide Information Sheet before you start taking study drug 
and each time you get a new supply. This Pomalidomide Information Sheet does not 
take the place of an informed consent to parti cipate in clinical research or talking to 
your study doctor or healthcare provider about your medical condition or your 
treatment.    
What is the most important information I should know about 
pomalidomide?  
1. Pomalidomide may cause birth defects (deformed bab ies) or death of an 
unborn baby.  Pomalidomide is similar to the medicine thalidomide. It is 
known that thalidomide causes life -threatening birth defects. Pomalidomide 
has not been tested in pregnant women but may also cause birth defects.  
Pomalidomide was found to cause birth defects when tested in pregnant 
rabbits.  If you are a female who is able to become pregnant:  
 Do not take study drug if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant  
 You must either not have any sexual relations with a man or use two 
reliable, separate forms of effective birth control at the same time:  
 for 28 days before starting study drug  
 while taking study drug  
 during dose interruptions of study drug  
 for 28 days after stopping study drug  
 You must  have pregnancy testing done at the following times:  
 within 10 – 14 days and again 24 hours prior to the first dose of study drug  
 weekly for the first 28 days  
 every 28 days after the first month or every 14 days if you have irregular 
menstrual periods  
 if you miss your period or have unusual  menstrual bleeding  
 28 days after the last dose of study drug (14 and 28 days after the last dose if 
menstrual periods are irregular)  
 Stop taking study  drug if you become pregnant during treatment  
 If you suspect you are pregnant at any time during the stud y, you must stop 
study drug immediately and immediately inform your study doctor. The 
study doctor will report all cases of pregnancy to Celgene Corporation.  
 Do not breastfeed while taking study drug  
           Page 58 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15   The study doctor will be able to advise you where to ge t additional advice on 
contraception.  
If you are a female not of childbearing potential:  
In order to ensure that an unborn baby is not exposed to pomalidomide, your study 
doctor will confirm that you are not able to become pregnant.  
If you are a male:  
The effect of pomalidomide on sperm development is not known and has not been 
studied. The risk to the fetus in females of child bearing potential whose male 
partner is receiving pomalidomide is unknown at this time.   
1. Male patients (including those who have h ad a vasectomy) must 
either not have any sexual relations with a pregnant female or a 
female who can become pregnant, or must use a condom during 
sexual contact with a pregnant female or a female that can become 
pregnant:  
o While you are taking study drug  
o During dose interruptions of study drug  
o For 28 days after you stop taking study drug   
2. Male patients should not donate sperm or semen  while taking 
study drug and for 28 days after stopping study drug.  
3. If you suspect that your partner is pregnant any time during the 
study, you must immediately inform your study doctor. The 
study doctor will report all cases of pregnancy to Celgene 
Corporation.  Your partner should call their healthcare provider 
immediately if they get pregnant.  
2. Restrictions in sharing study drug and donating blood:  
1. Do not share study drug with other people. It must be kept out of 
the reach of children and should never be given to any other 
person.  
2. Do not donate blood  while you take study drug and for 28 days after 
stopping study drug.  
3. Do not  break, chew, or open study drug capsules.  
4. You will be supplied with no more than one cycle of study drug  
5. Return unused study drug capsules to your study doctor.  
Additional information is provided in the informed consent form and you 
can ask your study do ctor for more information.  
 
 
 
           Page 59 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Appendix II – SWOG  Performance Status Scale  
 
SCORE  DESCRIPTION  
0 Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease performance 
without restriction.  
1 Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and 
able to carry out work of a light or sedentary nature, e.g., light 
house work, office work.  
2 Ambulatory and capable of all self -care but unable to carry out 
any work activities.  Up and about more than 50% of waking 
hours.  
3 Capable of only limited self -care, confine d to bed or chair more 
than 50% of waking hours.  
4 Completely disabled.  Cannot carry on any self -care.  Totally 
confined to bed or chair.  
5 Dead.  
 
           Page 60 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Appendix 3 NCI CTC AE Version 4 .0 
 
TOXICITY WILL BE  SCORED USING NCI CTC  VERSION 4 .0 FOR TOXICITY 
AND ADV ERSE EVENT REPORTING .  A COPY OF THE NCI  CTC AE VERSION  
4.0 CAN BE DOWNLOADED  FROM THE CTEP HOMEPA GE: 
HTTP://EVS.NCI.NIH.G OV/FTP1/CTCAE/ABOUT. HTML .  ALL APPROPRIATE 
TREATMENT AREAS HAVE  ACCESS TO A COPY OF THE CTC VERSION  
 
           Page 61 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  APPENDIX 4  
 
Cancer Research Cent er Data Safety Monitoring Charter  
 
Data Safety and Monitoring Program  
BU/BMC Cancer Center  
Boston, MA  02118  
617-638-8265  
 
Table of Contents:  
Mission .......................................................................................................... ....................... 1  
Background .................................................................................................................. ........ 1  
Responsibilities ............................................................................. ....................................... 2  
Membership .................................................................................................................. ....... 3  
Meeting Schedule .............................................................. .................................................. 3  
Procedures .................................................................................................................. ........ 4  
Appendix I: DSMC Form.............................................. ......................................................... 5  
Figure 1…. .................................................................................................................. ........ .6  
 
Mission:  
The Cancer Center Data Safety Monitoring Committe e (DSMC) functions to ensure the 
safety of participants in investigator -initiated, interventional clinical trials conducted by 
BUMC Cancer Center members by monitoring clinical trial progress and the collection, 
validity and integrity of the data collected  on clinical trials  under its jurisdiction.  The 
committee ensures compliance with FDA, NCI and IRB requirements. The policies and 
procedures of the Data and Safety Monitoring Committee follow NCI guidelines.  
 
Background:  
All cancer related interventional  protocols from any department must be reviewed by the 
Cancer Center Scientific Review Committee (SRC).  This includes trials that are recruiting 
individuals to cancer prevention or detection; treatment of disease or symptoms; and 
studies of cancer survivo rs, i.e. people who have had a previous diagnosis of cancer.   
 
At the time it approves a new investigator -initiated, interventional protocol, the SRC assigns 
a category of risk that determines the level of monitoring required by the DSMC . The level 
of ris k (low, moderate high) is based on a number of criteria, including the expected 
duration of the study based on the study design and a realistic estimate of the rate of 
enrollment; the nature of the study population ( e.g., prisoners, pregnant women); 
proced ures to ensure the safety of subjects in accordance with the degree of risk; the 
complexity of methods needed to ensure the validity and integrity of the data; and planned 
data management systems including case report forms, records and the plan for data 
collection. Multiple -site studies must also have an operational plan that describes the 
procedures for reporting serious adverse events to the Cancer Clinical Trials Program 
(CCTP), IRB, FDA, and NIH, as appropriate, and plans for notifying participants of trial 
results and communicating relevant study information to participants’ health providers ( e.g., 
cessation of drugs, changes in dosage, etc.)  
 
Prior to implementation, all studies in need of internal monitoring must have a monitoring 
plan approved by t he SRC, including frequency of reviews based on the level of risk and 
accrual target. Typically, high -risk studies are reviewed quarterly by the DSMC, moderate 
           Page 62 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  risk studies are reviewed twice each year, and low risk studies are reviewed annually. 
However, each study is considered independently. Implementation of monitoring plans 
approved by the SRC is the responsibility of the DSMC. The DSMC Coordinator manages 
the logistics associated with DSMC sessions.  
 
Two months prior to a scheduled DSMC review, the PR MS Administrator informs the 
principal investigator and primary study coordinator of the upcoming review.  At this time, 
the research staff is requested to submit a completed DSMC Report Form (Appendix I) and 
associated documents to the PRMS Administrator (for each DSMC review).   
 
In addition to being monitored by the DSMC, clinical studies also undergo annual auditing 
by the SRC (see below).  Two months prior to an annual DSMC review, the PRMS 
Administrator informs the Principal Investigator and primary s tudy coordinator to prepare 
protocol documents for audit and informs the PRMS Audit Committee that an audit is due.  
The Audit Committee audits 10% of charts for a given year, or a minimum of three charts, 
to assess fidelity to the approved protocol, study  documentation, timeliness of adverse 
reporting, accuracy of data collection, and other variables.  The audit report, which lists all 
major and lesser deviations from protocol, is submitted to the Principal Investigator and to 
the DSMC.   
 
One month prior to the DSMC Meeting, the PRMS Administrator distributes pertinent 
documents to the Committee members, including.   
 Completed DSMC Form (Appendix I)  
 Electronic copy of the protocol  
 Spreadsheet including: date of enrollment, patient initials, patient number,  gender, 
age, race, status on study ( i.e., active, follow -up, completed, expired)  
 A copy of the Data Safety Monitoring Plan outlined in the INSPIR application.  
 SAE reports,  follow -up reports, and outcome reports  
 Audit Committee Report (if annual review)  
 
Responsibilities of the DSMC  
 Familiarize themselves with the research protocol(s) and review proposed plans for 
data safety monitoring, and protocol data submitted by the research staff.  
 Review annual audit report from the PRMS Audit Committee to evalua te the 
appropriateness of th e conduct of the study.   
 When applicable, review interim analyses of toxicity data prepared by the study 
statis tician according to the data safety monitoring plan and upon special request. 
Recommendations regarding study modi fication, or termination of study accrual based 
on these analyses can be made at that time by the DSMC. Modifications may include 
dropping a treatment arm based on toxicity results, dose adjustment, increasing or 
decreasing sample size, etc.   
 Provide the PI and the Cancer Center S cientific Review Committee with a written 
report following each DSMC meeting summarizing its review of the trial as related to 
the cumulative toxicities observed and any relevant recommendations related to 
continuing , amending or terminating accrual to the trial.  
           Page 63 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  
  The Committee has the authority to require amendments, to recommend suspension 
or termination of any research activities that fall under its jurisdiction, and to institute 
other requirements to improve par ticipant safety  
 
 Confidentiality Procedures:  No communication of the deliberations or 
recommendations of the DSMC is allowed outside the DSMC, except as provided for in 
the DSM policy. It is also understood that industry studies are considered propriet ary to 
the sponsor. Any outcome results are strictly confidential and must not be divulged to 
anyone who is not a member of the DSMC, except as specified in the policy.  
 
DSMC Membership  
 
The Chair of the DSMP is responsible for overseeing all aspects of da ta monitoring, 
ensuring the safety of participants in all clinical trials, particularly institutionally -sponsored, 
investigator -initiated trials, and verifying the validity and integrity of the data provided to the 
DSMC.  
 
Omar Eton, MD; Hematology and Onco logy (DSMC Chair)  
Michael Stone, MD; Surgical Oncology  
Gustavo Mercier, MD Radiology  
Gregory Russo, MD, Radiation Oncology  
David Baribeault, Pharm D, Investigational Pharmacy  
Bhavesh Shah, Pharm D, Investigational Pharmacy  
Gail Wilkes, RN Nurse Educator  
Linda Frattura,  BA Clinical Research Associate, Cancer Clinical Trials Program  
Mary -Tara Roth, Clinical Research Resources Office  
Natalie Erali, CCRP, PRMS Administrator  
Douglas Faller, MD, PhD, Director, Cancer Research Center (ex officio)  
 
Theodore Colton , ScD. Director of Cancer Bio statis tics Resource ( ad hoc ) 
Jack Clark, PhD (Health Policy and Management) ( ad hoc ) 
 
 
The members of the multi -disciplinary DSMC include representatives from medical 
oncology, surgical oncology, radiology, radiation oncology, oncology nursing, pharmacy, 
health policy, the Boston University Clinical Research Resources Office, and the Cancer 
Clinical Trials Office and Pharmacy.  
 
 
Meeting Schedule  
DSMC meetings will be held at least every three months. Special meetings (in person,  via 
telephone or electronic) may be convened when necessary, for urgent concerns regarding 
patient safety or data integrity. The PI or the Scientific Review Committee may request 
unplanned monitoring of a given study. Data will be collected and analyzed a pproximately 
four weeks before the DSMC meeting. A copy of all the analyses will be mailed to the 
DSMC members before the meeting. The timing for ending material will allow two (2) 
weekends for the DSMC members to review it.  
 
           Page 64 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  Data and safety monitoring and  study reviews take place until all subjects have completed 
any protocol -related activities and are beyond the time during which study -related adverse 
events may occur.  
 
 
DSMC Procedures  
 
The DSMC may vote to take one of the following actions for each prot ocol reviewed:  
 
Full Approval: enrollment may continue; no outstanding questions regarding toxicity or 
accrual.  
 
Conditional Approval: enrollment may continue conditional upon satisfactory response by 
the principal investigator to the DSMC concerns regardi ng toxicities and/or accrual and/or 
new information relevant to the trial.  
 
Suspension: enrollment immediately suspended pending principal investigator response to 
the DSMC concerns regarding toxicity and/or accrual patterns.  
 
Closure: study closed due to unacceptable toxicity and/or accrual patterns. The presence 
of three or more of the DSMC voting members constitutes a quorum.  
 
All DSMC decisions are conveyed in writing to the study principal investigator and the 
Scientific Review Committee.  
 
The CCTP Pro tocol Review and Monitoring System (PRMS) Administrator serves as 
recording secretary to the DSMC and is responsible for coordinating all meetings and 
communications.  
 
Study principal investigators may appeal DSMC decisions in writing to the chairman of th e 
DSMC.  
 
Temporary or permanent suspension of any BMC investigator -initiated clinical trial by the 
DSMC will be reported immediately to the BUMC IRB and any relevant study collaborators 
(e.g. pharmaceutical companies).  The monitoring plan is amended as to reflect any new 
monitoring requirements.  
 
If the suspension is temporary, the BUMC IRB and any relevant study collaborators will 
also be notified in a timely manner regarding the resolution of the issues that caused the 
suspension, and the date that the su spension was lifted.  
 
This committee was established in January, 2010 and its procedures will be continually 
reviewed and refined until a more permanent charter can be adopted.  
           Page 65 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15  BUMC Cancer Center Protocol Review and Monitoring System (PRMS)  
 
Please submi t this form two weeks prior to the scheduled DSMC Meeting and attach the following documents:  
•  Electronic copy of the protocol  
•  Spreadsheet including: date of enrollment, pt initials, pt number, gender, age, race, status on study  
•  A copy of the Data Safety Monitoring Plan outlined in the INSPIR application.  
•  SAE reports,  follow -up reports, and outcome reports  
  
BUMC PROTOCOL #:    Activation DATE:   
STUDY STATUS:  Open to Accrual  DATE OF LAST REPORT:   
 
PROTOCOL TITLE  
 
10 Principal Investigator; Prima ry Research Nurse/Associate  
 
11 PROTOCOL ACTIVITY  
Planned Accrual Duration:     
Date First Patient Enrolled at BMC:   Local Accrual to Date / Goal:  
National Accrual to Date / Goal:   /  
/  
# Consented Since Last Report:   Accrual Since Last Report:   
# Eligi ble Since Last Report:   # Ineligible Since Last Report:   
12 Study Status:  (include # of Patients currently active, in follow -up, completed or expired.)  
13  
14  
15 PROTOCOL -SPECIFIC INTERIM ANALYSIS (if applicable)  
16  
17  
18  
19 SAE/UPSER REPORTING SINCE LAST REPORT : List event, causality attribution, expected/not 
expected, patient study ID number, date of occurrence (include cycle #, Day #), and date IRB 
notified.  Attach SAE reports,  follow -up reports, and outcome reports.  
1]  
2]  
3]  
PATIENTS COMPLETED/OFF PROTOCOL  SINCE LAST REPORT w Provide reason [progression, death (include cause), toxicity (specify), completed 
therapy, etc].  Provide detailed supplemental information for patients off study treatment due to toxicity or death.  
 
PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS/EXCEPTIONS SI NCE LAST REPORT w Include both purposeful and accidental  variances in the approved procedures outlined for 
a study in its IRB approved protocol; provide date reported to Regulatory or IRB.  Attach any protocol deviation forms.   
 
OTHER COMMENTS  
 
Inves tigator Signature & Date:   Data Manager Signature 
& Date:   
           Page 66 of 66  
Pomalidomide                           Protocol:  
Protocol version 5/11/15   
 Figure 1 shows the procedures involved in data and safety monitoring.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scientific Review Committee : 
Ensures that protocol has also been 
reviewed and approved by 
Biostatis tical Shared Resource, IR B, 
and Institutional Biosafety 
Committee (if specimens are 
involved)  
 
The Data & Safety Monitoring 
Committee  monitors study progress, 
patient safety, and data integrity 
consistent with approved plan, through 
study completion or termination  Audit Team  conducts annual audit 
through completion of study 
interventions or termination  The Scientific Review Committee  
-Reviews and modifies/approves 
monitoring plan  
-Assigns risk level  
-Sets DSMC dates  
-Sets Audit date  
-Assigns Audit Team  
 
The Data & Safety Mo nitoring 
Committee  determines disposition; 
recommends needed actions and 
revisions to monitoring plan; and 
notifies PI, IRB, and other appropriate 
bodies of results and actions  Scientific Review Committee  
reviews the protocol and other 
required documents  
 
Revise or abort  Approved?  Revised protocol  
Yes No Protocol Review 
and Monitoring 
System Oversight 
Committee  New Investigator -Initiated Study  
Data and Safety 
Monitoring Board  