1 
  
The Evaluation of Thrombogenecity in Patients Undergoing WATCHMAN Left Atrial 
Appendage Closure (TARGET -WATCHMAN) Trial  
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator s: Paul A. Gurbel, M.D.   
 
 
 
 
Device Name: The WATCHMANTM Device  
 
 
 
Sponsor:  Boston Scientific, Inc.  
 
 
 
Site of Investigation: Inova Heart and Vascular Institute at Inova Fairfax Hospital,  
Falls Church, VA  
 
 
Date of Protocol:  5 January  2018 
 
Contact Information:  
Paul A. Gurbel, M.D.  
Inova Center for Thrombosis  Research and Drug Development  
Inova Heart and  Vascular Institute  
3300 Gallows Road  
Falls Church, VA 22042  
Phone: 410 -367-2590 
Fax: 410 -367-2596  
Email: paul.gurbel@inova.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
 
Title: The evaluation of thrombogenecity  in patients undergoing WATCHMAN left atrial 
appendage c losure trial 
 
Short Title:  TARGET -WATCHMAN  
 
Rationale: The results of this study will aid clinicians in better risk stratification of patients 
undergoing WATCHMAN left atrial appendage closure to pr event fut ure thromboembolic and 
bleeding events. Additionally, the information will help guide the management of 
anticoagulation post -WATCHMAN implant, in particular the duration of anticoagulation and 
anti-platelet therapy.  
 
Objectives  
Primary: To identify biomarkers, parameters of thrombosis and platelet function to assist in 
identification of a thrombogenic phenotype in patients undergoing implantation of the 
WATCHMAN left atrial appendage closure device.  
 
Secondary:  
1. Determine differences in thrombogenicity among patients undergoing WATCHMAN left 
atrial appendage closure pre - and up to 1 year post - implant.  
2. Identify blood biomarkers for predicting thrombo -embolic events and /or presence of LA 
thrombus detected on TEE performed 45 days, and a t 1-year post -WATCHMAN implant.  
3. Identify blood biomarkers for predicting major or clinically relevant non -major bleeding 
(CRNM) up t o 1-year post -WATCHMAN implant.  
5. Determine frequency of high on -treatment platelet reactiv ity and correlate to outcomes.  
6. Determine frequency of low, medium, and high risk thrombogenic phenotyp e within the study 
population.  
7. Identify changes in Galectin -3 and sST2 post -WATCHMAN implant and correlate to other 
biomarkers studied.  
 
Study Type : Observational study design.   
 
Study Design: Prospective, single center, observational study.  
 
Study Methodology: This investigation will be conducted in subjects >18 years of age 
scheduled for WATCHMAN device implantation procedure. The study explores novel 
biomarkers to assess thrombogenicity in patients undergoing WATCHMAN left atrial appendage 
closure. Patients will undergo serial assessment of thrombogenicity and fibrosis over a twelve -
month follow -up. 
 
Patients:  A tot al of 30  patients receiving WATCHMAN device implant ation . It is expected that 
an additional 10 patients may be required to be enrolled to account for screen failures.  
 
3 
 Statistical Methodology: Pearsons’ correlation coefficient, univariate and multivariate logistic 
regression models, ROC curve analysis. Statistical calculations will be carried out using SAS® 
for Windows, version 9.3 or later (Cary, NC).  
 
1 INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Specific Aims  
 To quantify and characterize specific biomarkers of thrombogenicity  in patients 
undergoing WATCHMAN implant, both pre - and post -procedure.  
 To identify variations in thrombogenic  phenotypes which play a role in the varied 
incidence of thromboembolic complications amongst patients undergoing percutaneous 
left atrial appendage closure with the WATCHMAN implant  
 Obtain pilot data for  future translational trials aimed at personalizing antithrombotic  
therapy  ( duration of anticoagulation and anti -platelet therapy ) by thrombogenic 
phenotype in WATCHMAN patients.  
 
1.2 Hypothesis  
We hypothe size that serial evaluation of (a ) platel et activation and aggregation, (b ) intrinsic 
thrombogenicity measured by thrombelastography, and (c) selected biomarkers will provide 
the “blueprint” of individual hemostasis to precisely characterize patients who have 
thrombotic or bleeding tendencies.  The latter will facilitate future efforts to personalize 
antithrombotic therapy regimens during and following WATCHMAN implant.  
 
1.3 Background and Significance  
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is associated with an increased risk of stroke and thromboembolism .1 
Anticoagulation, with either warfarin or the novel anticoagulants (NOACs) is recommended 
for patients at increased risk of stroke, based on the CHA2DS2 -VASc scoring system. 
However, treatment with these agents is not without its limitations and may be asso ciated 
with serious side effects, of which major gastrointestinal bleeding and hemorrhagic stroke are 
the most devastating. Non -pharmacologic strategies for stroke prevention in patients with 
atrial fibrillation exist.  Percutaneous left atrial appendage c losure with the WATCHMAN 
device is an FDA approved modality, and exists as an option for stroke reduction in patients 
with atrial fibrillation, deemed to be at high risk for long term anticoagulation.   
 
Current guidelines for WATCHMAN implant require that  a patient must be treated with at 
least 45 days of warfarin post WATCHMAN implant and then six months of a combination 
of aspirin and clopidogrel. This duration of therapy is based on the data from two large 
clinical trials (Protect AF and Prevail) involv ing WATCHMAN implant and several CAP 
registries.2-5  
 
No data exists on whether there are differences in markers of thrombogen icity among 
patients undergoing WATCHMAN implant, and whether those differences could be used to 
guide the management of anticoagu lation and anti -platelet therapy pre - and post -
WATCHMAN implant. The purpose of this study will be to quantify and characterize 
specific biomarkers of thrombogenicity in patients undergoing WATCHMAN implant, both 
pre- and post -procedure. In addition, we se ek to find variations in thrombogenic phenotypes 
4 
 which play a role in the varied incidence of thromboembolic complications amongst patients 
undergoing percutaneous left atrial appendage closure with the WATCHMAN implant.  
Furthermore , the individual thrombo genic phenotype may be used to guide anticoagulation in 
these patients, more specifically the duration of anticoagulation and anti -platelet therapy.  
This will be established by utilizing biomarkers assessed by thrombelastography (TEG), 
platelet aggregation , CAT assay, fibrinogen levels,  urinary  thromboxane, D -dimer, CRP and 
PAI-1. We hypothesize that by utilizing these assays, we can accurately identify a 
thrombogenic phenotype in patients undergoing WATCHMAN implant for left atrial 
appendage closure and he lp predict and manage the risk of subsequent thrombotic 
complications. The proteins soluble ST2 (sST2) and galectin -3 are currently gaining 
mounting interest as candidate biomarkers in cardiac disease which have been utilized to 
measure acute inflammation to chronic inflamm ation and tissue fibrinogenisis . In this pilot 
study, we will assess changes in Galectin -3 and sST2 post -WATCHMAN implant and 
correlate to other biomarkers studied.  
 
2 POST -IMPLANTATION CARE  
The device implantation procedure is performed in  a standard fashion per device implant 
protocol in  the cardiac catheterization laboratory. Device selection is based on accurate left atrial 
appendage measurements obtained in multiple angles. The device is permeable to blood thus 
patients require post -procedure warfarin therapy for 45 days on a dose assuring a therapeutic 
INR level  and ASA 81mg . A transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is performed for device 
assessment 45 days post -procedure after which a decision is made to discontinue warfarin. If the 
TEE shows no leak > 5mm around the device and no left atrial (LA) thrombus, warfarin is 
discontinued and the patient is treated with clop idogrel 75 mg and aspirin 325 mg for up to 6 
months, after which the clopidogrel is discontinued and aspirin  162-325mg th ereafter. If the 
follow -up TEE at 45 days shows a leak > 5mm around the device or a LA thrombus is noted, the 
patient will need to remain on warfarin for another 6 months (or upon resolution of thrombus ), 
and another TEE performed thereafter.   
 
If the TEE performed at 45 days shows that the opening of the LAA is not adequately closed, 
another TEE may be scheduled at around 6 months to re -evaluate whether adequate closer of the 
LAA has occurred. At about 12 months after the WATCHMAN implant, another TEE is 
performed to check on the device and make sure that the LAA is still closed.  
 
3 STUDY DESIGN AND SUBJECT SELECTION  
3.1 Study Type  
This is an observational study tha t will be conducted in subjects  scheduled for the 
WATCHMAN device implantation . The laboratory assessments (see section 1.1) will be 
performed at the baseline (pre -procedure), post -implantation, 45 days, 6 months, and 12 
months post -procedure (see table 1).  
 
3.2 Duration of Study  
Subject participation will be for 12 months after obtaining consent . 
 
3.3 Number of Subjects  
Thirty patients scheduled for WATCHMAN device implantation.  
5 
 3.4 Study Population  
3.4.1 Population Characteristics  
3.4.1.1  Gender and racial and ethnic origin of subjects  
The study’s intended population is inclusive of both genders (mal es and females), and all 
racial and ethnic groups and subgroups.   
 
3.4.1.2  Age of s ubjects  
Subject enrollment will be comprised of subjects >18 years of age.  
 
3.4.2 Vulnerable Population  
Children, pregnant women, institutionalized persons, and persons with decisional 
incapacity will be not be enrolled in this study.  
 
3.5 Recruitment  
Recruitment will occur at the Inova Heart and Vascular Institute. The expected length of the 
recruitment period  is 16 months . The average number of WATCHMAN left atrial appendage 
closure procedures performed at INOVA is approximated to be 60 per year. If the study 
conduct (e.g. recruitment rate; drop -out rate; data quality; protocol compliance) does not 
suggest a p roper completion of the trial within the reasonable time frame as agreed upon, the 
recruitment period may be extended to reach the desired sample size.  
 
3.6 Inclusion Criteria  
o Subject indicated and scheduled for WATCHMAN device implantation at IHVI.  
o Subjec t may be of either sex and of any race, and must be >18 years of age.  
o Subject must be willing and able to give appropriate informed consent.  
o The subject is able to read and has signed and dated the informed consent document 
including authorization perm itting release of personal health information approved by the 
investigator's Institutional Review Board (IRB).  
 
3.7 Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects will be excluded from entry if ANY of the criteria listed below are met:  
o Subjects with contraindications for WATCHMAN device implantation  
- Intracardiac thrombus is visualized by echocardiographic imaging  
- An atrial septal defect repair or closure device or a patent foramen ovale repair or 
closure device is present  
- The LAA anatomy will not accommodate a device  
- Any of the customary contraindications for other percutaneous catheterization 
procedures (e.g., patient size too small to accommodate TEE probe or required 
catheters) or conditions (e.g., active infection, bleeding disorder) are present.  
- There are contrain dications to the use of warfarin, aspirin, or clopidogrel  
- The patient has a known hypersensitivity to any portion of the device material or 
the individual components such that the use of the WATCHMAN Device is 
contraindicated  
o Ligated or oversewn left atriu m 
o Concurrent p articipati on in any investigational study  
6 
 o Subject likely to not be available to complete all protocol -required study visits or 
procedures, to the best of the subject's and investigator's knowledge  
o History or evidence of any other clinically s ignificant disorder, condition, or disease other 
than those outlined above that, in the opinion of the investigator, may compromise the 
ability of the subject to give written informed consent, would pose a risk to subject safety 
or interfere with the study  evaluation, procedures, or completion.  
 
4 STUDY METHODS  
4.1 Laboratory Measurements  
Phlebotomy sites will be carefully chosen to minimize risk  and platelet activation. In 
addition, blood from the left atrium via transeptal sheath will be collected during the 
procedure to compare clotting at the site of implant and the periphery. After discarding the 
first 2 -3mL of free flowing blood, the blood collection tubes will be filled to capacity and 
gently inverted 3 to 5 times to ensure complete m ixing of the anticoagulant. At each visit 
blood (total=approximately 17 ml  each visit ) will be collected in two 3.2% trisodium citrate 
tubes (light transmittance aggregometry  and thrombelastography ), one CTAD tube 
containing buffered citrate solution, theo phylline, adenosine and dipyridamole  (activation 
markers ) and one serum separator tube ( lipid and biomarker measurements ).  
 
 Platelet Aggregation by Light Transmittance Aggregometry  (LTA) (Chronolog)  
      Platelet aggregation will be assessed in platelet -rich plasma using a Chronolog  
Lumi -Aggregometer (model 490 -4D) with the AggroLink software packag e after  
stimulation with 5 and 20 µM ADP, 2mM AA, and 4ug/ml collagen.6 
 
 TEG6S with citrated multi -channel cartridge   
The TEG6s instrument is a microfluidic fully automated cartridge -based device. The 
standard hemostasis assay cartridge (Citrated Multi -Channel, CMC) uses a citrated blood 
sample that is mixed with  dried reagents within each of the 4 channels, ea ch with calcium  
chloride (to reverse the sodium citrate) and: (1) kaolin, (2) kaolin+ tissue factor activated 
(RapidTEG), (3) kaolin + heparinase,  and (4) kaolin + abciximab (functional 
fibrinogen) .7 
 
 Thrombogram (CAT assay) : Uses a slow fluorogenic thromb in substrate and continuous 
comparison to a simultaneously run calibrator, thrombin generation can be monitored 
automatically, on line, in clotting PPP or PRP at a throughput of up to 100 samples per 
hour. The resulting "Thrombogram" in PPP measure patient s with hypo - or 
hypercoagulable phenotypes.8 
 Urinary 11 -dehydrothromboxane B2 (UTBx) : Measures endogenous platelet activation.9 
 
 Soluble biomarkers  (fibrinogen, d -dimer, hsCRP, and PAI) to indicate thrombogenicity, 
oxidative stress, endothelial dysfunction , and inflammation.  
 
 Markers of fibrosis:  sST2 and Galectin -3 markers measure maladaptive response to tissue 
fibrosis .10 
7 
 4.2 Primary and Secondary Objectives  
4.2.1 Primary Objective  
To identify biomarkers, parameters of thrombosis and platelet function to assist in               
identification of a thrombogenic phenotype in patients undergoing implantation of the 
WATCHMAN left atrial appendage closure device.  
 
4.2.2 Secondary Objectives  
 Identify blood biomarkers for predicting thrombo -embolic events  and/or presence 
of LA thrombus detected on TEE performed 45 days, and at 1 -year post -
WATCHMAN implant.  
 Determine differences in thrombogenicity among patients undergoing 
WATCHMAN left atrial appendage closure pre - and up to 1 year post - implant.  
 Identify blood biomarkers for pr edicting thrombo -embolic events  and/or presence 
of LA thrombus detected on TEE performed 45 days, and at 1 -year post -
WATCHMAN implant.  
  Identify blood biomarkers for predicting major or clinically relevant non -major 
bleeding (CRNM) up to 1 -year post -WATCH MAN implant.  
 Determine frequency of high on -treatment platelet reactivity and correlate to 
outcomes.  
 Determine frequency of low, medium, and high risk thrombogenic phenotype 
within the study population.  
 Identify changes in Galectin -3 and sST2 post-WATCHMAN implant and correlate 
to other biomarkers studied.  
 
4.2.3 Clinical Endpoints  
 Thrombo -embolic events (Death, Stroke, and MI) and/or presence  of LA thrombus 
detected on TEE.  
 Bleeding  using Academic Research Consortium (BARC)  definition.  
 
4.3 Informed Con sent 
The research staff will meet with the participant to discuss the study, explain the goals, 
risks/benefits, answer questions, while allowing adequate time and privacy for decision 
making, and then obtaining a signed consent document. Patients incapable  of providing 
consent due to a medical situation will not be approached for study participation. No study 
related procedures may commence without a signed consent form.  
 
5 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS/DATA ANALYSIS  
   
5.1 Statistical C alculations  
No data exists on whether there are differences in markers of thrombogen icity among 
patients undergoing WATCHMAN implant, and if those differences could be used to guide 
the management of anticoagulation and anti -platelet therapy pre - and post -WATCHMAN 
implant. Similar pharmacodynamic studies  conducted in  device trials (Coronary Stent,  
TAVR ) have  typically enrolled  30- 75 patients to determine serial changes  in 
thrombogenicity and in biomarkers after implant. N o similar size analysis has been 
8 
 performed with  WATCHMAN patients.  As such a reasonable calculation of a sample size 
based on the accepted error rate is currently not feasible.   
5.2 Statistical Analysis  
Categorical variables will be expressed as n (%). Continuous variables with normal 
distributions will be reported as mean [standard deviation (SD)], while variables not having a 
normal distribution were reported as median (interquartile). Wilcoxon signed rank tests or 
paired t -tests will be performed to test differences in lab values before and after implant.  
Correlation analysis will be performed by Pears on’s correlation coefficient.  Univariate and 
multivariate  logistic regression model s will be used to determine predictors of  clinical 
endpoints .  The predictive cut -point va lues of platelet function tests or rate of fibrinolysis 
will be a ssessed by ROC curve analysis. Statistical calculations will be carried out using 
SAS® for Windows, version 9.3 or later (Cary, NC).  
 
5.3 Future Experiments:   
Our initial pilot study will allow for adjustments to our experimental methodology and will 
provide insights into the potential value of this analysis for determining an individual 
WATCHMAN recip ient’s degree of antithrombotic therapy.   If our pilot data is interesting 
we then pl an to expa nd our analysis to a consortium of WATCHMAN research centers . A 
larger cohort will allow validation of our initial findings.  Future experiments will then focus 
on titration of anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy to reduce the risk of bleeding and 
thrombotic complications.  In addition, the individual thrombogenic phenotype may be used 
to guide anticoagulation in these patients, more specifically the duration of anticoagulation 
and anti -platelet therapy. To facilitate these and future studies, we plan t o submit our pilot 
data generated from this grant as part of future grant applications.   
 
6 VISIT SCHEDULE AND ASSESSMENTS  
Informed consent will be obtained from subjects meeting the inclusion criteria and none of the 
exclusion criteria before the initiatio n of any study -specific procedures. The study comprises of 4  
periods: (1) Procedural (pre and post WATCHMAN implantation,  (2) 45 days post -procedure, 
(3) 6 months post -procedure, and (4) 12 months post -procedure . Required  assessments for each 
study visit are listed in Table 1 . Subjects should be seen for visits on the designa ted day or 
according to the allowed window period (see Table 1).  
 
Each clinic visit includes laboratory measurements, safety assessment, and health and 
concomitant medication review. A complete physical exam is required for visit 1 (baseline).  
 
 Laboratory measurements   
Laboratory measurements (see section 4.1) will be obtained at baseline (prior to device 
implantation procedure), immediately post -procedure , 45 days, 6 months, and 12 months 
post-procedure. Laboratory measurements needed at baseline and immediately post -
procedure will be done while the subject is on the pre -op area, angiography suite, and/or 
recovery area. The study will require clinic visits d uring the re quired laboratory 
measurements for 45 days, 6 months, and 12 month post -procedure.  
 
 
9 
  Health and concomitant medication review  
During the follow -up clinic visits, changes in participant’s medical condition (any new 
diagnosis, etc.) and concomit ant medications should be updated. Note that only 
anticoagulation and anti -platelet therapies will be collected. Adverse events will be reported, 
side effects and symptoms assessed.  
 
 Physical Exam  
A physical exam will b e conducted by the investigator  during the screening period after 
obtaining consent to evaluate the general status of the subject and to further elucidate patient 
symptoms, risk factors, or concerns that may increase the subject’s risk for adverse events.  
 
 Safety assessments  
Safety ass essments will consist of monitoring and recording of  serious a dverse events  (see 
section  10). The occurrence of adverse events should be sought by non -directive questioning 
of the subject at each visit during the study. AEs may also be detected when these are 
volunteered by the subject during or between visits or through physical examination, 
laboratory test, or other assessments. For the purpose of this study, only (a) thromboembolic 
and (b) bleeding events, and (c) serious adverse events (SAEs) directly r elated to study 
procedures, or (d) SAEs not previously reported to a left atrial appendage closure device or 
implantation (see device package insert) with potential relatedness to the WATCHMAN 
device  will be collected and reported (see section 10).  
 
Additional assessments required to ensure safety of subjects should be administered as 
deemed necessary by the investigator on a case by case basis .  
 
Table 1  
Schedule of Events  
 V1 
 V25 V35 V45 
 Pre-
procedure  Immediately 
post-
procedure  45 days 
post-
procedure  
(+ 10 days)  6 months 
post-
procedure 
(+1 month ) 12 months post -
procedure   
(+ 1-month ) 
Informed Consent  X     
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  X     
Medical History  X     
Review Prior/Concomitant 
Medications1 X X X X X 
Physical Examination  X     
Height, weight, Blood 
pressure, heart rate 
measurements  X     
TEE2 X  X  X 
Laboratory Measurements: 
TEG6S and platelet 
aggregation   X X X X X 
10 
  V1 
 V25 V35 V45 
 Pre-
procedure  Immediately 
post-
procedure  45 days 
post-
procedure  
(+ 10 days)  6 months 
post-
procedure 
(+1 month ) 12 months post -
procedure   
(+ 1-month ) 
Laboratory Measurements:  
Thrombogram (CAT assay), 
urinary 
thromboxane,biomarkers, 
markers of fibrosis  X X6 X X X3 
Adverse events4 X X X X X 
 
1 Anticoagulation and anti -platelet therapies only  
2 Standard of care procedure  
3 Thrombogram, urinary thromboxane, biomarkers, and markers of fibrosis obtained only if subject have 
reports of thromboembolic events post-implantation  
4Only thromboemboli c and bleeding events, SAEs  not previously reported to WATCHMAN  device or 
implantation procedure (see device package insert ) with potential relatedness to the WATCHMAN 
device /implantation procedure  and SAEs  directly related to study procedures will be collected  
5The 45 days, 6 months, and 12 month visits post -procedure coincide with recommended standard of care 
follow -up visits post -WATCHMAN implantation procedure .  
6Urinary thromboxane will not be performed  at post -procedure time point  
 
6.1 Timing of Assessments  
6.1.1 Visit 1: Procedural Day  
6.1.1.1  Pre-procedure  
The site principal investigator is responsible for reviewing and confirming that the 
subject signed and dated the ICF prior to any study -related procedure s. Additionally, 
the site PI is responsible for reviewing and confirming that each subject met all 
inclusion  and none of the exclusion criteria prior to WATCHMAN device placement.  
 
       The following tests and procedures are performed prior to device implan tation:  
 Subject demograph ic and baseline characteristics.  
- Demographic d ata to be collected on all subjects include: date of bi rth, 
age, sex, race, and ethnicity .  
 Past medical history and co -morbidities  
 Height and weight blood pressure and heart rate prio r to procedure  
 Concomitant medication review. Only anticoagulants and anti -platelet 
medications will be recorded in source documents (CRFs) . 
 Perform complete physical examination . 
 Laborato ry measurements for TEG 6S, platelet aggregation, thrombogram, 
urina ry thromboxane, biomarkers, and markers of fibrosis will be obtained 
prior to implantation procedure.  
 
6.1.1.2  Immediately post -procedure  
The procedure will be completed according to operating physician’s standard practice 
in an angiography suite. The following te sts and procedures are performed 
immediately after device implantation : 
11 
  Laboratory measurements for TEG 6S, platelet aggregation, thrombogram, , 
biomarkers, and markers of fibrosis will be obtained immediately post -
procedure . 
 Concomitant medication: all anticoagulant and antiplatelet medications will be 
collected . 
 Safety assessment (see section 10)  
 
6.1.2 Treatment Failures  
Failure to implant the WATCHMAN device will be recorded on the paper CRF as a 
treatment failure. In the event of a failure to implant the d evice, each site will follow their 
standard of care procedures and/or commercially available products to ensure safety of the 
subject. The reason for unsuccessful implantation (e.g. product malfunction) will be 
documented. Subjects will be exited from the study after failure and no other study -related 
procedures are required.  
 
6.1.3 Follow -Up Assessments  
Subjects are followed until 12 months after device implantation. Subjects will have follow -
up visits at 45 days, 6 months, and 12 months post -procedure. These vi sits may coincide 
with standard of care follow -up visits post WATCHMAN device implantation procedure.  
 
The following assessments will be performed at each in -person follow -up visit  
 Laboratory measurements (see table 1 for laboratory measurements required 
for each follow -up visit) will be obtained . 
 Adverse event monitoring ( see section 10).  
 Health and medication review. Anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapies will be 
collected.  
 
6.2 Lost to Follow -Up and Subject Withdrawal  
All subjects should be encouraged to  return for protocol -required clinic visits for evaluation 
during the study follow -up period. If a subject is unable to return for a clinic visit, all attempts 
should be documented in the source documents. If the subject does not respond to 3 telephone 
calls, then the Investigator must send the subject a certified letter. Only after failing to contact 
the subject using the methods above will the subject be considered a lost to follow -up.  
 
If the subject withdraws from the study, the reason for withdrawal m ust be documented. 
Possible reasons for early withdrawal may include but are not limited to the following:  
 Subject decides to withdraw from the study. Documentation of subject’s decision 
to withdraw is documented in the CRFs . 
 The Investigator may choose to  withdraw a subject from the study if there are 
safety concerns.  
 Death  
 
7 DATA MANAGEMENT  
7.1 Data Storage and Management  
Designated study site staff will record data required by the protocol into the CRFs and enter it 
into the electronic database. Authorized re search staff will review the CRFs for completeness 
12 
 and accuracy and make any necessary corrections to the data entered into the electronic 
database. Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to 
the requirements of the  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).  
Each subject screened and enrolled will be assigned a subject identification number (ID) and a 
list of subjects with their corresponding subject ID will be maintained separately from 
collected data. Physical CRFs will be stored in the research site in a locked office and 
electronic subject data will be locked in a password protected file on a secure internet server, 
accessed only by authorized research staff.   
 
7.2 Records Retention  
The Investigator will maintain the records of final CRFs (CDROM copies), worksheets, paper 
source documents, and all other study -specific documentation in accordance with ICH 
Guidelines. Essential documents should be retained until at least two (2) years after  the 
investigation is formally discontinued.  
 
7.3 Confidentiality  
Subject information will be kept confidential as according to HIPAA requirements. Subject 
data will be stored and ma naged as outlined in section 7.1 . All data records will be stored on 
site unti l 2 years after the investigation is formally discontinued. Paper records will be 
shredded and recycled. Records stored on a computer hard drive will be erased using a 
commercial software application designed to remove all data from the storage device.   
 
7.4 Oversight  
The principal investigator holds ultimate responsibility for the oversight and execution of the 
data and safety monitoring plan. This research site will be fully committed in the ongoing 
review and refinement of the trial’s processes to assure su bject safety, data validity and 
integrity, and regulatory compliance.  
 
8 HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION (RISKS, BENEFITS, AND ALTERNATIVES)  
8.1 Risks  
8.1.2 Potential Loss of P rivacy  
Protected health information (PHI) will be collected during the study. The risk for breach of 
confidentiality and privacy will be minimized by shielding the subjects unlinking his or her 
identity from his or her personal health information.  
8.1.3 Potential Adverse E vents  
For the purpose of this study  (see section 10) , only thromboembolic and bleeding events, 
SAEs  related to study procedures  (e.g. nerve damage directly related to blood draw), and 
SAEs not previously reported by device manufacturer with potential relatedness to the device  
or implantation procedure  (see package insert)  will be collected a nd reported . SAEs should 
be treated appropriately and managed as according to standard of care.  
 
8.1.4 Economic risk  
Subjects in the study may lose time at work or home and spend more time in the research site 
more than usual. Visit schedules will be made flexi ble for subjects (as allowed by protocol).  
 
 
13 
 8.2 Benefits and Alternatives  
There are no direct benefits to the patient. Participation in the study is entirely voluntary. The 
alternative is not to participate in the trial.  
 
9 SUBJECT COMPENSATION  
9.1  Costs  
This is an investigator -initiated study sponsored by Boston Scientific, Inc. The subject or their 
insurance company will not be billed for study -specific procedures (e.g. laboratory 
measurements for TEG 6S, etc.). All study -specific tests and procedures wi ll be paid for by the 
research site.  
 
9.2  Payment  
Subjects may receive up to $75 for their participation in this study. Subjects will be reimbursed 
$25 for each follow -up visit at the study site to cover their expenses associated with those 
visits.  
 
10 ADVER SE EVENT REPORTING  
10.1 AE Reporting  
  For the purpose of this study, o nly the following adverse events will be collected and reported:  
 
-Thromboembolic  events  
-Bleeding events  using BARC definitions (see section 10.5)  
-SAEs  related to study procedures (i.e. SAEs directly r elated to phlebotomy procedure)  
-SAEs not previously reported by device manufacturer with potential relatedness to the 
device or implant procedure. For serious adverse events not previously documented in 
study device’s Package Insert (new occurre nce) and are thought to be related to the study 
device  or implant procedure , the investigator may urgently require further information 
from the investigator for Health Authority reporting. Boston Scientific Corporation or 
designee may need to issue an IDE Safety Report (Investigator Notification) to inform all 
investigators involved in any study with the same device that this SAE has been reported.  
 
10.2 Adverse Events Treatment  
All AEs s hould be treated appropriately and managed as according to standard of care. The 
action taken to treat the AE should be recorded on the AE CRF  (see section 10.3). Assessment 
should be made at each visit (or more frequently, if necessary) of any changes in severity , 
relationship to the study procedures (if applicable) , the interventions required  to treat it, and the 
outcome.  
 
10.3 Adverse Event Reporting    
The principal investigator has the primary responsibility for SAE identification, documentation, 
grading, an d assignment of attrib ution to the study intervention . Note that only SAEs related to 
study procedures (e.g. arterial puncture , etc.), clinica l endpoints (see section 4.2.3), and SAEs 
not previously reported by manufacturer with potential relatedness to device or implantation 
procedure will be collected  and reported. SAEs must be recorded in the AE CRF with the 
following information:  
 -AE term  
 -The intensity grade ( CTCAE v4.03 grading)  
14 
  -The relationship to study procedure  
 -Attribution  
 -Duration  
 -Occurrence (known risks for study procedure -expected, unexpected)  
 -Other contributing causes  
 -Actions in response to event  
 -Outcome  
 -Criteria f or SAE  
 
10.4 AE Grading Scale  
The descriptions and grading scales found in NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse 
Events (CTCAE) version 4. 03 will be used for AE reporting . Each AE term is associated with a 
5-point severity scale.   
 
10.5 Bleeding Definitions  
Bleeding events will be documented using the Bleeding Academic Research Consor tium 
(BARC) standard definitions described below (excluding Type 4) .11 
 
Bleeding Academic Research Consortium Definition for Bleeding  
Type 0 : No bleeding  
Type 1 : 
Bleeding that  is not actionable and does not cause the patient to seek unscheduled 
performance of studies, hospitalization, or treatment by a health -care professional; may 
include episodes leading to self -discontinuation of medical therapy by the patient without 
consul ting a health -care professional.  
Type 2 : 
Any overt, actionable sign of hemorrhage (e.g., more bleeding than would be expected for a 
clinical circumstance, including bleeding found by imaging alone) that does not fit the 
criteria for type 3, 4, or 5 but do es meet at least one of the following criteria:  
• requiring nonsurgical, medical intervention by a health -care professional,  
• leading to hospitalization or increased level of care, or  
• prompting evaluation  
Type 3 : 
Type 3a:  
• Overt bleeding plus hemoglobin drop of 3 to < 5 g/dL* (provided hemoglobin drop is 
related to bleed)  
• Any transfusion with overt bleeding  
Type 3b:  
• Overt bleeding plus hemoglobin drop ≥5 g/dL* (provided hemoglobin drop is related to  
      bleed),  
• Cardiac tamponade,  
• Bleeding requiring surgical intervention for control (excluding 
dental/nasal/skin/hemorrhoid),  
• Bleeding requiring intravenous vasoactive agents  
Type 3c:  
• Intracranial hemorrhage (does not include microbleeds or hemorrhagic transformation,  
15 
       does in clude intraspinal),  
• Subcategories confirmed by autopsy or imaging or lumbar puncture,  
• Intraocular bleed compromising vision.  
Type 4: (not required for this trial)  
• CABG -related bleeding,  
• Perioperative intracranial bleeding within 48 h,  
• Reopera tion after closure of sternotomy for the purpose of controlling bleeding  
• Transfusion of ≥ 5 U whole blood or packed red blood cells within a 48 -h period,  
• Chest tube output more than or equal to 2L within a 24 -h period  
Type 5: Fatal bleeding  
Type 5a:  
• Probable fatal bleeding; no autopsy or imaging confirmation but clinically suspicious  
Type 5b:  
• Definite fatal bleeding; overt bleeding or autopsy or imaging confirmation  
 
10.6 Protocol Deviations and Violations  
The principal investigator will not deviate from the protocol without obtaining approval from 
the IRB or Ethics Committee and the sponsor. Protocol deviations that occur will be reported 
to the Inova IRB at the time of continuing review. Protocol violation s that affect the subject’s 
rights and safety, and/or affects study integrity will be reported to the Inova IRB within 10 
working days of event knowledge.  
 
11 FUNDING  
This is an investigator -initiated study sponsored by Boston Scientific, Inc. There is no 
investigational product involved. Treatment received by the  subject will be as according to main 
provider’s discretion as according to standard of care.  
 
12 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST    
The investigators declare no conflict s of interest linked to this study.   
 
13 FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT  
The research site is equipped with its own laboratory equipment, which includes state of the art 
technologies for platelet assays, centrifuges, refrigerators, and freezers for study  specimen 
processing and storage. For outpatient visits, s ubjects will be seen in the site’s outpatient clinic 
room equipped with supplies and equipment for necessary for subject assessment . 
 
14 OUTSIDE CONSULTANTS/COLLABORATORS  
There are no outside consultants/collaborators participating.  
 
15 CONTRACTURAL AG REEMENTS      
There are no outside consultants/collaborators participating.  
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 16 REFERENCES   
 
1 Reddy V, Price M, Valderrabano M, Sanchez J, Doshi S, Gordon N, Holmes D Jr.  
TCT -26 Long -Term Event Rates for Left Atrial Appendage Closure with WATCHMAN:  
PROTECT AF 5 Year and PREVAIL 3 Year Follow -up. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016 Nov  
1;68(18S ) 
 
2 Holmes DR Jr, Kar S, Price MJ, Whisenant B, Sievert H, Doshi SK, Huber K,  
Reddy VY. Prospective randomized evaluation of the Watchman Left Atrial Appendage  
Closure dev ice in patients with atrial fibrillation versus long -term warfarin  
therapy: the PREVAIL trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Jul 8;64(1):1 -12. doi:  
10.1016/j.jacc.2014.04.029. Erratum in: J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Sep  
16;64(11):1186. PubMed PMID: 24998121.  
 
3 Belg aid DR, Khan Z, Zaidi M, Hobbs A. Prospective randomized evaluation of the  
watchman left atrial appendage closure device in patients with atrial  
fibrillation versus long -term warfarin therapy: The PREVAIL trial. Int J Cardiol.  
2016 Sep 15;219:177 -9.  
 
4  Price MJ, Reddy VY, Valderrábano M, Halperin JL, Gibson DN, Gordon N, Huber  
KC, Holmes DR Jr. Bleeding Outcomes After Left Atrial Appendage Closure Compared  
With Long -Term Warfarin: A Pooled, Patient -Level Analysis of the WATCHMAN  
Randomized Trial Experien ce. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2015 Dec 28;8(15):1925 -32. 
 
5 Holmes DR Jr, Doshi SK, Kar S, Price MJ, Sanchez JM, Sievert H, Valderrabano  
M, Reddy VY. Left Atrial Appendage Closure as an Alternative to Warfarin for  
Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation: A Patient -Level Meta -Analysis. J Am  
Coll Cardiol. 2015 Jun 23;65(24):2614 -23.  
 
6 Gurbel PA, Bliden KP, Butler K, Tantry US, Gesheff T, Wei C, Teng R, Antonino  
MJ, Patil SB, Karunakaran A, Kereiakes DJ, Parris C, Purdy D, Wilson V, Ledley  
GS, Storey RF. Ran domized double -blind assessment of the ONSET and OFFSET of the  
antiplatelet effects of ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients with stable  
coronary artery disease: the ONSET/OFFSET study. Circulation. 2009 Dec  
22;120(25):2577 -85. 
 
7 Gurbel PA, Bliden KP, Tantry US, Monroe AL, Muresan AA, Brunner NE,  
Lopez -Espina CG, Delmenico PR, Cohen E, Raviv G, Haugen DL, Ereth MH. First  
report of the point -of-care TEG: A technical validation study of the TEG -6S 
system. Platelets. 2016 Nov;27(7):642 -649. 
 
8 Kelchter mans H, Pelkmans L, Bouwhuis A, Schurgers E, Lindhout T, Huskens D,  
Miszta A, Hemker HC, Lancé MD, de Laat B. Simultaneous measurement of thrombin  
generation and fibrin formation in whole blood under flow conditions. Thromb  
17 
 Haemost. 2016 Jul 4;116(1):134 -45. 
 
9 Bliden KP, Singla A, Gesheff MG, Toth PP, Tabrizchi A, Ens G, Guyer K, Singh  
M, Franzese CJ, Stapleton D, Tantry US, Gurbel PA. Statin therapy and thromboxane  
generation in patients with coronary artery disease treated with high -dose 
aspirin. Thromb Haemost. 2014 Aug;112(2):323 -31. 
 
10 Mueller T, Gegenhuber A, Leitner I, Poelz W, Haltmayer M, Dieplinger B.  
Diagnostic and prognostic accuracy of galectin -3 and soluble ST2 for acute heart  
failure. Clin Chim Acta. 2016 Oct 29.  
 
11 Rao SV, Mehran R. Evalu ating the bite of the BARC. Circulation. 2012 Mar  
20;125(11):1344 -6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 