 
 
Revised by PR 2017    
 
 
 
Dissemi nation of the Look Ahead Weight Management Treatment in the Military  
 
Date: 10/04/2017  
 
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   PROTOCOL FOR CLINICAL INVESTIGATION – NON -EXEMPT HUMAN  
(Wilford Hall Ambulatory Surgical Center – WHASC)  
 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
1.  Title:  
Dissemination of the Look Ahead Study: Weight Management Treatment in the Military  
FWH 20130095H  
 
2.0. Principal Investigator (PI):             WHASC PI:                  WHASC Co-PI: 
Name   Dr. Ann Hryshko -Mullen , PhD,  
GS-13 Dr. Gerald W. Talcott, PhD, Col, 
USAF (ret) * 
Rank/Corps or Civilian Rating
  N/A N/A 
Date of IRB Approved CITI 
Training &  
Date of Good Clinical Practice 
Training  2 Mar 2017  25 Sept 2017 
Branch of Service  N/A N/A 
AD Mil/DoD Civilian/Ctr/Non -DoD 
Civ DoD Civilian  Non -DoD Civ  
Department  & Base   Specialty Services  Flight/ WHASC  University of Virginia / WHASC  
Phone & Pager #   210-292-5968  210-292-3813 /210-632-9178 (c) 
E-Mail Address &   
AKO/DKO E -Mail Address  Ann.s.hryhskomullen.civ@mail.mil  
 gerald.w.talcott.ctr@mail.mil   
WHASC & DoD Assurance # and 
Expiration Date  DoD Assurance: F50007  
Expires: 31 Dec 2018  FWA00006183  
Expires: 13 Jun 2018  
 
3.0. Research Plan:  
 
3.1. Purpose :   
This study aims to  take the procedural and research -based  lessons learned from a  pilot weight loss 
intervention  study  (WHASC # FWH2013005 3H), conducted by the WHASC and The University of Tennessee 
Health Science Center in 2013 , and apply them to the current  study of 248 active duty military personnel 
stationed at Lackland AFB .  The pilot study translate d and tailor ed the Look Ahead weight loss intervention 
to an overweight/obese active duty U.S. Air Force population , while accommodating the lifestyle and 
environment that is unique to military members , and evaluate d materials and procedures used.  
 
3.2. Hypotheses , Research Questions  or Objectives :  
The objective of this intervention research  is to conduct a behavioral weight loss program and compare 
the intervention groups . 
 
4.  Brief Summary of the study :  
This  study is a weight loss intervention program tailored to a military population.  We will randomize the 
248 participants to either an intensive counselor -initiated  weight loss  intervention or a self -paced  weight 
loss intervention. Neither of the aforementioned conditions are controls and both treatments are 
expected to result in weight reduction.  
    
5. Subjects:    
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   Study participants wil l be active duty military personnel stationed  at Lackland A ir Force Base in San 
Antonio, Texas . 
 
6. Inclusion/exclusion criteria :   
Participants must be Active duty military  personnel stationed at Lackland A ir Force Base with at least one 
year left on station,  >18 years of age, English speaking, have a Body Ma ss Index ( BMI ) > 25kg/m2 , and 
obtain clearance by a  healthcare provider for participation in the study.    
 
7.  Number of Subjects:   TOTAL NUMBER OF SUBJECTS (nation -wide/study -wide) :  WHASC   248 
 
8.  Use of an Investigational New Drug:  N/A 
 
9.  Use of  an Investigational Device:   N/A 
 
10. Use of a Placebo: N/A 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   PROTOCOL FOR CLINICAL INVESTIGATION – NON -EXEMPT HUMAN  
(Wilford Hall Ambulatory Surgical Center – WHASC)  
 
1.  Title:  
A Dissemination of the Look Ahead Study: Weight Management Treatment in the Military  
FWH 20130095H  
 
2.0. Principal Investigator (PI):            WHASC PI:       WHASC  Co-PI: 
Name   Dr. Ann Hryshko -Mullen, PhD,  GS-
13 Gerald W. Talcott, PhD, Col, 
USAF (ret)  
Rank/Corps or Civilian Rating
  N/A N/A 
Date of IRB Approved CITI 
Training &  
Date of Good Clinical Practice 
Training  2 Mar 2017  25 Sept 2017 
Branch of Service  N/A N/A 
AD Mil/DoD Civilian/Ctr/Non -DoD 
Civ DoD Civilian  Non -DoD Civ  
Department  & Base   Specialty Services  Flight/ WHASC  University of Virginia / WHASC  
Phone & Pager #   210-292-5968  210-292-3813/210-632-9178  
E-Mail Address &   
AKO/DKO E -Mail Address  Ann.s.hryhskomullen.civ@mail.mil  
 Gerald.w. talcott.ctr@mail.mil  
 
DoD Assurance # and Expiration 
Date  FWA00001750, exp. 14 Oct 2019   
DoD # F50007 exp. 31 Dec 2018  FWA00006183  
Expires: 13 Jun 2018  
         
2.1. Associate Investigators (AI) :   
Provide the current list of all “engaged” AIs for the study based on 45 CFR 46.102, e.g., for purposes of 
research the AI: (1) obtains data through intervention or interaction with a research subject(s); and/or (2) 
obtains identifiable private information and/or protected health informat ion about the research subject(s); 
and/or (3) obtains the informed consent of human subjects for research.  All “engaged” investigators 
must complete IRB approved CITI training.  
 
Name  AD/DoD 
Civ/Ctr/  
Non -DoD Civ  Rank/ Corps or Civilian 
Rating/Title  Date of CITI 
Training  Phone & Pager #  
Robert Klesges  Non -DoD Civ  Co-PI/UVa 3 Jan 2015 901-448-5900  
Rebecca Krukowski, PhD  Non -DoD Civ  Co-PI/Assistant 
Professor /UTHSC  15 Jul 2015  901-448-2426  
Marion Hare , MD  Non -DoD Civ  Associate Professor /UTHSC  5 Feb 2015 901-448-3752  
Melissa Little, PhD  Non -Dod Civ  Assistant Professor/ UVA  8 Jan 2015  901-448-6878  
Phyllis Richey, PhD  Non -DoD Civ  Associate Professor /UTHSC  9 Mar 2015  901-448-8635  
Karen Johnson, MD  Non -DoD Civ  Interim Dept Chair /UTHSC  16 May 2016  901-448-5900  
Daniel Cassidy, PhD  AD Capt/WHASC Psychologist  13 Jul 2017 210-292-5869  
 
 
 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   2.2. Research Assistants (RA) & Coordinators (RC) :   
Provide the current list of all “engaged” RAs & RCs for the study based on 45 CFR 46.102, e.g., for purposes 
of research the RA or RC: (1) obtains data through intervention or interaction with a research subject(s); 
and/or (2) obtains identifiable private information and/or protected hea lth information about the research 
subject(s); and/or (3) obtains the informed consent of human subjects for research.  All “engaged” R as 
and RCs must complete IRB approved CITI training.  
Name  AD/DoD 
Civ/Ctr/  
Non -DoD Civ  Rank/Corps or Civilian 
Rating/Title  Date of CITI 
Training  
 Phone  & Pager #   
Karen LeRoy  Non -DoD Civ  Research Director  18 Apr 201 6 210-292-3504  
Christin Pasker  Non -DoD Civ  Research Specialist  13 Jan 2016 210-671-5565  
Allen Jones  Non -DoD Civ  Research Specialist  12 Jan 2016 210-671-1994  
Tina Boothe  Non -DoD Civ  Research Specialist  05 Jan 201 6 210-671-8175  
Rickey King  Non -DoD Civ  Research Specialist  8 Mar  2017 210-671-8174  
Leslie Gladney  Non -DoD Civ  Program Coordinator  19 Jun 2017 210-671-1997  
Kevin Love  Non -DoD Civ  Research Specialist  21 Jan 2016  210-671-1085  
Lisa McKenna  Non -DoD Civ  Administrative Coordinator  16 Dec 2014 210-292-3813  
Mark Amen  Non -DoD Civ  IT Specialist  22 Jan 2015 210-292-4469  
Annette Martinez  Non -DoD Civ  Research Specialist  29 May 2015  210-671-2076  
Trina Bolden  Non -DoD Civ  Research Specialist  18 Apr 2016  210-671-1600  
  
2.3. The research relevance of this protocol focuses on:  
[] Diagnosis  [x] Treatment     [] M edical Utilization/Managed Care   [] Prevention   [] Medical Readiness   
[] Other  
 
2.4. Location(s):    
a. Collaborating Facilities:  WHASC  
 b. Air Force Sites seeking Regional IRB :  N/A  
 c. List study sponsors:  NIH- National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases  
 
3.0  Research Plan : 
 
3.1. Purpose :   
This study aims to take the procedural and research -based lessons learned from a pilot weight loss 
intervention study (WHASC # FWH2013005 3H), conducted by  the WHASC and  The University of Tennessee 
Health Science Center in 2013, and apply them to the current  study of 248 active duty military personnel .  
The pilot study translated and tailored the Look Ahead weight loss intervention to an overweight/obese 
active duty U.S. Air Force population, while accommodating the lifestyle and environment that is unique to 
military members , and evaluate d materials and procedures used.  
 
3.2. Hypotheses, Research Questions or Objectives :   
The obje ctive of this study is to conduct a  behavioral weight loss program  and compare the  intervention 
groups . 
   
3.3. Significance:    
The current study is inspired by t he successful Look Ahead trial, a behavioral science obesity intervention 
treatment program that included: a collaborative approach, education, behavioral support, and 
motivational interviewing. The unique nature of this weight reduction study is signific ant. To our 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   knowledge, there had  not been a successful translation of a highly efficacious obesity treatment in the 
military  until the WHASC and The University of Tennessee Health Science Center implemented a pilot 
version of the Fit Blue program for active d uty U.S. Air Force members in 2013.  Following a successful pilot 
and extant results from the Look Ahead trial, we expect success during the full scale Fit Blue study.  
 
3.4. Military Relevance:   
Obesity and being overweight are serious problems throughout the military. O verweight and o besity is a 
major cause of discharge of military personnel. Additionally, treating obesity -related problems in the 
military is extremely costly. If successful, this project would represent, to our knowledge, the fir st full scale  
translation of a highly efficacious obesity treatment in the military.  
 
3.5. Background and Review of Literature:   
According to the report Mission: Readiness. Too Fat to Fight , being overweight is now by far the leading 
medical reason for rejection in the military. Also, obesity is a major cause for the discharge of uniformed 
personnel.  Unfortunately, the impact of weight problems on the military does not stop with those turned 
away from military service. From 1998 to 2008, the Armed Forces Health Surveillance Center reported the 
percent of active military members who experienced medical encounters for overweight or obesity 
increased. The estimated total days of work lost from abs enteeism associated with active -duty personnel 
who are overwe ight or obese was 658,000.  DOD  estimated that being overweight and obese  has cost  the 
DOD $103 million dollars in health care costs annually  (Dall, TM et al.,  2007) . Note this estimate is for ac tive 
duty personnel only.  
 
In reference to specific instrumentation to be used in this study:  Bull et al. (2009) examined reliability and 
validity of the Global Physical Activity Questionnaire ( GPAQ ) among participants in 9 countries; Reliability 
coefficients were of moderate to substantial strength (Kappa 0.67 to 0.73; Spearman's rho 0.67 to 0.81), 
and results on concurrent validity between an established measure of physical activity, the Internation al 
Physical Activity Questionnaires, and GPAQ also showed a moderate to strong positive relationship (range 
0.45 to 0.65) .  The Health Utility Index’s  validity and reliability demonstrated in many populations 
(Horsman et al., 2003) .   Hedrick, Comber et al . (2013) found significant test –retest reliability between the 
visit 1 and 2 Behavioral Questionnaire ( BEVQ ) responses for the fifteen beverage items.  Hedrick et al. also 
determine that the BEVQ -15 can detect change in beverage intake over time based on a n intervention. In 
another study, Hedrick, Savla et al. (2012) reported on the concurrent validity between three 24 -hour 
dietary recalls and the BEVQ -15; they found that the BEVQ -15 index of total beverage energy was highly 
correlated with the 24 -hour diet ary recalls of beverage intake (R2=0.59).  In reference to the Multifactor 
Screener , Thompson et al., (2004) reported that in various validation studies, the correlations between 
screener estimates and estimated true intake were 0.5 –0.8. 
 
3.5.1. Bibliograp hy:  
1. Mission:Readiness. Too Fat to Fight. Washington, DC , 2010.  
2. Bull FC, Maslin TS, Armstrong T.  Global physical a ctivity questionnaire (GPAQ):  N ine country reliability 
and validity study.  J Phys Act Health. Nov 2009;6(6):790 -804.  
3. Dall TM, Zhang Y, Chen YJ, et al. Cost associated with being overweight and with obesity, high alcohol 
consumption, and tobacco use within the military health system's T RICARE prime -enrolled population. Am 
J Health Promo t. Nov -Dec 2007;22(2):120 -139.  
4. Hedrick VE, Comber DL, et al. A rapid beverage intake questionnaire can detect changes in be verage 
intake. Eating Behaviors. 2013; 14(1), 90 -94. 
5. Hedrick VE, Salva J, et al.  Development of a brief questionnaire to assess habitual beverage intake 
(BEVQ -15): Sugar -sweetened beverages and total beverage energy intake . 2012  
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   6. Horsman J, et al. The Health Utilities Index (HUI): Concepts, measurement properties, and applicatio ns. 
Health and Qu ality of Life Outcomes, 1:54.  
7. Thompson FE et al. (2004) Performance of a short tool to assess dietary intakes of fruits and vegetables, 
percentage energy from fat and fibre. Public Health Nutrition, 7(8), 1097 -1106.  
  
3.6. Research Design and Methods : 
This is a two -arm individually randomized trial.  The Counselor -initiated  group will follow a more intense 
counselor -initiated  approach, where the counselor schedules weekly telephone sessions and contacts the 
group participants  directly.  The Self-paced  group uses a less intense approach, where the participants can 
receive the same telephone counseling sessions as the counselor -initiated  group, only if they call  the 
counselor.  Neither of the intervention groups  are controls, an d both treatments are expected to result in 
weight reduction.  A more detailed description of each randomization group is located below in section 
3.6.1.  
 
Potential participants will be recruited through the use of advertisements,  electronic bulletins, emails , 
newspapers,  and word -of-mouth.   Persons interested in learning more about the study  will call the study 
phone number , or can request a call back through the website or in person event .  If the participant 
decides that he/she is interested based on initial information by phone, a civilian research staff member 
will complete a phone -based  pre-screening consultation .  Through this pre -screening consultation , the 
individual will receive a more detailed description of the project if t hey meet  eligibility criteria (see Section 
3.6.7) .  If the person is considering participation, they will be scheduled for a screening visit (in -person) at 
the Lackland AFB Health and Wellness Center (HAWC)  within the next week .  The pre-screening 
consultation  will take approximately 15 minutes.  
 
At the in -person screening visit,  a civilian research staff member will review the consent document  with 
the study candidate , allow time for the individual to read  the document and ask any que stions.   If the 
individual wishes to review the consent with their family or physician, they will be allowed the time to do 
so and will be re -scheduled to complete the screening visit once they are ready to sign the consent form.   If 
the individual wants t o volunteer, they will be asked to sign the consent document and the HIPAA 
Authorization document.  Another civilian member of the research team will witness the consent.  Once 
informed consent is obtained, the research staff will  confirm  eligibility by  collect ing demographic 
information, physical measurements (i.e. height, weight), an array of screening visit questionnaires (see 
Section 3.6.2), and contact information.  A 1 -2 week run -in will be explained (see section 3.6.2)  and the 
participant will receiv e additional instructions that must be completed in order to be included in the study 
(i.e. obtain military medical clearance , participate in 1 week of dietary and physical activity self -monitoring).   
The screening visit wil l take approximately 6 0 minutes.  
 
The participant will return for the baseline visit in approximately 1 -2 weeks  at the HAWC .  At this visit, run -in 
material will be reviewed for completeness, physical meas urements will be taken (i.e. weight, abdominal 
circumferen ce, blood pressure and heart rate), and the participant will be randomly placed into one of the 
two treatment groups .  The abdominal circumference measurement will be assessed using the criteria 
stated in AFI 36 -2905, “Fitness Program,” Section 7.  At this  time, research staff will also inquire into 
current adverse events , such as physical injuries, illnesses or hospitalizations . Fifty percent of participants 
will be randomly assigned , using a computerized block design unique to the Filemaker v12 relational  
database application,  to the more structured  counselor -initiated  weight loss intervention and 50% to the 
self-paced  weight loss intervention.  If the participant is assigned to the counselor -initiated  group , he/she 
will be oriented to the group and study website, provided  lesson materials , exercise guidelines , an 
electronic body scale, meal replacements, and measuring cups and spoons .  If the participant is assigned to 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   the self -paced group, he/she will be oriented to the group and study website, and will be provided exercise 
guidelines, an electronic body scale, measuring cups and spoons, and a  Fit Blue t -shirt.  The Body Trace 
electronic body scales will be issued to the subject on a hand receipt  and will be returned at the 
completion of the study .  This baseline visit will take approximately 60 minutes.  For the Look Ahead Pilot 
Study (FWH20130053H), the AF/SG Legal Office made the determination that meal replacements, weight 
scale and measuring cups/spoons were integral to the study and should not be  considered as gifts to the 
research subjects.  It was also determined the use of meal replacements was not in violation of regulations 
governing a BAS food allowance for active duty members.  The gift of a T -shirt was within the monetary 
allowance for gif ts to military members and did not require any special approval through the Hospital 
Commander.  The WHASC IRB agreed these items did not increase the risk to the subjects nor were they 
unfair inducements or coercive.  
 
The participants will spend the next 12 months  involved in study inte rventions, diet a nd exercise self -
monitoring,  daily weighing , and may also include  telephone counseling sessions .  A detailed descript ion of 
intervention procedures is listed in section 3.6.1.  
 
The next in -person session  will occur 4 months after randomization .  This is the 4 -month follow -up visit.  At 
this visit, physical measure ments will be collected (i.e. height, weight, abdominal circumference,  blood 
pressure and heart rate)  and participants will complete various questio nnaires .  A Quality of Life 
questionnaire will also be administered by study personnel.   A business card magnet will be given to them 
as a reminder of the 12 month follow up visit.  
 
The final in -person session will occur 12 months after randomization.  At this visit, physical measurements 
will be collected (i.e. height, weight, abdominal circumference, blood pressure and heart rate), participants 
will complete various questionnaires and a program evaluation.  A Quality of Life questionnaire will also be 
adm inistered by study personnel.   A template EPR/OPR bullet will be given to them upon completion of the 
last data collection visit.  
 
A total of four  research -related in-person visits will be required o ver the 12 -month span of the study.  All in-
person visits  will occur at the HAWC and will be conducted by civilian research staff.   Adve rse events will 
be assessed at the baseline visit, follow -up visit s, and via self -report  during the 12 -month intervention 
period.  
Retention methods that may be u sed for telephone session reminders and  follow up data collection visits 
can include: phone calls, emails, and text reminders of appointments , as well as a letter sent via encrypted 
email to participants from Dr. Talcott and/or Dr. Hryshko -Mullen.     In ad dition, we will mail greeting  cards 
to increase retention throughout the year long program.   There will also be quarterly e -newsletters and 
retention events  for all active ppts .  The newsletter could include such things as tips about weight loss, 
inform ppts about the next retention event, a featured 5K in the community, recruitment and study 
updates.  Ppts will be given an option to opt out of the e -newsletter.   All active ppts w ill be invited to 
events related to diet and exercise.  Possible events could include guest speakers, classes on healthy food 
preparation, gardening demonstration, guided tours at a local farmer’s market or grocery store.    
  
3.6.1. Interventions, Observa tions, or Data Sought:  
The study will compare two modalities of implementing  the successful Look AHEAD intervention. One 
treatment group will follow a  Counselor -initiated  approach , while the  other group  will follow a  Self-paced  
approach.  
 
Proc edures for the Counselor -initiated  intervention group:  
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   • Individual Telephone Sessions are a main component of this stu dy. Participants will receive 28  
telephone sessions over a 12 month  period by interventionists trained in behavior change skills 
(e.g., goa l setting, problem solving, relapse prevention, stimulus control) and motivational 
interviewing techniques. The telephone calls will be designed to provide strategies to help 
participants with weight loss. Partic ipants will receive a call once a week for the first sixteen 
weeks (16 calls), every other week for the next 16 weeks (8 calls), and monthly for the duration of 
the treatment (4 calls).   Quality control will be  assessed randomly by a study investigator  to 
ensure consistency and fidelity of the intervention.  Random q uality control is conducted  only 
with  the participant’s consent . 
• Email Communication: Email will be used to provide participants with feedback and suggestions to 
help wit h weight loss.  
• Self-Monitoring: Because self -monitoring has bee n shown to be significantly associated with weight 
loss, participants will be asked to monitor food intake, physical activity and weight daily. 
Participants will be asked to use  the Lose It  app/website which, with their permission, the study 
staff will be able to access in order to retrieve their food and physical activity information. 
Monitoring of weight will be facilitated by the use of the BodyTrace e -scale. Each participant will 
be provided a scale which will upload their daily weight to a secure websi te (HIPPA compliant) 
which our study staff can access. Participants will receive feedback on self -monitoring through e -
mail.  
• Dietary goals: Dietary goals will be based on weight and will be personalized based on participants ’ 
weight-loss progress and goals.  
• Meal Replacements: Mea l replacements will be provided  to participants in the counselor -initiated 
group  at no cost . Vouchers for meal replacement products will be given to participants to use at 
local grocery stores.  Participa nts will be encouraged to replace 2 meals (typically breakfa st and 
lunch) and a snack with  meal replacements .  Participants may elect not to use meal replacements. 
If so, detailed meal plans (for all meals) using common foods that are designed to control p ortion 
size and calories will be  provided to the participant.  
• Physical Activity Goals: Taking into account the amount of physical activity for each participant at the 
beginning of the program, p articipants will be asked to gradually increase their cardiore spiratory 
(aerobic) exercise > 5 days per week at a moderate to vigorous intensity level for 40 to 60 
minutes per day ( each bout lasting a minimum of 10 minutes) , until they reach a total of 225-250 
minutes per week. Upon reaching th e physical activity goa l of 225 -250 minutes per week, they will 
be asked to maintain this level of physical activity.  
• Toolbox: The Too lbox includes additional treatment options for those who wish to take advantage of 
them.  Items may include: food scales, exercise videos, cookbooks, etc. These items may be 
checked out from Fit Blue  staff members, but must be returned prior to the completi on of the 
study.  
• Challenge  – There will be  several  challenges  (e.g. 10,000 steps per day for 30 days, dietary self -
monitoring everyday for 30 days) designed to increase participant interest and provide a specifi c 
goal  (e.g. increase self -monitoring , increa se activity level ) during the twelve  month  study period.  
Participants who successfully complete the challen ges will be given a small award (e.g. T -shirt  
valued at approximately $4.34 ).  Value of all study -related awards and incentives will not exceed 
$50 annual limit/person  and do not require any special approval through the Hospital Commander .  
 
Procedures for t he Self-paced  intervention group:  
• Individual Telephone Sessions are provided only when the participant calls the study phone line and  
requests a session with a counselor.  Participants may receive up to  28 telephone sessions over a 
twelve  month  period by interventionists trained in behavior change skills (e.g., goal setting, 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   problem solving, relapse prevention, stimulus control) and motivational interviewing techniques. 
The telephone calls will be designed to provide strategies to help participants with weight loss.   
Quality control will be assessed randomly by a study investigator to ensure consistency and 
fidelity of the interventio n.  Random quality control is conducted only with the participant’s 
consent.  
• Se lf-Monitoring: P articipants will be asked to monitor food intake, physical activity and weight daily. 
Participants will be asked to use the Lose It app/website which, with the ir permission, the study 
staff will be able to access in order to retrieve their food and physical activity information. 
Monitoring of weight will be facilitated by the use of the BodyTrace e -scale. Each participant will 
be provided a scale which will uplo ad their daily weight to a secure website (HIPPA compliant) 
which our study staff can access.  Participants will receive feedback, by request only, on self -
monitoring through e -mail.  
• Dietary goals: D ietary goals will be based on weight and will be persona lized based on participants ’ 
weight -loss progress and goals.  
• Meal Replacements will not be provided to self-paced  participants for the study.  However , 
participants will be encouraged to purchase their own meal replacements , although it is not 
required . Detailed meal plans (for all meals) using common foods that are designed to control 
portion size and calories will be provided to the participant.  
• Physical Activity Goals: Taking into account the amount of physical activity for each participant at the 
beginning of the program, participants will be asked to gradually increase their cardiorespiratory 
(aerobic) exercise > 5 days per week at a moderate to vigorous intensity level (each bout lasting 
a minimum of 10 minutes), until they reach a total of 225 -250 minutes per week. Upon reaching 
the physical activity goal of 225 -250 minu tes per week, they will be encouraged  to maintain this 
level of physical activity.  
 
3.6.2. Data Collection and Processing:   
Pre-screening  (via phone):  
• Descri ption of  the research project  
• Determine  eligibili ty 
• Collect name and contact  number  with oral approval by potential participants  
• Schedule in-person screening visit  
Screening visit  (in-person) : 
• Confirm  eligibility  
• Measure w eight and height  
• Obtain informed consent  
• Collect demographic information  
• Collect  contact information  
• Quality of Life questionnaire (administered by study personnel)  
• Complete brief dietary, physical activity, and weight -related attitudes and behavior questionnaires  
• Explain the  1 to 2 w eek run-in:  The run -in consists of two components: one week of dietary and 
physical act ivity self -monitoring and obtaining a letter from their AF healthcare provider approving 
partici pation in the intervention  (by visiting their healthcare provider or uti lizing MiCare, the Air 
Force’s secure patient portal)  
o Participants will use the Lose It! web/mobile based app to collect their diet and physical 
activity information. Participants will be asked to provide a valid personal e -mail address to 
access and use L ose It! . If they do not have one or do not wish to use their current personal 
email address, study staff will assist them in creating a new account for the purpose of 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   accessing Lose It!. Materials and instruction on using Lose It! will be provided to the 
participa nts. 
 
Baseline v isit (in-person , 1-2 weeks after screening visit ): 
• Determine whether run-in requirements were completed  
• Measure w eight, abdominal circumference, resting blood pressure and rest ing heart rate  
• Randomize participant:  If all of the above are completed satisfactorily, participants will be 
randomized to either the Counselor -initiated  intervention group or the Self-paced  intervention 
group.  
• Orientation to group assignment  and study website  
 
After randomization , participants will be upgraded to the Lose It! Premium app and added to the Fit Blue 
Premium account which will allow study counselors to access their di etary  and physical activity logs in 
order to provide feedback and suggestions. It will also allow this information to be down loaded to the Fit 
Blue database for further analysis and tracking. In order to upgrade to the Lose It! Premium Fit Blue 
account, a valid email address different from that used during the screening run -in diary phase will be 
required.  As before, if the par ticipant does not have a second email, or does not wish to use a current 
personal email address to access the Lose It! Premium Fit Blue account, study staff will assist them in 
creating a new email account to use that will provide them with the necessary a ccess for participation.   
Lose It provides their Premium version to the University of Tennessee Health Science Center as a gift at no 
cost.  
 
• Provide  study materials based on group assignment , including FIT B lue participant lesson materials  
(for the counselor -initiated group only) , Body Trace electronic scales, measuring cups and spoons , 
and exercise guidelines .  
• Self-paced  group will be given instructions on how to receive counseling from study staff if desired 
and a  T-shirt (Counselor -initiated  grou p given T -shirt at time of Self -Monitoring  Challenge ) 
• Assess for adverse events  
• The counselor -initiated group will be given an appointment for their first counseling session.  
 
Follow -up v isit (in-person  at 4 months ): 
• Height, w eight, abdominal circumference, resting blood pressure and resting heart rate will be 
measured  
• Complete the dietary , physical activity , and weight -related attitudes and behavior  questionnaires  
• Quality of Life questionnaire ( re-administered by study personnel)  
• Assess for adverse events  
 
Follow -up visit  (in-person at 12 months):  
• Height, w eight, abdominal circumference, resting blood pressure and resting heart rate will be 
measured  
• Complete the dietary, physical activity, and weight -related attitudes an d behavior questionnaires  
• Quality of Life questionnaire (re -administered by study personnel)  
• Assess for adverse events  
• Program evaluation  
• Air Force Fitness Test score s will be collected  (only for Air Force personnel)  through  Health 
Promotion personnel  
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   Additional procedures for participants who are going to deploy/PCS/separate/retire or have an extended 
TDY:  
 
• DEPLOYE D: Protocol for 4 month and 12 month data collection  
o We will ask th e participant if they might be willing to receive follow -up information forms while 
deployed.  The follow -up information would be sent via  the participants ’ preferred email 
address one time , if the participant agrees.   
o If the participant agrees to receive  an email with attached fo llow-up forms while deployed, an 
email will be  sent immediately reminding them of this approval.  
o If the participant does not want to receive a follow -up email, no email will be sent.  
o Communication frequency  if participant agrees to continue participation in the study while 
deployed : 
▪ One email only du ring deployment  with attached follow -up assessment forms.  
o Measures : 
▪ Weight  
▪ Questionnaires if interested and able  
▪ Will not obtain abdominal circumference, blood pressure, and heart rate  
o Method of data collection:  email  
▪ Deployment email address will NOT be used , unless specifically requested by participant  
o Will give an additional 2 week window on either side of the typical 4 -week data collection 
window  
o For those already deployed, an email will be sent giving options for treatment engagement and 
asking for interest/ability to provide follow -up information  
 
• PCS/RETIRED: Protocol for 4 month and 12 month data collection  
o If retired and in the San Antonio area : 
▪ Communication frequency : 
• Usual protocol  
▪ Measures:  full data collection  
• Weight and height (on the Body Trace scale and another scale, if not in -person)  
• Questionnaires if interested  
• Abdominal circumference, blood pressure, and heart rate  
▪ Method of data collection:  in-person (if possible) ; if not - phone, email , or mail (in this 
order)  
o If not in the San Antonio area : 
o Communication frequency : 
▪ Usual protocol  
o Measures : 
▪ Weight (on the Body Trace scale and another scale)  
▪ Questionnair es 
▪ Will not obtain abdominal circumference, blood pressure, and heart rate  
o Method of data collection:  phone, email, or mail (in this order)  
o Will give an additional 2 week window on either side of the typical 4 -week window to attempt 
in-person data collection  
 
• EXTENDED TDY: Protocol for 4 month and 12 month data collection  
o If in-person data collection is not possible : 
▪ Communication frequency : 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   • Usual protocol  
▪ Measures : 
• Weight (on the Body Trace scale and another scale)  
• Questionnaire  
• Will not obtain abdominal circumference, blood pressure, and heart rate  
▪ Method of data collection:  phone, email, or mail (in this order)  
o Will give an additional 2 week window on either side of the typical 4 -week window to attempt 
in-person data collection  
 
3.6.3. Setting:   
Subje cts will complete  pre-screening  via phone.  The screening , baseline visit, and follow -up visits will be in -
person and will take place at the Lackland AFB Health and Wellness Center (HAWC ). 
 
3.6.4. Date(s):   
Participants will be involved in study related activities for twelve  months  from the time of enrollment.  
 
3.6.5. Source of Research Material :  
Source of Research Material per Participant 
(Procedures)  # Routine 
Care  # Research 
Driven  # Total 
Procedures  
Weight  0 4 4 
Height  0 3 3 
Abdominal Circumference  0 3 3 
Resting Blood Pressure  0 3 3 
Resting Heart Rate  0 3 3 
Phone screen form  0 1 1 
Screening Visit Interview Questions form  0 1 1 
Contact information form  0 1 1 
Demographics form  0 1 1 
Global Physical Activity Questionnaire (GPAQ)  0 3 3 
Behavioral Questionnaire  0 3 3 
Health Utility Index/Quality of Life questionnaire  0 3 3 
Brief Beverage Intake Questionnaire (BEVQ -15) 0 3 3 
Multifactor Screener  0 3 3 
Baseline Visit Interview Questions form  0 1 1 
Program Evaluation  0 1 1 
Air Force Fitness Test score  (AF participants only)  0 1 1 
Physical Assessment Form   0 4 4 
 
3.6.6. Subjects:   Participants will be active duty military personnel currently stationed at Lackland AFB .  
 
3.6.7. Inclusion/ Exclusion  Criteria:  
Inclusion:  Age > 18 years, with a BMI > 25 kg/m2 , and with clearance from a  military healthcare provider for 
participation in the study . 
 
Exclusion  (determined using pre -screening questionnaire) : 
1. Uncontrolled hypertension defined as BP > 140/90  
2. Disability or condition that would limit regular aerobic physical activity  
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   3. Current use of weight loss medication  or other medication/supplement that influences weight  
4. History of cerebral, coronary, peripheral vascular disease, or uncontrolled cardiac arrhythmia  
5. History of uncontrolled congestive heart failure in last 12 months  
6. History of significant kidney or liver disease  
7. History of uncontrolled thyroid disease or pheochromocytoma  
8. Malignancy in last 5 years  (does not include non -melanoma skin cancer)  
9. History of diabetes mellitus treated with a medication that could cause hypoglycemia  
10. Current p regna ncy status , child birth  within the la st 6 months, breastfeeding for less than 6 months 
postpartum, or planning to become pregnant during the study follow -up time  (12 months)  
11. Presence of unstable , emotional or  psychiatric condition  (depression; schizophrenia)  
12. Severe bronchitis or emphysema tha t precludes exercise  
13. History of bariatric surgery or history of significant recent weight loss (> 10 pounds in the past 3 
months)  
14. Scheduled extended leave away from th e San Antonio area in the next 13  months (i.e. planned 
PCS/D eployment /extended TDY  greater than 30 days ) 
15. No computer access for self -monitoring using Lose It! and for email feedback from counselor  
16. More than one failure of the military -proctored  physical fitness  test in the last 12 months  based on 
AFI 36 -2905 (3 Aug 2010), “Fitness Progr am.”  
17. A military member of the same household is already a FIT Blue study participant  
18. Any medical condition or medication that could increase or decrease weight loss that might result 
from the proposed intervention protocol  
19. Any other medical, psychiatric, o r behavioral factors that in the judgment of the screening physician 
may interfere with study participation or the ability to follow the intervention protocol   
 
3.6.8. Instrumentation:   
Phone scr een form (during Pre -screening phone call ) – Includes name and contact number  for scheduling 
screening visit  and eligibility  criteria  
 
Screening Visit Interview Questions form (at preliminary screening visit)  – aimed at learning about 
subject’s thoughts/feelings concerning weight loss, how much weight they’d like to lose, and readiness for 
weight loss  
 
Baseline Visit Interview Questions form (at baseline visit)  – aimed at learning about subject’s 
thoughts/feel ings concerning aspects of their participation thus far  
 
Contact information form  (at screening visit ) - used to collect and update  pertinent contact information  
 
Demographics form  (at screening visit)  – used to collect pertinent demographic data  
 
Physical Assessment Form  (at screening, baseline and follow -up visits)  – used to capture weight, height, 
abdominal  circumference , heart rate  and blood pressure  
 
Global Physical Activity Questionnaire ( GPAQ ) (at screening and  follow -up visit s) – will capture current 
levels of physical activity of various types and the amount of sedentary be havior  
 
 
Revised by PR 2017    
Behavioral Questionnaire  (at screening and  follow -up visit s) – includes descriptive questions related to 
attitudes and behaviors associated with weighing, dietary behaviors , sleep , and weight loss  
 
Health Utility  Index /Quality of Life questionnaire  (at screening and  follow -up visit s) – assesses health 
status and quality of life 
 
Brief Beverage Intake Q uestionnaire  (BEVQ -15) (at screening and  follow -up visit s) – brief  15-item 
assessment of types/amounts of beverage intake over the past month  
  
Multi factor  Screen er (at screening and follow -up visits)  – a rapid assessment of approximate intakes of 
fruits and vegetables, percentage energy from fat, and fiber  
 
Program Evaluation  (at 12 -month follow -up visit)  - includes questions about the participants’ perspectives 
on the helpfulness of various program components and the participants’ recommendat ions for program 
modifications  
 
Air Force Fitness Test Scores (AF personnel Only) (at the 12 -month follow -up visit)  
 
4.0. Human Subject Protection : 
 
4.1. Recruitment :  
Participants will be recruited through advertisements at the Base Health and Wellness Center (HAWC)  and 
other loca tions on Lackland AFB .  We plan to use flyers, business cards, posters, newspaper, word -of-
mouth, and electronic advertisements in base bulletins.   Advertisements will include a phone number and 
Fit Blue  website by which to reach study personnel for more information.  
 
4.2. Consent Processes:   
No study specific procedures will be performed without a written and signed informed consent document  
and HIPAA Authorization .  Participants  who do not demonstrate the ability to understand or the 
willingness to sign the written informed consent document will be excluded fr om study entry.    
  
4.3 Participation Compensation:   Subjects will not be paid for participation in this study.  
 
4.4. Assent Process:  N/A 
 
4.5. Benefits:   
Both study intervention s (Counselor -initiated  and Self-paced ) may produce weight loss .  Participants in 
both intervention groups may increase their knowledge about healthy eating and physical activity.   
Participants in both intervention groups will receive a complementary Fit Blue T -shirt.  The gift of a T -shirt 
(at baseline visit for self -paced and after a challenge is met for counselor -initiated) is within the monetary 
allowance for gifts to military members and does not require Hospital Commander approval.  However, 
there is no guarantee or promise of direct benefit for subjects participa ting in the study.  
 
4.6. Risks:    
All study procedures involve only minimal risks to subjects.   Since regular exercise will be encouraged, 
some people may experience some muscle soreness. There are no major risks associated with taking 
measurements (height , weight, waist circumference, and blood  pressure), taking a health history or 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   collecting questionnaire data. There is, however, the potential risk of loss of confidentiality. Being a part of 
this study while pregnant may expose the unborn child to significant risks, t herefore, pregnant women wi ll 
be excluded from the study. Women who become pregnant during the course of the study will be 
withdrawn from the study and referred to their doctor for medical care.   Although, we do not anticipate 
that any study related procedures would increase a parti cipant’s risk of suffering from emotional distress 
or having  thoughts of suicide , study procedures are in place so that research staff can respond 
appropriately if this should occur (see section 4.9  for description of Study Procedures for Distressed 
Partic ipants).  
 
4.7. Costs:  N/A 
 
4.8. Safeguards for Protecting Information  
The research consents will be stored in a locked cabinet in a locked room.   All research data including 
patient  demographics will be kept in an electronic database, which will be encrypted, double password 
protected and the access will be restricted.   The research data will be de -identified and any links to 
identifiable data will be destroyed as soon as possible. The research data will not be utilized for further 
research activity beyond the protocol stipulations without additional IRB approval.  
 
Other study related documents will also be stored in a locked cabinet in a locked room.  In addition, this 
research data will be scanned into an electronic database at UTHSC via a secure co nnection using Cisco 
VPN client.  The data will be encrypted, double password protected, and access will be restricted.  The 
research database will be managed and maintained at UTHSC.   Upon completion of the study protocol, 
UTHSC will destroy paper forms a nd links.  
 
4.9. Safeguards  for Protecting Subjects:  
The principal investigator will be responsible for the protocol safety monitoring.  The PI will make study 
documents readily available for inspe ction by the local IRB and over sight staff for confirmation of the 
study data.  
Note: A Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) has been developed for this study (see attached).  
 
Study p rocedures for distressed participants were developed for research staff to follow in the event that 
a participant is suffer ing from emotional distress or having thoughts of suicide .   
 
Several precautions have been taken to both limit the likelihood of participants suffering from a significant 
psychological event and in the unlikely event that one occurs, we have established a ppropriate steps for 
the Counselor to follow in order to get the participant help.  
 
A. PRESCREENING FOR DISTRESS  
1. All prospective participants are pre -screened by a military medical provider who both screens the 
participants in person and review s their electro nic medical record.  Specifically, all prospective 
participants are asked whether they have any, “ Emotional or psychiatric conditions (depression, 
schizophrenia)”  asked on the Fit Blue  Research Project Medical Clearance Form .   
 
2. Additionally, every prospective participant is asked prior to randomization and every enrolled 
participant is asked at each follow -up data collection visit the following distress -related questions 
from the Health Utilities Index  (HUI) , a quality of life me asure, in a Counselor -administered interview:  
 
 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   “33. Would you de scribe yourself as having felt:”  
a)  Somewhat unhappy   
b) Very unhappy   
c) So unhappy that life was not worthwhile?   
__ Don’t know  
__ Refused  
 
“35. How often did you feel fretful, angry, irritable,  anxious or depressed?”  
a) Rarely  
b) Occasionally  
c) Often  
d) Almost always  
__ Don't know  
__ Refused  
 
“36. During the past four weeks, did you feel extremely fretful, angry, irritable, anxious or 
depres sed; to the point of needing professional help? ” 
a)  Yes  
b) No  
__ Don't know  
__Refused  
 
3. If any of the following responses are endorsed by the prospective/enrolled participant, the 
Counselor will (after completing the full Health Utilities Index interview) probe briefly for more 
information about the circumstances of their distress, including potential suicidality.  
 
a. Critical responses include:  
1) Item 33 responses b (“very unhappy”) and c (“so unhappy that life was not worthwhile”)  
2) Item 35 responses c (“often”) and d (“almost always”)  
3) Item 36 response a (“yes”)  
 
b. Counselor will ask whether the participant has a plan to harm his/herself (to act on his/her 
suicidal thoughts):  
1) Do you have thoughts about suicide?  
2) If yes , do you have a plan to hurt yourself?  
 
B. PRO CEDURES  FOR PARTICIPANT DISTRESS  
 
1. MILD TO MODERATE DISTRESS  
a. If the participant reports m ild to moderate stress (but no suicidal thoughts or morbid 
ideations such as thoughts of wanting to be dead), the participant will be provided a listing 
of community resources and encouraged to seek help.   
b. Counselor will help the participant develop an ac tion plan to be seen by a mental health 
professional should their distress persist over multiple sessions or worsen.   
c. Counselor will document the conversation and support materials provided.  
d. Continued distress without professional assistance and support c an be a reason to  
temporarily or permanently withdraw the participant from  the Fit Blue  Weight Loss 
Intervention protocol.  
 
 
Revised by PR 2017    
2. SEVERE DISTRESS AND SUICIDE IDEATIONS WITH NO INTENT OR PLAN  Participant  reports 
suicidal thoughts but no intent or plan.  
 
a. Counselor will develop an action plan to get help from a mental health professional.  This 
conversation with the participant and the action plan will be documented.  
b. Counselor will follow -up in two b usiness days to ensure that the participant has an 
appointment with mental health scheduled.   
c. Counselor will also inform the participant that if their condition worsens the following 
emergency resources are available:  
1) Mental Health Clinic (open for Walk -Ins during duty hours: 210-292-7361)  
2) SAMMC ED: 210 -916-0808  
3) Crisis Hotline  call: 1-800 -273-TALK  
 
3. SEVERE DISTRESS AND SUICIDAL IDEATION WITH INTENT OR PLAN  
a. Participant reports suicidal thoughts and intent or plan.  
b. Once a participant endorses suicidal intent they are not to be left alone.   
c. Whether the Counselor – Participant contact is by phone or in -person, the Counselor will 
attempt to maintain contact with the participant, identify the location of the Particip ant and 
maintain verbal contact until help arrives.  
d. Counselor will contact another staff member and indicate they have an emergency and 
direct them to call 911  (Lackland Command Post:  210 -671-4225; Security Forces: 210 -671-3030; 
Ambulance: 210 -292-7331 ) and provide an address.     
e. Counselor will document the conversation with the prospective participant and all actions 
taken.  
 
4.9.1. Minimizing Risks:    
This study follows evidence -based lifestyle recommendations for weight loss and improving health, 
including diet change and regular exercise. If followed according to program guidelines, no adverse 
medical conditions are expected to result from the research activities.  
  
There are no major risks associated with taking measurements ( i.e. height,  weight,  blood pressure,  and 
waist  circumference), taking a health history or collecting questionnaire data. There is, however, the 
potential risk of loss of confidentiality. Every effort will be made to keep participant information  
confidential as describ ed in Section 4.8 . In the event that questions asked make participants feel 
uncomfortable, they may refuse to answer and may take a break at any time during a study visit. However, 
we are not collecting any information that would in any way jeopardize part icipants’ careers in the Air 
Force.  
 
Being a part of this study while pregnant may expose the unborn child to significant risks. Therefore, 
pregnant women will be excluded from the study. Women who are able to become pregnant will be asked 
if they are preg nant at enrollment and each follow -up visit. Women who become pregnant during the 
course of the study will be withdrawn from the study and referred to their doctor for medical care. Women 
may breast feed while participating in this study so long as they have continuously breast fed for at least 
six months postpartum prior to entering the study.  
 
The research may involve risks to the subject (or to the embryo or fetus, if the subject i s or may become 
pregnant), which are currently unforeseeable.  
 
 
Revised by PR 2017    
Any significant new findings developed during the course of this research project, which may impact upon 
the safety and efficacy of the procedure or treatment under study and consequently infl uence 
participants’  willingness to continue participation, will be provided to them . 
   
4.9.2. Vulnerable Populations :  N/A  
 
4.9.3. Clinical C are:   
As all participants will be a ctive duty military  members, medical care (if needed) is provided at no cost 
through their Military Treatment Facility (MTF).  
  
4.9.4. Injury Compensation :  N/A  
 
4.9.5. Data Safety Monitoring:  
The trial will be conducted in compliance with this protocol, International Conference on Harmonization 
(ICH) Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and any applicable national and international regulatory 
requirements. The principal and associate investigators will be monitoring all aspects of the study in 
accordance with the appropriate regulations  in order to:   
1) Ensure protection of study subjects, compliance with the protocol, and accuracy and 
completeness of records.  
2) Verify the prompt reporting of all data points, including reporting  Serious Adverse Ev ents  (SAEs ) 
and checking availability of signed informed consent,  
 
The principal investigator will be responsible for the protocol safety monitoring.  The PI will make study 
documents readily available for inspection by the local IRB and over sight staff for confirmation of the 
study data.  
 
Note: A Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) has been developed for this study (see attached).  
 
5.0. Alternatives :   
Alternatives include not participating in the study, consulting with their P rimary Care Provider  (PCP)  or 
Health and Wellness Center dietary/exercise experts to assist them with weight loss  efforts , joining a 
private weight loss program not affiliated with the military, or self -monitoring of dietary intake and 
physical activity to achieve weig ht loss.   Meal replacements may also be bought at local stores.  
  
6.0. Data Analysis:  
We will analyze changes in BMI and abdominal circumference, as well as data pertaining to dietary intake 
and physical activity from baseline, 4 -month follow -up, and 12 -mont h follow -up. 
 
6.1. Outcome Measures:  
The primary outcome is percentage of weight loss . Secondary outcomes are abdominal  circumference , 
BMI,  and self -reported dietary intake and physical activity. Diet ary intake  will be measured by th e 
Multifactor Screener  and the Beverage Intake Questionnaire (BEVQ -15) and physical activity will be 
measures by the Global Physical Activity Questionnaire (GPAQ). Attitudes and behaviors associated with 
weighing, dietary behaviors, sleep, and weight loss will be measured using descriptive questions.  
 
Participants will be monito red for excessive weight loss ( > 12 pounds per month) and a DSMP has been 
established that outlines plans for monitoring adverse events and excessive drop -outs.  
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   6.2. Sample size estimation/power analysis:    
The study aims to enroll 248 participants, 124 participants in each group .  This distribution  will pro vide a 
diverse representation within each intervention group and will provide the necessary information for data 
and power an alysis.  
 
6.3. Statistical Analysis:  
The primary data analysis will adhere to the intention -to-treat principle and in the final analysis, the 
participants will be categorized according to their initial randomization. We will be using the baseline 
weight as a covariate in the final primary model where we compare the two arms in terms of the 
percentage of weight loss. We also plan to carry out secondary analyses where we will investigate the 
efficacy of the intervention in subgroups of Airmen based o n gender, race, and years of service in the 
Armed Forces. We will also evaluate the impact of adherence on outcome, whether it is number of 
intervention sessions completed, or adherence to dietary intake and physical activity recommendations. 
Finally, we’l l determine the prevalence of Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events in the two treatment 
conditions.   
 
6.4 Number  of Subjects :   
Num ber of subjects planned for 
WHASC  Enrolled in full 
study  248 to result 
in 248 completing the 
full study.  
TOTAL NUMBER OF SUBJECTS (nation -wide/study -wide) :___248___ 
 
7. Duration of Study:   Approximate duration of the study: 54 months  
 
8.  Local and External Support Services:    
A letter of support from the 559th Medical Group  Commander  (559 MDG/CC)  is attached.  The Health and 
Wellness Center on Lackland AFB will also provide work space for three study staff members as well as for 
participant visits /follow ups . 
 
9.  Intramural (GME) a nd Extramural Funding Support:    
The National Institute of Diabetes and  Digestive and Kidney Diseases  provided extramural funding for this 
study . 
 
10. Conflict of Interest:  
If you or any investigator participating in the repository has, or anticipates having, any income from or 
financial interest in: the sponsor of the repository protocol, the supporting organization, or the company 
that owns/licenses the technology being studied, contact the WHASC IRB.  A  “Conflict of interest exists if an 
employee’s position or authority may be used to influence or make decisions that lead to any form of financial 
or personal gain for that employee or for his or her family which includes spouse or dependent children.”   
[NOTE : A conflict of interest or even the appearance of conflict calls into question the judgment or actions 
of the in vestigator in areas that affect the rights and welfare of research subjects and the integrity of the 
research process.  At its worst, conflict of interest may endanger lives, e.g., not only those of the 
immediate research subjects under study, but those of  future patients treated on the basis of biased 
research results.]  
 a. Financial Conflict of Interest: None  
 b. Personal Conflict of Interest: None  
 c. Current Off -Duty Employment: None  
 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   11.  Use of an Investigational  New  Drug , use of a Drug for a non -FDA approved purpose , use of an 
investigative device  or use of a placebo :   
This research uses a n Investigational New Drug       [] YES [x] NO 
This research uses a FDA approved drug for a non -FDA approved purpose                                       [] YES [x] NO 
This research uses an Investigational Device           [] YES  [x] NO  
This research uses a placebo.                                                                                       [] YES  [x] NO  
 
12.  Medical Research Area  for the Study :  (Pick as many as appropriate)  
[] Analytical Chemistry  [] Anatomy  [] Anesthesiology  [] Biochemistry  
[] Cardiovascular Surgery  [] Cardiology  [] Cell Biology  [] Dentistry  
[] Dermatology  [] Dietetics  [] Electrophysiology  [] Endocrinology  
[] Emergency medicine  [] Gastroenterology  [] General Surgery  [] Hematology  
[] Histology  [] Immunology/Allergy  [] Infectious Disease  [] Microbiology  
[] Molecular Biology  [] Neonatology  [] Neurology  [] Neurosurgery  
[] Nursing  [] OB/GYN  [] Occupational Medicine  [] Occupational Therapy  
[] Oncology  [] Ophthalmology  [] Oral/Maxillofacial Surgery  [] Orthopedics  
[] Pathology  [] Pediatrics  [] Pharmacology  [] Physical Therapy  
[] Mental Health  [] Radiology/Imaging  [] Urology  [x] Wellness  
[x] Other (state):  Prevention, Behavioral  
 
13. Attachments:  
1. Certificate s of Compliance  
2. Informed Consent Document  
3. HIPAA Authorization Document  
4. Letter of Support - 559 MDG/CC  
5. Letter of Support - HAWC  
6. Extramural Funding Support Document  
7. Medical Clearance Letter  
8. Phone pre -screen form  
9. Screening Visit Interview Questions form  
10. Baseline Visit Interview Questions form  
11. Contact information form  
12. Demographics form  
13. Physical Assessment Form  (screening, baseline & follow -up visits ) 
14. Global Physical Activity Questionnaire (GPAQ)  
15. Behavioral Questionnaire  
16. Health Utility Index/Quality of Life questionnaire  
17. Brief Beverage Intake Questionnaire (BEVQ -15) 
18. Multifactor Screener  
19. Program Evaluation  
20. Counselor -initiated  Program Participant Lessons  
21. Self-paced  Program Participant Lessons  
22. Recruitment flyer /poster design  
23. Recruitment electronic /newspaper  advertisement  
24. Recruitment business card  
25. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP)  
 
 
 
Revised by PR 2017   14.0. Signature Section  
 
14.1. Principal Investigator  
I am aware that I am not authorized to accept any funds or other form of compensation for conducting 
research.  All subjects will be treated in compliance with all applicable organizational, service, DoD and 
Federal re gulations, and all applicable FDA and HHS guidelines.   I will notify the protocol office prior  to 
PCS/separations actions, or closure.  
 
Dr. Ann Hryshko -Mullen, PhD , GS-13 
Printed Name of Principal Investigator  
 
 
_____________________________  
Signature of Principal Investigator        Date__________  
 
14.2.   PI’s Flight Commander or Department Chair Coordination (WHASC)  
I have considered this protocol and the personnel and resource support involved. I find this prot ocol to 
have sufficient scientific merit for consideration by the Squadron Commander and Institutional Review 
Board Designee.  
 
________________________________________________________________________  
Printed Name of Flight Commander or Department Chair or Program director (WHASC)   
 
_________________________________________________________________________  
Signature block of Flight Commander or Department Ch air or Program director (WHASC)  Date_______  
 
14.3.   PI’s Squadron Commander (WHASC)        
After consideration of this protocol, I find it to have sufficient scientific merit and I approve squadron 
personnel and resource support, as needed.  I understand that I will be the point of contact for correction 
of deficiencies should the principal investigat or fail to meet his/her obligations.  
 
___________________________________________________________  
Printed Name of Squadron Commander or Department Chair (WHASC)  
 
____________________________________________________________  
Signature block of Squadron Comma nder  or Department Chair (WHASC)  Date _______________  
 
14.4. Joint Study.  N/A 