 Nudging High -acuity Emergency Department Patients to Schedule a Follow -up Visit  
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ) 
 
Study Protocol with S tatistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
August 9, 2024  
 
 
  
 Study Protocol  
 
Background  
 
The goal of this campaign is to reduce unnecessary emergency department ( ED) 
visits/encourage patients with high acuity visits who have a Geisinger primary care provider 
(PCP) in the Community Medicine Service Line (CMSL) assigned to follow up with an 
appropriate provider (their PCP or a specialist) in the future. In this campaign, patients will be 
assigned to receive or not receive outreach following ED discharge that is aligned with this goal. 
Outreach will occur via a text message, as well as information added to the patient's after visit 
summary  (AVS) , and will include a call  to action for the patient to schedule a follow -up 
appointment with their PCP or a specialist. The SMS messages and AVS will include a phone 
number to call to schedule an appointment.  The SMS messages will also include a hyper link to 
self-schedule an appointment.  The study will assess whether ED use differs across patients in 
different outreach conditions. It will also examine whether patients followed through on the 
message -specific calls to action in the messages differently across conditions.  
 
Objectives  
 
The study will involve  randomized assignment of patients to different versions of outreach,  
including a treatment  arm that encourages patients in non -emergent situations to call their 
PCP’s  office or a specialis t. Patients will also be provided a number to call through which they 
can schedule an appointment with a provider. SMS messages will include a hyperlink to self -
schedule an appointment with a provider . Both SMS text messages (at 1 day , or 1 day  and 8 
days , post-discharge) and AVS  (printed or available via patient portal upon discharge) will be 
used for active outreach. The control arm will receive the current standard  system outreach and  
AVS. Data will be analyzed to determine which version is most effective at reducing ED use.  
 
Design  
 
This study is a randomized controlled trial with three  study arms. Patients will be randomized to 
receive or not receive  SMS texts  (at 1 day or 1 and 8 days post discharge ) and a  modified AVS 
upon ED discharge.  
 
Methods  
 
At the time of an eligible  patient’s discharge from the ED, that patient  will be  assigned to one of 
the following study arms, based on which of several ranges of randomized  numbers that patient 
was originally assigned in their electronic chart : 
 
1. Current s tandard  practice  (control arm) : Patients in this arm will receive the current 
standard  AVS and whatever typical system outreach occurs . 
2. Follow -up scheduling single notice  (treatment arm) : Patients in this arm will receive 
suggestions for non -ED follow -up care with their PCP or a specialist via SMS messages  
at 1 day post discharge and in their AVS. The outreach will include a scheduling phone 
number to call. SMS messages  will include a hyperlink to self-schedule with a Geisinger 
provider. 
3. Follow -up scheduling notice plus reminder  (treatment arm) : Patients in this arm will 
receive suggestions for non -ED follow -up care with their PCP or a specialist via SMS 
messages at 1 and 8 days post discharge and in their AVS. The outreach will include a 
 scheduling phone number to call. SMS messages will include a hyperlink to self-
schedule with a Geisinger provider . 
 
 
Power Analysis  
 
With 7,500  patients, we would have 80% power to detect a 3.0% absolute decrease in ED visits 
between each active arm and the control arm , with two -tailed alpha of . 15, assuming a 33% 
baseline rate of subsequent ED visits within 120 days . The target effect size and number of 
patients are largely informed by practical considerations regarding the acceptable duration of 
the intervention ( maximum of 6 months , regardless of whether the full sample is achieved ), with 
an effect deemed useful if achieved.  
 
 
Project Status  
 
As of August 9, 2024, when  this document was uploaded, no messages have been sent  or data 
collected or an alyzed . 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Planned Analyses  
 
Primary Outcome : ED visit  [Time Frame: within 12 0 days following  day of discharge ] 
 
Question: Does outreach decrease ED visits  when including  information about follow -up care? 
 
Analysis  (Confirmatory):  We will test the hypothesis that SMS text plus  AVS outreach  (with or 
without reminder)  decrease s the likelihood patients will visit the ED  in the 120 days following  
day of discharge .  We will run an OLS regression including  a categorical  predictor variable 
coding for experimental arm  (0 = control  arm, 1 = single message  arm, 2 = message plus 
reminder  arm).  
 
Other  Pre-specified Outcomes  
 
We will run the analysis described above on the following additional outcomes:  
 
1. PCP/specialist  appointment scheduled  
 
PCP/specialist  appointment scheduled (yes/no)  
 
[Time Frame: within 7 days following day of discharge]  
 
2. PCP/specialist  visit attended  
 
PCP/specialist  appointment attended (yes/no)  
 
[Time Frame: within 7 days following day of discharge]  
 
 3. PCP/specialist  appointment scheduled  
 
PCP/specialist  appointment scheduled (yes/no)  
 
[Time Frame: within 14 days following day of discharge]  
 
4. PCP/specialist  visit attended  
 
PCP/specialist  appointment attended (yes/no)  
 
[Time Frame: within 14 days following day of discharge]  
 
5. PCP/specialist  appointment scheduled  
 
PCP/specialist  appointment scheduled (yes/no)  
 
[Time Frame: within 30 days following day of discharge]  
 
6. PCP/specialist  visit attended  
 
PCP/specialist  appointment attended (yes/no)  
 
[Time Frame: within 30 days following day of discharge]  
 
7. PCP/specialist  appointment scheduled  
 
PCP/specialist  appointment scheduled (yes/no)  
 
[Time Frame: within 60 days following day of discharge]  
 
8. PCP/specialist  visit attended  
 
PCP/specialist  appointment attended (yes/no)  
 
[Time Frame: within 60 days following day of discharge]  
 
 
 
Analysis Notes  
 
Recent work suggests that OLS regressions are appropriate in randomized experiments with 
binary outcome variables such as ours (Gomila, 2021).  
 
 
 
 Reference  
 
Gomila, R. (2021). Logistic or linear? Estimating causal effects of experimental treatments on 
binary outcomes using regression analysis.  Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General , 150(4), 700 -709. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000920  
 