      CONFIDENTIAL  
  
 
Prospective Clinical Evaluation of the Safety and Efficacy 
of NON -INVASIVE Electronic Stimulation for 
Improvement of Muscle Strength and Toning , 
Circumferential Reduction  of the Core and Extremities  
  
Sponsor: Lutronic, Inc.  
Funded by: Lutronic, Inc.  
 
  Date: September 8, 2021  
                  Clinical Protocol Number: AFL19006  
                                Version number: 2.0 
 
 
  

Electronic Stimulation for Strength and Muscle Toning   Version 2.0 
 
Protocol Number: AFL19006         Page 2 of 35 
 Sponsor Statement and Signature Page  
Company Name:    Lutronic, Inc.  
Address:     19 Fortune Drive  
Billerica, MA 01821  
Telephone:    888-588-7644  
The investigation will be conducted in compliance with the clinical investigation plan (CIP), GCP, EN ISO 14155, the 
Declaration of Helsinki, and regulatory authority requirements.  
 
Lutronic, Inc. (hereinafter “Study Sponsor”) maintains responsibility for the ongoing safety of this clinical trial 
involving the evaluation of the Genius System.  Study Sponsor will promptly notify all investigators, the responsible 
IRB(s), and the regula tory authorities of any findings from ongoing trial monitoring activities that could adversely 
affect the safety of subjects, impact the conduct of the clinical study, or alter the IRB’s approval to continue the 
study, specifically within 5 working days of  making an Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE) determination 
or 15 working days after first receiving notice of the UADE, within 10 days for Serious Adverse Event reports, and 
at least annually for routine reports.  In the event that participant saf ety could be directly affected by study results 
after the study has ended, Study Sponsor will notify all investigators of these results to enable investigators to 
consider informing participants as soon as possible or at least within one year of study clos ure.   
The following individuals are responsible for the content of the Clinical Investigational Plan:  
 
             
Paul Cardarelli                       Date  
Director, Clinical Research  & Product Development  
 
 
Contact Information  
 
Protocol Number:   AFL19006  
Sponsor:     Lutronic Global  
    19 Fortune Dr.  
    Billerica, MA 01821  
 
 
Lutronic Contact Information:  Paul Cardarelli  
    Director, Clinical Research  & Product Development  
    Phone: 888 -588-7644  
    Email: pcardarelli@lutronic -usa.com  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic Stimulation for Strength and Muscle Toning   Version 2.0 
 
Protocol Number: AFL19006         Page 3 of 35 
  
Site Contact Information:   Primary Investigator  
    Omar A. Ibrahimi, M.D., Ph.D.  
19 Fortune Dr.  
    Billerica, MA 01821  
Email: omar.ibrahimi@gmail.com  
Tel: (203) 428 -4440  
Fax: (203)890 -9449  
 
ANNE M. CHAPAS, M.D.  
Union Square Laser Dermatology  
19 Union Square West  
New York, NY 10003  
Phone: (212) 366 -5400  
Fax: (212) 366 -5461  
 
 
If you have any questions or complaints about your rights as a research subject, contact:  
Allendale IRB  
Telephone: (860)434 -5872  
Fax: (860)434 -5892  
rta1ali1@aol.com      
     
 
 
 
Electronic Stimulation for Strength and Muscle Toning   Version 2.0 
 
Protocol Number: AFL19006         Page 4 of 35 
  
Statement of Compliance  
I have thoroughly read and reviewed this clinical investigation plan (CIP) and hereby agree to participate in this 
clinical trial sponsored by Lutronic, Inc  I agree to conduct this investigation according to the requirements of the 
CIP provided by the Stu dy Sponsor and in accordance with Good Clinical Practice (GCP) as required by EN ISO 
14155, the Declaration of Helsinki, Investigational Device Exemption (21 CFR Part 812), Protection of Human 
Subjects (45 CFR Part 46), and other applicable FDA regulations , and regulations of other relevant regulatory 
authorities and conditions imposed by the reviewing Institutional Review Board (IRB) or Ethics Committee (EC). I 
agree that no deviation from, or changes to the CIP will take place without prior agreement from  the sponsor and 
documented approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB), except where necessary to eliminate an 
immediate hazard(s) to the trial participants. I agree to ensure that appropriate informed consent is obtained from 
all subjects prior to  inclusion in this study.  I also agree to supervise all testing of the device involving human 
subjects, and to report to the Study Sponsor, within 24 hours, any adverse event that is serious, whether 
considered treatment -related or not.  I am aware that t he Study Sponsor reserves the right to discontinue this 
investigation at any time.  
 
I understand that this investigation will be monitored by the Study Sponsor and/or a designee contracted or 
employed by the Study Sponsor. This monitoring will involve periodic inspection of my investigational site and 
ongoing review of the data that is su bmitted by me to the Study Sponsor. All study data will be scanned and 
uploaded within 1 week after the study visit. I am also aware that I may be inspected by a representative of the 
relevant regulatory authorities, including the United States Food and Dr ug Administration, to verify compliance 
with applicable regulations related to clinical research on human subjects.  
 
My current curriculum vitae and the curriculum vitae of physicians/licensed practitioners at this institution who 
will participate as co -investigators/sub -investigators in this study will be provided to the Study Sponsor. This 
curriculum vitae will include  the extent and type of our relevant experience with pertinent dates and locations. All 
personnel involved in the conduct of this study have completed Human Subjects Protection Training.  
 
I certify that I have not been involved in an investigation that was terminated for non -compliance at the insistence 
of the Study Sponsor, the IRB or EC, or other regulatory authorities. I agree to provide the Study Sponsor sufficient, 
accurate financial d isclosure information.  I also agree to update financial disclosure information if any relevant 
changes occur during the investigation and for one year following the completion of the study.  
 
I understand that this CIP and the trial results are confidential, and I agree not to disclose any such information to 
any person other than a representative of the Study Sponsor or the relevant competent authorities without the 
prior written consent of th e Study Sponsor.  
Accepted by:  
 
              
Principal Investigator Signature    Principal Investigator Name    Date   
  
              
Co-/Sub -Investigator Signature    Co-/Sub -Investigator Name    Date   
 
 
            _______  
Co-/Sub -Investigator Signature    Co-/Sub -Investigator Name    Date   
         
Electronic Stimulation for Strength and Muscle Toning   Version 2.0 
 
Protocol Number: AFL19006         Page 5 of 35 
 List of Abbreviations  
TERM  DEFINITION  TERM  DEFINITION  
AE Adverse Event  ICH E6   
International Conference on 
Harmonization Guidance for Industry, 
Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated 
Guidance  
 
ADE Adverse Device Effect  ICMJE  International Committee of Medical 
Journal Editors  
ANCOVA  Analysis of Covariance  IDE  Investigational Device Exemption  
BMI Body Mass Index  IFU Instructions for Use  
CFR Code of Federal Regulations  ISO International Organization for 
Standardization  
CGAIS  Clinician Global Aesthetic Improvement 
Scale  IRB Institutional Review Board  
CIP Clinical Investigation Plan  MOP  Manual of Procedures  
CMP  Clinical Monitoring Plan  NRS Numeric Rating Scale for pain assessment  
CRF Case Report Form  OHRP  Office for Human Research Protections  
CRO  Contract Research Organization  PI Principal Investigator  
CV Curriculum Vitae  PSQ Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire  
DCC Data Coordination Center  QA Quality Assurance  
DSMB  Data Safety Monitoring Board  QC Quality Control  
EC Ethics Committee  RF Radiofrequency  
eCRF  Electronic Case Report Form  Rhytidectomy  Mini facelift  
ETE Expected Treatment Effect  SAE Serious Adverse Event  
FDA Food and Drug Administration  SAP Statistical Analysis Plan  
FDAAA  Food and Drug Administration 
Amendments Act of 2007  SADE  Serious Adverse Device Effect  
GAIS  Global Aesthetic Improvement Scale  SGAIS  Subject Global Aesthetic Improvement 
Scale  
GCP Good Clinical Practice  SMC  Safety Monitoring Committee  
GLP Good Laboratory Practice  SOP Standard Operating Procedure  
GMP  Good Manufacturing Practice  UADE  Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect  
HIPAA  Health Information Portability and 
Accountability Act  USA United States of America  
IB Investigator’s Brochure    
ICH International Committee on 
Harmonization    
 
  
Electronic Stimulation for Strength and Muscle Toning   Version 2.0 
 
Protocol Number: AFL19006         Page 6 of 35 
 Protocol Synopsis  
Protocol Number:  AFL19006  
Protocol Title:  Prospective Clinical Evaluation of the Safety and Efficacy of NON -INVASIVE Electronic Stimulation 
for Improvement of Muscle Strength and Toning, Circumferential Reduction of the Core and 
Extremities  
Investigational Devices:  The Accufit Electrical Muscle Stimulation device is an FDA cleared two-channel muscle 
stimulator that provides up to 8 electrodes with unique waveforms for muscle stimulation.  
Development Phase:  Evaluation  
Study Objective:  The objective of this clinical study is to assess the safety and efficacy of a novel electrical 
stimulation device for use in improving muscle strength  and toning  of the core and extremities . 
Brief Study Overview:  Open -label, baseline -controlled, multi -center study evaluating an electrical muscle stimulation 
system  for Improvement of Muscle Strength and Toning, Circumferential Reduction of the Core 
and Extremities The study will enroll up to 60 subjects desiring  and to improve muscle strength 
and tone and circumferential reduction in their core and extremities .  Each sub ject will receive 
up to 8  bi-weekly treatments over a 4 -week period.  Follow up v isits planned for 30 - and 90 -days 
post treatment.  Measurement outcomes will be compared to baseline.  
Number of Sites 
Enrolling Participants:   Up to 6 sites  
Sample Size:  The study will enroll up to 60  male and female subjects ≥ 18 years  to 60 years  of age who are 
seeking to improve muscle strength and tone in the extremities.  
Subject Population:  Healthy, female and male adult subjects age 18  to 60 years who meet the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria.  
Inclusion Criteria:  1. Able to read, understand and voluntarily provide written informed consent.  
2. Healthy male or female, ≥ 18 years  to 65 years  of age seeking treatment for improved 
muscle strength and muscle toning in their core and extremities . 
3. Subject is determined to be physically fit and agrees to not making any major changes 
in their diet or lifestyle during the study.  
4. Able and willing to comply with the treatment/follow -up schedule and requirements.  
5. Women of child -bearing age are required to be using a reliable method of birth control 
at least 3 months prior to study enrollment and for the duration of the study as well as  
have a negative Urine Pregnancy test at baseline.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  1. Pregnant in the last 3 months, intending to become pregnant, postpartum or nursing in 
the last 6 months.  
2. Any previous liposuction/lipo -sculpture or any type of surgical procedure in the 
treatment area in the past 12 months.  
3. History of immunosuppression/immune deficiency disorders (including AIDS and HIV 
infection) or use of immunosuppressive medications, 6 months prior to and during the 
study.  
4. History of hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, hepatitis, blood coagulopathy or excessive 
bleeding.  
5. Having a history of skin cancer or any other cancer in the areas to be treated, including 
presence of malignant or premalignant pigmented lesions.  
6. Having a permanent implant in the treatment area such as metal plates or an injected 
chemical substance such as silicone in the treatment area.  
7. Suffering from significant skin conditions in the treatment area or inflammatory skin 
conditions including but not limited to open lacerations, abrasions, herpes sores, cold 
sores, active infections.  
8. Poor skin quality (severe laxity).  
9. Abdominal wall, muscular abnormality or hernia on physical examination.  
10. As per the investigator’s discretion, any physical or mental condition which may make it 
unsafe for the subject to participate.  
Electronic Stimulation for Strength and Muscle Toning   Version 2.0 
 
Protocol Number: AFL19006         Page 7 of 35 
 11. Subjects unwilling or unable to adhere to all study requirements for treatment and 
follow -up. 
12. Investigator may exclude any subject at any time at his/her discretion . 
 
Primary Endpoint:  
Photographic evaluation by an independent, blinded reviewer with correct identification of pre -
treatment baseline images when compared to post -treatment i mages taken at follow up visits.  
 
Secondary Endpoints:   
1. Global Aesthetic Improvement grading by Expert Clinician.  
2. Improvement of muscle strength as measured by a dynamometer at follow up visits 
compared to baseline measurements.  
3. Reduction in  core  circumference as measured by Seca Circumferential System at follow 
up visits compared to baseline measurement.  
4. To assess subject satisfaction using Satisfaction Survey at each follow up visit.  
 
Safety Endpoints:  Subject’s assessment of discomfort as measured by a 0 -10 numeric rating scale.  
Subjects experiencing a treatment -related adverse event (AE).  
Study Duration:  The duration from when the study opens to enrollment for 1 2 months .  
Participant Duration:  7 months  
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 8 of 35 
 Table of Contents  
Sponsor Statement and Signature Page  2 
Contact Information  2 
Statement of Compliance  4 
List of Abbreviations  5 
Protocol Synopsis  6 
1. KEY  ROLES  11 
1.1 Internal Responsibilities  11 
2. INTRODUCTION:  BACKGROUND  INFORMATION  AND  SCIENTIFIC  RATIONALE  11 
2.1 Background Information  11 
2.1.1  Device Name and Indications for Use  11 
2.1.2  Mechanism of Actions  11 
2.1.3  Device Overview  11 
2.2 Rationale  12 
2.3 Potential Risks and Benefits  12 
2.3.1  Known Potential Risks  12 
2.3.2  Contraindications  12 
2.3.3  Known Potential Benefits  12 
3. OBJECTIVES  AND  PURPOSE  13 
3.1 Study Objectives  13 
3.2 Study Endpoints  13 
3.2.1  Primary Endpoint  13 
3.2.2  Secondary Endpoints  13 
4. STUDY  DESIGN  AND  ENDPOINTS  13 
4.1 Description of the Study Design  13 
4.2 DURATION OF STUDY  13 
5. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT AND WITHDRAWAL  14 
5.1 Participant Inclusion Criteria  14 
5.1.1  Informed Consent  14 
5.1.2  Pre-treatment Recruiting/Screening  14 
5.1.2.1  Screen Failures  14 
5.1.3  Inclusion Criteria  14 
5.1.4  Participant Exclusion Criteria  15 
5.2 Strategies for Recruitment and Retention  15 
5.2.1  Subject Payment  16 
5.3  Participant Withdrawal or Termination  16 
5.4 Premature Termination or Suspension of the Study or a Study Site  16 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 9 of 35 
 6. STUDY PROCEDURES AND SCHEDULE  16 
6.1 Photography  16 
6.2 Study Schedule  17 
6.2.1 STUDY SPECIFIC PROCEDURES  17 
6.3 LABORATORY EVALUATION  17 
6.4 Screening & Baseline Assessment (Visit 1)  17 
6.5 Study Treatment  18 
6.5.1  Subject Preparation for Study Treatment  18 
6.5.2  Study Treatment (Visits 1 -12) 18 
6.5.3  Acute Responses  19 
6.5.4  Post - Care Instructions  19 
6.5.5  Schedule of Activities  19 
6.5.6  Safety Assessments  20 
6.5.7  Unscheduled Visit  20 
6.6 Study Treatment  20 
6.6.1  Subject Preparation for Study Treatment  20 
6.6.2  Study Treatment  20 
6.6.3  Acute Responses  20 
6.6.4  Post - Care  20 
6.7 Concomitant Medications  20 
7. ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  21 
7.1 Specifications of Safety Parameters  21 
7.1.1  Definition of an Expected Treatment Effect (ETE) and an Adverse Event (AE)  21 
7.1.2  Definition of Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  21 
7.1.3  Definition of Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects (Events)  21 
7.2 Classification of an Event  22 
7.2.1  Severity of Event  22 
7.2.2  Relationship to the Investigational Device  22 
7.2.3  Expectedness  22 
7.3 Time Period and Frequency for Event Assessment and Follow -up 22 
7.4 Reporting Procedures  23 
7.4.1  Adverse Event Reporting  23 
7.4.2  Serious Adverse Event Reporting  23 
7.4.3  Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect Reporting  23 
7.4.4  Reporting of Pregnancy  23 
7.4.5  Reporting of Deaths  24 
8. CLINICAL  MONITORING  24 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 10 of 35 
 9. STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  25 
9.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans  25 
9.2  Analysis Datasets  26 
9.3 DESCRIPTION OF STATISTICAL METHODS  26 
9.4 SAFETY ANALYSES  26 
9.6 BASELINE DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS  27 
9.7 Analysis of Primary Endpoints  27 
9.8 Analysis of Secondary Endpoints  27 
10. SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO SOURCE DATA/ DOCUMENTS  28 
11. ETHICS/PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  28 
11.1 Ethical Standard  28 
11.2 Institutional Rev thigh iew Board  28 
11.3 Informed Consent Process  29 
11.3.1  Consent/Assent and Other Informational Documents Provided to Participants  29 
11.3.2  Consent Procedures and Documentation  29 
11.4 Participant and Data Confidentiality  29 
12. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING  29 
12.1 Data Collection and Management Responsibilities  29 
12.2 Investigator Records and Reports  30 
12.2.1  Investigator Records  30 
12.2.2  Investigator Reports  30 
12.3 Study Records Retention  31 
12.4 Protocol Deviations  31 
12.5 Publication and Data Sharing Policy  32 
13. STUDY ADMINISTRATION  32 
13.1  Study Investigators  32 
13.2 Amendment Policy  32 
14. CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY  33 
References  34 
APPENDIX  PROTOCOL REVISIONS LOG  35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 11 of 35 
 1. KEY  ROLES  
Persons serving in key roles in the conduct or oversight of this clinical trial are listed in Table 1.1 -1 below.  
1.1 INTERNAL RESPONSIBILITIES  
TABLE 1: INTERNAL RESPONSIBILITIES  
Name  Function  Address  
Lutronic Aesthetics  Sponsor  19 Fortune Drive  
Billerica, MA 01821  
Phone: 888.588.7644  
Paul Cardarelli  Clinical Research Director  Phone: 888.588.7644  
Email: pcardarelli@lutronic -usa.com  
2. INTRODUCTION:  BACKGROUND  INFORMATION  AND  SCIENTIFIC  
RATIONALE  
2.1 BACKGROUND INFORMATION  
In 1761 Luigi Galvani provided scientific evidence that current can activate muscle. Electrical Muscle 
Stimulation is known to assist in muscle contraction.  
 
2.1.1  Device Name and Indications for Use  
Magnet -based and Direct muscle stimulation devices are commonly used to generate current flow 
through the muscles in order to activate the muscle.   The Accufit Electrical Muscle Stimulation device is 
an FDA cleared device having a two -channel stimulator that provides up to 8 electrodes with waveforms 
of interferential and biphasic for muscle stimulation.  The Accufit system  is indicated for relaxation of 
muscles, muscle re -education, reduction of pain and increased local blood circulation.  
 
2.1.2 Mechanism of Actions  
Muscle stimulation technology has been around for many decades and has been shown to be safe and 
effective for a variety of clinical applications. The foundational basis for the technology revolves around 
electrical current flowing through the muscle can be used to activate the muscle.  
 
2.1.3 Device Overview  
 
FIGURE 1: SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS  
 
Frequency  Up to 4khz  
Output power  Up to a 100mA  
Number of Electrodes  8 electrodes with disposables contact pads  
Simulation  Biphasic and Interferential Waveforms  
Pulse Repetition Rate  Up to 200Hz  
Pulse Width  Up to 290 us  
Handpieces/Delivery System  Single use Hydrogel electrode Round or Square  
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 12 of 35 
  
 
2.2 RATIONALE  
In accordance with the definition of “Significant Risk Device” provided in 21 CFR 812.3, the devices to be 
used in this study has been determined to be a Non-Significant Risk device based on the following:  
a) It is not an implant  
b) It is not purported or represented to be for use in supporting or sustaining human life and 
do not present a potential for serious risk to the health, safety or welfare of a subject  
c) It is not for a use of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating, or treating 
disease or otherwise preventing impairment of human health  
d) Use of the device does not pose a serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject.  
 
2.3 POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS  
2.3.1 Known Potential Risks  
Expected adverse events of the muscle Electrical stimulation treatment procedure include : 
• Transient tenderness  
• Erythema  
• Edema  
• Discomfort  
Other adverse events may include and include :  
• Localized tenderness  
• Skin burn   
• Hyperpigmentation  
• Hypopigmentation  
• Blister  
• Changes in skin laxity  (rarely, skin contour irregularities, dimpling, and asymmetry ).    
 
Risks will be mitigated by conducting this protocol with an investigator experienced in the therapeutic 
area of the clinical investigation.  The investigator will be trained by the sponsor on the use of the 
device.  The device design incorporates safety mechanisms which minimize risks.  Patients will also be 
rigorously screened prior to their enr ollment and rigorously followed over the course of the study.  
 
2.3.2 Contraindications  
Do not use this device on the pectoral area or patients who have a cardiac pacemaker, implanted 
defibrillator or other implanted metallic or electronic device. Do not use this device on patients whose 
pain syndromes are undiagnosed. Avoid direct irradiation of the eyes. Do not treat locally over the 
endocrine glands. Do not treat ischemic tissues in individuals with vascular disease.  
 
2.3.3 Known Potential Benefits  
If the subject agrees to participate in this study, he/she will be contributing to the understanding of the 
safety and efficacy of the use of this investigational device for muscle toning.  This understanding may 
lead to optimization of the treatment with this device.  
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 13 of 35 
 3. OBJECTIVES  AND  PURPOSE  
3.1 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
The objective of this clinical study is to assess the safety and efficacy of using a  non-invasive electrical 
stimulation system for circumferential reduction and improvement of muscle strength  and muscle ton e 
of the core and extremities .  
3.2 STUDY ENDPOINTS  
3.2.1 Primary Endpoint   
1. Photographic evaluation by an independent, blinded reviewer with correct identification of pre-
treatment baseline images when compared to post -treatment im ages taken at follow up visits 
(30 days, 90 days).  Results will be reported as a % of the correctly identified post treatment 
photographs chosen per Blinded Reviewer. An average of the % of the correctly identified post 
treatment photographs chosen by Blinded Reviewer will be calculated and used to determi ne 
efficacy.  
Bar, pie charts or graphs indicating percentages of the correctly identified post treatment 
photographs chosen by Blinded Reviewer may also be used to analyze efficacy.  
3.2.2 Secondary Endpoints   
The secondary endpoints of this clinical trial include:  
1. Improvement in  muscle  strength of the treated extrem ity as measured by a dynamometer at 
follow up visits compared to basel ine measurements.  
2. Reduction in circumference as measured by Seca Circumferential System at follow up visits 
compared to baseline measurement.  
3. To assess subject satisfaction using Satisfaction Survey at each follow up visit  
4. GAIS  (Global Aesthetic Improvement Scale)  by Expert Clinician.  
5. All statistical tests that will be two -sided. The level of statistical significance for effectiveness 
analyses is 5% (α = 0.05) for all tests of differences. Where appropriate, two -proportion z -test 
will be used to compare the subjects’ assessment of satis faction at post -treatment visits.  
Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) may also be used where appropriate.  
4. STUDY  DESIGN  AND  ENDPOINTS   
4.1 DESCRIPTION  OF STUDY  
Open -label, baseline -controlled, multi -center study evaluating an electrical muscle stimulation system 
for circumferential reduction and improvement in muscle strength and muscle tone  of the core and 
extremities . The study will enroll up to 60 subjects desiring circumferential reduction and to improve 
muscle strength and muscle tone of the ir core and  extremities .  Each subject will receive up to 8 bi-
weekly treatments over a 4-week period.  Follow up visits planned for 30- and 90 -days post treatment.  
Measurement outcomes will be compared to baseline.  
 
4.2 DURATION OF STUDY  
This study is not expected to exceed 12 months in duration.  
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 14 of 35 
 5. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT AND WITHDRAWAL  
5.1 PARTICIPANT IMPROVEMENT CRITERIA  
The study population will consist of males and females aged 18 – 60 years of age  who have chosen to 
participate in this clinical trial as evidenced by execution of the informed consent document.  
 
5.1.1  Informed Consent  
Written informed consent will be obtained from all subjects before any study -related procedures, 
including any pre -treatment screening procedures, are performed. Investigators, or delegated study 
personnel, may discuss the availability of the study and the  possibility for entry with a potential subject 
without first obtaining consent. Informed consent must be obtained and documented prior to initiation 
of any procedures that are performed solely for the purpose of determining eligibility for research.  
 
Investigators have ethical and legal responsibilities to ensure that the protocol is clearly explained to 
each subject considered for enrollment in the study. Compliance with this requirement should be 
documented on a written Informed Consent Form approved  by the reviewing IRB. Each Informed 
Consent Form will include the elements required by FDA regulations in 21 CFR Part 50.  
 
The IRB -approved Informed Consent Form will be signed by the study personnel obtaining consent. The 
subject will be given a copy of the signed Informed Consent Form. The investigative site will keep the 
original on file.  
 
5.1.2  Pre-treatment Recruiting/Screening  
Subjects will be recruited from the study site’s patient database or IRB approved advertisement and 
screened.  Study site personnel will explain the design and purpose of the study to potential study 
subjects. Subjects interested in participating will visi t the study site where informed consent will be 
obtained.   
 
5.1.2.1 Screen Failures  
A screen failure subject is one from whom informed consent is obtained and is documented in writing 
(i.e., subject signs an Informed Consent Form), but who does not receive a test spot exposure visit 
because of failure to meet all the eligibility criteria.  Screen failure subjects will be included in the total 
number of subjects enrolled (i.e., all subjects consented), but not counted towards the total subjects 
treated.  
 
5.1.3  Inclusion Criteria  
Subjects must meet all the following criteria for study enrollment:  
1. Able to read, understand and voluntarily provide written informed consent.  
2. Healthy male or female, ≥ 18 years to 60 years of age seeking treatment for  circumferential 
reduction  and improvement of muscle strength and muscle ton e in the core and extremities.  
3. Subject is determined to be physically fit and agrees to not making any major changes in their 
diet or lifestyle during the study.  
4. Able and willing to comply with the treatment/follow -up schedule and requirements.  
5. Women of child -bearing age are required to be using a reliable method of birth control at least 3 
months prior to study enrollment and for the duration of the study and have a negative Urine 
Pregnancy test at baseline.  
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 15 of 35 
 5.1.4  Participant Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects will be excluded if they meet any of the following criteria:  
1. Pregnant in the last 3 months, intending to become pregnant, postpartum or nursing in the last 
6 months.  
2. Any previous liposuction/lipo -sculpture or any type of surgical procedure in the treatment area 
in the past 12 months.  
3. History of immunosuppression/immune deficiency disorders (including AIDS and HIV infection) 
or use of immunosuppressive medications, 6 months prior to and during the study.  
4. History of hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, hepatitis, blood coagulopathy or excessive 
bleeding.  
5. Having a history of skin cancer or any other cancer in the areas to be treated, including presence 
of malignant or premalignant pigmented lesions.  
6. Having a permanent implant in the treatment area such as metal plates or an injected chemical 
substance such as silicone in the treatment area.  
7. Suffering from significant skin conditions in the treatment area or inflammatory skin conditions 
including but not limited to open lacerations, abrasions, herpes sores, cold sores, active 
infections.  
8. Poor skin quality (severe laxity).  
9. Abdominal wall, muscular abnormality or hernia on physical examination.  
10. As per the investigator’s discretion, any physical or mental condition which may make it unsafe 
for the subject to participate.  
11. Unable or unlikely to refrain from sun exposure, artificial tanning, including the u se of tanning 
booths, prior to 6 weeks  and during the duration of the study .  
12. Subjects unwilling or unable to adhere to all study requirements for treatment and follow -up 
13. Investigator may exclude any subject at any time at his/her discretion  
 
After subjects have provided informed consent and met the inclusion/exclusion criteria, the study 
procedures described in the following section will be performed.  
 
5.2  STRATEGIES FOR RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION  
Subjects will be recruited from the site’s patient database and surrounding area. Site personnel should 
conduct/send reminder phone calls, emails, and/or text messages to remind subjects of upcoming 
appointments. The next appointment should be scheduled pr ior to the subject leaving the current 
appointment.  
 
All subjects who have signed an Informed Consent Form, except for screen failures, will be considered 
enrolled in the study. Subjects who complete the study duration will be considered to have completed 
the study. Any subject who does not return for a sche duled follow -up visit will be contacted at least 
twice by telephone to determine the cause for the missed visit and to try to get the subject scheduled 
for the follow -up. A new visit will be scheduled as soon as possible. All subjects should be followed un til 
completing the study follow -up or until study discontinuation (withdrawal) for other reasons. The 
reason for study discontinuation should be documented for each subject. Subjects will be deemed “Lost -
to-Follow -up” if they have not returned within six w eeks after the last follow -up target. For any subject 
lost to follow -up at least three attempts to contact the subject must be documented; the attempts must 
be two phone calls/emails and a registered letter.  
 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 16 of 35 
 5.2.1  Subject Payment  
Subjects will not be compensated for participation in this study . 
  
5.3  PARTICIPANT WITHDRAWAL AND TERMINATION  
All subjects have the right to withdraw at any point during the study without prejudice. The investigator 
can discontinue any subject, at any time, if medically necessary. Subjects must be discontinued from the 
investigation by the investigator at any time for any of the following reasons:  
1. Withdrawal of informed consent.  
2. Pregnancy (no further study -related treatments will be performed; however, the follow -up visit 
will be completed if the study treatments has been completed and the subject will be followed 
to term, called after the pregnancy, childbirth , and/or pregnancy termination and queried for 
abnormalities or complications).  
3. Any AEs for which treatment continuation would constitute an unacceptably high risk for the 
subject.  
 
The reason for any subject’s withdrawal should be documented on the appropriate study -specific data 
form.   
5.4 PREMATURE TERMINATION OR SUSPENSION OF THE STUDY OR STUDY SITE 
The study or  study site can be prematurely terminated or suspended by the sponsor. Reasons for 
termination of the study or a study site may include, but are not limited to, the following:  
1. Subject enrollment is unsatisfactory.  
2. The risks and benefits of continuing the study have been reassessed, and the risks outweigh any 
potential benefits.  
3. The incidence of AEs constitutes a potential health hazard to the subjects.  
4. New scientific data do not justify a continuation of the study.  
5. The investigator or study site exhibit serious and/or persistent non -adherence to the protocol, 
the Declaration of Helsinki, EN ISO 14155, and/or applicable regulatory requirements.  
6. The sponsor decides to terminate the study at any time for any other reason.  
 
Furthermore, the study may be prematurely ended if the regulatory authority or the IRB has decided to 
terminate or suspend approval for the study, the study site, or the investigator.  
If the study is prematurely terminated or suspended for any reason, the investigator must inform the 
subjects and assure appropriate follow -up treatment. Within the timeframes noted in applicable 
regulations, the sponsor will promptly inform the investigat ors, study sites, the IRB, and regulatory 
authorities of the termination or suspension of the study, as well as provide reasons for the action.  
6. STUDY PROCEDURES AND SCHEDUL E 
6.1 PHOTOGRAPHY  
Standardized baseline and follow -up images will be taken as per specified Photography Procedure.  
A checklist is included in CRF to ensure “Standardized Images” are taken at specified visits.  
A series of standardized high -resolution digital photographs and/or video will be taken before and after 
treatment under controlled position and lighting conditions. Subjects will dress comfortably in loose 
garments and will be provided with disposable und ergarments for photographs.  
 
Prior to Taking Photographs : 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 17 of 35 
 1. Jewelry Removed  
2. Disposable undergarments will be supplied  
 
While Taking Photographs  
1. Photographer will position subject for photographs  
LABORATORY EVALUATION  
After Taking Photographs  (before subject leaves the office)  
1. Ensure all views have been taken  
2. Ensure all photographs are in focus  
3. Ensure lighting is consistent  
 
6.2 STUDY SCHEDULE  
6.2.1 Study Specific Procedures  
The following procedures will be done as part of this study:  
1.  Demographics (Visit 1)  
2.  Medical/surgical history  
3.  Concomitant medications  
4.  Assessment of eligibility (inclusion/exclusion criteria)  
5.  Urine pregnancy test for women of child -bearing potential (Visit 1 only)  
6.  Adverse event reporting  
7.  Photography (Pre -treatment, post -treatment and at follow up visits)  
8.  Weight  and circumferential measurements  (Visit 1 and follow up visits only)  
9.  Dynamometer measurements (Visit 1 and follow up visits only)  
10.  Subject Satisfaction Survey (at follow up visits only)  
 
6.3 LABORATORY EVALUATION  
Women of child -bearing potential  will be asked to provide a urine sample for a urine pregnancy  
test to be performed according to local site standards. Urine pregnancy required within 24 hours  
of study intervention. A negative result must be available prior to administration of the  
treatment.  
 
A staff member will explain how the pregnancy test will be performed at the screening visit  
depending on which type of pregnancy test is available at the study center. Instructions will  
include:  
1. Hold the pregnancy test stick directly un der your urine for 5 -10 seconds.  
2. Alternatively, you may be asked to urinate into a specimen cup and dip the pregnancy  test 
stick into the urine for 5 -10 seconds.  
3. Results are typically available within 2 -5 minutes,  but some tests take as long as 10  minutes.  
4. A positive result  indicating pregnancy will usually be a colored line or plus symbol in  the result 
window. A negative result indicating no pregnancy will usually be absence of a  colored line or a 
negative symbol . 
 
6.4 SCREENING AND BASELINE (VISIT 1) 
The Principal Investigator or his/her designee will assess the subject eligibility for participation in the 
clinical study using the inclusion/exclusion criteria (Sections 5.1; 5.2). Subjects meeting the study criteria 
for enrollment will be asked to sign an informed consent document. The Principal Investigator or his/her 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 18 of 35 
 designee will obtain informed consent from the subject. All subjects must clearly indicate his/her 
understanding of the requirements and possible risks involved with study participation. Once subjects 
sign the informed consent document,  they will be assigned a unique identifying number that will be 
composed of a two -digit site number and a three -digit  subject number in sequence. This unique 
identifier will be used throughout the entire study and will be entered in the subject’s case report form 
(CRF).  
 
During the screening visit, the Principal Investigator or his/her designee will review the subjects  
medical/surgical history, demographic information, concomitant medication and examine the treatment  
area. Weight and circumferential measurements of the core and extremities.  
 
Women of child -bearing potential will be asked the date of their last menstrual cycle and required to  
provide a urine sample for a urine pregnancy test. A negative result is required within 24 hours of  
treatment for participation in study. The investigator will inquire about contraceptive use to confirm  
they meet the inclusion criteria.  
1.  Obtain informed consent of potential participant verified by signature on study 
informed consent form.  
2.  Verify all preliminary/screening inclusion/exclusion criteria are met.  
3.  Document medical history.  
4.  Obtain pregnancy screen (if applicable).  
5.  Document concurrent medications.  
6.  Obtain demographics.  
 
6.5 STUDY TREATMENT  
6.5.1  Subject Preparation for Study Treatment  
The investigator, sub -investigator, or delegated clinician will first identify the skin areas to which 
treatment/exposure is to be performed. Treatment records will be maintained in accordance with this 
protocol. Skin in the treatment area should be clean.  Subject will be instructed to avoid lotion or oil on 
the treatment area 24 hours prior to treatment.  
 
6.5.2 Study Treatment (Visits 1 -8) 
All study treatments will be performed by the investigator, sub -investigator, or delegated clinician (i.e., 
study exposure clinician as designated by the principal investigator.)  The investigator will confirm that 
the subject continues to meet the inclusi on criteria and none of the exclusion criteria prior to each study 
treatment. Concomitant medications will be reviewed. Specific treatment parameters will be 
determined by the Investigator and recorded on the case report forms.   
 
Each subject will receive up to 8 study treatments over a 4-week period.  Subjects return for a  30 day 
and 90 -day post final treatment follow up visit.   
● Cleanse skin.  
● Obtain digital images.  
● Perform study treatment.  
● Obtain Numeric Pain Rating Scale score.  
● Assess for expected treatment effects (ETEs) and adverse events (AEs).  
 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 19 of 35 
 Subjects will be asked to return for follow up visits post -final treatment  at 30 days and 90 days. At 1st 
and all follow up visits weight, dynamometer measurements , circumferential  measurements , subject 
satisfaction survey, adverse events and photography will be completed and assessed.    
 
Subject discomfort during study treatment will be documented using a 0 (None) to 10 (Severe)  numeric 
pain rating scale.  If the treatment becomes too uncomfortable for a subject, it will be discontinued, or 
the settings may be lowered to a more comfortable level.  Subjects may also request that treatm ent be 
discontinued at any time, for any reason.  
 
6.5.3  Acute Responses  
For all exposures, acute responses (e.g., erythema or edema) will be observed by the study exposure 
clinician and recorded after exposure. If any Serious Adverse Events (SAE) are noted, an SAE Form 
should be completed.  
 
6.5.4  Post - Care Instructions   
Following treatment subject may assume normal activities.  Hot baths, sauna and vigorous exercise 
should be avoided.  The subject should be reminded to not make any major changes in their diet or 
lifestyle during the study.  
 
6.5.5 Schedule of Activities   
 
TABLE 1: SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES  
 Screening  Tx 1 Tx 2 Tx 3 Tx 4 Tx 5 Tx 6 Tx 7 Tx 8 FU 30 
day FU 90 
days  
Informed 
Consent  x           
Pregnancy 
Verification  x           
Concomitant 
Medications  x x x x x x x x x x x 
Medical History  x           
Demographics  x           
Weight  x         x x 
Dynamometer 
Measurements  x         x x 
Circumferential 
Measurements  x         x x 
Photography 
(pre- and - post 
treatment)   x        x x 
Subject 
Satisfaction           x x 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 20 of 35 
 Pain Scale Rating    x x x x x x x   
Adverse Events   x x x x x x x x x x 
 
6.5.6 Safety Assessments  
Assess for adverse events immediately post -treatments and at the follow -up visits.  
 
6.5.7 Unscheduled Visit  
Any unscheduled visit or examine should be documented in the subject’s medical record and adverse 
event form (if applicable) stating the reason for the visit and any actions taken. The Sponsor should be 
notified of the unscheduled visit.  
6.6 STUDY TREATMENT  
This study involves up to 8  treatments to be conducted after obtaining informed consent, screening for 
inclusion/exclusion, complying with standardized photography requirements, and completing pregnancy 
tests, if applicable.  
 
6.6.1  Subject Preparation for Study Treatment  
The investigator, sub -investigator, or delegated clinician will first identify the skin areas to which 
treatment/exposure is to be performed. Treatment records will be maintained in accordance with this 
protocol. Skin in treatment area should be clean. No lotion or oil should be present on the area to be 
treated.  
 
6.6.2 Study Treatment  
All study treatments will be performed by the investigator, sub -investigator, or delegated clinician (i.e., 
study exposure clinician as designated by the principal investigator.)  
Specific treatment parameters will be determined by the Investigator and recorded on the case report 
forms.  Subject discomfort during study treatment will be documented using a 0 (None) to 10 (Severe) 
pain rating scale.  If the treatment becomes too uncom fortable for a subject, it will be discontinued, or 
the settings may be lowered to a more comfortable level.  Subjects may also request that treatment be 
discontinued at any time for any reason.  
 
6.6.3 Acute Responses  
For all exposures, acute responses (e.g., erythema or edema) will be observed by the study exposure 
clinician and recorded after exposure. If any Serious Adverse Events (SAE) are noted, an SAE Form 
should be completed .  
 
6.6.4 Post - Care  Instructions  
Following treatment subject may assume normal activities.  Hot baths, sauna and vigorous exercise 
should be avoided.  The subject should be reminded to not make any major changes in their diet or 
lifestyle during the study.  
 
6.7 CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS  
All concomitant prescription medications taken during study participation will be recorded on the 
appropriate study -specific data form. For this protocol, a prescription medication is defined as a 
medication that can be prescribed only by a properly author ized/licensed clinician. Medications to be 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 21 of 35 
 reported on the data form and entered on the CRF are concomitant prescription medications, over -the-
counter medications and non -prescription medications.  
7. ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  
7.1 SPECIFICATIONS OF SAFETY PARAMETERS  
7.1.1  Definition of an Expected Treatment Effect (ETE) and an Adverse Event (AE)  
An expected treatment effect is defined as any typical treatment side -effect of the study devices of mild 
to moderate severity and lasting u p to a typical maximum duration . An adverse event is defined as any 
new medical problem, or exacerbation of an existing problem, experienced by a subject while enrolled 
in the study, whether it is considered device -related by the investigator.  All ETEs and AEs will be 
collected during the  conduct of this trial.   
 
7.1.2  Definition of Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  
Each adverse event should be assessed for its seriousness. The definition below should be used for this 
assessment. Please note that the term serious adverse event is not synonymous with a “severe” adverse 
event, which may be used to describe the intensity  of an event experienced by the subject.  
An adverse event should be classified as serious if it meets any of the following criteria:  
a. Death  
Death was an outcome of the adverse event.  
b. Life-threatening  
The subject was at substantial risk of dying at the time of the adverse event or use or continued 
use of the device.  
c. Hospitalization (initial or prolonged)  
Admission to the hospital or prolongation of hospitalization was a result of the adverse event.  
d. Disability or Permanent Damage  
The adverse event resulted in a substantial disruption of a person's ability to conduct normal life 
functions, i.e., the adverse event resulted in a significant, persistent or permanent change, 
impairment, damage or disruption in the patient's body functio n/structure, physical 
activities and/or quality of life.  
e. Congenital Anomaly/Birth Defect  
Exposure to a medical product prior to conception or during pregnancy may have resulted in an 
adverse outcome in the child.  
f. Required Intervention to Prevent Permanent Impairment or Damage (Devices)  
Medical or surgical intervention was necessary to preclude permanent impairment of a body 
function, or prevent permanent damage to a body structure, either situation suspected to 
be due to the use of a medical product.  
g. Other Serious (Important Medical Events)  
The event does not fit the other outcomes, but the event may jeopardize the subject and may 
require medical or surgical intervention (treatment) to prevent one of the other outcomes.  
 
Non -serious adverse events are all events that do not meet the criteria for a “serious” adverse event.  
 
7.1.3  Definition of Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects (Events)  
An unanticipated adverse device effect is defined as “any serious adverse effect on health or safety, or 
any life -threatening problem, or death caused by, or associated with, a device; if that effect, problem, or 
death was not previously identified in natu re, severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational plan, 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 22 of 35 
 or application (including supplementary application), or any other unanticipated serious problem 
associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.”  
 
7.2 CLASSIFICATION OF AN EVENT  
7.2.1  Severity of Event  
Each adverse event should be assessed for its severity, or the intensity of an event experienced by the 
subject, using the following classifications:  
1 = Mild  Discomfort noticed, but no disruption to daily activity  
2 = Moderate  Discomfort sufficient to reduce or affect normal daily activity  
3 = Severe  Inability to work or perform normal daily activity  
 
7.2.2  Relationship to the Investigational Device  
The investigator should assess the relationship of the adverse event to the investigational device. The 
relationship should be assessed using the categories presented in Table 2. 
 
TABLE 2: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ADVERSE EVENTS AND INVESTIGATIONAL DEVICE  
Definite  Definite relationship exists between the device/procedure and an adverse 
event  
Probably Related  A reasonable causal relationship between the device/procedure and an 
adverse event is more likely than not.  
Possibly Related  A reasonable relationship exists between the device/procedure and an adverse 
event, but the causal relationship is unclear or lacking.  
Not Likely Related  A temporal relationship exists between the device/procedure and an adverse 
event, but there is no reasonable causal relationship. For example, the adverse 
event occurs in a time frame, which makes a causal relationship to device 
treatment improbable.  
Unrelated  No relationship between treatment with the device/procedure and the 
adverse event exists.  
 
7.2.3  Expectedness  
Reported events will be categorized as Expected Treatment Effects if the event meets the definition of 
any typical treatment side -effect of study devices of mild to moderate severity and lasting up to a typical 
maximum duration . 
 
7.3 TIME PERIOD AND FREQUENCY FOR EVENT FOLLOW UP AND ASSESSMENT  
The occurrence of an AE or SAE may come to the attention of study personnel during a study visit or 
upon review by a study monitor. All ETEs and AEs will be captured on the appropriate data form. 
Information to be collected includes event description, date of onset, clinician’s assessment of 
seriousness and severity, relationship to study device/treatment (assessed only by those with the 
training and authority to decide), actions taken, and date of event resolution. All AEs occurring while on 
study must be documented appropriately regardless of relationship. All ETEs/AEs assessed as “not yet 
resolved” must continue to be followed via telephone contact, email or clinic visit every 7 days or sooner 
as per the physician’s direction until event resolution or stabilization or tissue resection.  
   
A pre -existing condition should not be reported as an adverse event unless there has been a substantial 
increase in severity or frequency of the problem that has not been attributed to natural history.  
 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 23 of 35 
 Changes in the severity of an event will be documented to allow for a determination if the event should 
be re -categorized from an ETE to AE.   
 
The PI will record all reportable events with start dates occurring any time after informed consent is 
obtained until 7 (for non -serious AEs) or 30 days (for SAEs) after the last day of study participation or 
until tissue is resected. At each study visit, the investigator will inquire about the occurrence of 
ETEs/AEs/SAEs since the last visit. Events will be followed for outcome information until resolution or 
stabilization or tissue is resected.  
 
7.4 REPORTING PROCEDURES  
7.4.1  Adverse Event Reporting  
Any new medical problem, or an exacerbation of an existing condition, reported from the time the 
informed consent form is signed must be followed until the last study visit after the last study 
treatment/exposure or until event resolution.   
AEs will not be followed up after the final study visit as tissue will be resected at the abdominoplasty 
visit. AEs related to the abdominoplasty are outside the scope of this study and will not be reported.  
 
7.4.2  Serious Adverse Event Reporting  
Serious adverse events must be reported to the Sponsor as soon as possible, preferably within 24 
hours but in no event later than 72 hours. Any AE considered serious by the PI or Sub -investigator or 
which meets the definition of an SAE included in Section 7.1.2, Definition of Serious Adverse Event 
must be documented on an SAE data form.  
 
The Sponsor will conduct an investigation. If the Sponsor determines that the investigation presents an 
unreasonable risk to subjects, all investigations or parts of the investigation presenting that risk will be 
terminated as soon as possible. The investigator must report serious ad verse events to the reviewing IRB 
according to the IRB regulations at the study site.  
 
7.4.3  Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect Reporting  
If an unanticipated adverse device effect occurs, the study investigator shall complete the appropriate 
study -specific data form and submit to the study sponsor and to the reviewing IRB as soon as possible, 
but in no event later than 10 working days after the investigator first learns of the effect. The study 
sponsor contact information is provided in Section 1, Key Roles . The study sponsor is responsible for 
conducting an evaluation of an unanticipated adverse device effect and shall report the results of such 
evaluation to FDA and to all reviewing IRBs and participating investigators within 10 working days after 
the sponsor first receives notice of the effect. Thereafter the sponsor shall submit such additional 
reports concerning the effect as FDA requests . 
 
7.4.4  Reporting of Pregnancy  
Each pregnancy that starts during the subject’s study participation must be reported by the investigator 
to the Sponsor within 24 hours of learning of its occurrence. Pregnancies and pregnancy follow -up 
should be reported on an Adverse Event form. Pregnanc y follow -up should describe the outcome of the 
pregnancy, including any voluntary or spontaneous discontinuation; details of the birth; the presence or 
absence of any congenital abnormalities, birth defects, maternal or newborn complications, and their 
relation to the device or treatment/exposure. Each pregnancy must be reported as a non -serious AE if 
the subject has received at least one study treatment/exposure.  The following criteria should be 
followed:  
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 24 of 35 
 a. If a subject becomes pregnant after the Baseline visit and all study treatments/test spot 
exposure have been completed, the subject should continue to be followed for the duration 
of the pregnancy.  
b. If a subject becomes pregnant after the Baseline visit but before any study treatments/test 
spot exposures, the subject should be exited from the study.  
c. If a subject becomes pregnant after the Baseline visit but before all study treatments/test 
spot exposures have been completed, additional study treatments/test spot exposures 
should be discontinued, and the subject should continue to be followed for th e duration of 
the pregnancy.  
 
7.4.5  Reporting of Deaths  
The investigator must notify the Sponsor as soon as possible, preferably within 24 hours but in no event 
later than 48 hours, of learning of a subject’s death, regardless of whether the death is related or 
unrelated to the investigational device. The investigator should attempt to determine, as conclusively as 
possible, whether the death is related to the device. The cause of death and the investigator’s discussion 
regarding whether the death was device -related should be des cribed in a written report. The 
investigator mush report death to the reviewing IRB according to the IRB regulations at the study site.  
8. CLINICAL  MONITORING  
Clinical site monitoring is conducted to ensure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are 
protected, that the reported trial data are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of 
the trial is in compliance with the currently appro ved protocol/amendment(s), with GCP, and with 
applicable regulatory requirement(s).  
1. Monitoring for this study will be performed by the Sponsor or Sponsor contract monitor.  
2. Clinical study site and data monitoring will be conducted via both centralized and on -site 
monitoring.  
a. Centralized data monitoring will focus primarily on:  
i. Ongoing, real -time review of clinical data supporting safety, and primary and 
secondary study -defined endpoints, specifically:  
1. Tracking the occurrence of adverse events and expected treatment 
effects.  
ii. Ongoing, real -time review of clinical data as entered on Case Report Forms 
(CRF):  
1. Initial study consent was obtained for all enrolled subjects;  
2. Eligibility for study participation of all enrolled subjects;  
3. Verification of protocol compliance and data completeness.  
iii. Ongoing, real -time evaluation of data trends to identify outliers, unexpected 
trends, or holes in data collection;  
iv. Ongoing, real -time evaluation of study photographs.  
b. Centralized monitoring requires timely data entry and timely uploading of completed 
CRFs to the study HIPAA compliant cloud -based system, e.g., no later than 7 working 
days after a study visit has occurred.  
c. On- site monitoring visits will include:  
i. Review of primary/secondary endpoint data source documents;  
ii. Confirmation that subject randomization is being completed appropriately (if 
applicable);  
iii. Confirmation that study blinding is maintained (if applicable);  
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 25 of 35 
 iv. Confirmation of appropriate execution of the PGAIS, SGAIS, PSQ, or other study -
specific scales;  
v. Note any other study -specific study design items requiring on -site confirmation.  
d. General on -site monitoring tasks will include:  
i. Review of study conduct and progress at each investigative site, e.g., protocol 
compliance, subject recruitment, etc.;  
ii. Confirmation that written informed consent was obtained and documented at 
the time of screening, using an appropriate version of an IRB -approved ICF, and 
subject eligibility is confirmed.  
iii. Confirmation that all expected treatment effects, adverse events and/or 
protocol deviations noted in site records are appropriately documented on 
study specific  CRFs.  
iv. Identification and resolution of any device performance issues;  
v. Review of the investigator’s study records, study management documents and 
subject informed consent documents.  
vi. Confirmation that all investigative site personnel with study -related 
responsibilities are adequately trained and that the applicable training records 
are maintained in the Site Regulatory Binder.  
vii. Confirmation that study -related responsibilities of site personnel are 
appropriately documented on the Delegation of Responsibility Log and the log is 
maintained in the Site Regulatory Binder.  
viii. Reconciliation of the Device Disposition Log against device inventory and 
confirmation that study devices are kept in a secure location.  
ix. Confirmation that required regulatory documents are present in the Site 
Regulatory Binder and are current and correct.  
x. Ensure that all findings, conclusions and any actions taken to correct 
deficiencies noted during an on -site monitoring visit are documented in a site 
monitoring report.  
e. On-site monitoring frequency  
i. An on -site monitoring visit will be completed at each study site at least one time 
during this clinical trial.  
ii. The frequency of site monitoring visits may be adjusted based on a number of 
factors, including but not limited to:  
1. Duration of the study;  
2. Number of subjects enrolled;  
3. Number of investigators/sites;  
4. Complexity of the study;  
5. The level of the study site’s experience in conducting and overseeing 
clinical trials;  
6. The quality of the data documented on study -specific data forms and 
entered into the study database;  
7. Number of outstanding issues from previous visits.  
9. STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  
9.1 STATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 
The primary analysis of efficacy will be based on the evaluable treated subjects, hence, only those 
subjects who received complete study treatments and follow up visits will be included in the analysis.  
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 26 of 35 
  
9.2  ANALYSIS DATASETS  
The following analysis sets will be defined for the statistical analysis of this investigation:  
 
Safety Evaluation Set (SES)  
Subset of all subjects who received the investigational treatment.  
 
Full Analysis Set (FAS)  
Subset of subjects in SES that received complete treatments have primary effectiveness data available.    
 
Per Protocol Set (PPS)  
Subset of all subjects who received complete treatments and have completed the study without major 
protocol deviations.  
 
9.3 DESCRIPTION OF STATISTIC METHODS  
Endpoints will be summarized using descriptive statistics including mean score, standard deviation,  
standard error and range. Frequency and percentage of subjects within each category will be presented  
for categorical data. If applicable, Wilcox t -test may be used to determine if two sets of data are  
significantly different from one another. If p -value is below the level of statistical significance for  
effectiveness analyses (α = 0.05) for all tests of differences, then the null hypothesis is rejected in fa vor 
of the alternative hypothesis. Rejection of null hypotheses will  establish that:  
o The two -sided 95% confidence interval for the difference between the means excludes 
zero.  
o  The two means are statistically significantly different at the 5% level (P <0.05) two -
sided.  
Upon rejection of null hypotheses, further statistical test tools such as, Confidence Interval, and/or One -
way ANOVA and/or descriptive statistical tools may be used to determine the performance of the  
treatment.  
 
9.4 SAFETY ANALYSES  
The safety analysis will be done by analyzing spontaneous reports of adverse events (AE ), as well as  
analysis of immediate response reports by the principal investigator from his/her  
observation/examination of the treated area. Appropriate Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
(MedDRA) code will be used to describe all spontaneously reported events or other study related  
adverse events.  
Summaries of spontaneously reported or other study related adverse events will be presented as:  
o Number (%) of subjects with any AE  
o  Number (%) of subjects with any serious adverse events (SAE)  
o  Number (%) of subjects permanently withdrawn from treatment due to AE  
 
Summaries of analysis of immediate response reports by the principal investigator examination 
will be  displayed on a bar or pie chart and/or a table as;  
a. The overall frequency of subjects with each event (pain during treatment, hemorrhage,  
burn, erythema, edema, purpura, etc.) . 
b. Frequency of subjects with specific severity/intensity for each event using a 5 -
point scale: 1=none; 2=trace; 3=moderate; 4=marked; 5=severe . 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 27 of 35 
 c. The overall proportion of subjects observed with marked or severe intensity of any  
event will be calculated and compared to those with none, trace or moderate  
severity/intensity . 
 
9.6 BASELINE DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS  
Subjects ’ baseline demographics will be compared using descriptive statistics such as mean score,  
standard deviation, standard error and range. Data will be displayed in tables or graphical presentation.  
 
9.7 ANALYSIS OF PRIMARY ENDPOINTS  
The following will be considered for the analysis of primary endpoints:  
The results of each Blinded Reviewer’s evaluation of photographs taken at 1 month and 3 months 
compared to  baseline will be analyzed,  and the results will be reported as a % of the correctly identified 
post treatment  photographs chosen per Blinded Reviewer. An average of the % of the correctly 
identified post treatment  photographs chosen by Blinded Reviewer will be calculated and used to 
determine  
 
Bar, pie charts or graphs indicating percentages of the correctly identified post treatment photographs  
chosen by Blinded Reviewer may also be used to analyses  efficacy.  
 
The % of the correctly identified post treatment photographs chosen by Blinded Reviewer of all subjects  
who received all treatment s with the investigational device and for whom all valid post -baseline  
assessment was obtained will be analyzed  for these primary endpoints. Multiple imputation method or  
modelling of available data may be used for missing data as appropriate.  
 
9.8 ANALYSIS OF SECONDARY ENDPOINTS  
For the analysis of changes in muscle tone and muscle strength , circumference of the extremities and 
subjects’ assessment of satisfaction with the treatment secondary endpoints, the following analysis will 
be considered:  
 
Summary tables of changes in measurements  of muscle tone and strength , circumference and subjects’ 
assessment of satisfaction at 1 and 3 months  post last treatment as compared to baseline will be 
displayed as mean difference, standard deviation and standard error.  
 
Bar charts, pie chart, graphs or any other descriptive statistical displays indicating scores, percentages  
and/or proportions of changes in circumference and subjects’ assessment of satisfaction at 1 month and 
3-month  post -treatment as compared to baseline will be used where applicable to analyze  efficacy.  
 
All statistical tests that will be two -sided. The level of statistical significance for effectiveness analyses is  
5% (α = 0.05) for all tests of differences. Where appropriate, two -proportion z -test will be used to 
compare  the differences between changes in abdominal circumference and subjects’ assessment of 
satisfaction at1 month and 3 months  post last treatment as compared to baseline.  
 
Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) may also be used where appropriate. Change  in abdominal 
circumference and subjects’ assessment of satisfaction assessments at twelve weeks post -treatment as 
compared to baseline of all  subjects who received all treatment s with the investigational  device and for 
whom have all  valid post -baseline assessment was obtained will be analyzed  for these secondary 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 28 of 35 
 endpoints. Multiple imputation method or modelling of available data may be used for missing data as 
appropriate.  
10. SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO SOURCE DOCUMENTS  
Source documents are defined as the results of original observations and activities of a clinical 
investigation. Source documents will include, but are not limited to, study -specific data forms, progress 
notes, electronic data, computer printouts, screenin g logs, and recorded data from automated 
instruments. All source documents pertaining to this study will be maintained by the investigators and 
made available for inspection by authorized persons.  
 
Following written SOPs, the clinical study monitors will verify that the clinical trial is conducted, and data 
are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in compliance with the protocol, GCP, and the 
applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
The investigational site will provide direct access to all trial related sites, source data/documents, and 
reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the sponsor, and inspection by local and 
regulatory authorities.  
11. ETHICS/PROTECTION  OF HUMAN  SUBJECTS  
11.1  ETHICAL STANDARD  
This clinical study will be conducted in accordance with the Protection of Human Subjects Regulations, 
including Subpart B Informed Consent of Human Subjects (21 CFR Part 50); the Institutional Review 
Board Regulations (21 CFR Part 56); the Financial Discl osure by Clinical Investigators Regulations (21 CFR 
Part 54); and the Investigational Device Exemptions Regulations (21 CRF Part 812), and the ICH E6.  
 
11.2  INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
Prior to initiation of any study procedures, the protocol, informed consent, and recruitment materials, 
and all participant materials will be submitted to a duly constituted IRB for view and approval. In 
addition, any amendments to the protocol or Informed  Consent Form will be reviewed and approved by 
the IRB. The Sponsor must receive a letter documenting IRB approval at the clinical site prior to the 
initiation of the study.  
The investigator is responsible for providing the appropriate reports to its reviewing IRB during the 
clinical study. These reports will include:  
1. Informing the IRB of the study progress periodically as required, but at least annually;  
2. Reporting any unanticipated adverse device effects within 10 working days of first learning of 
the event;  
3. Reporting any deviations from the clinical protocol to protect the life or well -being of a subject 
in the case of an emergency within five working days after the emergency occurred;  
4. Reporting the use of the device without obtaining informed consent from a subject within five 
working days of the event; and  
5. Providing any other reports requested by the IRB.  
 
The IRB must be notified of study completion within 30 days of the final visit of the last subject and 
should be provided with a summary of the results of the study by the investigator.  
 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 29 of 35 
 11.3  INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS  
11.3.1 Consent/Assent and Other Informational Documents Provided to Participants  
Consent forms describing in detail the study device, study procedures, and risks are given to the 
participant and written documentation of informed consent is required prior to starting 
intervention/administering study product .  
 
11.3.2  Consent Procedures and Documentation  
Informed consent will be obtained from all subjects prior to study participation. Informed consent is a 
process that is initiated prior to the individual’s agreeing to participate in the study and continues 
throughout the individual’s study participation. Extensive discussion of risks and possible benefits of 
participation will be provi ded to each participant. Consent forms will be IRB -approved, and the 
participant will be asked to read and review the document. The investigator, or investigator -delegated 
study personnel, will explain the research study to the participant and answer any q uestions that may 
arise. All participants will receive a verbal explanation in terms suited to their comprehension of the 
purposes, procedures, and potential risks of the study and of their rights as research participants. 
Participants will have the opport unity to carefully review the written consent form and ask questions 
prior to signing. The participants should have the opportunity to discuss the study with their surrogates 
or think about it prior to agreeing to participate. The participant will sign the  informed consent 
document prior to any procedures being done specifically for the study. The participants may withdraw 
consent at any time throughout the course of the trial. A copy of the informed consent document will be 
given to the participants for th eir records. The rights and welfare of the participants will be protected by 
emphasizing to them that the quality of their medical care will not be adversely affected if they decline 
to participate in this study . 
 
11.4  PARTICIPANT AND DATA CONFIDENTIALITY  
All information generated in this study must be considered highly confidential and must not be disclosed 
to any persons not directly concerned with the study without prior written permission from the 
Sponsor. Authorized regulatory officials and Sponsor per sonnel (or its representatives) will be allowed 
full access to inspect the records. All investigational devices and/or other materials collected will be 
used solely in accordance with this protocol, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the Sponsor.  
Subjects should be identified only by initials and unique subject numbers on study -specific data forms. If 
necessary, their full names may be made known to a regulatory agency or other authorized officials.  
12. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING  
12.1  DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES  
Data collection is the responsibility of the clinical trial staff at the site under the supervision of the site 
PI. The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of 
the data reported.    
 
During each subject’s visit to the clinic, study data will be documented by study personnel on study -
specific data forms (CRFs). In addition, study personnel will record progress notes to document all 
significant observations, and any contact with a subjec t by telephone or other means that provides 
significant clinical information will also be documented in the progress notes as described above.  
For transmission to the Sponsor, information from the study progress notes and other source 
documents will be promptly transcribed to study -specific data forms (CRFs). In this clinical trial, study -
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 30 of 35 
 specific data forms (CRFs) may also serve as source documents. Transcription of study data onto study -
specific data forms should be completed and uploaded within 7 days of the study visit.  
Copies of the CRF serving as source documents must be maintained for each participant enrolled in the 
study. Data reported in the CRF derived from source documents should be consistent with the source 
documents or the discrepancies should be explained and captured in a progress note and maintained in 
the participant’s official study record.  
 
Any changes to information in the study progress notes, other source documents, and data forms will be 
initialed and dated in ink on the day the change is made by a site study staff member authorized to 
make the change. Changes will be made by striking a s ingle line through erroneous data, and clearly 
entering the correct data. If the reason for the change is not apparent, a brief explanation for the 
change will be written in the source documentation by the clinician.  
 
12.2  INVESTIGATOR RECORDS AND REPORTS  
12.2.1  Investigator Records    
Prior to participation in the investigation, the investigator must provide the following documentation to 
the Sponsor:  
o Investigator Agreement, signed by the investigator, which lists any physicians who will be 
involved in conducting the investigation under the direction of the primary investigator;  
o A copy of the principal investigator’s, sub -investigator’s, other delegated study clinicians’ 
curriculum vitae;  
o A letter signed by the chairperson of the IRB overseeing the conduct of this study indicating that 
the IRB has reviewed and approved this investigational plan; and  
o A copy of the IRB -approved Informed Consent Form.  
During the study, investigators are required to maintain on file the following accurate, complete, 
and current records relating to this study as described in 21 CFR §812.140. A summary of these 
records is listed below:  
o All correspondence and required reports, which pertain to the study.  
o Records of receipt, use, or disposition of study devices, including the type and quantity of 
devices; the dates of receipt; the serial numbers; the names of all persons who received, used or 
disposed of each device; and why and how many units of the device  have been returned to the 
Sponsor, repaired, or otherwise disposed.  
o Records of each subject’s case history and exposure to the device.  
o Signed and dated consent forms.  
o Relevant observations, including records concerning adverse events, condition of each subject 
upon entering and results of diagnostic tests.  
o Study -specific data forms and corrections to the forms.  
o Protocol and amendments.  
o Subject recruiting materials.  
o Investigator curriculum vitae.  
 
12.2.2  Investigator Reports  
Investigators are required to prepare and submit to the Sponsor the following complete, accurate, and 
timely reports on this investigation when are required. These reports, which are listed below, are 
required by 21 CFR §812.150; additional reports may be requested by the Sponsor:  
o The investigator will notify the Sponsor of a subject death occurring during the investigation, as 
soon as possible, preferably within 24 hours of learning of the subject’s death, but in no event 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 31 of 35 
 later than 48 hours. The investigator will notify the reviewing IRB of a subject death as specified 
by the IRB.  
o The investigator will notify the Sponsor of any unanticipated adverse device effects within 48 
hours after learning of the effect. The investigator will notify its reviewing IRB of any 
unanticipated adverse device effects, as soon as possible, but no later  than 10 working days 
after learning of the effect.  
o The investigator will notify the Sponsor of the withdrawal of IRB approval, as soon as possible, 
but no later than five working days after learning of the withdrawal.  
o The investigator will provide current progress reports to the Sponsor and reviewing IRB at 
regular intervals and at least on an annual basis.  
o The investigator will notify the Sponsor and reviewing IRB of any deviation from the 
investigational plan to protect the life and physical well -being of a subject in an emergency, as 
soon as possible, but no later than five working days after the emergency  occurred.  
o The investigator will notify the Sponsor and reviewing IRB that an informed consent was not 
obtained from a subject, as soon as possible, but no later than five working days after such an 
occurrence.  
o The investigator will provide a final summary report to the Sponsor and reviewing IRB within 
three months after termination or completion of the study.  
o The investigator will provide any other information upon the request of an IRB, FDA, or the 
Sponsor.  
 
12.3  STUDY RETENTION RECORDS  
The investigator is responsible for retaining the necessary records, including a copy of the protocol, 
device labeling, study -specific data forms, medical records, original reports of test results, all study -
related correspondence, a record of written info rmed consent, and any other documents pertaining to 
the conduct of this study.  
FDA regulations require all investigators participating in investigational device studies to maintain 
detailed clinical records during the investigation and for a period of at least two years after the latter of 
the following two dates:  
1. The date on which the investigation is terminated or complete; or  
2. The date the records are no longer required for purposes of supporting a premarket approval 
application.  
The investigator must not dispose of any records relevant to this study without either:  
1. Obtaining written permission from the Sponsor; or  
2. Providing an opportunity for the Sponsor to collect such records.  
 
The investigator shall take responsibility for maintaining adequate and accurate electronic or hard copy 
source documents of all observations and data generated during this study. Such documentation is 
subject to inspection by the Sponsor and the FDA.  
 
12.4  PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS  
This study should be conducted as described in this protocol, except for an emergency in which the 
protection, safety, and well -being of a subject requires a protocol deviation, based on the judgment of 
the investigator (or a responsible, appropriately tra ined professional designated by the investigator). If 
the deviation from the protocol is necessary to protect the physical well -being of a subject in an 
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 32 of 35 
 emergency, such protocol deviations must be reported to the Sponsor and the reviewing IRB as soon as 
possible, but no later than five working days after the emergency occurred.  
In the event of a significant deviation from the protocol due to an accident or mistake, the investigator 
or designee must contact the Sponsor at the earliest possible time by telephone to discuss the deviation 
and its impact on the study and subject conti nuation in the study. These discussions will be documented 
by the investigator and the Sponsor and reviewed by the monitor.  
 
12.5  PUBLICATION AND DATA SHARING POLICY  
The data produced by this Lutronic‐sponsored study is the sole property of Lutronic.  Thereby, 
abstracts, publications and presentations of this data must be pre‐approved by Lutronic in writing (e‐
mail approval is acceptable).  The Sponsor must also be provided with the opportunity  to review all 
investigator‐prepared abstracts, publications or presentations.  A period of thirty (30) days for 
presentational materials and abstracts and forty‐five (45) days for manuscripts will be required for 
review and comment by Sponsor’s Clinical R esearch Department. These requirements acknowledge 
Sponsor's responsibility to evaluate such publications for their accuracy, to ascertain whether 
Confidential Information is being inappropriately released, to provide the Principal Investigator with 
inform ation which may not yet have been available to him/her, and to provide input from co‐authors 
regarding content and conclusions of the publication or presentation.    If requested in writing by the 
Sponsor, the Institution will withhold publication to prote ct the potential patentability of any invention 
described therein and/or made available to fulfill regulatory requirements.  Notwithstanding the 
foregoing, Institution agrees that if the Study is part of a multi‐center study, the first publication of the 
results of the Study shall be made in conjunction with the results from the investigators at the other 
study centers as a mult i‐center publication.  
13. STUDY ADMINISTRATION  
13.1   STUDY INVESTIGATORS  
All investigators will be experienced with aesthetic treatments using a variety of accepted clinical 
modalities.  
 
13.2  AMENDMENT POLICY  
The investigator will not make any changes to this protocol without prior written consent from the 
Sponsor and subsequent approval by the IRB, except if the deviation from the protocol is necessary to 
protect the life and physical well -being of a subject i n an emergency. Such protocol deviations must be 
reported to the Sponsor and the reviewing IRB as soon as possible, but no later than five working days 
after the emergency occurred.  
 Any permanent change to the protocol, whether it is an overall change or a change for specific study 
center(s), must be handled as a protocol amendment. Any amendment to the protocol that appears 
indicated as the study progresses will be fully discussed b y the investigator(s) and the Sponsor. If 
agreement is reached regarding the need for an amendment, the Sponsor will write it. The written 
amendment must be submitted to the chairman of the IRB identified with this responsibility. Except for 
“administrativ e amendments”, investigators must await IRB approval of protocol amendments before 
implementing the change(s). Administrative amendments are defined to have no effect on the validity of 
the data or information resulting from the completion of the approved protocol, or the relationship of 
likely patient risk to benefit relied upon to approve the protocol; the scientific soundness of the 
investigational plan or protocol; and the right, safety or welfare of the human subjects involved in the 
investigation.  
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 33 of 35 
 When, in judgment of the chairman of the IRB, the investigators and/or the Sponsor, the amendment to 
the protocol substantially alters the study design and/or increases the potential risk to the subject, the 
currently approved written Informed Consent Form  will require similar modification. In such cases, 
repeat informed consent will be obtained from subjects enrolled in the study before continued 
participation.  
14. CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY  
The independence of this study from any actual or perceived influence is critical. Therefore, any actual 
conflict of interest of persons who have a role in the design, conduct, analysis, publication, or any aspect 
of this trial will be disclosed and manage d. Furthermore, persons who have a perceived conflict of 
interest will be required to have such conflicts managed in a way that is appropriate to their 
participation in the trial.  
 
 
  
Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 34 of 35 
 References  
  

Electronic Stimulation for Muscle Toning and Circumferential Reduction  Version 2.0  
 
       Page 35 of 35 
 APPENDIX  PROTOCOL REVISIONS LOG  
VERSION  DATE  SIGNIFICANT REVISIONS  
V1.0  6/25/202 0 Initial Release  
V2.0  9/8/2021 Expand to include extremities , strength measurements , investigators  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
 