Protocol Page
Phase II Study of  Abraxane Plus Ipilimumab in  Patients  with Metastatic Melanoma
2011-1157
Core  Protocol Information
Short Title Phase II Study of Abraxane Plus Ipilimimab in Patients  with Metastatic 
Melanoma
Study Chair: Adi Diab
Additional Contact:Brooke C. Bessard
Courtney Powell
Sheila Lister
Additional Memo Recipients: Recipients List
OPR Recipients (for OPR use only)
None
Study Staff Recipients
None
Department:Melanoma Medical Oncology
Phone:713-792-2921
Unit:430
Study Manager: Carol S Vaughn
Full Title:  Phase II Study of Abraxane Plus Ipilimumab in Patients with Metastatic 
Melanoma
Public Description: The goal of this clinical  research study is to learn if the combination of 
ipilimumab and ABI-007 (abraxane) can help to control metastatic 
melanoma. The safety of this drug combination will also be studied.
Ipilimumab is designed to increase the immune system's  ability to fight 
cancer.Abraxane is designed  to stop cancer  cells from making new DNA (the 
genetic material of cells). This may stop the cancer cells from dividing 
into new cells.
Protocol Type:Standard Protocol
Protocol Phase: Phase II
Version Status: IRB approved  with contingencies 06/26/2018
Version: 14
Document Status:Saved as "Final"
Submitted by: Courtney Powell--6/15/2018 1:03:08 PM
OPR Action: Accepted by:  Yolanda Shorte  -- 6/18/2018 7:32:05 PM
Which Committee  will review this protocol?
 The Clinical Research  Committee - (CRC)
Protocol Body
1.0 Background
The optimum therapy for metastatic  melanoma remains unclear.  In Western  Europe  Dacarbazine alone remains the preferred 
palliative therapy for advanced metastatic melanoma while in  the United  States, the multi-drug combinations such  as CVD 
(Cisplatin, Vinblastine, Dacarbazine) or Dartmouth Regimen (including Cisplatin, BCNU, Dacarbazine, Tamoxifen) are the most  
commonly used regimens despite  any documented benefit  over Dacarbazine in prospectively randomized clinical trials.(1-
3)   During the past decade several small trials with IL-2-interferon-CVD combination  (biochemotherapy) studies suggested 
improvement in response rate and survival over the results observed  with multi-drug chemotherapy  combinations. (4-7)  To 
determine the impact of addition of biologicals to combination  chemotherapy on  response  rates and patient survival, 3 
prospectively randomized studies  Phase III trials were conducted in  USA.(8-10)   The outcome of these  trials failed  to show 
superiority of efficacy of biochemotherapy over combination chemotherapy in  terms of response  rates and survival. Paclitaxel 
and Docetaxel have been evaluated for efficacy against  metastatic melanoma.   The response rates to these  drugs ranged 
between 13 to 15 % in Chemonaive  patients.  Phase II study of ABI-007 in  patients with metastatic melanoma gave a response 
rate 20% in similar patient population indicating that it may be  the most effective taxane against metastatic melanoma. 
Multiple Phase II clinical trials with Ipilimumab alone, Ipilimumab in  combination with DTIC or immunotherapeutic agents such 
as interferon, IL-2 or gp-100 gave durable  complete responses  similar to IL-2. (12-16)   We have been evaluating Ipilimumab  –
temozolomide combination in patients  with metastatic melanoma without  prior chemotherapy over the past several years.  The 
combination is well tolerated and the toxicity profile is similar to Ipilimumab -Dacarbazine combination that was evaluated  in 
chemonaive patients earlier.(16) Clinical  trials during the past 8 years showed  that Ipilimumab containing regimens gives  
durable responses like IL-2.(17)
ABI-007 is a novel  Cremophor EL-free, non-crystalline, amorphous, albumin-bound  particle
form of paclitaxel suspended in normal  saline with several advantages over  Taxol:
Preclinical models  consistently demonstrated improved tolerability, increased  antitumor
activity and higher intratumor paclitaxel  levels  for ABI-007 compared to  Taxol. Recent
mechanistic studies  indicate that this increased antitumor  activity may be due to increased
tumor uptake of paclitaxel  that is mediated through albumin-receptors  on tumor
neovasculature.   ABI-007 is Cremophor EL-free and therefore associated with a reduced risk  of
hypersensitivity and no requirements for premedication  as compared  to Taxol.
ABI-007 does  not require steroid co-medication. ABI-007 is  better tolerated than Taxol. In a Phase I trial using  an every 3 week 
schedule of administration, the maximum  tolerated dose of ABI-007 (300 mg/m2) was substantially  higher than the labeled dose 
for Taxol (175 mg/m2).
The antitumor tumor activity of ABI-007  given every 3 weeks was greater than that
observed with Taxol in women with metastatic  breast cancer.  
Rationale 
There is compelling evidence that chemotherapy-induced tumor  cell death triggers  an innate  immune response,  which is 
required for maximal therapeutic benefit. Dying tumor cells are recognized by Toll-like  receptor 4 (TLR4) on dendritic cells, 
which leads to a widespread anti-tumor  immune  response. (21)  The Toll-like  receptors are  a large family of pattern-recognition  
receptors used by cells of the innate immune system to respond to specific lipid, protein, and nucleic acid  components produced 
by pathogens. (22)  There  is mounting  evidence that  innate immunity  is also involved in recognizing and destroying  tumor cells.  
Apetoh and colleagues showed  that tumor cells killed by chemotherapeutic  agents release HMGB1  (high-mobility group  B1), an 
abundant DNA-binding nuclear protein that serves as a "danger signal" for the immune system.  (22)  Once released, HMGB1  
bind TLR4  and stimulate dendritic  cells to secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines and activate an  innate immune response. 
Stimulation of complementary immune pathways has been  shown to be  highly effective in eradicating large established  tumors. 
(23, 24)  An acute   release of de novo tumor antigen  from apoptosis induced  by anti-DR5 antibody followed  by boosting the T-
cell activation phase using anti-CD40  and anti-41BB antibodies is possible (23)  Another study,  with similar results, used the 
same synergistic treatment combination, except  that activation  of invariant NKT cells with alfa-galactosylceramide was used  in 
place of anti-CD40  (23)  Our clinical  trial protocol here will put into practice a similar synergistic approach  through 
immunotherapy with interferon-alfa, interleukin-2 and anti-CTLA4  therapy.  IPI-Biotherapy  will lead to intense cytokine release  
and stimulation of cellular  immunity.  
The taxanes paclitaxel and docetaxel have shown response  rates in the range of  10 to 15% in a number of reported studies.(25) 
Dr. Evan Hersh conducted a Phase II trial of ABI-007 in patients with previously treated  and chemotherapy  naive malignant 
melanoma.(26) Treatment  was given weekly for 3 weeks followed  by a one-week break period.  The objective  response  rate was 
22% in chemotherapy naive patients. The higher ABI-007  dose administered  to chemotherapy naïve patients,  while resulting in 
a higher  incidence of peripheral neuropathy,  was otherwise  generally well-tolerated. Myelosuppression was not problematic  in 
either cohort. (Hersh  et al Cancer  2010; 116:155-63).
Clinical trials involving the use of chemotherapy,  interferon,  interleukin-2 or anti-CTLA-4 drugs,  administered separately have  
failed to give clinically significant  anti-tumor  T-cell responses.   Thus,  there  is a strong  rationale for combining immunologic 
agents, with cytotoxic anticancer agent  in a novel chemoimmunotherapy.  Our proposed novel therapy is designed in a rational 
fashion combining ABI-007 with Ipilimumab together to induce  tumor destruction that acutely releases tumor antigen into the 
system for T-cell  activation by antigen-presenting cells (APC), and  then cause T-cell activation and expansion against these 
newly-released antigens (and pre-existing  antigens) to generate  highest possible  number of tumor antigen-specific  T cells 
necessary for complete destruction of the tumor cells.   This will improve the anti-tumor immunity and survival.  Immunologic 
evaluation of the patients will be performed  prior to start of therapy and  during the therapy to clearly define the immune 
response and correlate  it with clinical  response.
2.0 Background Drug Information
2.1 ABI-007: Paclitaxel Protein-bound Particles
2.2.1 The Product
ABI-007 (paclitaxel protein-bound particles for injectable suspension)(albumin-bound) is a
Cremophor EL-free, albumin-bound  particle form of paclitaxel. Each 50  mL vial contains
100 mg of paclitaxel, and approximately 900 mg of  human albumin, as a white to  yellow
sterile lyophilized powder for reconstitution with 20 mL of 0.9%  Sodium  Chloride Injection.
2.2.2 Introduction
ABI-007 is a unique  protein formulation of a non-crystalline, amorphous form of paclitaxel
in an insoluble particle state. ABI-007  has been  developed to reduce the toxicities associated
with Taxol  (paclitaxel) Injection (in which  paclitaxel - from the native crystalline form - is in
solution with Cremophor EL/ethanol as the solvent) while maintaining or improving  its
chemotherapeutic effect. ABI-007  has been  approved in over 35 countries to date, including
the U.S. and Canada (and is under review in a number of other countries) for the treatment of
women with metastatic  breast cancer.
2.2.3 Preclinical Studies with ABI-007
Preclinical studies comparing  ABI-007 to Taxol  demonstrated lower toxicities, with a MTD
approximately 50% higher for ABI-007 compared to  Taxol. At equal  doses there was less
myelosuppression and improved efficacy  in a xenograft tumor  model of human mammary
adenocarcinoma. At equitoxic  doses  of paclitaxel, ABI-007 was  found to be  markedly  more
efficacious in these animal models  than Taxol.20
2.1.4 Clinical Studies with ABI-007
2.1.4.1 Every 3 Weeks  Schedule
In a Phase I study, the maximum tolerated dose (MTD)  of ABI-007  was determined to be
300 mg/m2 by 30 minute infusion  every 3 weeks, without  premedication or G-CSF  support.
Two multicenter Phase II studies  have evaluated 2 dose levels of ABI-007 (300 mg/m2, n=63,
and 175 mg/m2, n=43) in patients  with metastatic  breast cancer. The response rates (complete
response [CR]+partial response [PR]) in these 2 Phase II trials were  40% (95% CI 25-54%)
for the 175 mg/m2  dose, and 48% (95%  CI 35-60%) for the 300 mg/m2  dose. Of 39 patients
receiving 300 mg/m2 as first-line therapy  for metastatic breast cancer, 64% (95% CI 49-79%)
responded (CR+PR).  This was contrasted  with a 45% response  rate in similar patients  at the
lower dose level. Grade 4 neutropenia was noted in 24% of patients  at the higher dose level,
occurred primarily during the first cycle and resolved rapidly. A Phase III trial in patients
with metastatic breast  cancer compared  ABI-007 260 mg/m2  to Taxol 175 mg/m2 given every
3 weeks. Significantly  higher efficacy  for ABI-007 vs Taxol was demonstrated  as measured
by response rates (CR+PR, 33% vs 19%, p<0.001), time to tumor progression  (23.0  vs 16.6
weeks, p=0.002), and progression-free survival (22.7 vs 16.6 weeks, p=0.003). Survival was
longer with ABI-007, although the difference  was not statistically significant  (65.0  vs. 55.3
weeks, p=0.322).
2.1.4.2 Weekly for 3 Weeks, Every  4 Weeks Schedule
A Phase  I study of ABI-007 administered weekly for 3 weeks followed by a 1 week rest in
patients with advanced solid tumors  has recently been completed.21 The MTDs for heavily
and lightly pre-treated patients were 100 and 150 mg/m2  respectively.  Dose limiting
toxicities included  myelosuppression  and peripheral neuropathy.  Premedication  was not
required, and unexpected, non-taxane associated  toxicities were not observed. In a Phase II
trial in heavily pretreated patients  with taxane-refractory  metastatic breast  cancer, objective
antitumor responses occurred in 18% of women  treated with ABI-007  100 mg/m2  on this
schedule.22 Toxicity was minimal and this study  has been amended to evaluate  an increased
dose of 125 mg/m2 in this patient population.  The tolerability of 150 mg/m2 in previously
untreated patients has been confirmed  in an interim analysis of 32 patients with malignant
melanoma who received a mean  of 3.5 cycles (range 1-9). To date there has been  1 case of
Grade 3 sensory  neuropathy (no Grade 4) and 1 case  of Grade 4 neutropenia.
2.2.5 ABI-007 in Metastatic Malignant Melanoma
The taxanes paclitaxel and docetaxel have shown response  rates in the range of  10 to 15% in
a number of reported studies.23,24  Dr. Evan Hersh conducted a Phase II trial of ABI-007 in
patients with previously treated  and chemotherapy naive malignant melanoma. Treatment
was given weekly for 3 weeks followed by a one-week break period. A higher weekly dose
of ABI-007 was given to chemotherapy naive patients (150 mg/m2). Results from the trial
are presented in the table below. As expected, the objective response rate was higher  in
chemotherapy naive patients. The higher ABI-007 dose administered  to chemotherapy naive
patients, while resulting  in a higher incidence of peripheral neuropathy,  was otherwise
generally well-tolerated.  Myelosuppression  was not problematic in  either cohort. (Hersh  et al Cancer 
2010; 116:155-63).
2.2.6 Potential Risks of ABI-007
ABI-007 is not formulated  in Cremophor and thus the risk of hypersensitivity reactions  is
much less than that of Taxol.  The major risks of ABI-007 were known  toxicities of paclitaxel.  See the Investigator
Brochure for a complete  description of all toxicities reported.
Myelosuppression, predominantly neutropenia.  Grade 4 neutropenia typically resolved  in < 7
days and did not require colony  stimulating  factor support.
Peripheral neuropathy, predominantly sensory. Grade 3 peripheral neuropathy typically
improved to Grade 1 or 2 within  21 days of holding  the ABI-007 dose at which time therapy
could be restarted at a lower  dose.
Nausea and vomiting.  Nausea and vomiting  were typically Grade 1 or 2 and responded  to
standard anti-emetic regimens.
Myalgias and arthralgias. Myalgias  and arthralgias were typically Grade 1 or 2 and
responsive to standard  acetaminophen-containing medication.
Mucositis. Mucositis was typically Grade  1 or 2 and not dose  limiting.
Alopecia. Similar  to that seen with Taxol.
2.2.7 Advantages  of ABI-007
ABI-007 is a novel  Cremophor EL-free, non-crystalline, amorphous, albumin-bound  particle
form of paclitaxel suspended in normal  saline with several advantages over  Taxol:
Preclinical  models  consistently demonstrated improved  tolerability, increased  antitumor activity and higher intratumor  paclitaxel 
levels for ABI-007  compared to Taxol.  Recent mechanistic studies indicate that this increased antitumor  activity may be due to 
increased tumor uptake of  paclitaxel  that is mediated through albumin-receptors on tumor neovasculature.26
ABI-007 does  not require steroid co-medication.
ABI-007 is better tolerated than Taxol. In a Phase I trial using  an every 3 week schedule of administration, the maximum 
tolerated dose of ABI-007 (300 mg/m2)  was substantially higher than the labeled  dose for Taxol (175 mg/m2).27
The antitumor  tumor activity of ABI-007  given every 3 weeks was greater than that  observed  with Taxol.  In Phase II trials, 
antitumor activity  was documented in metastatic  breast cancer and a Phase III study utilizing ABI-007 at a dose  of 260 mg/m2 
every 3 weeks demonstrated increased objective response  rates and time to tumor  progression compared  to standard doses of 
Taxol in women  with metastatic breast cancer. 
The major  components of ABI-007  are unmodified paclitaxel and human  albumin. The absence of Cremophor EL  in the 
formulation allows the infusion  of ABI-007  in approximately 30  minutes.
ABI-007 is Cremophor EL-free  and therefore associated with a reduced  risk of hypersensitivity and no  requirements for  
premedication as compared to Taxol. The Cremophor EL constituent in Taxol  requires special  non-DEHP  tubing and in-line 
filters for intravenous administration, since  Cremophor  EL causes leaching of the tubing  plasticizers. ABI-007 requires no 
special tubing  or in-line filters.
2.2.8 Packaging, Labeling, and Storage of Study Drug
ABI-007 will be supplied by the Celgene  in single-use vials. Each single-use 50  mL vial will
contain paclitaxel (100 mg) and approximately 900 mg human albumin (HA)  as a stabilizer.
Each vial will be labeled according to country-specific regulatory requirements  for labeling
of investigational  products. Unreconstituted ABI-007 should be stored  at controlled room
temperature (25°C  or 77°F; excursions  permitted  to 15-30ºC [See USP controlled room
temperature]). Reconstituted ABI-007 should be used immediately. If not used immediately,
the vial of reconstituted ABI-007  must be placed  in its carton and be placed  in a refrigerator at 2° to 8°C (36° to 46°F) for  a 
maximum of 8 hours.  Both forms should be stored in an area free of environmental extremes and must be accessible only to 
study personnel. Temperature records for ABI-007 must be made available to Celgene or other sponsor nominated Contract 
Research Organization (CRO) monitoring  teams for  verification of proper  study drug storage. Only completely unused study 
drug vials should be destroyed per institutional policy. Partially used  and completely used  vials should be destroyed according  
to the site’s guidelines, and their disposition should be recorded on the Investigational  Drug Accountability Record Form. The 
investigator, or designee, shall record  the dispensing of study drug to patients and  any remaining study drug after dosing in a 
study drug accountability record. The study  drug record will be made available to  Celgene, or other  authorized Celgene-
designated monitoring personnel for the purpose  of accounting for the study drug supply. Inspections of the study drug supply 
for inventory purposes and assurance  of proper storage will be conducted as necessary. Any significant  discrepancy will be 
recorded and reported to Celgene  or their designee and a plan for resolution will be documented.
2.2.9 Study  Medication Administration
NOTE: The use of an in-line filter is not recommended.
ABI-007 will be reconstituted by appropriate study personnel  and administered to the patient in the study site. The investigator  
will calculate the body  surface area (BSA) of the patient using methods that  are standard for their institution in  order to 
determine the total amount of paclitaxel  to be administered.
Reconstitution and use of ABI-007:
1.Calculate the patient’s  BSA according  to standard institutional methods. BSA  will be calculated at Baseline and can be 
recalculated according to  institutional standards. BSA must be  recalculated  if body weight  changes by more  than  10%. Dosing 
BSA may be capped if the treating  physician  believes it is in the best interest  of an obese patient.
2.Calculate the total dose (in mg) to be administered by: Total Dose (mg)  = BSA x (study dose mg/m2)
3.Calculate the total number of vials required by: Total Number of  Vials = Total Dose (mg)  100 (mg/vial) Round up  the number of 
vials to be reconstituted to the next higher whole number  when  a fractional number  of vials is  obtained  by the above  formula 
(eg, if the total number  of vials = 4.05 or 4.5, then 5 vials would be  reconstituted).
4.Using sterile technique, prepare the vials for reconstitution.
5.Swab  the rubber stoppers  with alcohol.
6.Reconstitute each ABI-007 vial by using a 50 or 60  cc sterile  syringe to inject 20 mL of 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection or 
equivalent into each vial over a period of not less than 1 minute (Note: Change  the syringes  after reconstituting  every 3 vials). 
Slowly inject the 20 mL of 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection over  a minimum of 1 minute, using the sterile syringe 
directing the solution flow onto the inside  wall of the vial.
DO NOT INJECT the 0.9%  Sodium Chloride Injection solution directly  onto the lyophilized cake as this will result in 
foaming.
Once the injection is complete, allow  the vial to sit for a minimum of 5 minutes to ensure proper  wetting of the lyophilized  
cake/powder.
Gently swirl and/or invert the vial slowly for at least 2 minutes until complete dissolution of  any cake/powder occurs. 
Avoid generation of foam.
If foaming or clumping occurs,  stand  solution  for at least  15 minutes until foam  subsides.  Each mL of  reconstituted 
product will contain  5 mg of paclitaxel.
7.Calculate the exact total dosing  volume of 5 mg/mL suspension  required  for the patient: Dosing volume (mL) = Total dose 
(mg) / 5 (mg/mL)
8.The reconstituted sample should be milky and homogeneous without  visible particulates. If unsuspended powder is visible, the 
vial should be gently  inverted again  to ensure complete resuspension,  prior to use.
9.Use immediately following  reconstitution. If not used immediately, replace the reconstituted vial in the carton and  store 
reconstituted ABI-007 in a refrigerator for not more than 8 hours.
10.Using a new, sterile 50 or 60 cc syringe, withdraw the reconstituted ABI-007 solution.  Do not remove the rubber stopper from 
the ABI-007 vials as this can compromise  the sterility  of the drug preparation. 
11.Inject the calculated dosing volume of reconstituted  ABI-007 suspension  into an empty sterile, standard  PVC IV bag,  using an 
injection port. Inject perpendicularly  into the center  of the injection port to avoid  dislodging plastic  material into the IV bag.  
Repeat steps 9 and 10  until the patient’s  entire required  dose is  injected  into the IV bag.
12.Remove the injection port.
13.Once the exact volume of reconstituted ABI-007 has been withdrawn from the vials, discard any excess  solution  left over in 
accordance with standard operating procedures for cytotoxic drugs.
14.Administer the calculated dosing volume  of reconstituted  ABI-007 suspension by IV infusion over 30 minutes to 40 minutes. 
The use of an in-line filter  is not recommended.
2.2.10 Receipt and Return of Study Drug
Upon receipt of the study drug supplies, the investigator or designee  will conduct  an
inventory and sign the study drug receipt. A copy of the drug receipt  should be made and
retained in the investigator's regulatory  file records. The original  should be sent to the
address indicated on the stamped self addressed envelope  included with the shipment.
A representative from Celgene or his/her designee will inspect  the study drug inventory, and will authorize the destruction  of any 
remaining unused  study drug. If the investigational site has a policy, procedure or SOP  detailing the process to follow  for study  
drug destruction, the pharmacist or designee can choose to destroy  the study drug on site.  The following information must be 
recorded on the site’s pharmacy drug accountability log: quantity  of vials destroyed, expiration date and lot number.  The 
pharmacist must document that the study  drug was destroyed in accordance with their institution’s drug destruction policy or 
SOP.  A drug destruction memo and the site’s drug destruction SOP/policy should  be sent to Celgene Medical Operations Dept. 
A copy of the drug destruction memo should be retained at the clinical site.  In the event  of study  completion or termination, a 
copy of all pharmacy records (drug  dispensing log, drug accountability log and any destruction memos) must be mailed to  
Celgene Medical  Operations.
2.1 Ipilimumab
CTLA-4 and T Cell Activation
Advances in the understanding of mechanisms that regulate  T cell activation have allowed  the rational design of new strategies 
for immunotherapy of tumors, including  melanoma. It has been known for  some time that engagement of the T cell  antigen 
receptor by itself is not sufficient for full T cell activation; a second  co-stimulatory signal is required for induction  of IL-2  
production, proliferation  and differentiation to effector function of  naive T cells. Abundant  data now indicate  that the primary 
source of this stimulation is mediated  by engagement of CD28 on  the T cell surface by members  of the B7 family on the 
antigen-presenting cell (APC). [Lenschow D.J., et al., CD28/B7 system of T cell costimulation. Ann Rev Immunol, 1996.  14: p. 
233-58]. (See Figure 1.)  
Figure 1Mechanism of Action
Expression of B7 has been shown to be limited to “professional”  antigen  presenting cells; that is, specialized cells  of the 
hematopoietic lineage, including dendritic cells, activated macrophages, and  activated B cells. It has been suggested that  this 
sharply-defined restriction of B7 expression is a fail-safe  mechanism for  maintenance of peripheral T cell tolerance,  insuring that 
T cell activation  can only be stimulated by appropriate APCs  [Schwartz  R.H. Costimulation  of T lymphocytes: the role of CD28,  
CTLA4, and B7/BB1 in interleukin-2 production and immunotherapy. Cell, 1992.  71(7): p. 1065-8].  The fact  that tumor cells  do 
not express  B7 contributes to their poor capacity to elicit immune  responses [Chen L.S., et al., Costimulation  of antitumor 
immunity by the B7 counterreceptor for the T lymphocyte molecules CD28 and CTLA-4. Cell, 1992. 71(7):  p. 1093-102., 
Townsend S.E., et al., Tumor rejection after direct costimulation  of CD8+  T cells by B7-transfected melanoma cells.  Science, 
1993. 259(5093): p. 368-70].
The demonstration that induction of expression  of B7 on many tumor cells by transfection, transduction,  or other mechanisms 
can heighten tumor immunogenicity  led to great interest in  pursuing this as an approach to tumor immunotherapy. As 
demonstrated in vivo in murine tumor  models,  the utility  of B7 expression as a vaccination  approach is limited by the following 
factors: (1) B7-expressing  tumor  cell vaccines are only effective when the tumor cells have  a high degree of  inherent 
immunogenicity; (2) while  B7-expressing vaccines have been  shown in many  cases to be effective in inducing protective 
immune responses, they have demonstrated only limited  utility in inducing  responses to established tumors; and (3) inactivation 
of tumor cells by radiation has been shown to destroy the immuno-enhancing activity of the B7 gene  product  [Townsend S.E., et 
al., Specificity and longevity of antitumor immune responses  induced by B7-transfected  tumors. Cancer Res, 1994. 54(24): 
p.6477-83., Allison J.P., et al., Manipulation of co-stimulatory signals to enhance antitumor t cell responses.  Curr Opin  Immunol, 
1995. 7(5): p. 682-6].
In the past few years  it has become apparent that co-stimulation is even more complex than originally thought.  After  activation, 
T cells express CTLA-4, a close  homologue to CD28. CTLA-4 binds  members of the B7 family  with a much higher affinity  than 
CD28 [Linsley  P.S.,  et al., CTLA-4  is a second receptor  for the B cell activation antigen B7. J Exp Med, 1991. 174(3): p. 561-
9].  Although there was initially some controversy as to the role of  CTLA-4 in regulating T  cell activation, it has become  clear that 
CTLA-4 down-regulates  T cell responses  [Thompson C.B., and Allison J.P. The emerging role of  CTLA-4 as an immune 
attenuator. Immunity,  1997. 7(4): p.445-50]. This was initially suggested by the following in vitro observations: (1) blockade of 
CTLA-4/B7 interactions with antibody enhanced T cell responses; (2)  cross-linking of  CTLA-4 with CD3 and CD28 inhibited T 
cell responses; and (3) administration  of antibodies to CTLA-4  in vivo enhanced the immune response to peptide antigens or 
superantigens in mice  [Walunas T.L., et al., CTLA-4 can function  as a negative regulator  of T cell activation. Immunity, 1994. 
1(5): p. 405-13.,  Kearney E.R., et al., Antigen-dependent  clonal expansion  of a trace population of antigen-specific  CD4+ T cells 
in vivo is dependent on CD28 costimulation and inhibited by CTLA-4. J Immunol, 1995. 155(3):  p. 1032-6., Krummel  M.F. and 
Allison J.P. CD28  and CTLA-4 have opposing effects on the response of T cells to stimulation. J Exp Med 1995; 182(2): p. 459-
65., Krummel M.F.,  et al., Superantigen responses and co-stimulation: CD28 and  CTLA-4 have opposing effects on T cell  
expansion in vitro and in vivo. Int Immunol,  1996. 8(4): p. 519-23]. Blocking CTLA-4-B7 interaction while preserving  signaling via 
CD28 resulted in enhanced T cell responses  in vitro.10
Perhaps the most  convincing demonstration of the down-regulatory role of CTLA-4  came from examination of mice with a null 
mutation [Tivol E.A., et al., Loss  of CTLA-4 leads to massive lymphoproliferation and fatal multiorgan  tissue  destruction,  
revealing a critical negative regulatory role of CTLA-4. Immunity, 1995.  3(5): p. 541-7., Waterhouse  P. et al., 
Lymphoproliferative disorders with early  lethality in mice deficient in CTLA-4. Science, 1995. 270(5238): p. 985-8., Chambers 
C.A., et al., Lymphoproliferation in CTLA-4-deficient mice is mediated by costimulation-dependent activation of CD4+ T cells.  
Immunity, 1997, 7(6): p. 885-95]. CTLA-4  knockout mice appear to have spontaneously  activated T cells evident at 
approximately 1 week after birth, followed by rampant lymphoproliferation and  lymphadenopathy. These  mice die at 
approximately 3 weeks of age, either as a result  of polyclonal T  cell expansion and tissue destruction or as a result of toxic 
shock resulting from lymphokine  production  by the T cells. Since thymocyte  differentiation and selection proceed normally in 
CTLA-4-deficient mice, the rampant T cell expansion that  occurs in the mice indicates  that CTLA-4 plays  a critical role in down-
regulating T cell responses in the periphery.12
2.1.1  Pharmacology of Ipilimumab
Ipilimumab is a human immunoglobulin  G (IgG1)ê anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal antibody  (mAb). In vitro studies were performed  with 
Ipilimumab to demonstrate that it is specific for CTLA-4, actively inhibits  CTLA-4 interactions with B7.1 and B7.2,  does not show 
any cross-reactivity with human  B7.1,  B7.2 negative cell lines, and stains the appropriate cells without non-specific cross-
reactivity in normal human tissues, as demonstrated by immunohistochemistry. Ipilimumab does cross-react with CTLA-4 in 
non-human primates including cynomolgus  monkeys.
Ipilimumab was originally produced and purified from a hybridoma clone. Subsequently, a transfectoma (CHO cell) has been 
generated that is capable of producing more Ipilimumab on a per cell basis  than the hybridoma.  Material from the transfectoma  
will be utilized in this and future Ipilimumab clinical  studies. Biochemical, immunologic and in vivo preclinical  primate 
assessments demonstrated similarity  between hybridoma and  transfectoma-derived Ipilimumab.
2.1.2   Pre-Clinical Toxicology  of Ipilimumab
Complete information on the pre-clinical toxicology studies can be found  in the Ipilimumab Investigator Brochure (IB) Appendix 
C. Non-clinical  toxicity  assessments included in vitro evaluation  for the potential  of Ipilimumab to mediate  complement-
dependent cellular cytotoxicity (CDCC) or antibody-dependent cellular  cytotoxicity (ADCC),  and toxicology  assessments  in 
cynomolgus monkeys  alone and in the presence of vaccines.
The in vitro studies demonstrated that Ipilimumab did not mediate CDCC of  PHA- or (CD)3-activated human T cells. However, 
low to moderate ADCC activity was noted at concentrations  up to 50  ug/mL. These  data are  consistent with the requirement of 
high levels of antigen  expression on the surface of  target cells for efficient ADCC  or CDCC.  Since  Ipilimumab is a human IgG1,  
an isotype generally  capable of mediating CDCC  and ADCC, the lack of these  activities is  likely due to a very low expression of 
CTLA-4 on activated T cells. Therefore,  these data suggest  that Ipilimumab treatment would not result in  depletion of activated 
T cells in vivo. Indeed,  no depletion of T cells or T cell subsets were  noted in toxicology studies in cynomolgus monkeys.
No mortality or signs of toxicity were observed in three independent 14-day  intravenous toxicology studies  in cynomolgus 
monkeys at multiple doses up to 30 mg/kg/dose. Furthermore, Ipilimumab  was evaluated in  sub chronic and chronic  toxicology  
studies in cynomolgus monkeys with and without Hepatitis B (HepB) Vaccine  and Melanoma Vaccine.  Ipilimumab  was well 
tolerated alone or in combination in all studies. There were no significant  changes  in clinical signs, body weight  values, clinical 
pathology values or T cell activation  markers. In addition, there  were no significant  histopathology changes in  the stomach or  
colon.
2.1.3   Human Pharmacokinetics of Ipilimumab
Pharmacokinetic (PK) profiles for Ipilimumab  have been analyzed. The primary  objective of Protocol MDX010-015 was to 
determine the safety and PK profile  of single and multiple  doses of Ipilimumab  derived from a transfectoma or  hybridoma cell 
line. Mean  plasma concentrations of Ipilimumab administered at  doses of 3 mg/kg  (hybridoma-derived drug product); 2.8 mg/kg, 
5 mg/kg, 7.5 mg/kg, 10 mg/kg, 15 mg/kg,  and 20 mg/kg (transfectoma-derived drug product) demonstrated approximate  dose 
proportionality. Equimolar doses  of hybridoma-derived and transfectoma-derived drug product had comparable PK  profiles. The 
range of mean volume of distribution  at steady  state (Vss) across cohorts 2.8, 3,  5, 7.5, 10, 15, and 20 mg/kg, was 57.3 to 82.6 
mL/kg, indicating drug distribution was mostly limited to the intravascular  space.  The clearance was low (range 0.11 to 0.29 
mL/h/kg) and reflective  of the half-life  (range 297 to 414 h), which  is consistent with the long terminal disposition phase of 
Ipilimumab. There was moderate variability  in the PK parameters among  subjects,  with CV of 11% to 48% in  AUC(0-21d), 20% 
to 59% in CL, and 17% to 46% in Vss.
2.1.4 Clinical Safety  with Ipilimumab
Ipilimumab immunotherapy is currently  under  investigation in patients with unresectable  advanced melanoma  (unresectable 
Stage III or Stage IV) to potentially demonstrate an improvement on a large  unmet  medical need in this population.
Ipilimumab has been administered  to approximately 2633 patients with  different cancers in 24 completed or ongoing  clinical 
trials as of 31-Mar-2008  with a dose range  between 0.3 mg/kg and 20 mg/kg. Most experience with Ipilimumab exists at the 3 
mg/kg and 10 mg/kg  dose levels. Patients  who received Ipilimumab at 3 mg/kg  were  treated in clinical studies conducted  early  
in the development program  and received either a single or multiple injections.  Intra-patient  dose escalation indicated that 
patients who were unresponsive  at the 3 mg/kg  dose level may have responded to 9 mg/kg. Based on  preliminary data on the 
10 mg/kg dose level of Ipilimumab, the ongoing clinical program  investigating  Ipilimumab  in metastatic melanoma utilizes the 10 
mg/kg dose level with the expectation that 10 mg/kg will prove more beneficial than 3 mg/kg.
2.1.4.1  Details of Drug-Related Adverse Events
Drug-related adverse events were  reported in studies  with Ipilimumab as monotherapy as well as in combination studies with 
vaccines, cytokines or chemotherapy. The AE profile of Ipilimumab is relatively  well characterized, with most drug-related AEs 
being Immune-Related Adverse Events  (irAEs) which are  considered to be associated  with the mechanism of action of 
Ipilimumab. The most  common irAEs are colitis  and diarrhea, rash,  pruritis, deficiencies of  endocrine organs (pituitary,  adrenal  
or thyroid),  hepatitis, and uveitis.  Rare complications  are bowel perforations  (~1%) resulting from underlying  severe colitis, 
which have required  surgical intervention.
2.1.4.2   Drug-Related Serious Adverse  Events
Drug-related Grade  3 or Grade  4 serious adverse events (SAEs) include: rash/desquamation, pruritus, uveitis, speech 
impairment, abdominal  pain, diarrhea/colitis,  nausea/vomiting, transaminase elevation,  adrenal insufficiency, panhypopituitarism 
and atrial  fibrillation. Some  of these events, such as rash/desquamation, pruritus,  uveitis, diarrhea/colitis, transaminase  
elevation, adrenal  insufficiency and panhypopituitarism, may represent drug induced  irAEs.  Refer to the most  recent version of 
the Ipilimumab Investigator Brochure  for the latest update on SAEs.
Among subjects treated with Ipilimumab 10 mg/kg, SAEs considered possibly,  probably, or definitely related  to study drug were  
reported for 26% of subjects (176/675). Drug related SAEs  reported in at least 1%  of the 675 subjects at 10 mg/kg  included 
diarrhea (10%), colitis (7%), vomiting  (3%), dehydration (3%), autoimmune hepatitis  (2%),  hypopituitarism (2%), nausea (2%),  
abdominal pain (2%),  pyrexia  (2%),  aspartate  aminotransferase increased (1%),  alanine aminotransferase increased (1%),  and 
fatigue (1%).
2.1.5  Immune-Related Adverse  Events (irAEs) with Ipilimumab
Many of the adverse  events considered related  to Ipilimumab may be immune in nature and presumably a consequence of the 
intrinsic biological activity of Ipilimumab.  An irAE is defined as any adverse event associated  with drug exposure and consistent 
with an immune-mediated event. Disease progression, infections and other etiologic  causes are  ruled out or deemed unlikely  as 
contributing to the event. Supportive data, such as autoimmune  serology tests  or biopsies, are helpful but not necessary to  
deem an event an irAE. Events of unclear  etiology which were plausibly “immune-mediated” have  been conservatively 
categorized as irAEs  even if serologic or histopathology data are absent. These irAEs  likely reflect a loss of tolerance to some 
self antigens or an unchecked immune  response  to gut or skin flora.  Some breakthrough  of immunity  may be inseparably  linked 
to the clinical antitumor  activity of Ipilimumab.
Approximately 60% of subjects developed any grade irAEs  which involved predominately the gastrointestinal  (GI) tract,  
endocrine glands, liver, or skin. Based on data from the safety  database, the number of subjects with serious, dose-limiting  
irAEs was approximately 15% (401/2633), including 8.2%  for serious GI irAEs (diarrhea and/or  colitis), 2.2% of serious  
endocrinopathy (primarily hypophysitis/hypopituitarism) and <1% of serious skin  irAEs. Bowel perforation  was reported  in 
approximately 1% of subjects. With few exceptions these irAEs were clinically manageable  and reversible with supportive  care 
or corticosteroids. In responding patients,  addition of corticosteroids does not appear to  have a temporal relationship  to change 
in objective tumor response.
Additionally, as of February 2006,  there  has been observation from a National Cancer Institute (NCI) study of bowel wall 
perforation in some patients who were administered a high-dose  IL-2 following treatment  with Ipilimumab. Of the 22 patients 
administered high-dose  IL-2, three patients  experienced bowel wall perforations. This is a higher  rate than would be expected 
with high-dose IL-2 treatment alone. All three  patients had metastatic  melanoma and had previously  received their last dose of 
Ipilimumab > 77 days before  the first dose of IL-2. Two of the patients had clinically significant Ipilimumab-related diarrhea  or 
colitis and the symptoms had completely resolved prior to IL-2 administration. One patient did not experience  Ipilimumab-related  
diarrhea. It is unknown  whether this observation represents a true association or is mechanistically unrelated to prior Ipilimumab 
exposure.
2.1.5.1  Drug-Related Deaths
Based on reports from the safety  data base as of June  30, 2008,  there  have been  reports of death (approximately 1% 
[28/3000]), deemed  by the investigator  as possibly related to the administration  of study drug. The most  common  cause of drug 
related deaths was GI perforation. Other  causes included multiorgan failure, sepsis,  hypotension, acidosis, and adult respiratory 
distress syndrome.  For details on all drug-related deaths,  refer to the current version of the Ipilimumab Investigator Brochure.
2.1.5.2 Safety  of 10 mg/kg Multiple Doses
Based on a review  of the program-wide SAE data as previously  reported, evidence had suggested that Ipilimumab-associated 
irAEs were dose dependent  in frequency,  and higher irAE rates had been observed  at 10 mg/kg than at  lower  doses of 
Ipilimumab. Subsequently,  this dose-dependent effect  was further  demonstrated in CA184-022  in which three dose levels of 
Ipilimumab were studied,  including  0.3 vs 3 vs 10 mg/kg.  Table 1 summarizes the overall  irAE frequencies by dose from CA184-
022 based on safety data from the locked clinical database.
Qualitatively, the safety profile of Ipilimumab  at 10 mg/kg remains  consistent with the low-dose  safety profile in  that most of the 
drug-related SAEs are characteristic of immune-related toxicity, and most of the irAEs are reported in the GI, hepatic, and  
endocrine systems. However,  the data presented in Table 1 suggest  that the frequency of irAEs in association  with 10 mg/kg of  
Ipilimumab at multiple doses is higher compared with the irAE frequency reported for lower doses. 
Table 1.Summary of Immune-Related AEs by Treatment Groups -  Treated 
Subjects (CA184-022)
  Ipilimumab Dosage  (number of subjects)
                          0.3 mg/kg  (N=72)       3 mg/kg (N=71)    10mg/kg(N=71)
 % Overall 
irAEs               26.4                        64.8                        70.4                                 Grade 
3-4                      0                          7.0                          25.4
 % GI tract irAEs               16.7                        32.4                        39.4
      Grade 3-4                     0                           2.8                         15.5
 % Hepatic 
irAEs                 0                           0                             2.8                    Grade 3-
4                       0                           0                             2.8
  % Endocrine irAEs            0                          5.6                           4.2
      Grade 3-4                     0                          2.8                           1.4
  % Skin irAEs                   12.5                        45.1                         4
      Grade 3-4                      0                           1.4                         4.2
2.1.5.3 Neuropathies
Isolated cases of motor  neuropathy of an autoimmune  origin have been reported among patients treated with Ipilimumab. Two  
cases have been diagnosed as Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS), only one  of which was  considered study  related.  As of July 2, 
2008, 15 cases of neuropathy SAEs  have been  reported.   Of these, 13 were  assessed  as unrelated to study therapy because 
alternative etiologies, including brain metastases, spinal cord compression, or arterial thrombosis, were identified  in almost 
every case.
2.1.6 Clinical Efficacy of Ipilimumab
Treatment with Ipilimumab has demonstrated clinically important and durable tumor  responses in several malignancies including 
melanoma, prostate cancer, and renal cell carcinoma. The most extensively studied tumor type has been malignant melanoma. 
Based on preliminary results, Ipilimumab is active in patients  with advanced stage malignant melanoma.  The objective 
responses observed with Ipilimumab  may be considered  durable as they have occurred  across a spectrum  of doses and 
schedules.
Based on a preliminary analysis for study  MDX010-15 involving  Ipilimumab  10 mg/kg multiple doses, 34.8% of patients  (N = 23) 
were progression-free at 6 months and about  17.4% were progression-free at 1 year. In comparison, for Study  MDX010-08 
involving Ipilimumab 3 mg/kg multiple doses, 10.8% patients (N = 37) had progression-free survival at 6 months  and 8.4% at 1 
year. Ipilimumab has also been studied in combination with chemotherapy (dacarbazine),  melanoma vaccines  (gp100), and 
cytokines (IL-2). Further details on clinical  results can be  found in the current version of  the Ipilimumab Investigator  Brochure.   
2.1.6.1 Relationship Between  Response  and Immune Breakthrough Events in Patients with Metastatic Melanoma
Drug-related AEs of any grade considered to be immune-mediated in  nature (irAEs) were  reported for 54.0% of subjects in  
clinical studies  of Ipilimumab. These  irAEs are a consequence of inhibiting  CTLA-4 function and  most were reported as Grade 1 
or 2. An association  between BORR  and higher grade (Grade 3-4) irAEs was suggested  in early  studies of Ipilimumab  3 mg/kg 
but this association was not observed in 4 Phase 2 studies of Ipilimumab (CA184022, CA184008, CA184007 and CA184004).  
There were proportionally more subjects with irAEs  of any grade who experienced response  or stable disease than subjects  
without irAEs who experienced response or stable disease, but due to the small sample  sizes, these observations were 
statistically inconclusive (CA184022 Clinical  Study Report.  A Randomized,  Double-Blind,  Multi-center, Phase II  Fixed Dose 
Study of Multiple Doses of Ipilimumab (Ipilimumab) Monotherapy in  Patients with Previously Treated Unresectable  Stage III or 
IV Melanoma. Bristol-Myers  Squibb  Company  and Medarex Inc, 2008. Document Control No.  930026869.,  CA184008  Clinical 
Study Report. A Multicenter, Single Arm Phase 2 Study of Ipilimumab  (BMS 734016) Monotherapy in Patients with Previously 
Treated Unresectable Stage  III or IV Melanoma. Bristol-Myers Squibb  Company and Medarex Inc, 2008. Document Control 
No.  930025464.,  CA184007 Clinical Study Report. Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Phase  2 Study Comparing 
the Safety  of Ipilimumab Administered  With or Without Prophylactic Oral Budesonide (Entocort EC) in Patients with 
Unresectable Stage III or IV Malignant Melanoma. Bristol-Myers  Squibb Company  and Medarex Inc, 2008. Document  Control 
No. 930026874).
2.1.7 Overall Risk/Benefit Assessment
Results from the 3 primary  efficacy studies of Ipilimumab suggest that  the 10 mg/kg dose is  active and  offers  the best benefit to 
risk ratio based on a 27.1% to 35.1%  rate of disease control  and a favorable 1-year survival rate of 48.6% to 59.1% compared 
with that  reported in the literature (25.5% to 35%). (Korn EL, Liu P-Y, Lee S, et al. Meta-analysis  of phase II cooperative group  
trials in metastatic stage IV melanoma  to determine progression-free and overall  survival benchmarks for future phase II  trials. J 
Clin Oncol. 2008;26:527-534., Chapman PB, Einhorn E, Meyers ML, Saxman S, Destro AN,  Panageas KS,  Begg  CB, et al. 
Phase III Multicenter  Randomized  Trial of the Dartmouth Regimen Versus  Dacarbazine in Patients with Metastatic Melanoma.  J 
Clin Oncol. 1999;17(9)2745-2751., Middleton  MR, Grob JJ, Aaronson N, Fierlbeck G, Tilgen  W, Seiter S, Gore  M, et al. 
Randomized Phase III Study of Temozolomide  Versus Dacarbazine in the Treatment of Patients With Advanced  Metastatic 
Malignant Melanoma. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:158-166.,  Bedikian AY, Millward,  M, Pehamberger  H, Conry R, Gore  M, Trefzer U, 
Pavlick AC, et al. Bcl-2  Antisense (oblimersen sodium) Plus Dacarbazine in Patients  With Advanced Melanoma:  the Olimersen 
Melanoma Study. J Clin Oncol. 2006:24:4738  4745). Substantial  reductions in total tumor burden,  including widely disseminated 
disease in the skin, lung, and/or  other visceral disease sites,  were reported.  More than half the responses were reported in 
subjects staged with M1b or M1c advanced melanoma disease,  which is most resistant  to approved  therapies. The  kinetics of 
Ipilimumab resulted in known patterns  of clinical  activity (CR,  PR and SD) as well as novel patterns, characterized  by reductions 
in total tumor burden, including existing  and new lesions, after  initial tumor volume increase  and/or after appearance  of new 
lesions. In the pretreated population at 10 mg/kg in 2 of the 3 studies, disease control after initial tumor volume increase and/or  
new lesions was reported for 9.7% of subjects.  Across  all 3 studies, stable disease was often  accompanied  by clinically relevant  
reductions in tumor burden compared  to baseline. All patterns of response, including SD, appeared to result in favorable 
survival, based on 1-year survival rates.
Characteristic organ-specific inflammatory  irAEs were reported with Ipilimumab  therapy, typically  during induction therapy.  
Immune related adverse  events  were mostly reversible within  days to weeks  following cessation  of therapy or treatment  with 
symptomatic therapy, corticosteroids or other  anti-inflammatory agents, depending upon  severity. Accumulated clinical 
experience resulted in detailed toxicity  management  guidelines  (also termed algorithms), by use of which irAEs  can be 
effectively managed, especially when  irAEs are recognized early and subjects are treated  in a timely fashion. This can minimize 
the occurrence of irAE complications, such  as GI perforation/colectomy  or hepatic failure. 
Treatment with Ipilimumab resulted  in clinical activity in pretreated and previously untreated subjects with advanced  melanoma.  
Clinically relevant reductions  in the tumor  burden from baseline  were reported, together with a preliminary evidence of improved 
overall survival compared with published survival rates. These  findings, together  with evidence of a safety profile that is 
manageable with careful monitoring and appropriate intervention for treatment of immune-related toxicities, suggest an 
acceptable benefit to risk ratio.  The overall  risk-benefit  ratio for patients  entering this protocol is therefore at least comparable to 
and possibly better  than alternative options.
3.0 Objectives
Primary Objective:
1. To determine if the combination of ABI-007-Ipilimumab  combination  can delay disease progression in patients  with 
metastatic melanoma.
2. To determine the rate of progression-free survival (PFS)  at 6 months of the 
ABI-007-Ipilimumab combination.
Secondary Objectives:
1. To determine the efficacy of ABI-007-Ipilimumab combination  as measured by complete  and partial  response rate, 
response duration, and overall survival  in patients with metastatic unresectable  stage III/IV melanoma.
2. To determine the safety of IV ABI-007-Ipilimumab combination, given IV for the treatment of patients with metastatic  
melanoma
3. To study the immunologic changes in patients who receive this therapy.
4.0 Patient Eligibility
4.1Inclusion criteria:
1. Patients with histologically documented  diagnosis of advanced stage IV or unresectable  stage III mucosal  or 
cutaneous melanoma are eligible.
2. They must have recurrent melanoma  with measurable or evaluable sites of disease, 1.0 cm  or larger,  in order to 
assess the response to treatment by the immune-related  response criteria  (irRC).   
3. Patients should not have been  previously  treated with cytotoxic drugs  and immunotherapeutic  agents for unresectable 
Stage III or Stage IV disease. Prior Ipilimumab in metastatic setting is not allowed.  Prior therapy may  include one line of 
targeted therapy for metastatic disease ie BRAF or MEK inhibitor. At least 3 weeks should have passed since  the last dose 
of prior adjuvant  interferon therapy and prior targeted therapies, and all previous  therapy related  toxicities should  have 
resolved before starting  study treatment. Prior  adjuvant interferon is permitted.  Prior cytotoxic  therapy in adjuvant or 
metastatic setting is not allowed.   Prior Ipilimumab in adjuvant setting  is not allowed.  Prior adjuvant therapy with targeted  
therapy including but not limited  to B-RAF, MEK inhibitors  etc. is allowed.  Prior palliative radiation therapy for metastatic 
melanoma is permitted provided  the patient has unirradiated metastatic  sites for response evaluation and has fully recovered 
from its toxicity.
4. Patients between 12 years of age and 70 years  of age with an ECOG  performance status of 0 or 1 will be eligible
5. They should have normal blood  counts  with a WBC count of more than or equal to 3000/mm^3  an absolute  neutrophil  
count of more than or equal to 1500/mm^3 and a platelet count of more than 100,000/mm^3,  Hemoglobin > 9.0 g/dL and 
have no impairment  of renal  function  (serum creatinine less than 1.1 mg/dl for females and less than 1.4 mg/dl for males),  
hepatic function (serum bilirubin  level of less than 1.5 mg/dl, AST and ALT ≤ 2.5X ULN unless presence of hepatic 
metastasis sin which case  AST and ALT ≤ 5X ULN are acceptable.   Alk Phos ≤ 2.5X ULN ) and no evidence  of 
significant cardiac or pulmonary dysfunction.
6. They should have no significant  intercurrent illness such as an active  infection associated  with fever lasting more than 
24 hours  requiring  antibiotics, uncontrolled psychiatric illness, hypercalcemia (calcium greater than 11 mg), or active  GI 
bleeding.
Females of child-bearing potential (non-childbearing is defined as greater than one  year post-menopausal or 
surgically sterilized) must use acceptable contraceptive methods( abstinence,  intrauterine  device, oral contraceptive or  
double barrier devices)  and must have a negative serum or urine pregnancy test within 72 hours prior  to beginning treatment 
on this trial.  Sexually  active men must also use acceptable contraceptive  methods for the duration of time  on study and 
signed informed  consent .
4.2 Exclusion:
1. Patients with metastatic uveal melanoma
2. Patients with bone metastases only.
3. Patients with symptomatic brain or spinal cord metastases  or requiring steroid  therapy and patients with 
leptomeningeal disease. Patients  with treated and stable CNS metastasis for 3 months or more, off steroids are eligible for  
the study.   No major  surgery or radiation  therapy within 21  days  before starting treatment.
4. Patients with significant cardiac illness such as symptomatic coronary  artery disease  or previous history of myocardial  
infarction, impaired left ventricle function  (Ejection Fraction less than 50%) on account  of any organic  disease  such  as 
hypertension or valvular heart disease  or serious cardiac arrhythmia requiring therapy. Patients  with significant history of  
cardiac disease will be evaluated by the investigator or his designee.
5. Patients with significant impairment  of pulmonary function on account  of chronic bronchitis, emphysema or chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) which has resulted in impairment of vital capacity of FEV1 to less than 75% of 
predicted normal values.
6. Patients with symptomatic effusions on account of pleural, pericardial or peritoneal  metastases of melanoma.
7. Patients who are unable to return  for follow-up visits  as required by this study.
Patients with a history of second malignant tumor, other than the common skin cancers - basal and squamous 
carcinomas, within the past 3 years and uncertainty  about the histological nature  of the metastatic lesions. Cases with other 
types of malignancies  should be reviewed and decided by the PI of the study.
8.   Patients  with ≥ grade  2 sensory neuropathy at baseline. 
9.   Patients  who have  had major surgery  or radiation therapy within 21 days  of starting treatment. 
5.0 Treatment  Plan
5.1 Study Design
This is an open-label Phase II study to determine the efficacy and  safety of ABI-007-Ipilimumab combination administered 
intravenously to patients with chemotherapy naïve metastatic malignant melanoma.  Patients will be treated on an  outpatient 
basis.  All patients who sign an informed consent document  and meet  eligibility criteria  must be  registered and entered  into the 
Clinical Oncology Research System  (CORe).  Baseline data must be  entered before a cycle of therapy  can be given.  This study 
will be a single center, open-label,  single-arm study to assess  the safety and efficacy of ABI-007 plus Ipilimumab  in patients  with 
metastatic melanoma.
Baseline Assessments: Performed within 28 days of start of therapy.  All patients must 
begin treatment within 7 days  after registration.
Treatment:  Therapy will continue until disease progression or appearance of unacceptable  toxicity.
5.2 Drugs  and Dosages
Patients will be treated on an outpatient  basis.
5.2.1   The rationale for the starting dose of ABI-007 and Ipilimumab
Phase I study of ABI-007 using weekly doses x 3 every 28 days  has been completed in patients with metastatic breast cancer 
and melanoma.  The results indicated  that this dose schedule was better tolerated than ABI-007  administered by single dose 
every 21-day schedule.   The optimum  Phase II dose for the weekly x 3 q 28-day schedule was 150mg/m2 administered on days  
1, 8, 15. A Phase III clinical trial comparing this dose schedule of ABI-007 to dacarbazine has been completed.  The treatments 
were tolerated very well and the efficacy outcome of the trial will be announce in near future. The starting  dose of ABI-007  
chosen for this trial is 150mg/m2 to be administered  on days  1, 8, 15 every  28 days.
The clinical  experience with Ipilimumab in metastatic melanoma was recently reviewed.(17) The results of clinical trials with 
Ipilimumab used as single agent  indicates that Ipilimumab used as single agent  is most effective when delivered at the doses of 
3-10 mg/kg. Ipilimumab has been  given in combination with  gp100 vaccine, dacarbazine, and IL-2 as 2 drug 
combination.(17)  Currently, we are conducting a phase II study with  Temozolomide plus Ipilimumab.  Interim  analysis showed  
that the combination is safe.  In this trial, Ipilimumab  will be given  at the dose of 3mg/kg  IV every  3 weeks for 4 doses only. The  
dose of Ipilimumab  will not be increased. 
5.2.2 Premedication
As hypersensitivity  reactions  are not expected, patients do not require premedication prior to
ABI-007 administration.   In the unlikely event of a hypersensitivity reaction, premedication 
may be administered  using the premedication regimen the institution typically  uses for Taxol.
Antiemetics will be used regularly to control nausea and vomiting and may consist  of Palonosetron 0.25 
mg IV on days 1, 3, 5 or Zofran 16 mg IVPB daily until day 5 along with Ativan, 0.5-1  mg IV daily  x 5 days. No premedication is 
needed for Ipilimumab.
5.3 Treatment
5.3.1 ABI-007
ABI-007 will be dosed intravenously over approximately 30  minutes without  steroid pre-medication and without G-CSF 
prophylaxis (unless modified as described  below). 
ABI-007 at the dose  of 150mg/m2 will be administered Weekly for  3 weeks every  28 days (+/- 3 days). The cycle length for ABI-
007 is 28 days  (+/- 3 day) ABI-007 will be administered before  Ipilimumab on day one of every cycle that is concurrent with 
Ipilimumab.  After administering ABI-007,  wait 30 minutes, then administer  Ipilimumab.  
5.3.1 Ipilimumab:
Ipilimumab 3 mg/kg IV over 90 minutes  on day 1. Ipilimumab  dose will be  repeated every 21 days (+/- 3 days) for a total of 4 
doses. The cycle length for Ipilimumab  is 21 days (+/- 3 days). The treatment cycles will be repeated as scheduled when the 
absolute neutrophil  count has recovered to at least 750/mm3 and platelets to 75,000/mm3 and any other  therapy  related adverse  
event that may have  occurred has resolved to < Grade  1.  A treatment cycle can be delayed up to 3 weeks.  
After completion of Ipilimumab, ABI-007 will be administered alone at the same dose schedule. 
Therapy will continue until disease  progression or appearance of unacceptable  toxicity. 
5.3.1.1 Ipilimumab Dose Calculations
Calculate Total Dose as follows:  
Patient body  weight  in kg x [3 mg or study  dose ] = total dose in mg
Calculate Total Infusion Volume as follows:
Total dose  in mg ÷ 5 mg/mL = infusion  volume in mL
Calculate Rate of Infusion as follows:
Infusion volume in mL ÷ 90 minutes = rate of infusion in mL/min.
For example, a patient  weighing 114 kg (250 lb) would be administered 342 mg of  Ipilimumab (114 kg x 3 mg/kg = 342  mg) with  
an infusion volume of 228 mL (342 mg ÷ 5 mg/mL  = 69 mL) at  a rate of  approximately 2.5 mL/min, (69 mL ÷ 2.5 minutes) in 
about 25 minutes.
5.3.1.2 Storage, Preparation, and Administration
Ipilimumab Injection,  50 mg/vial (5 mg/mL)  or 200 mg/vial (5 mg/mL), must be stored refrigerated (2°C to 8°C) and protected 
from light. Ipilimumab  injection must not be frozen. Partially  used vials or empty vials of Ipilimumab Injection should  be 
discarded at the site according to institutional policy. 
Ipilimumab injection may be diluted in 0.9%  Sodium  Chloride Injection, USP or 5% Dextrose Injection, USP to concentrations 
between 1 mg/mL  and 2 mg/mL and stored  in PVC, non-PVC or glass containers  for up to 24  hours at 2-8ºC or RT/RL.  
Recommended safety measures for preparation and handling include protective clothing, gloves, and safety cabinets.
5.3.1.3 Preparation and Administration Guidelines
The supplies needed for Ipilimumab preparation and  administration include calibrated syringes and infusion containers. The 
product may be infused using  a volumetric pump at the protocol-specific dose(s) and rate(s)  through a PVC IV solution  infusion  
set with a 0.2 mm or 1.2 mm in-line polyethersulfone or 1.2 mm positively charged nylon filter to complete the infusion in  90 
minutes, with a 10-mL  normal saline flush  at the completion of the infusion.
1)As Ipilimumab is stored at refrigerated temperatures (2-8ºC), allow the appropriate  number  of vials  of Ipilimumab to stand at 
room temperature for approximately five minutes.
2)Aseptically  withdraw the required volume of Ipilimumab solution into a syringe.  Insert the needle at an angle  into the 
Ipilimumab vial by placing the needle – bevel side down  – against the glass, with the tip touching the neck of the vial. 
The initial solution concentration  is 5 mg/mL. [Note: A sufficient excess of Ipilimumab is incorporated into each vial to account 
for withdrawal losses].
3)Ensure that the Ipilimumab solution is clear colorless, essentially free from particulate  matter on visual inspection. If multiple 
vials are needed  for a subject, it is important to use a separate sterile syringe and needle for each vial to prevent  problems  such  
as dulling of needle tip, stopper coring,  repeated friction of plunger against syringe barrel  wall, etc.
4)Inject Ipilimumab  solution withdrawn into an appropriate size evacuated infusion  bag to produce a final  infusion  volume  that 
has been calculated from the weight of the patient.
5)If the total dose  calculates to less than 90 mL of solution  then the total dose needed should be diluted to a total volume  of 90 
mL in 0.9% sodium chloride. 
6)Mix by GENTLY  inverting several times. DO NOT shake.
7)Visually inspect the final solution.  If the initial  diluted solution or final dilution  for infusion is not clear or  contents appear to 
contain precipitate, the solution should be discarded.
8)Do not draw into each vial more  than once. Any partial vials should be safely  discarded and  should not be stored for reuse.
Ipilimumab should be administered under the supervision of a physician experienced in the use of intravenous (IV) agents. 
Ipilimumab is administered as an IV infusion only.
5.4 Dose Modification
5.4.1 ABI-007
If the first cycle of ABI-007 is not associated with grade  one or higher toxicity, the patient  will continue at the same  
dose level.  There will be no further ABI-007 dose escalation for the subsequent  cycles beyond 150mg/m2 weekly.  
Dose reduction
ABI-007 Dose reductions will be permitted as outlined below.  During the first cycle of therapy, to receive the day 8 and  15 
Abraxane dose the patient must have  ANC > 1000/mm3 and platelets  > 75,000/mm3.  If the ANC  and platelets are not 
adequate for treatment on day 8 and/or 15, the dose will be omitted for that  day and the total cycle length remains the same.  If 
the ANC and platelets are not adequate on day 15, the dose will be omitted  and that week  will become the week  of rest.  The 
next dose  (if counts and chemistries  permit) becomes Day 1 of  a new cycle,  and the patient is considered to have  had a 21 day 
cycle.  
A maximum of two dose reductions will be allowed from the original dose to the following dose levels:
1st dose reduction;  Level-1: ABI-007  dose will be decreased from original dose of 150mg/m2 to 120mg/m2 weekly
2nd dose reduction; Level-2:  ABI-007  dose will be decreased from 120mg/m2 to 90mg/m2 weekly
ABI-007 cycles  will be repeated at 4-week intervals as soon as the absolute neutrophil count has recovered  to near 1500/mm3 
and with a recovery  of platelets to 100,000/mm3 and any other therapy related adverse event  related to Ipilimumab has  
resolved to <grade 1 severity (except alopecia).   ABI-007 dose  modifications will be done  based on degree  of 
myelosuppression, renal, hepatic and neurologic toxicities as per standard guidelines.  The use of hematopoietic growth  factors  
to manage toxicities will not be allowed  during Cycles 1 but will be allowed  during subsequent cycles. The doses  of ABI-007 and 
Ipilimumab  will be adjusted to aim for an absolute neutrophil count of 500 +  250/ul provided the platelet count is staying above  
25,000/mm3 at nadir  of myelosuppression. The dose adjustments  will be  as follows:
Dose level ABI-007  mg/m2  days 1, 8, 15   Ipilimumab mg/kg day 1 only *
-2 90  3
-1 120  3
0 150  3
* If patient has grade  3 or 4 toxicity  definitely related to Ipilimumab, then the Ipilimumab  dose should be  held until  the toxicity 
resolves to ≤grade 1, then the dose should  be reduced to 1mg/kg. 
Patients who develop  prolonged neutropenic fever or infection during neutropenia, will have their doses of ABI-007  reduced by 1 
level. Growth factor for prevention  of neutropenia is allowed as needed after the first  cycle of therapy.  Patients who develop 
significant peripheral neuropathy  causing any evidence of ataxia or difficulty with function  of the fingers such  as writing  or 
buttoning the clothes, will not receive  any additional ABI-007.  Development  of moderately severe  paresthesia will be used as a 
guideline to hold further therapy with ABI-007.  Patients in whom  ABI-007 therapy is discontinued will receive  their  subsequent  
doses of Ipilimumab  therapy  till the completion of 4 doses of Ipilimumab therapy. 
If a toxicity requiring dose modification occurs  following the second dose reduction, further  treatment  should  be discontinued.
Rules for Dose Omissions  and Modified Schedules for ABI-007 during  second and subsequent cycles:
Day 1 dose missed:
If the dose held or missed was to be given on Day 1 of the next cycle, that next cycle will not
be considered to start until the day the first dose is actually administered to  the patient  
Day 8 dose is missed:
Cycle continues per protocol, with one dose  not given, Day 15 is administered as per cycle  
calendar if counts and chemistries permit.
Day 15 dose missed:
That week becomes the week of rest. Next dose (if counts  and chemistries permit) becomes
Day 1 of a new cycle, and the patient is considered to have had 21-day  cycle.
5.4.1.1 Administration of Study Drug to Patients with Abnormal Hematologic  Function
Abraxane dosing  should not be administered at the start of  each cycle until the ANC count returns  to >1500/mm3 and the 
platelet count retuns  to > 100,000/mm3.  For patients receiving weekly Abraxane, for each subsequent  dose of Abraxane within 
a cycle (days 8 and 15) patients must have ANC > 1000/mm3 and  platelets  > 75,000/mm3.   If the ANC and platelets  are not 
adequate for treatment on day 8, the dose will be omitted  and the total cycle length remains  the same.  If the ANC and platelets 
are not adequate  on day 15, the dose will be omitted and that week will become  the week of  rest.  The next dose (if counts and 
chemistries permit) becomes Day 1 of a new cycle, and  the patient  is considered to have had  a 21 day cycle.  
Colony Stimulating  Factor Administration:
Colony stimulating factors  may be given according to institutional  guidelines for the
treatment of neutropenic fever or infections  associated with neutropenia.   If a patient develops neutropenia after receiving study 
drug, the investigator may administer antibiotics  as a prophylactic measure with subsequent cycles. 
All medications administered to a patient (e.g., growth factors, antibiotics, etc.) must be documented.
5.4.1.2 Dose Reductions for Non-hematologic  Toxicity
HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS
Minor symptoms such as flushing, skin reactions, dyspnea, hypotension, or tachycardia may
require temporary interruption of the infusion. However, severe reactions,  such as
hypotension requiring treatment, dyspnea requiring bronchodilators, angioedema or
generalized urticaria require immediate discontinuation of study  drug administration  and
aggressive symptomatic therapy. Patients who develop severe hypersensitivity  reactions to
ABI-007 should not be re-challenged with the drug.
PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY
ABRAXANE should be withheld in patients who experience Grade 3 sensory  neuropathy.  Treatment  may be  resumed 
at the next lower dose level in subsequent  cycles after the sensory neuropathy  improves  to  Grade 1. The time to 
resolution to Grade  1 should  be the adverse event  duration used for adverse event reporting.  In those  patients who 
experience Grade 4 sensory neuropathy, study drug should be withheld, and treatment resumed at a reduction  of 2 
dose levels in subsequent cycles after the sensory neuropathy improves  to  Grade 1.  Note:  the investigator may elect 
to dose modify for Grade 3 sensory  neuropathy
CUTANEOUS TOXICITY
Patients who develop  Grade  2 or 3 cutaneous toxicity should  have their dose  reduced by 1
dose level. If the patient continues to experience  these reactions, despite dose reduction,
treatment should be discontinued. Patients who develop Grade  4 cutaneous toxicity should
have treatment discontinued.
GASTROINTESTINAL TOXICITY
If Grade 3 mucositis  or diarrhea occurs,  study drug should be withheld until resolution to
Grade 1, then reinstituted at the next lower  dose level.  Patients who
develop Grade 4 mucositis or diarrhea  should have treatment discontinued.
OTHER NON-HEMATOLOGIC TOXICITIES
If toxicities are Grade  2, manage symptomatically if possible, and  re-treat without dose
reduction.  If toxicities are Grade  3, treatment should be  withheld until resolution  to Grade  ≤ 1 or baseline if baseline was 
greater than Grade  1, then reinstituted, if medically appropriate, at the next lower  dose level.  Recurrence of a Grade 3 or 4 
toxicity following  2 dose  reductions will necessitate discontinuation of treatment.
Administration of Study  Drug to Patients with Abnormal Hepatic Function:
Hepatic dysfunction that occurs  while  the patient is on study should prompt an evaluation to 
determine the cause,  including the possibility  of progressive metastatic  disease and hepatotoxicity from concurrent 
medications.  ABI-007 should not be administered if total serum bilirubin  is > 1.5mg/dl.  
Treatment for Brain metastases
Patients who develop  brain  metastases  as their only sites of progressive disease may continue on this study after being treated 
(whole brain radiotheraphy, surgery or gamma  knife) if they still otherwise continue to  meet the eligibility criteria  and if the 
investigator feels it is in the patient's best interest to  continue on study. Therapy with study drug should be interrupted for  at 
least 1 week  after the patient has completed  treatment for the brain metastases and has recovered from any associated side  
effects of treatment.  For the purpose of data analysis, the date of progression for  the patient  will be the date  the brain 
metastasis was documented radiographically or clinically.
5.4.1.3 Ipilimumab Recommended  Dose  Modifications permenately discontinue Ipilimumab for any of the following:
5.4.2 Ipilimumab
Ipilimumab cycles will be repeated at 3-week  intervals  as soon as the absolute  neutrophil count has recovered  to near 
750/mm3 and with a recovery  of platelets to 75000/mm3 and any other  therapy related adverse event related  to Ipilimumab has 
resolved to < grade 1 severity (except alopecia).  Iplilimumab will be given every 3 weeks  (+/- 3 days) for  a total of 4 
doses.  Delay or cessation of Ipilimumab dosing  will be instituted  according to  the specific irAE criteria as well as these  NCI 
CTCAE (Version 4) criteria: Treatment modifications for suspected Adverse Reactions to Ipilimumab will be done based on the 
specific established pathways detailed in the appendices attached to  the protocol.  
Patients may develop  study drug-related toxicities that may require skipping doses or dose  discontinuation. If Ipilimumab dose is 
held or discontinued,  continue the Abraxane  therapy.  Some of these adverse  events  may be consistent with  potentially drug-
related immune-mediated  phenomena; termed  irAEs including dermatitis, enterocolitis, hypophysitis, uveitis,  hepatitis, and 
nephritis. 
Enterocolitis, defined  by grade 3/4 clinical  presentation and/or biopsy  documentation, was the most common dose-limiting  major 
toxicity (21% of patients). (Appendix  E). Details of how to  dose study  medication in the present of adverse drug reactions that 
may or may not be irAEs are addressed below.
.
Ipilimumab Dose  Modifications
Patients may develop  study drug-related toxicities that may require skipping doses or dose  discontinuation. Some of these 
adverse events  may be consistent with potentially drug-related immune-mediated phenomena; termed IRAEs.  Details of  how to 
dose study medication  in the present  of adverse drug reactions that  may or may not be IRAEs are addressed below.
Monitor thyroid function tests and clinical  chemistries at the start of ipilimumab, before each  dose and as clinically indicated  
based on symptoms.  Withhold ipilimumab dosing in symptomatic patients,  Initiate systemic  corticosteroids at  a dose of 1 to 2 
mg/kg per day of prednisone or equivalent, and initiate  appropriate  hormone replacement therapy. 
Treatment modifications will be made  based on specified safety criteria. Patients will delay  or discontinue treatment with  
Ipilimumab if they experience at least  one adverse event, specified below,  considered  by the investigator to be certainly, 
probably, or possibly  related to Ipilimumab treatment. The following  criteria will be used to determine dosing delay, restarting  
doses, or discontinuing  Ipilimumab.
Delay Ipilimumab dosing for the following  related adverse events:
- Any Grade 2 non-skin  related adverse event  (including IRAEs).
- Any Grade 3 skin-related adverse  event (including IRAEs).
Restart Ipilimumab  dosing if/when  the adverse  event(s) resolve(s) to Grade 1 severity  or returns to baseline  within 3 weeks of 
initial dose administration:
-  If the adverse event has resolved,  restart Ipilimumab dosing at  the next scheduled  time point per protocol.
-  If the adverse event has not resolved  in the protocol-specified  dosing window (4 weeks  [+/- 3 days], the next scheduled dose 
will be omitted.
5.4.2.1 Delay Ipilimumab dosing for the following related adverse events:
It may be necessary to skip study  drug dosing  for the following related adverse event(s):
Any > Grade 2 non-skin related adverse  event (including IBEs), except for laboratory abnormalities
Any > Grade 3 laboratory abnormality .
It is necessary to skip study drug dosing for the following  adverse events:
Any > Grade 3 skin-related adverse event regardless of 
causality.
Restart Ipilimumab dosing  if/when the adverse  event(s) resolve(s) to  < Grade 1 severity or returns to baseline  within 3 weeks  of 
initial dose administration:
If the adverse event  has resolved,  restart  Ipilimumab dosing at  the next scheduled  time point per  protocol.
If the adverse event  has not resolved  in the protocol-specified  dosing window (3 weeks  [+/- 3 days], the next scheduled dose 
will be omitted.
5.4.2.2 Duration of Treatment
Patients who have not progressed after completing the 12 weeks of combination  of ABI-007 plus Ipilimumab combination 
therapy, the patient may continue therapy  with ABI-007 cycles alone  every 4 weeks until they experience progressive  disease or 
unacceptable toxicity, withdraw  consent,  
or the treating physician feels  it is no longer in their best interest to continue  on treatment.  While  receiving the therapy  with ABI-
007 alone follow-up evaluation with physical examination every 4 weeks and blood  counts weekly, routine  chemistry  blood  tests 
every 4 weeks and radiologic restaging to determine disease  status should be performed every 8 weeks.  
5.4.1.3  Discontinuation  of Study Therapy
Subjects MUST  be discontinued from study therapy AND withdrawn  from the study  for the following reasons:
Withdrawal of informed  consent (subject’s decision to withdraw for any  reason):
Any clinical  adverse event, laboratory abnormality or intercurrent illness which, in the opinion of  the investigator,  
indicates that continued treatment with study therapy is  not in the best interest of the subject
Pregnancy
¨ All WOCBP should be instructed to contact the investigator immediately if they suspect they might be pregnant 
(e.g., missed or late menstrual period) at any time frequency of  on study pregnancy tests  for WOCBP enrolled in the study.
¨ The investigator must immediately  notify  M.D.  Anderson  Cancer Center- IND office and   BMS  in the event of a 
confirmed pregnancy  in a patient  participating in the study.  Termination of the study by the IND Sponsor-M.D. 
Anderson Cancer  Center- IND office or by Celgene Corporation.
Permanently discontinue  Ipilimumab  for any of the following:
oPersistent moderate adverse  reactions or inability to  reduce corticosteroid dose to 7.5 mg prednisone or equivalent per day.
oFailure to complete full treatment course within 16 weeks from administration  of first dose.
oSevere or life-threatening adverse  reactions,  including any  of the following:
Colitis with abdominal pain,  fever, ileus, or peritoneal signs;  increase in stool  frequency (7 or more  over baseline), stool 
incontinence, need for intravenous hydration for more than 24 hours,  gastrointestinal  hemorrhage, and gastrointestinal 
perforation.
Asparate aminotransferase  (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) >5 times  the upper limit of normal or total bilirubin 
>3 times the upper  limit of normal
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal  necrolysis, or rash complicated by full thickness dermal ulceration, or  
necrotic, bullous, or hemorrhagic manifestations.
Severe motor or sensory neuropathy,  Guillian-Barre syndrome, or myasthenia  gravis.
Severe immune-mediated reactions  involving any organ system (eg, nephritis, pneumonitis, pancreatitis, non-infectious  
myocarditis)
Immune-mediated ocular  disease that is unresponsive to topical immunosuppressive therapy.
Exceptions to Permanent Discontinuation of Ipilimumab  therapy
Potentially reversible inflammation (< Grade 4), attributable to a local anti-tumor reaction and a potential therapeutic  
response. This includes inflammatory reactions at sites of  tumor resections or in draining lymph nodes, or  at sites 
suspicious for, but not diagnostic of metastasis.  Hospitalization  for < Grade 2 adverse events where the primary 
reason for hospitalization is to expedite the clinical work-up.
Patients with the following conditions where  in the investigator’s opinion  continuing study drug administration is justified:
¨   Ocular  toxicity that has responded to topical therapy.
¨   Endocrinopathies  where clinical  symptoms  are controlled with appropriate hormone replacement therapy. 
Note: Ipilimumab  may not be restarted while the patient is being treated  with systemic corticosteroids except for patients  on 
stable doses of hormone replacement therapy  such as hydrocortisone.
Immune-Related Adverse Events (irAEs): Definition, Monitoring, and Treatment  Blocking CTLA-4 function may permit the 
emergence of auto-reactive T cells and resultant clinical  autoimmunity. Rash/vitiligo, diarrhea/colitis,  uveitis/episcleritis,  
hepatitis, and hypopituitarism were drug-related, presumptive autoimmune events, now termed irAEs, noted in previous 
Ipilimumab studies.
For the purposes of this study,  an irAE is defined as an AE of unknown etiology associated  with drug exposure and consistent 
with an immune  phenomenon. Efforts should be made to rule out neoplastic, infectious, metabolic, toxin or other etiologic  
causes prior to labeling  an AE an irAE. Serological, immunological,  and histological (biopsy)  data should be used to support  the 
diagnosis of an immune-mediated toxicity. Suspected irAEs must be documented on  an AE or SAE form. 
Patients should be informed of and carefully  monitored for evidence of clinically significant  systemic irAE (e.g., systemic  lupus 
erythematosus-like diseases) or organ-specific irAE (e.g.,  rash, colitis, uveitis, hepatitis  or thyroid disease). If an irAE  is noted, 
appropriate work-up (including biopsy if possible) should be  performed, and steroid  therapy may be considered  if clinically 
necessary. See Appendix E for suggested work-up and treatment of irAEs.
It is unknown if systemic corticosteroid therapy  has an attenuating  effect on Ipilimumab activity. However, clinical  anti-tumor 
responses have been maintained in patients  treated with corticosteroids and discontinued  from Ipilimumab. If  utilized, 
corticosteroid therapy should  be individualized for each patient. Prior experience  suggests that  colitis manifested  as > Grade 3 
diarrhea requires corticosteroid treatment. See Appendix E for  additional details.
5.4.1.4 Other Guidance
Treatment of Infusion Reactions Associated with Ipilimumab
Since Ipilimumab contains only human  protein  sequences, it is less likely that any allergic reaction  will be seen in patients. 
However, it is possible that infusion  of Ipilimumab will induce a cytokine release syndrome  that could be evidenced  by fever, 
chills, rigors, rash, pruritus, hypotension, hypertension, bronchospasm, or other symptoms.  No prophylactic pre-medication  will 
be given unless indicated by previous  experience  in an  individual patient. Reactions  should be treated based upon the following 
recommendations.
For mild symptoms  (e.g., localized cutaneous reactions such as mild pruritus, flushing,  rash):
¨Decrease  the rate of infusion until recovery  from symptoms, remain  at bedside and monitor  patient.
¨Complete  the Ipilimumab infusion at the initial planned rate.
¨Diphenhydramine 50 mg IV may be administered at  the discretion  of the treating physician  and patients may receive  
additional doses  with close monitoring.
¨Premedication with diphenhydramine may be given at  the discretion  of the investigator for subsequent doses of Ipilimumab.
For moderate symptoms (any symptom  not listed above [mild symptoms] or below [severe  symptoms] such as generalized 
pruritus, flushing, rash, dyspnea, hypotension  with systolic  BP >80 mmHg): 
¨Interrupt Ipilimumab.
¨Administer diphenhydramine  50 mg IV.
¨Monitor patient closely  until resolution of symptoms.
¨Corticosteroids may abrogate any beneficial immunologic effect, but may be  administered  at the discretion  of the treating 
physician.
¨Resume Ipilimumab  infusion after recovery of symptoms.
¨At the discretion of the treating physician, Ipilimumab infusion  may be resumed at one half the initial infusion rate, then 
increased incrementally to the initial  infusion  rate.
¨If symptoms develop after resumption of the infusion, the infusion should be discontinued  and no additional Ipilimumab 
should be administered  that day.
¨The next dose  of Ipilimumab will be administered at its next scheduled time and may be given with  pre-medication 
(diphenhydramine and acetaminophen) and careful monitoring, following  the same treatment guidelines outlined  above.
¨At the discretion of the treating physician  additional oral or IV antihistamine may be administered prior  to dosing with 
Ipilimumab.
For severe symptoms (e.g.,  any reaction  such  as bronchospasm, generalized urticaria,  systolic blood  pressure 80 mm Hg, or  
angioedema):
¨Immediately discontinue infusion of Ipilimumab, and disconnect  infusion  tubing from the subject.
¨Consider  bronchodilators, epinephrine 1 mg IV or subcutaneously, and/or diphenhydramine  50 mg  IV, with solumedrol 100  
mg IV, as needed.
¨Patients should be monitored until the investigator is comfortable that the symptoms will not recur.
¨No further Ipilimumab will be administered.
In case of late-occurring hypersensitivity  symptoms (e.g., appearance within  one week  after treatment  of a localized or  
generalized pruritus), symptomatic treatment may be  given (e.g., oral antihistamine, or corticosteroids).
Treatment of Ipilimumab-Related Isolated  Drug Fever
In the event of isolated drug fever, the investigator must use  clinical judgment to determine  if the fever  is related to the 
Ipilimumab or to an infectious etiology.  If a patient experiences isolated  drug fever,  for the next dose, pre-treatment with 
acetaminophen or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent (investigator discretion) should be instituted  and a repeated antipyretic 
dose at 6 and 12 hours  after Ipilimumab infusion, should be administered.  The infusion rate will remain unchanged for future  
doses. If a patient experiences recurrent isolated drug fever following premedication and  post dosing with an appropriate  
antipyretic, the infusion rate for subsequent dosing should be decreased  to 50% of the previous rate. If fever recurs  following 
infusion rate change, the investigator should assess the patient’s level of  discomfort with the event and use clinical  judgment to 
determine if the patient should receive  further  Ipilimumab.
5.4.2 Concomitant  Medications
Patients may not participate in any other  clinical protocol or investigational  trial that  involves
administration of experimental therapy  and/or  the use of investigational  devices with
therapeutic intent while  enrolled in this study.
Radiotherapy, other  than to control  brain metastases is  not allowed  during the study. 
Administration of other chemotherapy,  immunotherapy, or anti-tumor hormonal  therapy during the  study is not allowed. 
Supportive care, including but not limited to anti-emetic medications,  may be administered at the discretion of the Investigator. 
Concurrent treatment with bisphosphonates is allowed.  Erythropoietin may be administered  at the discretion of the investigator,  
consistent with institutional guidelines. G-CSF should be administered according  to the institutional guidelines.
5.4.3 Drug Interaction
a- ABI-007
The potential drug-drug  interactions precautions  contained in the Abraxane  prescribing
information will be applied to this study  (current version of  Prescribing Information  is
provided in the Study Manual). Specifically, the metabolism of paclitaxel  is catalyzed by
cytochrome P450  isozymes CYP2C8 and CYP3A4. Caution  is recommended when
administering ABI-007 concomitantly with substrates or inhibitors of the cytochrome  
P450isozymes CYP2C8 and CYP3A4.  Similarly, drugs, herbal preparations, and/or dietary
supplements known  to influence the expression  of CYP3A (eg, phenytoin, rifampin, St.
John’s wort, garlic supplements,  grapefruit juice) and/or CYP2C8 should be  used with
caution (see www.drug-interactions.com for a regularly updated list of drug interactions  with
cytochrome P450  isozymes).
The Abraxane prescribing  information also cautions for potential interactions between
paclitaxel, a substrate  of CYP3A4 and protease inhibitors (ritonavir,  saquinavir, indinavir,
and nelfinavir), which are substrates and/or inhibitors of CYP3A4 and have not been
evaluated in clinical trials.
Patients must be made  aware that the following medications are not allowed to be  taken
concomitantly with ABI-007 monotherapy: ritonavir, saquinavir, indinavir, nelfinavir and
doxorubicin, as well as any taxane,  anthracycline, anti-cancer  drug or other investigational
study drug.
In clinical studies of ABI-007 performed  to date, no steroidal premedication to  reduce the
risk of hypersensitivity reactions  was necessary. No  steroidal premedication is  to be given to
patients except as described below. If the investigator chooses to premedicate with an 
anti-emetic/anti-nauseant to prevent nausea and vomiting, medications  such as Kytril  and/or 
Compazine are suggested.
Hypersensitivity to Taxol has been attributed primarily to  Cremophor® in the product, and is
not therefore expected with ABI-007.  However, if the patient  experiences  a typical Taxol
hypersensitivity reaction manifested by flushing, lower back pain, and  chest tightness, he/she
should have their infusion  stopped immediately. In the unlikely event of a mild hypersensitivity reaction, 
premedication may be administered  using  the premedication regimen the institution typically  uses for  
solvent based paclitaxel.  In the rare event of a severe  hypersensitivity reaction,  discontinue  
Abraxane. 
b-  Ipilimumab therapy
Patients in this study may not use vaccines for the treatment of cancer  or prevention of  disease 
unless indicated as a component of the protocol regimen (including those for common medical 
conditions) for up to one month pre and post dosing with Ipilimumab. Concomitant  systemic  or 
local anti-cancer medications  or treatments are prohibited in this study while receiving  Ipilimumab 
treatments. 
Patients may not use any of the following  therapies during the study:
Any non-study anti-cancer agent  (investigational or non-investigational)
Any other investigational  agents
Any other (non-CA184024 related) CTLA-4 inhibitors or agonists
CD137 agonists
Immunosuppressive agents
Chronic systemic corticosteroids, although systemic  steroids may be given  to treat signs/symptoms of 
toxicities during the study, acute allergic  reactions including and not limited  to medications such as 
antibiotics, contrast media or asthma. Any non-oncology vaccine  therapies  used for the prevention of infectious 
diseases (for up to 30 days  prior to or after any dose of study drug
 
5.4.4 Assessments
A- Clinical
Toxicity Assessments:  Toxicity  of treatment will be graded  as per  NCI common toxicity criteria for adverse events,  version  4.0.
Response Assessments: Patients will be evaluated for complete response,  partial response, stable or progressive  
disease every 8 weeks (+/- 7 days) from the start of  treatment until progressive  disease is documented. Tumor response 
to therapy in this study will be done  using immune-related response  criteria (irRC) which is a modified  version  of WHO criteria.
Responders and stable disease  patients  will continue  on study unless  they develop unacceptable toxicity. Progressive disease 
or unacceptable toxicity will be the criteria for discontinuation of treatment. Patients who have not had progression of their  
cancer should continue to be followed with regularly scheduled tumor assessments  with radiographic imaging until progressive 
disease is documented.
End of Study  (EOS)  Evaluation: Physical examination (including  vital signs: blood  pressure, heart rate, respiration  rate and 
temperature), weight, performance  status, CBC/differential, platelet count, routine chemistry panel (must include  ALT and AST, 
alkaline phosphatase, LDH, total bilirubin, and creatinine), toxicity  assessment,  concomitant medications, CT scan, and tumor 
measurements will be performed within  14 days of when  the patient  goes off-study treatment.  For patients who have 
come off study  for progression of disease, and restaging  with all scans has been completed prior  to the EOS  visit, the scans will 
not need to be repeated within 14 days.   
Adverse Event Resolution Follow-up: Any adverse event  (AE) that  started any time beginning from the time of the first dose of 
study drug and ending 30 days  after the last dose  of study  drug or EOS (whichever is later)  will be followed.
Follow-up  for disease  progression: Patients  who are discontinued from treatment in the absence  of disease progression (e.g. –
 patients removed  for unacceptable toxicity) will undergo repeat imaging and  tumor response  assessments every 8 weeks  until 
disease progression  is documented.  Patients  who stop treatment prior to developing disease progression should be  followed 
without further treatment until progressive  disease is documented or until the treating physician feels additional treatment  is 
required. In the latter case,  there must be clear documentation as to the compelling  reason(s)  for starting a new treatment  in 
the absence  of progressive disease.
Follow-up  for Survival: Post study,  patient  survival status will be monitored on a bi-monthly basis for 6 months and every 3 
months thereafter,  for a total of 2 years post study. This evaluation  may be  by record review and/or telephone contact with  the 
patients’ treating physicians.
B- Laboratory
1- Evaluation of Molecular Biomarkers
Tumor biomarkers  will be studied  in an exploratory companion substudy to assess  prognostic
utility in identifying  responders and non-responders. Molecular  biomarkers will be assessed on 
archival paraffin-embedded (PE) tumor tissue  and blood of  patients entered into the trial who provide 
additional consent. 
These biomarkers  will include  known mutations associated with  melanoma may be  examined in  both 
tumor tissue and blood. The expression of molecular biomarkers such as SPARC and other  mRNA 
expression profiles  in PE tumor tissues will be assessed to determine its potential clinicopathological 
utility related  to treatment with ABI-007. The objective will be to assess  specific biomarkers that relate 
to treatment response  and disease outcome.  In addition, PE tissue sections will be obtained from  tumor biopsy for 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) to assess SPARC and for molecular tumor biomarker  validation. 
Secreted Protein Acidic and Rich in Cysteine (SPARC)
SPARC (also known  as osteonectin and BM40) is an  albumin-binding protein that is  overexpressed in 
over 70% of metastatic melanoma patients’ tumors and is  associated  with a poor prognosis.  
Albumin-binding proteins such as SPARC may play a role in the concentration of albumin-bound drugs, 
such as ABI-007,  in the area of the tumor, and may be partly responsible for the greater activity  of ABI-007 when compared to 
non-albumin-bound formulations. Tumor samples and  peripheral blood  will be collected  from patients treated on this study to 
obtain preliminary data on a potential correlation between SPARC expression and response  to therapy with  ABI-007. In those  
cases where tumor  samples from patients  treated on this study are available and informed consent has been obtained, tumor 
samples will be submitted  to a central laboratory for SPARC analysis. Samples will be run blinded to the treatment  assignment 
and to the response the patient had to treatment.   Tumor biomarker  analysis will be done on archived  tissue  or fresh tissue  at 
baseline and again at time of progression of disease.  
Information will be collected  for the mutation status from those  patients who had their tumor tested for 
B-RAF mutation prior to registration for this trial. For patients who did not have their  tumor tested for 
B-RAF mutation, tumor  tissue samples will be collected from skin metastasis for  B-RAF mutation testing.   
Participation in tumor  biopsy and these  tumor specimen-based molecular  biomarker analyses  is optional. 
In addition, we will attempt to evaluate blood  biomarkers that have shown prognostic  utility
in monitoring  patients during treatment . Blood samples  will be used for monitoring  the immunologic 
status of the patients during the therapy  on this study. 
2- Immunologic evaluations:
Venous blood samples  will be collected  at baseline, week 6, week 12, then every 12  weeks thereafter.  During the maintenance  
phase, the venous  blood samples  will be drawn  prior to the administration of IV Ipilimumab as an optional  procedure. The 4 
green top blood samples will be used to isolate PBMC and plasma  for analysis  in the laboratory as correlates  of clinical 
response during the trial.  We will use the PBMC to track changes in major lymphocyte (T-cell and NK  cell) subsets to  determine  
how activated the CD4+, CD8+,  and regulatory T-cells  (Tregs)  change during treatment  and how this correlates to  
response.  The plasma  will be used  to monitor auto-antibody production using  a defined  set of auto-antigen targets  previously 
defined in earlier Ipilimumab clinical trials by Dranoff and colleagues.  The plasma  will also be used to monitor  changes in pro-
inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines  (e.g., IL-1-beta,  IL-2, IL-4, IL-6,  IL-8, IL-10, TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, GM-CSF,  
and VEGF).  These will correlate eventually to clinical response. 
6.0 Pretreatment  evaluation
6.1 A complete history and physical, including  vital signs,  examination  (including height,  weight, and ECOG Performance 
Status) will be performed  within  14 days prior to signing the informed consent document. Documentation of all visible  or 
palpable sites of metastasis in the skin and lymph node  bearing regions will be  performed within  28 days of signing informed 
consent document which includes    documentation of  cutaneous lesions with  the aid of a photograph to be filed in the chart.
6.2 A complete laboratory  evaluation will be carried out and will include a CBC,  differential, platelet count, sodium, potassium, 
chloride, CO2,  BUN,  creatinine,  alk phosphatase, AST, ALT, LDH,  total bilirubin,  Mg, PT and PTT, and thyroid function tests 
(TSH, free T4) within 14 days  of signing  the informed  consent document.  
6.3 Staging  work up will be carried  out which  will include a CT scan  of the chest, a CT scan  of the abdomen and an MRI or less 
preferably a CT scan of the brain within 28 days  of signing the informed  consent  document.  Patients with melanoma  of the 
head and neck  or with primary arising below  the waist  line will have also a CT scan of the neck  and pelvis,  respectively. For 
patients with significant extremity metastases (subcutaneous or other), MRI or CT of the relevant extremity is required.
6.4 Patients will have a baseline  electrocardiogram  within 28 days  of signing  the informed  consent document.  In case 
of abnormal results, the case must be discussed with  the PI. 
6.5  Patients with history of clinically  significant  chronic bronchitis  or emphysema  will have pulmonary  function 
studies (FEV1  >65%  or FVC >65%) within  6 months  of signing the informed  consent. In case of  abnormal results, the 
case must  be discussed with the PI.
6.6  Pregnancy test (blood or urine) will be performed within 72 hours of administrating  Ipilimumab. If indicated, an FSH will be 
performed.
6.7  Concomitant medications and baseline toxicities will be documented within 14  days of signing the informed consent  
document informed consent document 
6.8  Evaluation of Molecular Biomarkers
Patients with archival  paraffin-embedded (PE) tumor tissue will have optional tumor biomarker study to assess prognostic utility  
in identifying responders and non-responders.  These biomarkers  will include known mutations associated with melanoma. The  
objective will be to assess specific biomarkers  that relate to treatment response  and disease outcome. In addition, PE tissue  
sections will be obtained from tumor biopsy for immunohistochemistry (IHC) to assess  SPARC and for  molecular  tumor  
biomarker validation.  Participation  in tumor  biopsy and these tumor  specimen-based  molecular biomarker analyses is optional. 
In addition, we will attempt to evaluate blood  biomarkers such as SPARC that have shown  prognostic utility in  monitoring 
patients during treatment .
Optional Tumor  Biopsies
Optional punch biopsies  will be obtained from patients who have cutaneous lesions that are amenable to punch biopsies at two 
separate time-points.  Optional  biopsies  are addressed  in the consent and participants must have agreed to undergoing 
biopsies by signing  and initialing this section  in the consent.  The first  optional biopsy will occur at baseline prior to 
treatment.  The second optional biopsy should  occur on cycle 1 day  22 before the Ipilimumab infusion.  Tissue samples  should  
be placed in formalin and made into FFPE.  Tumor tissue  volume should be at  least 125mm³.  The punch biopsy needle should 
be at least 5mm.  The length of the biopsy should also be at  least 5mm  deep into the tumor.  Half of  the tumor will be analyzed  
for flow cytometry  analysis and half for RNA isolation.      
6.9 Evaluation of immune  status: 
Optional blood sample will be collected  for evaluation of  immune status prior to start of therapy.
7.0 Evaluation During Study
7.1  Physical examination, weight, vital signs,  and concomitant medications will be assessed  before each cycle (+/- 3 days).
7.2  The toxicity  related  to the treatment will be assessed before  start of each cycle as per  standard of care.  Toxicity will be 
graded according  to the NCI Common  Toxicity Criteria (CTC),  Version 4.0.
7.3  During  the administration of ABI-007  plus Ipilimumab therapy, patients will have a CBC,  differential, platelet count, sodium , 
potassium, chloride, CO2, BUN, creatinine, Alk Phosphatase, total bilirubin, LDH, ALT, AST,  magnesium and pregnancy test 
(serum or urine)  just prior to each cycle (+/-3 days). Thyroid function tests (TSH, free T4) are  done before each dose of 
Ipilimumab and then every 3 months.  (+/- 3 days). Following the administration of therapy, patients will be  required to have a 
CBC, differential and platelets  weekly (+/- 3 days).  Weekly  lab tests may be done at an  outside facility.  The research nurse  or 
data coordinator will insure  that the results are received and reviewed.  Patients will be encouraged to bring a copy of the lab 
results to their clinic  visit, if possible.
7.4  The size of the tumor (either  in transit  or palpable) will be monitored closely  in order  to assess  response to 
treatment.  Physical measurements of the tumor will be done  by the principal  investigator or his designee before  start of each 
cycle (+/- 3 days).  Repeat  CT  of the affected area will done after  8 weeks (+/-  7 days)  for assessment  of response. For 
patients with skin lesions, photographs  of the skin lesions will be done every 2 cycles.  Chest x-ray will be done every 2 cycles. 
An MRI or CT scan of the brain  will be repeated every 2 cycles to  rule out the development of asymptomatic brain metastases. 
Thyroid function tests  (TSH, free T4) every 3 months.
7.5 Immunologic and molecular monitoring:  Venous blood samples will be collected for immunologic evaluation  and molecular 
monitoring before cycle 1, 3 and odd numbered cycles as optional procedure.   Not all optional samples may be collected at all 
time points and missed sample collections will not be  considered protocol deviations.   These will correlate eventually to clinical 
response.  
Table 2: Time  and Events Schedule for Protocol 
ProcedurePre-
TherapyWeeklyEvery 3 
WeeksEvery 4 
WeeksEvery 8 
WeeksEnd of 
Treatment
Eligibility Assessments 1
X
Informed Consent 1 X
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 1
X
Medical History 1,2 X X X
Physical Examination 1,2 
X X X
Performance Status  
1, 2X X X
Height and Weight 
1, 3X X X
Physical measurements
(in transit or 
palpable) 1X X X
Vital Signs 1, 2 X X X
Concomitant Medications 1, 2, 4
X X X
Electrocardiogram   X
Pregnancy Test 1, 5 X X
FSH 1 X
Assessment 
of Toxicity  2, 6X X X
Radiological
Evaluation 7X X X
Laboratory Tests 8 X X X X
Thyroid Function 
Tests 8X X
Ipilimumab Therapy 
9X
Abraxane Therapy 9 X
Tumor Biopsy 12         X
Assessment of 
Response 10X X X
Cytokine/Chemokine X X X
11 (serum)
Pulmonary Function 
Test 1X
1.Pre-treatment evaluations  will be performed within  14 days prior to signing  the consent form except pregnancy test and FSH (if indicated) which will be done 72 hours prior 
to first dose. Electrocardiogram  within 28 days  of signing consent form. PFT performed within 6 months of signing consent form.
2.Evaluations will be performed before each  cycle of ABI-007 and Ipilimumab therapy (+/- 3 days) and at the discontinuation of therapy.  They will Include blood pressure, 
pulse, respiration rate and temperature, weight, performance status.  Vitals will be taken before the ABI-007 infusion, in between the ABI-007 and Ipilimumab 
infusion, and after the Ipilimumab infusion has completed prior to discharge. On days  of ABI-007 infusion alone, vitals  will be taken before the infusion 
and after completion of infusion prior to discharge.  
3.Height  (at pre-treatment only) and weight  measurements.
4.Concomitant medications  including those taken within  30 days prior to first dose of study therapy,  during  each  cycle of ABI-007 therapy and those taken  30 days  after last 
dose of study  therapy.
5.A serum b-HCG or urine pregnancy test in women of child-bearing potential will be performed before  every therapy cycle of ABI-007.
6.An assessment of baseline conditions and symptoms  (including NCI-CTCAE grading for conditions present or ongoing prior to signing the consent form)
7.Imaging studies must be done within 28 days prior to signing the consent form.  Photographic measurement  of skin lesions are done when appropriate. For patients  with 
known or suspected lymphadenopathy  in the neck, contrast-enhanced CT of the neck is required. For patients with significant extremity metastases (subcutaneous  or 
other), MRI or CT of the relevant extremity is required. MRI or CT scan of the brain is required  prior the start of first therapy and every  8 weeks  (+/- 7 days). 
8.Pre-treatment blood  samples will be collected  before the 1st cycle of therapy.  CBC  is done weekly, liver and kidney profiles, electrolytes, magnesium are done before each  
cycle.  Thyroid function tests (TSH, free T4) are done before start of Ipilimumab  and before each dose of Ipilimumab  and then every 3 months.  (+/- 3 days). Labs may be 
done at an outside facility.   The research  nurse or data coordinator will be responsible  for outside lab tests
9.ABI-007 plus Ipilimumab therapy will be given in the outpatient clinic . Abraxane cycle will be every 4 weeks, while ipilimumab cycle will be 3 weeks . On the weeks 
where ABI-007 and Ipilimumab are administered  on the same  day; ABI-007 will be administered  first, wait 30 minutes after completion of ABI-007 
infusion, then administer Ipilimumab
10. Tumor status assessment  is done every 8 weeks (+/- 7 days) including photographic measurement of skin lesions, CT scans and/or MRI tumor assessments  until 
documented tumor progression for patients who had a CR, PR, or SD, or discontinued  study therapy due to toxicity or reasons other than progressive disease.
11. Blood  samples should  correlate with immunotherapy before treatment, during  treatment and after treatment has completed.
12. Tumor biopsies  will occur  on baseline and cycle 1 day 22 prior to the 2nd Ipilimumab  dose.   Tumor  biopsies will consist of punch biopsies on cutaneous lesions at two 
separate time-points.  All biopsies  are optional.      
7.6  Physical examination (including  vital signs: blood pressure, heart rate, respiration rate and temperature), weight, 
performance status,  CBC/differential,  platelet count,  routine chemistry panel (must include ALT and AST, alkaline phosphatase, 
LDH, total bilirubin, and creatinine),  toxicity assessment, concomitant medications, CT scan, and tumor measurements will be 
performed within 14 days of when the patient  goes off-study treatment.
7.7  All drug-related  toxicities must be followed  until resolution.   Patients are to be  followed for 30 days (+  7 days) after last drug 
administration for adverse events,  regardless of causal  relationship.
7.8  Survival data should be collected  every two months (+/- 7 days) for 6 months  and then every 3 months  up to 2 years after 
the off treatment visit.  Survival data will be collected by either telephone  or by reviewing medical records for clinic visits.  A 
record of the contact  will be filed in the patient's chart and a copy of the record sent to scanned  documents  for inclusion in the 
patient's electronic medical record.
7.9  All relevant information regarding  drug doses, concomitant medications and doses, measurable lesions, tumor response, 
laboratory examinations,  and treatment-related toxicities shall be documented in the patient's medical record  and flow 
sheets.  The principal investigator or his collaborators will be responsible for tumor  measurements and determine response 
whenever diagnostic imaging is performed.
8.0 Evaluation of response
8.1  Tumor  response to therapy in this study  will be done every 12  weeks (+/- 7 days) using  immune-related response criteria 
(irRC) which is a modified version  of WHO  criteria.
8.1.1  Definition  of Measurable and Non-Measurable Lesions
Measurable Lesions are lesions that can be accurately measured in  two perpendicular diameters,  with at least one diameter 
>20 mm and the other dimension  > 10 mm (10 mm x 10 mm for spiral CT). The area will be defined as the product of the largest 
diameter with its perpendicular.  Skin lesions can be considered  measurable.
Non-Measurable (evaluable) Lesions are all other lesions,  including unidimensionally  measurable disease and small  lesions 
(lesions without at least one diameter > 20 mm),  and any of the following:  
Lesions occurring  in a previously irradiated area (unless they are documented  as new lesions  since the completion of radiation 
therapy), bone lesions,  leptomeningeal disease,  ascites, pleural or pericardial effusion,  lymphangitis cutis/pulmonis, abdominal  
masses that are not pathologically/cytologically confirmed and followed by imaging  techniques and cystic lesions.
All measurable and non-measurable  lesions  should be measured at  screening and  at the defined tumor assessment  timepoints. 
Extra assessments  may be performed, as clinically indicated,  if there is a suspicion  of progression.
 8.1.2    Definition of Index/Non-Index Lesions
All measurable lesions,  up to a maximum of five lesions per organ  and ten lesions in total, should be identified  as index 
lesions to be measured and recorded  on the medical record at Screening.  The index  lesions should be representative of all  
involved organs. In addition, index lesions should be selected based  on their size (lesions with the longest diameters), their  
suitability for accurate repeat assessment by imaging techniques,  and how representative they are of the patient’s tumor 
burden. At Screening,  a sum of the products  of diameters (SPD) for all index  lesions will be calculated and considered  the 
baseline sum of the products of diameters. Response criteria to  be followed are listed below. The baseline sum will be used as 
the reference point  to determine the objective  tumor  response of the index lesions  at tumor  assessment (TA).Measurable  
lesions, other than index lesions,  and all sites of non-measurable disease, will be identified as non-index lesions. Non-index 
lesions will be recorded on the medical record  and should be  evaluated at the same assessment  time points as the index 
lesions. In subsequent  assessments, non-index  lesions will be recorded as “stable or decreased disease,”  “absent,” or  
“progression.”
8.2  Definition of Tumor Response Using irRC
The sum of the products of diameters at tumor  assessment  using the immune-related response criteria (irRC)  for progressive  
disease incorporates the contribution of new measurable lesions.  Each net Percentage  Change in Tumor Burden per 
assessment using irRC criteria accounts for the size and growth  kinetics of both old and new lesions  as they appear.
8.2.1  Definition of Index Lesions  Response  Using irRC
irComplete Response (irCR): Complete disappearance of all index lesions. This category encompasses  exactly the same 
subjects as “CR” by the mWHO criteria.
irPartial Response (irPR): Decrease, relative to baseline, of 50% or greater in the sum of the products of  the two largest 
perpendicular diameters of all index  and all new measurable  lesions (ie.,  Percentage  Change in Tumor Burden).  Note: the 
appearance of new measurable lesions is factored into the overall tumor  burden,  but does not automatically  qualify as 
progressive disease until the SPD increases  by >25% when compared to SPD at  nadir.
irStable Disease  (irSD): Does  not meet  criteria for irCR or irPR, in the absence of progressive  disease.
irProgressive Disease (irPD): At least 25% increase Percentage Change in Tumor Burden (i.e., taking sum of the products  of 
all index lesions and any new lesions) when compared to SPD at nadir.
8.2.2  Definition of Non-Index Lesions  Response Using irRC
irComplete Response (irCR): Complete disappearance of all non-index lesions. This category encompasses exactly the same  
subjects as “CR” by the mWHO criteria.
irPartial Response (irPR) or irStable  Disease  (irSD): non-index lesion(s)  are not considered  in the definition of PR,  these 
terms do not apply.
irProgressive Disease (irPD): Increases  in number or size of non-index lesion(s) does not constitute progressive disease 
unless/until the Percentage Change in Tumor Burden increases by 25% (i.e., the SPD at nadir  of the index lesions increases by 
the required amount).
8.2.3   Impact of New Lesions  on irRC
New lesions in and by themselves  do not qualify as progressive disease. However their contribution to total tumor burden 
is included in the SPD which in turn feeds into the irRC criteria  for tumor response.  Therefore, new non-measurable lesions will 
not discontinue any subject from the study.
8.2.4   Definition of Overall Response Using irRC
Overall response using irRC will be based on these criteria:
Immune-Related Complete Response (irCR):  Complete disappearance of all tumor lesions (index and non-index  together  
with no new measurable/unmeasurable lesions)  for at least  4 weeks from the date of  documentation of complete response. 
Immune-Related Partial Response (irPR): The sum of the products of the two largest perpendicular  diameters of  all index  
lesions is measured  and captured  as the SPD baseline.  At each subsequent tumor  assessment,  the sum of the products  of the 
two largest perpendicular diameters of all index  lesions  and of new measurable lesions  are added together to provide the 
Immune Response  Sum of Product Diameters  (irSPD). A decrease, relative to baseline  of the irSPD compared to the previous 
SPD baseline, of 50% or greater is considered an immune Partial  Response (irPR).  
Immune-Related Stable Disease (irSD): irSD is defined as the failure  to meet  criteria for immune complete  response or 
immune partial response, in the absence  of progressive disease.  
Immune-Related Progressive Disease  (irPD): It is recommended in difficult  cases to confirm  PD by serial  imaging. Any of  the 
following will constitute progressive disease:
At least 25% increase in the sum of the products of all index  lesions over baseline  SPD calculated for the index lesions.
At least a 25% increase in the sum of the products of all index  lesions and new measurable lesions (irSPD) over the baseline 
SPD calculated for the index lesions.
Table 3:Immune-Related  Response Criteria Definitions
Index Lesion  
DefinitionNon-Index 
Lesion DefinitionNew Measurable  
LesionsNew 
Unmeasurable 
LesionsPercent change in 
tumor  burden 
(including 
measurable new 
lesions when  
present)Overall irRC  
Response
Complete 
ResponseComplete 
ResponseNo No -100% irCR
Partial  Response Any Any Any > -50% irPR
Stable Disease Any Any Any <-50% to <+25% irSD
>+25% irPD
Progressive 
DiseaseAny Any Any >+25% irPD
8.2.5  Immune-Related Best Overall  Response Using  irRC (irBOR)
irBOR is the best confirmed irRC overall response over the study  as a whole, recorded between the date of first dose until  the 
last tumor assessment before subsequent  therapy (except for local palliative  radiotherapy for painful  bone lesions) for the 
individual subject in the study.  For the assessment of irBOR, all available assessments  per subject  are considered.
irCR or irPR determinations included in the irBOR assessment must be confirmed  by a second  (confirmatory) evaluation 
meeting the criteria for response and performed  no less than 4 weeks  after the criteria  for response are first met.
8.2.6  Response Endpoints
Ipilimumab is expected  to trigger  immune-mediated responses, which require activation  of the immune system prior to the 
observation of clinical responses. Such immune  activation may take weeks to months  to be evident.  Some  patients may have 
objective volume increase  of tumor lesions or other disease  parameters (based on study indication, ie, hematologic  
malignancies) within 12 weeks following start of Ipilimumab dosing. Such  patients may not have had sufficient time  to develop  
the required immune activation or, in some patients, tumor  volume or other disease parameter increases  may represent 
infiltration of lymphocytes into the original  tumor or blood. In conventional  studies, such tumor volume or relevant laboratory 
parameter increases during the first 12 weeks  of the study would constitute PD and lead  to discontinuation of imaging to detect  
response, thus disregarding the potential for subsequent immune-mediated  clinical response. 
Therefore, patients with tumor  volume increase  detected or lack of laboratory parameter response  documentation prior to week 
12 but without rapid clinical  deterioration should  continue to be treated with Ipilimumab  and clinically observed  with a stringent  
imaging schedule to allow detection of a subsequent tumor response.  The treating physician will make the decision  whether a 
patient should continue treatment or not although radiographic imaging may indicate  progressive disease. This will improve the 
overall assessment of the clinical activity  or Ipilimumab and more  likely capture its true potential to induce  clinical  responses. 
Tumor assessments  will be made using  irCR which is a modified WHO criteria.
9.0 Evaluation of Toxicity
All patients  who receive  at least  one dose of ipilimumab will be considered  evaluable for safety parameters. Additionally, any 
occurrence of a SAE from time of consent forward, up to and including follow-up  visits, will be reported. 
Safety will be evaluated  for all treated patients using the 
National Cancer Institute (NCI) Common  Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE), Version 4.0 
(http://ctep.cancer.gov ). Safety assessments will be based on medical review of adverse  event  reports and the results of vital 
sign measurements, physical examinations, and clinical laboratory tests.
ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING-BMS Reporting
9.1Collection of Safety Information
An Adverse Event (AE) is defined as any new untoward  medical occurrence  or worsening of a pre-existing medical condition  in 
a patient or clinical investigation subject administered an  investigational (medicinal) product  and that does not necessarily have 
a causal relationship with this treatment. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal  
laboratory finding, for example), symptom, or disease temporally associated  with the use of investigational product, whether or 
not considered related to the investigational product.
9.1.1 Serious Adverse Events
A serious  adverse  event (SAE) is any untoward medical occurrence that  at any dose:  
Results in death  is life-threatening (defined  as an event in which the subject was at risk of death  at the time of the event;  it does 
not refer to an event that hypothetically might have caused death  if it were more  severe) requires inpatient hospitalization or  
causes prolongation  of existing hospitalization (see “note”  below for exceptions) results in persistent or  significant 
disability/incapacity is a congenital anomaly/birth defect is an important medical event  (defined as a medical event(s)  that may 
not be immediately life-threatening or result  in death or hospitalization  but, based upon appropriate medical  and scientific  
judgment, may jeopardize the subject  or may require intervention [eg, medical, surgical]  to prevent one of the other serious  
outcomes listed in the definition above.)  Examples of such events include,  but are not limited to, intensive treatment in  an 
emergency room or at home for allergic  bronchospasm; blood  dyscrasias or convulsions that do not  result in 
hospitalization.)  Although overdose and cancer are not always serious by regulatory definition,  these events should be reported 
on an SAE form and sent to Celgene  and BMS in an expedited manner.  An overdose  is defined  as the accidental  or intentional  
ingestion or infusion of any dose  of a product  that is considered both excessive and medically  important.
NOTE: The following hospitalizations  are not considered SAEs in BMS clinical studies:
a visit to the emergency room or other hospital  department for less than 24 hours that does not result  in admission  (unless  
considered an “important medical event”  or a life-threatening event) elective surgery, planned before signing  consent 
admissions as per protocol  for a planned medical/surgical procedure routine health assessment requiring admission for 
baseline/trending of health status (eg, routine  colonoscopy)  medical/surgical admission  for purpose other than remedying ill 
health state and was planned prior to entry  into the study.  Appropriate documentation  is required in these cases admission 
encountered for another life circumstance  that carries no bearing on health status and requires no medical/surgical  intervention 
(eg, lack of housing, economic inadequacy, care-giver respite, family circumstances, administrative).  Note  that all pregnancies,  
regardless of outcome,  must  be reported to BMS  on a Pregnancy Surveillance Form,  not an  SAE form (Appendix  G). All 
pregnancies must  be reported  and followed  to outcome,  including pregnancies that occur in  the female  partner of a male  study 
subject.
9.1.2 Non-serious Adverse Events
All adverse events that are not classified as serious.
9.2    Assignment of Adverse Event  Intensity and  Relationship to  Investigational Product
All adverse events, including those that are serious, will be  graded according to the National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity 
Criteria for Adverse  Events (NCI CTCAE), Version 4.0. The following categories  and definitions of causal  relationship to 
investigational product  as determined by a physician should be used  for adverse  events:
Certain: There is a reasonable causal  relationship  between  the investigational product and the AE. The  event responds  to 
withdrawal of investigational product  (dechallenge), and recurs with rechallenge  when  clinically feasible.  Probable: There  is a 
reasonable causal relationship between the investigational product and the AE. The event responds to dechallenge. 
Rechallenge is not required.
Possible: There is reasonable causal relationship between the investigational product and the AE. Dechallenge information is 
lacking or unclear. Not likely: There is a temporal relationship to investigational  product administration, but there is not a 
reasonable causal relationship between the investigational product and the AE. Not Related: There is not a temporal  
relationship to investigational  product  administration (too early, or late, or investigational product  not taken), or  there is a 
reasonable causal relationship between non-investigational product, concurrent disease,  or circumstance and the AE.  The 
expression “reasonable  causal  relationship”  is meant to convey in general that there are facts  (eg, evidence  such as de-
challenge/re-challenge) or other arguments to suggest a positive  causal relationship.
9.3  Adverse events for this protocol will be recorded according  to the Recommended Adverse Event Recording  Guidelines for a 
Phase II protocol. The investigator is responsible for  verifying and providing  source documentation for all  adverse events  and 
assigning attribution for each event for all subjects  enrolled on the trial
9.4  ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING -  
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and Celgene-  Serious 
Adverse Event  Reporting
A serious  adverse  event is – any adverse  drug experience  occurring at any dose that results  in any of the following 
outcomes: 
·Death
·A life-threatening adverse drug experience  – any adverse  experience that places the patient, in the view of the initial 
reporter, at immediate risk of death  from the adverse experience as it occurred. It does not include an adverse  experience that, 
had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.
Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization
A persistent or significant disability/incapacity – a substantial disruption of a person’s ability to conduct normal life functions.
A congenital anomaly/birth defect.
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life-threatening,  or require hospitalization may  be considered  a serious  
adverse drug experience when, based upon appropriate medical  judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may  
require medical  or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes  listed in  this definition.  Examples of such medical  events 
include allergic bronchospasm requiring  intensive treatment in an emergency room  or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions 
that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development  of drug dependency or drug abuse (21 CFR 312.32).
Important medical events as defined above, may also be  considered serious adverse  events. Any important  medical  
event can and should be reported as an SAE if deemed appropriate  by the Principal  Investigator, Celgene or the IND 
Sponsor.
All events occurring during  the conduct  of a protocol and meeting the definition of  a SAE must be  reported to the IRB in 
accordance with the time frames and procedures outlined in “University of Texas M.  D. Anderson  Cancer  Center Institutional 
Review Board  Policy on Reporting  Serious Adverse Events”.  Unless stated otherwise  in the protocol, all  SAEs, expected or  
unexpected, must be reported  to the IRB office,  regardless of  attribution (within  5 working days  of knowledge of the event).
All life-threatening or fatal events, expected or unexpected, and regardless  of attribution  to the study drug, must  have a 
written report submitted within  24 hours (next working day) of knowledge of the event to Celgene  drug safety within  24 hours via 
email or fax using the information  below:
Celgene Corporation Drug Safety
86 Morris Ave
Summit, NJ 07901
Toll free  ; 800-640-7854
Phone 908-673-9667
Fax : 908-673-9115
Email: drugsafety@celgene.com
 and the IRB office.
The MDACC “Internal SAE Report Form for Prompt Reporting” will be used for reporting to the  IRB office. 
Serious adverse events will be captured from the time the patient signs consent until 30 days after the last dose of drug. Serious  
adverse events  must  be followed  until clinical  recovery is  complete and  laboratory tests  have returned to  baseline, progression  
of the event has stabilized, or there has been acceptable resolution of  the event.
Additionally, any serious adverse events that occur after  the 30  day time period that are related to the study treatment must be 
reported to the IRB office. This may include  the development  of a secondary malignancy.
Reporting to FDA:
Serious adverse events will be forwarded  to FDA by the IND Sponsor (Safety Project Manager  in the IRB office)  according to 21 
CFR 312.32.
It is the responsibility  of the PI and the research team  to ensure serious adverse events are reported  according to the Code of 
Federal Regulations, Good  Clinical  Practices, the protocol guidelines, the sponsor’s guidelines, and Institutional Review Board 
policy.
9.4.1 Collection and Reporting
Adverse events can be spontaneously reported or elicited during open-ended  questioning, examination, or evaluation  of a 
subject. (In order to prevent reporting  bias,  subjects should not be questioned regarding the specific occurrence of one or more 
AEs.)
If known, the diagnosis  of the underlying  illness  or disorder should  be recorded, rather than its individual symptoms. The 
following information should  be captured for all AEs: onset, duration, intensity, seriousness,  relationship  to investigational 
product, action  taken, and treatment  required. If treatment for the AE was administered, it should be  recorded  in the medical 
record.
The investigator shall supply BMS  and Ethics  Committee with  any additional requested  information,  notably for  reported deaths 
of subjects.
9.4.2 Serious Adverse Events
Following the subject’s  written consent to participate in the study, all SAEs must be collected, including those thought to be 
associated with protocol-specified procedures. All SAEs must be  collected that occur within  30 days of discontinuation of dosing 
of the investigational  product. If applicable, SAEs must be collected  that relate to any later protocol-specified procedure  (eg, a 
follow-up skin biopsy).  The investigator  should  notify BMS of any  SAE occurring after  this time period that is believed  to be 
certainly, probably, or possibly related  to the investigational  product or protocol-specified  procedure.
All SAEs whether related or unrelated  to the ipilimumab, must be immediately reported to BMS (by the investigator or  designee)  
within 24 hours of becoming  aware of the event.  If only limited information is initially available,  follow-up reports  are required. 
The original  SAE form must be kept on file at the study site.
All SAEs related to Ipilimumab should  be faxed or emailed  to BMS at:
Global Pharmacovigilance  & Epidemiology
Bristol-Myers Squibb  Company
Fax Number: 609-818-3804
Email: Worldwide.safety@bms.com
For studies conducted  under an Investigator IND, any event that  is both serious  and unexpected must  be reported to the FDA 
as soon as possible  and, in no event,  later than 7 days  (death or life-threatening event) or 15 days (all other SAEs) after the 
investigator’s or institution’s  initial receipt  of the information. BMS will be provided with a simultaneous copy of all adverse  
events filed with the FDA. SAEs  that meet  the FDA reporting requirements should be reported  on the MedWatch Form 
3500A, which can be accessed at:  http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/HowToReport/ucm167733.htm. Fax: 1-800-
FDA-0178 (1-800-332-0178) The principal investigator or his designee will provide BMS with copies  of all adverse events  filed 
with the FDA.
Serious adverse events, whether  related  or unrelated to investigational product, must be  recorded on the designated SAE form 
and reported expeditiously to BMS (or designee) to comply with  regulatory requirements. An SAE report  should  be completed  
for any event where doubt exists  regarding  its status of  seriousness.  
All SAEs must be immediately reported  by confirmed facsimile transmission  (fax) and  mailing of the completed SAE page. In 
some instances where a facsimile machine  is not available, overnight  express mail may be used. If  only limited information is 
initially available, follow-up  reports are required.  (Note: Follow-up  SAE reports should include the same  investigator term(s) 
initially reported.) In selected circumstances,  the protocol may specify conditions that require  additional telephone  reporting. 
If the investigator believes that an SAE is not related to the investigational  product,  but is  potentially related  to the conditions  of 
the study  (such as withdrawal of previous  therapy, or a complication of a study procedure), the relationship should  be specified 
in the narrative section of the SAE page.
If an ongoing SAE changes in its intensity or relationship to the investigational product, a follow-up SAE report should be sent 
immediately to the BMS. As follow-up information becomes available  it should be  sent immediately using the same procedure 
used for transmitting  the initial SAE report. All SAEs should be  followed to  resolution or stabilization.
9.4.3 Handling of Expedited Safety Reports
In accordance  with local regulations, BMS will notify investigators  of all SAEs that are  suspected (certainly,  probably, or  possibly 
related to the investigational product) and unexpected (ie, not previously  described in the Investigator Brochure).  In the 
European Union (EU),  an event  meeting these criteria is termed a Suspected,  Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR).  
investigator notification  of these events will be in the form of  an expedited safety  report (ESR). 
Other important  findings which  may be reported  by the sponsor as an ESR include: increased frequency of a clinically significant  
expected SAE,  an SAE considered  associated with study  procedures that  could  modify the conduct of the study, lack of efficacy 
that poses  significant hazard to study subjects, clinically significant safety  finding  from a Non-clinical  (eg, animal) study,  
important safety recommendations from a study  data monitoring committee, or sponsor  decision to end or temporarily  halt a 
clinical study for safety  reasons.
Upon receiving an ESR from BMS, the investigator must review and retain  the ESR with  the Investigator Brochure.  Where  
required by local regulations  or when there is a central IRB/IEC for the study,  the sponsor  will submit the ESR to the appropriate 
IRB/IEC. The investigator  and IRB/IEC will determine if the informed consent  requires revision. The  investigator should also  
comply with the IRB/IEC  procedures  for reporting any other safety information. 
In addition, suspected serious  adverse  reactions (whether  expected or unexpected) shall be reported by BMS  to the relevant 
competent health authorities in all concerned countries according to local  regulations  (either as expedited and/or in  aggregate 
reports).
9.4.4 Non-serious Adverse Events
The collection of non-serious AE information should begin at initiation  of investigational product.  Non-serious AE information 
should also be collected from the start of a placebo lead-in  period or other observational  period intended to establish a baseline  
status for the subjects.  
If an ongoing non-serious AE worsens in its intensity,  or if its relationship to the investigational product  changes, a new non-
serious AE entry for the event should be completed. Non-serious AEs should be followed  to resolution or  stabilization, or 
reported as SAEs if they become  serious. Follow-up is also required  for non-serious  AEs that cause  interruption or  
discontinuation of investigational  product, or those that are  present at the end of study participation. Subjects  with non-serious 
AEs at study completion  should receive post-treatment follow-up as appropriate.
All identified non-serious AEs must be recorded and described in the medical record.
9.4.5 Pregnancy
Sexually active WOCBP must use an effective  method  of birth control during the course  of the study, in a manner such  that risk 
of failure  is minimized. Before enrolling  WOCBP in this clinical study, the investigator must review the guideline  about study 
participation for WOCBP which can be found in the GCP Manual for Investigators. The topics include the following:
General Information
Informed Consent Form
Pregnancy Prevention Information Sheet
Drug Interactions with Hormonal Contraceptives
Contraceptives in Current Use
Guidelines for the Follow-up of a Reported  Pregnancy.
Before study enrollment,  WOCBP must  be advised of the importance  of avoiding pregnancy during study participation  and the 
potential risk factors for an unintentional  pregnancy.  The subject  must sign an informed consent form  documenting this 
discussion.
All WOCBP MUST have  a negative  pregnancy test within  72 hours  before receiving ipilimumab and ABI-007. The 
minimum sensitivity of the pregnancy test must be 25 IU/L or equivalent  units  of HCG. If the pregnancy test  is positive, the 
subject must not receive ipilimumab  and must not be enrolled  in the study.
In addition, all WOCBP should be instructed to contact the investigator immediately if they suspect they might  be 
pregnant (e.g., missed  or late menstrual period) at any time during study participation.
If, following initiation of the investigational  product, it is subsequently discovered that  a study subject  is pregnant or may have 
been pregnant at the time of investigational  product exposure, including during  at least 6 half-lives after product  administration, 
the investigational product  will be permanently discontinued in  an appropriate manner (eg, dose tapering if necessary  for subject 
safety). The investigator must immediately notify  BMS of this event and record the pregnancy on the Pregnancy Surveillance 
Form (not an SAE form). Initial information  on a pregnancy must be reported immediately  to BMS, and the outcome information 
provided once the outcome is known. Completed Pregnancy Surveillance Forms must be forwarded to BMS  according to SAE 
reporting procedures.
Any pregnancy that occurs  in a female partner of a male  study participant  should be reported  to BMS, and Celgene.Information  
on this pregnancy  will be collected on the Pregnancy Surveillance Form.
Protocol-required procedures for study discontinuation and follow-up must  be performed  on the subject unless  contraindicated  
by pregnancy (e.g., x-ray  studies).  Other  appropriate pregnancy follow-up procedures should  be considered if indicated. In 
addition, the investigator must report to BMS and to Celgene, and follow-up on information regarding the course of the 
pregnancy, including  perinatal and neonatal outcome. Infants should be followed for a minimum of 8 weeks.
9.4.6 Other Safety Considerations
Any significant worsening  noted during interim or final physical examinations, electrocardiograms,  x-rays, and any other 
potential safety  assessments, whether  or not these procedures are required  by the protocol,  should also be recorded in the 
medical record.
9.4.7  The investigator shall supply  the sponsor and Ethics Committee with any additional requested information,  notably for  
reported deaths of subjects.
9.5Collection and Reporting
Adverse events can be spontaneously reported or elicited during open-ended  questioning, examination, or  evaluation of a 
subject. (In order to prevent reporting  bias,  subjects should not be questioned regarding  the specific  occurrence  of one or  
more AEs.)
If known, the diagnosis  of the underlying  illness  or disorder should  be recorded, rather than its individual symptoms. The 
following information should  be captured for all AEs: onset, duration, intensity, seriousness,  relationship  to investigational 
product, action  taken, and treatment  required. If treatment for the AE was administered, it should be  recorded  in the medical 
record.
10.0 Number of Patients
Simon’s minimax  two-stage design  will be used to perform  interim efficacy monitoring.   It is assumed that the combination 
treatment will have  a target PFS rate of 30%.  A PFS rate of  15% or lower is considered a failure  and the combination  treatment  
will be considered as not having desired efficacy.  With type I error of 0.05 and power  of 90%, we will enter 42 patients in the 
first stage.   If there are 6 or fewer patients  who are alive and progression  free at  month 6, then the trial  will be stopped and the 
combination treatment will not be considered for further  study.  If there are 7 or more patients who are alive and progression 
free at 6 months,  22 more patients will be enrolled and evaluated, giving us a total of 64 patients.  
Primary Endpoints:
The primary efficacy objective of the study is to determine if the combination  of ABI-007 plus Ipilimumab can  delay disease 
progression in patients with metastatic melanoma.  The primary  efficacy endpoint is the rate of progression-free survival (PFS) 
at 6 months.  Patients who are lost to follow-up  or who are not evaluable at 6 months  will be considered as failures  (i.e., disease  
progression occurred).    The 6-month PFS rate associated with the standard of care dacarbazine or temozolomide is about 
15%, and we will target a PFS rate of 30% in this study.
Rationale for the primary endpoint:
The main goal of systemic therapy is to achieve  complete remission when possible.   The greater is the tumor regression;  the 
better is palliation, improvement in quality of life and overall survival.   Thus,  it appears more  appealing to use overall survival 
rather than response rate to assess the efficacy  of systemic  therapy,  especially so with targeted  therapies and immune 
response modifiers which show their beneficial  effects slowly  over time unlike the cytotoxic  drugs.  However,  since patient death 
is observed quite late, after use of multiple  regimens,  any effect of the first  line therapy has on  the overall  survival  may be 
altered by the effects of subsequent  therapies.  The use of Progression Free survival (PFS)  to assess benefit  from an 
investigative agent makes the determination of the benefit from that  therapy more accurate than that observed from use  of 
overall survival. During the past couple  of years,  Meta-analysis of the outcomes of therapies of  metastatic malignant melanoma  
(27) and colorectal (28) cancer were performed to determine if PFS is  a better surrogate for survival in patients with these  
tumors.  These studies  concluded that PFS indeed offers a direct measure of  new drug efficacy  that is not obscured by 
subsequent therapies.  It was postulated that, as more effective agents become available,  PFS will become  an even more 
desirable primary efficacy end point than overall  survival.  The advantage of  determining  the 6-month PFS rate rested in that 
ability to make early assessment of the agent in the trial, even if that agent showed  its effect at a slower pace than cytotoxic 
drugs, as is the case with many  targeted  therapies  and immunotherapeutic  agents.  Its use  will reduce the sample  size; shorten 
accrual time, and speed up the time of first analysis of  treatment outcome.
We will also monitor the safety of the ABI-007 plus Ipilimumab combination treatment.  Safety will  be measured.  We assume 
that response  and toxicity are independent.
Efficacy Monitoring:
Simon’s minimax  two-stage design  will be used to perform  interim efficacy monitoring.(29)   It is assumed that the combination 
treatment will have  a target PFS rate of 30%.  A PFS rate of  15% or lower is considered a failure  and the combination  treatment  
will be considered as not having desired efficacy.  With type I error of 0.05 and power  of 90%, we will enter 42 patients in the 
first stage.   If there are 6 or fewer patients  who are alive and progression  free at  month 6, then the trial  will be stopped and the 
combination treatment will not be considered for further  study.  If there are 7 or more patients who are alive and progression 
free at 6 months,  22 more patients will be enrolled and evaluated, giving us a total of 64 patients.  Accrual will be suspended 
after the 1st stage  in the event  where there are not at least 7 patients who are alive and progression free at 6 months and not all 
patients have been fully evaluated for the 6 months. Once a 7th patient has been  observed to be  alive and progression free at 6 
months, accrual  will be resumed. At the end of the study, if there  are more than 14 patients  who are alive and  progression free  
at 6 months  among  the 64 patients,  the ABI-007 plus Ipilimumab combination  will be  considered  successful and will be 
considered for further study.  If there are 14 or fewer patients who are alive and progression free at 6 months,  then the 
combination will not be considered for future study.  The early stopping probability is 55% if the PFS rate at 6 month is 15%.
Under the null hypothesis  that the progression-free survival  rate for the combination  treatment is 15%,  the trial will falsely  
conclude that it is effective 4.8%  of the time.  Under the alternative  hypothesis  that the progression-free survival rate  is 30%, the 
study will falsely conclude that the combination treatment does not work 9.97% of the time.
Safety Monitoring:
The method of Thall, Simon, and Estey  will be employed to perform interim safety  monitoring.(30)  We will assume a Beta (0.6, 
1.4) prior distribution  for the DLT rate on combination treatment,  which in  particular has  mean DLT rate  of 30%.  
The following decision criteria will be applied with minimum of 3 patients, cohort size of 1, up  to the 64th patient.   Targeting a 
30% DLT rate as a trade-off, the trial will be stopped early  according to the following monitoring rule.
Pr{DLT  rate > 30%| data} > 0.98
That is, if at any time during the study we determine that there is more than a 98% chance that the DLT rate in the combination  
treatment group is more than 30% we will stop the study.  Stopping boundaries corresponding  to this  probability  criterion are to 
terminate the trial if
[# of patients with DLT/ # of patients  evaluated]:
> 4/4, 5/5, 6/7, 7/9, 8/12, 9/14, 10/16, 11/19,  12/21, 13/24, 14/26, 15/29,  16/32, 17/34, 18/37,  19/39, 20/42, 21/45, 22/48,  23/50, 
24/53, 25/56, 26/58,  or 27/61.
The operating characteristics of this rule in the trial are shown in the following table:
Operating Characteristics  for Safety  Monitoring Rule in the Study
True DLT Rate Probability of 
Stopping EarlySample Size
P25         Median          P75
10% 0 % 64              64                 64
20% 0.6 % 64              64                 64
30% 9.3 % 64              64                 64
40% 52.7 % 25               60                 64
50% 93.9 % 11               20                 35
Statistical Analyses:
Descriptive statistics will be summarized for baseline characteristics of patients enrolled.  Treatment administration will be 
summarized for each treatment cycle.   Safety  variables will be  summarized by descriptive statistics.  Adverse events  and 
laboratory results will also be summarized in severity grade  (CTCAE).    
Tumor response will be evaluated based  on immune-related  response criteria (irRC) which is a modified  version  of WHO 
criteria.  Progression-free survival  will be estimated using the method of Kaplan-Meier.   It will be determined  from the start of the 
study until disease progression or death, whichever is first.  All patients  who do  not have  a disease progression  or death  will be 
censored on their last evaluable tumor assessment date.  The PFS rate at 6 month  will be provided with its 95% confidence  
interval estimated using bootstrap method.  Median PFS will be  reported together  with a two-sided 95% CI calculated using  the 
method of Brookmeyer  and Crowley.   Cox's proportional hazard model  will be used to determine the relationship  with PFS and 
the potential prognostic factors.  Exploratory  logistic regression  will be  used to identify the prognostic factors that are 
significantly correlated with PFS rate at 6 months.  
We will also calculate the disease  control rate (CR, PR, and stable disease)  at 6 months for all the patients,  together with  its 
95% confidence interval.  Again, logistic  regression will be used to determine the relationship between the disease  control and 
the potential prognostic factors.  Complete and partial tumor response rate as defined  in section 9.2  of the protocol  will also  be 
provided, together with their 95% confidence intervals.  
SPARC and Other Molecular Biomarkers
The correlation of SPARC  and other molecular  biomarkers with  efficacy outcomes  will be analyzed. 
Response duration and overall survival  will be estimated using the method of Kaplan-Meier method. The duration of response is 
measured from the date of first documentation of objective response (either complete or partial  response, whichever is recorded 
first) to the date of first objective documentation of progression  of disease according  to the irRC criteria (taking as a reference 
for progressive disease the smallest measurements recorded since  protocol therapy was initiated).  The median and range of  
duration of response  will be presented for subjects with a complete  response, subjects with a partial response,  and subjects with 
an overall  response (i.e., confirmed complete  or partial response).  Overall  survival is defined as the duration from the start of 
the study  till death.  If a patient is still alive at the end of the study, this patient will be  censored on his  last follow-up 
date.  Median overall  survival will be reported with their 95% CI.  Cox’s  proportional hazard model will be  used to estimate  the 
relationship between  overall survival  and the same  set of covariates used  for PFS model.
11.0 Criteria for Removal from the Study
11.1  Progression disease associated  with rapid clinical  deterioration or development of new metastasis at a site that  
may be life threatening as judged by the treating  physician at any time during therapy. 
11.2 Development of unacceptable toxicity or patient's refusal to  pursue further  treatment.
11.3 Patients  who have  shown  a systemic response and developed brain metastases as the only site of progression of  disease  
may have the brain metastases treated and then resume the systemic therapy at  the discretion  of the study chairman.
Any serious adverse events will be reported  to the Surveillance Committee at  the M.  D. Anderson Cancer Center.  A serious 
adverse reaction includes any experience that:
Is fatal or immediately  life-threatening
Is severely  or permanently disabling
Requires or prolongs hospitalization
Is a congenital anomaly, cancer,  or overdose.
Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs) related  to the study drugs are to  be reported to the MDACC  Surveillance Committee (IRB)  
within 10 working days of their occurrence.   This includes all grade 4 and 5 toxicities except  for grade 4 myelosuppression. 
All serious,  related adverse events will be reported and documented on Form FDA 3500 A (Med Watch Form) and forwarded  
directly to MGI Pharmaceuticals.   This includes serious, related, labeled (expected)  and serious, related, unlabeled 
(unexpected) adverse experiences.  
12.0 References
1. Middleton MR, Grobb JJ,Aaronson N, et al. Randomized phase III study of  temozolomide versus DTIC  in the 
treatment of patients with advanced  metastatic  malignant melanoma. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:158-166.
2. Buzaid AC, Legha SS, Winn R, et al. Cisplatin (C), vinblastine (V), DTIC (D)  (CVD) versus DTIC  alone  in metastatic 
melanoma: preliminary results phase  III cancer community oncology program (CCOP). Proc Am Soc Clin 
Oncol 1993;12:1328. Abstract.
3. Chapman PB, Einhorn  LH, Meyers ML, et al. Phase  III multi-center randomized trial of  the Dartmouth regimen versus 
DTIC in patients  with metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:2745-2751.
4. Legha SS, Ring S, Eton O,et al. Development  and results of  biochemotherapy in metastatic melanoma: the University 
of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center Experience. Cancer J Sci Am 1997;3:S9-S15. 
5. Legha SS, Ring S, Eton 0, et al. Development of a biochemotherapy regimen with concurrent administration of  
cisplatin, vinblastine, DTIC, interferon alpha,  and interleukin-2 for patients  with metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 
1998;16:1752-1759. 
6. O'Day SJ, Gammon G, Boasberg PD, et al. Advantages of  concurrent biochemotherapy modified by decrescendo 
interleukin-2, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, and tamoxifen for patients with metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 
1999;17:2752-2761.
7. Legha SS, Ring S, Bedikian  A, et al. Treatment of  metastatic melanoma  with combined chemotherapy containing 
cisplatin, vinblastine and DTIC (CVD) and biotherapy using  interleukin-2 and interferon-alpha. Ann Oncol 1996;7:827  -835.
8. Rosenberg SA, Yang  JC, Schwartzentruber DJ, et  al. Prospective randomized  trial of the treatment of patients with 
metastatic melanoma using chemotherapy with cisplatin, DTIC, and tamoxifen alone or in combination with interleukin-2 and 
interferon alfa-2b. J Clin Onco1 1999;17:968-975. 
9. Eton 0, Legha S, Bedikian A, et al. Phase III randomized trial of  cisplatin, Vinblastine, DTIC  (CDV) plus  interleukin-2 
(IL2) and interferon-alpha-2b (INF)  versus  CVD in patients (Pts) with metastatic melanoma. Proc Am Soc Clin 
Onco1 2000;19:552a.  
10. Atkins MB, Lee S, Flaherty LE, Sosman JA, Sondak VK, Kirkwood JM,  for the U.S. Melanoma  Intergroup. A prospective 
randomized Phae  III trial of concurrent  biochemotherapy (BCT) with cisplatin,  Vinblastine, DTIC (CVD), IL-2 and interferon 
alpha-2b (IFN) versus CVD alone  in patients  with metastatic melanoma (E3695):  an ECOG-coordinated  intergroup 
trial.  Proc. ASCO 2003;22:70 (#2847).
11. Bedikian AY, Johnson MM, Warneke CL. Papadopoulos N, Hwu WJ, Kim K, Hwu P. Systemic Therapy for Unresectable 
Metastatic Melanoma: Impact  of Biochemotherapy on Long-term Survival. Journal  of Immunotoxicology 5:201 -  207, 4/2008. 
12. L. Fong and E. J. Small; Anti-Cytotoxic  T-Lymphocyte Antigen-4 Antibody:  The First in  an Emerging  Class of 
Immunomodulatory Antibodies for Cancer  Treatment. J. Clin. Oncol., November 10, 2008;  26(32): 5275 -  5283.
13. G. Q. Phan, J. S. Weber, and V. K. Sondak;  CTLA-4 Blockade  with Monoclonal Antibodies in Patients with  Metastatic 
Cancer: Surgical Issues. Ann. Surg.  Oncol.,  November 1, 2008; 15(11): 3014 - 3021. 
14. J. Weber Overcoming Immunologic  Tolerance to Melanoma: Targeting CTLA-4 with Ipilimumab (Ipilimumab). Oncologist, 
October 1, 2008; 13(suppl_4):  16 - 25. 
15. Lens,  M; Ferrucci, PF.; Testori, A Anti-CTLA4 Monoclonal Antibody Ipilimumab  in the Treatment of Metastatic 
Melanoma: Recent Findings. Recent Patents  on Anti-cancer  Drug Discovery, 2008,  3: 105-113. 
16. Hersh EM, O'Day SJ, Powderly J, Khan  KD, Pavlick AC, Cranmer LD, Samlowski  WE, Nichol GM, Yellin  MJ, Weber 
JS.  A phase II multicenter study  of Ipilimumab  with or without  dacarbazine in chemotherapy-naïve patients with advanced 
melanoma. Invest New Drugs. 2010 Jan 16. [Epub ahead of print]
17. Thumar JR, Kluger HM.  Ipilimumab:  A promising immunotherapy for melanoma, Oncology 24:1280- 1304,  2010.
18. Tarhini AA, Moschos  SJ, Tawbi H, Shuai Y, Gooding  WE, Sander  C, Kirkwood  JM. Phase II  evaluation of 
Tremelimumab 9Treme) combined with high-dose interferon alpha-2b (HDI) for metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 28: 
No.15S, 617s  (abstact  # 8524),  2010
19. Ajay V. Maker, Giao Q. Phan, Peter  Attia,  James C. Yang, Richard M. Sherry,  Suzanne  L. Topalian, Udai S. 
Kammula, Richard  E. Royal, Leah R. Haworth,  Catherine Levy, David Kleiner,  , Sharon A. Mavroukakis, Michael  Yellin, and 
Steven A. Rosenberg,  Tumor  Regression and Autoimmunity in Patients Treated With Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte –Associated 
Antigen 4 Blockade  and Interleukin 2: A Phase I/II Study.  Ann Surg Oncol. 2005 December ; 12(12):  1005– 1016.
20. Lawrence DP, Hamid O,McDermott DF, Puzanov I, Sznol M,  Clark J, Logan  T, Hodi FS, Heller KN, Margolin  KA. Phase 
II trial of Ipilimumab monotherapy in melanoma  patients with brain  metastasis. J Clin Oncol 28: No.15S, 616s (abstact  # 
8523), 2010
21. Apetoh  L. Ghiringhelli F, Tesniere A. et al. Toll-like  receptor 4-dependent contribution of the immune system to 
anticancer chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Nat Med.  2007:13:1050-10.
22.  Trinchieri G, Sher A. Cooperation of Toll-like receptor signals in innate immune defense.  Nat Rev Immuno!. 2007;7:179-
190 .
23.  Uno T, Takeda K, Kojima Y et al Uno et al., 2006, Eradication of  established  tumors in mice by a combination antibody-
based therapy Nat.  Med. 2006,  12: 693-698; 
24. Teng MWL, Westwood JA, Darcy PK et al, Combined Natural Killer  T-Cell--Based Immunotherapy Eradicates 
Established Tumors in Mice.  Can Res. 2007, 67: 7495-7504
25. Gogas  H, Bafaloukos D, Bedikian AY. The role of taxanes in the treatment of  metastatic melanoma. Melanoma Res 
14(5):415-20, 10/2004.
26. Hersh EM, O'Day S, Gonzalez R, et al. Open-label, multicenter, phase II trial of ABI-007 in previously treated and 
previously untreated  patients with metastatic malignant melanoma. JCO 23:724S, (Abstract #7558), 2005. 
27. Korn El, Liu P-U, Lee SJ et al. Meta-analysis of phase II Cooperative Group Trials in  metastatic stage IV melanoma  to 
determine progression-free and overall  survival  benchmarks for future phase  II trials. J Clin Oncol 26:527-534, 2008
28. Buyse  M, Burzykowski T, Carroll K et al. Progression-free survival  is a surrogate for  survival in advanced  colorectal 
cancer. J Clin Oncol 25:5218-5224, 2007
29. Simon R. Optimal Two-Stage Designs for Phase II Clinical  Trials. Controlled Clinical  Trials 10:  1-10, 1989
30. Thall, PF, Simon RM,  H. Estey EH. New Statistical Strategy for Monitoring Safety and Efficacy in Single-Arm Clinical 
Trials. J Clin Oncol  14:296-303