 
 
 
Prospective Multicenter Post Approval Study  of the  
LPS-Flex Mobile Bearing Knee  
 
 
 
Protocol # 0 7-100 
 
 
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
 
 
 
May 15, 2007  
Revised August 29, 2007  
Revised January 30, 2008  
Revised February 6, 2008  
Revised April 29, 2008  
Revised June 11, 2008  
Final Revision August  12, 2008  
Amendment  I February 14, 2014  
Revised April 18, 2014  
Revised August 6, 2014  
 
 
 
Zimmer, Inc.  
PO Box 708  
Warsaw, IN  46581 -0708  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This protocol contains CONFIDENTIAL information and should be restr icted in its 
distribution  
Prospective Multicenter Post Approval Study of the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee         Protocol # 07 -100 
August 12, 2008  
Amendment I January 2, 2014  
  Table of Contents  
 
1. Protocol Summary         1 
2. Introduction          2 
3. Objective          3 
4. Study Design  
 4.1   Additional Data Sources       3 
5. Patient Selection Criteria        4 
5.A. Patient Eligibility  Criteria      4 
5.B. Contraindication s      5 
6. Study Procedures         6 
6.A. Inclusion of Patient       6 
6.B. Operative Procedures       6 
6.C. Follow -Up Procedures       7 
7. Plan to M inimize Loss to Follow -up      8 
8. Data Collection         10 
8.A. General Instructions       10 
8.B. Dev ice Outcome Case Report Forms     10 
8.C. Data Collection Schedule      12 
8.D. Quality Assur ance and Control                12 
9. Statistical Procedures         12 
10. Management of Incurrent Events                19 
10.A. Device Failure/Replacement Procedure              19 
10.B. Patient Withdrawal                 20 
10.C. Modifications to this Protocol                20 
11. Requirements Prior to Study Initiation                20 
12. Informed Consent                   21 
13. Annual Reporting to the FDA                  21 
14. Completion of Study                   21 
15. Device Retrieval         22 
16. Retention of Records                   22 
17. Additional  Data Source        24 
18. References                    25 
 
   
 
Page 1 of 28  1. Protocol Summary  
 
The objective of Post Approval Study ( PAS) is to assess the long -term performance 
of the NexGen® LPS-Flex Mobile Bearing Knee  in the treatment of patients with 
severe knee pain o r degenerative knee disease.   The target population of 400 cases  
will be from two parallel groups .  
 
Group 1  will consist of approximately 300 patients already implanted with either the 
LPS-Flex Fixed Bearing Knee (control population) or the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing 
Knee device  during the IDE study from approximately 10 sites.  These patients  will 
be involved in long -term follow -up through 10 year s.   
 
Group 2  will consist o f approximately 100 new patients who are eligible for a total 
knee replacement , have been chosen to receive the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee  
and meet  the study eligibility criteria .  The clinical and radiographic data collectio n 
will be the same for both groups.   
 
The Knee Society  Knee  Score  will be used for both groups to evaluate clinical 
parameters such as functional ability, level of pain and range of motion . The SF -12 
will be used to assess patient’s quality of life status.   Radiographic views will be 
obtained at the immediate postoperative interval (A /P view only) and at each post-
operative follow -up interval  (A/P and lateral views ).  In addition to the independent 
radiographic evaluation at each p ost-operative follow -up interval, patient 
improvement  in Knee Society and SF -12 scores will be characterized as the change in 
postoperative scores from the preoperative values, and will be summarized at 6 
weeks, 6 months an d at annual increments up to 5 years  for Group 2 and at 5, 6, 8 and 
10 years for Group 1.   
 
Adverse events  will serve as clinical  study endpoints, and will be summarized over 
the long -term follow -up period (over the 6 year period beginning at 4 years (if 
applicable) and extending to 10 years from the date of primary knee replacement 
surgery) for Group 1, and over the first 5 postoperative years for Group 2 .   
 
The length of follow up for Group 1 will begin with protocol approval at 
approximately 4 to 5 years from the date of the primary knee replacement surgery 
date and will extend through 10 years from the primary surgery date .  A number of 
patients have reached the 4 and/or 5 year post -operative time point  during the period 
between the submission of th e PMA and the launching of the post approval study  at 
which time data was not required to be collected per the IDE protocol.  If the 4 and/or 
5 year data was collected during this period as part of the surgeons standard of care, 
the patient informed consen t will request permission to collect this retrospective data 
for use in the post approval study.  The length of follow -up for Group 2 will extend 
through 5  years from the date of primary knee replacement surgery .    
 
  
 
Page 2 of 28   
2. Introduction  
 
Total knee arthroplasty, TKA, is a medical procedure where the entire knee joint is 
replaced with a prosthetic device.  Since the first total condylar implant procedure in 
1974,1 TKA has become a widely acce pted orthopaedic procedure.  Each year, 
approximately 478,000 TKR surgeries are performed in the United States for end -
stage arthritis of the knee joint.  
 
Major indications of TKA include osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile 
rheumatoid arthritis , osteonecrosis, and other types of inflammatory arthritis.3  The 
TKA surgical procedure involves resurfacing the knee joint by removing diseased 
bone and cartilage on the surface of the femur, tibia, and patella and implanting an 
artificial device.  
 
Clinical experience has highlighted the need to minimize wear of p olyethylene and 
transmission of contact stresses to biological interfaces in total knee replacement 
applications.1,9,2 1  It has long been recognized that the wear rate of the articulating 
surfaces is correlated with the contact pressures imposed upon them during 
movement.1,21,  It is difficult, however, to increase the congruency of the tibiofemoral 
articulation surfaces without detrimentally affecting knee kinematics and i ncreasing 
contact stress transmission to an unacceptable level.8,13 
 
In the natural knee joint, incongruency of the opposing surfaces of the femoral 
condyles and tibial plateau is accommodated by the menisci, which serve to spread 
the applied load and thus reduce contact pressure.  In the case of artificial knee 
replacement s, it is possible to achieve the same effect by allowing one of the bearing 
surfaces, typically the tibial articulating surface, to move relative to the other.  The 
advantage of allowing the tibial articulating surface, or (meniscal bearing surface), to 
move, is that it allows the possibility to retain knee conformity while also maintaining 
a good range of natural movement and thereby  reduce contact pressure.  
 
The LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee is designed specifically to optimize congruency 
between the femor al and tibial articulating surfaces over the entire range of motion, 
while providing movement of the tibial articular surface to maintain optimal 
kinematics.  Congruency is important ove r the entire range of motion because the 
highest contact pressures are  often encountered at significant flexion angles when 
climbing and descending stairs, and rising out of a chair.  In the literature, it has been 
demonstrated that in high flexion, the ti bia will have a tendency to rotate up to 25º.23  
The articular surface  of the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing is designed to permit free 
rotation about the tibial baseplate trunnion up to 25º of internal or external rotation 
(total possible rotation is 50º).  The tibial/femoral conformity is thus maximized 
throughout the entire rang e of motion continuum.  
 
The LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee is a meniscal bearing total knee replacement, 
designed to accommodate posterior cruciate ligament resection.  The device is 
 
Page 3 of 28  designed for use with bone cement only for fixation of all components , which include 
the femoral, tibial and patellar implant devices . 
 
 
3. Objective  
 
The objective of PAS is to assess the long -term performance of the NexGen® LPS-
Flex Mobile Bearing Knee in the treatment of patients with severe knee pain or 
degenerative joint disease, in comparison with the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee. . 
Outcome data will be collected to evaluate:  
 
 Pre and post -operative status of affected  knee . 
 Alleviation of pain in the knee joint 
 Restoration of function  
 Radiographic findings  
 Quality of life  
 Revision, removal or secondary surgery;  
Procedure -related complication and device -related adverse events.  
 
 
4. Study Design  
 
This is a prospective , multi-center , parallel group,  active and historically controlled 
post approval study  comparing the clinical performance of the LPS -Flex Mobile 
Bearing Knee with  the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee .  Group 1 consists of patients 
who received either the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee or the LPS -Flex Mobile 
Bearing Knee  during the active IDE , completed the two arm randomized actively 
controlled IDE study and  has provided written consent to participate in the post 
approval study .  Group 2 patients will be enrolled into a single arm, historically 
controlled, short - term study (5 years) and will consist of those patients who are 
eligible to receive the LPS-Flex Mobile Bearing Knee and will have the device 
implanted by orthopaedic surgeons experienced in primary total knee  replacement.    
 
The post approval study will be offered to all Group 1 patients  who participated in the 
IDE portion of the study  and agree to participate in the post approval study .  For those 
patients willing to consent to continued follow -up, visits will occur at the following 
post-operative intervals: Years 5, 6, 8, & 10 .  All data will be recorded on the Study 
Case Report Forms (CRFs) which will be provided to each site.  As stated in Section 
1, if the 4 and/or 5 year data was collected during the period between the submission 
of the PMA and the launching of the post approval study as part of the surgeons 
standard of care, a request will be made to the patient in the inform ed consent 
requesting  permission to collect this retrospective data for use in the post approval 
study.  The retrospective data will include any data collected by the investigator per 
his/her standard of care.  If the data collected includes all data points  as specified in 
the IDE, this information will be transferred onto the post approval case report forms 
 
Page 4 of 28  and reported as part of the post approval study.  If the data collected includes any of 
the data points as specified in the IDE, this information will b e transferred onto the 
post approval case report forms and flagged to be analyzed separate from the study 
data.  
 
Patients in Group 2 will be selected according to the Patient Eligibility Criteria set out 
in Section 5.  Data on pain, function, deformity, radiographic parameters, and 
complications will be collected .   Patients undergoing primary total knee arthroplasty 
which require a b ilateral procedure will also be eligible for  inclusion into Group 2 .   
Follow -up examinations will be made at 6 weeks, 6 months, 1 year,  2 year , 3 year,  4 
year, and  5 year  intervals .     
 
Up to 5 new sites will contribute subjects to Group 2 of the post approval study  of the 
LPS-Flex Mobile Bearing Knee Prosthesis.  Surgeon selection will be based on the 
following criteria:  1) the surgeon is willing to conduct this research study in 
accordance to the protocol and applicable federal regulations, 2) the surgeon 
identifies staff to assist him/her to conduct the research  and collect the required data 
and 3) an adequate patient population exists to support study enrollment 
requirements.  This number of centers will permit assessment of the consistency of 
outcomes across a variety of investigators.  Each site will enroll ap proximately 20 
patients .  The enrollment period may be 12 months or longer to assure an adequate 
number of cases at each site.  
 
4.1 Additional Data Sources  
 
Additional data sources ( i.e. Australian  Registr y) will be requested  annually to 
provide further information on the long term safety and efficacy of the NexGen 
LPS Flex Mobile Bearing Knee , in comparison with  the LPS -Flex Fixed 
Bearing Knee .  Please refer to Section 17 for further details regarding the 
acquisition and use of this data.  
 
 
5. Patient Selection Criteria /Recruitment Strategy  
 
In order to avoid possible ascertainment bias, the investigator agrees to screen all 
presenting total knee replacement patients against the patient eligibility  and 
contraindication  criteria and to offer enrollment to all consecutive patients (Group 2) 
that satisfy the criteria. The investigator also agrees to provide an informed consent to 
these presenting patients, who satisfy the patient eligibility and contraindication  
criteria as specified below.  
 
 Patients must  meet the following criteria to be eligible for participation.  
 
5.A. Patient Eligibility Criteria  
 
 
Page 5 of 28  Enrol lment into Group 2 of the PAS will be offered to all patients who  prese nt with 
severe knee pain and disability due to:  
 
 Osteoarthritis (OA)  
 Primary and secondary traumatic arthritis  
 Avascular necrosis of the femoral condyle  
 Moderate varus,  valgus, or flexion deformities  (i.e. valgus/varus 
deformity of ≤15˚, fixed flexion deformity of ≤10˚) 
 
5.B. Contraindications  
 
▪ Contraindications include:  
1. Previous history of infection in the affected joint and/or 
local/systemic infection that may affect the prosthetic joint.  
2. Insufficient bone stock on femoral or tibia l surfaces.  
3. Skeletal immaturity  
4. Neuropathic arthropathy  
5. Osteoporosis or any loss of musculature or neuromuscular disease 
that compromises the affected limb.  
6. A stable, painless arthrodesis in a satisfactory functional position  
7. Severe instability secondary t o the absence of collateral integrity  
▪ Total knee arthroplasty is contraindicated in patients who have rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and an ulcer of the skin or a history of recurrent breakdown 
of the skin because their risk of postoperative infection is greate r.  RA 
patient using steroids may also have increased risk of infection.  Late 
infections in RA patients have been reported 24+ months postoperative.  
▪ Patient is a poor compliance risk, i.e., history of ethanol or drug abuse, or 
mental handicap that would co mpromise patient compliance with respect 
to rehabilitation or follow -up.  
▪ Patient is not willing or able to give informed consent to participate in the 
follow -up program.  
▪ Patient is not willing to return for all scheduled follow -up appointments as 
defined  by this protocol.  
 
Participation in Group 1 will be offered to all subjects enrolled in the LPS 
Flex Mobile IDE study.  Of the IDE study participants, it is anticipated that 
approximately 150 procedures implanted with the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing 
Knee and approximately 150 procedures implanted with the LPS -Flex Fixed 
Bearing Knee will be included in this arm of the study.  Group 1 subjects are  
subjects : 1) without preoperative diagnoses of rheumatoid arthritis, 2) 
implanted with a study device, 3) completed  the (IDE) study,  4) will agree to 
be consented for the post approval study and 5) are will ing to be re -evaluated 
for their ability to comply with the follow -up schedule specific to the post -
market approval study.  All patients from the IDE study cohort will be 
followed unless any of the following occurs: 1) refusal to provide informed 
 
Page 6 of 28  consent t o participate in the PAS, 2) death, or 3) voluntarily withdraw al from 
participation.    
 
Group 2 will consist of approximately 100 unilateral procedures which are 
implanted with the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee, have signed the 
informed consent, and are ev aluated using the patient 
eligibility/contraindication  criteria specific to the post -market approval study.  
Group 2  patients will have a shorter period of follow -up, and will be 
followed until death, revision (or re -revision), withdrawal, or 5 years 
which ever comes first.   All p rocedures requiring contralateral knee 
replacement will be placed into an ancillary bilateral study arm, and reported 
on in a separate summary of bilateral study procedures.  All p rocedures 
requiring revision surgery will be placed into a revision study arm, and 
reported on in a separate summary of revision study procedures.  
 
 
6. Study Procedures  
 
6.A. Inclusion of Patient  
 
For each consecutive patient in Group 2 presenting as a candidate for total 
knee replacement, the inclusion and contraindication  criteria of Section  5 
should be reviewed . If all patient selection criteria are satisfied, the patient 
informed consent process will be completed .  No preoperative inf ormation can 
be collected until the patient informed consent has been signed.   A 
preoperative patient questionnaire, health status patient questionnaire, and 
preoperative clinical evaluation will be obtained  for Group 2 .  
 
The investigator or designee will discuss with the IDE patients  continuing into 
Group 1 of the post approval study , the importance of returning for follow -up 
visits at the required intervals.  If during this discussion the patient is 
identifi ed as a poor compliance risk, (i.e., history of ethanol or drug abuse, or 
mental handicap that would compromise patient compliance with respect to 
extended follow -up), this patient would be excluded from the study.  Patients 
having a history of drug and/or  alcohol abuse or who are mentally 
handicapped could have the potential to report inaccurate data during the 
follow -up visits and/or could be considered a high risk for non -compliance 
which could inadvertently bias the study.  For this reason, these patien ts will 
be excluded from the study.  Any baseline information and clinical results of 
these excluded patients at the end of the IDE will be provided in the PAS 
status report. Once th e patient is deemed appropriate for continuing into 
Group 1, the patient informed consent process will be completed.  Study 
information will not be collected until the patient informed consent has been 
signed.   
  
 
Page 7 of 28  6.B. Operative Procedures  
 
Details of the surgical procedures for Group 2 will be recorded on the CRFs 
provided.   Surgical procedures for Group 2 will follow the same procedures 
that were required for the Group 1 patients enrolled into the IDE phase of the 
study . 
 
All surgical procedures will be performed under aseptic conditions using the 
procedure specified in the  appropriate surgical technique manual . 
 
All LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee components will be implanted using bone 
cement of the investigators choice.  The surgical technique for implantation of 
the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee is included in Appendix 6 of the p rotocol .   
 
Three separate surgical techniques standard and MIS are available for 
implantation of the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee, with the choice of 
technique related to surgeon preference for specific instrumentation.  The 
techniques include intramedullary instrument, epicondylar instrument and 
Multi -Reference™ 4-in-1 Femoral Instrumentation surgical techniques.  All of 
the instruments used to implant this device are currently available for 
implantation of the NexGen  Complete Knee Solution dev ice.   
 
The Operative Information form  and Surgical Device Information form will 
be completed for Group 2 at the time of surgery  or immediately thereafter.  
Similarly, t he Immediate Postoperative Evaluation form will be completed as 
soon as possible after the surgery, but prior to  the 6 week follow -up visit.  The 
case report forms to be completed at each event and interval  can be found in 
Appendix 1 of the protocol.  
 
6.C. Follow -Up Procedures  
 
Data needed to complete the functional evaluation and the radiographic 
evaluation will be collected for both groups in the study.   
 
Group 1:  Postoperativ ely at 4 years  (if applicable ), 5 years  (if 
applicable) , 6 years, 8 years and 10 years.  
 
Group 2:  Postoperatively at 6 weeks, 6 months, 1 year , 2 years , 3 years , 
4 years , and 5  years .  
 
Acceptable windows for follow -up for both groups are as follows: 6 weeks ±2 
weeks, 6 months ± 1 -month and yearly ± 2 months.  There will be a minimum 
of 5 years of follow -up for each case in Group 2, although some patients may 
fail to achieve the minimum 5 year follow -up due to death, withdrawal from 
the study, or identified as lost to follow -up.  If provided with a second, LPS -
Flex Mobile Bearing Knee bilat eral implant, patients will be asked to 
 
Page 8 of 28  complete two patient questionnaires, and data for each knee implanted will be 
evaluated on separate case report forms.  This information will be analyzed 
separately from patients with unilateral knee replacement.   A ll patient data 
will be used in the analysis of re -operation rates, pain scores, deformity 
scores, radiographic indications, and complication rates for as long as the 
patient is in the study.  This will remain true until lost to follow -up, or the 
study is closed.   
 
 
Follow -up 
Intervals  Group  Follow -up 
Windows  Months Post -op 
Range  
6 weeks  Group 2  ± 2 weeks  4 - 8 weeks  
6 month  Group 2  ± 1 month  5 – 7 months  
1 year  Group2  ± 2 months  10 – 14 months  
2 year  Group 2  ± 2 months  22 – 26 months  
3 year  Group 2  ± 2 months  34 – 38 months  
4 year  Group 1 (if applicable)  
Group 2  ± 2 months  46 – 50 months 
5 year  Group 1 (if applicable)  
Group 2  ± 2 months  58 – 62 months  
6 year  Group 1  ± 2 months  70 – 74 months  
8 year  Group 1  ± 2 months  96 – 98 months  
10 year  Group1  ± 2 months  118 – 122 months  
 
Radiographs (A/P and lateral views) for Group 1 will be required at each 
postoperative interval as specified in the protocol.  Radiographs for Group 2  will be 
required at the preoperative interval (A/P and lateral views), at the immediate 
postoperative interval (A/P view only) and at each postoperative interva l (A/P and 
lateral views) as specified in the protocol.  All radiographs (Group 1 and Group 2) 
will be reviewed by the investigator at each interval and a Radiographic Review Form 
will be completed.  If a significant radiographic event is identified, a Significant 
Radiograph ic Event form will be completed.  An independent radiographic review 
will be performed on Group 1 and Group 2 at all PAS post -operative follow -up 
intervals.  (See Section 8B ).   
 
 
7. Plan to minimize Loss to Follow -up 
 
Patient follow -up is extremely important for the conduct of a sound clinical study.  
The expectation of the FDA is to obtain an 80% follow -up rate by the end of this 
 
Page 9 of 28  study.  In an effort to minimize lost to follow -up study subjects, the following 
recommend ations and/or stud y requirements are essential to ensure proper patient 
selection and compliance.  
  
All Group 2 patients will be selected according to patient eligibility  criteria detailed 
in Section 5  and are expected to return for all follow -up visits. Patients from both 
groups will be counseled during the informed consent process on the importance of 
returning for follow -up vis its.  Patients who are not willing to return for study 
required  follow -up visits and/or are not willing to comply with the follow -up schedule 
will be excluded from  enroll ment  in the study.  In addition, if a patient is a poor 
compliance risk, (i.e., history of ethanol or drug abuse, or mental handicap that would 
compromise patient compliance with respect to extended follow -up) that patient will 
be excluded from the study.   Patients having a history of drug and/or alcohol abuse 
or who are mental ly handicapped could have the potential to report inaccurate data 
during the follow -up visits and/or could be considered a high risk for non -compliance 
which could inadvertently bias the study.  For this reason, these patients will be 
excluded from the stu dy.  Any baseline information and clinical results of these 
patients at the end of the IDE will be provided in the PAS status report.   
 
In addition to proper  patient selection, patient due notices will be sent to the sites on a 
regular basis in order to t rack each study participant and monitor adherence to the 
required follow -up visit timeframes.  The patient due listings will facilitate scheduling 
the patients for their return office visits.  If during the course of the study it is 
determined that a patie nt is experiencing a financial hardship that prevents the  patient  
from returning for follow -up visits, Zimmer should be notified to discuss possible 
financial  assistance which may be available to the patient .    
 
Attempts to contact patients will be documented on the Study Completion form.  It is 
recommended that the first three attempts be made by telephone .  If a response  is not 
received from the phone calls , a letter from the investigator should be sent to the 
patient  explaining their agreement per the informed consent to comply with the 
follow -up intervals as stated in the protocol.  If a response is not received from th is 
letter to the patient , the final re commendation would be to send a certified letter  to the 
patie nt.  If no response is received from the certified letter, the patient will be deemed 
lost to follow -up and a study completion form will be completed.  
 
In addition, patient contact infor mation of two additional sources will be requested 
from the patient and collected on the Confidential Patient Information form.   If the 
patient is unable to be located either by direct contact to the patient or the two 
additional sources listed on the Conf idential Patient Information form, the National 
Death Index will be used to determine whether the patient has died.  If the patient 
should decide to withdrawal from study participation, the Study Completion form will 
include documentation for the reason of  withdrawal.  It will also have a question 
which requests permission  to contact the patient at the end of the study to assess the 
experience with the device.   
 
 
Page 10 of 28  Should these recommendations and/or requirements fail to achieve the FDA required 
80% follow -up compliance for Group 1 at the 10 year time point, the follow -up 
requirements for Group 2 will continue until the patients reach the ten year post -
operative interval.  These patients will be expected to continue annual post -operative 
follow -up visits at 5,  6, 8 and 10 years.  The consent for Group 2 will include the 
following statement to allow for additional follow -up out to the 10 year time point.  
“You will be required to complete follow -up visits at 6 weeks, 6 months, and annually 
out to 5 years.  Howev er, if at the end of the 5 year period, additional data is required 
to fulfill FDA requirements, you may be asked to continue annual post -operative 
follow -up visits at year  6, 8, and 10.”    
 
 
8. Data Collection  
 
8.A. General Instructions  
 
Bilateral cases will require the completion of two separate sets of case report 
forms (CRFs)  and thus will have two separate identification numbers.  
 
The CRFs should be completed in black ink.  
 
Data corrections should be made by striking out the incorrect entry with a 
single line and initialing and dating the change(s), and the correct response 
marked alongside.  
 
All questions on the forms should be answered. If the information is not 
available,  the supporting information shall be document ed in the general 
comments section of the CRF. This will help to reduce the number of data 
queries generated for data that may not be available. Consistent occurrences 
of missing/incomplete data may prevent thor ough and proper analysis of the 
study data.  
 
8.B. Device Outcome Case Report Forms  
 
Pre-operative Assessment (consisting of five different CRFs – 
Demographic Evaluation, Patient Questionnaire, Physical Exam, Knee 
Assessment and Health Status Questionnaire  (SF-12)) will include 
demographics, relevant medical & surgi cal history, diagnosis, clinical 
evaluation (Knee Society Knee Score) and quality of life evaluation (SF -12) 
 
Operation Details (consisting of three different CRFs – Operative 
Information , Surgical Device Information , and Immediate Postoperative  
Evaluation ) will include procedure and device information, length of stay 
and details of any perioperative complications.  
 
 
Page 11 of 28  Group 1 patients will return for follow -up visits  at 4 years  (if applicable ), 5 
years  (if applicable ), 6 years, 8 years and 10 years .  Group 2  will return for 
follow -up visits at 6 weeks, 6 months , 1 year , 2 years, 3 years, 4 years, and 5 
years.  There are three clinical assessment forms (Patient Questionnaire, 
Physical Exam and Knee Assessment) , a Significant Radiographic Event 
form and an SF12 (Health Status Questionnaire)  form allocated for each 
routine follow -up visit, with additional forms as required (i.e., Independent 
Radiograph Review , Concomitant Medical Events/Complication Re port 
form , Protocol Deviation  form, and Study Completion  form. )  
 
Independent Radiograph Review will be performed on all required post -
operative follow -up intervals for both Group 1 and Group 2.  The findings of 
independent radiographic review will be captured on the Independent 
Radiograph Evaluation form.  If the findings of the independent reviewer  are 
different from that of the investigator review, the independent review will be 
considered the final determination.   
 
Adverse Events/Adverse Device Effects/Complications Reporting will 
include a description o f all complications, onset date, type of event, severity, 
relation to the device, treatment and outcome. One Concomitant  Medical 
Events/Complications Report  form is completed for each complication 
identified d uring the course of the  study .  
 
Study Completi on form s will be completed if one of the following events 
occurs:  
1) Patient  completes study follow up,  
2) Patient  withdraws from the study,  
3) Patient  death ,  
4) Patient  is lost to follow up ,  
5) The patient undergoes revision of the study implant (or revision  implant 
where warranted) , (Please Note : these patients will be classified as a 
failure and moved into the Revision a rm of the study)  or  
6) Other  reason such as senility or dementia.  
The form will include the date of study completion, study completion st atus, 
(e.g. patient expired , lost to follow -up, withdrawal of consent, implant 
revision, etc.) and questions regarding if the device is still in place and if the 
patient is experiencing any complications at date of last contact . 
 
Revision Study Subjects  
Any study subject who undergo es a revision procedure during the course of 
this post -approval study will be terminated from their respective group and 
moved into the revision arm of the study , per request of the FDA.  
 
Revision information will be collected  on the Reoperation/Device Removal 
form  and include the following information:    
1) Component  removed,  
 
Page 12 of 28  2) Reoperation  information consisting of reason for removal, date of 
removal, new components implanted, disposition of device,  
3) Re-operative findings, and  
4) IRB  notification.   
 
The revision surgery information will be collected on the Revision 
Operative Information form and the Revision Surgical Device 
Information form  which will be completed at the time of surgery, or 
immediately thereafter.   The Revision Immediate Postoperative 
Evaluation form will be completed as soon as possible after the 
surgery , but prior to the 6 week follow -up visit.  The post -operative 
follow -up inte rvals after revision surgery will be  at 6 week, 6 month, 
and annually thereafter until the study has been completed.  The case 
report forms to be completed at each revision event and interval can 
be found in Appendix 1 of the protocol.  
 
8.C. Data Collection Schedule  
 
Completed Case Report Forms should be sent direct ly to the Clinical Affairs  
Department at Zimmer for data entry, validation and analysis.   Please see 
Appendix 2  of the clinical protocol for a detailed data collection matrix.  
 
8.D. Quality Assurance and Control  
 
Study Monitors from the Zimmer Clinical Affairs Department will visit sites 
on a periodic basis and will require either direct or indirect access to patient 
records for monitoring purposes.   
 
Study data will be summarized and  reported to the participating centers  on an 
annual basis .  Confidentiality of individual site data will be strictly 
maintained.  
 
 
9.  Statistical Procedures  
 
9.A.  Analysis Objectives  
 
The statistical analysis has four major objectives:   
(1) to evaluate the ability to replicate the short -term efficacy and the safety 
of the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee prosthesis observed in the 
original IDE study population in a prospective cohort which  
corresponds to its continued use in routine clinical practice (Group 2);  
(2) to evaluate the long -term efficacy and the safety of the LPS -Flex 
Mobile Bearing Knee prosthesis (Group 1);  
 
Page 13 of 28  (3) to evaluate the combined midterm efficacy and safety of the LPS -Flex 
Mobile Bearing Knee prosthesis from the combination of two 
prospective sequential cohorts (Group 1 and Group 2); and  
(4) to summarize the short -term (e.g., generally less than 5 years) efficacy 
and safety in the small subcohort of primary TKAs from G roup 1 and 
Group 2 who undergo revisions during the post approval study.   
 
To achieve these objectives, we will evaluate safety and efficacy through:   
(1) A comparison of a clinical success endpoint between unilateral 
primary procedures in the short -term LPS-Flex Mobile Bearing Knee 
cohort  (Group 2) at the 2+ year postoperative clinical assessment with 
the full unilateral primary IDE LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee 
representing per -protocol procedures cohort at the 2+ year 
postoperative clinical assessment;  
(2) A comparison  of short -term LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee cohort 
(Group 2) at the 2 + year postoperative clinical assessment with the full 
unilateral primary IDE LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee representing 
per-protocol procedures cohort at the 2+ year postoperati ve clinical 
assessment.  
(3) A comparison of a clinical success endpoint between the primary 
unilateral LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee and the LPS -Flex Fixed 
Bearing Knee long-term cohort  (Group 1) at the 10+ year 
postoperative clinical assessment;  and  
(4) A comparison of clinical success in the mid -term 5+ year postoperative 
clinical assessment between the combined LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing 
Knee (Group 1 + Group 2 ) and  the full unilateral primary IDE LPS -
Flex Fixed Bearing Knee historical control representing  per-protocol 
procedures cohort which also includes all IDE per -protocol procedures 
which were not enrolled in Group 1 by carrying their last postoperative 
clinical assessments forward to 5 years.   
Results of one -sided statistical tests will be given in the statistical 
analysis because it is of interest to know if the patient outcomes with 
the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee are not worse than those observed 
in the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee.  In addition,  
 (5) Safety  and efficacy parameters will be provide d for primary TKAs 
that undergo revision (Group 1 and Group 2) during the post approval 
study at the time of clinical assessment.  Safety and efficacy will be 
evaluated for each cohort (and their combination at 5+ years) and 
results will be compared betwee n the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee 
and the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee.  
 
Analyses of clinical success will also be accompanied by sensitivity analyses 
which will report clinical success rates for subgroups defined by study device:  
 
Page 14 of 28  (1) Investigative site;  
(2) Baseline  symptoms (Knee Scores);  
(3) Subcohort  (Group 1, Group 2, and IDE procedures not enrolled in 
Group 1);  
(4) Patient  age;  
(5) A 5+ Year results restricted to subjects enrolled in Groups 1 and 2 (i.e., 
without carrying forward results of all I DE subjects that did not enroll 
in Group 1);  
(6) Missing  data imputed as failures (regardless of device group);   
(7) Missing  data imputed as failures for the LPS -Flex Mobile Knee group 
and successes for the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee group;   
(8) Missing  data imputed as successes for the LPS -Flex Mobile Knee 
group and failures for the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee group;   
(9) Various  proportions of missing data imputed as failures (regardless of 
device).   
Sensitivity analyses are intended to assess  the consistency of the results with the 
LPS-Flex Mobile Bearing Knee prosthesis and the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee 
under different conditions.  
 
 
9. B. Variables for Analysis  
 
Variables to be studied include:  
 
1. Baseline Data  
 
a. Age 
b. Sex  
c. Symptomatic side  
d. Diagnosis  
e. Medical history  
f. Preoperative clinical and functional analysis (Knee Scores)  
g. Operative time  
 
2. Follow -up Data  
 
a. Functional analysis (Knee Scores)  
b. Radiographic analysis  
c. Complications  
d. Implant Survival  
e. Quality of Life (SF -12) 
 
Surgical p rocedures followed to 10 years ( Group 1 ) will be evaluated 
postoperatively at 4 years  (if applicable) , 5 years  (if applicable) , 6 years, 8 
years, and 10 years.  Procedures followed to 5 years ( Group 2 ) will be 
 
Page 15 of 28  evaluated preoperatively, perioperatively, and in follow -up at 6 weeks, 6 
months, 1 year, 2 years, 3 years, 4 years, and 5 years.  
 
Randomization Scheme  
 
Patients in Group 2 will not be randomized in the post -approval study, but will 
be required to provide informed consent, meet inclusion criteria, and be free 
from attributes represented in contraindication  criteria for inclusion.   Patients 
in Group 1 were randomized and implanted with a study device prior to the 
post approval study.  
 
Sample Size Justification  
 
Sample size serves to characterize safety and efficacy through separate 
assessments which each are measures of clinical success.   Success will be 
assessed from implant survival, as well as, from clinical, functional, 
radiographic, and safety evaluations.    
 
Success for each clinical endpoint will be e valuated separately for each 
procedure at key time points.   Each procedure which meets all the criteria for 
clinical success will be classified as a clinical success.  
 
The following are the five (5) criteria for classification of a procedure as a 
clinical  success : 
 Knee Society assessment score greater than/equal to 70 points  
 Knee Society function score greater than/equal to 70 points  
 No intended, actual, or planned revision and/or removal of any component 
of the knee system  
 Absence of severe knee related complications  
 An absence of subsidence of greater than or equal to 2 millimeters  and an 
absence of both osteolysis and radiolucencies greater than or equal to 2 
millimeter s as determined by independent radiographic reviewer  
 
If one or more of the above cri teria are unmet, the procedure will be classified 
as a failure to achieve clinical success . 
 
Sample size was based on independent Blackwelder1 test of clinical success 
proportions for non -inferiority by a comparison of proportions of primary 
unilateral pro cedures implanted with the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee 
versus unilateral procedures implanted with the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing 
Knee.   Clinical success at the 5 year postoperative assessment will correspond 
to assessments made at follow -up visits conducted at the 58 postoperative 
month or beyond for both device groups.   The LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee 
estimate will be obtained from the combination of clinical results obtained 
from both Group 1 and Group 2, as well as subjects in the original IDE group 
that were not enrolled into Group 1.   All LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee 
 
Page 16 of 28  procedures that were not enrolled in Group 1 will be included in analysis, and 
will have their last postoperative clinical assessments carried forward (LOCF) 
to 5 years.   The LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee estimate will be obtained from 
clinical assessments performed on Group 1, and will include all subjects in the 
original IDE group that were not enrolled into Group 1.   LPS-Flex Fixed 
Bearing Knee procedures not enrolled into Group 1 will have their last 
postoperative clinical assessments carried forward (LOCF) to 5 years for 
completeness.   This comparison will therefore consist of all eligible unilateral 
procedures.   The equivalence of clinical success will be tested using a two -
group proportio n test.    
 
In addition to the comparison  of clinical success of all eligible unilateral 
procedures at the 5 year postoperative assessment, the equivalence of clinical 
success will be assessed in secondary analyses at each key protocol -specified 
scheduled postoperative clinical assessments using a two -group proportion 
test following the article by Blackwelder.1  Primary unilateral LPS -Flex 
Mobile Bearing Knee procedures will be compared with the LPS -Flex Fixed 
Bearing Knee with restriction to Group 1 proced ures at 10 years using FOCB 
(first observation carried backwards) .  Clinical success will be compared 
between primary unilateral Group 2  LPS-Flex Mobile procedures at 2 years 
and the historical rate in primary unilateral LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee 
procedures obtained in the IDE study at 2 years.   Two year comparisons will 
be performed us ing FOCB (or LOCF if FOCB unavailable).      
 
The null (H o) and alternative (H 1) hypotheses for testing equivalence are 
represented by:  
 
Ho:  PLPS-Flex Fixed Bearing   P LPS-Flex Mobile Bearing +  
 
H1:  P LPS-Flex Fixed Bearing <  P LPS-Flex Mobile Bearin g +  
 
where, PLPS-Flex Mobile Bearing  is the clinical success rate for the LPS -Flex Mobile 
Bearing Knee, PLPS-Flex Fixed Bearing  is the clinical success rate for the LPS -Flex 
Fixed Bearing Knee, and  is the minimum difference of practical 
interest.   The clinical success endpoint is dichotomous in nature and as a result 
will be evaluated independently by a two -sample t -test which employs a 
normal approximation to the binomial distribution.      
 
Sample size determination for the comparison of clinical succe ss rates 
between the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee and the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing 
Knee at 5 years was completed using a  one-sided  alpha (Type I) error rate of 
5%, and was based on the 2 Year clinical success rate reported in the 
regulatory submission (IDE G 000157) for the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee 
(67.7%, Volume 11 page 04329) .    Sample size was computed with 
consideration of imbalances between the number of procedures implanted 
with the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee in Group 1 and Group 2 and the 
 
Page 17 of 28  control  implanted with the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee in Group 1.   A 2:1 
ratio of the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing to LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee 
unilateral procedures was used in the estimation of sample size.     
 
Specifically, Blackwelder ’s method was modified to a llow for imbalances in 
sample size.   The following formula was used for the one -sided two -group 
proportion test:  
  
   
)(*2* (*) 1(*(3)(22
1 1
  Z Z P Pn Size Sample
 
 
Where
2exp control erimental P P  is the average clinical success rates for the LPS -Flex 
Fixed Bearing Knee (P control ) and  the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee (P experimental ) 
under the alternative hypothesis.  
 
Table 1: Power analyses for the comparison of clinical success rates at 5+ Years in the Post -
Approval Study  
Primary 
Endpoint  Type I 
Error  
() Difference 
(δ) Power  
(%) Estimate of 
Success in 
control  N  
LPS-Flex 
Mobile 
Knee N  
LPS-Flex 
Fixed 
Bearing 
Knee 
Clinical 
Success  0.05 15% 90 67.7% 274 137 
Clinical 
Success  0.05 15%‡  96.7 67.7%  268‡ 134‡ 
Clinical 
Success  0.05 10% 62.9 67.7%  274 137 
Clinical 
Success  0.05 10%‡  80 67.7%  268‡ 134‡ 
‡ Sample size determined using additional estimates obtained from the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee 
IDE study for per -protocol endpoints at 2+ Years follow -up using a modification of the sample size 
formula provided in Fundamentals of Clini cal Trails (Friedman, Furberg, and DeMets, PSG Publishing, 
1985, page 90) :  
 
22
1 1 0 02 2
*2)]) 1(*[)] 1(*2[*( )) 1(*3*(
  p p p p Z p p Z
N 

 
Where p(bar) represents the average of p 0  the clinical success rate in the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee, 
and p 1  the clinical success rate in the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee,.     
The use of the observed clinical success rate in the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee (69.9%) resulting in an 
average rate of clinical success of 68.6%, and adjustment of the non -inferiority m argin (10%) to 
accommodate the 2.2% greater rate of clinical success observed in  the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee (i.e., 
adjusted to 12.2% for the 10% margin and 17.2% for the 15% margin) for sample size estimation. .  
 
Page 18 of 28  Based on the modification of Blackweld er’s sample size algorithm, a fixed sample 
size of 1 37 implants in the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee and 274 in the 
combined LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee study groups (Group 1 + Group 2)  at 
the 5 year postoperative assessment has 90%   power to detect a difference in 
clinical success rates of 15% (δ) or greater at a 1 -sided alpha (Type I) error level 
of 0.05, as suming a clinical success rate in the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee of 
69.4 percent.   With additional considerations, a sample size of 153 implants in the 
LPS-Flex Fixed Bearing Knee and the combined LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee 
study groups (Group 1 + Group  2) also has 80% power to detect a difference in 
clinical success rates of 10% at a one -sided alpha (Type I) error level of 0.05.   
Analyses at the 5 year assessment will ensure an adequate number of procedures 
are available using an imputation of the firs t assessment beyond 58 months 
backwards (FOCB).   If the 5 year postoperative assessments are unavailable, then 
the last postoperative clinical assessment will be carried forward (LOCF).    
 
9.C. General Statistical Methods  
 
At study completion, all cases will be evaluated for compliance with the patient 
selection criteria and follow -up procedures.  A case may be dropped from the 
final analysis for any of the following reasons:  
i. Patient is lost to follow -up 
ii. Patient withdraws prior to final follow -up 
iii. Patient does not meet patient eligibility criteria  
iv. One or more components were improperly implanted  (i.e., subjects 
enrolled but not implanted with a study device at primary knee 
surgery will not be included)  
v. Patient did not comply with follow -up procedures  
 
Any cases dropped from the primary analysis will be evaluated and reported 
separately.  
 
Data tabulation and summarization will be presented to help in the evaluation of 
the importance differences in clinical success ra tes.  One -sided statistical 
comparisons will be performed at an alpha (Type  I) error level which will not be 
adjusted (for multiplicity) and will equal to 5 percent in the test of the null 
hypothesis of non -inferiority.  Tests of the primary hypothesis wil l be carried out 
by computing the 95% confidence limit for differences in clinical success rates (
control al experiment P P
) between the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee (experimental) 
and the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee (control) , and declaring non -inferiority , if 
the lower bound of the one -sided 95% confide nce limit is greater than the non -
inferiority margin (-10%) The non -inferiority of the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing 
Knee as compared to the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee will also be assessed at a 
non-inferiority ma rgin of -10%.  Details concerning the specific testing 
procedures to be used are reported below.  
 
 
Page 19 of 28  Point estimates of means or rates will be reported for many results. Confidence 
intervals are used when it is important to evaluate the uncertainty of an esti mate 
or hypothesis test.  In particular, a null hypothesis may not be rejected even 
though it is false, and a confidence interval can then be used to give a range for 
the plausible size of the undetected difference.  
 
Secondary analyses will be chosen to be  appropriate for the scale and distribution 
of the measures being analyzed:  discrete categorical, discrete ordinal, continuous 
non-Gaussian, and continuous Gaussian.   
 
Most of the measures analyzed are discrete in nature.  This includes patient 
classific ation measures, such as diagnosis, as well as several components of the 
symptom, function, and physical examination evaluation.  Most of the 
components of the function and physical examination are ordinal and will be 
analyzed as ordinal measures.  
 
Comparis ons of distributions of dichotomous variables between a subcohort and 
the historical control will be performed using Fisher's exact test.  Comparisons of 
distributions of polychotomous variables between a subcohort and the historical 
control will be perfor med using a likelihood ratio Chi -square test.   
 
Comparisons of distributions of continuous variables between a subcohort and the 
historical control will be performed by a comparison of averages using Student’s 
t-test.  Significance will be inferred at a 2 -sided alpha (Type I) error level of 0.05.  
The assumption of equal study group sample variances will be assessed using an 
F-test (folded), at an alpha (Type I) error level of 0.05.  If the assumption of equal 
sample variances is unmet, then a non -parametr ic Wilcoxon rank sum test will be 
performed, and significance will be inferred at a 2 -sided alpha (Type I) error level 
of 0.05.    
 
9.D. Specific Analyses  
 
Preoperative, baseline, and perioperative characteristics of the subcohort and 
historical controls will be compared  between study device groups.  Those factors 
that are found to significantly differ at an unadjusted alpha (Type I) error level of 
0.05 between the two groups will be considered in a secondary adjusted logistic 
regression analysis of clinical success which accounts for significant 
demographic, baseline, and perioperative differences  through the use of 
propensity scores .  Specifically, baseline and demographic variables will be used 
to estimate probabilities of study device group assignment, and the probabilities 
or propensity scores will be used as an adjustment  variable in a secondary 
adjusted logistic regression analysis of clinical success measures.  Demographic, 
baseline, and perioperative characteristics will also be summarized by study 
device for each cohort (Group 1, Group 2, and IDE  procedures not enrolled in 
Group 2) .  
 
Page 20 of 28  Distributions of available outcomes (Knee Society function and assessment, 
radiographic parameters, etc.) at each scheduled time of clinical assessment in the 
short -term arm of the study (Group 2) will be compared between primary 
unilateral LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee procedures and the historical control  of 
primary unilateral LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee at the 6 Week, 6 Month, 1 Year, 
and 2+ year postoperative assessments , and parameters will also be summarized 
for Group 2 procedures that undergo revision at each time point .  Distributions of 
available outcomes (Knee Society functi on and assessment, radiographic 
parameters, etc.) will be compared between the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee 
and the LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing Knee at each scheduled time of clinical 
assessment (4 year, 5 year, 6 year, 8 year, and 10+ years ) for primary unilat eral 
procedures enrolled in the long -term phase of the study (Group 1) , and parameters 
will also be summarized for Group 1 procedures that undergo revision at each 
time point.      
 
Revision rates for each cohort or historical control will be estimated using the 
Kaplan -Meier product limit method.  The Kaplan -Meier curves will be plotted 
over the relevant period of follow -up, and the survival curves will be compared 
using the log rank and Wilcoxon rank sum tests.  
 
Adve rse events will be summarized by study device and group  as patient adverse 
events  (counted once per patient per type) and, separately, as adverse events  
(counted overall).  Adverse event rates will be compared between the subcohort 
and the historical contr ol using Fisher’s exact test at a two -sided alpha (Type I) 
error level of 0.05.  In addition , time-course of adverse events summaries will be 
performed for patient adverse events and adverse events.   
 
 
10. Management of Intercurrent Events  
 
10.A. Device Failure / Replacement Procedure  
 
Total knee r evision procedures, should they be necessary, must  be recorded 
on the Concomitant Medical Events/Complications Report  and the 
Reoperation/Device Removal  CRF.  A full explanation of the cause and 
treatment is needed.  The Study Completion  CRF should also be completed.  
 
The revision patients will be moved into the Revision Arm of the study and 
follow -up will continue until the study is completed  as stated in Section 8b .   
 
Standard total knee replacement and revision methods will be used in the 
event of a device failure requiring revision of one or more total knee 
components.  Clinical and radiographic information, and a detailed operative 
report  will be gathered on all revision cases.  
 
10.B. Patient Withdrawal  
 
Page 21 of 28   
Subjects have the right to withdraw from the study at any time .  The reason 
for the withdrawal will be documented on the Study Completion  case report 
form.  In the event of withdrawal, investigators should request permission to 
contact the study subject at the end of study to find out if the patient had a 
revision or if the device is still in place.  This contact will occur at the 10 
year follow -up for Group 1 and at the 5 year follow -up for Group 2.  
 
10.C. Modifications to this Protocol  
 
Neither the investigator nor  Zimmer will proceed to modify this protocol 
without mutual agreement.  
 
After agreemen t to initiate the modification (in the form of a protocol 
amendment), the investigator agrees not to institute this modification until 
instructed to do so by the Zimmer m onitor.  It will be necessary to obtain 
FDA and IRB approval prior to implementation o f any change s in the 
protocol that may affect the scientific soundness or the rights, safety, or 
welfare of the patients involved.  
 
11. Prior to Initiation of the study  
 IRB Protocol Approval  
 
A copy of the Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval containing the 
protocol version, the IRB meeting date and the provisions for periodic review in 
compliance with FDA regulations should be submitted to Zimmer.   
 
 Informed Consent  
 
A copy of the final, date stamped  (if applicable)  IRB approved Informed 
Consent form must be submitted to Zimmer.  If the IRB requires a document 
differing from that provided in the investigational plan, a specimen copy of the 
Informed Consent should be submitted by the investigator to Zimmer for review 
and approval by Zimmer and if necessary, the FDA.  Informed consent must be 
obtained for each case prior to study enrol lment.   
 
 Clinical Investigator Agreement  
 
A signed Clinical Trial Agreement (CTA) must be submitted to Zimmer.  An 
investigator will not be permitted to participate in this clinical investigation until 
the CTA is fully executed and received by the Zimmer Clinical Affairs 
Department.   
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 28  12. Informed Consent  
 
Patients should be made aware that their data will be included in a computerized 
database for this study.  
 
Any additional information required about this study should be obtained from  the 
Zimmer Clinical Affairs Study Manager at :   
 
Kim Ro we 
1800 West Center Street  
Warsaw, Indiana 46580  
Tel: 574 -372-4843  
Fax: 574-372-4710  
 
 
13. Annual Reporting to the FDA   
 
Zimmer will submit an Interim Study Status Report to the FDA every six months 
for the first two years of the study and annually thereafter until a Final Study Report 
has been submitted. These reports will include information required by FDA 
guidance document entitled: Procedures for Handling Post -Approval Studies 
Imposed by PMA Order dated August 1, 2007 or otherwise directed by the FDA.   
 
14. Completion of Study  
 
The investigator will complete and report the results of the study in satisfactory 
compliance with the protocol within  6 months of last patient follow -up.  
 
It is agreed that either the investigator or sponsor may terminate this study before 
the above date, provided a written notice is submitted at a reasonable time in 
advance of intended termination.  Upon receipt of thi s written notification by either 
party, it is understood that no additional patients will be entered into the study.  
 
After conclusion of the study, Zimmer will prepare a clinical summary which will 
include tabulations of the data  reported.  
 
15. Device Retrieval  
 
In the event of a revision , all components revised should  be returned to Zimmer for 
analysis .  The investigator must notify the study manager prior to the return of any 
device.  There are three types of returned devices:  1) unused; 2) used, non -
contaminated (i.e., the outer package has been opened or the seal has been broken, 
but the device has not been implanted; and 3) used, contaminated (i.e., those which 
have been implanted in human subjects ).   
 
 
Page 23 of 28  For used, contaminated devices, immerse the implant in 10 percent neutral buffered 
formalin, label the implant container to identify the investigator, patient, date of 
removal, and that the implant is from a clinical study case.  Properly prepared 
specimen s are to be sent to:  
  
 Zimmer, Inc.  
 Attention:  Product Service Department  
 1777 West Center  Street  
 Boggs Industrial Park  
 Warsaw, Indiana 46580  
 
Once the analysis is complete, a copy of the report will be maintained in the study 
subject records by Zimmer Clinical Affairs and a copy will also be sent to the 
Investigator for his study records.   
 
A summary of all detailed explant reports will be provided to the FDA in the 
Annual Reports.  
 
 
16. Retention of Records  
 
Federal law requires that a copy of all correspondence with Zimmer, study 
monitor’s, IRB’s, the FDA, or another investigator, and all records which support 
case reports of this study must be retained in the files of the investigator for a 
minimum of two years following written notification by Zimmer that the clinical 
trial has b een completed or has been discontinued.  
 
17. Additional  Data Source    
 
Purpose  
The intent is to  utilize  data from the Australian Orthopaedic Association National Joint 
Registry  (AOANJRR)  external registry data in order to supplement existing internal data 
submitted as required for the Prospective Multicenter Post Approval Study of the LPS -
Flex Mobile Bearing Knee (P060037).  
History  
On August 12, 2008, the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee Post Approval Study Protocol 
was approved and the study launched as a condition of approval for the LPS -Flex Mobile 
Bearing Knee System.  
The post approval study is comprised of two groups: Group 1 was to include 
approximately 300 patients ( both mobile bear ing and fixed bearing) who were enrolled in 
the IDE study and eligible to participate in the post approval study.  These patients were 
to be followed until the completion of 10 -year follow -up visits.   However, of the original 
fifteen (15) sites participati ng in the IDE study, only nine (9) sites agreed to participate in 
this post approval study, representing 161 mobile and 146 fixed bearing subjects eligible 
for study participation, or a total of 307 potential study participants from Group 1.   As of 
 
Page 24 of 28  10/1/20 13, enrollment in Group 1 is 144 subjects (76 fixed bearing, 68 mobile bearing).  
All sites in Group 1 are in year 10 of follow -up for those participating patients , with all 
sites completing 10 -year follow -up in 2014.  
Failure of  Group 1 sites to reach  the desired compliance rate for Zimmer to meet the 
conditions of approval for the post approval study  may bias the post -approval study 
results and decrease the statistical precision of the difference between the LPS -Flex 
Mobile Bearing Knee and the LPS-Flex Fixed Bearing Knee . Data received from the 
AOANJRR will be used to supplement data  being collected in  the post-approval study . 
This supplement s Zimmer data to further demonstrate safety, efficacy and  a low revision 
rate for the LPS-Flex Mobile Bearing device  in over 4, 000 knees.  
Group 2 consists of 3 new surgeons who are to enroll a total of 120 patients.  These 
patients are to be implanted with the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee and followed until 
the completion of 5 -year follow -up.  As of  10/1/2013, enrollmen t in Group 2 is 11 9 
subjects.  
 
Comparison of Data  
 
Objective  
Group 1 participation includes 1 44 patients (7 6 fixed bearing  and 6 8 mobile bearing ) who 
have consented to participate in the post approval study and have returned for follow -up 
evaluations.  I n order to meet the FDA’s PAS requirements, external registry data will be 
used to supplement current clinical data being collected.  The supplemental data will be 
obtained annually from the Australian Orthopaedic Associati on National Joint Registry 
(AOA NJRR).  The AOANJRR collects data on revision  procedures  and calculates 
revision rates by device fixation, type of revision and revision diagnosis on the requested 
brand name product and compares it to all total knees of the same or similar category 
perfor med in Australia.  The NexGen LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing Knee System was 
approved for commercial use  in Australia on July 18, 2003.  
 
Data Acquisition  
On October 1 of each year, Zimmer will request data for the catalog numbers  with 
descriptions (see Appendix D) for ad -hoc reports  from the AOANJRR utilizing the 
required form (See Appendix E) and requesting specific data available (primary 
diagnosis , gender , reason for revision) for comparison with data collected as part of the 
post approval study.   Only those c omponent combinations approved in the PMA 
Application P060037 will be analyzed to obtain current survivorship data for submission 
with the annual report.   Fixed Bearing Components cleared  in 510(k)  K062768  will be 
reported as well , because these components  were used as the Control Group in the 
original IDE .   
 
The AOANJRR is a Level 1 Registry and as such, endpoints available for data submitted 
to Sponsor  are limited  to revision rates .  Per policy of AOANJRR, o nly verified data 
published in the current year’s registry will be released for reporting purposes (i.e. data 
published as of December 31, 2013 will be reported in the 2014 annual report).   Please 
review Appendix A for a copy of the data collection tool used by the AOANJRR.    As 
 
Page 25 of 28  requested by FDA, Sponsor  has provided in Appendix B the “Introduction” section from 
the 2013 Australian Registry detailing how the data is collected,  validated and 
survivorship  estimates are calculated.   Included in Appendix C is an example of the 
reports from AOANJRR for both the mobile bearing knee components as well as the 
fixed bearing knee components.  
 
The expected reports from the AOA NJRR will include the following:  
 Revision Rates  
 Primary Diagnoses  
 Type and Reason for Revision  
 Demographic  
▪ Gender  
▪ Age (categorical only)  
 
Data Analysis  
Due to the manner in which AOANJRR reports and categorizes age in the registry , age 
comparison cannot be made.  Sponsor will compare revision rates, primary diagnoses, 
types of revisions and gender  for mobile bearing subjects obtained  from AOANJRR with 
mobile bearing subjects’ data currently collected for the post approval study.   The 
following are the methods Zimmer intends to use to compare results from the PAS group 
and the AOA NJRR data:  
 Revision rates will be presented for each ye ar where the number of cases at 
risk exceeds fifty (50).   The cumulative percent revision at a certain time is 
the complement (in probability) of the Kaplan -Meier survivorship function 
at that time, multiplied by 1001. The two survival distributions will be 
statistically compared using the log -rank test.  Statistical inference will be 
inferred at a Type I error rate of 5% . 
 Types of revisions will be compared between th e LPS Flex Mobile PAS 
data and the AOA NJRR using a Likelihood Ratio Ch i-Square test.   
Statistical inference will be inferred at a Type I error rate of 5%.  
 Primary diagnosis will be compared between the LPS Flex  Mobile  PAS data 
and the AOANJRR using a Likelihood Ratio Ch i-Square test.   Statistical 
inference will be inferred at a Type I error ra te of 5% . 
 Gender will be compared between the LPS Flex Mobile PAS data and the 
AOANJRR using the Fishers Exact test.   Statistical inference will be 
inferred at a Type I error rate of 5%.  No p -values will be adjusted for 
multiplicity.  
 
However, data analys es of the AOANJRR data will not be possible due to the restricted 
access to the registry’s raw data.   
 
Indications for use of the LPS -Flex Mobile Bearing and LPS -Flex Fixed Bearing devices  
are the same for US as well as Australia.  
 
                                                           
1 Australian Orthopaedic Association National Joint Replacement Registry. Annual Report. Adelaide:AOA; 2013, pg 5  
 
Page 26 of 28  IRB Protocol Amendment Approval  
This amendment will be submitted for review and approval to all  Group 1 and Group 2  
participating IRB’s.   A copy of each IRB’s approval for this amendment will be 
submitted to Sponsor .  
 
Informed Consent  
Patients enrolled in the post approval stud y have signed informed consents detailing the 
study  requirements  and are aware their data will be included in a computerized database 
by Sponsor  for this study.   Since this amendment does not affect data already submitted 
and reported to Sponsor , nor will this amendment affect patient safety  or well -being , 
subjects will not be required to sign a new consent.  
 
The AOANJRR supplemental data will be included with all Post Approval Study Annual 
Reports as required by FDA.   The Final Study Report  will include the AOANJRR data 
as well as a comparison of the data as described in the Data Analysis Section on page 24 
of this amendment . 
  
 
Page 27 of 28  18. References  
 
1. Argenson, J -N, et al., “Polyethylene Wear in Meniscal Knee Replacement A  
One to Nine Year Retrieval Analysis of the Oxford Knee,” Journal of Bone and 
Joint Surgery  (Br), 1992, Vol. 74 -B, pp. 228 -32. 
 
2. Bert, J. M., M.D., “Delayed Failure of Meniscal Bearing Elements in Total 
Knee  Arthroplasty”  Journal of Arthroplasty , 11(5), Aug ust 1996, pp. 611 -12. 
 
3. Bert, J. M., M.D., “Dislocation/Subluxation of Meniscal Bearing Elements 
After New Jersey Low -Contact Stress Total Knee Arthroplasty,” Clinical 
Orthopaedics and Related Research , (254), May 1990, pp. 211 -15.      
 
4. Blackwelder , C. W (1982) . “Proving Null Hypothesis” in Clinical Trials. 
Controlled Clinical Trials  3:345 -353. 
 
5. Bose, W. J., et al., “Long -Term Outcome of 42 Knees with Chronic Infection 
after Total Knee Arthroplasty,” Clinical Orthopaedics , (319), October 1995, 
pp. 285-96. 
 
6. Brandt, C. M., et al., “Staphylococcus Aureus Prosthetic Joint Infection 
Treated with Debridement and Prosthesis Retention,” Clinical Infectious 
Disease , 24(5), May 1997, pp. 914 -19. 
 
7. Briard , J-L,  et al. “Patellofemoral instability in Total Knee Arthroplasty,” 
Journal of Arthroplasty ,” 1989 supplement, pp. S87 -S97. 
 
8. Buechel, F. F., et al, “A Metal -Backed, Rotating -Bearing Patellar Pro sthesis to 
Lower Contact Stress - An 11 -Year Clinical Stud y,” Clinical Orthopaedics and 
Related Research , (248) November 1989, pp. 34 -49. 
 
9. Buechel, F. F., et al., “New Jersey Low Contact  Stress Knee Replacement 
System - Ten-Year Evaluation of Meniscal Bearings,” Orthopedic Clinics of 
North America , 20(2), April 1 989, pp. 147 -77. 
 
10. Buechel, F. F., “Cementless Meniscal Bearing Knee Arthroplasty: 7 -to 12 -Year 
Outcome Analysis,” Orthopaedics , September 1994, 17(9), pp. 833 -36. 
 
11. Casagrande, J. T., et al.,  "An Improved Approximate Formula for Calculating 
Sample Sizes fo r Comparing Two Binomial Distributions," Biometrics , 34, 
1978, pp. 483 -486. 
 
12. Chao, E. Y. S, Ph.D., et al., “Biomechanics of Malalignment,” Orthopaedic 
Clinics of North American , 25(3), July 1994, pp. 379 -86. 
 
 
Page 28 of 28  13. Cohen, M., et al., “Meniscal -Bearing Uni compart mental Knee 
Arthroplasty” An 11 -Year Clinical Study,” Orthopaedic Review , XX(5), May 
1991, pp. 443 -48.   
 
14. Chow, S.C. and Liu, J.P. (1998). “Design and analysis of clinical trials: 
concepts and methodologies”, John Wiley & Sons , pp 137 -144.  
 
15. Elashoff , J. D (2000). nQuery Advisor® Release 4.0, pp 11 -1:-6, 15 -38:44, A -
11:12, A -4:5.  
 
16. Ewald, F.C., et al., “ The Knee Society Total Knee Arthroplasty 
Roentgenographic  Evaluation and Scoring System,”  Clinical Orthopaedics and 
Related Research , (246), November 1989, pp. 9 -12. 
 
17. Fehring, T. K., et al., “ Knee Instability  after Total Knee Arthroplasty”,  Clinical 
Orthopaedics , (299), February 1994, pp. 157 -62. 
 
18. Goldberg, V. M., et al., “ Technical Considerations in Total Knee Surgery.  
Management of Pa tella Problems”,  Orthopaedic Clinic of North America , 
20(2), April 1989, pp. 189 -99. 
 
19. Healy, W. L., et al., “ Patellofemoral Complications Fol lowing Total Knee 
Arthroplasty”,  Journal of Arthroplasty , 10(2), April 1995, pp. 197 -201.   
 
20. Heyse, J.F. and Rom, D. (1988). “Adjus ting for multiplicity of statistical tests 
in the analysis of carcinogenicity studies.” Biometrical Journal  30, 883 -896. 
 
21. Huang, C. H., et al., “ Polyethylene Failure in New Jersey Low -Contact Stress 
Total Knee Arthroplasty”,  Journal of Biomedical Material Research , 39(1), 
January 1998, pp. 153 -60. 
 
22. Insall, J. N., et al, “Rationale of The Knee Society Clinical Rating System,” 
Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research , March 1989, pp. 13 -14. 
 
23. Niwa, Shigeo, M.D., “Hyperflexion in Japanese Knee Replacement Des ign & 
Clinical Results,” The Wellington Knee Surgery Unit’s Eighth International 
Teaching Meeting Developments & Problems in Total Knee Arthroplasty, 
March 5 -6, 1998, Wellington Hospital, The Wellington Knee Surgery Unit in 
London.  
24. March 5 -6, 1998, Wellington Hospital, The Wellington Knee Surgery Unit in 
London.  
 
25. Friedman LM, Furberg CD, and DeMets DL (1985). “Fundamentals of Clinical 
Trials”  PSG Publishing Company. , pp. 88 - 93.  