[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Official Title:  Reducing Asymmetry During Gait Using the TPAD (Tethered 
Pelvic Assist Device) for Stroke Patients  
 
 
Version Date:   February 28, 2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PDF/A  
 
 
 
 
TITLE: The  Integration of Principles of Motor Le arning to Reduce Load 
Asym metry  Using a Novel  Robotic Device in Individuals Chronically  Post- 
Stroke 
 
 
Stan dard Operating Procedure - Study Protocol  Manual 
 
Prepared  By: Lauri Bishop, PT, DPT  
 
 
 
 
Doctoral Committee:  
Sponso r: Lori Quinn, EdD 
Committee  Membe r: Richa rd Magill,  PhD  
Committee  Membe r: Sunil  Agrawal,  PhD  
 
Collaborating  Rese archers: 
Joel Stein, MD 
Moiz  Khan,  MS 
Adam Blancha rd, MS 
Lynne Weber,  MA, OTR/L 
 
 
 
*All study related  procedures involving partici pants  will take  place  within  the Department 
of Rehabilitation  & Regenerati ve Medicine, Columbia Unive rsity Medical Center.  This is 
located  on the 1st Floor of the Harkness  Pavilion  at 180 Ft. Washington  Ave. New  York, NY 
10032. 
 
*Study related  procedures inclu ding advisem ent, data anal ysis and manusc ript preparation  
will take  place  at two locations.  These will include Columbia Unive rsity Medical Center (as 
listed  above) and at Teache rs College,  Columbia  Unive rsity within  the Neu roRehab ilitation  
Lab.  This is located  on the 10th Floor of Thorndike at 525 West  120th St. New  York, NY 
10025. 
Table of Contents  
 
 
 
I.         Project Summa ry/ Abstract……………… …………… ………..….…… …  2 II.          
Resea rch Questi ons……………………… …………… ………………..…. …..  3 
III. Study  Desi gn/ Method ology………… …………… .…… …..……..….… … 3 
IV.      Outc ome Measu res.……………………… …………… .………….………… …  3 V.          
Study Population…………………………… …………… ……………..….… …   4 
VI.         Procedures  ……………… …………………… …………… …………… …...… …   4 
a. Info rmed C onsent Process………… …….………. …………..…… … 4 
b.  Ove rall Study Schema………………… ……………… ………....……. .   5 c.    
Assessments…………… …………………… ……………… .……..…… ….   6 
i. Ove rground Assessments………… ………… ………. …….   7 
1.    Gait A ssessments…………………… …...…….… …   8 
2.   Balance As sessment……………… …..…………. . 15 
ii. Treadmi ll Assessments………………… …..………….…. . 16 
d.   Intervention……… ………………………… …………… ……..…….…… .    18 
i.   Set u p……………… ………………………… …....…………… .…. 18 
ii. Treadmi ll Training…… …………………… ………….……. . 20 
1. Visual  Feed back Instructions… ………….…. . 21 
2. Visual  Feed back Schedule………………..…… . 22 
iii. Ove rground Training………………… ……………… …….. 24 
 
VII. Participa nt Withdrawal………………… …….………… ………………… . 25 
 
VIII.  
Risks/Benefits………… …………………… …….………… …………………..   
25 
 
IX.  
Data  Management/Storage……… ………… .………. ……………………   
25 
 
X.  
Adve rse Event Reporting…………… ……….………. ……………………   
26 
 
XI.  
Stati stical  Ana lysis ……………………… …..…… ………… ..………………   
26 
 
XII.  
Dissem ination of Re sults…………………...………… ……………..…… .  
26 
I. Project summary  / Abstract  
 
BACKGROUN D: Hemi paresis,  spast icity and reduced motor contr ol are typical 
impai rments  after  stroke and commonly contr ibute  to motor  deficits  that  affect gait. These  
deficits  manifest  as reduced velocit y, decreased cadence  and asymmetries in tempo ral, 
spatial  and force paramete rs during ambulati on. Robotic -based  thera pies have been  used  
to increase  gait velocity  and reduce asymmetry  in a population  of indi viduals after  stroke, 
however  these  therapies  have demonstrat ed results similar  to that  of conventional  
trainin g. This is poss ibly due to guided-assist  control  strate gies used  to deliver robotic  
trainin g, which  strate gies limit  partici pant involvement  and thus  constrain motor  learning.  
The TPAD  is a robotic  device that  emplo ys actuated  tethers  at the use r’s pelvis to 
guide the user’s pelvis along  a pre-set movement  trajecto ry. The TPAD tethe rs can be 
configured in an infinite  array of possibilities,  and most recen tly have been  used  to increase  
loading onto  the paretic  limb  in a populati on of individuals  after  stroke. While other   
robotic  devices  guide the limb  through the motor trajecto ry, and constrict  the participa nts 
ability  to partic ipate  in the motor  planning  and movement  execution,  the TPAD promotes  
weight shifting,  but allows an individual to freely move the limb  and to na vigate 
spatiot empo ral aspects  of training  independently. Further,  if coupled  with overground to 
focus on addressing  a specific  task  goal, this device  may  prove usef ul to impr ove symmet ry 
in individuals  after  stroke. 
 
OBJE CTIVE S: The purpose  of this study is to evaluate  the overall  feasi bility  in terms of 
safet y, treatment  toler ance and adherence  as well  as address prelimina ry efficacy  of 
implementing  a treatment paradigm using  the TPAD  with visual  feedback  and overground 
training  to reduce load  asymmetry  on the treadmill  and promote increased  stance  
symmetry on the paretic  limb  during overground gait. 
 
PARTICI PANTS: To account for 20% attrition,  a total  of 12 individuals in the chronic  (>6 
months)  stages post stro ke will be recruited  from a volunta ry stroke resear ch registry  with 
antici pation  that  10 individuals  will complete  participatio n. 
 
DESIGN:  A non -randomized pilot  study of feasi bility  will be used  to establi sh the 
prelimina ry efficacy  of using  the TPAD  in combination  with  overground training  to reduce 
load  force asymmetry in this populatio n. 
 
METHOD S: Participants will undergo a series  of three assessments  within  a one week time  
frame  prior to initiating  intervention.  Inter vention using the TPAD  and overground  
training  will occur the following week for five consecuti ve visits.  On completion  of the final 
training  visit, particip ants will be re-assesse d, and return for a sing le follow up visit  the  
next week  for the final  assessment.  Each  study visit will be approximately  1-1.5 hours in 
duration,  and total  part icipation  shou ld be completed  within  three weeks. 
 
EXPECTED  OUTCOM ES: We antici pate this training  paradigm will prove feasible  in 
reducing both  load and stance  asymmetry  in a population  of indi viduals with chronic  
stroke. 
 
II. Research Que stions:  
1) Is a five day gait training program using  the TPAD  and inco rporating  augmented  
visual  feedback  and an overground  walking component  feasi ble in terms of 
safet y, treatment  toler ance,  and adherence  in individuals  with chronic  stroke 
who present  with gait asymmetry? 
 
2) Is this training  program effective  at imp roving load  force symmetry after five 
sess ions?  
 
3) Is this training  program effective  at imp roving stance  time  symmetry  in 
overground  gait? 
 
 
III. Study  Design/Methodology  
This is a sing le arm, non-randomized pilot study of feasi bility.  The study population  and 
details  of study procedures are specifi ed belo w. 
 
IV. Outcome  Measures 
A. Primary  Outcomes  
 Measu res of Feasi bility  
o Safety  
▪ Adverse  Events  / Serio us Adverse Events  
o Adherence  
▪ Atten dance  Rates  of Study Visits  
o Tolerance  
▪ Ratin gs of Perceived  Exertion  (RPE) 
▪ Hea rt Rate  (HR)  
 Efficacy  
o Overall  Load  Force Symmetry  (over the course of trainin g) 
o Stance  Time  Symmetry 
 
B. Second ary Outco mes 
 Daily  Load  Force Symmetry (intraday changes  in load  force) 
 Time in Double  Support 
 Swing Time  Symmetry 
 Stride Length Symmetry 
 Stride Velo city Symmetry 
 Gait  Velo city 
 Balance  (as per the Berg  Balance  Scale)  
 
 
V. Study  Popul ation 
A total  of 12 adults (ages 18-75) will be recruited  for participation  from a volunta ry stroke 
registr y, antici pating 20% attrition,  or that  at least 10 participants  will meet  criteria  and 
complete  study partici pation. 
 
Inclusion Criteria: 
 Chronic  (>6 months)  stages  post  stro ke 
 Histo ry of a sing le stroke event (either  ischemic  or hem orrhagic by origin) 
 Minimal  score of 22 or higher on the MoCA 
 Must  be independent community  ambulator  (with/without AFO) 
 May  use a unilate ral assistive  device  (cane,  quad cane)  
 Must  have a notable  asymmetry in stance  time  (defined by a symmet ry ratio  
of 0.90 or lower) 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
 Histo ry of multiple  strokes 
 Histo ry of other  neurological disease (e. g. Parkinson’s Diseas e, Multip le 
Scle rosis)  
 Uncontr olled medical conditions  that  would limit exercise tolerance  (e.g. 
hypertension)  
 Excessi ve spastic ity in the paretic  lower limb  (sco re >3 on Modified  
Ashworth Scale)  
 Contractu res of the lower  limb  that  prevent  the ankle and knee from 
achie ving a neutral  position  (sc 
 
 
VI. Procedures  
A. Informed  Cons ent Proce ss 
Written  consent  forms with associated  HIPAA  forms will be prepared, approved by the 
institutional  review board, and reviewed  with each  participant by a member  of the 
resear ch team  prior  to initiat ing study procedures. All participants  will have the 
opportunity  to ask any questions  they  may have,  and a member  of the research team  will 
answer any questions  posed. All participants  will sign  written  info rmed  consent  and 
HIPAA  forms prior to participating  in any study related  procedures. Participants  will be 
given  a copy  of these  signed  forms for their  personal  record. 
 
▪ Prior to initiating  study procedures, participan ts will also  complete  a demo graphic 
form (Case Repo rt Form (CRF_TP AD_Form_01)– See attac hed) and will be asked 
about use of an Ankle Foot Orthosis  (AFO) – specifically  if s/he typically  ambulates  
inside the home with or without an AFO. 
➢ IF the participa nt typi cally DOES  NOT  wear the AFO  for househ old 
ambulation,  then  the AFO WILL  NOT be worn during the study procedures. 
➢ IF the particip ant typically DOES  wear the AFO during househ old 
ambulation,  then  the AFO WILL  be worn during the study procedures. 
B. Overall Study Schema  
 
 
vergrou 
 
 
Re 
D 
 
d ® 
M D P A s a e 
M t 
Week 2 
APDM® 
ures Gai 
Gait Measures  
 
 
Overground 
Pre-Test 1 
(1-1.5 hours) 
 
 
 
 
Week 1 O nd 
Pre-Test 2 
(1-1.5 hours) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline 
(5 Min) Overground 
Pre-Test 3 
(1-1.5 hours) 
 
 
TPAD  Tethered  
Training 
(40 Min) 
 
Visual  Feedback  
Faded  over  5-days 
 
Overground 
Post-Test 
(1-1.5 hours)  
 
 
 
 
Post 
Training 
(10 Min)  
 
 
 
 
Overground 
Training 
(5-10 Min)  
 
 
 
peat 
aily 
x 5 
ays 
 
 
 
Week 3 Overground 
1-week Follow Up 
(1-1.5 hours) 
 
 
End of Study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Week  1 – PRE  TEST 
(3 visits) Week  2 - TRAINING 
(Daily  visits) Week  3 – FOLLOW  UP 
(1 visit) 
Consent  **Day  1 only  10MWT  with APDM®  
before  and after training  
daily  10MWT  with APDM®  
Info  Shee ts **Day  1 only Tread mill (TM) Train ing 
with Feed back BBS  
MoCA  **Day  1 only  Ove rground Training  SIS 
Stroke  Impact Scale (SIS)  
**Day  1 only  Tread mill Assessments 
(Force  Meas ures in tandem 
with baseline  and post 
training  gait on TM)   
10MWT  with APDM®  BBS  **Day  5 only  
Berg Balance Scale (BBS) SIS **Day  5 only   
C. Assessments  
 
 
Overground 
Pre-Test 1 
(1-1.5 hours) 
 
 
 
 
Overground 
Pre-Test 2 
(1-1.5 hours) 
 
 
 
 
Overground 
Pre-Test 3 
(1-1.5 hours) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overground 
Post-Test 
(1-1.5 hours) 5 Day Training with 
pre/post  10MWT  
**Post Test occurs on 
comple tion of Day 5. 
 
 
 
Overground 
1-week Follow Up 
(1-1.5 hours) 
 
i. Ove rground Assessments 
Overgound  assessments  will include: 
 Gait  Assessmen ts 
o 10MWT  as measu red with APDM®  senso rs 
 Balance  Assessmen ts 
o Berg Balance  Scale  (BBS)  
 Self Assessme nts 
o Stroke Impact  Scale  (SIS) 
 
Overground assessme nts will be taken during week one (Pre Test ing), week two (Gait 
Assessme nts befo re/after  Inter vention  and Post  Testing on Day  5) and week three 
(Foll ow Up) of study  procedures. 
 
The Ove rground Assessment will occur as per the following schedule: 
 Week 1: (Pre Test)  Participant sessions  will include gait 
assessments, balance  assessments and  self-assessment (Day 1 
only) for each  of three visits  during the first week of study  
participa tion. 
 Week 2: (Intervention)  Participants  will repeat gait assessments  
befo re and after  each  daily inte rvention  sess ion. On day 5 after  study  
inte rvention,  partici pants will be given  a 10-15 minute  seated  rest 
break, and all (gait, balance, and self assessme nt) assessments  will be 
repeated.  These will be recorded as Post  Test.  
 Week 3: (Foll ow Up) Participants  will complete all (gait, balance and 
self assessme nt) assessments.  
 
** Denotes  primary  outcome measu re. 
 
➢ Participant will complete the ‘ Informed  Conse nt’ process p rior to initi ating any 
assessment  or study related  procedures. 
 
➢ A physical  therapist and at least  one other  member  of the resea rch team  will be 
present  to perform all assessme nt procedures. 
 
➢ Participants’  height and  weight will be measu red and recorded on 
CRF_TP AD_Form_03a (See attac hed). 
 
➢ Any incidents  with  patient safety** during assessment  sess ions will be reported 
on CRF_TPAD _Form_03/03a/03b. 
 
➢ Any missing  visits** of the assessment  sess ions will also  be noted  on 
CRF_TP AD_Form_03/03a/03b. 
 
1. Gait  Assessments 
 
Gait  variables  recorded include: 
 Percenta ge of time  in Stance  phase  of gait cycle (for each  limb  individually)** 
 Percenta ge of time  in Swing phase  of gait cycle (for each  limb  individually) 
 Percenta ge of time  in Double Support phase  of gait (net  for both  limbs)  
 Stride Length (for each  limb  individually) 
 Stride Velocity  (for each limb  individually)  
 
 
 
A 14-meter  course will be measured along  a quiet  hallway. The middle 10- 
meter  segment of this course will be marked. Gait  measu res will be recorded 
during a series of three, 10 meter  walk tests  (10MW T) using  the APDM®  inertial 
based  senso rs. 
A. Set up:  
a. Turn  on MacBook  Pro (M id 2015, Apple®,  Inc.) lap top and login with 
the User Name “NRR_Lab” and Password  “anngentile1”. 
b. Secure t he Access Point in the a ccompa nying stan d, and attach to the  
MacB ook Pro laptop  via the (18  inch) Micro USB cable provide d. 
c. Attach Opal  Sensors (Sensor N umbers: 125 1, 125 3, 1254)  to the 
Docking Stat ion using 3 of the (6 inch) M icro USB  cables provided.  
d. Attach t he Docking  Station to the Mac Book Pro lap top with t he atta ched 
USB  cable.  
 
 

e.   Initia te Mob ility Lab©  2015 (Version 2.0, APDM, Inc.) softwar e.  
 
 
 
f. Ensure that Project Group “TPAD” is selected. 
 
 

g.    From  tabs (at  top of page), select “Hardware Config uration”.  
 
 
 
 
h. Ensure  and/or assign sensors by dragging ‘Available Sensor’ to 
associated position at figure. Sensor assignment  is: 
 XI-001254 : Lumb ar 
 XI-001251 :  Left  Foot 
 XI-001253 :  Right  Foot 
 
 
 
 

i. Select “Apply Configu ration”.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
j. From  tabs (at  top of page), select “Subjects”. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1. For New parti cipants (DAY 1 Pre Test O NLY): 
a. Select “+ New  Subject” (at top right of screen). 
b. Add First Name = “TPAD_D” (for ALL participants). 
c. Add Last Name = En ter Participant’s Study ID number. 
d. Enter participa nt height. 
e. Select ‘gender’. 
f. Enter year of birth. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2. For Returning participants: 
a. Select part icipant from list by clicking  on “Last Name” / 
Participant Study ID number. 
 
 
 
 
 
k. From  tabs ( below Project Group), select “New  Test”. 
 
 
l. At Pop  Up Test Selection prompt,  select ‘Open  Ended’ from the ‘Walk’ 
para meter (top of list). 

 
 
m. Select the “ + “ button  3 times to add  a tot al of 3  walks to the participant 
prof ile. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
n. Select ‘Next’. 
 
 
o. Ensure participa nt is seated for sensor  placement. 
 
 
p. Remove  Opal se nsors from Docking  Station and place on  participant at 
L2, and at the dorsal surface of bilateral  feet as shown. (Port faces down 
for l umbar sensor  and towards t he toes for feet sensors.) 
 
 
 
 

 
q. Participant is asked  to stand and is assisted (if needed) to one end of the 
14-meter walkway. 
r. Turn  on Sony 6300  camera. 
 
 
B. Procedure s:  Conducting the As sessment 
a. Instr uct the par ticipant to walk from  their  current position to the 
oppo sing end of the 14-meter path at a  ‘comfortab le pace’ on your “GO” 
signal. 
b. Activate O pal sensors by selec ting “Start Recordi ng”. 
c. At the sou nd of the tone, instruct  the participant to begin walking. 
d. A stopwat ch will be used to captu re the 1 0MWT portion  of the pathway.  
e. Times will be recorded on  CRF_TPAD_Form 03/03a/03b  (See att ached). 
f. A mem ber of the study  team will walk alongside the participa nt to 
ensure  safety. 
g. A second member of the  study  team  will video record the part icipant’s 
gait during performance  of the walk using the Sony  6300 camera. 
h. Repeat  procedures for all  3 walk trials. 
i. On com pletion of all  3 trials, the p articipa nt will be seat ed, Opal sensors 
removed a nd reatt ached to the D ocking  Station. 
j. From  tabs (at  top of page) select “Power Off Sensors”. 
k. Remove  sensors from docking  station after ‘Power Off’ sequence  is 
complet e. 
l. Ensure Opal se nsors go blank. 
m. Deta ch Docking  Station and Access Point from MacBook  Pro laptop  and 
repla ce into APDM®  suitcase. 
n. Close Mo bility  Lab software and shutdown  MacBook Pro laptop.  
 
 
 
 This will complete  the gait assessment portion. 
 
2. Balance  Assessments 
 
A stan dardized Berg Balance  Scale  is performed with each  of the participants 
(CRF_TP AD_Form_04 – See attac hed). 
 Assessme nts will be video  recorded, and independent reviewers will score 
each  item  of the asses sment.  
 Total scores will be recorded on CRF_TPAD_Form_03/03a/03b (See  
attac hed). 
 
3. Self Assessment 
 
 A Stroke Impact  Scale  (SIS) will be given to participants  to complete  on Pre 
Testing,  Day  1, on Post  Testing,  and on Follow up. Total scores of these  
assessments  will be recorded. 
 
 
 
 This will complete  the over ground assessment portion.  
 
 
 
 
ii. Tread mill Assessments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Force  Measures  Taken 
during Baseli ne and 
Post Training 
 
 
 
 Force Assessme nts will be reco rded on the treadmill  in an effort to calculate 
force symmetry between the affecte d/less  affected  limb.  
 
Treadmill assessme nts will occur simultaneously  within  the inte rventional  sessions.  
These assessments  will be completed  daily during week two of study participatio n. As 
they  will occur within  the inte rvention,  no additional  time  is needed for data colle ction  
during these  procedures. 
 
An engineer  trained  in the use of the TPAD  will be present  and record data while the 
physical  therapist is supervising  the particip ant during the treadmill  portion  of the 
inte rvention.  
 
Data  collected  from baseline  (Intervention  Day  1) and post  training  (Inter vention  Day  
5) will be used  as a primary outcome  of vertical Ground Reaction  Force (GRF)**. Daily 
measu res (Baseline  to Post Training  within  day) will be used  as secon dary measu res of 
GRF  over the course of training.  

 
Procedures are as follows: 
 
➢ Reflective  markers, safety  harness,  pelvic belt and arm  sling  will be placed as 
described  in ‘Inter vention’ section a bove. 
 
➢ The participant  will be assisted  onto  the dual belt  trea dmill  and confirmed  gait 
speed  established  as described  in ‘Inter vention’  section  above. 
 
➢ Force plates  embe dded under the dual belts  of the trea dmill will be activated  for 
data reco rding of Forces in the vertical  direction  (Fz) as a measu re of GRF.  
These recordings will occur during minute  1, 3 and 5 during ‘Baseline’  gait 
procedures as described in the ‘ Inter vention’ section a bove. 
 
➢ RPE** and HR** will be recorded before (at  restin g) and after  ‘Baseline’ gait, at 
10-minute  inte rvals during TPAD force inte rvention, on  completion of ‘Post 
Trainin g’ gait, and lastly  on co mpletion  of overground gait.  These  measu res will 
be reco rded on CRF_TPAD_Form_02. 
 
➢ Force plates  will also  be activated  for data collection  of Fz as a measu re of GRF 
during minutes  1, 3, 5, 7, 9 of of ‘Post  Training’  gait procedures as outlined  in the 
‘Inter vention’ section above. 
 
➢ These procedures will be repeated  during daily inte rvention  sess ions. 
 
 This will complete  the Treadmill  Assessment portion. 
 
D. Intervention 
 
 
 
Treadmill Training 
 
 
Baseline 
(5 Min)  
TPAD Tethered 
Training (40 Min) Post 
Training 
(10 Min) Overground 
Training 
(5-10 Min) 
 
 
Visua l Feedba ck 
Faded 
 
 
Tethers ON  Tethers OFF 
 
All inter ventional  procedures are to be performed during week two of study participation.  
These sessions  will occur daily for five consec utive days. The duration  of each  
inte rventional  sessi on will be approximately  one and one half hours (90 minutes).  
 
Participants  will be asked to wear gym shorts and comfortable  walking shoes  for each  
training  sess ion. If participan ts wear other  clothing  to the sess ion (e.g. in winter  months ), 
they  will be given the opportunity  to change clothes  prior to initiat ing any study 
procedures. 
 
A licensed  physical  therapist will supe rvise all training  sessions.  Engi neers experienced  in 
operating  the TPAD  will be primarily  responsi ble for the operating  and running  of the 
TPAD and trea dmill  during  the training  sessio n. 
 
1. Set up 
Prior  to initiating  the trainin g, a member  of the resear ch team  will complete  the Treatment 
Checklist, including: 
 
a. Participants  will stand  while reflecti ve mar kers are placed  bilaterally  at: 
 R/L  Medial & Lateral 
metata rsal heads 
 Supe rior surface  of first 
distal  toe 
 R/L  Med & Lateral  malleoli 
 R/L  Heel 
 R/L  Tibial  Plateau  
 R/L  Fibula  Head  
 R/L  Med  & Lateral  distal 
Femur  
 R/L  anterior  shaft of the 
Femur  (at midpoint)  
 R/L  lateral shaft of the 
Femur  (at midpoint)  
 Anterior  Supe rior Iliac Spine  
(ASIS) 
 Supe rior (on abdomen) to 
ASIS for ASIS Recreation  
 L3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. Patient  clothing will be taped  in place to ensure marker visibi lity throughou t 
treatment.  
 
c. Participants  will then  don: 
 A safety  harness  that  will connect  to an overhead metal  brace/beam 
during gait tasks  on the trea dmill. 
 A sling  to support the paretic  arm during gait. This is done to prevent the 
blocking of reflecti ve mar kers during gait that are  needed for the 
applicati on of forces. 
 A pelvic belt  that  has been altered  to allow  the attach ment of force 
tethers.  
 
d. Hea rt Rate  (HR)  monit or and Borg  Scale  will be in place  to allow  recordings 
throughout treatment  sess ion. 

 
e. Participants  will then  be assisted  onto  the dual belt  trea dmill.  
 
f. A still image will be recorded using  a Vicon®  infrared  recording system and 
eval uated  to ensure all markers are in place  and are visible.  
 
g. During the still image,  recordings will be made of vertical  forces (Fz) during quiet 
stance  for both  the paretic and non-paretic  limb. 
 
h. Measu res of resting  heart  rate (HR)  and Ratings  of Perceived  Exertion  (RPE) will be 
taken and recorded on CRF_TP AD_Form_02 (See attac hed). 
 
2. Tread mill Training  
 
 
a. The treadmill  will be initiated  and speed  gradually increased  by 0.1 m/s inte rvals. 
The participant  will be asked  when s/he  feels  this will be a challen ging, yet tolerable 
speed  to sustain  for one hour (60 minutes).  A supervising  Physical  Therapist will 
confirm the speed and this will be recorded on CRF_TP AD_Form_02 (See attac hed). 
The confi rmed  speed  will be used  for all subs equent  treatment  sessions. *This  will 
occur during Day  1 treatment  ONLY.  
 
b. The participant  will continue  walking at the self-selected  gait speed for five minutes.  
 
c. During this time  the participant  will gain famil iarity  with treadmill  walking 
(Baselin e), and vertical  force measu res (Fz) will be recorded. This is explained  in 
detail in the ‘ Assessme nts’ section.  
 
d. Video  recordings will be taken  from a posterior  view during minutes  3-4 of baseline 
gait. 
 
e. On completion  of the five minutes  of baseline  gait, the super vising  therapist will 
verbally  tell the patient  to hold  on to the side hand rails,  and the treadmill  will be 
stoppe d. 
 
f. HR and RPE will be reco rded on CRF_T PAD_Form_02 (See  attache d). 
 
g. Tethers  will be attached  to the pelvic belt.  
 
h. Participants  will be offered a seated  rest break. Time of rest break will be reco rded. 
 
i. Reflective  markers will be placed  on the tethers  at the point  of attachment to the 
pelvic belt and at the level of the pulley/frame.  

 
 
j. A force of resting  magnitu de will be applied  during  static  stan ding (enough force to 
keep tethers  taut  during gait, but this resting  magnitu de will be evenly  distributed 
among  the four force tethe rs along  a horizontal  plane  at left/ right anterior/posterior  
posit ions).  
 
k. A still image will be taken to ensure tethers are appropriately  in place, and markers 
attac hed to tether  atta chment points  will be removed. 
 
l. Once  forces tethers  are taut,  the visual  feedba ck monor will be turned on and the 
supe rvising  therapist will explain  the role of feedback  during the trainin g. 
 
 Verbiage  to be used: 
“Do you see the 2  bars in front  of yo u?  The ri ght/left (s ide of the paretic 
limb)  represe nts your weaker  leg. This bar moves  depe nding  on how 
much weight you put into your leg. Go ahead  and  lift your leg so you can 
see the bar move .” [Participant lifts leg and bar representing  paretic  limb 
lessens].  
“Do you see the other bar?  It is your target.  On each  step, I want you to 
try and  get your right/left (pare tic) bar up to the top of that target and  
keep  it there as long as possible  while you are walkin g. Do you have  any 
questions?”  [Participant is given  an opportuni ty to ask questions  for which  a 
member  of the resea rch team  will respond appropriatel y.] 
“There will be points  during  training  where this screen  isn’t on.  I still 
want you to think  abo ut the screen  and  put as much weight on your 
weaker  leg and  keep  it there as long  as possible – even  when you do not 
see the s creen.  Do you  unders tand?”  
 
m. The treadmill  will be re-initiated  at the self-selected  spee d, and a force of 10% of the 
participa nts’ bo dy weight will be applied along  the ho rizontal plan in the 
ante rolate ral direction,  ramping  up/down in a trape zoidal fashion  on the side of the 
paretic  limb.  This will occur at the point  of heel  strike and be complet ed by mid- 
stance  during each  step.  This will be sustained  for 40 minutes.  
 
n. At the midpoint  of training  part icipants will be offered a seated  rest break, after  
which  training  will immediately  be re-initia ted. 
 
 If participants  decline  rest at midpoint  (20 minutes),  they  will be offered 
another  rest break at minute  30 of trainin g. 
 Duration  of rest break(s) will be reco rded. 
 
 
o. Visual  feedback  will be given  as indicated  by Table  1: 
 
 
 
Table  1: Visual  Feedback  Schedule per Training  Day Visit 
 Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5 
Minute 1-
10 9 minutes  on/ 
1 minute  off 7 minutes  on/ 
3 minutes  off 5 minutes  on/ 
5 minutes  off 3 minutes  on/ 
7 minutes  off 1 minute  on/ 
9 minutes  off 
Minute 
11-20 9 minutes  on/ 
1 minute  off 7 minutes  on/ 
3 minutes  off 5 minutes  on/ 
5 minutes  off 3 minutes  on/ 
7 minutes  off 1 minute  on/ 
9 minutes  off 
Minute 
21-30 9 minutes  on/ 
1 minute  off 7 minutes  on/ 
3 minutes  off 5 minutes  on/ 
5 minutes  off 3 minutes  on/ 
7 minutes  off 1 minute  on/ 
9 minutes  off 
Minute 
31-40 9 minutes  on/ 
1 minute  off 7 minutes  on/ 
3 minutes  off 5 minutes  on/ 
5 minutes  off 3 minutes  on/ 
7 minutes  off 1 minute  on/ 
9 minutes  off 
 
Total 90% on (36 
min)/  10% off (4 
min)  70% on (28 
min)/  30% off 
(12 min)  50% on (20 
min)/  50% off 
(20 min)  30% on (12 
min)/  70% off 
(28 min)  10% on (4 
min)/  90% off 
(36 min)  
 
****** Video  Recordings using  a posterior  view will be made during minut es 5, 15, 
25, and 35 of trainin g. 
 
p. On completion  of the 40 minute  training  with the force tethe rs and visual feedback, 
the particip ant will be cautioned  to hold onto  the hand  rails and the treadmill  will be 
stoppe d. 
 
q. HR and RPE will be taken  and recorded at every 10 minute  inte rval (at minute  10, 20, 
30 & on completion)  throughout the treatment  sess ion using  CRF_TP AD_Form_02 
(See  attache d). 
 
r. Participants  will be offered a seated  rest break and water at  completion  of trainin g. 
 
s. Immediately  on completion  of the rest  break, participants  will stan d, and continue  to 
walk for an additional  10 minutes  on the treadmill  with no force teth ers attac hed 
(Post T raining ).  This will allow  the participant  to ‘co ol down’ from the trainin g. 

 
During this time  vertical  forces (Fz)  will be taken  for each  the paretic  and non  paretic  
limb.  
 
t. Video  recordings will be made from a posterior  view during minutes  5 of post  
trainin g. 
 
u. On completion  of post  training,  partic ipants  will be assisted  off of the treadmill and 
reflecti ve mar kers, safety harness,  pelvic belt  and arm  sling  will be removed. 
 
v.   HR and RPE will be taken and recorded on CRF_TPAD _Form_02 (See  attache d). 
 
3. Ove rground Train ing 
 
 
 
 
Overground 
Training 
(5-10 Min) 
 
 
 
a. Participants  will then  initiate  overground training  for which  they  will ambulate  in a 
quiet  corridor and will receive verbal and gentle  tactile  cues to reinfo rce TPAD 
trainin g. Overground training  will be between 5-10 minutes.  Duration  of 
overground  training  period will be recorded. 
 
 Verbal  cues will inclu de: 
o “Remember  to walk and put as mu ch weight on your right/left 
(paretic) limb as possi ble and  keep it there as long as possible .” 
o “Can you put m ore wei ght on your right/left ( paretic)  side?” 
o “A little mo re” 
o “Mo re weig ht over here” 
o “Keep  it/your weight there a little lon ger with each ste p.” 
 Tactile  cues will inclu de: 
o Gentle  tapping  at right/left  (paretic)  side. 
o Gentle  tapping  at right/left  (paretic)  quadriceps. 
o Light hand  hold around  pelvis with  gentle  weight shift onto  paretic 
side. 
 
b. On completion  of overground trainin g, HR and RPE will be ta ken and recorded one 
additional  time  on CRF_TP AD_Form_02 (See  attache d). 
 
c. CRF_TP AD_Form_02 will be completed  daily for each  inte rvention session. 
 
d. Any incidents  with  patient safety  during inte rventional  procedures will be 
reported on CRF_TPAD _Form_02. 
 
e. Any missing  visits** occurring during inte rvention will also  be noted  on 
CRF_TP AD_Form_02. 
 
f. This will conclude the training  portion  of the sess ion. 
 
VII. Participant Withdraw al 
Participation in this study is volunta ry. Participants  will be allowed to withdraw from the 
study at any point.  Withdrawal  of participati on from this study will not preclu de 
individuals  from participating  in any future studies relating  to stroke or for which  the 
individual would be a potential  candidate.  
 
The participant  may  be withdrawn  by a memb er of the resea rch team  if: 
 The participant  does not complete  all Pre-Test  Assessmen ts. 
 The participant  compl etes < 4/5 training  visits  
 The participant  does not complete  Post-Test  Assessment  
 The participant  sust ains an inju ry while participating  that  would prevent  s/he  from 
completing  study procedures 
 
VIII. Risk / Benefit 
No invasive  inte rventi onal procedures will be used  during these  study procedures. Thus, 
this is a low risk study.  Gen eral risks  of exercise are expected  during study participation,  
including but not limited  to muscle fatigue, muscle stiffness,  and muscle soreness.  In an 
effort to minimi ze risk to participants, a licensed physical  therapist will be present  for all 
study related  activities.  Additionall y, a MD will be available  in the event of an injury or the 
occurrence  of an adverse event. Any medical injuries sustained  during participa tion in this 
study will be recorded (CRF_TP AD_Form_02), and the Principle Invest igator  and the 
Institutional  Review  Board will be notified  within 24 hours of event. The study participant 
will be responsi ble for any incurred cost  from a study related  inju ry. 
 
We antici pate that  participants  who complete  study procedures may  receive impr ovement 
in gait symmetry  by participating in this trial.  However, we cannot  guarantee  physical  
benefit  from study participatio n. Additionall y, it is likely  that  any benefit  in gait 
performance  seen from participa ting in this trial will be tempo rary and not long-lasting 
due to the short duration  (one  week) of the inter vention.  
 
 
IX. Data Managemen t/ Storage  
Hard  copies  of CRF and study documents  will be stored in files coded by patient 
identification  numbe rs assigned at the onset of study participation.  These files will be 
stored in a locked file cabinet  in the office of a member  of the study team. Only  team 
membe rs will have access to these  files.  
 
Electr onic data will also  be coded using  the same patient identifica tion numbe rs. A code 
key will be located  in the hard  copy  files.  All electronic  data will be stored either  in a 
RED Cap Database  (feasibility  results  of safet y, adherence,  treatment  tolerance,  gait velo city 
and balance  scores) or on a CUMC encrypted  end point  device  (gait data  from embe dded 
force plates  and APDM  inertial  senso rs) that  is backed up regularl y. Patient  data sheets   
will be input into  the REDCap database  and each  member  of the study  team  will have  
access  via an individualized login/passw ord combinatio n. Coded copies  of electronic  data 
will be shared  between membe rs of the resea rch team  via Columbia  University  email  
 
system.  To ensu re data security, all elect ronic  data will be coded, and the code key will not 
be inclu ded with data files. 
 
 
 
X. Adverse  Event Report ing 
Adverse  events  include study related  inju ries including, but not limited  to: 
 Falls  
 Ankle sprains/st rains  
 Fractu res 
 Orthope dic related  inju ries 
 Dizziness  
 Seve re fatigue that  requires a ceas ing of study procedures 
 
In the case  of an adverse event (AE), the partic ipant  will be eval uated  immediately  by the 
physical  therapist present for all study procedures. If the AE persists,  study procedures 
will be stop ped, and the study MD notified  to evaluate  the partic ipant. In such  cases  where 
applicable  (e.g. fractu re, ankle injury) the part icipant will be referred and assisted  to the 
Eme rgency  Room for imme diate attentio n. 
 
All AEs will be reco rded and reported to the PI and IRB within  24 hours. 
 
 
XI. Statistical Analysis 
Please  see attached Statistical  Analysis  Plan.  
 
XII. Dissem ination of Resu lts and Publications 
Results  of this work will be anal yzed and a manus cript prepared  for publication.  Full 
details  of this work including prior work using  the TPA D, background, study procedures, 
statistical  analysis procedures and detailed  results will be written  and stored on file as a 
part  of the final  dissertation  report. 
 
Lauri Bish op, PT, DPT  will serve as primary  author  on the dissertation  with Lori Quinn,  
EdD providing  sponso rship.  Ms. Bishop  will also  serve as a primary  author  for manusc ripts 
prepared  discussing  the feasi bility  and prelimi nary efficacy  of the TPAD  to reduce 
asymmetry  in a population  of indi viduals after  stroke. Moiz  Khan,  MS will serve as primary  
author  for any manusc ripts detailing  technical  specifics  of implement ing TPAD  treatment  
in a population  of individuals  after  stroke. Other participating  membe rs of the resea rch 
team  will be reco gnized in autho rship  in all manusc ripts submitted  for publication.  