10/16/2017  
 1  
CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL 
 
 
Comparing the Efficacy of Five  Oral Analgesics for Treatment of  
Acute Musculoskeletal Extremity Pain in the ED  
Study Number  
2016- 7322  
Clinical Trials Number - [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Sponsor  
Department of Emergency Medicine/Montefiore Medical Center  
3411 Wayne Ave  6th Floor,  Bronx, New York,   United States  10467  
 
Principal Investigator : Polly E. Bijur, PhD  
Albert Einstein College of Medicine  
Rose F. Kennedy Center room 915F  
1410 Pelham Parkway South  
Bronx, NY  10461  
Tel 718 -430- 4217  
Email: polly.bijur@einstein.yu.edu  
 
Co-Investigator : Douglas P. Barnaby, MD  
Montefiore Medical Center  
Email: dbarnaby@montefiore.org  
 
  
10/16/2017  
 2  
 
Synopsis  
 
Primary Objective  
The primary objective is  to compare the efficacy of five oral analgesics for treatment of moderate 
to severe acute musculoskeletal extremity pain in the ED.   
 
Secondary Objectives  
The secondary objective is to compare the incidence of side effects of the oral analgesics.  
 Primary Outcome Variables  
The primary outcome is the between treatment group difference in change in patients’ rating of 
pain intensity one hour after ingestion of the study medication.  
 Secondary Outcome Variables  
Secondary outcomes include: 1) the between treatment group difference in change in patients’ 
rating of pain intensity two  hour s after ingestion of the study medication; 2) d ifference in 
proportion of patients who  receive rescue medication; 3) difference in proportion of patients who 
wou ld choose to take the study medication again if they returned to the ED with similar pain; 4 ) 
difference in proportion of patients who are satisfied with pain medication; 5) d ifference in 
proportion of patients who  experience  side effects.  
 
Study Duration  
The study will continue until the target enrollment has been achieved.  Based upon prior research 
studies, we anticipate that it will take approximately 15 months to reach our target.  
 
Study Design  
This is a double- blind, randomized controlled trial comparing the analgesic efficacy of 5 mg 
oxycodone + 325 mg acetaminophen, 5 mg hydrocodone + 300 mg acetaminophen, 30 mg code ine 
+ 300 mg acetaminophen, 400 mg ib uprofen + 1000 mg acetaminophen, and 8 00 mg ib uprofen + 
1000 mg acetaminophen.  
 Study Population  
Adult patients (21 through 64  years of age) presenting to the Emergency Department with 
moderate to severe acute musculoskeletal extremity pain.  
 Number of Participants  
Our target enrollment is 5 50 patients with complete data (110  in each arm).  We anticipate 
needing to enroll up to 600 patients (120 in each arm) in order to achieve this goal.    Number of Study Sites  
This study will be conducted in the acute care areas of the Emergency Departments on the Moses and Einstein campuses of Montefiore Medical Center.  
 
10/16/2017  
 3 Introduction  
 
 According to a recent nationally representative survey of US Emergency Department visits, 
23.3 m illion o ral analgesics were prescribed during ED visits in a single year.1 Approximately 40%  
of the se analgesics contained opioids. The three most commonly prescribed opioid analgesics  are 
hydrocodone  + acetaminophen, oxycodone +  acetamino phen, and codeine +  acetaminophen.   
 Only a relatively small number of studies have made direct comparisons of these 
medications  for treatment of acute pain.2-10 They are difficult to compare as they use varying 
doses of the medications, use different outcomes, and have a variety of methodological limitations 
including small sample sizes and substantial loss to follow -up.  
The Cochrane Collaboration has produced se veral reviews describing the effectiveness of 
codeine, both with and without acetaminophen, as well as a review of the efficacy of oxycodone alone 
or in combination with acetaminophen.  Indirect comparisons over a period of 4- 6 hours dem onstrated 
greater efficacy of oxycodone compared to codeine.11-13   Most of the studies included in the reviews 
were postoperative dental studies utilizing extraction of the third molar as the pain model.  There are no Cochrane reviews that describe the efficacy of hydrocodone.   
Two randomized cont rolled trials were found comparing hydrocodone and codeine for chronic
 
pain.  Rodriguez et. al. found no significant difference in either analgesia or incidence of side effects in a 
study of 121 patients using 5 mg of hydrocodone vs. 30 mg of codeine, both in combination with 500 
mg of acetaminophen.14  Palangio et al. in a three armed study design with 469 patients, found greater 
analgesia in the 15/400 mg hydrocodone/ibuprofe n group compared to the 60/600 mg of 
codeine/acetaminophen.15 
We have conducted three randomized clinical trials of oral opioids for patients discharged from 
the ED following presentation for acute musculoskeletal pain.  The first compared 
hydrocodone/acetaminophen against codeine/acetaminophen and found no difference in change in pain 
intensity when patients were contacted 24 -hours post -discharge.8 The second compared 
oxycodone/acetaminophen against codeine/acetaminophen and again found no difference at 24 hours.10  
The third trial compared oxycodone/acetaminophen against hydrocodone/acetaminophen and also failed 
to show a difference in pain control at 24 hours following ED discharge.9  The design of these studies 
differed from other studies of oral analgesics in that patients were called 24 hours after they left the ED, 
10/16/2017  
 4 and they were asked to recall their pain intensity just prior to their most recent dose of pain medication 
and again 2 hours after ingestion of the study medications.  
 Due to the substantial increase in prescription opioid -related overdoses and deaths since 
the 1990’s ,16 the widespread use of oral opioids has been questioned .  A potentially efficacious and 
safer alternative to the opioid com binations prescribed in the ED is a combination of ibuprofen 
and acetaminophen. The combination of 400 mg ibuprofen and1000 mg acetaminophen has been 
found to provide superior pain relief to that of 60 mg codeine+1000 mg acetaminophen for pain 
following th ird molar extraction,17 and to the individual components of the combination.18 The 
same combinatio n of 400 mg ibuprofen+1000 mg acetaminophen has also been reported to 
provide superior analgesia when compared to 30 mg codeine+325 mg acetaminophen following micrographic surgery for head and neck skin cancers.
19 In the Oxford League table of analgesic 
efficacy 800 mg of ibuprofen had the lowest nu mber needed to treat (NNT) of oral analgesics, 1.6 
compared with 2.4 for 400 mg ibuprofen.20 Combining  800 mg of ibuprofen with 1000 mg 
acetaminophen is a promising strategy to increase analgesic efficacy  of non -opioid analgesics .  
While high doses of ibuprofen are known to cause gastric ulceration when given 3 times daily over 6 weeks
21 there is no evidence that a single dose would be associated with this adverse event.  
For this proposed study, we wished to look at the comparative efficacy of a single dose of 5 oral 
analgesics given while the patient is in the ED and assessed over a two hour period.  The aim of the proposed study  is to compare the efficacy of five  oral analgesics : 5 mg oxycodone + 325 mg 
acetaminophen, 5 mg hydrocodone + 300 mg acetaminophen, 30 mg codeine + 30 0 mg acetaminophen, 
400 mg ibuprofen + 1000 mg acetaminophen, and 800 mg ibuprofen + 1000 mg acetaminophen.   The 
null hypothesis is that there is no difference in efficacy of the 5 analgesics.  The alternate hypothesis is that treatment with at least one of the analgesics is more efficacious than one or more of the other analgesics and that the difference between treatments will meet a standard criterion for clinical significance commonly used in emergency medicine pain research.  
The results of the study will help physicians to make evidence- based decisions about or al 
analgesic  treatment of patients with acute extremity pain in the ED.   
 
                                         
10/16/2017  
 5 Methods  
 
 Design  and Setting : The study will be conducted as a randomized double -blind trial of five  oral 
analgesic combination medications: 5 mg oxycodone + 325 mg acetaminophen, 5 mg hydrocodone + 
300 mg acetaminophen, 30 mg cod eine + 300 mg acetaminophen, 400 mg ibuprofen + 1000 mg 
acetaminophen , and 800 mg ibuprofen + 1000 mg acetaminophen.  The oral  opioids and doses were 
chosen because they are most commonly used in the ED.1 We chose to study the non -opioid 
combination of  400 mg of  ibuprofen and 1000 mg of acetaminophen because several  studies found them 
to be superior to codeine.17, 19 While the combination of 800 mg of ibuprofen and 1000 mg of 
acetaminophen has not been formally studied, the analgesic efficacy of 800 mg of ibuprofen suggests it 
may be an improvement over the lower dose combination.  Patients will be assesse d for eligibility when 
they present to the urgent care areas of the Weiler and Moses EDs of the Montefiore Medical Center in 
Bronx, NY . The primary outcome, patient’s rating of pain intensity, will be  obtained 1 hour after the 
patients receive the study me dication. Secondary outcomes will be assessed 2  hours after ingestion.  If 
the patients leave before 2 hours they will be contacted by mobile phone  at that time point by trained 
research assistants.   
Inclusion criteria:  
• Patients ages 21 through 64 years of age  
• Complaint of acute musculoskeletal pain in one or more extremity , defined as distal to 
and including the shoulder or hip joints . In the majority of instances  this is due to isolated 
blunt trauma .  Blunt trauma is injury caused by the application of mechanical force to the 
body by a b lunt force, object or instrument, or an injury in which the body strikes a 
surface such as a wall or the ground.  
• Pain of less than seven days duration  
• Patient speaks Spanish or English  
• The clinician plans to treat the pat ient in the ED with oral analgesics and is willing to 
treat the patient with opioid analgesics  or up to 800 mg  ibuprofen and  1000 mg 
acetaminophen  
• Patie nt is going to receive imaging of the painful extremity . Standard practice is to give 
patients an oral analgesic while awaiting imaging and subsequent care. This criterion 
10/16/2017  
 6 assures that the majority of patients enrolled will still be in the ED at the time the primary 
outcome measure is obtained.  
• Clinician judg es patient to have capacity to provide informed consent  
 Exclusion criteria:  
• Patient does not have cell phone or can not receive a verification phone call on their cell 
phone while in the ED  
• Any use of methadone  currently or previously  
• Chronic condition re quiring frequent pain management such as arthritis, sickle cell 
disease, fibromyalgia, or any neuropathy  
• History of an adverse reaction to any of the study medications  
• Opioids taken in the past 24 hours  
• Ibuprofen or acetaminophen taken in past 24 hours  
• Any other prescribed or over the counter  topical  or oral analgesics taken in  past 24 hrs  
• Pregnancy by either urine or serum HCG testing  
• Breastfeeding per patient report  
• History of peptic ulcer disease  
• Medical condition that might affect metabolism of opioid a nalgesics, acetaminophen, or 
ibuprofen such as hepatitis, renal insufficiency, hypo-  or hyperthyroidism, Addison’s , or 
Cushing’s disease  
• Lacerations,  
• Multiple injuries   
• Taking any medicine that might interact with one of the study medications, su ch as 
antidepressant SSRI’s or t ricyclics, antipsychotics, anti- malaria medications quinidine or 
halofantrine, amiodarone or dronedarone, diphenhydramine, celecoxib, ranitidine, 
cimetidine, ritanovir, terbinafine, or St John’s Wort. 
 
Measures : Pain intensity will be assessed on  a reliable and validated 11- point numeric al rating 
scale (NRS) where 0 indicates no pain,  and10 indicates the worst possible pain.
22, 23 Upon discharge, 
patients  will be asked: “The next time you come to the emergency room with acute pain, do you want to 
be given the same pain medication?”  Patients  will also be asked if they experienced any of the 
10/16/2017  
 7 following side effects after taking the study medication in the ED: nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, 
heartburn, gas, constipa tion, diarrhea, itch, rash, dizziness, and drowsiness .  
Baseline information including age, sex, weight, diagnosis, procedures performed, and pain 
scores using the NRS will be obtained. RAs will obtain documentation of administratio n of rescue 
medications and timing of administration from the medical record.  
 
 
Outcome s 
 Primary outcome: The primary outcome is the between -group difference in change in patients’ 
NRS rating of pain intensity 1 hour after ingestion of the study medication.  
Secondary outcomes : Secondary outcomes include: 1) the between- group difference in change 
in patien ts’ NRS rating of pain intensity 2 hours after ingestion of the study medication; 2) difference in 
proportion of patie nts who receive rescue medi cation during the study; 3) difference in proportion of 
patients who would choose to take the same study medication to which they were randomly allocated on 
a later occasion if they returned to the ED with s imilar pain; 4 ) difference in proportion of patie nts who 
experience side effects.  
 
Protocol   
 Patients will be referred to the study by the attending physician only after the clinician has 
determined that the patient meets inclusion criteria and has the capacity to provide informed consent.  
Further patient screening for both inclusion and exclusion criteria will be performed by our team of 
trained bilingual (Spanish and English) salaried research associates who staff both study  EDs 24 hours a 
day, 7 days a week.  The research associates receive training and periodic refreshers in the ethical and 
practical aspects of data collection and a practicum with a senior research associate.  The PI will orient 
the research associates to the specific details of the protocol and monitor data collection.  The attending 
physician will conduct a final revie w of e ligibility prior to enrollment in the study. The research 
associates will obtain written informed consent and perform all  data collection .   
Randomization w ill be performed in blocks of 10 determined by a sequence generated at 
http://www.randomization.com .  The pharmacist working in an area inaccessible to ED staff will ensure 
proper blinding of the study by masking the medication and inserting it into unmarked gel capsules ,  
filling any void with small amounts o f lactose.  In order to ensure that the capsules are small enough for 
10/16/2017  
 8 all patients to comfortably swallow, the dosage will be  divided into fifths and 5 ident ical capsules will 
be filled. The pharmacist will make up  numbered research packets  based on the random allocation list , 
each with 5  tablets containing the masked investigational medication.  Research packets will be removed 
sequentially by the nurse  from the Pyxis automated medical dispensing system and administered to the 
study patients in the ED.   Based on the allocation list  patients will be randomized to one of the five  
experimental arm s using the randomization schedule as described above :  5 mg oxycodone + 325 mg 
acetaminophen, 5 mg hydrocodone + 300 mg acetaminophen, 30 mg codeine + 300 mg acet aminophen, 
400 mg ibuprofen + 1000 mg acetaminophen, and 800 mg ibuprofen + 1000 mg acetaminophen.  
While the patients are in the ED , the RAs will collect background information and will instruct 
them on the use of the verbal NRS pain measure. Outcome data will be obtained 1 and 2 hours after 
ingestion of the study drug for patients who remain in the ED through 2 hours. If patients receive rescue 
medication they will be asked to rate their pain immediately before they received the rescue medication. 
Since radiologic imaging is required for study entry, it is anticipated that the majority of patients will 
have the second pain score assessed while still in the ED.  Patients who leave the ED before 2 hours will 
be called at the appropriate time after patients to ok the medication  by the RA . Cell phone numbers will 
be validated  before the patients leave the ED. To minimize loss to follow -up, a minimum of two phone 
numbers will be recorded for each patient . During the follow -up phone call the RA will ask the patients  
to rate their pain intensity and respond to structured queries about side effects.   
Patients who require rescue medications will receive oxycodone 5 mg (without acetaminophen).  
This will be determined subjectively (i.e. if the patient requests ad ditional pain medication or the 
treating physician decides that additional pain medication is  needed). Decisions about discharge 
medication and follow -up will be at the discretion of the treating provider as per his/her usual care.  
 
Safety Monitoring 
 
 Patients will be enrolled in the urgent care area of the ED and will stay there for the duration of 
the study where they can be observed by medical and nursing staff.  All the Research Associates have 
substantial experience with interacting with patients in pain studies and recognizing adverse events. 
They will receive refresher training by the Co -PI in recognizing serious adverse events and the need of 
reporting them immediately  to the treating physician and the Co -PI.  As part of the informed consent 
the p atients are asked t o tell their doctor if they do not feel well and to report all symptoms, reactions 
10/16/2017  
 9 and other complaints to the research personnel. This will be emphasized by the Research Associates 
during the informed consent process. Any adverse events  observed by the RAs will be immediately 
reported to the clinical staff.  
  
Data Collection, Processing  
 
The research associates will collect data electronically through REDCap (Research Electronic 
Data Capture), a secure, web -based application designed to support data capture for investigational 
purposes. The PI will review the data collected and informed consent documents  weekly  for accuracy 
and completeness. The data when downloaded from REDCap will be kept in backed -up, password -
protected files on the PI’s computer kept in a secure location .   
 
 Data analysis  
 
We will calculate descriptive statistics for all variables , expressed as : frequencies,  means  and 
standard deviations, medians and IQR, and proportions  as appropriate. The primary analysis is an 
analysis of variance (ANOVA) of the mean difference in pain from immediately before the medication 
was taken to 1 and 2 hours later. A s ignificant ANOVA at a significance level of 0.05 will be followed 
by pairwise comparisons of medication.  We will apply the  Bonferroni method to adjust the ove rall 
significance level of 0.05  to avoid inflation of type 1 errors  for the primary analysis . As there are 10 
pairwise tests the ac tual significance level is 0.005 .  The main analyses will be intention -to-treat.  
However, i t is likely that some patients will require and receive rescue medication.  Therefore w e are 
asking patients to rate their pain be fore taking the rescue medication.  That rating will be used as the 
pain rating at 1 hour, for those who receive rescue medication before 1 hour, and at 2 hours for those 
who receive pain medication between 1 and 2 hours.  This will be  done because the eff ect of the study 
medications could be obscured by the effect of the rescue medicine.  
We will use chi -square tests to compare  secondary categorical outcomes. In order to reduce the 
number of comparisons  of side effects, they will be grouped into upper GI ( nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
pain, heartburn,), lower GI (c onstipation, diarrhea),  dermato logic (itchiness, rash), and CNS  (dizziness, 
10/16/2017  
 10 drowsiness, confusion).  We will also conduct multi- variate analyses if there are differences between the 
groups at baseline. SPSS version 24 (Chicago, I L.) will be used to conduct all data analyses.   
 
Sample Size Calculation  
The following parameters were used to calculate the sample size: an overall 2 -sided s ignificance 
level of 0.05 (0.005 for each t -test using the Bonferroni correction), power of 80%, delta of 1.3 NRS unit 
change in pain between groups , based on a validated and reliable standard definition of the minimal  
clinically significant difference in pain  between different analgesic treatments ,22, 23 and a within group 
standard deviation of 2.6,  based on estimates from previous work of variability of change in pain in 
response to oral opioid analgesics.8-10 Using these parameters 110  patients are needed in each group for 
a total of 550 patients. We propose enrolling up to an additional 50 patient i n order to be sure of having 
at least 550 patients with analyzable data i.e., a total of 600 patients.   
 
Data safety and monitoring  
 The monitoring plan will be executed by a Data Safety Monitoring Committee. The DSMC will be 
comprised of Dr. Adrienne Birnbaum and Dr. Benjamin Friedman, both Emergency Medicine physicians and 
experienced researchers. They both have Masters of Science degrees in Clinical Research. The DSMC will 
make the final decision about conti nuation, revision or discontinuation of the research project following 
reports of adverse events, unanticipated problems, or protocol deviations. They will decide if they need to 
convene a meeting in addition to the regularly scheduled meetings, review the  data, discuss it with each other 
and the PI and will make a decision based on these discussions.  The committee will meet twice a year. We 
feel the committee does not need to meet more frequently because the oral analgesics studied are all routinely used in the ED, there are few serious adverse events associated with these medications, the patients only receive the medication one time in the ED, and there is an opportunity for rescue medication if patients 
want more pain relief.   
 Specific Procedures: The research assistants (RAs) who collect the data will notify the PI 
immediately if any serious adverse event occurs whether anticipated or not. The PI will report all serious 
adverse events to the DSMC within 24 hours of occurrence. The RAs will also be asked to report any 
protocol violations and deviations to the PI.  The PI will analyze the data weekly for the first month and biweekly after that to look for systematic errors in data collection, participant enrollment, missing data, and 
the occurrence of non-serious adverse effects (e.g., nausea, vomiting, stomach pain).  The PI will report all 
10/16/2017  
 11 adverse events, unanticipated problems, and protocol deviations to the IRB as specified in the Reportable 
Events Policy of the IRB.  
 We plan to conduct an interim analysis after half the data are collected, i.e. 50 patients in each arm of 
the study. With a target p- value of 0.005 (all pairwise comparisons with a Bonferroni adjustment), we 
calculated the p -value for the interim analysis to be 0.00004 using the Lan-Deme ts1approach with O'Brien-
Fleming alpha spending. The p-value for the comparisons at the end of the study is 0.00496. This translates into a mean difference of 2.1 NRS units between any pair of means. Thus if the mean difference between any 
arm of the study  and one or more of the other arms is 2.1 or more (indicating worse pain control) that arm 
will be dropped so that patients are not exposed to a markedly less effective treatment.  Dr. Friedman will 
conduct the interim analysis.  
 
 
Risks and Benefits  
 Pote ntial benefits: Determining the relative efficacy and side effect profile of both opioid and 
non-opioid oral analgesics will help the clinician choose effective therapies for the treatment of acute 
pain. If the efficacy of ibuprofen  and acetaminophen is si milar to or greater than that of the oral opioid 
analgesics with the same or fewer side effects, and if this is replicated in other settings, this study may 
contribute to addressing the increasing problems of overuse and abuse of oral opioids. 
 Potential r isks: While all five  treatments have been found to provide analgesia, some research 
subjects may experience less analgesia if there is a difference in efficacy.  
 Oral opioid analgesics combined with acetaminophen are known to cause several non -serious 
adve rse events including nausea, vomiting, constipation, dizziness, drowsiness , headache, blurred 
vision, ringing in ears, and dry mouth. Rare serious adverse events that may occur include: s evere 
allergic reactions (rash; hives; itching; difficulty breathing; chest tightness; swelling of the mouth, face, lips, or tongue); e xtreme weakness, shallow breathing, uneven heartbeat, s weating, or cold or clammy 
skin;  dark -colored urine or pale stools, difficulty urinating,  jaundice ; confusion, fear, anxiety ; 
hypotension, bradycardia, respirat ory depression, oxygen desaturation , and addiction to opioids. 
Physicians who enroll eligible patients in this study must consider the oral opioid analgesic combination 
drugs  as a possible treatment for the patient, so these risks are likely not to be any greater than those of 
patients who are not enrolled in this trial who also commonly receive these drugs  in the ED .   
 Ibuprofen is known to cause several non -serious adverse events including abdominal pain, 
heartburn, gas, nausea, and rash. Serious adverse events in addition to those associated with opioid 
analgesics (e.g., allergic reaction) include stomach pain, heartburn, gastrointestinal bleeding.  Physicians 
10/16/2017  
 12 who enroll eligible patients in this study must conside r ibuprofen as a possible treatment for the patient, 
so these risks are likely not to be any greater than those of patients who are not enrolled in this trial  who 
also receive ibuprofen.   
 The combination of ibuprofen and acetaminophen is not commonly use d in the ED but they are 
commonly used separately.  There is no ev idence that the combination of these two analgesics are 
associated with a higher incidence of adverse events than the opioid combination medications.17 
 Potential non- medication risks to study subj ects include breach of confidentiality although this is 
considered to be unlikely  given the limited access to the data  and the secure electronic means of 
acquiring it. 
 
Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
 The Principal and Co- Principal Investigators will be responsible for closely monitoring patient 
safety and data integrity. The Research Associates will be instructed to report any serious AEs, UAs and 
PDs as soon as they occur to the investigators who will  decide if they need to be reported to the IRB 
and/or if any procedures need to changed.  The PI will review the data every week for the occurrence of 
all AEs, UAs and PDs. The PI will maintain a log with all the serious AEs, UAs and PDS.  She will also 
review the data weekly for completeness of data collection,  and any indication that the study is not being 
conducted as intended. The PI will maintain the key file that links the code number assigned to each patient and the patient’s identifying information and will de -identify the data as they accumulate.   
  
Conclusion  
 This 5- arm rand omized, double -blind clinical trial is expected to further our understanding of the 
relative efficacy of three commonly prescribed oral opioids  (oxycodone, hydrocodone, and codeine, 
each combined with acetaminophen) and two novel  non- opioid combinations of ibuprofen and 
acetaminophen, thereby improving the physician’s ability to manage acute musculoskeletal extremity 
pain in the ED.    
10/16/2017  
 13 References  
1. National Center for Health Statistics. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Survey, 2012. 
Public -use data file and documentation.  
ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/Datasets/NHAMCS . Accessed June 1, 2016.  
2. Turturro MA, Paris PM, Y ealy DM, et al. Hydrocodone versus codeine in acute musculoskeletal 
pain. Ann Emerg Med . 1991;20:1100- 1103.  
3. Forbes JA, Bates JA, Edquist IA, et al. Evaluation of two opioid -acetaminophen combinations and 
placebo in postoperative oral surgery pain. Pharm acotherapy . 1994;14:139- 146.  
4. Palangio M, Wideman GL, Keffer M, et al. Combination hydrocodone and ibuprofen versus combination oxycodone and acetaminophen in the treatment of postoperative obstetric or gynecologic pain. Clin Ther. 2000;22:600- 612.  
5. Pa langio M, Morris E, Doyle RT, Jr., et al. Combination hydrocodone and ibuprofen versus 
combination oxycodone and acetaminophen in the treatment of moderate or severe acute low back pain. Clin Ther . 2002;24:87- 99. 
6. Marco CA, Plewa MC, Buderer N, et al. Co mparison of oxycodone and hydrocodone for the 
treatment of acute pain associated with fractures: a double- blind, randomized, controlled trial. 
Acad Emerg Med . 2005;12:282- 288.  
7. Litkowski LJ, Christensen SE, Adamson DN, et al. Analgesic efficacy and toler ability of oxycodone 
5 mg/ibuprofen 400 mg compared with those of oxycodone 5 mg/acetaminophen 325 mg and hydrocodone 7.5 mg/acetaminophen 500 mg in patients with moderate to severe postoperative pain: a randomized, double- blind, placebo -controlled, single -dose, parallel -group study in a dental 
pain model. Clin Ther . 2005;27:418- 429.  
8. Chang AK, Bijur PE, Munjal KG, et al. Randomized clinical trial of hydrocodone/acetaminophen versus codeine/acetaminophen in the treatment of acute extremity pain after emer gency 
department discharge. Acad Emerg Med . 2014;21:227- 235.  
9. Chang AK, Bijur PE, Holden L, et al. Comparative Analgesic Efficacy of Oxycodone/Acetaminophen Versus Hydrocodone/Acetaminophen for Short- term Pain 
Management in Adults Following ED Discharge.  Acad Emerg Med . 2015;22:1254- 1260.  
10. Chang AK, Bijur PE, Lupow JB, et al. Comparative Analgesic Efficacy of 
Oxycodone/Acetaminophen vs Codeine/Acetaminophen for Short- Term Pain Management 
Following ED Discharge. Pain Med . 2015;16:2397- 2404.  
11. Derry S,  Moore RA, McQuay HJ. Single dose oral codeine, as a single agent, for acute 
postoperative pain in adults. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews . 2010:CD008099.  
12. Gaskell H, Derry S, Moore RA, et al. Single dose oral oxycodone and oxycodone plus paracetamol (acetaminophen) for acute postoperative pain in adults. The Cochrane database of 
systematic reviews . 2009:CD002763.  
13. Toms L, Derry S, Moore RA, et al. Single dose oral paracetamol (acetaminophen) with codeine for postoperative pain in adults. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews . 2009:CD001547.  
14. Rodriguez RF, Castillo JM, Del Pilar Castillo M, et al. Codeine/acetaminophen and hydrocodone/acetaminophen combination tablets for the management of chronic cancer pain in adults: a 23 -day, p rospective, double -blind, randomized, parallel -group study. Clinical 
therapeutics . 2007;29:581- 587.  
15. Palangio M, Wideman GL, Keffer M, et al. Combination hydrocodone and ibuprofen versus combination oxycodone and acetaminophen in the treatment of postop erative obstetric or 
gynecologic pain. Clinical therapeutics . 2000;22:600- 612.  
10/16/2017  
 14 16. US Department of Health and Human Services. Addressing Prescription Drug Abuse in the 
United States: Current Activities and Future Opportunities.  https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/pdf/hhs_prescription_drug_abuse_report_09.2013.pdf
. 
Accessed September 15, 2016.  
17. Daniels SE, Goulder MA, Aspley S, et al. A randomised, five- para llel-group, placebo- controlled 
trial comparing the efficacy and tolerability of analgesic combinations including a novel single-tablet combination of ibuprofen/paracetamol for postoperative dental pain. Pain . 2011;152:632-
642.  
18. Bailey E, Worthington HV,  van Wijk A, et al. Ibuprofen and/or paracetamol (acetaminophen) 
for pain relief after surgical removal of lower wisdom teeth (Review). In: Library C, editor. Cochrane Database Syst Rev: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.; 2013.  
19. Sniezek PJ, Brodland DG, Zitelli J A. A Randomized Controlled Trial Comparing Acetaminophen, 
Acetaminophen and Ibuprofen, and Acetaminophen and Codeine for Postoperative Pain Relief After Mohs Surgery and Cutaneous Reconstruction. Dermatologic Surgery . 2011;37:1007- 1013.  
20. Richards D. The  Oxford Pain Group League table of analgesic efficacy. Evid -based Dent . 
2004;5:22 -23. 
21. Hawkey C, Laine L, Simon T, et al. Comparison of the effect of rofecoxib (a cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitor), ibuprofen, and placebo on the gastroduodenal mucosa of patients with osteoarthritis: a randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial. Arthriti s & Rheumatism . 2000;43:370.  
22. Todd KH, Funk JP. The minimum clinically important difference in physician- assigned visual 
analog pain scores. Acad Emerg Med . 1996;3:142- 146.  
23. Bijur PE, Latimer CT, Gallagher EJ. Validation of a verbally administered nu merical rating scale 
of acute pain for use in the emergency department. Acad Emerg Med . 2003;10:390- 392.  
 