Protocol Summary Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 1 of 22
Version Date:
08/22/2019Protocol Title:
Mechanisms of Antidepressant Non-
Response in Late-Life Depression
Protocol Number:
6836
Contact Principal Investigator:
Bret Rutherford, MD
Email: brr8@columbia.edu  
Telephone: 646 774 8660Clinic:
Adult and Late Life Depression
Protocol Summary Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 2 of 22
Application for Continuation of Research
Status
Current Status of Study: 
All research interventions were completed. Only data analysis is ongoing.
Summary of Experiences  to Date
Please provide a summary of scientific progress of  the study and the experience of research participants, to 
date. This requirement is designed to allow for the investigator and the IRB to reassess the study’s risks and 
benefits in terms of developments in the field, changing practice patterns, and new IRB policies and 
procedures.
Enrollment and research interventions have concluded. Data analysis is ongoing. Study recruitment met and 
exceeded expected enrollment (n=130), with one hundred thirty-eight subjects signing informed consent. 
The study progressed well, with neuropsychological testing, MRI scans, and other procedures tolerated well 
by participants. Overall, response and remission rates were consistent with antidepressant clinical trials in 
older adults. Many patients went on to receive follow-up treatment in CAAM and expressed appreciation for 
the high quality care we provide. Data has been well maintained and internally-monitored.
Overall  Progress
Approved  sample  size
130
Total number of participants enrolled to date
138
Number of participants who have completed the study to date 
99
Have there been any significant deviations from the anticipated study recruitment, retention or completion 
estimates? 
No
Comments / additional information 
Page 3 of 22Sample Demographics
Older adults with diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder  Total number of participants enrolled from this 
population :138
Gender, Racial and Ethnic Breakdown Gender
Male: 51
Female: 87
Race:
American Indian/Alaska Native: 0
Asian: 2
Black/African-American: 30
Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander: 0
White: 85
More than one: 7
 Don't Know: 11
Missing: 3
Ethnicity:
Not Hispanic/Latino: 112
Hipanic/Latino: 22
Missing: 4 130
Total number of participants enrolled to date
138
Number of participants who have completed the study to date 
99
Have there been any significant deviations from the anticipated study recruitment, retention or completion 
estimates? 
No
Comments / additional information 
Protocol Summary Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 4 of 22
Procedures
   Psychiatric  Assessment
   Neuropsychological  Evaluation
   Medication  Trial
   Use  of Placebo or Sham Treatment
   MRI
   Medication-Free Period or Treatment Washout
Population
Indicate which of the following populations will be included in this  research
   Adults
   Adults over 50
   Non-English Speaking Participants
Protocol Summary Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 5 of 22
Study Location
Indicate if the research is/will be conducted at any of the following
   NYSPI
Lay Summary of Proposed Research 
Lay Summary of Proposed Research
This project seeks to elucidate the
 mechanisms by which antidepressant medications have limited efficacy in 
Protocol Summary Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 6  of 22
Late Life Depression (LLD) in order to develop new treatment interventions for this prevalent and disabling 
illness. We hypothesize that the presence of executive dysfunction (ED), which is common in depressed adults 
over 60, impairs the ability to form appropriate expectancies of improvement with antidepressant treatment. 
Greater expectancy has been shown to improve antidepressant treatment outcome and is hypothesized to be a 
primary mechanism of placebo effects. Moreover, white matter hyperintensities 
(WMH) on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are more prevalent in patients with LLD compared to healthy 
controls. It has been argued that WMH contribute to the pathogenesis of LLD with ED and decrease the 
efficacy of antidepressant medications by disrupting connections between prefrontal cortical (PFC) and 
subcortical structures. Vascular lesions to white matter tracts may also compromise the pathway by which 
expectancy-based placebo effects influence depressive symptoms. Expectancies reflect activation in PFC areas 
that may improve depressive symptoms by modulating the activity of subcortical regions subserving negative 
affective systems (i.e., amygdala) as well as those important in reward and hedonic capacity 
(nucleus accumbens and ventral striatum). Thus, LLD patients with ED and WMH may sustain a “double-hit” 
to their ability to experience placebo effects in antidepressant treatments: ED diminishes the ability to generate 
appropriate treatment expectancies, while WMH disrupt the physiologic pathways by which expectancies lead 
to improvement in depressive symptoms. 
To determine whether decreased antidepressant medication response in LLD patients with ED and WMH is 
caused by a loss of expectancy effects, we will evaluate 130 outpatients with LLD at baseline to determine their 
degree of ED (interference score on Stroop Color-Word Test), WMH burden (severity score on Fazekas 
modified Coffey Rating Scale derived from anatomical MRI), and white matter tract integrity 
(using diffusion tensor imaging [DTI]). Building on work from my K23 Award, we will manipulate 
participants’ expectancy of improvement in an 8-week duration antidepressant trial by randomizing them 
between open administration of escitalopram or duloxetine (i.e., high expectancy) and placebo-controlled 
administration of escitalopram or duloxetine (i.e., low expectancy). The difference in antidepressant response 
observed between open and placebo-controlled medication treatment is a measure of the expectancy 
contribution to outcome, which is substantial in younger depressed adults but we hypothesize will be 
diminished in LLD patients with ED and WMH.
Background, Significance and  Rationale
Background, Significance and Rationale
Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is a leading cause of disability, morbidity, and mortality across the lifespan 
but poses a particularly severe public health problem in late life.19-20 MDD affects 3% of community-dwelling 
adults over 60 years old,2 and 15% of older adults living in the community have clinically significant 
depressive symptoms.3 Diagnosis with MDD increases an older adult’s risk of disability by 67-73% over 6 year 
follow up,21 causes twice the functional impairment compared to those without MDD,22 increases the risk of 
mortality in patients with heart disease, and is associated with high rates of completed suicide in individuals 
over 65 (16.9/100,000 overall and 62/100,000 in white men).23-24 Late-life depression (LLD) is highly 
recurrent, can become chronic,25 and is often difficult to treat.1 Residual symptoms place patients at increased 
risk of suicide as well as cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.26-27
Available research on antidepressant non-response in older adults has focused on executive dysfunction 
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 7 of 22
(ED) and  white matter hyperintensities (WMH) on T2-weighted magnetic  resonance imaging (MRI)  scans  
as the variables prominently associated with poor treatment outcome.  ED is common  in older depressed 
patients5 and has been  shown to predict poorer  response to antidepressant  medication  and higher relapse 
rates during  the continuation phase  of treatment.28-29 Similarly,  WMH  are observed  in the majority of 
older adults with MDD and are  associated with a more chronic clinical course30  and poor response to 
antidepressants.31-32 To account for  these data,  the vascular depression model  proposes that  vascular  
lesions to deep white  matter tracts disconnect prefrontal cortical (PFC)  regions from striatal  and limbic 
areas, disrupting reciprocal modulation between PFC  and subcortical  structures,  and causing depressive  
symptoms as  well as ED.9  It has  been  postulated that  decreased observed antidepressant response in  
depressed patients with ED and WMH  results from serotonergic medications being less efficacious in the 
setting of  this structural brain pathology. 
While proposing ED and WMH as predictors of non-response to antidepressant medication is useful prognostically, the  vascular depression  model  does not provide a physiologic mechanism explaining non-
response. The provision of such a mechanism  would greatly advance our understanding  of the  pathogenesis 
of LLD as well as the biology of antidepressant  response. It  is not obvious  why  damage to  frontostriatal 
tracts should block the effects of antidepressants such as Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs).  
Their mechanisms of action  appear to be related  to salutary modulation of hyperactive limbic  structures33 
as well as stimulation of neurogenesis,34 which  would not necessarily  be affected  by deep WMH.  
Additionally, SSRIs are effective for the prevention35  and acute  treatment36 of post-stroke  depression and 
improve functional recovery following stroke.37 If SSRIs are effective in  these  contexts,  it is unclear why 
they should also not be  effective in treating LLD with ED and WMH.  As has been  the case with other 
developments in the history of psychopharmacology (e.g., understanding reserpine-induced depression  
leading to drugs targeting monoaminergic neurotransmitter systems), it is to be  hoped that identifying  the 
mechanism of antidepressant non-response  in LLD would  yield treatments based on rational designs 
targeting the pathophysiology. This project is designed to test the hypothesis that antidepressant response is lower in  LLD patients with  ED 
and WMH due  to a loss  of the component of medication response attributable to patient expectancy. Using a 
method of  studying expectancy-based placebo  effects emerging  from  my K23  Career Development 
Award,1,16,38 we  will first assess participants at baseline using a neuropsychological test battery, 
anatomical MRI, and  diffusion  tensor imaging (DTI). Next, participants’ expectancy of improvement will be 
manipulated by  randomizing them  to different  probabilities of receiving the same antidepressant medication.  
The high  expectancy condition is open escitalopram  (i.e., 100% chance  of receiving active medication), 
while the low expectancy condition is placebo-controlled administration  of escitalopram  (which  participants 
believe represents 50% chance  of receiving active medication). The difference in antidepressant response 
observed between the open and  placebo-controlled medication treatments is a measure of the expectancy 
contribution to  outcome, which is substantial in younger depressed adults but we hypothesize will be 
diminished in older patients with ED and/or WMH. The finding that  antidepressant non-response  in LLD is caused  by a  disruption in expectancy effects would 
have several significant implications.  Most  importantly, understanding antidepressant non-response in LLD 
at the level of mechanism may permit the  development of novel treatment interventions for patients  with  
continued symptoms. For example, methods may be developed to restore the expectancy component of medication response through specific cognitive  or manualized psychoeducational interventions aimed at 
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 8 of 22
enhancing patients’ expectation of improvement with antidepressant treatment. Pairing such interventions with inexpensive and widely available first-line antidepressant medications (i.e.,  SSRIs) may be a  safe, 
feasible, and effective way to enhance  treatment response. More speculatively, somatic treatments aimed  at 
promoting prefrontal-limbic and prefrontal-striatal connectivity may be promising therapeutic avenues to explore. Such  treatments  might include drugs that augment neurotransmitters supporting frontostriatal  
circuitry (e.g., dopamine, acetylcholine) or  transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
This project seeks to elucidate  the mechanisms by which antidepressant medications have limited efficacy  in 
Late Life  Depression  (LLD)1 in order  to develop  new treatment interventions for this prevalent and 
disabling illness.2-3 We hypothesize that  the presence of executive dysfunction (ED), which is common  in 
depressed adults over  60,4 impairs the  ability to form appropriate expectancies  of improvement with 
antidepressant treatment.  Greater expectancy has been shown to improve antidepressant treatment outcome 
and is hypothesized to be a primary  mechanism of placebo  effects.5-7 Moreover, white matter 
hyperintensities (WMH) on magnetic resonance  imaging (MRI)  are more prevalent in patients with LLD 
compared to  age-matched healthy controls.8 It has been argued that WMH  contribute to  the pathogenesis of 
LLD with ED and  decrease the  efficacy  of antidepressant  medications  by disrupting connections between 
prefrontal cortical  (PFC)  and subcortical  structures.9-10 Vascular lesions to white matter tracts  may also 
compromise the  pathway by which  expectancy-based placebo effects influence  depressive symptoms. 
Expectancies reflect activation in PFC areas  that may improve depressive symptoms by modulating the 
activity of subcortical  regions subserving negative  affective  systems (i.e., amygdala)11-12 as well as those 
important in reward and hedonic  capacity  (nucleus  accumbens and ventral striatum).13-14  Thus, LLD  
patients with ED and  WMH may sustain a “double-hit” to their ability to  experience placebo effects  in 
antidepressant treatments: ED diminishes the ability  to generate appropriate treatment expectancies,  while 
WMH disrupt the  physiologic  pathways  by which expectancies lead  to improvement in depressive 
symptoms. Consistent with the above model, cognitively  intact  patients  with LLD appear to experience large 
expectancy effects during  antidepressant treatment. We have shown that LLD patients enrolled in  
comparator-type studies, who are assured of receiving active medication for their condition, have medication response rates nearly double  those of LLD patients enrolled in placebo-controlled  studies, who  
are aware they  may  be receiving placebo.1 However, the ability to generate expectancy effects appears to  be 
attenuated in LLD  patients with significant  WMH:  we found in analyses of a  large antidepressant trial  for 
LLD that more severe WMH was associated with decreased response to  placebo.15 In addition, a 
prospective study conducted preliminary to this application randomized depressed patients to  receive  the 
same antidepressant  medication in “high  expectancy” vs.  “low  expectancy” experimental conditions.16 
Randomization to the high  as opposed to low expectancy condition resulted in  increased  expectancy of 
improvement and greater change in depressive  symptoms over 8 weeks for patients < 60 years old. This  was 
not true  for patients ≥ 60 years  old, who experienced little expectancy change and  no treatment  benefit in 
the high vs. low expectancy conditions. To determine whether decreased antidepressant  medication response  in LLD patients with ED  and WMH is 
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 9 of 22
caused by a loss  of expectancy effects,  we will evaluate 130 outpatients with  LLD at baseline  to determine 
their degree of ED (interference score  on Stroop Color-Word Test17), WMH  burden (severity score on 
Fazekas modified Coffey Rating  Scale18  derived from anatomical MRI), and white matter tract integrity 
(using diffusion tensor  imaging [DTI]).  Building on work from  my K23 Award, we will manipulate 
participants’ expectancy of improvement in an 8-week duration antidepressant trial by randomizing them  
between open administration of escitalopram or duloxetine (i.e., high expectancy) and placebo-controlled  
administration of escitalopram or duloxetine (i.e., low expectancy). The difference in  antidepressant 
response observed between open  and placebo-controlled medication treatment is a  measure  of the 
expectancy contribution to outcome,  which is substantial in  younger depressed adults16 but we  hypothesize 
will be diminished  in LLD  patients with ED and WMH. 
Specific Aim 1: To determine whether ED and/or WMH moderate the difference  in patient expectancy and 
antidepressant outcome between the open  vs. placebo-controlled conditions. Hypothesis 1:  Greater  ED and 
WMH will be associated with smaller  differences  in expectancy  and antidepressant outcome  between 
conditions.Specific Aim 2: To determine whether a loss of expectancy effects mediates the relationship between ED/WMH and poor antidepressant outcome.  Hypothesis  2: ED and  WMH will be associated with decreased 
change in depressive symptoms, and these associations will be  mediated  by a  decreased contribution of 
expectancy to  antidepressant outcome.
Exploratory Aim: To assess the integrity of frontostriatal and frontolimbic white matter tracts using DTI and explore whether specific damage to these pathways  is associated  with diminished expectancy effects in  
patients with LLD.
Substantiating this model would provide  a mechanism explaining how ED and WMH predict non-response 
to antidepressant medications in LLD. Understanding the mechanisms  of antidepressant non-response in  
LLD has the potential to yield treatments based on specific  and rational designs that target the involved 
biological pathways. By  combining inexpensive  and widely available antidepressant medications  with  
psychoeducational interventions or targeted  psychotherapies to enhance expectancy, it may be possible to 
significantly improve antidepressant response  rates  in LLD patients.
Description of Subject Population
Sample #1
Specify subject  population
N=130 outpatients  with MDD
Number of completers  required to accomplish study aims
90Projected number of subjects who will be  enrolled to obtain  required number  of completers
130Age range of subject  population
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 10 of 22
60-90
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
Gender: We anticipate  the sample will be composed of approximately 60% women and  40%  men. 
Racial/ethnic group: On the basis of previous depression studies  conducted in  the Adult  and Late Life 
Depression Clinic, it is anticipated that the sample  will be composed of approximately 75% Caucasian,  15%  
African American,  and 10% Hispanic subjects.
Description of subject populationThe proposed study will enroll 130 outpatients who are (1)  men and  women aged 60-90 years, (2) diagnosis 
with nonpsychotic  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual  (DSM)  IV MDD,  (3) 24-item Hamilton Rating Scale 
for Depression  (HRSD) score ≥ 16, (4) willing to and capable  of providing informed  consent  and complying 
with study  procedures.  Exclusion  criteria  are (1) current comorbid Axis I DSM  IV disorder other than 
Nicotine Dependence,  Adjustment  Disorder, or Anxiety Disorder, (2) diagnosis of substance abuse or 
dependence (excluding  Nicotine Dependence) within the past 12 months, (3) history  of psychosis,  psychotic 
disorder, mania, or bipolar  disorder,  (4) diagnosis of probable Alzheimer’s Disease,  Vascular Dementia, or  
Parkinson’s Disease, (5) MMSE <  24, (6) HRSD suicide item > 2 or Clinical Global Impressions (CGI)-
Severity88 score of 7 at  baseline, (7) history of allergic or adverse reaction to  escitalopram and duloxetine, 
or non-response to adequate trial  of escitalopram  (at least  4 weeks  at dose of 20mg)  and duloxetine (at least 
4 weeks at dose of 60mg) during the current  episode, (8) current treatment with psychotherapy, 
antidepressants, antipsychotics, or mood stabilizers,  (9) having contraindication to MRI  scanning (such as 
metal in body) or unable to tolerate  the scanning  procedures (i.e., severe obesity, claustrophobia) (for  
subjects undergoing  MRI scanning only), and (10)  acute, severe,  or unstable medical or neurological illness.
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
Subjects will be  recruited through radio and  newspaper  advertisements and referrals from other physicians.
How and by whom  will subjects be approached  and/or recruited? 
Individuals presenting  to the Adult and Late Life Depression Research  Clinic (ALLDRC) are evaluated 
under IRB #7284R, “Evaluation at  the Adult and Late Life Depression Center.”  Following this evaluation,  
one of the study psychiatrists authorized to obtain informed consent  will discuss  study participation with 
subjects.How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
Newspaper and radio advertisements, flyers  posted around CPMC, physician  referrals.
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
YesDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
YesPlease provide the NCT Registration Number[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Protocol Summary Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 11  of 22
Concurrent Research  Studies
Will subjects in this study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
Yes
Describe concurrent research involvement
Subjects who meet criteria for this and other protocols in the ALLDC can participate in both protocols 
concurrently. These protocols are listed below:
-PHYSICAL AND MENTAL FATIGABILITY IN LATE LIFE CLINICAL POPULATIONS (PI Brown) -
IRB #7360
-MITOCHONDRIAL FUNCTION, FATIGUE, AND DEPRESSION IN LATER LIFE (PI Brown) IRB
#7379
The consent form for this study is separate from those for the above protocols. Participation in this study 
will not affect their participation in the other study. This is made explicit in the consent form for this study. 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name the subject group/sub sample
Depressed
 patients
Create or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and methods to ascertain them
Inclusion criterionMethod of 
ascertainment
 
(1) men and women aged 60-90 yearsClinical 
interview
(2) diagnosis with nonpsychotic Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual (DSM) IV MDDClinical 
interview,
 SCID
(3) 24-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HRSD)
score ≥ 16 HRSD by 
trained
 rater
(4) willing to and capable of providing informed consent
and complying with study procedures Clinical 
interview
Create or insert table to describe the exclusion criteria and methods to ascertain them
 Exclusion criterion Method of 
ascertainment
 
(1) current comorbid Axis I DSM IV disorder other than
Nicotine Dependence, Adjustment Disorder, or Anxiety
Disorder Clinical 
interview,
 
SCID
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 12 of 22
 (2) diagnosis  of substance abuse or dependence (excluding 
Nicotine Dependence) within the  past 12 months Clinical interview, SCID
 (3) history of psychosis, psychotic disorder,  mania, or bipolar 
disorder Clinical interview, SCID
 (4) diagnosis  of probable Alzheimer’s Disease, Vascular 
Dementia, or Parkinson’s Disease  Clinical interview
 (5) MMSE  < 24  MMSE
( 6) HRSD suicide  item  > 2 or Clinical Global  Impressions 
(CGI)-Severity score of 6 or greater  at baseline HRSD by trained rater,  
CGI by study physician
 (7) history of allergic  or adverse reaction  to escitalopram and 
duloxetine, or non-response to adequate trial of escitalopram (at least 4 weeks at  dose of 20mg) and duloxetine  (at least 4 
weeks at dose of 60mg) during the current  episode  Clinical interview
 (8) current treatment with psychotherapy, antidepressants,  
antipsychotics, or mood stabilizers  Clinical interview
 (9) having contraindication to MRI scanning  (such  as metal 
in body) or  unable to  tolerate the scanning procedures (i.e., 
severe obesity,  claustrophobia) (for subjects undergoing MRI  
scanning only)  MRI safety screening form, Clinical interview
 (10) acute, severe,  or unstable medical or neurological illness Clinical interview, blood tests, physical exam
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) NoWaiver or alteration of consentNoWaiver of documentation of consent NoWaiver of parental consent 
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 13 of 22
No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
YesIndicate NYSPI IRB # 7284RDescribe Study Consent ProceduresWhen a patient arrives to be evaluated at the ALLDC, they must  first sign the ALLDC evaluation  consent 
form (IRB #7284R)  and HIPAA consent  form. The  clinic coordinator or an ALLDC research assistant  will 
then do the 30-item Mini-Mental State Exam  to get a general idea of the patient’s global cognitive  
performance (this is especially important in older  patients who  may be  experiencing cognitive/memory 
difficulties in addition  to depression). The  patient is then seen by one  of the ALLDC psychiatrists.  
Following the MD evaluation, the doctor may ask  for a SCID (Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM), a 
structured diagnostic interview,  and HAM-D (Hamilton Rating Scale  for Depression) to  be performed by a 
qualified rater (Nancy  Turret or trained research assistant).  Based on the information from the MD 
evaluation, HAM-D score, and  SCID  diagnosis(es),  the MD  will decide  if the patient  is eligible for  any of 
the ALLDC research protocols.Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
   Consent Form
Persons designated to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Broft, Allegra, MDRoose, Steven, MDRutherford, Bret, MDType in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
Study Procedures
Describe the procedures required for this study
Overview
 
The proposed 8-week  antidepressant clinical  trial design has been used to  successfully manipulate patient 
expectancy and influence  antidepressant outcome in pilot studies--the proposed design is  nearly identical to 
that approved under IRB  #6038. At baseline, subjects will be evaluated,  and eligible individuals will be 
invited to participate  in the study. Those signing informed consent will have physiologic  tests conducted  and 
will be scheduled for  baseline neuropsychological  testing and MRI scanning. Following  baseline testing, 
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 14 of 22
subjects will return  for a  Week 0 visit  when  continued symptoms will be confirmed and medication  will be 
distributed, after which  they will return for  8 weekly  visits. Psychological assessments performed on study 
participants by  a psychiatrist may  also be performed  by medical psychiatry interns (PGY-1) who  come to  
our clinic for  4-week  rotations. All medical  interns  will have  completed NYSPI-specific CITI training for 
human subjects research (specifically the biomed or social/behavioral course). The interns will be supervised by our clinical team, which consists of Steven Roose, MD; Bret Rutherford, MD;  Allegra Broft, 
MD; and  Patrick Brown, PhD.
 
Evaluation and Screening
 
1. Patients will first undergo an initial evaluation comprising  a psychiatric interview (MD), Mini  Mental  
Status Exam  (MMSE), as well as  Structured Clinical Interview Diagnostic (SCID IV) and  Hamilton Rating 
Scale for Depression (HRSD) by trained raters.  
2. All potentially eligible subjects will complete a screening questionnaire  that includes questions regarding 
the presence of ferromagnetic implants. If the subject  has any metallic implants (i.e. metal heart valve,  aortic 
clips, etc.) that are unsuitable for the scanner,  that subject will not  be offered MRI scanning  in this study.  
Further screening will be  done by New York State  Psychiatric Institute – Dept. of Psychiatry MRI Metal 
Screening Questionnaire.  This  is a 38-item questionnaire that was  developed  by Dr.  Peterson (as Director of 
the MRI Unit) will be  administered to every subject before they enter the MRI  scanner.  This  questionnaire 
asks specifically about  metallic implants and  past experiences with metal to further ascertain any possible 
risks the person  may  incur by entering  the scanner. If any metallic implants are  detected  that are unsuitable 
for the scanner, the subject will not undergo MRI scanning. Subjects who are otherwise  eligible for the 
study and wish to participate  will be offered  participation in  the clinical trial portion of the study only  and 
will not have an  MRI scan. 
3. The evaluating psychiatrist will review the consent form with eligible  patients and  invite  them  to 
participate.  
4. Patients who sign the consent  form will complete the  remainder  of the baseline evaluation, including  
further paper  measures, urine tests, blood tests, physical exam, and electrocardiogram (EKG) (RN or 
qualified research  assistant). Lab results will be available to patients,  should  they  request them.  
 
 MRI scanning1. Patients will be  scheduled for their  MRI  scan  and neuropsychological assessment immediately after 
baseline assessment and prior to the  first administration of study medication. It  is possible that treatment 
may be delayed  up to  1 week  total due to scheduling  these  assessments,  though we will make every effort  
not to delay treatment.2. For the MRI procedures,  the subject will be instructed to  lie as still as possible within the  magnet for 
approximately 90 minutes.  When we position a subject in  the scanner, head movement will be  minimized 
through: (a)  instructions  to the participant; and (b)  packing the head  inside the head coil with a system  of 
foam padding and pillows  that we have  found is well-tolerated by the participants,  yet limits movement.  All 
precautions and protections  will be given to the participant to  ensure that they are as safe and comfortable  as 
possible. For  the participant’s comfort  within the scanner, they will lie on a padded table with  a pillow to  
rest their heads on. A blanket will  also be provided to keep subjects warm during  the procedure.  
3. If the participant appears nervous or  anxious, a trained member of the clinical staff will remain with  them 
inside the  scanning  suite  for the duration  of the scan. The participant  will be  given a button box to terminate 
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 15 of 22
the scan  at any time.  If they push the button, they will be  removed from the scanner  immediately All of the 
MRI procedures will be  conducted on the  3-Tesla  MRI  scanner  at the New York State  Psychiatric Institute. 
Conducting these procedures will be an accredited Magnetic Resonance  Technologist  (B.M.R.) and  a 
member of  the research  staff (Bachelor’s Level  or Higher) trained in the acquisition  of MR images by Dr.  
Peterson, as well  as in procedures for testing  human subjects. 
4. Although our MRI Scans are for research purposes,  a radiologist will perform  a clinical reading on every 
MRI within  1 month of scanning; if anything  clinically significant  is found, Dr. Rutherford will be notified 
immediately and he will provide  an appropriate clinical referral to  the participant.
5. At the start of the session, a 3-Plane  localizer (scout) will be  acquired to determine patient position. 
Subjects will then  receive T1-weighted 3D SPGR (Spoiled Gradient  Echo),  T2 FLAIR,  Dual  FSE  (Fast Spin 
Echo), and DTI (Diffusion  Tensor Image) scans. While scanning  parameters may change slightly,  power-
monitoring software  on the scanner will ensure  total energy delivered to the  subject  will remain  within FDA 
guidelines. Specifically, the specific absorption rate (SAR) will be  not greater than:  (1) 4 W/kg averaged 
over the  whole body for  any period  of 15 minutes; (2) 3 W/kg averaged over  the head  for any  period  of 10 
minutes; (3) 8  W/kg  in any gram of tissue in the  head or torso;  (4) 12 W/kg in  any gram of tissue in  the 
extremities, for any period of 5 minutes. These  safety precautions are  built into the MRI  hardware,  and are 
standard with every system.6. We will rate the  severity of White matter hyperintensities (WMH) on axial T2 FLAIR images using the 
Fazekas modified Coffey Rating  Scale,  which has been used  extensively  in vascular depression research. 
DWMH are  scored  as 0 (absent), 1 (punctate  foci), 2 (beginning confluence of foci), and 3 (large confluent 
areas); subcortical gray matter HIs (basal ganglia) are  scored  as 0 (absent),  1 (punctate), 2 (multipunctate), 
and 3 (diffuse); periventricular HIs are scored as 0 (absent), 1 (caps), 2 (smooth halo), and 3 (irregular  and 
extending into the  deep white matter). Our primary measure of WMH burden  will be DWMH score, which 
has been  used to establish the only empirically  validated diagnostic criteria for vascular depression. 
7. Regarding DTI, we  will acquire  the baseline image B0 and the diffusion weighted  images (DWI) in  25 
directions. To isolate brain from  non-brain tissue, we will apply the DTI software in the  FSL analytic 
package (Analysis  Group, FMRIB, Oxford,  UK) to the B0  image  and use the  isolated brain as a mask  to 
define the brain in  DWIs.  The images will be  corrected for eddy current distortions, and then we will fit a 
diffusion tensor  model  to the DWI data  at each voxel. The tensor model  yields a voxel-wise map of 
1st/2nd/3rd eigenvectors and eigenvalues, fractional anisotropy (FA), and mean  diffusivity  across the entire 
brain. The DT images  for all participants  will be  coregistered by applying affine transformation to a 
template brain using the B0 images, thereby permitting voxel-wise statistical analyses of the various DTI measures. In  addition to the whole-brain voxel-wise  statistical analyses, we  will perform statistical analyses  
of the mean FA  value within specified ROIs defined  using  regions  of WMH in anatomical MR images for 
each participant. ROIs with  significantly differing DTI measures will be associated with  specific pathways 
in the brain by coregistering the template brain to a  DTI  atlas (LONI ICBM DTI atlas, cmrm.med.jhmi.edu), 
which parcellates the brain  into 23 functionally  meaningful anatomical regions, grouped  by brainstem,  
projection fibers, association  fibers,  and commissural fibers (described in  detail  at cmrm.med.jhmi.edu).  
Finally, within the coordinate space of the  template  brain, we will perform  diffusion tensor tractography 
from regions within prefrontal cortex to  striatum  and statistically analyze the  various  DTI measures  at each 
voxel along these pathways. Statistically  significant differences in  the DTI  measures along these pathways 
would indicate  disruption of anatomical connectivity between regions in  the prefrontal cortex and  the 
striatum.
 
Neuropsychological testing
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 16 of 22
 
 1. The baseline neuropsychological test  battery  assembled for this  study meets five important  criteria that 
we were striving to achieve  (see Table 4): 1) it is short  and well tolerated by the elderly (total administration 
time approximately  40 minutes), 2) it is a reasonably comprehensive assessment  of executive  functioning, 3) 
the measures are capable of tapping a  range  of abilities (minimizes floor and  ceiling effects), 4) it comprises 
standard tests, and 5) it allows for reliable  administration by trained technicians.  
2. Neuropsychological testing will include assessment of global  cognitive functioning, IQ, attention, 
memory, language, executive functions, reaction time, and visuospatial processing. The 30-item Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) will be used to measure general cognitive impairment. The Wechsler  
Test of Adult  Reading  (WTAR) will be used  in conjunction with demographic variables to estimate IQ.  
Memory will be  assessed using the Logical  Memory  Test  (WMS  III). We  will use two standard measures to 
assess executive functioning. The Stroop Color Word Interference Test  (Stroop) is a  measure of attention,  
concentration, and behavioral inhibition under distracting conditions  that is sensitive to frontal lobe 
dysfunction. The Mattis Dementia Rating Scale  Initiation and  Perseveration subtest (DRS I/P) measures  a) 
verbal initiation and perseveration  (e.g., naming supermarket items over 1 minute), b) performing 
alternating movements, and c) reproducing  graphomotor designs (e.g.,  XOXO). Attention will be assessed 
using the wechler adult  intelligence scale (WAIS-III) Digit Symbol Test.
3. NP testing  is for research purposes only and the results of these tests will not be interpreted clinically or 
shared with the patient.
 
Clinical study
 
 1. Patients will then  be randomized to an Open Group or a Placebo Controlled Group  (please  see attached 
for flow chart).a. Subjects in  the Open Group will be informed: “You have been  randomly  assigned to the open group of 
the study. This means that  there  is a 100%  chance  you will receive the antidepressant medication 
escitalopram [or  duloxetine] for  the duration of the  study. Escitalopram  [or  duloxetine]  has been  proven  
effective for the  treatment  of depression in patients like you. You  will not  be receiving any placebo pills for 
the duration of the study. While you are aware that  you are receiving actual antidepressant medication and 
not placebo, some of the staff  members seeing  you do not know whether  you are taking escitalopram [or 
duloxetine] or placebo.  If it can  be avoided, please do not reveal to  anyone in  the study what group you have 
been assigned to.” At the  time  of their entry into the  study, patients will be started on escitalopram 10mg  per 
day, which will be  continued for  four weeks.  If at the end of that  time patients  do not meet remission criteria  
(HRSD <  11) or the  patient continues to report depressive symptoms,  is tolerating the medication well, and 
wishes to try a  higher dose, the dose will be  increased to 20mg  escitalopram for the remainder  of the study. 
Subjects who have previously not responded to or  not tolerated escitalopram will be allowed to  receive 
duloxetine. Subjects will receive duloxetine 30mg for  1 week, then if they do not meet  remission criteria or  
the patient continues to report  depressive  symptoms, is tolerating the medication well, and wishes  to try a 
higher dose, will increase to 60mg for 4 weeks,  and then if they still do not meet remission criteria or the 
patient continues to report depressive symptoms, is tolerating the medication well, and wishes to try  a higher 
dose, will increase to 90mg for final 3 weeks. The first choice is for subjects to  receive escitalopram, and 
they will only receive duloxetine  if they  have  previously failed or not tolerated  escitalopram.
b. Subjects in the  Placebo-controlled Group will be randomized unequally (6:1) to escitalopram [or  
duloxetine] vs placebo. They  will be informed:  “You  have been randomly assigned to  the placebo-
controlled group of  the study. This means that  there  is a chance  you will receive  the antidepressant 
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 17 of 22
medication escitalopram [or duloxetine] for the  duration of the study. Escitalopram [or duloxetine] has been 
proven effective for the  treatment of depression in patients  like you. There is also a  chance you will receive 
placebo for the  duration  of the study. A placebo is a sugar pill  that is not specifically effective for 
depression. Neither you, nor your doctors,  will know whether you are receiving  escitalopram [or duloxetine] 
or placebo. If  it can be avoided, please do not reveal to anyone in the  study what  group you have been  
assigned to.” Patients will receive 1 pill (10mg escitalopram or placebo) per  day for four weeks. If  at the end 
of that time patients do not meet  remission criteria  (HRSD < 11) or the patient continues to  report 
depressive symptoms, is  tolerating the medication well, and wishes to try  a higher dose, the dose will be 
increased to 2 pills  per day (20mg escitalopram  or placebo) for the remainder  of the study. Subjects who 
have previously not  responded to or not tolerated  escitalopram will be  allowed to receive  duloxetine.  
Subjects will receive  1 pill (duloxetine  30mg or placebo) for 1 week, then if  they  do not meet remission 
criteria or the patient continues to report depressive symptoms, is tolerating the medication well, and wishes to try a  higher dose,  will increase  to 1 pill of 60mg duloxetine or placebo for  4 weeks. Then if  they  still do 
not meet remission criteria or the patient  continues to report depressive symptoms,  is tolerating  the 
medication well, and wishes to try a  higher dose, will increase to  2 pills (totaling 90mg  duloxetine or 
placebo) for final 3 weeks.  The first choice is for subjects to  receive escitalopram, and they will only receive 
duloxetine if they have previously failed  or not tolerated escitalopram.
2. Should a subject  ask about the specific chances of being assigned to  placebo  or escitalopram [or 
duloxetine] in the Placebo Controlled  Group, we will respond: “For the purpose of maintaining the study 
integrity, certain details of the study must be temporarily  withheld  from you. These details include your  
exact chances of  receiving  placebo  or escitalopram  [or duloxetine].  However,  we can tell you that your 
chances of receiving placebo in this  study are no greater than 50%. Also, following the  conclusion  of your 
participation in  the study, we will provide  you with the complete details  of the study design  if you so wish.” 
This approach allows the  patient sufficient  information to  judge whether they wish  to continue participating  
in the study while  ensuring that the data produced  are informative.  Of course, subjects may choose to  
withdraw informed consent  and not participate  in the study if they are not  comfortable  with  this level of  
specificity.3. Patients will return to the LLDRC for weekly  visits, at which  they will receive  clinical
management (MD)  and complete assessment measures conducted  by raters blinded to condition assignment. 
Weekly measures will include HRSD, Hamilton Anxiety  Scale (HARS),  Clinical Global Impressions 
(CGI)—Improvement, Credibility and Expectancy Scale (CES), and  Quick Inventory for Depressive 
Symptomatology (QIDS) (MD, RN, or MSW). 4. If a patient discontinues medication due to tolerability problems, ineffectiveness, patient preference, or other reasons, the patient will be  dropped  out of the study and enter the 3 month long  open treatment phase. 
Appropriate medication options will be discussed with  the patient  based on their symptoms and history. If 
the patient wishes,  they will be provided  referrals  for psychotherapy or treatment options  outside of our 
research clinic. No further research measures  will be conducted  once a  patient enters the  open  treatment 
phase.5. Patients in all  treatment  cells will be discontinued from the acute treatment  phase  if there is there  is a 
rating of 6 (much worse) or  7 (very  much worse)  on the  CGI—I for 2 consecutive weeks.  Patients receiving 
medication may continue receiving the same medication  if clinically indicated  after being dropped from  the 
study. No further  research measures will be performed on patient dropped from  the study.
6. The blind  will be broken at the end  of the 8 week  study period. Remitters (HRSD <  11) will be  continued 
on the same medication.  Responders to placebo  will be followed off of medication. Placebo non-responders 
Protocol Summary Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page  18 of 22
will be treated openly with escitalopram  [or duloxetine], while escitalopram [or duloxetine] non-responders 
will be treated as clinically indicated with augmentation or switch in class of antidepressants.
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Criteria for  Early Discontinuation  
Criteria for Early Discontinuation
If a patient discontinues medication due to tolerability problems, ineffectiveness, patient
preference, or other reasons, the patient will be dropped out of the study and enter the 3 month long open 
treatment phase. Appropriate medication options will be discussed with the patient based on their symptoms 
and history. If the patient wishes, they will be provided referrals for psychotherapy or treatment options 
outside of our research clinic. No further research measures will be conducted once a patient enters the open 
treatment phase.
Patients in all treatment cells will be discontinued from the acute treatment phase if there is there is a rating 
of 6 (much worse) or 7 (very much worse) on the CGI—I for 2 consecutive weeks. Patients may also be 
discontinued from the study if this is indicated in the clinical judgement of the study physician and/or 
principal investigator. Patients receiving escitalopram/duloxetine may continue receiving the same 
medication if clinically indicated after being dropped from the study. No further research measures will be 
performed on patient dropped from the study. 
Patients will be informed that should they experience a crisis or acute symptom worsening between 
scheduled weekly appointments, they should call their study clinician via the clinic office/research 
coordinator or the 24 hr doctor on call pager for the LLDC. The study physician will evaluate the patient 
and make appropriate follow up arrangements, which may include activating EMS, calling the relevant 
mobile crisis team, or scheduling pt for immediate outpatient appointment in the LLDC. Patients in crisis 
will be assessed immediately and appropriate clinical action taken as above (i.e., those meeting criteria for 
early discontinuation will be dropped from the study and treated openly).
Blood and  other Biological Samples
 CBC, blood chemistries, and electrolytes will be drawn before initiating escitalopram /duloxetine or 
placebo. The total amount of blood drawn should be no greater than 20cc.
Assessment Instruments
Protocol Summary Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 19  of 22
Clinical measures
1. SCID IV -- 30 minutes
2. HRSD --15 minutes
3.
QIDS -- SR 10 minutes
4. CES -- 5 minutes
5. CGI-I -- 1 minute
6. Blind assessment -- Patient guess -- 1 minute
7. Blind assessment -- Doctor guess -- 1 minute
8. TESS -- 3 minutes
9. ATHF -- 5 minutes
10. Credibility and Expectancy Scale  -- 5 minute
11. HARS -- 15 minutes
12. UCLA Revised Loneliness Scale -- SR -- 1 minute
Neoruopsychological tests
1. Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR)--5 min
2. Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) -- 8 min
3. Stroop Color Word Test (Stroop) -- 5 min
4. Mattis DRS- I/P subset -- 10 min
5. Digit Symbol Subtest of the WAIS III -- 2 min
6. Logical Memory Test (WMS III) -- 10min
Please attach copies, unless standard instruments are used
Off label  and investigational use of drugs/devices
Choose from the following that will be applicable to your study 
Research Related  Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?
Yes
Maximum
 duration of delay to any treatment 
It is possible that treatment may be delayed due to scheduling study MRI scans and neuropsychological 
testing, though we will make every effort not to delay treatment. If there are scheduling difficulties, 
treatment will not be delayed more than 1 week.
Maximum duration of delay to standard care or treatment of known efficacy
There will also be a delay of 8 weeks for 10/130 of patients (those assigned to receive placebo). 
Justification: In this study 10 subjects will be randomized to placebo in place of antidepressant treatment 
with escitalopram/duloxetine, which is not so toxic that patients routinely refuse treatment. The use of 
placebo rather than escitalopram/duloxetine could result in longer exposure to depressive symptoms, so the 
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 20 of 22
IRB algorithm would seem  to judge the risk of placebo as high. This  risk is mitigated since there are not 
large differences between  antidepressant medications  and placebos in  most  clinical trials.  Typical 
antidepressant response rates  in placebo controlled  trials are 40-45%, while  placebo response rates are  30-
35%. If 10 subjects  in this study are assigned to placebo rather than escitalopram/ duloxetine, then based on 
these estimated rates only 1 subject  would fail to respond to placebo who  may have responded to 
escitalopram/duloxetine. That being said,  continuing with the  IRB  algorithm, it is not possible to  accurately 
predict placebo  response in a single study (placebo  response ranged widely between 13-52%  in the Walsh et 
al 2002 meta-analysis).  Finally,  the potential  benefit of understanding the cognitive and  neural pathways by 
which placebo and  expectancy effects cause improvement in depressive symptoms  is substantial.  Therefore, 
according to  the algorithm provided by the  IRB,  the use of placebo  in this study is ethical.
Treatment to be  provided at the  end of the study
At the end of  the acute  treatment protocol, appropriate treatment  (medication continuation, change in  
medication, and/or follow-up)  will be  provided  free for 3 months.  Subjects will receive 3 months  of free  
doctor visits  in the  clinic  and at least  1 month of free medication. Every effort will be made to provide free  
medication for 3 months total, but we cannot guarantee the availability of free medication beyond  1 month. 
At the end of  the three month  period, patients will be referred out for further psychiatric follow up.
Clinical Treatment Alternatives
Clinical treatment alternativesThe alternative to participating in this study is to seek treatment outside the research  project. Patients who 
would rather receive treatment elsewhere will be given referrals to appropriate  and affordable care.
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that  could be  encountered during the study period
The main risks in this study are (1) patients may  not respond  to the medication treatment, (2) patients 
assigned to placebo may experience continued symptoms or clinical worsening, (3) side effects of the medication, (4) risks related to MRI, and (5)  specific  risks associated  with  being a participant aged over 60  
years (such as having a  comorbid medical condition, or being cognitively impaired). There are  also minimal 
risks associated with the blood draws, but there is no greater risk in this protocol for this  procedure than in 
any standard clinical setting.Describe procedures  for minimizing risks
Regarding (1), treatment with SSRIs and  SSNRIs are accepted first line  treatments  for depression. Reliable  
evidence does not exist for the superiority  of another  medication or psychotherapy to  escitalopram in  
depressed patients. Patients will be seen  weekly to have their symptoms assessed, and  patients who exhibit 
clinical worsening (as described in above procedures) will be  dropped from the study and  receive  clinical 
treatment. Regarding (2), it is the case that patients in  the Placebo Controlled Group  will not  receive a 
proven effective treatment  for their condition if they  are assigned  to placebo. However,  the risk of 
permanent harm to subjects will be minimized  by restricting the study to  depressed,  nonsuicidal  patients, 
following them  closely,  and dropping them from  the study for signs of clinical deterioration. Regarding (3), 
commonly observed  side effects associated with escitalopram and  duloxetine are diaphoresis,  diarrhea,  
nausea, insomnia,  somnolence, disorder of ejaculation, impotence, and fatigue. The FDA  has also  placed  a 
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 21 of 22
black box warning in the package insert for all SSRIs warning of increased  suicidal  ideation  and behavior. 
Side effects of the medication  will be  assessed at each visit. If the side effects represent an intolerable 
burden in the  assessment of the patient or the treating clinician, the medication will be  discontinued. 
Regarding (4), the Magnetic  Resonance (MR) scanner uses  strong magnetic fields  and radio waves  to take 
measurements in the  brain. MRI involves lying on a table that slides  into a large magnet shaped like  a 
cylinder. Before  beginning the procedure,  we will determine  that patients do not have a pacemaker or any  
unsafe metallic implants  such  as an aneurysm clip  or heart valve  and certain tattoos, and  they  will be  asked 
to remove  any metal or magnetized objects (such  as keys, chains, jewelry, retainers, medication  patches, 
hairpins or credit cards).  They will be asked  to lie flat on the back in the MRI scanner for approximately 90 
minutes and to  remain as still as possible. Some people have reported  sensations  during MRI scans, such as 
"tingling" or  "twitching" (or, very  rarely, a painful sensation), which are caused  by changes in the magnetic 
field that can stimulate  nerves in the body. With any  MRI scan,  on occasion, some people experience 
nervousness or types of metallic implants, and  medication patches, we are  not aware of any  other  potentially 
dangerous interactions  or hazards associated  with the  MRI scan. The MRI  scanner  also produces a  loud 
noise; earplugs will be provided to reduce  this discomfort. If a patient  experience any discomfort and  wish  
to stop  the scan, he/she can  tell the MRI technologist who will  stop the  scan  immediately. In our experience, 
no one has had  sensations  from the MRI that did not stop  when the scanning stopped. Finally, we will 
mitigate the risks associated with increased medical problems  in older adults by doing  a careful physical 
examination and blood tests to detect an unstable, severe, or acute medical  problem.  Since cognitive 
impairment is a  condition impacting  older  adults, we will measure a MMSE and  exclude  subjects with  a 
score lower than 24.
Methods to Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods  to protect confidentiality
All records of the participating subjects  will be kept in a  locked room  with access provided only to staff  
members. Patients’  names will be linked  with code  numbers in  a password protected  file to which  only  the 
research assistant has access. Only these  code  numbers will appear on all pill bottles and paper measures 
collected during study. All data collected will be  kept confidential and used for professional purposes only. 
Publications using these data will be done in a  manner that protects  the subjects’ anonymity. All 
electronically stored data will  be accessible by password known  only to the principal investigator  and 
research assistants  for the study. All MRI scans and
related data will be kept  on the secure, password protected, MRI server. MRI scan reports will be  provided 
to the clinic by  the MRI scanner, and kept  in a locked file.
Will the  study be  conducted under  a certificate of confidentiality?
No
Direct Benefits to Subjects  
Direct Benefits to Subjects
Patients who are  not currently  in treatment  and are experiencing depressive symptoms may receive  a 
medication proven effective for their  condition. Therefore, the major benefit is that patients will achieve 
Protocol Summary  Form
6836
Rutherford, Bret
Page 22 of 22
remission from  the depression as a result  of participating in  the study.
Compensation and/or  Reimbursement  
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered to subjects?
YesPlease describe  and indicate total amount and schedule of  payment(s).  
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate  if there are bonus  payments.
Subjects will receive  reasonable reimbursement for transportation related costs associated with study 
involvement as long as they provide receipts. Reimbursement is limited to no more  than $10 per  week. To 
compensate subjects for the time required  for the MRI scan, subjects will be compensated $100 for the scan.
References
ReferencesNIH Consensus Conference. Diagnosis and treatment of depression  in late life. JAMA 1992;  268:1018 –
1024.Alexopoulos GS. Role of executive  dysfunction in late-life depression. J Clin Psychiatry 2003;  64:18-23.
Rutherford BR, Sneed  JR, Roose SP. Does study design affect outcome? The effects of placebo control and 
treatment duration in antidepressant trials. Psychother and  Psychosom  2009; 78:172-181.
Rutherford BR, Roose SP. A model of placebo effects in  antidepressant clinical trials. Am J Psychiatry, 
advance online  publication, doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.12040474.
Uploads
Upload the entire grant application(s)rutherford.pdfUpload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)6838_CF_English_7.23.18 UNCHANGED 2019.pdf6838 CF Spanish  7.31.18 UNCHANGED  2019.pdf
Upload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of recruitment  materials/ads to be reviewed
Upload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
6836 HIPAA English 7.31.18.pdf6836_HIPAA_Spanish_July2018.pdfUpload any additional documents that  may be related to  this study