1 
  
 
NCT 03121794  
Ultrasonographic Identification of the Proximal 
Humer us Landmarks for Intra -Osseous Vascular 
Access a cross Different Body Habitus  
 
 
An observational study  to determine if there is consistency in ultrasonographic landmark 
identification of the proximal humerus  across various body habitus  
 
                                 Original Date: July 11, 2016  (version 1.0)  
           Final version Date:  12/01 /2016  
 
 
Names and Addresses of:  
 
Principal Investigator  Name:  Sergio Bustamante, MD  
Address:  Cleveland Clinic  
Department of Cardiothoracic Anesthesiology  
9500 Euclid Avenue  
Cleveland, OH 44195  
 
Tel: 216-444-4488  
Email:  bustams@ccf.org   
Co-investigator  Name:  Negmeldeen Mamoun, MD  
Address:  Cleveland Clinic  
Department of General Anesthesiology  
9500 Euclid Avenue  
Cleveland, OH 44195  
 
Tel: 216-444-7783  
Email:  mamounn@ccf.org   
Co-investigator  Name:  Shravan Cheruku, MD  

2 
 Address:  Cleveland Clinic  
Department of Cardiothoracic Anesthesiology  
9500 Euclid Avenue  
Cleveland, OH 44195  
 
Tel: 347-387-0039     
Email:  cheruks2@ccf.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Study Summary  
 
Title  Ultrasonographic identification of the proximal humerus landmarks for 
Intraosseous Vascular access across  different body habitus  
Short Title  Ultrasonographic landmark identification of the proximal humerus   
Principal Investigator  Sergio Bustamante, MD  
Primary Objectives  Evaluate whether discrete landmarks of the proximal humerus can be 
identified using  ultrasound in patients with various body habitus and BMI.  
Primary Endpoints  Ability to identify the following 6 anatomical landmarks for proximal 
humerus interosseous venous access  with ultrasound :  1.  Humeral shaft, 
2, Surgical neck of the hume rus, 3. Lesser tubercle, 4. Greater tuberc le, 5.  
Intertubercular sulcus 6 . Target site for needle insertion i n the greater 
tubercle . 
Secondary Objectives  - Evaluate the time  used to identify all 6 anatomical landmarks 
using ultrasound . 
- Evaluate the depth of each landmark from skin under ultrasound . 
- Correlate the Arm thickness with the depth of the anatomical 
structures . 
- Correlate the BMI with the depth of the anatomical structures .  
 
Secondary Objectives 
Measures  - Time used to identify all 6 anatomical landmarks  in seconds.  
- Depth of each anatomical landmark from skin in centimeters.   
Study Design  A single institution  observational study  
Inclusion Criteria  1- Males or females 1 8 years of age or older.  
2- BMI  > 18.5 
 
Exclusion Criteria  1. Limited mobility/ range of motion of arms  
2. Prior surgical intervention on shoulder or humerus  
3. History of arm dislocation with internal rotation  
4. History of arm fracture   
5. BMI in ranges: 25.1 – 29.9, 35.1 – 39.9 
 
Expected Sample Size  30 Patients  (60 exams)  
Statistical Methodology  We will summarize the total number of correctly identified landmarks per 
patient overall and by BMI category. We will also estimate the incidence 
of correctly identifying all landmarks per patient with a 95% bootstrap 
confidence interval.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
  
List of  Abbreviations  
 
 
 
Abbreviation                    Definition  
BMI     Body Mass Index  
CFD     Color Flow Doppler  
CV    Central Venous  
IO    Intraosseous  
PH    Proximal Humerus  
PHIO     Prox imal Humerus Intraosseous  
PHIOVA    Proximal Humerus Intraosseous Vasc ular Access  
PIV    Peripheral Intra venous  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
  
1 Introduction  
    This document is a protocol for a human research study. This study is to be conducted 
according to US and international standards of Good Clinical Practice (FDA Title 21 and 
International Conference on Harmonization guidelines), applicable government regul ations and 
Cleveland Clinic  research policies and procedures.  
 
1.1 Background and Rationale  
 Establishing vascular access is of vital importance during resuscitation  of cardiac arrest, 
trauma and during various intraoperative scenarios . During cardiac arrest  minimizing time 
wasted without  performing chest compression is vital to successful resuscitation , therefore , being 
able to establish vascular access quickly can save lives [1]. Intraoperatively , the ability to rapidly 
obtain vas cular access is crucial to maintain hemodynamic stability . Similarly,  having adequate 
vascular access is the cornerstone for resuscitation  in trauma patients .  
 Three main forms of vascular access are used in the scenarios  above : peripheral 
intravenous (PI V), Central venous (CV) and intraosseous (IO) . Of the different types of vascular 
access PIV and CV access have drawbacks when used during resuscitation [2], because they  can 
be difficult to obtain when patients are volume depleted as in cases of trauma. Attempting CV 
access  has numerous risks with complications occurring in up to 33% of attempts. These include 
failed placement (22%), arterial puncture (5%), catheter malp osition (4%), pneumothorax (1%) 
and asystolic cardiac arrest (<1%) [3]. Attempting to obtain CV access may also disrupt chest 
compressions in cases of cardiac arrest . Intraosseous  access has been used in scenarios where 
PIV an d CV access is difficult or impossible to obtain. Pharmacokinetic studies and standard 
practice support the bioequivalence of intraosseous and intravenous administration of common 
6 
 medications [4]. Intravascular depletion does not hinder attempts at IO access, and as the 
insertion sites are peripheral to the heart , insertion can be done avoidin g interruptions  in chest 
compressions. Obtaining  proximal humerus interosseous (PHIO ) access may also be  faster than 
obtaining both PIV and CV access  with a relatively low complication rate [2]. In one survey of 
Scandinavian use rs, complications of IO included difficulty in identifying correct anatomical site 
(3%), extravasation (3.7%), displacement after insertion (8.5%), and very rarely late 
complications including compartment syndrome ( 0.6%), osteomyelitis ( 0.4%) and skin infection 
(0.3%) [5]. 
 The site that has been used most commonly for IO access has been the proximal anterior 
tibia because of ease of landmark identification and provider familiarity. The proximal humerus 
(PH) has recently ga ined more attention and is a viable alternative to the anterior tibia because of 
decreased pain with initial bolus, decreased medullary pressure resulting in more rapid fluid 
delivery and is in closer proximity to the heart [6]. 
Proxima l humerus  interosseous  access  relies  on landmark  identification  of the greater  
tubercle  via palpation  of the surgical  neck  of the humerus.  This method  can be especially  
difficult  in patients  with prominent  deltoid  musculature  or adipose  tissue  overlying  these 
landmarks.  Failure  to identify  landmarks  is an absolute  contraindication  to IO access [1]. Success  
rates  for PHIO  needle  insertion  have  been  cited  as low as 76% in one study  compared  to 92% for 
proximal  tibial  insert ion[7]. Moreover,  a failed  IO needle  insertion  precludes  the immediate  use 
of the same  site for another  trial.  
7 
 Ultrasound  identification  of PH structures  on cadavers  has recently  been described  in the 
literature  and has the promise  of increasing  the success  rate of what  is now considered  a blind  
procedure [8] 
 
1.2 Clinical Data to Date  
Ultrasound identification of proximal humeral structures is a novel concept with no 
current case reports or clinical trials  demonstrating its use in clinical practice.  
A correspondence letter by Bustamante et al .[8] demonstrate d the use of ultrasound to 
identify PH structures on a cadaver model . Structures identified  were  the greater and lesser 
tubercle s, intertubercular groove and surgical neck. Identification of these structures are 
necessary for PHIO needle placement . A 13 -6 MHz ultrasound linear probe (SonoSite Inc; 
Bothell, Washington, USA) was used to identify these structures on 5 cadavers with body max 
indexes (BMI)  ranging from 20 – 35. All structures were relatively superficial, within 3cm from 
the skin. Once landmarks and target site were identified , an IO needle was inserted and 
placement was confirmed with  color flow d oppler  (CFD) .   
Failure to identify proximal humeral structures is considered an absolute contraindication 
to attempting PHIO placement. Prominent deltoid musculature and adipose tissue overlying 
proximal humeral landmarks can make identifying  proximal humeral structures by palpation 
difficult if not impossible. As failed PHIO access of one arm precludes the use of the same arm 
for subsequent trials the first attempt must be optimized to allow for the greatest chance for 
success. If ultrasound is found to successfully identify all landmarks, even in patients with higher 
BMI’s, failure to identify landmarks by palpation will no longer be considered an absolute 
contraindication.  
8 
  
2 Objectives  
2.1      Primary Objectives:  
Estimate the ability to successful ly identif y each of the six proximal humerus anatomical 
landmarks required for proximal humerus interosseous vascular access ( PHIOVA ), using 
ultrasound in  patients with different  body habitus : BMI 18 .5-25 kg/m2, BMI 30 -35 kg/m2, and 
BMI > 40 kg/m2. 
 
2.2       Secondary Objectives:  
- Estimate  the time used (in seconds)  to identify all 6 anatomical landmarks using 
ultrasound  in patients with different body habitus.  
 
- Estimate  the depth of each landmark  (in centimeters ) from the skin using  ultrasound  in 
patients with different body habitus.  
 
- Estimate the correlation between  upper arm thickness and the depth of the anatomical 
structures .  
 
- Estimate the correlation between BMI and the depth of  the anatomical structures .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 3 Primary h ypothesis  
We will test the hypothesis that all 6 anatomical landmarks for proximal humerus 
interosseous venous access  can be identified using ultrasound  in all patients irrespective of their  
BMI, or mid upper arm circumference . 
 
4 Study Design  
4.1 General Design  
- An observational study performed on adult patients undergoing general, cardiac, thoracic 
or vascular surgery .  
- Demographic data collected include age, sex, weight (kg), Height (cm)  
- BMI,  and mid upper arm circumference will be measured or calculated for all subjects.  
The study procedure will be performed on each patient by two out of three  investigators 
trained on performing an ultrasonographic exam of the proximal humerus  using a linear 
probe . All investigators have at least one year of experience in ultraso nography with the 
linear probe and have participated in at least three (3) PHIO access workshop s.  (Sergio 
Bustamante, MD, Negmeldeen Mamoun, MD, and Shravan Cheruku , MD ). Two 
investigators will perform an ultrasonographic exam on each patient, with one investigator 
examining each side. Investigator A will perform the exam and identify all 6 landmarks with 
ultrasound , while i nvestigator B will time the exam starting from whe n the ultrasound probe 
is handled  till all landmarks are identified. Investigator B’s role is also to verify that 
landmarks are identified and document how many of the landmarks were seen from zero to 
six out of six per arm. After the exam is complete, t he roles of investigator A and B are then 
10 
 switched to perform an exam on the contralateral humerus , where investigator B identifies 
landmarks on the opposite side and investigator A times the exam .  
After the conclusion of the exam on each arm the depth of e ach landmark under 
ultrasound will be noted, and the mid upper arm circumference will be measured .  
4.2        Primary Study Endpoints  
- Ultrasound evaluation of the proximal humerus will aim at identifying 6 anatomical 
landmarks for PIHOVA with ultrasound:   
1. The humeral shaft,  
2. The surgical neck of the humerus,  
3. The lesse r tubercle ,  
4. The greater tubercle ,  
5. The intertubercular sulcus   
6. The target site in the greater tubercle for needle insertion .  
Each arm will receive a score that ranges from zero to six out of six depending on how 
many landmark s were identified successfully.   
4.3        Secondary Study Endpoints  
- Time used to identify all 6 anatomical landmarks using ultrasound  in seconds.  
 
- Depth of each landmark from the skin using  ultrasound  in centimeters.  
 
- Correl ation between upper a rm thickness and the depth of the anatomical structures . 
- Correlation between BMI and the depth of the  anatomical structures  
 
 
 
11 
 5 Subject Selection and Withdrawal  
5.1  Inclusion Criteria  
1- Males or females , 18 years of age or older . 
2- BMI > 18.5 
5.2 Exclusion Criteria  
1. Limited m obility/ range of motion of any of the  upper extremities .  
 
2. Prior surgical intervention on shoulder or humerus in any of the upper extremities . 
 
3. History of arm dislocation with internal rotation  in any of the upper extremities . 
 
4. History of arm fracture  in any of the upper extremities .  
 
5. BMI in ranges: 25.1 – 29.9, 35.1 – 39.9 
 
5.3 Subject Recruitment and Screening  
Participant s will be  select ed after  chart review of current patients undergoing general, 
cardiac, thoracic, or vascular surgery.  Patients will be approached in the preoperative clinic or 
during their hospitalization (preoperatively or postoperatively) . Informed consent will be 
obtained on the same day of  performing the ultrasound exam . 
Participants will be separated into 3 cohorts based on BMI . The number of participants  in 
each cohort  is as follows: 10  patients  with BMI 18. 5 – 25 kg/m2; 10 patients with BMI 30-35 
kg/m2, 10 patients with BMI > 40 kg/m2.  
 
 
 
12 
 6 Statistical methods  
 We will summarize the study population on baseline characteristics using appropriate 
summary statistics (e.g., mean ± standard deviation, median [Q1, Q3], or N (%)).  
 
6.1 Primary  Analysis  
 We will summarize the success of landmark identification overall and by BMI category. 
Landmark identification is considered successful if all 6 landmarks are identified correctly. We 
will estimate the incidence of correct identification of all landmarks with a 95% bootstrap 
confidence interval.  We will use boots trap confidence intervals instead of binomial confidence 
intervals to account for intra -subject correlation because landmark identification will be 
performed twice per subject.   
We will also report the median [Q1, Q3]  of the mean number of  landmarks identi fied 
correctly  per patient  overall and by BMI category. Results will be presented in tables and 
appropriate graphs. Descriptively, we will summarize the percent of correct identification by 
landmark location.  
 
6.2 Secondary Analyses  
 We will estimate the median [Q1, Q3]  of the mean  time in seconds to identify all 
landmarks using ultrasound overall  per patient overall  and by BMI category.  
 Depth of each landmark will be summarized overall and by BMI category using 
appropriate summary statistics (e.g., mean  ± standard deviation and median [Q1, Q3] ). 
 We will estimate the correlation s between  the following measures  using Pearson 
correlation with 95% confidence interval s: 
13 
 - Arm thickness with depth of anatomical structures  
- BMI with depth of anatomical struct ures 
Arm thickness, depth of anatomical structures, and BMI are only measured once per patient so 
standard methods are applicable (i.e., no repeated measures).  
 
6.2 Sample Size Considerations  
We will enroll 3 0 patients, with 10 patients in each BMI catego ry: BMI 18.5 -25 kg/m2, 
BMI 30 -35 kg/m2, and BMI > 40 kg/m2. Given that investigators will be highly trained, we  
conservatively  assume  all landmarks will be identifi ed 80% of the time.  We expect very weak 
intra-subject correlation.  Ignoring intra -subject correlation , we expect 95% confidence interval 
widths as small as 0.22 for overall incidence of correct identification and 0.38 within each BMI 
category. Confidence intervals will be somewhat larger depending on the strength of intra -
subject correlation. Confidence interval widths will be narrower if investigators are more  than 
80% successful at identifying landmarks.  
Study enrollment will start with 3 pilot patients with different BMI, but they  will not be 
included in the statistical analysis. Thereby, a total of 33 patients will be enrolled in our study   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 References  
 
1. Anson, J.A., Vascular Access in Resuscitation. Is There a Role for the Intraosseous 
Route?  Anesthesiology, April 2014. 120(4): p. 1015 -31. 
2. Paxton JH, K.T., Klau sner HA Proximal Humerus Intraosseous Infusion: A Preferred 
Emergency Venous Access.  The Journal of Trauma, September 2009. 67(3): p. 606 -11. 
3. Eisen LA, N.M., Berger JS et al., Mechanical complications of central venous catheters.  
Journal of Intensive Ca re Mericine, 2006. 21(40).  
4. VonHoff DD., K.J., Burris HA. III, Miller LJ., Does intraosseous equal intravenous? A 
pharmacokinetic study.  American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 2008. 26: p. 31 -8. 
5. Hallas P, B.M., Folkestad L, Complications With Intraosseous Access.  Western J Emerg 
Med, 2013. 15(5): p. 440 -43. 
6. Philbeck T, M.L., Montez D, Puga T. , Hurts So Good.  Journal of Emergency Medical 
Services. , September 2010: p. 58 - 69. 
7. Kovar J, G.L., Alternate route: the humerus bone – a viable op tion for IO access.  Journal 
of Emergency Medical Services, August 2010. 35(8): p. 52 -9. 
8. Bustamante S, C.S., Ultrasound to Improve Target Site Identification for Proximal 
Humerus Intraosseous Vascular Access.  In press Anesth Analg, 2016.  
 