 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation of  Gallbladder contractility using bo th CCK and milk  consecutively 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
 
 
Version Date: 09/30/2016 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0015  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/30/2016   Evaluation of  Gallbladder contractil ity using both CCK and milk consecutively  
 
PI: Isis Gayed, MD 
 
Co-Inves tigators: Usha Joseph, MD 
David Wan, MD 
Study Coor dinator: Karen Swaby, RN 
 
 
 
 
Introd uction: 
 
Hepatobiliary imagi ng (HIDA)  has an important role in the evaluation of the function and 
dynamics  of the hepatobiliary  system and the flow of bile to the gastrointestinal system. Contractility 
of the gallbladder is one of the functions that are uniquely evaluated using a HIDA scan. Poor 
contractility of the gallbladder can be the source of pain in many patients. Anatomic  imag ing studies 
like ultrasoun d, CT and/or MRI are usually normal  in these patients. 
 
Contractility of the gallbladder is evaluated during a HIDA scan by intrave nous injection of 
cholecystokinin (CCK) a physiologic peptide enzyme  produced in the duodenum in response to the 
presence of fatly meal which causes  the gallbladder to contract and the sphincter of Oddi to relax, 
thus allowing the flow of bile from the gallbladder to the duodenum. CCK is usually administered 
during a HIDA scan intravenously after filling of the gallbladder with radioactive tracer  to simulate the 
action of the endogenous CCK in contracting the gallbladder and relaxation of sphincter of Oddi. 
Gallbladder ejection fraction (GBEF) in response to CCK injection is calculated using special  computer 
software program. A normal gallbladder ejection fraction is equal to or greater than 35%. Alternative 
to CCK injection, the patient may be administered milk  as a fatty drink that should stimulate a normal 
gallbladder to contract when it reaches the duodenum approximately 15-20 minutes after oral 
administration. Thus, gallbladder contractility may  be evaluated during a HIDA scan either by injecting 
CCK intravenously or oral administration of milk. Poor contractility of the gallbladder may  result in 
abdominal pain usually trigger ed by meals. However, in many patients with abdominal pain and a 
decre ased gallbladder contractility as evaluated by IV CCK or milk may  continue to suffer from pain 
even  after surgical  removal of the gallbladder. This suggests that abnormally decre ased GBEF after 
CCK  or  milk  stimulation  may  represent  false  positive  finding  resulting  in  unnecessary 
cholecystectomies in  some of the patients. There are no reports in the literature that have used both 
intravenous CCK stimulation and oral milk a dministration together in the same patient. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0015  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/30/2016   This study aims  to combine the use of IV CCK administration followed by oral milk  during a 
HIDA scan to further stimulate gallbladder contractility and decre ase the number of false positive 
HIDA s cans and unnecessary cholecystectomies  in some  patients. 
 
 
 
 
Objectives: 
 
- To evaluate any change in gallbladder contractility as reflected by a change in GBEF in the 
same  patient when milk is administered orally  after intrave nous CCK administration during a 
HIDA s can. 
- To evaluate the number of patients that might change from an abnormal low GBEF to a normal 
value. 
- To estimate the aver age change in GBEF with the administration of milk after intraveno us CCK 
administration. 
- Follow up the outcome  of the patients up to 6 months interval  after the study. 
 
Methods: 
 
- A total of 50  patients will be included in this study. 
- The patients will be referred to the Nuclear Radiology  department by their primary physician 
or referring physician for a HIDA s can to eva luate gallbladder function. 
- The patient will be injected with a standard dose of 4-6 mCi Tc-99m Choletec IV and dynam ic 
blood flow imag es in 1 seco nd/frame imag es for 1 minute followed by 60 min acquisition of 
sequential imag es of the abdomen at 1 min / frame rate.  
- If gallbladder is visualized during the first 60 min of imag es, CCK will be administered IV at 
0.02mg/Kg  slowly over 3 min as per standard of care protocol. 
- Additional  imag ing  will  be  obtained  of  the  abdomen  for  30  min  to  evaluate  gallbladder 
contractility as  per standard of care protocol. The GBEF will be calculated using the usual 
computer analysis program. 
- If the gallbladder ejection fraction is less than the normal value of 35%, the patient will have 
the study explained and will be consented to be a participant of this study.  The patient, who 
agre es to participate, will drink 8oz of half and half milk.  After 15-20 minutes waiting period, 
the patient will be imag ed again  with sequential static imag es of the abdomen  at 1min/ frame 
for an additional 30 minutes which will conclude the study. 
- The GBEF will be recalcu lated ag ain after the ingestion of milk  and compared to the GBEF after 
CCK administration. 
- The patients’ outcome in 6 month will be reviewed and data will be collected. In the event 
there are no medical records for the patient at 6 months, the patient may be contacted for a 
follow up call by the PI or his/her designee. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0015  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/30/2016    
 
Inclusion Criteria: 
 
- All patients referred for a HIDA s can for eva luation of gallbladder function. 
 
-  Patients with gallbladder ejection fraction of less than 35% after administration of CCK. 
 
- Patients who are able to lie flat on the imag ing table for an additional 30 min. of imagi ng after 
the standard of care 1.5 hour HIDA s can. 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
 
- Patient allergic to milk or dairy products. 
- Non visualized Gall bladder. 
- Patients below age of 18. 
 
Data Collection: 
 
A list  of enrolled subjects will be compiled electronically. Each subject will be given  a coded ID. 
The list of name, MR# and coded ID will be kept separate from the database, in a password-protected 
computer and/or locked room.  The list will be used to correlate the image interpre tation with the 
follow-up clinical information. 
 
The database will contain the coded ID,  as well as: 
 
- Patient demogra phics including gender, age and age at onset of abdominal pain. 
- Clinical  information regarding the nature and frequency of abdominal pain. 
- HIDA with CCK ima ge interpretation findings. 
- HIDA with milk i nterpre tation findings. 
- Summa ry of findings of other imagi ng modalities. 
- Clinical  follow-up parameters:   Patients’ outcome data regar ding relief of symptoms, 
any surgical  interventi on, medical interventi on or no interventi on. 
 
The  electronic  database  will  be  transferred  between  team  members  via  secu re  share  software 
approved by UT. 
 
 
 
 
Data Analysis: 
 
The study results will be analyzed using descriptive statistics. The change in abnormal GBEF 
between CCK alone versus CCK with milk  will be evaluated. Finally, the number of studies that were 
changed from abnormal to normal will be summarized. 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0015  
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  09/30/2016   Outcomes: 
 
There are two possible  groups of patients after ingestion of milk  and the addition of 30 
minutes of  imagi ng.  The first group will have an abnormal study which will remain  abnormal after the 
milk  and the second group with an abnormal study with CCK alone which will become normal after 
administering milk.  Both results with CCK alone and after milk  will be reported.  The follow up data 
will clarify if there were less cholecystectomies  performed in the second group of patients compared 
to the first one and if the patients in the second group continued to have the pain or not.  Also the 
follow up will help in evaluating if there were other causes to the pain or if it responded to medi cal 
therapy.   This will be compared with the incidence of cholecystectomies in  the first group and 
resolution of pain and other symptoms  if they had cholecystectomies or medically treated. 
 
References: 
 
1.   Pain provocation and low gallbladder ejection fraction with C CK cholesci ntigra phy are not predictive of 
chronic aca lculous gallbladder disease  symptom relief after chol ecystectomy. 
Edwar ds MA, Mullenbach B, Cham berlain  SM. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Nov;59(11):2773-8. 
 
2.   Systematic review and meta-analysis:  does gall-bladder ejection fraction on cholecystokinin 
cholesci ntigra phy predict outcome  after  cholecystectomy in suspec ted fu nctional biliary pain? Delgado- 
Aros S, Cremonini F, Bred enoord AJ, Camilleri M. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2003 Jul 15;18(2):167-74. 
 
3.   Does gallbladder ejection fracti on predict outcome after cholecystectomy for suspected chronic 
acalc ulous gallbladder dysfunction? A systematic review. 
DiBaise JK, Oleynikov D. Am J Gastroente rol. 2003 Dec;98(12):2605-11. 
 
 
 
4.   Stim ulation with fat ty meal (Lipomul) to ass ess gallbladder emptying in ch ildren with ch ronic aca lculous 
chole cystitis. H adigan C, Fishman SJ, Connolly LP, Treves ST, N urko S. J Pediatr Gastroente rol Nutr. 2003 
Aug;37(2):178-82. 
 
5.   Repr oducibility of gallbladder ejection fract ion measured by Fatty meal cholesci ntigraphy. 
Al-Muqbel KM, Bani  Hani MN, Elheis MA, Al-Omari MH. Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2010 Dec;44(4):246-51 
 
6.   Gallbladder ejection fract ion measu red by fatty meal cholesci ntigra phy: is it affected by extended 
gallbladder emptying data  acquisition time? Al-Muqbel KM. Ann Nucl Med. 2010 Jan;24(1):29-34. 