 
PROTOCOL 
 
Open Label Study of the Efficacy, Durability, Safety and Feasibility of 
Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation (iTBS) in Adolescents with Major 
Depressive Disorder:  Effect Duration, Suicidality, and Non -Suicidal 
Self Injurious Behavior  
 
 
 
NCT number  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date  12/03/2020  
 
 
 
1 PROTOCOL TEMPLATE: INTERVENTIONAL STUDY  
Complete Title:  Open Label Study of the Efficacy, Durability , Safety and Feasibility of Intermittent Theta Burst 
Stimulation (iTBS) in Adolescents with Major Depressive Disorder:  Effect Duration, Suicidality, and N on-
Suicidal Self Injurious Behavior  
 Short Title: iTBS for  Adolescent Depression  
Drug or Device Name(s): MagVenture;  Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation 
FDA IND/IDE (if applicable): 
Sponsor: Center for Health Innovation  
Protocol Date:  December 11, 2019  
Amendment 1 Date:  July 16,  2020  
Amendment 2 Date:  December 3, 2020  
Amendment 3 Date:  
Amendment 4 Date:  
 
      
 
 
 
 
Shahzad Ali, M.D.  
101 Manning Drive, CB# 7160  
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599 -7160 
Phone 984 -974-0033 
email: shahzad_ali@med.unc.edu  
 
 
 
2  
Protocol Signature page Version  3 
Principal Investigat or Name:          
Principal Investigator Signature:         
Date:             
 
    
 
       
 
       
 
 
 
3  
Table of Contents  
Table of Contents  3 
Abbreviations and Definitions of Terms  4 
Protocol Synopsis  5 
1 Background  and  Rationale 8 
2 Study Objectives  12 
3 Investigational plan  13 
4 Study Procedures  15 
5 Study Evaluations and Measurements  18 
6 S tatistical Considerations  20 
7 Study Intervention (Device or O ther I ntervention ) 22 
8 Study Intervention Adminis tration  23 
9 S afety Managem ent 23 
10  Da ta Collection and  Management  23 
11 Recruitment Strategy  24 
12 Consent Process  24 
13 Plans for P ublication  24 
14 References  25 
Appendix  27 
 
  
 
       
 
 
 
4 Abbreviations and Definitions of Terms  
 
Abbreviation  Definiti on 
AE Adverse Eve nt 
CDRS -R Children’s D epression Rating Scale Revised  
CPR Cardiopulmonary resuscitation  
C-SSRS  Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale  
cTBS  Continuous Theta Burst Stimulation  
DSM -V Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders version 5  
ECT Electroconvu lsive therapy  
EEG Electroencephalogram  
FDA Food and Drug Administration  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
HAM -D Hamilton Depression Rating Scale  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
iTBS  Intermittent Theta Bu rst Stimulation TM S 
iTMS  Intermittent Tr anscranial Magnetic Stimulation  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
MDD  Major Depressive Disorder  
MMSE  Mini -Mental State Examination  
NIH National Ins titute of  Health  
NSSIB  Non -Suicidal Self Injurious Behavior  
PHI Protec ted Health In formation  
PTSD  Post -Traumatic  Stress Disorder  
rTMS  Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation  
SCID-5 Structured Clinical  Interview for DSM -5 
SITBI  Self-Injurious Tho ughts and  Behavior Interview  
TBS Theta Burst Stimulation  
TMS  Tran scranial Magnetic Stimulation  
TMT  Trails Making Test  
TMT -B Trails Making Test part B  
TRD Treatment Resistant Depression  
UDS  Urine Drug Screen  
UNC  University of North Carolina  
 
 
 
5  
Proto col Synop sis 
Study Title  Open Label Study of the Efficacy, Durabili ty, Safety and Fea sibility 
of Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation (iTBS) in Adolescents with 
Major Depressive Disorder:  Effect Duration, Suicidality, and Non -
Suicidal Self Injurious Behav ior 
Funder  Center for Health Innovation Grant - UNC Health  
Clinica l Phase Pilot feasibility, open label 
Study Rationale  MDD (Major Depressive Disorder) is prevalent in the adolescent 
population and is associated with significant morbidity and in extreme 
cases mortality. Current treatment consists of medications, psychot herap y and ECT (El ectroconvulsive Therapy), each having its own 
potential complications and rates of efficacy.  
An alternative avenue of treatment is TMS (Transcranial Magnetic 
Stimulation),  which has been FDA (Food and Drug Administration) 
approved in the treatment of adult s, with evidence of efficacy and safety 
in adolescents. Current TMS treatments consist of a high burden of time – 37 minute daily treatments for 30 treatments. A potential  solution  to 
this is iTBS (Intermittent Theta Burst Stimulation), wh ich cuts down the  
treatment time to 3 minutes per day. iTBS has been shown to be effective in adults, is non -inferior to prior FDA approved TMS protocols, 
and is itself FDA approved for tr eatment r esistant MDD in adults.  
Our study proposes to investigate the efficacy, dura bility, safety and 
feasibility of feasibility of iTBS in adolescents with MDD.  
Study Objective(s)  ● To assess the efficacy in reducing depressive symptoms, 
durability of an tidepress ant effect, safety of treatment and 
feasibility of iTBS in  5 adolescents with MDD.  
Test Article(s)  
(If Applicable)  Theta burst transcranial magnetic stimulation will be performed for the 
treatment of depression in adolescents.  
Study Design  Open  label, f easibility  
Subject Population  
key criteria for Inclusion 
and Exclusion:  Inclusion Criteria  
1. Subjects age d 13-17 
2. Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) or Treatment Resistant 
Depression (TRD) by a score of >17 on Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM -D) an d >40 on Children’s Depression Rating Scale Revised (CDRS -R) 
Exclus ion Criteria  
1. Subje cts with metallic implants, brain injury, seizure disorder  
2. Current or lifetime history of an eating disorder, psychosis, 
bipolar disorder, substance abuse  
 
 
6 3. Current inpatien t psychia tric hospitalization, or current 
symptoms (including suici de ideation) that would require inpatient 
hospitalization  
4. Pregnancy for female subjects  
5. Any other condition investigators deem may interfere with study 
participation or safety  
Number Of Su bjects  5 
Study Duration  Participation will last 17 weeks. Treatme nt will occur 5 days a week for 4 
weeks. 3 Follow-up visits will be performed.  
Study will recruit for 1 year.  
Study Phases  
Screening  
Study Treatment 
Follow -Up   (1) Screening: screening fo r eligibility and obtaining consent  
(2) Intervention : subjects will receive iTBS, 5 days a week for 4 weeks  
(3) Follow up: a follow up visit will be done at 1 week, 4 weeks, and 12 
weeks after the last treatment session.  
Efficacy Evaluations  Evaluations o f CDRS -R (Children’s Depressive Rating Scale Revised) and 
HAM -D (Ha milton Depression rating scale) scores will be used to measure 
efficacy. MMSE, Trails B, list generation, Columbia Suicide Scale, semi-
structured interviews for Non -suicidal Self Injurious Behavior (NSSIB) , and 
medical review will be used to evaluate safet y. Assessment of t he 
number and per cent treatments completed and number and percent of subjects who withdraw from treatment will be used to assess feasibility 
Pharmacokinetic 
Evaluations  N/A 
Safe ty Evaluations  ● Evaluations of CDRS -R (Children’s Depressiv e Rating Scale 
Revised) and HAM -D (Hamilton Depression rating scale) scores will be 
used to measure efficacy. MMSE, Trails B, list generation, Columbia Suicide Scale, semi- structured interv iews for Non -suicidal Self Injurious 
Behavior (NSSIB), and medical r eview will be use d to evaluate safety.    
Assessment of the number and per cent treatments completed and number and percent of subjects who withdraw from treatment will be used to assess f easibilit y 
● In addition,  a medical review of symptoms, vital signs, U DS (Urine 
Drug Sc reen), physical exam, and applicable pregnancy test, regular 
assessment of adverse events and change in pregnancy status will be obtained.  
Statistical And Analytic 
Plan  This is a pilot feasibility study, and it will not be powered to sho w 
significance. 
● We will compare pre - and post -treatment measures of 
depression in all subjects with repeated ANOVA measures  
● Cognitive scales and safety assessments  
● Descriptive statistics  
● Pearson’s r  coefficient for correlation between Non -suicidal Self 
Injurious Behavior (N SSIB) , depression, and suicidality changes 
 
 
7 throughout the study.  
● The study may provide important preliminary data for NIH R01 
applications.  
Data And Safety 
Monitoring Pl an PI is responsible for data quality management and ongoing 
assessm ent of safety  
 
   
 
       
 
       
 
    
 
 
8 1.0       BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
  
1.1 Introduction  
Major depression disorder (MDD) in adolescents is a very common neuropsychiatric disorder. [1] Left 
untreated, adolescent MDD can severely affect relationships, the abil ity to participate  in extracurricular 
activities, academics, as well as social functioning.[1,2] In adolescents with MDD left untreated, the condition 
can affect the cognitive and emotional  trajecto ry towards adulthood. In the worst- case scenario, adolesce nt 
MDD can lead to  suicide . [1,2] 
Current psychiatric treatment options for adolescent MDD include psychotherapy, medications and ECT . [3] 
While effective, there are limitations for those requiring more rapid stabilization or with limited access to 
trained  therapists in their community. Psychotropic medications for adolescent MDD are typically offered as 
first line treatment for teens with severe symptoms . [3] Side effects and concern about increased  suicidality 
limit the acceptance of medication by teens a nd their parents. ECT is effective; however,  it is associated with 
significant adverse effects (anesthesia complications, memory deficits, and headache, nausea and vomiting, 
memory deficits ). The ef fect of ECT on the developing adolescent brain is unknown,  rendering ECT a less 
desirable treatment choice in this population . [4a] Close  to 30- 40% of adolescents do not respond to the first 
round of accepted treatment strategies including antidepressants and psychotherapy.  [4b] Of these patients, 
only half will t hen respond to a second treatment strategy, including a change in antidepressant.  [5] Those 
that do not  respond to two standard treatment regimens may be considered as having “Treatment Resistant 
Depression (TRD)” [5] .  
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation ( TMS) is an effecti ve [6 -8] and FDA approved treatment for MDD in adults. 
However, a newer form of TMS — Intermittent Theta burst stimulation (iTBS) — has been developed [9 , 10] 
and was rece ntly FDA approved for MDD in adults [11] after it was shown to be non-i nferior to con ventional 
TMS in adults. ITBS sessions are much shorter in duration (3  minutes) than conventional TMS (37 minutes). 
The brevity of iTBS may allow for increased capacity, d ecreased cost, decreased treatment burden, and more 
accessibility o f TMS for patients  with MDD.  [11] There is evidence that conventional TMS is safe and effective 
in adolescents.  [12] Only a very small number of adolescents in just a few studies have been treated with iTBS . 
[13] Preliminary  findings suggest safety and effi cacy. [13,14]  
It follows that determining whether Intermittent Theta Burst TMS is safe and effective in adolescents is an 
important question to ans wer. An open label, uncontrolled t rial f or the us e of iTBS in 5 adolescents from age 
13 to <18 with MDD wil l be performed, based on the relatively novel nature and the current availability of 
resources.  
The rationale behind managing MDD in adolescents with a treatment modality used in adults may  be 
expla ined by the significant symptoms overlap. The clinical pre sentation of MDD i s similar in adolescents and 
adults save a few general differences. Both are marked by a low mood or loss of interest in enjoyable activities (anhedonia), along with a num ber of as sociated symptoms including a disruption of sleep and appe tite, low 
energy, feelings of guilt, trouble with concentration, and at times suicide ideation. Differences found in the 
literature include a greater tendency for adolescents who are depres sed to ha ve so -called vegetative  
 
 
9 symptoms (weight and appetite chang es); while in adu lts, there is a greater tendency to have more 
concentration problems and anhedonia . [15] Diagnostic criteria also does not show difference between 
adolescents and adults f or Major Depressive Disorder according to the current Diagnostic an d Statistical 
Manu al for Mental Disorders (DSM -V) except for clarification that in adolescents irritability can be present 
instead of or in addition to low mood.  [16] Although there may be differenc es between the etiology o f 
adolescent and adult MDD [15] , there is precedenc e for managing adolescent MDD and adult MDD with 
similar modalities – various antidepressants such as fluoxetine or sertraline were initially studied in adults and 
later w ere studi ed and FDA approved in adolescents. Indeed, many of the pr actice parameters for managing 
adolescent MDD are based on the few large studies in adolescents, but also on adult studies and practical 
experience . [17] 
Adolescence itself is a dynamic period both physiologically and psychologically. Around the start of p uberty, 
there will start to be an increase in myelination in the brain, neural circuitry development, changes in the 
architecture of the gray and white matter in various regions of the brai n, in add ition to hormonal and 
neurotransmitter changes.  [18] The o nset of puberty depends on various factors including hereditary and 
environmental factors.  [18] There are no differences in the DSM- V diagnostic criteria for MDD between the 
various stages of pubert y, or between the various ages of adolescence. Fluoxetine has been FDA appro ved for 
pediatric MDD from age 8 to 17 . [19] It is the authors’ opinion that a study focusing on age 13 to 17 may serve 
to keep consistent the psychosocial factors of being in high  school . 
Although iTBS is FDA approved for TRD in adults, we will not focus exclusively on adolescents with TRD in this 
study, although they will be included. Optimization of two separate treatment strategies can take up to 3 -4 
months each, which will lead  to prolonged suffering and may worsen the depression.  Th e availability of an 
alternate and potentially effective treatment method may be welcomed by families. Some adolescents with 
MDD that are seen in our clinic cannot take part in routine trea tment str ategies due to logistic or financial 
reasons or due to the  unavailability of  resources – it is the goal of the investigators to not be biased against 
including these patients in the study. Due to the available resources for this study, the relativ e scarcit y of 
adolescents with TRD may prolong recruitment. As a pi lot study , the goa l is to eventually perform a larger 
study, where exploring iTBS’ place in the treatment algorithm for adolescents with MDD would be more appropriate.  
1.2 Name and Description of Invest igational Product or Intervention  
TMS is currently an FDA  approved treatmen t for MDD in adults who currently are in a depressive episode and 
have not responded to, or are unable to tolerate at least two medication trials . [20] Multiple devices ha ve 
been a pproved by the FDA to provide TMS for MDD. [ 21] It is thus  the aim of the re searchers to study the 
treatment modality, and not the machine. The specific machine that we will be using is from MagVenture, and the specific model is the MagPro. The Ma gVenture machine that we intend to use is currently being used in 
our outpatient clinic to provide treatment. This machine has the capability to provide iTBS. The researchers 
that will be providing the TMS treatment have been trained in the use of this machine, and  have logged 
multiple patient hours with this specific mac hine. 
TMS treatmen t for MDD consists of delivering non- invasive, magnetic stimulation to the left prefrontal cortex, 
where it induces an electrical current, which in turn affects neuronal a ctivity. [22] Repetitive stimulation 
 
 
10 patterns of the prefrontal cor tex at 10Hz for 40  minutes a day, five days a week, for 4 -6 weeks, has been 
shown to improve depressive symptoms. [20] Theta Burst Stimulation (TBS) is a newer form of TMS. Instead of 
provi ding 10HZ  stimulation, its stimulation pattern mimics endogenous br ain theta rhythms.  Studies of this 
form of stimulation have revealed improved induction of synaptic long -term potentiation, and have shown a 
benefit over placebo for treating MDD in adults,  and have  also been shown to be non- inferior to 10Hz TMS for 
the tr eatment of MDD in adults . [11]  
 A non -significant risk determination has been made and a request for this to be reviewed will be sent to the 
local IRB (Institutional Review Board). A device  descript ion will also be sent to the IRB for review. iTBS has also  
been FDA approved  for adults.  
 iTMS (Intermittent Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation) (sec 12.2) and iTBS (the subject of this investigation) are interchangeable. rTMS (Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation) – is a general term that describes how a 
pulsed magnetic fi eld is applied repeatedly, resulting in an electric current in the cerebral cortex. A TMS device 
uses a computer to drive an electromagnet to deliver a pulsed magnet field pattern known as the TMS 
protocol. The first TMS protocol that was  FDA approved in 2 008 delivered magnetic pulses at 10 cycles per 
second for 4 seconds followed by 26 seconds rest, repeated 75 times for a total of 3000 pulses delivered over 37.5 minutes.  Theta bur st stimulation (TBS) describes a new and different TMS pro tocol recently app roved by 
the FDA in 2019. Theta burst TMS applies stimulation that resembles the endogenous EEG (electroencephalogram) theta rhythms observed in EEG measures of humans. Theta burst TMS protocols can 
be delivered continuously which is call ed continuous thet a burst stimulation ( cTBS), or intermittently which is 
called intermittent theta burst stimulation (iTBS). Clinical research has demonstrated that iTBS is effective for 
treatment o f depression in adults, whereas cTBS is not effective. The  efficacy data of a new iTBS was so 
impressive that it was FDA approved. This particular TMS protocol delivers the magnetic field in triplet bursts 
(three stimulations very close together at a frequency of 50 hz very quickly). The triplet bursts are repeate d at 
a rate of 5 Hz for 2 seconds (30 pulses), followed by 8 seconds rest, repeated 20 times for a total of 600 pulses. 
This new FDA approved iTBS protocol is likely to be effective in ado lescents with MDD.  
 In this study we will investigate the efficacy and durability  of the effects of iTBS in adolescent depression (see 
Specific AIM 1 below) by measuring changes in clinical ratings  [CDRS -R, HAM -D, and 
Non-suicidal Self Injurious 
Behavior ( NSSIB) evaluations ] before and after 4 weeks of treatment, as well a s 12 weeks follow ing treatment.  
We expect that subjects will show: improvement in symptoms over 20 iTBS sessions as measured by the 
Children’s Depression Rating Scale Revised (CDRS- R), HA M-D and Non-suicidal Self Injurious Behavior (NSSIB) 
measures, and persistence of thi s reduction of depressive symptoms through the 12 weeks follow up period of 
the study. In this study,  we will investigate the safety  of the effects of iTBS in adolescent depression  (see 
Specific Aim 2 below) .   We will investigate safety o f the treatment r egimen by assessing suicidality.  We 
expect suicidal thoughts and behavior will reduce with iTBS treatment as measured by the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS) and a psychiatrist’s clinical assessment.   We also expect that t hose with NSSIB at  
the start of the trial will have less after iTBS treatments. We do not expect any change in cognition measured with 
MMSE, Trails B, and list generation . We will investigate treatm ent feasibility  by assessing treatment 
completion and with drawal (See Specif ic Aim 3 below) . We define the feasibility of iTBS  will be defined as 
feasible by as completion of 15/20 (75%) iTBS treatment sessions by all subjects AND  withdrawal from 
treatment  of no more than one of five subjects (20%) due to intoler able side effects or persistent symptoms of 
 
 
11 MDD. Investigation of efficacy, durability, safety as well as feasibility simultaneously is essential in  this 
preliminary study of the use of iTB S in adolescents  in order to justify a larger future study . 
Non -Clinical and Clinical Study Findings  
Potential Risks:  
Breach of Confidentiality: Like with all research, there is an unlikely but potential risk of confidentiality being 
broken. Due the stigma  with mental health disorders, if someone were to discover a patien t participated in 
this study, it is possible for them to face embarrassment or discrimination. However, all paper study files  will 
be coded and kept in a locked cabinet, in a locked office,  in a secure building at all times. The facility used is 
routinely used for clinical research as well as routine psychiatric care. Study staff will be the only ones with 
access to this information unless required by law. Additionally, study staff are trained on con fidentiality 
guidelines for patient healthcare and as rese arch subjects. In allowable circumstances, paper material that are 
allowed to be destroyed will be shredded by UNC (University of North Carolina) healthcare -grade shredding 
system. In addition, ques tionnaires will be done in a private office to protect the ir identity. Elect ronic files are 
stored securely on UNC -provided equipment and complies with all technological security requirements.  
Risk of Embarrassment: It is possible that by answerin g questio ns during screening and throughout the study 
that a patien t may feel uncomfo rtable or embarrassed to answer questions. Subjects will be answering these 
questions in a private office to protect their identity.  
Risk of  Pain or Discomfort : Some discomfort may  temporarily occur during treatment. There may be mild and  
temporary scalp pain where treatment is administered, in all recorded instances of previous studies, this 
recovered without intervention and was mild in severity.  
Risk of Seizure : This is a very lo w risk, but more likely to happen if the subject has a his tory of seizures o r 
central nervous system disorders.  
Current side effect statistics below: 
 iTBS is new for adolescents and kids. So far, however, safety data is extremely similar for that of adul ts. We 
looked at current safety data for iTBS used in anyo ne under 18 years old. The below information summarizes 
safety data.  
-    Mild side effects that are brief and resolve on their own without intervention (headaches, local 
discomfort, pain, tingling,  dullness, scalp pain, nausea, loss of appetite, change in  hearing, neck sti ffness, 
finger twitching, fatigue, musculoskeletal problems) : 9 -12.4 %  of participants  
-    Moderate side effects (headaches, ringing in ears, neurocardiogenic syncope):  1.3%  
-    Serious side effects (seizures): 0% in kids treated with iTBS in studies p erformed so far. The risk for 
seizure increases if someone has central nervous system disorders or a history of epilepsy. In regular 
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS), the risk is .06%  
 
 
12 There is no known risk for increasing suicidali ty by using iTBS.  In addition, patients who are imminently suicidal 
will not be allowed to participate in the study. Appropriate referrals will be made should this happen.  
Potential Benef its: 
Pote ntial benefits include a reduction in depressive symptoms.  This in turn can alleviate other impairments in 
functioning that are caused by depression; such as better sleep, appetite, socialization, school and work 
functioning, and overall wellness.  This will be measured and tracked through HAM- D and CDRS -R assessm ents 
(more informa tion on these assessments in section 5.2)  
 Additional Follow -up: Patients will continue to be seen by their regular provider and specialist, and may find 
benefit in workin g with an  additional treatment team for closer follow -up.  
 Risk /B enefit Assessment  
 Due to the need to expand treatment for MDD and similarities between the risks and benefits to other 
treatment options currently available or other clinical studies, it h as been determined that the potential 
benefits outweigh the potenti al risks.  
 
1.5 Relevan t Literature and Data   
See section 5.2  
2.0 STUDY OBJECTIVE   
The purpose of the study is to determine the efficacy/durability, the safety, and the feasibility of iTBS in 5 
adolescen ts with MDD.  
  Specific Aims.   
  Aim 1. Investigate the e fficacy and durab ility of effects by estimating the magnitudes of pre -
regimen vs. post -regimen longitudinal changes in CDRS -R, HAM -D, and NSSIB evaluations.  
 
Hypothesis 1:   Adolescents with MDD wil l show improvement in symptoms over 20 iTBS sessions 
as me asured by the Chil dren’s Depression Rating Scale Revised (CDRS- R), HAM -D and NSSIB 
measures.  
 Hypothesis 2:   Adolescents with MDD will show reduction of depressive symptoms will persists 
through th e 12 week follow up period of the study.  
 
Hypothesis 3:   Adolescents with MD D who demonstrate NSSIB at the start of the trial will show 
reduction in NSSIB after iTBS treatments.  
 
 
13  
  Aim 2. Investigate safety of the treatment regimen by assessing s uicidalit y with the Columbia 
Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS) .   
 
Hypothesis 1:  Adolescents with MDD will show reduction in suicidal thoughts and behavior with 
iTBS treatment as measured by the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS) and a 
psychiatris t’s clinical assessment.  
  Aim 3. Investigate treatment f easibility by asse ssing treatment completion and withdrawal.  
 
Hypothesis 1:  iTBS will be considered feasible if: a.) 15/20 (75%) iTB S treatment sessions are 
completed by all subjects, and; b.) no mo re than one of five subjects (20%) withdraw from iTBS  due 
to intolerable sid e effects or persistent symptoms of MDD.  
 
3.0 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN (brief overview)  
 
3.1  Study Design  
Type of design: A pilot study that is an open label, feasibility study. This study will aim to  reduce depressive 
symptoms in adolesce nts using iTBS and  evaluating the safety of methods. This will be an uncontrolled study 
design.  
The study phases are described below:  
- Screening/Baseline:  This will include informed consent, an Intake Assessment (including psychological 
assessments / ques tionnaires), medic al review with physical exam, vitals, UDS, and pregnancy screening for  a 
total of about 2 hours, and needed collateral. Screening will last up to 1 week prior to schedulin g first 
treatment session in order to allow sufficient time to gath er all needed medi cal information. The entire 
screening visit itself should last up to 3 hours with patient and caregiver.  
- Intervention/Treatment: Participants will receive iTBS immediately  followin g screening, should they be 
determined eligible. Treatment  visits will last 20 days, Monday -Friday for approximately 10 minutes each 
session. Although the actual procedure takes 3 minutes, we estimate close to 5 -7 minutes will be required for 
setting up the treatment and the equipment. Treatment will occur over a  4-w eek period. Once per week, 
additional cognitive and safety assessments will be performed. During the last the day of the treatment phase, 
efficacy and safety scales will be performed also. Subje cts will continue to receive routine psychiatric care 
from their outpatient mental health team, which may consist of a psychiatrist and a therapist.  
 
 
14 - Follow up:  There will be 3 follow up appointments to evaluate long -term efficacy and safety at 1 w eek, 
4 we eks, and 12 weeks since the last treatment session.  
- Unsche duled Visits: Thes e will be done for any safety concerns and may include any of the 
assessments listed above. If pregnancy is suspected, another urine pregnancy test will be performed.  
 
3.2 Allocati on to Treatment Groups and Blinding (if applicable) : N/A 
 3.3 Study Duration, Enrollment and Number of Subjects  
5 subjects are expected to enroll. The total study participation will be over the course of 1 6-17 weeks, 
including the 24 study visits.  The iTBS  treatment itself will last a few minutes, and additional t ime will be 
alloc ated for machine set -up and additional review of symptoms as needed.  Once per week during the 
treatment phase, subjects will also have additional cognitive and safety asse ssments d one for safety 
monitoring that will last approximately 1 h our.  
 
Given that subjects will need to come in 4 consecutive weeks Monday -Friday for treatments, it is likely one 
patient will be treated at a time. With the need to enroll and complete al l data co llection within a year, minus 
startup time, it is feasible  to enroll 5 patie nts. In addition, iTBS has not been used in patients younger than 16 
before, and while there is no safety concern for this, it would make sense from a safety perspective to start with a smaller number of participants. The data used from th is study will the n be used to pursue larger grant 
opportunities such as R01 to enroll more subjects that will allow for statistical significance calculations.  
 
3.4 Study Population  
Inclus ion Crite ria: 
-         A score of greater than 40 on the CDRS -R an d 17 on HAM -D. 
-         Documentation of DSM- V criteria for current MDD or  TRD will be required for study entry.  
-         Patients may be on antidepressant medication at a stable dose or receiving  psychotherapy with a 
licensed provider during the active p hase of TMS treat ment for 4 weeks.  
-         Ability to provide consent and take part in questionnaires and scales (i.e.: not currently intellectually 
disabled) . 
-         The presence of suicidality or NSSI B are not required to enter this study. Although  our secondary end -
points include suicidality, and we are also exploring NSSIB, and thus this may not lead to many  data, the 
investigators’ plan is to use data from this study to justify a larger st udy where this can be more robustly 
investigated.  
Exclusion ary criteria:  
-     Past or current diagnosis of bipolar disorder, psychosis, seizures or traumatic brain injury.  
-     Presence of intracranial metallic implants or fragments, which is a contraind ication for TMS.  
 
 
15 -     Lifetime history of (or currently p resent) epileps y.  
-     Current diagnosis of substance abuse, e ating disorder, PTSD (Post Traumatic Stress Disorder), or 
intellectual disability.* Nicotine use disorder will not directly preclude a  potential subject from this study. 
Although chronic nicoti ne use does effec t central nervous system excitability , [23] wh at would be more 
confounding to our study would be if there is a sudden change in nicotine use during the treatment phase, as  
this may  affect the motor threshold. Inclusion will however be at t he PI’s discretio n. 
-     Current imminent suicide ideation or other clinical reasons for inpatient psychiatric hospitalization.  
-     Currently pregnant. There is currently not adequate data from this population to ensure safety with the 
scope of this pr otocol.  
-     Any  reason the investigator determines may cause noncompliance with study rules or is unfit for receiving 
treatment.  
-     Currently taking certain medications including ant idepressa nts, stimulants, benzodiazepines, and 
antipsychotics , antiepileptic  (see App endix A).  
-     Any positive drug testing from a urine drug test unless medically indicated with a valid prescription.  
  *Those with marijuana/cannabis positive results m ay retest  later if at that time they do not meet 
criteria for subst ance abuse at scre ening and agree to refrain from use for the duration of study  participation. 
Decision to be made by Investigator discretion.  
   
4.0 STUDY PROCEDURES  
Please refer to Appe ndix B for Time and Event Schedule detailing when study tasks will b e 
performed.  
4.1  Screening/Baseline Visit procedures  
- Informed consent and assent for study participation will be obtained from the parent/guardian and child 
respectively  
- We will perf orm a clinical interview and then confirm diagnosis with MINI -KID. 
- The following sc ales will be administered : 
Diagnostic:  
- A  
- A SCID -5 (Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5) interview will establish diagnosis of major depression and 
rule out exclusionary psychiatric  disorders.  
Efficacy scales to establish a baseli ne: 
- Children’s Depression Rating Scale Revise d (CDRS -R), a commonly used, highly regarded and validated 
measure of depression as one of our primary outcome measures.  
- Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM -D), one of the most widely used depression rating scales in clinic al 
care and research. This will help measure the primary outcome . 
 
 
16 Cognitive / Safety:  
- Cognitive assessments will include MMSE, Trails B and List Generation.  
- Safety Assessments will include the C -SSRS, semi- structured interview for NSS IB, and a  medical review of 
symptoms including items commonly seen in the literature.  [24] 
- Medical review for metallic implants, general medical history, and medication review . 
- Physical exam including vital signs (temperatur e, respiratory rate, oxygen saturatio n, blood pressure, heart 
rate, weight ). 
- Neur ological exam performed by a trained psychiatrist and has exper ience providing iTBS. It entails the 
neurological history for epilepsy, seizures, including febrile seizures in infancy and self -limited is olated seizures 
in childhood, reason, time course and dose of treatment with anti -epileptic medications, other significant 
neurological illness that have cause that is infectious (meningitis), metabolic (electrolyte abnormalities), 
genetic/inherited (synd rome s Iike Downs or 22q de letion syndromes ) that are as sociated with mental illness, 
dementia and psychosis, any significant delay in cognitive, motor or sensory development. The neurological 
exam looks at Cranial nerves: I, II, III, IV , V, VI, VII, VIII, I X, X, has a moto r exam (s trength and symmetry, upper 
and lower extremity muscle groups), sensory exam (fine touch, pain, temperature, and proprioception ), and 
reflex exam. Cognitive function is also evaluated —Mini Mental Status of Folstein to include aler tness, 
orientatio n, short/ long -term memory, attention , concentration, fu nd of knowledge . 
- Urine pregnancy test for females of childbearing potential  
- Urine Drug Screen   
- Study team will ask subjects to speak with their regular doctors and have caregiv ers sign  release of 
inform ation forms if they agree.  
- Patients who sign consent for a screening will receive a unique subject ID code . It will be coded as “ERAxx” 
where “xx” represents the number of sequential  enrollment “01, 02, etc.” There will be a ke y that l inks 
subject’s ide ntifying information (name, date of birth) and subject ID stored securely with other study 
materials, that only those with permission have acce ss to on a need- to-know basis.  
4.2  Intervention/Treatment procedur es (by visits)  
-On t he first treatmen t day : Prior to initiation of iTBS administration, the physician will establish 100% of 
motor threshold . iTBS will then be administered starting at 100% of motor threshold, increasing to 120% of 
motor threshold while ad justing the coil pos ition to minimize  side eff ects. 
-The remaining 19 iTBS treatments : These will be delivered over a four week period, with five treatments 
delivered weekly by a UNC rTMS -trained physician Monday through Friday.  
-General information about the entire treatment  phase of study that is not visit specific: Each treatment will 
follow the iTBS protocols established by MagVenture, Inc. and treatment will be provided at 120% of motor 
threshold at all 20 treatment visits.  
-Patients will undergo CDRS -R, HAM -D, and cognit ive asse ssments o nce weekl y during the treatment phase,  
starting on their fifth treatment day, and each week from that time point depending on which day of the week they start treatment.  
-Patients will be assessed prior to every treatment for side effects  or safety-relate d symptom s, as well as 
review of conco mitant medication.  
 
 
17 - Vitals will be taken prior to every treatment administration during all 20 treatment days.  Weight will be 
obtained once per week during the treatment phase. Per investigator discr etion, weight may be obtained at 
additional timepoints during the treatment phase or unscheduled visits to ensure safety of the subjec t. 
- UDS and urine pregnancy tests can be done at any time due to inves tigator discretion for safet y purpose s. 
Pregna ncy ri sk assessment will be d ocumented at every visit for females of childbearing potential.  
 
4.3  Follow - up procedures (by visits)  
-At a 1 -week post treatment follow -up visit, the CDRS -R, HAM -D, cognitive and  safety assessments will be 
completed  (MMSE, L ist Ge neration, Trails B, C -SSRS, NSSIB interview). In addition, vitals including weight will 
be taken, a physical exam performed, and AE and concomitant therapy review will be done.  
 -At a 4 -week post treatment follow- up visit , the CDRS -R, HAM -D, cogniti ve and sa fety asse ssments will be 
completed (MMSE, List Generation, Trails B, C -SSRS, NSSIB interview). In addition, vitals including weight will 
be taken, a physical exam performed, and AE and concomitant therapy review will be done.  
- At a 12 -week post treatmen t follow -up visit, the CDRS -R, HAM -D, cognitive and safet y assessments will be 
completed (MMSE, List Generation, Trails B, C -SSRS, NSSIB interview). In addition, vitals including weight will 
be taken, a physical exam performed, and AE and concomitant thera py review will be done.  A 
Patient/Caregiver s atisfaction questionnaire wil l be done to  help  improve future study designs.  
 4.4  Unscheduled visits  
Any of the assessments used above may be used for an unscheduled visit, depending on the reasons for visit 
and safety needs. If the par ticipant at any time is experiencing an AE or a nother reason for safety concern, in 
which the investigator deems is probably related to the study treatment, an unscheduled visit can be scheduled for a safety review. Appropriate r eferrals can also be made f or ongoin g care sh ould a safety concern 
arise t hat is not study related.  
 4.5  Concomitant Medication documentation  
Concomitant psychotropic medications will be documented starting 1 month prior to screening and 
enrollment. In a ddition, this will be monit ored and recorded during every visit in which p articipant is enrolled 
in the study. Non- psychotropic medications for other significant medical conditions or birth control will also be 
monitored. There are a wide variety of medic ations that can decrease the  seizure threshold  such as 
antihistamines, anti cholinergics, and cephalosporins among others – there is no absolute contra -indication for 
TMS when taking these medications in adults. However , the decision to continue treatments w ill be done at 
every visit at the PI ’s discre tion of clinical need and ris k potential. Monitoring will be done for 
benzodiazepines, antidepressants, stimulants , and antipsychotics, which would preclude either initiation or 
continuation of the study. Pleas e see Appendix A for more de tailed in formation . 
 4.6 Rescue medication admi nistration: N/A 
 4.7 Subject Completion  / Withdrawal procedures  
Subjects who complete the study will be reminded of the study team’s contact information should they have 
any questio ns in the future. Files will be kept under loc k and key in a locked office in a secure facility for the 
 
 
18 required amount of time according to GCP (Good Clinical Practice) principles and FDA regulations. For those 
wishing to withdraw from the study early, a t ermination visit will be sc heduled t o ensure safety, proper follow 
up, review adverse effects, and medications.  CDRS -R, HAM -D, all cognitive, and safety assessments will be 
performed for final data capture if the patient agrees.  
 
Patients will be withdra wn by investigators if they miss 20% of planne d treatments, for noncompliance, or any 
other issues the PI determines can cause harm to the patient.  
 
We will not replace discontinued participants. We will use the data we have up until discontinuation.  
 
4.8  Screen failure procedures  
Subjects who scree n fail will be informed immed iately. A copy of their consent form will still go into their 
electronic medical records (EMR) through EPIC. Any other paper source documents will be stored securely 
with other enro lled-patient information.  
4.9 Qualifications of study team  
  The study tea m has Human Subject Protection and Good Clinical Practice training . The two psychiatrists on 
the team have been actively providing iTBS to adults for years. Questionnaires used in th e study have been 
used by study team  members in previous work both researc h and non- research related. Regarding NSSI B 
evaluations,  study team  receive d training from the psychology department by a Ph.D.  and his graduate 
student who have studied NSSIB for y ears. The main study team (s tudy coor dinator and 2 M.D. ’s) have been 
workin g together on multi -phase sponsor clinical trials for several years and have been trained in consent, 
questionnaires, and have clinical experience in diagnosing, intervention, and s afety monitoring. The 
psycho logy depa rtment ha s also been invested in clini cal research for years. Recruitment, questionnaires, and 
consent will be done by two M.D. psychiatrists and study coordinator. Confirmation of diagnosis, eligibility, 
physical and n eurological exams, study int ervention , and saf ety monitoring will be done b y the two 
psychiatrists.  
 
5.0 STUDY EVALUATIONS AND MEASUREMENTS   
 
5.1 Safety Evaluation  
- Variables that will be abstracted from medical charts : General medical health and stability  (current), 
concomitant medi cations, medical h istory, and diagnosis will be  used to help determine patient eligibility.  
- Baseline evaluation:  Baseline will be done at screening while eligibility is determined. SCID -5, CDRS -R, 
HAM -D, MMSE, Trails B, List G eneration, a semi- structured in terview, and C -SSRS will be used for diagnos is of 
depression and baseline cognitive functioning.  
o SCID -5 – This is a structured interview to evalu ate psychiatric diagnosis  in children and adolescents. 
Interrater reliability rang es from .78-1 depending on the diagnosis . [23] This is a descriptive, yes/ no, 
diagnostic assessment that will only be used at screening . 
 
 
19 o UDS  and urine pregnancy tests for c hildbearing -capable participants will be performed at screening for 
eligibility purpos es. Investigators will only repeat these tests as a discretionary basis if there is concern for 
pregnancy or unauthorized drug use that can cause the participant potentia l harm in c onjunctio n with study 
participation.  
 
- How measurements will be taken: Assessments will be done by a trained study staff in a private 
setting to ensure patient comfort and ability to answer questions. Various questionnaires will be used to 
measu re baseli ne and effi cacy, as listed above  in section 5.1. These will be done at scr eening, and the end of 
each treatment week (4  times total during treatment phase), and again at each of the 3 follow -ups.  
- Rating scales, tests, psychological tools, laboratory evaluat ions, etc. Assessments are described in 
section 5.2.  
- Safety eva luations  include vitals being monitored and a physical exam. Vitals will be monitored every 
visit. UDS and urine pregnancy test will be done at screening and any other time the inve stigator de ems 
suspi cion it is necessary for safety purposes. A physical exam will be done at screening and all follow up visits . 
Concomitant medication tracking and AE review will be done at every visit. Attention will also be placed on 
any change in medications or doses. Psychiatrists will evaluate safety through medical review  of symp toms at 
each study visit and monitor treatment sessions. Additional questionnaires for safety and cognitive evaluation 
once per week during the treatment phase. Please see A ppendix B f or detailed information.  
o Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C- SSRS)  – C- SSRS is a tool widely used in clinical s ettings to 
assess suicidality. A large problem before the scale ’s existence was a lack of uniformity among assessing 
suicidality . C-SSRS was created  to address this measuring four different constructs. T hese con structs are 
severity of ideation, intensity o f ideation, behavior subscale, and lethality subscale. C -SSRS is endorsed and 
recommended by multiple health and mental health related organizations . C-SSRS is an effective assessment 
tool for clinical a nd resea rch environments . [25] This is a descriptive and yes/no assessment.  
o Cognitive assessments:  
Mini -Mental Status Exam (MMSE) : MMSE is a tool used to assess cognitive function. It consists  of 30 it ems 
assessing orientation to time, orientation to place , attent ion and calculation, registration, recall, la nguage, 
repetition, and complex commands. While used primarily for assessment of dementia in older adults, MMSE is 
useful in ass essing and screening  intellectual disabilities in children and adolescents.  Preliminary studies found 
and concluded that MMSE co uld be used as a tool to assess cognitive function of children ages 4 and older . 
[26] This is a scored assessment.  
 
Trail Making  Test Part B (TMT -B): TMT (Trails Making Test)  is another tool used to asse ss cogni tive function. 
The test consists of two parts . Part A consists of connecting the dots together in sequential order based on 
numbers (1,2,3 …). Part B consists of the same ide a but uses and alternates both letters and numbers 
(1,A,2,B,3,C …) with the goal of con necting the dots in sequential order. TMT has a number of studies that 
supports its effectiveness and depicts its ability to differentiate between children with achieveme nt deficits  
and learning disabilities from their normally developing peers.  Trails B has been found to be more sensitive to 
thes e differences than Trails A. [27] This is a scored assessment.  
 
 
 
20 List Gen eration: This assessment determines the ability for one to recall as many items as possible in a given 
category. This study will ut ilize “a nimal names”, where subjects are to recall at  least 14 animals with a 60 
second period. This is a scored assessment.  
 
 
5.2 Efficacy Evaluation  
 
Children’s Depression Rating  Scale Revised (CDRS -R) – This is one of the most commonly used assessment 
tools for p ediatrics when identifying depression. It assesses symptom severity and can be administered 
filtered or unfiltered (in context of mood disorder or not ). [28] It is a semi  structured  intervie w scale. 17 items 
are scored, with 3 of these 17 being made fro m observation versus verbal response [28]. Th is will evaluate 
overall wellness to determine efficacy of treatment, measuring sleep, appetite, socialization, school/work 
func tioning, and overall  wellness. This is a scaled and scored assessment and is filter ed. 
 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM -D) – This is the most widely used tool to evaluate depression. 
Interrater reliability is high at 0 .97-0.98. It is easily administered and measures sev erity of depression. It is 
considered the “gold standar d” when assessing depression. There are 21 items to s core however only the first 
17 are actually totaled , each question has a scaled answer . [29] The HAM -D used in this protocol is the same 
tool used f or routine clinical services in the Department of Psychiatry at  UNC. This will also evaluate overall 
wellnes s to determine efficacy of treatment, measuring sleep, appetite, socialization, school/work functioning, 
and overall wellness. T his is a sc aled and scored assessment.  
 
 
SITBI (Self -Injurious Thoughts and  Behavio rs Interview)  short form & semi structured  interview  – Self-injurious 
thoughts and behaviors , lifetime and past month  will be assessed using the Self -Injurious Thoughts and 
Behaviors I nterview (SITBI) short form, a clinician -administered interview (3-10 mi n) that assesses the 
presence, frequency, sev erity, age -of-onset, and other characteristics of a broad range of self -injurious 
thoughts and behaviors. The SITBI has strong c onvergent v alidity, inter -rater reliability (K = .90), and test –
retest reliability (K = .70) . [30] It is a comprehensive assessm ent that is recommended for use in clinical and 
research settings . [30] This is a descriptive, yes/no assessment.  
 Other: Patien t/Caregiver  Satisfac tion questionnaire: This is an original, brief questionnaire us ing scaled and 
open ended questions that is s elf-reported. This will gather information on what the participants found helpful 
and what could be improved for future studies.  This quest ionnaire was created in collaboration and upon 
request of the funding so urce Center for Health Innovation.  
 5.3 Phar macokinetic Evaluation : N/A 
 
6.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS     
6.1 Primary Endpoint  
 
 
21 Differences in CDRS -R and HAM -D scores will be divided by the standard deviation for effect size (which will 
not be sca led for sta tistical significance given the sample siz e). Descriptive statistics and repeated ANOVA will 
be used to evaluate efficacy. Tolerability will be evaluated examining safety  and advers e events at every study 
visit. Given the novelty and duration of treatme nt, it is more likely 5 patients will be able  to participate and 
provide enough data for future research that is funded to expand sample size.  
6.2 Secondary Endpoint  
● To eva luate the r eduction of suicidality in adolescents with MDD: This will be do ne with des criptive and 
repeated measures ANOVA.  
● To assess durability of antidepressant effect: This will be done with descriptive and repeated measures 
ANOVA.  
● To evaluate the change in Non- suicidal Self Injurious Behavior (NSSIB): This will be evaluated  with 
descriptive statistics.  
● Evaluation of adverse events will be performed at every visit and documented according to GCP 
guidelines. Appropriate follow up and referrals will be made as nee ded.  
 
6.3 Statistical Methods  
- Baseline Data: CDRS -R, HAM -D, and  other c ognitive and safety assessments will be used at screening to 
capture baseline data.  
- Efficacy Analysis: As this is an uncontrolled study design, the investigators understand  that any c hange 
in scores or observed improvement in symptoms may not be n ecessari ly attributable to the treatment 
received . Thus, efficacy analysis will be described in this context. The investigators feel that a larger study 
would be indicated which may  be sham co ntrolled.   Repeated measures ANOVA will be used to compare 
depre ssion ra ting scores from each of the treatment weeks compared to baseline, as well as comparing scores 
between follow up visits and baseline and end of treatment weeks. Pearson’s r coefficient  will be used to 
determine correlation between, CSSR -S sco res, and  primary endpoints (CDRS -R & HAM -D).  Descriptive 
statistics to identify if NSSIB is present  since the subject’s last visit  at baseli ne, during  the interventional period  
and follow ups, will be used. It is wo rth noting that use of ANOVA analysis has been r ecomme nded by a 
biostatistician, but due to a small sample size, longitudinal data will not  have ade quate statistical power.  In 
addition, confidence inter vals will be large and results will be uninformative regarding statistical power. This 
uncertainty ma y cont ribute to a future study sample size that is still too small for statistic al power, but a larg er 
sample size than this protocol.  
- Pharmacokinetic Ana lysis : N/A 
- Safety Analysis:  Measurement of safety is a continuous process starting with screening. Me dical review 
of symptoms occurs at every visit. In addition, should safety conce rns related  to study  treatment occur, 
additional unscheduled safety visits can be performed. Additional assessments are done wee kly during the 4 -
week treatment phase.  
- Personne l: Stu dy coordinator will complete data entry into RedCap system and oversee data 
managemen t. The Pr inciple Investigator will do oversight . A TraCS biostatistician ( Dr. Feng -Chang Li n) will 
complete data analysis and computations and will work with the study tea m throughout the duration of study 
activities and completion.  
 
 
22 - Missing Dat a and Proto col Viola tions: Data will be collected in multiple formats – on paper and later 
electronically. Paper data will include various scales and assessments. There will be  two m emb ers of the 
investigation team during assessments and scale administrati on, which c an assist  with looking over the data. 
Paper documents will be labeled without any personal health information or othe r sensitive identifying 
information outside of t he study team. These documents will be stored in a locked cabinet in a locked office. If 
there is an y missing data, we will refer to the stored paper documents. If data continues to be missing, we are 
plannin g to mitigate selection bias by remarking clearly in o ur results and discussion that consideration must 
be given to this fact. Any protocol  violatio ns will be assessed by the Principal Investigator, will  be submitted to 
the IRB, and a discussion will be ha d on how to proceed with the study.  
- Other: For any mis sing data, rationale and documentation will be provided in the database (R edCap) 
and source do cumentation.  
 
6.4 Sample Size and Rationale  
This is a pilot study to measure the efficacy, duration, safety  and feasibility iTBS in 5 adolescents with MDD.   It 
will not be powered to show significance. The study may provide important preliminary data for NIH (National 
Institute of Health) R01 applications. In  addition, safety and tolerability will be documented  for all 5 subjects 
to support the expansion of recruitme nt for future research.  The sample size was determined by several 
facto rs. This is  a novel study treatment for adolescents, thus using smaller sam ple size will help evaluate safety 
and feasibility in  a safe manner. In addition, realistic logistical fact ors were considered: there is time 
commitment of treatment required, our p atient pool  at our c linic, and realistic ability to enroll and complete 
the study in a year ’s given time.  We expect to have 5 -10 patients consented, accounting for potential s creen 
failures. We also have parents calling our clinic asking for TMS/ iTBS tre atment but insurance  will not cover it, 
so we are confident we will be able  to successfully recruit. All statistical estimates o f population parameters 
will be tabulated along with c orresponding confidence intervals.  
 
6.5 Interim Analysis  
No interim analysis will be planned for this study. However, should serious or significant A E’s (Adverse Events) 
become prevalent and at investig ator discretion with a causality of likely or ve ry lik ely related to iTBS, the 
study will be stopped for safety reasons.  
7.0 ST UDY INTERVE NTION (De vice or Other I ntervention)  
- Description: Subjects will receive intermittent theta burst TMS, consisting of a  50 Hz triplet burst at 5 Hz for 2 
seconds per t rain, wit h an inter -train interval of 200ms , followed by 8 seconds rest, for 600  total puls es per tr eatment.  
- Receipt/Storage: The machine used for the stud y is routinely used for regular care at a UNC outpatient 
clinic and is regularly maintained and calib rated.   
- Packaging/Labeling: N/A 
- Dosing:  Patients will be treated at 120% of res ting Motor Threshold  as determined by standard 
methods. The treatment will be provided at UNC’s outpatient clinic where TMS is r outinely provided. TMS 
Treatment will be provide d daily M onday -Friday for 4 weeks, for a total of 20 sessions.  
- Drug Return/Destr uction: N/A 
- Drug Acc ountability: N/A 
 
 
23 The TMS apparatus consists of the following, the description and use of which is found in t he device 
description.  
- Treatment Coil  
- Motor Thre shold Coil 
- TMS stimulator  
- Chair with positioning arm  
8.0   STUDY INTERVENTION AD MINISTRATION  
Treatm ent compliance and Adherence: A medication review will be performed prior to each treatment 
administration f or treatment compliance. If 20% of planned sessi ons ar e missed, contraindicated medications 
are used, or there is worsening or lack of bene fit, inve stigators can remove subject from the study. A trained 
study clinician will do administration of treatment . 
 
9.0   SAFETY MANAGEMENT  
- Our protocol includes  multiple  safety assessments, which include the MMSE, Trails B, list generation,  C-
SSCR. In  addition, we will be performing a review of systems during each  visit, which will include the 
common adverse effects  seen in the literature as described in the side -effec ts section . [12, 24] 
- Hearing: All subjects will be provided ear plugs to be used dur ing the s essions.  
- Adverse Event/Serious Adverse Event monitori ng procedures:  Serious and non -serious AE’s will be 
monitored and documented at every visit. Additional ref errals or follow up will be provided on an as -needed 
basis.  See Appendix C  for a copy  of the U NC template  AE log used for documentation.  
- Adverse Event/Serious Adverse Event reporting procedures:  UNC p olicy will be followed for reporting of 
serious and no n-serious adverse events. If the event is unexpected and related or possibly related to 
treatment and serious or suggests new/ increased risk, this will be reported to the IRB. Reports of AE’s will be 
made within 24 hours of investigators discovering  the r eportable event.  
-Medical Emergency procedures:  In the rare event of a me dical emerg ency, the  investigators performing iTBS 
are medically trained to  handle the situation. In addition, the location of t he study will operate in proximity to 
UNC emerge ncy de partment, and 911 can be called for assistance. Investigators and study co ordinator a re 
Basic Life Support and CPR (Cardiopulmonary resuscitation)  certified.  
-Data Safety Monitoring Plan:  Adverse event s will be continuously monitored by investigators and assessed 
for severity, risk to benefit ratio, causality from study treatme nt. Study will be st opped if suspected pattern of 
lack of efficacy or additional risk of harm vs. benefit emerges.  
 
10.0 DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT   
 
10.1  Monitoring Plan : The P I will monitor response rate and adverse events reporting to the UNC IRB.   
 
10.2  Case  report f orms:  Data will be collected on paper source documents and stored according to GCP 
guidelines (more specifically listed below section 10.3). Data analysis w ill be  performed by a biostatistician 
from TraCS. Data will be collected on pape r source, s tored in a secure closet where study staff only have 
access to, in a locked office, in a secure building where badges  are needed to enter off -hours. This building 
 
 
24 location  is routinely used for clinical research and clinical care (Medical Wings behind the hospital) . A 
biostatistician has been engaged and we have budgeted for TraCS services to help us with data analysis. Data 
will be manually entered into REDCap. Data analys is will be completed by a biostatistician . 
10.3  How confidentiality will b e maintaine d: Data w ill be collected on paper source and  coded  with a 
subje ct number. All data and confidential PHI (Protected Health Information) will be locked in a secure 
cabinet/  closet in a secure office in a secure building routinely used for research and clini cal purpo ses. UNC 
badges and keys will be needed to access study  material by study staff only and those authorized pe r local and 
federal regulation. In addition, verbal co mmu nication will be done privately behind closed doors as routine 
care is normally provided. E PIC secure in -basket  system will also be used by study staff to communicate 
privately while maintaining conf identiality.  
 
10.4   Data Quality:  Source docum ents w ill outline which data to be collected and the Principle Investigator 
will oversee ve rificatio n of data entry . Study coordinator and investigators wi ll do metrics that can be verified 
in medical records  (demographics) . Data that is missing will have docume ntation as to why it is missing. Scores 
of assessments used will be collec ted and ent ered into  the database to measure each aim. Scores will be 
verif ied by at le ast two  study personnel.  
  
11.0 RECRUITME NT STRATEGY  
5 outpatients will be recruited thro ugh ei ther referrals of local psychiatric clinics, including UNC’s outpatient 
psychiatry cl inic. Additionally, advertisements will be used to recruit patie nts who may not have routine 
treatment at UNC or have  a provider referring them.  
 
12.0  CONSENT PROCES S 
12.1  Procedure that will be used to obtain informed consent/HIPAA authorizatio n and assen t:  Paren tal 
consent, assent, and HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) authorization will be u sed. A 
consent checklist/documentation form will  be us ed to ensure all aspects of informed consent are properly 
obtained.  
12.2  W ho will obt ain conse nt/assent: Consent will be performed by a study member,  licensed clin ician 
experienced in iTBS  treatment in order to answer all questions regarding safety, risks,  and benefits of study 
treatment. A study coordinator will also plan to be  present to  document  the consenting process. Paper 
consent, assent, and HIP AA forms will be obtained and copies will be provided  to the subjects as well as placed 
in medical re cords.  Original copies will be placed in the study record with subject’s source documents ( subject 
binders).  
12.3  Where consent /assent process will take place: Consent and assent will take place in a private  room for 
confidentiality purposes. The space ut ilized  for this is routinely used for research purposes at UNC.  
12.4  How invest igator will  assure t hat subjects comprehend the nature of the study, procedures, the risks 
and benefits: Patients and parents/guardians will be encouraged to ask any questions about the  study 
procedures, and confirm that both parties understand requirements for participating,  risks, and benefits. 
Participants will be reminded tha t participation is always voluntary and encouraged to  do their own research 
on the topic and discuss with f riends/ family as needed.  
 
13.0  PLANS FOR PUBLICATION  
 
 
25 We intend to publish  the results as a le tter to the editor in a peer reviewed medical journal.  
 
 
 
26 14.0 REFERENCES   
1.    https://www .who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/to pics/a dolescence/mental_health/en/  
2.    Cook, M., et al., ADOLESCENT DEPRESSION : An Update  and Guide to Clinical Decision Making. Psychiatry 
(Edgemont) 20 09; 6(9):17 –31. 
3.    Hussain, H., et al., Recent dev elopments in the treatment of major depressive disorde r in children and adolescents . 
Evid Based Ment Health. 2018 Aug; 21 (3):101- 106.  
4a.    Ghaziud din N., et al., Practice parameter for use of electroco nvulsive therapy with adolescents . J Am Acad Child 
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2004 Dec; 43 (12):1521 -39. 
4b.        Cipriani A, Zhou X, et al. Comparative efficacy and tolerability of antidepressants for major  depressive disorder in 
children and adolescents: a net work meta -analysis . Lancet 2016;388(10047):881e90.  
5. Brent, D., et al., Switching to another SSRI or to ve nlafaxine with or without cognitive behavioral therapy for 
adolescents wit h SSRI -resistant dep ression: the TORDIA randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2008 Feb; 299(8):901- 913.  
6.          George, M.S., et al., Daily left prefrontal transcranial magne tic stimu lation therapy for major depressive disorder: a 
sham -controlled randomi zed trial.  Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2010. 67(5): p. 507 -16. 
7.       O’Reardon,  J.P., et al., Efficacy and safety of transcranial magnetic stimulation in the acute treatment of maj or 
depres sion: a multisite randomized controlled trial.  Biol Psychiatry, 2007. 62(11): p. 1208 -16. 
8.       Brunoni, A.R., et al., Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation for the Acute Treatment of Major  Depressive 
Episodes: A Systematic Review With N etwork  Meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry, 2017. 74(2): p. 143- 152.  
9.       Huang, Y.Z., et al ., Theta burst stimulation of the human motor cortex.  Neuron, 20 05. 45(2): p. 201- 6. 
10.       Suppa, A., et al., Ten Years of Theta Burst Stimulation in Humans: Est ablished Knowledge, Unknowns and 
Prospects.  Brain Stimul, 2016. 9(3): p. 323 -335. 
11.   Blumberger, D.M., et al., Effectiveness of theta burst versus high -frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulatio n in patients with depression (THREE -D): a andomized  non-inferiority trial. Lancet, 2018. 391(10131): p. 1683 -
1692.  
12.   Croarkin, P., et  al., High-frequency repetitive TMS for suicidal ideation in ado lescents with depression . Journal of 
Affective Disord ers 239 (2018) 282 –290.  
13.   Croarkin, P., et al., Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation for Adolescent Depression. Child Adolesc P sychiatric Clin N Am  
28 (2019) 33 –43. 
14.   Kukke, S.N., et al. Hearing saf ety from single - and double -pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation in children and 
young adults . J Clin Ne urophysiol. 2017 July ; 34(4): 340– 347.  
15. Ricea, L. et al., Adolescent a nd adult di fferences  in major depression symptom profiles. Journal of Affec tive 
Disorders. 2019 January; 243: p.175- 181.  
16. Ame rican Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnosti c and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, 
VA. 
 
 
27 17. Brent , D., et al . Practic e Parameter for the Assessment and Treatment of Children and Adolescents With Depressive 
Disorders. Journal of the Am Academy of Psychaitry. 2017 Nov; 46: p. 1503- 1526. 
18. Arain, M., Maturation of the adolescent brain. Neuropsychiatr D is Treat. 2 013; 9: 4 49–461.  
19. https:/ /www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/20 11/018936s091lbl.pdf  
20. Perera T., et al., The Clinical TMS Society Consensus Review and Treatment  Recommendations for TMS Therapy for 
Major Depressive D isorder . Brain Stimul. 2016 ; 9(3): 336– 346.  
21. https://www.clinicaltmssociety.org/tm s/devices  
22. Hallet, M. Transcranial Magneti c Stimulation: A Primer.  Neuron 55 (2017): 187 -199.  
23. https://search.proquest.com/openview/c82ac300b0999a3b0cd334b989d87fe8/1?pq -origsite=gschol ar&cbl=135338  
Elbir, M ., et al. Adaptation and Reliability of Structured Clinical In terview for DSM -5 Disor ders, Clinical Version to the 
Turkish Language. Turkis h Journal of Ps ychiatry (2 019). 24. Hong, Y., Safety and tolerability of theta burst stimulation vs. 
single and paired pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation: a comparative study of 165 pediatric subj ects. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience. 2015 Feb; (9):1 -9 
25. Posner, K., et al., (2011). The Columbia –Suicide Severity Rating Scale: Initial Validity and Internal Consistency Findings 
From Three Multisite Studies With Adolescents and Adults. American Journ al of  Psychiatry, 168 (12) 1266 -1277. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3893686/  
26. Ouvrier, R.A., et al., (1993). T he Value of the Mini -Mental State Examination in C hildhood:  A Preliminary Study.  
Journal of Child Neurology,  (8) 1 45-148.  https://journals -sagepub -
com.libpro xy.lib.unc.edu/doi/pdf/10.1177/08830738930080020  
27. Delis DC, Kaplan E, Kramer JH. D -KEFS: Delis Kaplan Exe cutive Function System. San Anton io, TX: The Psychological 
Corporation; 2001. https://link.springer.c om/refe renceworkentry/10.1007%2F978 -0-387-79948 -3_1539  
28. Yee,  A., et al. (2015). Unfiltered Administration of the YMRS and CDRS -R in a Clinical Sample of Children.  Journal of 
Clinical Child and Adolescent Psc yhology, 44, (6) 992- 1007.  
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/15374416.2014.915548  
29. Inannuzzo, R., et al. (2006). Development and reliability of the HAM -D/MADRS Interview: An integrated depression 
sympto m rating scale. Psychiatry Research, 145, (1) 21 -37. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165178105003422  
30. 121. Nock, M.K., et al., Self-Injurious Thoughts and B ehaviors Interview: Development, reliability, an d vali dity in an 
adolescent sample.  Psychol Assess, 2007. 19(3): p. 9.  
31.   F rohlich, F., et al. Double -blind, randomized pilot clinical trial targeting  alpha oscillations with transcranial 
alternating curr ent stimulation (tACS) for the treatment of major depre ssive disorder (MDD). Translational Psychiatry 
volume 9, Article number:  106 (2019).  
32.   Bailey, N.W., et al., Responders to rTMS for depression show increased fronto -midline theta and theta  connecti vity 
compared to non -responders. Brain Stimulatio n 11 ( 2018) 190e203.  
33. Sheehan, D. V., Sheehan, K. H., Shytle, R. D., Janavs , J., Bannon, Y., Rogers, J. E., Milo, K. M., Stock, S. L., & Wilkinson, 
B. (2010). Reliability and validity of the Mini Internat ional Neuropsychiatric Interview for Children and Adole scents 
 
 
28 (MINI -KID). The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71(3), 313 –326. https://doi .org/10.4088/JCP.09m05305whi  
https://psycne t.apa.org /record/2012 -02346 -014 
 
 
29 15.0      APPENDIX  
 
Appendix A: PROHIBITED MEDICATION LIST  
Antidepressants  Tricyclic antidepressants are not allowed 7  
days prior to screening. Investigator 
discre tion for all antidepressants  
Benzodiazepines  Not allowed 7 days  prior to screening  
Stimulants  Investigator discretion, may need to be 
stopped 7 days prior to study treatment.  
Antipsychotics  Investigator discr etion, may need to be 
stopped 7 days prior to  study tr eatment.  
Antiepileptic   Not allowed if taken for Centr al Nervous 
Disorder (such as epilepsy  or to lower seizure 
threshold ).  
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
30 Appendix B: TIME AND EVENT SCHEDULE  
Time and Event Schedule  Screening  Weeks 1 -4 Treatment* g Follow up**  
Study tasks  V1 (1 wk 
period)  V2b ; V7, 
V12, V17  V3, V8, 
V13, 
V1813,  
V18 V4, V9, 
V14, V19 V5, V10, 
V15, V20  V6, V11, 
V16, V21  V22 c V23 d V24 d 
Informed consent***  x         
CDRS -R***  x     x x x x 
HAM D ***  x     x x x x 
SCID -5*** x         
MSSE  x     x x x x 
Trails B x     x x x x 
List Generation  x     x x x x 
NSSIB interview & SITBI  x     x x x x 
C-SSRS  x     x x x x 
UDS a x         
Urine pregnancy test a x         
Vitals (HR, RR, 02, BP, temp , 
weighth) xh x x x x xh xh xh xh 
Physical exam ***  x      x x x 
AE review h *** x x x x x x x x x 
Medication  revie w *** x x x x x x x x x 
Satisfaction Questionnaire          x 
Neurological exam***  x         
iTBS f ***  x x x x x    
Footnotes  
a: Can be done anytime at investigator discretion for safety purpos es, predo se on any  treatment day.  
b: Treatment shoul d star t by the following b usiness day, within 7 days of screening.  
c: 1 week after last tr eatment.  
d: 4 weeks after last treatment.  
e: 12 weeks after last treatment.  
f: First day of treatment will determine motor threshold 
g: Will include change in pregnancy sta tus (OHRE SOP 4801, re: verbal assessments for treatments w/o known teratogenic effects)  
h. Weight also collected as planned timepoint – per investigator discretion can  also be obtained at any tim e during pa rticipation  
*: To be done Monday- Friday, ca n start a ny day of the week.  
**: +/ - 3 days  
***: M.D. must be present and/or perform ta sks.   
 
 
31  
 
APPENDIX C: ADVERSE EVENT LOG  
   
ADVERSE EVENT  
Make a separate  entry 
for: 
 All new adverse 
events 
 All AEs with 
increased severi ty 
 All AEs with 
changes in study dru g 
relatio nship  
 All medical 
conditions present at 
study drug initiation 
which have worsened     
√ if AE meets 
definition of 
serious*  Grade / Intensity  
 
Asymptomatic  
Mild  
Moderate  
Severe  
 Start Date   
End Date  
  
Relationship to 
study 
intervention  
 
Related  
Possibly  
Not Likely  
Not Related  
  
Was Action 
Taken?  
(Circle One)  
Yes/No   
Action(s) 
Taken^: 
 
  
Outco me: 
 
Recovered  
Not Recovered  
Recovered   
w/Sequelae  
Fatal  
Unknown  
PI Initials / 
Date  
 