IRB NUMBER : HSC -M1S-19-0425 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/03/2019  GUIDE Trial Study Protocol    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guidance of Ultrasound in Intensive Care to Direct Euvolemia: A Cluster Randomized 
Crossover Comparative Effectiveness Trial (GUIDE Trial)  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 09/03/2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB NUMBER : HSC -M1S-19-0425 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/03/2019  GUIDE Trial Study Protocol   Guidance of Ultrasound in Intensive Care to Direct 
Euvolemia: A Cluster Randomized Crossover 
Comparative Effectiveness Trial (GUIDE Trial)  
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  Gabrielle Hatton MD  
 
Co-Investigators: John Harvin MD MS, Kevin Finkel MD, Charles Wade PhD, Lillian 
Kao MD MS, Timothy Donahue MD, Jessica Hudson MD, Shuyan Wei MD, Kayla Isbell 
MD 
 
 
 
 
Division of Acute Care Surgery 
Department of Surgery  
McGovern Medical School at UTHealth  

IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/03/2019   
 
2 
Significance:  
Severe injury, which occurs in approximately one quarter of the 2 million annual 
trauma patients in the United States, [1] is a known risk factor for acute kidney injury, 
which is independently associated with increased morbidity and mortality. [2] Prevent ion 
of post-traumatic  AKI has been  identified  by the  International  Kidney  Diseases  Improving 
Global Outcomes (KDIGO) group as a top research priority.  [3] 
 
Background and Preliminary Observations:  
AKI complicating severe trauma is associated with increased morbidity and 
mortality. Trauma patients are subjected to multiple, additional renal insults early after 
trauma  such  as  tissue  injury  resulting  in  
rhabdomyolysis, systemic inflammatory 
respo nse, and exposure to nephrotoxins 
such as intravenous contrast agents 
(Figure) . Renal inflammation and 
subsequent AKI can be worsened and 
prolonged by inadequate resuscitation of 
hemorrhagic shock and/or from excess fluid 
administration leading to renal ed ema. [4,  5] 
Therefore, prevention and recovery from 
AKI requires optimization of fluid 
management  and early  identification  of high- 
risk patients.  
In 2018, 46% of severely injured 
trauma patients developed AKI within    one  
week of admission to the Trau ma Intensive Care Unit (ICU) at our institution. AKI was 
defined according to the KDIGO guidelines (Table 1) . [3] AKI -free days is a novel metric 
of time without  AKI during  the first week  of admission.  In 2018,  AKI-free days  of less than 
6 was observed  in 39% of ICU patients.  A diagnosis  of AKI and fewer  AKI-free days were 
associated    with    increased    risk     of 
mortality, prolonged ICU length -of-stay, 
prolonged hospital length -of-stay, and 
discharge location other than home. 
Positive fluid balance w as also common 
among this population with 49% of 
patients having a fluid balance greater 
than 2L after 48 -hours. A positive fluid 
balance is an independent risk factor for 
AKI development  and mortality.  [6, 7] This 
is  despite  the  fact  that  euvolemia,   or 
 
GUIDE Trial Study Protocol  Table 1:  KDIGO guideline for AKI diagnosis  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0425  
IRB NUMBER : HSC -M3S-19-0425 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/03/2019  GUIDE Trial Study Protocol   maintaining a fluid balance near zero, is a usual goal of care for the trauma patient.  
Goal -directed therapy (GDT) -based fluid resuscitation is hemodynamic 
resuscitation targeting the achievement of pre -determined end -points, which include: (1) 
correction of coagulopathy guided by rapid thromboelastography (rTEG), (2) expedient 
hemorrhage  control,  and (3) restoration  of end-organ  perfusion  with balanced  transfusion 
guided by hemodynamic measurements, lactic acid, and base excess. GDT has been 
studied  in the peri-operative  setting  as part of enhanced  recovery  pathways  and has been 
reported to decrease the incidence of AKI. [8] Given that laboratory values are only 
obtained every few hours and hemodynamic abnormalities can persist despite adequate 
fluid resusc itation, the optimal strategy for ensuring optimal fluid administration 
during GDT remains  unknown.  
Dynamic  evaluation  of volume  status  complements  traditional  measurements  used 
in GDT to improve resuscitation once a patient arrives to the ICU. A number of dynamic 
and static tests have been evaluated in assessment of fluid responsiveness, all with 
various limitations ( Table  2). 
 
 
Method   
Threshold  Requires invasive 
measurements   
Limitations  
Pulse Pressure/Stroke volume variation 
[9] 12% Yes Inaccurate with spontaneous breathing, 
arrhythmias, or low Vt  
IVC diameter variations [10]  12% No Inaccurate with spontaneous breathing or 
low Vt  
SVC diameter variations [10]  36% Yes Requires transesophageal doppler, 
inaccurate with spontaneous breathing or  
Passive Leg Raising [11]  10% Yes*  Cannot be used if mobility limitations, 
requires direct CO measurement  
End-expiratory occlusion test [12]  5% Yes Requires patient to be intubated  
Mini-fluid challenge (100mL) [13]  6% Yes Requires precise CO measurement, 
irreversible fluid administration  
Conventional fluid challenge (500mL) 
[14] 15% Yes Requires direct CO measurement  
 
Table 2: Tests for assessing fluid responsiveness. Thresholds indicate validated percent change from 
baseline that is consistent with fluid responsiveness. [15]  
Vt=tidal volume, CO=cardiac output.  
*Passive leg raising is accurate with concurrent bedside echocardiog raphy  
 
Ultrasound assessment of volume status is appealing because it is non -invasive, 
rapidly  accessible,  inexpensive,  and easily  learned.  Guidelines  from the Society  of Critical 
Care Medicine endorses assessment of preload responsiveness by measuring inf erior 
vena cava (IVC) collapsibility by ultrasound (Grade 1B). [16] Kanji, et al. found a lower 
incidence of AKI after incorporating volume assessment by intensivist -performed limited 
bedside echocardiography for patients with shock of mixed etiologies. [1 7] Notably, 
volume assessment in their study frequently resulted in decreased fluid   administration.  
IRB NUMBER : HSC -M4S-19-0425 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/03/2019  GUIDE Trial Study Protocol   However, the effectiveness of routine ultrasound assessments for GDT in reducing AKI 
incidence and duration in trauma patients in a teaching institution is unknown.  
 
Rationale for Clinical Trial:  
Ultrasound assessment of volume status and fluid responsiveness is a technique 
frequent ly utilized in the trauma ICU at our institution and is performed by the ICU 
physicians. Residents are taught this technique during their clinical rotation on service, 
as well as during other intensive care rotations. Physicians utilize the information 
gathered from the IVC ultrasound for resuscitation feedback. However, obtaining 
repeated IVC measurements for feedback is uncommon and many physicians obtain 
resuscitation feedback from additional adjuncts, as listed in the table above. These 
practices are in consistently documented in the medical record, making it difficult to 
retrospectively ascertain if and how these practices impact clinical outcomes. 
Furthermore, implementation of a protocol without proof of effectiveness would risk 
inappropriate energy ex penditure by the care team. And finally, there may be risks of 
increased physician feedback.  
 
Design:  
 
Hypothesis : Ultrasound -guided GDT results in adult trauma patients with more AKI -free 
days when compared to usual care in the trauma ICU at a teaching ho spital.  
 
Design : This is a single -center, pragmatic, cluster randomized crossover trial to be 
performed  at The Red Duke  Trauma  Institute,  Texas  Medical  Center,  an academic,  level- 
1 trauma  center.  
 
Study  Participants : Primary  participants  are the care providers  in the Shock  Trauma  ICU. 
All providers will be included in this study. The care structure is comprised of post - 
graduate year 1 -3 surgical, anesthesia, and emergency medicine residents, a surgical 
critical care fellow, and a surgical critical car e faculty member. Secondary participants 
will include  injured  patients  at least  16 years  of age that are admitted  to the Shock  Trauma 
ICU will be assessed for eligibility. Exclusion criteria of secondary participants include 
prisoners and pregnancy. Prison ers will be excluded due to their vulnerable status. 
Because  pregnancy  results  in an increase  in circulating  blood  volume  up to 50%,  there  is 
a high likelihood of clinical misinterpretation of ultrasound findings. [18] Therefore, 
pregnant patients will be excluded as well. Both of these exclusions are expected to 
minimally impact secondary participant  enrollment.  
 
Randomization : Care teams will be clustered according to resident and fellow rotation 
schedule.  Rotations occur on the first of the month with a new care team and  therefore  
IRB NUMBER : HSC -M5S-19-0425 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/03/2019  GUIDE Trial Study Protocol   one month is considered a cluster. Clusters will be randomized at the first of the m onth 
using variable permuted blocks using a computer -generated random sequence.  Clusters 
will be randomized by a study coordinator using sequentially numbered, opaque sealed 
envelope. Care assignment will continue until the 15th of each month, at which poi nt the 
cluster      will      cross      over      and      provide      the      alternative        assignment.  
 
 
Procedures : 
During  the assigned  intervention  period,  a care team  member  will perform  IVC ultrasound 
to assess  volume  status  and fluid responsiveness  upon  patient  arrival  to the ICU, and two 
more times over a 24 -hour period. Assessments will be completed at least three hours 
apart. IVC diameter and collapsibility index (IVCCI) will be measured. Use of the results 
to guide care will be at the discretion of the primary team. Usual goals of resuscitation 
include lactate concentration <1 mmol/L, base excess +2 to -2, normal rTEG valu es, 
mean  arterial  pressure  >60 mmHg  after hemorrhage  control  has been  obtained.  The goal 
for volume  management in  this study  will be euvolemia,  most  consistent  with <18%  IVCCI 
and IVC diameter 15 - 25 mm. [19] Measurements are to be interpreted by the physician 
within  the clinical  context.  Results  of the ultrasound  and subsequent  management  will be 
recorded in a study notebook by the physician at time of  ultrasound.  
 
Usual Care: No changes to usual care will be made. Physicians will record results of  
IVC ultrasound, if  utilized.  
 
Quality Assurance : Accuracy of technique of all care team physicians will be assessed 
during  an ultrasound  training  session  provided  the day  prior to the intervention  arm of the 
cluster. Additional training will be provided until proficiency deemed adequate by the 
session leaders. Session leaders will include the Trauma ICU faculty and the study PI 
who has been independently certified in modif ied echocardiography for Critical Care, 
which includes IVC Ultrasound techniques (GH). The dedicated training session will be 
new to the rotating  resident  education,  but represents  a similar  training  to prior,  individual 
training sessions that occur betwee n a resident and faculty throughout an ICU  rotation.  Care  Team  1 Care  Team 2 Care  Team 3 Care  Team 4 Care  Team 5 Care Team  6 
(Month  1) (Month  2) (Month  3) (Month  4) (Month  5) (Month  6) 
Randomize  
 
First ½ 
Month  Treatment  Usual  Usual  Treatment  Treatment  Usual  
Crossover  
 
Second ½ 
Month  Usual  Treatment  Treatment  Usual  Usual  Treatment  
IRB NUMBER : HSC -M6S-19-0425 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/03/2019  GUIDE Trial Study Protocol   Troubleshooting Opportunities : At least three care team members are present in the 
STICU  at all times  and US for the same  patient  may be performed  by different  physicians, 
based on individual  care demands within the unit.  If the physician is having difficulty with 
US technique, another physician is available to attempt the ultrasound prior to indicating 
that the ultrasound was unable to be  performed.  
 
Outcomes : 
Primary  outcome:  AKI-free days  within  7 days  of injury.  AKI will be defined  by the KDIGO 
criteria.  All stages will be considered  AKI. 
 
Secondary outcomes: AKI incidence within the first 7 days of ICU admission, stage of 
AKI, need for renal replacement therapy, quantity and type of flui ds administered at 24 
and 48 hours, quantity and type of diuretics admisnistered at 24 and 48 hours, time to 
lactate normalization, time to creatinine concentration <1.5 mg/dL or to prehospital 
baseline, time to base excess normalization, ventilator -free d ays, ICU -free days within 
first 30 days. Adverse events determined a priori include transfusion -related acute lung 
injury, acute respiratory distress syndrome, abdominal compartment syndrome, new 
onset congestive heart failure, and re -bleeding requiring un scheduled intervention. Data 
measurement will occur according to the schedule outlined in Table 3 . 
 
Data and Collection Method  24 Hours  48 Hours  7 Days  30 Days  
IVC Measurements and Physician Actions – Data Forms  x    
AKI-Free Days – Chart Review    x  
AKI Incidence and Highest Stage – Chart Review    x  
Fluid Administration – Chart Review  x x   
Creatinine Trend – Chart Review    x  
Lactate Trend – Chart Review    x  
Base Excess Trend – Chart Review    x  
Ventilator -Free Days – Chart Review    x x 
ICU-Free Days – Chart Review    x x 
Mortality – Chart Review    x x 
Potential Adverse Events: transfusion -related acute lung injury, acute 
respiratory distress syndrome, abdominal compartment syndrome, 
and re -bleeding requiring unscheduled intervention, need for and 
duration of renal replacement therapy  – Chart Review     
x  
x 
Table 3:  Process measures and clinical outcome collection schedule  
 
Pre-planned subgroup analyses include:  
1. Resuscitation indication: hemorrhage, post -traumatic SIRS, rhabdomyolysis, 
other, and  none.  
2. Ventilation Type:  Spontaneous,  mechanical  
3. Order of intervention:  Intervention first, intervention  second  
IRB NUMBER : HSC -M7S-19-0425 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/03/2019  GUIDE Trial Study Protocol   Statistical Analysis : 
The largest feasible study will be completed over the course of 12 months with an 
estimated enrollment of 30 secondary subjects per cluster, resulting in 360 patients 
enrolled in each treatment group and 720 total patients in the study.  
 
No interim analysi s will be completed. Multilevel Bayesian analysis will be performed to 
assess the effectiveness of the intervention to account for care team cluster. Neutral, 
conservative priors will be used to estimate the probability of both benefits and harms.  
 
Safety Assessment:  
Ultrasound imaging uses high -frequency sound waves to create images from wave 
reflection from internal body structures. It has been utilized routinely for over 20 years, 
has an excellent safety record, and is considered safe when utilized by a healthcare 
provider. [20]  
 
Data Collection and Confidentiality:  
Clinical data and laboratory data will be prospectively collected as part of an ongoing, 
prospective trauma registry. Findings from both scheduled and unscheduled volume 
assessments  by any modality  will be recorded  in a study  notebook  kept in a locked  cabinet 
at the charge nurse’s station and transferred to a secure, Microsoft Access database 
daily. The database will be accessible only to study personnel, as approved by the 
institutional rev iew board.  
 
Future directions : 
The results of this study will inform the feasibility and effectiveness of implementing 
scheduled ultrasound -guided fluid resuscitation for AKI prevention.  
 
Ethical Considerations : 
 
The protocol proposed aims to increase phys ician feedback of resuscitation by means 
of a non -invasive ultrasounds and improve healthcare delivery. This study poses 
minimal risk to subjects and will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of patients  or 
physicians. The investigators seek approva l through the institutional review board for 
waiver of individual consent and qualify as a quality improvement  initiative.  
 
Personnel Roles : 
 
Dr. Gabrielle Hatton is a research fellow in the Department of Surgery. She is 
responsible for protocol development, physician training, troubleshooting, protocol  
IRB NUMBER : HSC -M8S-19-0425 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/03/2019  GUIDE Trial Study Protocol   implementation, data collection, data merging and cleaning, statistical analysis, 
interpretation of th e results and any other primary study requirements.  
 
Dr. Lillian Kao is a Professor in the Department of Surgery. She will assist with 
protocol development, outcome measure assessment, troubleshooting, protocol 
implementation, interpretation of the results, and mentorship to the primary PI.  
 
Dr. Charles Wade is a Professor in the Department of Surgery and Director of the 
Center for Translational Injury Research (CeTIR). He will assist with protocol 
development, outcome measure assessment, troubleshooting, protocol implementation, 
interpretation of the results, and mentorship  to the primary PI.  
 
Dr. Kevin Finkel is a Professor in the Department of Renal Diseases and Hypertension. 
He provides expertise in fluid management and kidney disease. He will assist with 
protocol development, outcome measure assessment, and interpretatio n of the results.  
 
Dr. John Harvin is an Associate Professor in the department of Surgery. He provides 
expertise in comparative effectiveness trials and will assist with protocol development, 
implementation, and interpretation of the results.  
 
Dr. Timothy Donahue is a Surgical Critical Care Fellow in the Department of Surgery. 
He will assist with protocol development, troubleshooting, process improvement, and 
implementation.  
 
Dr. Jessica Hudson is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Emergency 
Medici ne. She has expertise in use of point -of-care ultrasound in clinical care for 
critically ill patients. She will assist with protocol development, physician training, and 
protocol implementation.  
 
Drs. Shuyan Wei and Kayla Isbell are research fellows in the  Department of surgery. 
They will assist in physician training, protocol implementation, process improvement, 
troubleshooting, data collection, statistical analysis, and results interpretation.  
IRB NUMBER : HSC -M9S-19-0425 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/03/2019  GUIDE Trial Study Protocol    
References:  
1. Gore, F.M., et al., Global burden of disease in young people aged 10 -24 years: a 
systematic analysis. Lancet, 2011. 377(9783): p.  2093 -102. 
2. Podoll, A.S., et al., Incidence and outcome of early acute kidney injury in critically -ill 
trauma patients. PLoS One, 2013. 8(10): p.  e77376.  
3. Group, I.K.D.I.G.O.W., Clinical Practice Guidelines for Acute Kidney Injury 2012.  2012.  
4. Bouchard, J., et al., Fluid accumulation, survival and recovery of kidney function in 
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. Kidney Int, 2009. 76(4): p . 422-7. 
5. Kambhampati, G., et al., Perioperative fluid balance and acute kidney injury. Clin Exp 
Nephrol, 2012. 16(5): p.  730-8. 
6. Balakumar, V., et al., Both Positive and Negative Fluid Balance May Be Associated With 
Reduced Long -Term Survival in the Critica lly Ill. Crit Care Med, 2017. 45(8): p. e749 - 
e757.  
7. de Oliveira, F.S., et al., Positive fluid balance as a prognostic factor for mortality and 
acute kidney injury in severe sepsis and septic shock. J Crit Care, 2015. 30(1): p. 97 - 
101. 
8. Brienza, N., et al., Does perioperative hemodynamic optimization protect renal function 
in surgical patients? A meta -analytic study. Crit Care Med, 2009. 37(6): p.  2079 -90. 
9. Michard, F., et al., Relation between respiratory changes in arterial pulse pressur e and 
fluid responsiveness in septic patients with acute circulatory failure. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med, 2000. 162(1): p.  134-8. 
10. Vignon, P., et al., Comparison of Echocardiographic Indices Used to Predict Fluid 
Responsiveness in Ventilated Patients. Am J R espir Crit Care Med, 2017. 195(8): p. 
1022 -1032.  
11. Monnet, X., et al., Passive leg raising predicts fluid responsiveness in the critically ill. Crit 
Care Med, 2006. 34(5): p.  1402 -7. 
12. Monnet, X., et al., Predicting volume responsiveness by using the end -expiratory 
occlusion in mechanically ventilated intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med, 2009. 
37(3): p.  951-6. 
13. Muller, L., et al., An increase in aortic blood flow after an infusion of 100 ml colloid o ver 1 
minute can predict fluid responsiveness: the mini -fluid challenge study. Anesthesiology, 
2011. 115(3): p.  541-7. 
14. Vincent, J.L. and M.H. Weil, Fluid challenge revisited. Crit Care Med, 2006. 34(5): p. 
1333 -7. 
15. Monnet, X., P.E. Marik, and J.L. Teboul, Prediction of fluid responsiveness: an  update.  
Ann Intensive Care, 2016. 6(1): p. 111.  
16. Levitov, A., et al., Guidelines for the Appropriate Use of Bedside General and Cardiac 
Ultrasonography in the Evaluation of Critically Ill Patients -Part II: Cardiac 
Ultra sonography. Crit Care Med, 2016. 44(6): p.  1206 -27. 
17. Kanji, H.D., et al., Limited echocardiography -guided therapy in subacute shock is 
associated with change in management and improved outcomes. J Crit Care,  2014. 
29(5): p.  700-5. 
18. Hytten, F., Blood volume changes in normal pregnancy. Clin Haematol, 1985. 14(3): p. 
601-12. 
19. Flato, U.A., et al., Intensive care bedside echocardiography: true or a distant  dream?  
Rev Bras Ter Intensiva, 2009. 21(4): p. 437 -45. 
20. Administration, U.S.F.a.D. Ultrasound Im aging . Radiation -Emitting Products 2018 [cited 
2019 April 3, 2019]; Available from:  https://www.fda.gov/radiation - 
IRB NUMBER : HSC -1M0S-19-0425 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/03/2019  GUIDE Trial Study Protocol   emittingproducts/radiationemittingproductsandprocedures/medicalimaging/ucm115357.h  
tm. 