        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
1 
  
 
 
Vitamin D and Vascular Function in Obese Children  
Clinical Trial Protocol  
 
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Document Date: 12/ 2/2019  
 
Principal Investigator:  
Dr. Kumaravel Rajakumar, MD, MS  
Professor of Pediatrics  
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine  
 
Supported by:  
(1) National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) of the National Institutes of Health 
R01HL112985  
(2) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) of the Office of Director of the National Institutes of 
Health R01HL112985  
 
 
 
 
 
  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
2 
 Study Title  
Vitamin D and Vascular Function in Obese Children  
Objectives  
The primary objective of this randomized clinical trial is to determine  the efficacy of enhanced 
vitamin D 3 supplementation in improving vascular endothelial function, arterial stiffness, insulin 
sensitivity, and metabolic syndrome risk status  in 10- to 18 -year -old vitamin D -deficient (serum 
25-hydroxyvitamin D <20 ng/mL) obese or overweight  (BMI ≥85th percentile) children; and to 
assess whether these effects are dose -dependent. As a secondary objective, we will examine 
the vitamin D supplementation -induced effe ct on adipokines and inflammatory markers 
relevant to CVD risk.  
Design and Outcomes  
In a double -blinded, controlled trial, we propose to randomize 229 eligible children to receive 
either 600 IU (conventional supplementation , current recommended dietary all owance ), or 
1000 IU or 2000 IU (enhanced supplementation) of vitamin D 3 daily for six months.  
The p rimary outcome measure will be change in brachial flow -mediated dilation percentage at 
6 months (FMD %); FMD% is a measure of vascular endothelial function. The s econdary 
outcome measures  will include (1) pulse -wave velocity (PWV ) – a measure of arterial stiffness, 
(2) central and systemic blood pressure, (3) fasting blood glucose concentration, (4) 1 /fasting 
insulin  concentration a s a surrogate for insulin re sistivity , (5) lipid profile indices, (6) 
adipocytokines (plasma leptin, and adiponectin) and systemic markers of inflammation (plasma 
high -sensitivity CRP, IL -6, TNF -α). 
Eligible participants will be scheduled for enrollment within eight weeks of the init ial screening 
visit. Follow -up visit s will occur approximately at three  months and six months after  enrollment . 
FMD %, PWV , biochemical measurements, and inflammatory markers will be obtained at each 
study visit; DXA scan will be done at  enrollment  and at 6 months . 
Interventions and Duration  
Enrolled c hildren will  receive daily oral supplementation of  either 600 IU  or 1000 IU or 2000 IU 
of vitamin D 3 for six months.  
Sample Size and Population  
We aim to enroll  229 otherwise  healthy 10- to 18-year -old, overweight  (BMI percentile , ≥85th to 
<95th) or obese ( BMI percentile, ≥95th), vitamin D -deficient (serum 25(OH)D concentration <20 
ng/mL ) children.  
  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
3 
 1. STUDY OBJECTIVES  
1.1 Primary Objective  
To determine whether enhanced vitamin D 3 supplementation in 10 - to 18 -year -old obese and 
overweight children with serum 25(OH)D <20 ng/mL results in: (a) improved vascular health 
(arterial  endothelial function and arterial stiffness) and (b) improved insulin sensitivity and 
metabolic syndrome ma rkers  (blood pressure, fasting blood glucose, lipid profile) . We 
hypothesize that vitamin D 3 supplementation with 2000 IU or 1000 IU daily will be more 
effective than 600 IU in improving vascular health and insulin sensitivity and metabolic 
syndrome marker s. 
1.2 Secondary Objectives  
To examine whether down regulation of systemic inflammatory m arkers  and adipokines 
underlie the effects of vitamin D on vasculature and metabolism . We hypothesize that vitamin 
D effects on vascular health and metabolism may be driven  by the attenuation of obesity -
associated inflammation.  
2. BACKGROUND AND RATIO NALE  
2.1 Background on Condition, Disease, or Other Primary Study Focus  
Childhood obesity is a major public health problem in the United States (US). In 2007 -2008, 32% 
of 2- to 19 -year-old US children were either obese (BMI ≥95th percentile) or overweight (BMI 
85th - 94th percentile) .1 Obese and overweight children exhibit cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk 
factors2 and have a high risk of metabolic syn drome3 (i.e. large waist circumference, 
hypertension, fasting hyperglycemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and low levels of high -density 
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol). Obesity and its atherogenic risks track from childhood to 
adulthood, increasing the risk of adult CVD and pointing to t he need for developing primary 
prevention strategies in affected children.  
2.2 Study Rationale  
Vitamin D deficiency is emerging as an independent risk factor for CVD and metabolic syndrome 
in children4-7 and adults.8,9 Our preliminary work shows that obese children have an increased 
risk of vitamin D deficiency; hypovitaminosis D is also associated with other CVD risk factors, 
such as low HDL cholesterol and lower insulin sensitivity in youth.10,11 Accordingly, optimization 
of vitamin D status in obese child ren might improve their CVD risk profile and reduce their risk 
of later CVD. As vitamin D is a potent immune modulator, its cardiovascular and metabolic 
benefits might be mediated, in part, through downregulation of inflammatory mediators, 
including adipok ines.  
In the proposed study, we will test the central hypothesis  that enhancement of vitamin D status 
in otherwise healthy obese and overweight vitamin D -deficient children will improve their 
vascular health and their CVD and metabolic syndrome risk profil e. 
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
4 
 3. STUDY DESIGN  
We propose a double -masked, randomized, controlled clinical trial of enhanced vitamin D 3 
supplementation (600 IU vs 1000 IU vs 2000 IU) for six months in 10 - to 18 -year -old, overweight 
(BMI percentile , ≥85th to <95th) or obese (BMI  percentile , ≥95th), vitamin D -deficient ( serum 
25(OH)D concentration <20 ng/mL)  children. Children who seek care at the Primary Care 
Centers of CHP (Oakland, Mercy Hospital, and Turtle Creek) or at affiliated PittNet offices 
(Practice Based Research Network, PBRN) will be eligible to participate. Our primary aim is to 
determine whether enhanced  supplementation with vitamin D 3 (1000 IU or 2000 IU) compared 
to the standard of care  vitamin D 3 supplementation (600 IU), taken orally once daily, is effective 
in improving brachial FMD % by 25% or more at the end of six months. Secondary outcomes will 
determine effects of vitamin D supplementation in reducing arterial stiffness, improving insulin 
sensitivity, and reducing metabolic syndrome risks. We will also characterize the mechanistic 
effects of vitamin D on systemic inflammatory markers and adipokine s relevant to CVD risk.  
4. SELECTION AND ENROLL MENT OF PARTICIPANTS  
Children who seek care at the Primary Care Center of CHP Oakland or at affiliated PittNet 
offices (Practice Based Research Network, PBRN) will be eligible to participate . 
Eligible children wi ll meet the following inclusion and exclusion criteria  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
Potentially eligible children will be  
• 10 to 18 years of age  
• otherwise healthy  
• obese or overweight (BMI ≥85th percentile)  
• able to understand all aspects of study procedures  
• able  to voluntarily comply with all study procedures across the duration of the study  
• vitamin D -deficient and normocalcemic during screening (serum 25(OH)D concentration <20 
ng/mL ; serum calcium concentration: 10 -14 years, 8.8 -10.8 mg/dL; ≥15 years 8.4–10.2 
mg/dL ) 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
Children will be excluded from the study if they meet any of the following exclusion criteria:  
• Have hepatic or renal disease, metabolic rickets, malabsorptive disorders, primary 
hyperparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism, previ ous history of cancer or other chronic 
disorders that could affect vitamin D or glucose metabolism  
• Are receiving treatment with anticonvulsants, systemic glucocorticoids, pharmacologic 
doses of vitamin D ( >1000 IU of vitamin D 2 or D 3 daily) , antihypertensi ves, vasoactive drugs, 
antilipidemics, metformin, antipsychotics,  other oral insulin regulators, or cancer 
treatments  
• Have cholelithiasis or urolithiasis  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
5 
 • Have type 1 or type 2 diabetes  
• Have a condition or underlying abnormality that could compromise the sa fety of the subject 
during study procedures (e.g. sickle cell trait/disease)  
• Found to be hypercalcemi c during screening visit  (serum calcium >10.8 mg/dL  in 10 - to 14 -
year-old children; >10.2 mg/dL in ≥15 -year-old children ) 
• Significant fasting hyperglycemia (fasting blood glucose concentration >125 mg/dL) during 
the enrollment visit 
• Post-menarchial girls with a positive pregnancy test at enrollment will be excluded; 
however, contraception is not required for post -menarchial girls  
4.3 Study Enrollment Procedures  
Participants will be recruited from the Primary Care Center of CHP Oakland or at affiliated 
PittNet offices. In addition to the two recruitment locations, participants may also be recruited 
through  various community outreach programs . The study will also be advertised through the 
University of P ittsburgh Pitt+Me database  to strengthen our recruitment effort . 
Potential participants among children attending the CHP Oakland Primary Care Center will be 
screened for eligibility by reviewing their EPIC electronic medical record s. Subjects who are not 
excluded during the preliminary EPIC chart review will be approached for screening. Reasons 
for inclusion and exclusion will be electronically documented on a screening form in the study -
specific electronic database administered by the University of Pittsbu rgh Center for Research 
on Health Care (CRHC).  
Written informed consent from a biological or legally -adoptive parent  and participants’ assent, 
will be obtained prior to enrollment (both screening and enrollment ) of 10 - to 17 -year -old 
children. Participants  who are 18 years of age can consent for themselves  for both screening 
and enrollment . Legal guardians will have to  provide documentation of guardianship from 
relevant agencies and/or courts . 
Participants found to be vitamin D -deficient during screening, and thus eligible for study 
enrollment , will be randomized to one of three vitamin D supplementation doses (600 IU, 1000 
IU, or 2000 IU). The randomization codes will be assigned electronically through the CRHC study 
database using a block randomization sch eme set forth by the study statistician prior to the 
onset of the study. Both participants and study investigators  will be blinded to the assigned 
supplementation dose throughout the trial . 
5. STUDY INTERVENTIONS  
5.1 Interventions, Administration, and Duration  
Enrolled study participants will be randomized to one of three vitamin D supplementation 
doses: 600 IU (conventional supplementation), 1000 IU, or 2000 IU (enhanced 
supplementation). Assigned study v itamin D supplement bottle will be  dispensed to the 
participants at enrollment  and 3-month follow -up visit. Supplementation bottles will be given 
with Medical Event Monitoring System caps ( MEMS , manufactured by AARDEX Group Ltd., Sion, 
Switzerland)  for assessing and enhancing adherence . Participants wil l be instructed to take only 
one study vitamin D tablet daily for the duration of the study, and to not double the ir dose if a 
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
6 
 previous dose  was missed . 
5.2 Handling of Study Interventions  
Study vitamin D supplements will be manufactured by Douglas Laboratorie s in Pittsburgh, PA. 
The procurement of the required tablets will be coordinated in conjunction with the UPMC 
Investigational Drug Service Research Pharmacist. Study vitamin D supplements will be directly 
shipped to the research pharmacist who will ensure appropriate masking, labeling, bagging, and 
coding of the supplement bottles. The study vitamin D supplements will be identical in color, 
taste, and size. Each dispensed bottle will contain 105 pills.  
The coded study vitamin D supplement bottles  will be stored in a locked cabinet in the UPMC 
Osteoporosis Prevention and Treatment Center in the Kauffman Building. Once, the trial is 
completed,  all excess  vitamin D supplements will be returned to the UPMC Investigational Drug 
Service research pharmacist for dis carding . 
If multiple children of the same household enter the study, the dispensed supplement bottles 
will be color -coded to ensure identification of their respective medication . 
5.3 Concomitant Interventions  
Allowed Interventions  
For the duration of the study, participants are permitted  to take any medications that are 
not included in the list of prohibited interventions . 
Required Interventions  
Participants will be required to take one study vitamin D 3 supplement table t daily for the 
duration of the study ( six months), beginning on the day of their enrollment . 
Prohibited Interventions  
Participants are expected to not  take the following medications during their participation in 
the study . If these medications are clinically necessary and prescribed by a provider, the 
participant may be withdrawn from the study based on the PI’s discretion.  
• Multivitamins  
• Anticonvulsants  
• Systemic glucocorticoids  
• Antips ychotics  
• Antihypertensives  
• Vasoactive drugs  
• Antilipidemics  
• Metformin or other oral insulin regulators  
• Chemotherapeutics or other cancer treatments  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
7 
 5.4 Adherence Assessment  
Adherence to the vitamin D supplement will be measured using MEMS cap, pill count, and t he 
medication calendar log. Each supplement bottle will be equipped with a MEMS cap,  which will 
be activated when the study supplement bottle is dispensed during enrollment . Study staff will 
assess the adherence  measures  (MEMs cap, pill count, and medication calendar)  during follow -
up. To promote valid  MEMs cap data, subjects will be advised to take their study vitamin D 
supplement once daily directly from the dispensed bottle —preferabl y around the same time  
each day . Use  of other medication storage devices  or dispensers  will be discouraged.  
6. STUDY PROCEDURES  
6.1 Schedule of Evaluations  
Assessment  Screening  Enrollment  3-month 
Follow -Up 6-month 
Follow -Up 
 (Visit 0)  (Visit 1)  (Visit 2)  (Visit 3)  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  x    
Informed Consent/Assent Form  x x   
Demographics  x    
Medical History  x x x x 
Anthropometric Measurements  x x x x 
Skin Color Assessment  x   x 
Short Vitamin D and calcium intake FFQ & 
Sunlight Exposure Questionnaire  x   x 
Blood Chemistries  x x x x 
Urine Pregnancy Screen*   x  x 
Brachial FMD   x x x 
Pulse Wave Velocity/Analysis   x x x 
Dual -Energy X-ray Absorptiometry (D XA) Scan   x  x 
Activity Survey   x  x 
Youth and Adolescent FFQ   x  x 
Pubertal Self -Assessment (Tanner Stage)   x   
Dispense Study Vitamin D Supplement   x x  
Medication Adherence    x x 
*Only post menarchial girls require a urine pregnancy screen as a safety requisite for D XA scan  
6.2 Description of Evaluations  
Potentially eligible patients passing the inclusion and exclusion criteria will be screened . 
Screened p articipants who are found to be vitamin D -deficient (serum 25(OH)D concentration 
<20 ng/ mL) will be eligible to enroll in the study. Eligible participants will be scheduled for 
enrollment  visit within eight  weeks of the ir screening  evaluation . Study duration is six months. 
Randomized participants will return for follow -up evaluations twice. The f irst follow -up visit will 
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
8 
 occur a pproximately three months after the ir enrollment  visit, and their final study visit will be 
scheduled approximately three months thereafter.  
Screening Evaluation  
Consenting Procedure  
Written informed c onsent will be obtaine d separately for screening and for enrollment, at 
the respective study visits . The parent or medical legal guardian of the child ( as defined by 
state  law) will be given a copy of the informed consent and will be provided an opportunity 
to read the consent in its entirety. F or a legal guardian to consent on behalf of  a child to 
participate in research, the guardian must present a copy of the appropriate legal document  
proving guardianship under state law  before  signing the consent document. A copy of the 
guardianship document will be included in the research subject’s chart.  
The consent form given at the screening visit will describe the procedures that will  take 
place only during the screening visit. The consent form given at the enrollment  visit will 
detail all procedures to be performed at each study visit. Participants must give their assent 
and only biological parents, or legally -recognized guardians , may provide consent.  
Only trained study coordinators and the principal investigator may obtain informed consent 
from participants . Person obtaining consent  will review all aspects of the consent and allow 
the parent or legal guardian the opportunity to ask questions. The following points will be 
explained to the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) at the time of consent:  
• The study involves research  
• The purpose, b ackground and rationale of the study  
• Study involves taking vitamin D supplementation (Vitamin D 3 600 IU vs. 1000 IU vs. 2000 
IU once daily for six months) which has been  mask ed and random ly assign ed 
• The responsibility of the parent and the participant  
• All reasonably foreseeable risks or inconveniences associated with all the expected 
study procedures (i.e. vascular function tests, D XA scan, blood draw, skin color 
estimation, completion of physical activity, diet and sun exposure surveys)  
• Potential risk of h ypervitaminosis D (vitamin D poisoning) and its symptoms  
• The expected benefits of the study  
• The participation in this study is voluntary and that the parent  or subject  may refuse to 
participate or withdraw from the study at any time without penalty of loss  of benefits to 
which he/she may be entitled  
• The accessibility of the records to the regulatory authority(ies), monitor(s), auditor(s), or 
other appropriate reviewers  
• Maintenance of  confidentiality of the patient record  
The consent form will include: the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) signature, the printed name 
of the child, and the date, as to document that all -of-the-above was completed. Participants 
who are 18 years of age will sign their own consent.  The consenting research staff member 
will also sign the consent form to indicate that he/she  has reviewed and explained the 
consent form with the subject and was present at the time of signing . After obtaining signed 
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
9 
 consent, a copy of an unsigned consent  form will be given to the parent(s) or legal 
guardian(s) for their records. The original signed copy of the consent will be kept within the 
study folder . 
 
Screening  
The following procedures are performed to determine a subject’s eligibility:  
• Age Calculati on: To enter the study children should have completed their 10th birthday and 
not have had their 19th birthday.  18-year-old children are eligible to enroll  until the day 
before their 19th birthday.  
• BMI Calculation : Height will be measured three times in centimeter (cm) to the nearest 
0.1-cm and averaged to determine the participant’s height in centimeter. Weight will be 
measured three times in kilogram (kg) to the nearest 0.1 -kg and averaged to determine 
the participant’s weight in kilogram. BMI will be c alculated using the following formula:  
[Weight in k ilogram ]/[Height in meter]2 
BMI can also be calculated using metric measurements of height (in cm) and weight (in 
kg) through NHLBI online BMI calculator available at: 
http://nhlbisupport.com/bmi/bminojs.htm  
• Medical History Form : Captures  anthropometrics,  demographic data (age, sex, race, and 
ethnicity), level of education, smoking status , current medications, and type of medical 
insurance.  
• Contact Form: To be completed by parent unless subject is 18 years of age  
• Vitamin D and Su nlight Exposure Questionnaire: To be completed by parents unless 
subject is 18 years of age  
• Waist Circumference Measurement: Waist circumference will be m easured three times, 
using a non-stretch tape measure , at the mid -point between the lowest rib and the iliac 
crest at minimal respiration while standing. The respective w aist circumference 
measurements will be measured to the nearest 0.1 cm and averaged.  
• Fitzpatrick Sun -reactive Skin Type estimation:  Sun-reactive skin type estimate will be 
made by the parent unless the subject is 18 years of age  
• DSM II Colormeter Measurement: Study staff will normalize the 
dermatophotospectrometer on the calibration plate and obtain three readings from the 
forehead, b ack of the hand, and inner upper arm. The measurements obtained at each 
site will be averaged to estimate the melanin index at the respective sites.  
• Venipuncture, Specimen Collection, and Specimen Processing : 
o Venipuncture: Venipuncture s at the Primary Care  Center will be done by the clinic 
nurses or phlebotomy -trained medical assistants. For subjects consenting for 
screening at the Pediatric PittNet practices, venipuncture will be performed by the 
pediatric PittNet nurs e, the clinic nurse , or the phlebotomy -trained medical 
assistants  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
10 
 o Specimen Collection:  At least 5 mL of blood needs to be drawn in one or two  red-top 
tubes and 10 mL of blood in one or two green -top tubes  
o Specimen Processing: Label the specimens with screening ID, date of birth, and date 
of vi sit. Complete lab test order forms (instructions for lab procedures). Enclose the 
collected tubes in a medical -biohazard seal bag with the lab order/procedure 
instruction sheets and drop -off the specimens at the appropriate place in the UPMC 
Central Lab bu ilding or in the clinic for transportation of the samples to the Clinical 
Chemistry Lab at UPMC Presbyterian.  
Enrollment  
Enrollment  
Participants that are deemed vitamin D deficient (serum 25(OH)D concentration <20 ng/ mL) 
and meet all other inclusionary criteria are eligible to enroll in the study . Prior to entering 
the study (initiation of baseline assessments and randomization), participants will be  
required to complete a second informed consent, which outlines the assessments that will 
take place at the three study visits.  
Baseline Assessments  at enrollment  
Patients who have been successfully screened for the study and have enrolled will undergo 
the following baseline assessments:  
• Medical history form  
• Anthropometric measurements  
• Venipunctur e, specimen collecting, and specimen processing  
• Urine pregnancy screen : Only post -menarch eal girls require urine pregnancy screen . 
Only s ubjects with a negative pregnancy screen will be permitted to  enroll . 
• Fasting glucose concentration screen: Only participants with fasting serum glucose <125 
mg/dL will be permitted to enroll  
• Activity survey: Participant may complete this survey, with parenta l help if they are ≤17 
years of age.  
• Nutritional survey: Parent may complete a survey regarding subject’s food frequency 
habits  for participants ≤17 years of age. If subject is 18 years of age or older, he or she 
will complete this questionnaire on their own.  
• Pubertal self -assessment: Subject s will self -identify their pubertal stage by looking at 
Tanner Stage drawings  and selecting the image that corresponds most closely to their 
stage of development.  
• Vascular function testing (pulse wave velocity, pulse wave analysis, and  flow mediated 
dilation , and blood pressure measurements ) 
o Blood pressure . Measurements will be obtained by a CTRC vascular technician prior 
to vascular health assessments, and after 10 minutes of participant rest and 
acclimatization while supine, using a model C ONTEC08A automated digital 
oscillometric device (cuff 22 -32 cm). Measurements will be taken three times, one 
minute apart, and averaged.  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
11 
 o Endothelial function. Brachial artery diameter will be measured using a high -
resolution ultrasound machine (GE, Vivid 7, GE Health care, Milwaukee, WI) 
equipped with a 9 -L linear transducer preset to a dedicated vascular scanning 
protocol. We will then occlude  brachial arterial flow at the upper forearm using a 5 -
cm-wide occlusive cuff (Hokanson SC5) inflated to a pressur e of 50 mmHg above the 
systolic blood pressure or to 200 mmHg, whichever is greater, by a rapid release 
sphygmomanometer (Hokanson DS 400) for 5 minutes. Post -cuff release diameter 
measurements during the reactive hyperemic phase, obtained at 60, 120, and 180 
seconds, will be used to calculate FMD%.  
o Arterial Stiffness Indices . Carotid -femoral pulse wave velocity (PWV), Aortic 
Augmentation Index at heart rate of 75/min (AIx -75), and central systolic and 
diastolic blood pressure were measured using arterial tonometry (SphygmoCor 
CVMS V9, CPVH System, Model EM3, AtCor Medical, Sydney, Australia).  
• DXA  scan: Measures total body adiposity and percent of body fat  
Participants should enroll within two months of initial screening. If participants do not 
enroll within this time window, they will be required to rescreen to ensure eligibility.  
Subjects that have successfully completed the enrollment process and baseline procedures 
will be randomized to a study intervention dosage, which is blind ed to both st udy team and 
participant.  
Parents will be instructed to record each dose of intervention  given to their child in a 
calendar  supplied by the investigators.  
3-month Follow -up Visit  
The window for the follow -up visit will be three months after the enrollment  date (± 15 
days ). The following procedures will be performed at this visit:  
• Medical history form  
• Anthropometric measurements  
• Venipuncture, specimen collecting, and specimen processing  
• Vascular function testing (pulse wave velocity, pulse wave analysis, and  brachial flow 
mediated dilation , and blood pressure measurements ) 
• Medication adherence assessment  
o Collect medication calendar  
o Read MEMs cap and obtain Patient Adherence Report  
• Dispensation  of second supply of vitamin D supplements  
Final Visit (6 -month Fol low-up Visit)  
The window for the final visit will be three months after the 3 -month follow -up date (± 15 
days ). The following study procedures are performed  at this visit : 
• Medical history form  
• Anthropometric measurements  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
12 
 • Venipuncture, specimen collecting, and specimen processing  
• Urine pregnancy screen (only post -menarchial girls require urine pregnancy screen) . 
Subjects with a positive pregnancy screen will not undergo a D XA scan but can complete 
the remaining study procedures if they are willin g.  
• Activity survey  
• Nutritional survey  
• Vitamin D and Sunlight Exposure Questionnaire  
• DSM II Colormeter Measurement : Will be measured at similar body sites as the baseline 
testing  
• Vascular function testing (pulse wave velocity, pulse wave analysis, and  brac hial flow 
mediated dilation , and blood pressure measurements ) 
• DXA scan  
• Medication adherence assessment  
o Collect medication calendar  
o Read MEMs cap and obtain Patient Adherence Report  
7. SAFETY ASSESSMENTS  
7.1 Specification of Safety Parameter  
• Serum calcium levels will be monitored for participant safety. Serum calcium >10.8 
mg/dL in 10 - to 14 -year -old children and >10.2 mg/dL in ≥15 -year -old children will 
prompt further evaluation. An elevated serum calcium level will be repeated and if still 
abnormal, study medication will be discontinued. Children who discontinued study 
medication due to hypercalcemia will have serum 25(OH)D measured to rule out 
vitamin D toxicity (levels ≥100 ng/mL) and will be referred to a pediatric endocrinologist 
for further evaluation and management. Children with hypercalcemia and normal serum 
25(OH)D levels (<100 ng/mL) will be also be referred for further evaluation to their 
primary care provider and a pediatric endocrinologist to rule out other unusual causes 
of hypercalcemia (chronic granulomatous disorders, primary hyperparathyroidism, 
familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia).  
• Significant fasting hyperglycemia (fasting blood glucose >125 mg/dL) during enrollment 
visit will disqualify subject from enrolling in the  study.  
• Post -menarchial girls that test positive during pregnancy screen at the enrollment visit 
will be excluded. Positive screens in the final visit will disqualify subject from getting a 
DXA scan but will not exclude subject from completing the study.  
• At the 3 -month follow -up and the final visit, the MEMS cap data will be downloaded to 
assess adherence.  
7.2 Methods and Timing for Assessing, Recording, and Analyzing Safety Parameters  
Serum calcium will be measured at the screening visit and only children with  normal calcium 
results for age will be eligible to enter the study. Upon enrollment , serum calcium will be 
monitored for safety at the 3 -month and 6 -month  follow -up v isits, and children found to have 
elevated serum calcium (>10.8 mg/dL in 10 - to 14 -year -old children and >10.2 mg/dL in ≥15 -
year -old children) will be further managed as stated above in section 7.1.  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
13 
 7.3 Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  
An adverse event is any unintended medical occurrence (symptom, diagnosis, sign, abnormal 
laboratory finding , or missed study procedure ) that occurs during the study that was  not 
present at baseline.  
• Any medical condition present at the time of enrollment is considered baseline, and not 
reported as an adverse event.  
• If the severity of a pre -existing medical condition worsens at any time during the study 
participation, it will be considered an adverse event . 
• All adverse events will be assessed by the Princip al Investigator to determine the 
severity of the event (mild, moderate, severe, life -threatening) and whether the event is 
related to the study product or study intervention  
• All AEs will be recorded in the eCRF  in the study database . The event description,  date of 
onset and study clinician’s assessment of severity and relationship to study product, 
date of resolution and outcome will be recorded. To elicit any adverse event, the parent 
will be prompted at each encounter to report any change in their child s ince the last 
contact.  
A serious adverse event (SAE) is any unintended medical occurrence in which the patient 
outcome is death  or life-threatening hospitalization, disability, or incapacity.  
• In the event of an SAE, t he SAE eCRF  must be completed by the re search coordinator 
and the details of the relevant SAE should be notified to the PI (D r. Rajakumar ) 
immediately . The event description, date of onset and study clinician’s assessment of 
severity and relationship to study product, and outcome of event will be recorded.  
• SAEs will be logged in the electronic database and will be periodically monitored by  the 
study statistician.  
7.4 Reporting Procedures  
• All AEs will be reported to the  Data and Safety Monitoring Board annually . 
• Unanticipated protocol -related problems will be notified by the PI (Dr. Rajakumar) to 
the IRB as and when they occur  
• All SAEs must be reported by the research staff to Dr. Rajakumar, the study principal 
investigator, immediately.  Principal investigator will report SAEs to the University of 
Pittsburgh  Institutional Review Board (IRB) according to the local IRB requirements.  
SAEs related to the research intervention will be notified by the PI (Dr. Rajakumar) to 
the IRB within 24 hrs. AEs of moderate severity related to the  research intervention will 
be notified by the PI (Dr. Rajakumar) to the IRB within 5 days.  
7.5 Follow -up for Adverse Events  
• Follow -up of a n on-serious adverse event of mild or moderate severity will end when 
the study reporting period ends [i.e., 6 -month follow -up visit (final study visit )]. Study 
staff will keep apprised of subject’s adverse event until the parent/subject provides a 
date of resolution for the AE; resolution date  will be documented in the CRHC database.  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
14 
 • Follow -up for a non-serious adverse event of severe nature will be the following:  
o At the time of the event, the investigator will provide appropriate treatment or 
follow  up, including communicating the event to the  child’s primary care provider 
and/or providing a referral to a specialist.  
o The staff will place a follow  up phone call to the parent, regardless of the study 
reporting period, to assure that the child is improving or that the family has 
connected with the  suggested referral.  Study staff will keep apprised of subject’s 
adverse event until the parent/subject provides a date of resolution for the AE; 
resolution date will be documented in the CRHC database.  
7.6 Safety Monitoring  
• Members of the Data  and Safety Moni toring Board will evaluate participants’ risks 
(adverse events) vs. the benefits and other factors that can affect study outcome.  
• Real -time reports of SAEs will be sent to the Data and Safety Monitoring Board as 
determined by the principal investigator.  
• We will appoint an Independent Safety Monitor (ISM) who will have expertise in 
pediatrics and whose primary responsibility will be to provide timely safety monitoring, 
to ensure good clinical practice and to quickly identify safety concerns. Safety reports b y 
the ISM will be submitted on a regular basis, (e.g., real time, weekly, monthly, quarterly ) 
as determined by the DSMB . To minimize bias, the ISM will evaluate SAEs masked to 
treatment assignment, unless the DSMB approves partial or complete unmasking. The 
ISM will participate for the duration of the study.  
• The ISM will be able to readily access participant records. The primary focus of the ISM 
is to independently review SAEs that may be associated with study treatment as well as 
adverse event s of special interest. The ISM will investigate any events considered 
serious and unexpected. The ISM will be in communication with Dr. Rajakumar  and the 
DSMB chair for any event that needs further evaluation. The ISM will not be directly 
involved in the t rial, will not be under the investigator ’s supervision, and will have no 
financial, intellectual, proprietary or professional interest in the outcome of the trial.  
8. INTERVENTION DISCONT INUATION  
To ensure children’s safety, we will use a serum calcium cutoff of >10.8 mg/dL in 10 - to 14 -year -
old children and >10.2 mg/dL in ≥15 -year -old children to prompt further evaluation. A n 
elevated  serum calcium level will be repeated and if it remains abnormal , study medication will 
be discontinued,  and participant will be withdrawn from the study protocol . Children who 
discontinued study medication due to hypercalcemia will have serum 25(OH)D measured to 
rule out vitamin D toxicity (levels ≥100 ng/mL) and will  be evaluated by a pediatric 
endocrinologist. Children with hypercalcemia and normal serum 25(OH)D levels (<100 ng/mL) 
will be referred for further evaluation to their primary care provider and a pediatric 
endocrinologist to rule out other unusual causes o f hypercalcemia (chronic granulomatous 
disorders, primary hyperparathyroidism, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia).  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
15 
 9. STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS  
9.1 General Design Issues  
In this randomized, controlled, double -blinded clinical trial, eligible children will rec eive in a 
1:1:1 ratio either  600 IU or 1000 IU or 2000 IU vitamin D3 supplementation orally once daily for 
six months. Our primary outcome measure will be brachial FMD at 6 -month  follow -up. A 25% or 
more improvement in brachial FMD % in the 1000 IU or the 2000 IU group when compared to 
the 600 IU group, after six months of vitamin D replacement will be considered significant.  
Our secondary outcomes will include : (1) pulse wave velocity (PWV) as a measure of arterial 
stiffness, (2) 1/fasting insulin concentration as a surrogate for  insulin sensitivity, and (3) 
metabolic syndrome risk factors (blood pressure, waist circumference, HDL cholesterol, 
triglycerides, and fasting blood glucose) at the 6 -month  follow -up. 
9.2 Sample Size and Randomi zation  
Our sample size estimates are based on showing a relative improvement in baseline brachial 
artery flow mediated vasodilation (FMD, %) of at least 25% in children receiving each of the 
higher doses of vitamin D3 (1000 IU and 2000 IU) compared with no  improvement in the 600 IU 
group after six months of treatment. We assumed the baseline FMD was ~6.5% based on 
previous studies in overweight children similar to our projected population.12-14 A sample size of 
56 in each treatment group at the end of the trial would have 84% power (two -sided two -
sample comparison of means, α=0.025) to detect this clinically important difference of 25% 
relative improvement (absolute improvement=25%*6.5% ≈1.6%) as suming a standard deviation 
of 2.6% (conservative estimates based on published literature).12,14 To provide for a projected 
drop -out rate of 25% by the end of the trial, we propose to recruit 225 children into the trial. 
We have over 90% powe r to detect a dose -response effect by testing for linear trend assuming 
a 0%, 20%, and 30% improvement in vascular health among children receiving 600 IU, 1000 IU, 
and 2000 IU, respectively.  
Our original sample size of n=252 was based on 90% power and 20% attrition to allow for 
subgroup analyses by race. In December  of 2015 , the PI and funder decided to re -evaluate the 
targeted sample size due to slower than expected recruitment. Accordingly, with approval from 
NHLBI, our accrual target  was revised from 252 participants to 229 participants based on 
projected enrollment and p ower of at least 80% to detect the original effe ct size with 25% -30% 
attrition . The lower sample size of n=225 would still allow for detection of clinically significant 
effect of vitamin D supplementation. However, the proportion of African Americans in th e 
recruited sample was much larger than anticipated ; the small number of Caucasian subjects in 
the cohort  preclude s doing race -stratified analysis . For the secondary outcomes, we have 8 9% 
power to detect effect sizes of 0.61 or greater without adjustment f or multiplicity.  
 
Treatment Assignment Procedures  
In this randomized, controlled, double -blinded clinical trial, eligible children will be randomly 
allocated, using a permuted block design, in 1:1:1 ratio, to receive either conventional (600 IU) 
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
16 
 or enhance d (1000 IU or 2000 IU) vitamin D 3 supplementation orally once daily for six months. 
Study supplement bottles were masked and labeled by the research pharmacist with 
appropriate randomization codes. At enrollment, the CRHC database  assigned the 
randomizatio n code based on the permuted block scheme.  
Study participants or investigators will not have access to the assigned doses until the end of 
the clinical trial [timing of planned breaking of randomization code]. Unmasking may occur in 
the instance of an SAE. The ISM may divulge the masked dosage to the PI or relevant clinicians 
who are treating the patient.  
9.3 Interim analyses and Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
No interim efficacy analysis has been planned. Dr. Moore will work with Dr. Rajakumar to 
prepare a DSMB report addressing specific concerns that she anticipates the DSMB may have 
regarding the conduct of the study. This will be distributed to DSMB members along with the 
Open Session report. Likewise, Dr. Moore’s report for the Closed Session will usua lly contain an 
assessment of the progress of the trial, including recommendations as to whether it should be 
terminated or modified. Interim data reports will generally include the following types of 
information, although only the Closed  Session data repor ts will include comparisons by 
treatment group:  
• Monthly and cumulative accrual compared with targets  
• Baseline characteristics, overall and by treatment group  
• Completeness and quality of data collection forms  
• Status of enrolled participants, overall and by treatment group  
• Participants’ off -protocol treatments  
• Compliance with eligibility criteria and other protocol requirements  
• Subject adherence to the treatment regimen, overall and by treatment group  
• Individual SAEs by subject ID number and a table of eve nt-specific cumulative rates, 
overall and by treatment group  
Dr. Moore will work to ensure that all the information presented at the DSMB meetings 
remains confidential. Each report will be marked as such. At the end of each DSMB meeting, all 
reports will b e collected and destroyed. At the end of the meeting, t he DSMB will make 
recommendations regarding the continuation of the trial. Dr. Rajakumar will implement the 
DSMB recommendations. Dr. Rajakumar will also submit the DSMB recommendations to the 
IRB. 
9.4 Outcomes  
Primary outcome  
Our primary outcome measure will be change in mean FMD % at 6-month  follow -up. A 25% 
or more improvement in FMD % in the 1000 IU or 2000 IU compared to the 600 IU group 
after six months of vitamin D replacement will be considered signif icant.  
Secondary outcome  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
17 
 Our secondary outcomes will include : (1) pulse wave velocity (PWV) as a measure of arterial 
stiffness, (2)  1/fasting insulin  concentration  as a surrogate for  insulin sensitivity, and (3) 
metabolic syndrome risk factors (blood press ure, waist circumference, HDL cholesterol, 
triglycerides, and fasting blood glucose) at the 6 -month  follow -up. 
9.5 Data Analyses  
Our primary analysis will use children’s original treatment assignment regardless of adherence 
(intention to treat). We will begin by calculating descriptive statistics for baseline demographics 
and clinical characteristics by vitamin D treatment groups (600 IU vs 1000 IU vs 2000 IU). Our 
primary outcome measure of vascular health is brachial artery FMD expressed as a percentage. 
We w ill use mixed -effects models with fixed effects of time  (baseline, 3 months, and 6 months) , 
the treatment *time interaction, and random subject effects to test for differential changes in 
FMD over time and differences in FMD at six months. We are primarily interested in the 
comparisons of each higher dose (1000 IU and 2000 IU) to the lower dose (600 IU) at six months 
(α=0.025 for each comparisons). The mixed -effects model will allow unbiased estimation of the 
treatment effects at six months even if some 6 -month data are missing because of the 
incorporated dependence among baseline, 3-month and 6 -month assessments (assuming data 
are missing at random). We will test the main effect of vitamin D supplementation ( three  
groups)  at 3 and 6 months  and pairwise comparisons of the groups receiving the larger doses of 
vitamin D with the group receiving 600 IU.  If differences are detected across the 3 groups, we 
will test for a dose response in FMD across doses by using a linear contrast of coef ficients test 
(α=0.05). We will use the same methodology to test the effects of higher doses of vitamin D on 
pulse -wave velocity, our primary measure of arterial stiffness.  
The second part of our primary analysis  of our trial is to determine whether higher  doses of 
vitamin D will result in improvements in insulin sensitivity and metabolic syndrome markers 
over time. We will use mixed -effects models with fixed effects of time  (baseline, 3 months, and 
6 months) , and the treatment  time interaction with random subject effects  to test for 
differential changes in secondary outcomes  over time. We will test the main effect of treatment 
(three  groups)  at 3 and 6 months  and pairwise comparisons of the groups receiving the larger 
doses of vitamin D with the group recei ving 600 IU.  All tests will be two sided with α=0.05. 
We will explore the mediating effects of inflammatory markers ( hs-CRP, IL -6, TNF -α) and 
adipokines (leptin and adiponectin) on the temporal relationship between vitamin D and 
vascular health. We hypoth esize that vitamin D effects on vascular health may be driven by 
inflammatory processes and adipokines. An analysis that would complement this hypothesis 
would be a mediation analysis where we demonstrate that the effect of vitamin D on vascular 
health is partially mediated by our measures of inflammation and adipokines. We propose to 
use single -mediator and multiple -mediator methods incorporating product of coeffi cients to 
test for mediation.15 For the simple single -mediator analysis, we first must demonstrate that 
the high dose vitamin D has a significant effec t on each mediator (inflammatory markers and 
adipokines) at three  and six months using a general linear model. We will then test whether 6 -
month vascular health is correlated with each mediator. Both tests would have to be significant 
for there to be evide nce of mediation. We will estimate the mediated effect by taking the 
product of the following coefficients: 1) the coefficient for the intervention effect on the 
mediator, and 2) the coefficient for the mediator in a model testing the intervention effect o n 
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
18 
 vascular health controlling for the potential mediator. This estimate will provide the reduction 
in the effect of vitamin D on vascular health when adjusted for the mediator. The confidence 
interval for the mediated effect will be calculated using bootst rap methods. Since our vitamin D 
intervention is hypothesized to target multiple mechanisms, we will test for a multiple -
mediator model after single mediation is thoroughly investigated.  
Missing Data  
We do not expect substantial missing item -response data due to the electronic nature of data 
collection. Based on our pilot work, we anticipate <20% attrition at the 6 -month assessment, 
and we have accounted for this in sample -size analyses. Participants w ho wish to discontinue 
the study drug will be asked to continue to participate in all follow -up visits; those who no 
longer wish to participate in the study will be considered dropouts, and we will monitor these 
events. We will obtain reasons for dropout i n case it appears possible to modify the protocol so 
as to increase retention. At the end of the study, we will compare baseline characteristics and 
treatment arms between participants who have received 3 - and 6 -month assessments and 
participants who have not, to learn what factors are associated with missing visits.  
For participants with missing 6 -month outcome data, we will conduct several sensitivity  
analyses to test the impact on our study conclusions. The methods proposed assume that the 
data are missi ng at random (MAR), where the missing data mechanism is related to observed 
data, not the unobserved values. Although this assumption is difficult to confirm, our sensitivity 
analyses will allow us to assess the robustness of our findings and threats to th e MAR 
assumption. Given that our outcomes are highly mechanistic and less patient -relevant 
symptomatic/functional outcomes, missing data at 6 months would likely be related to baseline 
characteristics or 3 -month values. As mentioned previously, we will use  linear mixed models for 
analysis, since these models are more robust to missing data than traditional multivariate 
models or single -point -in-time ANOVA. From these models, we can estimate the treatment 
impact at 6 months using the covariance structure of the repeated measurements. Th is 
approach will be compared to a complete case analysis (missing complete at random) and a 
nonignorable missing data method  (pattern mixture modeling ). These different methods should 
result in consistent qualitative results if  our findings are robust to missing data.  
 
10. DATA COLLECTION AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
10.1 Data Collection Forms  
Data based on source documents (eligibility , anthropometrics , demographics , etc.) will be 
assessed and  entered by the research coordinator. Data collecte d in paper records (skin -typing, 
sun exposure history, DSM II color -meter readings, pubertal self -assessment, lab results,  
adverse events , etc.) will be entered  into the CRHC study database , and data with electronic 
outputs (vascular function results and adherence  data from MEMs cap) will be merged into the 
CRHC study database. Tracking reports will be developed to assess recruitment, participant 
status, upcoming visits, and outstanding asse ssments. Automated reports for data and safety 
monitoring will also be developed.  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
19 
 All paper records containing identifying information will be kept in locked files accessible only 
to study staff and unlocked only while a study staff member is working with the files. 
Information regarding individual subjects will be kept private and shared only with the IRB and 
appropriate government agencies.  
10.2 Data Management  
Data management effort for this clinical trial will be coordinated through University of 
Pittsburgh’ s Center for Research on Health Care Data Center  and will use a paperless data 
collection systems (eSYSDM), using both the Internet and tablet PCs with backup paper data 
collection. Dr. Rajakumar will work with Dr. Moore to oversee all aspects of data mana gement. 
Along with the lead research coordinator, they will develop an operation manual to standardize 
all procedures and staff training in areas such as participant recruitment; measurements; 
assessments; and data entry, management, and security.  
10.3 Quality Assurance  
Training  
All key personnel and research staff have completed or will complete the re quired training 
and certification for research integrity, protection of human subjects, HIPPA privacy and 
blood -borne pat hogens.  
Quality Control Committee  
Quality Control Committee will include Dr. Rajakumar, Dr. Moore, and Ms. Kearney .  
 Metrics  
• Monthly and cumulative accrual compared to enrollment/follow -up targets  
• Baseline characteristics, overall and by treatment group  
• Completeness and quality of data collection forms  
• Status of enrolled participants, overall and by treatment group  
• Participants’ off -protocol treatments  
• Compliance with eligibility criteria and other protocol requirements  
• Subject adherence to the treatment regimen, overall and by trea tment group  
• Individual SAEs by subject ID number and a table of event -specific cumulative rates, 
overall and by treatment group  
Protocol Deviations  
Any protocol deviations recognized by study staff will be communicated to Dr. Rajakumar 
(PI). The PI will de termine if the IRB needs to be immediately apprised of the deviation or 
can be informed at the next renewal. This deviation will be documented in the “As Needed” 
forms in the CRHC database. The protocol deviations and the course of actions taken to 
address  the deviations will be discussed in the next DSMB meeting.  
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
20 
 Monitoring  
Dr. Rajakumar, Dr. Moore, and Ms. Kearney  have extensive experience in all areas of clinical 
trial oversight, including developing quality assurance benchmarks, enforcing quality 
contro l, and monitoring protocol -specific activities through ongoing reporting structures 
and on -site evaluations. Dr. Moore will be responsible for generating reports on 
recruitment and follow  up; quality control reports, which include the quality of data 
recei ved; participant follow  up adherence data, which include missed visits; and participant 
characteristics. Ms. Kearney will be responsible for monitoring the study site to ensure that 
all regulatory procedures are met. This will include ensuring  that all stu dy personnel 
(especially those hired after the trial begins) have completed required training and received 
certification to conduct human subjects’ research.  
Within one month of initiating a protocol, we will conduct an audit to review the study 
procedures  and documentation of their use, including standardized procedures for 
obtaining informed consent, proper recording of data, reporting AEs and SAEs, training of 
personnel, and protection of patient identification and confidentiality. This process will be 
repeated every six months to assure that the protocol is being properly implemented, and 
that data are being collected and entered accurately. Enrollment and retention rates, 
protocol deviations, all SAEs, and all informed consent documentation will also be reviewed.  
The following elements will be reviewed under the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan: study 
progress, including an assessment of data quality (monitored monthly); outcomes and 
adverse -events data, including out -of-range laboratory results (ongoing monitoring); any 
pertinent new information (monitored every six months); study procedures designed to 
protect the privacy of the subjects and the confidentiality of the data, i.e., that data and 
charts are stored in locked area and data are recorded to pro tect the identity of subjects 
(monitored weekly); interim analysis and final conclusions evaluating benefit -to-risk ratio of 
study participation. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan reports will be submitted yearly to the 
Institutional Review Board at the time  of renewals.  
11. PARTICIPANT RIGHTS A ND CONFIDENTIALITY  
11.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review  
This protocol and the informed consent document s, and any subsequent modifications to these 
documents, will be reviewed and approved by the IRB committee responsible for oversight of 
the study.  
11.2 Informed Consent Forms  
Written informed consent from either a biological or adoptive parent , and participant’s assent, 
are required for enrollment of eligible participants <18 years of age (10 - to 17 -year -old 
children). Eligible p articipants who are 18 years  of age can provide legal consent for 
themselves.  Consent forms will include the purpose of the study, why the subject is eligible to 
participate, the study procedures to be implemented, associated benefits and risks, the 
voluntary nature of the study, and notices of privacy rights. The original, signed consent form 
will be retained by the study and a copy of the consent form will be given to the 
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
21 
 parent/guardian. If a non-biological legal guardian  consents fo r the subject, a copy of state 
documentation stating legal guardianship will be retained with the consent form.  Consent 
documents will only be in English; non -English speakers/readers will not be eligible to consent 
for the study.  
11.3 Participant Confidentiali ty 
Subjects will be assigned an anonymizing Participant ID, which will serve as the primary means 
of identifying subject to non -study related personnel (e.g. clinical labs, etc.). All paper records 
containing identifying information will be kept in locked files accessible only to study staff and 
unlocked only while a study staff member is working with the files. All computer and 
networking systems will comply with the University of Pittsburgh standard for digital security 
and password -encryption, as necessa ry. Information regarding individual subjects will be kept 
private and shared only with the IRB and appropriate government agencies.  
11.4 Study Discontinuation  
The study may be discontinued at any time by the IRB, the NHLBI , the OHRP, the FDA, or other 
governme nt agencies as part of their duties to ensure that research participants are protected.  
12. COMMITTEES  
• Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
• Quality Control Committee will include Dr. Rajakumar, Dr. Moore, and Ms. Kearney .  
13. PUBLICATION OF RESEA RCH FINDINGS  
Proposed trial will be registered at ClinicalTrials.gov and the results of the will be submitted to 
ClinicalTrials.gov as per NIH policy. Finding of the trial will also be published in a peer -reviewed 
medical journal.  
14. REFERENCES  
1. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, Lamb MM, Flegal KM. Prevalence of high body mass index 
in US children and adolescents, 2007 -2008. JAMA 2010;303:242 -9. 
2. Freedman DS, Mei Z, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS, Dietz WH. Cardiovascular risk fa ctors and 
excess adiposity among overweight children and adolescents: the Bogalusa Heart Study. J 
Pediatr 2007;150:12 -7 e2.  
3. Ice CL, Murphy E, Minor VE, Neal WA. Metabolic syndrome in fifth grade children with 
acanthosis nigricans: results from the CARDI AC project. World J Pediatr 2009;5:23 -30. 
4. Delvin EE, Lambert M, Levy E, et al. Vitamin D status is modestly associated with glycemia 
and indicators of lipid metabolism in French -Canadian children and adolescents. J Nutr 
2010;140:987 -91. 
        Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
22 
 5. Kumar J, Munt ner P, Kaskel FJ, Hailpern SM, Melamed ML. Prevalence and Associations of 
25-Hydroxyvitamin D Deficiency in US Children: NHANES 2001 -2004. Pediatrics 2009.  
6. Pacifico L, Anania C, Osborn JF, et al. Low 25(OH)D3 levels are associated with total 
adiposity, metabolic syndrome, and hypertension in Caucasian children and adolescents. 
Eur J Endocrinol 2011;165:603 -11. 
7. Reis JP, von Muhlen D, Miller ER, 3rd, Michos ED, Appel LJ. Vitamin D Status and 
Cardiometabolic Risk Factors in the United States Adolescent P opulation. Pediatrics 2009.  
8. Giovannucci E, Liu Y, Hollis BW, Rimm EB. 25 -hydroxyvitamin D and risk of myocardial 
infarction in men: a prospective study. Archives of Internal Medicine 2008;168:1174 -80. 
9. Kayaniyil S, Vieth R, Harris SB, et al. Associati on of 25(OH)D and PTH with metabolic 
syndrome and its traditional and nontraditional components. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2011;96:168 -75. 
10. Rajakumar K, de Las Heras J, Chen TC, Lee S, Holick MF, Arslanian SA. Vitamin d status, 
adiposity, and lipids in bl ack american and caucasian children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2011;96:1560 -7. 
11. Rajakumar K, de Las Heras J, Lee S, Holick MF, Arslanian SA. 25 -Hydroxyvitamin D 
Concentrations and In Vivo Insulin Sensitivity and beta -Cell Function Relative to Insulin 
Sens itivity in Black and White Youth. Diabetes Care 2012.  
12. Engler MM, Engler MB, Malloy MJ, et al. Antioxidant vitamins C and E improve endothelial 
function in children with hyperlipidemia: Endothelial Assessment of Risk from Lipids in 
Youth (EARLY) Trial. Circulation 2003;108:1059 -63. 
13. Kelly AS, Wetzsteon RJ, Kaiser DR, Steinberger J, Bank AJ, Dengel DR. Inflammation, insulin, 
and endothelial function in overweight children and adolescents: the role of exercise. J 
Pediatr 2004;145:731 -6. 
14. Woo KS, Choo k P, Yu CW, et al. Overweight in children is associated with arterial endothelial 
dysfunction and intima -media thickening. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 2004;28:852 -7. 
15. MacKinnon DP, Fairchild AJ, Fritz MS. Mediation analysis. Annu Rev Psychol 2007;58:5 93-
614. 