[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 SYNOPSIS 5
2I N T R O D U C T I O N 8
2.1 B ACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 8
2.2 B ENEFITS AND RISKS TO SUBJECTS 9
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS 11
3.1 O BJECTIVES 11
3.2 P RIMARY ENDPOINT 11
3.3 S ECONDARY ENDPOINTS 11
3.4 A DDITIONAL ENDPOINTS 12
3.5 S AFETY ENDPOINTS 12
3.6 B IOMARKER SAMPLES 12
4 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 12
4.1 O VERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN 12
4.2 D ISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN 14
5 STUDY ACTIVITIES 15
5.1 E LIGIBILITY CRITERIA 15
5.2 C ONTRACEPTION RECOMMENDATIONS 19
5.3 P ROHIBITED MEDICATIONS AND THERAPY 20
5.4 P RIOR AND CONCOMITANT THERAPY 24
5.5 W ITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS AND DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY 26
5.6 F OLLOW -UP FOR SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL FROM STUDY 27
5.7 S TUDY DRUG 28
5.8 R ANDOMIZATION /DRUG ASSIGNMENT 30
5.9 P ROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 32
5.10 O THER STUDY PROCEDURES 32
6 SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS 45
6.1 C OMPLAINTS AND ADVERSE EVENTS 45
6.2 T OXICITY MANAGEMENT 52
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.3 D ATA MONITORING COMMITTEE AND CARDIOVASCULAR ADJUDICATION COMMITTEE 56
6.4 O THER SAFETY DATA COLLECTION 57
6.5 SUSAR R EPORTING 57
7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE 57
7.1 S TATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 57
7.2 D EFINITION FOR ANALYSIS POPULATIONS 57
7.3 S TATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR EFFICACY 57
7.4 S TATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR SAFETY 58
7.5 S TATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF OPTIONAL PROTEOMIC BIOMARKER DATA 59
8E T H I C S 59
8.1 I NDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE /INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD (IEC/IRB) 59
8.2 E THICAL CONDUCT OF THE STUDY 59
8.3 S UBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 59
9 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM COMPLETION 59
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE 60
11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY 60
12 REFERENCES 61
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. EXAMPLES OF COMMONLY USED STRONG CYP3A INHIBITORS AND INDUCERS 24
TABLE 2. DESCRIPTION OF STUDY DRUG AND PLACEBO 28
TABLE 3. SPECIFIC TOXICITY MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES FOR ABNORMAL LABORATORY VALUES 54
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. STUDY SCHEMATIC 14
FIGURE 2. INTERPRETATION AND MANAGEMENT OF HBV SEROLOGIC TEST RESULTS 43
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS 63
APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 67
APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIGNATORIES 68
APPENDIX D. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE 69
APPENDIX E. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES 73
APPENDIX F. OPERATIONS MANUAL 74
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2 INTRODUCTION
2.1 Background and Rationale
Why This Study Is Being Conducted
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is an inflammatory, pruritic, chronic or chronically relapsing skin disease.  The 
adult phase of AD begins at puberty and frequently continues into adulthood.  In adults, disease typically involves flexural folds, face, neck, upper arms and back, and dorsal surfaces of the hands and feet.
1,2
Management of AD primarily consists of trigger avoidance, careful attention to skin care, and both pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatment.
3  The 2006 PRACTALL Consensus Report recommends 
treatment by addition of agents in a stepwise fashion based on disease severity, starting with topical corticosteroids of increasing potency and/or a topical calcineurin inhibitor and escalating to systemic therapy for recalcitrant, severe disease.
4  Systemic immunomodulatory agents used to treat AD include 
cyclosporin A, azathioprine, methotrexate (MTX), mycophenolate mofetil, interferon gamma, systemic corticosteroids, and dupilumab, a monoclonal antibody that inhibits interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13 signaling.
5-7  Despite these systemic therapies, an unmet need continues to exist for patients who are 
non-responders or partial responders to these agents.
The Janus kinases or JAKs are a family of intracellular tyrosine kinases that function as dimers in the 
signaling process of many cytokine receptors.  The JAKs play a critical role in both innate and adaptive immunity, making them attractive targets for the treatment of inflammatory diseases.  Targeting the JAK signaling pathway for AD is supported by the involvement of various pro-inflammatory cytokines that 
signal via JAK pathways in the pathogenesis of AD.  The activation of JAK signaling initiates expression of 
survival factors, cytokines, chemokines, and other molecules that facilitate leukocyte cellular trafficking and cell proliferation, which contribute to AD and other inflammatory disorders.
8,9
Upadacitinib is an oral, reversible JAK1 selective inhibitor.  JAK1 inhibition blocks the signaling of many important pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-2, IL-6, IL-7, and IL-15, which are known contributors to inflammatory disorders.  Through modulation of these proinflammatory cytokine pathways, upadacitinib offers the potential for effective treatment of inflammatory and autoimmune disorders such as AD, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriatic arthritis (PsA), Crohn's disease (CD), ulcerative colitis (UC), axial spondyloarthritis (AxSpA), and Giant Cell Arteritis.  In the upadacitinib Phase 2 AD study, a statistically significant difference in the mean percent change from Baseline in Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI) score at Week 16 (primary endpoint) was observed for 7.5 mg (–39.4%; P= 0.032 vs 
placebo), 15 mg (–61.7%; P< 0.001 vs placebo), and 30 mg (–74.4%; P< 0.001 vs placebo) groups 
compared with placebo (–23.0%).  Through Week 16 (Period 1), the percentages of subjects with 
adverse events (AEs), serious adverse events (SAEs), severe AEs, and AEs leading to discontinuation were 
similar across treatment groups.  There were no deaths reported during Period 1.
Additionally, upadacitinib was studied in rheumatoid arthritis with the results of two Phase 2 studies 
and two Phase 3 studies available as peer-reviewed manuscripts.
10-13  Results from the Phase 2 study in 
AD showed that upadacitinib doses of 15 mg and 30 mg per day had an efficacy and safety profile that 
can benefit patients with moderate to severe AD.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Clinical Hypothesis
Based on the differentiated selectivity profile for JAK1 inhibition, upadacitinib could demonstrate an 
improved benefit-risk profile compared to other therapeutic strategies for patients with inflammatory diseases.
Upadacitinib is expected to provide better efficacy compared to dupilumab and is expected to be well 
tolerated in adult subjects with moderate to severe AD.
Additional information regarding indications under study can be found in the current edition of the 
upadacitinib Investigator's Brochure.
14
2.2 Benefits and Risks to Subjects
Treatment of AD in adolescent and adult subjects depends on the extent and severity of disease.  Topical agents alone are commonly used for mild to moderate cases.  The most commonly used topical agents are corticosteroids, calcineurin inhibitor agents, and moisturizers.  The most common adverse events (AEs) of topical corticosteroids occur when used as monotherapy for prolonged periods and include skin thinning, acne, pigmentation, and striae.  Common AEs associated with use of topical calcineurin inhibitors are transient warmth, burning, itching, or stinging at the application site.
2,15  When 
topical therapies are insufficient for treating the signs and symptoms of AD, systemic therapy or phototherapy are generally added to topical agents.
2,15
Treatment guidelines developed by the American Academy of Dermatology recommend the use of systemic immunomodulatory agents for subjects in whom optimized topical regimens and/or phototherapy do not adequately control the signs and symptoms of disease.
5,16  These guidelines 
recognize that insufficient data exist to firmly recommend optimal dosing, duration of therapy, and precise monitoring protocols for any systemic immunomodulating medication.  Importantly, in addition to the lack of well-controlled efficacy data supporting their use in moderate to severe AD, the duration of use of many traditional systemic immunomodulatory agents are limited due to cumulative toxicity.
5,16
More recently, dupilumab, a monoclonal antibody that inhibits IL-4 and IL-13 signaling, was approved for the treatment of moderate to severe AD in adults in the European Union (EU)
17and United States 
(US)18in 2017.  Although dupilumab addresses the needs of some patients with moderate to severe AD, 
a large unmet need still exists in this population since, in the dupilumab Phase 3 studies (even when combined with topical corticosteroids [TCS]), fewer than 40% of patients achieved 0 or 1 on the Investigator's Global Assessment (IGA) scale; therefore, 60% or more of patients continued to experience significant symptoms on dupilumab therapy.
6,7  Nearly 50% of dupilumab subjects who were 
IGA 0 or 1 responders at Week 16 became nonresponders by Week 52.17  Dupilumab is generally 
well-tolerated, and the most common AEs are injection site reaction, conjunctivitis, and blepharitis.5,16
At this time very few systemic agents are approved for AD and, of those, cyclosporin A and oral prednisone are not suitable for long-term use.
5,16  Thus, there is a high unmet need for a significant 
number of patients with an inadequate response to currently available agents.  While not approved for 
AD, other systemic treatments may also be utilized including methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil, and
azathioprine.5,16
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.These systemic agents all have immunomodulating properties leading to potential AEs.  The most 
common AEs associated with use of cyclosporin are abnormal renal function tests (e.g., increased 
creatinine or proteinuria), hyperlipidemia, hypertension, headache, and hypertrichosis.5,16  The most 
common AEs associated with methotrexate use are gastrointestinal disorders (e.g., stomatitis, oral 
ulcers, dyspepsia, abdominal pain, nausea, diarrhea) and abnormal liver function tests (e.g., increased aspartate transaminase [AST] or increased alanine transaminase [ALT]).
5,16  The most common AEs 
associated with use of mycophenolate mofetil and azathioprine are gastrointestinal disorders (e.g., nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, cramping, bloating, anorexia) and occasional leukopenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia.
5,16
Taken together, these agents may generally increase the risk of infections and cytopenias, gastrointestinal disorders, and may impact renal and/or liver function.
5,16  Rarely, lymphoproliferative 
disorders, lymphoma, and other malignancies are associated with these agents.5,16  Thus, there is a high 
unmet need for a significant number of patients with an inadequate response to currently available agents.
Upadacitinib is a novel selective orally available JAK1 inhibitor with the potential to decrease Th2 
mediated skin inflammation and itch while having minimal inhibitory effects on JAK2 and JAK3.  This could potentially minimize some of the reported safety concerns with non-selective JAK inhibition which are thought to be mediated by inhibition of JAK2 and JAK3 signaling pathways.
19,20
Primary results from the ongoing Phase 2 study demonstrated superior efficacy of upadacitinib with an acceptable safety profile at the selected doses for Phase 3 (15 mg and 30 mg once daily [QD]) compared to placebo in subjects with moderate to severe AD.  Taken together, the efficacy and safety data from 
the Phase 2 AD study and cumulative safety data from ongoing Phase 2 and 3 programs in other disease 
indications support further development of upadacitinib in subjects with moderate to severe AD.
Adverse events such as infections, herpes zoster reactivation, malignancies, and hematologic AEs have 
been observed with JAK inhibition.  Events of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism have been 
reported in patients receiving JAK inhibitors including upadacitinib.  Malignancies have been reported in 
the RA clinical studies for upadacitinib.  Based on the integrated data from the Phase 3 RA studies, there were comparable incidence rates of malignancies other than non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) between the upadacitinib 15 mg QD and 30 mg QD groups with long-term treatment.  NMSC is a common malignancy in the general population.  Although the incidence rate of NMSC was higher in the upadacitinib 30 mg group compared to the upadacitinib 15 mg group in the integrated analysis data, the risk of patients experiencing a NMSC when receiving upadacitinib 15 mg and 30 mg in the Phase 3 RA studies did not appear to increase over time.  Based on review of the data available, no pattern of the types of malignancies was noted, the malignancies are expected for a population of patients with 
moderately to severely active RA, and the standardized incidence rate is within the expected range for 
the general population.  The safety profile specific to upadacitinib is evolving, with safety results to date consistent with those known to be associated with JAK inhibition, with non-serious infections (e.g., upper respiratory tract infection or nasopharyngitis) being the most commonly reported AEs.  In addition, laboratory changes observed with upadacitinib include elevations of serum transaminases, lipids, creatinine, and creatine phosphokinase; both increased and reduced hemoglobin, depending on Baseline inflammatory burden; and reductions in white blood cell counts, including natural killer (NK) cells.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The results of all genetic toxicology testing indicate that upadacitinib is not genotoxic; however, 
upadacitinib is teratogenic based on animal studies, which necessitates avoidance of pregnancy in 
females of childbearing potential.  Based on the calculated safety margins for human fetal exposure with 
seminal fluid transfer, there is judged to be no risk to the pregnancy of female partners of male subjects who are treated with upadacitinib.
A detailed discussion of the pre-clinical and clinical toxicology, metabolism, pharmacology, and safety 
experience with upadacitinib can be found in the current Investigator's Brochure.
14
Taken together, the safety and efficacy data from upadacitinib studies to date show a favorable benefit-
risk profile for upadacitinib and support the continued investigation of upadacitinib in patients with 
various autoimmune/inflammatory conditions.
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
3.1 Objectives
The objective of this study is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of upadacitinib versus dupilumab for the treatment of adult subjects with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis who are candidates for systemic therapy.
3.2 Primary Endpoint
The primary endpoint is the proportion of subjects achieving a 75% reduction in EASI (EASI 75) from Baseline at Week 16.
3.3 Secondary Endpoints
Ranked Secondary Endpoints:
1. Percent change from Baseline to Week 16 in Worst Pruritus Numerical rating scale (NRS)
2. Proportion of subjects achieving a 100% reduction in EASI (EASI 100) from Baseline at Week 163. Proportion of subjects achieving a 90% reduction in EASI (EASI 90) from Baseline at Week 164. Percent change from Baseline to Week 4 in Worst Pruritus NRS5. Proportion of subjects achieving a 75% reduction in EASI (EASI 75) from Baseline at Week 2
6. Percent change from Baseline to Week 1 in Worst Pruritus NRS
7. Proportion of subjects achieving an improvement (reduction) in Worst Pruritus NRS ≥ 4 from 
Baseline at Week 16 for subjects with Worst Pruritus NRS ≥ 4 at Baseline
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.4 Additional Endpoints
All variables listed as primary or secondary endpoints will be analyzed at all visits other than those listed 
above.  In addition, the following variables will be analyzed at all visits:
!Proportion of subjects achieving a 75% reduction in EASI in the head and neck body region from Baseline
!Proportion of subjects achieving a 75% reduction in EASI in each body region (other than head and neck) from Baseline
!Proportion of subjects achieving an improvement (reduction) in Daily Worst Pruritus NRS ≥4 
from Baseline for subjects with Daily Worst Pruritus NRS ≥4 at Baseline by day up to Day 28
3.5 Safety Endpoints
The following safety evaluations will be performed during the study:  treatment-emergent AEs (TEAEs), SAEs, AEs of special interest (AESI), AEs leading to discontinuation; vital signs, and laboratory tests.
3.6 Biomarker Samples
Optional biospecimens (e.g., blood, serum, plasma, and skin biopsies) will be collected at specified time points ( Appendix D ) throughout the study to evaluate known and/or novel disease-related or drug-
related biomarkers.  Types of biomarkers may include nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and/or metabolites.  This research may be exploratory in nature and the results may not be included with the clinical study report.
The analyses of optional biomarker samples may include but are not limited to genetic markers that will 
help to understand the subject's disease and response to upadacitinib.  Genes of interest may include those associated with pharmacokinetics (drug metabolizing enzymes, drug transport proteins), genes within the target pathway (JAK, Tyk2, TNF), or other genes believed to be related to AD and other inflammatory diseases (Filaggrin [FLG], Claudin 1 [CLDN1], Human Leukocyte Antigen [HLA]).  Research may also include epigenetic changes in DNA that may associate with the subject's response to treatment or disease.  Samples for RNA and proteomics will be used to research if any genetic variants result in changes to gene expression or protein concentrations.  For any samples collected in Germany, the research will be restricted to upadacitinib and AD.
4 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan
This is a Phase 3b, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, active comparator-controlled multicenter study that will evaluate the safety and efficacy of upadacitinib versus dupilumab in adults ( ≥ 18 to 
≤75 years of age) with moderate to severe AD who are candidates for systemic therapy.  Eligible 
subjects must have a documented history of inadequate response to treatment with topical AD 
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.treatments or documented use of systemic treatment for AD within 6 months prior to the Baseline Visit 
or for whom topical treatments are otherwise medically inadvisable.
The study is comprised of a 35-day Screening Period, a 24-week double-blind treatment period, and an 
End-of-Treatment Follow-up Visit.  Subjects who complete Study M16-046 will have the option to enroll into an open-label study of oral upadacitinib 30 mg QD in which they will be treated for an additional
52 weeks.  The End-of-Treatment Follow-up Visit will be 12 weeks after the last injection for subjects 
who do not enroll into the open-label study.
Subjects who meet eligibility criteria will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to one of the two arms as shown 
below:
!Treatment A (N = 325):  Daily oral doses of upadacitinib 30 mg from the Baseline visit until the 
Week 24 visit, and placebo pre-filled syringe administered at the baseline visit (2 subcutaneous 
[SC] injections), followed by placebo pre-filled syringe (1 injection) every other week until the Week 22 visit.
!Treatment B (N = 325):  Dupilumab 600 mg (2 × 300 mg dupilumab SC injection) administered at the Baseline visit, followed by dupilumab 300 mg SC injection every other week until the Week 22 visit and daily oral doses of placebo tablets from the Baseline visit until the Week 24 visit.
Randomization will be stratified by baseline disease severity (moderate validated Investigator Global Assessment for atopic dermatitis [vIGA-AD 3] vs. severe [vIGA-AD 4]) and age (< 40, ≥ 40 to < 65, 
≥65 years).  The subject's age at baseline will be used for randomization and throughout the duration of 
the study.
Information on the Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) and Cardiovascular Adjudication Committee 
(CAC) is described in Section 6.3.
The schematic of the study is shown in Figure 1 .  Further details regarding study procedures are located 
in Section 5.10 .
See Section 5.1for information regarding eligibility criteria.
The study sites and subjects will remain blinded to treatment assignments for the duration of the study.  A Week 24 database lock will occur after all ongoing subjects have completed the Week 24 visit; the Primary Analysis will be performed based on this database lock, which is the only and final analysis for efficacy.  A final database lock will be performed at the end of the study.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Figure 1. Study Schematic
BL = Baseline; SC = subcutaneous
* Dupilumab 300 mg SC injection will be administered every other week starting at the Week 2 visit and until the Week 22 
visit, after an initial dose of 600 mg at the Baseline visit.
4.2 Discussion of Study Design
Choice of Control Group
Dupilumab is a systemic therapy approved in the US, EU, and elsewhere for treatment of adult patients 
with moderate to severe AD.  Indirect comparison of the upadacitinib Phase 2 study results with 
published results from the dupilumab Phase 3 studies shows superior nominal results for upadacitinib 30 mg QD versus dupilumab 300 mg every other week, in a similar patient population.  This study is being performed to evaluate the hypothesis of potential superiority of upadacitinib.
Appropriateness of Measurements
Standard clinical and laboratory procedures will be utilized in this study.  All efficacy measurements in this study are standard for assessing disease activity in subjects with AD.  Other than the biomarker analyses which are exploratory, all clinical and laboratory procedures in this study are standard and generally accepted.
Suitability of Subject Population
Eligible subjects have a documented history of inadequate response to treatment with topical or systemic AD treatments or they are subjects for whom topical treatments are otherwise medically inadvisable.  As a result, these subjects have an unmet need for adequate control of their AD.  Results in 

STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.the Phase 2 study that evaluated upadacitinib treatment for AD demonstrated superior efficacy of 
upadacitinib with an acceptable safety profile at the selected dose (30 mg QD) compared to placebo in 
subjects with moderate to severe AD.  Therefore, this subject population is considered appropriate for 
treatment and for evaluating a treatment difference between upadacitinib and dupilumab.
Selection of Doses in the Study
This study will evaluate upadacitinib (30 mg QD).  The selection of this dose was informed by the analysis of the 16-week safety, efficacy, and exposure-response data of the Period 1 of the Phase 2 AD 
Study M16-048, which evaluated 3 doses of upadacitinib (7.5 mg, 15 mg, and 30 mg QD) versus placebo.  
In addition, all of the currently available pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, safety, and efficacy data from upadacitinib studies were used to support the selection of these doses.
Study M16-048 Period 1 results demonstrated superior efficacy of upadacitinib with an acceptable 
safety profile at the selected dose (30 mg QD) compared to placebo in subjects with moderate to severe AD.  A statistically significant difference in the mean percent change from Baseline in EASI score at Week 16 (primary endpoint) was observed for 7.5 mg (–39.4%; P= 0.032 vs placebo), 15 mg (–61.7%; 
P< 0.001 vs placebo), and 30 mg (–74.4%; P< 0.001 vs placebo) groups compared with placebo 
(–23.0%).  Through Week 16 (Period 1), the percentages of subjects with AEs, SAEs, severe AEs, and AEs leading to discontinuation were similar across treatment groups.  There were no deaths reported during Period 1.  Preliminary exposure-response analyses for Period 1 of the Phase 2b study show that the percentage of subjects achieving EASI 75, EASI 90, or IGA 0/1 increased with increasing upadacitinib plasma exposures.
In addition, indirect comparison of the Phase 2 study results with published results from the dupilumab 
Phase 3 studies shows superior nominal results for upadacitinib 30 mg QD versus dupilumab 300 mg every other week, in a similar patient population.  This study is being performed to confirm the hypothesis of potential superiority raised by this indirect comparison.
In summary, exposures associated with upadacitinib 30 mg QD using the once-daily formulation are 
predicted to be efficacious in treatment of subjects with moderate to severe AD with limited effects on laboratory parameters.
The selection of the dupilumab dose was based on the approved posology in moderate to severe atopic 
dermatitis subjects [initial dose of 600 mg (two 300 mg injections), followed by 300 mg given every other week administered as subcutaneous injection].
17,18
5 STUDY ACTIVITIES
5.1 Eligibility Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria in order to be included in the study.  Anything other than a positive response to the questions below will result in exclusion from study participation.
Consent and Demographics
1. Subject must be ≥ 18 years old and ≤ 75 years old at Screening Visit.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
2. Subjects and/or their legally authorized representative must voluntarily sign and date an 
informed consent, approved by an Independent Ethics Committee (IEC)/Institutional Review 
Board (IRB), prior to the initiation of any screening or study-specific procedures and comply with 
the requirements of this study protocol.
3. Subject is judged to be in general good health (other than AD) as determined by the Principal Investigator, based upon the results of medical history, laboratory profile, physical examination, chest x-ray (CXR), and a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) performed during Screening.
AD Disease Activity
4. Chronic AD with onset of symptoms at least 3 years prior to baseline and subject meets Hanifin and Rajka criteria.
21
5. Subject meets all of the following disease activity criteria:
!EASI score ≥ 16 at the Screening and Baseline Visits;
!vIGA-AD score ≥ 3 at the Screening and Baseline Visits;
!≥ 10% body surface area (BSA) of AD involvement at the Screening and Baseline Visits;
!Baseline weekly average of daily Worst Pruritus NRS ≥ 4.  Note:  The baseline weekly 
average of daily Worst Pruritus NRS will be calculated from the 7 consecutive days immediately preceding the Baseline Visit.  A minimum of 4 daily scores out of the 7 days is needed.
6. Subject has applied a topical emollient (moisturizer) twice daily for at least 7 days before the 
Baseline Visit.  Note:  Subject may use prescrip tion moisturizers or moisturizers containing 
ceramide, urea, filaggrin degradation products or hyaluronic acid if such moisturizers were 
initiated before the screening visit.
7. Documented history (within 6 months of the Baseline Visit) of inadequate response to TCS or topical calcineurin inhibitors (TCI) OR documented systemic treatment for atopic dermatitis within 6 months prior to the Baseline Visit, OR for whom topical treatments are otherwise medically inadvisable (e.g., because of important side effects or safety risks).
Contraception
8. Females of childbearing potential must have a negative serum pregnancy test at the Screening Visit and must have a negative urine pregnancy test at the Baseline Visit prior to study drug dosing.  Note:  subjects with borderline pregnancy test at Screening must have a serum pregnancy test ≥ 3 days later to determine eligibility (refer to Section 5.10 for details).
9. If female, subject must be postmenopausal OR permanently surgically sterile OR for females of childbearing potential practicing at least one protocol specified method of birth control (refer to Section 5.2) that is effective from the Baseline Visit through at least 12-weeks after the last 
injection.
10. Female subject must not be pregnant, breastfeeding or considering becoming pregnant during the study or for approximately 12 weeks after the last injection.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
11. Additional local requirements may apply.  Refer to Section 5.10 .
Prior and Concomitant Therapy
12. No prior exposure to any JAK inhibitor (including but not limited to ruxolitinib, tofacitinib, 
baricitinib, upadacitinib, abrocitinib [PF-04965842], and filgotinib).
13. No prior exposure to dupilumab.
14. Subjects must not have used the following AD treatments within the specified timeframe prior to Baseline Visit:
!Systemic therapy for AD, including but not limited to corticosteroids, methotrexate, cyclosporine, azathioprine, phosphodiesterase type 4 (PDE4)-inhibitors, interferon-gamma (IFN-γ ) and mycophenolate mofetil within 4 weeks;
!Targeted biologic treatments (refer to Section 5.3) within 5 half-lives [if known] or within 
12 weeks, whichever is longer;
!Phototherapy treatment, laser therapy, tanning booth, or extended sun exposure that could affect disease severity or interfere with disease assessments within 4 weeks;
!Oral or parenteral traditional Chinese medicine within 4 weeks;
!Marijuana use within 2 weeks;
!Topical treatments (with the exception of topical emollient treatments, described in Eligibility Criterion 6), including but not limited to TCS, TCIs, or topical PDE-4 inhibitors 
within 7 days.
15. Subjects must not have received any live vaccine within 4 weeks (or longer if required 
locally) prior to the first dose of study drug, or expected need of live vaccination during study 
participation including at least 12 weeks (or longer if required locally) after the last injection.
16. No systemic use of known strong cytochrome P450 (CYP)3A inhibitors or strong CYP3A inducers from Screening through the end of the study (refer to Table 1 in Section 5.3for 
examples of commonly used strong CYP3A inhibitors and inducers).
17. No treatment with any investigational drug of chemical or biologic nature within 4 weeks or five half-lives of the drug (whichever is longer) prior to Baseline Visit or is currently enrolled in another clinical study.
Medical History
18. Laboratory values must not meet the following criteria within the Screening Period prior to the first dose of study drug:
!Serum aspartate transaminase (AST) > 2 × upper limit of normal (ULN);
!Serum alanine transaminase (ALT) > 2 × ULN;
!Estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of < 40 mL/min/1.73 m2 by simplified 4-variable Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) formula;
!Total white blood cell count (WBC) < 2,500/ μL;
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) < 1,500/ μL;
!Platelet count < 100,000/ μL;
!Absolute lymphocyte count < 800/ μL;
!Hemoglobin < 10 g/dL.
19. Subject must have no current or past history of infection including:
!Other active skin diseases or skin infections (bacterial, fungal, or viral) requiring systemic 
treatment within 4 weeks of the Baseline Visit or would interfere with the appropriate assessment of AD lesions;
!History of recurrent herpes zoster, or one or more episodes of disseminated herpes zoster;
!History of one or more episodes of disseminated herpes simplex (including eczema herpeticum);
!History of known invasive infection (e.g., listeriosis and histoplasmosis);
!Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, defined as confirmed positive anti-HIV antibody (HIV Ab) test;
!Active Tuberculosis (TB) or meets TB exclusionary parameters (refer to Section 5.10 for 
specific requirements for TB testing);
!Non-skin related active infection(s) requiring treatment with parenteral anti-infectives within 30 days, or oral anti-infectives within 14 days prior to the Baseline Visit;
!Chronic recurring infection and/or active viral infection that, based on the investigator's clinical assessment, makes the subject an unsuitable candidate for the study;
!Active hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepatitis C virus (HCV):
!HBV:  hepatitis B surface antigen (HBs Ag) positive (+) or detected sensitivity on the 
HBV DNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) qualitative test for hepatitis B core antibody (HBc Ab) positive (+) subjects (and for hepatitis B surface antibody positive [+] where mandated per local requirements);
!HCV:  HCV ribonucleic acid (RNA) detectable in any subject with anti-HCV antibody (HCV Ab).
20. Subject must have no current or past history of the following medical conditions:
!Any of the following cardiovascular conditions:
!Recent (within past 6 months) cerebrovascular accident, myocardial infarction, 
coronary stenting or moderate to severe congestive heart failure (New York Heart 
Association Class III or IV);
!A confirmed systolic blood pressure > 160 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure > 100 mmHg;
!Any other unstable clinical condition which, in the opinion of the investigator, would put the subject at risk by participating in the protocol.  Diagnosed active endoparasitic infections; suspected or high risk of endoparasitic infection, unless clinical and (if necessary) laboratory assessment have ruled out active infection before randomization.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!Subject has been a previous recipient of an organ transplant which requires continued 
immunosuppression;
!History of gastrointestinal (GI) perforation (other than due to appendicitis or mechanical injury), diverticulitis or significantly increased risk for GI perforation per investigator judgment;
!Conditions that could interfere with drug absorption including but not limited to short bowel syndrome;
!History of any malignancy except for successfully treated NMSC or localized carcinoma in situ of the cervix;
!History of clinically significant medical conditions or any other reason, which in the opinion of the investigator, would interfere with the subject's participation in this study or would make the subject an unsuitable candidate to receive study drug or would put the subject at risk by participating in the study.
Miscellaneous
21. No history of an allergic reaction or significant sensitivity to constituents of the study drugs (or its excipients) and/or other products in the same class.
22. No history of clinically significant (per investigator's judgment) drug or alcohol abuse within the last 6 months preceding the Baseline Visit.
5.2 Contraception Recommendations
Contraception Recommendations for Females
Subjects must follow the following contraceptive guidelines as specified:
!Females, Non-Childbearing Potential
!Females do not need to use birth control during or following study drug treatment if considered of non-childbearing potential due to meeting any of the following criteria:
!Postmenopausal, age > 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an 
alternative medical cause.
!Postmenopausal, age ≤ 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an 
alternative medical cause AND a follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) level > 40 IU/L.
!Permanently surgically sterile (bilateral oophorectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, or hysterectomy).
!Females who have not experienced menarche (at least one menstrual period).
!Females of Childbearing Potential
!Females of childbearing potential must avoid pregnancy while taking study drug and for at least 
12 weeks after the last injection.  Females must commit to one of the following methods of 
highly effective birth control:
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!Combined (estrogen- and progestogen-containing) hormonal birth control (oral, 
intravaginal, transdermal, injectable) associated with inhibition of ovulation initiated at least 
30 days prior to study Baseline Day 1.
!Progestogen-only hormonal birth control (oral, injectable, implantable) associated with inhibition of ovulation initiated at least 30 days prior to study Baseline Day 1.
!Bilateral tubal occlusion/ligation (can be via hysteroscopy, provided a hysterosalpingogram confirms success of the procedure).
!Intrauterine device (IUD).
!Intrauterine hormone-releasing system (IUS).
!Vasectomized sexual partner (the partner has received medical confirmation of the surgical success of the vasectomy and is the sole sexual partner of the trial subject).
!Practice true abstinence (unless not acceptable per local practices), defined as:  refraining from heterosexual intercourse when this is in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of 
the subject (periodic abstinence [e.g., calendar, ovulation, symptothermal, post-ovulation 
methods] and withdrawal are not acceptable).
If required per local practices, females of child bearing potential must commit to using 2 methods of contraception (either 2 highly effective methods or 1 highly effective method combined with 1 effective method).  Effective methods of birth control are the following:
!Progestogen-only oral hormonal contraception, where inhibition of ovulation is not the primary mode of action, initiated at least 30 days prior to Study Day 1.
!Male or female condom with or without spermicide.
!Cap, diaphragm, or sponge with spermicide.
!A combination of male condom with a cap, diaphragm, or sponge with spermicide (double barrier method).
Contraception recommendations related to use of concomitant therapies prescribed per standard of care should be based on the local label.
At each visit, the study staff should review the pregnancy avoidance recommendations with each female 
of childbearing potential and document this discussion in the subject's source records.
5.3 Prohibited Medications and Therapy
JAK Inhibitors
Prior and concomitant oral and topical exposure to any other JAK inhibitors including the investigational 
drug, upadacitinib (including but not limited to ruxolitinib [Jakafi®], tofacitinib [Xeljanz®], baricitinib, 
abrocitinib [PF-04965842], and filgotinib) is not allowed.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Targeted Biologic Therapies
Current and concomitant biologic therapies and biosimilar versions of biologic drugs are prohibited 
during treatment with the study drug.  Examples of biologic therapies include but are not limited to the following:
!abatacept
!adalimumab
!anakinra
!belimumab
!certolizumab
!efalizumab
!etanercept
!golimumab
!guselkumab
!infliximab
!ixekizumab
!natalizumab
!omalizumab
!rituximab
!secukinumab
!tocilizumab
!ustekinumab
!vedolizumab
Other Non-Biologic Systemic Therapy
Concomitant treatment with systemic non-steroidal systemic immunosuppressive drugs is prohibited during treatment with study drug, including but not limited to: 
!corticosteroids
!methotrexate
!cyclosporine
!azathioprine
!PDE4-Inhibitors (e.g., apremilast)
!mycophenolate mofetil
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.See also Rescue Therapy in Section 5.4for further details on allowed rescue.
Corticosteroids
Concomitant treatment with systemic corticosteroids (oral, intravenous, intramuscular) and intralesional 
corticosteroids is prohibited during treatment with study drug.
Inhaled, ophthalmic drops and nasal corticosteroid formulations are allowed throughout the study.See Rescue Therapy in Section 5.4for further details on allowed rescue.
Investigational Drugs
Subjects who have been treated with any investigational drug within 4 weeks or five half-lives of the 
drug (whichever is longer) prior to the first dose of study drug are excluded from participation in this 
study.  Investigational drugs are also prohibited during treatment with study drug.
Phototherapy, Tanning Booth, and Extended Sun Exposure
Ultra-violet (UV) B or UVA phototherapy including psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA) or laser therapy for at least 4 weeks prior to the Baseline visit and during the study are not allowed.  Tanning booth use or 
extended sun exposure that could affect disease severity or interfere with disease assessments for at 
least 4 weeks prior to the Baseline visit and during treatment with study drug.
Topical Therapy
No topical treatments for AD should be started for the duration of the treatment with study drug except for rescue treatment (see Rescue Therapy in Section 5.4).  This includes but is not limited to calcineurin 
inhibitors, corticosteroids, prescription moisturizers or moisturizers containing additives such as ceramide, hyaluronic acid, urea, or filaggrin.  Topical emollient treatments are allowed per Eligibility Criteria.
Topical anti-infectives, topical antihistamines, and bleach baths are not prohibited during the study if 
they are used for reasons other than AD.  Topical anti-infectives, topical antihistamines, and bleach 
baths may be used in the first 16 weeks of the study for AD if they were used in the 6 months prior to the Screening visit.
If there is any question regarding whether a concomitant medication may be used during the study, the 
study site should contact the AbbVie Therapeutic Area Scientific Director (TA SD).
Vaccines
If the subject and investigator choose to receive/administer live vaccines, these vaccinations must be completed (per local label) at least 4 weeks (or longer if locally required) before first dose of study drug.  Live vaccinations are prohibited during study participation until at least 12 weeks after the last injection.
If the live herpes zoster vaccine is to be administered and there is no known history of primary varicella 
(chicken pox), preexisting immunity to varicella should be confirmed with antibody testing at or prior to 
Screening and prior to administration of the herpes zoster vaccine.  If screening varicella antibody 
testing is negative, the live herpes zoster vaccine should not be administered.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Examples of live vaccines include, but are not limited to, the following:
!Monovalent live influenza A (H1N1) (intranasal);
!Seasonal trivalent live influenza (intranasal);
!Zostavax (herpes zoster, live attenuated);
!Rotavirus;
!Varicella (chicken pox);
!Measles-mumps-rubella or measles-mumps-rubella-varicella;
!Oral polio vaccine;
!Smallpox;
!Yellow fever;
!Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG);
!Typhoid (oral).
See Section 5.4for information about permitted vaccines and recommendations for vaccines.
Cannabis
Use of medicinal and recreational marijuana is prohibited during the study and subjects must have 
discontinued use at least 2 weeks prior to Baseline.
Traditional Chinese Medicine
Traditional oral or parenteral Chinese medicine is not permitted during the study as these may interfere with upadacitinib metabolism and exposure and may impact efficacy and safety of upadacitinib treatment.  Subjects must have discontinued oral or parenteral traditional Chinese medicine at least 4 weeks prior to the first dose of study drug.
Strong CYP3A Inhibitors or Inducers
Systemic use of known strong CYP3A inhibitors or strong CYP3A inducers is excluded from the Screening Visit through the end of the study.  The most common strong CYP3A inhibitors and inducers are listed in Table 1 .
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 1. Examples of Commonly Used Strong CYP3A Inhibitors and Inducers
Strong CYP3A Inhibitors Strong CYP3A Inducers
Boceprevir Avasimibe
Clarithromycin Carbamazepine
Cobicistat Phenytoin
Conivaptan Rifampin (Rifampicin)
Grapefruit (fruit or juice) Rifapentine
Indinavir St. John's Wort
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Lopinavir/RitonavirMibefradil
Nefazodone
NelfinavirPosaconazoleRitonavir
Saquinavir
TelaprevirTelithromycinTroleandomycin
Voriconazole
Elective and Emergency Surgeries
Elective surgery will not be allowed during the study.
If the subject must undergo emergency surgery, the study drug should be interrupted at the time of the 
surgery.  See Section 5.7for allowed study drug interruption parameters.
5.4 Prior and Concomitant Therapy
Any medication or vaccine (including over-the-counter or prescription medicines, vitamins and/or herbal supplements) that the subject is receiving at the time of screening, and/or receives during the study, must be recorded along with the reason for use, date(s) of administration including start and end dates, and dosage information including dose, route and frequency on the appropriate electronic case report form (eCRF).  Also, medications taken for atopic dermatitis since date of diagnosis (based on subject recollection and available medical records) should be entered into the appropriate eCRF inclusive of the dates of first and last dose, maximum dosage taken, route of administration.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.If there are any questions regarding concomitant or prior therapies, the AbbVie TA SD should be 
contacted who will then discuss it with the AbbVie Therapeutic Area Medical Director (TA MD) and provide a recommendation.
Vaccines
Vaccines recommended by local guidelines should be considered.  If the investigator chooses to administer a vaccine, this should be completed before first dose of study drug with appropriate precautions and time interval.  It is recommended that subjects be up to date for recommended 
inactivated, toxoid or biosynthetic vaccines, such as injectable flu vaccine, pneumococcal, and pertussis 
(Tdap).  It is recommended that the live herpes zoster vaccine should be considered for administration at least 4 weeks before first dose of study drug or administered at least 12 weeks after the last injection.  If the herpes zoster vaccine is to be administered, and there is no known history of primary varicella (chicken pox), pre-existing immunity to varicella should be confirmed with antibody testing at or prior to screening and prior to administration of the herpes zoster vaccine.  If screening varicella antibody testing is negative the herpes zoster vaccine should not be administered.  See Prohibited Medications/Therapy for a list of commonly used live vaccines that are prohibited during study participation.
Administration of inactivated (non-live) vaccines is permitted prior to or during the study according to 
local practice guidelines.  Examples of common vaccines that are inactivated, toxoid, or biosynthetic include, but are not limited to:  injectable influenza vaccine, pneumococcal, Shingrix (zoster vaccine, recombinant, adjuvanted), and pertussis (Tdap) vaccines.
Required Concomitant Medications
Beginning at the screening visit, twice daily use of an additive-free, bland emollient is required for at least 7 days prior to Baseline and for the duration of the study.
Note:  Subject may use prescription moisturizers or moisturizers containing ceramide, urea, filaggrin 
degradation products or hyaluronic acid if such moisturizers were initiated before the screening visit.
Rescue Therapy
Rescue treatment for AD may be provided, if medically necessary at the discretion of the investigator.
Investigators should attempt to limit the first step of rescue therapy to topical medications, and escalate 
to systemic medications only for those subjects who do not respond adequately after at least 7 days of topical treatment.
Subjects who receive topical rescue treatment during the study treatment period can continue study 
drug.
If a subject needs rescue treatment with a systemic agent (including but not limited to corticosteroids, 
cyclosporine, methotrexate [MTX], mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine) or phototherapy, study drug 
should be permanently discontinued prior to the initiation of rescue systemic agent or phototherapy.
Subjects who permanently discontinue study drug are encouraged to continue to participate in the
study (no study drug given) and complete the schedule of study visits and assessments.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Investigators should conduct efficacy and safety assessments (e.g., disease severity scores, safety labs) 
before administering any rescue treatment.  An unscheduled visit may be used for this purpose if necessary.
5.5 Withdrawal of Subjects and Discontinuation of Study
Subjects may withdraw from the study completely (withdrawal of informed consent) for any reason at any time.  Subjects who discontinue the study prematurely after randomization will not be replaced.  Subjects may discontinue study drug treatment but may choose to continue to participate in the study.  A subject who discontinues one treatment (injection or tablet) will be discontinued from the other treatment (tablet or injection).
Subjects can request to be discontinued from participating in the study at any time for any reason 
including, but not limited to, disease progression or lack of response to treatment.  The investigator may discontinue any subject's participation at any time for any reason, including but not limited to, disease 
progression, lack of response to treatment, an AE, safety concerns, or failure to comply with the 
protocol.  Refer to Section 6.2for additional discontinuation criteria relating to Toxicity Management of 
serious infections, gastrointestinal perforation, cardiovascular and thromboembolic events, malignancy, ECG abnormality, and select laboratory abnormalities.
Subjects will have study drug discontinued immediately if any of the following occur:
!Rescue treatment is administered outside of the parameters described in Section 5.4(Rescue 
Therapy).
!Initiation of any systemic rescue therapy for AD.
!Permanent discontinuation from study drug will be mandatory after Week 4 for any subject with 
an EASI score worsening of 25% or more compared with their Baseline EASI score at any 2 consecutive scheduled study visits after Week 4 (after a trial of rescue treatment, if appropriate; see Rescue Therapy in Section 5.4).  For example, permanent study drug 
discontinuation would apply at Week 8 if EASI score worsening criteria are met at Week 4 and Week 8 without rescue therapy given at Week 4.  Permanent study drug discontinuation would apply at Week 12 if EASI score worsening criteria are met at Week 8 and Week 12 with rescue therapy given at Week 4.  This rule applies similarly to later timepoints.
!Anaphylactic reaction or other severe systemic or local reaction to study drug injection.
!Abnormal laboratory results or AEs that neither meet the criteria for discontinuation of study drug, as stated in Section 6.2or determined by the investigator and the AbbVie TA MD or TA SD 
rule out safe continuation of the study drug.
!The investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject.
!The subject requests withdrawal from the study.
!Eligibility criteria violation was noted after the subject started study drug, when continuation of the study drug would place the subject at risk as determined by the AbbVie TA MD or TA SD.
!Introduction of prohibited medications or dosages when continuation of the study drug would place the subject at risk, as determined by the AbbVie TA MD or TA SD.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!Subject is non-compliant with TB prophylaxis (if applicable) or develops active TB at any time 
during the study.
!The subject becomes pregnant or plans to become pregnant while on study drug.
!Malignancy, except for localized NMSC or carcinoma in-situ of the cervix.
!Subject develops a GI perforation.
!Subject is significantly non-compliant with study procedures which would put the subject at risk for continued participation in the trial in consultation with the AbbVie TA MD or TA SD.
!An ECG change considered clinically significant and with reasonable possibility of relationship to 
study drug, OR a confirmed absolute Fridericia's correction formula (QTcF ) value > 500 msec in 
adults OR a change of QT interval corrected (QTc) interval > 60 msec from baseline.
!Confirmed diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolus, or non-cardiac, non-neurologic arterial thrombosis.
The study will be discontinued or terminated in case of an unacceptable risk, any relevant toxicity, or a negative change in the risk:benefit assessment.  This might include the occurrence of AEs with a character, severity, or frequency that is new in comparison to the existing risk profile.  In addition, any data deriving from other clinical trials or toxicological studies that negatively influence the risk:benefit assessment may cause discontinuation or termination of the study.
AbbVie may terminate this study prematurely, either in its entirety or at any site.  The investigator may 
also stop the study at his/her site if he/she has safety concerns.  If AbbVie terminates the study for safety reasons, AbbVie will promptly notify the investigator.
For subjects to be considered lost to follow-up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain 
information on the subject's final status.  At a minimum, 2 telephone calls must be made and 1 certified letter must be sent and documented in the subject's source documentation.
5.6 Follow-Up for Subject Withdrawal from Study
Discontinuation of Study Drug and Continuation of Study Participation
In order to minimize missing data for efficacy and safety assessments, subjects who prematurely discontinue study drug treatment or study participation should complete a Premature Discontinuation visit (PD visit).  All attempts must be made to determine the date of the last study drug dose and the primary reason for discontinuation of study drug or study participation.
Subjects who prematurely discontinue study drug but continue study participation should complete a PD 
visit as soon as possible, preferably within 2 weeks.  Afterwards, subjects should follow the regular visit schedule as outlined in Appendix D and should adhere to all study procedures except for dispensing 
study drug.  Once the subject has discontinued study drug, all rescue and efficacy driven discontinuation criteria no longer apply.  If at any point a subject no longer wants to provide assessments (withdrawal of informed consent) following discontinuation of study drug, a second PD visit is not required.  The End-
End-of-Treatment Follow-up visit is not applicable for subjects who discontinued study drug and 
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.continued study participation and completed at least one study visit at least 12 weeks after the last 
injection.
Premature Discontinuation of Study (Withdrawal of Informed Consent)
If a subject prematurely discontinues study participation (withdrawal of informed consent), the procedures outlined for the Premature Discontinuation visit (PD visit) should be completed as soon as possible, preferably within 2 weeks.  In addition, if subject is willing, an End-of-Treatment Follow-up visit or phone call may be completed 12 weeks after the last injection to ensure all treatment-emergent AEs and SAEs have been resolved.
Biomarker Research:
In the event a subject withdraws consent from the clinical study, biomarker research will continue unless the subject explicitly requests analysis to be stopped.  When AbbVie is informed that samples are withdrawn from research, samples will not be analyzed, no new biomarker analysis data will be 
collected for the withdrawn subject or added to the existing data or database(s).  Data generated for 
biomarker research before subject withdrawal of consent will remain part of the study results.
5.7 Study Drug
The individual study drug information is presented in Table 2 .
Table 2. Description of Study Drug and Placebo 
Investigational ProductMode of 
Administration Formulation Strength Manufacturer
Upadacitinib tablet oral Film-coated tablet 30 mg AbbVie
Placebo tablet oral Film-coated tablet NA AbbVie
Dupilumab pre-filled syringe SC Solution for injection 
in pre-filled syringe300 mg Sanofi, 
Genzyme 
(Regeneron)
Placebo pre-filled syringe SC Solution for injection 
in pre-filled syringeNA AbbVie
The type and amount of kits dispensed will be managed by the Interactive Response Technology (IRT).
AbbVie will not supply drugs other than upadacitinib and dupilumab.
Storage and Disposition of Study Drug
Upadacitinib and placebo tablets must be stored at controlled room temperature (15° to 25°C/59° to 
77°F).
Dupilumab and placebo pre-filled syringe must be stored refrigerated at 2°C to 8°C and protected from 
light, as specified on the label.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The investigational products are for investigational use only and are to be used only within the context 
of this study.  The investigational products supplied for this study must be maintained under adequate 
security and stored under the conditions specified on the label until dispensed for subject use or 
destroyed on site as appropriate.
Upon receipt, study drugs should be stored as specified on the label and kept in a secure location.  Each 
kit will contain a unique kit number.  This kit number is assigned to a subject via Interactive Response 
Technology (IRT) and encodes the appropriate study drugs to be dispensed at the subject's corresponding study visit.  Study drugs must not be dispensed without contacting the IRT system.  Study drugs will only be used for the conduct of this study.
Packaging and Labeling
Upadacitinib and placebo tablets will be packaged in bottles with quantities sufficient to accommodate the study design.  Each bottle will be labeled per local requirements.  The labels must remain affixed to the bottles.  Each kit label will contain a unique kit number.
Dupilumab and placebo pre-filled syringes will be packaged in cartons with quantities sufficient to 
accommodate the study design.  Each pre-filled syringe and carton will be labeled as required per country requirements.  Labels must remain affixed to the syringe and carton.  Each kit label will contain a unique kit number.
Dispense Study Drug
The type and amount of kits dispensed will be managed by the IRT.  Dupilumab and placebo pre-filled syringe will be dispensed through IRT every 2 weeks, and upadacitinib and placebo tablets will be dispensed through IRT every 4 weeks.
Upadacitinib and placebo tablets will be dispensed to subjects beginning at baseline (Day 1) and as 
specified in Appendix D .  The first dose of study drug will be administered after all other baseline (Day 1) 
procedures are completed.  At the visits specified, the site personnel will review returned study drug kits and empty study drug packaging to verify compliance.
Each site will be responsible for maintaining drug accountability records including product description, 
manufacturer, and lot numbers for all non-investigational products dispensed by the site.
Study Drug Administration
Upadacitinib or placebo tablets will be taken orally once daily beginning on Day 1 (Baseline) and should be taken at approximately the same time each day.  The study drug can be taken with or without food.  
If a subject should forget to take upadacitinib or placebo tablet dose at their regularly scheduled dosing 
time, they should take the forgotten dose as soon as they remember as long as it is at least 10 hours before their next scheduled dose.  Otherwise they should take the next dose at the next scheduled dosing time.  Upadacitinib and placebo tablets should be swallowed whole and should not be split, crushed, or dissolved.
Dupilumab or placebo pre-filled syringe will be administered by SC injection at study visits on Day 1 and 
every other week at the study visits specified in Appendix D until Week 22.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The subject will be instructed to return all drug containers (even if empty) to the study site personnel at 
each study visit.  The study site personnel will document compliance.
For allowed study drug interruption due to elective and emergency surgeries, the following rules apply:
1. If the subject must undergo emergency surgery, the study drug should be interrupted at the 
time of the surgery.  After emergency surgery, allow re-introduction of study drug once the 
physician has examined the surgical site and determined that it has healed and there is no sign of infection.
2. Elective surgery, and interruption of study drug for such a surgery, will not be allowed during 
the study.
5.8 Randomization/Drug Assignment
All subjects will be assigned a unique identification number by the IRT at the Screening Visit.  For subjects who rescreen, the screening number assigned by the IRT at the initial screening visit should be 
used.  The IRT will assign a randomization number that will encode the subject's treatment group 
assignment according to the randomization schedule generated by the statistics department at AbbVie.
Subjects will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to one of two treatment groups:
!Treatment A:  Upadacitinib 30 mg + placebo pre-filled syringe (N = 325)
!Treatment B:  Dupilumab 300 mg + placebo tablets (N = 325)
Randomization will be stratified by baseline disease severity (moderate [vIGA-AD 3] vs. severe 
[vIGA-AD 4]) and age (< 40, ≥ 40 to 65, ≥  65 years).
Blinding
All AbbVie personnel with direct oversight of the conduct and management of the trial, with the 
exception of AbbVie Drug Supply Management Team, will remain blinded until the Week 24 database 
lock.  All study site personnel involved in the study and the subjects will remain blinded to the subject's treatment throughout the study.  To maintain the blind, the upadacitinib tablets and placebo tablets provided for the study will be identical in appearance.  In addition, dupilumab pre-filled syringe and placebo pre-filled syringe will be administered to the subjects at the investigative site.  Both types of pre-filled syringes will be provided in identical cartons.  The cartons are sealed with tamper-evident seals.  The study site personnel must not break the seals and open the cartons throughout the conduct of the study.  The investigator will designate an unblinded administrator to administer the injection to the subject.  The designated unblinded administrator must not have involvement with any other study-related activities.
To maintain the blind for the study, only the designated unblinded administrator will be allowed to 
break the tamper-evident seals of the cartons just prior to administration.  If a kit of dupilumab/placebo is dispensed by IRT, it should remain sealed until the time of drug administration.  If for any reason the 
study drug administration is not performed, the carton should remain sealed, and should be accounted 
and prepared for destruction without breaking the tamper evident seal, maintaining the blind of the study.  Other study site personnel, including safety and efficacy evaluators, must not be involved with 
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.administration of the injectable dosage forms.  To maintain the blind for the subject, appropriate 
measures must be taken to ensure the subjects do not see the study drug syringe or subcutaneous 
administration of study drug.  The investigational sites must take appropriate precautions, including, but 
not limited to, blindfolding the subject, creating a barrier between the subject and administrator or administration site, or by any other means of blinding the subjects.  The unblinded administrator will immediately discard the syringe in an appropriate container after conducting administration and prior to removing the barrier between administrator and the subject.
Empty cartons without the syringe should be retained along with the unopened cartons for 
accountability.  If the carton with the syringe has been opened (the tamper-evident seal broken) and the unblinded administrator is not able to administer study drug syringe for any reason, then the administrator must document the kit number and a reason(s) for not administering a specific kit.  The unblinded administrator will immediately discard the syringe in an appropriate container after documenting accountability of such kit and prior to removing the barrier between administrator and the subject.
Other site personnel besides an unblinded administrator will not be made aware of the subject 
treatment assignments except in the event of an emergency where identification of the study drug is required for therapeutic measures.  The IRT will provide access to unblinded subject treatment information in the case of a medical emergency.
In the event of a medical situation that requires unblinding of the study drug assignment, the 
investigator is requested to contact the AbbVie TA MD prior to breaking the blind.  However, if an urgent therapeutic intervention is necessary which warrants breaking the blind prior to contacting the 
AbbVie TA MD, the investigator can directly access the IRT system to break the blind without AbbVie 
notification or agreement.  Unblinding is available in the IRT system via the Unblinded Subject transaction, which is available only to the investigator.  If the IRT system is unavailable, unblinding may occur by contacting the technical support of the IRT vendor via either phone (preferred) or email (support@endpointclinical.com).  For country-specific phone numbers, please see the following website:  http://www.endpointclinical.com/helpdesk/.
In the event that the blind is broken before notification to the AbbVie TA MD, the AbbVie TA MD should 
be notified within 24 hours of the blind being broken.  The date and reason that the blind was broken must be conveyed to AbbVie and recorded on appropriate eCRF.
Treatment Compliance
The investigator or his/her designated and qualified representatives will administer/dispense study drug only to subjects enrolled in the study in accordance with the protocol.  The study drug must not be used for reasons other than that described in the protocol.
Dupilumab and placebo pre-filled syringe dosing will be recorded on the designated eCRF.  Subjects will 
be instructed to return all drug containers (even if empty) to the study site personnel at each clinic visit.  The study site personnel will document compliance in the study source documents, and the accountability of the Study Drug/Placebo will be recorded in IRT.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.9 Protocol Deviations
The investigator is responsible for complying with all protocol requirements, written instructions, and 
applicable laws regarding protocol deviations.  Protocol deviations are prohibited except when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects.  If a protocol deviation occurs (or is identified), the investigator is responsible for notifying independent ethics committee (IEC)/independent review board (IRB), regulatory authorities (as applicable), and AbbVie.
5.10 Other Study Procedures
Subject Information and Informed Consent
The investigator or his/her representative will explain the nature of the study to the subject and answer all questions regarding this study.  Prior to any study-related screening procedures being performed on the subject or any medications being discontinued by the subject in order to participate in this study, the informed consent statement will be reviewed, signed, and dated by the subject or their legally authorized representative, the person who administered the informed consent, and any other signatories according to local requirements.  A copy of the signed informed consent will be given to the 
subject and the original will be placed in the subject's medical record.  An entry must also be made in 
the subject's dated source documents to confirm that informed consent was obtained prior to any study-related procedures and that the subject received a signed copy.
Information regarding benefits for subjects and information regarding provisions for treating and/or 
compensating subjects who are harmed as a consequence of participation in the study can be found in the informed consent form.
Optional biomarker research samples will only be collected if the subject has voluntarily signed and 
dated a written consent form describing the exploratory research.  The written consent may be part of the main consent form.  If the subject does not consent to providing optional samples, the subject will still be allowed to participate in the study.
Screening and Re-Screening Procedures
Within 35 days prior to the Baseline Visit, subjects will receive a full explanation of the study design and study procedures, provide a written informed consent, and undergo the screening procedures outlined in Operations Manual Section 2.1.  With the exception of the QuantiFERON TB-Gold and purified protein derivative (PPD) tests (Tuberculosis Testing/Tuberculosis Prophylaxis below), otherwise exclusionary laboratory values can be re-tested once during the Screening Period.  If the re-tested laboratory value(s) remain(s) exclusionary, the subject will be considered a screen failure.  Redrawing samples if previous samples were unable to be analyzed would not count as a retest since previous result was never obtained.
Subjects who initially screen-fail for the study are permitted to re-screen once following re-consent.  For 
additional re-screening, AbbVie TA MD or TA SD approval is required.  As appropriate, sites are encouraged to contact the AbbVie TA MD/SD to confirm if subjects should or should not be re-screened.  All screening procedures with the possible exceptions noted below will be repeated during re-screening.  
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The subject must meet all eligibility criteria at the time of re-screening in order to qualify for the study.  
There is no minimum period of time a subject must wait to re-screen for the study.
If the subject had a complete initial screening evaluation including the following assessments, these 
tests will not be required to be repeated for re-screening, provided the conditions noted in Section 5.1of the protocol are met, there are no changes in the subject's medical history that would warrant re-testing, and no more than 90 days have passed:
!HBV, HCV and HIV serology
!QuantiFERON Tuberculosis [TB] Gold or equivalent and/or a PPD test (or both if required per local guidelines)
!CXR
!Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Medical History
A complete non-AD medical history, including demographics, history of tobacco, alcohol, and nicotine use, will be taken at Screening.  Additionally, a list of each subject's specific AD-related medical history should be recorded at Screening.  History of clinical herpes zoster, herpes zoster vaccination, and hepatitis B vaccination status will be recorded as part of the medical history.
The subject's medical history will be updated prior to study drug administration at the Study Day 1 visit.  
This updated medical history will serve as the baseline for clinical assessment and to ensure the subject is still eligible for enrollment.
A detailed medical history with respect to TB risk factors will be documented in the study source 
documentation.  This information will include Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccination, cohabitation with individuals who have had TB, and travel to, reside in, or work in TB endemic locations.
Drug and Alcohol Screen
Subjects should have no history of clinically significant (per investigator's judgment) drug or alcohol abuse within the last 6 months.
Urine specimens will be tested at the screening visit for the presence of drugs of abuse.  The panel for 
drugs of abuse will minimally include the drugs listed below.  Any positive result must be assessed for clinical significance.  These analyses will be performed by the certified central laboratory chosen for the study.
!Opiates
!Barbiturates
!Amphetamines
!Cocaine
!Benzodiazepines
!Alcohol
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!Phencyclidine
!Propoxyphene
!Methadone
Adverse Event Assessment
The subjects will undergo physical examination for any active AEs and AEs that have occurred and 
resolved since the last visit as well as be interviewed for AEs that are not apparent in a physical examination.  SAEs and protocol related nonserious AEs that occur after a subject signs the informed consent will be collected, prior to the first dose of study drug.  Please refer to Section 6.1.
Patient-Reported Outcomes
Subjects will complete the self-administered patient-reported outcome (PRO) instrument (when allowed per local regulatory guidelines).  Subjects should be instructed to follow the instructions provided with the instrument and to provide the best possible response to each item.  Site personnel shall not provide 
interpretation or assistance to subjects other than encouragement to complete the tasks.  Subjects who 
are functionally unable to read any of the instruments may have site personnel read the questionnaire to them.  Site personnel will encourage completion of the instrument at all specified visits and will ensure that a response is entered for all items.
Subjects will complete the following questionnaires (described below) as specified in Operations Manual 
Section 2.1:  Worst Pruritus NRS; ADerm-IS; Head and Neck - Patient Global Impression of Severity (HN-PGIS), and Oral vs Injectable Questionnaire (only for the United States).  The subject should complete the questionnaires before site personnel perform any clinical assessments and preferably before any interaction with site personnel has occurred to avoid biasing the subject's response.
A validated translation will be provided in their local language, as applicable.  All PROs are collected 
electronically.
For the Worst Pruritus NRS, ADerm-IS, and HN-PGIS, the PRO instrument should be completed prior to 
drug administration on Day 1.  All PRO instruments should be completed prior to any discussion of adverse events or any review of laboratory findings.
Worst Pruritus Numerical Rating Scale (NRS)
The Worst Pruritus NRS is an assessment tool that subjects use to report the intensity of their pruritus during a daily recall period.  Subjects are asked the question:  "On a scale of 0 to 10, with 0 being no itch and 10 being the worst imaginable itch, how would you rate your itch at its worst during the past 24 hours?"  The Worst Pruritus NRS will be administered daily from Screening through Week 16 using an electronic hand-held device that will be given to subjects to take home at Screening.  Hand-held device usage ends at the Week 16 visit (subjects should provide their response on the site's tablet at the Week 16 study visit).  Starting at the Week 16 visit, the frequency of administration will be reduced from daily assessments to assessments only at scheduled site visits using a tablet at the site.
Evaluation of the psychometric properties and assessment of the measurement validity of the Worst 
Pruritis NRS is pending Phase 3 data.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Atopic Dermatitis Impact Scale (ADerm-IS)
The ADerm-IS is a 10-item PRO questionnaire designed to assess a variety of impacts that subjects 
experience from their AD across both a 24-hour recall period (the daily items 1 to 3) and 7-day recall 
period (the weekly items 4 to 10).  Daily items are related to sleep, and include difficulty falling asleep, 
impact on sleep, and waking at night.  Weekly items include household activities (e.g., washing dishes, sweeping, doing laundry), physical activities (e.g., walking, exercising), social activities, concentration, self-consciousness, embarrassment, and sadness.  All items of the ADerm-IS are scored on an 11-point NRS from 0 (no impact) to 10 (extreme impact).
The ADerm-IS will be administered on electronic hand held devices from Screening through Baseline; 
devices will be given to subjects to take home at Screening.
Head and Neck Patient Global Impression of Severity (HN-PGIS)
The HN-PGIS asks subjects to describe the severity of their head and neck AD symptoms right now.  
Subjects rate their head and neck AD symptoms on a 7-point scale ranging from 0 = Absent (no 
symptoms) to 6 = Very Severe (cannot be ignored and markedly limits my daily activities).  The HN-PGIS will be administered on the tablet at site visits throughout the study.
Oral vs Injectable Questionnaire (only in the United States)
The Oral vs Injectable Questionnaire is an assessment tool designed to assess subject preferences 
regarding route of administration (oral QD vs injection Q2 weeks) for medications for AD.  The 
Questionnaire is administered at Week 24 at the site visit.  Subjects provide responses to up to 5 questions using the electronic tablet device.
Investigator Assessment
The investigator assessments will be recorded on paper worksheets and entered into the eCRF and 
conducted at the study visits specified in Operations Manual Section 2.1.  If possible, the investigator 
assessments should be performed by an independent and blinded assessor who should not perform any other study related procedures.  In order to minimize variability, the same assessor should evaluate the subject at each visit for the duration of the study.  A back-up assessor should be identified.  The assessor must be a qualified medical professional (e.g., nurse, physician's assistant, or physician).  Any assessor must be trained and competent in performing such assessments.  It is the responsibility of the investigator to ensure that all assessors are qualified and trained to perform assessments and that all training is documented.  If the primary assessor is not available, the pre-identified back-up assessor should perform such assessments.
Validated Investigator's Global Assessment for Atopic Dermatitis (vIGA-AD)
The vIGA-AD is a validated assessment instrument used in clinical studies to rate the severity of AD globally, based on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (clear) to 4 (severe).
Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI)
The EASI is a validated measure used in clinical practice and clinical trials to assess the severity and extent of AD. The EASI is a composite index with scores ranging from 0 to 72.  Four AD disease characteristics (erythema, thickness [induration, papulation, edema], scratching [excoriation], and 
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.lichenification) will each be assessed for severity by the investigator or designee on a scale of "0" 
(absent) through "3" (severe).  In addition, the area of AD involvement will be assessed as a percentage 
by body area of head, trunk, upper limbs, and lower limbs, and converted to a score of 0 to 6.  In each 
body region, the area is expressed as 0, 1 (1% to 9%), 2 (10% to 29%), 3 (30% to 49%), 4 (50% to 69%), 5 (70% to 89%), or 6 (90% to 100%).
Body Surface Area Involvement of Atopic Dermatitis (BSA, %)
A qualified investigator or designee should select the subject's right or left hand as the measuring 
device.  For purposes of clinical estimation, the total surface of the palm plus five digits will be assumed 
to be approximately equivalent to 1%.  Measurement of the total area of involvement by the investigator is aided by imagining if scattered plaques were moved so that they were next to each other and then estimating the total area involved.  The site should make every attempt to have the same qualified investigator or designee perform all BSA assessments on a given subject throughout the study.
Vaccines
Vaccines recommended by local guidelines should be considered.  If the investigator chooses to administer a vaccine, this should be completed before first dose of study drug with appropriate precautions and time interval.  It is recommended that subjects be up to date for recommended inactivated, toxoid or biosynthetic vaccines, such as injectable flu vaccine, pneumococcal, and Tdap.  It is recommended that the live herpes zoster vaccine should be considered for administration at least 4 weeks before first dose of study drug or administered at least 12 weeks after the last injection.  If the herpes zoster vaccine is to be administered, and there is no known history of primary varicella (chicken pox), pre-existing immunity to varicella should be confirmed with antibody testing at or prior to 
screening and prior to administration of the herpes zoster vaccine.  If screening varicella antibody 
testing is negative the herpes zoster vaccine should not be administered.  See Prohibited Medications/Therapy for a list of commonly used live vaccines that are prohibited during study participation.
See Section 5.3(Prohibited Medications and Therapy) for a list of commonly used live vaccines that are 
prohibited during study participation.
Tuberculosis Testing/Tuberculosis Prophylaxis
The TB screening tests provide diagnostic test results to be interpreted in the context of the subject's 
epidemiology, history, exam findings, etc., and it is the responsibility of the investigator to determine if a 
subject has previous, active, or latent TB.  Expert consultation for the evaluation and/or management of 
TB may be considered per investigator discretion.
At Screening, all subjects will be assessed for evidence of increased risk for TB by a risk questionnaire 
(Operations Manual Section 3.2) and tested for TB infection by QuantiFERON-TB Gold test.  The site staff 
will complete the TB risk questionnaire for all subjects regardless of TB test results and enter the data into the appropriate eCRF.  One or more "yes" response on the TB risk questionnaire indicates increased risk of TB.
If a subject had a negative PPD test within 90 days prior to Screening and a QuantiFERON-TB Gold test 
cannot be performed by the central laboratory at Screening and source documentation is available, TB testing by PPD Skin Test (also known as a TB Skin Test or Mantoux Test) does not need to be repeated 
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.provided nothing has changed in the subject's medical history to warrant a repeat test.  These cases may 
be discussed with the AbbVie TA MD.  The results of the TB test(s) will be retained at the site as the original source documentation.
The results of the TB test(s) will be retained at the site as the original source documentation.Subjects with a negative TB test and CXR not suggestive of active TB or prior TB exposure may be 
enrolled.
Subjects with a positive TB test must be assessed for evidence of active TB versus latent TB, including 
signs and symptoms and CXR.  Subjects with no signs or symptoms and a CXR not suggestive of active TB may be enrolled after initiation of TB prophylaxis (see below).
Subjects with evidence of active TB must not be enrolled.For subjects with a negative TB test result at Screening or the most recent evaluation, an annual TB 
follow-up test will be performed.
If an annual TB test is newly positive (seroconversion), a CXR needs to be performed as soon as possible 
to aid in distinguishing active versus latent TB and subsequent annual TB follow-up tests are not required.  Any positive TB test after the patient has started the study should be reported as an AE of latent TB or active TB (as applicable).
If the subject is experiencing signs or symptoms suspicious for TB or something has changed in the 
subject's medical history to warrant investigation and a repeat test before the next scheduled annual TB retest, the case (including the TB test results) should be discussed with the AbbVie TA MD.
TB test
!The QuantiFERON-TB Gold test (or equivalent) should be performed at Screening on all subjects.  The PPD skin test should be utilized when the QuantiFERON-TB Gold test (or equivalent) is not possible or if both tests are required per local guidelines.
!Subjects with documentation of prior positive result of QuantiFERON-TB Gold Test and/or PPD 
skin test are not required to repeat either test at Screening or during the study and should be 
considered positive.
!For regions that require both PPD and QuantiFERON-TB Gold testing, both will be performed.  If either PPD or QuantiFERON-TB Gold is positive, the TB test is considered positive.
!The PPD Skin Test should be utilized only when a QuantiFERON-TB Gold Test is not possible for any reason (unless both tests are required per local guidelines).
!If only a PPD is placed at Screening, then the TB test to be used for the remainder of the study for that subject is the PPD.  Similarly, if a subject enters the study with a QuantiFERON-TB Gold test alone, then the subject should have their annual TB test performed with a QuantiFERON-TB Gold test.
!If the QuantiFERON-TB Gold Test is NOT possible (or if both the QuantiFERON-TB Gold Test and 
the PPD are required per local guidelines) the PPD will be performed.  The PPD should be read 
by a licensed healthcare professional between 48 and 72 hours after administration.  A subject 
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.who does not return within 72 hours will need to be rescheduled for another skin test.  The 
reaction will be measured in millimeters (mm) of induration and induration ≥5 mm is 
considered a positive reaction.  The absence of induration will be recorded as "0 mm" not "negative."
!Subjects who have an ulcerating reaction to PPD in the past should not be re-exposed and the PPD should be considered positive.
!If the QuantiFERON-TB Gold test is indeterminate, then the investigator should perform a local QuantiFERON-TB Gold test (or through the central laboratory if not locally available) to rule out a positive test result.  If testing remains indeterminate or is positive, then the subject is considered to be positive for the purpose of this study.  If the testing result is negative, then the patient is considered to be negative.
!In cases where the QuantiFERON-TB Gold test by the central laboratory is positive and the investigator considers the subject at low risk for TB and has no clinical suspicion of TB, the investigator may perform a local QuantiFERON-TB Gold test (or repeat testing through the central laboratory if not locally available) to confirm the positive test result.  If the repeat testing result is negative, the investigator may consider the test to be negative based on his/her clinical judgment; if the repeat testing result is positive, the test is considered positive.
!An equivalent Interferon Gamma Release Assay (IGRA) (such as T-SPOT TB test) may be substituted for the QuantiFERON-TB Gold.
TB prophylaxis
Note:  Rifampicin and Rifapentine are not allowed for TB prophylaxis.
At Screening, if the subject has evidence of latent TB infection, prophylactic treatment must be initiated 
at least 2 weeks prior to administration of study drug (or per local guidelines, whichever is longer).  At 
least 6 months of prophylaxis must be completed; however, the full course of prophylaxis does not need to be completed prior to the first dose of study drug.
Subjects with a prior history of latent TB that have documented completion of a full course of anti-TB 
therapy will be allowed to enter the study provided nothing has changed in the subject's medical history to warrant repeat treatment.  For subjects with completion of a full course of anti-TB therapy, but insufficient documentation, the investigator should consult with the AbbVie TA MD.
During the study, subjects with new evidence of latent TB must initiate prophylactic treatment 
immediately per local guidelines and complete at least 6 months of prophylaxis.  Study drug should not be withheld.  Two to four weeks later, the subject should be re-evaluated (unscheduled visit) for signs and symptoms as well as laboratory assessment of toxicity to TB prophylaxis.
Newly initiated prophylactic treatment and prior therapy should be captured in the eCRF.
Chest X-Ray
CXR (posterior-anterior and lateral views) is required:
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!For all subjects at Screening to rule out the presence of TB or other clinically relevant findings.  
The CXR will not be required if the subject had a previous normal CXR (posterior-anterior and 
lateral views) within 90 days of Screening, provided all source documentation is available at the site, as outlined below and provided nothing has changed in the subject's medical history to warrant a repeat test.
Subjects can have a repeat CXR at any time during the study as warranted based on the opinion of the Investigator.
A radiologist or pulmonologist must perform and document an assessment of the CXR.  The Principal 
Investigator will indicate the clinical significance of any findings and will sign and date the report.  In the 
assessment of the CXR, the Principal Investigator or their delegate must indicate the presence or absence of (1) calcified granulomas, (2) pleural scarring/thickening, and (3) signs of active TB.  If the CXR demonstrates changes suggestive of previous TB (e.g., calcified nodule, fibrotic scar, apical or basilar pleural thickening) or other findings that are clinically significant, the Principal Investigator should contact the AbbVie TA MD before enrolling the subject.
12-Lead Electrocardiogram
A 12-lead ECG will be performed at Screening (Operations Manual Section 2.1).  The ECG should be performed prior to blood collection.
The ECGs will be evaluated by an appropriately trained physician at the site ("local reader").  The local 
reader from the site will sign and date all ECG tracings and will provide his/her global interpretation as a written comment on the tracing using the following categories:
!Normal ECG
!Abnormal ECG – not clinically significant
!Abnormal ECG – clinically significant
Biomarker Sampling
Optional biospecimens (blood, serum, plasma, and skin biopsies) will be collected for biomarkerresearch at visits detailed in Appendix D .  All biomarker samples should be labeled and shipped as 
outlined in the study-specific laboratory manual.  AbbVie (or people or companies working with AbbVie) will store the samples and data in a secure storage space with adequate measures to protect confidentiality.  The samples may be retained while research on upadacitinib (or drugs of this class) or atopic dermatitis and related conditions continues, but for no longer than 20 years after study completion, or per local requirement.
Height and Body Weight
Height and body weight will be measured without shoes at visits specified in Appendix D .  All 
measurements will be recorded in imperial or metric units where applicable.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Vital Signs
Vital sign determinations of systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, and body temperature will 
be obtained at visits specified in Appendix D .  Blood pressure and pulse rate should be measured after 
the subject has been sitting for at least 3 minutes.  For additional guidance on conventional office blood pressure measurements, please refer to the 2018 European Society of Cardiology (ESC)/European Society of Hypertension (ESH) guidelines.
22
Physical Examination
A complete physical examination will be performed at visits specified in Appendix D .  The physical 
examination performed on Study Day 1 will serve as the baseline physical examination for the entire study.  Physical examination abnormalities noted by the investigator at Baseline prior to the first dose of study drug will be recorded in the subject's medical history; abnormalities noted after the first dose of study drug will be evaluated and documented by the investigator as to whether or not the abnormality is an AE.  All findings, whether related to an AE or part of each subject's medical history, will be captured on the appropriate eCRF page.
At any time, a symptom-directed physical examination can be performed as deemed necessary by the 
investigator.
Clinical Laboratory Tests
Blood and urine samples will be collected following a minimum 8-hour fast.  If a subject is not able to fast when necessary (except during Screening visit), due to unforeseen circumstances, the non-fasting status will be recorded in study source documentation.
A certified laboratory will be utilized to process and provide results for the clinical laboratory tests.  
Laboratory reference ranges will be obtained prior to the initiation of the study.
Instructions regarding the collection, processing, and shipping of these samples will be provided by the 
central laboratory.
A urine dipstick macroscopic urinalysis will be completed by the central laboratory at all required visits.  
A microscopic analysis will be performed in the event the dipstick results show leukocytes, nitrite, protein, ketones, or blood greater than negative or glucose greater than normal.
If a laboratory test value is outside the reference range and the investigator considers the laboratory 
result to be clinically significant, the investigator will:
!repeat the test to verify the out-of-range value;
!follow the out-of-range value to a satisfactory clinical resolution.
A laboratory test value that requires a subject to be discontinued from the study drug or requires a subject to receive treatment will be recorded as an AE.  The central laboratory chosen for this study will provide instructions regarding the collection, processing and shipping of these samples.  The baseline laboratory test results for clinical assessment for a particular test will be defined as the last measurement prior to the initial dose of study drug.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Clinical Laboratory Tests
Hematology Clinical Chemistry Other Tests
Hematocrit 
HemoglobinRBC countWBC count
Neutrophils
BandsLymphocytes
Monocytes 
Basophils Eosinophils Platelet countBUN CreatinineTotal bilirubinINR (reflex only)
a
AlbuminALTAST
Alkaline phosphatase
CPK Sodium Potassium 
Bicarbonate/CO
2
Chloride
CalciumInorganic phosphorus
Uric acid 
Total protein Glucose 
Cholesterol 
LDL-CHDL-CTriglyceridesCentral Lab Tests:
Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) International normalized ratio (INR) Serum pregnancy (beta human chorionic 
gonadotropin [bHCG]) test
Hepatitis Screening:
Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBs Ag) 
Hepatitis B surface antibody (HBs Ab)
Hepatitis B core antibody (HBc Ab)Hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid 
polymerase chain reaction (HBV DNA 
PCR [reflex only])
Hepatitis C virus antibody (HCV Ab) 
Hepatitis C virus ribonucleic acid (HCV RNA 
[reflex only]) 
Human immunodeficiency virus antibody 
(HIV Ab) 
QuantiFERON-TB Gold
High-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) 
Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH)
b 
Drug and alcohol screenLocal Lab Tests:
Urine pregnancy testVaricella antibody, if indicatedPPD test/T-SPOT TBUrinalysis
Specific gravityKetonespH Protein 
Blood Glucose
Urobilinogen Bilirubin Leukocytes 
Nitrites
Microscopic examination, if 
needed
Ab = antibody; ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AST = aspartate aminotransferase; bHCG = beta human chorionic gonadotropin; 
BUN = blood urea nitrogen; CO 2= carbon dioxide; CPK = creatine phosphokinase; DNA = deoxyribonucleic acid; FSH = follicle-
stimulating hormone; HBc Ab = hepatitis B core antibody; HBs Ab = hepatitis B surface antibody; HBs Ag = hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV = hepatitis B virus; HCV Ab = hepatitis C virus antibody; HDL-C = high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; HIV = huma n 
immunodeficiency virus; hsCRP = high sensitivity C-reactive protein; INR = international normalized ratio; LDL-C = low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; RBC = red blood cell; RNA = ribonucleic acid; TB = tuberculosis;
WBC = white blood cell
a. INR will only be measured if ALT and/or AST > 3 × upper limit of normal (ULN).b. At screening only for female < 55 years old.
Pregnancy Tests (Serum and Urine)
A serum pregnancy test will be performed for female of childbearing potential at the Screening Visit.  
The serum pregnancy test will be sent to and performed by the central laboratory.  If the serum pregnancy test is positive the subject is considered a screen failure.  If the serum pregnancy test is borderline, it should be repeated ≥ 3 days later to determine eligibility.  If the repeat serum pregnancy 
test is:
!Positive, the subject is considered a screen failure;
!Negative, the subject can be enrolled into the trial;
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!Still borderline ≥ 3 days later, the subject is considered a screen failure.
A urine pregnancy test will be performed for all female of childbearing potential at the Baseline Visit 
prior to the first dose of study drug and at minimum at monthly intervals at study visits.  More frequent pregnancy tests will be performed throughout the study if required per local requirements.  If the End-
of-Treatment follow up period is longer than 30 days, female subjects should perform monthly 
pregnancy tests at home, and the results of the monthly at home tests should be communicated to the site.
!If the baseline urine pregnancy test performed at the site is negative, then dosing with study drug may begin.
!If the baseline or post-baseline urine pregnancy test performed at the site is positive, dosing with study drug must be withheld and a serum pregnancy test is required.  The serum pregnancy test will be performed by the central laboratory.  If the serum pregnancy test is negative, study 
drug may be started or resumed.  If the serum pregnancy test is positive, study drug must be 
permanently discontinued.  In the event a pregnancy test comes back borderline, a repeat test is required ( ≥ 3 days later) to document a negative result.  If the repeat serum pregnancy test is:
!Positive, the subject must be discontinued;
!Negative, the subject can continue in the trial;
!Still borderline ≥ 3 days later, the subject must be discontinued.
If during the course of the study a female becomes surgically sterile or post-menopausal and complete documentation as described in Contraception Recommendations for Female is available, pregnancy 
testing is no longer required.
A pregnant or breastfeeding female will not be eligible to enter the study or be allowed to continue 
study drug.
Clinical Chemistry
A minimum 8-hour fast will be necessary for blood samples to be drawn for chemistry.  If a subject is not able to fast when necessary due to unforeseen circumstances, the nonfasting status will be recorded in study source documentation.
Urinalysis
Dipstick urinalysis will be completed by the central laboratory at all required visits.  Specified abnormal macroscopic urinalyses defined as leukocytes, nitrite, protein, ketones, or blood greater than negative, or glucose greater than normal will be followed up with a microscopic analysis at the central laboratory.
Hepatitis Screen
All subjects will be tested for the presence of HBV and HCV at Screening.
Hepatitis B Virus (HBV):
Subjects will be tested for the presence of HBV at Screening using the following tests:
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!HBs Ag (Hepatitis B surface antigen)
!HBc Ab/anti-HBc (Hepatitis B core antibody)
!HBs Ab/anti-HBs (Hepatitis B surface antibody)
A positive result for HBs Ag will be exclusionary.
A negative result for HBs Ag will trigger automatic reflex testing for HBc Ab and surface antibodies (HBs 
Ab).
!A negative test result for HBc Ab does notrequire HBV DNA PCR qualitative testing and the 
subject may be enrolled ( Figure 2 , Scenarios A and B).
!For a subject who has had a HBV vaccination (should document in the medical history), a positive test result for HBs Ab is expected, the HBV DNA PCR qualitative testing is notrequired 
and the subject may be enrolled ( Figure 2 , Scenario B).*
!For subjects without a history of HBV vaccination (and where mandated by local requirements) a positive result for HBs Ab requires HBV DNA PCR testing (automatic reflex testing; Figure 2 , 
Scenario B).
!A positive test result for HBc Ab requires HBV DNA PCR testing (automatic reflex testing) (Figure 2 , Scenarios C and D).  A result for HBV DNA that exceeds detection sensitivity will be 
considered positive.
Figure 2. Interpretation and Management of HBV Serologic Test Results
* A positive test result for HBs Ab is expected for subjects who have had a HBV vaccination.  For subjects without a history of
HBV vaccination (and where mandated by local requirements) a positive result for HBs Ab requires HBV DNA PCR testing.  
** Where mandated by local requirements; subjects with HBs Ab+ and/or HBc Ab+ and negative HBV DNA at Screening 
should have HBV DNA PCR testing performed every 12 weeks.  HBV DNA PCR testing every 12 weeks is not necessary when 
the subject has a history of HBV vaccine and HBs Ab+ and HBc Ab.
!A positive result for HBV DNA or a result that exceeds detection sensitivity will be 
exclusionary.

STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!A subject with a negative result for HBV DNA testing may be enrolled.
!Where mandated by local requirements:  A positive result for HBs Ab requires HBV DNA PCR 
testing.
!A result that exceeds detection sensitivity by central laboratory will be considered a positive 
result for HBV DNA and will be exclusionary.
!A subject with a negative result for HBV DNA may be enrolled.
!For subjects with HBs Ab+ and/or HBc Ab+ and negative HBV DNA at screening, HBV DNA PCR test should be performed every 12 weeks.  HBV DNA PCR testing every 12 weeks is not necessary when the subject has a history of HBV vaccine and HBs Ab+, HBc Ab–.
!Subjects with HBc Ab+ (irrespective of HBs Ab status) and negative HBV DNA at screening who develop a positive result for HBV DNA PCR testing during the study accompanied by the following should be referred to a hepatologist within one week for consultation and recommendation regarding subsequent treatment, and immediate study drug interruption will be required (or per local guidelines):
!an ALT > 5 × ULN OR
!ALT or AST > 3 × ULN and either a total bilirubin > 2 × ULN or INR > 1.5 OR
!ALT or AST > 3 × ULN along with clinical signs of possible hepatitis.
Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)
Blood samples for HCV serology will be obtained at the Screening Visit.  A positive HCV Ab will trigger a 
HCV RNA test.  A subject will not be eligible for study participation if test results indicate active Hepatitis 
C (HCV RNA detectable in any subject with anti-HCV Ab). 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
Subjects with HIV infection (positive HIV test) are excluded from study participation.  An anti-HIV antibody (Ab) test will be performed at Screening, unless prohibited by local regulations.  The 
investigator must discuss any local reporting requirements to local health agencies with the subject.  The 
site will report confirmed positive results to their health agency per local regulations, if necessary.  If a subject has a confirmed positive result, the investigator must discuss with the subject the potential implications to the subject's health and subject should receive or be referred for clinical care promptly.  AbbVie will not receive results from the testing and will not be made aware of any positive result.
Discontinuation of Study Drug and Subjects Withdrawal
All attempts must be made to determine the date of the last study drug dose and the primary reason for discontinuation of study drug or study participation.  The information will be recorded on the appropriate eCRF page.  However, these procedures should not interfere with the initiation of any new treatments or therapeutic modalities that the investigator feels are necessary to treat the subject's condition.  Following discontinuation of study drug, the subject should be treated in accordance with the investigator's best clinical judgment irrespective of whether the subject decides to continue participation in the study.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Discontinuation of Study Drug and Continuation of Study Participation
Subjects may discontinue study drug treatment but may choose to continue to participate in the study.  
A subject who discontinues one treatment (injection or tablet) will be discontinued from the other 
treatment (tablet or injection).  Subjects who prematurely discontinue study drug should complete a 
Premature Discontinuation visit (PD visit) as soon as possible, preferably within 2 weeks.  Afterwards, subjects should follow the regular visit schedule as outlined in Appendix D and should adhere to all 
study procedures except for annual TB testing, dispensing study drug, and blood sample collection for optional exploratory research and validation studies.  Once the subject has discontinued study drug, all rescue and efficacy driven discontinuation criteria no longer apply, and subjects should be treated per standard of care.  If at any point a subject no longer wants to provide assessments (withdrawal of informed consent) following discontinuation of study drug, a second PD visit is not required. 
Premature Discontinuation of Study (Withdrawal of Informed Consent)
Subjects may withdraw from the study completely (discontinuation of study drug treatment and study participation; withdrawal of informed consent) for any reason at any time.  If a subject prematurely discontinues study participation, the procedures outlined for the PD visit should be completed as soon as possible, preferably within 2 weeks of study drug discontinuation.  In addition, an End-of-Treatment Follow-up visit or phone call may be completed 12 weeks after the last injection to determine the status of any ongoing AEs/SAEs or the occurrence of any new AEs/SAEs.  Subjects who discontinue the study prematurely after randomization will not be replaced.
All attempts must be made to determine the date of the last study drug dose and the primary reason for 
discontinuation of study drug or study participation.  The information will be recorded on the 
appropriate eCRF page.  However, these procedures should not interfere with the initiation of any new 
treatments or therapeutic modalities that the investigator feels are necessary to treat the subject's condition.
Following discontinuation of study drug, the subject will be treated in accordance with the investigator's 
best clinical judgment, irrespective of whether or not the subject decides to continue participation in the 
study.
6 SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Complaints and Adverse Events
Complaints
A complaint is any written, electronic, or oral communication that alleges deficiencies related to the physical characteristics, identity, quality, purity, potency, durability, reliability, safety, effectiveness, or performance of a product/device.  Complaints associated with any component of this investigational product must be reported to AbbVie.
Product Complaint
A product complaint is any complaint related to the biologic or drug component of the product or to the medical device component(s).
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.For a product this may include, but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, labeling discrepancies/inadequacies in the 
labeling/instructions (e.g., printing illegible), missing components/product, device not working properly, 
or packaging issues.
Product complaints concerning the investigational product and/or device must be reported to AbbVie 
within 1 business day of the study site's knowledge of the event.  Product complaints occurring during 
the study will be followed up to a satisfactory conclusion.
Medical Complaints/Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
An AE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with 
this treatment.  An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not the event is considered causally related to the use of the product.
Such an event can result from use of the drug as stipulated in the protocol or labeling, as well as from 
accidental or intentional overdose, drug abuse, or drug withdrawal.  Any worsening of a pre-existing condition or illness is considered an AE.  Worsening in severity of a reported AE should be reported as a new AE.  Laboratory abnormalities and changes in vital signs are considered to be AEs only if they result in discontinuation from the study drug, necessitate therapeutic medical intervention, meets protocol specific criteria (see Section 6.2regarding toxicity management) and/or if the investigator considers 
them to be AEs.
The investigators will monitor each subject for clinical and laboratory evidence of adverse events on a 
routine basis throughout the study.  All adverse events will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion.
If any of the following events are reported, then the following supplemental report must be completed:
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Hospitalization or 
Prolongation of HospitalizationAn event that results in an admission to the hospital for any length of time or prolongs the subject's hospital stay.  This does not include an emergency room visit or admission to an outpatient facility.
Congenital Anomaly An anomaly detected at or after birth, or any anomaly that results in fetal loss.
Persistent or Significant Disability/IncapacityAn event that results in a condition that substantially interferes with the activities of daily living of a study subject.  Disability is not intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
significance such as headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, 
and accidental trauma (e.g., sprained ankle).
Important Medical Event 
Requiring Medical or Surgical 
Intervention to Prevent Serious OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately life-
threatening or result in death or hospitalization, but based on 
medical judgment may jeopardize the subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent any of the outcomes listed above (i.e., death of subject, life threatening, hospitalization, prolongation of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or significant disability/incapacity).  Additionally, any elective or spontaneous abortion or stillbirth is considered an important medical event.  Examples of such events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in 
inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.
All adverse events reported from the time of study drug administration until 12 weeks after the last injection will be collected, whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the subject.  Subjects who discontinue study drug treatment but continue to participate in the study will have AEs collected for the remainder of study participation.  In addition, serious adverse events and protocol-related non-serious adverse events will be collected from the time the subject signs the study-specific informed consent.
Additionally, in order to assist the adjudication process, additional information on any potential major 
adverse cardiovascular events will be collected, if applicable.

STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.AbbVie will be responsible for Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) reporting for 
the Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) in accordance with global and local requirements.
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special interest that may 
indicate a trend or risk to subjects.
Adverse Events of Special Interest
The following AEs of special interest for upadacitinib will be monitored during the study:
!Serious infections
!Opportunistic infections
!Herpes zoster
!Active Tuberculosis
!Malignancy (all types)
!Adjudicated Gastrointestinal perforations
!Adjudicated cardiovascular events (e.g., major adverse cardiovascular event [MACE])
!Anemia
!Neutropenia
!Lymphopenia
!Increased serum creatinine and renal dysfunction
!Hepatic events and increased hepatic transaminases
!Elevated creatine phosphokinase (CPK)
!Adjudicated embolic and thrombotic events (non-cardiac, non-Central nervous system [CNS])
Adverse Event Severity and Relationship to Study Drug
The investigators will rate the severity of each AE according to the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.03.
If no grading criteria are provided for the reported event, then the event should be graded as follows:
Mild (Grade 1) Asymptomatic or mild symptoms; clinical or diagnostic observations only; 
intervention not indicated
Moderate (Grade 2) Minimal, local or noninvasive intervention indicated; limiting age-appropriate instrumental activities of daily living (ADL)
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Severe (Grade 3 - 5)
Grade 3 Severe or medically significant but not immediately life-threatening; 
hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization indicated; disabling; limiting self care ADL (Self care ADL refers to bathing, dressing and undressing, feeding self, using the toilet, taking medications, and not bedridden)
Grade 4 Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated
Grade 5 Death related to AE
The investigator will use the following definitions to assess the relationship of the AE to the use of study drug:
Reasonable Possibility – After consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic plausibility, 
clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is sufficient evidence (information) to suggest 
a causal relationship.
No Reasonable Possibility – After consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is insufficient evidence 
(information) to suggest a causal relationship.
For causality assessments, events assessed as having a reasonable possibility of being related to the 
study drug will be considered "associated."  Events assessed as having no reasonable possibility of being related to study drug will be considered "not associated."  In addition, when the investigator has not reported a causality or deemed it not assessable, AbbVie will consider the event associated.
If an investigator's opinion of no reasonable possibility of being related to study drug is given, an Other 
cause of event must be provided by the investigator for the SAE.
Pregnancy
While not an adverse event, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 1 working day after the site becomes aware of the pregnancy.  If a pregnancy occurs in a study subject information regarding the pregnancy and the outcome will be collected.
Female subjects should avoid pregnancy throughout the course of the study, starting with the Screening 
Visit through 12 weeks after the last injection.  Results of a positive pregnancy test or confirmation of a pregnancy will be assessed starting with the Screening Visit through the final study visit.
Subjects who become pregnant during the study must be discontinued from study drug treatment 
(Section 5.5).
The pregnancy outcome of an elective or spontaneous abortion, stillbirth or congenital anomaly is considered a SAE and must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site becomes aware of the event.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.infection or a serious opportunistic infection.  A subject who develops a new infection during treatment 
with study drug should undergo prompt diagnostic testing appropriate for an immunocompromised 
subject.  As appropriate, antimicrobial therapy should be initiated, and the subject should be closely 
monitored.  Study drug may be restarted once the infection has been successfully treated.  Subjects who develop active TB must be permanently discontinued from study drug.
Management of Herpes Zoster
If a subject develops herpes zoster, consider temporarily interrupting study drug until the episode resolves.
Management of Serious Gastrointestinal Events
Subjects presenting with the onset of signs or symptoms of a gastrointestinal perforation should be evaluated promptly for early diagnosis and treatment.  If the diagnosis of gastrointestinal perforation is confirmed, the subject must be discontinued from study drug.
Management of Thrombosis Events
Subjects who develop symptoms of thrombosis should be promptly evaluated and treated appropriately.  If the diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolus or non-cardiac, non-neurologic arterial thrombosis is confirmed, the subject must be discontinued from study drug.
Management of Malignancy
Subjects who develop malignancy other than NMSC or carcinoma in-situ of the cervix must be discontinued from the study drug.  Information including histopathological results should be queried for the confirmation of the diagnosis.  Periodic skin examination is recommended for patients who are at increased risk for skin cancer.
Management of ECG Abnormality
Subjects must be discontinued from study drug for an ECG change considered clinically significant and with reasonable possibility of relationship to study drug, OR a confirmed absolute Fridericia's correction formula (QTcF) value > 500 msec, OR a change of QTc interval > 60 msec from baseline.
Management of Select Laboratory Abnormalities
For any given laboratory abnormality, the investigator should assess the subject, apply the standard of care for medical evaluation and treatment following any local guidelines.  Specific toxicity management guidelines for abnormal laboratory values are described in Table 3 and may require a supplemental eCRF 
to be completed (see Protocol Section 6.1[Complaints and Adverse Events]).  All abnormal laboratory 
tests that are considered clinically significant by the investigator will be followed to a satisfactory resolution.  If a repeat test is required per Table 3 , the repeat testing must occur as soon as possible.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 3. Specific Toxicity Management Guidelines for Abnormal Laboratory Values
Laboratory 
Parameter Toxicity Management Guideline
Hemoglobin ! If hemoglobin < 8 g/dL interrupt study drug dosing and confirm by repeat testing with new sample
! If hemoglobin decreases ≥ 3.0 g/dL from baseline, without an alternative etiology, 
interrupt study drug dosing and confirm by repeat testing with new sample.
! If hemoglobin decreases ≥ 3.0 g/dL from baseline and an alternative etiology is known, 
the subject may remain on study drug at the investigator's discretion.
! If confirmed, continue to withhold study drug until hemoglobin value returns to normal reference range or its baseline value.
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC)! If confirmed < 1000/μ L by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug dosing 
until ANC value returns to normal reference range or its baseline value.
! Discontinue study drug if confirmed < 500/ μL by repeat testing with new sample.
Absolute lymphocyte counts (ALC)! If confirmed < 500/ μL by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug dosing 
until ALC returns to normal reference range or its baseline value.
Total white blood cell count ! If confirmed < 2000/μ L by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug dosing 
until white blood cell count returns to normal reference range or its baseline value.
Platelet count ! If confirmed < 50,000/ μL by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug 
dosing until platelet count returns to normal reference range or its baseline value.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Laboratory 
Parameter Toxicity Management Guideline
AST or ALT ! Interrupt study drug if confirmed ALT or AST > 3 × ULN by repeat testing with new 
sample and either a total bilirubin > 2 × ULN or an international normalized ratio (INR) 
> 1.5.
! A separate blood sample for INR testing will be needed to measure INR at the time of repeat testing for ALT or AST.  A repeat test of INR is not needed for determination if above toxicity management criteria are met.
! Interrupt study drug if confirmed ALT or AST > 3 × ULN by repeat testing with new sample along with new appearance of fatigue, nausea, vomiting, right upper quadrant pain or tenderness, fever, rash, and/or eosinophilia (> 5% increase from baseline).
! Interrupt study drug if confirmed ALT or AST > 5 × ULN by repeat testing with new 
sample for more than 2 weeks.
! Interrupt study drug if confirmed ALT or AST > 8 × ULN by repeat testing with new 
sample.
• Subjects with HBc Ab+ (irrespective of HBs Ab status) and negative HBV DNA PCR 
testing at Screening who develop the following should have HBV DNA PCR testing performed within one week (based on initial elevated value):
! ALT> 5 × ULN OR
! ALT or AST > 3 × ULN if an alternate cause is not readily identified.
! A separate blood sample for HBV DNA PCR testing will be needed at the time of repeat testing for ALT or AST.  As with INR, a separate tube is needed.
A positive result for HBV DNA PCR testing will require immediate interruption of study drug (unless not acceptable by local practices) and a hepatologist consultation should occur within 1 week for recommendation regarding subsequent treatment.
Subjects who meet any of the above criteria should be evaluated for an alternative 
etiology of the ALT or AST elevation and managed as medically appropriate.  The investigator should contact the AbbVie TA MD to discuss the management of a subject when an alternative etiology has been determined.  The alternative etiology should be 
documented appropriately in the eCRF; study drug should be discontinued if no alternative 
etiology can be found and ALT or AST elevations persist.
For any confirmed ALT or AST elevations > 3 ULN, complete the appropriate supplemental 
hepatic eCRF(s).
Serum Creatinine ! If serum creatinine is > 1.5 × the Baseline value and > ULN, repeat the test for serum creatinine (with subject in an euvolemic state) to confirm the results.  If the results of 
the repeat testing still meet this criterion, then interrupt study drug and re-start study 
drug once serum creatinine returns to ≤ 1.5 × Baseline value and ≤ ULN.
For the above serum creatinine elevation scenario, complete the appropriate supplemental renal eCRF(s).
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Laboratory 
Parameter Toxicity Management Guideline
Creatine Phosphokinase! If confirmed CPK value ≥ 4 × ULN and there are no symptoms suggestive of myositis or 
rhabdomyolysis, the subjects may continue study drug at the investigator's discretion.
! If CPK ≥ 4 × ULN accompanied by symptoms suggestive of myositis or rhabdomyolysis, 
interrupt study drug and contact AbbVie TA MD.
For the above CPK elevation scenarios, complete supplemental increased CPK eCRF.
Ab = antibody; ALC = absolute lymphocyte counts; ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AST = aspartate aminotransferase; 
CPK = creatine phosphokinase; DNA = deoxyribonucleic acid; eCRF = electronic case report form; HB = hepatitis B; HBc Ab+ = Hepatitis B core antibody positive; HBs Ab = Hepatitis B surface antibody; HBV = hepatitis B virus; INR = international normalized ratio; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; TA MD = Therapeutic Area Medical Director; ULN = upper limit of normal
6.3 Data Monitoring Committee and Cardiovascular Adjudication 
Committee
An external DMC comprised of persons independent of AbbVie and with relevant expertise in their field 
will review unblinded safety and if necessary, efficacy data from the ongoing study.  The DMC members consist of two clinicians and one biostatistician with one clinician being an expert in the management of subjects with AD.  The primary responsibility of the DMC will be to protect the safety of the subjects participating in this study.
The operation of the DMC data review involves data preparation by AbbVie (for blinded data) and an 
independent CRO (Axio Research for unblinded data to DMC), DMC review of the data at a prespecified schedule (every 4 months) or ad hoc if needed, DMC report with recommendations provided to the AbbVie Contact, and triage of the recommendations the AbbVie Contact to the appropriate parties (AbbVie Study Management Team or Internal Review Committee).  The first DMC meeting is expected to occur approximately 4 months after the first subject first dose date.
A separate DMC charter will be prepared outside of the protocol and will describe the roles and 
responsibilities of the DMC members, frequency of data reviews, and relevant safety data to be assessed.
Communications from the DMC to the Study Teams will not contain information that could potentially 
unblind the team to subject treatment assignments.  In addition, the treatment outcomes will not be communicated from the DMC to the Study Teams.
An independent committee of physician experts in cardiovascular adjudication will be utilized to assess 
potential cardiovascular and thromboembolic AEs in a blinded manner as defined by the Cardiovascular Adjudication Committee charter.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.4 Other Safety Data Collection
Specific manifestations of AD (i.e., itching, excoriations, oozing, crusting, erythema, etc.) should not be 
reported as individual AEs if they are considered to be a worsening of the underlying disease; instead, worsening of atopic dermatitis should be reported as the AE.
6.5 SUSAR Reporting
AbbVie will be responsible for SUSAR reporting for the IMP in accordance with global and local guidelines and Appendix A of the Investigator Brochure will serve as the Reference Safety Information (RSI).  The RSI in effect at the start of a DSUR reporting period serves as the RSI during the reporting period.  For follow-up reports, the RSI in place at the time of occurrence of the 'suspected' Serious Adverse Reaction will be used to assess expectedness.
7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE
7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
The objective of the statistical analyses is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of upadacitinib for the treatment of adult subjects with moderate to severe AD who are candidates for systemic therapy.
Complete and specific details of the statistical analysis will be described and fully documented in the 
Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).  The SAP will be finalized prior to the Week 24 database lock.  The statistical analyses will be performed using SAS (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, North Carolina, USA).
7.2 Definition for Analysis Populations
The Intent-to-Treat (ITT) Population consists of all randomized subjects and will be used for the efficacy analyses.  A Per-Protocol Population may be defined if deemed necessary to exclude subjects with protocol violations that will affect the primary endpoint.  If defined, the criteria to determine the 
Per-Protocol Population will be detailed in the SAP.  List of subjects to be excluded from the 
Per-Protocol Population will be finalized before database lock and blind break.  The Per-Protocol Population, if defined, will be used to analyze the primary efficacy endpoint.
The Safety Population consists of all randomized subjects who received at least 1 dose of study drug 
including placebos.
7.3 Statistical Analyses for Efficacy
All efficacy endpoints will be analyzed in the ITT population to test the superiority of upadacitinib over dupilumab.  In addition, the primary efficacy endpoints will be analyzed in the Per Protocol Population, if defined.  Subjects will be included in the treatment group to which they are randomized.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Categorical variables will be analyzed using Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) test, stratified by vIGA-AD 
categories (vIGA-AD 3 or 4).  Continuous variables will be analyzed using mixed-effect model with repeated measures (MMRM).
Missing values and visits after the rescue will be handled by non-responder imputation (NRI) for 
categorical variables (except for missing values due to COVID-19, which will be handled by multiple imputation, NRI-C) or MMRM for continuous variables.
Primary Analysis
The primary endpoint is the proportion of subjects achieving EASI 75 at Week 16.
Comparison of the primary endpoint will be made between the upadacitinib group and the dupilumab 
group using the CMH test, stratified by vIGA-AD categories.  NRI-C will be the primary approach to handle missing values, with multiple Imputation (MI) as the sensitivity approach to handle missing values.  Per-protocol analysis, if defined, will be used as another sensitivity analysis.
Secondary endpoints will be analyzed in the ranked order as outlined in Section 3.3.
Sample Size Estimation
Approximately 650 subjects (18 - 75 years old) will be randomized to upadacitinib 30 mg or dupilumab in 
a ratio of 1:1 (325 subjects per treatment group).  Assuming an EASI 75 response rate of at most 50% in the dupilumab arm, this sample size will provide more than 80% power to detect at least a 12% treatment difference using two-sided test at a 0.05 significant level.  The assumption of dupilumab response rate for EASI 75 at Week 16 and 12% treatment difference were based on the pooled response rates of dupilumab Phase 3 monotherapy studies (SOLO 1 and SOLO 2) and the response rate of upadacitinib 30 mg in the upadacitinib AD Phase 2b study.
23
7.4 Statistical Analyses for Safety
The safety analyses will be carried out using the Safety Population and will be based on treatments the subjects actually received.  Safety will be assessed by AEs, physical examination, laboratory assessments, and vital signs.  Note that missing safety data will not be imputed.  Analysis details will be specified in the SAP.
Adverse events will be coded using MedDRA.  Treatment-emergent AEs (TEAEs) are defined as those 
that began or worsened in severity after the first dose of study drug and no more than 5 half-lives of the drug after the last dose of study drug.  Specifically, 30 days will be used for upadacitinib, and 84 days (12 weeks) will be used for dupilumab.  The number and percentage of subjects experiencing TEAEs will be tabulated using the MedDRA SOC and preferred term (PT), by severity, and by relationship to the 
study drug as assessed by the investigator.  Summaries (including percentages and events per 
100 patient-years) of SAEs, deaths, AEs leading to discontinuation and AESIs will be provided as well.  Pre-treatment AEs will be summarized separately.
For laboratory and vital signs, mean change from Baseline and percentage of subject with evaluations 
meeting criteria for pre-defined Potentially Clinically Significant values will be summarized.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.5 Statistical Analysis of Optional Proteomic Biomarker Data
Analysis may be conducted on optional proteomic biomarker data for the purpose of identification of 
prognostic, predictive, surrogate, and pharmacodynamic biomarkers associated with efficacy or safety.  The association of biomarkers to the efficacy or safety endpoints may be explored for each biomarker one at a time, and also for combinations of biomarkers via some multivariate predictive modeling approaches.
8 ETHICS
8.1 Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board 
(IEC/IRB)
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all subject materials will be submitted to the IEC/IRB for review and approval.  Approval of both the protocol and the informed consent form(s) must be obtained before any subject is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will require review and approval by the IEC/IRB before the changes are implemented to the study.  In addition, all changes to the consent form(s) will be IEC/IRB approved.
8.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, Operations Manual, International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines, applicable regulations, and guidelines governing clinical study conduct and the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  Responsibilities of the investigator are specified in Appendix B .
8.3 Subject Confidentiality
To protect subjects' confidentiality, all subjects and their associated samples will be assigned numerical study identifiers or "codes."  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie.
9 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM 
COMPLETION
The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the data reported.  All source documents should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data.  Clinical site monitoring is conducted to ensure that the rights and well-being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the currently approved protocol, ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable local regulatory requirement(s).
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Electronic Patient Reported Data
Patient reported data must be completed for each subject screened/enrolled in this study.  Some of 
these data are being collected with an Electronic Patient Reported Outcome (ePRO) system called 
Trialmax, provided by the technology vendor CRF Health of Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA.  The ePRO 
system is in compliance with Title 21 CFR Part 11.  The documentation related to the system validation of the ePRO system is available through the vendor, CRF Health, while the user acceptance testing of the study-specific patient reported outcome design will be conducted and maintained at AbbVie.
The subject will be entering the data on an electronic device; these data will be uploaded to a server.  
The data on the server will be considered source, and maintained and managed by CRF Health.  Daily Worst Pruritus NRS and daily and weekly ADerm-IS ePROs will be collected from subjects electronically every evening via a hand-held device provided to the subject at Screening.  Hand-held device usage stops at the Week 16 visit.  The Week 16 and subsequent NRS will be completed electronically via an onsite tablet device.  ADerm-IS will be collected only during the Screening period and at the Baseline Visit.  The hand-held electronic device will be programmed to allow data entry once per day.  The ePRO data of HN-PGIS will be collected electronically via an onsite tablet device into which the subject will directly enter the required pieces of information at visits specified in the Operations Manual Section 2.1 
(Individual Treatment Period Visit Activities).  The Oral vs Injectable Questionnaire will be collected 
electronically from subjects via the onsite tablet device at the Week 24 visit (only performed in the United States).  The electronic tablet device will be programmed to allow data entry for only the visits specified in the protocol and will not allow for subjects to complete more than one of the same assessments at any one visit.  All data entered on the devices will be immediately stored to the devices itself and automatically uploaded to a central server administrated by CRF Health.  The investigator and delegated staff will be able to access all uploaded subject entered data via a password protected website, up until the generation, receipt and confirmation of the study archive.
Internet access to the ePRO data will be provided by CRF Health for the duration of the study.  This 
access will be available for the duration of the study to the site investigator, as well as delegated personnel.  Such access will be removed from investigator sites following the receipt of the study archive.  Data from the ePRO system will be archived on appropriate data media (CD-ROM, etc.) and provided to the investigator at that time as a durable record of the site's ePRO data.  It will be possible for the investigator to make paper print-outs from that media.
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE
AbbVie will ensure that the clinical trial is conducted with a quality management system that will define quality tolerance limits in order to ensure human subject protection and reliability of study results.  Data will be generated, documented, and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP, and applicable regulatory requirements.
11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end-of-study is defined as the date of the last subject's last visit. 
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.12 REFERENCES
1. Kunz B, Oranje AP, Labrèze L, et al.  Clinical validation and guidelines for the SCORAD index:  
consensus report of the European Task Force on Atopic Dermatitis.  Dermatology.  
1997;195(1):10-9.
2. Wollenberg A, Barbarot S, Bieber T, et al.  Consensus-based European guidelines for treatment 
of atopic eczema (atopic dermatitis) in adults and children:  part I.  J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol.  2018;32(5):657-82.
3. Krakowski AC, Eichenfield LF, Dohil MA.  Management of atopic dermatitis in the pediatric 
population.  Pediatrics.  2008;122(4):812-24.
4. Akdis CA, Akdis M, Bieber T, et al.  Diagnosis and treatment of atopic dermatitis in children and 
adults:  European Academy of Allergoly and Clinical Immunology/American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology/PRACTALL Consensus Report.  Allergy.  2006;61(8):969-87.
5. Sidbury R, Davis DM, Cohen DE, et al.  Guidelines of care for the management of atopic 
dermatitis:  section 3.  Management and treatment with phototherapy and systemic agents.  J Am Acad Dermatol.  2014;71(2):327-49.
6. Blauvelt A, de Bruin-Weller M, Gooderham M, et al.  Long-term management of moderate-to-
severe atopic dermatitis with dupilumab and concomitant topical corticosteroids (LIBERTY AD 
CHRONOS):  a 1-year, randomised, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.  Lancet.  
2017;389(10086):2287-303.
7. Simpson EL, Bieber T, Guttman-Yaasky E, et al.  Two phase 3 trials of dupilumab versus placebo 
in atopic dermatitis.  N Engl J Med.  2016;375(24):2335-48.
8. Chung-Ching C, Di Meglio P, Nestle FO.  Harnessing dendritic cells in inflammatory skin diseases.  
Semin Immunol.  2011;23(1):28-41.
9. Nobbe S, Dziunycz P, Muhleisen B, et al.  IL-31 expression by inflammatory cells is preferentially 
elevated in atopic dermatitis.  Acta Derm Venereol.  2012;92(1):24-8.
10. Genovese MC, Smolen JS, Weinblatt ME, et al.  Efficacy and Safety of ABT-494, a Selective JAK-1 
Inhibitor, in a Phase IIb Study in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis and an Inadequate Response to Methotrexate.  Arthritis Rheumatol.  2016;68(12):2857-66.
11. Kremer JM, Emery P, Camp HS, et al.  A Phase IIb Study of ABT-494, a Selective JAK-1 Inhibitor, in 
Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis and an Inadequate Response to Anti–Tumor Necrosis Factor Therapy.  Arthritis Rheumatol.  2016;68(12):2867-77.
12. Genovese MC, Fleischmann R, Combe B, et al.  Safety and efficacy of upadacitinib in patients 
with active rheumatoid arthritis refractory to biologic disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (SELECT-BEYOND):  a double-blind, randomised controlled phase 3 trial.  Lancet Online.  2018;391(10139):2513-24.
13. Burmester GR, Kremer JM, Van den Bosch F, et al.  Safety and efficacy of upadacitinib in patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis and inadequate response to conventional synthetic disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (SELECT-NEXT):  a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial.  Lancet Online.  2018;391(10139):2503-12.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.14. AbbVie.  Upadacitinib Investigator's Brochure Edition 10.  19 August 2019.
15. Eichenfield LF, Tom WL, Berger TG, et al.  Guidelines of care for the management of atopic 
dermatitis:  section 2.  Management and treatment of atopic dermatitis with topical therapies.  
J Am Acad Dermatol.  2014;71(1):116-32.
16. Wollenberg A, Barbarot S, Bieber T, et al.  Consensus-based European guidelines for treatment 
of atopic eczema (atopic dermatitis) in adults and children:  part II.  J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol.  2018;32(6):850-78.
17. Dupixent [summary of product characteristics].  Paris, France:  Sanofi-Aventis Groupe.  2017.
18. Dupixent [package insert].  Tarrytown, NY:  Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc; 2017.19. Banerjee S, Biehl A, Gadina M, et al.  JAK-STAT signaling as a target for inflammatory and 
autoimmune diseases:  current and future prospects.  Drugs.  2017;77(5):521-46.
20. Norman P.  Selective JAK1 inhibitor and selective Tyk2 inhibitor patents.  Expert Opinion on 
Therapeutic Patents.  2012;22(10):1233-49.
21. Hanifin JM, Rajka G.  Diagnostic features of atopic dermatitis.  Acta Derm Venereol.  
1980;944-47.
22. Williams B, Mancia G, Spiering W, et al.  2018 ESC/ESH guidelines for the management of 
arterial hypertension.  Eur Heart J.  2018;39(33):3021-104.
23. Simpson EL, Bieber T, Guttman-Yassky E, at al.  SOLO 1 and SOLO 2 Investigators.  Two Phase 3 
trials of dupilumab versus placebo in atopic dermatitis.  NEJM.  2016;375(24):2335-48.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
Ab Antibody
AD Atopic dermatitis
ADerm-IS Atopic dermatitis impact scale
ADL Activities of daily living
AE Adverse event
AESI Adverse events of special interest
ALC Absolute lymphocyte count
ALT Alanine transaminase
ANC Absolute neutrophil count
AST Aspartate transaminase
AxSpA Axial spondyloarthritis
BCG Bacille Calmette-Guérin
BSA Body surface area
BUN blood urea nitrogen
CAC Cardiovascular adjudication committee
CD Crohn's disease
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CLDN1 Claudin 1
CMH Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel
CNS Central nervous system
CPK Creatine kinase
CRO Contract Research Organization
CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
CXR Chest x-ray
CYP Cytochrome P450
CYP3A Cytochrome P450 3A
DMC Data monitoring committee
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
EASI Eczema Area and Severity Index
EASI 75/90/100 75%/90%/100% reduction in Eczema Area and Severity Index
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.ECG Electrocardiogram
eCRF Electronic case report form
EDC Electronic data capture
eGFR estimated glomerular filtration rate
ePRO Electronic patient reported outcome
EU European Union
EudraCT European Clinical Trials Database
FLG Filaggrin
FSH Follicle-stimulating hormone
GCP Good clinical practice
GFR Glomerular filtration rate
GI Gastrointestinal
HBc Anti-hepatitis B core antibodies
HBc Ab Hepatitis B core antibodies
HBs Anti-hepatitis B surface antibody
HBs Ab Anti-hepatitis B surface antibody
HBs Ag Hepatitis B surface antigen
HBV Hepatitis B virus
HCV Hepatitis C virus
HCV Ab Hepatitis C antibody
HDL-C high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus
HIV Ab HIV antibody
HLA Human Leukocyte Antigen
hsCRP High-sensitivity C-reactive protein
ICH International Council for Harmonisation
IEC Independent ethics committee
IEC/IRB Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board
IFN interferon
IFN-γ Interferon gamma
IGA Investigator's Global Assessment
IgE Immunoglobulin E
IGRA Interferon-gamma release assay
IL Interleukin
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.IMP Investigational Medicinal Product
INR international normalized ratio
IRB Institutional review board
IRT Interactive response technology
ITT Intent-to-Treat
IU International Unit
IUD Intrauterine device
IUS Intrauterine hormone-releasing system
JAK Janus kinase
LDL-C low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
MACE Major adverse cardiovascular event
MDRD Modification of Diet in Renal Disease
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MI Multiple imputation
MMRM mixed-effect model with repeated measures
MTX Methotrexate
NCI National Cancer Institute
NK Natural killer
NMSC Non-melanoma skin cancer
NRI Non-responder imputation
NRI-C Non-Responder Imputation incorporating Multiple Imputation to handle missing 
data due to COVID-19
NRS Numerical rating scale
PCR Polymerase chain reaction
PD Premature discontinuation
PDE4 Phosphodiesterase type 4
PGIS Patient Global Impression of Severity
PPD Purified protein derivative
PRO patient-reported outcome
PsA Psoriatic arthritis
PT Preferred term
PUVA Psoralen and ultraviolet A
QD Once daily
QTc QT interval corrected
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.QTcF Friedericia's correction formula
RA Rheumatoid arthritis
RBC red blood cell
RNA ribonucleic acid
RSI Reference safety information
SAE Serious adverse event
SAP Statistical analysis plan
SC Subcutaneous(ly)
SOC System organ classes
SUSAR Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction
TA MD Therapeutic Area Medical Director
TA SD Therapeutic Area Scientific Director
TB Tuberculosis
TCI Topical calcineurin inhibitor
TCS Topical corticosteroids
Tdap Tetanus-diphtheria-acellular pertussis
TEAE Treatment emergent adverse event
TNF tumor necrosis factor
Tyk2 Tyrosine kinase 2
UC Ulcerative colitis
ULN Upper limit of normal
US United States
UV Ultra violet
vIGA-AD Validated Investigator Global Assessment for atopic dermatitis
WBC White blood cell
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M16-046:  A Phase 3b Multicenter, Randomized, Double-Blind, Double-Dummy, Active 
Controlled Study Comparing the Safety and Efficacy of Upadacitinib to Dupilumab in Adult Subjects with Moderate to Severe Atopic Dermatitis
Protocol Date:  10 November 2020Clinical research studies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the International Council for Harmonisation 
(ICH) Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and local regulations and guidelines governing the study at the site location.  In signing the Investigator Agreement, the investigator is agreeing to the following:
1. Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GCP, the applicable regulatory requirements, 
current protocol and operations manual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying AbbVie and the appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee (IEC), except when necessary to protect the subject from immediate harm.
2. Personally conducting or supervising the described investigation(s).
3. Informing all subjects, or persons used as controls, that the drugs are being used for 
investigational purposes and complying with the requirements relating to informed consent and 
ethics committees (e.g., IEC or IRB) review and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
4. Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investigation(s) to AbbVie.
5. Reading the information in the Investigator's Brochure/safety material provided, including the 
instructions for use and the potential risks and side effects of the investigational product(s).
6. Informing all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the study about 
their obligations in meeting the above commitments.
7. Maintaining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records 
available for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, 
and retaining all study-related documents until notification from AbbVie.
8. Maintaining records demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial 
clinical protocol and all of its amendments.
9. Reporting promptly, all changes in the research activity and all unanticipated problems involving 
risks to human subjects or others, to the appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, institution director) and/or directly to the ethics committees and AbbVie.
10. Providing direct access to source data documents for study-related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB 
review, and regulatory inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed)
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIGNATORIES
Name Title Functional Area
Clinical Program Development
Immunology Clinical Development
Immunology Clinical Development
Data and Statistical Sciences 
Data and Statistical Sciences
Pharmacovigilance & Patient Safety
Immunology Translational Science 
Medical Writing
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX D. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE
The following table shows the required activities.  The individual activities are described in detail in the 
Operations Manual Section 2.1.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX E. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Protocol Date
Version 1.0 17 October 2018
Version 1.1 (VHP Countries:  Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Finland, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Norway, Poland, 
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom)18 February 2019
Version 1.2 (Ireland only) 18 February 2019
Administrative Change 1 31 May 2019
Version 1.3 (United States only) 25 June 2019
Version 2.0 13 March 2020
Version 2.1 (Ireland only) 13 March 2020
Version 2.2 (VHP countries) 31 July 2020
Version 3.0 28 October 2020
Version 2.2.1 (VHP countries) 29 October 2020
Summary of Protocol Changes:
!Section 4.1Overall Study Design and Plan
!Specified that a Week 24 database lock will be conducted to perform the Primary Analysis.
Rationale:  To clarify the timing of the Primary Analysis.
!Section 5.8Randomization/Drug Assignment
!Clarified that AbbVie personnel will remain blinded until the Week 24 database lock.
Rationale:  To be consistent with Section 4.1.
!Section 7.1Statistical and Analytical Plans
!Specified that the SAP will be finalized prior to the Week 24 database lock.
Rationale:  To be consistent with Section 4.1.
STUDY M16-046  |  Version 4.0  |  EudraCT 2018-002264-57
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX F. OPERATIONS MANUAL