Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
1  
 
Protocol for " ImmuneRACE – Immune Response Action to 
COVID- 19 Events " 
 
 
Protocol: ADAP -006 
Version: 1.0 
Date: 7/24/2020 
 
Principle Investigator: Dr. Jennifer N. Dines, M.D.  
Sponsor : Adaptive Biotechnologies Corporation 
1551 Eastlake Ave E, Suite 200  
Seattle, WA 98102 
(206) 659- 0067 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 

Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
2 I. BACKGROUND 
 
Adaptive Biotechnologies has developed a platform technology called T -cell receptor β eta-1 
(TCRβ1) Assay  for immune profiling, also referred to as immunoSEQ§ in this proposal. The 
platform  utilizes next- generation sequencing (NGS) to identify rearranged T -cell receptor 
beta (TRβ)gene sequences and  the abundance of those sequences. This broad platform 
technology can be used to  determine the  diversity of the cellular adaptive immune system  and 
track  phenotype associated T -cell clones to query the current state and history of the adaptive 
immune system.   
 
Detecting Specific TCRs for Diagnostics1-3  
 Despite the overwhelming number of possible T -cell receptors (TCRs), many TCRs are quite 
common and repeatedly recur within and between individuals, comprising the public T -cell 
repertoire
4. These public TCRs are diagnostically useful because  once a TCR has been associated 
with a particular antigen or disease state, the association is reliable even when that TCR is seen in a new individual.  Using this technique, we have demonstrated that CMV infection can be assayed purely from the peripheral  TCR repertoire
3. 
 When specific TCRs associated with particular antigens  or disease states are known, scanning the 
T-cell repertoire for those specific sequences can be clinically useful. The purpose of this research 
study is to explore the immune system in individuals with coronavirus  disease . 
  
II. PROPOSED RESEARCH  
 The SARS -CoV -2 virus which causes coronavirus disease ( COVID -19) is spreading rapidly 
throughout the world. Researchers, governments, and biotechnology companies are mobilizing to develop and disseminate diagnostic and therapeutic alternatives to try to curb t his global 
pandemic. The vast majority of these R&D efforts are focused on the RNA of the virus itself rather than critical information held within the genetics of a patient 's immune response to the 
virus and the disease patterns we can infer from studying the immune response at the population level.  
 
First, we will identify the parts of the virus, called antigens, that induce a cellular immune 
response via T cells. We do this by rapidly determining the nearly full set of processed, 
presented, immunogenic, and immunodominant antigens from a disease. This has historically 
been very challenging for the immunology community and we are confident that our approach is a significant breakthrough in the field. Next, we use these antigens to identify tens of thousands 
of T-cell receptors from T cells that expand in response  to the virus across the human population. 
This requires the scale of data generation and processing made possible by the Adaptive and 
Microsoft partnership.  In parallel, we will identify and confirm the TCR signature of the immune response to SARS -
CoV -2 virus . To do this, we require  DNA extracted from the peripheral blood or whole blood of  
 
§ For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures  
Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
3 approximately 1000 blood samples from patients with COVID -19. The immune signature we 
expect  to identify of COVID -19 is a  starting point to solve key public health challenges in the 
present . These samples can either be newly diagnosed patients or patients who have already  
recovered from the virus because the immune response will still be identifi able in the memory 
compartment.  
 
 
III. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
 
The primary aim is to increase the understanding of  the immune system response in coronavirus  
diseases by assaying the peripheral immune  repertoire for TCRs  and a secondary aim of  BCRs , 
specific to  severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV -2), the virus which 
causes COVID -19, with the potential to develop better diagnostic  tests and treatments . 
 Adaptive and Microsoft are committed  to making T CR repertoire data public  to researchers 
around the world. We hypothesize that by studying the immune response in patients with COVID- 19 and making these data public, we can help solve several key challenges plaguing this 
current pandemic.  
 
Specific Aims  
 Aim 1. Comparison of disease -specific TCR signatures in patients and controls  
 We will run i mmunoSEQ on approximately 100 0 patient samples with disease status unbli nded. 
After sequencing these samples, we will  quantitatively describe the compartment of the T -cell 
repertoire specific for the disease of interest. We will then use th ese data to construct a classifier 
that accurately distinguishes patients from controls.  Aim 2.  Identify  the immunodominant antigens that elicit a T -cell response to COVID- 19 
 We developed technology to query the  antigen specificity of the  T-cell repertoire to hundreds of 
peptide epitopes in a single blood sample
5.  This technology not only allows us to parse out 
immunodominant epitopes of a given infection from irrelevant epitopes , but also allows us to 
determine the TCR sequences of the T cells responding to the se immunodominant epitopes.  We 
will use this technology to determine which peptide epitopes derived from the  SARS -CoV -2 
genome  commonly elicit a n immunodominant T -cell res ponse in different samples. The TCR 
sequence data generated from these studies will be used to boost the diagnostic classifier  
obtained in Aim 1. In addition, the identification of immunodominant epitopes c an be 
disseminated to fuel studies in vaccine desi gn and antigen specific T -cell responses relating to 
clinical outcome  in other labs . 
 Aim 3.  Risk Stratification  based on an individual's immune signature  
 There is a critical need for a reliable risk stratification test to enable treatment prioritization given the potentially massive number of symptomatic patients. Despite an emerging understanding of the diagnosis of COVID -19, how it spreads, and the death rate, there is no 
currently available way to predict who needs hospitalization beyond age associated risk and 
Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
4 limited epidemiologically linked comorbidities.  We aim to utilize the immune signature as a way 
to predict disease severity  in individuals by util izing T cell sequencing capabilities and machine 
learning pipelines to identify T cells specific to the virus and assessing the strength of the 
immune response by the expansion of these T cells in a patient's blood. By understanding the strength and specif icity of a patient's immune response, which may be temporarily bolstered by 
recent exposure to other coronaviruses (e.g., common cold) in some people, we may be able to 
significantly improve the diagnostic and risk stratification process.     Aim 4.  Determ ine whether an immune signature can be detected in individuals exposed to 
SARS -CoV- 2 earlier than  currently available tests    
 Another critical need to contain the spread of SARS -CoV -2 is to determine the false negative 
rate of the RNA test in asymptomatic people and offer an alternative diagnostic that is more sensitive in this cohort. For example, it is possible that early stage disease is not picked up by RNA tests because the virus m ay be isolated to regions such as the lower respiratory cavity that 
are not assessed by standard testing methods. We aim to determine whether the i mmune response 
can be used to detect the virus from a simple blood test thereby providing a more sensitive te st in 
asymptomatic people even if the virus itself is not directly detectable in the upper respiratory region.   Secondary Aim : 
Aim 5 . Explore whether additional research assays could potential identify and/or confirm 
antigenic binding  
 
As a secondary aim, Adaptive will perform explorational research with  additional sequencing-based 
research assays  to profile the adaptive immune system, such as, but not limited to TCR pairSEQ**6 
and B-cell receptor (BCR)  pairSEQ††.  These assays use a combinatorial method for pairing TCR 
alpha and beta chain sequences and BCR heavy and light chain sequences. The output is a large set 
of full length paired BCR or TCR sequences, which allows reconstruction of a functional antibody or 
TCR. We regularly utilize the results of our pairSEQ assays to identify and/or confirm antigenic binding. For the case of BCR pairSEQ, the resulting antibody sequences could pot entially have 
therapeutic value for imparting passive immunity.  
 
IV. STUDY POPULATION 
Participants  
 
Prospective ascertainment of approximately 1000 individuals , between the ages of  18 – 89, who 
reside within  the United States. Blood samples and nose or throat swabs  will be collected at 
affiliated sites  or with mobile  phlebotomy. These samples will be shipped frozen or transported 
refrigerated or at room temperature  to Adaptive Biotechnologies for processing, including, but 
not limited to DNA extraction and analysis. Minors, pregnant women, prisoners, mentally disabled persons , and wards -of-the-state will be excluded to prevent any risk to vulnerable 
populations. The selection of participants  will b e equitable per 45 CFR 111(a). The inclusion and 
exclusion criteria for the three c ohorts are included below.  
 
** For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures  
†† For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures  
Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
5  
Cohort 1. Exposed to coronavirus disease   
Inclusion criteria   
 
Participants must satisfy the following criteria to be enrolled in the study:   
i. Individuals exposed to someone with a confirmed diagnosis of coronavirus disease  within 
2 weeks of exposure  (or at the discretion of the investigator ) 
ii. Male and female participants  of any race and ethnicity between 18 to 89 years of age 
(inclusive) at the time of enrolling in the study  
iii. Must be able to communicate with the investigator, understand and comply with the requirements of the study 
 
Exclusion Criteria   
 The presence of any of the following will exclude a participant  from enrollment:   
i. Individuals who have not been exposed to a person with a confirmed diagnosis of  
coronavirus disease  within 2 weeks of exposure (or at the discretion of the investigator ) 
ii. Protected populations including minors, pregnant women, prisoners, mentally disabled 
persons, and wards -of-the state  
iii. Any significant condition, laboratory abnormality, or psychiatric illness that would prevent the participant from safely participating in the s tudy  
iv. Donated more than 500 cc or 1 pint of blood in the past  60 days prior to the blood 
draw  (at the discretion of the investigator ) 
 
Cohort 2. Active coronavirus disease  
Inclusion criteria   
 Participants must satisfy the following criteria to be enrolled in the study:   
i. Individuals w ith a diagnosis of coronavirus disease : 
a. Either by c linical diagnosis  made by a medical professional , or 
b. By positive  laboratory tes t, including but not limited to  naso - or oropharyngeal 
swab  (or at the discretion of the investigator ) 
ii. Male and female participants  of any race and ethnicity between 18 to 89 years of age 
(inclusive) at the time of enrolling in the study  
iii. Must be able to communicate with the investigator, understand and comply with the requirements of the study 
 
Exclusion Criteria   
 The presence of any  of the following will exclude a participant  from enrollment:   
i. Individuals without a diagnosis of coronavirus disease  
ii. Protected populations including minors, pregnant women, prisoners, mentally disabled persons, and wards -of-the state  
iii. Any significant condi tion, laboratory abnormality, or psychiatric illness that would 
prevent the participant from safely participating in the study  
Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
6 iv. Donated more than 500 cc or 1 pint of blood in the past 60 days prior to the blood 
draw  (at the discretion of the investigator)  
 
Cohort 3. Recovered  from coronavirus disease  
 
Inclusion criteria   
 
Participants must satisfy the following criteria to be enrolled in the study:  
i. Individuals previously diagnosed with coronavirus disease and cleared from active 
infection (within 2 weeks  or at the discretion of the investigator) by:  
a. Testing negative on two consecutive naso- or oropharyngeal swab tests  following 
initial diagnosis , or 
b. Cleared by a healthcare professional or public health authorit y, or 
c. Resolution of symptoms related to COVID -19 (or at the discretion of the 
investigator ) 
ii. Male and female participants  of any race and ethnicity between 18 to 89 years of age 
(inclusive) at the time of enrolling in the study  
iii. Must be able to communicate with the investigator, understand and comply with the requirements of the study 
 
Exclusion Criteria   
 The presence of any of the following will exclude a participant  from enrollment:   
i. Individuals without a previous diagnosis of coronavirus  disease at the discretion of the 
investigator  
ii. Protected populations including minors, pregnant women, prisoners, mentally disabled persons , and wards -of-the state  
iii. Any significant condition, laboratory abnormality, or psychiatric illness that would prevent the participant from safely participating in the study  
iv. Donated more than 500 cc or 1 pint of blood in the past 60 days prior to the blood 
draw  (at the discretion of the investigator)  
 
V. METHODS AND PROCEDURES  
 
Sample  and Data Collection Plan  
 
Blood Draw  and Sample Processing  
Standard blood draws will be performed via routine venipuncture during either routine clinical 
care of the participants or scheduled remote phlebotomy appointment s for the research study. 
Whole blood will be collected in volumes of approximately 10- 60 mL (~ 1-6 X 10 mL tubes) . All 
blood sample s will be shipped frozen (at -20 to - 80 °C) or transported refrigerated ( at 2 to 8°C)  
or at room temperature within 72 hours  of being drawn to Adaptive Biotechnologies for further 
testing. Blood will undergo DNA extraction, and the immunoSEQ  Assay will be performed. This 
will quantitatively describe the compartment of the T -cell repertoire specific for the disease of 
interest com pared to controls. In addition, additional research assays  may be applied.   
 
Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
7 Depending on the needs of the study, Adaptive will coordinate with the phlebotomist blood 
draws that will be transported and processed same day at room temperature. These samples  must 
be process ed and cryopreserved within 6 hours of the sample blood draw. Both the PBMC s and 
serum will be processed and frozen. For samples undergoing this route, participants  that will be 
prioritized  include, but are not limited to individuals with  a confirmed diagnosis of coronavirus 
disease and  reporting symptoms for at least two  weeks prior to blood draw .  
 
Nose or Throat Swabs  
A nasopharyngeal  or oropharyngeal  swab will be collected  by inserting a swab into the nose  or 
throat of the participant . Samples collected will be  shipped frozen at - 80 °C to Adaptive  within 1 
month of collection or stored at 4 °C and transported to Adaptive within 72 hours . All samples 
will be stored at - 80°C  until further testing is performed. Testing may include, but not limited to, 
clinically available tests for coronavirus disease or other respiratory illnesses.  
 
Study Visit  
 
During the study visit, the examiner  will collect information including, but not limited to , 
participant's diagnosis of coronavirus disease and symptoms associated with coronavirus disease. 
This information will be used in the analysis to better understand and interpret the test results. This information will be stored with an alphanumeric code. All information will be de -identified 
in accordance with HIPAA standards.  
 
Electronic Questionnaire   
An electronic questionnaire will be administered in this study to collect information pertaining to the participant's medical history, symptoms, and diagnostic tests performed for cor onavirus 
disease. This information will be used in the analysis to better understand and interpret the test results. This information will be stored with an alphanumeric code. All information will be de -
identified in accordance with HIPAA standards.  
 As pa rt of this study, medical records , with the participant's consent, may be accessed to confirm 
medical information pertaining the participant's medical history, symptoms, and diagnostic tests performed for coronavirus disease.  
 As part of this study, participants may be asked to provide diagnostic test results performed for coronavirus disease , if available . Diagnostic test results can be provided via secure email or 
secure fax.  
 
Optional Participation  
Participants will have the option to undergo up to four additional blood draws and four  additional 
questionnair es about the  participant's symptoms and medical informa tion relating to coronavirus 
disease throughout a  4-month time period. Each additional blood draw will be approximately 10-
60 mL (1 -6 x 10mL  tube(s)).  Optional blood draws are at the discretion of the investigator and 
dependent on the needs of the study. 
 
Additional tests may be run to diagnose or support the diagnosis may be run on the  participant 's 
sample  from all cohorts . This is explicitly stated in the consenting information sheet. 
Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
8 Shipping  
 
Batches of samples can be transported to Adaptive by courier. All sample  shipments  will follow 
regulations for UN 3373 Biological Substance, Category B . Shipment notification  and the 
electro nic manifest should be provided before sample receipt at Adaptive.  
 
Contact: Emily Svejnoha ( esvejnoha@adaptivebiotech.com ) +1 (206) 693- 2032  
Address:  
ATTN: BSM  
Adaptive Biotechnologies  
1551 Eastlake Ave E, Suite 200 
Seattle, WA 98102  
 
Metadata Summary :  
For each sample the following metadata will be included , but not limited to :  
i. Basic demographics (age at collection, gender, ethnicity/race)  
ii. Symptoms associated with coronavirus disease and at time of  blood draw  
iii. Required hospitalizations relating to coronavirus disease  
iv. Date and city/state of diagnosis of coronavirus  disease  
v. Test results for coronavirus disease   
vi. Other comorbid conditions that may impact results and interpretation ( for example , 
asthma, chronic lung disease, autoimmune conditions ) 
vii. Medications  that may impact results and interpretation  
Data  Analysis  
 Data analysis will be performed by Adaptive Biotechnologies scientists using customized molecular assays and software designed to capture detailed information about the immune  
repertoire. In collaboration with Microsoft, we will use these data to construct a classifier that  
accurately distinguishes cases from controls with the use of machine  learning and artificial  
intelligence (AI) based on TCR repertoire analysis. A rigorous statistical analysis will be  
performed.   
 For the secondary aim, TCR pairSEQ and /or BCR pairSEQ assay analysis  will be performed. 
This involves a  combinatorial method for pairing TCR alpha and beta chain sequences and BCR 
heavy and light chain sequences will be performed, allowing reconstruction of a functional antibody or TCR.   This study is considered minimal risk and does not require additional data  monitoring measure s 
in place.  
 
Immunodominant peptide analysis  
 
Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
9 Cryopreserved PBMC will be used to run the assay, which will link TCR sequences to T -cell 
specificity of peptides derived from the SARS -CoV -2 genome as described by Klinger et al.5. 
Briefly, memory T cells from SARS -CoV -2 exposed individuals will be incubated with epitopes 
derived from the entire genome of SARS -CoV -2. The SARS -CoV -2 specific memory T cells 
will be isolated and sequenced.  The TCR sequences of the memory response will be used to 
broaden the diagnostic signal obtained by repertoire analysis alone.  In addition, the SARS -CoV -
2 antigenic epitopes that are found to be immunogenic in participants  who have cleared the 
infection will be identified and shared with the community so that further studies can be targeted at these epitopes.   
 
Data Storage and Confidentiality  
 DNA extracted from the samples will be stored at -20 to - 80 °C until the sample is exhausted. 
Samples and associated clinical information will be de -identified prior to  being transferred or 
upon arrival to Adaptive Biotechnologies . The samples will be stored and tracked by the research 
technicians using a laborator y information management system (LIMS).  The samples may be 
used for research assays in areas beyond the disease of interest at the conclusion of this study.  
 
To the extent , the results of this research study are presented at meetings or in publications, the 
identity of participants will not be included in the information that is disclosed. In addition, 
records related to this study may be reviewed during a regulatory inspect ion. 
 
VI. RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
 Risk Category: Minimal  
 
Potential Risk  - Physical  
 
Physical risks associated with  drawing blood, include  soreness at the site of puncture, bruising, 
and in the rare case, infection of the blood draw site, fainting, nerve , or tendon damage.  
 
Physical risks associated with a nose or throat swab include: a very small risk of bleeding when 
swabbing the inside of your nose or throat (mucosal membranes).  
 
Mitigating strategies to minimize risk : 
 Standard procedures to minimize discomfort, and the chance of infection resulting from 
venipuncture , nasal or throat swabs will be utilized.  
 
Potential Risk – Loss of Confidentiality  
 
There may be a risk of loss of confidentiality of the protected  health information of the 
participants.  
 
Mitigating strategies to minimize risk : 
 
Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
10 All data, blood samples from participants will be de -identified at  Adaptive  in accordance with 
the HIPAA Safe Harbor Method . In addition, staff sign confidentiality agreements as conditions 
of their employment  and are trained annually on the HIPAA Privacy and Security Rule . 
Delegated  research staff will be able to view information about  the participant , the code given 
their samples, and the resulting data derived from the analysis. Therefore, appropri ate data 
security measures will be in place to prevent unauthorized access to individually identifiable 
data.   
 
Benefits  
 
No direct benefit will be seen by the study participants.   Participants are made aware that allowing the study to use their blood samples and analyze their  
DNA may help develop better lab tests and lead to a better scientific understanding of coronavirus disease.  
 In addition, de -identified data will be shared with the global research community with the 
potential of developing better tests and treatment for coronavirus disease.  
 
The participants are informed that they will not receive individual results from this study. 
Moreover, we will not give the results to their doctor or put them in their medical records . 
 
Alternatives to Participation  
 
Options include not participating or participating in other research studies. 
 
VII. PARTICIPANT IDENTIFICATION, RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT  
 
Method of Participant  Identification and Recruitment  
 Prospective participants  will be identified and recruited by, but not limited to, clinicians and 
other health care personnel at participating sites , online and printed marketing material, and radio 
and television advertisements . The identification and recruitment of participants  will protect 
privacy and be free of undue influence. All material will be submitted to the IRB for approval.  
 
Process of Consent  
 Eligible individuals will be given an information sheet and will electronically consent to participate in the study. We are requesting a waiver of signed consent given:  
 
• The research involves no more than minimal risk 
• The waiver of informed consent will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the 
participant  
• It is not practicable to conduct the research without the waive r or alteration  
• Whenever appropriate, participants will be provided with additional pertinent information after their participation.  
Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
11 Participants who wish to participate in this study will demonstrate consent by clicking 
"ACCEPT" to an information sheet that describes the study. They will not be able to participate  
if they do not click "ACCEPT". Additional information about the study will be available to 
participants as FAQ. Please reference the FAQ and eConsent information sheet for fur ther 
details. There will be no elements of coercion or undue influence. Consent will be obtained via  
an eConsent process and/or through a research coordinator or other appropriate study staff when  
applicable. Documentation of consent and contact information for those who wish to be  
contacted in future studies will be obtained and stored on a secure, password- protected server.  If 
eConsent is not available  or handwritten signatures are required, a paper consent will be used, 
the participant  will demonstrate c onsent by signing at the bottom of the information consent 
sheet that describes the study.  For certain instances where a wet ink signature is required, a HIPAA form to be shared with the provider network will be issued for authorization of release of medi cal records.   
 
Costs to the Participant  
 
Adaptive Biotechnologies, the Sponsor, or study partners (Microsoft, LabCorp/Covance and Illumina), will pay for procedures associated with the study and necessary follow -up. 
Participants will not incur any costs nor will insurance be billed for  research procedures in this 
study. 
 
Payment for Participation  
 Participants will be given a $ 50 gift card for their participation in the study. Participants must  
complete the blood draw , nasal or oral swab,  and study questionnaire prior to receiving the gift 
card.   
 
Participants will be provided an additional $50 gift card after completing  each additional blood 
draw and questionnaire  about their symptoms  and medical information relating to COVID -19.  
 
VIII.  SPONSOR  
Adaptive , or study partners (Microsoft, LabCorp/Covance , and Illumina), will sponsor the 
entirety of this study and all related costs including resource needs to curate metadata.  
 
Adaptive Biotechnologies Corp.,  Seattle, Washington,  USA 
ADAP -006 
WIRB# 20200625  
12 REFERENCES  
 
1 De Neuter, N.  et al.  Memory CD4(+) T cell receptor repertoire data mining as a tool for 
identifying cytomegalovirus serostatus. Genes and immunity , doi:10.1038/s41435- 018-
0035- y (2018).  
2 DeWitt, W. S., 3rd et al.  Human T cell receptor occurrence patterns encode immune 
histor y, genetic background, and receptor specificity. eLife  7, doi:10.7554/eLife.38358 
(2018).  
3 Emerson, R. O. et al.  ImmunoSEQ uencing identifies signatures of cytomegalovirus 
exposure history and HLA -mediated effects on the T cell repertoire. Nature genetics  49, 
659-665, doi:10.1038/ng.3822 (2017).  
4 Venturi, V., Price, D. A., Douek, D. C. & Davenport, M. P. The molecular basis for 
public T -cell responses? Nature Reviews Immunology  8, 231- 238, doi:10.1038/nri2260 
(2008).  
5 Klinger  M, Pepin F, Wilkins  J, Asbury T, Wittkop T, et al. Multiplex Identification of 
Antigen- Specific T Cell Receptors Using a Combination of Immune Assays and Immune 
Receptor Sequencing. PLOS ONE  10, doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0141561 (2015). 
6 Howie B, Sherwood AM, Berkebile AD, Berka J, Emerson RO, Williamson DW, Kirsch I, Vignali M, Rieder MJ, Carlson CS, Robins HS. High -throughput pairing of T cell 
receptor α and β sequences. Sci Transl Med. 2015 Aug 19;7(301):301ra131. doi: 10.1126/scitransl med.aac5624. Erratum in: Sci Transl Med. 2015 Oct 14;7(309):309er7.  