 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
1 
  
 
 
 
Protocol  and Statistical Analysis  Plan  
 
IRB00071015  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Title:  The Use of Fecal  Microbiota  Transplantation  in Patients   
with Ulcerative  Colitis -associated  Pouchitis  
 
Principal  Investigator:  Virginia  Shaffer,  MD, Associate  
Professor of Surgery, Emory University School of Medicine  
 
Date 06/26/2017  
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
2 
 Title:  The Use of Fecal  Microbiota  Transplantation  in Patients  with Ulcerative  Colitis -
associated  Pouchitis  
 
Principal  Investigator:  Virginia  Shaffer,  MD, Associate Professor of Surgery, Emory 
University School of Medicine  
 
Emory  University  School  of Medicine  
Divisions  of Digestive  Diseases and Infectious  Diseases,   
Department  of Surgery  
 
 Research Protocol  
 
Title:  The Use of Fecal  Microbiota  Transplantation  in Patients  with Ulcerative  Colitis -
associated  Pouchitis  
 
Principal  Investigator:  Virginia  Shaffer,  MD, Associate Professor of Surgery, Emory 
University School of Medicine   
 
1. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
The aims  of this study  are: 1) to determine  the utility  of fecal  microbiota  transplantation  
(FMT)  in the treatment  of patients  with ulcerative  colitis  (UC)  associated  chronic  antibiotic -
dependent  pouchitis  (CADP)  and chronic  antibiotic  refractory  pouchitis  (CARP)  and 2) to 
study  the changes  in the microbial  environment  in patients  with pouchitis  (pre- and post-
treatment)  and 3) to assess  the impact  of therapy  on the patient's  perceived  quality  of life. 
 
2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
 
The spectrum  of inflammatory  bowel  diseases  (lBO)  includes  ulcerative  colitis  (UC)  and 
Crohn's  disease  (CD).  The etiology  of these  diseases  is not clear  but appears  to involve  
aberrant  immunological  responses  to intestinal  bacteria  in a genetically  predisposed  host.  
There  is increasing  evidence  that the intestinal  microbiota  play an important  role in the 
initiation  and maintenance  of lBO.  Studies  have  demonstrated  that the microbiota  in patients  
with lBO differ  from  the healthy  non-IBD individuals  with a decrease  in species  such as 
Clostridium  leptum  and Faecalibacterium  prausnitzii.   This "dysbiosis"  may result  in fewer  
bacteria  that produce  short  chain  fatty acids  which  are important  in protecting  intestinal  
epithelium.  The intestinal  microbiota  is important  in maintaining  homeostasis  in the intestine  
and interacts  with the host immune  system  to enhance  immune  function.  Manipulation  of 
the gut bacteria  through  the use of antibiotics,  probiotics,  and prebiotics  have  been  shown  
to be beneficial  in lBO.   The use of antibiotics  for the treatment  of mild to moderate  active  
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
3 
 colonic  Crohn's  disease  is effective  in many  cases.  Antibiotics  are often  used to treat acute  
episodes  of UC-associated pouchitis,  an inflammatory  condition  seen in patients  who undergo  
a restorative  proctocolectomy  with an ileal pouch  anastomosis  (IPAA).  Probiotics  (such  as 
VSL -3) for the treatment  of acute  UC-associated  pouchitis  as well as for the secondary  
prevention  of repeated  episodes  of pouchitis  have  been evaluated  in several  studies  with 
positive  results.  
 
Greater  than 50% of lBO patients  who undergo  an IPAA  will develop  pouchitis.  Many  of these  
patients  will develop  recurrent  episodes  of pouchitis  and up to 5% will develop  chronic  pouchitis 
requiring  maintenance  therapy  with antibiotics  or other  agents  and may even  pouch  excision.  
The etiology  of pouchitis  is unknown,  but theories  include  fecal  stasis  leading  to bacterial  
overgrowth  and alteration  of normal  commensal  flora  in a genetically  susceptible  individual.  
Microbiome studies  in UC pouch patients have  shown  alterations  in the fecal  flora  with increases  
in anaerobic  bacteria  and sulfate  producing  bacteria.  
 
In a recent  study,  pouch  microbiomal  environments  appeared  to be distinctly  unique  in patients  
with a normal  UC-associated  IPAA  and those  with UC-associated  pouchitis  (Zelia  GC, IBD,  
May 2011).  Pouchitis  samples  showed  more Clostridium  and Eubacterium  genera  compared  to 
healthy  UC pouch  patients.  The current  treatment  approaches  for pouchitis  are based  on small  
randomized  controlled  trials  showing some  efficacy  with use of antibiotics  and probiotics.  
However,  the choice  of antibiotics,  dose, and  duration  of treatment  are largely  empiric.  In 
addition,  probiotics  have  limited  durability  after discontinuation,  while  the antibiotics  most  
utilized  have  known  side effects  as well as the potential  for selecting  multi -drug resistant  
bacteria.  Development  and study  of additional  therapeutic  options  for pouchitis  treatment  are 
areas  for further  research.  
 
Fecal  microbiota  transplantation  (FMT)  has been  shown  safe and effective  as a method  of 
manipulating  the microbiota  in patients  with recurrent  Clostridium  difficile  infection  (van Nood  
et al.  NEJM  2013). In the literature,  there  are 41 cases  in 17 articles  reported  of fecal  
transplantation  in the treatment  of inflammatory  bowel  disease  (IBD).  The majority  experienced  
a reduction  of symptoms  (19/25),  cessation  of IBD medications  (13117),  or disease  remission  
(15/24)  (Anderson,  Edney  et al. APT  2012).  Some  ofthe  weaknesses  ofthe  available  data are 
small  number  of cases,  unreported  or not clearly  defined  IBD characteristics,  and lack of 
uniformity  when  measuring  outcome  variables.  A recent  prospective  controlled  pilot trial of 
use of  FMT  for chronic  refractory  pouchitis  revealed  negative  outcomes.  However,  the 
researchers  used a single  dose and administered  the stool  preparation  through  a nasogastric  tube.  
Several studies  have  shown  lower  success  rates  of FMT  in C. difficile  with use of nasofeeding  
tube versus  a colonoscopy  or sigmoidoscopy.  In addition,  a recent  trial of use of FMT  to treat 
ulcerative  colitis  showed  improvement  in clinical  activity  scores  when  five successive  fecal  
enemas  were used  (Kunde  20 13). At the present,  it is unclear  which  phenotype  of IBD-ulcerative  
colitis, Crohn's  disease,  or pouchitis  or what  level  of disease  activity  is best treated  with fecal  
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
4 
 microbiota  transplantation.  
 
In collaboration  with sub-Investigator  Colleen  Kraft,  MD, sixty -two (62) fecal  microbiota  
transplants  have  been  attempted  in 56 patients  at our institution  for the indication  of refractory  
C. difficile  infection.  One patient  who consented  for the study  was found  to have  graft -versus­  
host disease  was not transplanted.  
 
To date,  61 FMT  procedures  have  been  completed  in 55 patients.  Data  is available  on 48 FMTs 
performed  on 42 patients.  
 
Eight  FMTs  have  experienced  relapse:  
- l patient  relapsed  due to abx for UTI - resolved  after receiving  course  of vancomycin  
- 2 solid  organ  transplant  patients  with FMTs  relapsed  but improved  after 
receiving  a second  infusion  
- 1 patient  required  total of 3 FMTs  (1 via Dobhoff,  2 colon)  
- 1 patient  required  total of 2 FMTs  via colon  
- 1 patient  was 95 y/o NH patient  
- 1 patient  had no response  to 2 FMT  
 
Three  FMT  subjects  have  experienced  adverse  events:  
- 1 hospital  admission  due to abdominal  pain post FMT  in a patient  with 
history  of irritable  bowel.  Negative  work -up 
- 1 inpatient  FMT  with abdominal  pain post FMT  -- negative  findings  
- 1 subject  experienced  episode  of diverticulitis  post colon  FMT1 
 
Additional  findings:  
- 2 subjects  with diagnosis  of collagenous  colitis  
- 1 colon  cancer  
 
To date,  based  on available  data,  there  has been  a 95% overall  response  rate (primary,  
secondary,  tertiary  response  rates  inclusive).  Secondary  and tertiary  response  are defined  as 
response  to repeat  antibiotic  therapy  and/or  repeat  FMT.  
 
We hypothesize  that the use of FMT  in patients  with chronic  pouchitis  symptoms  will restore  
the microbial  balance  in these  patients  and help treat pouchitis.  This would  circumvent  the 
need  to use  chronic  antibiotic  therapy  and/or  potentially  salvage  the pouch,  and serve  as a 
more  durable  form  of treatment  for this group  of patients.  In addition,  we hope  to show  that 
the microbial  environment  of pouchitis  patients  will change  to a more  favorable  one (as 
defined  by the donor  microbiota)  as determined  via 16S ribosomal  RNA  gene  sequencing  of 
the microbiota  and metabolomic  profiling.  
 
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
5 
   
3. STUDY  DESIGN  
 
The primary  investigative  design  will be a single  arm study  to determine  if FMT  has the 
potential to  be used in the treatment  of chronic  pouchitis.  
 
3.1 Study  Objectives:  
Primary  Objective:  To determine  the safety  and tolerability  of fecal  microbiota transplant 
(FMT) in treatment  of chronic  pouchitis  
 
Secondary  Objective :  To study  the microbial  environment  of IPAA/UC  associated  
pouches  in patients  presenting  with symptoms  of pouchitis  with and without  endoscopy -
visualized pouchitis  and to assess  the impact  of the therapy  on the patient's  perceived  quality  
of life 
 
3.2 Study  design  Type/Phase:   This is a two center,  Phase  1 open  label  study  designed  to 
determine  the safety,  tolerability  and use of fecal  transplant  in patients  with pouchitis  
and to study the  differences  in microbiome  in patients  before  and after treatment  with 
FMT.  
 
3.3 Sites  Centers  of Research :  This study  will be conducted  in the Emory  Clinic - Adult  
Digestive Disease  Clinic  and Colorectal  Surgery  Clinic, the Emory Center Endoscopy 
Center,  and St. Joseph's  Hospital  (SJH)  in Atlanta, GA . 
 
3.4 Measures  to minimize/avoid bias : Eligible  subjects  will be given  options  of other  
treatments if they choose  not to participate.  
 
3.5 Study  duration:   The total duration  of the study  for each patient  will be twelve  weeks.  
 
3.6 Study  Procedures  
 
The following protocol essentially requir es two sets of study procedures. One set of study 
procedures outlines testing requirements for the donor of allogenic human feces (see Table 1.  
Donor  Related  Study Activities) . The other set outlines activities and expectations of the research 
participant wh o will receive the donated stool specimen (see Table 2 . Research Participant Study 
Activities).  The donor set of activities will be managed by Colleen Kraft, MD, a sub -investigator 
and Associate Professor of Medicine within the Division of Infectious Disea ses. In the past, Dr. 
Kraft has overseen the donor recruitment and screening within previous FMT trials via ordering 
the appropriate antibody screens, fecal sample preparation (e.g. use of saline, etc.) and any other 
necessary tests to ensure that the feca l specimen is non -infectious and safe for insertion into 
research participants. Dr. Kraft still oversees this process and prepares the allogenic human fecal 
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
6 
 donation in her lab on site. However, she will not be able to provide these activities listed in Table 
1 for effort.  
 
All activities  outlined in Table 1  would be billed to the sponsor to compensate Dr. Kraft for her 
time and effort to support our participants and overall project goals and needs. The donor related 
activities will take place before the research participant is seen for informed consent during the 
screening visit (see Table 2 ). This is done to ensure that the donor has been screened for infectious 
diseases in a timely manner and that Dr. Kraft has ample time to prepare the allogenic human fecal 
specimen in her lab for the transplant on the enrollment visit.  Donors will be screened every four 
weeks which is standard protocol for Dr. Kraft’s lab.  More details about the donor screening 
process and requirements are listed in the protocol section 3.6 a)  Donor Stool Collection and 
Processing .  
 
Table 1.  Donor Related Study Activities  
Donor Activity  Specific Test Ordered  Visit  
Blood/Serology Testing  1. Hepatitis A IgM and IgG  
2. Hepatitis B S Ab/Sag/Core Ab  
3. Hepatitis C Ab  
4. RPR  
5. Human Imm unodeficiency Virus 
(HIV) 1 and 2 Antibody   
 
 
Donor Screening  (every four 
weeks)  
Stool Testing  1.  Clostridium Difficile PCR  
2.  Salmonella, Shigella, and 
Campylobacter  
3.  Ova and parasites  
4.  H. Pylori  antigen  
5. 5.Vancomycin resistant 
Enterococcus (VRE)  
6.  Carbapenemase resistant 
Enterobasteriacae  
Fecal Sample Preparation for 
Donation1 N/A 
 
1The fecal sample will be prepared for the FMT in Dr. Colleen Kraft’s laboratory on site. Please refer to section 3.6 a  
for more detailed information regarding the donor fecal sample processing activities.  
 
Table 2  outlines a total of five complete research visits for each research participant: screening 
(initial), enrollment (transplant), 2 weeks post -transplant  (may be a  phone call at the discretion of 
the physicia n), 4 weeks post -transplant, and 3 months post -transplant. For the initial or screening 
visit, research participants will first complete the informed consent process with a member of the 
research team. Upon comp letion of the informed consent process, the participant will receive 
phlebotomy to collect blood for plasma chemistries, CBC with differential, and platelet counts.  
 
Urine will also be collected and screened for basic urinalysis. Women of child bearing po tential 
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
7 
 (WOCBP) will be screened using urine pregnancy kits to test for beta HCG levels. These kits will 
be provided by the sponsor. The results of these kits will be used as the final determination of 
pregnancy for WOCBP . WOCBP  who screen positive for bet a HCG (i.e. are pregnant) will be 
excluded from the study for the safety of both the mother and her unborn child. Phlebotomy for 
plasma collection, eventual CBC with differential, and platelet count will be performed for each 
research visit. Urine and stoo l will also be collected for each study visit.  In addition to phlebotomy, 
urine collection, and stool collection, research participan ts will  also receive a physical exam for  
each research visit.  
 
Waist and hip circumfe rence will be measured during the screening visit only. For the second visit  
(i.e. enrollment) , the research participant will also receive a physical exam along with a flexible 
sigmoidoscopy. The flex sigmoidoscopy will be performed under moderate sedation using propofol  
per usual anesthes ia services . The flexible  sigmoidoscopy will be used to gain access to the pouch 
and to take a mucosal tissue pouch biopsy.  
 
Table 2. Research Participant Study Activities  
Visit  Procedures  Screening2 Enrollment  2 Wee k3 
(+/- 3 days)  4 weeks  
(+/- 7 days)  3months  
(+/- 14 days)  
Informed  Consent  
Process   
X     
Physical Exam  X X X X X 
Urine  pregnancy  testing  
for WOCBP   
X     
Phlebotomy  X X X X X 
Labs and Specimen 
Processing : 
Stool  collection  
Plasma  collection  
Urine  collection  
CBC  w/diff ., platele t count4  
 
X 
X 
X 
X  
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X  
 
X 
X 
X 
X  
 
X 
X 
X 
X  
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Flexible    
Sigmoidoscopy with 
Moderate Sedation    
X    
Mucosal  Biopsy  
Collection    
X    
Waist  and hip 
circumference measures   
X     
 
Fecal  Microbiota     
Transplant    
X    
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
8 
 Modified  PDAI  X (clinical)  X X (clinical)  X(clinical)  X (clinical)  
Quality  of Life 
Questionnaires   
X    
X  
X 
Food  Recall  Questionnaire   X  X X 
2If both screening  and enrollment  visits  occur  within  7 days,  research  samples  may not be recollected  at the enrollment  
visit,  at the discretion  of the investigator  3The 2-week  visit may be conducted  over the telephone  for subjects  who live a significant  distance  from  the 
study  site and at the discretion  of the study  investigator.  Biological  samples  will not be collected  on subjects  
who complete  visit via telephone,  however  subject  may be asked  to mail in a stool  sample  for testing   
4 Screening  labs for hemoglobin (Hgb) , platelet count, and absolute neutrophil count ( ANC ) may be performed  within  
six months  of screening  visit 
 
3.6. a) Donor  Stool  Collection  and Processing  
 
The standard  donor  stool  will be obtained  from  a donor  who has undergone  testing  for potential  
transmittable  infections.  These  include  Hepatitis  A, Hepatitis  B, Hepatitis  C, syphilis,  HIV,  H 
pylori,  Salmonella,  Shigella,  Campylobacter,  C. difficile,  as well as screening  for ova and 
parasites , and multidrug  resistant  organisms  (specifically  carbapenemase -producing  
Enterobacteriaceae and vancomycin -resistant  Enterococcus).  This testing  is performed  through  
Emory  Medical  Laboratories.  In addition,  the donor  will be screened  for illnesses  that would 
exclude  him from  donating  stool  for the current  study  (see attached  screening  questionnaire).  
Donor  screening  will be completed  and all results  confirmed  negative  prior  to use of donor  
stool for  transplant.  Standard  donors  will be re-screened  every  six months.  
 
The standard  donor  voids  the stool  at home  just prior  to leaving  for work  in the morning.  The 
stool  is dropped  off in the microbiology  laboratory  within  60 minutes  of being  voided.  The 
stool is  processed  within  60 minutes  of the drop off, and administered  within  120 minutes  of 
the processing.  The time that elapses  from  the stool  being  voided  by the donor  and administered  
to the  patient  ranges  from  60-240 minutes.  Donor  stool  will be handled  as a level  2 biohazard  
with appropriate  universal  precautions.  
 
Appropriate  Personal  Protective  Equipment  (PPE)  will be worn  by personnel  while  
handling/processing  donor  fecal  material:  
• Nitrile  gloves  will be worn  while  working  with all potentially  infectious  agents.  
Gloves  should  be removed  before  touching  common  objects  in public  areas.  Hand  
washing  will be performed  each time gloves  are changed.  
• Gloves  should  be removed  prior  to removal  of other  PPE.  Gloves  should be  removed  
before  leaving  the laboratory.  
• Lab coats  will be worn  over clothing  while handling /processing stool specimen and 
preparing  FMT  solution  
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
9 
 • Contaminated  clothing  will be decontaminated  and laundered  on-site or by a 
commercial  laundry  service.  
• Protective  eyewear/goggles  will be used,  if splash  potential  exists  
• Laboratory  access  will be limited  to authorized  personnel  only.  
• Biohazard  containers  for disposal  of contaminated  materials  are readily  accessible  in 
the processing  area.  
• Good  laboratory  techniques  will be exercised  to minimize  the formation of  aerosols,  
droplets,  spatters,  splashes.  
 
The FMT  processing  (performed  by Dr. Kraft)  involves  taking  of the standard  donor's  stool  
which  is received  in the clinical  microbiology  laboratory  along  with a short  questionnaire  
(see Appendix  2).  The hood  is terminally  cleaned  with 10% sodium  hypochlorite  followed  
by 70% ethanol.  The hood  area is then lined  with clean  lab mats. Thirty cubic centimeter 
(ccs) saline aliquots  are poured  into 50  ml centrifuge  tubes  and 1 cm3 of stool  is distributed  
in these  aliquot  containers.  The stool  is mixed  gently  using  a tongue  depressor  until a smooth  
suspension  is formed.  The contents  are then filtered  using  a standard  Parapak  filter.  The 
suspension  is allowed  to settle  in the 50-ml centrifuge  tube for 10 minutes  and then poured  
off into a sterile  container.  This filtrate  is then drawn  up in 60 cc syringes,  and labeled  "For 
Enteral  Use Only".  Syringes  are placed  into sealed biohazard  labeled  bags for transport.  
 
3.6. b) Fecal Microbiota Transplant (FMT)  Procedure  
 
Subjects  will be asked  to clean  out their pouch  using  two over the counter  enemas  no longer  
than 3 hours  before  the procedure  time.  This is standard  of care for patients  undergoing  routine  
flexible  sigmoidoscopy.  Subjects  will also be asked  to take 4 mg of loperamide  (over -the-
counter  anti-diarrheal  medication)  one half hour before  the FMT.  
 
Subjects  will be placed  in the left lateral  decubitus  position  with elevated  hips in a designated 
private  room  in clinic  or endoscopy  suite  for 90 minutes  of FMT  intervention.  Subjects  will be 
asked  to rotate  180 degrees  slowly  during  a 10-minute  period.  Subjects  will be monitored  for 30 
minutes  after FMT  for any adverse  events  and discharged.  
 
Concomitant  Medications:  Permitted  concomitant  medications:  Patients  may remain  on 
chronic  medications  during  the study  period.  
 
Prohibited  medications:   Patients  will need  to be off antibiotics  and probiotics  for at 
least 48 hours  prior  to fecal  transplant.  
 
End of the study:   The end of study  for each patient  is defined  as the date of the last visit (i.e. 
3 month visit post -transplant).  
 
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
10 
 Timeline:  All the proposed  aims  and enrollments  will be carried  out within  24-month  period. 
We do anticipate  a large  proportion  of eligible  subjects  may travel  to Emory  as the interest  
in this therapeutic  platform  is quite  high with us already  receiving  numerous  requests.  
 
3.7 Inclusion and Exclusion  criteria  
 
The following list s outline key criteria used by  the principal investigator, sub-investigators , and 
study team  to determine who can and cannot be in this study.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Males  and females  between  the ages of 18 and 80 (inclusive)  with ulcerative  colitis -
associated  IPAA with and without  pouchitis  
2. Eligible  patients  will be identified  through  the Emory  Clinic  (TEC), St. Joseph’s Hospital 
(SJH),  and Emory  University  Hospital  (EUH)  
3. Signed  informed  consent  
 
Exclusion  Criteria  
1. Age <18 years  or >80 years  of age 
2. Exposure to immunosuppressive   therapy within the 4 weeks prior to enrollment or their  
expected  use within  1 month  of FMT  
3. Concomitant  Clostridium  difficile  infection  
4. Suspected  Crohn'  s disease  
5. Documented  active  infection  of any kind 
6. Patients  on anti-coagulant  therapy,  with platelet  count  less than 50,000,  significant  
anemia  with hemoglobin<  7, or those  with other  conditions  that place  them  at increased  risk 
of bleeding  
7. Pregnant  or breastfeeding  women (pregnancy will be verified using urine pregnancy kits)  
8. Need  for imminent  surgery  
9. Absolute  neutrophil  count  (ANC) < I 000 or history  of opportunistic  infection  
10. Administration  of any investigational  drug within one  month  before  FMT  
 
Demographic  data,  including  prior  history  of pouchitis  with sub-classification  into chronic  
antibiotic  resistant  (refractory)  pouchitis,  chronic  antibiotic  use as well as previous  treatments  
will be recorded.  Measures of  waist  and hip circumference  and waist  to hip ratio will be 
calculated  and recorded. Stool  samples,  urine,  and serum  samples  will be collected.  Patients  
will be screened  at entry  for enteric  pathogens  (C. difficile , routine  bacterial  stool  culture,  
ova and parasites ) and positive results  will exclude  entry  to the study.   
 
Fecal  samples  from  subjects  will be analyzed  for microbiome  genetics,  and metabolomic  
profiles  before  and four weeks  after  therapy.  Scored  symptoms  according  to the modified  
pouch  disease  activity  index  (mPDAI)  (Appendix  1) as proposed by  Shen  et al. will also be 
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
11 
 documented before  pouch  endoscopy.  Investigation  with biopsy  incorporating  both 
endoscopic  and histologic  criteria  will be pursued.  As per Shen's  protocol  when  developing  
the modified  PDAI  (mPDAI),  biopsies  will be taken  from  the posterior  wall of the pouch  if 
the pouch  has abnormal  endoscopic  appearance  and from  areas  of maximal  inflammation  
(Shen  2003).  In addition  to the two to four biopsies  that are taken  for the pathologist,  
additional  biopsies  will be taken  to study  the epithelial  microbiome.   
 
No more  than 6 total biopsies  will be taken.  A single  gastrointestinal  pathologist,  blinded  to 
the clinical  presentations  and endoscopic  findings,  will assess  the pouch  biopsies  for grade  of 
inflammation.  On the basis  of the criteria  proposed  by Sanborn  et al patients  with a total PDAI  
of seven  or more  will be classified  as having  pouchitis.  Symptomatic  patients  without  
endoscopic  and histologic  evidence  of pouchitis  and a PDAI  less than seven  points  will be 
defined  as not having  pouchitis.  All patients  undergoing  pouchoscopy  will receive  a universal  
donor  fecal  transplant  deposited  in the most  proximal  limit  of the afferent  limb after the 
mucosal  biopsies  are obtained.  There  will be 2 categories  of patients.  Patients  with pouchitis  
symptoms  with endoscopic  and histologic  evidence  of pouchitis,  and patients  with pouchitis  
symptoms  without  endoscopic  features,  but with histologic  evidence  of pouchitis.  
 
We will assess  patient  perceived  improvement  in symptoms  and quality  of life by asking  
participants  to complete  two surveys --Short  Quality  of Life Questionnaire  for Inflammatory  
Bowel  Disease  and the Cleveland  Global  Quality  of Life.  Participants  will be asked  to 
complete  these  surveys  at enrollment  and again  at 4 weeks  and I2 weeks  post-FMT  procedure 
(Appendix  4). 
 
 
4. BIOLOGICAL SPECIMENS  TO BE ACQUIRED  
 
1. Fecal  sample - The patient  will submit  a stool  specimen  in a container  for genomic  
analysis  at week  0, week  2, week  4, and week  12.  Prior  to enrollment,  the patients  
will undergo  PCR  testing  for C. difficile,  routine  stool  culture,  and ova and parasites.  
Any remaining  stool  sample  will be used for research  purposes  for microbiota  
evaluation  by 16S sequencing.  
 
2. Mucosal Pouch Tissue  -A total of up to 6 mucosal  biopsies  will be taken  during  
routine  standard  of care flexible  sigmoidoscopy  procedure  in patients  undergoing  
investigation  for presumed  pouchitis  or for routine  surveillance  of the pouch  in 
patients  without  pouchitis.  Two to four will be sent to pathology  for assessment  of 
histology.  Two to four biopsies  will be obtained  for research  purposes.  No more  
than a total of 6 will be taken.  All non-research  biopsies  will be placed  in saline  and 
transported  to the Pathology  Department  at Emory  immediately.  Research  related  
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
12 
 biopsies  will be collected  by the study  team  and transported  to the Pathology  
Department  at Emory  University.  
 
3. Stool - Additional  stool  will be collected  after treatment  4 weeks  and 3 months  after 
fecal  microbial  transplant  (FMT).  If the first and second  study  visit occur  within  
48hours,  the second  collection  of biologic  samples  will be at the discretion  of the 
study  doctor.  
 
Samples  collected  through  this study  will be given  a de-identified  code  that is not derived  from 
or related  to information  about  the individual  and is not otherwise  capable  of being  translated  
to identify  an individual.  The samples  will then be barcoded  and transported  to a central  core 
laboratory  at Emory  University  managed  by Dr. Colleen  Kraft.  Fecal  and mucosal  samples  
will be  saved  and stored  in locked  refrigerators/freezers in  Dr. Kraft's  laboratory  in the 
Woodruff Memorial  Building.  DNA  will be extracted  for sequencing  at this laboratory  using  
automated  extraction.  Sequencing  of the  16S regions  will be performed in  Dr. Kraft's  
laboratory.  
 
Plasma  and urine  samples  will be collected  from  each patient  at study  visits  as illustrated  in 
the study  procedures  table,  and will be barcoded  and saved  in locked  freezers  in Dr. Kraft's  
laboratory  in the Woodruff  Memorial  Building  until all the samples  are collected.  At such 
time,  they will be transported  to Dr. Dean  Jones'  laboratory  in the Whitehead  building  for 
metabolomic  profiling.  
 
Biological  samples  will not be collected  on subjects  who complete  study  visits  via telephone  
follow -up. 
 
5. ADDITIONAL DATA  COLLECTION  
 
Additional  information  will also be gathered  from  the patient's  medical  chart.  This will 
include demographic  information  including  age, sex and race,  as well as clinical  information  
such as 
pre-existing  medical  conditions,  allergies,  medicines  prescribed,  diseases  that run in the 
patient's  family,  any previous  surgical  procedures,  and the results  of any previous  medical  
testing  (including  biopsy  results).  
 
Subjects  will be asked  to complete  a Food  Recall  Questionnaire  at enrollment,  week  4 and 
week  12 (Appendix  5). 
 
Any data obtained  from  the patient's  medical  record  will have  any and all identifiable  
information  removed  and will be kept in a password  protected  electronic  file accessible  only 
 
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
13 
 by the authorized  study  team.  
 
6. REQUIRED  NUMBER  OF PARTICIPANTS  
 
A total of 11 patients  with IPAA/UC  related  pouchitis  will be enrolled  over 12 months  as 
part of this pilot study.  
 
7. PATIENT SAFETY  
 
The risks  of this study  are limited  to those  inherent  with mucosal  tissue  biopsy  and fecal  
microbial  transplant  with use of a flexible  sigmoidoscopy.  
 
The primary  risk associated  with a mucosal  tissue  biopsy  is bleeding  from  the area of biopsy.  
Significant  bleeding  from  the biopsy  site is uncommon,  but possible  (I in 1,000).  Even  more 
rarely  (I in 3,000),  a perforation  can be made  at the site of biopsy  which  would  require  surgery 
to repair.  To minimize  these  risks,  standard  practice  is to not take a biopsy  of large  vessel,  not 
to repair.  
 
To minimize  these  risks,  standard  practice  is to not take a biopsy  of large  vessel,  not more  than 
one biopsy  from  a given  mucosal  site and not to over distend  the bowel  lumen  while taking  
biopsies.  Furthermore,  mucosal  biopsies  are not painful  as the bowel  lining  does not have  pain 
fibers  to sense  pain.  In addition,  all the above  mentioned  risks  apply  regardless  if the biopsy 
is done  for donating  tissue  to this study  or for diagnostic  purposes.  Mucosal  biopsy  sampling  
will be performed  by medical  staff with expertise  in performing  these  procedures.  
 
Research  associated  peripheral  blood  draws  may result  in some  discomfort  or risk of 
bruising at  the site of the needle  entry.  There  is a remote  risk of fainting  from  a vasovagal  
response  or local  infection.  These  risks  will be minimized  using  trained  phlebotomists  and 
aseptic  technique.  Sample  collections  will be performed  with the patient  seated  or 
recumbent.  
 
There  is not significant  risk to urine  donation.  There  is not significant  risk to stool  donation.  
 
The primary  risks  of fecal  microbiota  transplantation  are transmission  of infection  and 
potential  immune  stimulation.  We will be using  a standard  donor  who will be screened  for 
transmittable  infections  through  serologic  and stool  testing.  In addition,  the donor  will be 
screened  clinically  for illness  in which  there  is potential  for disruption  of normal  
gastrointestinal  flora  such as irritable  bowel  syndrome.  The donor  will be excluded  from  the 
study  if he is found  to have  such an  illness.  The risk associated  with placement  of the 
transplant  enema  through  flexible  sigmoidoscopy  is discomfort. Small  volume  (100 mL-
200mL)  enemas  will be used to minimize  this risk. 
  
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
14 
  
7.1 Women  of Childbearing  Potential  (WOCBP)   
Pregnant  or nursing  (lactating)  women,  where  pregnancy  is defined  as the state of a female  
after conception  and until the termination  of gestation,  confirmed  by a positive  serum 
h u m a n  chorionic  gonadotrophin  laboratory  test (>5 miU/mL)  will be excluded  from  
participation  in this study.  
  
Women  of child -bearing  potential,  defined  as all women  physiologically  capable  of becoming  
pregnant,  including  women  whose  career,  lifestyle,  or sexual orientation precludes  intercourse  
with a male  partner  and women  whose  partners  have  been sterilized by vasectomy  or other  
means  must  agree  to use two birth  control  methods  throughout  their participation  in the 
study.  The two methods  can be a double  barrier  method  or a barrier  method  plus a hormonal  
method.  
Subjects  will be counseled  by the study  team  regarding  adequate  forms  of contraception.  
 
• Adequate  barrier  methods  of contraception  include:  diaphragm,  condom  (by the 
partner),  intrauterine  device  (copper  or hormonal),  sponge  or spermicide.  Hormonal  
contraceptives  include  any marketed  contraceptive  agent  that includes  an estrogen  
and/or  a progestational agent.  
• Reliable  contraception  should  be maintained  throughout  the study.  
Women  are considered  post-menopausal  and not of child  bearing  potential  if they 
have  had 12  months  of natural  (spontaneous)  amenorrhea  with an appropriate  clinical  
profile  (e.g. age appropriate,  history  of vasomotor  symptoms)  or six months  of 
spontaneous  amenorrhea  with serum  FSH levels  > 40 mlU/mL  and estradiol  < 20 
pg/mL]  or have  had surgical  bilateral  oophorectomy  (with  or without  hysterectomy)  
at least six weeks  prior  to study  enrollment.  In the case of oophorectomy  alone,  only 
when  the reproductive  status  of the woman  has been  confirmed  by follow  up hormone  
level  assessment  is she considered  not of child  bearing  potential.  
 
8. ANTICIPATED BENEFITS  
 
Given  that over 50% of patients  will have  a recurrent  episode  of pouchitis  after an initial  
episode. Fecal  microbiota  transplant  has the potential  for preventing  further  episodes  and 
obviate  the need  for repeated  course  of antibiotics  if it proves  to be effective.    
 
9. DATA  ANALYSIS  
 
Patients  will be identified  by physicians  on this protocol  in The Emory  Clinic  or Emory  
  
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
15 
 University  Hospital.  Patients  will be consented  using  an IRB approved  informed  consent  
and undergo  the procedure  on their follow  up visit.  
 
Since  this is a pilot study,  no formal  power  calculation  is provided.  Descriptive  statistics  
and ANO VA will be used to detect  differences  between  groups.  One-sample  t-test or 
Wilcoxon's  signed  rank-tests will be used to see if there  were  any significant  changes  in 
PDAI  and QOL scores  before  and after transplant.  A Simon's  two stage  design  will be used 
to decide  whether  to enroll  more  patients  in the future.  
 
Data  relating  to laboratory  results  will be obtained  through  the EMR computerized  patient  
information  systems  EML  microbiological reports.  A dataset  will be created  in a secure  file, 
with access  given  only to authorized  study  staff.  
 
A list of possible  cases  that have  been  reviewed  for inclusion  will be secured  by study  staff.  
This list will contain  subject  name,  birth  date,  medical  record  number,  and the number  of the 
corresponding  data abstraction  sheet.  Such  a list will be maintained  so as not to duplicate  
the abstraction  of a single  subject.  Once  the data from  all included  subjects  is entered  into a 
database,  the list of identifiable  patient  information  will be destroyed.  
 
Data  analysis  will be performed  with Microsoft  Excel,  SAS Institute  software,  and 
SPSS  software.  
 
10. END  POINTS  
 
The primary  endpoint  of this study  will be resolution  of clinical  pouchitis  symptoms  using  
the clinical  component  of the modified  pouchitis  disease  activity  index  without  relapse  for 3 
months.  Secondary  endpoints  include 16S  ribosomal  gene  sequencing  and metabolomic  
profiles  that are more  favorable  (as defined  by the donor  microbiota).  An additional  secondary  
endpoint  will be improvement  of quality  of life as determined  by QOL  questionnaires.  
 
11. DATA  SAFETY  MONITORING  PLAN  
 
A committee  consisting  of two physicians,  Dr Jay Varkey  (Assistant  Professor,  Division  of 
Infectious  Diseases)  and Dr Jenny  Han MD, (Assistant  Professor,  Division  of Pulmonary  and 
Critical  Care)  has been  created.  Dr. Varkey  and Dr. Han have  agreed  to be part of the 
committee  and will not have  any direct  participation  or interests  in the study.  The committee  
will meet  emergently  in the event  of the reported  SAE  and consider  the future  course  based  
on the outcome  of the event.  If no SAE  is reported,  the committee  will meet  every  6 months  
to assess  the safety  and review  the AEs.  
 
12.  CLINICAL ADVERSE EVENTS  
  
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
16 
  
An adverse  event  is any untoward  medical  occurrence  in a subject  administered  the study  
procedure  and which  does not necessarily  have  a causal  relationship  with the study  
procedure.  An adverse  event  can thus be any unfavorable  and unintended sign,  symptom,  
or disease  temporally  associated  with the use of the study  drug,  whether  or not considered  
related  to the study  drug.  Pre-existing  conditions  that worsen  during  the study  are 
considered  adverse  events.  For the purposes  of this study,  AE's  related  to study  procedures  
will be collected.  
 
12.1 Severity  
 
Severity  of the adverse  event  will be defined  as follows:  
Mild  - Discomfort  noticed  but no disruption  of normal  daily  
activity  Moderate  - Discomfort  sufficient  to reduce  or affect  daily  
activity  Severe  - Inability  to work  or perform  normal  daily  activity  
Life Threatening  - Represents  an immediate  threat  to life. 
 
12.2 Determination  of Relationship  of Adverse  Event  to FMT  
 
There  will be four categories  of possible  relationship  between  the adverse  event  and FMT. 
Determination  of drug-relatedness  of the adverse  event  to FMT  will be determined  by the 
investigator.  
 
Category 1: Probable  (must  have  first three)  
A probable  relationship  will be assigned  to an adverse  event  that is considered,  with a high 
degree  of certainty,  to be related  to FMT.  An adverse  event  may be considered  probable  if: 
1. It follows  a reasonable  temporal  sequence  from  administration  of the FMT.  
2. It cannot  be reasonable  explained  by the known  characteristics  of the subject's  clinical  
state,  environmental  or toxic  factors,  or other  modes  of therapy  administered  to the subject.  
4. It follows  a known  pattern  of response  to FMT  
 
Category 2: Possible  (must  have  first two) 
A possible  relationship  will be assigned  to an adverse  event  when  the connection  with FMT  
administration  appears  unlikely  but cannot  be ruled  out with certainty.  An adverse  event  will 
be considered  possible  if: 
1. It follows  a reasonable  temporal  sequence  from  administration  of FMT  
2. It may have  been  produced  by the subject's  clinical  state,  environmental  or toxic  
factors,  or other  modes  of therapy  administered  to the subject  
3. It follows  a known  pattern  of response  to FMT  
 
Category 3: Remote  (must  have  first two) 
  
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
17 
 An adverse  event  will be considered  remote  if: 
1. It does not follow  a reasonable  temporal  sequence  from  administration  of FMT  
2. It may readily  have  been  produced  by the subject's  clinical  state,  environmental  or 
toxic  factors,  or other  modes  of therapy  administered  to the subject.  
3. It does not follow  a known  pattern  of response  to FMT  
 
Category 4: Unrelated  
An adverse  event  will be considered  unrelated  if it is judged  to be clearly  and   
incontrovertibly  due only to extraneous  causes  such as disease,  environment,  etc. while  not 
meeting  the criteria  for drug relationship  as listed  above  for remote,  possible,  or probable.  
 
12.3  Serious  Adverse  Event  
 
A serious  adverse  event  is any experience  that suggests  a significant  hazard,  
contraindication,  side effect  or precaution  and meets  at least one of the following  
criteria:  
• Is fatal (results  in death);  
• Is life-threatening;  
• Requires  in-patient  hospitalization  or prolongs  existing  hospitalization;  
• Results  in persistent  or significant  disability/incapacity;  
• Results  in a congenital  anomaly/birth  defect;  
• Is medically  significant  or requires  intervention  to prevent  one or other  of the 
outcomes  listed  above.  
 
The clinical  judgment  of the investigator  shall  be used in deciding  whether  a certain  situation  
may warrant  consideration  as a serious  adverse  event  but may not meet  the above  criteria.  
This medical  event  may not be immediately  life-threatening  or result  in death  or 
hospitalization  but may jeopardize  the subject  or may require  intervention  to prevent  one of 
the outcomes  listed  in the definitions  above.  
 
12.4 Reporting  of Serious  Adverse  Events  
 
All adverse  events  considered  serious  and unexpected  shall  be reported  to 
• FDA  (via form  MedWatch  3500 -see Appendix  3) within  10 calendar  days  (by fax) 
• Emory  University  IRB within  10 business  days 
• DSMB  within  7 days 
 
13. CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
The Investigator  will take the following  precautionary  measures  to protect  the privacy  and 
  
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
18 
 confidentiality  of the subject's  research  and/or  medical  records.  
• The donated  blood  and mucosal  tissue  collected  through  this study  will be given  a 
code  (or number)  that is not derived  from  or related  to information  about  the 
individual  and is not otherwise  capable  of being  translated  to identify  an individual.  
• Access  to medical  and research  records  will be limited  to clinical  and research  
personnel assigned   to data collection  and monitoring  for this study.  Only  those  
medical  records  pertaining  to the study  will be reviewed.  
 
• Research  records  will be de-identified  and maintained  in a secured  location.  
• Dates  recorded  on research  records  will be limited  to those  essential  to completion  
of the study.  
• No individual  identifiers  will be used in any publications  or reports  resulting  from  
the study.  
 
PI and authorized  study  staff will have  access  to a secure  file containing  linkages  of biological  
samples  to subject  identities.  
A copy  of the consent  form  will be included  in the subject's  medical  research  record.  
 
13. 1 Compliance  Statement  
 
The study  will be conducted  in accordance  with the protocol,  Good  Clinical  Practices,  the 
relevant  ICH guidelines,  the applicable  regulatory  requirements,  and the ethical  principles  
that have  their origins  in the Declaration  of Helsinki.  As required  by United  States  Food  and 
Drug  Administration  (FDA)  Code  of Federal  Regulations  (CFR)  (21 CFR  56) and the 
Declaration of  Helsinki,  the study  protocol,  amendments,  and Informed  Consent  form  will 
be reviewed  and approved,  according  to 21 CFR  §50 and §56, respectively,  by IRB.  
 
13. 2 Subject  Information  and Consent  
 
The study  will be explained  to each subject,  they will have  the opportunity  to read the 
informed consent  document,  ask questions  and have  their questions  answered  to their 
satisfaction.  Alternatives  to participation  in this study  will be explained.  Patients  will be 
informed  that their participation  in this study  is voluntary  and that their decision  regarding  
participation  will not affect  their ability  to receive  care.  Prior  to any study  procedures,  the 
IRB approved Informed Consent  form  will be signed  by each subject.   A copy  of the  consent  
form  will be given  to each patient  approached  for participation  in the study.  
 
The Emory  University  IRB will review  the written  Informed  Consent  Form.  These  
documents  will meet  requirements  for subject  information,  as outlined  in FDA  regulations  
(21 CFR  50), ICH Guideline  E6, and the Declaration  of Helsinki.  
  
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
19 
  
14. COSTS  
 
14.1 Donor Activities Related Costs  
 
The cost of all donor serology and stool testing will be covered by the sponsor. Fecal sample 
preparation will also be covered by the sponsor.  
 
14.2. Research Participant Activities Related Costs  
. 
All physical exams will be covered by principal investigator and/or sub -investigator effort. Waist 
to hip circumference will be taken during the physical exam for each visit, therefore, they will also 
be considered as  physician effort. Urine pregnancy kits used during for screening WOCBP will be 
covered by sponsor funds. All associated labs and specimen processing (i.e. stool collection, 
plasma collection, urine collection, and CBCs with differential and platelet count  will also be 
covered. The flexible sigmoidoscopy with moderate sedation will be covered by the sponsor. 
Eligible research participants who enroll in the study  will not be paid for their participation . 
 
15. REFERENCES  
 
1. Zelia  GC, Hait EJ, Glavan  T, Gevers  D, Ward  DV, Kitts  CL, Korzenik  JR; Distinct  
microbiome  in pouchitis  compared  to healthy  pouches  in ulcerative  colitis  and 
familial  adenomatous  polyposis.  lntlamm  Bowel  Dis. 2011  May;  17(5):1092 -100 
 
2. van Nood  E, Vrieze  A, Nieuwdorp  M, Fuentes  S, Zoetendal  EG, de Vos WM,  Visser  
CE, Kuijper  EJ, Bartelsman  JF, Tijssen  JG, Speelman  P, Dijkgraaf, MG,  Keller  JJ; 
Duodenal  infusion  of donor  feces  for recurrent  Clostridium  difficile.  N. Engl  J 
Med.2 013 Jan 31;368(5):407 -15. 
 
3. Anderson  JL, Edney  RJ, Whelan  K; Systematic  review:  faecal  microbiota  
transplantation  in the management  of inflammatory  bowel  disease.  Aliment  
Pharmacol  Ther.  2012  Sep;36(6):503 -16. 
 
4. Kunde  S1, Pham  A, Bonczyk  S, Crumb  T, Duba  M, Conrad  H Jr, Cloney  D, 
Kugathasan S.;Safety,  tolerability,  and clinical  response  after fecal  transplantation  in  
children  and young  adults  with ulcerative  colitis.J  Pediatr  Gastroenterol  Nutr.  2013  
Jun;56(6):597 -601. doi: 10.109 7/MPG.ObO  l3e318292fa0d.  
 
5. Shen  B, Achkar  JP, Connor  JT, Ormsby  AH, Remzi  FH, Bevins  CL, Brzezinski  A, 
Bambrick  ML, Fazio  VW,  Lashner  BA.Modified  pouchitis  disease  activity  index:  
a simplified  approach  to the diagnosis  of pouchitis.  Diseases  of Colon and Rectum.  
  
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
20 
 2003  Jume  46(6):  748-53. 
 
6. Khalili  H1, Ananthakrishnan  AN, Konijeti  GG, Higuchi  LM, Fuchs  CS, Richter  JM, 
Chan  AT. Measures  of obesity  and risk of Crohn's  disease  and ulcerative  colitis. 
Inflamm  Bowel  Dis. 2015  Feb;21(2):361 -8. 
  
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
21 
  
 
APPENDIX 1:  
MODIFIED POUCH DISEASE ACTIVITY INDEX (MPDAI)  
 
 

 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
20 
 APPENDIX 2:  
FECAL DONOR QUESTIONNAIRE  
 

 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 3.0, date  finalized 06/26/2017  
21 
  

  
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 2.0, date 05/31/2017  
22 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 2.0, date 05/31/2017  
23 
  
 
 
 

  
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 2.0, date 05/31/2017  
24 
  
 
 
APPENDIX 3:  
MEDWATCH FORM  
 
   Please see attached US Food and Drug Administration Document entitled FDA 3500.  
 
 
 
APPENDIX 4:  
QUALITY OF LIFE SURVEY TOOLS  
 
 
 

  
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 2.0, date 05/31/2017  
25 
  
 
 

  
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 2.0, date 05/31/2017  
26 
  
 
 

  
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 2.0, date 05/31/2017  
27 
 APPENDIX 5:  
FOOD RECALL QUESTIONNAIRE  
 
 
 

  
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 2.0, date 05/31/2017  
28 
  
 
 

  
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 2.0, date 05/31/2017  
29 
  
 
 

  
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 2.0, date 05/31/2017  
30 
  
 
 

  
 
FMT  in UC-associated  Pouchitis  
Version 2.0, date 05/31/2017  
31 
  
 
