Impact of Medicaid Health Home on Patients With Diabetes in New York City 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Victoria Mayer, MD
Document Date: 8/17/2020
1 PROTOCOL  
ISMMS GCO 15 -1545  
The Impact of Medicaid Health Homes  on patients with diabetes  
8/17/2020  
1)Objectives
We plan to examine  the effects  of New  York  State’s  (NYS)  Medicaid  Health  Home  (HHs)  program  (a
population -targeted  intervention  at the state  level) on the process  of care , outcomes,  and racial/ethnic
disparities among  low-income  residents of New York  City (NYC)  with Type  II diabetes  mellitus.   In 2012,
NYS Medicaid  initiated  HHs with  the “triple  aim”  of 1) improving  quality,  2) improving  outcomes,  and 3)
reducing  costs  of care  for high -need  patients  with  chronic  diseases.  The program was designed  to
enhance  care  and outcomes  for patients  with  two or more  chronic  conditions,  such  as diabetes  and
coronary disease,  HIV, and/or  a serious  mental health  condition.   HHs provide  these  patients  with
coordination  of care, by promoting  collaboration  among  health  care  providers,  social service  agencies,
community -based  organizations, and  health  insurance  plans.  Taken  together, the roll-out, timing,
scope  of the program,  which  currently  serves  over  60,000  patients  in NYC,  and the availability  of both
Medicaid  data and  unique  clinical data  in NYC through  the NYC-Clinical Data  Research  Network  and the
Health Evaluation and Analytics Lab provides  an opportunity  to evaluate  the impact of HHs on diabetes
management,  complications,  and health  disparities,  using  quasi -experimental  methods.
Similar  care  management  programs  have  been  shown,  in studies  of limited  scope, to  improve  
intermediate  outcomes  for patients  with  diabetes.  However,  the impact  of HHs on process es of care 
and outcomes among  low-income  patients  with  diabetes  mellitus  in large, diverse,  and complex  urban 
settings  remains  largely  unexplored.   Additionally,  current  research  on the impact of HHs, both  in NYS 
and elsewhere,  does  not incorporate  individual -level clinical data  on chronic  disease  management.  As 
a result, whether the Medicaid  HHs program  has impacted  the health  of patients with diabetes  has 
not been  examined.  It is also not known  how  interventions  of this scope  will affect  long -standing  racial 
and ethnic  disparities  in the quality  of care  and outcomes  of individuals  with  diabetes.  Since  similar 
programs  are being  implemented  nationally,  it now  is critically  important to evaluate  the effects  of 
HHs on the process and  outcomes  among patients with diabetes,  a condition  with  multiple  
complications, which  are disproportionately  prevalent  among  racial and  ethnic  minorities  and low-
income  populations  in the United  States.  
We plan  to use  two complementary sources  of longitudinal  individual -level  data:  1) NYS Medicaid  
administrative  and claims  data  and 2) the New  York  City-Clinical Data  Research  Network  (NYC -CDRN),  
funded  by the Patient -Centered  Outcomes  Research  Institute  (PCORI).  The NYC-CDRN  has identifie d a 
cohort  of patients  with  diabetes (approximately 90,700  Medicaid  enrollees  with  diabetes) from 7 large  
health  systems  based  on electronic  health  record  data; and  it has developed  a common  data  model that  
includes  clinical variables  related  to the proces s and outcomes  of care  of patients  with  diabetes.   Using  
information  available  from the  two complementary data  sources  and quasi -experimental methods, we 
will assess  the impact of Medicaid  HHs in NYC.   
 Among  adult  Medicaid  patients  with  diabetes  in NYC,  we propose:  
Aim 1: To assess  the impact of HHs on the process  of care  for patients  with  diabetes.   
Aim 2: To assess  the impact  of HHs on the health  outcomes of patients  with  diabetes.  
2 Aim 3:  To assess  the impact of HHs on racial and  ethnic  disparities  in the process  of care  and outcomes  
among  Medicaid  patients  with  diabetes.  
Our sample  will include  Medicaid  enrollees  with  diabetes  who  are seen  at NYC-CDRN  sites  and in HHs 
(estimated  6,500-20,000 ) and a matched  comparison  group  of Medicaid  enrollees  with diabetes  who  are 
part of the NYC-CDRN,  but not HHs.  We plan  to develop  a set  of propensity  score matched  controls, 
based on a  set of patient,  practice, and  market -level (zip -code)  characteristics.  We will use quasi -
experimental methods  to investigate the magnitude  of the effects  of the HHs program between  2010 
and 2017 . This secondary data analysis is referred to as Activity 1  in this protocol. In addition, we will 
gather information regarding the patient  experience of HHs through interviews (Activity 2 ). We will also 
utilize interviews with HH leaders and care managers from NYC HHs to further characterize these entities 
(Activity 3 ). Columbia University will participate in only Activity 1 .   
8/20/20 update: Apart from evaluating the impact of the NYS Med icaid HH program on the process and 
outcomes of care for low -income NYC residents with diabetes, compared to non -enrolled residents with 
similar conditions and utilization histories, we have received funding to extend this work to examine the 
impacts of th e COVID -19 pandemic on this vulnerable population, a majority of which is Black or Latinx. 
We hypothesize that HH participation will reduce pandemic -related disruptions in access to health care 
and social services and improve health outcomes among patients  with diabetes in NYC. Using a quasi -
experimental difference -in-differences design, we will contrast access and utilization of health care and 
social services and health outcomes among HH enrollees and non -enrollees during a baseline period 
prior to the pa ndemic (CY2019) with each month of the pandemic time period (2020).  
Aim 4:  Using Medicaid claims data, we will estimate the impact of HH enrollme nt compared to usual 
care among Medicaid -insured patients with diabetes and other chronic conditions on acces s to health 
care and social services and COVID -19 and non -COVID -19 clinical outcomes, as well as racial/ethnic 
disparities in these outcomes, before and during the pandemic in NYC.  
Using Medicaid claims  only , we will identify HH participants with diabetes  living in NYC in 2019, and use 
matching and weighting methods to develop a non -HH comparison group who were similar to HH 
enrollees in their demographics, comorbidities and utilization histories. We will then conduct difference -
in-differences analyses usi ng an “event study” framework to compare the pre -COVID time period 
(CY2019) to each month of the post -COVID period (2020) in terms of access, utilization, and clinical 
outcomes between the HH and matched non -HH group, overall and stratified by race/ethnici ty (Activity 
4).  
2)Background
Diabetes Prevalence  
Type II diabetes mellitus is a common chronic disease, with an overall prevalence of 9.3% in the US (1). 
In New York City (NYC), the overall prevalence of diabetes is somewhat higher, 10.8%; and, the 
prevalence  of diabetes are higher among racial and ethnic minoritie s, compared to Whites (2):  among 
Hispanics, the prevalence is 15.2%; among non -Hispanic Blacks 12.8%; and, among non -Hispanic Whites 
7.1%. (3)  The prevalence of diabetes also is higher among those of lower socioeconomic status (SES), 
3 compared to those of higher SES: among those living at <100% of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL) the 
prevalence is 14.8%; and, among the highest  income group (>/=600% FPL) 4.7%. (3) 
Diabetes Complications  
The complications of diabetes impact health and well -being.  In addition to the direct metabolic 
consequences, diabetes increases the long -term risk of cardio -renal diseases, including coronary heart 
disease, stroke, heart failure, renal disease, retinopathy and blindness; and these complications 
contribute to health disparities.  In NYC, mortality related to diabetes is significantly higher among non -
Hispanic Blacks and Hispanics and among individuals living in high -poverty neighborhoods, compared to 
non-Hispanic Whites and those living in low -poverty neighb orhoods respectively. (4) Individuals living in 
high -poverty neighborhoods also have higher rates of hospitalizations for diabetes -related 
complications. (5)  
Diabetes care  
In order to improve health care and outcomes, reduce costs, and address health disparities related to 
diabetes, a number of health care interventions have been implemented by health systems and 
insurance providers, many focused on care management and care coordination. Increasingly, as health 
systems are incentivized to address health on a population level, interventions are also designed to 
address health determinants outside of the health care system, such as social and environmental factors 
and health behavior, through collaboration with community -based organizations (CBOs).  Prior research 
among racially and ethnically diverse populations has shown that care management interventions 
delivered by primary care providers, registered nurses, community health workers, and endocrinologists 
can improve intermediate outcomes, such as hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c). (6-9) However, evidence does not 
presently exist on the long -term outcomes of care management and care coordination for patients with 
diabetes. Peek et al. describe many interventions that involve community -health system p artnerships. 
Examples include clinics working with community -health workers, physician -referrals to community -
based education, food “prescription” programs, and the integration of community -based resources into 
broad quality improvement initiatives. (10) While evaluations of some of these ha ve shown promising 
effects on intermediate outcomes, there is little data about the overall effects of such interventions to 
date, especially in large, diverse, urban settings.  
Medical homes  
Care management and community -health system partnerships common ly exist within the patient -
centered medical home (PCMH) model. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) defines 
the PCMH as a model of care that offers comprehensive care of each patient’s physical and mental 
health through a team of provider s, is patient -centered, coordinates care across the health system, 
provides accessible services, and engages in continual quality and safety improvement evaluation and 
activities. (11) Consensus principles of the  PCMH, building on the backdrop of 40 years of primary -care 
practice redesign, were established in 2007 by the American College of Physicians, the American 
Academy of Family Physicians, the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the American Osteopathic 
Assoc iation. (12) A growing number of p roviders are part of PCMHs, serving several million patients. (13, 
14)However, there are large variations in the definition, and implementation of the PCMH. (15) This
variatio n has made it difficult to assess the impact of the PCMH on quality of care  and clinical outcomes .
Affordable Care Act and Medicaid Health Homes 
4 As part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010, “health homes” were 
authorized for  care management and coordination for individuals enrolled in Medicaid. Under the ACA, 
six health home services are eligible for reimbursement: comprehensive care management, care 
coordination and health promotion, comprehensive transitional care, patient and family support, 
referral to community and social support services, and use of health information technology to link 
services. (16) As such, the Medicaid Health Home (HH) includes interventions previously tested among 
individuals with diabetes. However, the payment reforms associated with these new care delivery 
mechanisms add another aspect  to the intervention. In addition, these types of interventions are now 
being expanded to include a larger patient population - those eligible for HHs. In order to be included in a 
HH, patients need to have chronic conditions, including serious mental illne ss, substance use disorders, 
or multiple chronic diseases, including diabetes. As of November 2014, 20 states had approved plans for 
HHs. (17)  
New York State (NYS) established a Medicaid Health Home program in 2012, with the New York State 
Health Home State Plan Amendment (SPA). In New York State at the end of 2014, over 5 million low -
income individuals were enrolled in Medicaid, including over 3 million of NYC’s estimated 8.4 million 
residents. (18, 19)  The State estimated in 2012 that approximately 1 mill ion individuals would be eligible 
for the HH program, including 418,677 Medicaid recipients with mental health or substance use 
disorders, and 386,399 participants with other chronic conditions. HHs were rolled out in three phases 
during 2012, with Phase I  in January (which included the Bronx and Kings (Brooklyn) Counties), Phase II 
in April (which included New York (Manhattan), Queens and Richmond (Staten Island), the remaining 
counties in NYC), and Phase III in July. (20) As of August 2014, 40,776 individuals were enrolled in 
NYC. (21, 22)  Around 35,000 Medicaid enrollees across NYS were part of precursor care management 
programs (including the Office of Mental Health’s Targeted Case Management Program (for those with 
severe mental illness), Managed Addictio n Treatment Services Program, and the Comprehensive 
Medicaid Case Management Program (for people living with HIV/AIDS), which are all in the process of 
converting to HHs. (16)   
The identification of individuals eligible for HHs is initiated by one of two processes: a NYS Department 
of Health (DOH) predictive algorithm utilizing Medicaid servi ces data, which prioritizes individuals based 
on risk of future hospitalization; and community or “bottom up” referrals from healthcare providers, 
community -based care management providers, including harm reduction providers, and other agencies 
such as tho se who serve individuals re -entering the community from jail or prison. Enrollment in HHs 
has been slower than expected, and several challenges have been identified and are being addressed by 
the NYS DOH. These include inaccuracies in the lists of targeted  individuals, challenges in the 
recruitment process, and individuals electing not to participate in the program. (16) The new program 
may put stress on already under -resourced facilities, by increasing the complexity of billing, the 
requirements around health information technology (HIT), the caseloads of facilities and case managers, 
and, in s ome cases, lowering reimbursement for care management services. Another significant change 
brought about by HHs is the expanded scope of health conditions of clients served by care management 
agencies that formerly provided case management for people livin g with HIV/AIDS, substance use 
disorders, or serious mental illness (P. Schafer, personal communication, March 9, 2015).   
Medicaid Health Homes and Diabetes Management  
HH-eligible patients with diabetes are likely to be an especially vulnerable populatio n, and one where 
disparities in access and quality are starker. The prevalence of diabetes among patients with serious 
5 
 mental illness (SMI) is higher than in the general population. Increased mortality among those with SMI 
is partially attributable to high er rates of cardio -metabolic disease. (23, 24)  Patients with SMI and 
diabetes have been found to be less likely to receive indicated services and care, and more likely to be 
admitted to the hospital with ambulatory -care sensitive conditions when compared to those without 
SMI. (23, 25)  Over half of patients with diabetes have at least one other chronic condition, and a large 
proportion of these have two or more. (26, 27)  Suffering from multiple chronic disease s puts individuals 
at greater risk of preventable hospitalizations, poor functional status, higher cost care, and increased 
mortality. (26, 28)  
 
HH enrollment would ideally improve the processes and the outcomes of care; and it would reduce 
health disparities (related to the process and outcomes of care) for individuals with diabetes. Through 
coordination of care, intensive case management, and att ention to social needs, individuals with 
diabetes could develop better disease self -management, receive proper specialist evaluation and 
evidence -based regimens, and work with a team that identifies opportunities to bolster social support.   
As the HH inte rvention is applied differently at different facilities, these effects may vary across 
institutions. In NYS, evaluations are currently being conducted of the overall HHs program and of those 
participants with substance use disorders and those with HIV; how ever, by focusing on individuals with 
diabetes, the proposed research would add substantially to knowledge about the effect of HHs on 
patients on an important common chronic condition, diabetes.  
 
Impact of COVID -19 on Medicaid Health Homes  
 
In spring 2020,  New York City (NYC) was the American epicenter of the COVID -19 pandemic. In addition 
to direct health effects, the pandemic also had major impacts on the delivery of health care and social 
services. Low -income patients with diabetes, especially among raci al/ethnic minorities, are more 
vulnerable to the serious morbidity and mortality associated with COVID -19; and, they are more likely to 
experience a lack of access to health care and social services. Outpatient medical care essentially shut 
down for in -person visits during the pandemic, and access to primary care, disease management, and 
medications continue to be disrupted. Limited mobility and social determinants, such as access to 
transportation, employment, internet connectivity, and competing needs, al so likely impacted access to 
health care and social services and clinical outcomes during the pandemic. In response, New York State 
(NYS) Medicaid adapted regulations to allow Health Homes (HHs) to bill for remote delivery of care 
management services. As a  result, HH participants are likely to have higher rates of health care and 
social service utilization and better health outcomes, compared to similar HH non -participants . 
 
The proposed study will be among the first to utilize the New York City Clinical Da ta Research Network 
(NYC -CDRN) data and infrastructure to examine the effects of a population -level health policy, the 
implementation of the Medicaid HH program, on the process, outcomes, and disparities of care for a 
common chronic condition, diabetes.   
 
3) Setting of the Human Research  
 
The primary research team is located at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Other members of 
the team are located at Weill Cornell Medicine and the New York Academy of Medicine  (NYAM) (Co -PI 
David Siscovick) . NYAM i s a non -profit center of interdisciplinary research, evaluation, policy, and 
6 
 program initiatives focused on urban health.  The study is a collaboration with the New York City Clinical 
Data Research Network  and the HEAL at NYU School of Medicine.  
 
The New York City Clinical Data Research Network (NYC -CDRN) was founded with support from the 
Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) to join its PCORnet program. The mission of the 
NYC-CDRN is to create an accessible, sustainable, scalable clinical d ata network to facilitate patient -
centered research, learning healthcare systems and a national research network (PCORnet). Efforts  are 
focused  on five goals:  
1. Creating thoughtful privacy policies that protect the identities of individual patients, 
clinicia ns, and health systems;  
2. Establishing a de -identified database with clinical data on at least one million New 
Yorkers;  
3. Engaging patients, caregivers, and clinicians in network governance and decision -making;  
4. Embedding research activities in the delivery of healthcare to minimize the burden on 
patients, clinicians, and health systems; and  
5. Developing a high -functioning, sustainable governance structure.  
 
NYC-CDRN’s program builds on the joint efforts of 22 organizations – including academic medical 
centers, as sociated Clinical and Translational Science Centers, federally qualified health centers, regional 
health information organizations (RHIOs), research institutions, consumer advocacy groups and 
government agencies - to develop a patient -centered, sustainable  network for conducting research 
across New York City and the nation and facilitating a learning healthcare system.  
 
The Health Evaluation and Analytics Lab (HEAL)  promotes applied research to help health sector 
organizations evaluate initiatives that seek  to improve health outcomes among populations and to 
improve health care delivery practices.  HEAL has built a unique New York State Medicaid claims file. 
This large data system allows for a wide range of evaluative work focused on improving care and 
outco mes for the most vulnerable New Yorkers, who rely on Medicaid to pay for their medical care 
needs. The data set also allows providers to better track the services received by their patients. The 
effort to create the claims file analytical system was financ ially supported by the New York State Health 
Foundation and was done in close collaboration with the New York State Department of Health.  
 
 
Participating organizations include: * 
Health Systems/Facilities:  
 Clinical Directors Network  
 Columbia University  
 New York -Presbyterian Hospital  
 NYU Langone Medical Center  
 Montefiore Medical Center  
 Mount Sinai Health System  
 Weill Cornell Medical College  
 Charles B. Wang Community 
Health Center  
 Community Healthcare Network  Infrastructure:  
 Biomedical 
Research Alliance 
of NY (BRANY)  
 Bronx RHIO (BRIC)  
 Healthix RHIO  
 A Weill Cornell 
approved vendor 
(NYC -CDRN 
Central 
Repository)  
 Rockefeller Other Partners:  
 Center for Medical 
Consumers  
 Cornell NYC Tech 
Campus  
 NY Academy of 
Medicine  
 NYS Department of 
Health  
 Healthcore  
 NYU School of 
Medicine  HEAL  
7 
  Lutheran Family Health Center 
Network  
 
*All entitie s are involved in Activity 1. 
Bolded entities are also a part of Activity 2.  University   
Figure 1: NYC -CDRN Organizational Structure  
 
 
 
 
4) Resources Available to Conduct the Human Research  
Our study team  includes multiple experienced investigators, a data analyst, experienced project 
management staff, and an experienced engagement manager. This team has the knowledge and 
resources need ed to conduct the retrospective cohort analysis, focus grou ps, and HH leader 
interviews. ISMMS has robust data management and security protocols in place to safely store study 
data. For this study, we will be working with the NYC -CDRN, which, as described above, has the 
resources to combine data from multiple inst itutions and facilitate collaboration , and to ensure data 
security and quality.  
 
Activity 2:  The primary team at ISMMS will collaborate with partner institutions to conduct  
interviews . Investigators and stakeholders from the partner institution s will advi se the primary team 
on reaching out to clinical providers , care management agencies, and HHs  about contacting their 
patients. The primary team will reach out to and follow up with these providers.  Then, the primary 
team will reach out to eligible particip ants. The primary team will conduct all interviews .  
 
 
5) Study Design  
a) Recruitment Methods  
Activity 1: For this retrospective data analysis, we will not be recruiting any participants.  The 
study will rely upon a distributed query of the participating healthca re systems in the NYC -
CDRN. For a full description of query design, see section f for Activity 1. The protocol relies 
upon the NYC -CDRN infrastructure established under the BRANY IRB -approved protocol #14 -
02-95-380 (PI: Kaushal) to accomplish the data aggr egation.  
8 
 Activity 2:   
Health Home patients will be recruited through referral from HH care managers. Care 
managers will share a flyer (created by the study team) describing the study with patients. If 
patients are interested, the care manager will add thei r contact information to an excel 
spreadsheet that will be shared with study staff. Study staff will follow up via phone. If the 
participant is reached via phone and interested in participating, study staff will provide 
further information about the interv iew process and content and will schedule the 
phone/virtual interview.  
 
Activity 3:  In order to identify  leaders from HH s in NYC, we will utilize multiple sources 
including internet sites for each  HH listing name and contact information for those in 
leade rship positions, referrals from our Patient and Stakeholder Advisory Board (of which one 
member is a leader of a NYC HH and thus familiar with many of these individuals), from 
interviewees who have already participated, and HH forums.  Study staff will rea ch out to 
individuals by phone or email and describe the study. If potential participants are interested, 
the study staff member will set up a telephone  or video  meeting, during which verbal consent 
will be obtained prior to any data collection.  
Health Hom e directors that are study stakeholders and partners will assist with the 
identification of HH care managers and will share contact information of interested 
participants with the study staff in an excel spreadsheet. Study staff will follow up via email 
or via phone. If the participant is reached and interested in participating, study staff will 
provide further information about the interview process and content and will schedule the 
phone/virtual interview.  
 
Activity 4:  For this retrospective data analysi s, we will not be recruiting any participants  We plan to 
use NYS Medicaid administrative and claims data in the Medicaid Data Warehouse, available to 
researchers at HEAL at New York University.  
 
b) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Activity 1: For this analys is, the study cohort will consist of patients who: 1) have Type II diabetes, 
2) are  insured by Medicaid, and 3) are either part of a Health Home or meet criteria for Health Home 
enrollment, but are not enrolled in a Health Home.  
1) In consultation with the  Diabetes Subcommittee of the NYC -CDRN, this protocol will use the 
SUPREME -DM definition of diabetes, which has been previously validated. (29) This definition has 
been adopted as a standard across the three CDRNs th at have diabetes as a disease focus (New York, 
Louisiana, and Oregon -Advance). It consists of the following algorithm (see Table 1), where any of the 
listed criteria are sufficient for inclusion for any patient with at least one outpatient visit at a 
parti cipating CDRN site within the past year.  
 
Table 1. Diabetes Definition  
Criteria  Parameter  
ICD9/10 - Inpatient 
discharge diagnosis  1 or more of (250.x, 357.2, 366.41, 
362.01 –362.07)   
ICD9/10 - 
Outpatient 
diagnosis  2 or more of (250.x,357.2, 366.41, 362 .01–
362.07)  Visits must occur on separate days. Ambulatory 
visits only.  
9 
 HbA1c  2 or more HbA1c's at >=6.5%  Tests must be on separate days no more than 2 
years apart.  
Fasting Plasma 
Glucose  2 or more at >= 126 mg/dL  Tests must be on separate days no more than 2 
years apart.  
Random Plasma 
Glucose  2 or more at >= 200 mg/dL  Tests must be on separate days no more than 2 
years apart.  
Random plasma 
plus fasting glucose  1 at => 200 mg/dL AND 1 at => 126 mg/dL  Tests must be on separate days no more than 2 
years apart.  
HbA1c plus fasting 
glucose  1 at >= 6.5% and 1 at >= 126 mg/dL  Tests can occur on same day but cannot be more 
than 2 years apart.  
HbA1c plus random 
plasma glucose  1 at >= 6.5% and 1 at >= 200 mg/dL  Tests can occur on same day but cannot be more 
than 2 years apart.  
2-h 75 -g OGTT  1 at >= 200 mg/dL  Do NOT count if measured during pregnancy.  
Medications  Sulfonylurea, insulin, biguanide, SGLT -2 
inhibitors,  
thiazolidinedione, alpha -glucosidase 
inhibitor,  
incretin mimetic, meglitinide, amylin 
analog, or  
dipeptidyl peptidase inhibitor  >= 1 prescription. If dispense was for metformin, 
any 
thiazolidinedione , or exenatide, at least one lab 
test (HbA1c > 6.5%, random glucose >= 200 mg/dl, 
fasting glucose >= 126 mg/dl) is also required.  
 
2) In order to be elig ible for the cohort, subjects need to have been insured by Medicaid 
at some point during the years 20 10-2016.  This categorization will be available in the NYC -
CDRN data set. Data will be gathered only from individuals who meet criteria for diabetes and 
have been insured by Medicaid.  
3) Subjects who have participated in the HH program will be the treatment group in this 
study. Medicaid data contains a field that will i dentify those patients who were a part of this 
program during the study period.  Our compa rison group will consist of similar individuals 
who were not part of the HH progra m. The comparison group will be constructed of patients 
who have been propensity score matched to those in the treatment group, and are therefore 
similar on a number of chara cteristics.  
 
Activity 2: For the focus group  and interview  aspect of this study, we will be conducting 2 
rounds of data collection , in years 2 and 5. We aim to recruit 20-40 participant s in year 5.  
Year 5 data collection will consist of only individual in terviews. Inclusion criteria are as 
follows:  
a. English -speaking  
b. Are enrolled in a HH  
c. 18 years old or older  
All participants must be able to provide informed consent to participate, and must be able to 
speak with a study staff member over the phone /video cal l.  All individuals must be able to 
communicate  in English.  
 
The ISMMS study team  will coordinate with stakeholders who lead NYC HHs to engage HH 
members/patients who are potential participants.  
 
 
10 
 Activity 3:  HH leaders:  In order to participate in this p ortion of the study, individuals must 
speak English and be in a leadership position at a HH entity in NYC or a NYC HH -affiliated C are 
Management Agency (CMA) . Other than not meeting the inclusion criteria, there are no 
exclusion criteria.  
Care managers:  In order to participate in this portion of the study, individuals must speak 
English and be in care manager position with a NYC HH -affiliated Care Management Agency 
(CMA). Other than not meeting the inclusion criteria, there are no exclusion criteria.  
 
Activ ity 4:  For this analysis, the study cohort will consist of patients who: 1) have Type II diabetes, 2) 
are insured by Medicaid, and  3) are either part of a Health Home or meet criteria for Health Home 
enrollment, but are not enrolled in a Health Home.  These  criteria will be determined using only 
Medicaid claims data.   
 
 
 
c) Number of Subjects  
Activity 1:  Estimated sample size of 51,000 patients.  
Activity 2:  20-40 participants in year 5. 
Activity 3:  Approximately 1 0-30 participants (HH leadership  and CMA leaders hip, care 
managers ). 
Activity 4:  Estimated sample size of 60,000 patients  
 
d) Study Timelines  
Activity 1: This is a retrospective cohort analysis. We will examine two data sets: one with 
data from 2007 -2014, and one with data from 201 0-2017.  The project has been funded from 
3/1/2016 -2/28/2021.  
Activity 2: We complet ed our year 2 focus groups and interviews by 8/31/2018  and we 
anticipate completing year 5focus groups by 2/202 1. Participation in the study will consist of 
being a part of an interview , and option al follow up activities (receiving study results). The 
project has been funded from 3/1/2016 -2/28/2021.  
Activity 3:  We complet ed our first round of  HH leadership interviews by 8/31/18 . Year 5 
interviews will be conducted by 2/2021.  The project has been fun ded from 3/1/2016 -
2/28/2021.   
Activity 4 : We anticipated conducting primary analyses by 6/30/2021.  
 
e) Variable and endpoints  
Activity 1  and 4 : For this aspect of the study, we will examine multiple endpoints related to 
process of care, outcomes, and racial/ ethnic disparities. We will examine variable and 
endpoints in the following categories:  
1) Individual level characteristics  
Variables include gender, age, race/ethnicity, health insurance type, health care site, patient zip  
code, and tobacco use.  
 
2) Health hom e indicators and patient co -morbidities  
11 
 Indicators available include whether the individual was enrolled in the HH program, the date of 
joining the program, the name/location of the HH, patient -level co -morbidities and chronic 
conditions (additional diagno ses).  
 
3) Process measures  
In consultation with the Diabetes Subcommittee of the NYC -CDRN, the following process 
measures have been identified (see Table 2). Several organizations in the United States have 
developed sets of quality metrics that can be used t o evaluate the adequacy and appropriateness 
of processes of care and outcomes for patients with diabetes. These include the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), the Pharmacy Quality Alliance (PQA), the National 
Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA)’s Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set 
(HEDIS), and the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality’s (AHRQ) Prevention Quality 
Indicators (PQI) (which assess the quality of care for “ambulatory care sensitive conditions,” also 
known as preventable admissions). (30-33) 
 
Table 2. Process Measures  
Metric  Component  
Adherence to Chronic 
Medications (CMS)  At least two prescriptions for statins and a Proportion of Days Covered (PDC) of at least 
0.8 dur ing the measurement period (12 consecutive months)  
Adherence to Chronic 
Medications (CMS)  At least two prescriptions for ACEIs/ARBs and a PDC of at least 0.8 during the 
measurement period (12 consecutive months).  
Adherence to Chronic 
Medications (CMS)  At least two prescriptions for a single oral hypoglycemic agent or at least two 
prescriptions for multiple agents within an antidiabetic class and a PDC of at least 0.8 
for at least 1 antidiabetic class during the measurement period (12 consecutive 
months).  
Eye Exam (NCQA)  Received a retinal or dilated eye exam during the measurement year or a negative 
retinal or dilated eye exam in the year prior to the measurement year.  
HbA1c testing (NCQA)  Received an HbA1c test during the measurement year.  
LDL-C Screen ing 
(NCQA)  Received an LDL -C test during the measurement year.  
Medical Attention for 
Nephropathy (NCQA)  Received a nephropathy screening test or had evidence of nephropathy during the 
measurement year.  
Appropriate Treatment 
of Hypertension (PQA)  If dispe nsed a medication for diabetes and hypertension , are receiving an angiotensin -
converting -enzyme -inhibitor (ACEI) or angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) or direct 
renin inhibitor (DRI) renin -angiotensin -antagonist medication.  
Foot exam (NCQA)  Received a fo ot exam (visual inspection with either a sensory exam or a pulse exam) 
during the measurement year.  
 
4) Outcome measures  
In consultation with the Diabetes Subcommittee of the NYC -CDRN, the following outcome 
measures have been identified (see table below). As with the identified process measures, these 
are metrics identified and developed by major quality reporting organizations, which means that 
results will be readily interpretable by policymakers and easily compared to other studies and 
datasets. (30) 
 
In order to assess these metrics, and to perform individual -level longitudinal analyses, we will 
evaluate health system utilization and intermediate and long term outcomes.  Outcomes will 
include:   
12 
 1) Intermediate outcomes :HbA1c, blood p ressure, LDL and renal function  
2) Long -term outcomes:  we will use validated ICD -9 code based -algorithms to assess  
a. macrovascular outcomes (stroke  and myocardial infarction)  
b. microvascular outcomes (nephropathy, end -stage renal disease, neuropathy, 
amputati on, retinopathy, and blindness)  
3) Utilization outcomes :  
a. Number and diagnoses associated with diabetes -related preventable hospitalizations  
i. uncontro lled diabetes admissions  
ii. diabetes short -term complications admissions (diabetic ketoac idosis, 
hyperosmolarity, coma)  
iii. and long -term complications admissions (renal, eye, neurologic al, and 
circulatory disorders)  
b.  ER visits  
c.  Outpatient visits.  
 
 
Table 3. Outc ome measures  
Metric  
HbA1c Control (<8.0%) (NCQA)  
HbA1c Poor Control (>9.0%) (NCQA)  
Blood Pressure Control (<140/90 mm 
Hg) (NCQA)  
Uncontrolled Diabetes Admission s 
Rate (PQI 14) (AHRQ)  
Diabetes Short -Term Complications 
Admission s (PQI 1) (AHRQ)  
Diabet es Long -Term Complications 
Admission s (PQI 3) (AHRQ)  
Lower -Extremity Amputation Among 
Patients With Diabetes (PQI 16) 
(AHRQ)  
Medical Attention for Nephropathy 
(NCQA)  
 
Activity 2: For this qualitative research, we will  identify  cross -cutting themes from 
interviews.  
Activity 3:  Data collected through these interviews will be utilized to categorize HH , CMA, 
and care manager activities and experiences.  
 
f) Procedures Involved in the Human Research  
This is a mixed -methods study that will utilize  a retrospective  cohort design, as well as 
qualitative focus groups and interviews consisting of a combination of closed - and open -
ended questions.   
Activity 1:  This part of the study will examine a merged data set that will include EHR data, 
Medicaid claims data, and HH -specific data. The study will rely upon a distributed query of the 
participating healthcare systems in the NYC -CDRN  and HEAL at NYU School of Medicine will 
13 
 extract the  NY State Medicaid data . Our data flow is depicted in the figure and described below.  
The protocol relies upon the NYC -CDRN infrastructure established under the BRANY IRB -
approved protocol #14 -02-95-380 (PI: Kaushal) to accomplish the data aggregation.   
1. The NYC -CDRN (New York City Clinical Data Research Network) 
conducts a query on centralize d, de -identified electronic health record (EHR) data to 
select patients with diabetes.   
2. A Weill Cornell approved vendor (NYC -CDRN Central Repository ) identifies the patients 
selected in step 1 who were insured by Medicaid at some point during the study pe riod 
(2007 -2017) and provides a list of the relevant CDRN Master IDs and site -specific proxy 
IDs back to the NYC -CDRN.  
3. The NYC -CDRN assigns site - and study -specific IDs (SS -IDs) to each patient. The SS -ID is 
unique to this study. The NYC -CDRN provides a li st to:  
4. 4a. The NYC -CDRN central data repository, which holds data from each of the NYC -CDRN 
clinical sites.  
4b. Health Evaluation and Analytics Lab (HEAL) - NYU School of Medicine  
4c. To Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai (ISSMS) (in the form of a maps et, 
containing all linked SS -IDs).  
5. HEAL  utilizes SS -IDs to obtain the relevant Medicaid IDs.  
6. HEAL  provides Medicaid IDs to NYS Medicaid.  
7. NYS Medicaid pulls HH data for the relevant Medicaid IDs.  
8. NYS Medicaid sends HEAL  HH data by Medicaid ID.  
9. NYU HEAL  crea tes a limited data set (containing 5 -digit zip code and actual dates) 
including Medicaid claims data an d HH data by SS -IDs. 
10. HEAL  sends l imited data set to Mount Sinai.  
11. The NYC -CDRN central data repository, which holds data from e ach NYC -CDRN clinical 
site, uses the SS -IDs provided to them in step 4a to perform a  query of EHR data and 
create s a limited data set (containing 5 -digit zip code and actual dates).  
12. The NYC -CDRN central data repository, which holds data from e ach NYC -CDRN clinical 
site, provide s limited data set with SS -IDs to ISMMS.  
13. ISMSS merges Medicaid and HH data with EHR limited data sets using the map set of SS -
IDs.  
This merged data set will then be used of analyses.  
We will perform this process twice: once in 2017 for data 2007 -2014 and once  in 2019, for data 
2010-2017.  
We will perform this process twice: once in 2017 for data 2007 -2014 and once in 2019, 
for data 201 0-2017.  
Activity 2: Interviews  will be conducted with 20-40 participants in year 5. Given the 
COVID -19 pandemic, all interviews will be conducted remotely, either by phone or video 
call. One-two staff members will be present to obtain consent, conduct the interview, 
take notes, and facilitate recording . The interview  guide was developed with the input of 
our study’s investigators a nd Patient/Stakeholder Advisory Board (PSAB).  The topics 
covered include : the experiences of HH members/clients/patients in NYC  during the 
COVID -19 pandemic , particularly with regards to a ccessing care (for COVID -19 and non-
COVID conditions)  and a ccessing  social services . 
14 
 Based on experiences with initial  interviews , we will iteratively modify the guide based 
on discussion flow and content.  
No linkage with or examination of the participant’s medical record will occur. Transcripts 
will be stripped of ident ifying information and not linked in any way to PHI. 
Activity 3:  One-on-one interviews will be conducted with leaders from NYC HHs  and care 
managers .  No other procedures will be performed with participants. The interviews will 
cover topics including: HH a nd Care Management Agency (CMA) struc ture, activities, 
reporting, quality measurement, quality improvement, challenges, areas of excellence, 
referral and enrollment processes, characteristics of the population served , and the 
experiences of New Yorkers wor king with the Health Home (care managers, program 
leaders) during the COVID -19 pandemic .  The interview guide was developed in 
collaboration with our study’s Patient/Stakeholder Advisory Board (PSAB).  These 
interviews are low -risk: they do not touch on pri vate or confidential information . 
 
Activity 4:  We plan to use NYS Medicaid administrative and claims data in the Medicaid Data 
Warehouse, available to researchers at HEAL at New York University.  This is the same data set described 
in Activity 1.  
 
 
g) Specime n Banking  
Not applicable.  
 
h) Data Management and Confidentiality  
Activity 1:  The NYC -CDRN has  developed standardized protocols to transfer data  securely 
between sites (including ISMMS), RHIOs, a Weill Cornell approved vendor (NYC -CDRN Central 
Repository) , Project Ops of the NYC -CDRN. All data flows between parties will use established, 
secure methods of transmission.  These currently include secure FTP and public key encryption 
protocol (for data transmission from sites to  a Weill Cornell approved vendor ); secure FTP (for 
data transmission from sites to the RHIOs); secure sockets layer (for data transmission from 
Healthix to a Weill Cornell approved vendor ).  The data flow was created to minimize any privacy 
and confidentiality risks through the use of Member IDs (proxy IDs) and of Site - and Study -
Specific IDs (SS -IDs).   
Dr. Mayer and her team  have signed  a contract committing them to comply with NYC -CDRN 
privacy and security policies and abide by applicable state and federal privacy and security legal 
require ments.  
Dr. Mayer will upload all  data received to a secured, password -protected, fire -walled local hard 
drive. Only Dr. Mayer and other authorized members of the analysis team will be able to access 
these files for the purpose of conducting analyses.  All  authorized members of the team will have 
completed any required CITI courses in biomedical research.  After all analyses are complete, the 
files will be removed from the hard drive and deleted permanently.   
Activity 2: Focus groups , telephone focus group s, and individual interviews  will be audio 
recorded. Audio recordings will be securely shared with a HIPAA compliant transcription 
and translation company. Focus group  and interview  transcripts will be stripped of 
identifiers prior to storage on password -prote cted, hard -drives.  Participant  contact 
information will be stored separately so that data cannot be linked with the participant 
15 
 (no study ID or other link will be used).  Contact information will also be stored only on 
password -protected hard drives. Only authorized study staff who have completed 
research ethics training will have access to any data. Data will be stored for an additional 
year after all analyses have been completed.  
Activity 3:  Contact data for this aspect of the study is publicly avail able  for HH and CMA 
leaders . All contact data for leaders and care managers will be stored on password -
protected hard drives.   Interview s will be audio recorded and transcribed and  transcripts 
will be stripped of identifiers prior to storage on password -protected, hard -drives.  
Participant contact information will be stored separately so that data cannot be linked 
with the participant (no study ID or other link will be used).  Only authorized study staff 
who have completed research ethics training will hav e access to any data. Data will be 
stored for an additional year after all analyses have been completed.  
 
i) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
This research involves no more than minimal risk to subjects.  The PI, Dr. Mayer, will 
oversee data monitoring, focusing on the protection of the confidentiality of participant 
data.  The Principal Investigator, Dr. Victoria Mayer, and the primary study team are 
located at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai (ISMMS). The study will ut ilize the 
IRB of the Biomedical Research Alliance of New York (BRANY) and the Columbia 
University IRB (the only member of the New York City Clinical Data Research Network 
(NYC -CDRN) that does not rely on BRANY).  
 
The PI, Dr. Mayer, will monitor the resear ch study in close collaboration with and in 
concert with the regulations of the staff of the NYC -CDRN, NYS Medicaid’s Data 
Warehouse Office of Health Insurance Programs Privacy Office, BRANY, the Columbia 
University IRB, and the ISMMS.  
 
This study will ut ilize multiple data sources, including 1) data from the NYC -CDRN and 
data from New York State Medicaid (both retrospective), 2) focus groups  and interviews , 
and 3) one -on-one interviews with Health Home leaders. All 3 aspects of this study 
present no more than minimal risk to study participants. The NYC -CDRN has developed a 
comprehensive set of privacy and security policies and procedures that include strong 
provisions to protect data security at rest and in motion in line with state and federal law 
and ind ustry best practices.   All sites have signed a master data use agreement, and 
investigators are required to sign individual data use agreements, agreeing to comply 
with those terms. Focus group data and interview data will be stored securely at ISMMS 
on pa ssword -protected, firewalled hard drives.  The principle research -associated risk for 
the main retrospective cohort analysis is that of breach of confidential data. In order to 
minimize this risk, we will work with the NYC -CDRN and NYS Medicaid to ensure t hat all 
data transfer and storage protocols are consistent with best practices for data security. 
All data at ISMMS will be stored and accessed according to established regulations of 
ISMMS to ensure data privacy and security. Limited data sets will be con structed to 
contain the minimal amount of PHI needed to complete the study.  
16 
  
While we do not anticipate adverse events associated with our focus groups or 
interviews, in the case of an adverse event the study team would report this to BRANY for 
review. In  the case of unanticipated problems, the study team will report this to BRANY a 
for review.  
 
 
j) Withdrawal of Subjects  
Activity 1  and 4 : Researchers will not be able to identify subjects. Identifying subjects in 
order to withdraw them from the study would c ompromise confidentiality.   
Activity 2:  Subjects may withdraw from the study at any time by contacting the study PI 
or Engagement Manager .  If subjects choose to withdraw from the study, we will not 
collect any further data, but will utilize already colle cted data as part of the focus group  
or individual interview . 
Activity 3:  Subjects may withdraw from the study at any time by contacting the study PI 
or Engagement Coordinator.  If subjects choose to withdraw from the study, we will not 
collect any further  data, but will utilize already collected data.  
 
  
6) Risks to Subjects  
Activity 1  and 4 : The principal potential risks to subjects are confidentiality risks.  We 
believe the risk is minimal because researchers, partner sites , and  the a Weill Cornell 
approved vendor (NYC -CDRN Central Repository ) must follow rigorous, established NYC-
CDRN policies and proced ures for privacy and security. NYC -CDRN p roject staff are 
trained in privacy and security, data transfer protocols are in place and data will be held 
on serv ers approved for holding PHI. The limited  data sets that contain retrospective EHR 
data  and Medicaid data , which will be given  by the various NYC -CDRN partner sites  to 
investigators  at Mount Sinai will  meet all applicable federal regulations and there is 
minimal risk to patient confidentiality.  The merged limited data sets will be stored on 
servers approved for holding PHI. Only study staff trained in data privacy, security, and 
research ethics will be able to access this data.  
Activity 2 : The principal po tential risks to subjects are non -physical privacy and 
confidentiality risks.  As far as confidentiality, transcripts will be stripped of all identifying 
information  during the transcri ption process. We will use a HI PAA compliant transcription  
service.  Thu s, transcripts used for analysis will not contain identifiable data. Any sharing 
of results will also not contain any identifiable information. In addition, participants may 
find it uncomfortable to answer certain questions that come up during the intervie ws. 
Moderators will make it clear that participants can stop sharing at any time, and that they 
do not need to answer any questions that make them feel uncomfortable - it is their 
choice.   
Activity 3:  There is a minimal confidentiality risk associated with the HH leader and care 
manager interviews. It is unlikely that any information shared in these interviews will be 
confidential; however, participants may share sensitive opinions/criticisms. When 
reporting results, we will therefore remove identifying info rmation by which the 
interviewee could be surmised.  
17 
  
7) Provisions for Research Related Harm/Injury  
This research involves  no more than minimal risk to subjects.   
 
8) Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Activity 1  and 4 : There will be no direct benefit to subjects w hose data is a part of this 
study. The overall goal of the study is to evaluate the impact of the Health Home 
intervention on patients with diabetes. Identifying care management programs that are 
effective can offer benefit to the population of patients wi th diabetes and complex 
medical problems.  
Activity 2:  There will be no direct benefit to focus group or individual interview 
participants. As above, the overall study aims to benefit patients with diabetes.  
Activity 3 : There will be no direct benefit to HH  leaders or care managers who participate 
in interviews. However, as key stakeholders in the HH program, they may benefit from 
knowledge eventually produced by the study.  
 
9) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Activity 1  and 4 : This aspec t of the research involves retrospective data analysis, with no 
contact with participants.  
Activity 2:   Interview  recruitment: HH care managers will share the names and contact 
information of interested members/clients/patients with the recruitment team, or 
interested participants can reach out directly to team staff. The recruitment team will be 
trained in responsible research practices and will not reveal any private information via 
voicemail or message.  No private information will be elicited by phone.   
Interviews : We will let participants know that they may decline to answer any questions 
or refrain from participating in any discussions that are not comfortable or which raise 
privacy concerns for them.  Any sharing of results will also not contain any identifiable 
information.   
Follow up:  As part of the study, we have proposed sharing overall study findings with 
participants from focus groups  and interviews . Thus, we have included in the consent 
form that we would like to contact participants in the f uture regarding study findings.  In 
addition, we will utilize address information to send gift cards to participants. Again, all 
outreach staff will not disclose private information as part of outreach efforts.  
Activity 3: Information on the names and cont act information of HH leaders is publicly 
available, and we will not be risking privacy by recruiting these participants.  Care manager 
information will not be linked with responses.  We will make it clear to those who choose 
to participate that data on thei r personal opinions/criticisms will not be linked with their 
identity/specific -HH.  
 
10) Economic Impact on Subjects  
Activity 1: no costs to subjects.  
Activity 2: no costs to subjects.  
Activity 3: no costs to subjects.  
Activity 4: no costs to subjects.  
 
 
18 11)Paym ents to Subjects
Activity 1  and 4 : There will be n o payments to subjects.  
Activity 2:  We will provide a $40 gift card to each participant in appreciation of their time , 
individuals who participate in individual phone interviews will receive their gift card s in 
the mail.   
Activity 3:  We will provide a $ 100 gift card to each participant in appreciation of their 
time.  
12)Consent Process
Activity 1  and 4 : For this analysis, we request a HIPAA waiver.  
Activity 2:  Prior to participation in an individual phone inte rview ,  study staff will read a 
script describing the research study, the risks and benefits of participating, and requesting 
verbal consent.  Participants will be provided with written information describing the 
research.  We are seeking a waiver of written  consent in this case . The only purpose of an 
in-person interaction would be to obtain written consent.  This aspect of the research 
presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects, and this research involves no 
procedures for which written consent i s normally required outside of the research 
context.  
Activity 3: We request a waiver of written documentation of the consent process. This 
aspect of the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects, and this 
research involves no procedur es for which written consent is normally required outside of 
the research context. Study staff will read a script describing the research study, the risks 
and benefits of participating, and requesting verbal consent by phone.  Participants will be 
provided with written information describing the research.  
13)Process to Document Consent in Writing
Activity 1  and 4 : For this analysis, we request a HIPAA waiver.  
Activity 2:  Any individuals who participate in individual phone interviews will provide 
verbal consen t before the interview begins.  
Activity 3: We request a waiver of written documentation of the consent process. This 
aspect of the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects, and this 
research involves no procedures for which written c onsent is normally required outside of 
the research context.  
14)Vulnerable Populations
Activity 1  and 4 : This retrospective data analysis will not specifically target vulnerable 
populations; however, vulnerable individuals may be a part of the cohort. For t his arm of the 
research, we will not be asking participants to engage in research -related risk, and will have 
measures in place to protect the confidentiality of all individuals who are included in the 
research.  
Activity 2:  For t he interviews , we will not  recruit individuals from vulnerable populations. All 
participants will need to be able to give consent and be adults.  
19 Activity 3: The HH -leader  and care manager  interviews will be carried out with individuals in 
leadership positions, and we will not recr uit individuals from specific vulnerable populations. 
15)Multi -Site Human Research (Coordinating Center)
This is a multi -site study with ISMMS  as the lead entity. All data will be stored at ISMMS. 
Investigators from other institutions will have access only to data from analyses, but not 
to individual level data. They will participate in developing analysis plans and reviewing 
results.   
16)Sharing of Results with Subjects
Results of all activities will be shared in aggregate through academic presentations and 
publications, lay talks, lay press communications. Results of overall study will be 
disseminated among focus group and interview participants.  
17)Control of Drugs, Biologics, or Devices
Not applicable. 
1. Centers for Disease Control a nd Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion. National Diabetes Statistics Report, 2014. Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/ diabetes/pubs/statsreport14/national -diabetes -report -web.pdf . Accessed 1 March
2015.  
2. Bleich SN, Jarlenski MP, Bell CN, LaVeist TA. Health inequalities: trends, progress, and policy.
Annual review of public health. 2012;33:7 -40. doi: 10.1146/annurev -publhealth -031811 -124658.
3. EpiQuery: Community Health Survey 2013. [Internet]. New York City Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene. Available at: https://a816 -
healthpsi.nyc.gov/SASStoredProcess/guest?_PROGRAM=%2FEpiQuery%2FCHS%2Fchsindex&year=2
013. Accessed 20 February 2015.
4. Epi Data Brief: Diabetes -related mortality in New York City. [Internet]. New York City
Department of Health and M ental Hygiene; 2013. Available at:
http://www.nyc.gov/html/doh/downloads/pdf/epi/databrief28.pdf  Accessed 20 February 2015.
5. Epi Data Brief: Diabetes and its complications. [I nternet]. New York City Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene; 2013. Available at:
http://www.nyc.gov/html/doh/downloads/pdf/epi/databrief36.pdf . Accessed 20 February 2015.
6. Peek ME, Cargill A, Huang ES. Diabetes health disparities: a systematic review of health care
interventions. Medical care research and review : MCRR. 2007;64(5 Suppl):101S -56S. doi:
10.1177/1077558707305409.
7. Quinones AR, O'Neil M, Saha S, Freeman M, He nry SR, Kansagara D.  Interventions to Improve
Minority Health Care and Reduce Racial and Ethnic Disparities. VA Evidence -based Synthesis Program
Reports. Washington (DC)2011.
8. Saxena S, Misra T, Car J, Netuveli G, Smith R, Majeed A. Systematic review of  primary
healthcare interventions to improve diabetes outcomes in minority ethnic groups. The Journal of
ambulatory care management. 2007;30(3):218 -30. doi: 10.1097/01.JAC.0000278982.65063.5c. PubMed
PMID: 17581434.
9. Quinones AR, Ramsey K, Newsom JT, Dor r DA. Racial and ethnic differences in clinical
outcome trajectories for care managed patients. Medical care. 2014;52(11):998 -1005. doi:
10.1097/MLR.0000000000000249. PubMed PMID: 25304019.
20 
 10. Peek ME, Ferguson M, Bergeron N, Maltby D, Chin MH. Integrated  community -healthcare 
diabetes interventions to reduce disparities. Current diabetes reports. 2014;14(3):467. doi: 
10.1007/s11892 -013-0467 -8. PubMed PMID: 24464339; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3956046.  
11. Patient Centered Medical Home Resource Center: Defini ng the PCMH. [Internet]. Available at: 
http://pcmh.ahrq.gov/page/defining -pcmh . Accessed 10 March 2015.  
12. Kilo CM, Wasson JH. Practice Redesign And The Patient -Centered Medical Home: History, 
Promi ses, And Challenges. Health affairs. 2010;29(5):773 -8. doi: DOI 10.1377/hlthaff.2010.0012. 
PubMed PMID: WOS:000277256300004.  
13. Nielsen, M, Langner, B, Zema, C, Hacker, T, Grundy, P. Benefits of implementing the primary 
care Patient Centered Medical Home:  a review of cost and quality results, 2012. [Internet] Patient -
centered primary care collaborative; 2012. Available at: https://www.pcpcc.org/guide/benefits -
implem enting -primary -care-medical -home . Accessed 27 February 2015.  
14. Bitton A, Martin C, Landon BE. A nationwide survey of patient centered medical home 
demonstration projects. J Gen Intern Med. 2010;25(6):584 -92. doi: 10.1007/s11606 -010-1262 -8. PubMed 
PMID: 20467907; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2869409.  
15. Vest JR, Bolin JN, Miller TR, Gamm LD, Siegrist TE, Martinez LE. Medical Homes: "Where You 
Stand on Definitions Depends on Where You Sit". Medical Care Research and Review. 2010;67(4):393 -
411. doi: Doi 10.117 7/1077558710367794. PubMed PMID: WOS:000280044500002.  
16. Patchias, EM, Detty, A, Birnbaum, M. Implementing Medicaid Health Homes in New York: Early 
Experience. Medicaid Institute at United Hospital Fund. February 2013. Available at: 
http://www.uhfnyc.org/publications/880881 . Accessed 20 February 2015.  
17. Health Home Information Resource Center. [Internet]. Medicaid.gov. Available at: 
http://www.medicaid.gov/State -Resource -Center/Medicaid -State -Technical -Assistance/Health -Homes -
Technical -Assistance/Health -Home -Information -Resource -Center.html . Accessed 12 March 2015.  
18. Medicaid Enrollees and Expenditures by County. [Internet]. New York State Department of 
Health. Available at: https://www.health.ny.gov/statistics/health_care/medicaid/eligible_expenditures/ - 
table1 . Accessed 20 February 2015.  
19. QuickFacts: New York City. [Internet]. United States Census Bureau. Available at: 
http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/36/3651000.html . Accessed 10 March 2015.  
20. New York State Medicaid Update: New York State Medicaid Health Homes. [Internet]. New York 
State Department of Health. Available at: http://www.medicaid.gov/state -resource -center/medicaid -state-
technical -assistance/health -homes -technical -assistance/downloads/medicaid -health -homes -overview.pdf . 
Accessed 15 March 2015.  
21. Medicaid Health Homes: An Overview. [Internet]. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 
Avaiable from http://www.medicaid.gov/state -resource -center/medicaid -state-technical -assistance/health -
homes -technical -assistance/downloads/m edicaid -health -homes -overview.pdf . Accessed 15 March 2015.  
22. Dashboard B9: Health Home Enrollment [Internet]. New York State Department of Health. 
Avaiable from http://dsripdashboards.health.ny.gov/SDM/Publish.aspx?dashboard=DSRIP+ -
+B9+Health+Home+Enrollment&categoryId=0&hideTopBar=true - 
SID=0959ef7f916647aab799b83bf28ee47c .  Accessed 1 September 2015.  
23. Goldberg RW, Kreyenbuhl JA, Medoff DR, Dickerson FB, Wohlheiter K, Fang J, et al. Quality of 
diabetes care among adults with serious mental illness. Psychiat Serv. 2007;58(4):536 -43. doi: DOI 
10.1176/appi.ps.58.4.536. PubMed  PMID: WOS:000245503400019.  
24. De Hert M, Correll CU, Bobes J, Cetkovich -Bakmas M, Cohen D, Asai I, et al. Physical illness in 
patients with severe mental disorders. I. Prevalence, impact of medications and disparities in health care. 
World psychiatry : o fficial journal of the World Psychiatric Association. 2011;10(1):52 -77. PubMed 
PMID: 21379357; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3048500.  
21 25. Druss BG, Zhao L, Cummings JR, Shim RS, Rust GS, Marcus SC. Mental comorbidity and
quality of diabetes care under Medicaid:  a 50-state analysis. Medical care. 2012;50(5):428 -33. doi:
10.1097/MLR.0b013e318245a528. PubMed PMID: 22228248; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3360811.
26. Wolff JL, Starfield B, Anderson G. Prevalence, expenditures, and complications of multiple
chronic condit ions in the elderly. Archives of internal medicine. 2002;162(20):2269 -76. doi: DOI
10.1001/archinte.162.20.2269. PubMed PMID: WOS:000179148300001.
27. Druss BG, Marcus SC, Olfson M, Tanielian T, Elinson L, Pincus HA. Comparing the national
economic burden of five chronic conditions. Health affairs. 2001;20(6):233 -41. doi: DOI
10.1377/hlthaff.20.6.233. PubMed PMID: WOS:000172297900030.
28. Fried LP, Bandeen -Roche K, Kasper JD, Guralnik JM. Association of comorbidity with disability
in older women: the Women' s Health and Aging Study. J Clin Epidemiol. 1999;52(1):27 -37. PubMed
PMID: 9973071.
29. Nichols GA, Desai J, Lafata JE, Lawrence JM, O'Connor PJ, Pathak RD, et al. Construction of a
Multisite DataLink Using Electronic Health Records for the Identification,  Surveillance, Prevention, and
Management of Diabetes Mellitus: The SUPREME -DM Project. Preventing Chronic Disease. 2012;9.
doi: Artn 110311
Doi 10.5888/Pcd9.110311. PubMed PMID: WOS:000306648500002.
30. AHRQ Quality Indicators: Guide to Prvention Quality Indicators. [Internet]. Agency for Healtcare
Research and Quality; 2007. Available from:
http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/Downloads/Modules/PQI/V31/pqi_g uide_v31.pdf . Accessed 27
February 2015.  
31. PQA Performance Measures. [Internet]. Available at: http://pqaalliance.org/measures/default.asp .
Accessed 19 March 2015.
32. HEDIS & Performance Meas urement. [Internet]. National Quality Assurance Program. Available
at: http://www.ncqa.org/HEDISQualityMeasurement.aspx . Accessed 18 March 2015.
33. CMS Quality Measures. [Internet]. Centers  for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Available at:
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare /Quality -Initiatives -Patient -Assessment -
Instruments/QualityMeasures/index.html?redirect=/qualitymeasures/03_electronicspecifications.asp .
Accessed 18 March 2015.
34. COVID -19 Guidance for Health Homes. [Internet]. New York State Department of Health. Av ailable At:
https://www.health.ny.gov/Health_Care/Medicaid/Covid19/Docs/2020 -03-14_Guide_Hhsa_Hhsc.Pdf. Accessed
28 April 2020.
35. Health Home COVID -19 Response Frequently Asked Questions. [Internet]. New York State Department of
Health. Available At:
https://www.health.ny.gov/Health_Care/Medicaid/Program/Medicaid_Health_Homes/Docs/Hh_Covid_19_Faq.
Pdf. Accessed 28 April 2020.
36. Mobile Fact Sheet, June 2019. [Internet] the Pew Research Center. Available Online:
http://www.pewinternet.org/Fact -Sheet/Mobi le/. Accessed 20 May 2020. .
37. Vangeepuram N, Mayer V, Fei K, et al. Smartphone Ownership and Perspectives on Health Apps among a
Vulnerable Population in East Harlem, New York. mHealth. 2018;4:31.