Date: November 01, 2017
Principal
 Investigator: Marco Grados, MD  
Application No.: IRB00097094
Page 1 of  9 
Combined Parental Permission Informed Consent/Authorization March 2017 Version 3If you  are using EPIC for this study, fax a 
copy of the signed  consent form to 410-367-  
7382
PARENT INFORMED CONSENT AND PRIVACY
AUTHORIZATION FORM
Protocol Title: Breathing Retraining  for  Panic and Anxiety  Disorder in Teens
Application No.: IRB00097094
Sponsor: Pediatric Anxiety Research  internal fund
Principal Investigator: Marco  Grados, MD, MPH
Johns Hopkins  Hospital
Bloomberg Children's  Center, 12th floor 1800 
Orleans Street, Baltimore MD 21287,
Phone 443-287-2291
Fax 410-955-8691
1. What  you should know about this study:
• You  are being asked to allow your child to join a research study. This consent form explains the 
research study and your child’s part in the study.  Please read it carefully and take as much time as 
you need. Ask your study doctor  or the study team to explain any words or information that you do 
not understand.
• Joining  this study is voluntary. If you allow your child to join the study, you can change your 
mind later. There will be no penalty or loss of benefits if you decide not to allow your child to 
continue the study.
• During  the study, we will tell you if we learn any new information that might affect whether 
you wish to continue to allow your child to participate.
• If  we think your child’s participation in this study may affect your child’s clinical care, information 
about your child’s study participation will be included in your child’s medical record, which is used 
throughout Johns Hopkins.   Doctors outside of Johns Hopkins may not have access to this 
information.  You can ask the research team to send this information to any of your child’s doctors. 
When Johns Hopkins is used in this consent form, it includes The Johns Hopkins University, The 
Johns Hopkins Hospital, Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, Howard  County General Hospital,  
Johns Hopkins Community Physicians, Suburban  Hospital, Sibley Memorial Hospital and All  
Children’s Hospital.
• A  description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov, as required  by
U.S. Law.  This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the Web site 
will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.
Approved November 1, 2017
Date: November 01, 2017
Principal
 Investigator: Marco Grados, MD  
Application No.: IRB00097094
Page 2 of  9 
Combined Parental Permission Informed Consent/Authorization March 2017 Version 3•If  you would like to review the information for this study, or a summary of the results, ask the 
study team doctor for the ClinicalTrials.gov study registration number.
2. Why  is  this research being done?
This research is being done to measure the effectiveness  of the Freespira Breathing System (FBS) for 
children and adolescents  who have an anxiety disorder.
The FBS is a portable, at-home device that has been cleared by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for use in adults with panic disorders. The device trains users to adjust their breathing to control 
and normalize their breathing patterns. The objective of this study is to see if FBS decreases anxiety in  
children and adolescents.
Children between the  ages  of 9-17  years old, with an anxiety disorder may join the study.
How many people will be in this study?
Up to 60 children and adolescents and their parents will be recruited to participate in the study.
3. What  will happen if you allow your child to  join this study?
If you  agree to allow your child to be in this study, we will ask you and your child to complete the 
following things:
The role of the parent in this study will be to fill out the required questionnaires, bring their child to the 
study visits and to monitor their child’s compliance in using the Freespira Breathing System.
During this study if a study team member suspects abuse, neglect or abandonment of a child they will 
report it to the proper authorities. 
a) Screening  Visit (Week 0):
You and your  child will be asked to take part in a screening visit where the study will be 
explained to you and your child. At this visit, you will be asked to provide your child’s current 
medication list and confirm it has not changed in the last month.
If at  any time during the study, your child is found to be depressed or exhibit severe suicidality or 
ideation, he/she will be referred to the study doctor, who will evaluate your child and make the 
appropriate treatment referral.
As part of the study, your child will be randomly (by chance, like a flip of a coin) assigned into 
either the Active  Intervention Group or the Active Control Waitlist Group. In this visit, we will 
discuss the use of FBS.  The FBS will be used by your child twice a day, once in the morning for 
17 minutes and once in the evening for 17 minutes. During this screening visit, we will help you 
and your child come up with a plan to help your child use the FBS on a regular schedule.
b) Baseline  Visit (Week 1)
Active Intervention  Group
During a second visit, a personal interview  will take place with your child, which will last about 2 
hours. This visit will either take place in participant’s home visit (at study doctors discretion) or will 
take place at the research study office. The questions will primarily address your child’s anxiety and 
past history.
Approved November 1, 2017
Date: November 01, 2017
Principal
 Investigator: Marco Grados, MD  
Application No.: IRB00097094
Page 3 of  9 
Combined Parental Permission Informed Consent/Authorization March 2017 Version 3You will also be asked to  complete paper-and-pencil questionnaires about your child.
We will ask about any changes to your  child’s medication since the last study visit. We will also 
ask how many therapy sessions your child has attended since they last study visit.
You and your  child will receive training on how to use the FBS.
oThere  will be sounds emitted from the device to help your child with his/her breathing pace.
oThis  device will also measure breathing rates and  carbon dioxide, a gas that  you breath 
out normally..
oThe  device will come with a hand-held  Tablet computer  with the Freespira Application. 
The App provides  easy-to-follow audio and visual  instructions  that guide your child through 
prescribed breathing sessions.
oYou  will then be asked to assist your child in breathing exercises for 17 minutes, twice a day, 
for 4 weeks.
oThe  FBS is loaned to you while your child is participating in the study. We will ask you to 
sign an Equipment Loaner Form. This form is an agreement for you to have the device as 
loaned, and keeping returning the Equipment will result in a charge of $500 after the study is 
over.
Daily panic attack diaries:  Your child will be given a daily panic attack diary to track frequency,  
symptoms and severity of any panic  attacks they may experience over the four weeks of 
breathing retraining. You may help  your child complete the diary as needed.
Active Control  Waitlist Group
You will be contacted by phone or online (SKYPE), whichever is more convenient, to fill out  
baseline assessments (clinical interview and pen and paper questionnaires). The waitlist 
participants will complete the same baseline assessments as the active intervention group. 
Waitlist participants will also be given daily panic attack diaries diary to track frequency, 
symptoms and severity of any panic attacks they may experience.  You may help your child 
complete the diary as needed.
c) Scheduled  visits (Weeks 2, 3, 4 and 8):
Active Intervention  Group
During each study visit we will ask about any changes to your child’s medication since the last study 
visit.  We will also ask how many therapy sessions your child has attended since they last study visit.
At weeks 2 and 3, we will have a check-in with  you and your child by phone or online (SKYPE),  
whichever is more convenient.
Approved November 1, 2017
Date: November 01, 2017
Principal
 Investigator: Marco Grados, MD  
Application No.: IRB00097094
Page 4 of  9 
Combined Parental Permission Informed Consent/Authorization March 2017 Version 3At weeks 4 and 8, you and your child will either have an in-home visit (at study doctors discretion) or 
return for a study visit with the study doctor.   The interview portion can also be done by phone within 
a window of one week. During these visits, we will review the results of the breathing sessions, and 
go over any questions or concerns you or  your child may have.  Your child may do a four-minute 
breathing session at  both office visits. The panic  diary will be reviewed during these sessions. The 
device will be returned at the Week 4 visit.
During the week 8 visit  you and your child will either have an in-home visit (at study doctors 
discretion) or come back to receive  a final assessment that includes the clinical interview and paper-
and-pencil questionnaires.  The interview portion can also be done by phone within a window of one 
week. Your child will complete a  four-minute breathing session with the CO2 sensor to record  your 
child’s final breathing rate. This visit will last about 45 minutes
Active Control  Waitlist Group
During Weeks 2, 3, 4 and 8 the Waitlist Group be contacted for check-ins by phone or online 
(SKYPE), whichever is  more convenient, to complete the same questionnaires as the Active  
Intervention Group. During weeks 4 and 8 the Waitlist Group will complete the same questioners as 
the Active Intervention Control Group. The panic diary will be reviewed.
Following the Week 8 visit, you  and your child will follow the schedule of visits and procedures  
described above for the  Active Intervention Group.
d) Long-  Term Follow-up
You will also be asked to  have a check-in over the phone or online (SKYPE) at six (6) and have a 
office or in-home visit at twelve (12) months after the study has been completed  for a follow-up 
evaluation. This evaluation includes a clinical interview and pen-and-paper questionnaires.
Future Studies
We would like  your  permission to contact you about other studies that you or your child may be  
eligible for in the future Please check the appropriate box and sign below.
□Yes,  I would like to be  contacted for future studies
Signature of Parent Date
□No,  I would not like to be contacted for future studies
Signature of Parent Date
4. What  are the risks or discomforts of the study?
Freespira Breathing System (FBS)
Approved November 1, 2017
Date: November 01, 2017
Principal
 Investigator: Marco Grados, MD  
Application No.: IRB00097094
Page 5 of  9 
Combined Parental Permission Informed Consent/Authorization March 2017 Version 3Risks specific to the FBS were obtained from users of the device from adult clinics. We have 
also conducted  a small study with children and adolescents which has provided us information 
on side effects.
Possible side effects are:  headaches, light-headedness or dizziness may occur in the first several 
breathing retraining sessions. These side effects typically improve during later sessions.
Questions/questionnaires:
Sometimes people find it hard to talk about their lives.  If you find it too upsetting, you and your 
child may end the interview at any time. You and your child may refuse to  answer any question you 
are asked.
Confidentiality:
We will keep what  you  tell us confidential.  This means that what you or anyone  else tells us will not 
be told to others.  However, there is the risk that information about you may become known to 
people outside this study.
Your name and your child’s name and the information that  you provide will be kept completely 
confidential and will not be released to anyone other than for the scientific purposes of the project. 
These documents will be archived.  They will be labeled by your subject number only, that is, it will 
not be labeled using your name.  The linkage of your name with  your child’s subject number can only 
be accessed by members of  the research team who can access the central records room for the study.
If you  would like the information released to your doctor, you may sign a release form allowing us to 
do so.
5. Are there benefits to your child from being in the study?
There may or may not be  a direct benefit to your child from being in this 
study. If your child takes part in this study, your child may help others in the 
future.
6. What  are your options if you do not want your child to be in the study?
You do not have to allow  your  child to join this study.  If your child does not take part in the study, 
your child’s care at Johns Hopkins will not be affected.
If you  decide not to allow  your child to join this study, other options are available. You do not have 
to allow your child to join this study to get treatment.  Treatments for anxiety disorder include 
cognitive behavioral therapy or medication but your child cannot start these treatments while he/she 
is enrolled in this trial.
7. Will  it cost you anything to allow your child to  be in this study?
No.
In the  event  of a lost/misplaced device, you will be responsible for $500 payment to the sponsor. 
This payment will not be requested in the event of a damaged device, and is only a small portion of 
Approved November 1, 2017
Date: November 01, 2017
Principal
 Investigator: Marco Grados, MD  
Application No.: IRB00097094
Page 6 of  9 
Combined Parental Permission Informed Consent/Authorization March 2017 Version 3the total cost  of the device.
8. Will  you or your child be paid if you allow your child to join this study?
Your child will be given $30 for the Consent visit, Week 4 visit, and Week 8 visit. Your parking cost 
will also be covered for all visits.
You may be  required to provide your child’s social security number to be  paid for taking part in this  
study. Federal tax  law requires that you report  your research payments when you file your taxes. If 
your total payments from Johns Hopkins exceed $600 per year, Johns Hopkins will report these 
payments to the Internal Revenue Service and  you will receive a 1099-MISC form from us.
9. Can  your child leave the study early?
•You  can agree to allow your child to be in the study now  and change your mind later.
•If  you wish to end your child’s participation, please tell us right away.
•Leaving  this study early will not stop your child from getting regular medical care.
•If  your child leaves the study early, Johns Hopkins may use or give out your child’s health  
information that it already has, if the information is needed for this study or any follow-up 
activities.
10. Why  might we take your child out of the study early?
Your child may be taken out of the study if:
•Staying  in the study would be harmful.
•Your child needs treatment not allowed in the study.
•You  or your child fails to follow instructions.
•The  study is cancelled.
•If  they fail to complete the required breathing exercises for over 50% of the allotted time, as efficacy would 
not be able to be assessed. 
•If  during the study, participants are found to be depressed or exhibit suicidal ideation while completing 
surveys, they will be referred to the P.I. Dr. Marco Grados, a board-certified child and adolescent 
psychiatrist, who will evaluate them and make the appropriate treatment referral. Treatment failure will be 
assessed at the 4-week post-treatment interval (8 weeks from study initiation).
•If  participant is unable to complete Week 4, Week 8, and 12 Month visits within visit windows they will be 
contacted by study PI, and if the issue is not able to be resolved they will receive a research study 
withdrawal letter in the mail explaining why they are being withdrawn from the research study.
•There  may be  other reasons to take your child out of the study that we do not know at this time.
•If  your child is taken out of the study early, Johns Hopkins may use or give out your child’s 
health information that it already has if the information is needed for this study or any follow-up 
activities.
11. How  will your child’s privacy be protected?
We have rules to protect information about  your child. Federal and state laws and the federal medical  
Privacy Rule also protect your child’s privacy.  By signing this form you provide your permission, 
called your “authorization,” for the use and disclosure of information protected by the Privacy Rule.
Approved November 1, 2017
Date: November 01, 2017
Principal
 Investigator: Marco Grados, MD  
Application No.: IRB00097094
Page 7 of  9 
Combined Parental Permission Informed Consent/Authorization March 2017 Version 3The research team working on the study will collect information about your child.  This includes 
things learned  from the procedures described in this consent form.  They may also collect other 
information including  your child’s name, address, date of birth, and information from your child’s 
medical records. This could include information about HIV and genetic testing, or treatment for drug 
or alcohol abuse or  mental health problems.
The research team will know  your  child’s identity and that your child is in the research study.  Other  
people at Johns Hopkins, particularly your doctors, may also see or give out  your child’s information. 
We make this information available to your child’s doctors for your child’s safety.
People outside  of Johns Hopkins may need to see or receive your child’s  information  for this study. 
Examples include government agencies (such as the Food and Drug Administration), safety monitors, other 
sites in the study and companies  that sponsor the study.
We cannot do this study without  your authorization to use and give out your child’s information.  
You do not have to give us this authorization.  If you do not, then you may not join this study.
We will use and disclose your child’s information  only as described in this form and in our Notice of 
Privacy Practices; however, people outside Johns Hopkins who receive  your child’s information may 
not be covered by this promise or by the federal Privacy Rule. We try to make sure that everyone 
who needs to see your child’s information keeps it confidential – but we cannot guarantee that your 
information will not be re-disclosed.
The use and disclosure of  your  child’s information  has no time limit. You may revoke (cancel) your 
permission to use and disclose your child’s information at any time by notifying the Principal 
Investigator of this study by phone or in writing.  If you contact the Principal Investigator by phone,  
you must follow-up with a written request that includes the study number and your contact 
information. The Principal Investigator’s name, address, phone and  fax information are on page one  
of this consent form.
If you  do cancel your authorization to use and disclose your child’s information,  your child’s part in 
this study will end and no further information about  your child will be collected. Your revocation 
(cancellation) would not affect information already collected in the study, or information we 
disclosed before you wrote to the Principal Investigator to cancel  your authorization.
12. What  treatment costs will be paid if your child is injured in this study?
Johns Hopkins does not have a program to pay you if your child is hurt or has other bad results from  
being in the study.  However, medical care at Johns Hopkins is open to your child as it is to all sick or 
injured people.
The costs for any treatment or hospital care your child receives as a result of a study-related injury that 
is not covered by a health insurer will be billed to you.
By signing this form you will not give up any rights you have to seek compensation for injury.
Approved November 1, 2017
Date: November 01, 2017
Principal
 Investigator: Marco Grados, MD  
Application No.: IRB00097094
Page 8 of  9 
Combined Parental Permission Informed Consent/Authorization March 2017 Version 313. What  other things should you know about this research study?
a. What  is the Institutional Review  Board (IRB) and how does it protect you?  The Johns 
Hopkins Medicine IRB is made up of:
•Doctors
•Nurses
•Ethicists
•Non-scientists
•People  from the local community.
The IRB reviews human research  studies. It protects the rights and welfare of the people taking 
part in those studies.  You may contact the  IRB if you have questions about your child’s rights 
as a participant or if you think  you or your child have not been treated fairly.  The IRB office 
number is  410-955-3008. You may also call this number for other questions, concerns  or 
complaints about the research.
When the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine  Institutional Review Board (IRB) reviews a study at 
another site, that site (institution) is solely responsible for the safe conduct of the study and for 
following the protocol approved by the Johns Hopkins IRB.
b. What  do you do if you have questions about the study?
Call the principal investigator, Dr. Marco Grados  at 443-287-2291. If you wish, you may contact 
the principal investigator by letter or by fax. The address and fax number are on page one of this 
consent form.  If you cannot reach the principal investigator or wish to talk to someone else, call 
the IRB office at 410-955-3008.
c. What  should you do if  your child is injured or ill as a result of being in this study?
If you  think your child is injured or ill because of this study, call Dr. Marco Grados at 443-
2872291
during regular office hours.
d. What  happens to Data that are collected in the study?
Johns Hopkins and our research partners work to understand and cure diseases. The data you 
provide are important to this effort.
If you  allow your child to join this study, you should understand that you/your child will not  
own your child’s data, and should researchers use them to create a new product or idea, 
you/your child  will not benefit financially.
14. Assent Statement
This research study has been explained to my child in my presence in language my child can 
understand. He/she has been encouraged to ask questions about the study now and  at any time in the 
future.
Approved November 1, 2017
Date: November 01, 2017
Principal
 Investigator: Marco Grados, MD  
Application No.: IRB00097094
Page 9 of  9 
Combined Parental Permission Informed Consent/Authorization March 2017 Version 315. What  does your signature on this consent form mean?  Your signature on this form 
means that:
•you  understand the information given to you in this form
•you  accept the provisions in the form
•you  agree to allow your child to join the study
You and your  child will not give up any legal rights by signing this consent form.
WE WILL GIVE YOU A COPY OF THIS SIGNED AND DATED CONSENT FORM
Signature of Parent (Print Name) Date/Time
Signature of Person Obtaining Consent (Print Name) Date/Time
Signature of Legally Authorized Representative (LAR) (Print Name) Date/Time For 
CHILD  PARTICIPANT
Description of LAR’s authority under Maryland Law to act as surrogate health care
Date/Ti
me decision-maker for child research participant (for example, Legal Guardian, court-ordered representative)
Signature of Child Participant (optional unless IRB required) (Print Name) Date/Time
Signature of Witness to Consent Procedures (Print Name)
Date/Time  (optional unless IRB or 
Sponsor required)
NOTE: A COPY OF THE SIGNED, DATED CONSENT FORM MUST BE KEPT BY THE PRINCIPAL 
INVESTIGATOR;  A COPY MUST BE GIVEN TO THE PARTICIPANT; IF  YOU ARE USING EPIC FOR THIS 
STUDY A COPY MUST BE  FAXED TO 410-367-7382; IF YOU ARE NOT USING EPIC A COPY MUST BE PLACED 
IN THE PARTICIPANT’S  MEDICAL RECORD (UNLESS NO MEDICAL RECORD EXISTS OR WILL BE 
CREATED).
ONLY CONSENT FORMS THAT INCLUDE THE JOHNS HOPKINS MEDICINE LOGO CAN BE USED TO OBTAIN  
THE CONSENT OF RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS. IF THIS CONSENT FORM DOES NOT HAVE A  JOHNS HOPKINS  
MEDICINE LOGO, DO NOT  USE IT TO OBTAIN THE CONSENT OF RESEARCH PARTICIPANTS
Approved November 1, 2017