New York State Psychiatric Institute  - Columbia University Department of Psychiatry 
INFORMED CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A RES EARCH STUDY  
RESEARCH SUMMARY  COVER SHEET  
•The goal of this research is to assess safety and efficacy of magnetic seizure therapy
(MST) in the treatment of depression  in the elderly.
•MST will be compared to a well known, standard of care treatment, called
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT).
•Particip ants will be assigned randomly (like flipping a coin), to either MST or ECT
treatment arms.
•Both groups, MST or ECT, will receive convulsive therapy; there is no placebo group.
•Participants will have intravenous (IV) line placed on the morning of the tre atment.
Through this line th ey will receive two kinds  of medication s at the beginning of the
treatment. First medication  will make the m fall asleep (for a brief period of time,
lasting a few minutes);  second one will relax their muscles .
•During the treatment, p articipants will remain under the care of two doctors . The first
one is an anesthesiologist  – a doctor who put s the patient to sleep  and monitors
patient’s vital signs and the second one is the treating psychiatrist .
•Participants will be aske d to wear earplugs  because of the brief noise generated during
the treatment, while under anesthesia.
•Treatments are performed 3 times a week: on Monday, Wednesday and Friday
mornings.
•In order to evaluate  study progress,  standard  tests will be given before, after and in -
between treatments.
Patient Consent Form  
IRB Protocol # 6427  
Version 07/28/161 New York State Psychiatric Institute  - Columbia University Department of Psychiatry 
INFORMED CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A RES EARCH STUDY  
The purpose of this Consent Form is to provide you with information you ne ed to 
consider before you decide whether to participate in this research study.  
STUDY TITLE : IMPROVING OUTCOMES I N GERIATRIC DEPRESSI ON: 
MAGNETIC SEIZURE THE RAPY  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:   STEFAN ROWNY, M.D.  
AFFILIATION OF PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:     
NEW YORK STATE PSYCHIATRIC INSTITUTE / COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY  
Purpose of Study  and Overview  
You are eligible to participate in this study because you have severe depression and it 
has been recommended that you receive treatment  for your depression  that uses el ectricity to 
cause a seizure  (convulsive therapy) . You have been invited to participate in a research study 
using a new type of convulsive therapy, called magnetic seizure therapy (MST ), which  will be 
compared to an existing standard of care treatment, ele ctroconvulsive therapy (ECT).  Like 
ECT, MST causes a seizure.  Unlike ECT, which uses electricity , MST uses magnetic fields 
that create a small amount of electricity in the brain to trigger the seizure.  MST is 
experimental and is not approved by the Food  and Drug Administration (FDA ).  MST has only 
been used  previously  to treat depression in about 1 50 patien ts. Two investigational devices are 
available worldwide, with which magnetic seizure therapy treatments have been performed to 
date. At the time of writing this consent form, 57 individuals have received acute series of 
treatments with the device that we use c urrently. Limited published data exist at this time, but 
early reports suggest promising  results  in treating  depression with fewer side effects  from this 
new convulsive treatment. However, because of the small number of published reports and 
limited number  of patients who received this treatment under research conditions so far, it is 
not known if MST is effective in treating depression, particularly depression  in the elderly . Its 
safety has not been fully evaluated  yet. The most commonly reported side effe cts will be 
discussed elsewhere. In general, those who received MST treatment have a  few minutes of 
confusion after treatment,  not different from that of general anesthesia. The risk of short -term 
and long-term memory loss , appears to be minimal, temporary  and only in the setting of 
receiving the acute treatment.  This study will compare the effects of MST and ECT in the 
elderly. We will also compare the safety of MST with ECT.  This information will teach us 
more about whether MST may someday be a useful a lternative to ECT in the treatment of 
depression. The investigators plan to include 30 participants in this research.  This study is 
funded by a grant from the National Institute of Mental Health.  
Voluntary 
Participation in this research study is voluntary. If you decide not to participate, or if 
you later decide to stop participating, you will not lose any of the benefits to which you are 
otherwise entitled. A decision not to participate or withdraw of your participation will not 
affect your current or future treatment at the New York State Psychiatric Institute or Columbia 
University.  
Patient Consent Form  
IRB Protocol # 6427  
Version 07/28/162 You will be notified of significant new findings that may relate to your willingness to 
participate.  
Alternatives to Part icipation 
You do not have to participate in this study to receive treatment for your depression.  The 
alternative to participating in this study would be to receive other treatments for depression like 
ECT, antidepressant medication, and psychotherapy.  These alternative treatments have their own 
benefits and risks.  The question of whether convulsive therapy or an alternative treatment is best 
for you depends on your prior  experience with th ese treatments, your psychiatric and medical 
condition  and other considerations that you should discuss with your doctor.  
Procedures  
Clinical and Stud y Evaluation s:  Before starting treatment, you will be asked about 
your past and c urrent physical and mental health.  During the time that you are receiving 
convulsive treatments and during the week after you finish treatment, you will be interviewed 
about changes in your symptoms and side effects. You will be interviewed about your 
depression and side effects two and six months after the last treatment.  
To test the effects of treatment on your thinking and memory, you will receive a set of 
tests before and after each session. This will take about 45 minutes.  In addition, a longer 
session with similar tests will be given within three days before the start of treatment, within 
three days aft er the last session, and again 6 months  after the last treatment.  
Schedule of testing:   This study is performed in a psychiatric hospital.  On the first 
testing day, you will be admitted to the hospital. Even  if you are accepted for outpatient 
treatment, you will still need to be admitted to the inpatient unit for the first week of treatment 
and will receive the same study procedures.  You will be interviewed, have a physical exam, 
hearing test, and an interview about your psychiatric condition.  You will also have your blood 
drawn, give a urine sample, and have a chest X -Ray.  If you are taki ng medications to treat 
your depression, these medications will be gradually stopped.  You will be off of these 
medications for at least five days before you start receiving treatments.  Therefore, your actual 
delay to treatment may be as short as 5 and po ssibly as long as 7 days or even longer, 
depending on how you tolerate the medication washout and when the actual washout begins. 
Treatments are given only on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays. You will be assigned to 
receive either MST ( with magnetic coil p laced at the surface of your head) or right unilateral 
ECT (a standard method of ECT  with two electrodes touching  the scalp ). If you decide to 
participate in the study, you will have a fifty percent chance (or 1 out of 2) of receiving MST. 
You will then re ceive your assigned treatment three times a week. Neither you nor the clinician 
who evaluates the level  of your depression  will know which treatment you are receiving. The 
study assignment is made in advance by a procedure similar to drawing straws.  Treatments 
will continue usually for two to six weeks, depending on your doctor's judgment of how you 
are responding. Your parti cipation in the study will be stopped  after eight treatments  if your 
depression does not improve by at least 25% as measured by a  test we use (Hamilton 
Depression Rating Scale ). There is no maximum number of treatments. However, if you need 
more than 25 tr eatments, a new consent form will need to be signed.  At the first and last 
treatment sessions, you will receive several  stimulations until the smallest amount of MST or 
ECT needed to cause a seizure is reached.  At the other sessions, you will be treated at a dosage 
Patient Consent Form  
IRB Protocol # 6427  
Version 07/28/163 above that threshold.  Before and after each session, you will complete tests of your memory 
and thinking.  You will also complete  a questionnaire about side effects and be asked questions 
about your depression. After your first, sixth, and las t session, your hearing will also be tested. 
If the test shows that your hearing has worsened during the study, the doctor will discuss 
treatment options with you and carefully assess whether to continue with treatment. If the 
hearing tests show that you h ave experienced hearing loss, your hearing will be tested again 
periodically until either it returns to the level where it was before treatment or the doctor 
determines that it will not improve any more. At the end of the treatment course, one of the 
study  investigators will provide you with a letter stating that the seizure(s) you experienced 
were produced as part of an experiment.  
Blood tests:  A blood sample will be taken to carry out recommended tests before 
convulsive therapy. Further blood tests wil l be drawn at your second, sixth, and next to last 
session to look at hormonal effects of the treatment.  The total amount of blood taken for all 
research procedures will be less than one cup.  This is about half the amount of a typical 
donation to a blood  bank.  
 Studies  of the nervous system function (Neurophysiology) :  A set of tests will be done 
to examine the effects of the MST and ECT on brain activity.  These tests include 
electroencephalography (referred to as EEG, or looking at “brain waves”) and t ests of your 
brain’s responses to magnetic pulses (referred to as motor cortex excitability studies).  For the 
EEG, your scalp will be cleaned and sensors placed on your head and near your eyes.  The 
sensors are used to measure the brain waves that natural ly occur in your brain, while you lie 
quietly.  The EEG will be measured before treatment, during two of the MST/ECT sessions, 
and during the week following the last treatment.  
The test of your brain’s responses to magnetic pulses will be done before your  first 
session and in the week following your last session.  During this procedure, small sensors will 
be attached to the skin of your hands and/or legs to measure muscle twitching. A technician 
will hold a magnetic coil over your head or on the back of yo ur neck.  This coil will give a 
number of quick magnetic pulses.  Some of these pulses will cause your fingers or foot to 
twitch.  Earplugs will be worn throughout the testing because the stimulator makes a clicking 
noise.  
MST/ECT: At each treatment, you will be under the care of an anesthesiologist, a 
psychiatrist, and a nurse.  To receive each treatment you will be brought to a special room 
containing all the appropriate equipment that is needed for your treatment.  The treatments are 
given in the mornin g, before breakfast.  Because the treatments are done under general anesthesia 
(while you are asleep), you will not be allowed to drink or eat for at least eight hours before each 
treatment. During the treatment, medications will be given to you through a thin plastic tube (an 
“IV line” or catheter) placed in your arm.  You will be given medicine that will quickly put you to 
sleep.  You will be given a second drug that will relax your muscles.  Because you will be asleep, 
you will not feel pain or discomfor t during the procedure.  
To prepare for the treatments, monitoring sensors will be put on your head and other 
parts of your body. This is done to monitor your brain, your heart, and your blood pressure.  
These recordings involve no pain or discomfort. A bl ood pressure cuff will be put on one of 
your legs.  Before starting the MST/ECT procedure, you will be asked to remove any metal or 
Patient Consent Form  
IRB Protocol # 6427  
Version 07/28/164 magnetized objects (such as keys, jewelry, hair pins, and credit cards).  MST makes a loud 
clicking sound, so you will be gi ven earplugs for your comfort and safety.  
If you are assigned to MST, after you are asleep the MST coil will be placed on your 
head.  MST is given using a magnetic stimulator.  A magnetic stimulator is a device that makes 
a magnetic field.  The magnetic field is made by passing current through a coil of wire.  The 
magnetic field passes through the skull to the brain. The magnetic field creates a small amount 
of electricity in the brain.  That electricity triggers a seizure (convulsion).  
If you are assign ed to ECT, after you are asleep, electrodes used to stimulate the br ain 
will be  placed on your head.  ECT is given using an electrical stimulator, which is a device that 
can pass an electrical current between two stimulating electrodes.  When the current i s passed, a 
seizure is produced in the brain.  
Because you will have received a medication to relax your muscles, body movements 
that would ordinarily happen during a seizure will be much weaker.  The seizure will last for 
about one minute.  Within a few m inutes, the medicine that put you to sleep will wear off and 
you will wake up.  You will be given oxygen to help you breathe.  After waking up, you will be 
taken to a recovery room, where you will be watched for about 45 minutes (the time varies for 
differ ent people) until you are ready to leave the recovery area.  
You will be monitored very closely while the seizure is going on.  There will be sensors 
on your forehead that will allow the psychiatrist to track the progress of the seizure in your 
brain. The psychiatrist and nurse will also monitor your seizure by inflating a blood pressure 
cuff around one of your ankles.  This cuff decreases the amount of muscle relaxant that can 
reach your foot, so that the psychiatrist and nurse will be able to see your foo t moving even 
though the rest of your body is relaxed. Your motor seizure (seizure visible in your foot) will 
also be timed.  
If MST fails to cause a seizure, you will be allowed to wake up and your treatment 
options will be discussed with you.  At any poi nt in the study, you are free to switch to ECT if 
MST fails to cause a seizure or to improve your depression.  If you do not respond to treatment, 
you will be provided other treatment options that are best for you.  As a clinical inpatient at 
NYSPI other psychiatric treatment options would be provided at no cost.  
Risks and Inconveniences  
Experimental Nature of the Treatment:  MST is experimental and it may have 
unknown side effects.  MST may not help your depression get better and it is possible that your 
depression will get worse; receiving MST may delay your ability to receive effective treatment.  
Delay in treatment of depression may also result in making your symptoms worse.  
Medication Withdrawal:   Stopping your medications that  you are taking to treat your 
depression , if any,  may cause your depression to get worse.  There may also be side effects 
from stopping some medications. Your medications will be stopped on a schedule that  is best 
for you so that these effects can be minimized.  The length of time of your withdrawal from 
medication will depend on the type of medication you are currently taking.  
Risk due to general anesthesia: Both MST and ECT require general anesthesia. As 
Patient Consent Form  
IRB Protocol # 6427  
Version 07/28/165 with any procedure where you are put to sleep (general anesthesia), there is a remote risk of 
death.  The risk of death  attributable to the management of general anesthesia with  convulsive 
treatment  is estima ted to be one out of 10,000 patients treated . 
Risks common to outpatient Treatment for both MST and ECT:   If you participate as 
an outpatient, there is an increased risk of falling  and thus injuring yourself  after each 
treatment, risk of injury from operating dangerous machinery (such as driving or using the 
stove).  If you eat or drink after midnight, serious risk of aspirating the content of your stomach 
exists during anesthesia. This can lead to pneumonia and other serious medical complications, 
including in rare cases, death.  To reduce these risks, we require that in order to participate as 
an outpatient, you remain under the supervision of another responsible adult who will oversee 
the treatment regimen. We also require that a minimum of 3 treatmen ts be administered on the 
inpatient unit.  
MST:  Although  it is expected that the side effects of MST will be similar or less 
intense than the side effects of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), the risks and benefits are not 
known .  The risks may include mem ory loss, confusion, headache, muscle soreness, nausea, 
and dental pain. It is possible that, if you experience dental pain, it could last beyond when 
your MST treatment ends.  Both ECT and MST put electricity into the brain and cause a 
seizure.  Magnetic fields do not enter into the brain as deeply as the electric fields used in ECT.  
This might mean that the memory side effects from the stimulation of deeper parts of the brain 
may be less with MST than ECT, but this is not known.  In the cases of healthy volunteers who 
had accidental seizures with magnetic stimulation, there have been no signs of any long -term 
side effects.  
The clicking noise made by the stimulator may affect hearing for a short time.  
Earplugs reduce this risk, so you will be asked to we ar earplugs during MST.  As with all 
antidepressant treatments, including ECT, there is a possible risk of inducing mania.  
ECT:  Like other medical procedures, ECT involves some risks. Serious medical 
complications with ECT are rare.  With introduction of modern anesthesia, bone fractures and 
dislocations are exceedingly rare and none such occurred in the last 25 years of our experience 
with treatments in this institution. Each patient receives a dental exam by the anesthesiologist 
prior to treatment to add ress an y potential problems and to reduce the risk of dental 
complications like teeth or caps cracking .  While also rare, the most common medical 
complications with ECT are changes in heart rate and rhythm, which can be effectively treated 
in most cases.  To reduce the risk of medical complications, you will receive a careful medical 
evaluation before starting ECT.  But, even with precautions there is a small chance that you 
may have a medical complication.  If this happens, medical care and treatment will be started 
immediately.  Facilities to handle emergencies are available.  
A common side effect of ECT is memory loss.  How much memory is lost is likely to 
be related to the number and type of treatments given.  A smaller number of treatments is 
likely to cause less memory loss than a larger number of treatments.  The memory problems 
with ECT follow a certain pattern.  Shortly after a treatment, the problems with memory are 
most noticeable.  As more time goes by, memory improves.  Shortly after the last ECT  
treatment, you may have trouble remembering things that happened before and while you 
received ECT.  Problems with memories for the past may go back to several months before you 
Patient Consent Form  
IRB Protocol # 6427  
Version 07/28/166 had ECT, and rarely, to one, two, or more years.  Many of these memories will  return during 
the first few months after ECT.  However, you may be left with permanent gaps in memory, 
especially for things that happened around the time of the ECT treatments.  In addition, for a 
short period following ECT, you may have trouble learning  and remembering new events.  
This difficulty in making new memories should be short and will most likely go away within 
several weeks after the last ECT treatment.  
The amount of confusion and memory problems during and shortly following ECT 
varies among people.  However, depression itself worsens learning and memory.  A small 
percentage of patients report severe problems in memory that last for months or even years.  
The reasons for these reports of long -lasting memory problems are not fully understood.  
However, as with any medical treatment, people who receive ECT differ in the way they 
experience side effects.  Rarely, ECT may cause permanent and large gaps in memory.  
When you wake up after each treatment, you may feel confused.  The confusion usually  
goes away within an hour.  Shortly after the treatment, you may have a headache, muscle 
soreness, or feel sick to your stomach.  These side effects usually respond to simple treatment.  
Because of the possible problems with confusion and memory in both EC T and MST, it 
is important that you not make important personal or business decisions during treatment or 
immediately following treatment.  This may mean postponing decisions about financial or family 
matters.  After the treatment, you will begin a “conval escence (recovery) period.” This usually 
lasts one to three weeks, but this varies from patient to patient.  During this period you should 
not drive, do business, or other activities for which poor concentration or memory may be a 
problem, until your docto r tells you to do so.  
Neurophysiological Studies  involving EEG:  There are no anticipated risks of the EEG 
procedure.  EEG electrodes will be slotted or made from plastic to reduce electrode heating, as 
recommended by the literature.  
Neurophysiological Studies to determine Motor Threshold:  
The tests of muscle twitching use magnetic pulses given at low frequency (less than one 
per second).  Low frequency magnetic pulses pose no significant health risk.  Electrical current 
is produced i n the brain from magnetic pulses.  This current is well below harmful levels.  The 
most serious known risk of low frequency magnetic stimulation is seizure, although low 
frequency  magnetic stimulation has not been known to cause seizure in properly selecte d 
individuals .  In spite of these precautions, there is a chance that you will experience a seizure 
or other medical complication from low frequency magnetic stimulation during this test. If you 
have a seizure, you may have to be admitted to the hospital a nd follow -up neurological 
evaluation.  Having had a seizure may adversely affect your medical insurance, your future 
employment, and your ability to drive.  It is not known whether having had one seizure will 
make a person more likely to have future seizur es. 
The most commonly reported side effect of low frequency magnetic stimulation is a 
“muscle -tension” type headache.  About 17 out of every 100 people will experience a mild 
headache with this type of magnetic stimulation.  If a headache occurs, it usually st arts during 
or immediately after the low frequency magnetic stimulation and lasts from minutes to hours 
later.  The headache usually goes away with standard over the counter pain medications 
Patient Consent Form  
IRB Protocol # 6427  
Version 07/28/167 (acetaminophen, ibuprofen, Toradol (ketorolac tromethamine)).  Ne ck pain may also occur, 
and it is also usually managed easily with the same standard over the counter painkillers.  You 
may also experience some discomfort on your head where the coil is held.  This is due to 
contraction of scalp muscles.  The clicking noi se produced during the stimulation may 
temporarily affect hearing.  The earplugs will reduce this risk.  
Blood tests :  A blood sample will be taken to carry out typically recommended studies 
before convulsive therapy. For most people, drawing blood does n ot cause any serious 
problems. However, there is a risk of bleeding, bruising, discomfort, dizziness, infections and 
pain at the needle site.   These side effects usually go away in a few days.  
Clinical Evaluation, Neuropsychological Procedures and Physical Examination:   
There are no known or expected risks to you from the interview about your history.  There are 
no known risks of the physical and neurological examination.  The interviews are time 
consuming and they are about personal matters. It is possible that you will feel upset, tired or 
anxious. If this happens, you can choose not to answer specific questions or ask to have the 
interview stopped at any time.  
Unforeseen risks:  A previously unknown problem could result from your participation 
in this research. There could be an interaction between MST/ECT/anesthesia medication, and 
other medications you take (prescribed or over the counter). It is not possible to estimate the 
chances of such problems or how serious the problems could be.  
Benefit s 
You may or may not benefit from this study. Whether you are assigned to receive ECT 
or MST, your depression may improve, although there is no guarantee that this will happen. 
Information obtained from this study may add to knowledge about safer treatm ents for severe 
depression.  
Confidentiality  
Your right to privacy and the confidentiality of your participation in this project, should 
you choose to participate, will be safeguarded and, if research papers are written, you will not be 
mentioned by name. Research records, like other medical and clin ical records, will be kept 
confidential to the extent permitted by law. Any information obtained during this study and 
identified wi th you will remain confidential. Records will be available to the research staff, and 
Federal, State and I nstitutional regul atory personnel , who may review records as part of the 
routine audits . There are legal advocacy organizations that have the authority under state law to 
access otherwise confidential research records, though they cannot re -disclose this information 
without  your consent. All information will be stored in locked files and will not have your name 
or any other identifying information associated with it.  
All data (written and electronic) will be coded. A master list matching the subject with 
codes will be kept under lock and key, separate from any research records or the computer 
database, with access restricted to research staff, to the extent permitted by law.  Only staff 
directly involved in this project will have access to the master list linking your name t o code 
numbers. Your name and other personal identifying information will be stored in an 
electronically secure database at the New York State Psychiatric Institute . 
Patient Consent Form  
IRB Protocol # 6427  
Version 07/28/168  A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as 
required by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include information that can identify you. At most, the 
Web site will include a summary of the results. You can search this Web site at any time.
You should know that if we learn that you or someone else is threatened with serious 
harm, such as a child or an elderly person being abused, the investigators would take actions to 
protect you and others, including reporting these situations to proper authorities.   
Study  Compensation   
There is no cost for participation in this study.  You will not be paid to participate in 
this study.  
In Case of Injury  
Federal regulations require that we inform you about our institution's policy with regard 
to compensation and payment for treatment o f research -related injuries.  Short term emergency 
medical treatment, which has been determined to be necessary by New York State Psychiatric 
Institute's doctors, and which is within the capability of New York State Psychiatric Institute 
will be provided.  In addition, we will provide assistance in arranging follow up care in such 
instances.  
New York State Psychiatric Institute or Research Foundation for Mental Hygiene does 
not provide compensation or payment for treatment of research related injuries.  Ho wever, you 
should be aware  that participation in this research does not waive any of your legal rights to 
seek such compensation through the courts.  
Your participation in this research study is completely voluntary.  You may refuse to 
participate or withdraw at any time, without loss of benefits to which you are otherwise 
entitled. The Investigator may also end your participation in this study if it is  no longer in your 
best interests to participate, if you do not keep appointments or follow instructions, or if the 
study is ended prematurely. Such a decision will not affect your medical care at the New York 
State Psychiatric  Institute, now or in the fut ure.  The doctors conducting this research study are 
also responsible for your clinical care.  
Questions  
The principal investigator, Dr. Rowny, will answer to the best of his ability any 
questions you may have now or in the future about this study and research procedures . If you 
have any questions about the study procedures  or about  your response to the procedures , you 
may contact Dr. Rowny at (646) 774-5417 . You  will be given the opportunity to discuss in 
confiden ce any questions you may have. You will be given a copy of this consent form for you 
to keep.  
If you have any questions about your rights as a research participant, want to provide  
feedback, or have a complaint, you may call the NYSPI Institutional Review Board (IRB).(An 
IRB is a committee tha t protects the rights of participants  in research studies). You  may call 
the IRB Main Office  at (646)774 -7155 during regular office hours.  
Patient Consent Form  
IRB Protocol # 6427  
Version 07/28/169 Statement of Consent  
I voluntarily agree to participate in the research study described above.  
Signature of parti cipant________________________________ Date________________  
Printed name of participant_____________________________  
I have discussed the proposed research with this patient including the risks, benefits, an d 
alternatives to participation (including the alternative of not participating in the research). The 
participant has had an opportunity to ask questions  and in my opinion, this patient is capable of 
freely consenting to participate in this research.  
Signed:  ____________________________________  
Print name:   _________ ____________________ _____ Date_________________  
Person Designated to Obtain Consent  
Project Director:  Stefan B Rowny, M.D.  
Division of Brain Stimulation and Therapeutic Modulation  
New York State Psychiatric In stitute  
(646) 774 -5417  
Capacity to Consent Addendum   Protocol # 6427  
I have examined                                                       on ________ ____ for the purpose of 
determining whether he/she is capable of understanding the purpose, nature, risks, benefits and 
alternatives (including non -participation) of the research, making a decision about 
participation, and understanding that the decision about participation in the research will 
involve no penalty or loss of benefits to which the patient is otherwise ent itled, for Dr. Stefan 
Rowny’ s research project “ Improving Outcomes in Geriatr ic Depression: Magnetic  Seizure 
Therapy ”.  On the basis of this examination I have arrived at the conclusion that:  
______ A.  This patient has this capacity at this time.  
______ B.   There is a question about this patient’s capacity at this time.  
______ C.   This patient clearly lacks this capacity.  
Signature    Date 
Print ed Name  
Member of Treatment Team  MD or PhD  (not a co -Investigator)  