Providing comprehensive harm reduction via telemedicine for PWID  
using syringe services  programs: a feasibility stud y 
 
P1 
Protocol Version: 5/19 /2020  
 
 
  
1. Introduction  
 
The U.S. South is suffering from alarmingly high rates of both opioid misuse and new HIV 
infections , including two counties in North Carolina: New Hanover and Mecklenburg.  
Wilmington , located in New Hanover County,  has the highest rate of opioid prescription misuse 
in the nation, with misuse occurring among 12% of individuals who received an opioid 
prescription [1]. Studies have shown that when opioids are misused, there is a higher tendency 
towards injection use and transitioning from prescription opioids to heroin [2-6]. Mecklenburg 
County, home to the largest city  in North Carolina - Charlotte, is ranked first in North Carolina for 
rates of newly diagnosed HIV infections [7], and has one of the highest rates in the U.S. As 
such, Mecklenburg County has been identified as a priority area for the national  program Ending 
the HIV Epidemic  (https://www.hiv.gov/federal -response/ending -the-hiv-epidemic/overview). 
Although the  HIV prevalence among people who inject drugs (PWID) in these two counties, or in 
North Carolina overall, is not known, the high rates of both HIV and injection drug use warrant 
targeted efforts.     
 
To help reduce HIV transmission associated with North Ca rolina’s opioid epidemic, legislation 
was passed in July 2016 legalizing free syringe services programs (SSPs). In the Wilmington 
area, there are currently one fixed site and three mobile sites for syringe access . In Charlotte, 
there are three fixed sites for syringe access . Together, these organizations, who will serve as 
community partners in this pr oject, have dispensed over 1,000,000 syringes in 2018 -2019, 
serving approximately 5,000 participants and represent tremendous progress towards HIV 
prevention in North Carolina.  
 
Successful HIV prevention programs for PWID are comprehensive and should offe r resources 
that are accessible and acceptable to the target population. Along with SSPs, these resources 
include medication s such as daily oral pre -exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) with 
tenofovir/emtricitabine, and combination buprenorphine and naloxone (bup/n x) for opioid use 
disorder. PrEP has been proven effective for reducing HIV acquisition among PWID [1, 8] . 
Similarly, medication for opioid use disorder (MOUD) with bup/nx has been shown to 
significantly reduce cravings, overdoses and death [9]. In addition, because bup/nx reduces 
cravings, it can result in decreased injection drug use and  needle sharing, which decreases the 
risk for drug -related HIV risk behaviors [10]. While both PrEP and MOUD are FDA approved – 
they remain underutilized, particularly among people who use drugs, for a variety of reasons 
including lack of awareness, cost, and lack of providers and/or access [11-14]. 
 
Providing PrEP and MOUD via SSPs represents one way to reach PWID, a particularly difficult 
to reach population. In 2018 we collected primary data from PWID attending SSPs, many of 
whom were at risk for HIV. Participants reported that they would be interested and willing to take 
PrEP  and would prefer to access PrEP at SSPs (versus going to a medical clinic or health 
department). Building on this preliminary research, we will conduct a feasibility study in which 
we will provide both PrEP and MOUD for PWID utilizing SSPs in New Hanover and 
Mecklenburg counties. To facilitate access to care, telemedicine will be used for  follow -up visits. 
Prior studies have shown no difference in outcomes between patients receiving opioid use 
disorder treatment through telemedicine or from face to face encounters [15, 16] . Similarly, 
there have been successful strategies for telemedicine -delivered PrEP [17].  
Providing comprehensive harm reduction via telemedicine for PWID  
using syringe services  programs: a feasibility stud y 
 
P2 
Protocol Version: 5/19 /2020  
 
 
  
Given that the national opioid epidemic continues to escalate with alarming consequences, 
including heightened risk of new HIV infections, we think there is a critical need to identify novel 
ways to provide harm reduction to this population. Partnering with SSPs and providing follow up 
through telemedicine will create an innovative and much -needed opportunity to provide 
evidence -based prevention strategies for a difficult -to-reach population.  
 
2. Purpose and study objectives  
 
The purpose  of this study is to provide medication for opioid use disorder ( MOUD) with 
buprenorphine and naloxone, or bup/nx,  and pre-exposure prophylaxis ( PrEP ) for HIV 
prevention for persons who inject opioids accessing syringe services programs ( SSPs ), as p art 
of a comprehensive harm reduction program, and assess the acceptability and feasibility of 
using telemedicine to implement the program.  
 
The initial visit  will be conducted  either  in person  or remotely via telemedicine given COVID -19 
protocols  at the SSP sites in Charlotte  and Wilmington ; follow -up visits will be conducted via 
telemedicine. The study will include a site coordinator at each site and a central study 
coordinator. The site coordinators will be trained p hlebotomists , responsible for follow -up visit 
scheduling and coordination, and collection of urine and blood samples. The central study 
coordinator will be responsible for participant screening, formal consenting, and collection of 
baseline and follow up participant questionnaires.  
 
The study  objectives  are the following:  
 
a) To assess u ptake and persistence to bup/nx and PrEP as part of a comprehensive harm 
reduction program among people who inject drugs using SSPs.  
b) To assess f easibility  and acceptability of implementing a telemedicine -based  MOUD and 
PrEP program among program im plementers  
c) To assess f easibi lity and acceptability of partic ipating in a telemedicine -based  MOUD 
and PrEP program among users  (this objective will be assessed in an ancillary protocol ) 
 
3. Study population  and setting  
 
The study population is people who inject drugs, specifically opioids, and who access  services 
at SSPs . The setting s is the SSP  sites in Wilmington in New Hanover County and Charlotte in 
Mecklenburg County.  
 
4. Study design  
 
We plan to enroll 20 PWID  (10 at each site)  accessing the participating SSP  sites in Charlotte  
and Wilmington , NC. Participants will be enrolled in the study for 6 months. At the end of the 
study, they will be referred to MOUD and P rEP providers identified in the community.  
 
5. Eligibility, sample size, recruitment, and data collection   
 
Providing comprehensive harm reduction via telemedicine for PWID  
using syringe services  programs: a feasibility stud y 
 
P3 
Protocol Version: 5/19 /2020  
 
 
 Eligibility :  Participants must have a history of self -report injection opioid use in the past 6 
months , participat e in SSPs , be HIV negative , willing to take bup/nx  and PrEP  for 6 months,  
have no  medical contraindications  for these medications  such as history of renal failure or bone 
diseases , not be pregnant and be 18 years or older. In addition, participants must not currently 
be taking PrEP or any form of MOUD, and have either a history of sharing injection or drug 
preparation equipment or risk of sexual acquisition of HIV (such as engaging in sex work or men 
who have sex with men) i n the past 6 months.  
 
Exclusion criteria :  Positive pregnancy test , positive HIV test  at enrollment , altered mental status 
in which participant cannot sign a consent form, or evidence of renal failure ( estimated 
creatinine clearance <60 mL/min ) will be cause for exclusion from the study . Although hepatitis 
B is not necessarily a contraindication to PrEP use, participants who are hepatitis B surface 
antigen positive will be excluded from this study and referred to an experienced hepatitis B and 
PrEP provider.  
 
In the event that a participant becomes incarcerated during the course of the study, the study 
team will withdraw  the participant from the protocol and cease any ongoing study activities, 
including  ongoing  data collection. If a participant becomes pregnant on study, they will also be 
withdrawn  from the study , and all efforts will be made to link the pregnant woman to PrEP and 
MOUD services in the community without lapse.  For participants who withdraw from the study, 
all data  already collected  will be stored securely within the Duke electronic medical record.  
 
Sample size :  We plan to enroll 20 PWID  (10 at each site) . If a participant  drops out before 
completing the 6 months, we will consider enrolling another participant to fill the  spot.  
Participants  will be allowed to stay on study even if they stop taking one of the paired  
medication s.  
 
Recruitment:   Participants for this study will be clients of the SSP s who have expressed 
interest in the study.  Participants  will be recruited through the primary fixed SSP in Charlotte 
and through the fixed SSP in Wilmington . There will be recruitment flyers hanging in the SSP 
central office s, and additional recruitment flyer s may be placed in the supply bags provided to 
SSP clients. These fliers will direct  people  to reach out to the central study coordinator  or ask 
SSP staff/site coordinators to facilitate the connection with the  study coordinator.    
 
The central study coordinator will perform a short screener with SSP clients who are interested 
in participating in the study to ensure they are eligible for participation. Their answers will not be 
used as data, only determine wheth er we can schedule an appointment to go through the formal 
consent.  
 
The study  provider/ primary investi gator  (PI), and the central study coordinator  will be on site or 
remote via telemedicine due to COVID -19 protocols during enrollment visits  to conduct  
participant consenting, and obtain baseline surveys . The site coordinator  will be on site to 
complete  laboratory testing . 
 
Informed consent:   At each site  during the enrollment visit , identified  participants who are 
interested and eligible will sign a consent  or e-consent  to enroll in the study. This consent will be 
provided by the central  study coordinator, who has  completed all necessary Research Ethics 
Providing comprehensive harm reduction via telemedicine for PWID  
using syringe services  programs: a feasibility stud y 
 
P4 
Protocol Version: 5/19 /2020  
 
 
 training and  undergone Duke ’s informed consent training . The study  provider/ PI and the study 
coordinator  will be able to answer any questions or concerns about the consent in person  or 
remotely given COVID -19 protocol . 
 
The participant will then meet with the study  provider/ PI to conduct the initial visit.  
 
Data collection:  
 
Enrollment  visit:  
 Consen t and baseline data collection : Participants  will be given information about  the 
study and about  MOUD  and PrEP  in general . If interested, participants will provide  
written informed consent  or e-consent using REDCap . After signing the consent  form, 
participants will be provided with a baseline self-administered survey  to collect 
demographics, HIV risk behaviors, and substance use history. Specific questions  will 
include 1) previous drug, alcohol, and needle use, 2) sexual practices; 3) demographic 
questions; 4) recent or previous incarceration, 5) frequency of participation in SSPs and 
secondary syringe access sites , 6) HIV risk perceptions, 7) awareness of PrEP, 8) 
interest in taking PrEP, 9) history of HIV testing, and 10) health services utilization.  
 
 Initial visit with the study  provider/ PI:  The initial study visit will take place in person  or 
remotely via telemedicine in response to COVID -19 with the study  provider/ PI after the 
participant has been consented and completed the baseline survey with the central 
study coordinator.  
During the initial  visit with the study  provider/ PI, participants  will undergo laboratory testing 
including:  
 HIV antigen/antibody  (2 mL) , comprehensive metabolic panel (1 mL) including serum 
creatinine and liver function tests , hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B core 
antibody, hepatitis C  antibody (hepatitis serologies total 4 mL)  
 Urine  pregnancy (if female , under the age of 5 5 years, and without documented 
sterilization)  
 Urine tox icology  screen ing 
 
Labs will be drawn by the site coordinator on site , and will be picked up by a local LabCorp 
representative. The total amount of blood requested is 6 mL at the initial visit.  The participants 
cannot remain in the study if they refuse the lab draws or pregnancy test (if female). However, 
they can refuse the urine toxicology screen.  
 
All study activities will occur in a safe, confidential, and private space at the SSP. Results f rom 
the lab testing will be available in 1 -2 days after the lab draw. Participants who receive a 
positive HIV test will be counseled by the study  provider/ PI per CDC guidelines [18] and referred 
to the respective  county  health department s (or primary care provider, if patient prefers) for 
confirmatory testing . HIV testing is performed at the  New Hanover and Mecklenburg Health 
Department s free-of-charge Monday to Friday. Bus passes will be offered to participants 
needing HIV confirmatory testing, and study staff will follow up with those individuals.  Because 
HIV is a reportable disease in North Carolina  (NC) , all participants will be advis ed that their 
contact information  will be submitted to NC Department of Health and Human Services 
(NCDHHS) if they test HIV positive , and that a NCDHHS Disease Intervention Specialist will 
Providing comprehensive harm reduction via telemedicine for PWID  
using syringe services  programs: a feasibility stud y 
 
P5 
Protocol Version: 5/19 /2020  
 
 
 then contact them to facilitate entry into care.  Being HIV positive  is an exclusion for this study, 
and participants will be informed of this.  
 
All participants who receive a positive hepatitis C test will be referred for hepatitis care in 
Charlotte  or Wilmington . Participants will be given the referral information and e ncouraged to 
call for follow -up. Hepatitis C does not exclude an individual from participation  and these 
persons will be encouraged to participate  in the study.  Participants  with a positive hepatitis B 
surface antigen will be excluded and referred to the appropriate medical provider (as mentioned 
above).  
 
Medications  
 
Bup/nx require s induction , and office -based prescription guidelines will be followed closely. A 
too gradual induction may precipitate withdrawal. Typically, participants on day 1 will be given a 
total induction dosage of 8 mg of bup/nx. On day 2, the dose can be increased to 16 mg, which 
is the common recommended target dose. Subxone® comes as a sublingual film  and 
participants will be advised to keep it out of sig ht and reach of others, especially children . The 
participant will be advised that they have to start bup/nx when they are in withdrawal (typically 
12 hours from last opioid dose) or else it will trigger  withdrawal symptoms . 
 
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine (trade name Truvada®)  for PrEP  is very well 
tolerated and taken once daily. Tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine (trade name Descovy®) for 
PrEP will not be used in this study as it has not b een studied in persons who inject drugs. 
Participants will be advised of the ‘start up’ syndrome which includes some nausea, flat ulence 
and gastrointestinal distress typically in the first 2 weeks . Participants will also be advised that it 
can take up to 2 0 days before maximum intracellular concentrations of the medication are 
reached in the blood and that they should take other precautions to prevent HIV in that time 
period.  
 
Bup/nx will be provided free of charge to all participants through grant funding . PrEP (or 
Truvada®) will be obtained through the participant’s medical insurance or if uninsured, the 
Gilead Advancing Access Program (https://www.gileadadvancingaccess.com). The paperwork 
for the Gilead assistance program will be completed by the study c oordinator  in conjunction with 
Walgreens (see below) . For persons who are insured, Gilead co -pay cards will be provided to 
offset any costs of the medications.  
 
Participants will be able to access their prescriptions for both Suboxone® and Truvada®  at a 
designated lo cal Walgreens in the Wilmington/ Charlotte area, where the study team has set up 
a contract and the pharmacy is aware of the program and will provide support. Participants can 
also choose to have their  Truvada®  delivered by the specialty/mail -order Walgreens in order to 
avoid potential issues with transportation. Mail order is not an option for Suboxone, however, 
and participants  will need to pick up the medication weekly from Walgreens in the local area. 
There is a possibility that these weekly visits can be extended to biweekly, decided by the study  
provider/ PI. 
 
Follow up visits:  
 
Providing comprehensive harm reduction via telemedicine for PWID  
using syringe services  programs: a feasibility stud y 
 
P6 
Protocol Version: 5/19 /2020  
 
 
 Follow -up vis its with the study  provider/ PI will be conducted via telemedicine  (also referred to as 
telehealth ), scheduled by the site coordinator . For the first month  (Month 1) , there will be weekly 
telemedicine visits conducted by the study  provider/ PI with each study participant  to ensure that 
they are stable on the appropriate bup/nx dose . In a private location in each  SSP, participants 
will be ab le to access the Duke MaestroCare telehealth p latform . This platfo rm enables secure, 
encrypted, and effective audio/video communication between the pa rticipant and provider.  The 
study  provider/ PI and SSP site will use the Duke teleheal th platform with an embedded camera, 
and the platform will transmit real -time audio and video captured by high -definition camera and 
integrated microphone. Both endpoints encompass  a secure and encrypted platform approved 
by Duke Heal th System Information Security. The site coordinator will be present to provide 
technical assistance with the telehealth platform.  
Starting a t Month 2, the telemedicine visits will take place monthly. At that point, participants 
should be stable on the appropriate bup/nx doses . Participants will be asked to complete a 
questionnaire  at Month 3 and Month 6  which include questions on HIV risk and drug use, as 
well as adherence evaluation for both bup/nx and PrEP.  
Lab testing during follow up visits  
During  the weekly tele medicine  visits for Month 1, the site coordinator will perform urine 
toxicology (‘tox’)  screens weekly  on site  (although not mandatory) and urine  pregnancy tests  
weekly for female  participant s on site unless an alternative form of contraception can be 
confirmed. Starting at Month 2, urine tox screens and pregnancy tests (for females) will be 
requested at monthly visits.  
At Month 3 and  Month 6 , participants will have blood drawn  by the site coordinator  to test  for 
HIV antibody/antigen and a repeat comprehensive metabolic panel . Labs w ill be picked up by 
LabCorp and results sent directly from LabCorp to the study  provider/ PI. The total amount of 
blood for follow up visits is 3 mL.  
Unscheduled visits  
Participants will be able to contact the study  provider/ PI on an unscheduled visit basis as 
needed. The site coordinator  will reach out to  the provider by pager/cell phone /email, and if 
possible, a telemedicine visit will be set up. Direct p hone calls with the study  provider/ PI will also 
be an option if there an u rgent medical question.  In the event of an urgent medical problem, 
participants will be referred to their primary care provider or an  urgent care /emergency room  in 
their area . 
Of note, the study  provider/ PI is an infectious disease physician with 15 years of experi ence 
treating persons with HIV. She has conducted many HIV clinical research trials including 
working with PWID in SSPs. She is the Medical Director of the Duke PrEP Clinic which has 
treated >300 persons for PrEP. She is an experienced buprenorphi ne provider who frequently 
participates in the  UNC ECHO Lab case conferences which provides support and mentoring for 
MOUD.  She also has worked with the Duke Telehealth Office on telemedicine -related activities 
and has their support for this project.   
Providing comprehensive harm reduction via telemedicine for PWID  
using syringe services  programs: a feasibility stud y 
 
P7 
Protocol Version: 5/19 /2020  
 
 
 Schedule  of study activities  (all visits to occur at SSP)  
*Information on interviews in ancillary protocol  
 
 
6. Data analysis  
 
The total number to treat will be 20 (10 at each site) as this is a pilot/feasibility study. We will 
consider enrolling new participants if there is an early withdrawal.  
 
For Objective 1, w e will use descriptive statistics to describe the baseline characteristics of the 
sample , including their demographics, sexual and injection risk behaviors , history of substance 
abuse , perceptions of and interest in MOUD, and awareness of and interest in using PrEP .  
 
For Objective 2, w e will collect feasibility information such as how many times the PI and  study 
coordi nator travelled to the SSP site, how many telemedicine visits occurred per participant, 
how long the visits lasted, how many were rescheduled or did not happen on time. Similar 
information will be collected from SSP staff who participated in this program.  
 
By the end of the study, we hope to determine the following:  
 
1. The proportion of persons who demonstrate no or minimal opioid use  Week  Description of visit  
Week 1  
Enrollment 
Visit Consent and demographics:  participant consent; baseline questionnaire  
Initial visit with the study  provider/ PI: screening; baseline laboratory 
investigations; patient assistance application for PrEP; prescriptions sent  to 
pharmacy; begin medications  
Week 2  Telemedicine visit ; urine tox screen; urine pregnancy test  
Week 3  Telemedicine visit ; urine tox screen; urine pregnancy test  
Week 4  Telemedicine visit; urine tox screen; urine pr egnancy test  
1st interview* conducted at the end of the first month  
Month 2  Telemedicine visit; urine tox screen; urine pregnancy test  
Month 3  Telemedicine visit; f/u questionnaire; laboratory investigations (including urine 
tox and pregnancy tests)  
Month 4  Telemedicine visit; urine tox screen; urine pregnancy test  
Month 5  Telemedicine visit; urine tox screen; urine pregnancy test  
Month 6  Telemedicine visit; f/u questionnaire; laboratory investigations (including urine 
tox and pregnancy test); final  interview*  
Providing comprehensive harm reduction via telemedicine for PWID  
using syringe services  programs: a feasibility stud y 
 
P8 
Protocol Version: 5/19 /2020  
 
 
 a. Defined as  completing Month 3 and Month 6 visits with self -reported opioid use 
on ≤4 days i n the past  mont h and /or 2 or more consecutive negative  urine tests . 
2. The proportion of persons who remain HIV negative . 
a. Measured via negative HIV test at Month 3 and Month 6  
3. Retention or persistence in care  
a. Defined as the proportion who remain on treatment  (MOUD, PrEP or both) at 
Month 3 and Month 6  
b. We will also examine whether participants a re more apt to remain on 
paired/combined therapy compared to individual treatment .  
 
7. Reimbursement  
 
Medical care and medications are being provided free of charge and p articipants will be 
provided with bus passes to cover all visits to the SSP (weekly for Month 1 and then monthly 
until end of study)  and to the pharmacy . Participants will be offered additional bus passes for 
unscheduled visits  if needed.  
 
 
Description of Potential Risks  
The study will provide  MOUD with bup/nx  and a prescription for PrEP for 6 months. At the end 
of study, all participants will be linked with local MOUD  and PrEP clinics  in Charlotte  to ensure 
continuity of care. These clinics  will be identified early in the study.  If participants are leaving the 
area, assistance will be given to  locate an appropriate clinic.  
 
Bup/nx : If participants are not in withdrawal at time of induction, bup/nx can precipitate 
withdrawal. There is also the risk of overdose, misuse  and abuse, especially if participants are 
using concomitant benzodiazepines and other central nervous system  depressan ts, including 
alcohol. These risks and side effects will be discussed with participants  and a handout detailing 
these adverse effects will be provided . Additionally , participants will be encouraged to keep the 
medication in secure storage and out of sight and reach of others, especially children.  
 
There is also risk of abrupt discontinuation of bup/nx due to incarceration, loss of access, 
withdrawal from the study , noncompliance, or diversion.  
 
Lab results including HIV/hepatitis :  Participants may become worried or anxious when 
waiting for their test results. They will be informed  that they can speak with the study  provider/ PI 
about their concerns if they wish.  
 
Potential loss of confidentiality: Every effort will be made to protect partici pants’ privacy and 
confidentiality ; however, as with all research, there is no guarantee that privacy and 
confidenti ality can be fully maintained. Therefore, t here is the potential risk of loss of 
confidentiality . 
 
If a participant indicates potential harm  to self or others, this will need to be addressed 
appropriately and with sensitivity. Any disclosures will be handled within the framework of 
existing legal mandates, clinical practice, and social norms. When possible, disclosures will be 
discussed with t he participant to determine the best management alternatives. This may include 
Providing comprehensive harm reduction via telemedicine for PWID  
using syringe services  programs: a feasibility stud y 
 
P9 
Protocol Version: 5/19 /2020  
 
 
 notifying family members, referring to medical treatment, calling emergency services, or 
escorting the participant to a local hospital in Wilmington or Charlotte . When required by law, 
the Police Department and/or the Department of Social Services will be notified.  
Anticipated Benefits  
 
Participants are benefiting in that they will receive M OUD  and PrEP  at no cost , medications that 
have demonstrated efficacy for reducing opioid use and preventing HIV infection, respectively.  
 
Confidentiality /Data Safety and Monitoring  
 
We will have several p rocedures in place to protect participants’ privacy and to keep their data 
confidential.  
1. We will obtain a Certificate of Confidentiality (COC) from the National Institutes of Health  
so we are able to legally refuse to disclose information that may identify participants in 
any federal, state, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative,  or other proceedings 
(IRB approval must first be granted before the NIH will issue a COC).  We will not 
conduct any study procedures until the COC is obtained.   
 
2. All research activities will be conducted in private locations.  
 
3. Participant s will be issued a Duke medical record number to be used on all  study 
documents instead of participants’ names.  
 
4. All participant information will be stored within the Duke electronic medical record.  
 
5. Participants will not be mentioned by name in any report or publication , nor will any 
information be included that could be easily traced back to an individual . All study results 
will be presented in aggregate.  
 
6. Any electronic data files  other than patient med ical records will be stored in a folder on 
the secure Duke server   
 
7. All hard copies of data generated during the study (handwritten notes, consent forms) 
will be stored in a locked cabinet within a locked office at the study site only accessible 
by the study team. Files will only remain at the study site until the study t eam can 
retrieve them and scan and upload them to create electronic copies. The paper copies 
will then be destroyed as per University guidelines.  
 
8. All data will be stored securely at Duke University for up to 6 years after completion of 
the study.  
 
8. Ethics    
Ethics  Training  
 
Providing comprehensive harm reduction via telemedicine for PWID  
using syringe services  programs: a feasibility stud y 
 
P10 
Protocol Version: 5/19 /2020  
 
 
 Study staff will have completed all required research ethics training prior to contact with any participant or 
their data. Site coordinators will be fully trained in Duke Research Ethics training.  
 
Study Monitoring  
Standard operating protocols will be developed for each site. We will also be monitoring for 
bup/nx misuse and diversion via urine tox screens , although they will not be mandatory . 
Participants who test negative for bup/nx will not be taken off the study; rather, they will 
counseled on the importance and benefits for MOUD.   
We will have weekly team meetings with each  of the SSPs to ensure that we are on track. This 
will include reviewing enrollment and retention rates, and making adjustments as needed to 
ensure that the project objectives  are being met.  
 
  
Providing comprehensive harm reduction via telemedicine for PWID  
using syringe services  programs: a feasibility stud y 
 
P11 
Protocol Version: 5/19 /2020  
 
 
 References  
 
1. Castlight Health, The opioid crisis in America's workforce . 2016: San Francisco, CA.  
2. Mars, S.G., et al., "Every 'never' I ever said came true": transitions from opioid pills to 
heroin injecting.  Int J Drug Policy, 2014. 25(2): p. 257 -66. 
3. Lankenau, S.E., et al., Initiation into prescription opioid misuse amongst young injection 
drug users.  Int J Drug Policy, 2012. 23(1): p. 37 -44. 
4. Young, A.M. and J.R. Havens, Transi tion from first illicit drug use to first injection drug 
use among rural Appalachian drug users: a cross -sectional comparison and 
retrospective survival analysis.  Addiction, 2012. 107(3): p. 587 -96. 
5. Al-Tayyib, A.A., et al., Association between prescript ion drug misuse and injection 
among runaway and homeless youth.  Drug Alcohol Depend, 2014. 134: p. 406 -9. 
6. Neaigus, A., et al., Potential risk factors for the transition to injecting among non -injecting 
heroin users: a comparison of former injectors and never injectors.  Addiction, 2001. 
96(6): p. 847 -60. 
7. North Carolina HIV/STD/HepatitisSurveillance Unit (2019), 2018 North Carolina HIV 
Surveillance Report. , D.o.P.H. North Carolina Department of Health and Human 
Services, Communicable Disease Branch., Ed itor.: Raleigh, North Carolina.  
8. Choopanya, K., et al., Antiretroviral prophylaxis for HIV infection in injecting drug users 
in Bangkok, Thailand (the Bangkok Tenofovir Study): a randomised, double -blind, 
placebo -controlled phase 3 trial.  Lancet, 2013. 381(9883): p. 2083 -90. 
9. Velander, J.R., Suboxone: Rationale, Science, Misconceptions.  Ochsner J, 2018. 18(1): 
p. 23 -29. 
10. Sullivan, L.E., et al., Buprenorphine/naloxone treatment in primary care is associated 
with decreased human immunodeficiency virus risk behaviors.  J Subst Abuse Treat, 
2008. 35(1): p. 87 -92. 
11. Bazzi, A.R., et al., Limited Knowledge and Mixed Interest in Pre -Exposure Prophylaxis 
for HIV Prevention Among People Who Inject Drugs.  AIDS Patient Care STDS, 2018. 
32(12): p. 529 -537. 
12. Edelman, E.J., et al., Primary Care Physicians' Willingness to Prescribe HIV Pre -
exposure Prophylaxis for People who Inject Drugs.  AIDS Behav, 2017. 21(4): p. 1025 -
1033.  
13. Molfenter, T., et al., Barriers to Buprenorphine Expansion in Ohio: A Time -Elapsed 
Qualitative Study.  J Psychoactive Drugs, 2019. 51(3): p. 272 -279. 
14. Haffajee, R.L., et al., Characteristics of US Counties With High Opioid Overdose 
Mortality and Low Capacity to Deliver Medications for Opioid Use Disorder.  JAMA Netw 
Open, 2019. 2(6): p. e196373.  
15. Zheng, W., et al., Treatment Outcome Comparison Between Telepsychiatry and Face -
to-face Buprenorphine Medication -assisted Treatment for Opioid Use Disorder: A 2 -Year 
Retrospective Data Analysis.  J Addict Med, 2017. 11(2): p. 138 -144. 
16. Weint raub, E., et al., Expanding access to buprenorphine treatment in rural areas with 
the use of telemedicine.  Am J Addict, 2018. 27(8): p. 612 -617. 
17. Hoth, A.B., et al., Iowa TelePrEP: A Public -Health -Partnered Telehealth Model for HIV 
Pre-Exposure Prophyla xis (PrEP) Delivery in a Rural State.  Sex Transm Dis, 2019.  
18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Revised guidelines for HIV counseling, 
testing, and referral.  MMWR Recomm Rep, 2001. 50(RR-19): p. 1 -57; quiz CE1 -19a1 -
CE6-19a1.  