1 
 Document Last Updated on 0 8/2018 
Cost -Effectiveness of a n Integrated Telemedicine -Home Visitation Program for 
Children with Medical Complexity : A Quality Improvement (QI) Pilot Project  
Co-Principal Investigator s: Elenir B.C. Avritscher, MD, PhD, MBA1 
     Ricardo A. Mosquera, MD1 
Co-Investigators : Claudia Pedroza, PhD1;                              
                            Tomika S. Harris, RN, PNP, DNP1;  
                            Matthew Harting, MD, MS2 
         Madelene Ottosen, PhD, MSN, RN3          
IT Consultants : Andrew Streckfuss, MBA, Manager of IT Projects and Research3  
1 Department of Pediatrics , 2 Department of Pediatric Surgery,  3 Center for Healthcare 
Quality and Safety ( CHQS ), The University of Texas Health Science Center ( UTH) 
 
On March 29, 2018 , the Institutional Review Board from The University of Texas Health 
Science Center  determined that this quality improvement project does not qualify  as 
human subject research.  
 
  
2 
 Abstract  
Children with medical complexity ( CMC ) account for <1% of all children but 
approximately 40% of all pediatric deaths and inpatient care spending in the U.S .1  
Optim izing their outcomes require s a comprehensi ve approach to augmenting care in all 
settings: clinic, hospital, and home. The clinic  component of our comprehen sive care 
(CC) program provides 24/7 access to an experienced team of primary care providers 
and subspecialists and r educe d their serious illnesses and hospital and ICU d ays by 47 -
69% and health -system costs by >$10,000  per child-year.2,3  Our hospital  component 
(inpatient cons ultation service) is further improv ing outcomes .  Having improved both 
inpatient and outpatient care, we now  propose to complete a  360 degree approach an d 
by develop ing and rigorously assess ing an integrated telemedicine -home -visitation 
program (THVP ) to augment care for CMC in their homes to reduce the need for clinic 
visits as well hospitalizations.  Building on prior expe rience in using telemedicine for 
children at UT H and evidence of benefits  in other populations , 4,5 our providers will use 
a convenient, inexpensive, HIPAA -compliant telemedicine platform to make 
observations in the home to augment care, help address acute problems remotely at 
any hour, better coordinate care with healthcare personnel, and thereby reduce clinic 
visits, ED visits, and hospitalizations.  Home visits will be conducted by a nurse home 
visitor  when ever considered likely to be beneficial for any of the CMC  and at least once 
by the primary care providers ( PCPs ) immediately  following enrollment of new 
technology -dependent children  following discharge home from the neonatal intensive 
care unit ( NICU ).  To promote reimbursements and further grant funding, w e will test the 
3 
 integrated TH VP in a randomized  quality improvement ( QI) pilot study  to verify its 
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness in reducing total days of care outside the home.   
Background  
Children with medical complexity ( CMC ) have one or more chronic illnesses, require 
treatment from multiple specialists, and  often  depend on medical technology for 
respiratory and nutritional support .6 Their care is fragmented, ineffective, and 
inefficient,2,7 and while they represent only 0.4% of all children in the U.S., they account 
for approximately 40% of pediatric deaths and hospital  charges.6  
Optimizing their outcomes is likely to require a comprehensive approach to their care in 
all settings: clinic, hospital, and home .  Our team has developed effective programs for 
their clinic and hospital care and now propose to add an innovative program to improve 
care in the home and verify it s incremental  cost effective ness.  
Our clinic component is provided in our High -Risk Children’s Clinic ( HRCC ), an 
enhanced medial home for CMC staffed by a highly experienced  team of nurse 
practitioners, pediatricians, and pediatric subspecialists. The multiple features to 
promote prompt effe ctive care at all hours include  24/7 c ell-phone access to our PCPs .  
As shown in our randomized trial (funded by a CMS Health  Care Innovation Award), this 
program reduced ED visits, hospital days, and ICU days by 47 -69%, and health system 
costs by $10,258 per child -year below that with usual care . This trial was published in 
JAMA,2 highlighted by CMS , and attracted national attention as the most rigorous 
evidence to date supporting medical homes for patient group .8,9  The remarkable cost  
effectiveness of this program was found in later cohort analyses to have been well 
4 
 maintained or enhanced when the program was expanded  to include all eligible CMC , 
including prior con trol children and new enrollees.3 
Our hospital component is an inpatient consultation service in which our HRCC staff 
consult and follow their  patients admitted to Children’s Memorial Hermann Hospital 
(CMHH ) to make treatment recommendations, coordinate care, and plan t heir 
discharge. We randomized half of HRCC patients to receive this service in pilot testing.   
Results indicate a major reduction in  inpatient days  for patients given the service vs. 
those not given the service :  289 vs. 615 total hospital days /100 child-years  with a 95 % 
(posterior) probability of reduced hospital days  in Bayesian analysis .  Having improved 
both inpatient and outpatient care, we now  propose to develop and rigorously assess a 
novel integrated telemedicine -home -visitation1  program  (THVP) to also  augment care 
for CMC in their home. We will test the program in a clinical trial to verify its 
effective ness and cost -effectiveness in reducing total days of care outside the home 
and to augment clinical practice and health  policy.   
Rationale  and Evidence Base  
As emphasized by Hoffman and Emanuel10: 
“Clinicians need to abandon their long-established approach of caring for patients in the 
hospital or the office…Patients spend most of their time away from the health care 
system and the focus has to be one of managing their health literally where they live 
                                                           
1 After the approval of the study protocol, the home visitation component of the integrated  intervention  was 
deemed not to be feasible with the available resources and personnel and  has not been implemented .  
5 
 with much more wireless monitor ing, electronic and phone visits, at -home care, and 
patient engagement .” 
Reducing the need for care outside the home is likely to be especially beneficial for our 
CMC; >90% are Medicaid  beneficiaries . Their parents have  limited resources and  many 
find it d ifficult or costly to miss work  and travel to Texas Medical Center.  Moreover, any 
time spent in a medical setting  imposes a risk of acquiring serious, even life -threating 
infection s for CMC.   
A systematic review by AHRQ  in 201611 reported that : 1) telemedicine promotes  
positive outcomes for chronically ill adults but has received little study for CMC , and 2) 
research to identify cost-effective models of telehealth deserves high priority.  
Home visits have been widely recommended to improve care and reduce clinic visits 
and hospitalizations.12-15  However, systematic reviews of home visitation have 
emphasized the need for further study, particularly for socially high -risk children.13  
To maximize the potential benefits, we will provide both interventions in an integrated 
program.  We will randomize the CMC in our HRCC to receive  either our usual complex 
care ( UCC  [including comprehensive outpatient care and inpatient consultation ] or 
THVP  (UCC plus this telemedicine -home -visitation program )   
Study Hypotheses  
Primary Hypothesis . THVP will reduce days of care outside the home  (in the clinic, ED, 
or hospital) .  
 
6 
 Secondary Hypotheses .   
1) THVP will reduce the rate of serious illness (death, PICU admission, or prolonged 
hospitalization >7 days);  
2) THVP will reduc e the rate and total number of ER visits ;  
3) THVP will reduc e the rate and total number of admissions;  
4) THVP will reduce the rate  and total number of readmissions within 30 days of 
discharge;  
5) THVP will reduce health system costs ; 
6) THVP will increase mate rnal rating on the National Survey of Children with Special 
Health Care Needs (NS-CHSCN) Section 4 ( Access to care: Utilization and Unmet 
Needs)  and on The Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems 
(CAHPS) Child  12-Month Survey ; 
7) The investigators  will implement multiple program refinements in learning to optimize 
THVP .   
Methods  
Population : Children treated in the HRCC (enrollment criteria: chronic condition; >2 
hospitalizations , or ≥1 pediatric ICU admission s in the year prior to enrollment ; and 
>50% estimated ri sk of hospitalization in the year after enrollment ). We will exclude 
HRCC patients with a  do-not-resuscitate status seen for compassionate care  and those 
without access to the Internet .  
Enrollment  and Randomization : The UTH i nstitutional review board has reviewed this 
study and d etermined that it does not qualify  as human subject research . As a result, 
7 
 the study was registered within the UTH QI Project database .   Partly because of 
differences in the number of routine visits, a ll eligible CMC will be stratified by age ( < 2 
years or older), whether or not they are assigned to receive inpatient consultation  from 
the HRCC personnel , and by baseline clinical risk  (high risk if < expected median risk or 
very high risk if > expected median risk , as judged by the clinic’s medica l director [R. 
Mosquera ] based on diagnoses and prior clinical  course) and randomized to either 
THVP  or UCC using a computer -generated algorithm in REDCap with variable block 
sizes.  Randomization will occur at baseline for the existing HRCC patients, before 
NICU  discharge for newly enrolled technology -dependent infants , and during  the first 
clinic visit for new non -technology -dependent  children.  Patient enrollment will occur 
between August  23, 2018 and August  22, 2020.  
Integrated Telemedicine -Home -Visitation P rogram : Our program is based on : 1) 
published findings of telemedicine or home visits in chronically ill children with diabetes, 
hemop hilia, or leukemia;5,13-15  2) our collaboration with Dr.  Harting in successfully using 
telemedicine for  postoperative follow -up visits  for approximately 40 children in the past 
14 months ; 3) consultation from IT personnel at UTH (Andrew Streckfuss, MBA, 
Manager of IT Projects and Research) who have setup the Zoom platform  at UTH . In 
refining the program  during the project, we expect to interact with  centers advancing 
telemedicine use for  children with asthma, diabetes, hemophilia, or leukemia.4,5  
Planned Telemedicine Features :  We will use the Zoom  Telehealth  platform, a fully 
HIPAA -compliant  and s ecure  video conferencing  software with  complete end -to-end 
encryption .  Because our c linic is already equipped with a smart television, web 
camera s, and an emergency IPhone, no additional equipment will be required.   With the 
8 
 help of HRCC staff, the families randomized to THVP  will download a free Zoom  
application to any Android or iPhone, which almost all our patients already have.  
Telemedicine , defined in this study as real-time patient -provider video encounters,  will 
be utilized systematically following  calls received by the PCPs during clinic hours from 
parents seeking medical advice or trying to schedu le same -day appointment s for their 
sick child and only when judged needed by the PCPs for phone calls to the HRCC cell 
phone on weeknights and weekends . It will also be used  systematically for follow -up 
visits following hospital discharge and as needed fo r other scheduled follow -up 
appointments . 
Home Visitation F eatures2. Home visits will be conducted by a nurse home visitor when 
needed  for any of the CMC  and by our primary care providers ( PCPs ) at least once 
shortly after discharge home from the hospital following enrollment of a new technology -
dependent child. Visits will be scheduled at a time convenient for the family . When 
needed for clinical or safety concerns, the nurse  visitor or the PCP will be joined by a 
respiratory therapist, dietician, social worker, or medical assistan t.  Home visits will not 
be conducted whenever  the visitor(s) feel unsafe . In these circumstances, we will r ely 
instead  on telemedicine.   
To promote care coordination and avoid fragmentation, t he nurse visitor is expected to 
schedule the needed home visits about twice a week and to provide nursing care in the 
HRCC on the remaining weekdays. As an integr al member of the clinic staff, t he nurse 
                                                           
2 After the approval of the study protocol, the home -visitation component of the integrated  intervention was 
deemed not to be feasible with the available resources and personnel and  has not been implemented .  
9 
 visitor will be able to familiarize with all the HRCC patients and, thus, better coordinate 
care during  the home visits . 
Before any planned home visits t he clinic team will develop goals and a specific plan for 
each visit to meet the patient and families specific needs. The planning will be 
conducted during the weekly HRCC team immediately preceding the home visit. 
During the home visit the providers  will foc us on:   
 (1) Home environment, to identify and  address problems that compromise the patient’s 
safety or health (e.g., allergens in the homes of children with severe asthma or poorly 
controlled allergies ).   
(2) Nutrition, to ensure that the chil d’s nutritional needs are met, that any special diets 
are well understood and properly provided,  and that weight gain is improving for 
children with failure -to-thrive.   
(3) Medications, to ensure that they are given  in the appropriate dose and schedule and 
not outdated, that important side effects are identified and addressed, and that any 
problems are well addressed.    
 (4) Medical equipment/supplies, to ensure that all necessary equipment (e.g. 
ventilators, monitor s, nasogastric or gastrostomy tubes, catheters, indwelling vascular 
lines, or telemedicine equipment) is in proper working condition, and used appropriately   
(5) Education and anticipatory guidance.  
(6)  Change s in medical c ondition, as identified based on  information communicated in 
the meetings noted above.  
10 
 (7) Care coordination, to remind the caregivers of upcoming appointments and schedule 
additional visits if needed .  
The providers  will promptly enter a note about the visit into the child’s medical re cords 
and use telemedici ne in the clinic to follow -up and assure that any problems identified 
are well addressed.  
Blinding : While the families and HRCC staff  cannot be blinded , the healthcare 
economist and the statistician will remain blinded to treatment group when performing  
the analyse s.  
Assessment of  Outcomes : Days of care  in the hospital  is already collected by  the 
research nurse who review s the ED and admission  logs of CMHH each weekday .  The 
HRCC providers ask the parents at each visit about outside hospital services .  Days of 
care in the  clinic will be collected and recorded by the nurses . In addition, we will also 
continue to assess claims data from UT Physicians and the 1 4 Memorial Hermann 
Health System (MHHS ) hospitals .  Parental ratings of care will be obtained annually by 
research personnel uninvolved in the care.   
Economic Evaluation  and Statistical Analyses : The incremental costs of THVP vs. UCC 
will be assessed from a health system perspective. Hospital costs will be based on  the 
costs obtained from the cost -accounting system  of the 14 hospitals in the Memorial 
Hermann Hospital System . The costs at other hospitals outside MHHS w ill be estimated 
based on the mean costs of these encounters at MHHS .  Clinic costs for comprehensive 
care will be estimated using the HRCC’s total expenditures  to account for the low 
11 
 patient -to-PCP ratio and the provision of multiple non -billable services not included in 
estimates derived from co nventional claims -based methods .   
The personnel time for providing office visits at the HRCC will be assessed by time 
motion studies and will be multiplied by personnel unit costs and the observed number 
of HRCC visits occurring in each treatment group during the study. The pers onnel time 
cost devoted to providing inpatient consultation will be assessed by multiplying the 
mean time spent on hospital consultations by the number of hospital days at CMHH 
occurring in each treatment group and by personnel unit costs. For the THVP gro up, we 
will add the time spent providing telemedicine consultation by tabulating data on overall 
Zoom usage and multiplying it by personnel unit costs. THVP costs will also be 
augmented by the time devoted to home visitation , monthly fees for the Zoom lice nses, 
and the HRCC staff time spent assisting patients with Zoom App installation and use. 
The above clinic costs d o not include some costs such as those of telephone 
consultations and of other clinic personnel.  As a result, to capture the full costs of 
providing CC, the above clinic costs w ill be subtracted from the total HRCC 
expenditures and the otherwi se unaccounted for CC costs will be  allocated to patients 
based on their length of follow -up during the study period.  All economic and statistical 
analys es will be  conducted using  multilevel generalized estimating linear model  (GLM ) 
models. Differences  in costs  between treatment groups will be assessed u sing a GLM  
model with log -link and gamma distribution. Number of days of care in a medical setting 
in the THVP  and UCC groups will be compared using a negative binomial G LM model 
with log link.   All the models will be adjusted for  baseline risk , age <2 or > 2 years, and 
within -family correlation.  
12 
 We will perform Bayesian analyses  to assess the effectiveness  of the THVP  in reducing 
treatment days outside the home relative to UCC (primary outcome ) using a neutral 
prior probability. Given the favorable prior evidence of benefit from THVP  in other 
conditions,4,11 a skeptical prior is considered unnecessary .  Based on our current 
number of patients and enrollment rates in the HR CC, we expect to randomize ~400 
patients during the 2 -year study for a total of ~800 child-years of follow -up.  THVP will 
be considered beneficial if: a) Bayesian analyses indicate it has a >67% (2 in 3) 
probability of reducing tr eatment days  outside the home ; and b) there is no evidence of 
an increase in adverse secondary outcomes. If so, provision of THVP could be 
recommended simply to increase access to care for vulnerable, disadvantaged children.  
Under predefined stopping rules, enrollment will cease if Bayesian analyses performed 
at the end of the 1st year identifies a 75% or greater probability that THVP results in 
reduced treatment days outside the home.    
Frequentist analysis will also be performed. For days of care outside the home, pow er 
will be ~80% to identify 20% reduction from the mean value of 10 days in the clinic, ED, 
or hospital days per child -year in the past year  (SD=10.5).    
13 
 References  
 
1. Simon TD, Berry J, Feudtner C, et al. Children with complex chronic conditions in inpatient 
hospital settings in the United States. Pediatrics. Oct 2010;126(4):647 -655.  
2. Mosquera RA, Avritscher EB, Samuels CL, et al. Effect of an enhanced medical home on  serious 
illness and cost of care among high -risk children with chronic illness: a randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA. Dec 24 -31 2014;312(24):2640 -2648.  
3. Avritscher EBC, Mosquera RA, Samuels CL, et al. An Enhanced Medical Home for High -Risk 
Chronically Ill Children: Are Benefits Identified During a Clinical Trial Sustained in Practice?  
Under Review . 
4. McLean S, Chandler D, Nurmatov U, et al. Telehealthcare for asthma. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. Oct 06 2010(10):CD007717.  
5. Looman WS, Antolick M, Cady RG, Lunos SA, Garwick AE, Finkelstein SM. Effects of a Telehealth 
Care Coordination Intervention on Perceptions of Health Care by Caregivers of Children With 
Medical Complexity: A Randomized Controlled Trial. J Pediatr Health Care. Jul-Aug 
2015;29(4):352 -363.  
6. Simmonds B, Turner N, Thomas L, et al. Patients' experiences of participating in a large -scale 
trial of cognitive behavioural therapy for depression: a mixed methods study. Fam Pract. Dec 
2013;30(6):705 -711.  
7. Kuo DZ, Cohen E, Agrawal R, Berry JG, Case y PH. A national profile of caregiver challenges 
among more medically complex children with special health care needs. Arch Pediatr Adolesc 
Med. Nov 2011;165(11):1020 -1026.  
8. Cohen E, Berry JG, Camacho X, Anderson G, Wodchis W, Guttmann A. Patterns and co sts of 
health care use of children with medical complexity. Pediatrics. Dec 2012;130(6):e1463 -1470.  
9. Homer CJ, Klatka K, Romm D, et al. A review of the evidence for the medical home for children 
with special health care needs. Pediatrics. Oct 2008;122(4) :e922 -937.  
10. Hoffman A, Emanuel EJ. Reengineering US health care. JAMA. Feb 20 2013;309(7):661 -662.  
11. Totten AM WD, Eden KB, et al. . Telehealth: Mapping the Evidence for Patient Outcomes From 
Systematic Reviews. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare R esearch and Quality (US); 2016 
June. (Technical Briefs, No. 26.) Available from: 
https:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK379320/ . 
12. Wells S, O'Neill M, Rogers J, et al. Nursing -led Home Visits Po st-hospitalization for Children with 
Medical Complexity. J Pediatr Nurs. May - Jun 2017;34:10 -16. 
13. Peacock S, Konrad S, Watson E, Nickel D, Muhajarine N. Effectiveness of home visiting programs 
on child outcomes: a systematic review. BMC Public Health. Jan 9 2013;13:17.  
14. Parab CS, Cooper C, Woolfenden S, Piper SM. Specialist home -based nursing services for 
children with acute and chronic illnesses. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Jun 15 
2013(6):CD004383.  
15. Cooper C, Wheeler DM, Woolfenden SR, Boss T, Pi per S. Specialist home -based nursing services 
for children with acute and chronic illnesses. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Oct 18 
2006(4):CD004383.  
 
 