Title: Striatal Effective Connectivity to Predict Treatment Response in Cocaine Misuse  
 
PI: Ma Liangsuo, Ph.D  
 
NCT #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Unique Protocol ID: HM20000079  
 
Document  approval date: October 1, 2013  
 
Document Type:  Protocol  
 
  
Program Director/Principal  Inves tigator (Last, First,  Middle) : Ma, Liangsuo  
 
Research  Strategy:  
A. Significance   . 
A.1. Cognitive  enhancement  as target  for pharmacotherapy  of cocaine  dependence . Cocaine  dependence 
is associated  with several  cognitive  deficits  [33, 95-97]. Cognitive  enhancement  has been  suggested  as a 
target  for pharmacotherapy  of stimulant  addiction  [97]. Investigation  of the neurobiological  mechanisms  of 
therapeutic  interventions  to improve  cognition  has the potential  for predicting  and/or  evaluating  treatment 
outcomes,  improving  pharmacotherapy,  and aiding  the development  of new treatment  protocols  [44]. Several 
studies  [35, 98-100] have  investigated  the relationship  between  baseline  cognitive  functions  and treatment 
outcom e, and indicate  that treatment  outcome  is influenced  by baseline  neuronal  functionin g. Thus,  methods 
are needed  to measure  accurately  alterations  in neuronal  systems  underlying  cognitive  functions.  This would 
allow  development  of potential  biomarkers  that could  be predictive  of results  from more  time consuming  and 
costly  clinical  trial involved  in the development  of new treatments  for cocaine  dependenc e. There  is a pressing 
need  to develop  clinically  useful  biomarkers  to characterize  subpopulations  among  disease  populations  and to 
assess  efficiency  of candidate  therapies  [101, 102]: To date,  however,  it is still one of the major  challenges  in 
drug addiction  research  to identify  such  biomarkers  [103].  In this proposal,  we will use an fMRI -based  brain 
connectivity  approach  that may ultimatel y lead to biomarkers  for cocaine  dependence  treatment  response.  
A.2. Regional  fMRI  activation  studies  in cocaine  dependenc e. One of the traditional  applications  of fMRI  in 
drug addiction  is to identify  regional  neural  substrates  mediating  impaired  cognitive  functions  by using  the 
analysis  of regional  activations  (please  see [90, 104] for review ). Several  research  groups  [7, 34-36] have  used 
this method  to study  cognitive  deficits  in cocaine dependence,  and found  differences  in fMRI  blood  
oxygenation  level dependent  (BOLD)  signal  between  CDs and controls  while  the subjects  performed  cognitive 
tasks. For example,  using  a working  memory  task,  Moeller  et al. [35] found  that CDs showed  significantly  lower 
working -memory  load-dependent  activation  in several  cortical  and subcortical  regions  compared  to controls, 
including  caudate  nucleus,  DLPFC,  medial  orbitofrontal  cortex,  and thalamus.  Using  a Go/NoGo  task,  Kaufman 
et al. [7] found  that, relative  controls,  cocaine  users  had significant  hypoactivity  in cingulate,  pre-supplementary 
motor  and insula  region s, during  both successful  response  inhibition  and errors  of commission.  FMRI  analysis  
of regional  activation s has been  used  to measure  cognitive  functions  in CDs and showed  that baseline  regional  
activations  in CDs were  predictive  of treatment  outcome  [35, 99]. 
A.3. Brain  connectivity  analysis  in cocaine  dependence.  Although  traditional  analysis  of regional  fMRI  
activa tion has been  widely  used  in characte rizing the pathology  and treatment  response  of cocaine  
dependence  and has produced  valuable  findings,  this method  has several  limitations  when  it is applied  to study 
disease  or medication s. First,  cognitive  processes  essentially  depend  on interactions  among  brain  regions  [92, 
105-110], however  the analysis  of regional  activation  does  not directly  measure  these  interactions.  In addition, 
the sensitivity  of traditional  fMRI  analysis  to the presence  or severity  of disease  and/or  medications  can be 
lower  than that of connectivity  analysis  (please  see [93] for review ). Moreover,  chan·ges in the BOLD  signal 
could  be confounded  by the possible  disruption  by disease  or medications  on neurovascular  coupling  and/or 
hemodynamic  response  [94], and therefore  caution  should  be exercised  when  comparing  populations  with 
different  physiologic  or pharmacologic  conditions  [111, 112]. A previous  study  [113]  has shown  that the direct 
effects  of dopamine  (DA) upon  the vasculature  need  to be considered  when  measuring  the hemodynamic 
coupling  associated  with dopaminergic  drugs. This is especially  relevant  in cocaine  dependenc e, for which 
studies  have  suggested  is a disorder  associated  with reduced  DA neurotransmission  in the brain  [43, 44]. 
These  limitations  suggest  that methods  are needed  that measure  the connectivity  between  brain  regions  [114] 
and that are more  closely  associated  with the underlying  neuronal  activity  [79, 93, 115, 116]. 
Functional  connectivity  and effective  connectivity  analyses  are two methods  that can be used  to measure  
functional  integration  (interactions  among  brain  regions)  [78]. Functional  connectivity  refers  to correlations 
among  spatially  remote  neurophysiological  events  [78]. Unlike  functional  connectivity,  effective  connectivity 
measures  the causal  (hence  directional)  effect  that one region's  neuronal  activity  has on another  region  [78]. 
Several  functional  connectivity  studies  [117-123] have  been  conducted  to investigate  cocaine  dependenc e. 
These  studies  demonstrated  abnormal  functional  connectivity  in cocaine  users  during  tasks  [119,  121, 122]. 
A.4. Dynamic  Causal  Modeling  of effective  connectivit y. One limitation  of functional  connectivity  is that it is 
unable  to establish  causal  relationships  because  it is unable  to measure  directional  changes  between  brain 
regions.  The DCM  measurement  of effective  connectivity  that will be used  in the proposed  study  can overcome 
t/Jis limitation  [78]. Positron  emission  tomography  (PET)  studies  have  demonstrated  a significant  correlation 
between  dopamine  D2 receptor  function  and glucose  metabolism  in orbitofrontal  cortex,  anterior  cingulate,  and 
OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev.  08/12  Approved  Through  8/31/2015)   Page  40  Continuation  Format  Page  
Program Director/Principal  Investigator (Las t, First,  Middle):  Ma, Liangsuo  
Page   41 OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev.  08/12  Approved  Through 8/31/2015)  Continuation  Format  Page   
  
OLPFC  in subjects  with cocaine  dependence  and other  addictions  [44, 83]. Because  these  were  correlational 
analyses,  it is unclear  whether  PFC is causing  changes  in striatum,  or striatum  is causing  changes  in PFC. 
This question  is relevant  because  a prefrontal -striatal  glutamatergic  pathway  may regulate  striatal  OA, and thus 
decreased  function  of this pathway  may lead to a hypodopaminergic  state  in COs [44, 86]. Low OA may disrupt  
frontal  inhibition,  resulting  in poor inhibitory  control  over compulsive  drug intake  [84, 85]. Thus,  prefrontal­ 
striatal  connectivity  may be a potential  target  for developing  new pharmacotherapies  for COs. Using  OCM  to 
establish  the directionality  of this connectivity  and its degree  of impairment  relative  to controls  is a first step 
towards  answering  this clinically  significant  questio n. 
The possible  confounding  effects  by disease  or medications  are reduced  in OCM,  as reflected  by the 
following  three  point s: (a) Effective  connectivity  in OCM  is modeled  at the underlying  neuronal  level rather  than 
the observed  hemodynamic  level [75, 91]. (b) The parameters  of the effective  connectivity  (modeled  at the 
underlying  neuronal  level)  and the hemodynamic  response  functions  are jointly  optimized  in OCM  [91]. (c) 
Stochastic  OCM  [77, 124],  an advance  in OCM  technique  that has been  recently  implemented  by the authors  
of OCM!  takes  into account  hidden  and random  fluctuations  in neuronal  and vascular  responses  that may have 
profound  effects  on effective  connectivity  [77]. 
A.5. OA  enhancement  as a target  for pharmacotherapy  of cocaine  dependence.  The impaired  cognitive  
functions  observed  in COs may be related  to decreased  OA function  [54, 125, 126],  which  is associated  with 
cocaine  dependence  [43, 44, 127-129].  The hypodopaminergic state  is considered  as one of the main 
factors  that triggers  drug -seeking  and taking  [130].  PET studies  in humans  suggest  that decreased  DA 
function  in COs contribute  to repeated  drug  intake  [43, 44, 46,  84]. This is supported  by PET studies  in 
primates,  which  have  shown  that there  is an inverse  relationship  between  02 receptor  availability  and 
vulnerability  to the reinforcing  effects  of cocaine  [45, 131]. Studies  in rodents  indicate  that reduced  DA 
function  is a major  contributor  to the transition  from  drug  use to drug  dependence  [132].  
OA enhancement  has been  proposed  to be a target  for pharmacotherapy  of stimulant  addiction  [81, 88, 
89]. A recent  PET study  by Martinez  et al. [87]  showed  that low pretreatment  striatal  OA transmission  in COs 
was associated  with treatment  failure  from behavioral  therapy  alone  (without  any pharmacological  treatment).  It 
has been  theorized  that COs with low pretreatment  OA, such  as in [87], would  benefit  from the addition  of OA 
enhancing  medication  to the behavioral  therapy  [44]. The results  of Martinez  et al. [87] in addition  to our 
preliminary  findings  (section  C.2.4)  are consistent  with the theory  that preexisting  differences  between  COs in 
OA circuits  may underlie  variability  in responsiveness  to different  treatments  [44]. 
Previous  published  studies  in our center  [133-135] and other  studies  [136,  137] showing  feasibility,  safety 
and tolerability  of levodopa/carbidopa  in treatment  of cocaine  dependence.  Previous  studies  using  the DA 
drugs  levodopa/carbidopa  [135]  have  showed  significant  treatment  effects,  as evidenced  by 
significal)tly  reduced  cocaine  positive  urine  and craving . In the current  project,  it is hypothesized  that the 
effects  of levodopa/carbidopa  [133-135] will have  effects  on therapeutic  action  (OA enhancement)  and lead to 
optimal  treatment  efficac y. This clinical  trial provides  an opportunity  for the present  proposal  to investigate  the 
role of effective  connectivity  in the mechanism  of treatment  response  to OA medications  in COs.  
A.6. Striatal  gating  effects  and DA function.  An important  issue  that is relevant  to the development  of new 
treatments  for cocaine  dependence  is how  OA neurotransmission  interacts  with striatum  and PFC during 
cognitive  tasks.  One possible  way that OA regulates  cognition  is via gating  effects  (i.e., positive  modulation 
effect)  of striatum  that regulate  connections  between  the PFC and posterior  regions  [22, 23]. A  cognitive  model 
developed  by O'Reilly  and Frank  [22] addresses  this striatal  gating  mechanism.  In brief,  OA exerts  its effects  
via firing  of the "Open  Gate"  neurons  in the dorsal  striatum  [22]. When  "Open  Gate"  neurons  in the dorsal 
striatum  fire, they facilitate  connections  between  frontal  cortex  and posterior  cortical  regions  [22]. Nonlinear 
OCM  can be used  to evaluate  this striatal  gating  model  [76] as an indicator  of OA functio n. We propose  to use 
OCM  with the stochastic  and nonlinear  extensions  (snOCM)  to test our hypotheses.  
We propose  to test snDCM  on working  memory  and response  inhibition  in separate  fMRI  studies  
within  the same  CD subjects.  Working  memory  is chosen  for the task as it is well documented  that DA 
plays  a key role in working  memory,  and previous  studies  found  altered  working  memory  in COs. 
Cocaine  .use is associated  with  altered  working  memory  function  at both  the behavioral  [32, 33] and 
neuronal  [34-37] levels  in humans,  and in animal  studies  [38-41]. Cocaine  use is associated  with 
altered  DA function  [42-51]. DA neurotransmission  is involved  in working  memory  [52-58]; supporting 
evidence  comes  from  human  [59-68] and animal  [69-73] studies.  There  is evidence  that working 
memory  function  is predictive  of DA synthesis  capacity  in humans  [74]. Our published  data [35] and 
Program Director/Principal  Investigator (Las t, First,  Middle):  Ma, Liangsuo  
Page   42 OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev.  08/12  Approved  Through 8/31/2015)  Continuation  Format  Page   
  
unpublished  pilot data (Section  C.2.4)  have  shown  that the baseline  fMRI  working  memory  activation 
and the effective  connectivity  elicited  by the working  memory  task are predictive  of treatment  outcome 
with DA enhancing  medications  in COs.  Previous  studies  have  shown  that cocaine  use can induce 
impaired  response  inhibition  in both human  ([1-8] and see [9] for review)  and animals  ([10-12) and see 
[13] for review) . In addition,  there  is evidence  ([15-19) and see [20, 21] for review)  supporting  the 
hypothesis  that  DA modulates  response  inhibition.  Furthermore,  impulsive  personality traits  predict  
DA-dependent  changes  in frontostriatal  activity  during  component  processes  of working  memory  
[117).  A study  [100) conducted  by our group  has shown  that trait  impulsivity  is predictive  of cocaine 
addiction  treatment  outcome.  The relationship  between  cognitive  domains  and DA is relevant  because 
the major  objective  of this  study  is to predict  treatment  outcome  of DA enhancing  medications.  
Summary  of Significance:  (a) Establishing  the directional  relationship  between  PFC and striatum  and the 
role of striatal  gating  in cocaine  treatment  response  will significantly  improve  our understanding  of dopaminergic  
and pharmacotherapeutic  mechanisms  in COs.  (b) The pilot data (Section  C.2.4) suggest  that treatment  
outcome  in COs with low pretreatment  striatal  OA can be improved  with OA enhancing  treatments  by increasing  
striatal  OA function,  which  we theorize  increases  striatal  gating  of cortico -cortico  connections.  Thus the evidence  
supporting  the hypothesized  striatal  gating  mechanism  will have  significant  implication  in cocaine addiction  
treatment.  (c) An issue  in cocaine  dependence  research  is the lack of clinically  useful  biomarkers  for 
pharmacotherapies.  Effective  connectivity  as measured  by snOCM  may ultimately  lead to clinically  useful 
biomarkers  for cocaine  dependence  and its treatment.  
B. Innovation:  
There  is a paucity  of effective  connectivity  studies  in the  field of cocaine  dependence,  and we are unaware 
of any published  studies  of cocaine  dependence  that have  used  effective  connectivity  in predicting  treatment 
response  in COs. Thus,  the proposed  study  is novel  and will provide  evidence  on whether  cocaine -related 
alterations  in effective  connectivity  are related  to treatment  outcomes.  In addition,  the testing  of the striatal 
gating  model  and the application  of snOCM  to cocaine  dependence  are also novel.  
C. Approach:  
C.1 Overview  of Study  Design . The objective  of this study  is to use baseline  (pretreatment)  snDCM  to 
predict  the treatment  response  to DA medication.  
C.2 Preliminary  Studies:   C.2.1.  An analysis  of regional  fMRI  activations  showed  that pretreatment  thalamic  
activation  predicted  treatment  response  in COs [35]. This  study  examined  the relationship  between 
pretreatment  working -memory  elicited  regional  activations  and subsequent  treatment  response  in treatment­ 
seeking  early  abstinence  COs. Nineteen  COs who were  randomized  to treatment  studies  and 14 non-drug 
using  controls  underwent  fMRI  while  performing  a working  memory  task with variable  memory  load,  as 
parameterized  by two levels  of memory  delay  and three  levels  of digit load (number  of digits  presented  in each 
visual  stimulus).  Group  comparison  showed  that COs had significantly  lower  regional  activation  in caudate, 
putamen,  cingulate  gyrus,  middle  and superior  frontal  gyri, inferior  frontal  gyrus  pars triangularis  and pars 
opercularis,  medial  orbitofrontal  cortex,  precentral  gyrus,  and thalamus  compared  to non-drug using  controls. 
These  brain  regions  are known  to be part of a circuit  associated  with reward,  conditioning/memory,  executive 
control,  and motivation/drive  [92]. Within  COs,  pretreatment  thalamic  activation  significantly  correlated  with the 
subsequent  treatment  response.  Subjects  with pretreatment  thalamic  deactivation  showed  the poorest 
treatment response,  possibly  related  to thalamic  involvement  in mesocortical  and mesolimbic  OA projections. 
This study  supports  our research  group's  capacity  to carry  out fMRI  studies  in COs and our research  group's 
expertise  in treatment  response  prediction  research.  
C.2.2  A DCM  effective  connectivity  study  showed  that working  memory  load modulated  brain  connectivity  
in a parieto -frontal  network  in normal  healthy  subjects  [138] . This study  used  fMRI -based  OCM  to investigate 
how working  memory  load modulates  effective  connectivity  in normal  working  memory  system.  FMRI  data 
were  acquired  from eighteen  non-drug-using  healthy  subjects  while  they performed  the aforementioned 
working  memory  task [35]. Based  on regional  activations  and consistent  with working  memory  literature,  eight 
regions  of interest,  i.e., bilateral  (LR) OLPFC,  LR anterior  cingulate  cortex  (ACC),  LR inferior  frontal  cortex 
(IFC),  and LR posterior  parietal  cortex  (PPC),  were  chosen  for OCM analyses.  Bayesian  inference  indicated 
that a bilinear  OCM  in which  the digit load (3, 5, or 7 digits)  modulated  several  parieto -frontal  connections  was 
the optimal  model.  Analysis  of model  parameters  showed  that higher  digit load enhanced  connection  from left 
(L) PPC to L IFC, and lower  digit load inhibited  connection  from right (R) PPC to L ACC.  These  findings  
Program  Director/Principal  investigator  (Last,  First,  Middle ):  Ma, Liangsuo  
Page   43 OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev.  08/12  Approved  Through  8/31/2015)  Continuation  Format  Page   
 - 0  
suggest  that working  memory  load modulates  effective  connectivity  in a parieto -frontal  network,  and may reflect'  
altered  neuronal  processes,  e.g., information  processing  or error  monitoring,  with the change  in working 
memory  load.  This study  supports  our research  group's  expertise  in the use of OCM.  
C.2.3  A stochastic  OCM  effective  connectivity  study  showed  that the DLPFC -striatal  effective  connectivity  
was compromised  in COs  during  working  memory  task [37]. This study  used  fMRI -based  stochastic  DCM  to test 
whether  there  is altered  effective  connectivity  of working  memory  pathways  in cocaine  dependence. Nineteen  
COs and fourteen  non-drug using  controls  were  scanned  while  performing  the aforementioned working  memory  
task [35]. Nodes  for DCM  analysis  were  chosen  based  on areas  that significantly  activated common  to both 
groups,  according  to Seghier  et al [79]. Bayesian  inference  on model  parameters  showed  that the COs had large  
and reliable  differences  compared  to the control  subjects  in the strength  of the modulation effects  on prefrontal -
prefrontal  and prefrontal -striatal  connections  exerted  by the memory  delay  conditions.  The strength  of the 
modulation  effects  on connection  from DLPFC  to striatum  was lower  in the COs compared  to controls  (Baysian  
confidence  probability  > 0.999).  These  findings  are consistent  with altered  cortical -striatal networks  related  to 
reduced  OA function  in cocaine  dependence.  As far as we know,  this is the  first between­  
group  effective  connectivity  study  using  stochastic  OCM.  This study  supports  our research  group's  expertise  in · 
the use of stochastic  OCM  in addiction  researc h. 
C.2.4 Our pilot snOCM  study  showed:  (a) causal  (i.e., directional)  relationship  from OLPFC  to striatum  in 
COs;  (b) the strength  of the endogenous  connection  from OLPFC  to ventral  striatum  was lower  in COs 
compared  to controls;  and (c) low pretreatment  gating  by the dorsal  
striatum  on the IFC-PPC connection  predicted  subsequent  
improvement  after treatment  wih OA enhancing  medications . Six 
treatment -seeking  COs and six age- and sex-matched  controls,  who 
had been  included  in our previous  OCM  study  [37], were  included. 
The baseline  (pretreatment)  fMRI data  acquired  while  the subjects 
performed  the aforementioned  working  memory  task [35] were  used 
for testing  Hypotheses  1 and 2. The COs  subsequently  received  DA 
enhancing  treatment  (d-amphetamine:  1 subject,  levodopa:  2 
subjects,  and modafinil:  3 subjects).  Based  on the significant  
regional  activations,  seven  regions  of interest  were  chosen  as 
nodes  for the snDCM  analysis:  L OLPFC,  L IFC, L PPC,  R PPC,  LR 
dorsal  striatum,  LR ventral  striatum,  and LR thalamus.  OCMs  were   
 
........   20 
N I: -t> o(} 
 
Q)   -2 
Ol c 
-4 
-ro 
·-6 
C/) r=-0.69;  p=0.12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
0 
constructed  according  to Ma et al. [37]  with the following  addition s: 
(a) for each  CD, the following  putative  OCMs  were  constructed:  a 
model  in which  DLPFC  causally  (directionally)  affects  dorsal  and -S<-:0:------ :5:----10'::---- 15:::: ----='20 
TES 
ventral  striatum,  and a model  in which  the dorsal  and ventral  striatum  causally  affects  the OLPFC. 
Anatomically,  OLPFC  projects  to the caudate,  whereas  limbic  and paralimbic  regions  project  to the 
ventral  striatum  [139,  140].  However,  snOCM  effective  connectivity  can be validly  determined  by 
indirec t anatomical  connectivity  [141].  Thus,  the connection  from  OLPFC  to ventral  striatum  can be 
indirect  via corticocortical  intermediate  connections  [142,  143]. (b) The activity  in the dorsal  striatum  was 
hypothesized  to gate (positive  modulation  effect)  the connectivity  between  the L IFC and the L PPC,  based  on 
O'Reilly  and Frank  [22]. Bayesian  inference  on model  structure  showed  that the model  in which  the OLPFC 
causally  affects  the dorsal  and ventral  striatum  had higher  Bayesian  exceedance  probability  (<1>=0.98)  than the 
model  in which  the ventral  and dorsal  striatum  causally  affects  the OLPFC.  The strength  of the endogenous  
connection  from DLPFC  to ventral  striatum  was lower  in the COs (-0.025  Hz) compared  to controls  (0.019  Hz) 
(Baysian  confidence  probability>  0.999;  Cohe n's d = 1.89),  but there  was no significant  difference  between 
groups  for dorsal  striatum.  These  results  are consistent  with the corticostriatal  circuits  in addiction 
proposed  in [85], in which  increasingly  repetitive  or compulsive  cocaine  use is associated  with 
progressively  greater  involvement  of dorsal  striatum  but stable  involvement  of ventral  striatum  [144,  
145).  Thus  it is possible  that in COs there  is relatively  less heterogeneity  as a group  in ventral  striatum  
and relatively  more  heterogeneity  in dorsal  striatum.  Heterogeneity  in dorsal  striatum  is consistent with 
the above  figure.  This may explain  why a significant  average  group  difference  was found  in the 
connection  from  OLPFC  to ventral  striatum  but not in the connection  from  OLPFC to  dorsal  striatum. 
Based  on evidence  [146-150] showing  that glutamate  has an excitory  effect  on OA in striatum,  it can be 
speculated  that the lower  (negative)  strength  of the connection  from  OLPFC  to striatum  in COs reflects  
Program  Director/Principal  investigator  (Last,  First,  Middle ):  Ma, Liangsuo  
Page   44 OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev.  08/12  Approved  Through  8/31/2015)  Continuation  Format  Page   
  
decreased  DA caused  by decreased  prefrontal -striata l glutamatergic  neurotransmission  [44, 85, 86, 92]. 
Nonparametric  Spearman  correlation  analysis  showed  that the pretreatment  gating  effect  by the dorsal  
striatum  on the connection  from IFC to PPC was inversely  related  to the Treatment  Effectiveness  score  (TES), 
a measure  of relative  abstinence  from cocaine  use, after 8 weeks  of treatment  with OA enhancing  medications 
(r = -0.69,  p=0.12,  see figure  in this section).  These  preliminary  findings  are consistent  with the theory  that OA 
enhancement  may be a useful  target  for pharmacotherapy  of  cocaine  dependence  in COs who have 
pretreatment  hypodopaminergic  state  [81, 88, 89]. A recent  study  by Martinez  et al. [87] showed  that low 
pretreatment  striatal  OA transmission  in COs was associated  with treatment  failure  from behavioral  therapy 
alone  (without  any pharmacological  treatment ). One may speculate  that COs with low pretreatment  OA in that 
study  would  benefit  from the addition  of OA enhancing  medication  [44]. The results  of [87] and our preliminary 
findings  are consistent  with the theory  that preexisting  differences  between  COs in OA circuits  may be a 
mechanism  underlying  variability  in responsiveness  to different  treatments  [44]. This pilot study  supports  our 
expertise  in the use of snDCM  and Hypotheses  1 and 2. 
C.2.5  Our pilot fMRI  study  testing  response  inhibition  in COs showed:  (a) activation  in an 
orbitofrontal -striatal -thalamica/  circuit;  and (b) positive correlation  of caudate  activation  with 
performance,  and negative  correlation  of caudate  activation  with severity  of cocaine  addiction.  Eleven 
COs (cocaine  group)  and ten age-matched  controls  (control  group)  were  included  in an event -related 
fMRI  study  of response  inhibition.  The fMRI  data were  acquired  while  the subjects  performed  a Go/NoG o 
task [1], in which  there  are two levels  of difficulty  in NoGo  trials  (Easy  NoGo  and Hard  NoGo trials),  (see 
section C.4.6  and reference  [1] for description ). An SPM  univariate  2nd level analysis  of the fMRI  data 
across both  groups  revealed  that the main  effects  of correct  NoGo  trials  relative  to Go trials showed  
activation  in four  clusters  (uncorrected  2-tail cluster  P < 0.05,  cluster  size > 238 voxels)  that were  found  
in portions  of LR thalamus,  L posterior  cingulate,  LR supplemental  motor  area,  L superior frontal  gyrus  
(g), R superior  parietal  g, R angular  g, R inferior  parietal  lobule,  L fusiform  g, and L parahippocampal  g. 
There  was no significant  interaction  of activation  with task  difficulty.  Within  COs, whole  brain  voxel -
wise  SPM  regression  analysis  showed  positive  correlation  of NoGo  activation  with NoGo  accuracy  (d') 
in portions  of L caudate,  R middle  cingulate,  R inferior  parieta l lobule,  R medial orbital  g, R putamen,  R 
pallidum,  R rectus  g, and R lateral  orbitofrontal  cortex  (cluster  2-tail false discovery  rate [FOR)  corrected  
P < 0.10,  cluster  size>  465 voxels).  Whole  brain  voxel -wise SPM regression  analysis  also  showed  
negative  correlation  of NoGo  activation  with severity  of cocaine addiction  (total  KMSK  score  [151])  in 
portions  of L caudate,  L fusiform  g, L angular  g, L insula,  L olfactory  g, L medial  orbital  g, L rectus  g, L 
putamen,  L parahippocampal  g, L middle  temporal  g, and L inferior  tempora l g (cluster  2-tail FOR  
corrected  P < 0.10,  cluster  size>  443 voxels).  This pilot study supports  our expertise  in the use of a 
Go/NoGo  fMRI  task in studying  response  inhibition  in COs,  and the results  support  the regions  of 
interest  selected  for snDCM  analysis  to test Hypothesis  3 (C.4.19.2 ). 
C.3 Description  of the Clinical  Trial. The objective  of this proposal  is to use pretreatment  snOCM  to predict 
the treatment  response  to OA enhancing  medication  in COs.  
C.3.1 Participants  and Recruitment  for the Clinical  Trial:  Male  and female  treatment -seeking  individuals,  18 
to 55 years  old, who meet  current  OSM -IV criteria  for cocaine  dependence  and report  using  cocaine  within  the 
past 30 days  are enrolled.  Eligible  subjects  are required  to submit  at least  one positive  urine  toxicology  screen 
for the cocaine  metabolite  benzoylecgonine  (BE) > 300 ng/ml ,during  the one-week  screening  and pretreatment  
assessment  period.  Subjects  currently  dependent  on any psychoactive  substance  other  than cocaine,  nicotine,  
or marijuana  are excluded.  60 treatment -seeking  COs will be recruited.  
C.3.2  Screening,  Pretreatment,  Randomization  for the Clinical  Trial: Candidates  signing  written  informed  
· consent  enter  a one-weeintake  and assessment  phase  to evaluate  eligibility  and administer  baseline 
pretreatment  measures.  Those  who fail to return  for required  visits  during  this period  are not randomized  to 
treatment  so as to reduce  early  treatment  dropout  rates  [152].  An urn randomization  [153]  procedure 
assigns  subjects  to one of the four  treatment  groups.  This procedure  balances  groups  on pretreatment 
characteristics  that  may influence  measures  of cognitive  performance  and/or  treatment  outcome.  The 
variables  include  (a) severity  of cocaine  use, based  on days  using  cocaine  in past 30 days  and KMSK 
score  [151];  (b) lifetime  duration  of cocaine  use; (c) level of marijuana  use, based  on days  using  in past 
30 days;  (d) Barratt  Impulsiveness  Scale  (BIS)  [202],  measuring  trait  impulsivity.  
In the Clinical  Trial,  there  is one active  medication  arm and one placebo  arm. Equal  allocation  to treatment 
conditions  is expected,  as follows:  30 COs assigned  levodopa/carbidopa  400/100  BID, and 30 COs 
Page   45 OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev.  08/12  Approved  Through  8/31/2015)  Continuation  Format  Page  Program  Director/Principallnvestigator(Last,  First, Middle):  Ma, Liangsuo   
  
assigned  placebo . Treatment  assignment  is concealed  to all staff,  including  the investigators.  Only the study 
pharmacist  who dispenses  the study  medications  is unblinded  to participants'  assigned  condition.  At each  clinic 
visit (Monday,  Wednesday,  Friday)  subjects  are administered  the medication  at the dispensing  window  and 
given  take-home  doses  for intervening  days.  
C.3.3 Treatment  for the Clinical  Trial: During  the 12-week  active  trial participants  are scheduled  to attend  3 
clinic  visits  per week  (Monday,  Wednesday,  and Friday ). Weekly  cognitive  behavioral  therapy  (CBT),  an. 
evidenced -based  psychosocial  treatment  for cocaine  dependence,  is used  as the behavioral  therapy  platfor m. 
Participants  receive  individual  cognitive  behavioral  therapy  in 50-minute  weekly  session s. The CBT is based on 
the model  of relapse  proposed  by Marlatt  and Gordon  [154].  
C.3.4  Treatment  Outcom e: The primary  outcome  measure  of cocaine  use/nonuse  is based  on urine  drug 
screen  levels  (acquired  3 x per  week)  of the cocaine  metabolite  benzoylecgonine  (BE),  coded  as "positive"  for 
cocaine  use if BE ;;:: 300 ng/ml .However,  urine -based  definitions  of cocaine  use/nonuse  have  limitations  in 
terms  of data loss (due to missed  visits)  and carryover  effect.  Recent  procedures  for combining  self-report  and 
urine  BE have  been  recommended  [159,  160].  Thus,  as a secondary  measure  of cocaine  use/nonuse,  the new 
SRPHK1  (SelfReportPHarmacoKinetic1)  coding  method  is used.  This classifies  daily cocaine  use based  on 
evaluation  of self-report  (SUR)  (obtained  3 x per week),  quantitative  urine  BE levels,  and participants' 
concordance  rate (agreement  between  self-report  and urine  result).  Retention  in treatment  is measured  in two 
ways: (a) As a binary  variable,  defined  as "completing"  12 weeks  of cognitive  behavioral  treatment,  since  this 
cutoff  is regarded  as standard  duration  of treatment  [161]  and predictive  of better  outcome  [162]. (b) A 
secondary  continuous  measure  of retention  is the total number  of weeks  a subject  remained  in treatment.  
C.3.5 Retention  of Participants : As part of participation  in the clinical  trial, participants  receive  incentives  for 
attending  the in-person  intake  ($50.00  in gift cards)  and end of study  ($50.00  in gift cards).  They  also receive  
$5 for each  medication  p·ack returned  and bus/parking  tokens  as needed  to help defray  the costs  of travel.  Also 
during  treatment,  for each  visit attended,  subjects  earn a draw  from the attendance  voucher  "fishbowl",  with 
prizes  ranging  in value  from $0 to $100  (one slip).  Prizes  are exchanged  for voucher s. In addition,  they receive 
approximately  $50.00  in gift cards  for completing  behavioral/cognitive  laboratory  assessments.  All parking  is 
free. Subjects  receive  an additional  $130  for completion  of the  MRI scans.  
C.3.6  Assessment  of Medication  Compliance : Riboflavin  (50 mg) is added  to the medication (and 
placebo)  capsules  and used  as a marker  to monitor  compliance.  The compliance  to the treatment  . 
regimens  is assessed  by pill-counting  and by urine  riboflavin  determination.  
C.4 Experimental  Design  and Methods  for the snDCM  Study:  C.4.1 Subjects  for the snDCM  Study:  There 
are 3 groups  in the snDCM  study:  (a) medication  group,  {b) placebo  group,  and (c) control  group. 
Conservatively  estimating  approximately  20% unusable  scans  in each  group  because  of excessive  head 
motion,  clinical  structural  abnormalities,  artifacts,  or subject  no-show  for the scan,  this project  will need  to 
recruit  a total of 30 treatment -seeking  CDs for the medication  group  (15 male  and 15 female),  30 treatment­ 
seeking  CDs for placebo  group  (15 male  and 15 female),  and 30 age-, handedness -, and education -matched 
non-drug-using  healthy  control  subjects  (15 male  and 15 female)  in order  to achieve  24 subjects  per group  for 
final analysis  (Power  Analysis  section  C.4.21). Thus,  we need  to recruit  24 subjects  each  year over the first 3 
years  and 18 subjects  during  Year  4. Fewer  subjects  will be recruited  during  Year  4 because  more  time in Year  
4 will be devoted  to final data analysis,  write -up, presentation  of findings,  and subsequent  grant  applications.  
C.4.2  Subject  Recruitment  and Screening:  The medication  group  will consist  of 30 subjects  assigned  to 
levodopa/carbidopa.  The placebo  group  will consist  of 30 subjects  assigned  to placebo  in the clinical  trial. The 
30 non-drug-using  healthy  control  subjects  (control  group)  will be recruited  through  advertising  in local  
newspapers  and word  of mout h. Written  informed  consent  form will be obtained  from all subjects.  
All control  subjects  undergo  an initial  screening  that consists  of a physical  examination,  routine  blood  work, 
urinalysis,  electrocardiogram  (EKG),  metal  screening,  structured  diagnostic  interview  (SCID),  addiction  severity 
index  (ASI),  and human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  screening.  We anticipate  screening  45 potential  control 
subjects  in order  to recruit  30 control  subjects  (yielding  24 control  subjects  in the final analysis) . 
C.4.3 Subject  inclusion/exclusion  criteria : The patients  who meet  DSM -IV criteria  for current  cocaine 
dependence,  have  at least  1 positive  urine  benzoylecgonine  (BE) specimen  (> 300 ng/ml )during  intake,  and 
are assigned  medications  or placebo,  will be the candidates  for this study.  In addition,  the included  subjects 
must  simultaneously  meet  the following  criteria:  (a) Be between  18 and 50 years  of age; (b) Right  handed;  (c) 
Have  no past history  of Psychiatric  or non-Psychiatric  medical  disorders  which  could  affect  the central  nervous 
system  as assessed  by SCID  and physical  examination;  (d) Be in acceptable  health  on the basis  of interview,  
 
 Program  Director/Principal  Jnvestigator (Last, First, Middle ): Ma, Liangsuo  
 
medical  history,  labs,  and physical  exam;  (e) Be able to understand  the consent  form and provide  written 
informed  consent;  (f) Have  no metal  fragments  or other  bodily  metal  (e.g.,  pacemaker)  or significant 
claustrophobia  that would  put the subjects  at risk for MRI scannin g. (For a complete  list of inclusion  and 
exclusion  criteria  see Human  Subjects  section  below ). 
C.4.4  Coordination  between  the Proposed  Study  and the Clinical  Trial: For eacCD,  the MRI session  will 
be conducted  in Week  1, which  is before  the treatment  is initialized  (baseline  pretreatment ). The treatment 
outcome  (see Section  C.3.4  Treatment  Outcome)  will be shared  for the  snDCM  study.  
C.4.5 Working  Memory  Task  for fMRI : The immediate  memory  task/delayed  memory  task (IMTIOMT)  fMRI 
protocol  [35, 138, 165] is used  as the working  memory  test. The IMT and DMT  are delayed -matching -to­ 
sample  tasks  [166]. In both IMT and DMT,  each  stimulus  consists  of a string  of numbers  that is displayed  for 
0.5 s, followed  by an inter-stimulus  interval  of 0.5 s, at a rate of 1 stimulus  per second.  In DMT,  the target  and 
probe stimuli  are separated  by distracter  stimuli,  consisting  of a string  of all zeros  (e.g., 00000)  that is repeated 
three  times  at the same  rate and duration  as the target  and probe  stimuli.  Thus,  in DMT, the memory  delay 
between  the end of the target  stimulus  and beginning  of the probe  stimulus  is 3.5 s. In IMT, there  are no 
distracter  stimuli,  and thus the memory  delay  between  target  and probe  is 0.5 s. A nonsalient  stimulus 
consisting  of all ones  (e.g., 11111)  is presented  once  after each  DMT  trial and  four times  after each  IMT trial. 
Therefore  the sum of the distracter  stimuli  and the nonsalient  intertrial  stimuli  is the same  (four)  during  DMT and 
IMT conditions,  and hence  the number  of trials  is same  (seven)  for IMT blocks  and DMT  blocks.  In both IMT and 
DMT,  the probability  of a match  and the probability  of a catch  are 50%. In a catch,  the probe  differs  
from target  in only one of the digits.  Subjects  are instructed  to press  a button  using the right index  finger  only 
when  the probe  matches  the target  The A' score  [167]  is used  as ari accuracy  measure.  The A' ranges  from 
0.5 to 1.0, corresponding  to chance  to perfect  discriminability,  respectively.  There  are 12 blocks  alternating 
between  IMT and DMT  within  each  run. The number  of digits in the stimulus  string  can be 3, 5, or 7 and is held 
constant  within  each  block.  The digit-length  conditions  represent  three  levels  of digit load.  All digit conditions are 
presented  within  each  run, in counterbalanced  order  between  runs and subjects.  Each  block  is 42.5 s; there is 
10 s rest between  blocks  and 20 s rest at the beginning  of each  run. 
C.4.6  Response  Inhibition  Task  for fMRI : An event -related  Go/NoGo  task [1] is used  for fMRI  of 
response  inhibition.  In each  run, the subjects  look at a total of 224 visual  stimul i that are sequentially 
presented  in random  order.  Each  stimulus  is displayed  for 500 ms, and any two neighbor  stimul i are 
separated  by a blank  screen  lasting  1900,  2100,  or 2300  ms Uittered  randomly).  Each  visual  stimulus 
consists  of lines  enclosed  within  two boxes  that are presented  simultaneously  side by side.  The 
subjects  are instructed  to look  at both boxes  and to discriminate  the direction of the lines.  The 
subjects  are instructed  to press  a button  using  their right  index  finger  only  when  they see that both 
boxes  show  diagonal  lines  in the same  direction  in both boxes  (Go trials ). The subjects  are instructed 
not to press  any button  when  they see that both boxes  show  horizontal  lines (easy -NoGo  trials),  or 
when  they see that one box contains  diagonal  lines  that are in the opposite  direction of the diagonal 
lines  in the other  box (hard -NoGo  trials).  For Go trials,  a correct  response  is defined  as a key-press 
completed  within  600 ms. For NoGo  trials,  an incorrect  response  is defined  as a key-press  completed 
within  600 ms. There  are 168 Go trials  (75%),  28 easy -NoGo  trials  (12.5%),  and 28 Hard -NoGo  trials 
(12.5%)  in each  fMRI  run (10 min 40 s per run). For detailed  descripton,  please  see reference  [1]. 
C.4.7  Pre- and Post -treatment  Behavioral  Performance : Because  fMRI  sessions  in this project  are 
conducted  only  during  pretreatment  baseline,  this project  will also acquire  out-of-scanner  pre­ 
treatment and post-treatment  (week  12) behavioral  data for the cognitive  tasks.  Pre-treatment 
performance  will  be  considered  as a possible  confounding  factor  and will be controlled  as a covariate 
in the statistical  analysis  (Section  C.4.20).  Post -treatment  behavioral  performance  is a treatment 
outcome  and will be included  in the treatment  prediction  analysis  (C.4.20 ). In addition,  Dr. Scott  Lane, 
who is an expert  in the behavioral  science  of drug  addiction,  will be a Consultant on this project  to 
advise  on the behavioral  data implementation  and analysis.  
C.4.8 MRI Scanning  Site and Device s: MRI sessions  are conducted  at the Magne tic Resonance  Imaging 
Center  of the UTHSC -H, using a research -dedic ated Philips  lntera  3.0 T MRI scanner  with an 8-channel 
receive  head  coil (Philips  Medical  Systems,  Best,  Netherlands ). 
C.4.9 Task  Practice  and Mock  MRI Simulation : Prior to the real MRI  scan, the subjects  undergo  at least  10 
min of practice  of the fMRI  tasks  until it is clear  that the  procedures  are understood  and that the majority  of the 
practice  responses  are correct.  After  that, the subjects  undergo  a mock  MRI scan  using  a Philips  product  MRI 
OMB No. 0925·0001/0002  (Rev. 08/12 Approved  Through  8/31/2015)   Page 46 ·continuation  Format  Page 
Program Direct or/Principal  Inves tigator (Last,  First,  Middle):  Ma, Liangsuo  
 
Page  47 OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev. 08/12  Approved  Through  8/31/2015 ) Continuation  Format  Page   
 Procedure  Location  Timing  
Consent  for participa tion, screening  (physical  examination, 
routine  blood  work,  urinalysi s, EKG, metal  screening,  SCID, ASI, 
HIV, and urine  drug screen)  VCU  Collaborative  
Advanced  Research  Imaging  
(CARl)  program  Day 1 
Training  session  on the cognitiv e·tasks,  mock  scan, pre- 
treatment  behavioral  performance  MR Imaging  Center  Mock  
Scanner  at CARl  Day 2 
Urine  drug screen,  urine  pregnancy  screen,  breath  alcohol 
screen  CARl  Day 3 
Sagittal and SENSE  localizers,  3-D MPRAGE,  IMT/DMT  fMRI 
(x 3), Go/NoGo  fMRI  (x 3), 3D-FLAIR,  T2-weighted  fast spin 
echo  CARl  Research  Dedicated  
3T MRI Scanner  Day 3 
  
Simulato r. Lying  in the mock  scanner,  the subject  performs  the fMRI  tasks  as in the real scan,  while  listening  to 
a recording  of MRI sound s. The fMRI  tasks  are written  in E-Prime  1.2 (Psychology  Software  Tools ). 
C.4.10  Pre-scan  Screening : Immediately  prior to the real MRI scan,  all subjects  undergo  urine  drug screen  
and breath  alcohol  scree n. Female  subjects  also undergo  urine  pregnancy  scree n. The subjects  with a breath 
alcohol  result  of greater -than-zero do not proceed  for the MRI scan  that day, and are reschedule d. The control 
subjects  with a positive  urine  drug screen  are excluded  from the study.  The female  subjects  with a positive 
urine  pregnancy  test are excluded  from the study.  Subjects  who regularly  smoke  tobacco  are asked  to smoke 
two hours  prior to the first fMRI  scan,  and not to smoke  after that until the  fMRI  scans  are finished.  
C.4.11 MRI Scan s: The MRI session  is approximately  90 min, with a 10 min break  in the middl e. The first 2 
series  are a T1-weighted  spin echo  3-plane  localizer  (scout ), and a SENSE  localize r. A high resolu tion T1- 
weighted  3D-MPRAGE  series  is acquired  with the following  parameter s: 256 x 256 acquisition  and 
reconstruction  matrix , in-plane  resolution=  0.94 mm, 170 sagittal  slices,  0.94 slice thickness.  This is followed by 
3 working  memory  (IMT/DMT)  and 3 response  inhibition  (Go-NoGo)  fMRI  series  (runs)  with 
approximately  2 minutes  rest between  runs.  Each  fMRI series  is a single  shot spin-echo  echoplanar  (EPI) pulse  
sequence  (see next section  for rationale),  with SENSE  factor=  2.0, repetition  time=  2212 ms  for IMT/DMT  and 
2500  ms for Go-NoGo,  echo  time=  75 ms (optimized  for spin echo),  flip angle=  90 degrees, number  of axial 
slices  = 22 for IMT/DMT  and 25 for Go-NoGo,  field-of-view=  240 mm x 240 mm, in-plane resolution  3.75 mm 
x  3.75 mm, slice thickness=  3.75 mm, gap=  1.25 mm, repetitions=  294 for IMT/DMT  and 
256 for Go-NoGo  after 10 dummy  acquisitions,  total duration  = 10 min 47 s for IMT/DMT  and 10 min 40 s for 
Go-NoGo.  A 3D-FLAIR  and T2-weighted  fast spin echo  are acquired  to rule out incidental  intracranial  findings.  
C.4.12 Spin-Echo  EPI: Spin-echo  EPI, rather  than gradient -echo  EPI, is used  for fMRI  in this study  to avoid 
signal  losses  caused  by through -slice dephasing  in regions  that are affected  by strong  susceptibility  gradients at 
3 T [168-170]. The regions  affected  by strong  suscepti bility gradients  near air-tissue  interfaces  include  
medial  orbitofrontal  cortex  and medial  temporal  areas  that are important  for drug addiction  research.  In addition 
to its advantage  of eliminatin g signal  dropou t, spin-echo  EPI has other  advantages  over gradient -echo  EPI 
including  greater  extravascular  signal  componen t, less spatial  distortion,  and more  specific  spatial  localization  
at 3T [169,  171].  Although  the magnitude  of the BOLD  effect  is somewhat  lower  in spin echo  EPI compared  to 
gradient echo  EPI at 3T (in areas  of the brain that are not affected  by susceptibility  dropout),  a cogni tive fMRI 
study  using  spin-echo  EPI at 3T [169]  found  significant  activation  in the same  cortical  areas  that were  found 
using  gradient  echo  EPI (i.e., in the areas  not affected  by susceptibility  dropout).  Importantly,  that study  found 
signi ficant activation  in predicted  medial  orbitofrontal  areas  that were  not found  with gradient  echo  EPI [169]. 
Likewis e, our fMRI  [35] and fMRI -based  DCM  [138]  studies,  which  used  the same  working  memory  task and 
scanning  parameters  as in the proposed  project,  found  significant  findings  in medial orbitofrontal  cortex,  as well 
as in expected  cortical  areas  that are not affected  by magnetic  susceptibility  dropout.  
C.4.13 fMRI  presentation  syste m: Stimulus  presentation  and recording  of behavioral  performance  during  
fMRI  scanning  is managed  through  the Eloquence  fMRI  System  (lnvivo  Corporation,  Orlando,  Florida ), an 
update  of the Integrated  Functional  Imaging  System -Stand  Alone  system  (IFIS -SA, InVivo Corporation, 
Orlando,  Florida ). The subject  views  the task on an LCD video  display  unit that is built into the head  coil. The 
subject  responds  to the task by pressing  a keyboard -like button  with the right index  finge r. 
C.4.14 Flowchart  and Timeline  of Procedures  for All Aims·  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.4.15/ncJdental  Fmdmgs  on MRI: The FLAIR  1mages  and T2 weighted  spm echo  1mages  from all subJects 
will be read by the study  Radiologist.  The subjects  who have  clinically signi ficant abnormalities  will be  excluded 
from the study  and referred  for appropriate  treatment.  
 
Page  48 OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev. 08/12  Approved  Through  8/31/2015 ) Continuation  Format  Page  Program  Director/Principa l investigator  (Last,  First, Middle):  Ma, Liangsuo   
  
C.4.16  FMRI  Preprocessing : The fMRI  data is preprocessed  using  Statistical  Parametric  Mapping  (SPM8, 
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/)  software  from the Wellcome  Department  of Cognitive  Neurology,  London,  UK, 
implemented  in Matlab  (Mathworks  Inc.).  After  slice-timing  correction,  each  fMRI  time series  is realigned  to 
correct  for head  motion.  Runs  with head  motion  greater  than 1 voxel  (3.7S  mm translation  on any axis)  or 
rotation  greater  than 3.7S degrees  are eliminated  from analysis.  After  coregistering  the high-resolution  30- 
MPRAGE  to the fMRI  images,  the 30-MPRAGE  is warped  to the coordinates  of the Montreal  Neurological 
Institute  (MNI)  standard  space  [172,  173] using  the SPM8  Normalisation  procedur e, consisting  of affine  
followed  by non-linear  transformation s. These  transformations  are applied  to the fMRI  series  to convert  the 
fMRI  images  to MNI space,  and the fMRI  images  are then resliced  to 2 mm isotropic  resolution  and spatially 
smoothed  with a Gaussian  filter of 8 mm isotropic  full width  at half maximum  (FWHM ). 
C.4.17 SPM  univariate  analysis  of working  memory  fMRI  data: First-level voxel -wise univariate  statistical 
analysis  of the fMRI  data is conducted  using  SPM 8. The IMT and DMT  blocks  for each  digit condition  are 
modeled  by boxcar  functions  convolved  with the SPM8  canonical  hemodynamic  response  function.  The 
parameters  for each  condition  are estimated  using  the General  Linear  Model  (GLM)  [174]  at each  voxel  without 
global  normalization.  The fMRI  time series  is high-pass  filtered  with an optimized  cut-off period  of 330 s 
determined  by the Fourier  transformation  of each  condition's  time model,  which  shows  that the signal  from the 
experimental  condition  is retained  at this value·but not at shorter  cut-offs. Activation  for each  digit condition  is 
defined  as the contrast  of DMT  minus  IMT parameter  estimates  ("DI") for that digit condition  (i.e., 013, DIS, and 
017 for 3 digits,  S digits,  and 7 digit conditions  respectively ). In addition,  the following  contrast  images  are 
defined  to determine  the interaction  effects  between  the memory  delay  (IMT and DMT)  and the digit load (3 
digits,  S digits,  and 7 digits):  DIS minus 013, 013 minus  015, 017 minus  013, 013 minus  017, 017 minus  DIS, and 
DIS minus  017. The following  contrast  images  are defined  to determine  the main  effects  of memory  delay 
(pooled  across  3 digits,  S digits,  and 7 digits):  combined  013, DIS, and 017. The summary  contrast  images  are 
output  for each  subject  for entry  into the second -level analysis.  Because  a between -group  DCM  study  focuses 
on the characterization  of abnormal  connectivity  in a common  network  of regions , Seghier  et al. [79] 
recommended  that only commonly  activated  regions  in patients  and controls  should  be included  as nodes  in 
DCM  [79]. Accordingly,  a second -level Random  Effects  [17S]  SPM8  GLM  analysis  is conducted  in order  to 
determine  the nodes  of the working  memory  system  that are common  to both groups  for purpose  of DCM ._ 
analysis.  For each  type of summary  contrast  image,  the group  difference  and the main  effects  across  the 
means  for both groups  are deter mined with the default  non-sphericity  correction  for unequal  variance  between 
group s. The cluster -defining threshold  is voxel  t = 2.S. Statistical  significance  of the fMRI  analysis  is false 
discovery  rate (FOR)  corrected  cluster  P less than O.OS. 
C.4.18  SPM  univariate  analysis  of response  inhibition  fMRI  data:  This processing  is similar  to that 
for working  memory,  except  for the following.  (a) The cut-off period  of the high -pass  temporal  filter  is 
128 s, which  is an optimized  setting  determined  by Fourier  transform  of the GoiNoGo  task time-series 
model.  (b) The summary  contrast  images  of the first level  fixed  effects  analysis  are: correct  Easy  NoGo 
trials  minus  correct  Go trials,  correct  Hard  NoGo  trials  minus  correct  Go trials,  correct  Hard  NoGo  
trials  minus  correct  Easy  NoGo  trials  and combined  correct  NoGo  trials  (correct  Hard  NoGo  trials  plus 
correct  Easy  NoGo  trials)  relative  to correct  Go tri()ls  (in brain  regions  not showing  significant 
interaction  of activation  with task difficulty ). The last contrast  image  is used  to investigate  the overall 
effects  of the NoGo  trials.  
C.4.19 Effective  Connectivity  Analysis : The effective  connectivity  analysis,  described  below,  is conducted 
using  stochastic  and nonlinear  DCM  (snDCM)  as implemente d in the latest  update  to SPM8.  
C.4.19.1 Working  memory  DCM  analysis  
Regions -of-interest (ROis) : L IFC, L DLPFC,  L PPC,  R PPC,  LR dorsal  striatum,  LR ventral  striatum, 
and LR thalamus  are the ROis.  The LR dorsal  striatum  (or LR ventral  striatum)  is treated  as a single  ROI 
because  we found  that the DCM  parameters  on the connections  from or to the striatum  were  similar  for left  and 
right striatum  [37]. The ROis  are based  on the following  criteri a: (a) these  regions  showed  significant  activation 
in the SPM  second -level analysis  of the main  effect  of memory  delay  for the combined  groups  in our previous 
study  [37]; (b) meta -analyses  have  shown  that these  regions  activate  consistently  during  working  memory  
tasks  [176,  177];  (c) these  regions  have  been  implicated  in working  memory  processes,  e.g., encoding  [178], 
storage  [179], maintenance  [177-179],  and executive  control  [179]; and (d) some  regions  (e.g., thalamus)  have 
been  implicated  in treatment  response  in COs [3S].  · 
 
Page  49 OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev. 08/12  Approved  Through  8/31/2015 ) Continuation  Format  Page  Program  Director/Principa l investigator  (Last,  First, Middle):  Ma, Liangsuo   
  
Volumes  of interest  (VO!s)  and time series  extractio n: We follow  the method  of constructing  the VOis  as 
described  in Ma et al. [138].  The significant  group  level activation  clusters  form the VO/s,  which  are further 
constrained  [141]  to be within  the boundaries  of the aforementioned  seven  ROts,  as defined  by anato mical 
atlases.  The atlas -derived  binary  masks  of the regions  are obtained  from the Anatomical  Automatic  Labeling 
atlas  [180]  as implemented  in the WFU  (Wake  Forest  University)  PickAtlas  SPM  toolbox  [181,  182].  The binary 
mask  of DLPFC  is the middle  frontal  gyrus.  The binary  mask  of IFC is the set-theoretic  union  of the  atlas -based 
binary  masks  of inferior  frontal  gyrus  pars opercul aris and inferior frontal  gyrus  pars triangularis.  The binary 
mask  of PPC is the union  of the atlas -based  binary  masks  of superior  parietal  lobule  and inferior  parietal  
lobul e. The binary  mask  of dorsal  striatum  is the union  of the atlas -based  binary  masks  of dorsal  caudate  and 
dorsal  putame n, and the binary  mask  of ventral  striatum  is the union  of the atlas-based  binary  masks  of ventral 
caudate,  ventral  putamen,  and nucleus  accumben s. Following  Postuma  and Dagher  [183],  z = 7 mm (Talairach 
space)  is used  as the border  between  dorsal  caudate  and ventral  caudate,  and z = 2 mm (Talairach  space)  is 
used  as the border  between  dorsal  putamen  and ventral  putamen.  The atlas -derived  binary  mask  of the 
nucleus  accumbens  is obtained  from the Harvard -Oxford  Subcortical  Structural  atlas 
(http://www.cma.mgh.harvard.edu/)  as provided  in the FSL software  [184].  Each  VOl is obtained  by the 
intersectio n of the atlas -based  binary  masks  with the significant  activation  clusters  in common  for both groups, 
as determined  by the SPM8  second  level random  effects  univariate  analysi s. For each  subjec t, the time series 
from the first-level univariate  analysis  for that subject  is extracted  from all voxels  within the VOl, and the 
principal  eigenvariate  [141]  of this time series,  which  is adjusted  for effects  of interest,  is input  into DCM  for 
model  estimation  [141]. The same  VOis  are used  for all subject s. 
Striatal  gating  DCM: Based  on Landau  et al. [64] showing  that striatal  DA function  is related  to working­  
memory  capacity  and activation  in left inferior  PFC, and Honey  et al. [185]  showing  that working  memory 
capacity  is related  to effective  connectivity  from L IFC to L PPC,  we use L IFC and L PPC as the prefrontal  and 
posterior  regions,  respectively,  in the striatal  gating  model  proposed  by O'Reilly  and Frank  [22]. The  activity  in 
the dorsal  striatum  is hypothesized  to gate the connectivity  via thalamus,  between  the L IFC and the L PPC, 
based  on the striatal  gating  models  [22, 23] and our pilot study  results  (section  C.2.4). 
C.4.19.2  Response  Inhibition  DCM  analysis . ROis  are: R bilatera l OFC,  LR pre-supplementary  
motor  area (pre-SMA),  R PPC,  LR dorsal  striatum,  LR ventral  striatum,  and LR thalamus  are the ROis, 
which  are based  on our pilot data (Section  C.2.5);  and consistent  with: (a) existing  striata l gating 
models  [22, 23] and theoretica l models  on impulsivity  [24-26, 186];  (b) review  articles  on Go-NoGo  fMRI 
studies  [27-30] and cocaine  addiction  Go-NoGo  fMRI  studies  [7, 8, 31, 187, 188];  and (c) DA modulation 
effect  on response  inhibition  [15). Except  for the striatum,  our proposed  ROis  are different  from those 
used  in a published  effective  connectivity  study  [188]  using  Go/NoGo  task,  possibly  due to different 
subject  samples  (children  were  studied  in [188]  and we studied  adults)  and different  fMRI  design  (a 
block  design  was used  in [188]  and we used  event -related  design).  Since  these  regions  are based  on 
our pilot data,  other  regions,  if they show  significant  activation  on fMRI  using  the larger  sample  size 
that is proposed  in the grant,  win be considered  as ROis  in the future.  VOis  and time series  extractio n: 
This part  of processing  is essentially  same  as that in the working  memory  DCM  analysis.  Striatal  
gating  DCM:  Based  on the study  [83] showing  significant  correlation  between  dopamine  02 receptor 
function  and glucose  metabolism  in orbitofronta l cortex,  and the study  [15] showing  that levodopa 
affected  the magnitude  of Go/NoGo  task-elicited  fMRI  response  in right  parieta l cortex,  we use R lateral 
OFC  and R PPC as the prefronta l and posterior  regions,  respectively,  in the striata l gating  models  [22, 
23]. The activity  in the dorsal  striatum  is hypothesized  to gate,  via thalamus , the connectivity  between 
the R lateral  OFC  and the R PPC,  based  on the striatal  gating  models  [22, 23). 
C.4.19.3 Inference  on DCM  model  structur e: In DCM  analysis,  the number  of candidate  DCMs,  after 
permutation  and combination  of possible  endogenous  connections  and exogenous  inputs,  is very large. 
Therefore,  the network  discovery  technique  (NDT)  [189],  as implemented  in the latest  release  of DCM,  is used 
as a first step to determine  the model  structure  for each  subject.  The NDT scores  the relative  posterior 
probability  of each  candidate DCM  in order  to evaluate  efficiently  the large  number  of possible  DCMs  and to 
find the optimal  model  for each  subject.  The initial full model  to be reduced  by NDT includes  all possible  bi­ 
directional  endogenous  connec tions between  each  node  (see C.4.19.1  and C.4.19.2 VOis).  The contextual 
conditions  of the cognitive  tasks  are putative exogenous  inputs  and bilinear  modulators  at each  connection  
in the initial  full model.  In addition,  nonlinear  gating  by dorsal  striatum  on PFC-PPC is hypothesized  in the initial· 
full model  (see section C.4.1 9.1 and C.19.2 ). The NDT results  for each  subject  are checked  first to see 
 
Page  50 OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev. 08/12  Approved  Through  8/31/2015 ) Continuation  Format  Page  Program  Director/Principa l investigator  (Last,  First, Middle):  Ma, Liangsuo   
  
whether  the causal  (directional)  relationship  between  the OLPFC  and the striatum  has been  determined  and 
whether  the striatal  gating  OCM  is optimal  for all subjects  in each  group.  The inference  on model  structure  is 
further  conducted  using  Bayesian  model  selection  (BMS)  [190]  and Bayesian  family  level inference  (BFLI ) [191],  
as described  in detail  in Ma, et al. [138].  BMS  is an established  procedure  for selecting  an optimal  OCM from  
alternative  OCM s. This is realized  by comparing  model  evidence,  which  simultaneously  quan tifies how 
accurately  a model  explains  the data and model  complexity  [190].  An "optimal"  model  is reflected  by the 
Bayesian  exceedance  probability  [190], which  denotes  the probability  that a model  is more  likely  to have 
generated  the observed  data than the other  models  considere d. BFLI  is an extension  of BMS  that can be used 
to select  the optimal  family  from candidate  families  of models  [138, 191].  
C.4.19.4  Inference  on DCM  parameters : The inference  on OCM  parameters  is conducted  using  Bayesian 
model  averaging  (BMA)  [191].  BMA  is a Bayesian  approach  that averages  each  OCM  parameter  across 
subjects  and across  models  such  that the contribution  of each  model  (of each  subject)  for that parameter  is 
weighted  by each  model'$  posterior  probability  for that subject.  Thus,  BMA  avoids  the rigid assumption  of an 
identical  single  OCM  for all subjects  that is required  in classical  "Frequentist"  analysis  of OCM  parameters 
[191]. The same  model  space,  comprised  of the optimal  OCM  for the COs group  plus the optimal  OCM  for the 
control  group, is used  in the BMA  analysis  of each  group  to determine  the posterior  distribution  of each  OCM 
parameter  for each  subject  within  the group  [138]. 
C.4.20 Statistical  analysi s: 
Specific  Aim 1: To conduct  an snOCM  study  of working  memory  to determine  the baseline  effective 
connectivity  between  OLPFC and  striatum  in treatment -seeking  COs compared  to non-drug using  controls.  
Initial  analyses  will evaluate  group  differences  on demographic  and baseline  variable s, will use contingency 
tables  with chi-square  testing,  ANOV A's, and examination  of correlations  between  baseline  variables  and 
snOCM  results.  The Friston  et al. [189]  network  discovery  technique,  BMS,  and BFLI  (C.4.1 9.3) will be used  to 
select  the optimal  model  based  on the exceedance  probability  of the OCM  (or family  of OCMs)  in which  OLPFC 
causally  affects  ventral  striatum  vs. exceedance  probability  of the OCM  (or a family  of OCMs)  in which  the 
ventral  striatum  causally  affects  the OLPFC.  The parameter  estimates  for the endogenous  OLPFC -striatal 
connectivity  will be compared  between  groups  using  BMA  and also compared  using  analysis  of covariance.  
Specific  Aim 2: To determin e·whethe r the pretreatment  gating  effect  by dorsal  striatum  on IFC-PPC  
effective  connectivity  (reflec ting low OA) predicts  treatment  response  to OA pharmacotherapy  in COs. 
Urn randomization  [153],  a form  of stratified  randomization,  will help  ensure  comparability  of 
treatment  groups  on baseline  severity  and duration  of cocaine  abuse.  Pretreatment task behavioral 
performance or demographic  variables  on which  group  differences  are detected,  and which  are 
correlated  with  outcomes,  meet  the definition  of confounders  [192,  193].  In such  cases,  analyses  will 
evaluate  the robustness  of findings  after statistically  controlling  for the confounder.  If conclusions 
remain  unchanged  after covarying  for the confounder,  the more  parsimonious  model  will be reported 
along  with a statement  indicating  its robustness  to covariation  for potential  confounding.  If inclusion of 
the covariate alters  the conclusions  of the analysis,  both  models  will be reported.  Treatment  success is a 
function  of two elements:  (a) retention  and (b) demonstrating  cocaine -free status  using  the SRPHK1 criteri a 
(see section  C.3.4). The Treatment  Effectiveness  Score  (TES)  provides  a metric for this composite outcome  
[194].  TES is the sum of all cocaine -negative  tests  (according  to SRPHK1  rules).  Higher  TES indicates  that 
participants  both continue  to participate  in the study  and are nega tive for cocaine.  For each group,  BMA  
(section  C.4.19.4)  is conducted  across  all OCMs  in the model  spac e. Group  difference  in the gating  effect  by 
the dorsal  striatum  is assessed  using  Bayesian  confidence  probability  [195]. In additio n, BMA is conducted  
across  all OCMs  in the model  space  for each  subject  in the medication  group  and in the placebo  
group. Evaluation  of differential  treatment  response,  measured  by the TES,  as a function  of the averaged 
(across  the OCM  model  space)  gating  effec t, will use Poisson  regressio n. Violations  of assumptions  of 
dispersion  will result  in the use of more appropriate  approaches  such  as zero-inflated  Poisson,  negative 
binomia l, or zero-inflate d negative  binomial  model s. Regression  of treatmen t, averaged  gating,  and their 
interaction  will permit  evaluation  of differential  treatment  response  as function  of gating.  The critical  element  in 
doing  so is the evaluation  of the interaction  term. Given  that the current  study  is powered  to detect  group 
differences,  it is likely  underpowered  to detect  an interactio n. Brookes,  et al. [196]  demonstrate  that for studies 
with 80% power  to detect  a between -groups  effect,  power  to detect  an interaction  effect  of the same  magnitude 
as the main  effect  is approximately  29%. One solution  is to adopt  a Bayesian  subgroup  analysis  approach  
[197-201]. This approach  utilizes  the posterior  distribution  of the interactio n parameter  to estimate  the 
Program  Director/Principa 50 Investigator  (Last,  First, Middle):  Ma, 
Liangsuo   
  
probability  that it exceeds  some  number  (e.g., for Poisson  regression  a Risk Ratio  of 1.0). Specification  of 
vague  neutral  priors  will reflect  uncertainty  regarding  parameter  values,  utilizing  prior distributions  for the lower 
order  effects  that are neutral  and diffuse  with specification  -N(O,  1 x 10"6)  on the log scale  (i.e., centered  at the 
null hypothesis  with a 95% Credible  Interval  of± 1960)  for all coefficients,  and -U(0,100) for any required 
dispersion  terms.  Examination  of the  interaction  of treatment  and the subgroup  index  forms  the crux of the 
evaluation  of the subgroup  effect.  For evaluating  the interaction  representing  the differential  subgroup  effect,  
analysis  will be conducted  in two ways:  (a) utilizing  diffuse,  indifferent  priors  (-N(O,  1 x 10-6) on the log scale  for 
the interaction  coefficients,  and (b) using  informative  skeptical  priors  for the coefficients  will evaluate  sensitivity 
of statistical  conclusions  to specification  of priors.  Informative,  skeptical  priors  will be derived  via the meth.od 
first proposed  by Dixon  and Simon  [200].  Evaluation  of resulting  posterior  distributions  will permit  conclusions 
regarding  the probability  that subgroup/interaction  effects  of varying  magnitudes  obtai n. Examples  of this use 
of the posterior  distribution  may be found  in Green  et al. [197].  Bayesian  modeling  will use SAS v9.2 (Proc 
Genmod  and Proc Monte -Carlo  Markov  chain  [MCMC]),  and in WinBugs  1.4.3  (http://www.mrc­ 
bsu.ca m.ac.uklbugs).  Convergence  of Bayesian  analyses  on the posterior  distributions  via MCMC  will be 
assessed  via graphical  (Trace  Plot, Autocorrelation  Plot) and quantitative  (Geweke  Diagnostics,  Gelman -Rubin 
Diagnostics,  and Heidelberger -Welsh  Diagnostics)  evidence.  Evaluation  of posterior  distributions  will permit 
statements  regarding  the probability  that effects  of varying  magnitudes  exist,  given  the data. 
While  the use of urn randomization  [153]  will likely  result  in comparable  groups,  substantial 
heterogeneity may still exist  within  conditions  on baseline  variables  such  as  severity,  duration  of use, 
and impulsivity.  We propose  subgroup  analyses  following  the procedures  described  above.  This will 
determine  the degree  to which  baseline  variables  moderate  the interaction  of treatment  and snOCM.  
Specific  Aim 3: To conduct an snOCM  of impulsivity  to test Hypotheses  1 and 2 (above) . 
The statistical  analysis  is essentially  the same  as in Specific  Aims  1 and 2. 
C.4.21  Power  Analysis:  The power  analysis  was conducted  using  StudySize  2.0 software 
(http://www.studysize.com/ ). The power  analysis  for the correlation  analysis  between  the DCM  striatal  gating 
effect  and the subsequent  treatment  outcome  (Specific  Aim 2) is based  on the preliminary  data (Section  C.2.4 ). 
We have  shown  an effect  size of 0.69 in our correlation  analysis,  but this is probably  inflated  due to the small  
sample  size. Therefore  we have  conservatively  used  a more  modest  effect  size of 0.60 when  calculating  the 
power.  For an effect  size d = 0.60 and 2-tailed  alpha  = 0.05, a sample  size of 24 subjects  would  achieve  C:l 
power  of 86% for the correlation  analysi s. For Specific  Aim 1,  our pilot  data (Section  C.2.4)  showed  an effect 
size of 1.89 for the between -group  comparison  of the strength  of the endogenous  connection  from DLPFC  to 
ventral  striatum.  Based  on this effect  size, we have  calculated  that 24 subjects  per group  would  achieve  a 
power  of 99.9%  at a 2-tail alpha  = 0.05. Previous  studies  by our group  [35, 37] (section  C.2) found  significant  
fMRI  activation  in predicted  regions  with 19 CDs and 14 controls.  Thus  we expect  significant  fMRI  activation  in 
the current  project  using  the same  fMRI  task and scanning  parameters  with 24 subjects  per group.  
C.4.22  Limitations : OCM  is based  on several  assumptions,  especially  in its original  form [75]. 
However,  we will use the OCM  extensions,  nonlinear [76] and stochastic  [77] OCM,  to reduce  the 
dependence  on these  assumptions.  OCM  is a relatively  new approach  to study  effective  connectivity. 
However,  OCM  is being  established  as a primary  effective  connectivity  technique  in the neuroimaging 
literature,  as evidenced  by rapidly  increased  citation rates  [78], overall  publication  number  [203],  and 
publication  number  in other  patient  populations  [79], and high  reliability  has been  shown  in healthy 
subjects  [80]. This  project  will only  study  COs who are treatment -seeking  individuals,  which  may affect 
generalization  of the findings  to all COs.  We believe  that this  is an acceptable  trade -off because  the 
major  objective  of this  study  is to develop  a novel  biomarker  to predict  treatment  response  in 
treatment -seeking  COs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev.  08/12  Approved  Through  8/31/2 015)  Page  §1_ Continuation  Format  Page  
Program  Director/Principa 51 nvestigator  {Last, First, Middle ): Ma, Liangsuo   
  
1.   Be between  18 and 50 years  of age; 
2.   Right  handed;  
3.   Have  no past history of Psychiatric  or non-Psychiatric  medical  .disorders  which  could  affect  the central 
nervous  system  as assessed  by SCID  and physical  examination.  
4.  Be in acceptable  health  on the basis  of intervie w, medical  history,  labs, and physical  exam;  
5.   Be able to understand  the consent  form and provide  written  informed  consent;  
6.   Have  a medical  history  and physical  examination  demonstrating  no clinically  significant 
contr aindication s for study  participa tion; 
7.   Have  no metal  fragments  or other  bodily  metal  (pacemaker)  or significant  claustrophobia  that would  put 
the subjects  at risk for MRI scannin g. 
Cocaine -dependent  subjects  with medical  conditions  contraindicated  to, or taking  medications  known  to 
have  significant  drug interac tions with the study  medication (s) will be excluded  from the ongoing clinical  trial, 
and therefore  will not participate  this study.  In addition, a subject  will be excluded  from this study  if any of the 
following  conditions  apply: 
1.  Current  DSM -IV diagnosis  of any  psychoactive  substance  dependence  other  than cocain e, marijuana, 
or nicotine  (for cocaine -dependent  subjects  only) ; 
2.  Current  DSM -IV diagnosis  of any  psychoactive  substance  dependence  (for non-drug using  control 
subjects  only); 
3.   Have  a DSM -IV axis I psychiatric  disorder  (other  than psychoac tive substance  abuse  or dependence  as 
described  in criteria  1  for cocaine  dependent  subjects)  or neurological  disease  or disorder;;  
4.   Have  cognitive  impairment  due to non-substance  related  factors  (e.g.,  history  of stroke, transient 
ischemic  attacks,  mental  retardatio n, epilepsy,  head  injury) ; 
5.   Significant  current  suicidal or homicidal  ideatio n; 
6.   Take  CNS  active  concomitant  medication s; 
7.   Pregnant  or nursing  (for female  subjects  only) ; 
8.   Inability  to read,  write,  or speak  English;  
9.   Unwillingness  to sign a written  informed  consent  form;  
10. Have  evidence  of clinically  significant  heart  disease  or hypertension.  
 
1.b Sources  of Materials  
 
Urine,  blood , and breath  samples  will be collected  from all recruited  subject s. We will also collect 
demographic  information  as well as other  information  needed  for screenings,  e.g., family  history  information, 
and drug use information,  from all recruited  subjects. In additio n, MRI data will be collected  from all recruited 
subjects.  All data collected  from the subjects  will remain  confidential.  Data  recorded  by paper  will be kept in a 
locked  cabinet  in the Principal  Investigator's  laboratory.  Electronic  data will be stored  in compute r, COs or hard 
disks  with password  protection.  Only the Principal  Investigate  and trained  research  assistants  will have  access.  
 
1.c. Potential  Risks  
 
Phlebotomy:  There  is the potential  risk of bruising  at the site of the blood  draw  for the HIV test and for the 
blood  chemistries  and complete  blood  count.  
Contraindication  to MRI scanner:  Individuals  who have  pacemakers,  metal  or electromecha nical 
implant s or metallic  foreign  bodies can be injured  if they undergo  an MRI scan.  
Claustrophobia:  Some  individuals  become  anxious  due to claustrophobia  during  MRI scan s. 
Privacy  of individuals:  There  is potential  risk to privacy  of individual s. 
Pregnant  women:  There  is unknown  risk of MRI in  pregnancy.  
 
2 Adequacy  of Protection  Against  Risks  
 
2.a Recruitment  and Informed  Consent  
 
 
OMB  No. 0925-0001/0002 {Rev. 08/12 Approved  Through  8/31/2015)  Page  63  Continua tion Format  Page  
Program  Director/Principal  Investigator  (Last, First, Middle ): Ma, Liangsuo  
Page  54 OMB  No. 0925-0001/0002  (Rev. 08/12 Approved  Through  8/31/2015 ) Continuation  Format  Page   
  
Participants  for the Ongoing  Clinical  Trial (R01  DA03078 7; Dr. Joy M. Schmitz ,.EJj _will be self-referred  in 
response  to various  study  advertisement s.  Individuals  who call for  information  will be given  a brief description 
of the study. Those  interested  will then  be asked  to answer  questions  about  their current  substance  use.  A 
trained  research  assistant  will conduct  this telephone -screening  intervie w. Interviewee  responses  will be 
evaluated  by the Principal Investigator  of the ongoing  clinical  trial (Dr .Joy Schmitz)  , who is Co-Investigator  on 
the current  proposal,  and a decision regarding  study  eligibility  will be made. Eligible  subjects  will be scheduled 
for an in-person  visit at the CNRA . The first appointment  will begin  with the presentation  of the informed 
consent  form for the ongoing  clinical  trial. The consent  form will detail the  requirements  of study  participation 
(e.g., number  of visits, type of data collected,  time commitment,  etc.).  Information  about  the potential  risks and 
how these  risks are minimized  will be informe d. Other  information  on the consent  form will include  a full 
description  of study  requirement s, reimbursement,  risks,  benefits,  alternatives,  and the role of the  local 
Institutional  Review  Board  (IRS).  All questions  will be answered  before  written  consent  is requeste d. 
A copy  of the signed  consent  form for the ongoing  clinical  study  is made  and given to the subjec t, another 
copy  is held in the Principal  Investigato r's (Dr. Joy M. Schmitz)  records,  and the original  signed  consent  is kept 
in a separate,  locked  file accessible  to the IRS upon  request.  
Subjects  for the current  DCM  MRI proposa l will be recruited from participants  in the ongoing  clinical  trial 
(above ). Subjects  will be told by the P.I. (Dr. Liangsuo  Ma, or trained  research  assistant)  that the purpose  of 
the current  proposed  study  is to evaluate  the mechanism  of pharmacotherapeutic  response  for cocaine 
addiction treatment  using  MRI.  Information  about  the potential  risks and how these  risks are minimized  will be 
given. Other  information  on the consent  form will include  a full description  of study  requirement s, 
reimbursemen t, risks, benefit s, alternative s, and the role of the  local Institutional  Review  Board  (IRS).  All 
questions  will be answered  before  written  consent  is requested . 
A copy  of the signed  form is made  and given  to the subjec t, another  copy  is held in the Principal 
Investigator's  (Dr. Liangsuo  Ma) records,  and the original  signed  consent  is kept in a separat e, locked  file 
accessible  to the IRS upon  request.  
 
2.b Protection  Against  Risk from the proposed  DCM  MRI study  
 
Phlebotomy:  This risk will be minimized  by having blood  drawn  by a trained  phlebotomist  or nurse. 
Contraindication  to MRI scanner:  The individuals  under  this risk will be carefully  screened  out prior to 
participation  in the MRI experiment  by careful  history  and physical  examinatio n. 
Claustrophobia:  This risk will be minimized  by having all subjects  undergo  a "mock" MRI scan  using a 
simulator  prior to the actual  scan.  Subjects  with significant  claustrophobia  during  the mock  scan  will be 
excluded  from the actual  MRI study. Subjects  will be monitored  and can communicate  with the scanner 
operators  at all times  during  scannin g. The scanning  will be stopped  immediately  at the subject's  request  or in 
case  the subject  appears  uncomfortable.  
Privacy  of individuals:  All subject  related  information  will be coded  and de-identifie d. Any information 
about  the subjects  gained during  the course  of the study will  remain  confidential.  Data  recorded  by paper  will 
be kept in a locked  file cabinet  in the principal  investigato r's laboratory.  Electronic  media  (i.e., computer -stored 
data,  and data stored  on COs)  will be password  protected  via encrypted  code  key known  only to  the study 
personnel.  
Pregnant  women:  Pregnancy  will be carefully  screened  for female  subject s. Pregnant  women  will be 
excluded  from the study. 
 
3 Potential  Benefits  of the Proposed Research  to the Subject  and Others  
All subjects  will undergo  a free thorough  psychiatric  and non-psychiatric  medical  screening  during  the 
study. Any clinically  relevant  abnormalities  discovered  during  this screening  will be discussed  with subjects and 
they will be referred  for treatment  for these  abnormalitie s. All subjects  who undergo  an MRI scan  will have  a 
structural  scan  read by a Radiologist.  Any clinically  significant  abnormalities  on the MRI scans  will be 
discussed  with the subjects  by the study  physician  and will be referred  for treatment.  The optimal 
measurement  of the mechanism  of pharmacotherapeutic  response  has significant  implica tions in cocaine 
addiction  treatment,  and would  be a great  benefit  to societ y. 
 
4 Importance of the Knowledge  to Be Gained  
Program  Director/Principal  Investigator  (Last, First, Middle ): Ma, Liangsuo  
Page  65 OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev.  08/12  Approved  Through  8/31/2015 ) Continuation  Format  Page   
  
This study  aims  to optimally  measure  the mechanism  of pharmacotherapeutic  response  in dopamine­ 
related  neuronal  systems  underlying  impaired  cognitive  function  in cocaine  dependenc e. The completion  of the 
proposed  study  is expected  to improve  our understanding  of the dopaminergic  mechanism  and 
pharmacotherapeutic  mechanism  in cocaine  dependence,  and ultimately  allow  development  of a clinically 
useful biomarker  that could  be predictive  of more  time-consuming  and costly  clinical  trial results.  Compared  to 
above -stated  risks that are minimal,  the knowledge  to be gained  outweighs  the risks.  
 
5 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan  
 
The Principal  Investigator  will be responsible  of monitoring  the safety  and efficacy  of this study,  executing 
the data and safety  monitoring  (DSM)  plan,  and comply  with the reporting  requirements.  The P.l. will provide  a 
summary  of the DSM  report  to NIDA  on an annual  basis  as part of the progress  report.  The DSM  report  will 
include  the participants'  sociodemographic  characteristics,  expected  versus  actual  recruitment  rates,  treatment 
retention  rates,  any quality  assurance  or regulatory  issues  that occurred  during  the past year,  summary  of 
adverse  events  (AEs)  and serious  (SAEs),  and any actions  or changes  with respect  to the protocol.  The DSM 
report  to NIDA  will also include,  if applicable,  the results  of any efficacy  data analysis  conducted.  
All data will be obtained  for the specific  purposes  of this research.  We will obtain  information  about  subjects 
from structured  interview  evaluations,  physical  examina tions,  self-report  measures,  and collatera l. informants. 
The  biological  specimens  obtained  from  all  subjects  will  include  urine,  blood,  and  breath  samples.  Brain 
imaging  studies  will also be performed  on all subject s. Collected  data will be identified  with the study's  ID of the 
participant.  The  codes  that link the name  of the participant  and the study  ID will be kept confidential  in a 
secured  cabinet.  Data  entered  by trained  research  staff will be verified  via second  entry  by independent  staff. 
The study  statistician  will analyze  the data,  using  SAS software.  Primary  outcome  variables  will be derived 
through  vital signs,  self-reported  behavioral  effects,  and brain  imaging  measures.  
The following  procedures  will be taken  to safeguard  against  AEs: (1) careful  initial  screening  to determine 
eligibility  based  on  inclusion/exclusion  criteria;  (2)  thorough  physical  evaluation  prior  to exposure  to study 
drugs  consisting  of physical examination,  standard  laboratory  tests,  electrocardiogram,  toxicology  screen, 
pregnancy  test and vital signs ; (3) careful  screening  for presence  of a pacemaker,  metal  or electromechanical 
implants  or metallic  foreign  bodies.  Specific  criteria  will be used  to exclude  potential  subjects  for whom  MR 
imaging  is contraindicate d. 
All  AEs  occurring  during  the  course  of  the  study  will. be  collected,  documented,  and  reported  to  the 
Principal  Investigator.  The occurrence  of AEs will be assessed  at baseline,  on each  day of testing,  and on visit 
during  the chronic  administration  phase  of the study.  
AE's deemed  to be serious , as defined  by the FDA,  will be systematically  evaluated  on each  day of study 
participation.  Any SAE,  whether  or not related  to study,  will be reported  to the IRB and NIDA.  A full written 
report  to all institutions  will follow  as soon  as possible  but in no more  than three  days.  The written  report  will be 
in the format  required  by the local IRB and will contain  information  regarding  the date of the SAE,  description  of 
the SAE,  severity  rating  (Grade  1 to 4), assessment  of cause,  whether  the SAE indicates  an increased  risk for 
current  or future  subject s, and whether  changes  to the informed  consent  form are necessary.  
In cases  of early  termination  from the study  due to SAE,  the participant  will have  appropriate  follow -up 
medical  monitorin g. Monitoring  will continue  until the problem  has resolved  or stabilized  with no further  change 
expected,  is clearly  unrelated  to study  medication,  or results  in death.  Outcome  of SAEs  will be periodically 
reported  to NIDA.  A summary  of the SAEs  that occurred  during  the previous  year will be included  in the annual  · 
progress  report  to NIDA.  
 
 
Inclusion  of Women  and Minorities  
 
Men and women  of all ethnic  backgrounds  will be recruited  to participat e. It is anticipated  that the subject 
demographic  profile  will closely  _mirror  the larger  population  from which  they are recruite d. In the previous 
cocaine  clinical  trials  at our center , the percentage  of females  and males  is approximately  30% and 70% 
respectively.  We will continue  recruitment  efforts  to achieve  a 50 50 balance  and thus permit  meaningful 
analyses  by sex across  groups.  
Program  Director/Principal  Investigator  (Last, First, Middle ): Ma, Liangsuo  
Page  66 OMB  No. 0925 -0001/0002  (Rev. 08/12  Approved  Through 8/3112015)  Continuation  Format  Page   
  
In the ongoing  clinical  trial, efforts  are made  to have  the outreach  coordinator  present  educational  material 
and referral  information  at women's  clinics  in Houston  and the surrounding  communitie s. Advertising  in papers 
especially  directed  to women,  such  as SingleFile  (a publication  with 53% female  readership),  and the Health 
and Beauty  section  of the Gree nsheet  has helped  in the past to enhance  recruitment  of women  with cocaine 
dependence.  
The ethnic  representation  has been  55% African -American,  44% Caucasian,  15% Hispanic,  and <1% 
Asian. In the absence  of data on the prevalence  of cocaine  dependence  disorder  in the Houston  area,  we 
cannot  define  ethnic  base  rates.  The medical  center  environment  is not known  to be uniquely  avoided  by any 
particular  ethnic  group  and patients  view it as favorable  and neutral.  Nevertheless , we are prepared  to 
implement  recruitment  procedures  to ensure  a more  diverse  patient  populatio n:Thes e procedures  include:  1) 
Targeted  advertising  in newspapers  which  serve  minority  communities  (e.g., Chance,  a Hispanic  publication ). 
2) Distribution  of flyers  and notices  in neighborhoods  known  to have  a high minority  populatio n. 3) Engaging  in 
outreach  activities  on an ongoing  basis,  e.g., contacting  church  and community  leaders  in the Hispanic 
communities  to provide  educational  material  about  cocaine  dependence  and its consequences;  providing 
contact  information  to aid inreferrals  to clinic  at the CNRA.  
 
 
Inclusion  of Children  
 
Children  between  the age of 18 and 21 years  will be included  in this study. This age range  was chosen  as the 
vast majority  of subjects  who meet  criteria  for cocaine  dependence  are over 18 years  of age. In addition,  brain 
function  in children  under  18 is significantly  different  from that of adult s. The inclusion  of younger  subjects  than 
this age level will increase  variance  in brain  function.  