AKRON CHILDREN'S HOS PITAL  
Ultrasound Guided Single Shot Adductor Canal Block (ACB) 
Versus Single Shot Femoral Nerve Block (FNB) for Postoperative 
Analgesia after Arthroscopic Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) 
Reconstruction in Pediatrics  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
10/3/2019  
 
 
 
  
 
+Ultrasound Guided Single S hot Adductor Ca nal Block (ACB ) 
Versus Single S hot Femoral Nerve Block (FNB) for P ostoperativ e 
Analgesia after  Arthroscopic Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) 
Reconstruction  in Pediatrics  
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS  
ACL   Anterior Cruciate ligament  
ACB    Adductor Canal Block  
ACH   Akron Children’s Hospital  
AE Adverse Event  
ASA  American Society of Anesthesiologist  
FNB   Femoral Nerve  Block  
GE       General Electric  
HIPPA    Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act   
IRB Institutional Review Board  
Kgf     Kilogram -force   
NS        Numeric Scale   
PACU   Post Anesthesia Care U nit 
PHI    Protected Health Information  
PI        Principal Investigator  
POD    Post -operative Day  
PONV  Post- Operative Nausea and Vomiting  
PNB    Peripheral Nerve Block  
SAE  Serious Adverse Event  
 
SRF  Study Report Form  
 
 
 
1.0      INTRODUCTION  
Motor preservation with adequate analgesia has become the optimal postoperative goal in 
orthopedic surgeries, and in particular , knee surgeries. This enables earlier physical therapy, 
faster recovery and shorter hospital stays.  Both ultrasound guided ACB and FNB  have  been 
used to provide postoperative analgesia for knee surgeries  including anterior knee reconstruction  
(1,2,12). To our knowledge, no comparison has been made between these  blocks in relation to 
postoperative quadriceps muscle st rength , or duration and quality of postoperative analgesia for 
arthroscopic ACL reconstruction  in pediatrics . ACB predominantly block s the sensory 
component of the femoral nerve without much effect on the motor component.  Hence, it may 
lead to less quadr iceps muscle  weakness, early postoperative mobilization and  a decrease  in the 
incidence  of postoperative fall  (3, 4).  With the advent of ultrasonography, the adductor canal can  
be easily visualized at the mid -thigh level, allowing performance  of adductor canal block  (ACB) 
with a high success rate (5 ). In recent years, ACB has been successfully used for postoperative  
pain contr ol after knee surgery  (5-7). Anatomical study demonstrated  that the adductor canal 
may serve  as a conduit for more than just the saphenous nerve,  possibly  including the vastus 
medialis nerve, medial femoral cutaneous  nerve, articular branches from the obturator nerve, as 
well as  the medial retinacular nerve  (8, 9). Thus, the sensory change is not limited to the 
distri bution of the saphenous nerve (8) but includes  the medial and anterior aspects of the knee 
from the  superior pole of the patella to the proximal tibia.  In addition, recent evidence 
demonstrating of persistent strength deficits in patients receiving FNB further underscores the 
need for  
effective alternatives(10 )This prospective, double -blinded, randomized , controlled study will test 
the hypothesis that ACB  would be associated with less quadriceps motor weakness than  FNB  at 
4 hour  post block. We  also hypothesize that ACB will   provide analgesia  to the anterior knee  
that is not inferior  to FNB  and not  different in  opioid requirement  at 4 and 24  hours after 
Peripheral Nerve Block (PNB)  . 
 
 
 
2.0      STUDY OBJECTIVES  
2.1 Hypothesis  
ACB would be associated with less quadriceps motor weakness than  FNB and provide 
analgesia that is not inferior to FNB in quality or duration as  determined by Numeric 
Scale (NS) pain scores and opioid use a t 4 and 24 hours   post PNB.  
 
2.2 Objectives  
To compare FNB and ACB regarding:  
1-Quadriceps muscle strength  on both sides ( surgical and non –surgical)  in the 
immedia te pre -operative  period ) and at  4 hours after PNB . 
2-Pain scores at anterior knee at 4 hours and 24 hours  after PNB as assessed by 
Numeric Scale (NS) pain scoring system. Also pain site other than the anterior knee 
will be recorded and specified (posterior knee, calf, leg)  
3- Total opioid  consumption at 4  and 24 hours  after PNB . 
 
 
 
 
3.0     STUDY DESIGN  
 
     
3.1 Randomized , double blinded, single center clinical trial . A total of 52  pediatric  patients 
(ASA 1or 2), aged between 8 to 18  years, for elective ACL reconstruction  at Akron 
Children’s Hospital  ( ACH )  will be enrolled in the study.  Patients will be randomly 
assigned to one of two groups, A  (26 patients)  or B (26 patients) . Group A patients  will have 
ultrasound guided ACB and group B  will have ultrasound guided FNB after induction of 
anesthesia.  Quadriceps strength of both  legs will be assessed  by placing the dynamometer on 
the anterior  of the ankle, between the malleoli. Patients will be instructed to extend their legs 
three times each, with a 30 seconds pause between  each attempt as described by  Maffiuletti 
(11).  The assessment will be perfor med in the pre -operative period and will be repeated 
postoperatively at 4  hours  after PNB . Intraoperative, all  patients will receive fentanyl 1 -2 
mcg/kg and/or morphine 0.05 mg/kg.  All patients will receive adjuvant analgesic 
medications in the form of IV Tylenol 10 -12.5 mg  /kg (maximum 1 gm) after the induction 
of anesthesia. Also, with start of skin closure,  patients will receive IV Ketorolac  0.2-0.3 
mg/kg, maximum of 15  mg, unless contraindicated. After emergence from anesthesia,  all  
patients will be ob served in the post -operative period by an observer unaware of the 
technique of analgesia used. Pain will be assessed using the NS.  Postoperatively, PCA 
morphine pumps will be attached to patients. A loading dose of 0.05 mg/kg  to a maximum of 
5 mg will be administered in the  Post Anesthesia Care unit  (PACU ) as needed, followed  by 
demand interval dosing of 0.015 mg/kg every 10 minutes as  demanded by the patient .Four -
hours limits for morphine will be set  at 0.35 mg/kg. No continuous infusion and no adjuv ant 
NSAIDs or acetaminophen will be administered  in PACU . Rescue morphine dosing will be 
ordered via PCA pump at 0.05 mg/kg ( repeated once as needed) and will be available every 
two hours as needed by pain assess ment ( for a NS  ≥ 4 ) or patient request. Diazepam 0.03 
mg/kg IV will be available every 4 to6 hours as needed for muscle spasm or anxiety.   
Patients will be considered ready for discharge from hospital when all the followi ng criteria 
are met: Child is alert, oriented, stab le vital signs, and can  tolerate clear liquid s, with no 
nausea or vomiting , and good pain control  (no to mild pain) . The evaluation for meeting the 
discharge criteria will be done after one hour from arrival in PACU and every 30 minutes 
thereafter until  the patient meet s all the di scharge criteria.  After discharge , parent s will be 
instructed to give the patient oxycodone 0.1  mg /kg PO q 4   hours as needed for pain . 
Acetaminophen 10mg/kg q 4 hours and /or ibuprofen 10 mg/kg q 4  hours may be 
administered as needed for residual  pain, not exceed 2400 mg in 24 hours . The  total dose of 
oxycodone , ibuprofen  and acetaminophen will be recorded per parents fo r a total of 24 hours 
after PNB. P ain scores  and pain site will be also recorded by parent at 24 hours post -block.  
The data for total  opioids  used in the first 24 hours after PNB and  pain sco re at 24 hours will 
be collected from parent s by phone call .  
 
 
 
 
3.2   Study Endpoints  
       1-Quadriceps muscle strength  on both sides ( surgical and non -surgical)  pre-operatively 
and at 4 after  PNB                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
       2- Total morphine /morphine equivalent  at 4 and 24 hours  after PNB . 
       3-Pain scores  at anterior knee  via NS at  4 and 24  hours after PNB . 
           
 
      3.3 Primary Safety Endpoints  
 Adverse events related to both procedures (ACB and FNB) will be recorded (Please refer to 
section 8) . Known possible adverse events and complications are those associated with peripheral  
nerve blocks in general  and include s potential for bleeding ( hematoma) , infection, nerve injury , 
allergy to the local anesthetics  (ropivacaine) or adjuvant medication ( methylprednisolone)  used 
to achieve the block.  
 
           
 
4.0 SUBJECT SELECTION AND WITHDRAWAL  
4.1 Inclusion criteria:   
            1-ASA I or II  
            2- Age 8 to 18 years   
3-All research subjects must have an acceptable legally authorized representative   
capable of giving consent on the subject’s behalf  if under 18 years old . 
 
           4.2 Exclusion criteria:   
Those who were unable to use a standard 0 -10 NS., t hose with infection at the site of the 
block; those with bleeding disorders; t hose with allergy to the drugs used to perform the 
block (ropivacaine , methylpredniso lone); and those who refuse d a nerve block or 
enrollment in the study.  
 
            4.3 Subject recruitment:  
The surgical schedule will be reviewed for potential researc h subject s. Potential subjects will 
be seen in the orthopedic office prior to the scheduled surgery . If they are found to be eligible 
to participate in the study, the authorized legal representative (s) will be given the choice to 
participate in the study. The st udy will be explained to the authorized  legal r epresentative (s).  
An informed consent will be provided for review by the authorized legal representative (s). 
They will be given a phone number to contact in case they have any question s regarding the 
study . If they  agree to participate in the study, the authorized legal representative  (s) will be 
requested to sign and date the informed consent   prior to the  scheduled  surgery.  Patient 
ascent to the study ma y be also requested if needed.  
         4.4 Patient withdrawal:  
Patient and/or authorized legal representative may withdraw from the trial at any time and 
for any reason. Some possible reasons for withdrawal include:  
1- Patient  and/or authorized legal representative withdraws consent to c ontinued 
participation in the trial  
2-  Patient develop s a complication related to anesthesia and/or surgery  
 
4.5 Data Collection and Follow Up for Withdrawn Subjects:  
All subject s that withdraw from the study after randomization and/or performance of the 
block  will be asked if they will allow for the collection of data. This will  keep  the 
subjects in their already assigned group thereby allowing for the collection and analysis 
of data with the intention to treat principle.  However , if the subject does not want to 
allow collection of data, all follow -up must stop. At that time the subject will be 
considered a s drop out.   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
5.0  STUDY TREATMENT  
           5.1 Description:  
The patient will be randomly assigned to one of two groups, A or B. Group A patients 
will have ultrasound guided ACB  performed at mid -thigh level and  group B will have 
ultrasound guided FNB, with nerve stimulator  confirmation  with t he type of motor 
response ( e.g., quadriceps, patellar)  and the minimum current needed to be  recorded.   
Both block s will be performed under general anesthesia.  Both group  will have 
ropivacaine  0.2 % ( 0.5 ml/kg, maximum of 30   ml and methylpredniso lone acetate  1  
mg/kg , maximum of 40 mg ).Both block s will be performed using  a 22-gauge 2 -inch 
Stimuplex   A needle; ; B. Braun Medical Inc., Melsungen, Germany) .Both blocks will be 
performed using  linear ultrasound transducer,  General Electric (  GE). Ultrasound  
pictures will be obtained to Verify proper local anesthetic placement.  Unfortunately, 
surgeons ar e not able to determine  the type of procedure needed to correct ACL injury , 
until after knee arthroscopy is performed under general anesthesia  ACL reconstruction 
using a hamstring graft, which is the surgical procedure used in this study may not always 
be possible to perform by the surgeon. The surgical alternative of ACL reconstruction is 
ACL repair, which seldom  is done by our surgeon. Patient undergoing ACL 
reconstruction can experience pain in the posterior aspect of the knee, in the distribution 
of the sciatic nerve. This is due to the hamstring graft. In contrast to the anterior knee 
pain covered by both ACB and FNB, posterior knee pain is controlled with IV /oral 
analgesic. This is why recording the site of the knee pain is important to determine the 
PNB success. Due  to the inability to determine beforehand, the type of procedure to be 
performed, we decided therefore to continue the study procedures and data c ollection on 
both ACL reconstruction and ACL repair. The statistical analysis will include only 
patients that undergo ACL reconstruction. For the other patients that undergo ACL  repair, 
data will be collected but not included in the statistical analysis. T he data from these 
patients may be used as a pilot for future research.  
 
. 
 
5.2 Method for Assigning Subjects to Treatment Regimen  
Random allocation for one of the two treatments will be achieved using sealed envelope 
assigned by an external third party not involved in the study to ensure allocation 
concealment.  
 
5.3 Blinding of Study Procedure : 
Both the observer and the patient (and the legally authorized representative) will be blinded 
to the type of block performed.  
 
 
 
 
 
6.0  STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
 
Following emergence from anesthesia, all the patients will be observed in the post -operative 
period by an observer unaware of the technique of analgesia used. Children will be evaluated 
in the PACU every 10 minutes. Pain will be assessed using  the NS .  PCA  morphine pumps 
will be attached to patients ’ IV. A loading dose of 0.05 mg/kg to a maximum of 5 mg will be 
administered in the PACU as needed, followed by demand interval dosing of 0.015 mg/kg 
every 10 minutes.as demanded by the patient .Four -hours limits  for morphine will be set at 
0.35 mg/kg. No continuous infusion and no adjuvant NSAIDs or acetaminophen will be 
administered. Rescue morphine dosing will be ordered via PCA pump at 0.05 mg/kg ( 
repeated once as needed) and will be available every two hours  as needed by pain assessment 
( for a NS  ≥ 4 ) or patient request. Diazepam 0.03 mg/kg IV will be available every 4 to6 
hours as needed for muscle spasm or anxiety.  Patients will be considered ready for discharge 
from hospital when all the following crit eria are met (but actual discha rge will not be allowed 
before 4  hours  after PNB for the purpose of the study):  
Child is alert , oriented, stable vital signs and would tolerate clear liqu id, with no nausea or 
vomiting and with good pain control.  
 After disc harge , parents will be instructed to  give the child  oxycodone tablets/ elixir 0.1 mg 
/kg PO  q 3   hours as needed for pain. In addition, acetaminophen 10mg/kg q 4 hours PRN 
and/or ibuprofen 10 mg/kg q 6 hours PRN may be administered for any residual pain. 
Quadriceps muscle strength will be recorded at 4  hours after PNB in  the PACU.  
Pain scores using the NS  and total  opioids consumption will  be recorded at 4 and  24 hours 
post- block. The assessment at 4  hours will be done in the PACU  and the assessment at 24 
hours  will be done via phone call.  
 
7.0    ANALYTICAL PLAN  
   
7.1 Summary Statistics  will be provided for all variables.  Examination of continuous data 
will include normality testing as well as assessment of potential outliers.  Statistical testing 
will be based upon distributional shape, but for purpose of analytical planning and sample 
size analysis normality of distributions will be assumed.   
To examine for potential differences in quadriceps motor strength (QMS) between the two 
groups (ACB, FNB),  two change scores will be created and analyzed via T -Test for Equal 
and Unequal Variance s with appropriate Bonferroni adjusted alpha testing paired 
difference at two distinctive time points.  Assuming no statistically significant baseline 
differences between the two groups the QMS Change scores will be a) Baseline to 4 hours.  
Sample size ana lysis will be based upon testing of the QMS Change scores.  Non -
inferiority of ACB to FNB in analgesia provided will be assessed by examination of pain 
scores.  Non -inferiority of ACB compared with FNB is defined as the mean ACB - NRS 
pain score not higher  than the mean FNB – NRS pain score by an amount of 1.6.  (Kim, 
2014)  Pain scores  and pain site will be individually examined at the 4 hour and 24 hour 
post – operative time points with appropriate Bonferroni adjusted alpha.  In addition, a 
change in pain score from 4 to 24 hours will be created and evaluated for potential 
difference between groups.   
Total opioid consumption as measured in morphine equivalents will be assessed at the 24 
hour post -operative time point to determine whether a difference exists.  Opioid 
consumption will also be examined by creating a change score from 4 to 24 hour 
consumpt ion and comparing between the groups.   
 
Examination of subjects who undergo reconstruction will include descriptive statistics.   
 
Any other testing done will be exploratory in nature based upon examination of data and 
results of testing described above.   
 
All testing will be completed utilizing SAS 9.4 © software and evaluated at the Type I 
Error Rate of alpha = 0.05 level for statistical significance unless otherwise noted.   
 
7.2 POWER AND SAMPLE SIZE ANALYSIS  
Sample size analysis is based upon utilization of the T -Test to analyze for potential 
differences in QMS Change Scores between the two groups.  Calculated effect size = 1.1 
based upon reported quadriceps strength mean (SD) as 7.3 (5.4) for ACB and 2.2 (3.8 ) for 
FNB utilizing information from  study  by Kim  et al. (13). To account for analysis of paired 
differences at two time points the α = Type I Error Rate of 0.05 is adjusted using 
Bonferroni’s method to 0.025. Power set at 80%.   
Population differences from cited study limit the ability to calc ulate sample size requirements 
accurately.  Considerations must also be taken into account for potential departures from 
normality, non -evaluable subjects / drop outs and potential effect size smaller than calculated.  
Therefore the minimum recommended sam ple size  for this study is 50  subjects (25 in each 
arm).  Refer to tables below for more information regarding power and sample size.  
Minimum sample size required for given effect sizes  
 Effect 
Size n1 n2 N 
0.7 40 40  80 
0.9 25 25 50 
1.1 18 18 36 
 
Power approximations for varying effect sizes and sample sizes  
Effect Size  Alpha  N Approximate 
Power  
1.1 0.025  36 80%  
1.1 0.025  30 74%  
1.1 0.025  24 62%  
0.9 0.025  50 80%  
0.9 0.025  40 69%  
0.9 0.025  30 54%  
0.7 0.025  80 80%  
0.7 0.025  70 74%  
0.7 0.025  60 66%  
 
Sample size analysis was completed utilizing the “pwr” package in R 3.1.2 ©.    
 
7.3 Randomization Table  
A randomization table for up to 60 patients will be provided to the person responsible for 
blinding the study.  Randomization table completed using utilizing SAS 9.4 © software.  
 
8  SAFETY AND ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
8.1 Definitions  
Adverse events related to both procedures (ACB and FNB) will be r ecorded.  Known possible 
adverse events and complications are those associated with peripheral  nerve blocks in general,  
and include s potential for bleeding ( hematoma) , infection, nerve injury , allergy to the local 
anesthetics or adjuvant medications used to achieve the block.  
Also, any unexpected side effects suspected to be related to the study will be reporte d. 
8.2 Recording of Adverse Events  
The investigator will seek information on adverse events by specific questioning and, as 
appropriate, by examination. Information on all adverse events will be recorded 
immediately in the source document, and also in the appropriate ad verse event section of 
the Study Report Form (S RF).  All clearly related signs, symptoms, and abnormal 
diagnostic procedures results will also be recorded in the source document.  
The clinical course of each event will be followed until resol ution, stabilization, or until it 
has been determined that the study treatment is not the cause. Serious adverse events that 
are still ongoing at the end of the study period will be followed up to determine the final 
outcome. Any serious adverse event that  occurs after the study period and is considered to 
be possibly related to the study treatment or study participation will be recorded and 
reported immediately.  
 
8.3 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events  
 
IRB Notification by Investigator (s) 
 The following four types of events will be reported to IRB:  
1. Adverse events which are serious, unexpected, and related or possibly related to 
participation in the research.  
2. Other unexpected adverse events, regardless of severity, that may alter IRB  analysis 
of the risk versus potential benefit of the research and, as a result, warrant 
consideration of substantive changes in the research protocol or informed consent 
process/document.  
3. Unanticipated Problems  involving risks to subjects or others or  any serious or 
continuing noncompliance with this policy or the requirements or determinations of 
the IRB.”  
 
 
 
 
 
9  DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING  
9.1    Confidentiality and Privacy  
 Protected health information  (PHI) that will be collected from subjects in this study 
will be name,  birth date  and medical record number.  
 Only the PI  and the C o-investigator (s) on the study will have an access to this 
information. This information will be kept in a locked box in the anesthesia control office . 
 None of these PHI will be published or disclosed to any other parties  other than the 
investigators participating in the study.  
 All Informed consents / assents will be also kept in a locked box in t he anesthesia office and will 
be kept for reviews for at least 2 years after the publication of the study.  
 Legal authorized representative of the patient w ill also be requested to sign “Authorization for 
Release of Information for research ” to address Heal th Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPPA) requirements.  
 
 
 
9.2         Source Documents:  
Source documents will include PACU nurse assessment fl ow sheet s, pain score flow sheet s and 
medication s flow sheet s.  Dynamometer measurements for each patient will  be also collected 
pre-operatively , and at 4 hours postop . 
 
 
10  STUDY MONITORING, AUDITING AND INSPECTING  
 
10.1 Study Monitoring Plan  
This study will be monitored through a data monitoring committee.  
This is a relatively short study that will be performed over a period of 9 -12 months . This 
study offers minimal risk to the patient. The data monitoring committee will include the 
PI, at least one of the co-investigators, the principal statistician, and the principal 
research nurse.  
The data monitorin g committee wi ll meet when approximately 25%, 50%, 75% and 
100% of the primary outcomes are observed. The priority of the data monitoring 
committee will be to ensure the safety of the participants in the trial and to ensure the 
integrity of the trial. Also, these meetings will monitor the quality of the collected data to 
assess for weaknesses and errors. If any weakness and/or errors are identified, feedback 
will be provided during these meetings .The investigator (s) will allocate adequate time 
for such  monitoring activities. The investigator (s) will also ensure that the monitor or 
other compliance or quality assurance reviewer is given access to all the above noted 
study -related docum ents. 
 
10.2  Auditing and Inspecting  
The investigator (s) will permit study -related monitoring, audits, and in spections by the 
IRB,  Institutional compliance and quality assurance groups of all study related 
documents (for example, source documents, regulatory documents, data collection 
instruments, study data e tc.). Participation as an investigator (s) in this study implies 
acceptance of potential inspection by government regulatory authorities and applicable 
Institutional compliance and quality assurance offices.  
 
 
 
11  REFERENCES  
 
1- Pia Jeoger, Dusanka Zaric et al. :Adductor Canal Block Versus Femoral Nerve Block for Analgesia 
After Total Knee Arthroplasty :Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine 2013; 38:526 -532. 
2- David H. Kim ,Yi Lin et al.: Adductor Canal Block Versus Femoral Nerve Block for Total Knee 
Arthroplasty .  Anesthesiology 2014;120:540 -550 
3- Atkinson HD , Hamid Iet al.: Postoperative fall after use of the 3 -in-1 femoral nerve block for knee 
surgery : A report of four cases . J Orthop Surg ( Hong Knong)  2008 ; 16 : 381 -4 
4- Kandasami M ,Kinnimonmoth AW et al.: Fem oral nerve block for total knee replacement --- A word 
of caution. Knee 2009:16:98 -100 
5-  Manickam B, Perlas A, Duggan E, Brull R, Chan VW, Ramlogan  R: Feasibility and efficacy of 
ultrasound -guided block of the  saphenous nerve in the adductor canal. Reg Anes th Pain Med  
2009; 34:578 –80 
6- Jaeger P, Grevstad U, Henningsen MH, Gottschau B, Mathiesen  O, Dahl JB: Effect of adductor -canal -    
    blockade on established,  severe post -operative pain after total knee arthroplasty: A randomized study.  
    Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2012; 56:1013 –9 
7- Akkaya T, Ersan O, Ozkan D, Sahiner Y, Akin M, Gümüş  H, Ateş Y: Saphenous nerve block is an               
effective regional  technique for post -menisectomy pain. Knee Surg Sports  Traumatol Arthrosc 2008; 
16:855 –8 
8- H orn JL, Pitsch T, Salinas F, Benninger B: Anatomic basis to  the ultrasound -guided approach for 
saphenous nerve blockade.  Reg Anesth Pain Med 2009; 34:486 –9 
9-Krombach J, Gray AT: Sonography for saphenous nerve  block near the adductor canal. Reg Anesth 
Pain  Med 2007;32:369 –70 
10-. Luo TD, Ashraf A, Dahm DL, Stuart MJ, McIntosh AL: Femoral  nerve block is associated with 
persistent strength deficits at  6 months after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction in pediatric  
and adolescent patients. Am J Sports Me d 2015; 43:331 –6 
11- Maffiuletti NA: Assessment of hip and knee muscle function  in orthopaedic practice and research. J 
Bone Joint Surg Am  2010; 92:220 –9 
12- Abdallah  FW, Whelan DB et al.,  Adductor Canal Block  Provides Noninferior Analgesia and Superior 
Quadriceps Strength Compared with  Femoral Nerve Block in Anterior Cruciate Ligament  
Reconstruction . Anesthesiology 2016; 124:1053 -64) 
 
13-Kim DH, Lin Y, Goytizolo EA, et al. Adductor canal block versus femoral nerve block for total knee 
arthroplasty: a prospective, randomized, controlled trial. Anesthesiology . 2014;120(3):540 -550 
 