 
A Placebo Controlled Study of 
Colesevelam in Fecal 
Incontinence  
 
NCT# 02628626 
 
October 13, 2017 
Colesevelam in FI        1 of 16  
 
Title of the study:  A Placebo Controlled Study of Colesevelam in Fecal 
Incontinence  
Staff Principal 
investigator  Adil  E. Bharucha  
Co-Investigator s Subhankar Chakraborty , Gopanandan Parthasarathy, David 
Prichard , Bridget Neja,  Margaret Breen Lyles, Pratyusha 
Tirumanisetty  
Coordinator  Kelly Feuerhak  
Statistician  Alan Zinsmeister PhD  
 
Abstract  
 
Background: Available therapeutic options for idiopathic fecal incontinence (FI) are limited 
and unsatisfactory .  There are no controlled studies documenting the efficacy of medications 
used to treat FI .  We observed that oral clonidine significantly reduced  diarrhea in patients 
with urge FI; while clonidine reduced the frequency of FI, effects were not statistically significant .  Small u ncontrolled studies suggest that the bile acid binding resin colesevelam  
also improves functional diarrhea.  However, there are no controlled studies that have investigated the effect of colesevelam  in FI.  In this placebo controlled study, we plan to 
investigate the effects of combining colesevelam  with clonidine on symptoms in women with 
FI.  The primary aim  of our study is  to investigate the hypotheses  that compared to placebo, 
colesevelam  and clonidine will reduce the frequency of FI  and rectal urgency .  Additionally, 
we will also investigate the stool and mucosa associated microbiota in these patients at baseline and after treatment .  The role of microbiota in pathogenesis of FI is unknown and 
we hope this study will offer us valuable insight into this question.  Sixty women  (18-80 y) 
with symptoms of urge or combined (i.e. urge and passive)  FI will be recruited to this study 
and treated with a combination of colesevelam and clonidine or placebo for 4 weeks .  The 
primary outcome will be the proportion of  patients who achieve at least 5 0% reduction in the 
frequency of F I (number of FI episodes per Diem ) at the end of 4 weeks of treatment.   
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       2 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
A. Specific Aims  
Fecal incontinence (FI) is a common symptom that can significantly impair quality of life.  1  
The current management of FI, particularly in patients with moderate to severe symptoms, is 
unsatisfactory.  Our previous study showed that clonidine, a α2- agonist significantly 
decreased the proportion of loose stools in patients with urge or combined FI who also had diarrhea.  While clonidine reduced the frequency of FI, effects were not statistically 
significant.  A  retrospective analysis of patients with bile acid malabsorption (BAM) observ ed 
that colesevelam, a bile acid binding resin improved subjective symptoms of FI in more than 70% patients.
2  A prospective placebo controlled study on the impact of colesevelam in 
patients with FI is however lacking.   
While BAM and alterations in fecal and colonic microbiota have been implicated to 
contribute to functional  diarrhea and IBS respectively3, 4, the contribution of these  
disturbances to the pathogenesis or management of  FI has not been evaluated.  A better 
understanding of the same is necessary to guide the management of FI.  Likewise, while IBS 
has been associated with gene polymorphisms5-7, no studies have evaluated the association 
between gene polymorphisms and FI.   Finally, the colonic mucosal microbiota are currently 
assessed by obtaining mucosal biopsies during a flexible sigmoidoscopy.  It is conceivable that the mucosal microbiota can also be sampled with an rectal  catheter .  However, the 
characteristics of the  colonic mucosal microbiota profile obtained with sigmoidoscopy and a 
catheter  have not been compared.  
The central hypothesis  of this study is that a combination treatment with clonidine 
and colesevelam is better than placebo in reducing stool frequency and rectal urgency in FI .  
Additional hypotheses are that FI is associated with (i) BAM , (ii) alterations in the fecal and 
colonic mucosal microbiota , which are modified by treatment with colesevelam and clonidine 
and (iii) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of selected genes.  
 In order to investigate these hypotheses we propose five aims  as follows:   
Aim 1: Compare the effects of combination treatment with colesevelam and clonidine vs. 
placebo on bowel symptoms  in FI  
Aim 2: Investigate the prevalence of BAM in patients with FI  
Aim 3: Evaluate the fecal and colonic mucosal microbiota in patients with FI and the effects of treatment with colesevelam and clonidine  
Aim 4: Compare the colonic mucosal microbiota obtained wit h mucosal biopsies during a 
flexible sigmoidoscopy and an rectal  catheter  in FI  
Aim 5: Investigate SNPs associated with FI through microarray analysis of genomic DNA obtained at baseline.   
 
B.
 Background and Significance  
 Fecal incontinence, the involuntary leakage of stool from the anus, is a common 
symptom not only in nursing home residents, but also in the community .  8  Our observations 
(2800 women) from Olmsted County demonstrate that  one of 10 adult women and one of five 
women aged ≥  50 years have had one or more episodes of FI, unrelated to an episode of 
acute diarrhea.  1  Almost one of 15 adult women have moderate to severe FI.   
 There is very limited, mostly uncontrolled, evidence to support the approaches 
currently used to manage FI .  9-11  Based on observations of responsiveness to placebo in 
controlled clinical trials, conservative measures (e.g., dietary modification, behavioral measures to suppress rectal sensation and not  including biofeedback therapy ) improved  
symptoms in approximately 25% of patients .  
12  Amitriptyline and loperamide improved 
diarrhea and rectal urgency in uncontrolled studies .  13-15  However, the use of these agents 
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       3 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
is often limited by constipation.  Biofeedback therapy is better than pelvic  floor exercises 
alone in patients who do not respond to conservative measures.16  In the only controlled 
clinical trial of medical therapy for FI, the effects of oral clonidine (0.1 mg twice daily) for 4 
weeks on symptoms were not significantly different versus placebo in all comers with FI .  
However, clonidine significantly decreased the proportion of loose stools in FI patients with 
diarrhea.  Among patients with diarrhea, clonidine decreased the proportion of days with FI; 
however results were not statistically significant .17 Uncontrolled studies suggest that the bile 
acid binding resin colesevelam also increased stool consistency in patients with functional diarrhea.
18 19 A retrospective chart review and questionnaire suggested that colesevelam 
improved diarrhea and fecal incontinence in patients with cancer and diarrhea due to suspected bile acid malabsorption.
2 However, among patients with functional diarrhea, the 
effects of bile acid binding agents on stool consistency were relatively modest .  For example, 
in a study from Mayo Clinic, cole sevelam reduced the Bristol score from an average of 4.8 
before to 4.4 after therapy .  While colesevelam increases stool consistency by binding bile 
acids, clonidine does so by improving net absorption of fluids and electrolytes.20 Clonidine 
can also increase rectal capacity and reduce rectal sensation.21 Therefore, we propose to 
compare the effects of a combination of colesevelam and clonidine to placebo on bowel symptoms in patients with urge or combined type of FI.  
 At present, FI is attributed to bowel disturbances, particularly diarrhea, and anorectal 
dysfunctions.
17 Among older women with FI, our data strongly suggest that diarrhea and 
rectal urgency are more important risk factors than obstetric anal sphincter injury.22, 23 
Because many women with FI also have bowel disturbances (i.e., irritable bowel syndrome 
[IBS]) , it is important to understand the contribution of peripheral dysfunctions (e.g., BAM, 
altered colonic microbiota), which are observed in IBS, to FI. For example, while several small studies observed differences in the microbiota in feces  between health and irritable 
bowel syndrome,
24 we recently observed major differences in the mucosal microbiota profile 
between healthy and constipated women.25  However, no studies have evaluated t he fecal 
and colonic mucosal   microbiota in FI.  Currently , the mucosal microbiome is evaluated by 
obtaining mucosal biopsies during  flexible sigmoidoscopy .  It may be possible to assess the 
mucosal microbiota with an rectal  catheter , which  is a noninvasive technique.  Hence, we 
propose to compare the fecal and colonic mucosal microbiota obtained with flexible 
sigmoidoscopy and an rectal  catheter  in patients with FI .  
In the community, the prevalence of FI in men is similar to that in women (8.9% and 
7.7% respectively).26  However, in our practice, a majority of patients with FI are women , who 
have had several vaginal deliveries .  By contrast, the 3 main risk factors for FI in men are: 
proctitis secondary to radiotherapy for prostate cancer, a rectal evacuation disorder, and iatrogenic anal sphincter injury ( e.g., due to surgery).  Hence, t he pathophysiology of FI is 
differs betw een men and women.  Therefore, and to ensure a more homogenous composition 
of the patient group, this study is limited to women.   
   C. R
esearch Design and Methods  
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       4 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
1. Overall e xperimental design .   
This study will consist of four phases (Figure 1) 
1. Phase 1 (Initial 
screening)  
Patients who 
consent to participate in the study will visit with the investigator during which a physical examination may be performed.  During this visit they will be asked to compl ete 
questionnaires designed to determine whether or not they have FI, the type of FI, screen for anxiety or depression and assess quality of life at baseline.  Those who have diarrhea but not FI as assessed by 
the questionnaires (i.e. Bristol stool type 6 or 7, or >3 bowel movements/day on average) will be excluded from the study.   Eligible patients who give consent will undergo 
a urine pregnancy test, a 12 lead EKG, anorectal manometry (if not done at Mayo Clinic in the last 6 months), spot stool sample for microbiota analysis, blood draw for genotyping, assessment of the a rectal mucosal microbiota with a rectal catheter, and an optional flexible sigmoidoscopy.  Patients will be asked to record their dietary intake for 72 hours prior to collecting the stool sample.   
Of these tests in phase 1, only the pregnancy test and EKG will determine whether 
patients proceed to phase 2.  The remaining tests will be used to assess specific aims 2- 5.  
Anorectal manometry will help clarify whether these patients have FI because of weakness of the anal sphincter or rectal hypersensitivity.  The spot stool sample and rectal mucosal catheter  will be used to assess the microbial diversity in FI . Among patients who have a 
flexible sigmoidoscopy, the mucosal microbiota will be compared on mucosal samples and a rectal catheter .  In an attempt at (i) avoiding situations where we recognize subjects are 
not eligible to participate when they present at the screening visit and (ii) reduce the time taken for screening visits, we propose, when feasible, to ask participants to complete the questionnaires and a 2 week bowel diary before they come for their screening visit.  Subjects 
will return these questionnaires to us by regular or electronic mail.  If subjects are not subsequently consented/enrolled into the study, these items will be destroyed.  [This bowel 
diary is identical to that approved for use later in the study.]  
  
2. Phase 2 (Completion of bowel diaries)  
Patients, who have FI, as documented by the questionnaire during phase 1, are not 
pregnant, and do not have EKG exclusion criteria documented below will enter phase 2.  During this phase, patients will fill out daily bowel diaries to ascertain if they have FI sympt oms of sufficient severity.  The duration of this phase is variable and ranges from 2- 4 
weeks as clarified below.  Only those patients who meet all the following criteria at the earliest 
weekly review of the bowel diaries starting at week 2 i.e., (i) compl etion of at least 5 out of 7 
days of the diary in the preceding week and 10 out of 14 in the preceding 2 weeks, (ii) experience at least 1 episode of FI per week averaged over 2 weeks, (iii) have a Bristol stool form score ≥ 3, and (iii) an average stool frequency of ≥1/day will enter the treatment phase .  
Patients who have not filled out the minimum number of days of bowel symptoms will be asked to fill out bowel diaries for an additional 2 weeks .  Those who satisfy criteria at the end Figure 1.  Study design  
 

Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       5 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
of the two additional weeks will proceed to Phase 3.  Otherwise their participation in the trial 
will be terminated and they will exit the study.   
 
3. Phase 3 (Treatment Phase)  
Patients who satisfy symptom criteria in Phase 2 will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to 
receive either a combination of colesevelam (1.875 gm twice daily) and clonidine (0.1 mg 
oral twice daily) or an identical placebo for 4 weeks.  The randomization, to be prepared by Dr. Zinsmeister, will be balanced on age (<50 vs. ≥ 50 y) and BMI (<30 vs. ≥ 30 kg/m2) .  
Patients will fill daily  bowel diaries for the entire duration of the treatment phase and mail 
them in every week.  Patients will be contacted periodically (by phone or email) to assess compliance with medications, with filling bowel diaries and for any adv erse events.  At the 
end of the treatment phase, patients will be asked to fill questionnaires pertaining to their quality of life and satisfaction with treatment.  During the treatment phase, patients will be allowed to use rescue medication in the form of loperamide to circumvent the potential for withdrawal from the study due to overwhelming symptoms.  Patients are allowed to take loperamide (2mg/dose) up to 3 unit doses in a 24 hour period, 5 unit doses in a 48 hour period or 10 unit doses in any 7- day period.  Patients will need to record their loperamide 
usage in the bowel diary.   
 
4. Phase 4 (Post treatment phase)  
This phase, which lasts 4 weeks, will begin after patients take their last dose of 
medication.  All patients who complete at least 1 week of treatment will enter this phase.  During this phase, study staff will contact patients periodically  by phone or email to enquire 
how they are doing.  Patients will fill out daily bowel diaries for 4 weeks and return them weekly for review.  At the end of 4 weeks, they will be asked to complete post -treatment 
questionnaires to assess quality of life, anxiety and depression.  They will also be asked to collect a single spot stool sample and mail them in.  The questionnaires will be used to investigate if pati ents had worsening of symptoms after stopping therapy.  The spot stool 
sample will be used to analyze the effect of treatment on the fecal microbiota.  Participants will be asked record their dietary intake for 72 hours prior to collecting the stool sample  and 
mail in the food record.   
 
2. H
uman subjects .  
Eligibility criteria for each phase of the study are tabulated below.  
 
A. Phase 1  
Inclusion Criteria:  
i) Females aged 18- 80 years with urge predominant or combined (i.e. urge plus passive) 
FI, as defined by a validated questionnaire, for ≥  1 year duration will be eligible to 
participate.27  
 Exclusion Criteria:   (i) History of clinically serious cardiovascular or pulmonary disease or EKG showing 2
nd 
degree atrioventricular block or higher.  
(ii) Current or past history of colon or rectal cancer, scleroderma, inflammatory bowel disease, ischemic colitis, small bowel obstruction, congenital anorectal abnormalities, 
≥ Grade 2 rectal prolapse, history of rectal resection or pelvic irradiation  
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       6 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
(iii) Neurological disorders – Spinal cord injuries, dementia (Mini -Mental status score 
<21), multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, peripheral neuropathy  
(iv) Conditions precluding safe use of clonidine, i.e., symptomatic hypotension, or systolic 
blood pressure of <100 mm Hg on initial visit in Phase 1 of study  
(v) Colon resection greater than limited resection (e.g. sigmoid colectomy for diverticulitis is eligible but right hemicolectomy is not)  
(vi) Patients who are currently on or anytime in the past have been on colesevelam for FI  
(vii) Malabsorptive bariatric procedures (i.e., Biliopancreatic diversion with or 
without duodenal switch and Jejunoileal bypass), gastric bypass surgery (i.e., Roux en Y gastric bypass)  will be excluded. Those patients who have undergone 
restrictive procedures (e.g.  vertical banded gastroplasty, laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding) however will be eligible to participate  
(viii)  Currently pregnant or nursing women Prior history of intolerance to clonidine 
or colesevelam  
(ix) 
 History of sphincteroplasty, sacral nerve stimulator, previous injection of Solesta for 
treatment of FI  
(x)  Medications  
• .   
• Relative – opioid analgesics , other antihypertensive agents (i.e. if there is 
concern about synergistic effects and hypotension).  Patients using drugs with anticholinergic effects at high doses (e.g. nortriptyline greater than 50 mg/day or amitriptyline greater than 25 mg/day)  will be  excluded at the discretion of the 
physician.   Patients who use lower doses will be eligible to participate provided 
the dose will be stable during the study  
 
B. Phase 2  
Inclusion Criteria:  
i) Females aged 18- 80 years with urge predominant or combined (i.e. urge plus 
passive) FI for ≥  1 year, as defined by questionnaire  
 
     Exclusion criteria:  
(i) Positive urine pregnancy screen  
 
     C. Phase 3  
     Inclusion criteria:  
(i) Completion of at least 5 out of 7 days of the diary  in the preceding week and 10  out of 
14 in the preceding 2 weeks  
(ii) At least 1 episode of FI per week  averaged over 2 weeks  
(iii) Average Bristol stool score of  3 or higher  
(iv) Average stool frequency of ≥1/day  
 
     Exclusion criteria (if at least one is satisfied):  
(i) Missing data in bowel diaries, i.e. if patient did not record bowel symptoms data for more than 2 days in 1 week or 4 days over 2 week s  
(ii) Greater than 6 liquid [Bristol 6 or 7]) stools daily  
(iii) Average of l ess than 1 bowel movement daily  
(iv) Average Bristol stool score <3 as assessed from analysis of bowel diaries  
 
D. Phase 4  
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       7 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
Inclusion criteria:  
(i) All patients who complete at least 1 week of treatment with study drugs or placebo  
     Exclusion criteria : 
(i) Patients who completed less than 1 week of treatment with study drugs or placebo  
 
 
3. S tudy procedures  
a) History and physical examination   a physical examination will not be performed, at the 
discretion of the investigator, when this has been performed in the past 3 months at Mayo 
Clinic .  The MMSE test will be administered as described previously .  28 The maximum score 
is 30 and a score of less than 21 is suggestive of dementia.  
b) A norectal manometry  will only be performed when this has not been performed in the 
past 6 months at Mayo Clinic.  After rectal cleansing with 1- 2 magnesium citrate 
(Fleets ,C.B. Fleet, Lynchburg, 
VA) enemas, anorectal functio ns 
will be assessed using standard 
and established techniques in our laboratory 
29.  Anal pressures will 
be measured at rest, during squeeze, simulated evacuation, and a Valsalva maneuver  by 
high- resolution manometry .  
Since clinical observations suggest that FI is also associated with a rectal evacuation disorder, rectal balloon expulsion will also 
be assessed.   
c) F
lexible sigmoidoscopy  
will be performed in the Clinical Research Unit  after 1 -2 Fleet’s 
enemas .  This is an optional 
procedure and will be performed in Phase 1 of the study  after the 
rectal catheter  and if an anorectal 
manometry is performed, after that procedure also.   Using 
standard biopsy forceps, 8 mucosal biopsies will be obtained each from the sigmoid colon and 
the rectum.  Eight biopsies will 
provide adequate tissue for microbial DNA extraction.   If any 
abnormality is seen on sigmoidoscopy, additional biopsies will be obtained for histology .  The colonic mucosal 
Figure 2. Mega-Brush. A. Undeployed brush with blue sheath and the foam compressed inside a gelatin sheath. B. The foam is pushed out but not yet deployed C. Foam deployed. The foam shown in the figure has 20 pores per inch. We will be using one which is softer with 80 pores 
per inch.  
 
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       8 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
microbiota will be compared to that evaluated with a rectal catheter .  
d) Re ctal catheter .  This test will be done  in all patients either  just prior to anorectal 
manometry or during the initial visit in patients who do not have a manometry .  The Mega 
Brush ® (provided by Capnostics LLC., Figure 2) is a mass cytology cell retriever system 
comprised of a foam sphere made of biocompatible material that is used to obtain specimens 
from the anorectum.  It is FDA cleared (FDA K944614/A) for collection of mucosal specimen 
with an endoscope. .  The foam is enclosed in a flexible outer tube and the tip covered by a 
gelatin cap.  The diameter of the foam is 30 mm when fully deployed and the foam has 80 
pores per sq. inch.  We propose to introduce the catheter under direct vision during the rectal examination. Once the catheter is in the rectum, the capsule will be pushed out into the rectum and the cap allowed to dissolve over about 5 minutes. This will deploy the foam sphere. The foam sphere will be rotated 1- 2 times in the rectum very gently with the help of 
the sheath. The catheter will then be slowly withdrawn.  . 
e) Calculating relative abundance of
  bacterial 16s rRNA to human DNA:  Quantitative PCR 
will be used to assay the quantity of bacterial 16s rRNA in the stool sample.  This will be  
normalized to a single copy human gene ( e.g. TNF -alpha) as described in literature 30.  The 
relative proportion of bacterial to human DNA will be calculated by first generating a standard curve by dilution series using purified plasmids containing a representative target ( e.g. E.coli  
16s rRNA or human TNF-alpha).  Purified plasmids will be amplified in parallel with patient 
samples and a standard curve generated to assess number of copies of the target in each sample.  
f) F
ecal  and colonic  mucosal microbiome analysis:  Microbial DNA will be extracted from 
stool and tissue samples using standardized methods [18].  Phylotype profiles of the microbiome from colesevelam and placebo treated FI populations will be generated using deep rDNA hypervariable tag sequencing of the hypervariable V3- V5 region of the SSU rRNA gene, 
which has been validated for use with human microbiomes and is one of the methods of choice for the HMP.  With the longer reads from the MiSeq (250x250 paired end reads), our sequencing will include both the V3- V5 RGTs making for a more optimal phylogenetic analysis 
[19].  Phylotype profiles of the mucosa- associated microbiome will be generated using rDNA 
sequencing of the hypervariable V3- V5 region, which has been validated for standard use by 
the human microbiome project.  The 500 base pair reads will ensure a better optimal 
phylogenetic identification.  Barcoding samples prior to sequencing will yield approximately 
20,000 reads/sample, ensuring detection of both dominant (core microbiome) and poorly represented taxa (variable microbiome) .  Identifying the existent taxa, diversity, and ecological 
relationships within each sample requires that we process large volumes of 16S DNA sequence data.  In order to accomplish this task we will follow protocols that we have 
quantitatively shown to be optimal .  Reads will be aligned using our own custom multiple 
alignment tool (TORNADO v2.0) that has been optimized the production of taxonomic calls and alignments for downstream analysis such as OTU clustering and phylogeny from paired end reads [20].  Sequences will be culled according to initial quality files using QIIME, pre clustered in order to reduce the number of unique reads due to sequencing errors using mother, and aligned using the new version of the TORNADO pipeline for paired end reads.  TORNADO v2.0 will then be used to obtain the taxa calls that will be used in later correlation analysis .  Second, quantitative PCR assays targeting functional genes mcrA and mrtA 
(methanogens) dsrA (sulfate -reducing bacteria) and hydA (hydrogen -producing bacteria) will 
be performed on both stool and mucosal samples following published protocols [21].  Similarly, different sulfate- reducing genera will be quantified with validated 16S primers .  The abundance 
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       9 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
of functional genes will be correlated to physiological parameters.  Subsequent QPCR assays 
on microbial groups that are significantly distinct in sequencing analyses may also be 
performed.  
 (i) N utritional Assessment : Habitual dietary intake will b e assessed  at baseline using an 
electronic graphical food frequency questionnaire ( FFQ) (Viocare Technologies, Inc. 145 
Witherspoon Street, Princeton, NJ 08542).  This questionnaire is based on the Women's Health Initiative FFQ and has been adapted by VioCare in an electronic computer -
administered format to evaluate dietary intake over a three month period.  It employs the Minnesota NDS nutritional analysis database for nutrient analyses .  The FFQ has been 
validated and compares well with nutrient intake validated against food records and four 24-hr dietary recalls ( 29, 30 ).  (ii) Participants will keep food records of their actual dietary 
intake for 72 hours prior to collecting  the stool specimens for microbiome analysis .  The 
food records will be analyzed for energy, protein, fat, carbohydrate and fiber content by the CRTU nutrition staff using the ESHA Food Processor software (Version 10.15) developed by ESHA Research, Salem, Oregon 97309- 1028.    
g)   D
rug therapy  Patients  will be treated with colesevelam (1.875 gm)  and clonidine (0.1 
mg) twice daily or matching placebo for 4 weeks.  Patients  will need to discontinue any 
antidiarrheal  medications  from the start of Phase 1 through end of Phase 3.  Loperamide 
tablets (2 mg) will be provided for rescue when patients experience intolerable diarrhea.  Patients can take up to 3 unit doses in a 24 hour period, 5 unit doses in a 48 hour period or 10 
unit doses in any 7- day period.  They will be required to record their loperamide usage during 
the treatment phase.  
h) Genome wide DNA analysis .
   We are currently exploring for SNPs associated with FI 
by genotyping 175 women with FI and 175 age- and gender -matched controls from Olmsted 
County (IRB 22- 01), using a chip with > 500,000 SNPs spaced on average 1 every 5 kb in 
the genome.  Towards our long- term objective of uncovering associations between SNPs 
and FI, we propose to extract DNA from 2 0 ml of blood, to be drawn from study participants .  
The tubes will be spun down in the Clinical Research and Trial Unit immediately and the plasma stored at minus 80 degrees celsius .  The buffy coat will be stored at minus 80 degrees 
Celsius until DNA is extracted .  DNA extraction will be conducted at the B AP Lab.  Genome-
wide analysis will be conducted using Illumina 610 QUAD microarray or comparable approaches.  All patients who qualify for the study based on physician assessment in Phase 
1 will undergo genotyping.  Genotype -phenotype correlations will be examined using these 
patients and other patients in ongoing studies.  
i) Analysis of Differential Gene Expression by
  RNA Seq analysis .  In order to investigate 
if there is any relationship between the global gene expression in a patient and their response 
to treatment  for FI , we will perform RNA Seq analysis with help of the Gene Expression Core 
Facility at Mayo Clinic Rochester .  We will collect 7.5 ml of blood in PAX gene tubes  at the 
time of the initial visit .  RNA will be extracted from whole blood immediately and  stored at 
minus 80 degrees celsius .  Further processing of RNA will be done by the Gene Expression 
core facility at Mayo Clinic, Rochester.   
Summary of Blood Collect i ons.  The total blood collected for this study is 27.5 ml.   
Item Test ID  Lab Tube (amount required)  
DNA for SNPs 31669  CRU Lab  Use buffy coat from EDTA tubes (one 
tube of 20 ml)  
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       10 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
RNA extraction and 
processing 31669  BAP Lab PAX gene tubes ( 7.5 ml) 
 
j)  Symptom assessments.    
The following instruments will be used to evaluate symptoms, co -morbid conditions, and 
impact on QOL.  
(i) Fecal Incontinence Severity Index  (FISI)  – which is a validated 4- item scale used to 
assess the frequency of 3 different types of FI .  31 
(ii) Fecal Incontinence Quality of Life (FI -QOL) – is a 30- item validated questionnaire that 
assesses the effects of FI on QOL .  32 
(iii) Hospital Anxiety and Depression (HAD) Scale 33 
(iv) Health -status questionnaire (Radosevich DM, Wetzler H, Wilson SM. 1994.  Health 
Status Questionnaire (HSQ) 2.0: Scoring Comparisons and Reference Data.  Health 
Outcom es Institute, Bloomington, MN. )  is a self -report inventory designed to measure 
a patient’s overall health and functioning.  
(v)  Fecal incontinence and Constipation Assessment (FICA) Scale – This validated 
instrument, developed in our program, has 4- items (fr equency, type, amount of 
leakage, and presence of urgency) used to rate the severity of FI .  34  It is the only 
instrument that incorporates the amount of leakage, which is an important yardstick of the severity of FI.  
(vi) Satisfaction with treatmen t: In order to determine if patients were satisfied with the 
treatment received, we will use a previously validated visual analog score.  
FICA score will be calculated from the bowel questionnaire.  FISI, HAD, HSQ and Satisfaction 
with treatment score will be calculated from the General Questionnaire that will be administered pre and post -treatment ( Table 1 ). 
 Table 1 .  Symptom assessment tools and their administration during the study  
 
 Phase 1  Phase 2  Phase 3  Phase 4  
Duration  Up to 1 week  2-4 weeks  4 weeks  4 weeks  
Bowel questionnaire  X  X X 
Quality of life 
questionnaire  X  X X 
Hospital anxiety and 
depression 
questionnaire  X 
  X 
Daily bowel diaries   X X X 
Satisfaction with 
treatment    X  
 
4. D ata and statistical analysis   
i. Power Statement:   
Based on the observed difference in the frequency  of FI (i.e., mean number of FI episodes 
per subject per diem) betw een treatment and placebo groups  in the clonidine study, w e 
estimate that approximately 33 subjects in each treatment group (i.e. colesevelam  and 
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       11 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
clonidine vs placebo) will provide 80% power, using a two sided alpha level of 0.05, to detect 
at least a  50% difference in the frequency of FI  between treatment groups.17 
ii. D ata Analysis Plan:  
a) Statistical analysis  
An Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA) spreadsheet of treatment assignments (balanced on 
age and BMI) will be generated (by Dr.  Zinsmeister) and sent to the research pharmacy.  
Study personnel will be blinded until the study is completed.  
Bowel diaries will be analyzed as follows: S tool frequency , form, urgency and use of rescue 
medications  will be averaged first for each day and then over 1- 2 weeks (two weeks in Phase 
1 and one week in Phase 3) in each subject .   
We will compare response to treatment between colesevelam/clonidine and placebo between for the treatment period using the values during Phase 1 as covariates and 
separately, post -treatment.  The analyses will use an α value of 0.05 for each comparison.  
Treatment groups will compared using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with the corresponding baseline ( Phase 1) value as the covariate.  Data will be analyzed per intent -
to treat analysis using all subjects randomized.   Missing values will be imputed as described 
previously and an adjustment in the ANCOVA error degrees of freedom will be made.  
Separate ANCOVA models will be used to evaluate whether treatment effects were influenced by the presence or absence of diarrhea at baseline.  All tests will be two tailed.  
Endpoints   
   
The primary and secondary endpoints have been well described in our study of  clonidine in FI and will be employed in this study as well
34  
a) Primary endpoint:  
Previously, we have shown that in patients whom the frequency of FI (measured as 
mean number of episodes of FI per person per Diem ) decreased by at least 50%, the 
corresponding FICA severity score exceeded the minimum clinically -important 
difference ( i.e., the smallest change detected by an instrument that is considered 
clinically significant) in at least 75% of the cases .  This means  that the majority of 
people who report at least 50% improvement in FI frequency have a clinically 
significant improvement .  Hence i n this study, we will use  a 50% reduction in the 
frequency of FI episodes  as our primary end point.    
Secondary endpoints:  
The following secondary end points will be compared between placebo and colesevelam groups  
a) Change in the number of days with FI   
b) Volume of FI - this will be graded as small (staining only), moderate (requiring change 
of underwear) or large (requiring change of all clothes) .  We will calculate the 
proportion of FI episodes of each type and compare the proportion before and during treatment.  
c) Composition of leaked stools (measured as percentage of all incontinent bowel movements that were type 5- 7 on the Bristol stool scale) - average Bristol stool form 
will be calcula ted from bowel diaries and will be compared before and during 
treatment.  
d) Number of episodes of passive and urge incontinence per week  
e) Rectal urgency (proportion of total and incontinent bowel movements preceded by urgency)  
f) Proportion of complete bowel movements  
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       12 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
g) Time for which a bowel movement can be deferred after occurrence of urgency  
h) Change in Bristol stool form  
i) Change in proportion of FI episodes that were diarrhea (Bristol stool score 5- 7) 
j) Patient reported severity of bowel symptoms as assessed by VAS  
k) S everity of FI (FISI score)  
l) Impact of FI on quality of life (FI -QOL score)  
m) Impact on symptoms of anxiety and depression (HAD score)  
n) Satisfaction  with treatment measured by the visual analog scale  
o) Proport ion of days where patient used l operamide  
 
For the above end points, we will obtain information either from weekly bowel diaries or questionnaires administered during each of the phases of this study as outlined in Section 2.  
 Using standardized approaches established in our laboratory, mucosal  microbiota profiles 
will be compared between rectal  catheter s and  colonic mucosal biopsies obtained at 
flexible sigmoidoscopy.  
 
iii. Subject Safety.  Only subjects who are eligible based on pre- defined criteria, an 
interview and a physical examination, and screening laboratory tests will be enrolled.  The consent form details issues related to privacy, withdrawal from studies, and use of blood for genetic analyses among other items .  The eligibility criteria are structured 
to exclude patients who have a greater risk of side effects with clonidine.  Interventions (clonidine, colesevelam and anorectal tests) pose a low risk to participants.  In our previous study, clonidine was well tolerated by women with FI; dry mouth was the only side effect that occurred more frequently with clonidine than placebo .  
17  There is no 
known drug interaction between clonidin e and colesevelam .  Patients who are positive 
for depression by the HAD score will be offered referral to Psychiatry .  If the patien t 
endorses suicidal thoughts then we will first and foremost offer support .  If the patient 
is on Mayo campus and in department, we will then have a co -worker page 911 and 
ask for Security .  The study coordinator  will contact the principal investigator 
immediately to alert them that of the situation.  The study staff will stay with the patient 
until Security arrives at the location.  If the patient is not on Mayo campus, then the study staff will keep the patient on the line and have a co- worker page 911.  Study 
procedures are conducted by trained and experienced personnel .  Monitoring for side 
effects will be performed by study  personnel .  The PI will also review side effects .  
Each study is reviewed and analyzed; study discussions and communications are generally by e- mail and stored.   
iv. Data Integrity .  Only subjects who are eligible based on pre- defined criteria, an 
interview and a physical examination will be enrolled.  Transcription of data is accurate and complete.  Calculations will be standardized and accurate.  The study technician 
will monitor data after every study .  The PI will also review data after every 10 studies.  
v. Subject Privacy .  Subjects will be consented in a private room .  Adequate time for 
questions will be provided.   
vi. Data Confidentiality .  All records are maintained in password protected electronic files .  
Hard copies are filed in private offices.  
vii. Product Accountability .  Research Pharmacy will obtain and dispense medication.  
Unused medication will be collected from subjects at the end of the study and destroyed.  
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       13 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
viii. Study Documentation.  Documentation will be per established guidelines during the 
study (hard copy and electronic data capture).  These files will be sampled annually.  
ix. Study Coordination .  Quarterly debriefing will be conducted to ensure expectations 
are clear and if educational needs exist.  
 
D.  Human Subjects   
Only subjects who satisfy stringent inclusion and exclusion criteria and provide written 
informed consent will be included in the protocol.  The consent form details issues related to privacy, withdrawal from studies, and use of blood for genetic analyses among other items.  Additional details as follows:  
1. Anorectal assessments are extremely safe; discomfort, if any during rectal distention is 
mild and tolerable and the risk of rectal perforation in an uninflamed rectum is negligible.   
2. Clonidine  is generally well tolerated at this dose.  In a recent study, we observed that the 
most common side effect with clonidine was dry mouth (about 70% vs. 4.5% in placebo) .  
Other adverse effects included drowsiness (23% vs 14% in placebo), light headedness (27% vs.9% in placebo) and fatigue (36% vs. 23% in placebo)  although they did not reach 
statistical significance .  
17 
3. Colesevelam is generally well tolerated at this dose.  The most commonly reported side 
effects from Colesevelam are constipation, diarrhea, dyspepsia, hypoglycemia (mild and well tolerated), headache, abdominal cramps, nausea, and flatulence and back pain.  Their frequency ranges from 8% -40% in different studies .  
35-37 
 P atients will be appropriately screened and subjects with an increased risk of 
complications will be excluded from the study.  All side effects will be recorded at the follow -
up visit.  Since the effects of clonidine and colesevelam  in pregnant and nursing women are 
unknown, women who are pregnant or nursing will be excluded from the study.  Women of child-bearing potential will be advised to employ contraceptive measures during the study 
and a pregnancy test will be checked before beginning clonidine or col esevelam .   
 Patients who cannot tolerate clonidine 0.1 mg bid will be switched to 0.1 mg once daily 
(qhs)  Clonidine will be discontinued if: - 
(i) Subjects have syncope, or lethargy that interferes with safe performance of the volunteer’s activities of daily living; or  
(ii) if the systolic blood pressure drops to < 90 mmHg for patients with a systolic BP between 90 and 130 mmHg, or if systolic BP falls to < 100 mmHg for subjects with a pre-treatment systolic BP > 130 mmHg; or  
(iii) if a subject becomes pregnant during the study.   Patients who cannot tolerate three tablets of 625 mg colesevelam twice daily will have 
dose reduction by 1 tablet daily until they are able to tolerate the medication.  Colesevelam will 
be stopped if a subject becomes pregnant during the study.  
Data Safety and Monitoring Plan.  The DSMP utilized will adhere to the protocol approved by the Mayo Clinic IRB .  We propose the following plan: - 
Data quality and management : T
 he principal investigator will review all data collection 
forms on a thr ee-monthly basis for completeness and accuracy of the data as well as 
protocol compliance.  
Adverse events grading: The  common grading scale listed below will be used to grade AEs:  
0 No adverse event or within normal limits or not clinical significant  
1 Mild AE, did not require treatment  
2 Moderate AE, resolved with treatment  
3 Severe AE, resulted in inability to carry on normal activities and required professional medical attention  
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       14 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
4 Life threatening or disabling AE  
5 Fatal AE  
Attribution s c ale: An adverse event includes both, an expected side effect that is of a 
serious nature, or an unexpected side effect/ event regardless of severity .  All events will be 
graded as to their attribution (unrelated to protocol, or possibly, probably, or defi nitely 
related to protocol) .  Any event that is reported to either the principal investigator or his 
designated research associates by the subject or medical staff caring for the subject and 
which meets the criteria will be documented as such.  
Data M onitoring.  The majority of data generated from these protocols will be from analyses performed in our laboratory or the immunochemical core laboratory .  Standard 
quality control procedures are in place for each assay.  The frequency of data review for this study differs according to the type of data and can be summarized in the following table:  
 
Data type  Frequency of 
review  
Subject accrual (adherence to protocol regarding 
demographics, inclusion/exclusion)  Weekly  
Adverse event/safety rates (injuries)  Weekly  
Annual report  Yearly for IRB  
 4.  DNA and RNA analyses.   DNA , RNA  and plasma samples will be anonymized before 
being submitted to the genotyping or RNA Seq  assays.  Specific information is provided in the 
consent form regarding storage and future use of the biologic sample.  These results will not 
be added to the written record.           E. R ef
erences  
  
1. Bharucha AE, Zinsmeister AR, Locke GR, Seide B, McKeon K, Schleck CD, Melton LJI. 
Prevalence and burden of fecal incontinence:  A population based study in women. 
Gastroenterology 2005;129:42-49. 
2. Wedlake L, Thomas K, Lalji A, Anagnostopoulos C, Andreyev HJ. Effectiveness and tolerability of colesevelam hydrochloride for bile -acid malabsorption in patients with cancer: 
a retrospective chart review and patient questionnaire. Clinical therapeutics 2009;31:2549-58. 
3. Wedlake L, A'Hern R, Russell D, Thomas K, Walters JR, Andreyev HJ. Systematic review: 
the prevalence of idiopathic bile acid malabsorption as diagnosed by SeHCAT scanning in patients with diarrhoea -predominant irritable bowel syndrome. Alimentary pharmacology & 
therapeutics 2009;30:707-17. 
4. Mayer EA, Savid ge T, Shulman RJ. Brain- gut microbiome interactions and functional bowel 
disorders. Gastroenterology 2014;146:1500-12. 
5. Saito YA. The role of genetics in IBS. Gastroenterology clinics of North America 2011;40:45-67. 
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       15 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
6. Ek WE, Reznichenko A, Ripke S, Nies ler B, Zucchelli M, Rivera NV, Schmidt PT, Pedersen 
NL, Magnusson P, Talley NJ, Holliday EG, Houghton L, Gazouli M, Karamanolis G, Rappold 
G, Burwinkel B, Surowy H, Rafter J, Assadi G, Li L, Papadaki E, Gambaccini D, Marchi S, Colucci R, Blandizzi C, Barbaro R, Karling P, Walter S, Ohlsson B, Tornblom H, Bresso F, Andreasson A, Dlugosz A, Simren M, Agreus L, Lindberg G, Boeckxstaens G, Bellini M, Stanghellini V, Barbara G, Daly MJ, Camilleri M, Wouters MM, D'Amato M. Exploring the genetics of irritable bowel syndrome: a GWA study in the general population and replication in multinational case -control cohorts. Gut 2015;64:1774-82. 
7. Camilleri M. Peripheral mechanisms in irritable bowel syndrome. The New England journal of medicine 2013;368:578-9. 
8. Nelson RL. Epidemiology of fecal incontinence. Gastroenterology 2004;126:S3-7. 9. Bharucha A. Fecal Incontinence. Gastroenterology 2003;124:1672-1685. 10. Cheung O, Wald A. Review article: the management of pelvic floor disorders. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2004;19:481-95. 
11. Scarlett Y. Medical management of fecal incontinence. Gastroenterology 2004;126:S55-63. 12. Norton C, Chelvanayagam S, Wilson- Barnett J, Redfern S, Kamm MA. Randomized 
Controlled Trial of Biofeedback for Fecal Incontinence. Gastroenterology 2003; 125:1320-
1329. 
13. Read M, Read NW, Barber DC, Duthie HL. Effects of loperamide on anal sphincter function in patients complaining of chronic diarrhea with fecal incontinence and urgency. Digestive Diseases and Sciences 1982;27:807-14. 
14. Sun WM, Read NW, Verlinden M. Effects of loperamide oxide on gastrointestinal transit time and anorectal function in patients with chronic diarrhoea and faecal incontinence. Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology 1997;32:34-8. 
15. Santoro GA, Eitan BZ, Pryde A, Bartolo DC. Open study of low -dose amitriptyline in the 
treatment of patients with idiopathic fecal incontinence. Dis Colon Rectum 2000;43:1676-81. 
16. Heymen S, Scarlett Y, Jones K, Ringel Y, Drossman D, Whitehead WE. Randomized controlled trial shows biofeedback to be superior to pelvic floor exercises for fecal incontinence. Diseases of the colon and rectum 2009;52:1730-7. 
17. Bharucha AE, Fletcher JG, Camilleri M, Edge J, Carlson P, Zinsmeister AR. Effects of clonidine in women with fecal incontinence. Clinical gastroenterology and hepatology : the official clinical practice journal of the American Gastroenterological Association 2014;12:843-851 e2; quiz e44. 
18. Bajor A, Tornblom H, Rudling M, Ung KA, Simren M. Increased colonic bile acid exposure: a relevant factor for symptoms and treatment in IBS. Gut 2015;64:84-92. 
19. Camilleri M, Acosta A, Busciglio I, Boldingh A, Dyer RB, Zinsmeister AR, Lueke A, Gray A, Donato LJ. Effect of colesevelam on faecal bile acids and bowel functions in diarrhoea -
predominant irritable bowel syndrome. Alimentary pharmacology & therapeutics 
2015;41:438-48. 
20. Schiller LR, Santa Ana CA, Morawski SG, Fordtran JS. Studies of the antidiarrheal action of clonidine. Effects on motility and intestinal absorption. Gastroenterology 1985;89:982-8. 
21. Bharucha AE, Seide BM, Zinsmeister AR. The effects of clonidine on symptoms and anorectal sensorimotor function in women with faecal incontinence. Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics 2010;32:681-688. 
22. Bharucha AE, Seide BM, Zin smeister AR. The effects of clonidine on symptoms and anorectal 
sensorimotor function in women with faecal incontinence. Alimentary pharmacology & therapeutics 2010;32:681-8. 
Title of Study: Colesevelam for Fecal incontinence       16 of 16 
Principal Investigator: Adil E . Bharucha  
23. Bharucha AE, Zinsmeister AR, Schleck CD, Melton LJ, 3rd. Bowel disturbances a re the most 
important risk factors for late onset fecal incontinence: a population- based case- control study 
in women. Gastroenterology 2010;139:1559-66. 
24. Simren M, Barbara G, Flint HJ, Spiegel BMR, Spiller RC, Vanner S, Verdu EF, Whorwell PJ, 
Zoetendal EG. Intestinal microbiota in functional bowel disorders: a Rome foundation report. 
Gut 2013;62:159-76. 
25. Parthasarathy G, Chen J, Chen X, Chia N, O'Connor HM, Wolf PG, Gaskins HR, Bharucha AE. Relationship Between Colonic vs Fecal Microbiota and Symptoms, Colonic Transit, and Methane Production in Female Patients With Chronic Constipation. Gastroenterology 2015;In press.  
26. Whitehead WE, Borrud L, Goode PS, Meikle S, Mueller ER, Tuteja A, Weidner A, Weinstein M, Ye W, Network PFD. Fecal incontinence in US adults: epidemiology and risk factors. Gastroenterology 2009;137:512-7. 
27. Bharucha AE, Locke GR, Seide B, Zinsmeister AR. A New Questionnaire for Constipation and Fecal Incontinence. Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 2004;20:355-364. 
28. Folstein  MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. "Mini -mental state". A practical method for grading 
the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Journal of psychiatric research 1975;12:189-98. 
29. Bharucha AE, Seide B, Fox JC, Zinsmeister AR. Day- to-day Reproducibility  of Anorectal 
Sensorimotor Assessments in Healthy Subjects. Neurogastroenterology & Motility. 2004;16:241-50. 
30. Huse SM, Young VB, Morrison HG, Antonopoulos DA, Kwon J, Dalal S, Arrieta R, Hubert NA, Shen L, Vineis JH, Koval JC, Sogin ML, Chang EB, Raffals LE. Comparison of brush and biopsy sampling methods of the ileal pouch for assessment of mucosa -associated 
microbiota of human subjects. Microbiome 2014;2:5. 
31. Rockwood TH, Church JM, Fleshman JW, Kane RL, Mavrantonis C, Thorson AG, Wexner SD, Bliss D , Lowry AC. Patient and surgeon ranking of the severity of symptoms associated 
with fecal incontinence: the fecal incontinence severity index. Diseases of the Colon and Rectum 1999;42:1525-32. 
32. Rockwood TH, Church JM, Fleshman JW, Kane RL, Mavrantonis C, Thorson AG, Wexner SD, Bliss D, Lowry AC. Fecal incontinence quality of life scale: quality of life instrument for patients with fecal incontinence. Diseases of the Colon and Rectum 2000;43:9- 16; discussion 
16-7. 
33. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital a nxiety and depression scale. Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica. 1983;67:361-70. 
34. Bharucha AE, Zinsmeister AR, Locke GR, Schleck C, McKeon K, Melton LJ. Symptoms and quality of life in community women with fecal incontinence. Clinical Gastroenterology & Hepatology 2006;4:1004-9. 
35. Rosenson RS, Rigby SP, Jones MR, Chou HS. Effect of colesevelam HCl monotherapy on lipid particles in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cardiovascular drugs and therapy / sponsored by the International Society of Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapy 2014;28:229-36. 
36. Odunsi- Shiyanbade ST, Camilleri M, McKinzie S, Burton D, Carlson P, Busciglio IA, 
Lamsam J, Singh R, Zinsmeister AR. Effects of chenodeoxycholate and a bile acid sequestrant, colesevelam, on intestinal transit and bowel function. Clinical gastroenterology and hepatology 
: the official clinical practice journal of the American Gastroenterological Association 2010;8:159-65. 
37. Goldberg RB, Rosenson RS, Hernandez -Triana E, Misir S, Jones MR. Colesevelam improved 
lipoprotein particle  subclasses in patients with prediabetes and primary hyperlipidaemia. 
Diabetes & vascular disease research 2013;10:256-62. 