Protocol  
 
 
Inhaled Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity  
 
 
NCT number  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date  01/19/2024  
 
Complete Title:  Inhaled Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity   
Short Title: Inhaled Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity   
Drug or Device Name(s): Inhaled Oxytocin  
FDA IND/IDE (if applicable): Exempt 
Sponsor: NICHD  
Protocol Date: January 19 , 2024  
Amendment 1 Date:  
Amendment 2 Date:  
Amendment 3 Date:  
Amendment 4 Date:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Mood, Mother and Child: The Psychobiology of Dyadic Resilience  
NICHD, R01HD093901  
 
 
 2  
 
 
Table of Contents  
 
1. Abbreviations and Definitions of Terms 3  
2. Protocol Synopsis  3 
3. Background and Rationale  5 
4. Investigational Plan  6 
5. Study Procedures  8 
6. Study Intervention (Device, Drug, or Other Intervention)  11 
7. Study Intervention Administration (If Applicable)  11 
8. Safety Management  12 
9. Data Collection and Management  12 
10. Recruitment Strategy  12 
11. Consent Process  12 
12. Plans for Publication  13 
13. References  13 
14. Appendix  14 
 
  
 
 3  
1. Abbreviations  and Definitions  of Terms  
Abbreviation  Definition  
OT Oxytocin  
TSST  Trier Social Stress Test  
CRT Cortisol  
ACTH  Adrenocorticotropic hormone  
MMI Mood, Mother and Infant Study  
MMC  Mood, Mother and Child Study  
 
2. Protocol  Synopsis  
Study Title  Inhaled Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity  
Funder  NICHD  
Clinical Phase  n/a 
Study Rationale  This is Randomized Parallel Assignment Quadruple masked protocol to test the 
effect of inhaled oxytocin vs. placebo on HPA axis reactivity during a standardized 
social stressor, the Trier social stress test. This work will address a substantial gap 
regarding the effect of OT on psychobiology in women and test the extent to which 
differences in OT response contribute to dyadic development.  
 
Study Objective(s)  Primary  
The primary objective of this experiment is to test the extent to which oxytocin 
compared with placebo alters cortisol trajectory during the Trier Social Stress Test.  
 
Secondary  
The secondary objective of this experiment is to test the extent to which oxytocin 
compared with placebo alters other measures of stress reactivity during the Trier 
Social Stress Test. We will measure trajectory of ACTH, lagged association between 
ACTH and CRT, heart rate variability, and pre -ejection period during the Trier Social 
Stress Test.  
 
Other  
We will test the extent to which 1) maternal depression/anxiety and 2) OXTR 
genotype modifies the effect of oxytocin vs. placebo on measures of stress 
reactiv ity. 
 
Test Article(s)  
(If Applicable)  Participants will receive six intranasal sprays of oxytocin or placebo manufactured to 
mimic oxytocin nasal spray containing all equivalent ingredients except oxytocin.   
Each insufflation delivers 4 IUs of oxytocin for a total oxytocin dosage of 24 IUs. 
 
Study Design  
 Randomized Parallel Assignment Quadruple masked experiment  
Subject Population  
key criteria for 
Inclusion and 
Exclusion:  This study will follow -up the existing Mood, Mother and Infant (MMI) prospective 
longitudinal cohort (R01HD073220), comprised of 222 mother -infant dyads who 
were recruited between May 2013 and April 2017 and completed the 12- month MMI 
visit. Inclusion Crit eria for Inhaled Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity, a sub study  of 
 
 4 the Psychobiology of Resilience in Mother -Child Pairs follow -up study: 1) 
Participated in the MMI study 2) Both mother and child willing and able to participate 
in the follow -up visits at 6 to 8 years postpartum. 3) Not pregnant, verified by urine 
pregnanc y test on day of study visit.  
Number Of Subjects  
 Our projected enrollment is 150 participants, recruited from the 222 individuals who 
enrolled in the MMI study.  
Study Duration  Each subject’s participation in the Inhaled Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity study is 
expected to last 2 hours. Participation in the Mood, Mother and Infant and Mood, 
Mother and Child study began with recruitment in the third trimester of pregnancy. 
Child follow- up has currently extended to about 8 years. 
 
Study Phases  
Screening Study Treatment  
Follow -Up    (1) Screening : Participants in the Mood, Mother, and Infant study are invited to 
participate in the Mood, Mother, and Child follow -up study.  Those who meet 
inclusion criteria are scheduled for a mother -only visit for the Inhaled Oxytocin and 
HPA Axis Reactivity sub study .  
(2) Intervention: Non-pregnant women will be randomized to either 24 IU of nasal 
OT or placebo prior to the Trier Social Stress Test.  
(3) Follow- up:  Effects of nasal OT will be measured during the study visit, which will 
last about 2 hours.   
Efficacy Evaluations  This is not a treatment study; this is a translational study to test the effect of oxytocin 
on the HPA axis.  
Pharmacokinetic 
Evaluations  NA 
Safety Evaluations  Prior to and during a 90 -minute period following intranasal OT or placebo, mothers 
will be monitored for vital signs (heart rate, blood pressure, ear temperature), 
vascular resistance and mood.  
Statistical And Analytic 
Plan We will use a general linear model to test the hypothesis that participants who are 
randomized to receive nasal oxytocin experience lower HPA reactivity, 
operationalized using CRT area under the curve (AUC) during the TSST, to evaluate 
this proposed causal pathway  
Data And Safety 
Monitoring Plan Study PI, Dr. Alison Stuebe, will provide medical oversight for the randomized trial of 
oxytocin vs. placebo. Any adverse events, as well as any significant deterioration in 
mood, health or wellbeing, will be reported directly to Dr. Stuebe (the PI). All 
moderate and severe adverse events will be reported within one week to the FDA, 
whether anticipated or unanticipated.  
 
  
 
 5 3. Background and Rationale  
3.1. Introduction 
Mothers who were enrolled in the Mood, Mother and Infant study1 will be eligible to 
participate in the 6- year follow -up maternal visit. At the time of this visit, mothers will be 
randomized to a single 24 IU dose of nasal oxytocin or placebo. Following 
administration of the study drug, women will participate in the Trier Social Stress Test 
(TSST), and blood samples will be collected to quantify HPA axis reactivity.   
 
3.
2. Name  and Description  of Investigational  Product  or Intervention   
Active drug: Six intranasal sprays of oxytocin. Each insufflation delivers 4 IUs of 
oxytocin for a total oxytocin dosage of 24 IUs.  
Placebo: Six intranasal sprays of placebo manufactured to mimic oxytocin nasal spray containing all equivalent ingredients except oxytocin.  
 
3.3. Non-Clinical and Clinical Study  Findings   
Limited evidence suggests that exogenous OT has mixed effects on women with perinatal depression. Mah et al administered nasal OT and placebo in a within- subject 
cross- over study among women with PND. Nasal OT increased protective behavior 
towards the infant, but did not affect sensitive caregiving; moreover, with OT, women were more likely to report a harsh response to infant crying
2-4. No studies to our 
knowledge have examined exogenous OT among mothers of older children. In the present proposal, we plan a randomized controlled trial of nasal OT vs. placebo among MMC mothers. This work is innovative, because few studies have tested the effect of 
nasal oxytocin on HPA axis reactivity, and the overwhelming majority of subjects studied have been male
5,6: of 147 individuals in the extant literature who received OT or 
placebo prior to the TSST, only 24 were women. These studies found varying associations between OT and HPA axis activity, with moderation by factors such as concurrent social support
7 emotional regulation abilities8, substances use9 and 
childhood trauma history22,10. These differential effects of OT on HPA axis may 
contribute to perinatal depression or anxiety. We will test the effect of nasal OT vs. placebo among 150 women with detailed, longitudinal data, including patterns of endogenous OT secretion during breastfeeding and maternal experience of trauma in her own childhood.  
3.4. Relevant  Literature  and Data  
Perinatal depressive symptoms are associated with dysregulation of the HPA axis. Jolley et al
11 measured ACTH and cortisol during an exercise stressor at 6 and 12 
weeks postpartum and found expected correlations between ACTH and cortisol among euthymic women (N=13), but not among women with depressive symptoms (N=9). Heinrichs compared lactating mothers who breastfed vs. held their infants 30 minutes before the TSST and found that recent breastfeeding blunted cortisol, but not ACTH
12. 
This blunting is thought to be mediated by oxytocin, and a growing literature implicates dysregulation of OT in PND. Findings in our laboratory using extracted samples demonstrate an inverse association between OT during breastfeeding and maternal 
 
 6 symptoms of depression and anxiety at 2 months postpartum13. We further found that 
OT AUC differentially impacted HPA axis activity during the TSST in women with or 
without mood symptoms14. These results implicate OT and HPA axis dysregulation in 
the psychobiology of perinatal depression; in the proposed study, we will determine whether these differences persist at 6 to 8 years postpartum.   
3.5. Study  Objectives  
3.5.1.  P
rimary  Objective 
The primary  objective of this experiment is to test the extent to which oxytocin 
compared with placebo alters cortisol trajectory during the Trier Social Stress Test.  
 
3.5.2.  Secondary  O bjective  
The secondary objective of this experiment is to test the extent to which oxytocin 
compared with placebo alters other measures of stress reactivity during the Trier Social Stress Test. We will measure trajectory of ACTH, lagged association between ACTH and CRT, heart rate variability, and pre- ejection period during the Trier Social Stress 
Test.  
 
3.5.3.  Oth
er  objectives:   
We will test the extent to which maternal  depression/anxiety modifies the effect of OT 
on CRT, ACTH, lagged association between ACTH and CRT, heart rate variability, and 
pre-ejection period during the Trier Social Stress Test.  
 We will test the extent to which OXRT genotype modifies the effect of OT on CRT, ACTH, lagged association between ACTH and CRT, heart rate variability, and pre-ejection period during the Trier Social Stress Test.  
4. Investigational  Plan 
4.1. Study  Design  
This is Randomized Parallel Assignment Quadruple masked experiment to test the ef
fect of inhaled oxytocin vs. placebo on HPA axis reactivity during a standardized 
social stressor, the Trier social stress test. Mothers who were enrolled in the Mood, 
Mother and Infant study will be eligible to participate in the 6- year follow -up maternal 
visit. At the time of this visit, mothers will be randomized to a single 24 IU dose of nasal 
oxytocin or placebo. Following administration of the study drug, women will parti cipate 
in the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST), and blood samples will be collected to quantify 
HPA axis reactivity during a 90- minute period following study drug administration.  
   
4.
2. Allocation  to Treatment  Groups  and Blinding (if applicable)  
Non-pregnant women will be randomized to either 24 IU of nasal OT or placebo. The 
Investigational Drug Service will use a random number generator to prepare a randomization table. Participants will receive a nasal insufflation bottle of oxytocin intranasal  spray or placebo intranasal spray manufactured to mimic oxytocin nasal 
spray. 
 
 7  
4.3. Study  Duration,  Enrollment  and Number  of Subjects  
Each subject’s participation in the Inhaled Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity study is 
expected to last 2 hours. Participation in the Mood, Mother and Infant1 and Mood, 
Mother and Child15 study began with recruitment in the third trimester of pregnancy, with 
ongoing follow -up through the child’s 6 to 8th birthday.  
 
4.4. Study  Population  
This study will follow- up the existing Mood, Mother and Infant (MMI) prospective 
longitudinal cohort (R01HD073220)1, comprised of 222 mother -infant dyads who were 
recruited between May 2013 and April 2017 and completed the 12- month MMI visit. In 
the MMI study, 222 mothers ages 18- 45 and their infants were enrolled. Participants 
were recruited from community clinics in the third trimester of pregnancy and continued to participate in the study through 12 months postpartum. At the 12- month visit, mothers 
were invited to continue to be followed via online surveys at 6- month intervals; more 
than 80% of women who have completed the MMI study to date have continued to participate. Enrolled participants in the MMI study met the following inclusion and exclusion criteria:  
 
4.4.1.  MMI I
 nclusion Criteria:  
• Singleton pregnancy;  
• Intention to breastfeed (due to the centrality of breastfeeding to the oxytocin 
assessment); 
• Intention to remain within 40 miles of the University of North Carolina - Chapel 
Hill through infant's first birthday;  
• Ability to communicate in English.  
 
4.4.2.  MMI Exclusion Criteria:  
• Maternal diagnosis of Axis I disorders other than unipolar depression or anxiety disorders. Women with a history of bipolar disorder were excluded, given their increased risk of postpartum psychosis.  
• Active substance abuse at enrollment in the 3rd trimester of pregnancy (Tobacco, alcohol, illicits);  
• Major congenital anomaly;  
• Chronic medication/medical condition contraindicated for breastfeeding;  
• Current use of tricyclic antidepressants, which alter cortisol and heart rate variability.  
At enrollment, all participants underwent a Structured Clinical Interview Non- Patient 
version (SCID -NP). 
 
 8 4.5.  Inclusion Criteria  for Inhaled Oxytocin  and HPA Axis  Reactivity  
This is  a trial embedded within the Psychobiology of Resilience in Mother -Child Pairs 
follow- up study. Subjects were included who:  
• Participated in the MMI study  
• Both mother and child willing and able to participate in the follow -up visits at 6 to 
8 years postpartum.  
• Were not pregnant, verified by urine pregnancy test on day of study visit.  
5. Study Procedures  
The Mood, Mother and Infant Study is a prospective observational cohort study that 
began enrollment in May of 2013. Women were recruited in the 3rd trimester of pregnancy and followed prospectively through 12 months postpartum. Mother -infant 
pairs who completed the 12- month visit will be invited to participate in the current 
Psychobiology of Resilience in Maternal -Child Pairs follow- up study. The Inhaled 
Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity trial described here is a randomized controlled trial 
embedded within the Psychobiology of Resilience study.   
5.1. Screening/Baseline  Visit  procedures  
When the study staff member speaks with the participant to ascertain interest in participating in the MMC visits, the staff member will screen the participant for any contraindications to inhaled oxytocin and review the risks and benefits of OT administrat ion. Before the visit, the study staff member will email the participant the 
consent document. Prior to  the visit, a study staff member who has completed 
DocuSign Part 11 training will speak with the participant by phone and review the full consent documen t. Following this discussion, the participant will sign an electronic 
consent. Once the participant has signed the electronic consent, Dr. Stuebe will review and sign the order for IDS.  
 
5.2. Intervention/Treatment  procedure  for study  visit 
Non-pregnant women will be randomized to either 24 IU of nasal oxytocin (OT) or 
placebo. The Investigational Drug Service (IDS) will use a random number generator to prepare a randomization table. Participants will be block randomized by risk status at enrollment in the Mood, Mother and Infant (MMI) study, as verified by structured clinical 
diagnostic interview (No history of depression or anxiety, Past depression or anxiety, current depression or anxiety). Both participants and study personnel will be blinded to allocation group. At the end of the protocol, participants will be asked which condition they believed they were in ('oxytocin,' 'control,' 'not sure') to ascertain success of blinding. Forty minutes after treatment, women will undergo the Trier Soc ial Stress Test 
(TSST), comprised of a speech task and a math task; the TSST reliably induces large and consistent HPA and cardiovascular responses
16,17. The TSST is administered as 
follows: Pre -Task Instructions: (5 minutes) Subjects will be introduced to 3 people (the 
'selection committee') and asked to assume the role of a job applicant. Anticipation Period: The subject prepares her speech for 3 minutes in the presence of the committee. Speech: The committee asks the subject to deliver her talk for 5 minutes while being video and audio- recorded. If the subject finishes early, the committee 
 
 9 responds with prepared questions to ensure that she speaks for the entire 5 minutes. 
These questions are designed to be non- harassing but to create a feeling of lack of 
predictability/controllability (e.g., "Do you have any enemies?") Serial Subtraction (PASST): The committee will ask the subject to subtract the number 7 from 2000 as 
quickly and accurately as possible for 5 minutes. For each mistake, the committee says "Stop -- mistake -- start over at 2000." Stress Recovery: The subject sits quietly alone 
for 20 minutes.  
5.3. Follow - up procedures  : NA 
5.4. Unscheduled visits:  NA  
5.5. Concomitant  Medication  documentation:  NA 
5.6. Rescue medication administration ( if applicable):  NA 
5.7. Subject  Completion/  Withdrawal  procedures  
All participants will also be reminded before starting the procedures that they would be free to withdraw at any time without penalty, and may contact  our IRB review board or 
the Principal Investigator (numbers are provided) if she feels that rights regarding privacy or risk to health have been infringed. The right of the participants to withdraw from the study or to refuse any procedure will be made absolutely clear. The original consent form will be kept in a secured location in a locked office, and a copy will be provided to the participant.  
5.8. Screen  failure  procedures  
Some mothers who are eligible for Inhaled Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity are expected to be pregnant at the time of the follow -up study. Because oxytocin can cause 
contractions, the Inhaled Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity visit will not be scheduled while the mother is known to be pregnant, and will be deferred until 6 months postpartum. All mothers without a known pregnancy will be screened with a urine pregnancy test on arrival to the Mother Visit; if the pregnancy test is positive, the nasal OT and TS ST protocol will not be performed.  
5.9. STUDY  EVALUATIONS  AND MEASUREMENTS  
Mobile  Impedance Cardiographs (MindWare Tech Ltd, Gahanna, OH) will be used to 
measure cardiac rate, interbeat interval and pre- ejection period (PEP) in mothers and 
children. MindWare HRV software will be used to derive respiration and to calculate high frequency HRV and respiratory sinus arrhythmia from the IBI series as indices of parasympathetic activity. Respiratory rate will be used in all HRV analyses. MindWare Impedance Cardiography Analysis software will calculate cardiac time intervals (PEP, LVET),  stroke volume and cardiac output. PEP will index sympathetic activation.  
 Blood will be collected at baseline, during the speech and math tasks, and at 10 and 20 minutes of recovery, as HPA -axis responses are reliably found 10- 30 minutes following 
the TSST. Evidence regarding optimal timing of stress testing is conflicting. Visi ts will be 
scheduled for 1 pm to increase likelihood of detecting a stress response unopposed by the circadian influence, based on the experience of investigators in our laboratory and published studies of postpartum women. These investigators have found menstrual 
 
 10 cycle phase does not affect TSST results; therefore visits will not be scheduled based 
on cycle phase.  
 
A
t baseline, 40 minutes after nasal OT, at the end of the TSST, and at the end of 
recovery, participants will complete a brief task assessment questionnaire, rating on a scale of 0- 10 to what extent then felt 1) Stressed, Worried, Nervous, or Tense; 2) 
Happy, Relaxed, Comfortable, or Satisfied; 3) Irritated, Annoyed, ‘Pissed off,’ or 
Furious; 4) Depressed, Sad, Down, or Unhappy; and 5) Overwhelmed, Unable to Control Things, or Discouraged.  
 
At the end of the protocol, participants will be asked which condition they believed they 
were in ('oxytocin,' 'control,' 'not sure') to ascertain success of blinding.  
5.10.  E fficacy  Evaluation:  NA 
5.11.  Pharmacokinetic Evaluation:  NA 
5.12.  Safety  Evaluations  
Prior to and during a 90- minute period following intranasal OT or placebo, mothers will 
be monitored for vital signs (heart rate, blood pressure, ear temperature), vascular resistance and mood.   
5.13.  STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS   
5.13.1.  P
 rimary  Endpoint  
The primary endpoint of this analysis is CRT trajectory during the TSST.  
 
5.13.2.  S econdary  Endpoint  
Our secondary end points comprise other measures of stress reactivity during the 
TSST, including trajectory of ACTH, lagged association between ACTH and CRT, heart 
rate variability, and pre -ejection period.  
 
5.13.3.  Oth er endpoint  
In exploratory analyses, we will test the extent to which 1) maternal depression/anxiety 
and 2) OXTR genotype. 
5.14.  Statistical  Methods  
Our primary objective is to test the extent to which nasal oxytocin compared with placebo alters the trajectory of CRT during the TSST. We will use repeated measures analysis to quantify the effects of group (OT vs. placebo) on CRT trajectory during the TSST. We will first establish the shape of unconditional trajectory models for CRT using 
generalized linear mixed models with a random intercept and slopes to account for individual differences in CRT trajectories. We will test the fit of quadratic, cubic, a nd 
exponential effects of time as well as linear spline models. The most parsimonious unconditional trajectory model that fits the data well will be used for hypothesis testing. The intercept of the CRT trajectories will be placed at peak CRT. We will regr ess growth 
parameters (intercept and slopes) on treatment arm. A significant effect of treatment arm on the intercept will indicate a difference in peak CRT across groups, and a 
 
 11 significant effect of treatment arm on slopes will indicate differences in the rate of 
recovery during the TSST.  
 
For secondary endpoints, we will similarly use repeated measures analysis to quantify 
the effects of group (OT vs. placebo), time, and group x time on each measure’s trajectory during the TSST. We will use repeated measures analysis with an interaction term to test the extent to which maternal depression/anxiety and OXTR genotype modifies the effect of oxytocin vs. placebo on measures of stress reactivity.  
5.15.  Sample  Size and Power  
Our projected sample size is 150 participants whose cortisol is assessed 8 times during the visit. Heinrichs et al (2001) assessed the effect of breastfeeding vs. holding a baby 
on cortisol levels among postpartum women undergoing the Trier Social Stress Test. Cortisol levels were similar prior to the social stressor, and then diverged, with values that were 1.03, 1.22, and 0.73 standard deviations higher among those who had held their baby compared with those who had breastfed. Because CRT growth parameter s 
are individual -level parameters, power for detecting the effect of individual 
randomization to treatment arm on CRT trajectories can be simplified into an independent samples t -test. We used SAS 9.4 to estimate the minimum detectable 
difference for a two- sample t -test based on sample size, with 80% power and an alpha 
of 0.05. With only 30 participants per group, we are powered to detect a standardized effect of 0.74 standard deviations  (Table).  This effect is in line with the smallest 
plausible effect size in Heinrichs et al.  
 Table: Minimum detectable difference by N per group 
N per Group  30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 
Mean Diff  0.74 0.68 0.63 0.60 0.57 0.54 0.52 0.50 0.48 0.46 
 
5.16.  Interim  Analysis:  NA 
6. Study Intervention  (Device,  Drug,  or Other  Intervention)  
The study drug and placebo are obtained from Apotheke Roter Ochsen (Schaffhausen, 
Switzerland). The study drug was shipped to the UNC Investigational Drug Service, which took responsibility for storage, distribution, drug return and destruction.  
7. Study Intervention  Administration  (If Applicable )  
Randomization: Non -pregnant women will be randomized to either 24 IU of nasal 
oxytocin (OT) or placebo. The Investigational Drug Service (IDS) will use a random number generator to prepare a randomization table. Participants will be block randomized by risk status at enrollment in the Mood, Mother and Infant (MMI) study, as verified by structured clinical diagnostic interview (No history of depression or anxiety, Past depression or anxiety, current depression or anxiety).  
Masking:  Participants will receive a nasal insufflation bottle of oxytocin intranasal spray 
or placebo intranasal spray manufactured to mimic oxytocin nasal spray. A licensed provider will supervise administration of the study drug. Both participants and study personnel will be blinded to allocation group. At the end of the protocol, participants will 
 
 12 be asked which condition they believed they were in ('oxytocin,' 'control,' 'not sure') to 
ascertain success of blinding.  
8. Safety Management  
Study PI, Dr. Alison Stuebe, will provide medical oversight for the randomized trial of 
oxytocin vs. placebo. In addition, a licensed provider will administer the study drug and be present for the Mother Visit. If a participant reports an unanticipated problem or adverse event, Dr. Stuebe will be notified immediately, and she will follow -up directly 
with the participant. If medical intervention is required, treatment allocation will be disclosed to the participant. The study coordinator will monitor AEs at study visits, tabulating events weekly. Any adverse events, as well as any significant deterioration in mood, health or wellbeing, will be reported directly to Dr. Stuebe (the PI). All moderate and severe adverse events will be reported within one week to the FDA, whether anticipated or unanticipated.  
9. Data  Collection  and Management  
Participant contact information required for scheduling study visits and phone visits will be maintained and shared by team members only as required. This information will be stored in locked filing cabinets in locked rooms and/or transmitted on secure com puters 
only using masked study id's. All other data communicated to research team (biostatistic ians, lab personnel) will be masked.  
10. Recruitment  Strate gy 
This study will follow- up the existing Mood, Mother and Infant (MMI) prospective 
longitudinal cohort (R01HD073220), comprised of 222 mother -infant dyads who were 
recruited between May 2013 and April 2017 and completed the 12- month MMI visit. In 
the MMI stu dy, 222 mothers ages 18- 45 and their infants were enrolled. Participants 
were recruited from community clinics in the third trimester of pregnancy and continued to participate in the study through 12 months postpartum. At the 12- month visit, mothers 
were invited to continue to be followed via online surveys at 6- month intervals; more 
than 80% of women who have completed the MMI study continued to participate in follow- up surveys. We will contact MMI participants and invite them to participate in the 
Mood, Mother, and Child study, of which Inhaled Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity is a component . 
11. Consent  Process 
Each participant has previously enrolled in the Mood, Mother, and Infant Study. As with the MMI study, each participant in the Mood, Mother, and Child Study will receive a verbal and written explanation of the purpose, procedure and potential hazards of this protocol. If a participant agrees to participate in the MMC study, they will receive a verbal and written explanation of the purpose, procedures and potential hazards of the protocol for both the mother and child. When the study staff member speaks with the 
participant to ascertain interest in participating in the MMC visits, the staff member will screen the participant for any contraindications to inhaled oxytocin and review the risks and benefits of OT administration. Before the visit, the study staff member will email the 
participant the consent document. Prior to the study  visit, a study staff member who has 
completed DocuSign Part 11 training will speak with the participant by phone and 
 
 13 review the full consent document. Following this discussion, the participant will sign an 
electronic consent.  
12. Plans  for Publication 
We plan to submit our findings to a peer -reviewed publication, such as Biological 
Psychiatry  
13. References  
 
1. Stuebe AM, Meltzer -Brody  S, Propper  C, et al. The Mood,  Mother,  and Infant  Study:  
Associations  Between  Maternal  Mood in Pregnancy  and Breastfeeding Outcome.  Breastfeed  Med. Oct 
2019;14(8):551 -559. doi:10.1089/bfm.2019.0079  
2. Mah BL, Bakermans -Kranenburg MJ, Van IMH,  Smith  R. Oxytocin promotes  protective  behavior  
in depressed  mothers:  a pilot study  with the enthusiastic  stranger  paradigm.  Depress  Anxiety . Feb 
2015;32(2):76 -81. doi:10.1002/da.22245  
3. Mah BL, Van Ijzendoorn  MH, Out D, Smith  R, Bakermans -Kranenburg MJ. The Effects  of 
Intranasal  Oxytocin Administration  on Sensitive  Caregiving in Mothers  with Postnatal  Depression.  Child  
psychiatry  and human  development . Apr 21 2016;doi:10.1007/s10578 -016-0642-7 
4. Mah BL, Van Ijzendoorn  MH, Smith  R, Bakermans -Kranenburg MJ. Oxytocin in postnatally  
depressed mothers:  Its influence on mood  and expressed  emotion.  Progress  in neuro-
psychopharmacology  & biological  psychiatry . Oct 17 2012;40C:267 -272. 
doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.10.005  
5. Cardoso C, Kingdon D, Ellenbogen MA. A meta -analytic  review  of the impact  of intranasal  
oxytocin administration  on cortisol  concentrations  during laboratory  tasks: moderation by method and 
mental  health.  Psychoneuroendocrinology . Nov 2014;49:161 -70. doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2014.07.014 
6. Bakermans -Kranenburg MJ, van IJMH.  Sniffing  around oxytocin:  review  and meta -analyses  of 
trials  in healthy  and clinical groups  with implications  for pharmacotherapy.  Transl  Psychiatry . 
2013;3:e258.  doi:10.1038/tp.2013.34  
7. He inrichs  M, Baumgartner  T, Kirschbaum  C, Ehlert  U. Social  support  and oxytocin interact  to 
suppress  cortisol  and subjective responses  to psychosocial  stress. Biol Psychiatry . Dec 15 
2003;54(12):1389 -98.  
8. Quirin  M, Kuhl J, Dusing  R. Oxytocin buffers  cortisol responses  to stress in individuals  with 
impaired emotion regulation abilities.  Psychoneuroendocrinology . Jul 2011;36(6):898 -904. 
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2010.12.005  
9. McRae -Clark  AL, Baker  NL, Maria  MM, Brady  KT. Effect  of oxytocin  on craving and stress 
response in marijuana -dependent  individuals:  a pilot study.  Psychopharmacology  (Berl) . Aug 
2013;228(4):623 -31. doi:10.1007/s00213 -013-3062-4 
10. Simeon D, Bartz  J, Hamilton  H, et al. Oxytocin administration  attenuates  stress  reactivity  in 
borderline personality  disorder:  a pilot study.  Psychoneuroendocrinology . Oct 2011;36(9):1418 -21. 
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2011.03.013  
11. Jolley  SN, Elmore  S, Barnard KE, Carr DB. Dysregulation of the hypothalamic -pituitary -adrenal  
axis in postpartum  depression.  Research Support,  N.I.H.,  Extramural  
Research Support,  Non-U.S. Gov't. Biological  research for nursing . Jan 2007;8(3):210 -22. 
doi:10.1177/1099800406294598 
12. Heinrichs  M, Meinlschmidt  G, Neumann  I, et al. Effects  of Suckling  on Hypothalamic -Pituitary -
Adrenal  Axis Responses  to Psychosocial Stress  in Postpartum  Lactating  Women.  J Clin Endocrinol  
Metab. October  1, 2001 2001;86(10):4798 -4804.   
13. Stuebe AM, Grewen K, Meltzer -Brody  S. Association between  maternal  mood and oxytocin 
response to breastfeeding.  Journal  of Women's  Health. Apr 2013;22(4):352- 61. 
doi:10.1089/jwh.2012.3768 
 
 14 14. Cox EQ, Stuebe A, Pearson B, Grewen K, Rubinow  D, Meltzer -Brody  S. Oxytocin and HPA 
stress  axis reactivity  in postpartum  women.  Psychoneuroendocrinology . Feb 25 2015;55:164 -172. 
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2015.02.009  
15. Mills-Koonce WR, Grewen K, O'Shea NG, et al. The Mood,  Mother  and Child  Study:  Protocol  for 
a Prospective Longitudinal Study  and Randomized Controlled Trial.  JMIR  Res Protoc . Oct 26 
2023;12:e51132.  doi:10.2196/51132  
16. Kirschbaum  C, Pirke  KM, Hellhammer  DH. The 'Trier  Social  Stress  Test' --a tool for investigating 
psychobiological stress responses  in a laboratory  setting.  Neuropsychobiology . 1993;28(1- 2):76 -81.  
17. Kudielka BM, Hellhammer  DH, Kirschbaum  C. Ten Years  of Research  with the Trier Social  
Stress  Test -- Revisited.  In: Harmon- Jones  E, Winkielman P, eds. Social  neuroscience : integrating 
biological  and psychological  explanations  of social behavior . Guilford  Press;  2007.  
14. Appendix  
 
Study visit schematic : Inhaled Oxytocin and HPA Axis Reactivity  
 
 
