Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 1 of 26 
 
  
Title: Post-thrombotic Syndrome and Predictors of Recurrence in Catheter -Related 
Thrombosis  
NCT0199917 9 
Date: 11/5/18  
  
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 2 of 26 
 
  
  
Post -thrombotic Syndrome and Predictors of Recurrence in Catheter -
Related Thrombosis  
Protocol Version 10.0 
Principal Investigator:  Lisa Baumann Kreuziger,  MD, MS  
Co-Investigators:  Alan Mast, MD, PhD; Parameswaran Hari, MD  and Tzu-Fei Wang, 
MD 
Study Coordinator s:  
Zora Jovanovic , BSN, RN,  BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Conducted by:  
BloodCenter of Wisconsin and Froedtert Hospital , Milwaukee, Wisconsin  
 
The Ohio State University, Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 3 of 26 
 
 1. Background and Significance   
Over 5 million central venous catheters (CVCs) are inserted annually in the United 
States.1  CVCs improve quality of life in cancer patients by allowing safe administration 
of chemotherapy and easy access for phlebotomy. Despite these benefits, long -term 
presence of CVCs are associated with infectious and thrombot ic risks.1 The incidence of 
catheter -related thrombosis (CRT), or thrombosis in the vein housing the catheter, will 
occur in up to a third of patients with an indwelling catheter.2 CRT account for 
approximately 80% of upper extremity thrombosis, and pulmonary emboli have been 
detected in 15% of patients with symptomatic CRT.3,4 A systematic review and meta -
analysis has reported rates of p ost-thrombotic syndrome (PTS) in an average of 15% of 
adults with upper extremity thrombosis. Retrospective studies of patients with upper 
extremity thrombosis report PTS rates between 7 -47% and prospective studies report 
PTS rates of 15 -25%. These studies contain a limited number of patients w ith catheter -
related thromb osis.5 Presence of a c atheter  as the etiology of the upper extremity 
thrombosis is suggested to decrease the risk of PTS, but the outcomes of patients with 
catheter -related thrombotic events alone have not been well defined.  Residual 
thrombosis after treatment and thrombosis of the ax illary and/or subclavian vein 
increase the risk of PTS development5; however, no prospective studies have evaluated 
if duration of anticoagulation in CRT influences the development of PTS. Patients with 
PTS have significantly worse quality of life and limb function ;6 thus PTS is a patient  
important outcome to evaluate .  
Anticoagulant treatment of CRT is used to improve patient symptoms and decrease 
recurrent thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.  Low molecular weight heparin (LMWH, 
enoxaparin)  has been the anticoagulant of choice for cancer patients with catheter -
related thrombosis .7 Enoxaparin is the only LMWH FDA approved for treatment of acute 
venous thrombosis (enoxaparin product insert attached ). However, in recent year s, 
direct oral anticoagulants such as dabigatran, rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban 
have offered a more convenient alternative for anticoagulation.  A randomized control 
trial and prospective cohort study of cancer patients with venous thromboembolism 
treated with a direct oral anticoagulant  have been published.8 Two small stud ies have 
also been  published in using riva roxaban to treat CRT in cancer patients .9,10  Therefore 
direct oral anticoagulants have becom e part of clinical practice  to treat cancer patients 
with thrombosis in addition to LMWH. The FDA package inserts can be found at the 
follow websites:  
Rivaroxaban (Xarelto®): http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label  
/2011/202439s001lbl.pdf  
Apixaban (Eliquis®): http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label  
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 4 of 26 
 
 /2012/202155s000lbl.pdf  
Edoxaban (Savaysa®): http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label  
/2015/206316lbl.pdf  
Dabigatran (Pradaxa®): http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label  
/2011/022512s007lbl.pdf  
The catheter is removed if it is non -functioning or  is no longer  needed.7 The duration of 
anticoagulation in patients with catheter -related thrombosis has not been studied in a 
systematic fashion and is not standardized in clinical practice. A delicate balance exists 
between thrombosis and bleeding in cancer patients  because cancer patient s have 3 
times higher risk of recurrent thrombosis and 2.5 times higher risk of major hemorrhage 
compared to non -cancer patients.11 Consensus guidelines have a weak 
recommend ation for  anticoagulation for 3 months after catheter removal in patients  with 
upper extremity CRT (ACCP and ISTH guidelines attached).12,13 These 
recommendations are extrap olated from data on provoked lower extremity thrombosis , 
retrospective case series and two prospective cohort studies .12,13  Review of the 
literature reports treatment of catheter -related thrombosis ranging from catheter removal 
without anticoagulation to treatment with anticoagulation up to 6 months.14-16  In cancer 
patients, upper extremity CRT are often treated with anticoagulation for 4-6 weeks  to 
balance the risks of thrombotic recurrence with bleeding. Additionally, extraction of the 
catheter removes an inciting factor for thrombosis which may allow for shorter duration 
of therapy. In a survey of MCW Heme/Onc physicians, treatment of patients with CRT 
ranged from 4 weeks to 3 months. A retrospective review of patients with hematologic 
malignancies from 2009 -2011 found 85 patients with  catheter -related thrombosis 
treated at MCW.  Three patients (4%) were not treated for their CRT and 20 patients  
(24%) had the catheter removed only. Of the patients that underwent anticoagulation, 
the median total treatment duration was 42 days (range 3 -1485 days). Of patients who 
had their catheter removed, the median treatment duration after catheter removal was 
44 days (range 4 -453 days). The retrospective study was not able to assess 
development of PTS due to lack of assessment as a part of routine practice. Overall, 
there is no standard treatment duration for patients with catheter -related thrombosis and 
1 mont h of anticoagulation after catheter removal is within  clinical practice at both 
locations . This multicenter prospective cohort pilot study project defines the duration of 
anticoagulation after catheter removal at one month to balance the risk of thrombosis  
with the risk of bleeding, patient c ost and discomfort of injecting enoxaparin twice a day . 
The project will assess feasibility and obtain estimates of clinical outcomes  including 
PTS, thrombosis recurrence, and bleeding . The feasibility outcomes will ass ess accrual, 
enrollment, and retention procedures. The data obtained from the pilot study will be 
used  to provide sample size estimates for a larger definitive study.  Additionally the 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 5 of 26 
 
 estimates will allow an appropriate comparison of duration of anticoagul ation to be 
selected for a future randomized trial.   
Table 1 : Care of patients with CRT in practice vs. research protocol  
 Typical Care Approach  Research protocol  
Catheter removal  Not needed or malfunction  Not needed or malfunction  
Anticoagulation Type  LMWH (enoxaparin or 
dalteparin)  
Direct oral anticoagulant   
Enoxaparin or direct oral 
anticoagulant  
Duration of 
anticoagulation  1-3 months after catheter 
removal  1 month after catheter 
removal  
 
A clinical scoring system or biomarker t o predict recurrent catheter -related thrombosis in 
cancer patients do not exist. Currently patients are treated with anticoagulation for 
varying amounts of time based on local practice and extrapolation from clinical trials in 
lower extremity thrombosis. D evelopment of biomarkers predictive of thrombosis would 
allow targeting of anticoagulation strategies in cancer patients at highest risk of 
thrombosis. The Ottawa score allows prediction of recurrent thrombosis in cancer 
patients and is based upon gender, history of thrombosis, cancer type and stage.17,18 
The Khorana score integrates site of cancer, body mass index, and pre -chemotherapy 
platelet,  leukocyte and hemoglobin levels to predict initial thrombosis.19 The Khorana 
score has not been evaluated as a predictor of thrombotic recurrence and will be 
assessed from clinical information at the time of CRT d iagnosis. Validations of the 
Khorana score have also added biomarkers including D -dimer to expand the ability to 
detect high risk groups.20 Additionally, high levels of thrombin generation have been 
associated with increased risk of initial thrombosis in cancer patients.21 Elevated D -
dimer and peak thrombin generation have been shown to be risk factors for recurrent 
thrombosis in non -cancer patients, bu t the association has not been evaluated in cancer 
patients.22,23 Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor (TFPI) functions to limit the activation of 
factor X by the tissue factor/Factor VIIa complex.  TFPI has been shown to be a 
predictor of thrombosis with low levels of TFPI antigen associated with twice the risk of 
thrombosis.24 Platelet TFPI may also play a role in thrombotic risk as platelets 
accumulate at the site of injury. Platelet TFPI has not been assessed as a risk factor for 
thrombosis. Lastly, extracellular DNA released from neutro phils (NETs -neutrophil 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 6 of 26 
 
 extracellular  traps)  has been shown to form a scaffold for venous thrombosis in animal 
models. C irculating plasma free DNA  is a marker for NET formation and will be 
assessed in our patients.25 Overall, the proposed project will evaluate novel assays 
(platelet TFPI , plasma free DNA,  and thrombin generation with platelet -rich plasma) and 
apply techniques that predict incident thrombosis (Khorana score, D -dimer and thrombin 
generation with platelet -poor plasma) to predict the risk o f recurrent thrombosis. Overall, 
identification of a biomarker to predict thrombosis would allow a personalized approach 
to anticoagulation that would avoid  unnecessary bleeding risk, cost and lifestyle 
burdens in patients who do not require more prolonged  courses of anticoagulation . 
 
2. Study Objectives  
 2.1 Feasibility Objective s:  
1) To determine  the feasibility of a multicenter prospective cohort study of 
cancer patients with catheter -related thrombosis treated with 1 month of 
anticoagulation .  
a. Feasibility will be defined as accrual of 56  patients in 1 year and 80% 
completion of PTS assessments  
2) To determine the feasibility of obtaining plasma samples for biomarker 
analysis to predict recurrent venous thrombosis  
a. Feasibility will be defined as obtaining 80% of plasma samples for 
biomarker analysis  
 2.2 Clinical  Objective s:  
3) To determine the inciden ce of post -thrombotic syndrome , thrombotic 
recurrence and bleeding  in cancer patients with catheter -related 
thrombosis treated with 1 month of anticoagulation  
a. Success of the study will be defined as an incidenc e of post -thrombotic 
syndrome <20 %. 
3. Study Population  
The intended study population is any adult with cancer and catheter -related thrombosis.  
Children will not be included as the involved institutions do not care for children.  No 
gender or ethnic group will be excluded or targeted in the study.  
3.1 Study Sites  
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 7 of 26 
 
 1) BloodCenter of Wisconsin , Medical College of Wisconsin (MCW)  and 
Froedtert Hospital, Milwaukee, Wisconsin  
The primary study site will be  in Milwaukee. Patients will be recruited from 
MCW/Froedtert Hospital. Laboratory testing will be completed at the 
BloodCenter of Wisconsin in the laboratory of Dr. Alan Mast.   
2) Ohio State University, Wexne r Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio  
Ohio State University (OSU), Wexner Medical Center, will be a second 
site for the study.  Patients from OSU will be followed with clinical  
assessments only.  
 
 
3.2 Inclusion Criteria:   
1. Upper extremity venous thrombosis  involving the axillary, subclavian, brachiocephalic, 
superior vena cava, and/or internal jugular veins  associated with an indwelling catheter 
documented by ultrasound, CT or venography  
2. Current hematologic or solid tumor malignancy undergoing che motherapy, surgery, 
radiation or hormonal therapy for malignancy  and bone marrow transplant if within 100 
days of transplant  
3. ≥18 years of age  
4. Platelet count >50,000  
5. Creatinine clearance >30 ml/min  
6. Ability to provide informed consent  
3.3 Exclusion Criteria:   
1. Underlying medical condition or chemotherapy requiring long -term anticoagulation  
2. Known underlying higher risk throm bophilias including antiphospholipid antibody 
syndrome, antithrombin, protein C or protein S deficiencies, or homozygos ity or 
compound heterozygosity for prothrombin G20210A or Factor V R506Q mutations.  
3. Inability to remove venous catheter  
4. Anticipated replacement of central venous catheter within 3 months  after enoxaparin  or 
direct oral anticoagulant therapy  has been discon tinued  
5. Personal history of deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism  
6. Concurrent acute deep vein thrombosis of the leg or pulmonary embolism  
7. Major bleeding or clinically relevant non -major bleeding in the preceding 60 days  
8. Participation in another clinical trial that requires anticoagulation  
9. Treatment with thrombolysis  
10. Catheter removal >1 month prior to enrollment  
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 8 of 26 
 
 11. Use of anticoagulation >6 months prior to catheter removal  
3.4 Study Discontinuation Criteria  
Subjects may be removed from the study by t he Investigator for any of the 
following reasons:  
1. Subject’s condition has changed after entering the study so that they 
no longer meet inclusion criteria, or develop any of the exclusion 
criteria.  
2. Subject experiences an adverse event that warrants withdrawal from 
the study.  
3. Principal investigator determines subject is non -compliant.  
4. Subject requires placement of an alternate central venous catheter  
after discontinuation of enoxaparin  or direct anticoagulant therapy.  
3.5 Continuation of anticoagulation  criteria   
Participants will be continued on anticoagulation longer than one month after catheter 
removal if any of the following criteria exist:  
1. Development of thrombosis other than the CRT  
2. Extension of the catheter -related thrombosis (i.e.  additional vein occlusion  
on imaging obtained for clinical reasons)  
If an enrolled subject at MCW requires anticoagulation longer than 1 month after 
catheter removal, laboratory assessments will n ot be completed as the testing can be 
affected by the presence of an anticoagulant . The participant will not be removed from 
the study and will be followed for PTS outcomes.  
 
4. Study Design  
4.1 Study Overview  
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 9 of 26 
 
  
 
Figure 1 shows the overall study design of the multicenter prospective cohort of cancer 
patients with catheter -related thrombosis. Participants may be referred for screening at 
MCW in two possible mechanisms: participant contact study staff from information on CTSI 
FACT website or referral from treatin g Hematologist or Oncologist . At MCW, an EPIC 
report will be generated to identify people with CRT. The treating provider would then be 
contacted to determine if referral to the study was appropriate.   Subjects at OSU will be 
referred from the treating Hem atologist or Oncologist.    A report generated in Epic will be 
used to identify people with CRT.  The treating provider would then be contacted to 
determine if referral to the study was appropriate.  Participants  will be given printed 
information about the study  (Appendix A)  or verbal explanation using the informational flyer.  
Verbal consent will be obtained to be screened for participation and contacted by study 
personnel . Screening will be completed by BCW nurse coordinator ( Script Appendix B ; 
Screenin g form Appendix C ). We aim to consent and enroll patients after diagnosis of 
catheter -related thrombosis and prior to catheter removal. Consent and enrollment (Visit 1) 
must occur prior to discontinuation of anticoag ulation . Enrollment will be limited to p atients 
undergoing anticoagulation with either enoxaparin or a direct oral anticoagulant at the 
discretion of the treating provider. The study will follow patients treated with anticoagulation 
for one month after catheter removal. Prior to discontinuation of anticoagulation, patients 
will be contacted via telephone to review study protocol, assess for b leeding, and arrange 
for Visit 2  in the following 1-2 weeks . Appendices  D-H include  the background information 
that will be collected . Visits 3 and 4  will occur 3 and 6 months after catheter removal , 
respectively.  At visits 3 & 4, Medical history, cancer history, and medic ations will be 
updated (Appendices  E-G). At each visit, participants will be assessed for post -thrombotic 

Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 10 of 26 
 
 syndrome using the modified  Villalta scale (Appendix I ) and functional limitation using th e 
DASH questionnaire (Appendix J ).  At MCW, surveys will be administered by the TRU staff 
and physical examination will be completed by BCW nurse coordinator , Zora Jovanovic . At 
OSU, surveys wi ll be administered by research coordinator s trained to complete the 
assessment.  Laboratory samples will be obtained for MCW  participants only and processed 
as noted in section 5.6 and section 6 .  
 
4.2 Selection of Subjects   
Subjects will be recruited at MCW  and OSU  through referral from their treating 
Hematologist or Oncologist. The patient’s treating physician will give potential 
participants the informational flyer (Appendix A) or use the flyer to verbally describe the 
study and receive per mission for the patient to be screened for eligibility and contacted 
by the research coordinator . Additionally at Milwaukee  and Columbus , an electronic 
alert will be created that identifies a person with catheter -related thrombosis through the 
results  of their radiology report.  The research coordinator will review the report and 
then contact the treating physician to inform them of the study and receive permission to 
contact the subject. In 2012, 2350 new patients were seen in the Heme/Onc and BMT 
clinics at Froedtert Hospital and 1003 had a Port -A-Cath placed. Estimating a catheter -
associated thrombotic rate of 15%,5,26 this predicts approximately 150 patients annually 
with CRT due to a Port -A-Cath. Additional patients are anticipated due to CRT from 
peripheral ly inserted central catheters (PICC). A survey was conducted among the 
Heme/Onc and BMT physicians at MCW with a 60% response rate (21/35). The 
physicians estimated that 63 patients had been seen with CRT in the last 3 months (252 
annual). 86% of physician s reported that they would refer patients to a study of CRT 
treated with 4 weeks of anticoagulation; 14% were uncertain.  MCW physicians also 
noted a variety of treatment practice from 4 weeks to 3 months of anticoagulation after 
catheter removal.  We estima te a 10% drop out rate due to reinsertion of a catheter or 
inability to remove a catheter. We also estimate that we wi ll need to screen and 
approach 3  patients for every participant. Therefore, we will plan to screen and 
approach 250 patients to enroll 56 patients ( 36 BCW  and, OSU 20,) and have 50 
complete the study  as the overall target . 
4.3 Sample Size Estimates  
Sample size estimates were based on the confidence interval method  and were based 
upon the feasibility endpoints . With 50 patients completing the study, we would have 
95% confidence that completion of 80% of PTS assessments in the pilot study would 
correspond to 66 -90% completion in another study. Completion of 90% of assessments 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 11 of 26 
 
 would correspond to between 78 -96% of assessme nts. We estimate a 10% drop -out 
rate so will plan to enroll 56 patients over 1 year.   
Evaluation of 50 patients would provide 95% confidence that if the feasibility study 
found a PTS incidence of 10% that the true proportion in a larger study would not be 
greater than 20%.  
5. Clinical Procedures  
 
5.1  Enrollment and Consent  
We aim to consent and enroll participants  after diagnosis of catheter -related thrombosis 
and prior to catheter removal.  Participants must be consented and enrolled prior to 
anticoagulation discontinuation. Screening wi ll be completed using Appendix B ( Script 
Appendix B; Screening form Appendix C ). Medical history, family history, and medications 
will be re viewed after  consent is obtained (Appendices D -H).Consent for medical reco rd 
release will be obtained to determine cancer staging and laboratory information from the 
time of CRT diagnosis.  
  
5.2   Anticoagulation  
Participants will be treated with either enoxaparin for one mon th following catheter 
removal , or direct oral anticoagulant treatment (apixaban, rivaroxaban, dabigatran, or 
edoxaban) . Dosing an  alternate enoxaparin dose or interval based on anti -factor Xa 
testing that was obtained by clinical team, at standard dosing per FDA package insert . 
Anticoagulation will be continued for 1 month after catheter removal.  The minimum 
duration of anticoagulat ion will be one month and maximum duration is 7 months. The 
cost of enoxaparin or direct oral anticoagulant treatment will be the responsibility of the 
participant as use of the medication is part of routine care. Subjects will be contacted by 
telephone prior to discontinuation of anticoagulation to review if any  continuation rules 
apply  and arrange for research visit 2 .    
5.3   Concomitant medications  
The decision of which  anticoagulant  to prescribe  for the thrombotic event will be made 
by the patient’s physician  per standard of care. The patient’s  prescribing physician will 
be responsible for assessing the potential drug interactions between anticoagulant 
therapy and other medications  as he or she would in their normal medical practice. For 
example, direct oral anticoagulant therapy medications have drug interactions with  
CYP3A4 inhibitors  and inducers . Use of  anti-platelet agent s will be allowed and 
recorded. We anticipate the use of a ntiplatelet agents to be low because of the risk of 
thrombocytopenia associated with many chemotherapeutic agents.   
 
5.4   Catheter removal  
The timing and mechanism of catheter  or port  removal will be directed by the subjects’ 
treating physician. The practitio ner type (ex. MD Interventional Radiologist vs RN PICC 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 12 of 26 
 
 Team) will be recorded. Additionally, the reason for catheter removal will be recorded.  In 
a patient that requires catheter or port re -insertion while on enoxaparin  or direct oral 
coagulant therapy , the enoxaparin  or direct oral coagulant therapy  will be continued for 
30 days  following removal of all  catheter s or port s provided the time of anticoagulation 
does not exceed 6 months duration.  If a patient requires re -insertion of a catheter  or 
port after discontinuation of enoxaparin  or direct oral anticoagulant therapy , they will be 
removed from the study at that time  because a new catheter would be an additional 
thrombotic inciting factor . 
 
5.5   Post -thrombotic syndrome assessments  
Visit 2  will occur within 2 weeks of discontinua tion of anticoagulation. Visit 3  will be at 3 
months af ter catheter removal  plus or minus 2 weeks  and Visit 4  within 6 months  plus or 
minus 2 weeks  after catheter removal. At each visit, medical history and medication will 
be reviewed  (Appendices E -G). The subjective assess ment of the modified Villalta 
(page 1 and 2 of Appendix I ) and th e DASH questionnaire (Appendix J ) will be 
administered by the Translational Research Unit (TRU)  staff or the clinical nurse 
coordinator after completing the objective assessment . The objective assessment of the 
modified Villalta score will be completed by trained  clinical nurse coordinators blinded to 
the subjective assessment  (page 3 and 4 of Appendix I ). The subjective assessment of 
the modified Villalta (page 1 and 2 of Appendix I) and the DASH questionnaire 
(Appendix J), will be administered by the research co ordinator at OSU.  
 
5.6   Blood measurements  
Blood will be collected  by veni puncture  using a 20G needle or larger from patients at the 
BCW site  at Visit 2, 3 and 4 . A 21G needle may be used for collection of blood via 
venipuncture if blood cannot be obtained with a 20G needle or larger. The first 2 ml of 
blood will be discarded  due to tissue  factor activation with the veni puncture . Three  BD 
Vacutainer citrated tubes ( 0.105M sodium citrate) with 4.5 ml blood  will be collected. 
Thrombin generation, D -dimer, plasma total TFPI and TFPIα , and  platelet TFPIα, will be 
assayed using platelet -poor plasma (PPP). Thrombin generation will also be assayed 
using platelet rich plasma (PRP).  Laboratory procedures as noted in section 6.  
 
Table   2. Study Schedule of Procedures  
Procedure  Screening  Visit 1 
(Consent)  Visit 2  Visit 3  Visit 4  
Review Eligibility criteria  X X    
Consent for research 
participation   X    
Documentation -medical 
history, medications, &  X X X X 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 13 of 26 
 
 clinical data  
Physical E xamination    X X X 
PTS Assessment: 
modified Villalta, DASH    X X X 
Blood draw - D-dimer, 
thrombin generation, TFPI, 
plasma free DNA  
(MCW Only)    X X X 
 
6. Laboratory  Procedures   
 
6.1 Plasma preparation  
Tube 1 of citrated blood will be used to prepare PRP  and tube s 2 and 3  of citrated blood 
will be used to prepare PPP. Tube 1 will be centrifuged at 130 g at room temperature for 
10 minutes  within 30 minutes of blood collection.27 After centrifugation, the PRP will be 
pipetted off without disturbance of the white blood cell layer ( buffy coat ). 200 ul of PRP  
will be used to assess the platelet count via a Coulter counter.  Approximately half of the 
PRP will be placed into centrifuge tubes for preparation of PPP  by centrifugation at 
2000g for an additional 10 minutes . Tube s 2 and 3  will undergo centrifugation at 2000g 
for 10 minutes and centrifugation at 14,000 g for 5 minutes  at room temperature .27 PPP 
will be obtained from the upper half volume of plasma supernatant. PPP will be used to 
adjust the platelet count of the PRP to 150,000/uL. The unused PPP  will be fr ozen to 
allow batched processing of thrombin generation, D -dimer, plasma free DNA and TFPI 
testing.  
  
6.2 Thrombin Generation  
 
Thrombin generation will be measured through a calibrated automated thrombogram 
system (CAT, Thrombinoscope bv, Maastricht, The Netherlands) with and without tissue 
factor activation  using both PRP and PPP. Each well of the 96 -well plate will contain 20 
ul of reagent (PPP -Reagent or PRP -Reagent), 20 ul of thrombin calibrator, and 80 u l of 
plasma. Plasma samples will be measured in duplicate.  
 
6.3 D-Dimer  
The Stago Asserachrom® D -Di ELISA assay  will be used to determine D -dimer levels. 
The Asserachrome  ELISA has similar sensitivity and specificity as other D -dimer assays 
in clinical use.28 Batched laboratory testing will prevent clinical decisions from being 
altered by the D -dimer results.  
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 14 of 26 
 
 6.4 TFPI Assay  
Levels of platelet TFPI (TFPIα), plasma total TFPI and TFPIα will be assessed through 
TFPI AlphaLISA  assays . AlphaLISAs are a washless, bead based assay system. When 
the two beads are brought into close proximity by antigen binding, a singlet oxygen is 
released from the donor bead to the acceptor bead, resulting in light emission. Two 
AlphaLISAs are established i n the lab to measure TFPI, one for total TFPI (full length 
TFPIα, truncated TFPIα, and TFPIβ) and one specifically for TFPIα. Both assays use a 
common acceptor bead to which mouse anti -human TFPI antibody (directed toward the 
second Kunitz domain) is conju gated. The total TFPI AlphaLISA uses biotinylated 2H8 
(directed toward the first Kunitz domain) to detect all forms of TFPI, while the TFPIα 
AlphaLISA uses a biotinylated anti -K3 antibody to detect only TFPIα. A streptavidin -
conjugated donor bead is added to bind these antibodies. Each well of the 96 -well plate 
will contain 5ul of plasma and 20 ul mixture of anti -K2 conjugated acceptor bead and 
either the biotinylated 2H8 to measure total TFPI or biotinylated anti -K3 to detect TFPIα.  
Plasma samples will be  measured in duplicate.  
6.5 Plasma Free DNA  
Levels of plasma free DNA will be assessed using the Quant -iT PicoGreen dsDNA kit 
and the Sytox Green fluorescent dye.25 The Victor microplate reader will be used to 
determine the fluorescence omitted from the samples.  The DNA concentration will be 
determined through comparison to a standard curve.  
  
7.  Subject Re muneration  
 
For their time and efforts in study activities, re search subjects will receive $25  for each 
of the following patient  visits:  
• Study visit  2, 1 month after catheter removal  
• Study visit 3 , 3 months after catheter removal  
• Study visit 4 , 6 month after catheter removal  
 
A total of $75 will be paid to subjects completing all  study visits  to cover travel  to the 
research site , parking, and time of the visits . The subject will be paid $25 for each 
completed study visit whether they withdraw, the investigator withdraws them or they 
complete all study activities.  Payment will occur when they are no longer an active 
participant in the study.   Remuneration for study visits will only take place at the BCW 
site. 
 
7.1 Potential benefit to subjects  
Our protocol will treat participants  with anticoagulation for 1 month after catheter 
removal. There are no definite direct benefits to subject participation. Because the 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 15 of 26 
 
 duration of anticoagulation varies in clinical practice, treatment with one month of 
anticoagulation could have lower risk of hemorrhage in comparison to 3 or 6 months of 
anticoagulation. Additionally, the cost and discomfort associated with use of injecte d 
anticoagulant could  be lower. The study may also benefit others with CRT if the study is 
able to identify biomarkers that will predict thrombosis  to allow a tailored approach to 
treatment of CRT .   
 
8.  Human Subjects Protection  
 
8.1 Informed Consent: Subjects are required to sign an informed consent prior 
to enrollment , and before undergoing any study procedures or assessments . 
When substantial modifications are made to the informed consent, the IRB 
may require that all subjects curre ntly enrolled in the st udy will be re -
consented .   
 
Subjects will be provided with a copy of the signed informed consent form 
used in the study, procedures,  and assessments.  Subjects will also be 
provided with the contact telephone numbers of the investigator and qualified 
personnel who can assist with their questions and concerns.   
 
8.2  Protected Health Information  
 
Protected health information that will b e collected as part of this study 
includes name, date of birth, date of catheter placement, date of thrombosis 
diagnosis, date of bleeding event, and date of thrombosis recurrence.   This 
information will be stored for 10  years beyond the completion of the study. 
After blood is used for study testing  it will be discard ed.  
 
8.3 Confidentiality  
Loss of confidentiality is always a  potential risk when collecting protected 
health information. Research records will remain confidential. Subject’s 
records will be available to the study staff and to each site’s IRB and for audit 
purposes. Only authorized personnel will have access to the protected health 
information and research records.  The investigators, clinical research nurses, 
and TRU n urses will have access to the patient identifying code.  In order that 
confidentiality can be maintained, the PI/study staff will keep records in locked 
cabinets/room and results of tests will be coded to prevent association with 
volunteers’ names. All elec tronic data will be entered into a secured, website 
data management system , RED Cap,  that requires training and is password 
protected. Identifying information will not be included on laboratory sa mples, 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 16 of 26 
 
 faxes, or correspondence . Laboratory samples and printed surveys will only 
have participant number and not identifying information.  
All study team members are trained in HIPAA privacy regulations and other 
applicable site privacy policies. No information will be released, nor will 
participation in  the re search be acknowledged, to any party except where 
compulsory according to law or intuitional policy. The results of the research 
study may be published, but volunteers’ names or identities will not be 
revealed.  
 
9. Adverse Event Monitoring  
 
9.1 Definitions  
 
Adverse Event  (AE) – Any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a 
human subject  related to bleeding or thrombosis , including any abnormal sign 
(for example, abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or 
disease, temporally associated with the subject’s participation in research, 
whether or not considered related to the subject’ s partici pation in research . 
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  – Any adverse event temporally associated 
with the subject’s participation in res earch and related to bleeding or 
thrombosis that meets any of the following criteria:  
• Results in death;  
• Is life -threatening (places subject at immediate risk of death from 
the event as it occurs);  
• Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of exist ing 
hospitalization ; 
• Results in a persistent significant/incapacity;  
• Results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect;  or 
• Any other adverse event that, based upon appropriate  medical 
judgment, may jeopardize the subject’s health and may require 
medical or sur gical intervention to prevent on the other outcomes 
listed in this definition  
Note that seriousness and severity are separate concepts. The term “severe” 
refers to the intensity of a specific event; a severe event may be of minor 
medical significance (e.g. , a severe leg cramp). The term “serious” is based 
on an outcome or action criteria that are usually associated with events that 
pose a threat to the patient’s life or functioning. An event that is mild in 
severity is serious if it leads to one of the outc omes defined above.  
 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 17 of 26 
 
 Grade 4 and 5 events will always be considered Serious Adverse Events . 
Many Grade 3 and some Grade 1 and 2 events may meet the definition of a 
Serious Adverse Event.  
 
Unexpected Adverse Event - Any adverse event occurring in one or more  
subjects in a research protocol, the nature, the severity, or frequency of which 
is not consistent with either:  
• The known of foreseeable  risk of adverse events associated 
with the procedures involved in the research that are described 
in; 
o  the protocol related documents or the current IRB -
approved informed consent document  and;  
o other relevant sources of information, such as a product 
labeling or package insert or;  
• The expected natural progression of any underlying disease, 
disorder, or con dition of the subject(s) experiencing the adverse 
event and the subject’s predisposing risk factor profile for the 
adverse event . 
 
Unanticipated problem  involving risks to subjects or others (UP) - Any 
incident, experience or outcome that meets all the following criteria:  
• Unexpected (in terms of nature, severity, or frequency) given:  
o The research procedures that are described in the 
protocol related -docum ents, such the IRB -approved 
research protocol an d the informed consent form 
document and,  
o The characteristics of the subject population being 
studied ;  
• Related or possible related to the subject participation in 
research; and  
• Suggests that the research pla ces subjects or others at a 
greater risk of harm (including physical , psychological, 
economic, or social harm) related to the research than was 
previously known or recognized.  
 
Grading of Adverse Events – Events will be graded by using the Common 
Terminolo gy Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) Criteria version 4.0.  
 
Attribution  – the determination  and documentation of  whether an adverse 
event is related to a medical procedure.  
 
Attribution Categories:  
1. Not Related –Event clearly related to other factors (e.g., clinical state, 
other therapies; concomitant drugs)  
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 18 of 26 
 
 2. Possible Related – Sequence of event is compatible with study drug, 
device, or procedure, but could have been produced by other factors  
3. Probably Related - Sequence of event is compatible wi th study drug, 
or procedure and cannot be explained by other factors without much 
doubt  
4. Definitely Related - Sequence of event is compatible with study drug, 
or procedure and beyond doubt cannot be explained by other factors  
 
 
9.2  Site Monitor Physician  
A site monitor physician will be identified at each site. Lisa Baumann 
Kreuziger is the site monitor physician at MCW.   Tzu-Fei Wang will be the site 
monitor physician at OSU.   
The site monitor physician will: 
1)  Assess all adverse events and the frequency of adverse events  
2)  Report directly to the IRB in the event of a serious adverse event     
 
9.3  Study Staff  
Information on all adverse events, whether reported by the subject , directly 
observed, or detected by physical examination, laboratory test or other 
means, will be collected, recorded, followed , and reported as described in the 
following sections.  If follo w-up or clinical intervention is required, the treating 
provider will be informed and will provide treatment or follow -up as needed.   
The PI will monitor and review adverse  events monthly or more often as 
needed .   
 
9.4 Timeline for Reporting of Adverse events, Serious  Adverse Events, 
Unexpected Adverse Events  and Unanticipated Problems  
    
All serious adverse events , all unexpected adverse events , and all 
unanticipated problems  will be reported to the  IRB and DSMC as per 
standard operating procedure by phone, email or SAE form regardless of 
attribution.   
 
 
9.5 Reporting Events to Local Institutional Review Boards  
All serious adverse events will be reported to the institutional review board 
(IRB). Each site  will comply with the ir institution’s standard operating 
procedures for reporting adverse events. Subjects  will be instructed to report 
any adverse event(s)  during the study and  post-study .The investigator will 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 19 of 26 
 
 notify  the IRB and any other applicable regulatory agency of any 
unanticipated death or adverse event occurring after a participant has 
discontinued or ter minated study participation that may reaso nably be related 
to the study.  
9.6  Data Safety Monitoring Committee  (DSMC ) 
 
This study will be reviewed by the Medical College of Wisconsin Cancer Center Data 
Safety Monitoring Committee (MCW CC DSMC). A summary of the MCW CC DSMC 
activities are as follows:  
• Review the clinical trials for data integrity and safety  
• Review all adverse events requiring expedited reporting as defined per 
protocol  
• Review all DSM reports  
• Submit a summary of any recommendations re lated to study conduct  
• Terminate the study if deemed unsafe for patients  
A copy of the MCW CC Data and Safety Monitoring Plan and membership roster will 
be maintained in the study research file and updated as membership changes. The 
committee will review r eports from the study PI twice annually (or more frequently if 
needed) and provide recommendations on trial continuation, suspension or 
termination as necessary.  Any available DSMC letters will be submitted to the IRB 
of record as required .  
 
9.7 Potential Risk s to Volunteer  
 
Likely:   
Blood Sampling : Venipuncture can cause pain and discomfort at the needle 
puncture site  
Physical Exam : Pain associated with movement of arm and assessment of 
swelling.  
Anticoagulation: Use of injected anticoagulation can cause pain and 
bruising at the injection site.  Cost associated with anticoagulation  will be the 
responsibility of the participants and/or their insurance companies. The cost 
of enoxaparin (lovenox) will range in price from $24 to $119 a 
dose  depending on the dosage necessary for each person. The cost of direct 
oral anticoagulant treatment  averages $1 1-15 a dose. The amount of 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 20 of 26 
 
 insurance copays will depend on the insurance plan. Some insurance 
companies do not cover costs associated with research studies.  
Use of aspirin, clopidogrel (Plavix) and NSAIDs [ex.  ibuprofen (Motrin), 
naproxen (Alev e)], while using anticoagulation will increase your risk of 
bleeding.  The physician prescribing aspirin, clopidogrel or NSAIDs will 
determine if these medications should be continued while you receive 
enoxaparin  or direct oral anticoagulant therapy .  If needed , aspirin, 
clopidogrel, and NSAIDs can be safely resumed the day after anticoagulation 
is discontinued.  
Due to risk of bleeding, spinal procedures should be avoided while using 
anticoagulation . 
Less  Likely : 
Blood Sampling: Venipuncture can cause,  bruising, fainting or local infection 
at the needle site.  
Survey : Filling out the surveys could cause stress or anxiety to the participant  
Physical Exam : Examining the chest cause participant  embarrassment  
Anticoagulation:  Use of anticoagulation is known to cause an increased risk 
of bleeding that can occur at the injection site or systemically. Use of 
anticoagulation is known to cause an increased risk of bleeding that can 
occur at the injec tion site or systemically. Participants will have had 
anticoagulation for 0 -6 months prior to catheter removal and one month after 
catheter removal. Usual care would  include anticoagulation  between 1 -3 
months after catheter removal. With a shortened course of anticoagulation, an 
increased risk of thrombosis or post -thrombotic syndrome could occu r. 
Potential side effects of enoxaparin include fever, nausea, diarrhea, fluid 
retention, elevated LFTs, decreased platelets, decreased RBCs, local 
irritation, hematoma and redness.  
A potential side effect of all direct oral anticoagulant treatment include s 
bleeding.  Edoxaban also reported a rash, abnormal liver function tests , and 
anemia. Dabigatran is also associated with gastritis -like symptoms in 1 5% of 
patients .  
Rare:  
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 21 of 26 
 
 Blood Sampling : In rare circumstances venipuncture can cause blood clots, 
peripheral nerve injury or an arterial puncture.    
Anticoagulation: The anticoagulation medication prescribed from the 
treating provider as planned treatment for catheter -related thrombosis can 
rarely cause bleeding requiring hospital admission, transfusion, or death.  
Breach of confidentiality : personal health information will be collected and 
rarely a breach of confidentiality may lead to disclosure of that information.  
In addition to the above possible risks, there is always the risk of developing 
previously unknown side effects.  
10. Data  
10.1 Data  Management  
The data gathered will be entered into REDCap data system with each ID 
having a unique identifier for each participant. REDCap is a secure, web -
based application for building and managing online databases. All data will be 
de-identified and samples will on ly have a unique identifier that will link the 
unique identifier with the patient’s name.  
10.2 Data  Collection  
Research information, including consent forms and PTS assessments will be 
maintained secure as described in the Confidentiality section 8.3 . 
 Each participant will be identified with a unique identifier number in REDCap. 
This unique identifier will be linked to the same unique identifier for a 
biological specimen sample stored in the  Dr Alan Mast’s laboratory  or the 
TRU to allow batched testing .   
10.3 Data Monitoring  
The PI or study staff will review all data collection forms on an ongoing basis 
for data completeness, accuracy, and protocol compliance.  The data will be 
continuously monitored by the principal investigator of the study.  The 
regulatory officer that is a part of the BCW Clinical Trials Office  will assist with 
internal and external audits as appropriate.  If protocol compliance or data 
accuracy comes into question study PI will request a study review.  
Subject accrual, compliance wi th the protocol, status of enrolled subjects, 
adherence data regarding study visits, and adverse events will be 
summarized on a quarterly basis (or more frequently if needed) and reviewed 
by the PI.  Serious adverse events will be reviewed at the time of t he 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 22 of 26 
 
 occurrence by the PI and reported to the DSMC and IRB as per standard 
operating procedure.  
A biannual safety and progress report will be submitted to the DSMC.  The 
report will include the number of patients entered, number of patients treated, 
summary of all adverse events reported to date using standardized grading, a 
specific list of all serious adverse events [SAEs].  
Data safety and monitoring activities for each study will continue until all 
patients have completed their treatment and the 6 months o f follow -up.  In the 
event that data and safety monitoring results in the suspension or termination 
of enrollment and/or treatment of patients, the principal investigator, the MCW 
CCC Director, the MCW Associate Director for Clinical Medical College of 
Wisconsin Cancer Center Research, the MCW IRB will be notified p er MCW 
Office of Research Standard Operating Procedure.  
The PI is responsible for the o verall conduct of the project. Prior to start of the 
project at OSU , the PI will visit the site to ensure staff training, data 
management, and monitoring procedures are in place.  Weekly or as needed 
teleconferences will be arranged between the study staff and investigators 
between OSU  and WI to discuss enrollment, monito ring, concerns and trouble 
shoot any problems that arise.  Audits of study procedures will be completed 
through WI institutional review boards and BCW clinical trials offices.  
10.4 Stopping Rules  
The DSMC can consider stopping the study prior to completion  if: 
1. The intervention is associated with adverse events that call into question 
the safety of the intervention  
a. Interim analysis after 20 patients shows an incidence of thrombotic 
recurrence >40% (8/20 patients)  
i. Rationale: A retrospective review of CRT in patients with 
hematologic malignancy at MCW found development of 
thrombosis other than CRT or extension of the catheter -related 
thrombosis in 20/141 (14%) of patients.  Recurrent thrombosis 
has been reported in other studies  in 20% of cancer patients.1 If 
after half of patients are re cruited, the thrombotic incidence has 
doubled over the reported incidence in the literature, the study 
will be stopped.  This level was chosen because it would be 
unlikely that if 8 events in the first 20 patients occur that n o 
thrombotic events would occu r in the next 20 patients to have 
an overall 20% (8/40) recurrent thrombosis incidence.  
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 23 of 26 
 
 2. Difficulty in study recruitment or retention will significantly impact the ability 
to evaluate the study endpoints  
3. New information becomes available that necessitates stopping the trial  
11. Statistical Considerations  
11.1    Description  of Endpoints:  
1. 11.1.1 Feasibility  Endpoint s:  
a. Recruitment of 56 patients in 1 year and 80% completion of PTS 
assessments by enrolled patients.   
b. Feasibility of obtaining plasma samples for biomarker analysis as 
determined by obtaining 80% of samples from enrolled patients.  
11.1.2  : Clinical Endpoint  
2. Incide nce of post -thrombotic syndrome  <20% at 6 months.  
11.1.3: Secondary Endpoints   
1. Recurrent thrombosis  
2. Incidence of major and clinically relevant non -major bleeding  
3. Reliability of QuickDASH questionnaire in patients with catheter -related 
thrombosis  
11.2 Statistical Analysis  
 
The incidence of PTS, thrombotic recurrence, major bleeding and clinically relevant 
non-major bleeding will be reported as proportions. These outcomes will be compared 
at 3 and 6 months using Chi -square or Fisher’s exact tests. A Cox -proportional hazards 
model will be utilized to calculate the risk of PTS and thrombosis recurrence. Chi -square 
or Fisher’s exact tests will be used to determine if clot presentation or location predicts 
PTS or thrombotic recurrence. Agreement between the DASH and QuickDASH scal es 
will be assessed using the intraclass correlation coefficient. To compare the 
discriminating ability of the DASH and QuickDASH on the level of PTS, receiver 
operating curves will be developed using the scale scores at 6 months as the test 
variable and d ichotomized PTS assessment as the classifying variable. Levels of D -
dimer, thrombin generation, and TFPI will be reported as means. Logistic regression will 
evaluate if D -dimer, thrombin generation or TFPI levels at 1 month or % change from 
baseline predic t thrombotic recurrence. Where necessary, for parametric assumption, 
we will employ appropriate transformations with justifications. For example, the log of 
some of the biomarkers data may be used  if the data range is >1000 . Statistical 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 24 of 26 
 
 significance will b e determined with p<0.05. SAS version 9.13 and JMP 10 Statistical 
software wil l be employed for data analysis.  
 
An interim analysis will be completed after 20 patients complete 6 months of follow -up. 
The interim analysis will allow assessment of thrombotic recurrence by the DSMC.  
11.3 Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
The current proposal involves on -going data collection  for the duration of the study at 
each site . The records will be maintained per site policy . 
 
References  
1. McGee DC, Gould MK. Preventing complications of central venous 
catheterization. The New England journal of medicine. Mar 20 
2003;348(12):1123 -1133.  
2. Lee AY, Kamphuisen PW. Epidemiology and prevention of catheter -related 
thrombosis in  patients with cancer. Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH. 
Aug 2012;10(8):1491 -1499.  
3. Kucher N. Clinical practice. Deep -vein thrombosis of the upper extremities. The 
New England journal of medicine. Mar 3 2011;364(9):861 -869. 
4. Monreal M, Raven tos A, Lerma R, et al. Pulmonary embolism in patients with 
upper extremity DVT associated to venous central lines --a prospective study. 
Thrombosis and haemostasis. Oct 1994;72(4):548 -550. 
5. Elman EE, Kahn SR. The post -thrombotic syndrome after upper extre mity deep 
venous thrombosis in adults: a systematic review. Thrombosis research. 
2006;117(6):609 -614. 
6. Kahn SR, Elman EA, Bornais C, Blostein M, Wells PS. Post -thrombotic 
syndrome, functional disability and quality of life after upper extremity deep 
veno us thrombosis in adults. Thrombosis and haemostasis. Mar 2005;93(3):499 -
502. 
7. Guyatt GH, Akl EA, Crowther M, Gutterman DD, Schuunemann HJ. Executive 
summary: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: 
American College of Chest Physicians Evidence -Based Clinical Practice 
Guidelines. Chest. Feb 2012;141(2 Suppl):7S -47S. 
8. Mantha S, Laube E, Miao Y, et al. Safe and effective use of rivaroxaban for 
treatment of cancer -associated venous thromboembolic disease: a prospective 
cohort study. Journal of thrombosis and thrombolysis. Feb 2017;43(2):166 -171. 
9. Laube ES, Mantha  S, Samedy P, Wills J, Harnicar S, Soff GA. Treatment of 
central venous catheter -associated deep venous thrombosis in cancer patients 
with rivaroxaban. American journal of hematology. Jan 2017;92(1):E9 -E10. 
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 25 of 26 
 
 10. Davies GA, Lazo -Langner A, Gandara E, et al. A prospective study of 
Rivaroxaban for central venous catheter associated upper extremity deep vein 
thrombosis in cancer patients (Catheter 2). Thrombosis research. Feb 
2018;162:88 -92. 
11. Prandoni P, Lensing AW, Piccioli A, et al. Recurrent venous thrombo embolism 
and bleeding complications during anticoagulant treatment in patients with 
cancer and venous thrombosis. Blood. Nov 15 2002;100(10):3484 -3488.  
12. Kearon C, Akl EA, Comerota AJ, et al. Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: 
Antithrombotic Therapy  and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College 
of Chest Physicians Evidence -Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest. Feb 
2012;141(2 Suppl):e419S -494S.  
13. Debourdeau P, Farge D, Beckers M, et al. International clinical practice 
guidelines for th e treatment and prophylaxis of thrombosis associated with 
central venous catheters in patients with cancer. Journal of thrombosis and 
haemostasis : JTH. Jan 2013;11(1):71 -80. 
14. Jones MA, Lee DY, Segall JA, et al. Characterizing resolution of catheter -
associated upper extremity deep venous thrombosis. Journal of vascular surgery. 
Jan 2010;51(1):108 -113. 
15. Major KM, Bulic S, Rowe VL, Patel K, Weaver FA. Internal jugular, subclavian, 
and axillary deep venous thrombosis and the risk of pulmonary embolism. 
Vascular. Mar-Apr 2008;16(2):73 -79. 
16. Flinterman LE, van Hylckama Vlieg A, Rosendaal FR, Doggen CJ. Recurrent 
thrombosis and survival after a first venous thrombosis of the upper extremity. 
Circulation. Sep 23 2008;118(13):1366 -1372.  
17. Louzada ML, Carrier M, Lazo -Langner A, et al. Developmen t of a clinical 
prediction rule for risk stratification of recurrent venous thromboembolism in 
patients with cancer -associated venous thromboembolism. Circulation. Jul 24 
2012;126(4):448 -454. 
18. den Exter PL, Kooiman J, Huisman MV. Validation of the Ottaw a prognostic 
score for the prediction of recurrent venous thromboembolism in patients with 
cancer -associated thrombosis. Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH. 
May 2013;11(5):998 -1000.  
19. Khorana AA, Kuderer NM, Culakova E, Lyman GH, Francis CW. Dev elopment 
and validation of a predictive model for chemotherapy -associated thrombosis. 
Blood. May 15 2008;111(10):4902 -4907.  
20. Ay C, Dunkler D, Marosi C, et al. Prediction of venous thromboembolism in 
cancer patients. Blood. Dec 9 2010;116(24):5377 -5382.  
21. Ay C, Dunkler D, Simanek R, et al. Prediction of venous thromboembolism in 
patients with cancer by measuring thrombin generation: results from the Vienna 
Cancer and Thrombosis Study. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the 
American Socie ty of Clinical Oncology. May 20 2011;29(15):2099 -2103.  
22. Eichinger S, Heinze G, Jandeck LM, Kyrle PA. Risk assessment of recurrence in 
patients with unprovoked deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism: the 
Vienna prediction model. Circulation. Apr 13 2 010;121(14):1630 -1636.  
Medical Science s Institute - BloodCenter of Wisconsin  
Catheter -related thrombosis trial. Version 10 
PRO21429 Version 10.0 
Page 26 of 26 
 
 23. Verhovsek M, Douketis JD, Yi Q, et al. Systematic review: D -dimer to predict 
recurrent disease after stopping anticoagulant therapy for unprovoked venous 
thromboembolism. Annals of internal medicine. Oct 7 2008;149(7):481 -490, 
W494. 
24. Dahm A, Van Hylckama Vlieg A, Bendz B, Rosendaal F, Bertina RM, Sandset 
PM. Low levels of tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) increase the risk of 
venous thrombosis. Blood. Jun 1 2003;101(11):4387 -4392.  
25. Fuchs TA, Brill A, Duerschmied D, et a l. Extracellular DNA traps promote 
thrombosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America. Sep 7 2010;107(36):15880 -15885.  
26. Prandoni P, Bernardi E, Marchiori A, et al. The long term clinical course of acute 
deep vein  thrombosis of the arm: prospective cohort study. BMJ. Aug 28 
2004;329(7464):484 -485. 
27. Livnat T, Shenkman B, Spectre G, et al. Recombinant factor VIIa treatment for 
asymptomatic factor VII deficient patients going through major surgery. Blood 
coagulatio n & fibrinolysis : an international journal in haemostasis and 
thrombosis. Jul 2012;23(5):379 -387. 
28. Waser G, Kathriner S, Wuillemin WA. Performance of the automated and rapid 
STA Liatest D -dimer on the STA -R analyzer. Thrombosis research. 
2005;116(2):16 5-170. 
 
 