Protocol  Page 1 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015   
Protocol  ID#: B0902 -W 
1. Project Title : Metacognitive Training to Enhance Strategy Use In Blast -Related TBI  
2. Investigator(s):  PI: J. Kay Waid -Ebbs, PhD  
3. Abstract:  
     Increasing numbers of veterans are experiencing executive dysfunction due to a mild 
traumatic brain injury (mTBI). Executive dysfunction interferes with participation in home 
and work activities. Therefore, an effective intervention is needed that will provide 
significant and long-lasting  improvement in the everyday lives of our veterans. Goal 
Management Training (GMT), an intervention that teaches a five -step strategy to 
impro ve planning and organization, has demonstrated promising results (Levine et al., 
2000; 2007).  However, there are several weaknesses regarding validation of the GMT 
in individuals with TBI. Therefore, the proposed study is needed to determine the effect 
of the 10-session GMT on veterans with mTBI. This study will 1) administer the 10-
session GMT to individuals that have an objective executive dysfunction; 2) due to 
mTB I; 3) use probes designed to measure the activities trained in GMT, along with a 
measure o f generalization; and 4) determine the number of subjects needed to 
demonstrate a treatment effect in a future randomized clinical trial.  
4.  Background:     
Brain In jury has become the signature wound of Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) and 
Operation Endurin g Freedom (OEF). An estimated 20,000 military personnel have been 
wounded in action primarily due to blasts (US, 2006). However, an even larger number 
are thought to have suffered a mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) that was left 
undetected (Lew, 2005). A  mTBI is diagnosed if any of three following criteria are met: 
1) loss of consciousness less than 30 minutes with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 13 or 
above; 2) any loss of memory for events immediately before and after the event (not 
longer than 24 hours); any a lteration of mental state at the time of accident; 3) any focal 
neurological deficits that may, or may not, be transient (ACRM, 1993). Of an at risk 
group evaluated a t Walter Reed during 2003 -2004 an estimated 59% suffered at least a 
mild TBI while in comb at (Warden, 2005). It is known that over 2 million civilians sustain 
a TBI each year, of which an estimated 85% are mild (Sherer and Novack, 2003). 
However, this figu re may be an underestimation, since some individuals that sustain a 
mild TBI do not seek t reatment.  
     The problems that result from mTBI are diverse. During the acute stage individuals 
may experience obvious problems with attention, verbal retrieval, f orgetfulness, 
headache, dizziness, irritability, drowsiness, sleep disturbances and fatigu e (Ponsford, 
2000). In addition, military personnel also suffer emotional issues such as PTSD, 
depression and anxiety disorders (Lew, 2005). While the majority of ind ividuals with 
Protocol  Page 2 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015  mTBI are thought to totally recover within the first three months, several s tudies have 
found up to 48% continue to experience one or more symptoms up to a year after the 
injury (Alves, 1993; Jacobson, 1995). For example, Drake et al. (2000) found in a 
military sample that 46% were not able to return to their previous duty after t hree to 
fifteen months; with memory and executive functions impairments as the greatest risk 
factor.  
    The chaos and trauma that occur when an explosive device is detonated make it 
difficult to follow the diagnostic criteria outlined above.  Even so, mi litary personnel 
exposed to a blast may suffer a mild TBI because the brain is especially susceptible to 
the “blast over pressurization” that affects fluid filled org ans of the body (Mayorga, 
1997). Exposure to a blast may cause diffuse axonal damage, as w ell as damage 
sustained from being thrown or having objects hit the head (Lew, 2005). The frontal 
lobes are most susceptible to injury due to the contact of the bony orbital surface to the 
frontal lobes and the frontal poles (Damasio & Anderson, 2003). The refore, the diffuse 
axonal damage and contusions will occur prominently in the frontal lobes as well as 
other cortical and subcortical structures, which is evident in  the cognitive deficits 
following a mTBI.   
     Executive functions are most commonly aff ected by damage to the frontal lobes.  
They can be disrupted by damage to the focal areas in the frontal lobes or to the frontal -
subcortical circuits that integrate c ognitive, self -regulatory, and emotional behavior 
(Stuss, 2007). In fact, disorganization as a result of executive dysfunction is the most 
common complaint about individuals with TBI (Mateer, 1987). The self -regulation of 
behavior is less necessary in well -learned activities that become automatic but  is more 
necessary in new activities that re quire inhibition of an over -learned plan so that a new 
problem -solving strategy can be developed. A new plan requires the ability to maintain 
intentions as well as the  execution of those intentions (Levine, 2000). After frontal injury, 
intention and action  can become dissociated; individuals with frontal lobe damage may 
be able to tell you the appropriate action to take, but do not follow that action (Luria, 
1966). Seve ral steps need to be coordinated for an individual to achieve his/her 
intentions. First t he difference between the current state and the desired state must be 
detected. Second, the steps needed to reach that desired state must be formulated. 
Third, the des ired state must be kept in mind while resisting other distractions. Fourth, 
the barriers that occur along the way must be overcome until finally the goal is 
achieved. Once the goal is achieved, the result must be evaluated. Duncan (1986) 
refers to the inab ility to complete step 3 as “goal neglect”. In order to be able to live 
independently, we  must be able to keep in mind what we are doing, avoid distractions, 
respond to novel problems in new ways while inhibiting the ineffective way we have 
responded in th e past, and evaluate how well we did.  Individuals with executive 
dysfunction will have d ifficulty performing the tasks necessary to deal with novel 
situations in an unstructured setting.  
     Given the numbers of military personnel who may be struggling w ith executive 
dysfunction, an effective intervention to improve executive functions is ne eded. 
However, there are no treatments for executive dysfunction in mTBI that have been 
rigorously investigated. Robertson (1996) developed a treatment package called goal 
management training (GMT) based on Duncan’s theory of “goal neglect”. GMT is a 7 -
session (2 hours/ session) interactive module that is presented in a group format. A 5 -
Protocol  Page 3 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015  stage strategy is taught to the participants and is then incorporated into tasks pr acticed 
in the group session as well as in tasks each participant is to practice at home.  The 5 -
stage process consists of “stop -what am I doing”, “define the goal”, “list the steps”, 
“learn the steps”, then “check -am I doing what I planned”. Levine validat ed the GMT by 
randomly assigning 30 TBI patients to either a one -hour version of GMT or m otor skills 
training (Levine et al. 2000). The one -hour GMT was associated with improvements 
(being more careful as demonstrated by taking longer to complete the task after 
training) in paper and pencil tasks (proof reading and grouping) that simulated tas ks 
requiring cognitive control. Since then, Levine et al. have modified the GMT module and 
increased the length of training to seven, two-hour sessions (14 hours total ) (Levine et 
al., 2007). To date the only published use of this expanded GMT has been wit h an 
elderly sample, embedded in a larger rehabilitation package. The expanded version 
(modified GMT) may offer promise to the mTBI population as well.  
     The propos ed study is needed to determine the effect of the expanded GMT in 
veterans with mild TBI.  40-North Florida/South Georgia, Operation Enduring 
Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom /Operation New Dawn  (OEF/OIF /OND ) Veterans will 
be recruited who meet criteria for T BI (ARCM, 1993) and have current executive 
dysfunction.  
     Two screening measure s, Delis-Kaplan Executive Function Test System (D -KEFS) 
color word interference test and the Stop Signal Task will be used to select individuals 
that demonstrate deficits in  inhibition which is within the domain of executive function .    
    The Computerized Tow er of London will be used to assess the improvement of 
inhibition as a result of the intervention.   To measure the effect of the GMT on 
observations of executive func tioning in the home environment (generalization) the 
Behavior Inventory of Executive Func tioning in Adults (BRIEF -A) was selected.  The 
BRIEF -A is a global measure of executive functioning and will demonstrate whether 
improvements in simulated tasks genera lize to overall functioning as observed by a 
proxy in the home.   
     In addition to imp roved mea sures, the current 7-session/ 14-hour version of the GMT 
is the same as the one -hour version, however, the expanded version allows for 
additional practice of t he learned strategies in both the group setting and in the home 
setting. The increased pr actice may decrease the effort needed to apply the strategies 
and increase the use of the strategies beyond the therapy sessions. In fact, Robey 
(1998) demonstrated th at two or more hours of therapy a week produced a greater 
change than therapy delivered l ess than one and a half hours per week. Therefore, the 
expanded version is anticipated to show a stronger effect than the 1 -hour GMT. Turner 
and Levine (2004) predicte d that individuals with mild TBI would be able to apply the 
strategies learned in GMT eas ier than individuals with moderate or severe TBI. 
Therefore, it is expected that the proposed study will produce a magnified effect over 
the Levine et al. (2000) study  by using improved measures, using a longer treatment of 
20 hours instead of one hour, an d applying the intervention to individuals with mild TBI 
versus moderate and severe TBI.  
5. Specific Aims:  
Protocol  Page 4 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015  Specific Aims: The purpose of this Phase I study is to test  an innovative treatment for 
executive dysfunction in veterans with mTBI that utilizes fo rmalized and manualized 
procedures that can be exported for use in a subsequent randomized clinical trial.  
 
Aim 1.  
Aim 1 is to test the benefits of GMT for improving  executive function.  
Hypothesis 1a: GMT will significantly improve problem solving abili ty compared to the 
control group (primary measure: time to completion on the Tower of London (cTOL). 
Since PTSD is prevalent and a potentially influencing co -morbidity , we will to investigate 
whether there is a significant interaction between treatment gro up and PTSD severity. 
Secondary measures include  number of optimal moves on the TOL; and measures 
derived from the Stop Signal Task (SST; a measure of inhibition contr ol).  
Exploratory Hypothesis 1.a.GMT will significantly improve everyday activities that  
require executive function skills  (primary measure: Behavior Rating Inventory of 
Executive Function -Adult version, secondary measure: CRIS).  
Analysis Plan for Hypothe sis 1.  and Hypothesis 1.a. To test the first specific aim 
(hypothesis 1), the primary an alysis will use two sample t -test to compare group A 
(intervention) and group B (control) on improvements in time to completion on the TOL. 
In addition, as an explorato ry analysis, we will perform a regression analysis that 
includes treatment group, PTSD s everity and their interaction as independent variables, 
to adjust for PTSD severity and to investigate whether there is interaction between 
treatment group and PTSD sev erity. Similar analyses will be performed for hypothesis 1 
for secondary outcome variabl es of change in index of optimal moves on the TOL and 
reaction time (RT) and accuracy on SST. To test hypothesis 1a, exploratory tertiary 
analysis using paired t -tests will determine whether treatment effect generalizes to 
executive function performance in  everyday activities (BRIEF -A) or engagement in 
community participation (CRIS).   
Aim 2  
Aim 2 is to investigate factors which affect response to treatment.  
Hypothesis 2. Baseline cognitive ability, depression, sleep, and presence of PTSD will 
have a signif icant effect on response to treatment.  
Analysis Plan for Hypotheses 2.  To test the second specific aim, a general linear 
regression will be used to determine whether any of the four factors is associated with 
response to treatment. The analysis will be res tricted to the participants assigned to the 
intervention group. The dependent variable for the regression model will be ‘time to 
completion’ on the TOL, and the indep endent variables will be CWI, BDI -II, PCL-M and 
PSQI scores.  
6. Research Plan:  
To determi ne the effect of GMT on veterans with mTBI the following research will be 
conducted.  Clinical staff from the NF/SG VHS will hand out recruitment flyers or refer  
OEF/ OIF/ONF  veterans diagnosed with mTBI  to the Principal Investigator.  Referred 
Veterans wil l be contacted by the PI or i nterested Veterans  will contact the PI.  Veterans 
that meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria will be scheduled to obtain consent. Once 
Protocol  Page 5 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015  consent has been obtained the veteran will be scheduled for the first screening visit.  
Veterans that meet inclusion criteria will be randomly assigned to either treatment or 
control groups, in a ratio of 38:16. In addition, the Pocock -Simon covariate adapti ve 
randomization procedure will be used so that, for each PTSD severity category within 
each of the two sites, approximately 70% (38/54) of subjects are assigned to treatment 
group; consequently, there will be approximately equal proportion of PTSD subject s 
assigned to the treatment and control groups within each of the two study sites.  
Each v eteran will complete  testing prior to a 10-week intervention or control period ; after 
intervention or control period ; and at a one-month  follow -up. Intervention will be offered 
to participants in the control group once testing is complete.  
 
Participants wi ll also be recruited and run in a parallel study in Durham under a Durham 
VA IRB approval.  A total of 168 participants are anticipated to be enrolled in both 
Gainesv ille and Durham. Data from Durham will be entered in a VA share drive that 
both Gainesvill e and Durham staff can access.  Data will not be transferred.  
 
Table # 2 Study Design  
  1st Measure  GMT/Wait  2nd Measure  3rd Measure  
Group A  
(n=38) Pre-treatment  
testing  GMT/FP  
10 wks Post-treatment  
testing  Follow -up 
testing  
Group B  
(n=16) Pre-Control            
testing  Control           
(Brain Health 
Workshop ) 
10 wks Post-control 
testing  Follow -up 
Control  testing  
 
Methods  
Subjects  
Proxy/Informant: patient will sele ct a person to answer a questionnaire on their 
executive function that observes the pa tient at least 2 -3 times a week and is at least 18 
years of age.  
    Patient  Inclusion Criteria:  
• Diagnosis of Mild TBI or concussion by a physician or neuropsychologist  in the 
medical record compliant with the American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine ; 
any of three following criteria are met: 1) loss of consciousness less than 30 
minutes with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 13 or above; 2) any loss of memory for 
events immedi ately before and after the event (not longer than 24 hours); any 
alteration of mental state at the time of accident; 3) any focal neurological deficits 
that may, or may not, be transient (ACRM, 1993).   
• Executive dysfunction determined by at least 1.5 standard deviation below the 
average scaled score (corrected for age) on either the Delis -Kaplan Executive 
function System (D -Kefs) Color Word Interference Test , or the EXAMINER 
flanker task . 
• Age 18 to 55 years  
• At least 4 months post injury  
• Family member or fr iend that is willing to provide feedback  
      Exclusion Criteria :  
Protocol  Page 6 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015  • History of pre -morbid learning disability  
• History of psychiatric diagnosis sufficiently severe to have resulted in inpatient 
hospitalization.  
• Neurological disease unrelated to TBI (seizur e disorder, stroke, ADHD)  
•  Score < 90 on National Adult Reading Test (NART)  
• Failure of  validity testing on  either the Test of  Memory Malingering (TOMM), ). 
Score  of 45 or less on TOMM Trial 2 or retention trial.  
• Reported alcohol or substance abuse within t he past year  
• Reported involvement in current litigation  
• Recent change of medications fo r seizures, depression or memory.  
• Currently enrolled in other cognitive therapy  that cannot  be discontinued  
• Does not speak English fluently  
• Not competent to provide cons ent (also, not able to demonstrate understanding 
of expectations  of study and potential  risks of  participation).  
 
Procedures  
     Intervention : The GMT is a 7-session intervention has been modified to a 10 -session 
(2 hours/ session) interactive Power Point  module that is presented in a n individual or 
group  format. Sessions 5, 6 and 7 have be en split into two sessions each with time 
added to set -up and review functional practice. If a group format, t he subject will be 
incorporated into a therapy session with  3-5 other participants (either other clinical 
patients or research participants diagno sed with TBI). During each session, a 5 -stage 
strategy is taught to the participants. The 5 -stage process consists of “stop -what am I 
doing?”, “define the goal”, “list t he steps”, “learn the steps” then “check -am I doing what 
I planned”. The strategy is th en incorporated into tasks practiced in the group session 
as well as in tasks each participant is to practice at home. The participants discuss 
utilization of the strate gies and support the other members in the group. Friends or 
family members will partici pate in a training session prior to beginning GMT with the 
subject. The family member will be called each week during the GMT and asked to 
report whether the subject had  an easy or difficulty time completing the homework 
assignments each week.  
Simulated P ractice In The Laboratory : Tasks during GMT training include 
exercises such as: 1) clapping to words while inhibiting clapping to a targeted word; 2) 
card sorting; 3) de cision making and planning in order to complete five activities within a 
four minute ti me span; 4) Catalog Task; and 5) Book keeping task. The exercises start 
with relatively easy tasks and progress to more complex tasks.  Participant’s strengths 
and weakn esses are discussed. Improvements are identified and reinforced as they 
learn more effi cient planning and problem solving.  The following steps are taught 
during simulated tasks:  1) Identify Main Goal; 2) Break down task into sub -goals and 
steps for each goal; 3) List supplies needed; 4) Recognize potential barriers to 
completing goal; 5) D etermine strategy to accomplish task: 6) Prepare to begin task with 
“presence of mindedness” exercise; 7) State goal out loud; 8) Begin task and stop self 
frequently to state main goal out loud and check to be sure one is working toward the 
goal (on target ).  
Functional Practice with Smartphone Technology : In addition to GMT in the lab, 
three tasks will be first practice in the lab, than practiced at home.  Participants w ill 
Protocol  Page 7 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015  select from the following: meal planning and shopping; planning a party; building a  
birdhouse; or paying monthly bills. A Smartphone application (AP) specifically 
developed to utilize the strategies taught in GMT will be loaded onto the participant’s 
Smartphone (iPhone, iTouch, or Droid).  Veterans that do not already possess one of 
the devices will receive one as part of their clinical service through prosthetics. Training 
will begin during the first session to learn the features of the technology they  will need 
(calendar, list, alarms) using Michelle Wild’s standardized learning procedu re outlined in 
her guide books ( http://pda4memory.com ) that have been designed to train individuals 
with TBI how to use Smartphones.  Participants will use the application features to 
break down tasks, estimate time to c omplete, check off each step as completed, 
respond to visual/vibrating alert of “Goal” and respond to alert if “On Target”. 
Information, such as accuracy of planned step s, time to complete task, and number of 
distractions from goal will be collected by the  AP.   Data will not be electronically 
transferred; the  participant’s performance in functional practice at home will be reviewed 
and documented at the next lab session.   
  Control Group Intervention . The Brain Health Workshop (BHW; Levine 2011) was 
develo ped specifically for consistency with GMT session length and contact with the 
facilitator (Levine, 2011). BHW is an education presentation on brain function and 
cognitiv e principles of learning. Information about stress reduction, sleep hygiene, 
energy man agement, exercise and communication are covered, with homework and 
quizzes on information covered.  
 
 
Table 1: Testing Schedule  
Screening  Pre-Treatment   Post Treatment #  One-Month f/u#  
D-KEFs Color -
Word Interference 
Test   D-KEFs Color -Word 
Interference T est D-KEFs Color -Word 
Interference Test  
NART   *BRIEF -A  *BRIEF -A *BRIEF -A 
TOMM  PSQI   PSQI   PSQI  
 Tower of London  Tower of London   Tower of London  
EXAMINER  EXAMINER  EXAMINER  EXAMINER  
PCL-M RBANS  RBANS  RBANS  
 Stop -Signal Task  Stop -Signal Task  Stop -Signal Task  
 Beck Depression 
Inventory -II Beck Depression 
Inventory -II Beck Depression 
Inventory -II 
 CRIS  CRIS  CRIS  
*patient and family or friend  
Description of Measures  
Protocol  Page 8 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015  Screening  Measures  
Color -Word Interference Test or the Flanker Task will be used to de termine an objective deficit 
in inhibition by a score of ≥ 1. 5 standard deviation s (SD) below the normative mean. The Delis -
Kaplan Executive Function System (D -KEFS) was designed to detect executive dysfunction 
believed to be mediated by the frontal lobes.  Since it is generally believed that solders, 
diagnosed with mTBI and PTSD due to blast injury, have damage to the frontal lobes, the Color -
Word Interference Test of the D -Kefs will be used to screen for subjects that have, deficits in 
inhibition. The D -KEFS Tower Test, which is a version of the TOL, loads onto t he same factor 
(Inhibition) as the Color -Word Interference Test (Latzman, 2010).  Therefore, a deficit of ≥ 1.5 
SD on the DKEFS Color -Word Interference Test would negate possible ceiling effects on the 
primary outcome measure.  The test retest of the Color -Word Interference Test is suitable with a 
range of.49 to .86 for ages 20 -49. The validity was “reasonable” for detecting patients with 
frontal lobe lesions from normal patients (Homack, 2005).  
 
EXAMINER  
A battery of 10 executive function tasks have devel oped by a NINDS funded project to use in 
clinical research studies.  The tasks take approximately 60 minutes to administer  via a computer 
and result in 12 primary variables.  Tasks include: Dot counting  (count blue dotes on a series of 
screens and recall t he number of dots across screens ), N-back  (identify whether a series of 
locations match the location presented 1 or 2 before) , Flanker  (indicate the direction of an arrow 
that is flanked by arrows pointing in the opposite direction) , Continuous Performance  Test 
(respond to certain stimuli and withhold response to other stimuli on a computer screen) , Anti -
saccades  (move eyes toward a stimulus and moves eyes away from a stimulus) , Set-shifting  
(switch between a homogeneous matching task and a heterogeneous ma tching task) , 
Phonemic Fluency  (name as many words as possible with the same letter) , Category Fluency  
(name as many items as possible in a category) , Unstructured Task  (complete puzzles within 6 
minutes with the goal of earning as many points as possible) , and t he Social Norms 
Questionnaire  (answer yes no questions about socially appropriate behaviors) . Test re -test 
reliability is .94 and correlated with the FrsBe -0.57 in a multi -neurologic population. Patients 
that score at least 1.5 SD below the mean on  the Flanker task will be included in the study. 
Secondary analysis will be conducted to determine the effect size on each of the EXAMINER 
tasks.     
National Adult Reading Test  (NART) is an oral reading test consisting of 50 words (Nelson 
and Willison, 199 1). The NART can be used to estimate premorbid intelligence and will be 
used as a screen. Similar to Levine et al. (2007), we will use the cut off score of > 90 as an 
inclusion criterion to ensure that frontal lobe impairment is not the result of low premo rbid 
intelligence, and that the subject will be able to read the material during treatment.  
 
Test of Memory Malingering  (TOMM ): is frequently used to detect poor effort on 
neuropsychological assessment and has been validated with TBI patients (Tombaugh, 
1996; Slick et al., 2004; DeBoar, 2007). This test will be used to screen out patients scoring 
45 or below on Trial 2 or the Retention Trial (Trial 1 scores will not be used) to provide a 
level of confidence to the results of outcome measures.  
 
 
Primary Ou tcome Measure: Tower of London (TOL ): is a computerized program in which 
patients are shown two pictures simultaneously of a goal board and a test board 
(Unterrainer et al, 2006).  Each picture shows three balls of different colors arranged on 
three pegs, with the balls in a unique arrangement in each picture.  Patients are instructed 
to determine the fewest possible moves of the balls in the test picture to make the 
Protocol  Page 9 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015  arrangement of balls identical to that of the goal picture within 60 seconds. The screen 
reports whether the response is correct or incorrect.  Test administration is less than 45 
minutes for each session (pre/post/follow -up). Each set consists of 70 problems of variable 
difficulty, determined by variables, such as, the number of moves needed to  solve the 
problem (Berg and Byrd, 2002).  In turn, each set consists of the same number of 4, 5, 6 or 
7 move problems and has the same average difficulty level.  Difficulty rating is based on 
global and specific problem parameters shown to affect the plan ning process (Kaller, 2007, 
2008, 2009; Berg, Byrd, McNamara, & Case, 2010 ; Kaller, Unterrainer, Rahm, & Halsband, 
2004). The dependent variables are the total time spent solving the problem and the optimal 
moves made toward the goal display.  
 
Based on our previous studies, executive function represents three factors (behavior 
regulation, emotional regulation and metac ognition) (Waid, Wen, Heaton, and Velozo, 
submitted to Neuropsychology).  GMT is a metacognitive training with emphasis on 
planning prior to engaging in a complex task. Therefore, a primary measure that captures 
the planning and problem solving of a multi -step task, called the Tower of London (TOL), 
was selected. Based on results from our preliminary study, the dependent variables of total 
time and optimal moves will be used to determine treatment effect.  While, not all of the 
participants in our previous work demonstrated significant improvement on these variables, 
group differences based on paired T -tests were significant in Total Time (p=0.026) and 
Optimal Moves (p=0.022) from baseline to treatment.  In addition to our findings, Levine 
(2011) demonstrate d a significant change in the TOL following GMT for a mixed 
neurological sample compared to a control group.  Thus, the TOL appears to be sensitive to 
the effects of GMT.  
 
Stop Signal Task  
An “X” or “O” stimuli is presented visually on a computer screen. P articipants are asked to press 
the left button for an “X” and to press the right button for an “O” as quickly and as accurately as 
they can.  If the stimuli are followed by an auditory tone (stop signal) they are asked to not press 
the button. Dependent me asures are Response Time on Go Trials (RT) and Stop Signal 
Response Time (SSRT). Three sessions lasting approximately 10 minutes each will be 
conducted.  Stop Signal will be used as a secondary outcome measure to determine the effect 
size.   
 
Measures for Secondary Analysis  
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI):   is a 21-item questionnaire filled out by the individual 
diagnosed with TBI in the presence of the Principal Investigator.  Questions are rated using 
a 4-point  scale and cover symptoms of depression such as hopelessness, irritability, guilt, 
fatigue, weight loss and lack of interest in sex. The reliability of the BDI in TBI has been 
reported at .92 (Green, 2001; Beck et al, 1996).    
 
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) sym ptom checklist -military (PCL -M): The checklist is a 
17-item self -report measure of the 17 DSM -IV symptoms of PTSD with a 5 -point rating scale 
ranging from rarely to extremely frequent. The r ange of total score is 17 to 85 .  Internal 
consistency for the overall scale is .95 with cross val idation to clinician -administered interviews 
ranging from .64 for Vietnam veterans to .83 for motor vehicle accident and assault victims 
(Weathers, 1991 & 1993; Blanchard et al, 1996). The PCL -M will be used to determine the 
impact of PTSD on the response to treatment .  
 
Protocol  Page 10 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015   
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index  (PSQI): is a 19 -item self -rated questionnaire for evaluating 
subjective sleep quality over the previous month. Seven component scores are added to 
obtain a global score ranging from 0 –21, with higher scores i ndicating worse sleep quality. 
The PSQI has a sensitivity of 89.6% and specificity of 86.5% for identifying cases with sleep 
disorder and has been used in a wide range of population -based and clinical studies. Since 
sleep disturbances are common complaints  for Veterans returning from deployment and 
has been known to impair cognition, the PSQI will be used to determine whether sleep 
disturbances interfere with treatment response.  
 
Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological  Status (RBANS ): is a 
cognitive  screening instrument The RBANS is composed of 12 subtests that yield 5 index 
scores and a total score. The subtests of List Learning and Story Memory comprise the 
Immediate Memory Index; Figure Copy and Line Orientation yield the 
Visuospatial/ Constructional Index; Picture Naming and Semantic Fluency yield the 
Language Index; and Digit Span and Coding comprise the Attention Index. Four subtests 
make up the Delayed Memory Index, specifically, List Recall, List Recognition, Story Recall, 
and Figur e Recall  (Randolph, Tierney, Mohr, & Chase, 1998 ). Administration is 
approximately 20 minutes and has been used to assess cognition in mTBI (Cooper et al., 
2010 ). The index scores of the RBANS will be used to characterize the patient’s cognitive 
capacity and to determine whether particular aspects of cognitive ability impac t response to 
treatment.  
 
Exploratory Generalization Measure   
Generalization measures will be examined in a tertiary analysis to explore whether 
treatment effects generalize to everyday activities or participation in the community. Based 
on our previous s tudy, treatment effect did not generalize to everyday activities as 
measured by the BRIEF -A. However, with the proposed methodological changes and the 
addition of functional practice with a Smartphone application, generalization to activities and 
community  participation is anticipated to improve. The Metacognitive Index of the BRIEF -A 
was confirmed as a factor in our previous factor analysis and represents the executive 
function components targeted by GMT. The BRIEF -A was selected over the recommended 
commo n data element measure, the Frontal Systems Behavior Scale (FrSBe); since the 
FrSBe has not been tested in a homogenous TBI sample. While, our previous study did not 
reflect a significant improvement at the activity level, we will conduct a tertiary analys is to 
detect generalization using the BRIEF -A. In addition to the activity level of executive 
function, we would like to determine the effect of treatment at the community participation 
level. The TBI Outcomes Workgroup on common data elements (Wilde, 2010 ) has 
recommended the PART -O to measure participation in the community.   
 
Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Functions –Adult  (BRIEF -A) is a self and informant  
report questionnaire consisting of 75 statements about executive behaviors. There are three 
possible responses to items: often, sometimes, never. There are nine subscales: inhibit, 
self-monitor, plan/organize, shift initiation, task monitor, emotional control, working memory, 
and organization of materials. Normative self -report (n=1,050) r eliabil ity ranges from .73 to 
.90 for the scales and .93 to .96 for Index and Global Executive Composite  scores. While 
the reliability in a mixed clinical sample (n=233) ranged from .80 to .94 for scales and .96 to 
.98 for Index and Global Executive Composite  scores. Test -retest reliability over 4 weeks 
averaged .82 to .93 on the scales and .94 for Index and Global Executive Composite  
Protocol  Page 11 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015  scores. The total BRIEF -A score correlates at .84 with the Dysexecutive Questionnaire 
(Roth, 2005). In a sample of patients diagnos ed with TBI, the MI reported a Cronbach  alpha 
of 0.96 (Waid -Ebbs et al., 2012 ). The Metacogntive Index of the score of the BRIEF -A will 
be used to detect a change of  executive functioning in the subject’s home environment.  
 
Community Reintegration of Service Members (CRIS) : will be used  to measu re 
participation. The CRIS was developed specifically for soldiers with disabilities (Resnik et 
al., 2009, 2011) and is available in two formats, a paper and pencil version with 128 items 
and a computer adapted version that takes no more than 10 minutes to  complete. Three 
scales are found in the CRIS and have good internal reliability: Extent of Participation = 
0.91, Perceived Limitations = 0.93, and Satisfaction with Participation = 0.97 (Resnik et al, 
2009). Meaningful detectable change indices were 5.9, 6.2, and 3.6, respectively for Extent, 
Perceived and Satisfaction subscales (Resinik et al, 2012). CRIS -CAT scores were 
predictive of SF -12 physical and mental health related quality of life scores at the 1-year 
follow -up (Resinik et al, 2012). Preliminary  analysis described reveals good internal 
reliability and separation into ability levels in a sample of 44 mTBI Veterans. Test Retest 
reliability is 0.95 for Extent of participation; 0.85 for Perceive limitation; and 0.95 for 
Satisfaction scales.   
 
7. Statistical Methods  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Participants, who attend less than 90% of the trea tment sessions, have medication  changes 
during treatment that affect cognition and/or receive more than 5 hours of therapy (other than 
GMT) from a mental health spe cialist during the study will not be included in the final analysis.  
 
Aim 1 . 
Aim 1 is to test the benefits of GMT for improving executive function . 
Hypothesis 1 a: GMT and home practice device will significantly improve problem solving 
ability compared to t he control group (primary measure: time to completion on the Tower 
of London (cTOL ).  Since PTSD is prevalent and a potentially influencing co -morbidity, 
we will to investigate whether there is a significant interaction between treatment group 
and PTSD sev erity.  Secondary measures include  number of optimal moves on the TOL ; 
and measures d erived from the Stop Signal Task (SST; a measure of inhibition control).  
 
Exploratory Hypothesis  1.b.GMT and functional practice will significantly improve 
everyday activi ties that require executive function skills  (primary measure: Behavior 
Rating Inventor y of Executive Function -Adult version , secondary measure: CRIS ). 
 
Analysis  Plan for Hypothesis 1 .a. and Hypothesis 1. b. To test the first specific aim 
(hypothesis 1 a), the primary analysis will use two sample t -test to compare group A 
(intervention) and group B (control) on improvements in time to completion on the TOL . In 
addition, as an exploratory analysis, we will perform a regression analysis that includes 
treatment g roup, PTSD severity and their interaction as independent variable s, to adjust for 
PTSD severity and to investigate whether there is interaction between treatment group and 
PTSD severity . Similar analys es will be performed for hypothesis 1 for secondary outcome 
variable s of changes in index of optimal moves on the TOL and reaction time ( RT) and accuracy  
on SST.  To test hypothesis 1b, exploratory  tertiary analysis  using paired t -tests will determine 
whether treatment effect generalizes to executive function p erforma nce in everyday activities 
(BRIEF -A) or engagement in community participation ( CRIS ).  
Protocol  Page 12 of 12 
Janu ary 27, 2015  Aim 2  
Aim 2 is to i nvestigate factors which affect response to treatment . 
 
Hypothesis 2 a. Baseline cognitive ability, depression, sleep, and presence of PTSD wil l 
have a significant effect on response to treatment.  
 
Analysis  Plan for Hypotheses 2 a. To test the second specific aim, a general linear 
regression will be used to determine whether any of the four factors is associated with response 
to treatment. The ana lysis will be restricted to the participants assigned to the intervention 
group. The dep endent variable for the regression model will be ‘time to completion’ on the TOL, 
and the independent variables will be CWI,  BDI-II, and PCL-M scores .  
8. Possi ble Disc omforts and Risks:  
     The potential risks are minimal for the proposed intervention (group therapy).  The 
standard of care for Veterans with mTBI is to receive cognitive therapy in group or 
individual settings. The risks of the proposed research would no t increase from the 
current risks that patients experience in traditional therapy.  
     Patients may become anxious when discussing the trauma,  they experienced and 
the deficits they continue to face on a daily basis. Fatigue and/or anxiety may occu r 
while  performing screening tests and tests prior to each session. Subjects with attention 
and concentration deficits may have difficulty completing the testing within one session.  
The PI will monitor patient anxiety and recommend a lternative therapies su ch as 
individual speech therapy  and additional psychological services that are available to the 
patient .   
9. Possible Benefits:  
The proposed therapy has the potential to improve the subject’s ability to organize and 
complete tasks by utilizing a strategy that can be used in various settings. The group 
therapy process also will provide peer support to help cope with the frustration of living 
with executive dysfunction.  A group therapy also allows for more than one subject to 
receive therapy during the same  time frame.  
9. Conflict of Interest:  
None of the investigators have a conflict of interest in any part of this study . 