Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
Principal Investigator: David Goldfarb, MD  
Study Number: 17-00051  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
1)  Protocol Title   
Use of p atiromer  to transition chronic kidney disease patients with hyperkalemia to a plant -rich diet  
 
2)  Objectives  
The purpose of this proof -of-concept controlled -feeding  study is to determine whether p atiromer  (Veltassa®, 
Relypsa, Inc., Redwood City, CA ) can be used to maintain normal serum potassium concentrations in chronic 
kidney disease ( CKD ) patients who are transitioned to a plant -rich diet. We hypothesize that patriomer can be 
titrated to maintain serum potassium concentrations in the normal range, allowing CKD pa tients to consume a 
plant -rich diet without developing hyperkalemia. If successful, we plan to conduct a randomized clinical trial  to 
determine the quality of life and health outcomes of CKD patients with hyperkalemia undergoing an intensive 
behavioral int ervention to promote a low -potassium d iet, or a plant -rich diet plus p atiromer.  
 
3)  Background  
An estimated 22.5% of adults 60 years and older in the U.S. have stages 3 -5 CKD1. Individuals  with stages 
3-5 CKD are at increased risk of  high blood potassium concentrations  (hyperkalemia ), which in severe cases  
can disrupt the normal contractility  of the heart2. Several factors are thought to contribute to hyperkalemia in 
CKD patients, in particular diabetes, dietary potassium intake , and medications that inhibit the renin -
angiotensin -aldosterone system (RAAS inhibitors , which include angiotensin converting enzy me inhibitors and 
angiotensin 2 receptor blockers; ACEi and ARBs )3,4. Given the potential health consequences of hyperkalemia , 
stages 3 -5 CKD patients, even those without hyperkalemia, are often directed to follow a low -potassium diet4.  
Unfortunately, fol lowing a low -potassium diet involves limiting or avoiding many plant -based sources of 
potassium, including nuts, seeds, legumes, and high -potassium fruits and vegetables. With accompanying 
dietary restriction requirements for sodium, phosphate and protein,  the diet can be burdensome and unpalatable 
for the patients, and  can make it difficult to obtain essential nutrients4. In addition to providing potassium, high -
potassium plant foods are important sources of dietary fiber, organic anions  (potential base) , antioxidants and 
other phytochemicals (e.g., phytosterols), and therefore, a low -potassium diet may contribute to hypertension 
(low potassium), constipation and diarrhea ( low fiber), dysglycemia and dyslipidemia ( low fiber and other 
phytochemicals), metabolic acidosis ( low organic anions), oxidative stress and inflammation ( low antioxidants 
and other phytochemicals)4.  
Patiromer  is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of hyperkalemia,  
and has been demo nstrated to be effective in treating hyperkalemia  in CKD patients5. However,  the potential of 
this new therapy for allowing CKD patients to liberalize their diets , and the potential health benefits of 
following a plant -rich diet in advanced CKD are yet unexplored.  
 
4) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
The focus of the  study is to : a) evaluate the efficacy of patiromer  for managing serum potassium 
concentrations  in CKD  patients  as they are transitioned to a plant -rich diet that includes  high-potassium fruits 
and vegetables , and b) evaluate the impact of a plant -rich diet on health outcomes in CKD patients . We will 
recruit 10 CKD  patients with persistent ly elevated serum potassium  concentrations  in New York City.  
i. Inclusion criteria . In order to be eligible for the study, the individual mu st meet the following criteria:  
a) 19-80 years of age  
b) Stages  3-4 CKD (estimated glomerular filtration rate  (eGFR)  of 15 -59 mL/min/1.73m2, not 
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
treated with dialysis)  
c) No prior treatment with patiromer  
d) Mild hyperkalemia ( potassium 5.1 to <6.5  mEq/L ) on one of the last two blood tests  
e) No prior episodes of mode rate-severe hyperkalemia (potassium ≥6.5 mEq/L)  in the past 6  
months  
f) Deemed appropriate for the  intervention by the patient’s n ephrologist, considering the 
patient’s prognosis, cognition and pending treatments (e.g., dialysis)  
ii. Exclusion criteria . We will exclude from participation patients with the following characteristics:  
a) Change in medications that alter potassium homeo stasis ( e.g., RAAS inhibitors, diuretics, -
blockers)  in the last month  
b) Diagnosed with bowel diseases or syndromes (e.g., bowel obstruction, major GI surgery, 
short -bowel syndrome, irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease , chronic diarrhea )  
c) Dietary restrictions (e.g., allergies)  or othe rwise unable/unwilling to adhere to  study diets  
(excludes dietary restrictions on high -potassium foods)  
d) Pregnant  (females)  or planning to become  pregnant (males and females) during the study  
If at any point during the study (including  baseline) a  participant has moderate -severe hyperkalemia 
(potassium ≥6.5mEq/L), or if a participant becomes pregnant during the study, they will be withdrawn from the 
study.  
Inclusion of women and minorities  
Given the pilot nature of the intervention  and small sample  size (n=10) , the study  population will  not be 
representative of the CKD population, and  will have insufficient power to detect differences in intervention 
effect s by sex and race /ethnic ity. To our knowledge , plant -rich diets,  such as those being investigated in this 
study,  have similar health effects  by sex and race/ethnicity. No individual will be excluded from the study on 
the basis of sex or race/ethnicity alone, and we will attempt to obtain a sample that reflects the demographics of 
our source population.   
 
5) Study -Wide Number of Subjects   
We will recruit a total of 10 individuals to the study . We have secured the support of the New York Harbor VA 
Healthcare System , which served approximately 250 non-dialysis CKD patients  in the New York City area , as 
well as the Division of Nephrology at NYU Langone Health . It is estim ated that approximately 10% of these  
patients have hyperkalemia . Thus, we have no concerns about our ability to access and recruit the required 
number of participants for this study . The estimate demographic breakdown of patients at the renal clinic are 
95% male with  40% white, 25% black, 20% Hispanic,  10% Asian, and 5% other  racial/ethnic background . The 
planned enrollment is outlined in Table 1.   
 
Table 1. Planned enrollment report  
 
 
Racial Categories  Ethnic Categories   
 
Total  Not Hispanic or Latino  Hispanic or Latino  
Female  Male  Female  Male  
American Indian/  
Alaskan Native  0 0 0 0 0 
Asian  0 1 0 0 1 
Native Hawaiian or  
Other Pacific Islander  0 0 0 0 0 
Black or African American  0 2 0 1 3 
White  1 3 0 1 5 
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
More than 1 race 0 1 0 0 1 
Total  1 7 0 2 10 
 
6) Study -Wide Recruitment Methods   
Potential participants will be identified using two recruitment methods: 1.  Referral by the patient’s 
nephrologist, and 2. DataCore  directed search of electronic medical records. Nephrologist referral patients will 
be obtained from the New York Harbor VA Healthcare System , NYU Langone Health, and Bellevue Hospital . 
The DataCore directed search of electronic medical records will be lim ited to patients of nephrologists in the 
Division of Nephrology who have an episode of mild hyperkalemia in the past 6 -months. Once identified using 
the electronic medical record search, the patient’s nephrologists will be notified about their potential el igibility. 
Per the study inclusion criteria, nephrologists will be asked to confirm that the patient is appropriate for the 
study.  
(a) Dr. Goldfarb  or Margaret Curran will review each section of the written consent form with the 
referred participant, ask the participant if they understand each section, and clarify any questions 
they may have. The participant and the person obtaining consent will sign and date the consent form. 
Copies  of the consent , which includes the contact information o f the PI (Goldfarb),  will be provided 
to the participant and sent to the patient’s nephrologist . Informed consent will be considered an 
ongoing process throughout the study, and participants’ questions regarding their rights and 
responsibilities will be ad dressed whenever they occur.  
(b) Once enrolled, Dr. Goldfarb  and Margaret Curran  will meet to verify  that the participant  meets the 
inclusion /exclusion  criteria.  This information will be obtained from the patient’s electronic medical 
record.  
(c) Study staff will contact  eligible patients , and schedule a  fasting  screening appointment  (at least 8 
hours of fasting) . 
A fasting blood sample will be ob tained  at the screening visit , and analyzed for potassium. If this test is in 
the range of m ild hyperkalemia (potassium 5.1 to < 6.5 mEq/L), the  participant  will be deemed to have persistent 
hyperkalemia, and be accrued . Otherwise they will be deemed ineligible, and excluded from the s tudy.  
Regardless of enrollment status , all eligible patients  who are  invited to participate in the study will be 
reimbursed $25.00 for time and travel expenses incurred by attending the screening visit.   
 
7) Study Timelines  
We will recruit  10 participants. Given the intensiveness of the intervention , no more than two participants will 
be enrolled in the intervention at a time .  
 
8) Study endpoints   
Among 10 stages 3 -4 CKD  patients with persistent, mild hyperkalemia , we will evaluate, in a quasi -
experimental , controlled feeding study , the efficacy  of patiromer  for maintain ing normal serum potassium 
concentrations when following a plant -rich diet that includes high -potassium fruits and vegetables, as well as 
the effects  of this diet on health outcomes. The participants will be tr ansitioned gradually to a plant -rich diet , as 
outlined further below.  
The interventions will be evaluated  primarily  in terms of serum potassium concentrations, but  health 
outcomes will also be assessed, including  blood pressure,  gastrointestinal symptoms,  and fasting concentrations 
of phosphorus, calcium, magnesium, albumin, glucose, insulin, cholesterol, LDL -cholesterol, HDL -cholesterol, 
triglyceri des, urea nitroge n, bicarbonate and  C-reactive protein . For all parameters, baseline values will be 
compared to values at the end of each diet phase (weeks 2 and 4). 
 
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
9) Procedures involved  
a. Design . 
We will conduct a n unblinded , quasi -experimental, controlled feeding study , which will be coordinated 
through the New York University – Health  and Hospitals Corporation Clinical and Translational Science 
Institute (CTSI) . Throughout the study, participants will be prescribed patiromer by the study n ephrologist 
(D.S. G.), which will be administered through the CTSI pharmacy. After a 1 -week stabilization period, in which 
participants are prescribed Patiromer while following their usual diets, t he feeding component of the study will 
occur in two phases. During the first phase (week 2), participants  will be transitioned to a plant -rich renal  diet, 
which  contains  moderate protein  (10-15% of kcal ), restricts  dairy products  (1 serving/day) , and eliminates  
high-potassium  fruits and vegetables. During the second phase (weeks 3 and 4), the diet will be  altered to 
provide at -least half  of fruits and vegetables from high-potassium sources. To reduce  participant burden, meals 
will be delivered to participant s by Portable Chef (New York, NY)  three times per week.   
i. Patiromer . Patiromer  dosing  will be determined based on fasti ng potassium concentrations  measured at 
the end of each  week , factoring in  both the absolute concentration, as well as the rate of change. The baseline 
dose of patiromer will correspond  to the study by Weir et al. (2015); 8.4-g once  per day for participants with a  
baseline serum potassium of 5.1 mEq/L. The following dosing sche dule (Table 2) will be used for managing  
hyperkalemia  during the study:  
Table 2. Dosing of patiromer  during the study based on serum potassium concentrations  
Potassium  Change  in Potassium  Action  
<3.8 mEq/L  Same or decreased  Contact study n ephrologist to determine dose  
<3.8 mEq/L  Increased  Continue with current dose  
3.8-5.0 mEq/L  Changed <0.5 mEq/L  Continue with current dose  
3.8-5.0 mEq/L  Changed ≥0.5 mEq/L  Continue with current dose, but notify study n ephrologist  
5.1-6.0 mEq/L  Decreased  Continue with current dose  
5.1-6.0 mEq/L  Same or i ncreased  Contact study n ephrologist to determine dose  
>6.0 mEq/L  Decreased  Continue with current dose, but notify study n ephrologist  
>6.0 mEq/L  Same or increased  Contact study n ephrologist to determine dose  
ii. Research Diets . The guidelines for research diets are outlined in Table 3. With the exception of the Dairy 
Food Group, diets will be balanced according to the USDA MyPlate. Diets  will be based on a 7 -day menu 
cycle, and will be reviewed by participants during the screening visit. In order to promote participant adherence 
with the  diets, participants will be permitted to select appropriate substitutes based on their food preferences 
from a list of pre -approved substitutes. For example, if a participant does not like to eat apples, they may 
substitute this for a list of other low -potassium fruit s.  
Diets will be designed to match a participant ’s estimated energy requirements based on resting energy 
expenditure  (REE)  determined by Mifflin St. Joer equation  multiplied by 1.4 to account for thermal effect of 
food, and physical activity. As a precaution, two small snacks (~100 kcal)  that are low in potassium will be 
provide d along with meals , and the prescribed research diet will be adjusted  on the subsequent delivery , if 
needed . Participants will be directed to consume the foods provided, and record any deviations from the 
prescribed diets. As the intent of the study is not to modify fluid or sodium intake, participants will be 
encouraged to consume water, and  use table salt as per their usual practices. Because coffee and tea are high in 
potassium, participants will be directed to limit their intake  to no more than one cup per day.  
Research diet prescriptions will be generated  by the study coordinator (M.C.), and prepared and delivered to 
participants by Portable Chef, a commercial kitchen located in Manhattan that specializes in providing catered 
meal plans. Meals  will be prepared from scratch, using a commercial food scale (TE10FT, Taylor Precision 
Produc ts, Inc., Oak Brook, IL).  Any food items that may undergo commercial processing (e.g., enriched meats) 
will be carefully selected to ensure that they  contain no added s odium, phosphorus or potassium.  To ensure the 
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
privacy of participants, staff at Portab le Chef will not be provided any participant information , apart from their 
name, address and phone number , which are necessary  to coordinate meal deliveries .  
  
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
Table 3. Dietary guidelines for research diets  
Food Group  Low-K Plant -rich Diet  Liberalized Plant -Rich Diet  
Protein Foods  • ¼ animal, ¾ plant  • ¼ animal, ¾ plant  
Grain Products  • ½ refined, ½ whole grain  • ½ refined, ½ whole grain  
Dairy Foods  • 1 serving/day  • 1 serving/day  
Fruits & Vegetables  • Low-K only • ½ low -K, ½ high -K 
K, potassium  
 
b. Measures . Unless otherwise noted, measurements occur at baseline, and at the end of phase I (week 1) and 
phase II (week 3) . With the exceptions of patiromer  dose (obtained from the CTSI Pharmacy ) and data obtained 
from the participant’s medical charts , study measurements will be obtained during visits to  the CTSI Clinical 
Research Center (CRC) at Bellevue Hosp ital. A summary of study visits and proce dures  is provide d at the 
bottom of this section (Table 4).  
i. Screening meas urements . At the screening measurement visit, a fasting blood sample will be collected 
and analyzed for serum potassium concentrations. In addition, height and weight will be measured  by study 
staff at the CTSI using a stadiometer and balance scale, respectively for estimating  energy requirements (see 
9.ii.)  
ii. Baseline measurements . In addition to the outcome measures (described in detail below), key 
information used to characterize the patient population and/or control for as covariates , will be co llected at 
baseline through questionnaires , review of patients’ medical charts  and clinical measurement s. Questionnaires 
will be self -administered, and will include  questions on diagnosis with  diabetes and hypertension , 
race/ ethnicity, sex, age, income, education, employment , tobacco and  alcohol  use, use of dietary supplements  
and urine output . Data collected from medical charts will include cause of CKD , diagnosis of diabetes and 
hypertension  (for comparison  to and verification of  self-report ), urine albumin concentration, prescriptions for 
vitamin D , antihypertensives,  hypo glycemic agents , insulin,  and phosphorus binders.  Variables  that may change 
during the inter vention, including body weight and medication s, will also be assessed  at the end of  phase I 
(week 2) and phase II (week 4).  
ii. Usual dietary intake . Usual dietary intake of participants will be assessed during the stabilization period 
(week 1). Participants will be asked to maintain a 3 -day food record, which includes two weekdays, and one 
weekend day. Food records will be reviewed with the study coorindator (M.C.) at the end of the stabilization 
period to ensure accuracy.  
iii. Serum potassium concentrations . The primary purpose of this study is to evaluate the efficacy of 
patiromer  for maintaining serum potassium concentrations in CKD patients during  transition to a liberalized 
plant -rich diet by comparing fasting serum potassium concentrations at screening to values at the end of phase I 
(week 2) and phase II (week 4) of the study . However, because potassium concentrations are also being used to 
titrate the dose of patiromer  needed to achieve normal potassium concentrations, fasting serum potassium 
concentrations will also be measured at the end of week s 1 and 3 . To ensure a rapid re sponse to changes in 
serum potassium concentrations, blood samples obtained at the CTSI CRC will be immediately delivered to  the 
study laboratory at Tisch Ho spital for analysis , and  the results  sent to t he CTSI P harmacy for evaluation 
(section 10.a.i.).  Participants will be directed to pick up n ew prescriptions from the CTSI P harmacy on the days 
of measurement. To obtain a measurement of serum potassium concentration, a 0.5 mL sample of blood is 
required.  
iv. Blood pressure . Systolic and diastolic b lood pressure s will be measured after 5 -minutes of rest in a 
seated position with their arm supported at the level of their heart and their feet resting of the floor using an 
automatic sphygmomanometer . Blood pressure measurements will be obtained in duplicate with a third measure 
obtained if the systolic or diastolic values on repeated measurement differ by more than 5 mmHg.  
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
v. Gastrointestinal symptoms . The frequency and severity of p articipant gastrointestinal symptoms in the 
previous week  (abdominal cramping,  abdominal discomfort,  indigestion, infrequent or difficult to pass bowel 
movements , flatulence,  loose or watery stools) will be self -reported via an investigator -developed questionnaire  
at baseline, and at the end of the stabilization p eriod (week 1), phase I diet (week 2), and phase II diet (week 4) .  
vi. Other biochemical parameters . Fasting blood samples will be obtained at the CTSI CRC, and analyzed 
for concentrations of phosphorus, calcium, magnesium, albumin, glucose, insulin, cholesterol, LDL -cholesterol, 
HDL -cholesterol, triglyceri des, urea nitrogen, bicarbonate and  C-reactive protein. Similar to serum potassium 
concentrations, blood samples will be delivered by study staff to  the laboratory at Tisch Hospital  for analysis . 
To obtain these biochemical measurements, approximately 5.0 mL of blood is required.  
 
Table 4. Su mmary of study visits and proce dures  
 Screening  Baseline  Wk 1  Wk 2  Wk 3  Wk 4  
Baseline Questionnaire (comorbidities , 
sociodemographics , tobacco and alcohol use, use of 
dietary supplements and urine output)   
X  
   
Medical Chart Review (cause of CKD, 
comorbidities, urine albumin concentration )  X     
Medical Chart Review (medications)   X  X  X 
Dietary Assessment (3-day food record)    X    
Anthropometrics (height ) X      
Anthropometrics (weight)  X   X  X 
Fasting Blood Test (potassium)  X  X X X X 
Fasting Blood Test (phosphorus, calcium, 
magnesium, albumin, glucose, insulin, cholesterol, 
LDL -cholesterol, HDL -cholesterol, triglycerides, 
urea nitrogen, bicarbonate and C -reactive protein)   
X  
X  X 
Blood Pressure (systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure)   X  X  X 
Gastrointestinal Symptoms Questionnaire 
(frequency and severity of abdominal cramping, 
abdominal discomfort, indigestion, infrequent or 
difficult to pass bowel movements, flatulence, loose 
or watery stools in previous week)   
X X X  X 
 
10) Data and Specimen Banking  
No samples will be stored for future analyses in this study.  
 
11) Data Management  
Information to be obtained from participants includes height and weight,  blood pressure, medical history, blood 
tests, and self-administered questionnaires  (sociodemographics, clinical and comorbid conditions / management , 
cigarette and alcohol use  and gastrointestinal sym ptoms ). None of the data to be collected is considered 
sensitive in nature. Some of the participant data such as laboratory r esults will be linked to the participant’s 
name. Other data (e.g., height, weight, blood pressure, medical history, and surveys) will be linked to the 
participant through a subject  ID number. As a further measure to protect participants’ privacy, different  subject 
ID numbers will be used for study measurements and for coordinating the feeding  component of the study . We 
will maintain separate files for identified and de -identified data in locked  file cabinets in a locked office. Access 
to these data will be restricted to the PI ( Goldfarb ), and study staff responsible for gathering data and 
maintaining research files. Data will be entered into a centralized database maintained on a secure server. Data 
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
in these files will be linked to participants only through their ID number  – this file will be maintained in a 
locked filing cabinet at 180 Madison Avenue . All data collected will be used expressly for th e purpose of the 
proposed study.  
a. Overview.  
A descriptive analysis of all data collected will be performed using appropriate graphical and numerical 
exploratory data techniques. The information obtained from this preliminary investigation of the data will be 
used to: (1) asses s data quality and compl eteness,  (2) describe univariate distributions at baseline  and follow up, 
and (3 ) create summary statistical data for outcome variables at each time point, including the proportion of 
participants with hyperkalemia . We will identify features of the data that may necessitate special analytic 
methods (e.g., excess zeros, missing data, departures from distributional assumptions , outliers ).  
For analytic analyse s, we will examine: (1) changes in outcome variables  (blood  pressure , gastrointestinal 
symptoms, and fasting concentrations of potassium, phosphorus, calcium, magnesium, albumin, glucose, 
insulin, cholesterol, LDL -cholesterol, HDL -cholesterol, triglycerides, urea nitrogen, bicarbonate and C -reactive 
protein ), and covariates  (weight, medications, dose of P atiromer)  between baseline and the end of each diet 
phase,  and (2) relationships between the changes in outcome  variables and covariates. Changes in study 
outcomes will be will be graphically depicted using means + SD or median (IQR) as measures of central 
tendency  and variance . Changes in study outcomes will be analyzed using repeated -measures analysis of 
variance with post -hoc Tukey HSD test . Because of the small sample si ze, covariates will be  reported instead of 
being  included in a multivariable model. Depending on the types  of covariate  and outcome of interest , subgroup 
analyses may be performed with these participants removed from the dataset . For example, if a pa rticip ant’s 
dose of phosphorus binder medications changed during the study, the analysis of phosphorus concentrations 
would be conducted with/without this participant. Given the short during of this study ( 4 weeks) in relation to 
typical  monitoring of patients with stage 3B -4 CKD, we expect that th at few, if any,  subgroup analyses will be 
required.  
 
12) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
Protection against Risk .  
Once half of the participants are enrolled  and accrued , the PI (G oldfarb) will review serum potassium 
concentrations to ascertain if there were  any episodes of moderate -severe hyperkalemia , or protocol issues that 
require reporting, withdrawing a participant and/or stopping the study. An AE is any  unfavorable and 
unintended sign, symptom, or disease , including worsening of p re-existing medical conditions. The criteria for 
withdrawing partic ipants are outlined in section 14 below. The study will be stopped if there is a serious adverse 
events (SAE) related to the study . Any SAE related to the intervention will be reported t o the NYU School of 
Medicine Institutional Review Board by phone and e mail within 24 -hours of being notified.  To minimize 
participant risk and facilitate monitoring, we plan to enroll cohorts of ≤2 participants rather than a single cohort 
of 10 participants.  Summary data and safety monitoring reports will be submitted to the  NYU School of 
Medicine Institutional Review Board during annual review, or if there are changes in the risk/benefit ratio of the 
study.  
As per our Clinical Trial Agreement with Relypsa, Inc., the PI will undergo training in reporting AEs by 
Relypsa, Inc. before starting the study, and will report all AEs  that occur after the signing of informed consent, 
and up to 14 days after the intervention  to the Drug Safety and Pharmacovigilance (DSPV) Department at 
Relypsa, Inc within 15 days  of completing the study . Any AEs that are considered serious (SAEs), which occur 
will be reported to Relypsa, Inc. DSPV Department within 24 -hours of being identified/repor ted. SAE include 
“any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: (i) results in death; (ii) is immediatel y life threatening (i.e. 
in the opinion of the investigator, the AE places the subject at immediate risk of death; it does not include a 
reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death); (iii) requires inpatient 
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
hospitalization or results in prolongation of an existing hospitalization; (iv) re sults in a persistent or significant 
incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions; (v) is a congenital anomaly or 
birth defect; or (vi) is an important medical event that may not be immediately life threatening, resu lt in death, 
or require hospitalization, but may be considered an SAE when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, it 
jeopardizes the subject or may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in 
subsections (i) – (v)” (defined per the Clinical Trial Agreement with Relypsa, Inc.).  
This study investigates the use of p atiromer for managing normal serum potassium concentrations in CKD 
patients who are transitioned to a plant -rich diet. The major risk to participants in thi s study is cardiotoxicity 
related to hyperkalemia. Patiromer has been demonstrated to be effective for lowering serum potassium 
concentrations  and keeping them in the normal range  in CKD patients with hyperkalemia, but the role of diet ary 
potassium on serum potassium concentrations  is unclear. Current dietary  guidelines for managing hyperkalemia 
in CKD patients recommend avoiding high -potassium plant foods; however, this long -standing practice has 
never been demonstrated to be necessar y, and may contribute to other disease complications4. To our 
knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate liberalizing the diets of CKD patients with hyperkalemia, so we 
have incorporated many design features that can help us to protect against this risk.  
Prior to the interv ention,  participants will receive education on the sig ns and symptoms of hyperkalemia ; 
muscle weakness, abnormally slow or rapid heart rate , and heart palpitations (from Patient education: 
Hyperkalemia  (the basics) ; UpToDate.com)6. Participants will be directed to monitor themselves for these 
conditions, and to go to the emergency room if they start experiencing  them , making sure to  notify the 
emergency department staff  about their participation in the study . Standard treatment for  acute episodes of  
hyperkalemia includes intravenous infusions of calcium gluconate and glucose/insulin, often followed by 
polystyrene sulfonate or emergent dialysis to remove excess potassium. The emergent treatment of adverse 
events will be at the discre tion of the attending physician.  In the event of any admission to the emergency room  
(even if determined to be unrelated to hyperkalemia) , participants will be asked to alert the study PIs as soon as 
possible.   
The intervention contains several features t o lower the risk of hyperkalemia. For one, t he research diets will 
be pre pared for participants to provide control over the dietary potassium exposure . We will use the feeding 
study approach that gradually increase s dietary potassium in a step -wise manner  in order to prevent large shifts 
in dietary potassium intake . During phase I, participants will be stabilized on a plant -rich diet that restricts dairy 
products and excludes fruits and vegetables that are high in potassium.  This closely approximates the cu rrent 
dietary recommendations for CKD patients with hyperkalemia, but does include plant -based foods from the 
Protein Foods Group (legumes, nuts, seeds), which are high in potassium  (>200 mg/serving) . However, 
compared to the typical Western diet, plant -rich diets are more alkaline, and are higher in fiber, factors that are 
thought to help control serum potassium concentrations4. After a week of consuming this diet, high -potassium 
fruits and vegetables will be in troduced, and make up half of the fruit and vegetable servings. We will closely 
monitor participants’ adherence to the research diets through daily food records  to ascertain their adherence 
with the study diets – participants that are determined to be non -adherent with the research diets  at the end of 
phase I  (defined in section 14) will be withdrawn from the study .   
Another intervention feature to lower the risk of hyperkalemia is the close monitoring of participants’ serum 
potassium concentrations to adj ust the dose of p atiromer  (10.a.i. Table 2). We will measure serum potassium 
concentrations as per c urrent patiromer recommendations (weekly) , and samples will be process ed through  the 
Tisch Laboratory, and the results  sent to the CTSI Pharmacy for review. If values are abnormally high or  
rapidly  increasing towards hyperkalemia (10.a.i. Table 2) , the study n ephrologist (D.S.G.) will be immediately 
contacted. Because  hemolysis can cause artificially elevated serum potassium values, participants with 
abnormally high or  rapidly  increasing concentrations of serum potassium will have another blood test to 
confirm their  serum potassium concentrations .  
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
In addition to risks associated with  hyperkalemia, there are  potential  risks related  with patiromer  use. In a 
sample of 734 patients treated with patiromer, the most common AEs  were  constipation (7.2%), 
hypomagnesemia (5.3%), diarrhea (4.8%), nausea (4.8%), abdominal discomfort (2.0%) and flatulence (2.0%). 
It is likely that the most common of these AEs (constipation, hypomagnesemia, diarrhea) would be attenuated 
by a plant -rich diet, which contains higher amounts of fiber and magnesium compared to the typical Western 
diet. The less common adverse events (abdominal discomfort, flatulence) may be  exacerbated by the higher 
intakes of dietary fiber . These potential AEs will be assessed at the end of each week  through the 
gastrointestinal symptoms questionnaire , and blood testing at the end of phase I and II (for hypomagnesemia ). 
Patiromer also has t he potential to bind to other medication, reducing their absorption. This will be mitigated by  
directing patients to take patiromer  once daily , and at least 3  hours away from other medications .  
It is unlikely that women and men with stages 3 -4 CKD will become pregnant  or impregnate someone . 
Additionally, we will exclude anyone who is planning on becoming pregnant from the study. As part of our 
Clinical Trial Agreement with Relypsa, Inc., we will report any pregnancies (whether fe male or male 
impregnating a female) to Relypsa, Inc. In addition, because the patiromer and the research diets are untested in 
pregnant women,  we will withdraw women who become pregnant during the study period.  
Lastly, participants in the study are at risk of breaches of confidentiality. A variety of measures will be used 
to prevent breaches of confidentiality. First, all study staff will be trained in the NYULMC Practice 
Fundamentals, which include training in i ssues of confidentiality. Additionally, all study staff will be required 
to sign a confidentiality agreement. Although study staff may have access to sensitive information about the 
participant as recorded in their medical record, only that information per tinent to the study outcomes will be 
abstracted from the medical record. Data will be maintained as described  above (see section 12) . We will take 
steps to avoid participants’  perceptions of coercion in the recruitment process.  
 
13)  Withdrawal of subjects  
As mentioned previously, participant s may be withdrawn from the s tudy without their consent in the event that 
they become pregnant, or they are non -adherent with the research diets. Non-adherence to the research diets will 
be defin ed as consumption of >25% of energ y from non -research diet foods , which will be assessed at the end 
of phase I of the study. In the event that involuntary withdrawal is required, participants will be referred back to 
their treating physician of record for evaluation and management. Data collection will cease at the time of 
withdrawal.  
 
14)  Risks to subjects  
Most of the  risks associated with this study are outlined in section 13  along with corresponding measures to 
protect against these risks ( include hyperka lemia, patiromer  side effects and interactions with medications , and 
breach of confidentiality ). Blood tests will be drawn for this study, which are sometimes accompanied by 
bruising, bleeding, and minor tenderness at the puncture site.  Participants will b e made aware of all of these 
risks prior to enrolling in this study.  
 
15)  Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others  
Participants  may experience some  temporary  improvement in cardiometabolic risk factors  and serum 
potassium concentrations  related to intervention; however, this is not guaranteed. Moreover, any temporary 
improvements in these conditions are unlikely to have any lasting benefits to participants.  
This study will not provide the investigators  with data to demonstrate improvements in health -related 
quality of life, morbidity, mortality, and utiliza tion or cost  of care. However, if proven efficacious, future CKD  
patients may benefit from the knowledge generated from this study regarding the need  to limit or avoid high - 
high-potassium plant foods, and the potential health benefits of a plant -rich dietary pattern. Because this is a 
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
proof -of-concept study, the emphasis has been placed on safety and internal validity rather than real -world 
applicabil ity and generalizability to the CKD  population. Consequently, this is just a first step in several needed 
to benefit future CKD  patients.  Additional longer -term studies in free -living CKD patients would be needed 
before any such changes in practice could be realized.  
 
16)  Vulnerable populations  
No vulnerable populati ons are included in this study.  
 
17)  Multi -site research  
Not applicable.  
 
18) Commun ity-based participatory research  
Not applicable.  
 
19)  Sharing results with subjects  
The study results will n ot be shared with participants  who will be expected to return to usual care practices upon 
completion of the study.  
 
20) . Setting  
Research activities will occur at the CTSI CRC  and Renal Clinic of the New York VA . Ethical review will be 
obtained from  the Institutional Review Board at NYUL MC.  
  
21) Resources available  
i). Personnel.  
INVESTIGATORS  
David Goldfarb, MD (Principal Investigator, Effort = 0.6 CM)  is a Professor in the Departments of 
Medicine and Neuroscience and Physiology at the New York University School of Medicine , and Chief of 
Nephrology at the Renal Clinic of the New York VA . He is a nephrologist with extensive clinical and research 
experien ce with individuals with chronic kidney disease, including trials of medications. He is well - known in 
the local nephrology community. Dr. Goldfarb is co -investigator to Dr. Sevick’s ongoing Diabetes Healthy 
Hearts study (R01), and pending Kidneys and Beha vioral Management of Phosphorus study (R21). He will 
provide crucial medical oversight to the study, in particular safety monitoring, patiromer prescriptions, and 
assist with interpretation of data from a medical perspective in the dissemination of study r esults. Dr. Goldfarb 
has a part -time university position and his effort is estimated as a function of his university appointment.  
Mary Ann Sevick, ScD, RN, (Co -Investigator. Effort = 0.6 CM)  is a Professor in the Department of 
Population Health at New York  University School of Medicine, and Director of the mHealth Unit in the Center 
for Healthful Behavior Change. Over the past 20 years, Dr. Sevick has had experience with a variety of large 
clinical trials. Her primary interest is in the area of chronic illn ess and she has recently been involved, as 
principal investigator, in several studies to examine disease management regimens. She recently completed the 
BalanceWise study (NIH -R01-NR010135), a randomized clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy of a behavio ral 
intervention to reduce sodium intake in hemodialysis patients, and is currently the principal investigator of the 
NIDDK -funded Diabetes Healthy Hearts and Kidneys Study R01, a clinical trial evaluating alternative uses of 
technology to change multiple behaviors in those with diabetes and concurrent stage 2 -4 chronic kidney disease. 
As an experienced clinical investigator  in the Center for Healthful Behavior Change , Dr. Sevick will work 
closely with Dr. Goldfarb to manage the proposed project.  
Simon Jone s, PhD MSc (Co -Investigator, Effort = 0.6 CM)  is a Research Professor in the Department of 
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
Population Health at the New York University School of Medicine at the University. Dr. Jones has extensive 
experience in data management and statistical analysis. As such, he will oversee generation of preliminary 
reports for data quality, safety, and recr uitment. In addition, he will review all analyses specified in the 
proposal, and assist with interpretation of these analyses in the dissemination of study results.  
OTHER PERSONNEL  
Margaret Curran , (Research Coordinator , 0.6 CM).  The resear ch coordinator  will work with staff at the 
New York Harbor VA Healthcare System and CTSI -CRC. She will be responsible for conducting screening, 
baseline and follow up measurement visits , reviewing participant’s medical charts for eligibility, obtaining 
informed con sent, and coordinating study visits .  
ii). Institutional setting .  
Renal Clinic at the New York Harbor Veterans Affairs Healthcare System : The Renal Clinic at the New 
York Harbor VA Healthcare System serves approximately 250 CKD patients in th e Greater New York City 
region, and will be the source population for this study. The electronic medical records system  at the New York 
VA Healthcare System  will be used to assist in identifying potentially eligible patients for the study, and for 
obtaining clinical information to describe the patient population.  
Department of Population Health, NYULMC: The Department of Population Health, within NYUSOM , 
aims to integrate, support, and advance NYULMC's contributions to population health research and related 
disciplines, providing a vibrant departmental home for the "bedside -to-population" as well as the "population -
to-discovery" domains of translational resear ch. It provides an academic base for efforts to integrate research 
into NYU's expanding health care delivery system that transcends any particular school, department, or 
division. The Department is a research and training hub that brings together researche rs in nursing, medicine, 
psychology, epidemiology, biostatistics, health services and policy, behavior change, comparative effectiveness, 
medical ethics, prevention, and related disciplines, affording a unique and collaborative environment focused on 
impro ving the health of populations. The Department was initiated in January 2012. A core focus of the 
Department is improving health outcomes through innovative interventions as well as in enhancing the impact 
of interventions already known to be effective thr ough their more effective implementation and dissemination. 
Collaboration with key public sector stakeholders and with community partners is central to the Department’s 
mission. As researchers, faculty are engaged in dual roles: building cutting -edge scien ce in their areas of 
inquiry, and providing collaborative consultation to other investigators throughout the NYULMC academic 
community as well as across the University. Resources within the Department for this proposal include the use 
of over 5,000 square feet of dedicated office space located on the newly renovated 6th floor of the NYULMC 
Translational Research Building, telecom (phone, fax and LAN connections), administrative assistants, and 
grant, regulatory (IRB) and finance administrators.  
Center for Healthful Behavior Change, NYULMC: The Center for Healthful Behavior Change (CHBC) is 
located within the Department of Population Health. The mission of CHBC is to become a national leader in 
translational behavioral medicine, research, training, and educa tion. The CHBC works toward this mission 
through the development, implementation, and dissemination of innovative evidence -based behavioral 
interventions in routine clinical practice and community -based settings with the long -term goal of disseminating 
effective strategies nationally and internationally. The Center is comprised of core research faculty members 
with expertise in various fields relevant to translational behavioral research. Faculty engage in research 
pertaining to heart disease, hypertension,  chronic kidney disease, diabetes, cancer, health disparities research, 
community -based participatory research, health psychology, behavioral informatics, and health education and 
counseling.  
Division of Biostatistics NYULMC : Dr. Jones’ office is 180 Madi son Avenue , in the same building as the 
study coordinator (M.C.) . Dr. Jones  has access to state -of-the-art computing facilities that include a central 
server (Dell PowerEdge 2500) and a Sun Server. Statistical software available either on the network or the 
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
desktop includes SAS, SPSS, S -Plus (including Spatial Stats and Environme ntal Statistics Modules), R, PASS 
and Matlab.  
Portable Chef : Portable Chef is a metabolic kitchen / foodservice vender that will carry out the critical task of 
preparing meals and snacks for the study. This responsibility includes developing menus based o n the pre -
defined dietary patterns, sourcing ingredients, preparing and weighing foods and beverages, and delivering them 
to the partici pants to consume. The project study dietitian (D.E.S. ) reviewed available foodservice operations in 
the Greater New York  City area, and selected Portable Chef for this intervention based on their capacity, 
delivery, and experience in developing and preparing tailored, weighed menus for researchers and clients with 
special food requirements.  
 
22)  Prior approvals  
We have received approval from the Chief of the Nephrology at the New  York Harbor VA Healthcare System  
to coordinate this study in their Renal C linic. We also have approval from Portable Chef Director (Uri Attia), 
and a vendor agreement with Portable Chef is already in place for prior research projects.  
 
23)  Subject Payments  
Potential p articipants will be paid $2 5.00 for the screening visit, and enrolled participants  will additionally 
receive $25.00 per visit to the CTSI CRC .  
 
24) Local number of subjects  
We will recruit a total of 10 individuals to the study. Preliminary data from the New York Harbor VA 
Healthcare System  indicate that we will have access to  approximately 250  patients  with CKD , ~10% of which  
have hyperkalemia .  
 
25) Confidentiality  
Some of the participant data such as laboratory results will be linked to the participant’s name in their medical 
chart . Other data (e.g., surveys) will be linked to the participant through an ID number. We will maintain 
separate files for identified and d e-identified data in locked file cabinets in a locked office. Access to these data 
will be restricted to the PI ( Goldfarb) , and study staff responsible for gathering data and maintaining research 
files. Data will be entered into a centralized database main tained on a secure server. Data in these files will be 
linked to participants only through their ID number. All data collected will be used expressly for th e purpose of 
the proposed study.   
 
26) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Measures to be used to protect subjects’ privacy interests are described in section 13 above. Data collection will 
occur at the New York Harbor VA Healthcare System  (for medical chart review), CTSI Pharmacy (for 
patiromer dose), and CTSI CRC  (questionnaires, anthro pometric and clinical measurements, blood tests) . 
Measurements at the CTSI will be conducted in private rooms . Participants will be told that they can refuse to 
respond to any questions that make them uncomfortable, and that they can withdraw from the stud y at any time.  
 
27) Compensation for research -related injury   
Participants will not be compensated for research -related injuries . 
 
28) Economic burden to subjects  
Neither the patient nor the patient’s health insurance will be billed for any study activities  (including research 
diets) , tests, or procedures  related to the study. The cost of all procedures and tests will be covered by funds 
Protocol Version 6 – 07.10.2019  
received from Relypsa, Inc .  
 
29) Consent process  
A brief description of the study will be provided at the ti me of s creening for the study. After reviewing the 
consent form with patients, and after they have signed the consent form, we will verify that they meet the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria ( sections 5.i and 5.ii.) . Potential participants will be shown the research diet menus 
to determine whether they are willing  and able  to adhere to the research diets . All questions will be answered.  
A copy of the consent form will be given to the participant and they will be encouraged to contact the 
PIs with any and all questions  that occur at any time during the conduct of the study. No patients will be 
excluded on the basis of race/ethnicity, but this pilot study has a sample size that is insufficient to examine 
differences in the intervention by race/ethnicity.  
 
30) Process to document consent in writing  
Patient’s  consent ed participation in this study  will be documented in the ir medical record.  
 
31) Drugs or devices  
Participants in this study will be prescribed patiromer (dosing 10.a.i. Table 2), under the supervision of the 
study nephrologist (D.S.G.). Patiromer is an FDA -approved cation -exchange polymer that binds to potassium in 
the digestive tract, and is excreted  (along with bound potassium) in feces. Patiromer is indicated for the 
treatment of hyperkalemia, and is demonstrated  to result in clinically significant reductions in serum potassium 
concentrations. The safety concerns associated with patiromer, along with measures to reduce these 
complications, are noted in section 13, and include constipation (7.2%), hypomagnesemia (5 .3%), diarrhea 
(4.8%), nausea (4.8%), abdominal discomfort (2.0%) and flatulence (2.0 %), and binding to other medica tions.   
 
References.  
 
1. United States Renal Data System. 2016 USRDS annual data report: Epidemiology of kidney disease  
in the United States. National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD, 2016.  
2. Einhorn LM, Zhan M, Hsu VD, Walker LD, Moen MF, Seliger SL, Weir MR, Fink J. The frequency of 
hyperkalemia and its significance in chronic kidney disease. Arch Intern Med 2009;169(12):1156 -
1162.  
3. Takaichi K, Takemoto F, Ubara Y, Mori Y. Analysis of factors causing hyperkalemia. Intern Med 
2007;46(12):823 -829.  
4. St-Jules DE, Goldfarb DS, Sevick  MA. Nutrient non -equivalence: Does restricting high -potassium plant 
foods help to prevent hyperkalemia in hemodialysis patients? J Ren Nutr 2016;26(5):282 -287.  
5. Wier MR, Bakris GL, Bushinsky DA, Mayo MR, Garza D, Stasiv Y, et al. for the OPAL -HK Investigat ors. 
Patiromer in patients with kidney disease and hyperkalemia receiving RAAS inhibitors. N Engl J Med 
2015;372(3):211 -221.  
6. UpToDate®. Patient education: Hyperkalemia (the basics). UpToDate website. 
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/hyperkalemia -the-basics?source=see_link . Accessed February 
20, 2017.  
 
 
 