Synergistic Effect of Combined  tDCS/C IMT in Children  with Hemiparesis    
 
Synergistic Effect of Combined tDCS/CIMT  in Children  with Hemiparesis  
 
Regulatory Sponsor:  Bernadette Gillick  
Medical  School - PM&R  
420 Delaware Street  SE, MMC 388 
Minneapolis, MN 55455 
612.626.3121 
612.625.4274 
gillick@umn.edu  
 
Funding Sponsor:  CTSI  K01 Grant  
University  of Minnesota  
Clinical and Translational Science Institute  
717 Delaware St SE, Minneapolis,  MN 55414 
612.625.2874 
 
Cerebral  Palsy  International Research  Foundation (CPIRF)  
186 Princeton  Hightstown Road; Building 4, 2nd Floor  
Princeton  Junction, NJ  08550  
609-452-1200 
 
Foundation for Physical  Therapy 
Magistro  Family  Foundation Research  Grant  
1111 North Fairfax  Street  
Alexandria, Virginia  22314 -1488  
 
Study Product:  Transcranial  Direct Current  Stimulation  
Transcranial  Magnetic Stimulation  
Stereotactic  Neuronavigation 
          
 
 
 
   
 
Page 1 of 37 
Page  2 of 37 Version  Date:  5-9-2017  
Synergistic Effect of Combined  tDCS/CIMT  in Children  with Hemiparesis   Version  History  
 
Version  # Approval  
Date Significant  Changes  from  Previous  Version  
Version    1 9/11/14  Original  Protocol  Version  
Version  2 1/6/15  Addition of  Typically  Developing  Subjects  
Version  3 3/13/15  Addition of  Pregnancy  Test/MRI  at Follow -up 
Version  4 10/22/15  Addition of  ECG and Cuff Vitals Monitoring  
Version 5  3/6/2017  Addition of bimanual therapy and alteration  in tDCS 
dosage  
Version 6  4/13/17  Cons ent form for Eligibility  Screening  and Dosage  
Version 7  5/9/17  Change in MRI pre -testing  
Page  3 of 37 Version  Date:  5-9-2017  
Synergistic Effect of Combined  tDCS/CIMT  in Children  with Hemiparesis   Table of  Contents  
 
 
 
Study Summary  p. 4 
 
List of Abbreviations  p. 6 
 
1 Introduction  p. 7 
2 Background and Rationale  p. 7 
3 Study Objectives p. 7 
4 Study Design  p. 12 
5 Study Procedures  p. 16 
6 Data Analysis  p. 25 
7 Safety  and Adverse  Events  p. 26 
8 Data Handling and Record  Keeping  p. 32 
9 Study Monitoring, Auditing, and Inspecting  p. 34 
10 Ethical  Considerations  p. 34 
11 Study Finances p. 34 
12 Publication s Plan p. 35 
13 List of Reference Documents  p. 35 
14 References  p. 36 
Page  4 of 37 Version  Date:  5-9-2017  
Synergistic Effect of Combined  tDCS/CIMT  in Children  with Hemiparesis   Study Summary  
 
Title  Synergistic  Effect  of Combined  tDCS/CIMT  in Pediatric  
Hemiparesis due to Stroke  
Short Title  tDCS/CIMT in Pediatric Stroke  
Principal  
Investigator  Bernadette  Gillick, PhD,  MSPT, PT  
Study  Design  Exploratory pre-test post-test follow  up 
Study  Duration  September  2013 -December  2017 
Study  Center(s)  University  of Minnesota,  Medical  School,  420 Delaware  Street  
SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455;  Gillette  Children’s  Specialty  
Healthcare, 200 University  Avenue  E. St. Paul,  MN 55101  
Objectives  Evaluate  the safety  and determine  the efficacy  of combined  
tDCS/ rehabilitation  in children  with hemiparesis.  Examine  the 
influence  of combined  tDCS/CIMT  on brain  excitability  and 
reorganiza tion. 
Number of 
Subjects  30 
Main  Inclusion  / 
Exclusion Criteria  Primary  inclusion criteria:  
Children  ages 8-21 years with congenital  hemiparesis due to 
hemispheric  stroke  or Periventricular leukomalacia;  no evidence 
of    seizure    activity    within     the     last     2     years . For 
Bimanual therapy: Children must display a motor evoked potential 
on the lesioned hemisphere. Primary exclusion  criteria:  
Other  neurologic  disorder  unrelated  to stroke  (disorders  of 
cellular  migration  and proliferation,  acquired  traumatic  brain  
injury),  Metabolic disorders, neoplasm, epilepsy, expressive  
aphasia,  pregnancy, indwelling  metal  or incompatible  medical  
devices,  skin disease or skin abnormalities and botulinum  toxin or 
phenol  intramuscular block within  the preceding five months  
from scheduled  tDCS  application.   For Bimanual therapy: Children 
who do not display a motor evoked potential on the lesioned 
hemisphere.  
Study  Device  Transcranial  Direct  Current  Stimulation  (tDCS)  
Duration  of Device  
Exposure  Ten 20-minut e tDCS  sessions  over ten days during  concurrent  
rehabilitation  sessions.  
Reference  Therapy  Control  transcranial  Direct Current  Stimulation  with built- 
in placebo  feature .  For bimanual therapy: Period of time 
without intervention.  
Endpoints  Safety  and Efficacy  
Page  5 of 37 Version  Date:  5-9-2017  
Synergistic Effect of Combined  tDCS/CIMT  in Children  with Hemiparesis   Statistical  Methods  Descriptive analyses of baseline  characteristics and outcomes  will 
include  means and standard  deviations  for continuous  variables 
with frequencies and percentages for categorical  variables.  
Analysis  Populations:  There  are 3 analysis populations  planned. 
Intent -to-treat (ITT),  Per-protocol  (PP),  and the Safety  population. 
We do not anticipate  these groups to differ.  
 
Aim #1: Safety  analyses will use the safety  population and be 
primarily  descriptive,  reporting  the number  and perc entage  of 
adverse events.  
  
 
Aim #2:  The primary  analysis  will use the  Intent  to Treat  
population to compare logit-based AHA units  between  the 
intervention  and control  groups  adjusting  for baseline values  of 
AHA and  presence of MEP for precision. Support ive analyses  
using the PP  population will also be  conducted.  Secondary 
endpoints  of Canadian  Occupational  Performance  Measure 
(COPM),  TOKEN test, Stereognosis  and Finger  force  
measurements will be  analyzed  in a similar fashion. The 
association  of improved logit-based  AHA units with  DTI  derived 
fractional  anisotropy  (FA)  and MEP will be  evaluated across all 
patients  using generalized  linear  regression.  Secondary  analyses 
will evaluate these associations also  adjusting for age and sex  due 
to potential  confounding influence  though may be limited by  
sample  size. 
 
Aim #3:  Associations between changes in cortical  excitability  and 
the primary  and secondary  outcomes  will be  evaluated  across all 
patients  using generalized  linear regression  as in Aim #2.  
 
Power  and  Sample  Size:   The  sample  size  and  power   was 
primarily  driven by the primary  analysis of Hypothesis  #1 of Aim 
#2. Power  calculations  for the primary  outcome  of logit-based  
AHA units  were  based  on 10 patients  in each.  Based  on previous  
studies,  we will have 81% power  to detect  a difference  of 5 logit- 
based  AHA units  at a significance level  of 0.05. This study  is 
intended to determine  feasibility  and explore  preliminary  efficacy  
results  to inform the design of a future, larger  RCT  should  
promising  resul ts be found.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page  6 of 37 Version  Date:  5-9-2017  
Synergistic Effect of Combined  tDCS/CIMT  in Children  with Hemiparesis   List of Abbreviations  
 
AE Adverse  Event  
AHA  Assisting  Hand  Assessment  
CDC  Centers for Disease Control  
CFR  Code  of Federal  Regulations  
CIMT  Constraint -Induced Movement  Therapy 
CMRR  Center  for Magnetic Resonance  Research  
COPM  Canadian  Occu pational  Performance  Measure 
CRF  Case Report  Form  
CTSI  Clinical and Translational Science  Institute  
CWH  Children  with Hemiparesis 
DSMB  Data and Safety  Monitoring Board  
DSMP  Data and Safety  Monitoring Plan 
DTI Diffusion  Tensor Imaging  
EEG Electroencephalogr am 
EMG  Electromyograph  
FDA  Food and Drug  Administration  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GMFCS  Gross  Motor  Function Classification  Scale Score  
HIPAA  Health  Insurance  Portability  and Accountability  Act of 1996 
IDE Investigational Device Exemption  
IRB Institutiona l Review Board  
ITT Intent -to-treat 
MACS  Manual  Ability  Classification System  
MEP Motor Evoked Potential  
MPRAGE  Magnetization  Prepared  Rapid  Acquisition  Gradient  Echo  
MPSOM  Modified Pediatric  Stroke  Outcome  Measure 
MRI  Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
NIBS  Non-invasive Brain Stimulation  
PHI Protected  Health  Information  
PP Per-Protocol  
RCT  Randomized Controlled  Trial  
REPA  Report  of External  Professional  Activities  
rTMS Repetitive  Transcranial  Magnetic Stimulation  
SAE  Serious  Adverse Event  
SNN  Stereotactic  Neuronavi gation  
tDCS  Transcranial  Direct Current  Stimulation  
TMS Transcranial  Magnetic Stimulation  
UADE  Unanticipated  Adverse Device Effect  
UPIRTSO  Unanticipated  Problems  Involving Risk To  Subjects  or Others  
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  7 of  37  1 Introduction  
 
This document  is a protocol  for a human  research  study.  This study will be  conducted 
according to US and  International standards  of Good Clinical Practice,  applicable  
government  regulations  and Institutional research policies  and procedures.  
 
All individuals  responsible for the design and conduct  of this study have completed  
Human  Subjects  Protection  Training  and are qualified  to be  conducting this research  prior  
to the  enrollment  of any subjects.  
 
This document  is confidential  and the  property of the University  of Minnesota.  No part 
of it may  be transmitted,  reproduced, published, or used by other  persons  without  prior  
written  authorization  from the study sponsor.  
 
 
2 Background  and Rationale  
Cerebral  palsy  affects an estimated 800,000 people  in the  United  States.  The lifetime  cost 
of caring  for a person with  cerebral  palsy  is approximately  $1 million dollars.(CDC, 
2013)  The neurologic  deficits  associated  with this  condition can  take  a variety  of different  
forms  though one  of the most  common  manifestations  affects movement  on one  side of  
the body (hem iparesis).  Hemiparetic cerebral palsy  influences  motor  function in children 
during development  and throughout  their lifetime.  The deficits one sees are the result  both 
of the congenitally induced brain  lesion  and the  subsequent  plasticity  that can impair 
function of the surviving  neurons  in the  damaged brain.  
 
Unfortunately, many  current  treatments have limited  influence  on children’s  
neurorecovery. Constraint -induced movement  therapy (CIMT) involving  constraining  the 
unaffected  limb to encourage use of the affected  limb  has shown  promise,  yet with new 
technology revealing  the potential to directly  influence  the brain, there  is an urgent  need to 
study the synergy of combined techniques.  Another rehabilitation technique is b imanual 
therapy. Bimanual therapy  is a treatment in which  the child  works on using two hands for 
everyday tasks . 
 
Non-invasive  brain  stimulation  (NIBS)  as a direct  neuromodulatory intervention  has the 
potential to act  synergistically  with CIMT  or bimanual therapy to influence neurorecovery.  
 
tDCS  is a novel  form of painless,  noninvasive  brain  stimulation.  In contrast  to other  
forms  of NIBS, tDCS  has produced no reported seizures,  is less  than 1/10th the cost,  and 
is more  portable, allowing  simultaneous  use with rehabilitation  interventions.  Although 
motor  improvements  have been  found  using tDCS  in adult  hemiparesis,  the potential  
benefits  of this technique  in children  have not been tested.  
 
Combining behavioral  therapies, constraint- induced movement  therapy (CIMT)  or 
bimanual therapy with a novel  form of neuromodulation, transcranial  direct  current  
stimulation  (tDCS),  we will investigate  the influence  of this intervention  on improved  
motor  outcomes  in children  with cerebral  palsy.  
 
Children with hemiparesis often exhibit reorganization of the  area of the brain responsible 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  8 of  37  for movement (specifically the corticospinal tract of the primary motor cortex).  Children 
with hemiparesis may exhibit contralateral reorganization (meaning the lesioned hemisphere influences movement of the contralateral mo re-affected hand) or ipsilateral 
reorganization (meaning the non- lesioned hemisphere maintains control of the 
contralateral more -affected hand).  One method to determine reorganization patterns is our 
existing neuroimaging and Transcranial Magnetic Stimula tion (TMS) testing protocols.  
 
Research  Question  and Hypothesis  
The central  hypothesis is that combined tDCS/CIMT  or combined tDCS/Bimanual 
Therapy will be  safe and result  in greater  improvement  in hand function than CIMT  alone  
in congenital  hemiparesis.   Secondary analysis  will explore  for predictive  biomarkers 
based  on baseline  measures of clinical  characteristics and excitability  measures,  as well as 
diffusion tensor  imaging  (DTI).  TMS  testing  for excitability  measures will also determine 
neuroplastic  response to the intervention. CIMT Design:  Two-group randomized  
controlled  preliminary  trial, 20 children ages 8-21 with  hemiparesis,  one group receiving  
active tDCS  with CIMT (intervention)  and one  receiving  sham tDCS  with CIMT  
(control), for 10 daily  sessions.  Bimanual Therapy Design:  One -group open- label 
repeated measures preliminary study, 10 children ages 8 -21 with hemiparesis with all 
children receiving the active tDCS with bimanual therapy (intervention) for 10 daily sessions.  
 
Aim 1.  Establish  the safety  profile of combined  tDCS/CIMT  in congenital  
hemiparesis.  
Our previous  pilot  revealed  safety  with no adverse  events  surrounding a one-time 
application  of tDCS.  We will now explore  the safety  of 10 serial  sessions of tDCS  
combined with  CIMT.  
Hypothes is 1: No  seizure activity  or other  serious  adverse event  will occur in either  
group.  
Hypothesis  2: No  decline  in paretic or nonparetic hand function will occur  in either  
group.  
Preliminary results from the 20 children who have participated in our tDCS/CIMT  study 
totaling 260 neuromodulatory sessions has resulted in no serious adverse events.  We will now explore the safety of 10 serial sessions of tDCS combined with Bimanual therapy.  
Hypothesis  1: No  seizure activity  or other  serious  adverse event  will occ ur. 
Hypothesis  2: No  decline  in paretic or non-paretic hand function will occur . 
 
Aim 2.  Determine the behavioral  efficacy  of combined tDCS/CIMT in congenital  
hemiparesis.  We will assess hemiparetic  upper extremity  behavioral  motor  function 
changes  and responsiveness  to interventions.  
Hypothesis  1: The  intervention  group  will show greater  improvement  in paretic  hand 
function than controls.  
Hypothesis  2: The  degree of difference in the  integrity  of the ipsilesional  and 
contralesional  corticospinal  tracts  as characterized  by Diffusion Tensor  Imaging, and  
the presence  of ipsilesional  motor  evoked potentials  (MEP),  will be  associated  with  
improved hand function.  
For Bimanual Therapy:  Determine the behavioral  efficacy  of combined tDCS/Bimanual 
Therapy in congen ital hemiparesis.  We will assess hemiparetic  upper extremity  
behavioral  motor  function changes  and responsiveness  to interventions.  
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  9 of  37  Hypothesis  1: The  intervention  group  will result in greater  improvement  in paretic  hand 
function than the non- intervention period . 
Hypothesis  2: The  degree of difference in the  integrity  of the ipsilesional  and 
contralesional  corticospinal  tracts  as characterized  by Diffusion Tensor  Imaging, and  
the presence  of ipsilesional  motor  evoked potentials  (MEP),  will be  associated  with  
improved hand function.  
 
Aim 3.  Determine the influence  of combined  tDCS/CIMT on cortical  excitability  in 
congenital  hemiparesis.  Cortical excitability  will be tested  using single -pulse  
Transcranial  Magnetic Stimulation  (TMS).  
Hypothesis  1: Changes  in cortical excitability  will be  associated with improved 
behavioral  outcomes.  
Hypothesis  2: The  intervention  group  will show greater  changes, compared  to 
controls, in contralesional  primary  motor  cortex  (M1) cortical excitability  (i.e. ↑ 
motor  threshold  and ↓  motor evoked potential area)  
Hypothesis  3: When an  ipsilesional  MEP is present, the intervention group  will show  
greater  ipsilesional  M1 cortical  excitability  changes (↓ motor  threshold and ↑ motor  
evoked potential area)  compared to controls. 
For Bimanual Therapy: Determine the influence  of combined tDCS/Bimanual Therapy 
on cortical  excitability  in congenital  hemiparesis.  Cortical excitability  will be tested  
using single -pulse  Transcranial  Magnetic Stimulation  (TMS).  
Hypothesis  1: Changes  in cortical  excitability  will be  associated with improved 
behavioral  outcomes.  
Hypothesis  2: The  intervention  period  will result in changes in the contralesional  
primary  motor  cortex  (M1) cortical excitability  (i.e. ↑ motor  threshold and  ↓ motor 
evoked potential area)  
 
Preliminary  Data  
Combining electrophysiologic  and behavioral  methods, we  have recently  found promising 
results  in pediatric  hemiparesis using  a synergistic  intervention  of constraint - induced 
movement  therapy (CIMT) and  a form of  NIBS - repetitive  transcranial  magnetic  
stimulation  (rTMS).1   Of paramount  importance, the study determined  that alternating  5 
treatments  using 6-Hz primed  low-frequency rTMS with 5  treatments of CIMT  applied to 
the non-stroke  hemisphere  was safe; without serious  adverse events.  The most  common  
minor  adverse events  included headache and cast  irritation.  As to efficacy,  our primary  
outcome  variable,  the Assisting  Hand  Assessment  (AHA),  revealed  a significant  
difference in hand function  between  the control  and treatment  groups. (p=0.007)  Although 
significance was not achieved  for our secondary outcome  measures of  the Canadian  
Occupational  Performance Measure (COPM),  Stereognosis and Finger  Extension force  
there  were  within -group improvements. 
 
These recent  results  demonstrate safety  and reveal  significant  improvements in hand 
function using rTMS combined  with CIMT. However, it is currently  very difficult to 
incorporate  the use of rTMS  at the same time as performing therapy  with the  affected  
upper  extremity  due to machine size and application  challenges.  tDCS  may be more  
feasible.   Applying tDCS/CIMT  concurrently could optimize neuroplastic  principles  of 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  10 of  37  concurrent  firing  of neurons  and strengthening of neuronal  networks. Also,  TMS/rTM S 
can be ten times  the current  cost of tDCS  and thus cost may  be prohibitive  when  using 
TMS/rTMS. Furthermore, if the  application of tDCS  reduces the  need for additional  
therapies or  concurrent  therapies,  a cost savings could be realized.  Last,  albeit  rare, use of 
rTMS has resulted  in reports of adverse events  such  as seizures  and syncopal  episodes,  
both in adults  and children.2   In addition to  its cost  and portability, tDCS  resulted  in 
functional  improvements  in motor function in adults  with and without  the concurrent  use 
of CIMT. 3   The important  rationale  for the investigation of  tDCS  in this  population is  
that the use  of non-invasive  brain  stimulation  could translate  into clinical  applications, 
thus improving the quality of life for children  with  hemip aresis.  
 
After  the rTMS study,  we completed  a tDCS  pilot safety  study of a one-time application  
in pediatric  hemiparesis.4  Analysis  of 11 subjects,  children  with  congenital  hemiparesis,  
revealed  no serious  adverse  events  including seizure. We included a  physician  evaluation 
using a modified  Pediatric  Stroke  Outcome  measure,  and cognitive and behavioral  testing  
with no significant  differences from baseline or between  groups  in level  of function.  This 
study established  the feasibility  and safety  of this application.  
Bimanual therapy allows for a child to practice tasks with two -hands allowing for motor 
learning of both hands and mimicking the natural environment.  Bimanual therapy is a 
common therapy approach in the clinical setting.  Review of goal setting data suggests that the majority of children with hemiparesis identify and prioritize bimanual tasks as goals (e.g. tying their shoes, putting books in a backpack).  Evidence suggests that children with congenital hemiparesis benefit equally from CIMT or tw o handed, or 
bimanual, therapy.
5,6   
Device Description  
Non-Invasive  brain  stimulation  has been  recently  investigated  for benefits  in recovery  of 
motor  function in adults7 and more  recently  in children1,8   One form,  Transcranial  
Magnetic Stimulation  (TMS) , can be used  in specific protocols  either  to test cortical  
excitability  or as an  intervention  to attempt to  influence cortical excitability.  In this study  
we are using TMS only  as a test to assess cortical  excitability  in the  area of the brain  
known as the motor  cortex  or M1.  Recent evidence suggests that 1.0mA and 2.0mA is 
well-tolerated and results in motor learning both for children with typical development9 
and 1.0 mA in children with hemiparesis.10  Safety of tDCS is further confirmed in a 
recent evi dence based update with no reports of major adverse events following tDCS.11  
Transcranial  Direct  Current  Stimulation  (tDCS) will be used as an  intervention, applying 
stimulation  continuously over a  period  of 20 minutes.  
 
Testing  for Cortical Excitability: Transcranial  Magnetic  Stimulation  (TMS):  We will use  
a Magstim  Rapid2 TMS stimulator with  a flat 70 mm figure -of-eight  coil. TMS is a non - 
invasive  method for  assessing  the excitability  of the brain.  The  TMS stimulator is a non- 
significant  risk device.  The technique  involves  placing a special  electrode on the head. 
The electrode we will use  is a flat  figure -of-eight  coil with a  70-mm diameter for each 
loop of the  figure -of-eight.  The center  of the coil is hand held on the scalp  over the 
desired  region to be stimulated.  An electrical  current  is pulsed through  the electrode,  
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  11 of  37  which  creates a magnetic  field.   This  magnetic  field,  in turn, creates an electric  field in the  
surrounding area,  including inside  the skull, which  induces  an ionic  current to flow on t he 
surface of the brain.  Depending on the  parameters  of the stimulation  and the  
excitability  of the underlying cortex, the stimulation  may or may not depolarize  the nerve  
membrane  to threshold.  If it does  depolarize, an action  potential is generated and 
conducted to spinal  motor neurons, which, depending on their  own excitability,  may 
transmit  an action  potential  to muscle.   Ultimately,  the response  is recorded  as a motor  
evoked potential (MEP) with EMG electrodes located  over the target  muscle.  
 
Interven tion: Transcranial  Direct Current Stimulation  (tDCS):  Soterix  Medical  1x1 
stimulator.  This device  is intended for  the noninvasive stimulation  of the cortex  via 
transcranial  current  stimulation  (TCS).  The device  is capable of direct  current  
stimulation  and has a built- in sham  condition setting.  This sham  stimulation  feature 
allows  for consistent  application of the sham  setting  with ramp -up, extinguish and ramp - 
down modulation. As an added measure of safety,  we will be  using the LTE device  which  
provides  built-in adaptation to resistance and current.  This  device  is for  investigational  
research  only in the  United States.   An instructional  video from the Harvard Berenson - 
Allen  Center  for Noninvasive Brain  Stimulation  describes the use of Soterix  tDCS  in 
detail . http://www.jove.com/video/2744/electrode -positioning- and-montage -in-  
transcranial -direct -current -stimulation  
 
All investigational  devices  used  in this study will have the following label  statement: 
CAUTION – Investigational  Device.  Limited by Federal  law to investigational  use. 
 
Stereotactic Neuronavigation:  In order to verify  our exact  location  over the motor cortex  
we will be  using a computerized  method of  location called  Stereotactic  Neuronavigation 
(SNN).  (Brainsight  Stereotactic  Neuronavigation,  Rogue  Research, Montreal,  Canada)  
Through the  use of a locator  situated  atop the TMS device  and a comparative subject - 
specific MRI  image on a computer  screen which  shows  the locator  position, we will be  
able to specify  the TMS hotspot location and placement  of the tDCS  electrodes.  
 
3 Study Objectives  
Primary Objective  
Determine the safety  of contralesional   cathodal   transcranial  Direct  
Current  Stimulation  combined with Constraint -Induced Movement   
Therapy in children  with  hemiparesis.  
 
For Bimanual Therapy: Determin e the safety  of contralesional   cathodal   
transcranial  Direct  Current  Stimulation  combined with Bimanual   
Therapy in children  with  hemiparesis.  
 
Secondary Objectives  
Assess behavioral  status after combined  transcranial Direct  Current  
Stimulation/Constrain t-Induced Movement  in children  with hemiparesis.  
 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  12 of  37  For Bimanual Therapy: Assess  behavioral  status after combined  
transcranial  Direct  Current  Stimulation/Bimanual Therapy  in children  
with hemiparesis.  
 
4 Study Design  
 
 
 
Figure  1a-tDCS/CIMT  
 
 
 
  
 
  
Figure 1 b-tDCS/Bimanual Therapy  
 
Overview  of Study  Design  
The study  will use a  randomized, sham -controlled, blinded, repeated -measures  design.  
(Figure 1a above)  Twenty  total children  with congenital  hemiparesis and unilateral 
infarct  as confirmed  by MRI  will be  randomized  into one  of two groups:  active  tDCS  
with CIMT (intervention) or sham  tDCS  with  CIMT (control). Randomization  will be  
1:1 between  intervention  and control  groups  stratified on the presence of an 
ipsilesional MEP  and using randomly permuted blocks of  size 2 and 4. The  children  
will receive 10 weekday  sessions of  daily  tDCS  and CIMT at Gillette Children’s  
Specialty  Healthcare – St. Paul, MN. The study will be  conducted biannually in a 
camp -style format,  anticipating  3-5 children participating  in each camp.   This format  
is constructed thusly due to the extensive  personnel  and resources required to safely  
and effectively  run this  trial.  This study intends  to determine feasibility  and explore  
preliminary  efficacy  results  to inform  the design of  a future, larger  RCT,  should 
promising  results  be found.  
 
For Bimanual Therapy: This group will be studied with a repeated -measures design 
(Figure 1b above).  Ten  total children  with congenital  hemiparesis and unilateral  
infarct  as confirmed  by MRI  will receive  (active tDCS  with bimanual therapy).  The  
children  will receive 10 weekday  sessions of  daily  tDCS  and bimanual at UMN 
Center for Neurobehavioral Development . The study will be  conducted in a camp -
style format,  anticipating  3-5 children participating  in each camp.  This  format is  
constructed thusly due to the extensive personnel  and resources required to safely  and 
 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  13 of  37  effectively  run this study. This study  intends  to determine feasibility  and explore  
preliminary  efficacy  results  to inform  the design of  a future, larger RCT,  should 
promising  results  be found.  
 
Anticipated  Duration  of the Clinical Investigation  
 
The anticipated  duration of study is as follows:  Submission of  all indicated  applications  is 
presumed  to occur  over a 4-month period  of time,  with the potenti al for revisions  
within  this timeframe.  Recruitment  of children  will be  based  over a 1 year period of 
time,  running the camps during optimal time  off from school, holidays and vacations 
when children  are most readily  available.  Recruitment  accrual  rates will vary greatly  
due to the  variation  in a child’s  school  and after  school  activities.  
 
For Bimanual Therapy: The anticipated  duration of study is as follows:  Submission of  all 
indicated  applications  is presumed  to occur  over a 2-month period  of time,  with the 
potential  for revisions  within  this timeframe.  Recruitment  of children  will be based  over 
a 6-month period of time,  running the camps  during optimal time  off from school, 
holidays and vacations  when children are most readily  available.  Recruitment accrual 
rates will vary greatly  due to the  variation  in a child’s  school  and after  school  activities.  
 
If the trial ends  prior  to the  study completion, all  scheduled subjects will be  notified and  
study visits will be  terminated.   The  CTSI  will be  notified  and all future  reserved  dates  
for use of the CTSI  will be canceled.   All research investigators  on the study will be  
notified.  The  CTSI  funding agency  will also  be notified.  
 
Action —tDCS/CIMT  Anticipated  
Duration  
Award  Notice  Start date 9/1/13  
Confirm  proto col and consent/assent  with 
Gillette  Team,  Establish  full Gillette  UMN 
Team  6 months  
Scientific  Merit CMRR//IRB/CTSI  
Applications,  Reviews and Approvals  6 months  
Recruit  Subjects/Study  Enrollment and 
Intervention  18 months  
Database Queries  and Data Cleaning 1 month  
Database  Lock  and Analysis  1 month  
Final  Reports  and Manuscript  Preparation  1 month  
 
Action —tDCS/Bimanual Therapy  Anticipated  
Duration  
Award  Notice  Start date 9/1/13  
Confirm  protocol  and consent/assent  with 
Gillette  Team,   6 months  
Scien tific Merit CMRR//IRB/CTSI  
Applications,  Reviews and Approvals  4 months  
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  14 of  37  Recruit  Subjects/Study  Enrollment and 
Intervention  6 months  
Database Queries  and Data Cleaning  1 month  
Database  Lock  and Analysis  1 month  
Final  Reports  and Manuscript  Preparation  1 month  
 
Primary Clinical Endpoint  
The following measures  will be  used to create a safety  profile: 
• Demographics  
• Manual  Ability  Classification System  Score  
• TMS motor  threshold  
• Vital Signs  
• Electromyograph  (EMG)  Activity  of Ipsilateral  and Contralateral Muscu lature,  
• Subject  Report  of Symptoms  
• Ipsilateral  Hand Function  
• Physician  Evaluation  
• Specific to Bimanual Therapy: Physician involvement will remain as reviewer of 
medical records for inclusion/exclusion, Medical Director, Medical Monitor.  No 
physician evalu ation will be conducted.  
 
We will use  counts and percentages of  adverse  events to establish  the data for this 
endpoint. 
 
Study  Population  
 
Sample  Size: 20 children with hemiparesis  and unilateral  infarct as confirmed by MRI.  
Sample Size  (Bimanual):  10 chi ldren with hemiparesis and unilateral infarct as confirmed by MRI.  
 
35 children  will be  enrolled  and 20 final subjects will meet  all criteria  and be able to 
proceed  with  the study. The sample  size of n=20  was based  on practical  and clinical  
considerations.   Information  gleaned from this initial study will be  used for development  
of intervention  studies  with the results dictating  the defined direction of optimal  usage of 
tDCS.  
 
For Bimanual Therapy: An additional 20 children will be enrolled and 10 final 
participants will meet all criteria and be able to proceed with the study.  The sample  size 
of n=10 was based  on practical  and clinical considerations.   Information  gleaned from this 
initial study will be  used for development  of intervention  studies with the results 
dictating  the defined direction of optimal  usage  of tDCS.  
Subject  Recruitment:  The recruitment subject  pool  for children  with hemiparesis  will 
include  children  who participated in previous  studies,  children  from an IRB-approved 
database of families  that have expressed  interest  in Dr.  Gillick’s  research,  as well  as 
children  from the clinical  practices of this study’s   Medical  Director,  Dr. Tim Feyma,  
and Co-investigator,  Dr. Marcie Ward.  Upon IRB  approval, we  will further recruit 
through advertising  on the Gillick  Pediatric  Neuromodulation  Research  Lab website  
(z.umn.edu/gillicklab), recruitment  newsletters,   emails, letters  to colleagues, various  
media  outlets  as applicable,  ResearchMatch.org  and  on the  Children’s Hemiplegic  and 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  15 of  37  Stroke  Association  website  (http://www.chasa.org/).  Typically  developing  children 
needed  for a mock  walk -through of the logistics  of the study will be recruited  from  the 
database of children who participated  in a previous  study and have  requested  to be 
notified  of other  research  participation  opportunities.  Recruitment  of typically  developing 
children  will also include  reaching  out to families  who have expressed  interest  in Dr.  
Gillick’s  research  in response  to community  presentations  and her involvement  in 
community  service activities  (i.e., elementary  school  science fair judge). 
 
Subject  Screening:  In addition to the phone  screen,  the physician medical  records  screen,  
and the  on-site screen,  all female  subjects will need to take  a urine pregnancy test.  If the 
test is positive  the subject  will be  excluded from the study as the safety  of use of tDCS  
and TMS during pregnancy has not been  established.  If the pregnancy test is negative, the  
subject  can proceed  into the treatment component of the study.  
 
Prior and Concomitant  Therapy  
• Permitted - Behavioral  therapies including occupational, physical  or speech  
therapies will be allowed.  
• Not permitted - Implantable  ongoing therapies such  as intrathecal baclofen  
pumps. 
 
Inclusion Criteria  
Subjects  will be eligible  to participate  in the study if the  following conditions exist:  
1. Hemispheric Stroke  or Periventricular Leukomalacia confirmed  by most  
recent  MRI  or CT radiologic  report with resultant congenital  hemiparesis  
2. ≥ 10 degrees of  active motion at  the metacarpophalangeal  joint 
3. Receptive language  function to follow  two-step commands  as evidenced  
by performance  on TOKEN  test of  intelligence  
4. No evidence  of seizure activity  within the  last 2 years  
5. Presence of a motor  evoked potential from at  least the 
contralesional  hemisphere  if not both hemispheres  
6. Ages  8-21 years 
7. Able  to give  informed  assent  along with the  informed consent  of the 
legal  guardian 
8. Children  who  have had surgeries, which  may influence  motor  function 
e.g.- tendon transfer, will be included, yet surgical  history  will be  
documented and included in any publication  within a  participant  
characteristics table.  
9. For Bimanual Therapy: Children who display a motor -evoked potential 
from the lesioned -hemisphere as elicit ed by TMS single pulse testing. 
Exclusion  Criteria  
Subjects   will  be  excluded  from  participation   in  the  study  if  any  of  the  followin g 
conditions  exist:  
1. Metabolic Disorders  
2. Neoplasm  
3. Epilepsy  
4. Disorders  of Cellular  Migration and Proliferation  
5. Acqui red Traumatic Brain  Injury  
6. Pregnancy  
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  16 of  37  7. Indwelling  metal  or incompatible  medical  devices  
8. Evidence  of skin disease or skin abnormalities  
9. Botulinum  toxin or  Phenol  block within  [six-months]  preceding  the study.  Children 
who are within the 5th month following botulinum toxin injections who desire to 
participate in the study, will be reviewed individually by the PI and Medical 
Director of the study.  A determination of inclusion will be based on the child’s 
typical period of efficacy of injections.  
10. For Bimanual Therapy: Children who do not display a motor -evoked potential from 
the lesioned -hemisphere as elicited by TMS single pulse testing.  
 
 
Exit/Discontinuation  Criteria  
Subjects  will exit the study if any  of the following conditions exist:  
1. Subject  voluntarily  withdraws from  the study.  
2. Subject  death.  
3. Subject  acquires any of the listed exclusion criteria.  
4. Subject  completes the  protocol.  
5. Subject  is non-compliant with the  protocol. 
6. Subject’s well-being,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Investigator,  would  be 
compromise d by study continuation.  
7. Subject  experiences  a serious  adverse  event  or seizure.  
8. Medical  monitor  and/or  IRB recommendation  
 
 
5 Study Procedures 
 
Eligibility Screening Consent  
To determine eligibility for participation, caregivers will be asked screening info rmation using the 
Medical History Survey (version 3.6.17).  Prior to the collection of screening information that is identifiable, an Eligibility Screening consent form will be offered to caregivers by email, fax, mail, or waived.  If a caregiver chooses t o waive the consent for the eligibility screening, we will 
proceed with the eligibility screening at the time of the caregiver’s study inquiry. The waiving of the eligibility screening consent will be documented.  
 To further protect identifiable information, if the caregiver reports their child is not within the age range of 8- 21 years old and does not have a diagnosis of congenital hemiparesis (meaning the 
stroke occurred within the first year of life), the caregiver will be informed their child does not meet the study enrollment criteria and no further screening questions will be asked of the caregiver.   
 
Informed  Consent  
For subjects ages 8-17, each legal  guardian and subject  for this study will be  provided a  
consent  and assent  form  describing  this study and the opportunity to discuss the study 
with the  study  personnel. (Subjects  ages 18-21 will be provided a  non-minor consent  
form only).  Information  will be  provided for  an informed  decision about  their 
participation  in this study. The consent, assent,  and Addendum  to Assent  for Female  
Minors  forms  will be  submitted  with  the protocol  for review  and approval  by the IRB. 
The formal  consent/assent  of a subject,  using the IRB- approved consent/assent  form,  
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  17 of  37  must be  obtained before  that subject  undergoes any study procedure.  This  consent form  
must  be signed by the legal  guardian(s) and the assent/addendum  assent  form(s) must be  
signed by the subject along  with the  signature  on both forms  of the investigator - 
designated  research professional  obtaining the consen t/assent.   The  IRB-approved form 
must be  kept on-site and  by the sponsor -investigator.  
 
Assent  must  be obtained from  all minor  subjects  deemed  capable by the IRB (between  8 
and 17 years old, inclusive)  in addition  to the Informed  Consent  of the legal  guardian  in 
accordance with Federal  Regulations  and/or  the qualifying  Institutional Review  Board  
(IRB).  
 
tDCS/CIMT Randomization  Scheme  
Each  child will be  randomized to either  the real or sham  tDCS  arm of the study. The 
randomization  will be  done by sealed envelopes  constructed  by the study biostatistician 
using a random  number  generator.  The study  coordinator  will assign  envelopes, in  
numerical  order, to the  subjects upon their  enrollment.  The envelopes  will in turn be  
shared  by the study coordinator and the  research personnel  involved in the  intervention 
component  of the study.  
 
tDCS/CIMT Blinding  
The investigator  who performs  the testing,  and the physician who does the evaluations  
will be  blinded to the  treatment  arm as well  as the child/caregiver/family.    The following  
procedure  will be  employed:  
1. The study  coordinator and biostatistician will meet  and a  sealed envelope will  be 
given to the  study coordinator. 
2. The study  coordinator will share the group assignment  with theprincipal  investigator  
in a secure private room,  in the  absence of the physician, research  tester,  subject  legal  
guardian and subject.   The Medical  Monitor  to the  study will have access  to the group 
assignment.  
3. Interventionist  will, during the intervention, switch the setting  on the tDCS  device  to 
the designated  placebo setting,  hidden from view  of the subject.   Blinding is applied 
through the  designation of the setting  on the tDCS  machine  of sham  or real tDCS.  
For the first 30-seconds of either  setting, a  gradual “ramp -up” sensation  of the 
stimulation  occurs.  This is built into  the machine  for both settings.  However,  for the 
sham  stimulation,  the sensation then abates,  and not until the  end of the 20- minute  
session  does  the subject  receiving  the 30-seconds of “ramp -down”  sham  once again  
experien ce the sensation.  The sensation  then occurs and  “ramps -down”  the amperage  
until the  machine  turns  off. 
4. Information on subject  group assignment  will be logged and  stored  in a designated  
locked cabinet  at the study coordinators  office.  
 
tDCS/Bimanual Therapy : 
As this is an open -label design, all children will complete multiple baseline assessments to serve 
as their comparison period without intervention.  All children will then participate in the real 
tDCS/Bimanual Therapy intervention.  Children, caregivers,  and investigators will not be blinded 
to intervention.  Study collaborators assisting with the scoring of assessments will be blinded to the child’s progress during the intervention phase.  
 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  18 of  37  Laboratory  Testing Procedures  
Specimen  Preparation:  For females,  urine  samples will be obtained on site at the CTSI  
with use of private  bathrooms. The subject  and legal guardian will be instructed  on how 
to obtain the urine  specimen  by the study  PI. The urine  sample will then be obtained  in a 
screw -top urine cup and handed to the  PI who will be wearing  latex  gloves. 
 
Specimen  Handling and Storage:  Immediate  assessment  of pregnancy status will occur  as 
the PI, in the assignment  laboratory  specimen  assessment  room,  will utilize  the allotted  
amount  of sample  required for adequate  assessment.  Once  the testing  has occurred, the 
sample  will be flushed in a designated  CTSI  urinal  or disposal  sink. No storage  of urine  
material  will occur. If pregnancy test is positive, the child  will be excluded  from  the 
study, and a recommendat ion to follow -up with their primary  care physician will be 
enacted.  
 
No shipment  of specimens will occur  in this  study.  
 
Clinical Procedures  
Phone  Screen: All interested  subjects are screened  by phone  for a review  of inclusion and 
exclusion criteria,  to obtain  general  health  history  of potential subject,  and to give  
opportunity for family  to ask questions and have those  questions  answered.  
Study  Visit 
HIPAA consent  is obtained in order  to perform  a medical  record  review.   Information  for 
all subjects will be  collected  and managed in accordance with HIPAA policies.  This 
review  is completed by the study physicians  for review of inclusion/exclusion by history 
and MRI/CT radiographic reports  of the brain. Eligibility  will be  verified  by the principal  
investigato r after  this review.  Eligibility  is then discussed  with  the legal  guardian  and a  
formal  schedule  is established.  The family  will be  sent a detailed  itinerary  outlining  their 
visit.  Families interested in future study participation will be provided with the  
“HIPAA For Future Study” form.  Informed  consent/assent  will be  completed on the 
day of enrollment.  
 
 tDCS/CIMT:  
ASSESSMENTSANDMEASUREMENTS  Pre-Test Interim  Test Post-Test Follow -up 
MRI/DTI  x   X 
TMS x  x x 
Vital  Signs x  x x 
Subject  Report  of Sympto ms x x x x 
Physician  Evaluation  - MPSOM  x x x X 
Behavioral  and Cognitive  Testing  to include:  
TOKEN,  goal review,  , AHA,  x  x x 
Behavioral  Testing:  Hand  Dynamometer  X X X X 
Behavioral  Testing:  Participation  of activities  
 X   X 
Classification  Systems:  MACS/GMFCS  X    
tDCS  Survey    x  
Study  Feedback     x 
 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  19 of  37  tDCS/CIMT Pre-Test 
Location:  Center for Magnetic  Resonance  Research  (CMRR)  
Time: 1 hour  
• Consent/Assent  will be  obtained and a pregnancy test for  female  subjects will be 
administered.  
• Subjects  will be scanned  on a Siemens  3T system.  The scan protocol  will include  
both a T1-weighted structural Magnetization  Prepared  Rapid  Acquisition  Gradient  
Echo  (MPRAGE)  scan and Diffusion  Tensor Imaging  (DTI).  
Location:  Clinical and Translational  Science Institute (CTSI)  
Time: 2 hours  
• Cardiovascular  Measurements: Subjects will be instrumented  with a 3 or 12- 
Lead  ECG  for measurement  of heart  rate and a non-invasive  blood pressure 
measuring  device that will be  placed  on a finger  of their hand. (AD Instruments,  
Colorado Springs, CO).  Subject  Report  of Symptoms  survey will be  completed. 
• The testing  researcher will perform  an assessment  of cortical  excitability  using 
Transcranial  Magnetic Stimulation.  The subject  will be comfortably  seated  in a 
reclining  chair.  Surface EMG  electrodes will be  attached over the extensor  digitorum  
muscle serving the nonparetic  hand, which will record the MEPs resulting  from the  
magnetic  stimulation  to the contralesional  M1. Next, the  threshold for TMS  activation  
of the target  muscle will be determined.  Subjects  will wear a tight-fitting  Lycra  
(Invista,  Inc., Wilmington, DE)  swim cap  to allow measurement  and drawing of the 
region where  the optimal scalp  position (“hotspot”)  should be  located.  We will use a  
70-mm figure -eight  TMS coil  conn ected to a Magstim  200 machine. The coil will be  
handheld on the  swim  cap over  the approximate  hotspot  area tangential to the scalp  
and oriented with the  handle pointing posterolaterally  at a 45° angle to the  sagittal  
line. It will be  moved systematically  to find the  true location  of the hotspot. Single - 
pulse  magnetic  stimuli will be  delivered  manually at approximately 0.1 Hz  starting  at 
an intensity  of 60% of the stimulator maximum.  This level  will be  adjusted 
systematically  until the  resting  motor  threshold is  found, defined  as the minimum 
intensity  required  to elicit MEPs >50 µV peak-to-peak in at least 5 of 10 trials  with 
the target  muscle at rest. 
• The testing  researcher  will perform  an assessment  of cognitive and behavioral  
function using:  a TOKEN test  of intelligence,  Assisting  Hand  Assessment,  a 
measure of the child’s  goals, ,Hand Dynamometry,  the Gross  Motor Function 
Classification  Scale Score (GMFCS),   the Manual  Ability  Classification Sy stem 
(MACS),  and a measure of the child’s  general  activity  level.  
Location: Gillette  Children’s  Specialty  Healthcare  
Time: 15 minutes  
• The physician will assess  the subject  with the  Modified Pediatric  Stroke  Outcome  
Measure (MPSOM).  
 
Intervention  
Location: Gillette  Children’s  Specialty  Healthcare  – St. Paul, MN  
Time: 2 hours/day  for 10  (business)  days with interim  testing after Day 5 
 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  20 of  37  • Subject  will be  randomized  into active vs. sham  group 
• Before  the tDCS  session,  skin under  the electrode region will be assessed  for lesions  
and evidence  of skin disease or abnormalities  which  could cause potential  irritation.  
tDCS  is not administered  if there  is any skin damage,  rash or other  skin lesion  under  
the electrode  sites.  
• Skin is lightly cleaned  with  an alcohol swab,  taking care NOT to abrade  the skin in 
any manner.  Move  hair away  as best  as possible  from  the site  of stimulation in order  
to increase conductance.  
• Sanitized and disinfected  rubber  electrodes with clean,  single -use sponges  dampened 
with normal  saline are placed over the stimulation  sites and held against  the head with  
wide  rubber  bands  which  cover  the entire  surface of the electrodes.  Care is taken  to 
ensure  contact  with the  skin is firm and even over the entire  surface of the electrode.  
• The static impedance  measurement  is checked - stimulation  does  not proceed unless  
levels are within  limits  recommended by the tDCS  device  manufacturer.  
• Active  tDCS  with CIMT group  (intervention) Stimulation  is commenced  and 
subjects are advised to report  immediately  if the  stimulation  feels painful, or anything 
other  than low-level  itchy  or tingling  sensations,  common  yet consistently  reported at 
any time during  the period of stimulation.  tDCS  continues  with a weak  electrical  
current  of 0.7 mA applied  across the  scalp  for 20 minutes in a  single  experimental  
session.  
• After  the first 2 minutes, the subject  is questioned about  pain at the electrode sites.  If 
the stimulation  is painful, a small  amount  of additional  saline (approximately 4 mL) is 
added to the sponge, taking care to avoid wetting  adjacent  hair and thereby increasing  
the electrode area,  and the tightness  and placement  of the band are checked.   If pain 
persists,  the stimulation  is stopped and the electrode sites are checked. This procedure  
is repeated twice (every  5 min utes during tDCS)  with a  small amount  of saline  
solution being routinely  applied at these times.  
• During this 20 minute  tDCS  session  and then continuing for the next 1 hour and 40 
minutes, the  child will be  involved CIMT for the paretic  hand and arm using a mitt.  
The mitt will therefore be applied for the 2-hour total period which incorporates  this 
20 minute tDCS session. The CIMT  will be  administered  to the  child on an 
individual basis for these 2 hours  each  CIMT  day by a CIMT -trained  and licensed  
therapist .  Individualized activities  will be created  by the supervising treatment  
therapist  investigator  for shaping and repetition  activities.  Additionally, children will 
continue  to use  their paretic  limb during functional  activities  at home  and during a 
daily  parent -supervised  and documented  home program. 
• Sham  tDCS  with CIMT  group  (control).  These children  will receive 10 daily  
sessions of  both CIMT  and sham  tDCS.  Children will receive the same procedures  as 
the active tDCS  with CIMT  group (intervention),  yet the device  will be  set to an  
integrated  placebo setting  which  extinguishes the current  after a 30 second  to 1 
minute  ramp -up phase  and gradually reintroduces  the ramp -down  at the end of the 20 
minute  session.  
• At the  end of  stimulation,  the electrode site is checked for redness or  skin damage. 
The rubber  electrodes and headbands  are cleaned  with a  disinfectant  solution. 
• Vital signs  measurements and Subject  Report  of Symptoms  will be  conducted before  
and after  each daily  session.  
• Interim  testing  at Day 5 will c onsist  of vital signs, physician assessment,  cognitive  
and behavioral  testing  as well as subject  report  of symptoms.  
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  21 of  37  Post-Test 
Location:  Clinical  and Translational  Science Institute  (CTSI)  
Time:  2hours  
 
• Post-testing  will occur  1 day following  the 10- day intervention and, with  the 
exception of  an MRI,  the same  procedures  will be  followed  as the pre-testing  session,  
In addition the  subject  will be  asked  to complete  a tDCS  Feedback  Survey 
Follow -Up 
Follow -Up will occur 6 months after the intervention,  and participants  and their 
families  will be  reimbursed  for travel  and housing for this return  testing  session.  
 
Location:  Center for Magnetic  Resonance  Research  (CMRR)  
Time: 1 hour  
• A pregnancy  test for  female  subjects will be  administered.  
• Subjects  will be scanned  on a Siemens  3T system.  The scan protocol  will include  
both a T1-weighted structural Magnetization  Prepared  Rapid  Acquisition  Gradient  
Echo  (MPRAGE)  scan and Diffusion  Tensor Imaging  (DTI).  
Location:  Clinical and Translational  Science Institute  (CTSI)  
Time: 2 hours  
• Includes TMS testing,  behavioral  and cognitive  measures defined in pre - and post - 
tests, vital signs  measurements,  and Subject  Report  of Symptoms,  report  of activities  
performed since post-test and a  Family  Feedback  Survey.  
 
tDCS/Bimanual Therap y: 
ASSESSMENTSANDMEASUREMENTS  PreTest 
#1 Pre-tests 
# 2-4 Pre-Test 
# 5-6 Interim  Test Post-Test Follow -up 
MRI/DTI    x    
TMS X  x  x  
Vital  Signs X  x  x  
Participant  Report  of Symptoms  X  x x x x 
Behavioral  to include:  goal review,  Box and 
Blocks  X X x  x x 
Behavioral  Testing:  Hand  Dynamometer, AHA  X  X X X  
Classification  Systems:  MACS  X  X    
tDCS  Survey      x  
Study  Feedback       x 
 
 
Pre-Testing Session #  1:  
Location:  Center for Translational Science Institute  
Time: 2-3 hours  
• Consent/Assent  will be  obtained and a pregnancy test for  female  subjects will be 
administered.  
• Cardiovascular  Measurements: Subjects will be instrumented  with a 3 or 12- 
Lead  ECG  for measurement  of heart  rate and a non-invasive  blood pressure 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  22 of  37  measuring  device that will be  placed  on a finger  of their hand. (AD Instruments,  
Colorado Springs, CO).  Subject  Report  of Symptoms  survey will be  completed. 
• The testing  researcher will perform  an assessment  of cortical  excitability  using 
Transcranial  Magnetic Stimulation.  The subject  will be comfortably  seated  in a 
reclining  chair.  Surface EMG  electrodes will be  attached over the first dorsal 
interosseous  muscle serving the nonparetic  hand, which  will record the MEPs 
resulting  from the  magnetic stimulation  to the contralesional  M1. Next, the  threshold 
for TMS activation  of the target  muscle  will be determined. Subjects  will wear a 
tracker made of light weight plastic to allow for co -registration of the MRI images to the 
child’s head dimensions with the use of stereotactic neuronavigatio n.  We  will use a  70-
mm figure -eight  TMS coil  connected to a Magstim  200 machine.  The coil will be 
handheld over  the approximate  hotspot  area tangential  to the scalp  and oriented with 
the handle pointing posterolaterally  at a 45° angle to the  sagittal  line. It will be  
moved systematically  to find the  true location  of the hotspot. Single - pulse  magnetic  
stimuli will be delivered  manually at approximately 0.1 Hz  starting  at an intensity  of 
60% of the stimulator maximum.  This  level  will be  adjusted  systematically  until the  
resting  motor  threshold is  found, defined as  the minimum  intensity  required  to elicit 
MEPs >50 µV peak- to-peak in at least 5 of 10 trials  with the target  muscle at rest.  
• The testing  researcher  will perform  an assessment  of cognitive and behavioral  
function using:  Assisting  Hand  Assessment,  a measure of the child’s  goals, 
Hand  Dynamometry,  the Manual  Ability  Classification System  (MACS),  and a  
measure of the child’s  general  activity  level.  
 
Pre-Testing Sessions # 2 -4:  
Location:  Video phone cal ls 
Time: 30 minutes  
 
• The testing researcher will perform testing with the Box and Blocks test (wherein the child 
moves as many 1” wooden blocks within 1 minute) and child/caregiver questionnaires. For 
these pre- tests, we will mail you the supplies.  
 
Testi ng Session #5:  
Location:  Center for Magnetic Resonance Research (CMRR)  
Time: 2 hours  
 
• Subjects  will be scanned  on a Siemens  3T system.  The scan protocol  will include  
both a T1-weighted structural Magnetization  Prepared  Rapid  Acquisition  Gradient  
Echo  (MPR AGE)  scan and Diffusion  Tensor Imaging  (DTI).  
• For children who have previously participated in our studies that included a  MRI 
from the CMRR in the past 2.5 years, the MRI will not be repeated.  
 
Testing Session #6:  
Location:  Clinical and Translational  Science Institute  (CTSI)  
Time: 2 hours  
• Cardiovascular  Measurements: Subjects will be instrumented  with a 3 or 12- 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  23 of  37  Lead  ECG  for measurement  of heart  rate and a non-invasive  blood pressure 
measuring  device that will be  placed  on a finger  of their hand. (AD Instruments,  
Colorado Springs, CO).  Subject  Report  of Symptoms  survey will be  completed. 
• The testing  researcher will perform  an assessment  of cortical  excitability  using 
Transcranial  Magnetic Stimulation.  The subject  will be comfortably  seated  in a 
reclining  chair.  Surface EMG  electrodes will be  attached over the first dorsal 
interosseous  muscle serving the nonparetic  hand, which  will record the MEPs 
resulting  from the  magnetic stimulation  to the contralesional  M1. Next, the  threshold 
for TMS activation  of the target  muscle  will be determined. Subjects  will wear a 
tracker made of light weight plastic to allow for co -registration of the MRI images to the 
child’s head dimensions with the use of stereotactic neuronavigation.  We  will use a  70-
mm figure -eight  TMS c oil connected to a Magstim  200 machine.  The coil will be 
handheld over  the approximate  hotspot  area tangential  to the scalp  and oriented with 
the handle pointing  posterolaterally  at a 45° angle to the  sagittal  line. It will be  moved  
systematically  to find the  true location of  the hotspot. Single - pulse  magnetic stimuli 
will be  delivered  manually at approximately 0.1 Hz  starting  at an intensity  of 60% of 
the stimulator maximum.  This  level  will be  adjusted systematically  until the  resting  
motor  threshold is  found, defined as the minimum  intensity  required  to elicit MEPs 
>50 µV peak-to-peak in at least 5 of 10 trials  with the target muscle at rest.  
• The testing  researcher  will perform  an assessment  of cognitive and behavioral  
function using:  Assisting  Hand  Asse ssment,  a measure of the child’s  goals, 
Hand  Dynamometry,  the Manual  Ability  Classification System  (MACS),  and a  
measure of the child’s  general  activity  level.  
 
Intervention  
Location: University of Minnesota —Center for Neurobehavioral Development (CNBD)  
Time: 2 hours/day  for 10  (business)  days with interim  testing after Day 5 
 
• Before  the tDCS  session,  skin under  the electrode region will be assessed  for lesions  
and evidence  of skin disease or abnormalities  which  could cause potential  irritation.  
tDCS  is not administered  if there  is any skin damage,  rash or other  skin lesion  under  
the electrode  sites.  
• Skin is lightly cleaned  with  an alcohol swab,  taking care NOT to abrade  the skin in 
any manner.  Move  hair away  as best  as possible  from  the site  of stimulation  in order  
to increase conductance.  
• Sanitized and disinfected  rubber  electrodes with clean,  single -use sponges  dampened 
with normal  saline are placed over the stimulation  sites and held against  the head with  
wide  rubber  bands  which  cover  the entire  surface of the electrodes.  Care is taken  to 
ensure  contact  with the  skin is firm and even over the entire  surface of the electrode.  
• The static impedance  measurement  is checked - stimulation  does  not proceed unless  
levels are within  limits  recommended by the tDCS  device manufacturer.  
• Active  tDCS  with bimanual therapy  group  (intervention): Stimulation  is 
commenced  and subjects  are advised to report  immediately  if the  stimulation  feels 
painful, or anything other  than low-level  itchy  or tingling  sensations,  common  yet 
consistently reported  at any time during  the period of stimulation.  tDCS  continues  
with a weak  electrical  current  of up to 2.0 mA applied  across the  scalp  for 20 
minutes in a  single  experimental  session.  
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  24 of  37  • After  the first 2 minutes, the subject  is questioned about  pain at the electrode sites.  If 
the stimulation  is painful, a small  amount  of additional  saline (approximately 4 mL) is 
added to  the sponge, taking care to avoid wetting  adjacent  hair and thereby increasing  
the electrode  area,  and the tightness  and placement  of the band  are checked.   If pain 
persists,  the stimulation  is stopped and the electrode sites are checked. This 
procedure  is repeated twice (every  5 minutes during tDCS)  with a  small amount  of 
saline solution being routinely  applied at these times.  
• During this 20 minute  tDCS  session  and then continuing for the next 1 hour and 40 
minutes, the  child will be  involved bimanual therapy.  The  bimanual therapy will be  
administered  to the  child on an individual basis for these 2 hours  each  by an 
interven tionist .  Individualized activities  will be created  by the supervising treatment  
therapist  investigator  for shaping and repetition  activities.  Additionally, children will 
continue  to use  their paretic  limb during functional  activities  at home  and during a 
daily  parent -supervised  and documented  home program. 
• At the  end of  stimulation,  the electrode site is checked for redness or  skin damage. 
The rubber  electrodes and headbands  are cleaned  with a  disinfectant  solution. 
• Vital signs  measurements and Subject  Report of Symptoms  will be  conducted before  
and after  each daily  session.  
• Interim  testing  at Day 5 will consist  of vital signs, cognitive  and behavioral  
testing  as well as participant report  of symptoms.  
Post-Test 
Location:  Clinical  and Translational  Science Institute  (CTSI)  
Time:  2hours  
 
• Post-testing  will occur  1 day following  the 10- day intervention and, with  the 
exception of  an MRI,  the same  procedures  will be  followed  as the pre-testing  session,  
In addition the  participant will be  asked  to complete  a tDCS  Feedback  Survey  
Follow -Up 
Location:  Video conference call  
Time: 20 minutes  
• Follow -Up will occur 1 week after the intervention.  Includes a portion of the 
behavioral  and cognitive  measures defined in pre - and post - tests, and Subject  
Report  of Symptoms,  report of activities  performed  since post-test and a  Family  
Feedback  Survey. 
 
 
Study  Protocol  Compliance  
A home  program  will be issued  by the treatment  therapist  investigator  with journaling of 
activities  performed.  This  journal  will be  reviewed  daily.  
 
If the subject  or legal guardian displays  an inability  to complete the study due to non-  
compliance or incomplete involvement  in the study,  the subject will be withdrawn  from 
the study and no further  data will be obtained. 
 
Deviations  from  the Clinical Protoco l 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  25 of  37  When a  deviation from the protocol  is necessary  for an individual subject, the 
investigator must  complete  a description of the  deviation from  the protocol  and 
justification  on the  Protocol  Deviation  Form  and inform  the IRB of the protocol  deviation 
through formal  documentation. 
 
Subject  Withdrawal  
How to Withdraw  Subjects : Subjects  may discontinue  participation  at any time,  for any 
reason.  Any subject  observed to have unacceptable responses to research  procedures, or 
to be  unable  to safely  or comfortably tolerate  participation  will be withdrawn.  
 
Subjects  withdrawn  from  study will not be  replaced,  and the details  surrounding the 
circumstances of the reason  for withdrawing  the subject  from the study will be reported 
with no identifiers  included. 
 
Data Colle ction and Follow Up for  Withdrawn Subjects : If a subject and legal  guardian 
are not compliant  with  establishing  and meeting  for the components  of the study, the  
legal  guardian will be  contacted  up to 2 times by phone  in succession  and by 1 letter  
thereafte r. If no return  contact  is established, the subject  will be  withdrawn  from the 
study and any data collected  will be  analyzed.  
 
6 Data  Analysis  
 
Subject  Population(s) for Analysis  
Any subject who is observed in the  study will have their data analyzed  per the actual  
treatment  received for evaluating safety.  
 
Statistical Methods  
Descriptive analyses of baseline characteristics and outcomes  will include  means and 
standard  deviations for continuous  variables  with  frequencies and percentages for 
categorical  variabl es. Analysis Populations: There are 3 analysis populations planned. 
Intent -to-treat (ITT)  will include  any subject  randomized  according to their treatment  
assignment.  Per-protocol (PP) will include  randomized  subjects without  major protocol  
violations  and who were  compliant  (at least 80%  of planned  sessions with their treatment  
assignment.   A detailed  list of the major protocol  violations  warranting  exclusion  from  
the PP analysis will be  determined prior  to trial commencement.  The Safety  population 
will inc lude all subjects who receive treatment,  according to treatment  received.  We do 
not anticipate these groups  to differ.  
 
Aim #1: Safety  analyses will use the safety  population and be primarily  descriptive,  
reporting the number  and percentage  of adverse events, in particular,  any instances of 
seizure or other  serious  adverse event. Instances  of decline  in paretic  or nonparetic  hand  
function as measured  by the (Assisting  Hand  Assessment)  AHA  scaled  score will also be 
evaluated.  
 
For tDCS/Bimanual Therapy: The same analyses will be conducted as the tDCS/CIMT 
study outlined in Aim #1. 
 
Aim #2: The primary  analysis  will use the  ITT population to compare  logit-based AHA  
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  26 of  37  units between  the intervention  and control  group adjusting for baseline values  of AHA  
and presen ce of MEP for precision. Confidence  intervals  and P -values  will be based  on 
the t-distribution  with  corresponding degrees of freedom.  P-values  < 0.05 will be  
considered  significant. Supportive  analyses using the PP  population will also  be 
conducted. Secondary  endpoints of Canadian  Occupational  Performance  Measure 
(COPM),  TOKEN test, Stereognosis and Finger  force  measurements  will be  analyzed  in a 
similar fashion, adjusted  for baseline values  and presence of MEP with  supportive  
analyses using the PP populati on.  The  association  of improved logit-based  AHA units  
with DTI  derived fractional  anisotropy (FA)  and MEP will be  evaluated  across all 
patients  using generalized  linear regression  and the t-distribution  with corresponding 
degrees of  freedom  for inference.  Secondary analyses will evaluate these associations  
also adjusting  for age and sex due to potential  confounding  influence  though may be 
limited by  sample size.  Additional  analyses for the comparisons  mentioned above  will 
consider non-parametric tests or  transformations  of variables in the event  distributional 
assumptions  do not hold.  
 
For tDCS/Bimanual Therapy:  The primary analysis will compare logit -based AHA 
units pre and post intervention.  Confidence  intervals  and P -values will be based  on the 
t-distribution  with  corresponding degrees of freedom.  P-values  < 0.05 will be  considered  
significant.  Supportive  analyses  using the PP  population will also be conducted. 
Secondary endpoints of Canadian  Occupational  Performance  Measure (COPM),  
caregiver questionna ires will be  analyzed  in a similar  fashion, adjusted for baseline 
values.  Secondary analyses will evaluate these associations  also adjusting for age and 
sex due to potential confounding influence  though may be limited by  sample size.  
Additional  analyses for the comparisons  mentioned above  will consider non-parametric 
tests or  transformations  of variables in the event  distributional  assumptions do not hold. 
 
Power  and Sample  Size:  The sample size and power  was primarily driven  by the primary  
analysis  of Hypothesis  #1 of Aim #2. Power  calculations for the primary  outcome  of 
logit-based  AHA units  were  based  on 10 patients  in each group with variability  estimates 
from  the rTMS/CIMT  study mentioned in the preliminary  studies  section  suggesting a 
standard  deviati on of approximately 16. The correlation  between  pre- and post-treatment  
AHA scores in the rTMS/CIMT study  was 0.97. Based  on these estimates,  we will have 
81% power  to detect  a difference  of 5 logit-based  AHA units. This study  is intended to 
determine  feasibility  and explore  preliminary  efficacy  results  to inform  the design of a 
future, larger RCT  should promising  results  be found.  
 
Aim #3:  Associations between  changes in cortical  excitability  and the primary  and 
secondary  outcomes will  be evaluated  across all patients  using generalized  linear  
regression  as in Aim #2.  The change in contralesional  M1 cortical  excitability  will be  
compared  between intervention  and control  groups, adjusting for baseline values,  using 
the ITT population. This  comparison will be  repeated  within  the subgroup of patients  
with an  ipsilesional MEP.  Similar to other  aims,  confidence  intervals  and P-values  will 
be based  on the t-distribution  with corresponding degrees of  freedom  and supportive  
analyses using the PP population will also be  conducted. Additional  analyses for the 
comparisons  mentioned above  will consider  non- parametric  tests or  transformations  of 
variables in the  event  distributional assumptions  do not hold. 
 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  27 of  37  7 Safety and  Adverse Events  
Definitions  
Adverse Event  (AE): An adverse event  (AE)  is any  symptom, sign, illness  or experience 
that develops  or worsens  in severity  during the course  of the study. Intercurrent illnesses 
or injuries  will be regarded  as adverse events.  Abnormal  results  of laboratory or 
diagnostic  procedures  are considered  to be  adverse  events  if the  abnormality:  
• Results in study withdrawal 
• Is associated  with  a serious  adverse event  
• Is associated  with  clinical signs  or symptoms  
• Leads to additional  treatment or to further diagnostic tests 
• Is considered by the Investigator  to be  of clinical significance.  
 
Serious  Adverse Event  (SAE):  A serious  adverse event  (SAE)  is any adverse  event  that is:  
• Fatal  
• Life-threatening  
• Requires  or prolongs a hospital stay  
• Results in persistent or significant  disability  or incapacity  
• A congenital  anomaly or birth defect  
 
Important  medical  events are events  that may  not be immediately  life-threatening, but are 
clearly  of major  clinical  significance and may be SAEs.  They  may jeopardize the 
subject,  and may require intervention  to prevent  one or the other  serious  outcomes noted 
above.  
 
Hospitalization:  Hospitalization  shall include  any initial admission (even  if less than 24 
hours)  to a healthcare facility  as a result of  a precipitating  clinical  adverse effect;  to 
include  transfer within th e hospital to an intensive  care unit. Hospitalization or 
prolongation of  hospitalization  in the absence  of a precipitating,  clinical  adverse effect  
(e.g., for  a preexisting  condition not associated with a new adverse effect  or with a 
worsening of the preex isting  condition;  admission  for a protocol -specified  procedure)  is 
not, in itself,  a serious  adverse effect.  
 
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect  (UADE) : An unanticipated adverse device  effect  is 
any serious adverse effect  on health or safety  or any life-threatening problem  or death  
caused  by, or associated  with, a  device, if  that effect,  problem, or death  was not 
previously identified  in nature, severity, or  degree  of incidence in the investigational 
plan, or  any other  unanticipated serious problem  associated  with a  device  that relates  to 
the rights,  safety,  or welfare of subjects.  
 
Unanticipated Problems  Involving Risk To  Subjects  or Others (UPIRTSO) : An adverse 
event  that in the opinion of the Principal  Investigator  is unexpected, related  to the  device, 
and serious.  
 
Safety  Monitoring Plan  
All research  procedures  will be  performed by qualified  personnel  who  have completed  
required  training, including human  subjects training.  Dr. Bernadette  Gillick  has been 
investigating  NIBS since 2007 with PhD  training  in TMS and Neuroimaging.  
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  28 of  37  Additionally, she has been trained  by the Harvard  Berenson  Center  for Non-Invasive Brain  
Stimulation  2012 and NYC Neuromodulation Conference 2013 on the use and application  of 
tDCS,  and by Brainsight  Stereotactic  Neuronavigation President  Roch  Comeau  in 2013. 
 
TMS cortical excitability  testing  will occur at the CTSI  in the  designated  TMS  room  with  
the trained  nursing/medical  personnel  on site,  and the hospital emergency  response team  
immediately  available.  
 
tDCS /CIMT  application will occur at Gillette Children’s  Specialty  Healthcare in St. Paul,  
Minnesota.  Gillette  specializes  in diagnosing and treating  neurological  conditions  as well  
as other  complex  medical  conditions. Gillette  encompasses a  comprehensive  team  of 
specialists that provide medical,  surgical  rehabilitation  and assistive technology services.  
They  partner with Regions  hospital in the operation of a pediatric  intensive  care unit. 
 
For tDCS/Bimanual Therapy: tDCS  application and intervention will occur at UMN 
Center for Neur obehavioral Development in Minneapolis, Minnesota. We will have an 
on-call, physician during the intervention hours.    
 
All personnel  will comply  with all related  regulations  and laws,  included, but not limited  
to 45CFR  parts  60 and 64, and HIPAA Privacy  Regulations. Study data and information 
will be  kept confidential  and managed in accordance with requirements of HIPAA.   All 
data will be stored in locked offices and not released  without subject  permission. 
 
Subjects  will be rigorously screened  against  inclusion/exclusion criteria  to ensure  that 
their participation  is safe.  This screening  begins  at the initial discussion in the phone  
screen,  continues  with  review  of the medical  records by the physicians  on the study and is  
again  repeated  in-person with an  on-site screening  tool. 
 
AEs and SAEs  will be assessed and  followed throughout  the study.  Vital sign monitoring 
will occur  before  and after TMS and tDCS  applications.  Active  adverse events  collection  
through the  Subject  Report  of Symptoms  questionnaire  will be  employed before and after  
tDCS  application  
 
Subjects  will have  contact  information to enable  them to contact  study personnel  easily  
and quickly.  
 
Anticipated  Risks  / Risk Mitigation - We anticipate  minor  adverse events  as listed  below  
in this table.  For a serious  adverse event  such as seizure,  please refer to the study  
stopping rules  as listed in  next section.  
 
Study  Procedure  Anticipated  Risks  Risk Mitigation   
tDCS  Burn - Electrolysis  Ensure  proper  electrode  contact  with skin  
tDCS  Stimulation  in subjects  
with reduced  sensation  Assess  sensation,  avoid placing  electrodes  
over areas  of decreased  sensation   
tDCS  Stimulation  over 
broken skin, reduced  
resistance  Assess  skin integrity,  avoid placement  of 
electrodes over  recent  shaving, skin 
defects   
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  29 of  37  tDCS  Stimulation  over 
conductive  implants  Screen  appropriately  for exclusion  criteria  
of implants   
 
tDCS  Stimulation  over a 
tumor which  may alter 
metabolic  activity  Screen  appropriately  for exclusion  criteria  
of neoplasm. 
tDCS  Threshold  altering  
pharmacologi c agent  Screen  appropriately  for exclusion  criteria  
of centrally  acting  agent.  
tDCS  Itching,  Tingling,  
Burning Sensation in 
the area of the 
electrodes  Ensure  proper  contact  of surface  
electrodes with skin. Maintain current  
dosage within  low-range  of researched  
dosages.  Ensure that electrode  sponges  
are properly sanitized  and that saline 
solution is  appropriately  employed.  
tDCS  Headache  Ensure that headband  securing  electrodes  
is in proper placement, yet not to the level  
of impingement  of scalp  area.  Maint ain 
current  dosage  within  low range of  
delivery.  
tDCS  Pain- Neck,  Scalp  Ensure that electrodes are in proper  
contact  with  skin and adjust  head  position 
as needed  for comfort.  
tDCS  Skin Redness  Ensure  proper  electrode  position  and 
proper  level  of moisture  to even  
stimulation  across  the electrode  
tDCS  Fatigue,  Sleepiness  Screen  for continuous effect  at follow -up 
visit.  
tDCS  Concentration  or Mood  
Changes  Evaluate cognitive  status through  
physician examination and psychometric  
testing  at three  timepoints.  
TMS  Stimulation  over a 
tumor which  may alter 
metabolic  activity  Screen  appropriately  for exclusion  criteria  
of neoplasm. 
TMS  Threshold  altering  
pharmacologic  agent  Physician  review  of each medical  record  
for determination  of appropriateness for 
study  inclusion.  
TMS  Headache  Ensure that headband  securing  electrodes  
is in proper placement, yet not to the level  
of impingement  of scalp  area.  Maintain  
current  dosage  within  low range of  
delivery.  
TMS  Fatigue,  Sleepiness  Screen  for continuous effect  throughout  
observation.  
TMS  Temporary  mild 
hearing loss due  to 
noise level  of 
equipment  Ear plugs  will be inserted  before  
commencement  of TMS testing . 
 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  30 of  37  CIMT  Sling/Mitt  Irritation  Screen  continuously  during  application  
and modify sling/mitt position  to ensure  
comfor table  fit. 
MRI Potential dislodging  of 
indwelling  metals and 
disruption of medical  
devices.  Prior  to participation screen  for existence  
of indwelling  metal/medical  devices.  
Exclude, or, if metal/medical  devices are 
compatible,  obtain verification  from 
appropriate  physician.  
MRI Metal  projectiles  
inadvertently presented  
during  MRI  Conduct  on-site screen  and removal  of 
potential projectiles  (coins,  keys,  etc) 
MRI Unknown  effects  of 
MRI  on the unborn 
fetus  Administer  pregnancy  test on all female  
subjects.  Exclude if  test is positive.  
MRI Temporary  mild 
hearing loss due  to 
noise level  of 
equipment  Subjects  will wear  earplugs and 
headphones  during MRI  to protect  against  
excessive noise.  
MRI Strong  claustrophobia  Claustrophobia  will be screened  in 
advance  of participation  
MRI Transient  dizziness  
upon removal  from the 
magnet  Subject  will be  instructed  to sit up slowly  
and remain seated for several  minutes  
before  standing. Subject  will not be  
dismissed  until dizziness  subsides.  
 
Medical  Monitoring  for Particip ant Safety  
The Principal Investigator will oversee  the safety  of the study, including careful  
assessment  and appropriate  reporting  of adverse events.   Medical monitoring will include  
a regular  assessment  of the number  and type  of serious adverse events.  
 
The Medical  Monitor for  the study is: 
Linda E. Krach, MD  
Vice President of Medical 
Operations  
Courage Kenny Rehabilitation  Institute  
800 East  28th Street  
Mail Route 12101 
Minneapolis, MN  55407  
612-863-7150 
 
Study  Stopping Rules  
Both  Individual  and Entire  Study stopping rules  are described  below:  
 
Death. Study  stopped for  both individual  and entire  study.  A full investigation  of event  
will be  explored by entire  study team.  The medical  monitor will review  all details.  Report  
of event  will be  distributed  to all governing and monitoring committees.  
Seizure:  Individual - Immediate suspension of  tDCS  application  for this particular child  
and initiation and follow -through of safe and effective  seizure management.  Refer  to 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  31 of  37  comprehensive  seizure management  outline.  Provide physician  letter to subject  which  
describes the  research -related  adverse  event  with physician interpretation.  
 
Study Medical  Director Evaluation. Recommend  further evaluation to the  child  and legal  
guardian by pediatric  neurologist  if not the  pediatr ician  routinely involved in the child’s  
care.  
 
An identification  of causality  and re-evaluation of treatment  design will occur  by study  
researchers,  including consultants,  medical  monitor  and physicians  in order  to proceed.  
All procedures  will be assessed  for strict adherence to all intervention  steps  listed  in the 
protocol.  If deviation is found, error will be  corrected.  Proceed  with study. 
 
Entire  Study - If another  subject  incurs a seizure proceed  with steps for  Individual  
Stopping Rules as noted above.  Study will be  suspended at  this point and a thorough 
review  by research  team,  medical  monitor and consultants  will occur in order to assess  
the need for amendment  of the protocol  or full stop/termination  of study for future  safety  
concerns.  
 
Anticipated  Adverse Events  
Subjects  will be children  who  sustained  a congenital  stroke  before, during or one-year 
after birth.  In addition to cited  research procedure  risk, they will be  at risk for  
complications,  morbidities  and mortalities associated  with pediatric  strokes. 
 
Adverse Event Reporting 
All Adverse  Events  occurring during the study period must  be recorded.  The clinical  
course  of each event  will be  followed  until  resolution, stabilization,  or until it has  been 
determined  that study  treatment or  participati on is not the  cause.  
 
The Sponsor -Investigator  will promptly  review documented adverse effects and abnormal  
test findings  to determine 
1) if the  abnormal  test finding should be  classified  as an  adverse effect;  
2) if there  is a reasonable possibility that the adverse effect  was caused  by the 
investigational device  or, if applicable,  other  study treatment or diagnostic  
product(s);  and 
3) if the  adverse effect  meets the  criteria  for a serious  adverse effect.  
 
If the Sponsor -Investigator’s  final determination  of causali ty is “unknown and of  
questionable  relationship  to the  investigational  device  or, if  applicable,  other  study 
treatment  or diagnostic  product(s)”, the adverse effect  will be  classified  as associated  with 
the use  of the  investigational  device or study  treatm ent or diagnostic drug  product(s)     
for reporting  purposes.  If the investigator -sponsor’s  final determination  of causality  is 
“unknown but not related  to the  investigational  device or, if applicable, other  study 
treatment  or diagnostic  product(s)”, this determination  and the rationale  for the 
determination  will be  documented  in the  respective subject’s case history.  
Adverse Events  
All observed or volunteered adverse effects and abnormal  test findings, if applicable, or  
suspected causal  relationship  to the  investigational  device or, if  applicable, other  study 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  32 of  37  treatment  or diagnostic  product(s)  will be recorded  in the  subjects’  case histories.   For all 
adverse effects,  sufficient  information will be  pursued and/or  obtained so as to permit 
 
1) an adequate  determ ination  of the outcome of the effect  (i.e., whether  the effect  should 
be classified  as a serious  adverse effect)  and;  
2) an assessment  of the casual  relationship  between  the adverse effect  and the 
investigational device  or, if applicable, the other  study treatment  or diagnostic  product(s).  
 
Adverse effects  or abnormal  test findings  felt to be associated with the  investigational 
device  or, if  applicable,  other  study treatment  or diagnostic product(s)  will be followed  
until the  effect  (or its sequelae)  or the abnormal  test finding resolves  or stabilizes  at a 
level  acceptable to the Sponsor -Investigator.  
 
Adverse  Events  that do not  qualify as Serious  Adverse Events  or as Unanticipated  
Adverse  Device  Effects will be  reported the IRB with the  continuing review  progr ess 
report.  
 
Serious Adverse Events  
Unexpected  serious  adverse events that are at least  possibly related  will be reported  to the  
IRB within 10 days  of learning  of the event. 
 
Unanticipated  Adverse Device Effects  (UADE)  
Investigators are required  to submit a report of a UADE  to the  reviewing  IRB as soon as 
possible, but in no event  later than 10  working days after the Investigator  first learns of  
the event. 
 
If the Adverse  Event  is Serious, Unanticipated,  Device Related,  and determined  by the 
Sponsor -Investi gator  to present  an unreasonable  risk to subjects,  the Sponsor  must  
terminate  the study within 5 working days of that determination.  
 
Unanticipated Problems  Involving  Risk To Subjects  or Others (UPIRTSO)  
Investigators  are required  to submit  a report  of UPIRTSO  events  to the IRB within  10 
working days of first learning of the event.  
 
Data  Safety  Monitoring  Board  
No DSMB will be  incorporated in this study  as a medical  monitor is in place.  
 
8 Data  Handling  and Record  Keeping  
 
Confidentiality  
Information about  study subjects will be  kept confidential  and managed according  to the  
requirements  of the Health  Insurance Portability  and Accountability  Act of 1996 
(HIPAA).  Those  regulations  require  a signed subject  authorization  informing the subject  
of the following:  
• What protected  health information  (PHI)  will be  collected from subjects 
in this study  
• Who will  have access  to that information and why  
• Who will use or  disclose  that information 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  33 of  37  • The rights  of a research subject  to revoke  their authorization  for use of 
their PHI. 
 
In the event  that a subject revokes  authorization to collect  or use PHI, the investigator,  by 
regulation, retains  the ability  to use  all information  collected  prior  to the  revocation of  
subject  authorization.   For subjects that  have revoked authorizat ion to collect  or use PHI, 
attempts  should  be made  to obtain permission to collect  at least vital status (i.e. that the  
subject  is alive)  at the end of  their scheduled  study period. 
 
Source Documents  
Source Data are the clinical  findings  and observations, laboratory  and test data,  and other  
information contained in Source Documents . Source Documents  are the original  records  
(and certified copies  of original records);  including, but not limited to, hospital  medical  
records,  physician  or office  charts,  physic ian or nursing notes, subject  diaries  or 
evaluation checklists,  pharmacy  dispensing records, recorded  data  from automated  
instruments,  x-rays, etc. When applicable, information  recorded  on the  CRF shall match  
the Source Data  recorded  on the  Source Document s. 
 
Case  Report  Forms  
The study  case report  form (CRF)  is the  primary  data collection  instrument  for the study. 
All data  requested  on the CRF  must be  recorded. All missing  data must  be explained.  If 
a space on the CRF is left blank because the procedure  was not done  or the question was  
not asked,  write  “N/D”.   If the item is not applicable  to the  individual  case, write  “N/A”.  
All entries  should be  printed legibly  in black  ink.  If any entry  error has been  made,  to 
correct  such  an error,  draw  a single  straight line through the incorrect entry  and enter  the 
correct  data above  it.  All such changes must  be initialed  and dated. DO NOT  ERASE  
OR WHITE  OUT ERRORS.   For clarification of illegible  or uncertain  entries,  print  the 
clarification  above  the item,  then initial and date it.  
 
A Case Report  Form  will be completed for each subject  enrolled  into the  study. The 
investigator- sponsor  will review,  approve  and sign/date  each completed  CRF; the 
investigator- sponsor’s  signature  serving as attestation  of the investigat or-sponsor’s  
responsibility  for ensuring that all  clinical  and laboratory  data entered  on the CRF  are 
complete,  accurate and  authentic. 
 
1) Eligibility  Phone  Screen  
2) HIPAA  Form  
3) Demographic  Medical  History  Form  including MRI  Report  
4) Individual  Data Collection Forms  
5) Exit Forms  
Data for this study will be entered  by the research  investigators  and study coordinator  
immediately  into the CRF.  The data will then be  entered  within the  next week into a  
REDCap  database , which  uses a MySQL  database via a  secure web inter face with data  
checks used  during data entry  to ensure data quality. REDCap  includes  a complete suite 
of features to  support  HIPAA compliance, including a full audit  trail, user-based  
privileges,  and integration  with the  institutional LDAP  server. The MySQ L database and 
the web server will both be housed on secure servers operated by the University  of 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  34 of  37  Minnesota Academic Health  Center’s Information  Systems  group (AHC -IS). The servers 
are in a physically secure  location  on campus and  are backed  up nightly, with the 
backups  stored  in accordance with the AHC -IS retention  schedule  of daily,  weekly, and 
monthly tapes retained  for 1 month, 3 months, and 6 months, respectively. Weekly  
backup tapes  are stored  offsite.  The AHC -IS servers provide  a stable,  secure,  well -
maintained,  and high- capacity  data storage environment, and  both REDCap  and 
MySQL  are widely -used, powerful, reliable, well-supported systems.  Access to the  
study's  data in REDCap  will be  restricted  to the members  of the study  team  by 
username  and passwor d. 
 
Records Retention  
All records  will be  kept in the study  coordinator’s  office  in a locked file  cabinet.  The 
CRF’s will be kept with  the study coordinator until the study is completed.  Thereafter  the 
PI will maintain all  records  for 6 years.  
 
9 Study Monit oring,  Auditing,  and Inspecting  
 
This study will be  monitored according to IRB/CTSI/GCP  guidelines.  The  Investigator  
will allocate adequate time for such monitoring activities.  The Investigator  will also 
ensure  that the monitor or other  compliance or quality assurance reviewer  is given access 
to all study- related documents  and study related  facilities  (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic  
laboratory, etc.),  and has adequate  space to conduct  the monitoring visit.  
 
Study  Monitoring Plan  
The study  uses a non-significant  risk device.  Therefore, independent  monitoring  of the 
clinical  study  for clinical  protocol  and abbreviated IDE  application  compliance will be  
conducted periodically  (i.e., at  a minimum of annually)  by qualified  staff of the 
University  of Minnesota’s  Clinical  and Translational  Science Institute  (CTSI).  
 
Quality  Assurance Procedures  
Data will be reviewed  for completeness and accuracy  at the end of the trial by verifying  
missing  data is indeed missing  from the paper  form  and outliers  are true values prior  to 
beginning the study analysis.  
 
Auditing  and Inspection  
The investigator  will permit study- related  monitoring, audits, and inspections  by the IRB, 
the sponsor, government  regulatory  bodies, and University  compliance and quality  
assurance groups of all study related  documents  (e.g.  source documents,  regulatory  
documents, data collection  instruments, study data etc.).  The investigator will ensure  the 
capability  for inspections  of applicable  study- related  facilities  (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic  
laboratory, etc.).  
 
Participation  as an investigator in this study implies  acceptance of potential  inspection by 
government  regulatory  authorities and applicable  University  compliance and quality  
assurance offices.  
 
10 Ethical Considerations  
This study is to be  conducted accor ding to US and  international standards  of Good 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  35 of  37  Clinical Practice,  applicable  government  regulations and Institutional research policies  
and procedures.  
 
This protocol  and any amendments will be submitted  to a properly constituted  
independent  Institutional Review Board  (IRB), in agreement  with  local  legal  
prescriptions,  for formal  approval  of the study conduct.  The decision  of the IRB 
concerning the conduct  of the study will be  made  in writing  to the  investigator  and a  copy 
of this decision will be  provided to the  sponsor  before commencement  of this study.  
 
11 Study Finances  
 
Funding  Sources  
• This study is funded by a University  of Minnesota  Clinical and Translational  
Science Institute K01 Grant,  with  funds  provided to the University  by the National  
Institutes of Health (NIH).   Research  reported  is supported by the Eunice  Kennedy 
Shriver  National  Institute  of Child  Health and Human  Development  of the  
National  Institutes  of Health  under Award  Number  K01HD078484. The      
content  is solely  the responsibility  of the authors  and does  not necessarily  
represent  the official  views  of the National  Institutes  of Health.  
• Cerebral  Palsy  International Research  Foundation (CPIRF)  
• Foundation for Physical  Therapy Magistro  Family  Foundation  Research  Grant  
 
 
Conflicts of Interest  
Any investigator who has  a conflict  of interest  with this study (patent  ownership, 
royalties, or financial  gain greater  than the  minimum  allowable by their institution,  etc.) 
must  refer to the  Regents  Policies  on Individual  Conflict of Interest  Policy  or Institutional 
Conflict  of Interest  Policy. These policies require  University  Faculty  and staff to report  
external  professional  activities  and business and significant  financial  interests  related  to 
his or her University  activities by  submitting  a REPA (Repo rt of External  Professional  
Activities) at least once per year.  Faculty  and staff should also  file a REPA  when  
substantial  changes in business or  financial  interests  occur, when an activity  that presents  
a potential conflict of interest  is anticipated, or when submitting  an application for 
research  support or  technology transfer,  submitting  research  protocols  to the IRB, or 
receiving  financial  contributions. All University  of Minnesota  investigators  will follow  
the University  conflict  of interest  policy.  
 
12 Publications  Plan  
Neither  the complete nor any part of  the results  of the study carried out under  this protocol, nor  any 
of the information provided by the sponsor  for the purposes  of performing the study, will be  
published or  passed  on to any third party  without the  consent  of the study sponsor.  Any 
investigator  involved with  this study is obligated to  provide  the sponsor with complete test results  
and all data derived from  the study.  
 
13 List of Reference Documents  
Below is a list of documents  used in the conduct  of this study. Copies  of these 
documents  can be found in  the study’s regulatory  binder:  
 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  36 of  37  1. Phone  Screen  
2. Manual  Ability  Classification System  form  
3. Physician  Medical  Records  Screening  Form  
4. On-Site Screening  Form  
5. Consent  Form  
6. Assent  Form  
7. Addendum  to Assen t for Female  Minors  
8. Subject  Report  of Symptoms  Questionnaire  
9. Comprehensive  seizure management  outline  
10. Complete  seizure observation documentation form  
11. Physician  seizure note 
 
14 References  
 
1. Gillick  B, Krach  L, Feyma  T, Rich T, Moberg K ,Thomas  W, Cassidy  J, Menk J, 
Carey  J. Primed  low-frequency repetitive  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation and 
constraint -induced movement  therapy  in pediatric  hemiparesis:  A randomized  
controlled  trial. Dev Med Child  Neurol . 2014;56(1):44- 52. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12243.  
 
2. Kirton  A, Deveber G, Gunraj  C, Chen  R. Neurocardiogenic syncope complicating 
pediatric  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation.  Pediatr  Neurol . 2008;39(3):196 -197. 
 
Bolognini  N, Vallar  G, Casati  C, et al. Neurophysiological  and behavioral  effects  of 
tDCS  combined with  constr aint-induced  movement  therapy in poststroke  patients.  
Neurorehabil  Neural Repair . 2011;25(9):819- 829. doi: 10.1177/1545968311411056  
3. Gillick B, Feyma T, Menk J, Usset M, Vaith A, Wood TJ, Worthington R, Krach 
LE.  Safety and feasibility of transcranial dire ct current stimulation in pediatric 
hemiparesis: randomized controlled preliminary study. Phys Ther.  2015; 95(3): 
337-49. 
4. de Brito Brandao M, Gordon AM, Mancini MC.  Functional impact of constraint 
therapy and bimanual training in children with cerebral pa lsy: A randomized 
controlled trial.  Am J Occup Ther. 2012; 66(6): 672- 81. 
5. Gelkop N, Burshtein DG, Lahav A, Brezner A, Al -Oraibi S, Ferre CL, Gordon 
AM. Efficacy of constraint -induced movement therapy and bimanual training in 
children with hemiplegic cerebral palsy in an educational setting.  Phys Occup 
Ther Pediatr .  2015; 35(1): 24- 39. 
6. Bolognini  N, Vallar  G, Casati  C, et al. Neurophysiological  and behavioral  effects of  
tDCS  combined with  constraint -induced  movement  therapy in poststroke  patients.  
Neurorehabil  Neural Repair . 2011;25(9):819- 829. doi: 
10.1177/1545968311411056.  
 
7. Kirton  A, Chen R, Friefeld S, Gunraj  C, Pontigon AM, Deveber  G. Contralesional  
repetitive  transcranial magnetic  stimulation for chronic  hemiparesis  in subcortical  
paediatric  stroke:  A randomised  trial.  Lancet  Neurology . 2008;7(6):507- 513. 
 
8. Ciechanski P, Kirton A.  Transcranial direct- current stimulation can enhance 
motor learning in children.  Cereb Cortex. 2016. pii: bhw114 [Epub ahead of 
IRB Code  # 1408M53169  
Version  Date:  5.9.2017  37 of  37  print].  
 
9. Kirton A, Ciechanski P, Zewdie E, Andersen J, Nettel —Aguirre A, Carlson H, et 
al. Transcranial direct current stimulation for children with perinatal stroke and 
hemiparesis. Neurology.  2017; 88(3): 259 -267. 
 
10. Bikson M, Grossman P, Thomas C, Zannou AL, Jiang J, Adnan T, et al. Safety of 
transcranial direct current stimulation: Evidence based updated 2016.  Brain Stimul.  2016; 9(5): 641- 61. 