Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 1 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
  Prophylactic Limited Left  Sided  Maze  Procedure  to Prevent  Post -Operative  
Atrial Fibrillation  in Adult Cardiac Surgery Patients  
 (PREVENT  AF-Feasibility Study ) 
Investigator:   Charles Willekes , MD, FACS  
              CV Cardiothoracic Surgery  
              Spectrum Health   
              100 Michigan St, NE  
                            Grand Rapids, MI 49503      
 
Version Dat e: February 17, 2020  
Objective  
To evaluate  the safety and effect iveness of  a prophylactic limited  left sided  maze procedure  in subjects  
undergoing cardiac surgery  to decrease  the incidence of post -operative atrial fibrillation ( POAF).  
Background  
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common complication fol lowing adult open heart surgery  and is the  
leading cause  for prolong ed hospital stay (1,2) .  The incidence of this common p ost-operative 
complication is 30 to 60% (1,25). POAF  places enormous strain on hospital resources  and subjects’  
immediate post -operative wellbeing.  More importantly, patients who experience POAF have decreased 
long -term  survival  (33,34 ).  Currently there is no effective treatment to prevent POAF  (25,26) .  Although 
multiple  preventat ive therapies have been trialed  the overall incidence remai ns at aroun d 40% (Society 
of Thoracic Surgeons Database 2017) . New treatment strategies are  needed to  reduce or eliminate the 
occurrence  of POAF . An effective strategy would  lessen  the associated morbidities  such as hypotension 
and heart failure , exclude t he additional medications  especially anticoagulants , and negate the added  
hospital length  of stay ( LOS) incurred by this complication .     
 
AF is  an abnormal and irregular heart rhythm in which electrical signals are generated chaotically 
throughout the upper chambers (atria) of the heart .   Studies have demonstrated increased risk factors 
for the development of POAF (11,12,15).   The predominant risk factor is age .  Age 70 or greater predicts 
a minimum  30% risk of POAF with  isolated  coronary artery bypas s grafting (CABG)  surgery (11,12,15,18 ).  
An isolated aortic valve replacement (AVR) in this age group carries a 40% risk while a combined 
AVR/CABG , MVR (mitral valve replacement)/CABG or AVR/MVR  have a 60% risk of POAF  (18,25). 
Although there are other published risk  factors  which increase  the occurrence  of POAF such as  low 
ejection fraction, peripheral arterial  disease, d iabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , or re nal 
failure;  they are not consistent throughout the literature  (11,12,15, 18).   
The economic  impact of POAF on hospital resources is staggering.  POAF lengthens hospital stay  an    
average of two to four days  costing the health  care system an estimated  2 billion dollars per year (1 ,3).   
Additionally, the re are associated  costs and morbidity  such as bradydysrhythmias,  hypotension , 
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 2 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 bleeding , and the utiliz ation of  antiarrhythmic and anticoagulant drugs  in the treatment of POAF. The 
most severe complication of POAF is stroke  and patients permanently debilitat ed by a stroke  are known 
to have a decreased life expectancy  (4,9) .   
Ninety percent  of thrombi resulting from AF are found in the left atrial appendage ( LAA) and are thus 
the source of embolic stroke due to AF (20). Post open heart surgery  patients who experience  POAF are 
at nearly a 20% risk for long te rm AF with all its adverse sequela  including heart failure and decreased 
survival  (22). 
Although multiple causes for POAF have been examined such as inflammatory mediators , autonomic 
innervation, or  surgical trauma,  one definitive etiology has not been found  (1,25 ). What is known is tha t 
the etiologic cause  stimulates firing  of the most common  (90%)  triggers of AF  which are electrical 
impulses originating  in the pulmonary veins  (10). The procedure to eliminate these drive rs of 
spontaneous electrical activity  causing AF is known as ablation.  Ablation  can be done in the cardiac 
catheterization lab or the operating room.  Different energy sources such as cryotherapy, 
radiofrequency , or high intensity ultrasound,  may be used depending on operator preference.  Whether 
performed surgically or percutaneously the cornerstone of ablative therapy relies on pulmonary ve in 
isolation ( 35,36  ). Ablation has been proven to  be more effective than medical therapy regardless as to 
the conte xt in which AF occurs  (35,36) . 
Many studies have been done to evaluate medical interventions to prevent POAF and recommendations 
by the American College of Cardiology and Heart Rhythm Society are available to clinicians.  The first line  
(Class Ia)  and probably most effective  therapy is beta blockers.  Studies promoting amiodarone, the 
second most common recommended treatment  (Class IIa)  to prevent POAF, have not shown better than 
a 15-20%  decrease in the incidence of POAF  (38,39) .  Using beta block ers and amiodarone in 
combination also has been shown to reduce the incidence of POAF however there are marked side 
effects and drug interactions with the routine use of amiodarone .  None of these trials have been able to 
demonstrate better than a 20% redu ction in POAF (1,37,38).  Specifically , two of the largest and most 
cited are the BLOSS trial for beta blockers and the ARCH trial for amiodarone which current medical 
therapy is based on (46,47).  Of major significance is in spite of mandatory perioperativ e beta blockers 
for all CABG patients in the United States, the POAF incidence remains around 30% (45).  Sotalol has also 
shown some partial benefit in reducing POAF however  it is no longer on formulary  at Spectrum Health 
Hospital due to its toxic side effe cts. 
AtriCure is a medical device company that manufactures a n FDA approved  synergy  ablation system 
consisting of the Ablation and Sensing Unit (ASU2) , an Atri Cure Switch box (ASB3) , an Atri Cure® Synergy 
Ablation Clamp, and a footswitch.  When activated, the  ASU2 delivers radiofrequency energy to the 
linear elect rodes on the insulated jaws of the Synergy Ablation Clamp.  The AtriCure ® Synergy Ablation 
Clamp is a single patient use electrosurgical instrument designed  to ablate cardiac tissue for the 
treatment of patients with atrial fibrillation  who are undergoing concomitant cardiac surgery  (Figure 1) . 
The clamp uses two pairs of radiofrequency electrodes to deliver transmural lesions on the myocardium .  
The ASU2 is activated by depressing the fo otswitch.  Once activated, the ASU2 emits a continuous  
audible tone.  This tone confirms that current is flowing between the jaws of the Synergy Ablation 
Clamp.  When the tone turns to intermittent, tissue imped ance has been achieved and the footswitch 
can be released (IFU).  
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 3 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 The AtriCure ® Synergy Ablation System measures tissue i mpedance and temperature throughout the 
ablation cycle and uses this information to control the application of energy to the tissue. The amount of 
energy delivered to the tissue is driven solely by tissue impedance.  The System determines the 
minimum energy delivery required to create a transmural (full thickness) lesion based on tissue 
impedance and delivers only that amount of energy to the tissue. The time to tissue impedance varie s 
but has been shown to complete a transmural lesion at an average of 16 seconds. (41)  Energy delivery 
changes throughout the ablation cycle as tissue impedance changes. The lesion is visible as a white 
coloration of the tissue. The device is designed suc h that the lesions will not spread beyond the jaw 
width  (IFU) . 
The efficacy of this device in creating a transmural scar to block the abnormal impulses from the 
pulmonary veins has been proven in the ABLATE trial  and animal studies (27,41) .  
The AtriC ure device is FDA approved for both the surgical treatment  of AF and the ablation of cardiac 
tissue.  
 
 
Figure 1 
The limited left sided  surgical maze procedure involves amputation of the left atrial appendage ( LAA) 
and the creation of  bilateral lesions encircling the outside of the left atrium just proximal to the 
entrance of the pulmonary veins  (Figure 2 ). The effectiveness of the limited left sided  surgical maze  in 
restoring and maintaining sinus rhythm  in the literature  is 90 % at one year (6, 13,31). At Spectrum Health 
utilizing the Atricure in both chronic and paroxysmal AF our 30 day success rate is 74%.   A limited  left 
sided surgical maze  procedure , as opposed to a full left or bi -atrial maze , does not require  opening the 
cardiac  chambers to create additional lesions  inside the left or right atrium.  Whether performing a 
limited or  full left sided  surgical maze procedure , when  it is done concomitantly with the primary cardiac 
operation , no additional risks  are incurred by  the patient (7 ,8,28) .   
Amputation of the LAA is common practice amongst some cardiac surgeons to decrease the risk of 
stroke .  It is a routine part of the maze procedure as it has clearly been shown to decrease the risk of 
stroke , without  added risk for bleeding , as well as eliminating  myocardium with  a possible trigger of AF 
(10,20,29) . A prospective, randomize d trial from the University of Copenhagen presented at the 2017 

Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 4 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 European Society of Cardiology conclusively demonstrated that surgical  occlusion of the LAA markedly 
decreased the risk of stroke  in comparison to controls : at 3.7 years 6% in patients with no LAA versus 
18% in the control population (42). 
 
Figure 2. Pulmonary vein isolation procedure  
Hypothesis  
We hypothesize that performing a prophylactic limited left side d surgical maze , i.e., pulmonary vein 
isolation and  excision of the left atrial appendage , in a group of at  risk cardiac surgical patients at the 
time of the index procedure,  will reduce the incidence of  POAF. The null hypothe sis is that the 
prophylactic surgical ablation will have no effect on the incidence of POAF.    
Setting of the Research  
This study w ill be conducted  at a single center, Spectrum Health.  The PI and all Spectrum Health 
cardiothoracic surgeons participating i n the study are highly qualified and certified by the  American 
Board of Thoracic Surgery.   They are all proficient in performing the maze procedure as it is commonly 
utilized  in everyday practice to manage and treat AF.  
Subjects  will be seen in the cardiothoracic  surgeon’s  office and/ or the  hospital  inpatient setting.  The 
surgery will be performed  at the Meijer Heart Center , Spectrum Health Hospitals .  
Resources Avai lable to Conduct this Research  
Spectrum H ealth  cardiothoracic surgeons perform appro ximately  1200  heart surgeries per year. 
Approximate ly 300 of  thes e surgeries  which include isolated coronary  arter y bypass graft ing (CABG), 
isolated aortic valve replacement  (AVR) , or combined AVR/CABG are performed  in patients ≥  70 years of 
age.  Therefore , we do not anticipate difficulty recruiting the necessary number of subjects  during the 
enrollment period.  

Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 5 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 The PI will have dedicated research time in his schedule.  Experienced research staff from the  
CV Structural Heart Team will assist with the study as delegated by the PI. 
 
Study Design  
This is a  single -center, prospective , randomized , unblinded , interventional feasibility  study  to determine 
whether or not a prophylactic limited left sided  surgical maze proc edure is effective in reducing or 
preventing POAF . A high risk population  with no history of atrial fibrillation or flutter,  with a  baseline risk 
of POAF of 40% or greater  will b e chosen. This includes CABG /AVR , isolated  AVR,  and isolated CABG    
patients 70 years and older .  Up to 60 subjects who are scheduled to undergo elective  open heart 
surgery will be randomized 1:1 into one of two study arms:  
 
1. Control arm:  Elective open heart surgery without a limited left sided maze procedure.  
2. Treatment arm:  Elective open heart surgery with a limited left -sided maze procedure.  
 
Sample Size Determination  
No sample size calculation was performed  as this is a feasibility trial and the number is fixed at 60 
patient s where 30 will be randomly assign ed to the control arm and 30 randomly assigned to the 
treatment arm .  
Statistical Methods  
Summary statistics will be calculated. Quantitative variables will be expressed as mean ± standard 
deviation or median [interquartile range]. Qualitative variables wi ll be expressed as frequency (percent) .  
To determine if there is an association in POAF and the two arms of the study , a Chi -Square Test or 
Fishers Exact test will be used depending on assumptions being met. To look at our secondary outcomes 
such as  hospi tal length of stay  and incidence  of postoperative reoperations for bleeding , a two sample t -
test or Wilcoxon Rank Sum will be used to determine if there is a difference between the two groups 
and those that had POAF vs. those that didn’t.  Significance wil l be assessed at the 0.10 level. A level of 
0.10 will provide more power to the study while only allowing a slight increase in error.    
Recruitment methods  
All subjects  who receive an inpatient or outpatient heart surgery consult and meet the criteria may  be 
approached about study participation.  Consults will occur  in the C ardiothoracic Surgeon’s  office of the 
Meijer Heart Center or Spectrum Healt h inpatient units.  The subject’s  electronic medical record s (EMR), 
Cerner and Epic , will be reviewed .  There are no plans for a dvertisement or patient payment  related to 
study participation.   
It is expected enrollment will take approximately  6 months . 
 
 
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 6 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 Inclusion and Exclusion criteria  
Inclusion Criteria  
 
1. Male  or female  
2. Age ≥ 70 years  
3. Elective cardiac surgery:  isolated AVR , isolated CABG , or AVR/CABG ,          
Exclusion Criteria  
1. A history of AF  or atrial flutter  
2. Less common cardiac operations such as aortic root replacements, aortic dissections, myxoma 
excisions,  or pericardectomies.   Beating heart  or off-pump procedures , redo open heart procedures.  
3. Subjects  with existing pacemake r and/or AICD  
4. Vulnerable populations ; adults unable to sign consent , prisoners  
5. Need for emergent  or salvage  surgery for any reason  
6. Currently participating in  an investigational drug or another device study (excluding registries)  
7. Subjects currently on antiarrhythmic  drugs Class I and III including amiodarone.  
Study endpoints  
The incidence or absence of documented AF, defined by  Society  of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) registry data  
as the occurrence  of POAF or atrial flutter  that requires treatment , is the primary endpoint  (21).  In 
addition , length of stay ( LOS) and additional antiarrhythmic or anticoagulant medications  will be 
examined as a  secondary endpoint . 
Safety endpoints  
The safety endpoint is the occurrence of one of the following events between time of procedure and the 
30 day post procedure assessment : 
• All-cause death  
• TIA/stroke  
• Bleeding  (chest tube drainage)  that is procedure related and requires take back to the operating 
room or blood transfusions  
• Incidence of AF  
• Need for permanent pacemaker  
• Evidence of pulmonary vein stenosis  defined as > 50 % occlusion of the vessel.  
Proc edures Involved in the Research  
Baseline preoperative cardiac surgery workup will be done on all patients according to standard of care.   
This workup will  consist of:  
• History and physical exam  
• Chest X -Ray 
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 7 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 • Electrocardiogram  
• Echocardiogram  
• Cardiac catheterization  
• Blood and urine tests such a s complete blood count, complete metabolic count, cardiac 
enzymes, type and screen, and urinalysis . Any other indicated tests based on patient history and 
index procedure i.e.; pulmonary function tests, carotid ultrasound, leg vein mapping , 
noncontrast che st CT . 
Prior to enrollment, the protocol and informed consent must be approved by the Spectrum Health 
Institutional Review Board (IRB). IRB approved Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPPA) will also be used.  A regulatory binder and sub ject binders will be created according to local 
requirements and stored in the CV Research Department.  
Before the subject signs the informed consent form (ICF), the investigator or designated study personnel 
will explain the research, study procedure, anti cipated benefits, and potential risks of study 
participation. Adequate time will be allowed to read the ICF and ask questions.  The original signed ICF 
will be kept with the subject’s research records and a copy will be given to the subject.   
All subjects will be on a beta -blocker preoperatively and throughout the hospitalization as per STS 
guidelines  unless there is a clear contraindication .  The use of amiodarone  or other antiarrhythmic 
agents for prevention of POAF are not  allowed.  Should a patient exper ience POAF standard treatment 
with amiodarone or other agents may be utilized . 
A 1:1 randomization will occur prior to surgery using REDCap  to allocate subjects into the treatment 
(planned open heart surgery plus limited left -sided maze) or control arm (planned open heart surgery) . 
The subject will be notified of their randomization assignment .    
Care on the morning of surgery will follow cu rrent standards of care.  Baseline vital signs will be 
obtained and the subject will be placed on telemetry.  Vital signs such as blood pressure, heart rate and 
rhythm, central venous pressure, oxygen saturation will be monitored throughout the case as per  
standard of care.      
After establishing cardiop ulmonary bypass and myocardial arrest for the primary heart  surgery  
procedure , the limited left sided  surgical maze procedure will be performed  on those patients who were 
randomized to the treatment arm of the study.    An encircling lesion  will be performed  around the left 
atrial tissue just proximal to the entrance of both the left and right pulmonary  veins  utilizing  the 
AtriCure® Synergy Ablation System  according to I nstructions for Use (IFU) . The targeted tissue of the 
pulmonary vein will be placed between the distal and proximal jaws of the synergy ablation clamp 
ensuring that no tissue extends beyond the indicator line or into the jaw heel.   T he ASU2 is activated by 
pushing the footswitch.  Once activated, the ASU2 emits a continuous audible tone indicating that 
current is flowing between the jaws of the clamp.  When the tone turns to intermittent, it indicates 
tissue  impedance has been met  and the transmural lesion completed , then the  footsw itch is released.  
The system determines the minimum energy delivery needed to create a transmural lesion.  This is 
based on tissue impedance and only that amount of energy will be delivered to the tissue (IFU).  Time 
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 8 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 needed to create a transmural lesion varies according to tissue thickness, composition, and the length of 
tissue within the clamp but averages 16  seconds ( 41).   
No deviation from the IFU will occur , nor will the device be altered in any way.   
The synergy ablation clamp  is connected to a monitor screen  with a digital graph to disp lay the 
conduction  over time  of the myocardial tissue clamped between the  device jaws.   It is the transmural 
scar which develops th at prevents the abnormal impulse s from the pulmonary veins fro m 
communicating with the myocardial electrical system.      
The efficacy of the Atri Cure clamp in creating complete  circumferential lesions has been demonstrated 
in animal st udies and the RESTORE SR and ABLATE trials.  Because the  efficacy of the  technology  to 
ensure transmural lesions has been proven, entrance and exit block are not checked by most surgeons 
and neither is  it our practice at Spectrum Health.   Further the FDA approval  and instructions for use of 
the Atricure device do  not require the confirma tion of entrance or exit block.  
Our current surgical ablation success rate  at Spectrum Health in  treating patients ≥ 70 years old with 
both chronic and paroxysmal AF is 74% at 30 days . 
Amputation of the LAA will involve transecting the appendage at its ba se ensuring that all of the 
appendage tissue is removed.  The wound will be closed with a continuous double layer of 4-0 Prolene 
suture .  The site will be carefully inspected to ensure complete wound closure and no signs of bleeding.  
All surgeons will utilize the same method for LAA  amputation.    
The four pulmonary veins are large blood vessels that receive oxygenated blood from the lungs and 
drain into the left atrium of the heart. (Figure 3 ) 
 
  
Figure 3  
 

Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 9 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 This FDA approved device is currently in use and  is well known  to the surgeons participating in this 
study , thus no additional  training or instruction will be  required. Because this is a limited left sided  
surgical maze procedure , limited to the epicardium, the left atr ium will not require entry.   
Afte r completion of the limited left sided  surgical maze  procedure , for those patients who were 
randomized to the treatment arm,  the remainder of the elective  heart surgery will  proceed. Patients 
who  were  randomized to the control arm will proceed directly to their index cardiac surgery and will not 
have either component of the surgical maze procedure.   
Post operative  monitoring , diagnostic and lab tests w ill be done  according  to Spectrum Health  standard 
of care .  Current standard of care for the postoperative cardiac surgery patient at this institution consists 
of continuous telemetry monitoring, collection of arterial blood gas es, complete blood count, basic 
metabolic  panel and blood glucose  at regular intervals .  An EKG is obtained on arrival to the recovery 
area and any time a cardiac dysrhythmia is noted.  
In addition to standard of care,  subjects who were randomized to the treatment arm of the study  will 
have  a pre -discharge transthoracic ech ocardiogram  to ass ess the absence  or presence of thrombus in 
the left atrium.   If thrombi are  noted, subject s will be anticoagulated per standard of care.  
The highest risk of POAF is with in the first 48 to 96 hours after surgery .   All post -operative patients are 
on continu ous 24 hour telemetry after surgery until hospital discharge .  While it depends on the index 
procedure that was done, the usual length of stay at this institution following elective cardiac surgery is 
5 to 7 days.   
If subjects  develop  POAF, paroxysmal or sustained,  they will be treated with standard medications and 
protocols already in place for this complication .  
The current protocol to treat POAF first entails escalation of beta blocker therapy if it is tolerated. If 
further treatment is necessary, pati ents  are loaded with a dose of IV amiodarone and  then  changed to 
oral amiodarone for four weeks or longer if appropriate.  
Our current standard of care at Spectrum Health  for POAF anticoagulation is  as follows.  For POAF that 
persists for more than 24 hour s or is episodic and occurs more than once, anticoagulation  is initiated.   
Warfarin or one of the  new oral anticoagulant s such as dabigatran , rivaroxaban  or apixiban  will be used  
tailored to  the individual patient utilizing the ir CHA 2DS2 -VASc score and su rgeon preference .    
In addition, all patients who receive a mechanical valve or a bio prosthetic  mitral valve are started on an  
anticoagulant on postoperative day 2.  The dose is titrated to an INR of 2.5 -3.5. 
To our knowledge isolated radiofrequency  epicardial pulmonary vein lesions have not resulted in 
endocardial thrombus. Nor has this been reported with the At riCure clamp . The current 
recommendations are to anticoagulate  patients who undergo surgical ablation with endocardial lesions  
or full surgi cal Maze procedures  which involve additional lesions in the left and/or right atrium  (35,36) . 
At Spectrum Health we perform 1200 open heart surgery procedures per  year and it is not our standard  
to anticoagulate  patients after  isolated  PVI who remain in  sinus rhythm  except for a daily aspirin . Of 
note all cardiac surgical patient s are on daily Lovenox postoperatively to prevent deep venous 
thrombosis .   
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 10 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 Subject s will be visited daily by research staff during the index hospitalization.  The EMR will be revie wed 
with a focus on any  episodes of POAF  or any other cardiac dysrhythmias, any need for pacemaker, chest 
tube drainage or need for blood transfusion beyond what is normal for this patient population.   
The initial follow -up for POAF occurrence will be 30 +/-7 days  post hospital discharge ; this is standard for 
post -operative surgical care .   Additional follow -up, consisting of electronic medical rec ord (EMR) review  
anywhere care is given,  will occur at 6 weeks, 6 month s and 12 month s post procedure.   Review of 
subject data will include any adverse events that may have occurred, EKG,  and echocardiogram  review.   
If data is not available in the EMR, phone calls will be made to subjects.  
Data management  
Research Electronic Data Capture ( REDC ap) will be u sed for  randomization and data collection .  REDCap 
is password protected  and o nly IRB study approved personnel will have access to the data.   
Standard practice is to enter this group of surgical patient’s information into the Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons ( STS) Registry.  Subjects  in this study will be included in the STS Registry.  
Data to be collected will include:  
• Subject name, date of birth and medical record number  
• Gender, age  
• Inclusion/Exclusion criteria  
• Medical History: hypertension (HTN), diabetes mellitus (DM) , hypercholesterolemia, chronic 
lung disease, peripheral vascular  disease  (PVD), coronary artery disease (CAD ), CHF, chronic 
kidney disease (CKD) , cerebrovascular disease  (stroke/TIA)  
• Echocardiogram (pre -op and pre -discharge  (treatment arm only )): EF, LA measurement, LV 
measurement , mitral regurgitation , tricuspid regurgitation  
• Medications , pre - and post -op including  name of medication, indication, dose.  
• Procedure and date - including number of grafts and type of valve implant ed 
• CPB time, X -clamp time  
• EKG r hythm(s), pre- and post -op (atrial  flutter, SVT, VT, etc.) 
• Post procedural s troke/TIA  
• Post procedural MI 
• Post procedural p acemaker implant  
• Any bleeding complication  
• Any incidents of POAF (date occurred, treatment used, )  
• Length of stay  
Data will also be collected at 6 weeks,  6 months and 12 months post -proc edure.  This will include:  
• All adverse events  
• Any rehospitalizations  
• Medications, current and new  
• Any episodes of AF or other cardiac arrhythmias  
• EKG 
• Need for pacemaker  
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 11 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 • Echocardiogram :  EF, valve gradients, left and right atrial  function, pulmonary vein st enosis or  
presence of suspected thrombus . 
 
In the event th at we are unable to find subject  information in the EMR at appointed  study  intervals, 
we may telephone  subjects  to inquire how they are and whether or not they have had any adverse 
events.  
 
Assessments/procedures  Baseline  Hospitalization  Predischarge  Follow up  Follow up  Follow up  
 Screening   6 weeks 
post 
procedure  
+/-7 days  6 months 
post 
procedure  
+/- 7 days  12 months 
post 
procedure  
+/- 7 days  
Consent  X      
History/Inclusion and 
Exclusion  X      
Medication Review  X X  X X X 
Randomization  X      
AF occurrence and 
treatment   X  X X X 
Transthoracic echo    X 
Treatment 
arm only     
Rehospitalizations     X X X 
Adverse Events   X  X X X 
 
Adverse events  
An adverse event  (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence (signs, symptoms, abnormal laboratory 
findings) in a subject .  It does not necessarily have to be caused by the device or procedure to be 
considered an adver se event.  
 
A serious adverse event is one that led to death, serious deterioration in the health of the subject , 
result ed in a new hospitalization  or prolong ing the index hospitalization , a permanent impairment of a 
body structure or function, or required medical and/or surgical intervention to prevent  further  life-
threatening illness or injury  
 
A device related adverse event is an event that in the investigators judgement may be related to the 
investigational device.  
  
Adverse events reporting will include the categories of ca rdiac, respiratory, vascular, bleeding, 
neurological (stroke/TIA), other organ complications and infection.   Adverse events will be monitored by 
research staff and the investigator  from the time of cardiac surgery  until 365 days  post procedure .  AEs  
will be categorized according to seriousness and device and/or procedure relatedness.  The monitoring 
of adverse events will occur  from the time of cardiac surgery , throughout  the hospitalization , at the 30 
day, 6 week  +/- 7 days , 6 m onths +/- 7 days and 12 months  +/- 7 days  post procedure assessments.   
 
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 12 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 Serious adverse events or serious adverse device -related events will be reported to the FDA and 
Spectrum Health IRB per the regulations and reporting procedures .   
 
If any thromboembo lic events are observed during the study, an adverse event form will be submitted 
to the FDA.  This report will include anonymized information on the procedure, type , and severity of 
thromboembolic event, the patient specific anticoagulation protocol, and the total number of subjects 
enrolled and treated in each arm by the event time.   
 
Adverse events will be reported and recorded in REDCap  and will include the following information:  
• Date of onset first observation  
• Description of event  
• Seriousness of event  
• Causal relationship to device/procedure  
• Treatment required  
• Outcome/resolution  
The investigator and the non -study cardiothoracic surgeon will review all AEs.  
 
For the purposes of this study  certain events  will be considered part of the expected post -operat ive 
course and will not be reported unless the investigator feels they deviate from the norm : 
• Post -operative pain requiring medication  
• Temporary mental status changes (except TIA/stroke)  
• Mild GI disturbanc es, i.e. decreased appetite, nausea,  vomiting , cons tipation or diarrhea  
• Respiratory findings post -surgery, including oxygen usage, pleural effusion, atelectasis  
• Minor laboratory findings, including hypokalemia, hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, 
hypomagnesemia , leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, hyperglycemia   
• Post -operative anemia d/t intraoperative blood loss/dilution requiring  < 2 U transfusion  
• Low-grade fever <  38.5◦ C  
• Hypo/hypertension requiring treatment  
• Mild creatinine  increase,  < 0.3 mg/dL  
 
Provisions  to Monitor the Data for the Safety of Subjects  
Data will be reviewed by a non -study cardiothoracic surgeon;  John C. Heiser, MD . The review will include 
subject eligibility, documentat ion of the consent process, adverse events , and subject withdrawals . 
Review will occur after every 5 patients have  a completed surgical procedure  and are discharged from 
the hospital .   Adverse E vents (AE) will be evaluated for seriousness, unanticipated , procedural and/or 
device -related ness .  If any Serious  Adverse Events (SAE) occur beyond what is expected  in this patient 
population and are thought to be related to the limited left sided  surgical maze procedure, the FDA and 
Spectrum Health  IRB will be notified per reporting practices and the study may be terminated.  
Monitoring of patient data will continue  throughout the study at the scheduled assessment times.  
 
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 13 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 Withdrawal of subjects  
We do not foresee  any circumstances  in which subjects  would want to withdraw from the study.   
However, subjects may withdraw from this study at any point , it will not be held against them nor 
involve penalty or loss of benefits to which subjects are otherwise entitled .  
Risks/Benefits to Subjects  
Neither  LAA amputation or  pulmonary vein isol ation  ablation , the 2 comp onents of the  limited left sided 
surgical maze procedure , have been shown to pose additional risk to the subject  over the primary open 
heart procedure  (7,8,16 ,28).   
Potential ad verse events  with this combined procedure  are similar to the risks of cardiac surgery and are  
listed below  as described in the  AtriCure® Synergy Ablation System Instructions for Use : 
• Death  
• Excessive bleeding that may require re -intervention  
• Cardiac tamponade  
• Pulmonary vein stenosis  
• Restrictive o r constrictive pericarditis  
• Infection that may result in sepsis or endocarditis  
• Myocardial infarction  (MI)  
• Stroke or transient ischemic attack  (TIA)  
• Thromboembolism  
• Diaphragmatic  (phrenic nerve) paralysis  
• Esophageal -left atrial fistula or esophageal rupture  
• Atrial perforation or rupture  
• Ventricular perforation or rupture  
• Atelectasis  
• Pneumonia  
• Congestive heart failure   
• Cardiac valve injury  
• Persistent pneumothorax  
• Excessive pain and discomfort  
• Deep sternal wound infection (mediastinitis)  
• Perioperative atrial or ventricular rhythm/conduction disturbance  
• Pericardial effusion  
• Injury to the great ves sels 
• Injury to unintended surrounding tissues , including tears and punctures  
• Extension of cardiopulmonary bypass time  or aortic cross clamp time  
 
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 14 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 Potential risks already listed above that may be associated with the limited left sided surgical maze 
procedur e include : 
• Additional  time on C ardiopulmonary Bypass Pump  
• Additional  ventilation and anesthesia  
• Pulmonary vein stenosis  
• Need for permanent pacemaker  
• Bleeding  
• Unintentional damage to tissue near the pulmonary vein  
• Atrial flutter  
The Atri Cure® Synergy  Ablati on System  is FDA  approved and utilized around the world by cardiothoracic 
surgeons to treat AF. In the United States , it is the preferred device of surgeons to treat AF and is used 
approximately 200 -250 times a year at Spectrum Health to perform concomitan t maze procedures. The 
cardiothoracic surgeons at Spectrum Health are familiar with the Atri Cure® Synergy Ablation System  and 
technically capable of performing the maze procedure . Thus a proven device, along with a known 
common procedure, i.e., pulmonary v ein isolation and LAA amputation,  will be studied in an expanded 
population  of patients , those  without a history of AF, who are already undergoing open heart surgery.  
Paramount to this investigation is patient safety and the risk -benefit ratio incurred by the patient.  
Neither LAA amputation nor pulmonary vein isolation has been  shown to pose additional  risk to the 
patient beyond  the primary operation  (7,8,16 ,28,44).  Although the potential risk  list as stated above is 
extensive , the list is inclusive of ris ks common to  all adult open heart procedures and can be associated 
at the time  of surgery  with the risk of a maze procedure.  
There have been no documented cases of pulmonary vein stenosis , defined as > 50% vessel occlusion,  as 
the lesion is created on the left atrial cuff proximal to the entrance of the pulmonary veins (23), nor is 
there any risk of phrenic nerve injury as the lesion is well away from the nerve.   
In regard to postoperative atrial flutter  after a surgical maze, the risk is extremely low .  With pulmonary 
vein isolation alone by radiofrequency , atrial flutter has not been quantified. There are rare sporadic 
case reports after  a full maze (24 ). If atrial flutter is not amenable to medical management patients ma y 
require a catheter based ablation by an electrophysiologist.   
There have been reports that amputation of the LAA may increase the risk of POAF but these are not 
consistent and a recent meta -analysis demonstrated no increased risk of POAF  (43). Further a  surgical 
Cox maze is always defined by management of the LAA either with amputation or creation of an 
epicardial surgical lesion at its base and occlusion of the LAA.   Long term results of the maze procedure 
show no ill effects to the patient and left atri al transport function is maintained (30 ).  
Globally t he AtriCure device has been safely used in over 200,000 cases and is the predominant device 
used to perform surgical ablation of AF  in the world.   Thus the safety of the AtriC ure device has been 
outstanding with almost no  risk to the patient and  the ablation lesions have no late or long -term 
adverse effects on the myocardium.  
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 15 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 In a study  published in Circulation of over 10,000 patients who underwent amputation of the LAA there 
was no increased risk of bleeding  (16).   Multiple large studies have demonstrated that a left sided  or 
limited left side d surgical maze procedure  adds no operative risk and only improves patient outcomes , 
especially in regard to long term stroke risk and surv ival (7,8,17,28,29 ,44).   A recent  2018  publication 
from the STS Adult Cardiac Database  strongl y corroborates LAA  removal as it markedly decrease d the 
long term risk of stroke  (42). 
The strongest evidence, that there is no additional risk to the patient, i s put forth in the 201 7 Guidelines 
for The Surgical Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation set by The Society of Thoracic Surgeons: “Surgical 
ablation for AF can be performed without additional operative risk, and is recommended at the time of 
concomitant isolat ed AVR, isolated CABG and AVR+CABG operations to restore sinus rhythm.” The 
Society of Thoracic Surgeons labels this as a Class I  recommendation ; meaning that the procedure 
should be performed as a standard of practice because it is useful, effective , and the benefits far 
outweigh the risks.  
A recent Russian study  examining the effects of prophylactic pulmonary vein isolation with 
radiofrequency ablation in patients undergoing isolated CABG has shown very promising results. The 
incidence of POAF was re duced by 21% versus controls and at one year the effect was sustained as 98% 
of the prophylactic group was free from AF versus 84% of the controls . The conclusion was 
“simultaneous preventive pulmonary vein isolation during CABG is safe and effective” (40). 
There are subsets of cardiac surgical patients where a prophylactic maze has already shown benefits  
because the risk  of developing POAF is so high and the adverse sequela so  morbid . It is recommended  
that a prophylactic maze be considered in the setting o f re-operative  open  heart surgery  patients  with a 
dilated right or left atrium ( 19).  A prophylactic maze is also warranted in the subset of patients who 
undergo a combined mitral valve and tricuspid  valve operation  even if they are in sinus rhythm  (14).  
If our hypothesis proves true, the benefits of a prophylactic limited left sided surgical maze  procedure  
will impact  thousands of  cardiac surgical patients . At a minimum , those over age 70 have a 30% chance 
of developing  POAF with any open heart surgical procedure  (11,12,15,18). The detrimental effects of 
this complication include stroke,  hemodynamic instability, additional medications  for rate control and 
anticoagulation  with their side effects,  and prolong ed length of hospital stay . Even if patients  reve rt 
back to si nus rhythm they are discharged on additional medications to prevent recurrence  and stroke.  
Anticoagulation alone for POAF carries  a 3-4% annual risk of major hemorrhage (32) . The 20% of 
patients who  remain in POAF have a lifelong risk of increased stroke and decreased survival  (9,20,22) . 
Such risks are by far more serious  than any risk posed by a prophylactic limited left sided surgical maze  
procedure  which carries a risk of less than 1% for any complication.  Thus should our strategy 
succe ssfully reduce  or eliminate  the incidence of POAF , the immediate  benefit to cardiac surgical 
patients  will be immense and markedly decrease the burden on the health care system.  
Provisions to Protect th e Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Explanation  of the stu dy and consenting will be done in a private area of Spectrum Health.  HIPPA will be 
followed according to standard  practice.  
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 16 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 Confidentiality of Data  
Only IRB approved  research staff  will have access to study data.  Subject  binders will be kept in a secure 
area of the CV  Research office.  REDC ap will be utilized, the database is password protect ed.  Data will 
be stored according to current policy and procedure.   
Medical c are and compensation for Injury  
While not anticipated, if subjects  are injured or made sick from taking part in this research, medical care 
will be provided.  No funds have been set aside to pay subjects  in the unlikely event of a research 
related injury.  
Cost to Subjects  
Application will be made to CMS for reimbursement consideration.   Subj ect’s health insurance will be 
billed for costs that are part of usual medical care. Any co -payment, co -insurance or deductible, will be 
the responsibility of the subject.  There are no extra costs to subjects for participating in this research 
study. The p re-discharge transthoracic echocardiogram required for the study  (treatment arm only)  will 
not be billed to the subject or their insurance.  
Consent Process  
Once a subject  has been identified as meeting criteria for the study, the PI  and/or other delegated study 
personnel will explain the study in detail to the subject .  This discussion will take place in privacy at 
Spectrum Health .  Adequate time will  be allowed for questions.  A copy of the consent will be given to 
the subject  to read and review.   After allowing the subject  adequate  time to review the consent, the 
research coordinator will answer  any additional questions and ensure that the subject  realizes 
participation is voluntary .   A signed copy of the informed consent will be given t o the su bject . 
Sharing o f Results with Subjects  
There are no plans to sha re research results with subject s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 17 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 References  
1. Echahidi N, Pibarot P, Ohara  GO, et.al., Mechanisms, Prevention, and Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation 
After Cardiac Surgery, J Amer. Coll. Card.  2008;  51(8): 793-801.  
2. Perrier S, Mey er N, Minh TH, et al. Predictor s of Atrial Fibrillation After C oronary Artery Bypass 
Grafting : A Bayesian Analysis . Ann Thor Surg 2017; 103:92 -97 
3. Atrial Fibrillation After Cardiac Surgery ed. Jonathan S teinburg 2007 Springer Science & Business 
Media  
4. Villareal RP, Hariharan R, Liu  BC, et al.  Postoperative atrial fibrillation and mortality after  coronary 
artery bypass surgery, J Amer. C oll. Card. March 2004;  43(5): 742-748. 
5. Ar senault KA, Yusuf AM, Cr ystal E.  Interventions for Preventing Post -operative Atrial Fibrillation in 
Patients Undergoing Heart Surgery , Coc hrane Database Syst Rev  Jan 2013 ;31(1)  
6. Ad N, Holmes SD, Lamont D, et al.  Left sided  Surgical Ablation for Patients with Atrial Fibrillatio n Who 
are Undergoing Concomitant C ardiac Surgical Procedures. Ann Thor Surg 2017; 103: 58 -65 
7. Lawrence CP, Henn MC, Damiano RJ. Concomitant Cox -Maze IV techniques during mitral valve 
surger y. Ann Cardiothor. Surg  Sept 2015 ;4:483-486. 
8. Henry L, Ad N, Pe rformance of the Cox -Maze procedure —a large surgical center’s experience. Ann 
Cardiothor. Surg Jan 2014; 3:  
9. Sigurdsson MI, Lo ngford NT, Heydarpour M, et al.  Duration of Postoperative Atrial Fibrillation After 
Cardiac Surgery is Associated With Worsened Long -Term survival. Ann Thor Surg 2016;102:2018 -2027.  
10. Hurst’s The Heart. 13ed 2011 McGraw -Hill Companies, New York pg 963 . 
11. Maiscalco G, Biancari F, Zanobini M, et al. Bedside tool for predicting the risk of postoperative atrial 
fibrillation after c ardiac surgery: the PAOF score. J Am Heart Assoc 2014;3:1 -9.e00752.  
12. Magee MJ, Herbert MA, Dewey TM, et al. Atrial fibrillation after coronary artery bypass grafting 
surgery: development of a predictive risk algorithm. Ann Thor Surg 2007;83:1707 -12. 
13. Wolf RK, Schneeberger EW, Osterday R, et al. Video -assisted bilateral pulmonary vein isolation and 
left atrial appendage exclusion for atrial fibrillation J Thor Cardiovasc  Surg 2005;130:797 -802.   
14. Stulak JM, Suri RM, Dearani  JA, et al. When should prophylactic maze procedure be considered in 
patients undergoing mitral valve surgery? Ann Thor Surg 2010;89(5):1395 -1401.  
15. Filardo G,  Hamilton C, Hebeler RF, New -onset postoperative atrial fibrillation after isolated coronary 
artery bypass graft surgery and long -term survival. Circ: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes. 
2009;2:164 -169.  
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 18 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 16. Melduni RM, Schaff HV, Lee HC, et al. Impact of left atrial appendage closure during cardiac surgery 
on the occurrence of early postoperative a trial fibrillation, stroke, and mortality: a propensity score 
matched analysis of 10,633 patients. Circ 2016;116  
17. Cherniavsky A, Kareva Y, Pak I, et al. Assessment of results of surgical treatment for persistent atrial 
fibrillation during coronary arter y bypass grafting using implantable loop recorders. Interact Cardiovasc 
Thorac Surg 2014;18:727 -731.  
18. Tnawuttiwat T, O’Neill BP , Cohen MG, et al. New onset atrial fibrillation after aortic valve 
replacement. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014 ; 63(15); 1510 -1519.  
19.  Machiraju VR, Schaff HV, Svensson LG. Redo Cardiac Surgery in Adults 2nd edition. 2012. Springer, 
New York pg  115.  
20. Halperin JL, Gomberg -Maitland M. Obliteration of the left atrial appendage for prevention of 
thromboembolism. J Am Col Card 2003;42(7):1259 -1261.  
21. Calkins H, Brugada J, Packer DL, et al. HRS/EHRA/ECAS Expert consensus statement on catheter and 
surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation: recommendations for personnel, policy, procedures and follow -up. 
Heart Rhythm 2007;4(6):818 -859.  
22. Melduni RM, Schaff HV, Bailey KR, et al. Implications of new -onset atrial fibrillation after cardiac 
surgery on long term prognosis: A community based study. Am Heart J 2015: 170(4); 659 -68. 
23. Gaynor SL, Diodato MD, Prasad, SM, et al. A prospec tive single center clinical trial of a modified Cox 
maze procedure with bipolar radiofrequency ablation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2004; 128; 535 -42. 
24. Schleifer JW, Tondato F, Srivathasan K. Catheter Ablation of left atrial flutter occurring late after 
surgical maze. EP Lab Digest 2013; 13(9)  
25. Alqahtani,  AAR. Atrial  fibrillation post cardiac surgery trends toward management.  Heart Views 
2010; 11(2): 57 -63. 
26. Gillinov AM, Bagiella  E, Moskowitz AJ, et al. Rate control versus rhythm control for atrial fibrillation 
after cardiac surgery.  NEJM 2106; 374 (20): 1911 -21. 
27. Philpott JM,  Zemlin CW, Cox JL, et al. The ABLATE trial: safety and efficacy of cox maze -IV using a 
bipolar radio frequency ablation system. Ann Thor Surg. 2015;  100(5): 1541 -6. 
28. Al -Atassi T, Kimmaliardjuk DM, Dagenais C, et al. Should we ablate atrial fibrillation during coronary 
artery bypass grafting and aortic valve replacement. Ann Thor Surg 2017; 104:515 -22. 
29. Badhwar V, Rankin JS, Ad N, et al Surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation in the United States: trends 
and propensity matched outcomes. Ann Thor Surg 2017; 104: 493 -500. 
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 19 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
 30. Benussi S, Nascimbene S, Agricola E, et al. Surgical ablation of atrial fibri llation using the epicardial 
radiofrequency approach: mid -term results and risk analysis. Ann Thor Sur g 2002; 74: 1050 -57. 
31. Je HG, Shuman DJ, Ad N. A systematic review of minimally invasive surgical treatment for atrial 
fibrillation: a  comparison of the  Cox-Maze procedure, beating -heart epicardial ablation, and the hybrid 
procedure on safety and efficacy . Eur J Cardio -Thor Surg 2015; 48(4): 531 -541.  
32. Giuglian o RP, Ruff CT, Braunwald E, et al. Edoxaban versus warfarin in patient with atrial fibrillatio n. 
NEJM  2013;369:2093 -2104.  
33.Greenberg JW, Lancaster TS, Scheussler RB, et al. Postoperative atrial fibrillation following cardiac 
surgery: a persistent complication. Eur J Cardio -thor Surg 2017; 52: 665 -672.  
34. Rankin JS, Lerner DJ, Braid -Forbes MJ, e t al. One -year mortality and costs associated with surgical 
ablation for atrial fibrillation concomitant to coronary artery bypass grafting. Eur J Cardio -thor Surg 
2017; 52: 471 -477.  
35. Kirchhof P, Benussi S, Kotecha D, et al. 2016 ESC guidelines for the management of atrial fibrillation 
developed in collaboration with EACTS.    Eur Heart J 2016; 37: 2893 -2962 . 
36. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management of patients 
with atrial fibrillation. JACC 2014; 64(21): e1 -76. 
37. Connolly SJ, Cybulsky I, Lamy A, et al. Double -blind, placebo -controlled, randomized trial of 
prophylactic metoprolol for reduction  of hospital length of stay after heart surgery: the beta blocker 
length of stay (BLOS) study. Am Heart J 2003; 145: 226-232.  
38. Crystal E, Connolly SJ, Sleik K, et al.  Interventions on prevention of postoperative atrial fibrillation in 
patients undergoing heart surgery: A meta -analysis. Circ 2002; 106: 75 -80. 
39. Mitchell LB, Exner DV, Wyse DG, et al. Prophylactic oral  amiodarone for the prevention of 
arrhythmias that begin early after revascularization, valve replacement, or repair: PAPABEAR: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2005; 294: 3093 -3100.  
40. Lednev PV, Belov YV, Komarov RN, et al. The results of pulmonary v eins isolation to prevent 
postoperative atrial fibrillation. Khirurgiia (Mosk) 2017; 6: 16 -21. 
41. Voeller RK, Zierer A, Schuessler RB, et al. Performance of a novel dual -electrode radiofrequency 
ablation device: a chronic porcine study. Innovations(Phila)  2011; 6(1): 17 -22. 
42.  Lawton JS, Litle VR, Chikwe J, et al. Surgical left atrial appendage closure reduces stroke risk in 
randomized trial. Thor Surg News 2017; 13(11): 1 -2.  
Prevent AF Feasibility Study  
Version 5  Page 20 of 20 
17-FEB -2020  
 
  
43. Yi-Chin T, Phan K, Munkholm -Larsen S, et al. Surgical left atrial appenda ge occlusion during cardiac 
surgery for patients with atrial fibrillation: a meta -anlysis. EJCTS 2015; 47(5): 847 -54. 
44. Ad N, Holmes SD, Massimiano P, et al. Long -term outcome following concomitant mitral valve 
surgery and Cox maze procedure for atrial f ibrillation. JTCVS 2018; 155(3): 983 -96. 
45. Filardo G, Damiano RJ, Ailawadi G, et al. Epidemiology of new -onset atrial fibrillation following 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Heart 2018;  Jan/heartjnl -2017 -312150.  
46. Connolly SJ, Cybulski I, Lamy A , et al. Double -blind placebo -controlled  randomized tria l of 
prophylactic  metoprolol for reduction of hospital length of stay after heart surgery: the beta -blocker 
length of stay study. Am Heart J 2003;  145(2): 226 -32. 
47. Guarnieri  T, Nolan S, Gottlieb SO, et al. Intravenous amiodarone for the prevention of atrial 
fibrillation after open heart surgery: the amiodarone reduction in coronary heart (ARCH) trial. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 1999; 34(2): 343 -7. 