Protocol version 1.0  11/May/2016  Page 1 
 Phase IV Comparison of Combigan BID vs Simbrinza TID in Subjects Currently 
Treated with Latanoprost for Open -Angle Glaucoma or Ocular Hypertension  
 
Protocol Title:  Phase IV Comparison of Combigan BID vs Simbrinza TID in 
Subjects Currently Treated with Latanoprost for Open -Angle 
Glaucoma or Ocular Hypertension  
 
Protocol Number:  TEP001  
Study Phase:  Phase 4  
Indication:  Open -Angle Glaucoma or Ocular Hypertension  
Investigators:  PI:  Michael E. Tepedino,M.D.  
Sub-I:  Robert J. DaVanzo, M.D.  
Sub-I:  Michael  W. Evans , M.D.  
Sub-I:  J. Zachary Forsey, M.D.  
Sponsor:  Cornerstone Eye Care  
1400 East Hartley Drive  
High Point, NC USA  
27262  
IRB/IEC:  Alpha IRB  
1001 Avenida Pico, Suite C #497  
San Clemente, CA 92673  
 
 
  
Protocol version 1.0  11/May/2016  Page 2 
 Contact Information  
Title of Study:  Phase IV Comparison of Combigan BID vs Simbrinza TID in Subjects Currently Treated 
with Latanoprost for Open -Angle Glaucoma or Ocular Hypertension  
Name and degrees of Principal Investigator:  Michael E. Tepedino, MD  
Department: Cornerstone Eye Care  
Mailing Address:  1400 East Hartley Drive  High Point, NC  27262  
Phone #: 333 -802-2255   Fax#: 336 -885-7830  
Email: tepedino@cornerstonehealthcare.com  
 
Name of Study Coordinator:  April Kettering  
Department: Cornerstone  Eye Care  
Mailing Address:  1400 East Hartley Drive  High Point, NC  27262  
Phone #: 333 -802-2255   Fax#: 336 -885-7830  
Email: april.kettering@cornerstonehealthcare.com  
 
Name of funding source :  Allergan , Inc 
Contact for IRB invoicing:  April Kettering  
Department: Cornerstone Eye Care  
Mailing Address:  1400 East Hartley Drive  High Point, NC  27262  
Phone #: 333 -802-2255   Fax#: 336 -885-7830  
Email: april.kettering@cornerstonehealthcare.com  
Project Personnel and Conflicts of Interest  
All study investigators and study coordinators who have study -related contact with subjects or 
identifiable  data from subjects are listed below.   
Role  Name  
PI Michael E. Tepedino,M.D  
Sub-I Robert J. DaVanzo, M.D.  
Sub-I Michael W. Evans , M.D.  
Sub-I J. Zachary Forsey, M.D.  
Study Coordinator  April Kettering, C RA 
Study Coordinator  Chelsea Allred, COA  
 
No investigator or study staff member and/or their immediate family members has any conflict 
of interest in the design, conduct, or results of this study.  
  
Protocol version 1.0  11/May/2016  Page 3 
 Brief Summary  
Purpose  
To compare Combigan BID vs Simbrinza TID in approximately 40 subjects current ly being treated with 
Latanoprost for Open -Angle Glaucoma or Ocular Hypertension.  Both of these drugs are currently FDA 
approved as combination therapy for patients with Open -Angle Glaucoma or Ocular Hypertension.  The 
purpose of this clinical trial would  be to assess which treatment, if either, is superior in lowering 
intraocular pressure (IOP).  A secondary objective is to assess the tolerability of each drug.  
Participants  
Approximately 40 subjects a dults, male or female, age 18 and older, of any ethnicity or race with the 
diagnosis of Open -Angle Glaucoma or Ocular Hypertension currently being treated with latanoprost for 
at least six weeks prior to screening.  
Procedures (methods):  
After acquisition o f properly obtained informed consent, subjects will under the go the following 
assessments: Review of medical and ophthalmic history, demographics, review of concomitant 
medications, review of ocular symptoms, vital signs ( BP, Resp, Pulse ), Best Corrected Visual Acuity 
(BCVA), Intraocular Pressure (IOP) measurement, Biomicroscopy, Ophthalmoscopy, Gonioscopy, Central 
Corneal Thickness measurement (Pachymetry), urine pregnancy test ( if of child -bearing po tential ), and 
Visual Field.  
Purpose and Rationale  
Prostaglandins, such as latanoprost, are the most common initial therapy for POAG and OHT.  Patients 
being treated for POAG and OHT with latanoprost often require adjunctive therapy to achieve target 
pressures.  Patients are often switched to a combination  therapy for a number of reasons including 
improved efficacy, tolerability, and/or compliance.  Little head -to-head data exists comparing the 
current marketed combination products Combigan and Simbrinza.  This study will serve as a data 
reference comparing  safety, efficacy, and tolerability of Combigan and Simbrinza.  
Subjects  
Adults, male or female, age 18 and older, of any ethnicity or race with the diagnosis of Open -Angle 
Glaucoma or Ocular Hypertension currently being treated with latanoprost for at leas t six weeks prior to 
screening.   Subjects will be identified from Investigator’s current patient population.  
  
Protocol version 1.0  11/May/2016  Page 4 
 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria:  
 Open -angle glaucoma or ocular HTN  
 Currently treated with Latanoprost for min of 6 weeks  
 IOP must be   10 mmHg and  ≤ 34 mmHg  at screening visit while  on Latanoprost  
 Male or Female 18 yrs and older  
 BCVA 20/100 or better OU  
 Pachymetry >470 and < 640  
 Women of childbearing potential must have a negative urine pregnancy test at the 
screening/baseline visit 
 Patient willing and capable of providing informed consent  
Exclusion Criteria:  
 C/D >0.8  
 Visual field loss, which in the opinion of the investigator is functionally significant  
 Current use of ocular steroids  
 Concurrent significant active ocular disease  History : (within 3 months prior to Screening) of 
ocular laser, intraocular, filtering or refractive surgery or planned ocular surgery of any kind 
during study participation  
 Change ,  within prior 30 days or anticipated change ,  in any systemic medication t hat is known 
to affect IOP  
 Uncontrolled systemic disease  
 Significant ocular hyperemia at baseline  
 Prior glaucoma procedure within 3 months  
 Females who are pregnant, nursing, or planning a pregnancy or who are of childbearing 
potential and not using a relia ble method of contraception  
 Known allergy or sensitivity to any study medication  
 Asthma or any other known medical condition that the investigator feels would put patient at 
increased risk from any of the study medications  
 Current enrollment in an investigational  drug or device study or participation in such a study 
within 30 days prior to Screening  
Full Description of the Study Design, Methods and Procedures  
This research study will compare two currently FDA approved and marketed combination treatm ents for 
open -angle glaucoma and/or ocular hypertension.  The main objective of the study is to assess which 
drug is superior in lowering the intraocular pressure of the subjects.  The secondary objective is to 
compare the tolerability of each drug in rega rds to the following known side effects: Oral effects (bad 
taste, dry mouth) and Ocular comfort effects (itching, burning, stinging, burning on instillation, blurred 
vision).  
Protocol version 1.0  11/May/2016  Page 5 
 Subjects will be  discontinued from their current Latanoprost regimen and  randomiz ed 1:1 to either 
Combigan 0.2/0.5% BID or Simbrinza 1/0.2% TID.  Duration of treatment for each arm will be 90 days.  
Subjects will di scontinue Latanoprost at Visit 1 and begin  either Combigan 0.2/0.5% BID or Simbrinza 
1/0.2% TID on the evening of Visit 1 (approximately 8pm). Both are ophthalmic drops and will be placed 
in the eye by the subject according to the appropriate dosing scheduled (Combigan BID, Simbrinza TID).  
The following data will be collected by the Investigator and designated study team memb ers: 
Relevant (as determined by the Investigator)  
 
 Medical History  
 Ophthalmic History  
 Demographics  
 Concomitant Medications  
 Ocular Symptoms  
 Vital Signs (BP, Resp, Pulse)  
 Best Corrected Visual Acuity (BCVA)  
 Intraocular Pressure (IOP)  
 Biomicroscopy (Slit Lamp  Exam)  
 Ophthalmoscopy  
 Gonioscopy  
 Central Corneal Thickness (Pachymetry)  
 Urine Pregnancy Test (if child -bearing potential)  
 Visual Field  
All ophthalmic exams are routine Open -Angle Glaucoma/Ocular Hypertension assessments.  
Participation in the study may req uire earlier and will require more frequent performance of 
assessments.  
A detailed description of each visit is listed below:  
Visit 1  (Day 0) :  ICF, Med/Oph Hx, Con -Meds, Ocular Symptoms Assessment, Vitals ( BP, RES, HR ), BCVA, 
IOP ( 8am, 10am, and 4 pm ), Biomicroscopy, Ophthalmoscopy ( non-dilated if a dilated exam has been 
performed  within 6 months.  Dilated if no dilated exam within 6 months ), Gonioscopy ( if not performed 
within 12 months ), Visual Field ( if not performed within 12 months ), Central Corneal  Thickness ( if not 
performed within 12 months ), Urine Pregnancy test ( women of childbearing potential only ), IP 
dispensing  
Visit 2  (Day 7 +/ - 2 days) :  PHONE CALL ONLY - Med/Oph Hx , Con-Meds, Adverse Events, Ocular 
Symptoms Assessment  
Visit 3  (Day 30 +/ - 3 days) : Med/Oph Hx,  Con-Meds, Ocular Symptoms Assessment, BCVA, IOP ( 8am, 
10am, and 4pm ), Biomicroscopy, IP dispensing , Adverse Event  
Protocol version 1.0  11/May/2016  Page 6 
 Visit 4  (Day 90 +/ - 3days) :  Med/Oph, Hx Con-Meds, Ocular Symptoms Assessment, Vitals ( BP, RES, HR ), 
BCVA, IOP ( 8am, 10am,  and 4pm ), Biomicroscopy, Ophthalmoscopy ( non-dilated if a dilated exam has 
been performed within 6 months.  Dilated if no dilated exam within 6 months ), Central Corneal Thickness 
(if not performed within 12 months ), Gonioscopy, Adverse Event  
Unscheduled:   Con-Meds, Ocular Symptoms Assessment, Vitals ( BP, RES, HR ), BCVA, IOP ( 8am, 10am, 
and 4pm ), Biomicroscopy, Ophthalmoscopy ( non-dilated if a dilated exam has been performed within 6 
months.  Dilated if no dilated exam within 6 months ), Central Corneal Thic kness ( if not performed within 
12 months ), Adverse Event  
The patient and one study coordinator will be unmasked.  The investigator will be masked.  The 
investigator and a masked coordinator will complete all ophthalmic exams to avoid bias.  Open label 
drug  will be dispensed in a site provided non -see-through pouch to avoid risk of unmasking.  
Randomization will be conducted by assigning arm to individual subject numbers prior to beginning of 
enrollment.  This master list will be held by unmasked personnel a nd kept in a secure location.  As 
subjects enroll, they will be assigned a number in sequential order.  
Adverse Experiences  
Adverse Events  
 Adverse events occurring during the study will be recorded on an adverse event case report form.   If 
adverse events occur, the first concern will be the safety of the study participants.  
Definitions  
Adverse Event  
Any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical investigation subject administered a 
pharmaceutical product and that does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this  treatment.   An 
adverse event can therefore be any unfavorable and uninte nded sign (including an abnormal laboratory 
finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) 
product, whether or not related to the medicinal (investigational) product.   In addition, during the 
screening per iod, adverse events will be assessed regardless of the administration of a pharmaceutical 
product.    
Note:   Adverse events must be collected once informed consent has been obtained, regardless of 
whether or not the subject has been administered study drug.  
Adverse events will be assessed, documented, and recorded in the CRF throughout the study (ie, after 
informed consent has been obtained).   At each visit, the investigator will begin by querying for adverse 
events by asking each subject a general, non -directed question such as “How have you been feeling 
Protocol version 1.0  11/May/2016  Page 7 
 since the last visit?”   Directed questioning and examination will then be done as appropriate.   All 
reported adverse events will be documented on the appropriate case report form.    
Serious Adverse Event  
A serious adverse event is any adverse event occurring at any dose that results in any of the following 
outcomes:   death, a life -threatening adverse event, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization, a persistent or significant disa bility/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth 
defect.   Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse event when, based upon appropriate medical 
judgment, they m ay jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention 
to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.    
Pre-planned surgeries or procedures for pre -existing, known medical conditions for which a subject 
requires ho spitalization is not reportable as a serious adverse event.  
Severity  
A clinical determination will be made of the intensity of an adverse event.  The severity assessment for a 
clinical adverse event must be completed using the following definitions as guidelines:  
Mild  Awareness of sign or symptom, but easily tolerated.  
Moderate  Discomfort enough to cause interference with usual activity.  
Severe  Incapacitating with inability to work or do usual activity.  
Not applicable  In some cases, an adverse event may be an ‘all or nothing’ finding which 
cannot be graded.  
 
Relationship to Study Drug  
A determination will be made by the investigator of the relationship (if any) between an adverse event 
and the study drug, as applicable.   A causal relationship is present if a determination is made that there 
is a reasonable possibility that the adverse e vent may have been caused by the drug.    
Procedures for Reporting Adverse Events  
Any adverse event must be recorded on the appropriate case report form.  
All adverse events that are drug -related and unexpected (not listed as treatment -related in the current  
Investigator's Brochure) must be reported to the governing Institutional Review Board/Independent 
Ethics Committee (IRB/IEC) as required by the IRB/IEC, local regulations, and the governing health 
Protocol version 1.0  11/May/2016  Page 8 
 authorities.   Any adverse event that is marked ‘ongoing’ a t the exit visit must be followed -up as 
appropriate.  
Procedures for Reporting a Serious Adverse Event  
Any serious adverse event occurring during the study period (beginning with informed consent) must be 
immediately reported to Allergan but no later than 1 5 calendar days after learning of a serious adverse 
event.   Serious adverse events   must be recorded on the Serious Adverse Event Form provided by 
Allergan.   All subjects with a   serious adverse event must be followed up and the outcomes reported.   In 
the event of a serious adverse event, the investigator must:  
1. Notify Allergan immediately by fax or email  using the   Serious Adverse Event form.  
2. Obtain and maintain in his/her files all pertinent medical records, information, and medical 
judgments from colleagu es who assisted in the treatment and follow -up of the subject.  
3. Provide Allergan with a complete, written description of the adverse event(s) on the Serious 
Adverse Event form describing the event chronologically, including any treatment given (eg, 
medicati ons administered, procedures performed) for the adverse event(s).   Summarize 
relevant clinical information about the event:   signs, symptoms, diagnosis, clinical course and 
relevant clinical laboratory tests, etc.   Include any additional or alternative exp lanation(s) for the 
causality which includes a statement as to whether the event was or was not related to the use 
of the investigational drug.  
4. Promptly inform the governing IRB/IEC of the serious adverse event as required by the IRB/IEC, 
local regulations , and the governing health authorities.  
 
Benefits to Subjects and/or Society  
This study may or may not benefit the individual subjects.  A potential benefit to subjects may be better 
control of the subject’s IOP.  The potential benefit to society is the kn owledge of possible superiority of 
one drug over the other to reduce IOP.  This is especially of interest as Combigan requires BID dosing 
while Simbrinza require TID dosing.  The other potential benefit to society is the knowledge of 
comparative tolerabili ty and ocular discomfort associated with each drug.  
Full Description or Risks and Measures to Minimize Risks  
See package inserts for each drug for full list of risks.  
Most common side effects:  
Protocol version 1.0  11/May/2016  Page 9 
 Combigan:  5 to 15% experience allergic conjunctivitis, conjunct ival folliculitis , conjunctival hyperemia, 
eye pruritis, ocular burning and stinging  
Simbrinza:  3 to 5% experience blurred vision, eye irritation, dysgeusia, dry mouth, eye allergy  
Data Monitoring and Analysis  
For safety purposes the Principal Investigator will review the study data on each subject enrolled.  
For statistical analysis, summary tables will be provided for baseline variables (demographics, 
dispensing, medical history).  IOP is the primary endpoint - Summarized by treatment for each v isit.  All 
safety endpoints will be presented descriptively.  
Collect or Receive Identifiers  
Names, telephone numbers, social security numbers and any elements of dates (other than year) for 
dates directly related to an individual, including birth date, adm ission date, discharge date, date of 
death.  For ages over 89: all elements of dates (including year) indicative of such age, except that such 
ages and elements may be aggregated into a single category of age 90 and older will be collected or 
received.  
Identifiers in Research Data  
The collected or received identifiers listed above will not be linked or maintained with the research data.  
Confidentiality of the Data  
Paper records will be kept in a secure location accessible to only research personnel.   
 When ever feasible, identifying information will be removed from study related documents.  
Data Sharing  
The collected or received identifiers will not be shared with anyone outside the immediate research  
team.   
 
 
 
 
  
Protocol version 1.0  11/May/2016  Page 10 
 Appendix  
Patient Questionnaire  
Patient Diary  