VA Central IRBEffective Date: August 1, 2022SDR 21-141: Developing and Testing a COVID-19 Vaccination Acceptance Intervention
Multiple PIs: Karen H. Seal, MD MPH (corresponding), Jennifer K. Manuel, PhD,
Jeffrey Pyne, MD
[Version Number 5.0 Version Date 12.15.23]
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Abstract
Background: The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in significant loss of life with total case and 
death counts increasing daily. COVID-19 vaccines are effective in preventing symptomatic 
disease, severe disease, disease transmission, and death. Despite the efficacy and safety of 
COVID-19 vaccines, many people remain hesitant about vaccination with increased hesitancy 
among younger individuals (less than 50 years  old), Black and Hispanic adults, and those living 
in rural areas. Recent surveys of Veterans indicate that approximately 35% are unsure whether 
they will receive a vaccine, highlighting the critical need for evidence-based motivational 
interventions to increase COVID-19 vaccine acceptance in this population who, without 
vaccination, remain at risk of severe adverse outcomes and death. The overall objective of this 
study is to implement and test a COVID-19 vaccine acceptance intervention that is responsive 
to the needs of Veterans and VA healthcare providers (HCPs) and staff. VA HCPs and PACT 
staff are consistently identified by patients as trusted sources of vaccine information, thereby 
best suited to initiate vaccine acceptance discussions with patients. Methods: This evidence- 
informed Vaccine Acceptance Intervention will be conducted in VISNs 16 and 21 as a Hybrid 
Type 2 pragmatic implementation-effectiveness trial, guided by the i-PARiHS framework, and 
using Implementation  Facilitation as the overarching implementation strategy.  The specific aims 
are as follows: Aim 1) Examine the effectiveness of a Vaccine Acceptance Intervention versus 
Usual Care on Veterans’ vaccination rates in a one-year cluster randomized controlled trial. The  
implementation team will include VISN-level external facilitators, VAMC- level internal 
facilitators, and clinic-level site champions to support PACT staff and Whole  Health Coaches 
and Peers in implementing the Vaccine Acceptance Intervention with Veterans.  Aim 2) Survey 
Veterans to understand what factors are  associated with the decision to accept or not accept 
COVID vaccination among previously unvaccinated Veterans and through qualitative interviews,  
learn more about these factors and how they differ between sociodemographically and clinically  
diverse Veteran subgroups. Aim 3) Learn what aspects  of the Vaccine Acceptance  Intervention 
and implementation strategies  were helpful and not helpful in improving Veteran vaccine 
acceptance by conducting mid-trial and end-of-trial qualitative interviews with VISN 16 and 21 
study stakeholders using purposive sampling of VA staff and HCPs from  sites with high and low  
vaccination rates. Impact: This is the first multi-site randomized controlled trial to test an MI-
informed vaccine acceptance intervention that can be rapidly scaled across VA to improve 
COVID-19 vaccine acceptance in Veterans. Furthermore, information gained will be used to 
inform healthcare systems’ strategies to improve future vaccination and public health 
campaigns.
[Version Number 5.0 / Version Date 12.15.23] VA Central IRB Protocol Template Page 2 of 53
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
VA Central IRBEffective Date: August 1, 2022VA Central IRBEffective Date: June 14, 2022List of Abbreviations
ACTIV-3 Accelerating COVID-19 Therapeutic Interventions and 
Vaccines AE- Adverse Event
CAN Scores- Care Assessment Need Scores
CAVHS- Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System 
CDC- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
CDW- Clinical Data Warehouse
CEAL- Community Engagement 
Alliance Co-I- Co-Investigator
COVID-19- Coronavirus disease 2019 
CRE- CREATE
CSHIIP- Center for the Study of Healthcare Innovation, Implementation & Policy 
DART- Data Access Request Tracker
DoD- Department of Defense
FDA- Food and Drug Administration
GLVA- Greater Los Angeles Veteran Affairs 
HBC- Health Behavior Coordinator
HCP- Health Care Provider
HIPAA- Health Insurance Portability Accountability Act 
HPDP- Health Promotion Disease Prevention
IF- Implementation Facilitator 
ICN- Integration Control Number
IIR- Investigator Initiated Research
i-PARiHS- integrated Promoting Action on Research Implementation in Health 
Services IRB- Institutional Review Board
MD- Doctor of Medicine 
MHS- Mental Health 
Specialty MI- Motivational 
Interviewing
MIRECC- Mental Illness Research Education and Clinical Center
MWCCS- Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study and the Women's Interagency HIV Study
NCP- National Center for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention 
NIH- National Institutes of Health
OARS- Open Questions, Affirmations, Reflections, 
Summaries OHE- Office of Health Equity
OI&T- Office of Information and 
Technology PACT- Program Aligned Care 
Team
PCORI- Patient Centered Office and Research Institute 
PEI- National Partnered Evaluation Initiative
PHD- Doctor of 
Philosophy PHI- Protected 
Health Information PI- 
Principal Investigator
POC- Point of Contact
PTSD- Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
QUERI- Quality Enhancement Research Initiative 
RRT- Rapid Response Team
SAE- Serious Adverse Event
SARS CoV-2- Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2
SCALE- Veteran and Staff Perceptions of VHA Large Scale Adverse Event  
Communications SFVAHCS- San Francisco Veteran Affairs Health Care System
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
VA Central IRBEffective Date: August 1, 2022SQL- Structured Query Language
UAMS- University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences UC- Usual Care
UCSF- University of California San Francisco
VA HSR&D- Veteran Affairs Health Services Research and 
Development VACO- Veteran Administration Central Office 
VAI -Vaccine Acceptance Intervention
VAMC- Veteran Affairs Medical Center
VAPHCS- Veteran Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System 
VEP- Veteran Engagement Panel
VHA- Veteran Health Administration
VINCI- Veteran Informatics Computing Infrastructure 
VISN- Veterans Integrated Service Networks
VSSC- Veterans Support Service Center
wHOPE- Whole Health Options and Pain Education study 
WOC- Worker without compensation
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Contents
1.0Study Personnel............................................................................................................................... 6
2.0Introduction........................................................................................................................................ 7
4.0 Resources and Personnel................................................................................................................ 14
5.1Study Procedures............................................................................................................................. 20
5.2Study Design..................................................................................................................................... 20
5.3Recruitment Methods......................................................................................................................... 23
5.4Informed Consent Procedures/Enrollment ...................................................................................... 25
5.5Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria (All Study Aims).................................................................................. 30
5.6Additional Study Methods................................................................................................................ 31
5.8. Study Evaluations for Aims 1, 2, and 3.......................................................................................... 37
5.9Data Analysis.................................................................................................................................... 38
5.10Withdrawal of Subjects................................................................................................................... 43
6.1Safety Assessments......................................................................................................................... 43
6.2Specification of Safety Parameters.................................................................................................... 43
6.3Methods and Timing for Assessing, Recording,  and Analyzing Safety Parameters...................44
6.2 Data Safety Monitoring..................................................................................................................... 44
7.0 Reporting....................................................................................................................................................... 44
8.0 Privacy and Confidentiality............................................................................................................... 45
9.0 Communication Plan......................................................................................................................... 47
10.0 References.................................................................................................................................................. 48
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
1.0Study Personnel
San Francisco VA Health Care System:
Karen H. Seal, MD, MPH (PI, SFVAHCS) karen.seal@va.gov  
Jennifer K. Manuel, PhD (PI, SFVAHCS) jennifer.manuel@va.gov
Central Arkansas VA Healthcare System:
Jeffrey Pyne, MD (PI, CAVHS) Jeffrey.pyne@va.gov
Bedford VA Healthcare System
Rani Elwy, PhD (Co-I, Bedford VA) rani.elwy@va.gov
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
2.0 Introduction
COVID-19 is now the leading cause of death in the U.S. As of August 2021, there were over 
35 million cases and over 600,000 deaths attributed to COVID-19 in the U.S. COVID-19 has 
had a devastating impact on society, with racial and ethnic minority populations most adversely 
affected by the pandemic.1 In December 2020, the  FDA granted emergency use authorizations 
for the first COVID-19 vaccines. As of August 2021, 68% of the U.S. population ages 12 and 
older had received at least one dose of the vaccine and 58% are fully vaccinated.2 Veteran 
vaccination rates are lower, with recent reports citing that 47% of Veterans have received at 
least one dose. The emergence of vaccines has reduced COVID-19 cases and deaths, but 
overall acceptance of the vaccine is declining. This leaves those who remain unvaccinated at 
risk of severe disease and death.
Reasons for vaccine hesitancy are multi-factorial. The World Health Organization defines 
vaccine hesitancy as  “a delay in acceptance or refusal of vaccination despite availability of 
vaccination services.”3 Vaccine hesitancy is complex and context specific, varying across time, 
place, and vaccines. It is influenced by factors such as complacency, convenience and 
confidence. Reasons for not getting vaccinated include barriers such as lack of transportation or  
access to psychological services and cognitive barriers including perceived lack of risk, need for 
vaccine, or social benefit, which may be  more pronounced in individuals with lower levels of 
education,4 and underlying mental health and substance use disorders.5,6 Additional barriers 
include negative attitudes toward vaccines, prior negative experiences with vaccination (i.e., 
needle phobia), misinformation about vaccines (e.g., belief that the vaccine causes COVID), 
and general lack of trust in the healthcare system and government.7 In a recent study, the most 
cited reasons for COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy  included (1) concerns about side  effects, safety, 
and efficacy, and (2) the unprecedented speed with which the vaccine was developed, 
manufactured and approved for emergency use authorization.8
Sociodemographic factors are associated with greater COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy or 
distrust, including younger age (< 50 years old), Black or Hispanic ethnicity, lower education, 
rurality, Republican or independent political partisanship, and not having received a flu vaccine 
in the prior year.8,9 Vaccination rates are higher in White adults (50%) compared to Black and 
Hispanic adults (36%). Similarly, 16% of White adults say they will “Wait and see” before 
deciding to receive a vaccine compared to 24% of Black and Hispanic adults.1 The above 
sociodemographic data are from  non-VA sources. Current Veteran  vaccination rates are lower 
overall and vaccination rates are higher in Black Veterans compared to White and Hispanic 
Veterans (details on vaccination rate data for VISN 16 and 21 Veterans are in the Appendix).
Low vaccination rates among Black and Hispanic/Latinx populations may be attributed to 
greater distrust of COVID-19 vaccine safety and scientists and medical providers compared to  
Whites. In “Distrust, Race and Research,” a landmark 2002 JAMA Internal Medicine study, 
Corbie-Smith and colleagues found that compared with White Americans, Black Americans 
were more likely to believe that physicians would ask them to participate in harmful research, 
expose them to unnecessary risks, not fully explain the research, or treat them as part of an 
experiment without their consent.10 This mistrust among racial/ethnic minorities must be 
considered within the  larger context of systemic racism as well as historical trauma associated 
with research and healthcare in the U.S.11,120
COVID-19 vaccination rates may vary widely by geographic regions . As of early August 
2021, 46% of Veterans in VISN 16 and 58% of Veterans in VISN 21 have received at  least one 
dose of the vaccine. Variation in vaccination rates are even more pronounced at the Veterans 
Administration Medical Center (VAMC) facility level. In VISN 16, 63% of Veterans in New 
Orleans, LA have received at least one dose compared to 39% of Veterans in Alexandria, LA. 
These findings are consistent with overall vaccine acceptance trends which have demonstrated 
higher vaccination rates in urban centers compared to rural areas.13,14 Lower COVID-19 
vaccination rates in rural communities is concerning given that compared with their urban 
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
counterparts, rural adults are at higher risk  for the chronic diseases (i.e.,  heart disease, COPD, 
diabetes, obesity, cancer)15 that are also associated with worse COVID-19 clinical outcomes.16 
In rural communities, racial and ethnic disparities in access to care and health outcomes 
persist,17 which may lower vaccination rates further.
Healthcare providers’ (HCP) recommendations about vaccination is strongly associated 
with patients’ acceptance of vaccination.18 In VA, HCPs include all members of the Patient 
Aligned Care Teams (PACT), i.e., the medical providers (physicians and nurse practitioners), 
registered nurse (RN) care managers, licensed vocational nurses, medical support assistants, 
social workers, dieticians, pharmacists,  and mental health providers embedded in primary  care. 
HCPs are more likely to recommend vaccination to patients if they were vaccinated themselves, 
hold positive attitudes about vaccination, are knowledgeable about vaccination (e.g., 
understand and can articulate efficacy, safety and value), and are confident in leading 
vaccination conversations with patients. Thus, provider trainings in communication 
strategies may be an important strategy in increasing vaccine uptake in patients, especially as 
vaccination rates have been declining in recent months.19
Scientists speculate that COVID-19 may become an endemic virus20 and boosters may be 
required to protect individuals from variants and declines in immunity over time. Current 
studies show that two doses of the mRNA vaccines- those produced by Pfizer and Moderna- 
confer more than 90% efficacy and that immunity lasts at least six months after completing 
vaccination.21,22 The Johnson and Johnson single-dose vaccine has similar effectiveness and 
durability.23 Nevertheless, all three companies are currently testing COVID-19 boosters. This is 
because researchers suspect that immunity might wane over time, such as after one year or 
more, and might not provide sufficient protection against coronavirus variants that could 
emerge and evolve. Therefore, a vaccinated person might need a booster dose to stay 
protected against the original coronavirus strain, as well as newly emerging variants, similar to 
the rationale for administering the seasonal flu vaccine annually. Currently, the need for and 
timing for COVID- 19 booster doses has not been established, and at this time, booster doses 
of
COVID-19 vaccine are not recommended by the CDC (Interim Clinical Considerations for Use of 
COVID-19 Vaccines | CDC). Nevertheless, in late May 2021, the U.S. Surgeon General Dr.
Vivek Murthy has told Americans to be prepared to have a COVID-19 vaccine booster within  
one year.24 One question currently under investigation is whether the booster vaccine will be the 
same or a different product from the original COVID-19 vaccine.25 Thus, if and when booster 
doses of COVID-19 vaccine are approved and recommended for Americans, the VA may find 
itself in a similar position of needing strategies to overcome similar or even greater barriers to 
booster dose acceptance than with the original COVID-19 vaccines. This study will use surveys 
and qualitative interviewing techniques to explore Veterans’ and VA staff attitudes and 
perceptions of COVID-19 booster vaccination.
More immediately, the CDC has released updated guidance that the flu vaccine may be 
given at the same time as the COVID-19 vaccination, provided the individual is not ill at 
the time.26 This updated guidance is because there have been no reports of reduced 
immunogenicity with the administration of both vaccines simultaneously, as originally thought. It 
is recommended that each vaccine be given at different anatomical sites (different limbs) as an 
intra-muscular injection to mitigate local reaction. Given concerns about co-infection with 
seasonal flu and COVID-19, for Veterans not yet vaccinated against COVID-19, but who 
regularly get flu vaccine, messaging and coaching could be targeted to encourage uptake of 
both vaccines and simultaneous administration for convenience.
Preliminary     Studies     in     addition     to     ongoing     Phase     I     Pre-implementation     Project      
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
1. Telephone Motivational Coaching to Encourage Flu Vaccination and Prevent COVID- 
19 Co-Infection in High-Risk Patients within the SFVAHCS: A Quality Improvement 
Study (10/16/20-12/7/20) (Seal and Manuel, mPIs).
Objective: To conduct a Quality Improvement (QI) study to examine the feasibility of 
motivational interviewing (MI)-informed outreach calls for seasonal flu vaccination acceptance 
among higher-risk unvaccinated Veterans in the SFVAHCS.
Methods: First, Whole Health coaches and other staff members trained in Whole Health and 
motivational interviewing (MI) participated in a brief training focused on using MI to encourage 
acceptance of the seasonal flu vaccine. The VA National Center for Health Promotion and 
Disease Prevention (NCP),  “Moving to Vaccine Acceptance” scripts were  adapted as electronic 
medical record (EMR) note templates that served as scripts, and upon completion, as 
documentation of the telephone encounter. VA administrative data were used to identify 198 
Veterans in the SFVAHCS with Care Assessment Need (CAN) scores > 95 with no 
documentation of having received seasonal flu vaccine. After patients confirmed not having 
received the seasonal flu vaccine, a Whole Health coach, Peer Specialist, or other VA staff 
member engaged them in an MI-styled telephone conversation about their interest in and 
barriers to receiving flu vaccine, especially in light of risk for co-infection with COVID-19 and flu. 
Consistent with MI communication, coaches asked opened-ended questions, listened in a  non- 
judgmental manner, and asked permission to share information about flu vaccine, including 
specific information about where and when they could receive flu vaccination.
Results: 488 Veterans were initially identified for the intervention. VA staff made MI-styled flu 
outreach calls from 10/16/20 through 12/7/20. Of the original 488 Veterans, 290 veterans 
reported having already received a flu vaccine (although not documented), resulting in 198 
veterans remaining eligible for the intervention (see Table 1 below). The mean age was 73.4 
years (SD±11.2 years), 96% were male, 56% were rural, 70% were Caucasian, and 4% were 
Hispanic. Overall, 53 patients (27%) received vaccinations within 30 days of an MI coaching 
call. Vaccination rates within 30 days were highest among Veterans 85 and older (47%) 
followed by Veterans 75-84 (27%). Unexpectedly, rates were higher among Veterans who 
received primary care at rural versus urban facilities (40% vs. 21%) and who resided in rural 
areas (32% vs. 23%). Due to the small number of women and ethnic minority Veterans, we 
were unable to detect differences in these subgroups.
Discussion/Limitations: There were several limitations to this QI project including that the 
sample was small, single-site and a non-generalizable population of the oldest and sickest 
Veterans in the health care system. The rapid pace of the seasonal vaccination cycle 
underscored the importance of up-to-date and accurate vaccination information for prioritizing 
staff resources. The oldest and rural Veterans benefitted the most from the MI-styled flu 
outreach calls perhaps because they were the most isolated and lacked ready access to flu 
vaccine services.
Conclusion/Impacts:  This QI project demonstrated the feasibility of MI-styled outreach calls to 
encourage flu vaccination, which might generalize to other vaccines such as COVID-19. It also 
demonstrated that a work force of VA Whole Health Coaches, Peer Specialists, and others 
trained in Whole Health can be quickly re-purposed to use their MI and coaching skills to 
promote a target health behavior, in this case, seasonal flu vaccination to decrease risk for 
COVID-19 co-infection.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Table 1. 30-Day Influenza Immunization Rates for 198 Unvaccinated 
Veterans Contacted (10/16/2020 – 12/7/2020)
2a. Qualitative Interviews to Understand COVID-19 Vaccine Intentions in Veterans. 
Dr. Rani Elwy (Co-I), co-lead of the Bridge QUERI Rapid Response Team, led a quality 
improvement project to inform the National Center for Health Promotion and Disease 
Prevention’s vaccination efforts in VA. Semi-structured qualitative interviews (N=59) were 
conducted with Veterans (N=29 ) and VA staff members (N=30).
Qualitative interviews with Veterans indicated that “vaccine skepticism” was the most 
common form of vaccine hesitancy, But there’s always a fear like what’s in this injection, 
like is it a tracker? Lack of concern about COVID-19, or “vaccine indifference”, was cited by 
some Veterans, No, I don’t expect that I’ll get it [COVID-19]. I  think if I was gonna get it I 
would have had it by now. ” And other Veteran stated, “I mean, I take care of myself when  
it comes to eating good and you know, taking my vitamins and things like that. So, I try  
to keep as healthy as possible, so if I was to contract anything my body could fight it 
off as best I could.” Distrust was another barrier to vaccine acceptance. One Veteran 
stated, “I saw it wasn’t FDA approved and I see how fast they rush this stuff.” Another 
Veteran expressed overall distrust of the system, “I know a lot of people who have never 
gotten the flu shot ever in their lives. If they did, it was because it was required of 
them. You know, we just don’t trust this system. It’s not that we don’t trust science.” 
Interviews highlighted the unique barriers to vaccine acceptance in the Veteran population. 
One Veteran stated, “… I've been, you know, in the military and I went in the Marine 
corps and I was exposed to a whole bunch of chemicals and now I'm sick from them 
and I don't want--I don't want any more like chemicals added to my body that don't 
have to be added to my body .”
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
2b. Surveys of Veteran attitudes and intentions regarding COVID-19 vaccination. Dr. 
Rani Elwy and the Bridge QUERI Rapid Response Team collaborated with SHEP to survey  
Veterans (N=1,178) through SHEP’s ongoing Veterans Insights Panel (VIP). The survey was 
fielded March 12-28, 2021. Of those surveyed, 29% (N=339) reported that they had not been 
vaccinated. Unvaccinated Veterans were asked about their intent to vaccinate and 13% 
reported that they would probably not receive the vaccine, 22% were unsure, and 13% said 
they would probably receive the vaccine. Additionally, 27% reported they would definitely not 
receive the vaccine and, in contrast, 25% stated they would definitely receive the vaccine.
Veterans’ self-report of their overall health varied by vaccination intention. Those who were “not sure” 
whether they would receive the  vaccine were more likely to  describe their overall health as fair/poor  (43%) 
than those who would definitely/probably get vaccinated (30%), and 24% of those who said they would 
definitely/probably not get vaccinated reported fair/poor overall health. Similar trends were found regarding 
Veteran self-report of mental health status. Veterans who were “not sure” if they would get vaccinated were 
more likely to describe their mental health as fair/poor (44%) compared to those who expressed an intention 
to get vaccinated (37%), or remain unvaccinated (21%). Veterans cited a range of reasons for not getting 
vaccinated including concerns about vaccine side-effects, preference to use as few medicines  as possible, 
vaccine distrust, healthcare system distrust, a preference to gain natural immunity (from contracting COVID-
19), and a desire to wait to before making a decision about COVID-19 vaccination.
Thus, there is a sizable proportion of unvaccinated Veterans (~35%) who remain unsure 
or who might accept COVID-19 vaccination, sometimes referred to as the “moveable 
middle”. Reasons for delaying or refusing vaccine largely relate to general distrust of medicine 
and healthcare, and specific skepticism and distrust of the vaccine. In addition, as the 
pandemic continues, there is apathy, indifference, and a decreased perception of risk. This trial 
targets this actionable group of Veterans in testing an intervention intended to spark 
communication with VA providers to move patients toward vaccine acceptance.
Risks of infection, severe disease, and death due to COVID-19 persist for the 
unvaccinated. While cases, hospitalizations and death to COVID-19 are overall declining, 
these numbers include the approximately 60% of adults who have received at least one 
vaccination.27 When adjustments are made to include only those unvaccinated, the risk of 
infection is 73% higher than case rates that include both vaccinated and unvaccinated 
individuals.28 Thus, there is an urgent need for motivational interventions  to increase COVID-19 
vaccine uptake in the most vaccine hesitant populations given that they remain at risk of 
severe disease and death due to COVID-19. Moreover, a successful intervention must be 
tailored to the needs of racial/ethnic minorities, women, rural populations and high-risk 
individuals with mental health and substance use disorders; groups most likely to become 
infected, yet least likely to accept vaccination. There is a very little research of interventions to 
motivate vaccine acceptance. Thus,     we     propose     to     implement     and     test     a     COVID-19     vaccination   
acceptance intervention that is culturally and socially acceptable, focused on the behavioral  
factors that increase vaccine uptake, and responsive to the needs of Veterans and VA  
healthcare staff.     
3.0 Objectives
The overall goal of this study is to increase COVID-19 vaccination in VISN 16 and 21 Veterans either 
because of vaccine hesitancy or lack of access to COVID-19     vaccination  . This evidence-informed  
intervention will be conducted as a Hybrid Type 2 pragmatic implementation-effectiveness trial, guided by 
the i-PARiHS framework, and  utilizing Implementation Facilitation as  the overarching implementation 
strategy. For Aim 1, we will conduct a one-year cluster randomized controlled trial of a Vaccine Acceptance  
Intervention versus Usual Care with randomization at the level of VA Medical Center (VAMC) . Usual Care 
will consist of all national and local initiatives to promote COVID-19 vaccine acceptance in Veterans such as 
mobile clinics, outreach calls, public service announcements, etc. The implementation team will include 
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
VISN-level external facilitators, VAMC-level internal facilitators, and clinic-level site champions to support 
PACT staff, Coaches and Peers in implementing Vaccine Acceptance Intervention (VAI) communication 
strategies with Veterans.
In the VAI, research personnel will train and encourage PACT staff to use MI communication 
techniques to promote vaccine acceptance when speaking to patients about COVID-19 
vaccination. In addition, we will train Whole Health coaches, Peer Specialists and other 
interested and qualified VA staff from VAMC intervention sites to conduct virtual and in- person  
motivational COVID-19 vaccination coaching outreach calls through vaccine telehubs, one in 
each of VISNs 16 and 21. External facilitators will also assist intervention sites in developing 
strategies to address site-specific barriers to COVID-19 vaccine acceptance identified  by the 
site champions and internal facilitators. For Aim 2, during an 18-month period, which overlaps 
the trial period, each month, we will identify a diverse purposive sample of 25 Veterans 
distributed equally across VAMCs in VISNs 16 and 21 who have had primary care visits at 
Intervention and Usual Care sites (N= 450, in total), and recently received (N=360) or did not 
receive (N=90) the COVID-19 vaccination. We will oversample recently vaccinated Veterans to  
ensure a large enough sample to describe the impact of the Vaccine Acceptance Intervention  
on Veterans’ decision to accept COVID-19 vaccination after considering other factors. In 
addition, purposive sampling will prioritize Veterans who are women, ethnic/racial minorities, 
rural and younger individuals (< 50 years), and those with mental health conditions, including 
serious mental illness. In addition to surveying the larger sample of 450 Veterans, among a 
purposive subset of roughly 90 Veterans, we will conduct in-depth qualitative interviews to 
better understand the factors  related to recent vaccine acceptance and persistent vaccine 
hesitancy.
Finally, for Aim 3, we will conduct process and summative interviews with study stakeholders 
(VA staff and providers from sites with high and low vaccination rates) to learn which 
implementation strategies were most and least effective.
Our specific aims and associated hypotheses and research questions follow:
Specific Aim 1 Conduct a one-year pragmatic cluster randomized controlled trial of a COVID- 
19 Vaccine Acceptance Intervention to determine whether, compared to Usual Care sites, 
Intervention sites achieve:
oH1a: A greater incidence of Veterans receives at least one dose of COVID-19 vaccination during the 
study period, either as a primary vaccination or booster (primary outcome).
oH1b: A greater incidence of previously unvaccinated Veterans that completes COVID-19 
primary vaccination (2 doses of mRNA vaccine or 1 dose of Janssen (Johnson & 
Johnson) vaccine).29
Exploratory hypothesis H1c: A greater incidence of Veterans who complete 
seasonal flu vaccination.
Exploratory hypothesis H1d:  Among those eligible for a COVID booster during 
the trial period, a greater incidence of Veterans completes at least one booster 
dose. 
In addition, we will utilize the VA Corporate Data Warehouse (CDW) and other VA 
administrative data to assess other independent predictors of vaccine acceptance (e.g., 
sociodemographic, clinical, and health services utilization).
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Specific Aim 2 During an 18-month period that overlaps the trial period, conduct surveys in a 
sociodemographically and  clinically diverse purposive  sample of Veterans (N=450) with primary 
care visits from VISN 16 and 21 Intervention and Usual Care sites who did (N=360) and did not 
(N=90) receive COVID-19 vaccination. The survey will examine predictors of COVID-19 vaccine 
acceptance and are organized according to the World Health Organization Behavioral and 
Social Drivers of Vaccination (BeSD) framework.30 The survey includes questions from Centers 
for Disease Control and multiple VA surveys. In addition, in a smaller purposive subset of 
Veterans (N~90), we will conduct deeper-dive qualitative interviews to explore the following 
research questions:
 Did     discussions     with     Veterans’     HCPs     influence     their     decisions     to     accept     COVID-19      
vaccination?     
oIf so, how important were these discussions compared  to other factors?
oWhat   was important about the HCP or these 
discussions regarding decision- making?
oHow did this vary by Veteran subgroup?
oAre Veterans more likely to report engaging in discussions about 
COVID- 19 vaccination at Intervention compared to Usual Care 
sites?
 Which factors (e.g., trust in VA HCPs, correct information about vaccines, prior  
experiences     with     VA     healthcare,     risk     perception,     perceived     lack     of     time/access,     and/   
or discrimination) are most influential in Veterans’ decision-making regarding  
COVID- 19 vaccination?
oHow do these factors vary by Veteran subgroup: women, younger Veterans  
(< age 50), Black or African American, Hispanic/Latinx and Asian Pacific  
Islander Veterans, rural Veterans, and those with serious mental illness?
oAmong Veteran subgroups, do these factors differ at VAI vs. Usual Care sites?
 Do     COVID-19     or     pandemic-related     impacts     (e.g.,     COVID     long-haul     symptoms     or   
other medical problems, loss of job or housing) impact COVID-19 vaccination  
decisions?  
oAre some Veteran subgroups more influenced by COVID-related 
impacts in their decision-making re: COVID-19 vaccination?
oDo these impacts differ between VAI and Usual Care sites?
Specific Aim 3 Conduct mid-trial and end-of-trial qualitative interviews with VISN 16 and 21 
study stakeholders, (i.e., a purposive sample of VA staff and HCPs from sites with high and low 
vaccination rates) to learn which aspects of the Vaccine Acceptance Intervention and which 
implementation strategies were helpful (or not) in improving Veteran vaccine acceptance and 
access. Information from mid-trial process interviews will inform intervention and implementation 
refinements; end-of-trial interviews will inform the development of a toolkit for future vaccine 
acceptance interventions.
In sum, we hope to generate evidence for an MI-informed communication intervention and 
implementation strategies that can be rapidly scaled beyond VISNs 16 and 21 to improve 
COVID-19 vaccination acceptance in Veterans across the nation. In addition, we will gain a 
better understanding of how to implement and disseminate interventions to address future 
vaccination campaigns (i.e., COVID-19 boosters) and other public health emergencies.
4.0 Resources and Personnel
San     Francisco     VA     Health     Care   System      
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Karen Seal, MD, MPH (Corresponding PI, 8/8ths, SFVAHCS) is a Professor of Medicine and 
Psychiatry (In Residence) at UCSF. She serves as Chief of Integrative Heath at the SFVAHCS. 
She is PI of several funded pragmatic implementation-effectiveness trials including an NIH- 
funded UG3/UH3 multi-site pragmatic trial (wHOPE) to compare two approaches to chronic 
pain management in Veterans  (including Whole Health coaching),31,32 and is co-PI of a PCORI- 
funded study (VOICE) to test the SFVAHCS’s Integrated Pain Team approach.33-35 Dr. Seal has 
completed other trials using telehealth MI, one funded by NIH (with Drs. Borsari and Manuel) 
that increased uptake of complementary and integrative health strategies in Veterans with 
chronic pain prescribed opioids36,32 and two others, funded by VA which demonstrated that 
telehealth MI resulted in increased engagement in mental health treatment in OEF/OIF 
Veterans37 and improved mental health symptoms in rural Veterans (with Drs. Manuel, Pyne, 
Fortney and Mesidor).38 As Chief of Integrative Health, she oversees the Health Promotion and 
Disease Prevention (HPDP) program. In collaboration with Dr. Manuel, they trained Peers and 
Whole Health Coaches to conduct motivational coaching calls to several hundred high risk rural 
Veterans to encourage flu vaccination using NCP’s flu vaccine acceptance scripts on which the  
COVID-19 vaccination scripts are based. Outcome data including Veterans’ interest in COVID- 
19 vaccination using a  Qualtrics survey are forthcoming. Dr. Seal is  also leading the SFVAHCS 
Vaccine Outreach and Education Team responsible for developing a multi-pronged approach to 
increasing COVID-19 vaccination uptake in SFVAHCS employees and Veterans. These 
experiences plus her skillsets in pragmatic clinical trials of behavioral interventions,32,39 
implementation science,31,40,41 and secondary data analysis using the VA EHR42-45 support her 
leadership of the proposed study.
Jennifer Manuel, PhD (PI, 8/8ths, SFVAHCS) is an Associate Professor in the Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at UCSF and is based at SFVAHCS where she is a 
Clinical Research Psychologist, Deputy Director of Psychology and Health Behavior 
Coordinator in the HPDP program. Relevant experience includes serving as PI and Co-I on 
multiple trials examining the implementation of evidence-based treatments in front-line clinical 
settings.46,47 She serves as PI on an HSR&D grant examining the quality of care provided 
through VHA and the community, which includes qualitative research  on the impact of COVID- 
19 on the delivery of care to Veterans. Dr. Manuel has over 15 years of experience training 
medical providers in MI and previously worked for VA Central Office’s national MI training 
program where she monitored MI training outcomes and fidelity among frontline VA 
clinicians.48,49 In addition, Dr. Manuel  serves on SFVAHCS’s Health Equity Council and has 
published on adaptations of brief interventions for diverse populations.36,50
Central     Arkansas     VA     Healthcare     System:      
Jeff Pyne, MD (PI, 8/8ths, CAVHS) is a Navy Veteran, Professor of Psychiatry at UAMS, based 
at CAVHS, where he serves as the Associate Director for Research at the South-Central 
MIRECC and Director of the HSR&D CREATE “Improving Rural Veterans' Access/Engagement 
in Evidence-Based Mental Healthcare”. Relevant experience includes PI, Co-PI, or site PI of 
multiple projects focused on rural veterans, multi-component telemental health interventions, 
implementation science (RVR 19-478, PCS-1406-19295, QUE 15-282, CRE 12-083, SDP 10-
044, MHI 08-098-1, MH076908-04, MNT 05-152, NPI-01-006-1, IIR 00-0781),41,63-65 community-
based participatory research (I01 HX-002313-01, C00863),66-68 think-aloud survey development 
(IIR 03-257-1),69,70 and access to care survey development (CRE 12-300).71-76
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Bedford VA Healthcare System
A. Rani Elwy, PhD (Co-I, 8/8ths, Bedford VA) is an Associate Professor at Brown University. 
At the Bedford VA she is Multiple-PI of the Bridge QUERI Program and co-lead of Bridge 
QUERI’s Rapid Response Team (RRT), commissioned to evaluate needs for the COVID-19 
Vaccine Integrated Project Team in VACO, and NCP. The “QUERI RRT-3” are examining 
Veteran and employee vaccine hesitancy through surveys, interviews and focus groups, and 
using these data to develop communication and implementation strategies to increase vaccine 
acceptance. Dr. Elwy also leads studies of patient-provider-system level risk communication to 
Veterans and their families. Dr. Elwy's work on examining surgeons' disclosures of clinical 
adverse events, published in JAMA Surgery, received the HSR&D Best Paper Research Award 
in 2017. Her HSR&D funded study (SCALE, SDR  11-440) led to the development of the  Large- 
Scale Disclosure Toolkit, incorporated into VHA Directive 1004.08, "Disclosure of Adverse 
Events to Patients". Dr. Elwy is a member of the VACO Clinical Episode Review Team, where 
she delivers the toolkit through implementation facilitation to VHA facilities in need of support in 
communicating with Veterans, family members, Veterans Service Organizations, and VA 
employees when things go wrong during the course of delivering health care.78-80
5.1Study Procedures
5.2Study Design
This evidence-informed intervention will be conducted as a Hybrid Type 2 pragmatic 
implementation-effectiveness  trial, guided by the i-PARiHS framework, utilizing Implementation 
Facilitation as the overarching implementation strategy. For Aim 1, we will conduct a one-year 
cluster randomized parallel group trial, stratified by VISN, using covariate constrained 
randomization (e.g., rural/urban clinics, facility size).81 Specifically, we will compare a Vaccine 
Acceptance Intervention versus Usual Care with randomization at the level of VA Medical 
Center (VAMC), with the intervention directed at VAMC clinic and CBOC PACT staff . Usual 
Care will consist of all VA and other national and local initiatives to promote COVID-19 vaccine 
acceptance such as mobile clinics, outreach calls, public service announcements, etc. All VA 
and non-VA Usual Care initiatives will be documented and described in detail through quarterly 
environmental scans at all study sites.
The Vaccine Acceptance Intervention will be implemented using external facilitation by the 
research team in partnership with trained external facilitators in VISNs 16 and 21. External 
facilitators will partner with VAMC-level internal facilitators and clinic-level site champions to 
implement the Motivational Interviewing (MI)-informed Vaccine Acceptance Intervention (VAI). 
The implementation team will use VISN-level external facilitators, VAMC-level internal 
facilitators, and clinic-level site champions to support PACT staff and Coaches in implementing 
the Vaccine Acceptance Intervention communication strategies with Veterans.
Through the VAI, PACT staff will be trained and encouraged to use MI communication 
techniques to promote vaccine acceptance when speaking to patients about COVID-19 
vaccination. In addition, we will train Whole Health coaches, Peer Specialists and other 
interested and qualified VA staff from VAMC intervention sites to conduct virtual and in- person 
motivational COVID-19 vaccination coaching calls using NCP’s “Moving to COVID-19 Vaccine  
Acceptance” scripts (see VAI training manual) through vaccine telehubs, one in each of VISNs 
16 and 21. External facilitators will also assist intervention sites in developing strategies to 
address site-specific barriers to COVID-19 vaccine acceptance identified by the site champions 
and internal facilitators. For Aim 2, during an 18-month period, overlapping the trial period, 
each month, we will identify a diverse purposive sample of 25 Veterans distributed across 
VAMCs VISNs 16 and 21 with primary care visits at Intervention and Usual Care sites (N=450, 
in total), who recently received (N=360) or did not receive (N=90) the COVID-19 vaccine. 
Purposive sampling will prioritize Veterans who are women, ethnic/racial minority Veterans, 
rural and younger individuals (< 50 years), and those with mental health conditions, including 
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
serious mental illness. We will survey the larger sample of 450 Veterans, and among a 
purposive subset of roughly 90 Veterans, we will conduct in-depth qualitative interviews to 
better understand factors related to recent vaccine acceptance and persistent vaccine 
hesitancy. Finally, for Aim 3, we will conduct process and summative qualitative interviews with 
study stakeholders (VA staff and providers from sites with high and low vaccination rates) to 
learn which implementation strategies were most and least effective. (See Figure 1. Study 
Design, below).
Figure 1. Study Design and Timeline
5.2.a     Risk vs. Benefit  : Risk in this study is considered minimal. Potential risks include the 
following for participants: (1) VA staff: (a) concern about retribution or job loss for voicing 
opinions about implementation of their VAMC’s vaccination program or study intervention; or
(b) time away from regular duties to participate in the study as a stakeholder, internal facilitator 
or clinic champion or other study collaborator providing MI training, etc.; (2) Veterans 
participating         in     study     interviews  : (a) loss of privacy, (b) time required to participate in the study, 
or (c) some questions may cause mild discomfort. Benefits to study participation may mitigate 
potential risks: (1) For VA staff: (a) pride or satisfaction from working on high-priority area for 
VA; (b) participating in research to promote COVID-19 vaccination; (2) Veterans     participating     in   
interviews: (a) questions included in surveys do not cause more discomfort than those 
encountered in the course of routine clinical care or everyday life; (b) Veterans participating in 
the cohort survey or interviews will be renumerated for their time and effort; and (c)  
participating in research represents an opportunity to help other Veterans and Americans.
5.2.b     Study     Population  : Each of the three study aims involves different study populations:
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Aim 1: This cluster RCT (with randomization at the site level) will be conducted at a maximum 
of 16 VAMCs or systems  in VISNs 16 and 21: up to  8 VAMCs in each VISN that are willing and 
eligible to participate in the trial. ( See Table 2 below for specific study site locations; see 
Appendix Tables 1-3 for more detailed information about each study site ). VISNs 16 and 
21 cover broad regions of the U.S. affording considerable geographic diversity. VISN 16 
includes VAMCs and systems located in Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas and VISN 
21 covers Northern and Central California, Nevada, and Hawaii. This trial will include primary 
care clinics within each VAMC (i.e., Medical Practice, Geriatrics, Women’s Clinic, Infectious 
Disease/HIV Clinic), as well as community-based outpatient clinics (CBOCs) and the patient- 
Aligned Care Team (PACT) staff within each CBOC and clinic. Aim 1 will focus on Veterans  
who have had a primary care     visit   within     the     past     year     at     one     of     the     primary     care     clinics     or         
CBOCs     affiliated     with     each     of     the participating VAMCs in VISNs 16 and 21. The primary aim of   
receiving any COVID-19 vaccination includes all veterans regardless of prior vaccination status  
while the secondary aim of primary vaccine series completion is restricted to veterans who 
remained unvaccinated at the start of the trial.
Table 2: VAMCs and systems participating in the COVID Vaccine Acceptance Trial
Name VISNStation IDType Location StateAlexandria VA Health Care System 16502VAMC2495 Shreveport Hwy 71 N Pineville, LA 71360-4044LACentral Arkansas Veterans Healthcare SystemEugene J. Towbin Healthcare Center 16598VAMC200 Fort Roots Drive North Little Rock, AR 72114-170AR
Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System John L.McClellan Memorial Veterans Hospital16598VAMC4300 West 7th Street Little Rock, AR 72205-5484ARG.V. (Sonny) Montgomery VA Medical Center16586VAMC1500 E. Woodrow Wilson Avenue Jackson, MS 39216  MSGulf Coast Veterans Health Care System16520VAMC400 Veterans Avenue Biloxi, MS 39531MSMichael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center16580VAMC2002 Holcombe Blvd. Houston, TX 77030-4298TXOverton Brooks VA Medical Center & Shreveport16667VAMC510 E. Stoner Ave. Shreveport, LA 71101-4295 &LA510 E Stoner Ave Shreveport, LA 71101Southeast Louisiana Veterans Health Care System16629VAMC2400 Canal Street New Orleans, LA 70119LAVeterans Health Care System of the Ozarks16564VAMC1100 N. College Avenue Fayetteville, AR 72703ARVISN 16: South Central VA Health Care Network1610N16VISN715 S. Pear Orchard Road Ridgeland, MS 39157MSCentral California VA Health Care System21570VAMC2615 E. Clinton Avenue Fresno, CA 93703CALivermore & Menlo Park 21640VAMC4951 Arroyo Road Livermore, CA 94550CA795 Willow Road Menlo Park, CA 94025San Francisco VA Health Care System 21662HCS4150 Clement Street San Francisco, CA 94121CAVA Northern California Health Care System21612VAMC10535 Hospital Way Mather, CA 95655CAVA Pacific Islands Health Care System21459VAMC459 Patterson Road Honolulu, HI 96819-1522HIVA Palo Alto Health Care System 21640VAMC3801 Miranda Avenue Palo Alto, CA 94304-1290CAVA Sierra Nevada Health Care System21654VAMC975 Kirman Avenue Reno, NV 89502NVVA Southern Nevada Healthcare System21593VAMC6900 North Pecos Road N. Las Vegas, NV 89086NVVISN 21: Sierra Pacific Network 2110N21VISN391 Taylor Blvd., Suite 200 Pleasant Hill 94523CA
Aim 2: Sociodemographic characteristics of vaccinated and unvaccinated Veterans in VAMCs 
in VISNs 16 and 21 in June 2021 are shown in the Appendix (Table 2 and 3). Notably, among 
Veterans 18-50, on average, 81% remain unvaccinated against COVID-19; 67% women vs.
63% of men are unvaccinated; White and native populations have higher proportions of 
unvaccinated (67% and 63%-68% respectively) compared to African American/Black veterans 
(57.4%). In addition, there are greater numbers of unvaccinated Veterans among rural 
populations (68%) vs. 61% unvaccinated urban Veterans. In addition, not surprisingly, those 
who remain unvaccinated have had fewer mean outpatient visits over the past year compared 
to Veterans who have been vaccinated against COVID-19 (5.99 +/-  8.5 vs. 8.23 +/- 10.6 mean 
outpatient visits); health services utilization has been associated with receipt of vaccination.82,83 
Very importantly, these VA datasets showing the frequencies of unvaccinated VA patients are 
likely missing some proportion of Veterans who received the COVID-19 vaccination outside 
VA, but have either not reported their COVID-19 vaccination status to VA, or VA has not 
captured vaccine status through data-sharing with other vaccine providers such as state and 
county health departments, contracted businesses (e.g., Walgreens), or other health care 
providers
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
(e.g., Health Maintenance Organizations for dually insured Veterans and private offices). We 
received permission from the VA CIRB (in the Phase I pre-implementation application) to 
access Medicare data to capture some of this missing COVID-19 vaccine data. In addition, 
during the pre-implementation phase, we are actively seeking additional COVID-19 vaccination 
data sources to improve our team’s ability to accurately determine Veterans’ COVID-19 vaccine 
status. Moreover, because there are likely already vaccinated Veterans showing as 
unvaccinated in VA databases, and there is no literature to indicate what biases may impact 
vaccine reporting, the sociodemographics by vaccination status will also likely change as we 
more accurately define our denominator of unvaccinated Veterans.
Despite these limitations, given what we already know of the sociodemographic composition of 
Veterans in VA healthcare, we can anticipate the need for oversampling in order to interview a 
diverse population of Veterans. For instance, compared to the general U.S. population, women 
are underrepresented in Veteran samples. Thus, to achieve better representation of women, 
we will oversample women by inviting all preliminarily eligible women and only a proportion of 
preliminarily eligible men (target at least 20% women veterans). We will monitor enrollment of 
ethnic minority populations, relatively  younger (< age 50 years), and rural Veterans and will use 
similar procedures to over-sample and prioritize these groups. Minimum enrollment targets for 
the 450 total Veterans for Aim 2 are as follows: Veterans < age 50 years (30%), Black or  
African American (20%), Hispanic/Latinx (15%), Asian, Pacific Islander, and Native populations 
(10%), and rural Veterans (40%). Some of these subgroup designations will overlap in 
individuals. We will monitor sociodemographic characteristics of Veterans enrolled each month 
in Aim 2 and adjust recruitment accordingly to achieve these targets.
Aim     3  : VISN 16 and 21 study stakeholders (including VA PACT clinicians and VA administrative 
staff (e.g., MD, APN, RN, LVN, Pharmacist, Psychologist, Dietician, Social Work, Medical 
Support Assistants) from primary care  clinics with high and low vaccination rates will participate 
in qualitative interviews to learn which intervention components and implementation strategies 
were most and least effective through qualitative interviews. All participants will be VA 
employees.
5.2.c     Inclusion of Vulnerable Populations  : We do not anticipate excluding vulnerable 
populations with the exception of Veteran patients who, at the time of enrollment (Aim 2), are 
suicidal or homicidal (indicated by behavioral flags), or who demonstrate moderate to severe 
cognitive impairment, limiting their ability to participate in surveys and interviews. This study  
will not include VA staff or Veteran patients < 18 years of age or who are incarcerated at the 
time of enrollment because of need for special consent and access, respectively. VA 
employees are considered vulnerable because of the potential retaliation by supervisors and 
colleagues for participating or not participating in research. Therefore, VA employees’ 
decisions about study participation will not be shared with other VA employees or supervisors. 
All VA employees and Veteran patients will review information about the study in completing 
Informed Consent (or Study Information Sheets) and will be given the opportunity to ask 
questions of the research staff. In addition, all study data will remain private and confidential 
within the limits of confidentiality for VA research studies. To protect privacy and confidentiality, 
unique identifiers will be used to identify study participants and no personal identifiers will be 
associated with study data.
5.3Recruitment Methods
Aim 1: There are 8 separate VAMCs/systems in VISN 16 and 8 separate VAMCs/systems in 
VISN 21 for a total of up to 16 potentially eligible VAMCs/systems. Each of these has affiliated 
CBOCs and primary care clinics. During the pre-implementation  phase, the study team will seek
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
endorsement from VISNs 16 and 21 leadership to include their VAMCs and affiliated clinics and 
CBOCs in the Vaccine Acceptance Intervention Trial (see Informed Consent 
procedures/Enrollment below for more detail).
Sample Determination for Aim 1
We plan to include VAMCs, and by extension, their affiliated clinics and CBOCs. There are 136 
clinics and CBOCs in VISN 16 and 21. There are 900,622 total Veterans in VISNs 16 and 21; 
497,944 in V16 and 402,678 in V21. As of June 1, 2021, of those in V16, 322,596 (65%) 
remain unvaccinated (have not received at least one dose of COVID-19 vaccine) and in V21, 
248,766 (62%) have not initiated vaccination. VISN 16 includes 8 separate VAMCs of which
G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Alexandria VA 
Medical Center, and Biloxi VA Medical Center have the lowest percentage of Veterans 
vaccinated against COVID-19 vaccination ( Appendix, Table 2 ). VISN 21 includes 8 separate 
VAMCS/systems of which San Francisco VA Medical Center and North Las Vegas VA Medical 
Center have the lowest numbers of Veterans vaccinated against COVID-19 in the U.S. 
(Appendix, Table 3 ). By October 1, 2021 when the trial launches, given current vaccination 
rates     and trends,     forecast     models predict that     307,000 (62%) will remain unvaccinated in V16   
and 237,600 (59%) will remain unvaccinated in V21  (Appendix, Figures 1 and 2 ).
Aim 2: During the 18-month trial period, using VA administrative data, each month, we will 
identify a sociodemographically and clinically diverse purposive sample of 450 Veterans 
distributed equally across VAMCs in VISNs 16 and 21 with primary care visits at Intervention 
and Usual Care sites since the start of the trial at their facility, who recently received (N=360)  
or did not receive (N=90) COVID-19 vaccination. Purposive sampling will prioritize Veterans 
who are women, ethnic/racial minorities, rural and younger individuals (< 50 years), and those 
with mental health conditions, including serious mental illness. We will survey the larger sample 
of 450 Veterans and, among a purposive subset of roughly 90 Veterans, we will conduct in- 
depth qualitative interviews to better understand factors related to recent vaccine acceptance 
and persistent vaccine hesitancy. Each month, we will run reports to monitor the 
sociodemographic and clinical composition of our enrolled sample to achieve our  recruitment 
targets: Veterans < age 50 years (30%), Black or African American (20%), Hispanic/Latinx 
(15%), Asian, Pacific Islander and Native populations (10%), rural Veterans (40%), and 
Veterans with serious mental health conditions (15%). If it seems that we are not learning new 
information from the unvaccinated group over time, then we will shift those interviews to 
recently vaccinated Veterans resulting in more vaccinated Veteran interviews.
Sample for Aim 2: The numbers needed at each stage of recruitment to enroll a total sample of 
450 Veterans over 18 months is shown below, enrolling 25 Veterans per month, roughly 20 of 
whom are vaccinated and 5 of whom are unvaccinated (Table 3). Justification for over-sampling 
recently vaccinated Veterans is to ensure a large enough sample to describe the impact of the 
Vaccine Acceptance Intervention on Veterans’ decision to accept COVID-19 vaccination after 
considering other factors. The estimates for enrollment are conservative and derived from our 
experience recruiting for both survey studies and clinical trials in the past.
Estimating a 20% enrollment rate, with a target of N=450, if 80% of those who are phone 
screened are eligible to participate, and we are able to reach 35% of Veterans by phone to 
screen them, we would need to send out roughly 8,000 study information/opt-out  postcards over 
18 months (or roughly 450/month). Given that we anticipate as many as 108,000 to 160,000 
unvaccinated Veterans at the start of the trial across VISNs 16 and 21, if we conservatively 
estimate that 5% will become vaccinated each month (or 5,400-8,000), it is feasible to recruit 25 
Veterans each month for a total of 450 over 18 months and ensure that our purposive sampling 
targets are achieved ( see Table 3 below ). Monitoring of eligibility, contact and enrollment rates
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
will be performed for the study overall and by VISN weekly. The number of patients contacted 
each week will be adjusted to maintain overall target enrollment rates. The purposeful 
demographic and clinical selection could also change over time as we identify compelling 
sociodemographic or clinical subgroups (e.g., the youngest Veterans < 30 years, highly rural 
Veterans, or Veterans with substance use disorders or posttraumatic stress disorder) in the 
course of conducting surveys and interviews.
Table 3. Plan for recruitment of an adequate sample size (Aim 2)
18
MonthsMonthly
Total number of study information/opt-out  postcards needed8037447
Number of patients expected to be phone screened (.35)2813156
Of those screened, total number expected to be eligible (.80)2250125
Of those eligible, total number expected to enroll (.20)45025
In consultation with our qualitative research team, Drs. Elwy and Purcell, we have established 
a target sample size of N~90 Veterans (maintaining the purposive sampling scheme outlined 
above) for the in-depth qualitative interviews because we anticipate being able to reach 
thematic saturation for the research questions posed in Aim 2 with this sample size. This 
subset of ~90 Veterans from the total sample of 450 Veterans, will also be identified based on 
purposive sociodemographic and clinical targets.
Aim 3: Aim 3 involves mid-trial process interviews and end-of-trial summative interviews with 
VA staff and HCPs at Intervention sites to understand what worked and did not work about the 
intervention and implementation. If there are Usual Care sites with high vaccination rates, we 
will also interview staff and HCPs at those sites.
Number of Subjects for Aim 3: We are planning to conduct mid- and end-of-study interviews 
with up to three high and three low vaccination rate clinics per  VISN. The number of interviews 
per site will be 3 to 4 and this will result in approximately 48 mid-trial qualitative interviews and 
approximately 48 end-of-trial qualitative interviews. The purposive sampling of clinics will be 
based on the change in vaccination rate from baseline to each endpoint. In consultation with 
Site Champions, Internal and External Facilitators, we will choose individuals to interview who 
are most familiar with the intervention and/or clinic operations. We will also look for outlier sites 
to interview, e.g., Intervention sites with a dramatic improvement in vaccination rate from mid- 
to end-of-trial and Usual Care sites with high rates of change in vaccination rates.
5.4Informed Consent Procedures/Enrollment
5.3a. Aim 1 Vaccine Acceptance Trial.  This is a cluster randomized controlled trial design  
and  thus  randomization  is  at  the  level  of  VAMC  within  VISNs  16  and.  During  the  pre-  
implementation phase (Exempt protocol #E21-06), the study team will meet with leadership of  
VISNs 16 and 21
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
and their respective VAMCs to describe the study aims, methods and requirements of each 
study arm as well as the potential risks/burden and benefits of participation.  Specifically, at 
these meetings, the study team will explain that there is a 50/50 chance that a VAMC will be 
randomized to be an Intervention or Usual Care site and what is required of each condition. A 
VAMC assigned to Usual Care will have no specific trial intervention requirements beyond their 
usual level of participation in national and local initiatives to improve COVID-19 vaccine 
acceptance. At both Intervention and Usual Care sites, the study team will perform quarterly 
“environmental scans”. The environmental scan survey will include questions about site specific 
barriers to COVID-19 vaccination, current programs/initiatives in the clinic or local community 
that are improving or have had no impact on vaccination rates, and the perceived importance 
that the VAMC/CBOC and clinic staff is placing on vaccination ( Environmental Scan Survey, 
in preparation). At Usual Care sites, a point of contact will be chosen from each clinic and 
CBOC to complete the environmental scan, and at Intervention sites, the Site Champion ( see 
below) will perform the quarterly scan.
A VAMC assigned to the Intervention condition will have several requirements. First, VAMC 
leadership will need to  identify and provide release time  (about 10% FTE) for a  staff member 
who is already leading the COVID-19 vaccination effort at their site to serve as an Internal 
Facilitator for their VAMC. The VAMC Internal Facilitator will partner with the trial External 
Facilitators (research team staff designated as External Facilitators in VISNs 16 and 21) to 
adapt and implement the study intervention to best meet the needs and preferences of their 
VAMC site. In addition, each CBOC and clinic affiliated with a VAMC in the Intervention arm 
will need to identify a Site Champion to provide clinic-specific information to the Internal 
Facilitator to facilitate implementation of the Vaccine Acceptance Intervention at their clinic or 
CBOC. In addition, for clinics and CBOCs assigned to the Vaccine Acceptance Intervention, 
VAMC, clinic and CBOC leadership will need to agree  to release PACT staff (who voluntarily 
agree) for an initial two-hour Motivational Interviewing (MI) training, and at least one 60- 
minute post-training consultation session over the one-year trial period. There will be 
additional consultation sessions offered to intervention clinics and CBOC staff, but these will 
be optional.
All these trial requirements will be explained at the time of the initial meetings with VISN and 
VAMC leadership in VISNs 16 and 21. At these meetings, in addition to the above information, 
the study team will answer all questions related to trial participation. The research  team will also 
use these meetings to solicit specific information about VAMC-affiliated clinics and CBOCs to 
ensure eligibility to participate (primarily based on interest, adequate staffing, adequate release 
time for staff to participate, and having agreements in place with the VAMC to participate in 
research). Of note, VAMCs/systems will be able to participate as a study site even if not all 
VAMC-affiliated primary care clinics and CBOCs are available to participate. Further, all VA staff 
at participating study sites will be invited but not required to participate in the trial because 
research is optional and never required. There will be no negative impact for individual VA staff 
members who opt not to participate in activities related to the trial at an intervention clinic. As a 
follow-up to the meetings, we will ask the Chief of Staff (or Deputy) or the Medical Center 
Director (or Deputy) at each VAMC to respond to an email indicating that they agree to have 
their VAMC participate in the Vaccine Acceptance Study Intervention acknowledging all 
conditions of participation as explained in the meeting and summarized in the follow-up email.
VAMCs will also be invited to have a follow-up meeting with the study team if they have 
questions or concerns they wish to address prior to considering participation in the study.
Veteran vaccine status and other sociodemographic, clinical, and health service utilization data 
required to test Aim 1 hypotheses will be obtained through VA administrative databases. We will 
seek a HIPAA waiver and a waiver of Informed Consent to obtain these data. We will not seek
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
to obtain data from VA staff who attend meetings or trainings associated with Aim 1 unless they 
are specifically recruited for qualitative interviews ( see Aim 3 below).
Randomization     
This is a cluster randomized parallel group trial design in which the unit of randomization will be 
at the level of VAMC facility. Cluster randomization is often used to avoid contamination 
between those receiving the intervention and those who are not. In this case, the Vaccine 
Acceptance Intervention will occur at Intervention sites and not at Usual Care sites, but we will 
monitor for evidence of contamination, and if not able to fully guard against it (VA is a national 
system), we will document examples of potential contamination in the environmental scans 
described previously.
Randomization will be stratified by VISN (either 16 or 21) and covariate constrained by baseline  
primary series vaccination rates.81 Given the likely relatively small number of VAMCs that will be  
randomized (N < 16), we are selecting only one stratification variable (VISN  or geographic 
location) and one or more covariates to constrain on. We have chosen to stratify on VISN given 
the central importance of location on vaccination outcomes and so as not to have all VAMCs in 
one VISN randomly assigned to the same study arm. We will also constrain on baseline primary  
series vaccination rates according to whether sites have lower or higher rates at the start of the 
study. The number of sites that participate will guide the feasibility of constraining on additional 
factors, such as rurality, because current data (see Appendix, Table 1) suggests that rurality  is 
an important determinant of whether individual patients accept COVID-19 vaccination. 
Blinding  
The study PIs and co-investigators, other research staff (except for the study statistician, see 
below), qualitative interviewers and participating VA staff will be unblinded because they are 
involved in delivering the intervention or, in the case of the qualitative researchers, will be 
tasked with interviewing study stakeholders about the intervention or implementation strategies. 
In contrast, the study evaluators, study statistician, and Veterans at VAMC sites in VISN 16 and 
21 will be blinded to study arm assignment (Vaccine Acceptance Intervention vs. Usual Care). 
Thus, evaluators will conduct the study survey in 450 Veterans, and while they will be aware of 
COVID-19 vaccination status, they will not be apprised of study arm. In addition, unless 
Veterans are unintentionally informed, Veterans will not know to which arm their VAMC has 
been randomized. Blinding of the study statistician conducting the outcomes analyses, survey 
evaluators, and the Veteran participants is important to protect the internal validity of study 
findings. Despite this being a cluster RCT, outcomes will be ascertained at the patient level.
5.3.b. Aim 2 Veteran Surveys and Interviews
Additional     Recruitment     Methods:   The VA Corporate Data Warehouse (CDW) will be used (via a 
HIPAA waiver for recruitment) to identify over 8,000 eligible patients over the course of 18 
months for inclusion in the cross-sectional survey and qualitative interview across all 
participating VAMC clinics in VISNs 16 and 21. The following are the broad eligibility criteria 
used to search VA administrative databases for potentially eligible participants:
•≥1 visit(s) at a participating VISN 16 or 21 inpatient or outpatient service after the start of the 
trial at their site.
•Are members of one of two groups with respect to COVID-19 vaccination status:
(1) You have either not started COVID-19 vaccination, (2) you received your most 
current dose of the primary series of a COVID-19 vaccine series after clinicians 
at your site received the training intervention and within the past 150 days.
•No evidence of dementia using ICD-10 diagnostic codes.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Veteran eligibility data from the VA CDW will be entered into an SQL database by the study 
team’s data manger to which each site’s study coordinator will have access. The SFVAHCS 
will serve as the study’s data center. The SFVAHCS has experience in serving as a data center  
for other NIH- funded  (the wHOPE study, Seal, PI) and VA HSR&D-funded trials (COACH, 
Seal PI; Pyne site PI). The SFVAHCS study coordinator and data manager will train other 
study staff involved in recruitment on how to use the database for recruitment and enrollment.
Potentially eligible Veterans (identified through VA administrative databases using a HIPAA 
waiver for recruitment) will be mailed recruitment materials: patient letters inviting them for a 
cross-sectional survey and possible qualitative interview, study information sheets, and opt-out 
postcards addressed to the SFVAHCS data center. We will wait 10 days for opt-out postcards to 
be returned or for interested patients to call the study staff. If subjects do not opt out or call the 
study staff first, study staff will contact them via phone; study staff from the Little Rock VA 
(CAVHS) and staff at the SFVAHCS will contact Veterans in VISN 16 and VISN 21. No cold 
calls will take place. The recruiter will make up to 5 attempts to reach potential participants and 
leave up to 3 discrete voicemails. On reaching potential participants, the study staff will attempt 
to determine interest in participating in the survey, verify COVID-19 vaccination status and 
assess eligibility using a phone eligibility screener (see Appendix, Draft Phone Eligibility 
Script/Screener). This screener will assess the following criteria:
o No consistent ability to be contacted by phone
Potential participants who remain eligible after phone screening and interested in participating 
will be asked if they have email access at home to receive electronic Informed Consent (see 
below). If so, they will be scheduled for a  telephone appointment with study staff at SFVAHCS 
or at CAVHS for enrollment in the survey study. Eligible patients unsure about participation will 
be encouraged to discuss study participation with their friends and family and will be provided 
the option of a future follow-up recruitment call.
Study Enrollment: At the appointed date/time, eligible participants will be recontacted to be 
enrolled and complete the 60-minute telephone survey. At the beginning of the call, the study 
coordinator will email the potential participant a link to the electronic Informed Consent (IC) form 
to be completed via VA-approved DocuSign. DocuSign will require two factor authentication in 
which the potential participant enters their full name and a working email address to proceed to 
the IC form. In the case where a participant does not have access to email, the study 
coordinator will mail out a paper copy of the IC document prior to contacting the potential 
participant. Regardless of whether the participant receives the IC over email while on the phone  
or previously via mail, study staff will read through the IC document describing the purpose of 
the study, the study procedures and the risks and benefits of participating. After each major 
section of the script, the interviewer will pause and ask whether the participant understood what  
was read and whether they have any questions. Study staff will use clear, declarative 
statements when answering these questions. At the conclusion of reviewing sections of the IC, 
study staff will ask the subject questions to see if they understood basic aspects  of the trial as 
well as relevant human subjects’ issues. At the script’s conclusion, if the individual is interested 
in participating, they will be asked to electronically sign the informed consent document or 
physically sign the copy that was mailed. Study staff will then be able to begin  the survey over 
the phone immediately after obtaining the signed IC document for those using e-consent. For 
subjects without email/internet, the study staff will have the subject mail back their signed IC 
document. Once received, a telephone survey will be scheduled.
All study-related contact with potential subjects will be recorded in our SQL database. This 
includes the Veterans’ consent decision and, if they agree to participate, the date and version of 
the consent document. Potential study participants will be given as much time as they need to 
consider study participation, limited only by the length of the study period; those wishing to 
consider study participation further will be invited to call study staff back if and when they are 
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
ready to participate. In these circumstances a later date will be scheduled for completing the 
survey. We expect the IC process and quantitative survey  will take approximately 60 minutes  to 
complete. If the survey becomes a burden at any point during the study, participants will be 
given the option of completing the interview at another time.
Of note, the IC will request potential participants’ consent to possibly re-contact them after the 
survey to invite them to complete a qualitative interview, if they are needed for the qualitative 
interview (based on fulfilling purposive sampling targets) and after verifying current vaccine 
status (recently vaccinated against COVID-19 or persistently declining).
Once the study coordinator verifies the electronic signature on the IC form (via DocuSign) or 
receives a copy of the signed IC form via mail, participants are considered enrolled in the study 
and may complete the interviewer-administered  survey (see below for details of the survey).
Payments to Study Subjects : We estimate that the IC and survey will take 60 minutes to 
complete and the qualitative interview could take up to another 60 minutes to complete. To 
encourage participation and to compensate Veterans for their time and effort, participants will 
receive compensation after completion of the survey and, if invited, after completing the 
qualitative interview. Veteran participants will be compensated $50 for  completion of the survey 
and an additional $50 when the qualitative interview is complete. The participant will be paid by 
the VA and the VA requires that subjects receive payment via electronic funds transfer.  This 
requires that the participant fill out their bank information (checking/savings)  account number as 
well as social security  number along with a  signature on direct deposit forms to  return to the VA 
for processing.
5.3.c. Aim 3: Implementation-Focused Interviews  with VISN 16 and 21 Staff
Recruitment Methods : We are planning to conduct mid- and end-of-trial interviews with up to 
three high and three low vaccination rate clinics per VISN. Mid-trial change in vaccination rate 
will use the following calculation: 6-month vaccination rate minus baseline vaccination rate.
Because of the staggered roll-out study design, mid-trial vaccination rate changes will be 
calculated at 6-, 7-, and 8-months after the RCT start date. Intervention clinics will be ranked by 
vaccination rate change from highest to lowest and VA staff and HCPs (e.g., MD, APN, RN, 
LVN, Pharmacist, Psychologist, Dietician, Social Work, MSA) from these sites will be recruited 
for qualitative interviews. We expect to interview approximately 3-4 individuals at each site. We 
will interview individuals who are most familiar with the intervention and/or clinic operations. Site 
champions and internal and external facilitators will select these individuals to interview from the 
intervention sites and will provide their names to study staff, who are also VA staff members.
For the usual care sites, the point of contact for the  environmental scans will provide names to 
study staff. The study team will email clinic staff and HCPs inviting them to participate in a 1- 
hour phone interview (consent 15 minutes; interview 45 minutes). If the clinic staff or HCPs 
agree to participate then we will set up an interview time before or after duty hours, on a break, 
or on leave. Informed consent  for staff and HCPs will be verbal  and a waiver of documentation 
of written informed consent will be requested from the Central IRB. Interviews will be audio 
recorded using a VA-compliant Audacity software.
Study     Enrollment:   At the appointed date/time, clinic staff and HCPs will be contacted by phone. 
Study staff will review the information sheet describing the purpose of the interview and 
research staff will obtain verbal consent to conduct and audio record the interview.
Payments     to     Study     Subjects  : We will not be reimbursing HCP and staff participants for their 
completion of the survey or qualitative interviews.
5.4Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria (All Study Aims)
Each study Aim has a unique set of inclusion and exclusion criteria summarized below.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
5.4. a. Aim 1: Cluster RCT of Vaccine Acceptance Intervention (Randomization at the level of 
VAMC)
Inclusion criteria:
o Primary care clinic visit in VISN 16 or 21
Exclusion criteria:
o Per VISN or VAMC leadership, the  clinic or CBOC has extreme staffing shortages such 
that it would not be feasible or in the best interests of patient care to allow clinic or 
CBOC staff release time to participate in trainings or other meetings related to the trial.
5.4.b. Aim 2: Evaluation of recently vaccinated (N=360) and unvaccinated (N=90) Veterans 
across VISNs 16 and 21 at Intervention and Usual Care sites.
Inclusion criteria:
•≥1 visit(s) at a participating VISN 16 or 21 inpatient or outpatient clinic after the 
start of the trial at their site, and
•At the time of recruitment, COVID-19 vaccination status is verified as one of 
the following: (1) has not initiated COVID-19 vaccination; (2) has  received the 
most current dose of the primary series of a COVID-19 vaccine after clinicians 
at their site received the training intervention and within the past 150 days.
Exclusion criteria:
No consistent ability to be contacted by phone
Evidence of dementia using ICD-10 diagnostic codes.
5.4.c. Aim 3: Implementation-focused  Interviews with VISN 16 and 21 Staff and HCPs 
Inclusion criteria: Staff and HCPs work at one of the clinics involved in the study 
Exclusion criteria: Staff or HCPs declines invitation to participate in the interview.
5.5Additional Study Methods
5.5.a.Vaccine Acceptance Trial Overview  (Aim 1). We will conduct a one-year cluster 
randomized parallel group trial stratified by VISN using covariate constrained randomization 
(e.g., baseline vaccination rates, rural/urban clinics, facility size).81 Specifically, we will compare 
a Usual Care (UC) versus Vaccine Acceptance Intervention (VAI) with randomization at the 
level of VA Medical Center (VAMC).81 In collaboration with our VA operations partners, NCP, 
OPCC-CT and the Office of Health Equity, VISNs 16 and 21, and the CDC Vaccine Confidence 
Team, we will use these conceptual  frameworks-Vaccine     Hesitancy     and     Motivation,     Risk         
Communication, and     i-PARiHS,   supported by MI-informed communication , to iteratively refine, 
tailor, implement, facilitate and test an intervention to improve COVID-19 vaccination 
acceptance in Veterans across culturally and  geographically diverse regions (Northern and 
Central California, Nevada, Hawaii, Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas).
5.5.a.1. Usual Care (UC) Condition: Usual Care will consist of all national and local initiatives to promote 
COVID-19 vaccine acceptance in Veterans such as mobile clinics, outreach calls, public service 
announcements targeted at Veterans, lotteries, etc. Usual Care initiatives  will be documented and described 
in detail through quarterly environmental scans at all study sites.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Figure 2. Vaccine Acceptance Intervention
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
5.5.a.2. Vaccine Acceptance Intervention (VAI):
The VAI condition will use the evidence-informed conceptual frameworks,19,85-88,90 Vaccine Hesitancy  and 
Motivation, Risk Communication, Motivational Interviewing (MI) strategies, and the Integrated Promoting 
Action on Research Implementation in Health Services (i- PARiHS) to improve COVID-19 vaccination rates 
among Veterans. As described in Figure 2, the VAI intervention utilizes a multi-pronged approach  to increase 
Veteran vaccine acceptance. First, the research team will train Health Behavior Coordinators (HBCs) at 
intervention sites in VAI.  HBCs will then train PACT teams at their site and Whole Health Coaches, Peer 
Specialists and other VA staff in VAI strategies to use with Veterans. Whole Health Coaches, Peer Specialists 
and other VA Staff will conduct outreach calls, using VAI strategies, with Veterans.
5.5.a.2.a. Vaccine Hesitancy.  The “Vaccine Hesitancy”89 model (see Figure 3) categorizes vaccine hesitancy 
into 3 C’s: Complacency, not perceiving risk or need for vaccine; Convenience, lack of access or cost concerns; 
and Confidence, lack of trust in the effectiveness and safety of vaccines, the healthcare system, and/or the 
government. Confidence may be especially salient for Black Veterans and other racial/ethnic minority populations  
who have experienced medical exploitation and social and economic marginalization.90 The VAI is designed to 
shift personal vaccine hesitancy towards intrinsic acceptance for receiving the COVID-19 vaccination (see Figure 
4). Vaccine hesitancy is an actionable construct because it focuses on vaccine behavior and is influenced by 
potentially modifiable contextual factors .85,91Vaccine motivation is conceived as an individual behavior influenced 
by what     people     think     and      feel, (i.e., confidence in vaccine benefits and safety, perceived risk to self and others, 
seeing negative information) and social processes (influence from others, norms, autonomy, trust in providers).30 
Vaccine hesitancy and motivation are also dynamically influenced by ever- changing public health and vaccine 
policies, HCPs’ recommendations, new communications and  media, all of which exist within socio-cultural,         
historical     and     political     contexts,   and can vary considerably for different Veteran subgroups.85 Notably, vaccine 
hesitancy may be more pronounced with COVID-19 vaccine than other vaccines due to the speed with which it 
was developed and authorized for emergency use, the pause on the Janssen Johnson & Johnson vaccine for a 
safety review,92 a pervasive internet and social media disinformation campaign, general  distrust of the 
government and healthcare institutions, all compounded by a long history of racial injustice and inequities.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Figure 4. Vaccine Motivation Model90
5.5.a.2.b. Risk Communication . In considering how to facilitate a shift from vaccine hesitancy  to acceptance, a 
risk communication paradigm is a useful heuristic when there is (1) complex health or risk-related information 
being communicated; (2) a high level of concern; (3) expert disagreement or high uncertainty; and/or (4) low trust 
in those responsible for protecting against risk, which describes the context when the COVID-19 vaccine was 
introduced.19 An Institute of Medicine report described Risk Communication as a dynamic process responsive to 
input from several sources, changing concerns of affected populations, modification in scientific risk evidence, 
and newly identified needs for communication.93 Thus, developing a COVID-19 vaccination acceptance 
intervention using Risk Communication theory in the context of a pragmatic trial and implementation framework 
allows for input and feedback from trial stakeholders and adaptation of implementation strategies based on 
evolving information, and site-specific needs and preferences.40 Further, Risk Communication in this intervention 
will be guided by ethical public health practice recommendations from the CDC, the National Institutes   o      f     Health         
(NIH)     Community     Engagement     Alliance     (CEAL),   VA     Office     of     Health     Equity  , and the VA National Center for 
Health Promotion and Disease Prevention  (NCP) and includes:94
•Community  engagement  -  e.g.,  Veterans,  clinics,  CBOCs,  VAMCs,  VISNs,  and  
VACO partners
•Transparency through open, honest and comprehensive education about the research  
and development of vaccines, monitoring of vaccine safety and efficacy, including areas 
of uncertainty
•Maintaining a non-judgmental attitude regarding skepticism and negative attitudes 
toward vaccines
•Selection of trusted messengers, e.g., HCPs and messengers from the same gender, 
race/ethnicity
•Acknowledgement of indelible impacts of unethical research and racism within 
healthcare that exploited and/or mistreated Black individuals and individuals from other 
racial/ethnic minority groups contributing to distrust of COVID-19 vaccine and the 
healthcare system in general95
•Identifying core values for health of individuals and communities in the face of 
disproportionate negative impacts of the pandemic on women with children, 
racial/ethnic minority groups, those with mental health disorders, the poor, and other 
vulnerable populations
•Leveraging of peer influence to promote vaccination, e.g., Veteran opinion leaders and 
social media and Veteran peer intervention Coaches
•Countering misinformation about COVID-19 vaccines in a collaborative and affirming 
manner
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
5.5.a.2.c. Motivational Interviewing (MI). MI is an ideal communication strategy for the  VAI. MI is an empathic, 
non-judgmental evidence-based  communication style intended to promote  behavioral change consistent with the 
patient’s intrinsic values and goals.87 MI has a strong evidence-base across a variety of target behaviors in 
medical settings (e.g., smoking cessation, treatment engagement, dietary changes)96,96,97 and has been identified 
as a promising intervention to address vaccine hesitancy.86,98-100 There are several reasons why MI holds promise 
as an effective COVID-19 vaccine acceptance intervention:
1.MI is a collaborative approach, which is well-suited for patients who may feel they 
need to defend their vaccination status or intentions
2.Open questions, a key strategy in MI, can be used by HCPs to evoke and 
understand a patient’s views about vaccination.
3.Autonomy-supportive statements (e.g., “only you can decide whether to 
receive the vaccine”) are useful ways of diffusing patient resistance towards 
vaccination.
4.For patients who are ambivalent about vaccination, MI providers can elicit the 
patients’ personal values (e.g., to be healthy, concerns about missing work, 
caring for children or elderly relatives) and how receiving or not receiving the 
vaccine is consistent with these values.
5.Collaborative information-sharing through Eliciting the patient’s permission to 
Provide information and then Eliciting the patient’s reaction to the information 
(Elicit-Provide-Elicit)  can be used to share COVID-19 vaccine related information 
that is personally relevant to the patient.
6.MI has a strong evidence-base with culturally diverse populations,96 including rural 
populations,101 and has been further adapted for use with racial and ethnic minority 
populations.102-105
5.6Vaccine Acceptance Intervention (VAI) Training Methods
5.6.aTraining Health Behavior Coordinators in Vaccine Acceptance.  One of this 
study’s operational partners, the VA National Center for Health Promotion and Disease 
Prevention (NCP) supports MI training of PACT staff throughout VA through a “train-the-trainer 
model.” First, NCP provides in-depth training for all Health Behavior Coordinators (HBCs) that 
includes content on MI and other patient-centered communication skills, as  well as strategies to 
lead an engaging MI training with PACT staff. Once HBCs have participated in the training, they 
are then tasked with training PACT staff at their local facility in MI and other patient-centered 
communication skills. HBCs have trained thousands of PACT providers across the VA health 
care system in the use of MI and other communication techniques.
During the first 3 months of the study, Dr. Manuel (Study mPI and SFVAHCS Health 
Behavior Coordinator) will collaborate with Dr. Mesidor (co-I; CAVHS Health Behavior 
Coordinator) and Dr. Borsari (co-I; SFVAHCS Health Behavior Coordinator) to train HBCs 
based at VAMCs randomized to the VAI condition in VISNs 16 and 21. HBCs will be trained in 
the Vaccine Acceptance Intervention, which will rely heavily on MI techniques and will also 
include discussions of vaccine hesitancy and risk communication. The training will closely align 
with NCP’s two-hour MI  training for PACT staff so the structure  will be familiar to HBCs but will 
differ from NCP’s MI training in that all content will be focused on COVID-19 vaccine 
acceptance. The estimated time to train HBCs will be approximately 4 hours. The training will 
review MI training strategies, information regarding COVID-19 vaccines, risk communication 
and vaccine hesitancy.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Following the training, HBCs at intervention sites will be invited to attend a twice-monthly 
consultation call, to discuss recent advances regarding MI and COVID-vaccine acceptance, to 
review training strategies and problem-solve any training or intervention issues that may arise.
5.6.bVAI Training for PACT Staff and Coaches. PACT providers (e.g., MDs, NPs, 
RNs, LVNs, MSAs and other PACT allied health professionals) will be invited to attend a two- 
hour training in MI, delivered by local HBCs as described above and/or by research team HBCs 
(i.e., Drs. Manuel, Borsari, and Mesidor). Trainings will be offered to maximize PACT team 
participation by offering a flexible schedule consisting  of either a single two-hour training or  two 
separate one-hour trainings. Trainings will consist of a mix of both didactic instruction and 
opportunities for practice, including demonstrations and role-plays. Trainings will be offered 
virtually and in-person via Microsoft Teams. Our partners, NCP and the CDC Vaccinate with 
Confidence team, have provided relevant materials that will be used to inform innovative 
provider training, consultation, and VAI delivery. The VAI training manual is included in the 
appendix.
The VAI training will include MI strategies (e.g., open-ended questions, affirmations, 
providing empathy), along with key aspects of vaccine hesitancy (e.g, addressing barrier to 
vaccination) along with risk communication strategies. Our training scripts (see appendix) 
informed by MI and Whole Health and risk communication strategies follows this sequence:106
(1)Validate (provider listens with empathy, seeks to validate patients’ experience and/or 
beliefs), (2) Educate (provider asks permission to share information with patient without 
overstating benefits or minimizing harms), (3) Activate (negotiates SMART goals for vaccination; 
encourages questions, asks permission to share educational resources and arranges follow-up).
5.6.cVaccination Scripts . PACT teams and VA staff will be introduced to MI-styled 
communication scripts designed specifically to increase vaccine acceptance among vaccine 
hesitant Veterans. These scripts were adapted by NCP, in collaboration with the CDC, to assist 
VA HCPs in motivating Veterans to accept flu and now COVID-19 vaccination (“Moving to  
COVID-19 Acceptance ”). Scripts will be made into medical chart (CPRS) note templates to 
facilitate use with patients. Additionally, scripts will be printed on pocket-cards that will include 
brief communication strategies in a format that allows HCPs to access during appointments with 
Veterans.
5.6.dPost-Training Consultation. All intervention site PACT and VA staff will be invited 
to attend a weekly one-hour VISN-wide consultation session (consistent with the Office of 
Mental Health and Suicide Prevention’s national Motivational Interviewing training format where 
Drs. Manuel and Borsari serve as MI Consultants). The sessions will be led by site or research 
team HBCs and will be held at a time that is convenient for clinic staff. Sessions will build upon 
the skills taught in the initial 2-hour training. Additionally, PACT staff will be invited to share 
successes and challenges regarding the use of MI vaccine discussions with patients. These 
consultation sessions could be used as early steps to developing a learning collaborative 
including PACT staff and the VAI implementation team.
5.6.e. Coach outreach to Veterans. Whole Health Coaches and Peer Specialists will 
conduct outreach calls to VAI site Veterans. We will work with VISN  and site leads to prioritize 
outreach calls but will consider prioritizing calls to Veterans with upcoming primary care 
appointments. Coaching sessions will utilize NCP’s “Moving to COVID- 19 Vaccine Acceptance”  
scripts and will be guided by the VAI framework. VAI PACT staff will also be  able to place a 
consult to Coaches and Peer Specialists or add them as co-signers on a clinical note if they 
have a Veteran who would benefit from further discussion about COVID-19 vaccination.
5.7Implementation Framework and Training:
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
5.7.a.Implementation Framework . i-PARiHS88 is the implementation framework (Innovation, 
Recipient, Context, Facilitation) that will be used to adapt and implement the intervention.88,107 
This framework proposes that implementation facilitation (IF) is the active ingredient,  where 
facilitators activate and support intervention implementation by assessing and responding to 
the recipients of the intervention within their unique contexts.108 IF is a multifaceted strategy 
involving a process of interactive problem-solving and support that  occurs in the context of a 
recognized need for improvement and supportive interpersonal relationships.109 A number of 
VA107,110 and non-VA111,112 studies have shown IF to be an evidence-based strategy for 
improving implementation of complex evidence-based interventions; this evidence is robust 
across diverse clinical settings, including under-resourced facilities.113
The i-PARiHS innovation construct refers to the process of aligning intervention evidence and 
characteristics with the local practice, priorities, and values. As noted above, the evidence for 
MI interventions includes a number of health conditions including vaccine hesitancy. The MI 
intervention derives from  our experience developing and testing MI-informed interventions and 
NCP’s experience training VA staff  and providers in MI  methods and techniques. The recipient 
construct involves the people who are involved in (primary care staff and HCPs) or expected to 
be affected by the intervention (Veterans) and includes understanding their motivation, goals, 
skills, resources, leadership, and organization. The context construct includes understanding 
inner (local clinic) and outer (health system and community) settings related to implementation.  
Facilitation is the active ingredient that brings together an understanding of these constructs to 
enable recipients to adopt, tailor, and apply the innovation to their particular context.  To inform 
future implementation of  vaccine acceptance  interventions, it will be critical to develop a deep 
understanding of these implementation constructs and incorporate this understanding into 
future vaccine acceptance intervention implementation plans. Other discrete implementation 
strategies that can be used within the context of IF and are relevant to this project include 
stakeholder discussion/engagement, use of clinician reminders about Veterans eligible for 
COVID vaccinations  with upcoming clinic visits, train-the-trainer where local HBCs are trained 
to provide the motivational interviewing training to primary care HCPs and clinic staff, action 
planning, audit and feedback, and creating a learning collaborative for Site Champions and 
Internal Facilitators.109 The focus of Aim 3 mid-trial interviews will be on adapting the Vaccine 
Acceptance Intervention and implementation strategies for this study. Aim 3 end-of-trial 
interviews will focus on intervention and facilitation strategies to be used in a future roll-outs of 
vaccine acceptance interventions.
5.7.b.Implementation Facilitation Training. One Internal Facilitator will be identified for  each 
VAMC participating in the  intervention arm of the study. Internal Facilitators  or research staff 
who have not completed IF training or who are interested in a refresher will participate in the 
Implementation Facilitation training. IF is a multifaceted, implementation strategy involving a 
process of interactive problem-solving and support that occurs in a context of a recognized need 
for improvement and supportive interpersonal relationships. IF typically bundles an integrated 
set of activities to support uptake of effective practices, including but not limited to engaging 
stakeholders, identifying champions, action planning, staff training, academic detailing, problem- 
solving, providing technical support, audit/feedback and marketing. An increasing volume of 
literature supports IF as an evidence-based strategy for implementing evidence-based  practices 
(EBPs) and other clinical innovations.
Implementation Facilitation training is supported by Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Quality 
Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI) grants QIS 18-200 and QUE 20-026. While it is 
targeted to implementation practitioners (clinical and operational staff and/or managers who are 
conducting implementation efforts), it is also often attended by VA and non-VA researchers and 
clinical/operational leaders charged with implementing key VA initiatives. Faculty for trainings 
include Dr. Kathy Dollar, Mr. Jeffrey Smith, Dr. JoAnn Kirchner, Dr. Eva Woodward, and Dr.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Jessica Martin. Together these faculty have decades of experience and substantial expertise in 
applying and evaluating IF strategies, providing a wealth of experiential knowledge that is 
shared with trainees during training. At this time, the training is only provided virtually; sessions 
are split into 4-hour blocks over 4 consecutive days. Internal Facilitators for this study will attend 
the December 7-10, 2021 training.
5.8.Study Evaluations for Aims 1, 2, and 3
5.8.a.Aim 1 Evaluation Plan . Data for Aim 1 will come from the VA Corporate Data 
Warehouse (CDW) and other VA databases, such as the VA COVID-19 Shared Data Resource. 
Outcome data will include receipt of a COVID-19 vaccination (one or more doses of Pfizer, 
Moderna, Johnson and Johnson, or other WHO-authorized vaccine; completed primary series 
with two doses of Pfizer, Moderna, one dose of  Johnson and Johnson, or the specified number 
of doses for other WHO-authorized vaccines)  and receipt of the seasonal flu vaccine 
(exploratory hypothesis) during the one-year trial. Covariates will include baseline demographics  
(e.g., age, race/ethnicity, gender, service connection), clinical and mental health diagnoses, and  
medications and healthcare  utilization in the year prior to the start of the trial (e.g., VA and non-
VA primary care visits, inpatient hospitalizations). The primary  data sources for VA-administered  
vaccines are the ORDCOVID_Vaccine tables, which are enhancements of the CDW 
Immunization table and is updated weekly. Immunizations performed outside VHA for which the 
administration fees are reimbursed by VHA will be ascertained from CDW Community Care data  
in the Payment Integrity Tool (PIT) files and the Integrated Veteran Care Consolidated Data Set,  
which replaced PIT. Immunizations for which administration fees are reimbursed by Medicare 
will be ascertained from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Institutional 
Outpatient, Carrier, and Medicare Advantage files using the quarterly and annual updates as 
they become available through the VA Information Resource Center (VIREC).
Aggregate data for county vaccination rates for adults older and younger than 65, by week, are 
available from the CDC COVID Data Tracker dataset “COVID-19 Vaccinations in the United 
States, by County”. (See Data Analysis section  below for plan to ascertain vaccination status 
for Veterans who receive COVID-19 vaccination outside of VA in which vaccination data is not 
accessible to VA researchers.)
5.8.b.Aim 2 Evaluation Plan. Data for Aim 2 will come from Veteran quantitative surveys  and 
qualitative interviews. Data collection methods for Aim 2 will be telephone interview 
administered. We will use data from CDW to send opt-out letters to purposeful samples of  
newly vaccinated and unvaccinated Veterans. When telephone contact is made with potential 
subjects, we will introduce the study and conduct the initial telephone eligibility screen ( See 
Appendix Draft Phone Eligibility Script/Screener. ) We will ask the minimum number of 
required screening questions to gauge potential interest and study eligibility. Telephone 
eligibility screening questions will confirm interest in and ability to participate in a research 
study; vaccination status and participation in another COVID-19 research study. Study staff will 
determine if the potential participant is at a VAI or UC site. If the individual is interested in 
participating and study eligibility criteria are met, we will conduct informed consent (IC) using 
Docusign or mailed consents. During the IC process, we will ask the Veteran if they are willing 
to also participate in a separate qualitative interview.
The Veteran self-report survey developed for this study was informed by the Behavioral and 
Social Drivers of Vaccination (BeSD) World Health Organization model.30 The W.H.O model  
was used to identify the predictors of COVID-19 vaccine acceptance in the development of the 
study survey (see draft version of the Veteran survey ). The BeSD model includes four 
domains: What people Think and Feel, Social Processes, Motivation, and Practical Issues. The 
constructs within each domain are: Thinking and Feeling: COVID experience, perceived risk, 
vaccine confidence, mitigation behaviors, and COVID beliefs; Practical     Factors  : COVID 
impacts, competing  demands, and health problems; Social     Processes  : trust, social norms, 
discrimination, and information sources; Motivation: intention, location, motivators, and barriers. 
Other domains included in the draft version of the Veteran survey include seasonal flu and other  
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
vaccines (exploratory hypothesis), VA primary care experience, health status, and 
demographics.
The source for each question is annotated in the draft survey (see Appendix, Draft Survey ). 
The following summarizes the sources for different parts of the Veteran survey. The survey 
items based on the BeSD model are from the CDC U.S. Vaccine Confidence Survey Question 
Bank, CDC COVID-19 Community Survey Question Bank, and VA QUERI Rapid Response 
Team COVID-19 SHEP Survey. The COVID impacts questions are from the NIH/VA/DoD Pain 
Management Collaboratory COVID Impacts survey. The competing demands questions are 
from the VA ACORN Survey. COVID-19 vaccine barriers question are from the NIH CEAL and 
SHEP surveys. The racial discrimination questions are from the Williams Discrimination Scale 
that was adapted for Veterans by LRM Hausmann et al. The trusted sources of information 
questions are from the Johns Hopkins COVID-19 Community Response Survey. The seasonal 
flu and other vaccine questions are from the San Francisco VAHCS Flu Vaccine Project and 
the Columbia University Collaborative Cohort of Cohorts for COVID-19 Research. The 
substance use questions include the 3-item AUDIT-C (Alcohol Use Disorders Identification 
Test) used by VHA as an alcohol use screener and PhenX Toolkit measures are used for 
cigarette smoking, vaping, and marijuana smoking status. The primary care experience 
questions are from the VA QUERI Rapid Response Team COVID-19 SHEP Survey.
Qualitative interviews will be conducted on a subset of Veterans who completed the quantitative 
survey according to the purposive sampling scheme described above. The qualitative interview 
will be audio-recorded. The audio consent will be included in the informed consent document 
Veterans will sign prior to completing the quantitative survey. If participants choose not to be 
audio-recorded, they may still participate in the quantitative survey. The consent document will 
have a check box in the qualitative interview section for “agree to be audio-recorded” or “do not 
agree to be audio-recorded.” The qualitative interview will focus on a more detailed discussion 
about factors contributing to their decision to get or not to get the COVID-19 vaccine (see 
Appendix Draft Aim 2 Qualitative Interview Guides). We  will also examine Veterans’  interactions 
with VA HCPs and staff about COVID-19 vaccination to understand if and how the VAI impacted 
their vaccination decision. Other topics include previous/current barriers to getting the vaccine 
and ideas about how to get more Veterans vaccinated. We expect the qualitative interview will 
take 45-60 minutes to complete.
5.8.c.Aim 3 Evaluation Plan. The Aim 3 qualitative interviews with HCPs and staff will occur 
approximately 6- and 12-months after the trial start date for each site. The Aim 3 qualitative 
interviews will take place by phone. The interview guide questions will be organized around the 
i-PARiHS constructs of Innovation/Intervention, Recipient, Context, and Facilitation. Mid-  and 
end-of-trial qualitative data will be collected by research assistants with qualitative data 
experience supervised by Drs. Purcell and Elwy. The general outline for the interview guides will 
include an open-ended grand tour prompt (e.g., “Tell me about your experience with the  
Vaccine Acceptance Intervention”). Follow-up probes will address barriers and facilitators and 
the i-PARiHS constructs: Innovation (e.g., what worked well/not so well), Recipient (e.g., how 
could we get more primary care staff and providers to participate in the Vaccine Acceptance 
Intervention training), Context (e.g., other community, VA, VAMC, and clinic efforts to increase 
vaccine acceptance), and Facilitation (e.g., how could the facilitation team efforts be more 
effective) (see Appendix, Draft VA Staff Interview Guides). We expect the HCP and staff verbal 
consent process and qualitative interviews will take approximately 1 hour (consent 15 minutes; 
interview 45 minutes) to complete.
5.9Data Analysis
The data analysis team consists of Denise Esserman, PhD (Associate Professor of 
Biostatistics, Yale University and VA Connecticut Health Care System, WOC), who is 
experienced in conducting data analyses for multi-site randomized clinical trials in and outside 
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
of the VA healthcare system. She currently serves as the lead biostatistician on our NIH-funded 
wHOPE trial and prepares the open DSMB reports for this multi-site VA trial of pain 
management approaches for Veterans with chronic pain. Dr. Esserman will work closely with 
Adam Kaplan, PhD, biostatistician, and Mr. Bertenthal, our data analyst based at the 
SFVAHCS, who has well over a decade’s experience conducting  analyses using VA EHR data 
and specially has experience in accessing non-VA community care data and the COVID 
Shared Data Resource. Both Dr. Esserman, Dr. Kaplan, and Mr. Bertenthal will be supported 
by our experienced data manager, Mr. Allan Chan, who built and now oversees the database  
application for the wHOPE trial and has a similar data application planned for this trial. Dr. 
Esserman and Dr. Kaplan will remain blinded throughout the course of the trial phase. Dr. 
Esserman will oversee the preparation of the  open DSMB reports but  will not prepare any 
closed DSMB reports or see any data by treatment arm. Mr. Bertenthal and Mr. Chan will 
prepare the closed DSMB reports. In addition, we will develop a detailed statistical analysis 
plan a priori to guard against bias should Dr. Esserman inadvertently become unblinded. The 
details of our data analysis plan by study aim are as follows:
Specific Aim 1 Conduct a one-year pragmatic cluster randomized controlled trial of a COVID- 
19 Vaccine Acceptance Intervention (VAI) to determine whether, compared to Usual Care sites, 
Intervention sites achieve:
oH1a: A greater proportion of Veterans that receives one or more doses
of COVID-19 vaccination, whether as a primary series or booster  (primary outcome)
oH1b: A greater proportion of previously unvaccinated Veterans that completes COVID- 
19 vaccination primary series.
Exploratory hypothesis H1c: A greater proportion of Veterans that receives at least 
one COVID booster;  a greater proportion of Veterans completes seasonal flu 
vaccination.
In addition, we will utilize the VA Corporate Data Warehouse (CDW) and other VA 
administrative data (e.g., VA Shared COVID-19 Data Resource), to assess other independent 
predictors of vaccine acceptance, including sociodemographic factors, clinical diagnoses, and 
health services utilization.
Sample Size Determination:  Of the 16 VAHCS in VHA region 16 and 21, 10 VAHCS agreed 
to participate in the study, with an average of 9 to 10 clinics per VAHCS, and an average of at 
least 1,000 Veterans per clinic. These numbers were based on conservative projections of the 
number of Veterans at the time of randomization and account for missing vaccination (i.e., 
misclassification) status for Veterans who may have been vaccinated outside of the VA. We 
hypothesize that the larger proportion of Veterans will get vaccinated (both first and fully) 
within 12 months in the VAI arm compared to usual care. Calculations were conducted with 
PASS 19 (Kaysville, Utah) using sample size for mixed models for two sample proportions with  
a 3-level hierarchical design assuming an intra-cluster correlation (ICC) of 0.07 for individuals 
within a clinic and an ICC of 0.02 for clinics within a VAHCS.114 With a type I error rate of 0.05 
(two-sided) we will have at least 90% power to detect between a 9.6% and 14.6% difference in  
vaccination rates assuming a rate in the usual care group ranging from 5% to 20% and a total 
sample size of 90,000 to 100,000. Table 4 shows details of different scenarios .
Table 4: Detectable difference for comparing 2 proportions in a hierarchical model 
assuming 5 VAHCS per arm with on average 9-10 clinics per VAHCS and,  on average, 
1000 individuals per CBOC/clinic, 90% power, type I error of 5% (two-sided) and level 
ICC of 0.07 and level 2 ICC of 0.02
Total Sample Size Clinics VAMC* Rate in 
Usual CareDetectable 
difference
90,000 95%9.7%
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
100,000 105%9.6%
90,000 910%12.0%
100,000 1010%11.8%
90,000 915%13.5%
100,000 1015%13.3%
90,000 920%14.6%
100,000 1020%14.4%
*Only presented 9 and 10 clinics per VAMC for baseline rate of 5%- a negligible difference in 
the detectable difference between 9 and 10.
These calculations are for both the primary outcome (any dose) and secondary outcome 
(primary vaccination series completion).  Since there is only one secondary outcome, no multiple 
testing procedures will be applied, and a type I error rate of 5% will also be used for this 
outcome.
Analytic Plan: All analyses will be performed using SAS v9.4 (Cary, NC) or the latest version 
of R (https://cran.r-project.org/ ). Statistical tests and confidence intervals will be two-sided and 
carried out at the 5% level of statistical significance. All analyses will follow the intention to treat 
principle, that is, any previously Veteran at the start of the trial who receives VA inpatient or 
outpatient clinic services at a participating VAMC will be considered in the denominator of the 
vaccination rate regardless of whether they received the intervention. Since randomization will 
be stratified by VISN and at the level of VAMC, but analysis will be conducted  at the individual 
level, we will implement covariate constrained randomization for key variables (e.g., primary 
series vaccination rates, rural/urban distribution and facility size) and assess the adequacy of 
the randomization by comparing baseline characteristics between the two treatment groups.115 
No statistical tests will be used to assess these comparisons. Variables will be summarized 
using descriptive statistics (means, proportions,  etc.) and plots (e.g.,  box and whisker). 
Variables that appear to be different between the VAI and Usual Care sites will be adjusted for 
in sensitivity analyses. For analysis of the primary (one or more doses from a primary series or 
booster) and secondary outcome (primary series completion), we will use a multi-level model 
that takes into account the hierarchical clustering116 and adjusts for variables included in the 
covariate constrained randomization (e.g., rural/urban distribution and facility size) to estimate 
the difference in proportion of vaccinated Veterans at 12 months between VAI and Usual Care. 
We will adapt methods presented by Sinclair et al.117 to estimate the spill-over effect of the 
intervention (i.e., impact on the receipt of seasonal flu vaccination).
The uncertainty in vaccine records ascertainment is pertinent to discuss prior to describing how 
we will analyze the primary, secondary, and exploratory outcomes with standard and sensitivity 
analyses. There will be Veterans who receive their COVID-19 vaccinations outside of the VA 
system or from venues not currently captured in VA databases (i.e., State fairs, shopping malls 
etc.). This could inflate our denominator of unvaccinated Veterans at the start of the trial (i.e., 
false negatives – Veterans are actually vaccinated). It could also decrease our numerator 
during the trial because we could miss Veterans who received COVID-19 vaccines during the 
study follow-up period at non-VA sites not captured in VA data. There are two main avenues to 
supplement missing vaccine information in VA records; however, both have important 
limitations.
First, we will supplement VA vaccination records with Medicare claims data. While the federal 
government paid for the vaccine product, providers were permitted to bill for the cost of 
administering the vaccines. Based on analyses from the VA Information Resource Center 
(VIReC) in 2021, linking Medicare data substantially improved ascertainment. There are a few 
limitations. First, due to a lag, claims data will not be available for the complete study period. 
For Veterans enrolled in traditional Medicare fee-for-service, which account for approximately 
70% of Medicare-enrolled Veterans, we anticipate data being available through 2022.129 For 
Veterans enrolled in Medicare Advantage (i.e., managed care programs), data will only be 
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
available through 2021. Second, during the early phases of vaccine rollout in 2021 when mass 
vaccination clinics had been common, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services estimated 
that claims were never submitted for as many as half of Medicare-age people.
Second, VHA has been developing a health information exchange with state Immunization 
Information Systems (IIS) in partnership with CDC to query and report Veteran immunization 
records. This exchange, known as the IZ Gateway, began querying state registries for 9 of the 
10 study sites during July and August of 2023. Unfortunately, VHA does not plan to query state 
registries retrospectively for all Veterans. Instead, VHA will query individual Veterans’ records 
when they receive VA health services. Accordingly, we anticipate differential vaccine 
ascertainment in which Veterans who receive care from the time the Gateway was activated in 
their home state until the final data lock for this study will have near-complete vaccine 
ascertainment; in contrast, Veterans who do not receive care during this period will have less-
complete ascertainment. Vaccine records populated through the Gateway can be identified 
which will help us to evaluate potential biases resulting from the timing of the Gateway rollout. 
For the main analyses, records populated through the IZ Gateway are being removed from the 
analytic dataset to avoid differential bias.
Due to limitations of the IZ Gateway and Medicare data, we will utilize one or more of several 
methods to ascertain the missing vaccination records and its impact on our estimates. These 
include comparison of our rates to those published by state and federal authorities for our 
VISNs or comparison of our rates to those reported by national and local VA dashboards. 
Alternatively, to estimate population levels of underreporting, we may need to utilize survey 
sampling methodology and probability weighting to randomly survey Veterans with no 
documentation of COVID vaccination. In sum, primary analyses for Aim 1 will utilize only VA 
electronic health data to ascertain Veterans’ vaccination status. We will also conduct sensitivity 
analyses that incorporate all available data sources (e.g., electronic health records; Medicare; 
state-level records; IZ Gateway).
Sensitivity Analyses 
Expanding Analyses to Include Vaccination Records from Medicare/Medicaid and IZ 
Gateway
We plan to incorporate the vaccination records from Medicare/Medicaid and the IZ gateway and  
run sensitivity analyses for the primary outcome. These supportive analyses will provide 
variation in the estimated intervention effect related to incorporating external sources of 
vaccination records. On account of the IZ Gateway querying state IIS records on a prospective 
basis, these sensitivity analyses will focus on Veterans who have received care since the IZ 
Gateway was activated in their home states, which for the study sites happened during July or 
August of 2023. The specified statistical model is identical to that laid out in the analytic plan.
Missing Outcomes/Misclassification of Vaccination Status
We will conduct sensitivity analyses with a Bayesian form of multi-level logistic regression that 
uses the same core hierarchical model.130 Bayesian methods estimate parameter values (e.g., 
odds ratio of vaccine uptake between intervention arms) by summarizing sequentially drawn 
values from probability distributions with parameters updated jointly by the observed data 
(vaccination counts, clinic, and VAMC characteristics, etc.) and updated values of other model 
parameters. For our needs, the Bayesian logistic regression will incorporate a multiple 
imputation step that corrects the observed vaccination rates in two different ways. We can 
correct the total number of eligible Veterans, i.e., the denominator at each facility due to 
misclassifying them as unvaccinated prior to study start. Second, we can correct the count of 
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
observed vaccinations over the course of the study at each study site, i.e., the numerator, due 
to imperfect vaccination records ascertainment. 
For the primary aim, we assume no uncertainty in Veteran eligibility since we will be using all 
Veterans with at least one primary care visit. This entails not subtracting a modeled probabilistic  
number of Veterans from the denominator of the rate of vaccination per facility, whereas the 
multiple imputation adds a random quantity to the count of instances of any vaccine dose (i.e., 
the numerator) to represent the unknown vaccinations over the course of the study that, if 
ignored, would be labeled as unvaccinated in the eligible sample.
Each clinic’s corrected quantity will be equal to a probabilistically modeled rate of misclassified 
vaccinations multiplied by the count of those Veterans labeled as unvaccinated according to the  
available data. The distribution for each timepoint’s rate of misclassified vaccinations will be 
assumed to follow a truncated Beta distribution with a lower bound estimated from available 
Medicare data from 2021-2022, upper bound, mode (most likely value), lower and upper 
percentile values determined by investigators. The Bayesian framework then updates the 
model’s parameters with these corrected vaccination counts instead of the observed 
vaccination counts. We will assess changes in the parameter estimates across a range of 
assumptions for the two misclassification rates and summarize the results with posterior 
probabilities of a non-null intervention effect, 95% credible intervals, and posterior means and 
medians.
Analysis of Secondary Outcome
We will use the same hierarchical, multi-level method for binary outcomes to analyze the 
secondary outcome of primary series completion in Veterans reported to not have initiated or 
completed the COVID-19 primary series at randomization. The model structure and 
adjustments are identical to that for the primary outcome. No multiple testing will be considered 
since there is only one secondary outcome. We will report the difference in rates between the 
VAI and usual care arms and the 95% confidence interval. 
Sensitivity Analyses 
Expanding Analyses to Vaccination Records from Medicare/Medicaid and IZ Gateway
We plan to incorporate the vaccination records from Medicare/Medicaid and the IZ gateway and  
run sensitivity analyses for the secondary outcome. The motivation and analysis model are 
identical to that laid out above. We will include Veteran records provided by these additional 
data sources who were not reported to have completed or initiated the primary series at 
randomization. 
Missing Outcomes/Misclassification of Vaccination Status
We will use the Bayesian multiple imputation model described in the main analysis for the 
secondary outcome for the same motivations described therein. Due to the uncertainty in the 
definition of the eligibility, that is, knowing with 100% certainty that a Veteran did not complete 
the vaccine primary series prior to study start, the total count of eligible Veterans at each clinic 
(i.e., the denominator) will be reduced by a random quantity to represent the count of Veterans 
who were misclassified as having not completed the primary series at or before baseline. 
Thereafter, we will correct the count of observed primary series completions by adding a 
random value to represent the unknown primary series completions over the course of the 
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
study that, if ignored, would be labeled as incomplete primary series in the eligible sample. 
Analytical summaries will be identical to those laid out in the main analysis.  
Analysis of Exploratory Outcomes
No control for multiplicity will be performed for exploratory outcomes. We will use the same 
methods proposed to analyze the primary and secondary outcomes to analyze receipt of a 
booster vaccination and flu vaccination. We will adapt methods presented by Sinclair et al. 
(2012) to estimate the spill-over effect of the intervention by analyzing receipt of seasonal flu 
vaccination. CDC guidelines on the minimum length of time between COVID-19 primary series 
completion and booster eligibility decreased during the study period. We will use the most 
recent guideline in effect during our study period, which was a minimum of 60 days from 
primary series completion to receipt of the first booster. In instances where a third mRNA 
vaccine dose was administered prior to 60-days following the second mRNA dose, that is 
classified as an additional primary series dose per CDC guidelines for Veterans with 
immunosuppression, and the date of that vaccination is defined as the date of primary series 
completion. Due to difficulties ascertaining which Veterans have immunosuppression, and the 
relatively loose guidelines for which conditions qualify, third doses have been defined 
empirically based on vaccination dates.
Because of evolving guidance on COVID vaccinations (products, dosing, etc.) in the context of 
fluctuating background COVID-19 prevalence at different VAHCS sites combined with seasonal  
flu vaccination in the Fall and Winter months, we expect temporal and site trends. Therefore, 
we plan to conduct the following exploratory analyses: (1) adjust for time-dependent variables; 
and (2) perform analyses stratified by time period and site.
Specific Aim 2 During an 18-month period that overlaps the trial period, we will conduct 
surveys in a sociodemographically and clinically diverse purposive sample of 450 Veterans  
equally distributed across VISNs 16 and 21 from Intervention and Usual Care sites with 
inpatient or outpatient clinic visits (past year) who did (N=360) and did not (N=90) receive 
COVID-19 vaccination. In addition, in a smaller purposive subset of Veterans (N~90), we 
will conduct deeper-dive qualitative interviews. These mixed methods will be used to 
determine correlates and emerging themes related to COVID-19 vaccine acceptance and 
persistent refusal.
Sample Size Determination: The numbers needed at each stage of recruitment to enroll a total 
sample of 450 Veterans over 18 months is shown in Table 4 above. Each month we will enroll 
25 Veterans; roughly 20 of whom are vaccinated and 5 of whom are unvaccinated. We will over- 
sample recently vaccinated Veterans to ensure an adequate sample size to be able to describe 
the impact of the Vaccine Acceptance Intervention on COVID-19 vaccine acceptance after 
considering other factors. This is primarily a descriptive aim as there is no prior data to guide 
sample size/power calculations. Our  primary hypothesis testing is for Aim 1. For Aim 2, the main 
research question is whether discussions with VA HCPs and other VA staff impact Veterans’ 
decisions to accept COVID-19 vaccination (and secondarily flu vaccine). For similar reasons, 
planned sub-group analyses will be primarily descriptive. Given that we anticipate as many as 
108,000 to 160,000 unvaccinated Veterans  at the start of the trial across VISNs 16 and 21, if we 
conservatively estimate that 5% will become vaccinated each month (or 5,400-8,000), it is 
feasible to recruit 25 Veterans each month for a total of 450 over 18 months and ensure that our 
purposive sampling targets are achieved ( see Table 4 above ).
In consultation with our qualitative research team, Drs. Elwy and Purcell, co-Is, we have 
established a target sample size of N~90 Veterans (maintaining the purposive sampling 
scheme outlined above) for the in-depth qualitative interviews (following the quantitative 
surveys) because we anticipate being able to reach thematic saturation for the research 
questions posed in Aim 2 with this sample size. This subset of ~90 Veterans from the total 
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
sample of 450 Veterans, will also be identified based on purposive sociodemographic and 
clinical targets after the cross-sectional survey concludes.
Aim     2     Analytic   Plan:      
Survey Data: Similar to Aim 1 (above), we will use descriptive statistics (mean and standard 
deviations; proportions and frequencies) to describe the population. We will use generalized 
linear mixed models that account for clustering to model the outcomes of interest and estimate 
differences with 95% confidence intervals in Veteran characteristics that may be associated with 
the decision to receive vaccine. We will present parameter estimates (mean differences; 
differences in proportions; odds ratios).
Qualitative Data     from Interviews with Veterans:   A purposive clinically and sociodemographically  
diverse sample of roughly 90 Veterans sampled equally from VAMC Intervention and Control 
sites in VISNs 16 and 21, will be interviewed by telephone after they have completed the 
quantitative survey. As above, we will over-sample recently vaccinated Veterans. Semi- 
structured interview questions will address experiences with elements of the Vaccine 
Acceptance Intervention (i.e., discussions with HCPs about vaccination etc.) and Usual Care 
and what (if any) aspects of the Intervention (and Usual Care) influenced their personal decision 
to accept or persistently decline COVID-19 (and/or flu) vaccination. In addition, we will probe 
several domains contained in the survey to assess other factors influencing decisions to accept 
vaccination (or not). We will continue to conduct interviews with Veterans until thematic 
saturation within demographic and clinical subgroups is reached. Based on recommendations 
for qualitative sampling and accounting for subgroups of interest, we expect to conduct a total of 
90 participant interviews.
Interviews will be audio-recorded using a VA-compliant Audacity software. Data from all audio- 
recorded interviews will be analyzed by the qualitative research team using rapid analysis 
methods developed for health services research.118,119 After each interview, research assistants 
with qualitative analysis experience will analyze recordings using rapid analysis procedures 
(RAP) under Drs. Purcell and Elwy oversight.120 RAP is a type of qualitative analysis that 
utilizes a coding template and is common in team-based health services research.121 This 
technique was designed to be time- and resource-efficient, balancing rigor with pragmatism  
and yielding results that are comparable to traditional qualitative methods.122-124 Rather than 
producing and analyzing transcripts, analysts listen to the audio-recording of each interview  
and prepare a written summary using a templated matrix organized by topical areas drawn  
from the interview guide.120,125 At least two trained analysts will independently listen to 
interviews and prepare a written summary using a templated matrix organized by topical areas. 
The qualitative team (analysts and Drs. Purcell and Elwy) will then meet to review and 
compare completed templates, identify and organize recurring themes across interviews, and 
refine a description of each theme. The result of this collaborative process, typically completed 
through review of 2-4 interviews, is a master, summary template that integrates content across 
individual interviews. This process of independently analyzing the same interview and meeting 
to discuss results to establish analytic rigor will be repeated until the analysts achieve 
agreement. Then, analysts  will independently summarize content. Unanticipated, emergent 
content and observations about the interviews will be incorporated in an “Other” domain. After 
data from each individual interview has been summarized (i.e., templated), a summary  
template will be developed for vaccinated and unvaccinated Veterans. Qualitative analysts will 
meet with Drs. Purcell and  Elwy weekly and additionally as needed. Identified themes  will form 
the basis of qualitative summary reports. Similar analysis techniques have been used by study 
personnel during the implementation of other interventions.126-128
Specific Aim 3 Conduct mid-study and end-of-study qualitative interviews with VISN 16 and 21 
study stakeholders, (i.e., a purposive sample of VA staff and HCPs from sites with high and low 
vaccination rates) to learn which aspects of the Vaccine Acceptance Intervention and 
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
implementation strategies were helpful (or not) in improving Veteran vaccine acceptance and 
access. Information from mid-trial process interviews will inform intervention and implementation 
refinements; end-of-trial interviews will inform the development of a toolkit for future vaccine 
acceptance intervention and implementation.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
Sample Size Determination: We are planning to conduct mid- and end-of-trial interviews with 
up to three high and three low vaccination rate  clinics per VISN. The number of interviews per 
site will be 3-4 and this will result in approximately 48 mid-trial qualitative interviews and 
approximately 48 end-of-trial qualitative interviews. The purposive sampling of clinics will be 
based on the change in vaccination rate from baseline to each endpoint.
Aim     3     Analytic   Plan:      
Aim 3 interview guides are organized using the i-PARIHS framework. Data collection and 
analysis will be similar to that described for Aim 2. The initial template for Aim 3 qualitative 
analysis will be based on higher-order i-PARIHS domains: facilitation, innovation, recipient, and 
context. The mid-study templates will be summarized at the clinic level and presented via 
conference call to the study team and operational partners. Qualitative results will also be 
presented to the facilitation team at each clinic to inform discussions about mid-study 
refinements. The end-of-study templates will be summarized across all sites and presented to 
the study team, operational partners, and facilitation teams at the VAMC level to enhance our 
understanding of the findings and inform future vaccine implementation and dissemination 
efforts.
5.10Withdrawal of Subjects
Subjects will be withdrawn if it is determined that they are actively suicidal or otherwise 
seriously unstable medically or psychiatrically (requiring hospitalization). This determination will 
be made by the mPIs, Dr. Seal (general internist), Dr. Pyne (psychiatrist) and Dr. Manuel 
(psychologist). In this case, withdrawal may occur without participants’ consent. We will follow 
the procedure outlined in the “Reporting” section of this protocol and appropriate mental health 
or physical health referrals will be made. Also, if at any time during the study, a participant 
wishes to withdraw, they may do so via phone call or written correspondence to a study staff 
member. We will use our database to track participants and will record if a subject withdraws, 
so that no future contact will be made. Participants will be made aware that there will be no 
negative consequences should they elect to withdraw. In particular, Veteran participants will be 
advised that they can continue to receive all VA health care benefits and services and VA staff 
will be advised that their employment will not be impacted by their decision to withdrawal.
6.1Safety Assessments
6.2Specification of Safety Parameters
•Endorsement of mental health-related crises (e.g., suicidal or homicidal ideation) or 
life- threatening physical health problems during telephone assessments, and 
interviews
6.3Methods and Timing for Assessing, Recording, and Analyzing 
Safety Parameters
The proposed study confers a minimal level of risk, posing no more risk than expected in daily 
life for Veterans. Veterans will be referred for mental health care, if appropriate. Participants will 
remain in their usual primary care, mental health and specialty care clinical treatment
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
relationships throughout their participation in the study. If study staff identify a concerning 
clinical finding, they will communicate with the participant’s other treating clinicians, as is the 
standard in VHA care. Based on this level of risk, the PIs will monitor and record the safety 
issues in accordance with IRB guidelines.
6.2 Data Safety Monitoring
We will be using the HSR&D DSMB and will adhere to their reporting requirements. The Data 
and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will review aggregate and individual participant data 
related to safety, data integrity, and overall conduct of the trial and will provide 
recommendations to continue, modify, or terminate the trial. Termination or modification may be 
recommended on the basis of serious safety concerns, non-compliance with human safety 
regulations, or serious protocol violations. The DSMB will not review interim analyses of 
effectiveness. This study has no pre-specified endpoints that would trigger immediate 
suspension of research. If termination or suspension is triggered by unexpected events (e.g., an 
SAE, serious noncompliance, major information security violations, loss of funding), the PIs will 
email notification to local site facility directors and to local site approving bodies (including local 
site IRB and R&D committees), along with Central IRB, within 5 business days. Additionally, the 
PIs will provide local sites with detailed information about procedures to ensure continuation of 
appropriate clinical care for research participants.
7.0 Reporting
Adverse Events. An adverse event (AE) is generally defined as any unfavorable and 
unintended diagnosis, symptom, sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), syndrome or 
disease that either occurs during the study, having been absent at baseline, or if present at 
baseline, appears to worsen. Adverse events are to be recorded regardless of their relationship 
to the study intervention. AEs that do not meet criteria for reporting within five days in 
accordance with VHA Handbook 1058.01 will be reported to the IRB of Record at Continuing 
Review. A serious adverse event (SAE) is generally defined as any untoward medical 
occurrence that results in death, is life-threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or 
prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity,  or 
is a congenital anomaly.
PIs will be notified by the research personnel immediately of any possible event that poses a 
risk to a subject. In addition, at least one of the PIs (Seal, Manuel or Pyne) or all will also be 
notified. The PI(s) will promptly respond to the problem and mitigate any negative 
consequences for the participant(s) involved. The PI and/or study coordinator will report the 
event to the IRB of Record within the timeline as follows:
a.Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others. Members of the VA 
research community are required to ensure that unanticipated problems involving risks to 
participants or others in research are reported promptly to the IRB within five business days.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
b.Serious Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others. Within five 
business days of becoming aware of any serious unanticipated problem involving risks to 
participants or others in VA research, members of the VA research community are required to 
ensure that the problem has been reported in writing to the IRB.
c.Local Unanticipated SAEs . Within five business days of becoming aware of any local (i.e.,  
occurring in the reporting individual’s own facility) unanticipated SAE in VA research,  members 
of the VA research community are required to ensure that the SAE has been reported in writing 
to the IRB.
If an AE/SAE is reported by a participant directly to the local study coordinator at their 
participating site, the local study coordinator will complete an AE form on the study database 
within 24 hours of notification. If this event also meets the criteria for an SAE, the local study 
coordinator will indicate this on the AE form in the study database within 24 hours. For SAEs, 
the local study coordinator will download a  pdf of the completed SAE form and send this as an 
attachment via encrypted email to the Project Coordinator and PIs (Drs. Seal, Manuel, Pyne). 
The PIs will confer via email or phone to determine the severity and relatedness of the event to 
the study intervention within 48 hours of notification. The lead site will follow VA Central IRB 
reporting guidelines as appropriate.  If we are unsure whether a  document requires submission 
or reporting, we will contact the VA Central IRB @ the toll-free number 877-254-3130 or 
VACentralIRB@va.gov . This study will not have a Data Monitoring Committee.
8.1Privacy and Confidentiality
8.2 Veteran     Participants  . Our proposed research plan involves VA-enrolled Veterans 
receiving care in a VISN 16 or 21 primary care clinic. We will utilize VA CDW data and other VA  
administrative databases to examine COVID-19 and influenza vaccine acceptance and potential 
predictors of Veteran vaccine acceptance including sociodemographic characteristics, mental 
health and medical diagnoses, and other health services utilization variables among Veterans in 
enrolled clinics in VISN 16 and 21. We will conduct brief surveys and qualitative interviews with 
a purposive sample of Veterans from enrolled sites who both received and did not receive the 
COVID-19 vaccine. Protected health information, as described above will be collected and 
stored using processes described below. Study results will be reported only in aggregate. No 
participant names will be used in any reports or publications.
8.2.aVA administrative data . VA CDW and other VA administrative data will be accessed 
through the VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI), an initiative to improve 
researchers’ access to VA data and to facilitate the analysis of those data while ensuring 
Veterans’ privacy and data security. Domains in CDW that will be accessed include Veteran 
sociodemographics, ICN (Integration Control Number), health services utilization, 
associated ICD-10 diagnoses, COVID-19 vaccine acceptance, current and prior year 
influenza vaccine acceptance.
8.2.bVeteran Qualitative Interviews . Qualitative interviews will be conducted by study 
personnel by phone. Research personnel will work in a private location. Verbal consent will be 
obtained over the phone and documented in study records prior to starting the interview audio- 
recording and the participant will not be named after that. If a participant’s name is inadvertently 
recorded, it will be electronically stripped from the recording. Audio recordings will be retained  
in accordance with the VHA Records Control Schedule.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
8.3Stakeholder     Participants  . Mid-trial and end-of-trial qualitative interviews will be conducted 
with VISN 16 and 21 staff with the goal of learning which aspects of the intervention and 
implementation were helpful, or not helpful, in improving Veteran COVID-19 vaccine 
acceptance. Stakeholders will be asked to consent verbally to participation. All qualitative 
interviews will be conducted by phone.
8.4 Data   Security  .
8.4.aLinks to Subject Identifiers . Participant names and contact information (e.g., phone 
number) will be stored in a recruitment database that will be maintained throughout the duration 
of the study. After enrolling in the study, each survey or interview participant (including both 
Veterans and healthcare providers) will be assigned a unique identification number. Participant 
ID numbers and names will be linked in a password protected file stored on secure servers at 
SFVAHCS and CAVAHCS. The PIs and Project Coordinators will oversee confidentiality of this 
list. Research staff will have access to this database only when necessary.
8.4.bData Storage. All study data will be stored in password protected files on secure servers, 
within VA-firewall protected server data drives. All data will be accessed and analyzed from 
encrypted PIV and password-protected  computers. Current policy is that data must be archived 
indefinitely as described in VA Medical Center Memorandum 11-89, which is based on VA 
policy and the National Archives and Records Administration Records Control Schedule; 
however, if new policies are in effect at the end of this project, then data will be handled in 
accordance with those new policies.
Storage of hard copy documents:
SFVAHCS: 4150 Clement Street San Francisco, CA 94121 Building 6, Room 205,  
CAVHS: 5th floor, room 5010, at 3 Financial Centre Parkway, 900 South 
Shackleford Rd, Little Rock AR
Storage of electronic documents:
SFVAHCS: R:\Seal\COVID vaccine trial
CAVHS: \\R02lithsmdc101.v16.med.va.gov\services$\HSR
S:\HSR\Pyne_J_DTC19VInter_1629257
VINCI- VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure server
The data will be collected via RedCap, a secure VA-approved web-based tool for building 
surveys. A secure VA compliant database will also be used to track recruitment and enrollment. 
To protect against loss of confidentiality, researchers will maintain control over all research 
records including computer files of audio recordings of interviews. They will be coded using a 
numeric code and will be kept in an encrypted file behind the VA firewall and on a password 
protected computer in the investigator's locked office. In manuscripts, reports,  publications, and 
other documents, the names of individual research participants will be identified only by 
pseudonyms, if at all. Researchers will suppress or alter distinguishing features so participants 
so that participants ' identities are anonymous.
8.4.cData Access. Only study personnel (PIs, research staff, and others authorized by PIs)  
will have access to confidential study information (e.g., participant names, other identifiers). The 
PIs assume ultimate responsibility for data security. All study data will be stored in accordance 
with the Department of Veterans Affairs record control schedule (RCS 10-1). Study personnel 
will be fully trained in relevant ethical procedures, including participant confidentiality 
protections. They will undergo NIH and VA education and training in research methods and  
data protection procedures.  The PIs will also train project staff on the latest governmental 
requirements on the protection of participant confidentiality and privacy.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
9.1Communication  Plan
Research personnel and study PIs (Dr. Seal, Manuel and Pyne) will communicate via encrypted 
email, Microsoft Teams, or through a secure VA project SharePoint site.
The SFVAHCS lead site will maintain files of all IRB documentation for VISNs 16 and 21, 
including consent forms and supporting documents. The research staff at SFVAHCS and 
VACAHCS will have a minimum of weekly telephone check-ins. At these meetings, the following 
will be addressed:
•Ensuring all required local site approvals are obtained.
•Ensuring that the Director of any facility where research is being conducted is apprised 
of the study before any research efforts begin at that facility.
•Keeping all engaged sites informed of changes to the protocol, informed consent, and 
HIPAA authorization.
•Informing each site of any Serious Adverse Events, Unanticipated Problems, or interim 
results that may impact conduct of the study.
•Ensuring the study is conducted according to the IRB-approved protocol.
•Notifying local facility investigators when the study reaches the point that it no 
longer requires engagement of the local facility.
All points above are considered time-sensitive and will be communicated among study staff at 
the sites immediately. All sensitive materials will be shared among study staff at all sites via our 
VA server, using a VA-approved Sharepoint site, Microsoft Teams channel, or via encrypted 
email. Other study-related issues will also be addressed at the bi-weekly meetings (recruitment, 
challenges, issues and needed any changes) with the lead site and PIs to discuss and 
troubleshoot concerns. The PIs and co-investigators will also have quarterly telephone check- 
ins to discuss the progress/challenges of the study.
All study staff will be trained in the importance of maintaining confidentiality and privacy and will 
undergo mandatory VA education and training in research methods and data protection 
procedures. The PIs will also train project staff on the latest governmental requirements on the 
protection of participant confidentiality and privacy. In addition, we will train research study staff 
on all study procedures including the informed consent process.
10.0 References
1.Hamel L, Artiga, S., Safarpour, A., Stokes, M., & Brodie, M., . KFF COVID-19 
Vaccine Monitor: COVID-19 Vaccine Access, Information, and Experiences 
Among Hispanic Adults in the U.S. 
https://  www.kff.org/coronavirus-covid-19/poll-   finding/kff  -   covid-19-   vaccine-
monitor-access-information-experiences-hispanic-  adults/. Published 2021. 
Accessed June 20 2021.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
2.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. COVID-19 Vaccinations in the United 
States. https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/#vaccinations . Published 2021. 
Accessed.
3.MacDonald NE. Vaccine hesitancy: Definition, scope and determinants. Vaccine.
2015;33(34):4161-4164.
4.Education Is Now a Bigger Factor Than Race in Desire for COVID-19 Vaccine [press 
release]. University of Southern California, Leonard D. Schaeffer Center for Healthy 
Policy and Economics. , March 2, 2021 2021.
5.Warren N, Kisely S, Siskind D. Maximizing the Uptake of a COVID-19 Vaccine in 
People With Severe Mental Illness: A Public Health Priority. JAMA Psychiatry. 2020.
6.Wang  QQ,  Kaelber  DC,  Xu  R,  Volkow  ND.  COVID-19  risk  and  outcomes  in  
patients with substance use disorders: analyses from electronic health records in  
the United States. Mol Psychiatry. 2020:1-10.
7.Schmid P, Rauber D, Betsch C, Lidolt G, Denker ML. Barriers of 
Influenza Vaccination Intention and Behavior - A Systematic Review of 
Influenza Vaccine Hesitancy, 2005 - 2016. PLoS One. 
2017;12(1):e0170550.
8.Hamel L KA, Munana C, Brodie. KFF COVID-19 Vaccine Monitor: December 2020.  . 
Kaiser Family Foundation. . https://www.kff.org/coronavirus-covid-19/report/kff-
covid- 19- vaccine-monitor-december-2020/ . Published 2020. Accessed 1/15/2020.
9.Szilagyi PG, Thomas K, Shah MD, et al. National Trends in the US Public's Likelihood of 
Getting a COVID-19 Vaccine-April 1 to December 8, 2020. JAMA. 2020.
10.Corbie-Smith G, Thomas SB, St George DM. Distrust, race, and research.
Arch Intern Med. 2002;162(21):2458- 2463.
11.Gramlich J, Funk, C. Black Americans face higher COVID-19 risks, are more hesitant to 
trust medical scientists, get vaccinated. Pew Research Center. 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/06/04/black-americans-face-higher-covid-  
19-risks-are-more-hesitant-to-trust-medical-scientists-get-vaccinated/ . Published 2020. 
Accessed 1/19, 2021.
12.Bajaj SS, Stanford FC. Beyond Tuskegee - Vaccine Distrust and Everyday Racism.
N Engl J Med. 2021.
13.Brandt HM, Vanderpool RC, Pilar M, Zubizarreta M, Stradtman LR. A narrative review of 
HPV vaccination interventions in rural U.S. communities. Prev Med. 2020:106407.
14.Hall LL, Xu L, Mahmud SM, Puckrein GA, Thommes EW, Chit A. A Map of Racial and 
Ethnic Disparities in Influenza Vaccine Uptake in the Medicare Fee-for-Service Program. 
Adv Ther. 2020;37(5):2224-2235.
15.Garcia MC RL, Bastian B, Faul, M, Dowling NF, Thomas CC, Schieb L, Hong Y, Yoon 
PW, Iademarco MF. . Potentially Excess Deaths from the Five Leading Causes of Death 
in Metropolitan and Nonmetropolitan Counties — United States, 2010–2017. MMWR 
Surveill Summ 2019. 68(No. SS-10):1-11.
16.Gandhi RT, Lynch JB, Del Rio C. Mild or Moderate Covid-19. N Engl J Med.
2020;383(18):1757- 1766.
17.James CV MR, Wilson-Frederick SM, Hall JE, Penman-Aguilar A, Bouye K. 
Racial/Ethnic Health Disparities Among Rural Adults — United States, 2012– 
2015. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2017;66(23):1-9.
18.Wiley KE, Massey PD, Cooper SC, Wood N, Quinn HE, Leask J. Pregnant women's 
intention to take up a post-partum pertussis vaccine, and their willingness to take up the 
vaccine while pregnant: a cross sectional survey. Vaccine. 2013;31(37):3972-3978.
19.Santos SL, Helmer D, Teichman R. Risk communication in deployment-related  exposure 
concerns. J Occup Environ Med. 2012;54(6):752-759.
20.Veldhoen M, Simas JP. Endemic SARS-CoV-2 will maintain post-pandemic immunity.
Nature Reviews Immunology. 2021;21(3):131-132.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
21.Baden LR, El Sahly HM, Essink B, et al. Efficacy and Safety of the mRNA-1273 
SARS- CoV-2 Vaccine. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020;384(5):403-416.
22.Polack FP, Thomas SJ, Kitchin N, et al. Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA 
Covid-19 Vaccine. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020;383(27):2603-2615.
23.Sadoff J, Gray G, Vandebosch A, et al. Safety and Efficacy of Single-Dose 
Ad26.COV2.S Vaccine against Covid-19. New England Journal of 
Medicine. 2021;384(23):2187-2201.
24.Howard J. Covid-19 vaccine boosters may be necessary. Here's what you need to know. 
https://www.cnn.com/2021/05/22/health/covid-19-vaccine-boosters-explainer-wellness/  
index.html. Published 2021 Accessed June 10, 2021.
25.Kim JH, Marks F, Clemens JD. Looking beyond COVID-19 vaccine phase 3 trials.
Nature Medicine. 2021;27(2):205-211.
26.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Interim Clinical Considerations for Use of 
COVID-19 Vaccines Currently Authorized in the United States. 
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-19/clinical-considerations/covid-19-vaccines-  
us.html?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fvaccines%2Fcovid-  
19%2Finfo-by-product%2Fclinical-considerations.html#Coadministration . Published 
2021. Accessed.
27.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC COVID Data Tracker. 
https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/#cases_totalcases . Published 2021. Accessed.
28.Keating DaS, L. . The Unseen COVID-19 Risk for Unvaccinated People. .
The Washington Post. . May 28, 2021. , 2021;Coronavirus. .
29.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Vaccines & Immunizations. Interim 
clinical considerations for use of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines currently authorized 
in the United States.  Last updated February 10, 2021. 2021.
30.Brewer NT, Chapman GB, Rothman AJ, Leask J, Kempe A. Increasing Vaccination: 
Putting Psychological Science Into Action. Psychological Science in the Public 
Interest. 2017;18(3):149-207.
31.Purcell N, Becker WC, Zamora KA, et al. Tailored to Fit: How an 
Implementation Framework Can Support Pragmatic Pain Care Trial Adaptation 
for Diverse Veterans Affairs Clinical Settings. Med Care. 2020;58 Suppl 2 
9S(Suppl 2 9 Suppl):S80-s87.
32.Seal K, Becker WC, Murphy JL, Purcell N, Denneson LM, Morasco BJ et al. Whole 
Health Options and Pain Education (wHOPE): A Pragmatic Trial Comparing Whole 
Health Team versus Primary Care Group Education to Promote Non- 
Pharmacological Strategies to Improve Pain, Functioning and Quality of Life in 
Veterans--Rationale,  Methods and Implementation. Pain Medicine. 2020;21:S91-S99.
33.Gibson CJ, Grasso J, Li Y, et al. An Integrated Pain Team Model: Impact on Pain- 
Related Outcomes and Opioid Misuse in Patients with Chronic Pain. Pain Med. 
2020;21(9):1977-1984.
34.Purcell N, Zamora K, Tighe J, Li Y, Douraghi M, Seal K. The Integrated Pain Team: A 
Mixed-Methods Evaluation of the Impact of an Embedded Interdisciplinary Pain Care 
Intervention on Primary Care Team Satisfaction, Confidence, and Perceptions of Care 
Effectiveness. Pain Med. 2018;19(9):1748-1763.
35.Seal KH, Rife T, Li Y, Gibson C, Tighe J. Opioid Reduction and Risk Mitigation in VA 
Primary Care: Outcomes from the Integrated Pain Team Initiative.  J Gen Intern 
Med. 2020;35(4):1238-1244.
36.Borsari B, Li Y, Tighe J, et al. A Pilot Trial of Collaborative Care with 
Motivational Interviewing to Reduce Opioid Risk and Improve Chronic 
Pain Management. Addiction. 2021.
37.Seal KH, Abadjian L, McCamish N, Shi Y, Tarasovsky G, Weingardt K. A randomized 
controlled trial of telephone motivational interviewing to enhance mental health treatment
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
engagement in Iraq and Afghanistan veterans. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2012;34(5):450- 
459.
38.Seal K. Telephone Veteran Peer Coaching for Mental Health Treatment 
Engagement among  Rural Veterans: Not What We Expected, But a Win for 
VA. HSRD/QUERI Conference; October 29-31, 2019, 2019; October 29-
31, 2019.
39.Seal KH, Borsari B, Tighe J, et al. Optimizing pain treatment interventions (OPTI): A pilot 
randomized controlled trial of collaborative care to improve chronic pain management 
and opioid safety-Rationale, methods, and lessons learned. Contemp Clin Trials. 
2019;77:76-85.
40.Koenig CJ, Abraham T, Zamora KA, et al. Pre-Implementation Strategies to Adapt  
and  Implement  a  Veteran  Peer  Coaching  Intervention  to  Improve  Mental  Health  
Treatment Engagement Among Rural Veterans. J Rural Health. 2016;32(4):418-428.
41.Zamora KA AT, Koenig CJ, Hill CC, Pyne JM, Seal KH. . Using an adapted case study 
approach to understand rural veteran experiences in patient engagement and patient- 
centered care research. . Qualitative Research in Medicine and Healthcare. 2020:54-64.
42.Seal KH, Shi Y, Cohen G, et al. Association of mental health disorders with prescription 
opioids and high-risk opioid use in US veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan. Jama. 
2012;307(9):940-947.
43.Seal KH, Maguen S, Bertenthal D, et al. Observational Evidence for Buprenorphine's  
Impact on Posttraumatic Stress Symptoms in Veterans With Chronic Pain and Opioid 
Use Disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 2016;77(9):1182-1188.
44.Seal KH, Bertenthal D, Barnes DE, Byers AL, Strigo I, Yaffe K. Association of Traumatic 
Brain Injury With Chronic Pain in Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans: Effect of Comorbid 
Mental Health Conditions. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2017;98(8):1636-1645.
45.Seal KH, Bertenthal D, Barnes DE, et al. Traumatic Brain Injury and Receipt of 
Prescription Opioid Therapy for Chronic Pain in Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans: Do 
Clinical Practice Guidelines Matter? J Pain. 2018;19(8):931-941.
46.Osilla KC, Becker K, Ecola L, et al. Study design to evaluate a group-based therapy for 
support persons of adults on buprenorphine/naloxone. Addict Sci Clin Pract. 
2020;15(1):25.
47.Manuel JK, Lum PJ, Hengl NS, Sorensen JL. Smoking cessation interventions with 
female smokers living with HIV/AIDS: a randomized pilot study of motivational 
interviewing. AIDS Care. 2013;25(7):820-827.
48.Manuel JK, Houck JM, Moyers TB. The impact of significant others in motivational 
enhancement therapy: findings from project MATCH. Behav Cogn Psychother. 
2012;40(3):297-312.
49.Moyers TB, Rowell LN, Manuel JK, Ernst D, Houck JM. The Motivational 
Interviewing Treatment Integrity Code (MITI 4): Rationale, Preliminary Reliability 
and Validity. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2016;65:36-42.
50.Satre DD, Manuel JK, Larios S, Steiger S, Satterfield J. Cultural Adaptation 
of Screening, Brief Intervention and Referral to Treatment Using 
Motivational Interviewing. J Addict Med. 2015;9(5):352-357.
51.Trick WE, Das K, Gerard MN, et al. Clinical trial of standing-orders strategies to 
increase  the  inpatient  influenza  vaccination  rate.  Infect  Control  Hosp  
Epidemiol. 2009;30(1):86- 88.
52.Nicosia F, Gibson, C. J., Purcell, N., Zamora, K., Tighe, J., Seal, K. H. . Women 
Veterans’ Experiences with Biopsychosocial Pain Care: A Qualitative Evaluation of One 
VA’s Integrated Pain Team. . Pain Medicine (in press).
53.Gibson CJ, Li Y, Bertenthal D, Huang AJ, Seal KH. Menopause symptoms and chronic 
pain in a national sample of midlife women veterans. Menopause. 2019;26(7):708-713.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
54.Gibson CJ, Li Y, Jasuja GK, Self KJ, Seal KH, Byers AL. Menopausal Hormone Therapy 
and Suicide in a National Sample of Midlife and Older Women Veterans. Med Care. 
2021;59:S70-s76.
55.Kelly JD, Barrie MB, Mesman AW, et al. Anatomy of a Hotspot: Chain and 
Seroepidemiology of Ebola Virus Transmission, Sukudu, Sierra Leone, 2015-16. 
J Infect Dis. 2018;217(8):1214-1221.
56.Kelly JD, Reid MJ, Lahiff M, Tsai AC, Weiser SD. Community-Level HIV Stigma as a 
Driver for HIV Transmission Risk Behaviors and Sexually Transmitted Diseases in Sierra 
Leone: A Population-Based Study. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2017;75(4):399-407.
57.Kelly JD, Weiser SD, Wilson B, et al. Ebola virus disease-related stigma among 
survivors declined in Liberia over an 18-month, post-outbreak period: An observational 
cohort study. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019;13(2):e0007185.
58.Shelhamer MC, Wesson PD, Solari IL, et al. Prone Positioning in Moderate to Severe 
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Due to COVID-19: A Cohort Study and Analysis 
of Physiology. J Intensive Care Med. 2021;36(2):241-252.
59.Purcell N, Zamora K, Gibson C, et al. Patient Experiences With Integrated Pain Care: A 
Qualitative Evaluation of One VA's Biopsychosocial Approach to Chronic Pain Treatment 
and Opioid Safety. Glob Adv Health Med. 2019;8:2164956119838845.
60.Johnson M PN. Equity Toolkit for Patient Experience Departments. 2017.
61.Purcell N JM. Equity Toolkit for Core Oversight Departments. School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco2017.
62.D'Souza G, Springer G, Gustafson D, et al. COVID-19 symptoms and SARS-CoV-2 
infection among people living with HIV in the US: the MACS/WIHS combined cohort 
study. HIV Res Clin Pract. 2020;21(5):130-139.
63.Howland M, Tennant M, Bowen DJ, et al. Psychiatrist and Psychologist Experiences with 
Telehealth and Remote Collaborative Care in Primary Care: A  Qualitative Study. J Rural 
Health. 2020.
64.Fortney JC, Heagerty PJ, Bauer AM, et al. Study to promote innovation in rural 
integrated telepsychiatry (SPIRIT): Rationale and design of a randomized 
comparative effectiveness trial of managing complex psychiatric disorders in 
rural primary care clinics. Contemp Clin Trials. 2020;90:105873.
65.Fortney JC, Veith RC, Bauer AM, et al. Developing Telemental Health Partnerships 
Between State Medical Schools and Federally Qualified Health Centers: Navigating the 
Regulatory Landscape and Policy Recommendations. J Rural Health. 2019;35(3):287- 
297.
66.Pyne JM, Rabalais A, Sullivan S. Mental Health Clinician and Community Clergy 
Collaboration to Address Moral Injury in Veterans and the Role of the Veterans Affairs 
Chaplain. J Health Care Chaplain. 2019;25(1):1-19.
67.Sullivan G, Hunt J, Haynes TF, et al. Building partnerships with rural Arkansas faith 
communities  to  promote  veterans'  mental  health:  lessons  learned.  Prog 
Community Health Partnersh. 2014;8(1):11-19.
68.Sullivan S, Pyne JM, Cheney AM, Hunt J, Haynes TF, Sullivan G. The pew versus the 
couch: relationship between mental health and faith communities and lessons learned 
from a VA/clergy partnership project. J Relig Health. 2014;53(4):1267-1282.
69.Pyne JM, Fischer EP, Mittal D, Owen R. A Patient-Centered Antipsychotic 
Medication Adherence Intervention: Results From a Randomized Controlled Trial. 
J Nerv Ment Dis. 2018;206(2):142-148.
70.Pyne JM, McSweeney J, Kane HS, Harvey S, Bragg L, Fischer E. Agreement between 
patients with schizophrenia and providers on factors of antipsychotic medication 
adherence. Psychiatr Serv. 2006;57(8):1170-1178.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
71.Pyne JM, Kelly PA, Fischer EP, et al. Initial concurrent and convergent validity of the 
Perceived Access Inventory (PAI) for mental health services. Psychol Serv. 2020.
72.Bovin MJ, Miller CJ, Koenig CJ, et al. Veterans' experiences initiating VA-based mental 
health care. Psychol Serv. 2019;16(4):612-620.
73.Pyne JM, Kelly PA, Fischer EP, et al. Development of the Perceived Access Inventory: A 
patient-centered measure  of access to mental health care. Psychol Serv. 2020;17(1):13- 
24.
74.Connolly SL, Miller CJ, Koenig CJ, et al. Veterans' Attitudes Toward Smartphone App 
Use for Mental Health Care: Qualitative Study of Rurality and Age Differences. JMIR 
Mhealth Uhealth. 2018;6(8):e10748.
75.Cheney AM, Koenig CJ, Miller CJ, et al. Veteran-centered barriers to VA mental 
healthcare services use. BMC Health Serv Res. 2018;18(1):591.
76.Miller CJ, Burgess JF, Jr., Fischer EP, et al. Practical application of opt-
out recruitment methods in two health services research studies. BMC 
Med Res Methodol. 2017;17(1):57.
77.Wright HM, Griffin BJ, Shoji K, et al. Pandemic-related mental health risk among front 
line personnel. J Psychiatr Res. 2020.
78.Bauer MS, Weaver K, Kim B, et al. The Collaborative Chronic Care Model for Mental 
Health Conditions: From Evidence Synthesis to Policy Impact to Scale-up and Spread. 
Med Care. 2019;57 Suppl 10 Suppl 3(10 Suppl 3):S221-s227.
79.Elwy AR, Bokhour BG, Maguire EM, et al. Improving healthcare systems' disclosures of 
large-scale adverse events: a Department of Veterans Affairs leadership, policymaker, 
research and stakeholder partnership. J Gen Intern Med. 2014;29 Suppl 4(Suppl 4):895- 
903.
80.Elwy AR, Itani KM, Bokhour BG, et al. Surgeons' Disclosures of Clinical Adverse Events.
JAMA Surg. 2016;151(11):1015- 1021.
81.Greene EJ. A SAS Macro for Covariate-Constrained  Randomization of General Cluster- 
Randomized and Unstratified Designs. J Stat Softw. 2017;77(Cs1).
82.Takayama M, Wetmore CM, Mokdad AH. Characteristics associated with the uptake of 
influenza vaccination among adults in the United States. Prev Med. 2012;54(5):358-362.
83.US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention/National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases. 
Expanding COVID-19 Vaccine Distribution to Primary Care Providers to 
Address Disparities in Immunization.  April 14, 2021 2021.
84.Callahan CM, Unverzagt FW, Hui SL, Perkins AJ, Hendrie HC. Six-item screener to 
identify cognitive impairment among potential subjects for clinical research. Med 
Care. 2002;40(9):771-781.
85.Dubé E, Vivion M, MacDonald NE. Vaccine hesitancy, vaccine refusal and the anti- 
vaccine movement: influence, impact and implications. Expert Rev Vaccines. 
2015;14(1):99-117.
86.Gagneur A, Gosselin V, Dubé È. Motivational interviewing: A promising tool to 
address vaccine hesitancy. Vaccine. 2018;36(44):6553-6555.
87.Miller WR, & Rollnick, S. Motivational Interviewing: Preparing People for Change. 3rd 
edition ed. New York: Guilford Press; 2013.
88.Harvey G. KA. PARIHS revisited: from heuristic to integrated framework for the 
successful implementation of knowledge into practice. Implement Sci. 2016;11:33.
89.World Health Organization. Addressing Vaccine 
Hesitancy. Secondary Addressing Vaccine Hesitancy. . 
2017.
90.Best AL FF, Kadono M, Warren RC. Institutional distrust among African Americans and 
building trustworthiness in the COVID-19 response: Implications for ethical public 
health practice. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 2020
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
91.Cooper LZ, Larson HJ, Katz SL. Protecting public trust in immunization. Pediatrics.
2008;122(1):149-153.
92.FDA and CDC Lift Recommended Pause on Johnson & Johnson (Janssen) COVID-19  
Vaccine Use Following Thorough Safety Review [press release]. Last updated April 23, 
2021 2021.
93.Institute of Medicine. Protecting Those Who Serve; Strategies to Protect the Health  
of Deployed U.S. Forces. Washington, DC2000.
94.Centers for Disease Prevention and Control. Crisis + Emergency Risk Communication.
2018.
95.Robeznieks A. How to overcome COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy among Black patients.
American Medical Association
https://www.ama-assn.org/delivering-care/public-health/how-overcome-covid-19-  
vaccine-hesitancy-among-black-patients . Published 2020. Accessed.
96.Hettema J, Steele J, Miller WR. Motivational interviewing. Annu Rev Clin Psychol.
2005;1:91-111.
97.Frost H, Campbell P, Maxwell M, et al. Effectiveness of Motivational Interviewing on 
adult behaviour change in health and social care settings: A systematic review of 
reviews. PloS one. 2018;13(10):e0204890-e0204890.
98.Opel DJ, Robinson JD, Spielvogle H, et al. 'Presumptively Initiating Vaccines and 
Optimizing Talk with Motivational Interviewing' (PIVOT with MI) trial: a protocol for a 
cluster randomised controlled trial of a clinician vaccine communication 
intervention. BMJ Open. 2020;10(8):e039299.
99.Reno JE TJ, Pyrzanowski J, et al. Examining strategies for improving healthcare 
providers' communication about adolescent HPV vaccination: evaluation of secondary 
outcomes in a randomized controlled trial. Hum Vaccin Immunother 2019;15(7):1592- 
1598. .
100.McClure CC, Cataldi JR, O'Leary ST. Vaccine Hesitancy: Where We Are and Where We 
Are Going. Clin Ther. 2017;39(8):1550-1562.
101.Seal KH, Pyne JM, Manuel JK, et al. Telephone veteran peer coaching for mental health 
treatment engagement among rural veterans: The importance of secondary outcomes 
and qualitative data in a randomized controlled trial. J Rural Health. 2021.
102.Hanson JD, Oziel K, Sarche M, MacLehose RF, Rosenman R, Buchwald D. A culturally 
tailored intervention to reduce risk of alcohol-exposed pregnancies in American Indian 
communities: Rationale, design, and methods. Contemporary Clinical Trials. 
2021;104:106351.
103.Rimal P, Khadka S, Bogati B, et al. Cross-cultural adaptation of motivational 
interviewing for use in rural Nepal. BMC Psychol. 2021;9(1):52.
104.Venner KL, Serier K, Sarafin R, et al. Culturally tailored evidence-based substance use 
disorder treatments are efficacious with an American Indian Southwest tribe: an open- 
label pilot-feasibility randomized controlled trial. Addiction. 2021;116(4):949-960.
105.Lee CS, Rosales R, Colby SM, Martin R, Cox K, Rohsenow DJ. Addressing social 
stressors in a brief motivational interview improve mental health symptoms for Latinx 
heavy drinkers. J Clin Psychol. 2020;76(10):1832-1850.
106.National Center for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention. COVID-19 
Vaccine Planning - How Healthy Living Teams Can Help. Nov. 11, 2020 2020.
107.Kirchner JE, Ritchie MJ, Pitcock JA, Parker LE, Curran GM, Fortney JC. Outcomes of a 
partnered facilitation strategy to implement primary care-mental health. J Gen Intern 
Med. 2014;29 Suppl 4(Suppl 4):904-912.
108.Harvey G KA. Implementing evidence-based practive in healthcare: a facilitation guide. 
2015.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
109.Powell BJ, Waltz TJ, Chinman MJ, et al. A refined compilation of 
implementation strategies: results from the Expert Recommendations for 
Implementing Change (ERIC) project. Implement Sci. 2015;10:21.
110.Kilbourne AM, Almirall D, Eisenberg D, et al. Protocol: Adaptive Implementation of 
Effective Programs Trial (ADEPT): cluster randomized SMART trial comparing a 
standard versus enhanced implementation strategy to improve outcomes of a mood 
disorders program. Implement Sci. 2014;9:132.
111.Nutting PA, Miller WL, Crabtree BF, Jaen CR, Stewart EE, Stange KC. Initial 
lessons from the first national demonstration project on practice transformation to 
a patient- centered medical home. Ann Fam Med. 2009;7(3):254-260.
112.Wang A, Pollack T, Kadziel LA, et al. Impact of Practice Facilitation in Primary Care on 
Chronic Disease Care Processes and Outcomes: a Systematic Review. J Gen Intern 
Med. 2018;33(11):1968-1977.
113.Ritchie MJ, Parker LE, Edlund CN, Kirchner JE. Using implementation facilitation to 
foster clinical practice quality and adherence to evidence in challenged settings: a 
qualitative study. BMC Health Serv Res. 2017;17(1):294.
114.Elley CR, Kerse N, Chondros P, Robinson E. Intraclass correlation coefficients from 
three cluster randomised controlled trials in primary and residential health care. 
Aust N Z J Public Health. 2005;29(5):461-467.
115.Moulton LH. Covariate-based constrained randomization of group-randomized trials.
Clin Trials. 2004;1(3):297-305.
116.Guo G, Zhao H. Multilevel Modeling for Binary Data. Annual Review of Sociology.
2000;26(1):441-462.
117.Sinclair B, McConnell M, Green DP. Detecting Spillover Effects: Design and Analysis of 
Multilevel Experiments. American Journal of Political Science. 2012;56(4):1055-1069.
118.Hamilton A. Qualitative methods in rapid turn-around health services research. Health 
Services Research & Development Cyberseminar Web site. 
http://www.hsrd.research.va.gov/for_researchers/cyber_seminars/archives/  
video_archive.cfm?SessionID=780 . Published 2013. Accessed.
119.Palinkas LA MS, Hamilton AB,. Innovations in mixed methods evaluations.
Annu Rev Public Health. 2019 01:423-442.
120.Hamilton A. Qualitative methods in rapid turn-around health services research. . VA 
HSR&D Cyberseminar; 11 Dec. 2013, 2013.
121.Brooks J, McCluskey S, Turley E, King N. The Utility of Template Analysis in 
Qualitative Psychology Research. Qual Res Psychol. 2015;12(2):202-222.
122.Palinkas LA, Horwitz SM, Green CA, Wisdom JP, Duan N, Hoagwood K. Purposeful 
Sampling for Qualitative Data Collection and Analysis in Mixed Method 
Implementation Research. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2015;42(5):533-544.
123.Taylor B, Henshall C, Kenyon S, Litchfield I, Greenfield S. Can rapid approaches to 
qualitative analysis deliver timely, valid findings to clinical leaders? A mixed methods 
study comparing rapid and thematic analysis. BMJ Open. 2018;8(10):e019993.
124.Vindrola-Padros C, Johnson GA. Rapid Techniques in Qualitative Research: A Critical 
Review of the Literature. Qual Health Res. 2020;30(10):1596-1604.
125.Hamilton AB. Rapid qualitative analysis: Updates/developments  [Internet]. . VA Health 
Services Research & Development Cyberseminar; 2020 Sep 29, 2020.
126.Drummond KL, Painter JT, Curran GM, et al. HIV patient and provider feedback on a 
telehealth collaborative care for depression intervention. AIDS Care. 2017.
127.Koenig CJ, Abraham T, Zamora KA, et al. Pre-implementation  strategies to adapt 
and implement a Veteran peer coaching intervention to improve mental health 
treatment engagement among rural Veterans. Journal of Rural Health. 
2016;32(4):418-428.
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023
128.Curran GM, Pyne J, Fortney JC, et al. Development and implementation of collaborative 
care for depression in HIV clinics. AIDS Care. 2011;23(12):1626-1636.
129.Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Assessing the Completeness of Medicare 
Claims Data for Measuring COVID-19 Vaccine Administration.; 2021. Accessed 
September 19, 2023
130.Polson, N. G., Scott, J. G., & Windle, J. (2013). Bayesian inference for logistic models 
using Pólya–Gamma latent variables. Journal of the American statistical Association, 
108(504), 1339-1349.  
 
VA Central IRB
Effective Date: December 20, 2023