 
   
 
 
 
 
Study Title : COAPS: C o-Use of Opioid Medications and Alcohol Prevention S tudy  
NCT:  05599672  
Document Date: Version 1.0  March 11, 2022; I RB approval: April  13, 2022  
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
Co-Use of Opioid Medications and Alcohol Prevention Study (COAPS)  
 
SPECIFIC AIMS  
Co-use of  alcohol and opioid medications can result in serious individual harm . Given alcohol and opioids 
act on μ -opioid receptors,1 coinciding consumption potentiates their  analgesic effects —producing severe r espir-
atory depression, sedation2-6 and heightened overdose risk.7,8 Co-use of alcohol and opioids persists in the US 
notwithstanding these serious health/safety hazards. Although limited information  is available within peer -re-
viewed literature,9 large -scale system and clinical research have demonstrated 24 -38% of those with alcohol use 
disorders also have an  opioid use disorder ,10,11 with rates of past 30 day opioid medication misuse among those 
seeking alcohol treatment as high as 68% .12 Also, h alf of those with binge alcohol use have past 30 day opioid 
medication misuse.13 Our 3 recent studies  in community pharmacies with patients receiving  opioid medications 
provide further insight into co- use of alcohol and opioids. Community pharmacy is rapidly becoming recognized 
as a valuable setting to address opioid medication- related risk14 given a multi- decade shift with  pharmacist s 
integrated into team -based care leading medication management .15-22 In our first study, we screened 344 phar-
macy patients receiving opioid prescripti ons in 4 pharmacies  (71% consent rate) —22.4% reported current risk  
drinking.23 Our second study was a small- scale -clinical trial testing the Brief Intervention- Medication Therapy 
Management  (BI-MTM) intervention among pharmacy patients with opioid medication misuse in 2 community 
pharmacies (N=32; 74% consent rate). BI -MTM showed significant improvements for mitigating opioid medica-
tion misuse, depression, and pain compared to control patients (Standard Medication Counseling [SMC]).24 In 
this study —19% of participants  reported current risk drinking  at enroll ment.24 Finally, our third,  recently com-
pleted study , screened  patients in 19 community pharmacies at point -of-opioid -dispensing (94% consent  rate).25 
Of the  1,523 patients  screened—3 1% reported current risk drinking.26 Given these patterns of co -use of alcohol 
and opioids  medications —particularly in community pharmacy —we propose to adapt , manualize,  and test the 
acceptability, feasibility, and preliminary efficacy of an Alcohol -targeted Brief Intervention- Medication Therapy 
Management (ABI -MTM) intervention with community pharmacy patients. ABI -MTM will be a pharmacy -based 
medication management intervention27 combined with Screening, Brief  Intervention, and Referral to Treatment28-
31 delivered as 1  session at point -of-dispensing with a 7-day telephone- based booster session . ABI -MTM will 
target : (1) alcohol use elimination during  opioid treatment OR (2) non-opioid pain management  substitution  (in 
consultation with the prescriber) . This study will accomplish 3 Specific Aims (SA):  
SA1: Adapt/ manualiz e an Alcohol -targeted  Brief Intervention -Medication Therapy Management 
intervention . Rational e: BI-MTM  was developed to address opioid medicati on misuse  and comorbid  health con-
ditions (e.g., pain, mental health);  yet, it was not designed for universal delivery to patients with active opioid 
prescriptions and concurrent  alcohol use. Approach : We will utilize the ADAPT -ITT (Assessment, Decision, Ad-
ministration, Production, Topical Experts, Integration, Training, and Testing)32 framework to modify /manualize  
BI-MTM for delivery to community pharmacy patient s with co-use of alcohol (both risk level and non- risk level 
alcohol  use) and opioid medications  (i.e., an Alcohol -targeted Brief Intervention- Medication Therapy Manage-
ment or ABI-MTM).  Outcome: Completion of SA1 will result in a  manualized protocol for clinical trial evaluation .  
SA2: Test the Feasibility, Acceptability , and Preliminary Efficacy of ABI-MTM  for Community Phar-
macy Patients w ith Concomitant Alcohol and Opioid Medication Use.  Rational e: The extent to which ABI-
MTM: is acceptable to patients , can be feasibly delivered in community pharmacy  settings , and can mitigate  co-
use of alcohol and opioid medications  is unknown. Approach : We will conduct a small- scale trial in 3 community 
pharmac ies and enroll  those with /without  risk drinking, with a stratified randomization to ABI-MTM  (1:1 ratio;  risk 
use n=10; non -risk use n=10 ) or standard medication counseling (SMC ; risk use n=10; non- risk use n=10). Out-
come 1: Feasibility will be established through delivery of both ABI -MTM  components to 85% of ABI -MTM  recip-
ients. Outcome 2: Acceptability  will be demonstrated thr ough qualitative interview s, patient satisfaction,33,34 and 
participant retention (85%) at study completion. Outcome  3: Intent -to-treat analyses will show g reater proportions 
of ABI -MTM recipients will eliminate  co-use of  alcohol (risk and non-risk alcohol use) and opioid medications  
compared to SMC assessed by Timeline Follow -Back  and urine toxicology .35-37 Product : Accomplishing SA 2 
demonstrates  ABI-MTM  is positioned for a subsequent fully-powered multisite randomized trial .  
SA3: Identify  Pharmacy System /Practice- Level  Barriers and Facilitators  for Universal Alcohol 
Screening/Intervention  among Opioid Recipients. Rationale:  The barriers/facilitators that may  promote/im-
pede adoption of u niversal alcohol screening/intervention at point of opioid medication dispensing  are not known. 
Approach : Employing  the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR)38,39 and Organizational 
Readiness t o Change Assessment (ORCA) ,40 we will develop a mixed methods assessment guide to interview  
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
pharmacy technicians  (N=20), pharmacists  (N=20), and corporate leaders  (N=20).41,42 Interviews will assess  
perceptions towards screening/intervention, internal organizational  challenges , and process es related to ABI -
MTM implementati on for large- scale research/ practice.39 Outcome : Results will provide critical insight s into strat-
egies  for executing a subsequent powered trial and possible future  system /practice- level implementation.  
RESEARCH STRATEGY  
SIGNIFICANCE  
Opioids, Co-Use with Alcohol , and How Much is Too Much  
Notwithstanding  important declines in opioid prescribing in recent years ,43 enough opioids were dis-
pensed in 2018 to supply 51.4 prescriptions per 100 Americans , and 11% of US counties dispensed enough 
medication to supply every person with an opioid prescription.44 This continued wide spread use has perpetuated  
trends in opioid- related a dverse events . Among the most severe repercussions of the continued epidemic include 
overdose, which in 2018 , nearly 70% of the more than 67,000 fatal dr ug overdoses involved an opioid45—with 
emerging reports indicating spikes in opioid overdose in the face of the COVID -19 pandemic.46 Among the sig-
nificant risks  for overdose that persist  among those prescribed opioid medications is co -use of alcohol. This 
serious  risk is based in both alcohol and opioids act ing on μ-opioid receptors1—potentiating analgesic effects of 
these substances  and producing possible severe respiratory depression, sedation,2-6 and heightened overdose 
risk.7,8 Previous research has documented more than  1 in 5 individuals  with alcohol use disorders also have 
opioid use disorder (OUD) —with some studies showing as high as 2 in  5 having OUD .10,11 Further , among those 
individuals  seeking alcohol treatment , nearly 70% reported opioid medication misuse  in the month before treat-
ment initiation,12 and half of those with binge alcohol use also report opioid medication misuse in the last month.13 
Combined us e of alcohol and opioid medications is not only found among those with alcohol use disorder and 
aberrant opioid use patterns, such as misuse and OUD. Our research among community pharmacy patients  has 
demonstrated co -use of alcohol  and opioid medications is widespread, showing among patients filling opioid 
medications —approximately 20-30% have  current high risk  drinking.24,25,47  
A most critical question is how much can a person drink while taking opioids and not face possible harmful 
effects . In working  to answer this question, our team has not identified any empirical report, article, textbook , 
guideline, consensus statement,  or other literature that indicates  how much alcohol can be safely  consumed by 
an individual while taking opioid medications for acute or chronic pain management. In contrast , our team  found 
extensive literature  to the contrary . Human lab studies clearly document respiratory and sedative effects alcohol 
and opioid medications ,48,49 with resultant overdose risk, as well as heightened abuse liability  for co -use com-
pared to alcohol or opioids used alone.50 Labeling by the Food and Drug Administration of marketed formulations 
of opioid medications contain strong  warnings advising against concomitant use of opioids and any other central 
nervous system depressants, specifically citing  alcohol .4-6,51 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
clearly concludes: “ The risk of harm increases with the amount of alcohol consumed, but  there is no safe level 
of alcohol use for people using opioids .”52 NIAAA’s updated, Helping Patients Who Drink Too Much, A Clini-
cians Guide,53 recommends  for patients  taking prescriptions that interact with alcohol , that these individuals  
abstain from alcohol or  consume amounts  of alcohol  less than maximum  daily/weekly  limits compared to the 
general population. However,  the Clinician’s Guide does not provide  actual suggested quantity limits . Taken 
collectively , these data underscore a marked  need for interventions to address  co-use of alcohol and opioids —
particularly among community pharmacy patients —to prevent negative outcomes including overdose and use 
disorders . Thus , we seek  to develop and test an intervention that targets overlapping use of alcohol ( risk level 
use and non -risk level use) and opioid medication s for delivery  in community pharmac ies.  
Community Pharmacy to Address Co-Use of Alcohol and Opioid Medications  
Community pharmacy is an underutilized resource and setting for identification and intervention to ad-
dress co-use of alcohol and opioid medications . With prescribers reporting high levels of  burden and burnout 
from the myriad of clinical duties ,54 the well-documented multiple physical/behavioral health problems among 
patients with pain/opioid misuse,55-63 and the continued nationwide misuse of prescribed opioid medications (>9 
million individuals annually )64— collaborating with auxiliary health care professionals to support opioid prescrib-
ing and patient management  is paramount .  As the last healthcare professional encountered before opioid dis-
pensation, the pharmacist is critical in addressing risks of co -use of alcohol and opioids . Moreover, while phar-
macists may benefit from training in psycho therapeutic or motivational approaches for  alcohol  treatment (as is 
provided in this project), they  have unmatched training in drug- drug interactions, medication safety, and coun-
seling in the safe/effective use of medications.65 This study leverages and expands upon this specialized training 
to prevent  a harmful medication interaction by providing needed prescriber support  with a time critical interven-
tion before opioid dispensation.   
Community pharmacy  locations ; which  include supermarket, chain, and independent settings; are pri-
mary locations where patients legally fill opioid prescriptions that are often taken concurrently with alcohol24,25,47 
or are misused by patients .66,67 Community pharmacies are abundant nationally,68 providing easy access for 
patients —including those in rural areas —creating a platform for population- level impact . Previous research has 
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
shown patients are willing to receive behavioral health information from these professionals,69 and pharmacists 
are ranked among the top 2 most trusted professionals in the US .70 While some question if lack of private space 
to interact with patients may be a barrier to pharmacist engagement in behavioral health care with patients, m ore 
than 40% of community pharmacies  have been documented to have private counseling rooms (often used for 
counseling or vaccination administration) where pharmacists can discretely provide care and maintain confiden-
tiality .71 Thus, these specialized service settings and professionals are positioned to  make an unparalleled impact 
in identifying patients currently engaged in co- use of alcohol and opioid medications  and aid them to  eliminate  
alcohol consumption during opioid treatment OR  substitute their opioid pain treatment  (in consultation with their 
prescriber)  with a non -opioid alternative . Yet, l imitations for services to address co- use of alcohol and opioids is 
largely rooted in the lack of empirical evidence supporting interventions delivered in this setting as well as iden-
tifying pathways implementation.  
 
INNOVATION 
The primary innovation of this proposed study is that it establishes  needed data for building a viable 
community pharmacy -based response to preventing opioid overdose and related adverse events  through miti-
gating co- use of alcohol and opioid medications . To our knowledge,  a pharmacist -led intervention does not exist 
to specifically target co- use of alcohol and opioid medications . This innovation precisely  aligns with the Pilot and 
Feasibility Studies in Preparation for Drug and Alcohol Abuse Prevention Trials  program announcement  (R34: 
PA-18-775): 
“Both NIDA and NIAAA are interested in research on prevention strategies to address … alcohol use  
simultaneous with marijuana, prescription drug and opioid use, and illicit substances …This FOA encour-
ages pilot and feasibility research on the following and related topics: Feasibility and pilot testing of 
screening and universal  brief intervention models  to prevent alcohol and drug use and misuse (including 
opioid misuse  and opioid use disorder ) for delivery in medical settings and the broader healthcare system  
(e.g., primary care, obstetrics and gynecology, pediatrics, adolescent medicine, pain and rehabilitation 
settings, and emergency departments). ”  
 We include community pharmacy among these vital health care settings. In addition to the topical align-
ment of addressing co -use of opioids and alcohol within the novel health care setting of community pharmac y, 
this study likewise brings a critical  innovation of adapting a research -based prevention intervention targeting  
possible future system -level implementation. This innovation is also a key focus  of PA-18-775:  
“An important emphasis of NIDA’s and NIAAA's prevention research programs is prevention services 
research, which includes questions pertaining to system - and organizational -level processes and mech-
anisms associated with … adaptation …[and]…  implementation of empirically validated prevention inter-
ventions in community, practice and service systems . In preparation for large- scale  prevention services 
and systems research projects, pilot studies often are needed to: empirically test and establish evidence for the feasibility and acceptability of intervention protocols …and implementation strategies …”  
 APPROACH Preliminary Studies  
Given the important potential to address  co-use of alcohol and  opioid medications in community pharmacies, 
the currently proposed study builds  upon critical  preliminary  data our team has previously established.  These 
preliminary data support  this work  and answer 4  important questions  posed as possible barriers . Note to review-
ers: Please be aware that we will use two similar acronyms in this application:  (1) BI-MTM, which represents 
Brief Intervention Medication Therapy Management  and (2) ABI-MTM, which represents  Alcohol -targeted Brief 
Intervention- Medication Therapy Management intervention. BI- MTM will be discussed  in reference to our previ-
ously tested intervention that primarily targets misuse of opioid medications. ABI -MTM refers to the intervention 
that will be brought forward in this study that specifically targets the co- use of alcohol and prescr iption opioid 
medications .  
 Question 1:  An often questioned barrier to pharmacists engaging patients in behavioral health services is:  
“Do pharmacist s care about intervening with patients with risky opioid medication use behaviors ? We con-
ducted a web- based survey of  pharmacists in two states  about routinely screening and possibly intervening 
with patients engaged in opioid medication misuse behaviors , which  results  are reported in 2 peer reviewed 
papers .72,73 Of the 739 respondents, most (89.7%) wanted to help patients engaged in opioid medication 
misuse  and related  behaviors  but reported needing training (81.1%) and resources (79.8%) to compe-
tently/effectively do so.72,73  
 Question 2:  Another questioned barrier  to pharmacist engagement of patients regarding behavioral health 
is: Is it feasible to identify patients at point -of-dispensing using opioid prescriptions and currently engaged in 
concomitant  alcohol use ? Mentioned above, our team has conducted 3 studies in the previous 5 years with 
community pharmacy patients filling opioid medications , which results have been published in 8 peer re-
viewed papers ,23,24,74 -79 with a number under review. In these studies, we collectively  screened approximately 
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
1,900 pharmacy patients  filling opioid medications. Results showed approximately 20 -30% of these patients 
reported current risk or binge drinking.24,25,47  
Specifically , Table 1 shows the re-
sults for studies 1 and 2, which took 
place in southwestern Pennsylvania. 
In the first study , we collected Alcohol 
Use Disorders Identification Test -C 
(AUDIT -C) data from patients filling 
opioid medications in 4 community pharmacies , which showed 22.4% of 
344 participants reported current risk 
alcohol use.
23 Furthermore,  in study 2 
(our small -scale RCT testing the BI -
MTM intervention, detailed below in Questions 3 and 4) based on the AU-
DIT-C, 19% of 32 participants re-
ported current risk drinking at base-
line. Summarizing item level data across these two projects,  17.4% of participants report ed drinking ≥2- 3 
times per week; 25.8% of  participants reporting ≥3- 4 standard drinks on their typical drinking days, and 17.2% 
reported  binge drinking ≥monthly. Altogether, these results demonstrate participants in these studies en-
gaged in regular, and often , risky drinking.   
In our third study   in Ohio and Indiana (recently completed) , 31% of 1,523 participants  filling opioid med-
ications in community pharmacy  reported current risk drinking on the Tobacco, Alcohol, Prescription medi-
cation, and other Substance use (TAPS) Tool .
26 Examining specific survey items, Table 2 shows  87.1% 
reported use of alcohol in the past 3- months , and 6 7.7% of males and 50.2 % of females reported  binge use 
in the last 3- months . Roughly  8-9% of participants had others express concern about their drinking or  unsuc-
cessfully had tried to stop/cut down in the last 3-months .  
 Questions 3 and 4:  An additional suggested barrier  to pharmacist engagement of patients in behavioral 
health services  is: Can a  pharmacy -centered intervention be adapted to address behavioral health issues 
among pharmacy patients and be implemented in community pharmacies AND would such an intervention  
successfully impact  opioid- related  risk behaviors ? Our research team held a 1- day session in which phar-
macy and addiction experts strategized the adaptation of Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treat-ment (SBIRT) for opioid medication misuse among pharmacy pa-tients , which results were reported in a peer -reviewed article.
80 Our 
expert panel advised  that the pharmacist deliver  SBIRT in conjunc-
tion with  the evidence -based practice of Medication Therapy Man-
agement  (MTM) , targeting medication adherence/misuse . The ex-
pert panel also suggested enriching the pharmacist delivered 
SBIRT/MTM intervention with  a Patient Navigation adjunctive inter-
vention to activate patients in self -management of health conditions 
that elevate risk for misuse—this  intervention was named: BI- MTM.  
We subsequently implemented the BI -MTM in a small -scale ran-
domized clinical trial (RCT, PI: Cochran, NIDA: R21DA043735) that compared BI -MTM (n=15) to Standard Medication Counseling 
(SMC; n=17). We published our findings, which demonstrated feasibility with a 74% recruitment rate and >93% retention at the final assessment (3 -months).
24 BI-MTM feasibility was demonstrated by delivery of all 
pharmacist -led sessions and an average of 7 of 8 patient navigation sessions. BI -MTM acceptability was 
exhibited by high participant satisfaction ratings for pharmacist and patient navigation sessions. Study results 
at the final 3- month assessment showed preliminary BI -MTM efficacy for positive improvements in opioid 
misuse, depression, and pain compared to SMC (all p<0.05) —with strong trends for reductions in opiate 
toxicology ( p=0.05).24  
We acknowledge only this  pilot study for BI -MTM has been completed—with strong preliminary data cited 
above. Nevertheless, t his current  application is the product of urgency in the field, documented by 3 clinical 
studies  from our research team ( also cited above) conducted in 3 separate states across 5 years . These 
preliminary studies each has shown similar  high rates of risky drinking among patients receiving opioid med-
ications. Considering this exigency combined with the robust premise of our research program in community 
pharmacy addressing opioid misuse, our team has brought  forth this application as a strong candidate to 
address this serious risk behavior  of co -use of alcohol and opioids .  
 O verall , these preliminary studies show  pharmacists are interested in engaging patients with opioid re-
lated- risk behaviors; patients with co- use of alcohol and opioid medications are prevalent and can be identified ItemStudy
# Never <Monthly2-4 times/ 
month2-3 times/ 
week>4 times/ 
week
1 52.2 29.9 10. 0 5.9 2.1
2 46.9 28.1 15. 6 9.4 0.0
1-2 3-4 5-6 7-9 >10
1 86.8 9.6 2. 9 0.7 0.0
2 37.5 6.3 6. 3 0.0 0.0
Never <Monthly Monthly WeeklyDaily/ 
almost daily
1 61.4 24.5 9. 2 3.7 1.2
2 75.0 21.9 3. 1 0.0 0.0Table 1. Percentages of Patients Filling Opioid Medications in Study 1 (N=344) and 2 
(N=32) with Drinking Behaviors  
AUDIT-CHow often drink 
alcohol
Standard drinks 
typical day
>6 drinks on one 
occasion
Past 3 mo use 87.1
Past 3 mo male >5 drinks in a day 67.7
Past 3 mo female >4 drinks in a day 50.2
Past 3 mo others concered about use 8.3
Past 3 mo tried/failed to control, cut 
down or stop use 9.3Table 2. Percentages of Patients Filling Opioid 
Medications in Study 3 (N=1523) with Drinking 
Behaviors  
TAPS Tool
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
at point -of-dispensing; and an intervention can be adapted/ implemented and possesses preliminary evidence 
for patient benefit. The currently proposed  study will advance the field by (1) adapting/manualizing an Alcohol -
targeted Brief Intervention- Medication Therapy Management intervention, i.e., ABI -MTM,  (2) testing  ABI-MTM 
feasibility/ acceptability and examining preliminary efficacy for eliminating concomitant alcohol use during opioid 
treatment , and (3) identifying facilitators and barriers for large- scale research and practice implementation.  
Project Investigators   
Principal Investigator : Gerald Cochran, MSW, PhD , is an Associate Professor of Internal Medicine and 
Psychiatry at the University of Utah. Dr. Cochran is an expert in evaluation of evidence -based practices for 
addressing behavioral  health conditions and outcomes. He has published more than 80  peer-reviewed articles, 
with the majority related to monitoring/ treatment of opioid and other substance misuse/use disorders —including 
risk/binge alcohol use . He has extensive knowledge of brief alcohol interventions delivered in health care settings  
and extensive experience in analysis thereof . He is the  Multiple PI of t he NIDA Clinical Trials Network Greater 
Intermountain Node and has extensive experience in the management/ conduct of multisite trials . He was PI on 
the above discussed preliminary studies (and related grants) and is first author on the related publications. Dr. 
Cochran will be responsible for all aspects of this project. Multiple Principal Investigator : Alina Cernasev, 
PharmD, PhD , is an Assistant P rofessor of Pharmacy at University of Tennessee. Dr. Cernasev  possesses doc-
torate degrees in clinical pharmacy and social and administrative pharmacy , with  specialization in qualitative 
methodology . Dr. Cernasev will work closely with  Dr. Cochran in day -to-day management of Tennessee study 
staff, training, data collection, intervention delivery , session fidelity , and reporting.  Dr. Cer nasev will also be 
charged with leading SA3, in collaboration with Drs. Cochran and Ken Hohmeier  (coinvestigator, see below) .  
Coinvestigator s: Adam Gordon, MD, MPH , is a Professor of Medicine at the University of Utah School of 
Medicine and the Section Chief of Addiction Medicine at the Salt Lake VA Healthcare System.  Dr. Gordon is the 
PI of the NIDA Clinical Trials Network Greater Intermountain Node.  He is board- certified in internal medicine and 
addiction medicine and is an  expert in implementation science. Dr. Gordon will provide expertise in high risk 
opioid use, implementation science,  and will assist in interpretation of findings and publications. Dr. Ken 
Hohmeier, PharmD  is an Associate Professor and Director of Community Affairs for Clinical Pharmacy at Uni-
versity of Tennessee.  Dr. Hohmeier’s  expertise is in pharmacy management/operations, medication therapy 
management (a critical component of the ABI -MTM intervention), and pharmacist training/education . As Director 
of Community Affairs, he manages relationships with 90 community pharmacy practice locations in state. In this 
study, Dr. Hohmeier  will provide commun ity pharmacy practice expertise, aid in management of the clinical phar-
macy site s, and session fidelity review . He will also aid in the intervention protocol manualization . Ralph Tarter, 
PhD is psychologist and  Professor of Pharmacy, Psychiatry, and Clinical & Translational Sciences at the Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh. Dr. Tarter has a long history of NIH funded substance use research —including center 
grants, large- scale investigator -initiated awards, and career development. Dr. Tarter has been a  long- time coin-
vestigator with Dr. Cochran on the above -mentioned preliminary studies  (~10 years) . Dr. Tarter is an expert in 
measurement of substance use and related behaviors  and will continue work  with Dr. Cochran on outcome 
assessment  and data analysis/interpretation.  Craig Field, PhD  is an Associate Professor at t he University of 
Texas, El Paso and  a clinical psychologist. Dr. Field is an  expert  in SBIRT  for alcohol  use and has been PI and 
Co-PI on a number of NIH funded large- scale studies testing these interventions. He is the director of the Latino 
Alcohol & Health Disparities Research Center. He has been coinvestigator  with Drs. Cochran, Gordon, and 
Tarter  on several of the studies prelimi nary to the current application. He will provide extensive expertise to the 
team regarding brief alcohol interventions . It is important to note,  Dr. Cochran has a number of current and past  
collaborations with the investigators from this team , which require(d)  regular/frequent team meetings and com-
munication. Dr. Cochran  has published with Drs. Tarter, Gordon, Field, or Hohmeier  more than 40 articles  com-
bined and with Drs. Tarter and Gordon has received more than a dozen foundation or federally funded research 
grants . Dr. Cochran had recently began a close collaboration with Dr. Cernasev , which since September 2020 
they have coauthored two papers (along with Dr.  Hohmeier )81,82 and have submitted 1 grant ( not including the 
current  application) regarding opioid harm reduction in community pharmacy .  
SA1: Adapt and manualize an Alcohol -targeted  Brief Intervention- Medication Therapy Management in-
tervention.   
Rationale.  While the BI -MTM intervention, as cited above,  has demonstrated promising outcomes  for 
mitigating opioid medication misuse, depressi on, and pain; it was not speci ally tooled for targeting co -use of 
alcohol and opioids. We will thus systematically adapt BI -MTM to eliminate  alcohol use during opioid treatment 
OR to facilitate non- opioid substitution for pain treatment by creating  an Alcohol -targeted Brief Intervention- Med-
ication Therapy Management intervention (ABI -MTM) , which will leverage  and expand upon the unique expertise 
of the community pharmacist  in preventing harmful medication interactions . To do so, we will employ the ADAPT -
ITT framework (Assessment, Decision, Administration, Production, Topical Experts, Integration, Training, and 
Testing) .32 ADAPT -ITT is a framework originally designed for adapting evidence- based HIV interventions. Given 
the epidemiological nature and health concerns associated w ith the opioid epidemic and risks associated with 
co-use of alcohol , ADAPT -ITT is a highly appropriate framework to guide the modification of this intervention. 
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
Drs. Cochran (project PI), Tarter , and Gordon (project coinvestigator s) have successfully employed the ADAPT -
ITT model in previous collaborations for adapting evidence based interventions,80,83 which interventions have  
been suc cessfully funded for testing in separate clinical trial s on which Dr. Cochran was PI and Dr s. Tarter and 
Gordon were  coinvestigator s (NIDA: R21DA043735; CDC: R01CE002996).  
Methods . The following points outline how we will adapt the BI -MTM model to address co -use of alcohol 
and opioid medications using the ADAP- ITT framework .  
 Assessment : Dr. Cochran will provide written materials  on the etiology, epidemiology, pharmacology , and 
ways to address co -use of alcohol and opioids to the project expert panel  and project investigators with the 
assignment to read and mark up the materials. The expert panel will consist of 4 individual s, including :  
o Michael Moss , MD, Assistant Professor and Medical Director of the Utah Poison Control Center . He is 
also a practicing emergency physician, Data 2000 waivered, and active care provider in the U of U emer-
gency department opioid use disorder bridge clinic.  Expertise: Pharmacology/toxicology of opioids.  
o Katie Witkiewitz , PhD, Professor and Director of the University of New Mexico Addictive Behaviors and 
Quantitative Research Lab.  She is a licensed clinical psychologist in New Mexico.  Expertise: Co -use of 
alcohol and opioid medications.  
o Kenneth E. Leonard, PhD , Professor and Director of the University of Buffalo Clinical and Research In-
stitute on Addictions . Expertise: Co- use of alcohol and opioid medications.  
o Maureen  Reynolds , PhD, Research Assistant Professor of Pharmaceutical Sciences  at the University of 
Pittsburgh . Expertise: Pharmacist  delivery of  screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment .  
Completing materials review , the panel  and project investigators  will attend a full-day (6 hrs.) recorded web-
conference where:  (1) Dr. Moss will present on critical aspects of human pharmacology of alcohol and opioid 
medication use; (2) Dr. Cochran (project PI)  will present on clinical characteristics of those who misuse opioids 
and previous research on the BI -MTM intervention; and (3) Dr. Witkiewitz will present on epidemiology and 
clinical implications of co -use of alcohol and opioid medications. The assessment phase of the meeting will also 
involve panel members  and project investigators  providing brief verbal summaries of their assigned reading 
materials to one another within the group.   
 Decision : Following the pres entation and summaries, the web- conference will involve Dr. Cochran facilitating 
a roundtable discussion, eliciting comments and dialog regarding needed intervention modification,  and com-
ponents  needed for inclusion. This portion will specifically plan how pharmacists  will facilitate referral for high 
needs patients (e.g., substance use or mental health disorders).  Dr. Cochran will also provide information 
from his previous work regarding warm handoff for high needs patients. A  rich literature shows warm -handoff 
is an evidence- based method for connecting individuals with substance use needs, including opioid use, to 
treatment.84-88 
 Administration : Dr. Cochran will instruct the meeting participants to provide specific recommendations on 
how to incorporate the  identified components into the intervention that will result in an alcohol targeted inter-
vention for pharmacy patients with co- use of alcohol and opioid medications .  
 Production: Concluding the web conference, Dr. Cochran will request handwritten notes and comments rec-
orded during the Decision phase. Once received, Dr. Cochran will incorporate the identified components into the intervention  materials/manual .  
 Topical Experts : The adapted intervention manual  will be circulated to the project coinvestigators and expert 
panel  for review and comment.  
 Integration: Comments and edits from the review will be returned to Dr. Cochran for finalization and incorpo-ration into the intervention materials/ manual.  
 Training: Dr. Cochran will work with Dr. Hohmei er, coinvestigator, (given Dr. Hohmei er’s expertise in train-
ing/education of pharmacists , see investigator section) to author  training/ instructions for  delivery of  the 
adapted intervention.  
 Testing: The alcohol adapted intervention will be included within the pilot RCT materials, and co -use of alco-
hol and opioid medications  outcomes will be assessed at baseline, 2, and 3 months post -delivery (see SA2).  
Product : Com pletion of SA1 will result in an adapted/ manualized protocol ready  for trial evaluation.  
SA2: Test the Feasibility, Acceptability, and Preliminary Efficacy of ABI -MTM for Community Pharmacy 
Patients with Concomitant Alcohol and Opioid Medication Use.  
SA2 Rationale. Possessing the manualized ABI -MTM intervention, it is paramount to assess ABI -MTM’s  
feasibility for delivery in community pharmacy; whether patients will find the intervention acceptable, and if it will produce a preliminary clinical effect resulting in elimination of  co-use of alcohol. Such a preparatory step is critical 
to demonstrate if  ABI-MTM is adequately prepared for subsequent testing within  a larger multi -site framework 
and possible eventual  system -wide implementation.  
SA2 design and participant identification. We will conduct a small- scale  single -blinded 2- group RCT 
(staff administering data collection will be blinded to intervention condition) within 3  Kroger  community pharmacy 
locations in the greater Nashville area (2 in metro areas and 1 in a rural location; see Kroger letter of support) . 
The rationale for RCT implementation in this location was  based on its  high rate of  opioid overdose rates , high 
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
prescribing rates,89 and high alcohol consumption compared to other states, which alcohol consumption results 
in the state’s  status among the top 15 in the US for alcohol related drunk driving deaths90 and the state being 
among the top alcohol -attributable death states in the US.91  
The Kroger pharmacies  selected provide a full complement of pharmacy services that attract a highly 
diverse patient population within local communities. Study pharmacists or technicians trained in the screening 
protocol will approach patients dropping off/picking up opioid prescriptions  at the counter and ask if they are 
interested in taking a brief confidential electronic tablet -based health screening (<5 minutes), with the opportunity 
of compensation up to $240 if they qualify and enroll in the study. In our small- scale study of BI -MTM , we suc-
cessfully engaged 81% of patients a t point of service who presented at the community pharmacies picking up 
medications as well as  health plan members who received a study adverti sement and came to the pharmacy . 
Patients approached will be asked on a tablet to verify they are English speaking, ≥18 years, and not receiving 
cancer treatment.   
Patients fitting these criteria will move on to being screened for eligibility for receiving ABI -MTM. As stated 
above, given that no scenarios exist where co -use of alcohol and opioids would be advisably safe, we will target 
delivery of the intervention to all patients with overlapping use—both those with risk and non -risk alcohol use. 
Risk drinking will be operationalized by a score of ≥4 or i n men and ≥3 or more in women using the valid/reliable 
the AUDIT -C.37,92 Screening will include administration of 5 questions: the 3 items from the AUDIT- C, 1 item 
inquiring when the patient last consumed alcohol, and 1 item inquiring days supply and refills available. Self -
reported alcohol consumption patterns rather than biochemical testing was  selected given biochemical testing 
of alcohol use currently has a limited window of detection that could unnecessarily exclude patients who would 
be eligible for intervention receipt.  
The decision flow diagram  de-
picted in Figure 1 will be used to deter-
mine ABI-MTM eligibility . The first ques-
tion will be from the AUDIT -C, item 1: 
“How often do you have a drink contain-
ing alcohol?”  Responses of ≥2 -4 times 
per month indicate eligibility  for ABI-
MTM —given participants drinking pat-
terns will likely overlap with any opioid 
medication regimen prescribed to them . 
A response of ≤monthly  drinking will trig-
ger the second  question: “ When was your 
last drink?” Alcohol consumption ≥7 days 
ago indicates eligibility for ABI-MTM —
given that participants ’ regular drinking 
pattern could overlap with the current opi-
oid medication. Alcohol consumption of <7 
days  will trigger the third question:  “How many days of supply and numbers of refills do you have of your current 
opioid medication? We will use this question instead of relying on the Kroger medication record given the patient 
may have prescriptions outside of Kroger. Reponses of ≥7 days  current  supply indicate eligibility for ABI-MTM  
given that patients’  regular drinking patterns in  the month and their medication supply will likely overlap.   
SA2 inclusion/exclusion criteria.  Patients eligible  for ABI -MTM aged ≥18 will be offered the opportunity  
to learn about the study. Patients will be excluded if they: (1) are pregnant (given potential complications asso-
ciated with pre -natal opioid use93-97 and/or alcohol use98), (2) cannot provide collateral contact information for ≥2 
persons (to ensure consistent contact/follow up), (3) do not have a reliable landline or mobile phone to be con-tacted by study staff, (4) are filling only buprenorphine (given some formulations are not indicated for pain), (5) 
plan to leave the area for an extended period of time in the next 3-months , or (6) have experienced  a psychotic 
and/or manic episode in the last 30 days (before consent, patients will be asked to screen for psychosis [psy-
chosis subscale from the reliable/valid Behavior and Symptom Identification Scale
99] and mania [from the relia-
ble/valid Altman Self -Rating Mania Scale100]). We will not exclude patients with severe substance use problems 
given ABI-MTM will possess  the capacity to refer  and follow up on patient engagement in substance use treat-
ment.  Patients excluded will be given educational information about co-use of alcohol and opioid medications , 
and research assistants will aid them to seek additional care if desired. Patients not interested or not co -use 
positive will be rescreened on subsequent visits. Patients positive for co -use, who are interested/eligible , will b e 
asked to provide written informed consent to participate.  

Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
SA2 recruitment feasibility, randomization , sample size, and justification.  It is important to note, i n 
order to enroll an equal number of participants engaged in risk  drinking (n=20) and non-risk drinking (n=20), we 
will sample those with risk and non-risk drinking at a ratio of 1:1. Noted above, our previous research has shown 
that approximately 20- 30% of pharmacy patients filling opioid medications have risk  use or binge drinking. To 
ensure risk and non-risk drinking status is not strongly collinear with enrollment time, enrollment during the study 
for the larger sample size group may  be periodically/ temporarily held until 
the smaller sample size group achieves an equal sample size,  which 
would occur  if the larger group has a sample size of more than 2 greater 
than the smaller sample size group.  Once the 1:1 enrollment is met, full 
enrollment will proceed , with this process repeating until recruitment 
ends . Randomization will be stratified to ensure equal distribution of 
those with risk and non- risk drinking into treatment and control groups.  
Randomization will be generated via SAS PROC PLAN , with limit ed runs 
of 4 to condition assignment.  
 Sample size will not be based on a power estimate. Rather, our 
sample size is based on our experience of how many patients can be 
screened and consented within the study timeframe.101 Using consort 
chart data from our BI- MTM small scale  study,102 we present Table 3 that 
demonstrates our estimates of how many patients we anticipate needing 
to approach/screen to meet our recruitment target  within our study time-
line. Based on these data, we will need to approach 338 patients during the study recruitment phase. Of these, 
we anticipate 81% will be interested/available for screening, of whom approximately 50 % will meet eligibility 
criteria (most patients will be ineligible because they will not have co -use of alcohol and opioid medications ). 
From among the eligible patients  who are positive for co- use of alcohol and opioid medications, we anticipate 
27 will be positive for risk drinking, and 110 will be positive for non -risk drinking. We anticipate consenting 74%  
of those interested in participation and eligible —including consideration of our procedure mentioned above of 
1:1 recruitment of individuals with risk /non- risk use—which will result in our final  population to be randomized: 
N=40 (ABI-MTM : risk use n= 10; non- risk use n=10; SMC : risk use n=10; non -risk use n=10) . Randomization will 
be stratified by pharmacy site.  
In terms  of needed time to recruit our targeted patient population, based on our  data from our recently 
completed research study (mentioned above) at 19 Kroger sites  and based on our previous screening study and 
small scale  study, we expect to approach 9 patients  for recruitment monthly at each of our pharmacy loca-
tions.23,25,102 With this rate  and based on our procedure mentioned above of 1:1 recruitment of individuals with 
risk/non- risk alcohol  use, study recruitment will require approximately 13-months  to complete . We have chosen 
to focus recruitment at a limited number of sites (N=3)  during feasibility/acceptability/preliminary efficacy testing  
to ensure  internal validity of our procedures, limiting possible site variation, and limiting multisite challenges. 
During screening, we will capture sex, insurance status, and age for all eligible patients to assess basic demo-
graphic differences among those who participate versus  those that do not.  
While definitive estimation and hypothesis testing are not the aim of this study, the target sample size will 
allow estimation of odds ratios via 95% confidence intervals comparing outcome rates in the intervention and 
control arms, while accounting for within site clustering, with lower bounds differing from the odds ratio estimate by a factor of 1/3 to 1/2 and upper bounds differing from the odds ratio estimate by a factor of 2 to 3 for a broad range of overall rates, true odds ratios, and magnitude of si te-to-site effects. In particular, this  study will allow 
detection of strong signals of preliminary benefit  and provide suggestions of benefit for more subtle signals.  
SA2 treatment -as-usual and intervention conditions. S tandard Medication Counseling (SMC)  will be  
the treatment as usual condition in this study and was chosen/developed following Gold et al.’s guide for select-
ing control conditions in behavioral intervention studies.
103 For the first component, all SMC participants will 
receive a single 5- 10 minute medication information/counseling session delivered by a Kroger  pharmacist, other 
than the study pharmacist, that possesses a similar level of education and professional licensing. The content of 
this session follows federal and state pharmacy requirements104,105 requiring pharmacists to: (1) offer counseling, 
(2) document counseling was offered, (3) offer a counseling process for patients not present (not applicable to this study given all patients must screen in person), and (4) discuss generic substitution.
104,106 Following this 
session, in the second SMC component, participants will be emailed/ mailed  (according to  participant preference)  
safety information about co- use of alcohol and opioids. Pharmacists delivering SMC will be provided information 
quarterly to remind of practice standards for SMC service delivery by Dr.  Hohmeir . SMC is specifically yoked in 
duration with A BI-MTM, totaling 2 participant contacts to control for attention bias in outcome assessment.  It is 
important to note all study participants will receive SMC given state and federal requirements.  
Alcohol  B rief Intervention -Medication Therapy Management ( ABI-MTM) will be the intervention condition 
adapted and prepared  for utilization in this study.  ABI-MTM sessions will be set by appointment  between the 
pharmacist and the participant.  The study pharmacist will possess a PharmD degree and be licensed. Study Table 3: Recruitment Projections  n a 
Total needed to approach  338 
Interested in screening (81%)  373 
Screening eligible after anticipated 
exclusion ( 50%) 137 
Not risk drinking (~ 80%)  110 
Risk drinking (~ 20%)  27 
Consented and randomized (74%  
of those with risk  drinking + those 
with non -risk drinking ) 40 
a Rate estimates based on pilot study consort 
chart numbers.  
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
pharmacist t raining will be led by Drs. Cochran, Cernasev , and Hohmeier . Training entails: the pharmacist  pre-
reading/studying the protocol followed by 2-days of motivational interviewing training tailored to the protocol, 
including lecture, group discuss ion, and observed role- plays  (motivational interviewing training will provided in 
Nashville  by Kali Worley , PhD, MA; a Nashville -based Motivational Interviewing Network of Trainers  [MINT] , 
trainer ; see letter of support ). Following in -person training, mock sessions are conducted/recorded and assessed 
using fidelity checklists. Drs. Cochran, Cernasev , Worley , and Hohmeier  will adapt and prepare fidelity checklists , 
including a protocol adherence checklist  and motivational interviewing scoring sheet , which will be modified from  
BI-MTM materi als employed in the small -scale study cited above.  The protocol adherence checklist  will be re-
viewed and scored by Drs. Cochran, Cernasev , and Hohmeier , with t he study pharmacist  required to demon-
strate  ≥80% proficiency on the protocol  checklist to be permitted to interact with study participants  (80% being 
an acceptable level based on Dr. Cochran’s previous experience training staff in similar interventions ). For initial 
Motivational interviewing proficiency, Dr. Worley will code training sessions using the Motivational Interviewing 
Treatment Integrity Code (MITI 4)107,108 and will ensure fair /basic competency on technical and relational global 
scores as well as complex reflections and ratio of reflections to questions.107,108 Ongoing session fidelity  will be 
monitored by review of session recordings  (all pharmacist sessions will be audio recorded to ensure delivery and 
for fidelity review ). With these recordings,  each month, investigators and staff will (including Dr. Worley):  (1) 
review randomly select ed recorded sessions  using the protocol  checklist  and MITI 4 , (2) provid e verbal/written 
feedback, and (3) participat e in a group discussion.  
While details regarding the various components , specific language, and materials  of the intervention  and its 
manual  for delivery will be determined and produced as the primary  outcome  of SA1, the framework of the ABI -
MTM intervention (similar to BI -MTM) will be based in MTM  (i.e., medication therapy management) and SBIRT 
(i.e., screening brief intervention, and referral to treatment) . MTM is an evidence- based intervention delivered in 
community pharmacy involving a brief session where medications are reviewed,  and patients are assisted to 
resolve barriers to adherence.  MTM has been documented to improve medication adherence.27 While lack of 
payment has been cited as a possible barrier for many services in community pharmacy settings, MTM is reim-
bursable by Medicare and several commercial insurance plans .109 A core goal of MTM is to empower patients in 
active medication self -management.110,111 MTM in the current study will be  based on the American Pharmacists 
Association and National Association of Chain Drug Stores Foundation service model , which includes 5 core 
elements.112 A common duration for medication counseling in outpatient pharmacies  a single 30 -45 minute  ses-
sion;113 we anticipate ABI -MTM session duration to be simila r. Session 1 will be in -person; however, if in- person 
visits are not possible (e.g., COVID -19 restrictions), both sessions may occur telephonically.  
 Element 1  is a medication review. In t his element , the pharmacist  collect s patient specific information related 
to the medication regimen and their health and prioritizes any identified problems.   
 Element 2  develops  a personal medication record . In this element, the pharmacist and the patient develop a 
list of the medications the patient is taking . This list also documents patient and health care provider contact 
information, problematic interactions, allergies, review date, and medication details.  
 Element 3 produc es a medication action plan. This plan includes steps the patient must take to improve 
medication self-management and their health.  
 Element 4  is the intervention and/ or referral. This is where the pharmacist would employ  SBIRT  to work with 
the participant to either choose (1) to eliminate alcohol use during opioid therapy  OR (2) to facilitate commu-
nication with  the prescriber to select a non -opioid pain management alternative . SBIRT is an evidence- based 
practice for improving alcohol problems ,28-31 with demonstrated evidence from  pharmacists and other provid-
ers for medication adherence improvement114-118 and reductions in problematic prescription opioid use.24,119-
121 It is highly important to note that in the current application context, SBIRT targeting elimination of co -use 
of alcohol and opioids (i .e., alcohol use eliminatio n during opioid treatment OR  non-opioid pain management 
substitution)  is designed to prevent related sequelae, i.e., possible overdose risk and use disorders.  We do 
recognize,  however, some participants may not choose the  non-opioid pain treatment  option and also be 
ambivalent about elimination of alcohol use. These participants will be encouraged to reduce alcohol use.  
 Element  5 includes  documentation and follow up. D ocumentation includes the pharmacist recording 
notes/action items related to elements 1- 4. The follow -up (booster  session)  portion includes scheduling a 
telephonic session 7 days following the init ial visit , during which  the pharmacist review s commitments made 
during the initial session, work s to resolve barriers, and provides  additional referrals/resources.  
SA2 assessment, follow up, and retention.  Participants will be assessed at baseline, 2- months, and 
3-months  post-randomization at the Kroger community pharmacy settings  or other appropriate locations. Partic-
ipants will be compensated $40 for the baseline assessment, $50 for the 2- month, and $75 for the 3-month —
with a $75 completion bonus for those completing all assessments. Research assistants will aid participants to 
complete self -administered portions of the questionnaires as necessary to prevent missing data and ensure 
accurate/completed assessments. Research assistants will also be trained to administer urine toxicology as-
sessments to participants. Efforts to ensure  continued participant contact include collecting locator information 
and at least 2 collateral contacts as well as sending letters and cards, electronic messages, and making phone 
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
calls. Noted above, these retention methods were successful in the BI-MTM  study , resulting in >93% retention 
at the final study follow up.102 
SA2 intervention feasibility and acceptability outcome measurement. Achievement of feasibility  of 
delivery of all intervention components to 85% of ABI-MTM recipients  will be captured by the pharmacist  logging  
completed intervention components. Achievement of A BI-MTM acceptability  will be assessed at month 3 and 
will be captured by intensive qualitative interview following a semi -structured interview guide focusing on partic-
ipant opinions/experience with ABI-MTM. Acceptability will also be captured at month 3 by assessing patient 
satisfaction using the Patient Satisfaction Survey for Comprehensive Medication Management (PSSCMM),33 a 
reliable and content/factorial ly valid 10- item self -report instrument33 that will assess patient satisfaction with in-
tervention. Last, acceptability will also be assessed by intervention recipient retention (85%)  at study completion . 
SA2 preliminary efficacy outcome measurement . This aim  postulates that intent -to-treat analyses will 
show greater proportions of ABI -MTM recipients will report elimination of co- use of alcohol and opioid medica-
tions compared to SMC.35,36 Our primary assessments will include:  
 Timeline Follow Back  (TLFB) assesses quantity/frequency of alcohol  and opioid medication use , which is a 
measure that is reliable and is content, criterion, and construct valid.35,36 Also note, w e will capture  any illicit 
drug use with the TLFB .  
 14 panel drug urinalysis  will be collected in private restrooms of the pharmacies or other appropriate loca-
tions, which will capture  opiates, oxycodone, methadone, cannabis, cocaine, PCP, amphetamine, MDMA, 
methamphetamine, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, buprenorphine, tricyclic antidepressants, and propoxy-
phene. Participants are considered co -use free  if self -report and urine assessments coincide.  
In addition to our primary outcome measures, we  will also capture concomitant conditions as covariates 
at each time point . Each of these conditions are well known correlates of opioid related risk, substance use, and 
health behavior change:  
 Opioid Use Behaviors
122,123 
 Prescription Opioid Misuse Index (POMI) , a 6-item criterion valid and reliable measure that assesses pre-
scription opioid misuse behaviors and opioid medication misuse.124  
 Opioid Compliance Checklist (OCC),  an 8-item, a test/retest reliable and criterion valid tool125-127 that as-
sesses adherence/misuse to the prescribed opioid regimen.  
 Diagnostic Statistical Manual -5 Checklist for Opioid Use Disorder , is an 11 -item reliable and valid assess-
ment that identifies mild, moderate, and severe opioid use disorder. 128,129 
Pain and Physical Health130-133 
 Brief Pain Inventory , is a well- validated and reliable assessment, which consists of a 4- item pain intensity 
subscale and a 7- item pain interference subscale.134  
 Pain Catastrophizing Scale, a 13 -item factorially/concurrent/discriminant valid and reliable assessment135 
that measures rumination, magnification, and helplessness aspects of pain catastrophizing.  
 Short Form -36 (SF -36) will assess physical health and is a 36 -item content, criterion, and construct valid 
measure with demonstrated reliability.136 This measure assesses physical functioning, role functioning, bodily 
pain, general health, vitality, social functioning, emotional functioning, and mental health.  
Mental Health and Risk Alcohol Use47,122,123 
 Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ) will assess mental health  and is an 11 -item criterion valid mental health 
assessment with demonstrated reliability.137-140 The PHQ assesses depression, anxiety, somatoform, eating, 
and alcohol use disorders. This assessment will also be used to monitor suicidal ideation across time.  
 Primary Care -Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  assessment will measure post -traumatic stress disorder, which 
is a 5 -item criterion valid and test -retest reliable instrument.141-144  
 Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test -C (AUDIT -C) is a 3 -tem abbreviated version of the AUDIT -10, which 
has demonstrated internal consistency and test -retest reliability and construct and criterion validity .37,92 The 
AUDIT -C has highly similar performance as the full version37,92 and assesses frequency , quantity, and binge 
drinking (note, the AUDIT -C will be administered at  screening [not baseline], 2- , and 3 -months  assessments).  
 WHO Alcohol, Smoking,  and Substance Involvement Screening Test alcohol subscale will be used to assess 
lifetime and recent alcohol use. This 7-item measure has demonstrated reliability as well as criterion, con-
struct, concurrent, discriminant validity.145   
Engagement in Physical Health and Psychosocial Services  
 Treatment Services Review (TSR) -6 will assess engagement in services for: substance abuse, medical/men-
tal health, family issues, financial/housing needs, and legal concerns. The TSR -6 also captures medication 
use; which we will use to capture type, dose, and frequency of opioid consumption  and other medications. 
The TSR contains 56 -items and is criterion and construct valid and reliable.146-149 The TSR will be used, in 
particular, to identify length of the written opioid prescription, which will allow for examination of elimination 
of co -use during the opioid treatment. This will also allow for monitoring of natural  cessation of opioid use  
during the course of treatment  
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
Readiness to Change150,151 
 The Readiness to Change Questionnaire is a 12 -item assessment of individual readiness to change drinking 
behaviors that evaluat es three of the stages of change: pre- contemplation, contemplation, and action.  This 
assessment has content, criterion, and construct validity —with test -retest reliability.152-155 
Social Desirability  
 The Marlowe -Crowne Social Desirability Scale and short Form  contains 13 items and is criterion valid156,157 
and reliable. This measure will assess the participants ’ degree of social desirability at each time point.  
SA2 acceptability and feasibility analysis plan. Successful delivery of all intervention components will 
be analyzed by calculating the total number recipients  that received both ABI -MTM sessions divided by the total 
number of participants randomized to this condition.  Intensive qualitative interviews of ABI-MTM acceptability 
will be analyzed following  methods recommended by Braun and Clarke that capture associations between cat-
egories, extract , and conceptualize themes.158 Our team  will independently review the interview data and code 
inductively and deductively. Codes will be clustered based on their similarities into categories. The research 
team will meet multiple times to discuss the emergent themes.158 Patient satisfaction with the intervention re-
ported on the PSSCMM will be analyzed by calculating frequencies of responses, measures of central tendency, and proportions. Treatment retention of 85% of ABI-MTM recipients at study completion will be analyzed by 
calculating number of recipients retained at 3 -months  divided by number of consented recipients.   
SA2 preliminary efficacy analysis plan. This aim compares the preliminary  efficacy of the intervention 
(ABI-MTM vs. SMC) on the primary binary co-use outcome ( i.e., co-use vs . no co- use of alcohol and opioid 
medications). Mentioned above, successful elimination of co -use can be in the form of (1) participants eliminating 
their alcohol consumption while they are receiving opioid therapy, which will be measured by the TLFB , OR (2) 
by choosing an alternative non- opioid pain management strategy (not altering their alcohol consumption)  by 
recommendation of the pharmacist and in collaboration with their prescriber , which  will be  measured by agree-
ment of urine toxicology and TLFB .  
We will first provide descriptive summaries of each variable measured at baseline, 2- , and 3 -months 
overall , by risk/non-risk alcohol use, as well as by intervention group (note that all included participants are 
positive for co-use at baseline). Within an intent -to-treat framework, w e will fit 3 -level generalized linear mixed 
models (GLMM) to relate repeated assessments across time of the primary outcome measured (i.e. elimination 
of co- use) to the intervention . Additional analyses within the 3- level GLMM  framework will also be conducted to 
assess the overall impact of the intervention on reducing percent days alcohol use among patients  during the 
prescribed opioid treatment period. A ll analyses will be adjusted for  covariates likely to be associated with the 
outcome. Specifically, thi s will include baseline measures such as opioid use, mental health, substance use, 
pain/physical function, social services utilization, and readiness to change in addition to  and demographic co-
variates including (but not be limited to) age, sex, race, socioeconomic status, and rural/urban living.
159 Social 
desirability156,157 will also be included as a time varying covariate to account for the degree to which participant 
response bias may impact study outcomes. Random intercepts will be used to account for correlations on the 
patient level and pharmacy  site level.  We will also test risk/non-risk alcohol use as an effect modifier to determine 
whether the intervention has a differential impact on individuals with distinct levels of drinking; we recognize, 
however, the sample study sample size may limit the power of the analysis t o detect changes at a probability  of 
<0.05 . Thus, it is important to note our above discussed analysis focus on 95% confidence intervals comparing 
outcome rates in the intervention and control arms  in order to detect subtle trends in relation to intervention 
efficacy . Model parameters, including treatment effects at each follow -up, will be estimated using restricted max-
imum likelihood.160 An advantage of this approach is treatment effect estimates remain consistent and approxi-
mately unbiased if missing data follow a missing -at-random pattern (MAR; data values are independent of the 
missingness mechanism conditional on the observed data161), the most general data -centric missing data as-
sumption.   
As biological sex is an important factor among individuals with pain and opioid/alcohol  use,162,163 we will 
explore differences by intervention gr oup and biological sex for SA 2. Based on our previously published research 
in this population, we anticipate recruiting ~57% females/~43% males24,164 in this study. We will first examine 
descriptive demographic differences at baseline, 2- , and 3-months within the ABI-MTM and SMC conditions by 
sex. Next, to explore the potential role of sex as an effect modifier for A BI-MTM on co -use, we will test  interaction 
terms between the intervention group and sex to explore possible heterogeneity of treatment effects and to 
characterize if sex subgroups might benefit more from the intervention. As discussed above with reference to 
the risk /non- risk alcohol use as an effect modifier analyses, sex subgroup analyses will likewise focus on 95% 
confidence intervals comparing outcome rates in the intervention and control arms  in order to detect subtle trends 
in relation to intervention efficacy . 
SA2 product.  By successfully a ccomplishing SA2, this will establish  the necessary feasibility, accepta-
bility, and preliminary efficacy  data to demonstrate ABI -MTM is ready for a subsequent fully powered  multisite 
randomized trial.  
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
SA3: Identify Pharmacy System/Practice -Level Barriers and Facilitators for Universal Alcohol Screen-
ing/Intervention among Patients with Opioid Medications.   
SA3 rationale.  We have discussed above a number of barriers to pharmacists engaging patients regard-
ing behavioral health. While o ur previous research has worked to address these barriers, t he process of applying  
evidence- based services into real w orld health care settings is a paramount aspect of evidence- based imple-
mentation science and involves rigorous planning, monitoring, and evaluation165-167 and indeed requires thought-
ful preparation.  Therefore, S A3 focuses on implementation planning to  identify what barriers  exist for implement-
ing universal alcohol screening/intervention for those using opioid medications  for a subsequent  large- scale 
multi- site efficacy trial as well as eventual  integration into system -level commercial pharmacy chain workflow . 
Likewise, this step will also identify facilitato rs to scaling alcohol screening/intervention for those who use opioid 
medications  for a large- scale multisite trial and pharmacy system wide. To establish this information , we will 
employ tools from the Consolidated Framework for  Implementation Research (CFIR)38 and organizational be-
havior and management.  The CFIR is  a multidimensional framework comprised of constructs for drawing out 
information related to implementing research into practice,168 ranging from pre -implementation activities to post -
implementation outcome analyses.169-171 The CFIR has been employed within a variety  of clinical and adminis-
trative  areas, including healthcare delivery and processes redesign, quality improvement, health promotion, and 
disease management as well as  in clinical areas  including mental health, obesity, and high blood pressure.168  
SA3 design and participant identification.  We will implement  cross -sectional one- time mixed methods 
key informant interview s to capture data that will inform our understanding of pharmacy system/practice- level 
barriers and facilitators for universal alcohol screening/intervention among patients with opioid medications. In-
terview participants will be identified through a purposi ve/snowball sampling approach. Relying on both on Dr. 
Hohmei er (project coinvestigator) and Dr. Stacey Frede’s  (project consultant) professional networks at the 
Kroger corporate and Nashville regional levels , our team will reach out and offer interview participation to indi-
viduals in each category of key informant (technicians, pharmacists, and corporate leaders). Dr. Frede is the  
national  Manager of Clinical Program Development with the Kroger Health Corporate office who has been a  
close collaborator with Dr. Cochran over the past 3 years in his NIDA CTN funded research project (CTN -0093; 
see letter of support). Identified interviewees will be contacted via email and/or by telephone.  Interview s will take 
place in a location and time that is convenient and selected by the participants. The interviews will be conducted 
by a research assistant trained in qualitative interviewing and are anticipated to last up to 1  hour.  At the close of 
these interviews, the research assistant will request from the participant suggestions of other individuals who 
would represent the specific perspective of pharmacy corporate leaders, pharmacists, and technicians. Com-pleting the interview, participants will b e provided with a $75 gift card.  
SA3 assessment.  Prior to meeting in- person for the qualitative interview, t he first step in our mixed 
methods  assessment will involve  the quantitative data collection.  We will administer , via a web-based survey 
platform , the internally consistent reliable and factorially valid Organizational Readiness t o Change Assessment 
(ORCA) .
40 This 77 item instrument  assesses organizational readiness for implementing evidence- based prac-
tices in clinical settings. Primary domains assessed by the instrument include respondents ’ perceptions of 
strengths of evidence for the change and ability of the organization to support the change.40  
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
For the in-person portion of the interview, we will administer open- ended questions drawn and adapted 
from the CFIR interview guide for qualitative research.  Items will be selected by the research team in collabora-
tion with Dr. Frede.  Items from the constructs  set forth in Table 4 will be employed39 and include Intervention 
Characteristics , Inner Setting, Characteristics of Individuals, and Process . Our team has previously employed 
CFIR constructs along with the CFIR interview guide to develop an open -ended survey schedule for administra-
tion to health care professionals regarding substance use care within health care settings,172,173 which interview 
results were used for system -level and community -wide intervention/  implementation planning. Also mentioned 
above, Dr. Gordon is an expert in implementation science and has more than 20 years of experience in this area.  
Sample size.  We will recruit pharmacy technicians (N= 20), pharmacists (N=20), and corporate leaders 
(N=20 ) to complete the SA3 interview .41,42 Previous research has demonstrated sample sizes of 20 individuals 
or less can achieve close associations between the researcher and the participants, which will generate rich data 
needed for elucidating complex re-
lationships .41 Previous research 
has also demonstrated samples of approximately 12 interviews  can 
reach saturation of findings .
42 
Saturation has been defined as a point beyond which no significantly new information is being obtained. Saturation will be discussed and an-alyzed by the research team after each interview has been completed.
 
Lincoln and Guba’s framework174 
will be used to address and meet criteria for quality and rigor in this study  and involve credibility, de-
pendability, confirmability, and transferability .
174  
SA3 analysis plan.  For the 
quantitative survey items collected based on the ORCA survey, we will employ descriptive analyses as well as conduct chi square and One -
Way ANOVA tests to examine dif-
ferences between interviewed 
groups (pharmacy technicians, pharmacists, and corporate lead-
ers). For the qualitative data, s imilar 
to SA2 , the research team will follow 
methods  recommended by Braun 
and Clarke that will capture associ-
ations between categories and ex-
tract and conceptualize themes.
158 
The researchers will independently review the interview data and code inductively and deductively. C odes will 
be clustered based on their similarities into categories. The research team will meet multiple times to discuss the emergent themes.
158  
Timeline. Based on our previous work in conducting clinical research  with similar populations in commu-
nity pharmacy settings, we estimate this study will require  3 years to complete (Table 5) . Year 1 quarters  (Q) 1-
3 will involve receiving IRB approval and hiring/training staff. During the same time, we will undertake and com-plete all activities related to SA1, intervention adaptation and protocol development. Year 1 Q 2- 3 will involve 
finalizing the assessment battery for SA2; Q3 will also involve the initiation of activities related to the small -scale  
Table 4. Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research Constructs in SA3 Key Informant 
Survey Development  
Intervention 
Characteristics  Evidence 
Strength and 
Quality  Stakeholders’ perceptions of  the quality and validity of evidence 
supporting the belief that the intervention will have desired 
outcomes.  
Relative  
Advantage  Stakeholders’ perception of the advantage of implementing the 
intervention versus an alternative solution.  
Trialability  The ability to test the intervention on a small -scale  in the 
organization, and to be able to reverse course (undo 
implementation) if warranted.  
Complexity  Perceived difficulty o f the intervention, reflected by duration, scope, 
radicalness, disruptiveness, centrality, and intricacy and number of 
steps required to implement.  
Inner Setting  Implementation 
Climate  The absorptive capacity for change, shared receptivity of involved 
individuals to an intervention, and the extent to which use of that 
intervention w ill be rewarded, supported, and expected within their 
organization.  
Relative Priority  Individuals’ shared perception of the importance of the 
implementation within the organization.  
Leadership  
Engagement  Commitment, involvement, and accountability of l eaders and 
managers with the implementation.  
Available  
Resources  The level of resources dedicated for implementation and on -going 
operations, including money, training, education, physical space, 
and time.  
Characteristics 
of Individuals  Knowledge and 
Beliefs about 
the Intervention  Individuals’ attitudes toward and value placed on the intervention as 
well as familiarity with facts, truths, and principles related  to the 
intervention.  
Process  Engaging  Attracting and involving appropriate individuals in t he 
implementation and use of the intervention through a combined 
strategy of social marketing, education, role modeling, training, and 
other similar activities.  
Champions  Individuals who dedicate themselves to supporting, marketing, and 
‘driving through’  an implementation overcoming indifference or 
resistance that the intervention may provoke in an organization.  
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
trial, including patient recruitment, inter-
vention delivery, outcome assessments and data safety monitoring board meet-ings (DSMB), which will conclude in 
Year 3 Q1. Beginning in Year 1 Q4, we 
will initiate our activities related to SA3, 
including developing our qualitative in-terview schedule, participant identifica-tion, interviewing, and analyses, which will conclude Year 3 Q1. Study papers 
will be produced Year 1 Q3- 4 and Year 
3 Q2 -4.  
Possible Barriers to Study Success 
and Resolutions  
 We anticipate 3 primary barriers 
to the success of this study and have 
plans in place for response and/or reso-
lution . First, c ritics may suggest that 
providing an intervention to those with 
non-risky alcohol use who are also tak-
ing opioid medications is unnecessary  
given they are at low probability  for neg-
ative consequences. It is important to recall , as reviewed/cited  above, there is no empirical literature that sup-
ports this perspective— rather all-peer reviewed human and animal, governmental, packaging inserts , and pro-
fessional lit erature available clearly state that any co- use of alcohol and opioid medications is dangerous and 
should be not done. Therefore, this study will specifically recruit on a 1:1 ratio those with non -risk as well as 
those with risk y alcohol  use and examine outcomes for both subgroups by intervention condition.  
Second, some critics may also assert that given the BI -MTM intervention already has been developed 
and tested in a small -scale clinical trial, that advancing ABI-MTM is unnecessary and BI -MTM should be sufficient  
for co -use of alcohol and opioid medications . Our team deliberated over  this question extensively. Opioid medi-
cation misuse is a composite set of behaviors including, for instance, using more medication than prescribed, using to get high or to cope with problems, and doctor shopping. Misuse also is frequently accompanied by a  
variety of concomitant conditions (i.e., mental health, illicit substance use) that together require a resource in-
tense and comprehensive intervention. Our goal with the ABI- MTM intervention is to integrate a very brief and 
targeted intervention focusing only on the  highly  specific outcome of co- use elimination ( i.e., [1] eliminating al-
cohol use during opioid treatment or [2] substituting a non- opioid pain therapy). Thus, ABI -MTM will be very 
different in practice than the BI -MTM —requiring specific adaptation efforts and preliminary testing.  
Third, we do not anticipate a change in our ability to recruit participants  in SA2  (i.e., pharmacy patients ); 
however,  there is a chance recruitment could slow at some point in the study. Given the hundreds of Kroger 
stores in Tennessee (and thousands across the US) and our close collaboration with corporate and local leaders 
on this project, should participant  recruitment become a challenge, we have the ability to open up recruitment in 
other stores and/or  create Kroger medication system hard stops in the store workflow that would require patients 
to be screened before leaving the stores. Based on our experience, these are highly effective tools that can be 
used to improve site performance. In the same vein, based on our close collaboration with corporate and local 
leaders, we are confident that should our sampling approach for SA3 (i.e., staff /leadership key informant inter-
views ) prove to not meet our targets, our local and corporate partners will help assist us to identify additional 
possible participants who would be available and potentially interested with speaking with us.  
 CONCLUSION  
The opioid epidemic continues to result in serious negative consequences in the US . While some im-
provements have been observed for reductions in prescribing in recent years ; high rates of misuse, subsequent 
OUD, and overdose persist. Among the most high- risk behaviors for those taking opioid medications is co- use 
with alcohol. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has clearly stated: “… there is no safe level of 
alcohol use for people using opioids.”
52 Previous research, including that of our team, shows that a significant 
portion of those regularly using opioids  medications —particularly filling opioids at community pharmacies —are 
involved in the co -use of alcohol. This study proposes to leverage pharmacists’ special training in medication 
interactions and safety; adapt a previously developed intervention for opioid medication misuse;  test its accept-
ability, feasibility, and preliminary efficacy; and identify barriers /facilitators to large- scale research  and system -
level implementation. Results will inform a subsequent powered multisite trial examining the impact  of the ABI -
MTM intervention on reducing co- use of opioid medications and alcohol and improve public health nationally.  Aim Activity Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
1
-3IRB approval x
Hire staff x x x
Train staff x x
1Adapt intervention x x
Adapt/expand protocol x x
Finalize study protocol x x
2Finalize assessment battery x x
Patient recruitment x x x x x
Intervention delivery x x x x x x
Outcome assessments x x x x x x x
DSMB meetings x x x x x x x
Data cleaning/analyses x x
Protocol paper x x
Main outcome paper x x x
3Develop qualitative interview x x
Identify participants x x
Administer survey/interview x x
Data analysis x x
Main outcome paper x x x
1-3Submit final report xYear 1 Year 2 Year 3 Table 5. Project Timeline
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
 
 
REFERENCES  
1. Amato L, Minozzi S, Davoli M, Vecchi S. Psychosocial and pharmacological treatments versus pharmacological treatments for opioid detoxification. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 
2011(9):Cd005031.  
2. Brands B, Blake J, Marsh DC, Sproule B, Jeyapalan R, Li S. The impact of benzodiazepine use on 
methadone maintenance treatment outcomes. J Addict Dis. 2008;27(3):37- 48. 
3. Kuerbis A, Sacco P, Blazer DG, Moore AA. Substance abuse among older adults. Clinics in geriatric 
medicine. 2014;30(3):629- 654. 
4. FDA. HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESCRIBING INFORMATION: OXYCODONE. In: 
US_Food_and_Drug_Administration, ed. Silver Spring, MD2018.  
5. FDA. HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESCRIBING INFORMATION: PERCOCET. In: US_Food_and_Drug_Administration, ed. Silver Spring, MD2018.  
6. FDA. HIGHLIGHTS OF PRESCRIBING INFORMATION: OXYCONTIN. In: 
US_Food_and_Drug_Administration, ed. Silver Spring, MD2018.  
7. CDC. Drug overdose deaths in the United States hit record numbers in 2014. 
http://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/epidemic/index.html . Published 2016. Accessed September 7, 2016.  
8. Cochran G, Gordon AJ, Lo- Ciganic WH, et al. An Examination of Claims -based Predictors of Overdose 
from a Large Medicaid Program. Med Care. 2016.  
9. Witkiewitz K, Vowles KE. Alcohol and Opioid Use, Co- Use, and Chronic Pain in the Context of the 
Opioid Epidemic: A Critical Review. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research. 2018;42(3):478 -
488. 
10. Hartzler B, Donovan DM, Huang Z. Comparison of opiate -primary treatment seekers with and without 
alcohol use disorder. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2010;39(2):114- 123. 
11. Hser Y -I, Mooney LJ, Saxon AJ, Miotto K, Bell DS, Huang D. Chronic pain among patients with opioid 
use disorder: Results from electronic health records data. Journal of substance abuse treatment. 
2017;77:26 -30. 
12. Price AM, Ilgen MA, Bohnert AS. Prevalence and correlates of nonmedical use of prescription opioids 
in patients seen in a residential drug and alcohol treatment program. J Subst Abuse Treat. 
2011;41(2):208 -214. 
13. Esser MB, Guy GP, Jr., Zhang K, Brewer RD. Binge Drinking and Prescription Opioid Misuse in the 
U.S., 2012- 2014. American journal of preventive medicine. 2019;57(2):197- 208. 
14. Compton WM, Jones CM, Stein JB, Wargo EM. Promising roles for pharmacists in addressing the U.S. 
opioid crisis. Research in social & administrative pharmacy : RSAP. 2019;15(8):910- 916. 
15. AccreditationCouncilForPharmacyEducation. Guidance For The Accreditation Standards And Key 
Elements For The Professional Program In Pharmacy Leading To The Doctor Of Pharmacy Degree. 
Chicago, IL: Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education;2015.  
16. Shane A, Argáez C. Pharmacist -Led Medication Reviews: A Review of Clinical Utility and Cost -
Effectiveness Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health. 2019.  
17. Choi YJ, Kim H. Effect of pharmacy -led medication reconciliation in emergency departments: A 
systematic review and meta- analysis. Journal of clinical pharmacy and therapeutics. 2019;44(6):932 -
945. 
18. Brown JVE, Walton N, Meader N, et al. Pharmacy -based management for depression in adults. The 
Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2019;12(12):Cd013299.  
19. Khorassani F, Tellier S, Tsapepas D. Pharmacist's Role in Improving Medication Adherence in 
Transplant Recipients With Comorbid Psychiatric Disorders. J Pharm Pract. 2019;32(5):568- 578. 
20. Lee H, Ryu K, Sohn Y, Kim J, Suh GY, Kim E. Impact on Patient Outcomes of Pharmacist Participation 
in Multidisciplinary Critical Care Teams: A Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. Crit Care Med. 
2019;47(9):1243 -1250.  
21. Parajuli DR, Kourbelis C, Franzon J, et al. Effectiveness of the Pharmacist -Involved Multidisciplinary 
Management of Heart Failure to Improve Hospitalizations and Mortality Rates in 4630 Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. J Card Fail. 2019;25(9):744-
756. 
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
22. Segal EM, Bates J, Fleszar SL, et al. Demonstrating the value of the oncology pharmacist within the 
healthcare team. J Oncol Pharm Pract. 2019;25(8):1945 -1967.  
23. Cochran G, Bacci JL, Ylioja T, et al. Prescription opioid use: Patient characteristics and misuse in 
community pharmacy. Journal of the American Pharmacists Association : JAPhA. 2016.  
24. Cochran G, Chen Q, Field C, et al. A community pharmacy -led intervention for opioid medication 
misuse: A small -scale randomized clinical trial. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2019;205:107570.  
25. NIDA. Validation of a Community Pharmacy -based Prescription Drug Monitoring Program Risk 
Screening Tool (PHARMSCREEN) (NIH HEAL Initiative). https://www.drugabuse.gov/about -
nida/organization/cctn/ctn/research- studies/validation- community -pharmacy -based- prescription- drug-
monitoring- program -risk-screening- tool. Published 2020. Accessed May 12, 2020.  
26. McNeely J, Wu LT, Subramaniam G, et al. Performance of the Tobacco, Alcohol, Prescription 
Medication, and Other Substance Use (TAPS) Tool for Substance Use Screening in Primary Care 
Patients. Annals of internal medicine. 2016;165(10):690 -699. 
27. Viswanathan M, Kahwati LC, Golin CE, et al. Medication therapy management interventions in outpatient settings: A systematic review and meta -analysis. JAMA Internal Medicine. 2015;175(1):76-
87. 
28. Cochran G, Field C. Brief Intervention and Social Work: A Primer for Practice and Policy. Social Work in Public Health. 2013;28(3- 4):248- 263. 
29. Strobbe S. Prevention and screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment for substance use in 
primary care. Prim Care. 2014;41(2):185- 213. 
30. Beich A, Thorsen T, Rollnick S. Screening in brief intervention trials targeting excessive drinkers in 
general practice: systematic review and meta -analysis. . BMJ: British Medical Journal. 
2003;327(7414):536 -540. 
31. Bertholet N, Daeppen J -B, Wietlisbach V, Fleming M, Burnand B. Reduction of Alcohol Consumption by 
Brief Alcohol Intervention in Primary Care: Systematic Review and Meta- analysis. Archives of Internal 
Medicine. 2005;165(9):986- 995. 
32. Wingood GM, DiClemente RJ. The ADAPT- ITT Model: A Novel Method of Adapting Evidence- Based 
HIV Interventions. JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes. 2008;47 Suppl 1, The First National Scientific Meeting of the Social and Behavioral Science Research Network(Supplement 
1):S40- S46. 
33. Moon J, Kolar C, Brummel A, Ekstrand M, Holtan H, Rehrauer D. Development and Validation of a 
Patient Satisfaction Survey for Comprehensive Medication Management. Journal of managed care & 
specialty pharmacy. 2016;22(1):81 -86. 
34. Thayaparan AJ, Mahdi E. The Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire Short Form (PSQ -18) as an 
adaptable, reliable, and validated tool for use in various settings. Medical Education Online. 
2013;18:10.3402/meo.v3418i3400.21747.  
35. Sobell M, Sobel lL, Bogardis J, Leo G, Skinner W. Problem drinkers' perceptions of whether treatment 
goals should be self -selected or therapist -selected. Behav Ther. 1992;23:43- 52. 
36. Sobell L, Sobell M, eds. Timeline follow -back: a technique for assessing self -reported alcohol 
consumption, in  Measuring Alcohol Consumption: Psychosocial and Biological Methods.  Totowa, NJ: 
Humana Press; 1992. J. A, R. L, eds.  
37. Bush K, Kivlahan DR, McDonell MB, Fihn SD, Bradley KA. The AUDIT alcohol consumption questions 
(AUDIT -C): an effective brief screening test for problem drinking. Ambulatory Care Quality Improvement 
Project (ACQUIP). Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test. Archives Of Internal Medicine. 
1998;158(16):1789 -1795.  
38. Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, Kirsh SR, Alexander JA, Lowery JC. Fostering implementation of 
health services research findings into practice: a consolidated framework for advancing implementation 
science. Implementation science : IS. 2009;4:50.  
39. CFIR.org. The Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research. https://cfirguide.org/ . Published 
2020. Accessed January 9, 2020.  
40. Helfrich CD, Li YF, Sharp ND, Sales AE. Organizational readiness to change assessment (ORCA): development of an instrument based on the Promoting Action on Research in Health Services 
(PARIHS) framework. Implementation science : IS. 2009;4:38.  
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
41. Crouch M, McKenzie H. The logic of small samples in interview -based qualitative research. Social 
Science Information. 2006;45(4):483 -499. 
42. Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L. How Many Interviews Are Enough?:An Experiment with Data Saturation 
and Variability. Field Methods. 2006;18(1):59 -82. 
43. IQVIA Institute. Medicine Use and Spending in the U.S. A Review of 2017 and Outlook to 2022. 
Durham, NC: IQVIA Institute 2018.  
44. CDC. U.S. Opioid Prescribing Rate Maps. Centers for Disease Control. 
https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/maps/rxrate -
maps.html#:~:text=The%20overall%20national%20opioid%20prescribing%20rate%20declined%20from
%202012%20to,168%20million%20total%20opioid%20prescriptions ). Published 2020. Accessed July 
9, 2020.  
45. Wilson N, Kariisa M, Seth P, Smith Ht, Davis NL. Drug and Opioid -Involved Overdose Deaths -  United 
States, 2017 -2018. MMWR Morbidity and mortality weekly report. 2020;69(11):290- 297. 
46. NIDA. NIDA in the News. https://www.drugabuse.gov/news -events/nida- in-news . Published n.d. 
Accessed September 3, 2020.  
47. Cochran G, Bacci JL, Ylioja T, et al. Prescription opioid use: Patient characteristics and misuse in 
community pharmacy. Journal of the American Pharmacists Association. 2016;56(3):248 -256.e246.  
48. Darwish M, Bond M, Yang R, Tracewell W, Robertson P, Jr. Assessment of Alcohol -Induced Dose 
Dumping with a Hydrocodone Bitartrate Extended -Release Tablet Formulated with CIMA(®) Abuse 
Deterrence Technology. Clin Drug Investig. 2015;35(10):645- 652. 
49. van der Schrier R, Roozekrans M, Olofsen E, et al. Influence of Ethanol on Oxycodone- induced 
Respiratory Depression: A Dose- escalating Study in Young and Elderly Individuals. Anesthesiology. 
2017;126(3):534 -542. 
50. Zacny JP, Gutierrez S. Subjective, psychomotor, and physiological effects of oxycodone alone and in 
combination with ethanol in healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2011;218(3):471 -481. 
51. FDA. FDA warns about serious risks and death when combining opioid pain or cough medicines with 
benzodiazepines; requires its strongest warning. Washington, DC: Food and Drug Adminisitration 2016.  
52. CDC. Alcohol Screening And Brief Intervention for People Who Consume Alcohol and Use Opioids. 
Atlanta, GA: Centers for Diease Control and Prevention 2018.  
53. NIAAA. Helping patients who drink too much: A clinicians guide. Bethesda, MD: National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism;2007.  
54. Reith TP. Burnout in United States Healthcare Professionals: A Narrative Review. Cureus. 2018;10(12):e3681 -e3681.  
55. IsHak WW, Wen RY, Naghdechi L, et al. Pain and Depression: A Systematic Review. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2018;26(6):352- 363. 
56. Salas J, Scherrer JF, Ahmedani BK, et al. Gender and the Association between Long- Term 
Prescription Opioid Use and New -Onset Depression. J Pain. 2018;19(1):88- 98. 
57. Scherrer JF, Salas J, Schneider FD, et al. Characteristics of new depression diagnoses in patients with 
and without prior chronic opioid use. Journal of affective disorders. 2017;210:125- 129. 
58. Scherrer JF, Salas J, Sullivan MD, et al. The influence of prescription opioid use duration and dose on development of treatment resistant depression. Preventive medicine. 2016;91:110- 116. 
59. Amari E, Rehm J, Goldner E, Fischer B. Nonmedical prescription opioid use and mental health and 
pain comorbidities: a narrative review. Canadian journal of psychiatry Revue canadienne de 
psychiatrie. 2011;56(8):495.  
60. PDMPAssist. State Profiles West Virginia Brandeis University PDMP TTC;2016.  
61. Seal KH, Shi Y, Cohen G, et al. Association of mental health disorders with prescription opioids and 
high- risk opioid use in US veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical 
Association. 2012;307(9):940- 947. 
62. Sullivan MD, Edlund MJ, Zhang L, Unutzer J, Wells KB. Association Between Mental Health Disorders, 
Problem Drug Use, and Regular Prescription Opioid Use. Archives of Internal Medicine. 
2006;166(19):2087 -2093.  
63. Jones JD, Mogali S, Comer SD. Polydrug abuse: A review of opioid and benzodiazepine combination 
use. Drug and alcohol dependence. 2012;125(1 -2):8-18. 
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
64. SAMHSA. Key substance use and mental health indicators in the United States: Results from the 2019 
National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publication No. SMA 18- 5068, NSDUH Series H -53). . 
Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Center for Behavioral 
Health Statistics and Quality 2020.  
65. ACPE. Accreditation Standards and Key Elements for The Professional Program In Pharmacy Leading 
to the Doctor of Pharmacy Degree. Chicago, IL: Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education;2015.  
66. Inciardi JA, Surratt HL, Kurtz SP, Cicero TJ. Mechanisms of Prescription Drug Diversion Among Drug-
Involved Club-  and Street -Based Populations. Pain Medicine. 2007;8(2):171- 183. 
67. Cicero T, Kurtz S, Surratt H, et al. Multiple Determinants of Specific Modes of Prescription Opioid 
Diversion. J Drug Issues. 2011;41(2):283- 304. 
68. CDC. Select features of state pharmacist collaborative practice laws. . Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;2013.  
69. Dhital R, Whittlesea CM, Norman IJ, Milligan P. Community pharmacy service users' views and 
perceptions of alcohol screening and brief intervention. Drug And Alcohol Review. 2010;29(6):596- 602. 
70. Riffkin R. Americans Rate Nurses Highest on Honesty, Ethical Standards. Gallup. 
http://www.webcitation.org/6hZbvKPDQ . Published 2014. Accessed May 17, 2016.  
71. Peacock G, Kidd R, Rahman A. Patient care services in independent community pharmacies: A 
descriptive report. Journal of the American Pharmacists Association. 47(6):768a -771a.  
72. Cochran G, Field C, Lawson K, Erickson C. Pharmacists' knowledge, attitudes and beliefs regarding 
screening and brief intervention for prescription opioid abuse: a survey of Utah and Texas pharmacists. 
Journal of Pharmaceutical Health Services Research. 2013;4(2):71- 79. 
73. Cochran G, Field C, Lawson K. Pharmacists Who Screen and Discuss Opioid Misuse With Patients: Future Directions for Research and Practice. J Pharm Pract. 2015;28(4):404- 412. 
74. Cochran G, Rubinstein J, Bacci JL, Ylioja T, Tarter R. Screening community pharmacy patients for risk of prescription opioid misuse Journal of addiction medicine. 2015;9(5):411 -416. 
75. Cochran G, Hruschak V, Bacci JL, Hohmeier KC, Tarter R. Behavioral, mental, and physical health 
characteristics and opioid medication misuse among community pharmacy patients: A latent class 
analysis. Research in social & administrative pharmacy : RSAP. 2017;13(6):1055 -1061.  
76. Cochran G, McCarthy R, Gordon AJ, Tarter RE. Opioid medication misuse among unhealthy drinkers. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2017;179:13 -17. 
77. Cochran G, Rosen D, McCarthy RM, Engel RJ. Risk Factors for Symptoms of Prescription Opioid 
Misuse: Do Older Adults Differ from Younger Adult Patients? J Gerontol Soc Work. 2017;60(6- 7):443 -
457. 
78. Cochran GT, Engel RJ, Hruschak VJ, Tarter RE. Prescription Opioid Misuse Among Rural Community 
Pharmacy Patients: Pilot Study for Screening and Implications for Future Practice and Research. J 
Pharm Pract. 2017;30(5):498- 505. 
79. Hruschak V, Hildenbrand AK, Cochran G. Psychiatric comorbidity and co- occurring opioid misuse: 
Depression mediates the relationship between post -traumatic stress disorder and opioid misuse in 
community pharmacy settings. Substance abuse : official publication of the Association for Medical 
Education and Research in Substance Abuse. 2020;41(1):77 -84. 
80. Cochran G, Gordon AJ, Field C, et al. Developing a framework of care for opioid medication misuse in 
community pharmacy. Research in Social and Administrative Pharmacy. 2016;12(2):293 -301. 
81. Webb K, Cernasev A, Li MS, Gatwood J, Cochran G, Hohmeier KC. An Exploratory Study of 
Pharmacist Perceptions of Opioid Interventions for Acute Pain. Journal of Pharmacy Technology. 2021;37(1):36 -44. 
82. Hohmeier KC, Cernasev A, Sensmeier M, Barenie R, Cochran G. Student Pharmacist Perceptions of the Pharmacists Role in Methadone for Opioid Use Disorder. Sage Open Medicine. In press.  
83. Cochran G, Smid MC, Krans EE, et al. A pilot multisite study of patient navigation for pregnant women 
with opioid use disorder. Contemporary clinical trials. 2019;87:105888.  
84. Richter KP, Faseru B, Shireman TI, et al. Warm Handoff Versus Fax Referral for Linking Hospitalized Smokers to Quitlines. American journal of preventive medicine. 2016;51(4):587 -596. 
85. Mussulman LM, Faseru B, Fitzgerald S, Nazir N, Patel V, Richter KP. A randomized, controlled pilot 
study of warm handoff versus fax referral for hospital -initiated smoking cessation among people living 
with HIV/AIDS. Addict Behav. 2018;78:205 -208. 
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
86. Ober AJ, Watkins KE, McCullough CM, Setodji CM, Osilla K, Hunter SB. Patient predictors of 
substance use disorder treatment initiation in primary care. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2018;90:64- 72. 
87. Kelly T, Hoppe JA, Zuckerman M, Khoshnoud A, Sholl B, Heard K. A novel social work approach to 
emergency department buprenorphine induction and warm hand -off to community providers. Am J 
Emerg Med. 2020;38(6):1286- 1290.  
88. Taylor RM, Minkovitz CS. Warm Handoffs for Improving Client Receipt of Services: A Systematic 
Review. Matern Child Health J. 2021.  
89. NIDA. Opioid Summaries by State. https://www.drugabuse.gov/drug -topics/opioids/opioid- summaries -
by-state . Published 2020. Accessed August 29, 2020.  
90. CDC. Drunk Driving State Data and Maps. 
https://www.cdc.gov/motorvehiclesafety/impaired_driving/states -data-tables.html . Published 2016. 
Accessed August 3, 2020.  
91. Spillane S, Shiels MS, Best AF, et al. Trends in Alcohol -Induced Deaths in the United States, 2000 -
2016. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(2):e1921451- e1921451.  
92. Reinert DF, Allen JP. The alcohol use disorders identification test: an update of research findings. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2007;31(2):185 -199. 
93. Krans EE, Dunn SL. Health care use patterns of opioid- dependent pregnant women. Obstetrics and 
gynecology. 2014;123 Suppl 1:61S -61S. 
94. Lejeune C, Simmat -Durand L, Gourarier L, Aubisson S. Prospective multicenter observational study of 
260 infants born to 259 opiate- dependent mothers on methadone or high- dose buprenophine 
substitution. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2006;82(3):250- 257. 
95. Patrick SW, Dudley J, Martin PR, et al. Prescription opioid epidemic and infant outcomes. Pediatrics. 
2015;135(5):842 -850. 
96. Pritham UA, Paul JA, Hayes MJ. Opioid dependency in pregnancy and length of stay for neonatal abstinence syndrome. Journal of obstetric, gynecologic, and neonatal nursing : JOGNN / NAACOG. 
2012;41(2):180 -190. 
97. Stanhope TJ, Gill LA, Rose C. Chronic opioid use during pregnancy: maternal and fetal implications. 
Clinics in perinatology. 2013;40(3):337 -350. 
98. CDC. Alcohol Use in Pregnancy. https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/fasd/alcohol -
use.html#:~:text=Alcohol%20in%20the%20mother's%20blood,alcohol%20spectrum%20disorders%20(
FASDs ). Published 202. Accessed August 27, 2020.  
99. Eisen SV, Normand SL, Belanger AJ, Spiro A, 3rd, Esch D. The Revised Behavior and Symptom 
Identification Scale (BASIS -R): reliability and validity. Med Care. 2004;42(12):1230 -1241.  
100. Altman EG, Hedeker D, Peterson JL, Davis JM. The Altman Self -Rating Mania Scale. Biological 
psychiatry. 1997;42(10):948- 955. 
101. Leon AC, Davis LL, Kraemer HC. The Role and Interpretation of Pilot Studies in Clinical Research. 
Journal of psychiatric research. 2011;45(5):626- 629. 
102. Cochran G, Chen Q, Field C, et al. A community pharmacy -led intervention for opioid medication 
misuse: A small -scale randomized clinical trial. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2019;205: 107570.  
103. Gold SM, Enck P, Hasselmann H, et al. Control conditions for randomised trials of behavioural 
interventions in psychiatry: a decision framework. Lancet Psychiatry. 2017;4(9):725- 732. 
104. CMS. Drug Diversion Toolkit: Patient Counseling-- A Pharmacists Repsonsibility to Ensure Compliance. 
Washington DC: CMS;2014.  
105. TennesseeBoardofPharmacy. News. Nashville, TN: Tennessee Board of Pharmacy;2017.  
106. UtahAdministrativeCode. Operating Standards - Patient Counseling. In: Rules D, ed. R156 -17b-
6102019.  
107. Moyers TB, Rowell LN, Manuel JK, Ernst D, Houck JM. The Motivational Interviewing Treatment 
Integrity Code (MITI 4): Rationale, Preliminary Reliability and Validity. Journal of substance abuse 
treatment. 2016;65:36- 42. 
108. Moyers TB, Manuel JK, Ernst D. Motivational Interviewing Treatment Integrity Coding Manual 4.1. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico, Center on Alcohol, Substance use, And Addictions 
(CASAA);2014.  
109. Perlroth D, Marrufo G, Montesinos A, et al. Medication Therapy Management in Chronically Ill 
Populations: Final Report Burlingame, CA: Acumen, LLC;2013.  
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
110. APhANACDSF. Medication therapy management in pharmacy practice: Core elements of an MTM 
service model (version 2.0). J Am Pharm Assoc. 2008;48:341 -353. 
111. Bluml BM. Definition of medication therapy management: development of professionwide consensus. 
Journal of the American Pharmacists Association : JAPhA. 2005;45(5):566- 572. 
112. APhA/NACDSF. Medication Therapy Management in Pharmacy Practice: Core Elements of an MTM 
Service Model, 2.0. Washington DC: American Pharmacists Association and National Association of 
Chain Drug Stores Foundation;2008.  
113. Zingone MM, Malcolm KE, McCormick SW, Bledsoe KR. Analysis of pharmacist charges for medication 
therapy management services in an outpatient setting. American journal of health- system pharmacy : 
AJHP : official journal of the American Society of Health- System Pharmacists. 2007;64(17):1827 -1831.  
114. Cook PF, Emiliozzi S, Waters C, El Hajj D. Effects of telephone counseling on antipsychotic adherence 
and emergency department utilization. Am J Manag Care. 2008;14(12):841- 846. 
115. Hill S, Kavookjian J. Motivational interviewing as a behavioral intervention to increase HAART adherence in patients who are HIV -positive: a systematic review of the literature. AIDS care. 
2012;24(5):583 -592. 
116. Taitel M, Jiang J, Rudkin K, Ewing S, Duncan I. The impact of pharmacist face- to-face counseling to 
improve medication adherence among patients initiating statin therapy. Patient preference and 
adherence. 2012;6:323- 329. 
117. Kaplan JE, Keeley RD, Engel M, Emsermann C, Brody D. Aspects of patient and clinician language predict adherence to antidepressant medication. Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine : 
JABFM. 2013;26(4):409- 420. 
118. Barkhof E, Meijer CJ, de Sonneville LM, Linszen DH, de Haan L. The effect of motivational interviewing on medication adherence and hospitalization rates in nonadherent patients with multi -episode 
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia bulletin. 2013;39(6):1242- 1251.  
119. McCauley JL, Back SE, Brady KT. Pilot of a brief, web- based educational intervention targeting safe 
storage and disposal of prescription opioids. Addictive behaviors. 2013;38(6):2230- 2235.  
120. Zahradnik A, Otto C, Crackau B, et al. Randomized controlled trial of a brief intervention for problematic prescription drug use in non- treatment -seeking patients. Addiction. 2009;104(1):109- 117. 
121. Bohnert AS, Bonar EE, Cunningham R, et al. A pilot randomized clinical trial of an intervention to 
reduce overdose risk behaviors among emergency department patients at risk for prescription opioid 
overdose. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2016;163:40 -47. 
122. Cochran G, Gordon AJ, Lo- Ciganic WH, et al. An Examination of Claims -based Predictors of Overdose 
from a Large Medicaid Program. Med Care. 2017;55(3):291 -298. 
123. Sullivan MD, Edlund MJ, Fan M -Y, Devries A, Brennan Braden J, Martin BC. Risks for possible and 
probable opioid misuse among recipients of chronic opioid therapy in commercial and medicaid 
insurance plans: The TROUP Study. Pain. 2010;150(2):332- 339. 
124. Knisely JS, Wunsch MJ, Cropsey KL, Campbell ED. Prescription Opioid Misuse Index: a brief 
questionnaire to assess misuse. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2008;35(4):380 -386. 
125. Jamison RN, Martel MO, Huang CC, Jurcik D, Edwards RR. Efficacy of the Opioid Compliance Checklist to Monitor Chronic Pain Patients Receiving Opioid Therapy in Primary Care. J Pain. 
2016;17(4):414 -423. 
126. Jamison RN, Martel MO, Edwards RR, Qian J, Sheehan KA, Ross EL. Validation of a Brief Opioid 
Compliance Checklist for Patients with Chronic Pain. The journal of pain : official journal of the 
American Pain Society. 2014;15(11):1092 -1101.  
127. Jamison RN, Ross EL, Michna E, Chen LQ, Holcomb C, Wasan AD. Substance Misuse Treatment for 
High Risk Chronic Pain Patients on Opioid Therapy: A Randomized Trial. Pain. 2010;150(3):390- 400. 
128. Denis CM, Gelernter J, Hart AB, Kranzler HR. Inter -observer reliability of DSM -5 substance use 
disorders. Drug and alcohol dependence. 2015;153:229- 235. 
129. Grant BF, Saha TD, Ruan WJ, et al. Epidemiology of DSM -5 Drug Use Disorder: Results From the 
National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions –IIIEpidemiology of DSM -5 Drug Use 
DisorderEpidemiology of DSM -5 Drug Use Disorder. JAMA Psychiatry. 2016;73(1):39 -47. 
130. Rose C, Shahanaghi A, Romero- Gonzalez M, et al. Mortality Associated With Opioid Overdose: A 
Review of Clinical Characteristics and Health Services Received in the Year Prior to Death. Psychiatr 
Serv. 2019;70(2):90- 96. 
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
131. Webster LR. Risk Factors for Opioid- Use Disorder and Overdose. Anesthesia and analgesia. 
2017;125(5):1741 -1748.  
132. Becker WC, Sullivan LE, Tetrault JM, Desai RA, Fiellin DA. Non- medical use, abuse and dependence 
on prescription opioids among U.S. adults: Psychiatric, medical and substance use correlates. Drug 
and Alcohol Dependence. 2008;94(1):38 -47. 
133. Hudson TJ, Edlund MJ, Steffick DE, Tripathi SP, Sullivan MD. Epidemiology of regular prescribed opioid use: results from a national, population- based survey. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2008;36(3):280-
288. 
134. Keller S, Bann CM, Dodd SL, Schein J, Mendoza TR, Cleeland CS. Validity of the brief pain inventory 
for use in documenting the outcomes of patients with noncancer pain. Clin J Pain. 2014;20(5):309 -319. 
135. Osman A, Barrios FX, Kopper BA, Hauptmann W, Jones J, O'Neill E. Factor structure, reliability, and 
validity of the Pain Catastrophizing Scale. Journal of behavioral medicine. 1997;20(6):589 -605. 
136. Ware JE. SF -36® Health Survey Update. http://www.sf- 36.org/tools/sf36.shtml#MODEL . Published n.d. 
Accessed July 17, 2015.  
137. Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Kroenke K, Hornyak R, McMurray J. Validity and utility of the PRIME -MD 
patient health questionnaire in assessment of 3000 obstetric -gynecologic patients: the PRIME -MD 
Patient Health Questionnaire Obstetrics -Gynecology Study. American journal of obstetrics and 
gynecology. 2000;183(3):759- 769. 
138. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB. Validation and utility of a self -report version of PRIME -MD: the 
PHQ primary care study. Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders. Patient Health Questionnaire. 
JAMA. 1999;282(18):1737- 1744.  
139. Smith TC, Smith B, Jacobson IG, Corbeil TE, Ryan MAK. Reliability of Standard Health Assessment 
Instruments in a Large, Population- Based Cohort Study. Annals of Epidemiology. 2007;17(7):525 -532. 
140. Hides L, Lubman DI, Devlin H, et al. Reliability and validity of the Kessler 10 and Patient Health Questionnaire among injecting drug users. Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry. 
2007;41(2):166 -168. 
141. van Dam D, Ehring T, Vedel E, Emmelkamp PMG. Validation of the Primary Care Posttraumatic Stress 
Disorder screening questionnaire (PC -PTSD) in civilian substance use disorder patients. Journal of 
Substance Abuse Treatment. 2010;39(2):105 -113. 
142. Ouimette P, Wade M, Prins A, Schohn M. Identifying PTSD in primary care: Comparison of the Primary 
Care -PTSD Screen (PC -PTSD) and the General Health Questionnaire- 12 (GHQ). Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders. 2008;22(2):337- 343. 
143. Prins A, Ouimette P, Kimerling R, et al. The primary care PTSD screen (PC -PTSD): Development and 
operating characteristics. Primary Care Psychiatry. 2003;9:9 -14. 
144. Prins A, Bovin MJ, Smolenski DJ, et al. The Primary Care PTSD Screen for DSM -5 (PC -PTSD -5): 
Development and Evaluation Within a Veteran Primary Care Sample. Journal of General Internal 
Medicine. 2016;31(10):1206- 1211.  
145. Humeniuk R, Ali R. Validation of the Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test 
(ASSIST) and Pilot Brief Intervention: A Technical Report of Phase II Findings of the WHO ASSIST 
Project. Geneva: WHO;2006.  
146. McLellan AT, Alterman AI, Cacciola J, Metzger D, O'Brien CP. A new measure of substance abuse treatment. Initial studies of the treatment services review. The Journal of nervous and mental disease. 
1992;180(2):101 -110. 
147. McLellan AT, Hagan TA, Levine M, et al. Does clinical case management improve outpatient addiction treatment. Drug Alcohol Depend. 1999;55(1 -2):91 -103. 
148. McLellan AT, Hagan TA, Levine M, et al. Supplemental social services improve outcomes in public addiction treatment. Addiction. 1998;93(10):1489- 1499.  
149. Allen JP, Wilson VB. Assessing Alcohol Problems: A Guide for Clinicians and Researchers. Bethesda, 
MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, National Institutes of 
Health, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism;2003.  
150. Ries R, Krupski A, West II, et al. Correlates of Opioid Use in Adults With Self -Reported Drug Use 
Recruited From Public Safety -Net Primary Care Clinics. Journal of addiction medicine. 2015;9(5):417-
426. 
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
151. Bertholet N, Cheng DM, Palfai TP, Samet JH, Saitz R. Does readiness to change predict subsequent 
alcohol consumption in medical inpatients with unhealthy alcohol use? Addictive behaviors. 
2009;34(8):636 -640. 
152. Napper LE, Wood MM, Jaffe A, Fisher DG, Reynolds GL, Klahn JA. Convergent and discriminant 
validity of three measures of stage of change. Psychol Addict Behav. 2008;22(3):362 -371. 
153. Hannöver W, Thyrian JR, Hapke U, Rumpf HJ, Meyer C, John U. The readiness to change questionnaire in subjects with hazardous alcohol consumption, alcohol misuse and dependence in a 
general population survey. Alcohol and alcoholism (Oxford, Oxfordshire). 2002;37(4):362 -369. 
154. Forsberg L, Halldin J, Wennberg P. Psychometric properties and factor structure of the readiness to 
change questionnaire. Alcohol and alcoholism (Oxford, Oxfordshire). 2003;38(3):276 -280. 
155. Forsberg L, Ekman S, Halldin J, Rönnberg S. The readiness to change questionnaire: reliability and 
validity of a Swedish version and a comparison of scoring methods. British journal of health psychology. 
2004;9(Pt 3):335 -346. 
156. Robinette RL. The relationship between the Marlowe- Crowne Form C and the validity scales of the 
MMPI. Journal of clinical psychology. 1991;47(3):396- 399. 
157. Andrews P, Meyer RG. Marlowe- Crowne Social Desirability Scale and short Form C: forensic norms. 
Journal of clinical psychology. 2003;59(4):483 -492. 
158. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology. 
2006;3(2):77 -101. 
159. Hernandez AV, Steyerberg EW, Habbema JD. Covariate adjustment in randomized controlled trials 
with dichotomous outcomes increases statistical power and reduces sample size requirements. J Clin 
Epidemiol. 2004;57(5):454- 460. 
160. Fitzmaurice GM, Laird NM, Ware JH. Applied Longitudinal Analyses.  Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 
2012.  
161. Rubin DB. Inference and missing data. Biometrika. 1976;63(3):581 -592. 
162. Serdarevic M, Striley CW, Cottler LB. Sex differences in prescription opioid use. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2017;30(4):238 -246. 
163. Pisanu C, Franconi F, Gessa GL, et al. Sex differences in the response to opioids for pain relief: A 
systematic review and meta- analysis. Pharmacol Res. 2019;148:104447.  
164. Cochran G, Bacci JL, Ylioja T, et al. Prescription opioid use: Patient characteristics and misuse in 
community pharmacy. Journal of the American Pharmaceutical Association. 2016;56(3):248 -256.e246.  
165. Bauer MS, Damschroder L, Hagedorn H, Smith J, Kilbourne AM. An introduction to implementation science for the non -specialist. BMC Psychology. 2015;3(1):32.  
166. Ostergren JE, Hammer RR, Dingel MJ, Koenig BA, McCormick JB. Challenges in Translational 
Research: The Views of Addiction Scientists. PLoS ONE. 2014;9(4):e93482.  
167. Lobb R, Colditz GA. Implementation Science and its Application to Population Health. Annual review of 
public health. 2013;34:235- 251. 
168. Kirk MA, Kelley C, Yankey N, Birken SA, Abadie B, Damschroder L. A systematic review of the use of 
the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research. Implementation Science. 2016;11(1):72.  
169. VanDevanter N, Kumar P, Nguyen N, et al. Application of the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research to assess factors that may influence implementation of tobacco use 
treatment guidelines in the Viet Nam public health care delivery system. Implementation Science. 
2017;12(1):27.  
170. Serhal E, Arena A, Sockalingam S, Mohri L, Crawford A. Adapting the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research to Create Organizational Readiness and Implementation Tools for Project 
ECHO. J Contin Educ Health Prof. 2018;38(2):145- 151. 
171. Warner G, Lawson B, Sampalli T, Burge F, Gibson R, Wood S. Applying the consolidated framework 
for implementation research to identify barriers affecting implementation of an online frailty tool into 
primary health care: a qualitative study. BMC health services research. 2018;18(1):395 -395. 
172. Archer S, Smid MC, Kelley AT, Baylis J, Foringer J, Cochran G (2020). Opioid Use in Pregnancy in Rural Communities: An Assessment of Treatment Implementation Needs, Barriers, and Facilitators. 
Oral presentation, Assocation for Medical Education and Resear ch in Substance Abuse, Virtual 
Conferce. .  
Version 1.0; 11Mar2022 
PI: Jerry Cochran, PhD  
 
173. Bryan MA, Smid MC, Cheng M, et al. Addressing opioid use disorder among rural pregnant and 
postpartum women: a study protocol. Addiction science & clinical practice. 2020;15(1):33.  
174. Lincoln YS, Guba EG. Naturalistic inquiry.  Vol 75. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1985.  
  