 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   8/15/05  
Page 1 of 8  
 
 
 
 
 
The Role of Skin Care Regimen in Skin Health  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 5, 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date:  04/05/2018  
Principal Investigator: Dr. Anna Chien , MD  
Application Number: IRB00165140  
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 2 of 8 
 JHM IRB - eForm A – Protocol  
 
The Role of Skin Care Regimen in  Skin Health  
**********************************************************************************************  
1. Abstract  
Dry skin is not a disease entity but it is  an important  patient  matter as  it can significantly 
decrease  a person’s quality of life. Individuals with dry skin experience discomfort associated with 
itching , skin  tightness , and irritation. The lack of proper hydration is one of the most apparent 
characteristics of dry skin , which  is associated with  erythema and  scaling on the skin surface.  Skin 
care products with  moisturizing feature s have beneficial effects in the treatment  of dry skin.  The 
aim of our study is to evaluate the  role of a regular skin care regimen comprising of a mild cleanser 
and moisturizer in  improving  dry skin  and overall skin health . 
This study will have a study population of up to 100 individuals over the age of 18.  Each study 
participant will have up to 3 on-site visits within 4 weeks.  Select  participants will be  asked to 
apply  a mild cleanser  and moisturizer  daily for 2 weeks.  To assess the effects of a regular  skin care 
regimen, cl inical evaluations , digital photography , and subject questionnaires  will be obtained 
during the study . 
 
2. Objectives  
 The primary aim of the  study is to evaluate the role of a regular skin care regimen com prising of a 
mild cleanser and moisturizer in improving dry skin and overall skin health.  
 The secondary aim of the  study is  to assess  quality of life  improvement  with a routine skin care  
regimen.   
 
3. Background  
Dry skin  is a common phenomenon and  can dramatically decrease  a person’s quality of life  as 
well as contribute to a wide variety of skin diseases . Individuals with dry skin experience 
discomfort associated with itching , skin tightness , and irritation1. The lack of proper hydration is 
one of the most apparent characteristics of dry skin , which  is associated  with erythema and scaling.2  
Dry skin is caused by  the interaction of lifestyle  and e nvironmental factors .  Hereditary factors and 
advanced ag e can also contribute to  dry skin. The severity of dry skin is usually exacerbated by the 
frequent use of harsh cleansers , the lack of moisturization,  and by cold, dry air3.4.   
Skin care products are topical preparations with mainly moisturizing feature  which  have  
beneficial effects  on dry skin.  Skin care products hydrate the skin  and break s the dry skin cycle5. 
There are many mild cleansers and moisturizers widely available for improvement of dry skin.   
However,  many healthcare providers  and patients  overlook  the importance of  skin care products  and 
a regular skin care regimen .  Numerous studies show  that usage of mild cleansers and  moisturizers 
hydrates and improves dry skin  and appearance .6-13. While there is  extensive evidence of benefits of 
using mild cleanser s and moisturizers, much of the previous studies are limited to the effects of 
Date:  04/05/2018  
Principal Investigator: Dr. Anna Chien , MD  
Application Number: IRB00165140  
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 3 of 8 
 single cleans er or moisturizer. Skin care regimen s incorporating  regular use of a mild cleans er and 
moisturizer have not been assessed.14-16. This study  aims to  evaluate  the role of a regular skin care 
regimen com prising of a mild cleanser and moisturizer in  improving  dry skin , skin appearance,  and 
overall skin health . 
 
4. Study Procedures  
 
a. Study design, including the sequence and timing of study procedures   
 
Recruitment:  Individuals will be recruited from patient populations seen at the general 
dermatology clinics of Johns Hopkins Department of Dermatology or from patient populations 
participating in Johns Hopkins Cutaneous Translational Research Program (CTReP) research 
studies.  Interested study participants will be evaluated after their routine clinical c are visits.  
Participants will also be recruited from other patient populations at the Johns Hopkins Hospital 
through the use of flyers and online advertisements.  Study procedures will be conducted at the 
Johns Hopkins CTReP office located at the Johns Ho pkins Outpatient Center.  Recruitment may 
include Johns Hopkins University employees or students, but these groups will not be specifically 
targeted for participation.  Interested indivi duals will be interviewed to ascertain  whether they meet 
the basic eli gibility criteria to participate in the study.  Once eligibility has been demonstrated, the 
potential subjects will be directed to make their first study appointment.  We will recruit up to 100 
participants over the age of 18 with dry, itchy  skin and t hey will be split into 2 groups . Participants 
will be random ly assi gned to skin care regimen group  (approximately 75%  of total enrolled ) and 
control group  (approximately 25%  of total enrolled ). All evaluation will  be conducted similarly in  
both groups.  
    
 Visit 1  
During the  first scheduled appointment , the research protocol will be discussed with the subject, 
and documentation will be obtained of the subject’s consent to participate in the study as well as 
the subject’s agreement to be contacted about futu re research studies.  
Once informed consent is obtained,  individuals will undergo a washout period of one week in 
which they are asked to refrain from the use of all moisturizers on their skin.  Participants will 
be supplied with a skin cleanser , Dove® Soap, to use during this period  and application log . All 
applications should be reported in the application log by the participants.  
During this visit, investigators will also perform clinica l assessment, take photographs  and 
administer  subject  questionnaire s. 
 
 Visit 2 (Baseline ): 
Date:  04/05/2018  
Principal Investigator: Dr. Anna Chien , MD  
Application Number: IRB00165140  
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 4 of 8 
  All participants will return after the washout period.  Participants in the skin care regimen 
group  will receive Vaseline® Moisturizer, Dove® Soap, and application log. These  participants 
will be asked to apply  the Vaseline® Moisturizer  twice a day  and use Dove® Soap  daily  for 2 
weeks. All applications should be reported in the application log by  the participants. A 
demonstration and verbal instructions for how and where to apply the products will be provided 
to the subjects  along with the application log for daily use .  Individuals not in the skin care 
regimen group will continue with the provided Dove® Soap .  
During this visit, investigators will perform clinical assessment s, take photographs and 
administer  subject  questionnaire s. 
Visit 3 (day 14±2): 
During this visit, investigators will perform clinica l assessment, take photographs  and 
administer  subject  questionnaire s.  Application logs will be returned.  
 
Clinical assessment: Clinical a ssessments will be performed 1) to record baseline skin findings, 2) 
to evaluate skin status by visual scoring, and 3) to identify any occurrence of any adverse  events.   
 
Photography: Standardized digital photographs will be obtained by study staff using a digital 
camera and software under sta ndard photographic conditions.  Photograph files will be coded to 
remove personal identifiers and stored on a secure hard drive in CTReP.  
 
b. Study duration and number of study visits required of research participants.  
The study consists of up to 3 on-site visits within 4 weeks.  We will allow 1 year to complete 
the study.  
c. Blinding, including justification for blinding or not blinding the trial, if applicable.   
NOT APPLICABLE  
d. Justification of why participants will not r eceive routine care or will have current therapy 
stopped.  
NOT APPLICABLE  
e. Justification for inclusion of a placebo or non -treatment group.  
NOT APPLICABLE  
f. Definition of treatment failure or participant removal criteria.  
 
Any clinical findings determined by t he Investigator to be important and/or unusual will be 
referred to as an adverse  event (AE).  Study participants will be  asked to contact clinic staff 
immediately if they experience an adverse reaction to the products  at any time during the study.  
Date:  04/05/2018  
Principal Investigator: Dr. Anna Chien , MD  
Application Number: IRB00165140  
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 5 of 8 
 Such rea ctions may be documented in a problem events log.  The Investigator will use her 
discretion to remove participants from the study, and all problem events will be reported to IRB.   
 
g. Description of what happens to participants receiving therapy when study e nds or if a 
participant’s participation in the study ends prematurely.  
NOT APPLICABLE  
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion:  
1. Participants must be over the age of 18 years old with  dry, itchy  skin;  
2. Participant must be willing to comply with the requirements of the protocol;  
3. Participant must have the ability to understand and communicate with the investigator;  
4. Participant must provide informed consent.  
 
 
Exclusion:  
1. Subjects who are unable to provide informed consent;  
2. Subjects who are unable to ref rain from swimming or hot tub use or no more than 2 showers per 
day throughout the study duration  
3. Subject with significant medical history or current skin diseases that the investigator feels is not 
safe for study participation;  
4. Subjects who have been trea ted with systemic retinoids or steroids within the past month prior 
to entry to the study;  
5. Subjects who have been treated with topical steroids, re tinoids or other topical drugs within 2 
weeks prior to entry to the study;  
6. Recently treated or current skin d iseases that would affec t clinical evaluation ; 
7. Subjects who self -report that they are pregnant or nursing;  
8. Patients with history of investigational drug use in the 30 days prior to entry into the study.  
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices  
a. The rationale for choosing the drug and dose or for choosing the device to be used.  
 
NOT APPLICABLE  
 
b. Justification and safety information if FDA approved drugs will be administered for non -FDA 
approved indications or if doses or routes of administration or participant popul ations are 
changed.  
 
NOT APPLICABLE  
Date:  04/05/2018  
Principal Investigator: Dr. Anna Chien , MD  
Application Number: IRB00165140  
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 6 of 8 
  
c. Justification and safety information if non -FDA approved drugs without an IND will be 
administered  
 
NOT APPLICABLE  
7. Study Statistics  
 
a. Primary outcome variable.  
Clinical/ visual score s and  subjective score from subject questionnaire s.  
 
b. Secondary outcome variables.  
Adverse effects reported by participants and investigator . 
 
c. Statistical plan including sample size justification and interim data analysis.  
Analysis will include paired and unpaired t -tests with two -tailed p -values. Values obtained at 
baseline , in middle of the study and after completing the study  will be  compared. The difference 
of measure values will be compared between application group and  control group .  
 
d. Early stopping rules.  
If the participant wishes to withdraw from the study for any reason, or if the primary caretaker 
or study investigators wish to cease use of the products . 
 
8. Risks  
 
The moisturizing lotion and wash  are generally very well tolerated.  Rarely, they can  induce a 
burning sensation, dryness, skin irritation, erythema, stinging, sensitization , and dermatitis. Possible 
side effects from the product applications  include irritant and allergic reactions. Irritation from these 
agents can be improved or relieved when participants stop using the products . Risk events, 
problems, and deviations will be reported by the PI directly to the IRB.  
In terms of confidentiality, there are minimal risks as all study participant information will be 
de-identified.  No confidential or protected information would be taken beyond the standard.  There 
is a slight financial risk to the participants in the rare event that the above complications occur, 
requiring additional medical care.  
 
9. Benefits  
Date:  04/05/2018  
Principal Investigator: Dr. Anna Chien , MD  
Application Number: IRB00165140  
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 7 of 8 
  
Patients with dry skin in the skin care r egimen group may experience improvement in their 
overall skin health.  There will be no direct benefit to the participant s in the control group.   In 
addition, ther e is also  the potential benefit to society at large.  We hope to  assess the role of a 
routine  skin care regimen in  improving  dry skin and reduc ing symptoms .  This  can improve quality 
of life for  patients who suffer from dry skin .       
 
10. Payment and Remuneration  
 
Study participants who undergo all study procedures, including correct application of 
moisturizing lotion and wash  in the skin care regimen group  will receive a total of $60  at 
completion of the study.  
 
11. Costs  
                          Study costs will be covered  by the UniL ever Corp .    
 
12. References  
1. Kawada C , Yoshida T , Yoshida H , Matsuoka R , Sakamoto W , Odanaka W , Sato T , Yamasaki 
T, Kanemitsu T , Masuda Y , Urushibata O . Ingested hyaluronan moisturizes dry skin. Nutr J.  
2014; 11;13:70.  
2. Feng L , Chandar P , Lu N, Vincent C , Bajor J , McGuiness H . Characteristic differences in barrier and 
hygroscopic properties between normal and cosmetic dry skin. II. Depth profile of natu ral moisturizing 
factor and cohesivity. Int J Cosmet Sci.  2014 ;36(3):231 -8. 
3. Rawlings AV , Harding CR . Moisturization and skin barrier function. Dermatol Ther.  2004;17 Suppl 
1:43-8. 4.  
4. Rawlings AV , Matts PJ . Stratum corneum moisturization at the molecular level: an update in  relation to 
the dry skin cycle . J Invest Dermatol.  2005 ;124(6):1099 -110.     
5. Ortonne  JP, Queille -Roussel  C. Evaluation of the effect of Dardia® Lipo Line on skin inflammation  
induced by surfactants using the repeated ope n-application test.  J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol . 2007 ;21 
(Suppl. 2) :19-25  
6. Lodén M. Barrier recovery and influence of irritant stimuli in skin treated with a moisturizing cream. 
Contact Dermatitis. 1997;36(5):256 -60. 
7. Buraczewska I, Berne B, Lindberg M, et al. Changes in skin barrier function following long -term 
treatment with moisturiz ers, a randomized controlled trial. Br J Dermatol. 2007; 156: 492 –498.  
Date:  04/05/2018  
Principal Investigator: Dr. Anna Chien , MD  
Application Number: IRB00165140  
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 8 of 8 
 8. Buraczewska I, Berne B, Lindberg M, et al., Long -term treatment with moisturizers affects the mRNA 
levels of genes involved in keratinocyte differentiation and desquamati on. Arch D ermatol Res . 
2009;301:175 –181.   
9. Buraczewska I, Berne B, Lindberg M, et al., Moisturizers change the mRNA expression of enzymes 
synthesizing skin barrier lipid s. Arch Dermatol Res . 2009;301: 587–594. 
10. Loden M. Role of topical emollients and moisturizers in the treatment of dry skin barrier disorde rs. Am 
J Clin Dermatol . 2003;4: 771-788. 
11. Hoppe T, Winge MC, Bradley M, et al., Moisturizing treatment of patients with atopic dermatitis and 
ichthyosis vul garis improves dry skin, but has a modest effect on gene expression regardless of FLG 
genotype. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol . 2015;29(1):174 -7.  
12. Hoffman L, Subramanyan K, Johnson AW, Tharp MD. Benefits of an emollient body wash for patients 
with chroni c winter dry skin. Dermatol Ther. 2008;21(5):416 -21.  
13. Ishikawa J, Yoshida H, Ito S, Naoe A, Fujimura T, Kitahara T, Takema Y, Zerweck C, Grove GL. Dry 
skin in the winter is related to the ceramide profile in the stratum corneum and can be improved by 
treatment with a Eucalyptus extract. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2013;12(1):3 -11. 
14. Hawkins SS , Subramanyan K, Liu D, Bryk M. Cleansing, moisturizing, and sun -protection regimens 
for normal skin, self -perceived sensitive skin, and dermatologist -assessed sensitive skin. Dermatol Ther. 
2004;17 Suppl 1:63 -8.  
15. Levin  J and Miller  R. A Guide to the ingredients and potential benefits of over-the-counter cleansers 
and moisturizers for rosacea patients. J  Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2011 ;4(8): 31 -49. 
16. Del Rosso  JQ, Gold  M, Rueda  MJ, Brandt  S, Winkleman W J. Efficacy, safety, and subject satisfaction 
of a specified skin care regimen to cleanse, medicate, moisturize, and protect the skin of patients under 
treatment for acne vulgaris. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2015;8(1):22 -30. 
 
 
 