Protocol version: 5 5OCT2020  
Template updated 9.24.14  1  
 
 
 
Official Title:  Nurse Initiated Auricular Acupressure for Post -operative Pain Management in Knee and 
Hip Arthroplasty Patients  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IRB-Approved Date:  10/19/20  
Protocol version: 5 5OCT2020  
Template updated 9.24.14  2 Return Code for Ignite Grant: 4WHMKYRL  
EIRB: 00057513  
Study Title :  Nurse initiated auricular acupressure for post -operative pain management in  knee and hip 
arthroplasty  patients  
Principal Investigator , Co-investigator(s) : Carolyn Huffman, WHNP, PhD ; Remy  Rene Coeytaux, MD  
 
Sponsor or funding source: Departmental  
 
Background , Rationale  and Context  
Postoperative pain management has become an area of concern over the last decade due to the 
opioid epidemic and concerns that the use of opioids as a primary pain  management strategy  in 
the post -operative period may promote misuse or abuse of opioids in the outpatient setting  (Hah, 
Bateman, Ratliff, Curtin, and Sun, 2017; Alam, Gomes, Zheng, Mamdani, Juurlink & Bell, 2012) . 
As of January 1, 2018 , The  Joint Commissi on requires hospitals  to have non-pharmacologic 
modalities  available for pain management in an effort to  decrease the need for  opioids.  
Acupuncture and acupressure have been used for centuries in the management of a variety of 
disor ders including pain.  A recent meta -analysis ( Zhong et al., 2019) of 26 RCTs (all included 
studies were in China) favored the use of acupressure for pain management over usual care based 
on total effective rate (RR =1.25, [CI= 1.13, 1.37 ], p <.0001)  and total analgesia  use (RR=0 .41, 
[CI= 0.24, 0.68] p = .0006).  There were no serious adverse events reported in the 26 trials 
(N=1063 in treatment groups) and no withdrawals from the stud ies were reported due to adverse 
events.  Unlike acupuncture , acupressure can be easily applied w ith training and is within the 
scope of practice for nurses, according to the North Carolina Board of Nursing  (NCBON, 2013) .  
Although acupressure has been used for centuries in traditional Chinese medicine, there are few 
studies assess ing the use of nurse  initiated acupressure in hospital settings as an adjuvant to post -
operative pain management.   
 
Battlefield acupuncture (BFA) was developed by Dr. Richard Niemtzow, a U.S. Air Force 
radiation oncologist. BFA utilizes 5 acupoints that are thought to be inv olved in central 
processing of pain. Dr. Niemtzow’s protocol has been used in the United States military in the 
treatment of pain for over 15 years. In the last few years, the Veterans Administration in 
conjunction with the Department of Defense has expand ed BFA training to providers within the 
VA system (Walker, et al., 2016). A cross sectional study of 753 patient BFA encounters (284 
individual patients) within the West Haven VA Medical Center, found that patients receiving 
BFA showed on average a 2 point  decrease in pain scores (measured on a 0 -10 scale) with each 
BFA encounter ( p < .001) (Federman et al., 2018). More recently, in an effort to increase access 
to non -pharmacological modalities for pain management, the VA has developed a battlefield 
auricul ar acupressure (BAA) protocol . The BAA protocol uses the same acupoints as the BFA 
protocol but instead of piercing the skin with needles to stimulate the acupoints, tiny beads or 
seeds are placed on the sites and stimulation of the sites is achieved when manual pressure is 
applied to the seed. The advantage of BAA is that since it does not require needles, patients may 
tolerate or be more open to its use, application of the seeds or beads is within the scope of 
practice of registered  
 
The purpose of this p ilot is to test the feasibility of nurse initiated post-operative battlefield 
auricular acupressure as an adj unct to medication  for post -operative pain management .  
 
Objective s 
 
1. To determine if battlefield auricular acupressure applied in the immediate pre-operative 
period improves post-operative pain management  related to :  
Protocol version: 5 5OCT2020  
Template updated 9.24.14  3 a. total opioid intake over 5 days  
b. aggregated mean pain score over  5 days 
c. acceptability of auricular acupressure as pain management tool  
2. To determine the feasibility of nurse initiated battlefield acupressure related to nurse time, 
cost and perceptions related to auricular acupressure and workflow.  
Methods and Measures  
 
Design  
• Randomized controlled trial.  
Setting  
Davie  Medical Center  
 
Subjects selection criteria  
• Inclusion Criteria  
Adults 18-80 admitted  for knee or hip arthroplasty . Pre-surgery morphine equivalent  < 50, 
ASA score < 3 
• Exclusion Criteria  
Participants with a history of skin disease ( e.g., psoriasis)  involving the ear , adhesive allergy, 
latex allergy, recent scar tissue on ear,  or current abrasions or cuts on ear, history of delirium,  
or cognitive impairment . Some hearing aids may prevent proper placement of acupressure  
pads and thus, require exclusion. Since this is a feasibility pilot, only English speaking 
participants will b e eligible.  
• Sample Size  
Based on previous published literature, we estimate a total sample size of 48 -52 needed (2 4-
26 each arm) to detect a 30 % difference in pain  scores or 25% reduction in analgesia .  
Recruitment target will be 30 in each arm (N=60) to allow for attrition. In order to identify 
the 60 subjects needed, we may need to screen as many as 120 because some people will not 
qualify to be included in the study.   
 
Intervention s and Interactions  
 Terms:   AA = Auricular acupressure  
Acupressure pa d= hypoallergenic adhesive pad containing a 2 mm Vaccaria  seeds  
(Earseeds ®)  
   Acupoint = specific area of body where acupressure is applied.  
 BAA= Battlefield Auricular Acupressure  
    
The three regional anesthesia nurses at Davie will be trained to del iver the intervention.  All three 
nurses have been CITI trained and for this protocol will be referred to as auricular acupressure (AA) 
nurses.  In addition to the three AA nurses, CTSI will provide st udy coordination.  
 
• Training of the AA nurses for auric ular acupressure will be done by the Wake Forest Center 
for Integrative Medicine (CIM) providers.  Training will have both didactic  and hands -on 
practice components :  basic concepts of auricular acupressure, anatomy and physiology of the 
ear, assessment of  ear anatomy, proper identification of therapeutic acupoints, proper 
cleaning  of the ear, application of acupressure pads and activation , and patient education 
related to activation of the acupressure  pads with manual pressure . Competency will be 
assessed both by assessment of knowledge (written assessment) and direct observation by 
CIM acupuncturist of the  AA nurse’s ability to correctly identify auricular acupressure points 
through visual inspection , proper  application of acupressure  pads and activation  of the 
acupoints via manual pressure applied to the acupressure pads.   
Protocol version: 5 5OCT2020  
Template updated 9.24.14  4 • Participants will be informed of the study at the time of their  surgical consult with their 
physician or at their pre -operative appointment  via flyers made available to the surgical 
clinics.  Prior to the pre -assessment visit, study personnel  will review the chart of patients 
who express interest in the study to confirm eligibility. Inform ed consent will be obtained at 
the pre -operative assessment visit by study personnel  and the partici pant questionnaire will be 
reviewed with instructions  on the day of surgery, the AA nurse  will confirm  consent for 
participation.  Random assignment will be generated by REDCap  and emailed  to the  AA 
nurse  by the study coordinator . If participant is assigne d to treatment , the acupressure pad s 
will be placed in the pre -operative holding room . The  participant’s designee will be given the 
study questionnaire packet  as well as instructions for completing .  
• AA nurses will record time from the moment they enter participant’s  room in holding room 
for the purposes of placing acupressure pad s and activating each pad until they exit room .  
AA nurse s will make notation if recorded time includes activity unrelated to placement of 
acupressure pads .  After placement of acupressure pads, AA nurse will enter procedure note 
in WakeOne  and complete the REDCap  nurse questionnaire.  
 
• Treatment Group : The AA nurses will place the acupressure pad s on the participant pre-
operatively while the participant is in the PACU  using the foll owing BAA protocol:   
 
o Before acupressure pad placement, pain assessment will be performed and 
recorded in the study chart  by the AA  nurses .  AA nurse will also ensure that a 
responsible family member is in the pre -operative holding room with participant 
to listen to instructions.  
o Acupressure pads will be placed prior to any amnesic or pain medication.  
o AA n urse will have participant don surgical cap, being careful to keep all hair 
under the cap.   
o If the ear contains lesions, skin breakdown, or show signs of  irritation, the 
acupressure pads will not be placed and this will be noted in the study record.    
o A total of 10 adhesive acupressure pad s will be placed , 5 acupressure  pads per  
ear. The pads  will be placed bilaterally on the following 5 auricular sites: 1 ) 
Cyngulate gyrus , 2)  Thalamus , 3) Omega 2  4) Point Zero, and 5) Shen Men . 
These sites were selected based on the  WV’s Battlefield Auricular Acupressure 
Protocol for acute and chronic pain .  This is the protocol the Veterans 
Administration uses for acupr essure therapy for acute and chronic pain 
management  and is taught to both nurses and physicians . Each ear will be 
cleansed with alcohol, beginning at the base of the ear (lobule) to the apex.  The 
acupoints will be visually located  and marked with a sterile surgical marker .  The 
pads will be placed by visual identification  of the preselected acupoints  as per 
BAA protocol . The pads will be placed on the on the identified site by hand or 
with the assistance tweezers, with the seed portion of the pad aligning  with the 
identified acupoint.   To secure the pad, gentle but firm pressure will be applied to 
the pad, making sure that pressure is applied to the entire pad.  
o After placement, the study nurse will apply moderate pressure to each 
acupressure pad  for 30 sec onds (total time 2 .5 minutes per ear) . Both right and 
left ear site will be stimulated at the same time with pressure in the following 
order: 1) Cyngulate gyrus, 2) Thalamus, 3) Omega 2, 4) Point Zero, and 5) Shen 
Men   Participants will tell the AA nurse when they feel a tingling sensation in 
the ear or feel moderate tenderness or pressure  as confirmation that moderate 
pressure is being applied .  
Protocol version: 5 5OCT2020  
Template updated 9.24.14  5 o The AA nurse will document in WakeOne acupressure pad placement  and 
activation .   
o Once participant is transferr ed to the floor, t he AA nurse will review with 
participant and family how and when to activate each pad and give participant  or 
designee  a picture of a right and left ear with the acupressure pads in place with 
pads labeled 1 -5.  Participants  will be remin ded to gently press on each pad for 
30 seconds three times a day to activate and to do this three times a day for a total 
of 5 days (roughly every 6 -8 hours, while awake during the day) .  The provided  
picture will be used by the participant to account for any missing pads on the 
participant questionnaire.  If the participant requests, the AA nurse will take a 
picture with the participant ’s smartphone of the participant ’s ears with the pads in 
place . The study questionnaire  will also direct participants to apply moderate 
pressure using thumb and forefinger to each pad for 30 seconds  each three times 
a day .   
o If acupressure pads fall off while the participant is still in the hospital, the 
participant and/or nursing staff will be instructed to call the AA nurse  on call for 
replacement of the pads prior to discharge.  
o Participants may stimulate both ear sites at the same time beginning with site 1 
and ending with site 5.  Studies have placed acupressure pads for 3 -8 days  
depending on study outcomes (He et al., 20 13; Yeh et al., 2014 ), the pads will be 
placed for a total of 5 days based on manufacturer’s recommendation and the 
BAA protocol  (See example of  Earseeds instruction  brochure ). On the day of 
surgery, the participant will be informed to apply pressure one t o 2 more times 
that day, depending upon the time the acupressure pads were placed .  Participants 
will be informed that if any acupressure pads fall off  while home , they are not to 
be replace d, but to record on the study questionnaire (see participant 
quest ionnaire). Staff nurses will remind participants  to complete their 
questionnaires and to call the AA nurses with any questions  related to the 
acupressure pads or the study . 
o At time of discharge, the study personnel will  ensure that the participant has 
participant  questionnaire  and the addressed and stamped envelope. Instructions 
for activation of the acupressure  pads and questionnaire  completion will be 
reviewed .  Participants will be informed that they will either receive a phone call 
or text reminder twic e daily to complete the questionnaire  and to activate their 
pads 3 times per day. Participant is to continue to apply pressure to remaining 
pads until the end of the study.    
o On post -operative day 4, the study personnel will  call the patient and instruct 
them to remove the acupressure pads by gently pulling on the edges of the pad 
and lifting off with their fingers or using tweezers to loosen the pad if needed. 
Participants will be reminded to  mail questionnaire in the provided postage paid 
envelope , if they have not done so already   
 
• Control Group:  The AA nurse will give  participants in the control group  the study 
questionnaire  once they arrive to the floor and remind participant and family to complete the 
questionnaire  as indicated.  At time of discharg e, study personnel  will ensure that participant 
has study questionnaire  and the addressed and postage paid  envelope. Participants will be 
informed that they will either receive twice daily phone call s or text messages to complete the 
questionnaire. On post operative day 4, study personnel  will call and remind participate to 
mail questi onnaire in the provided postage -paid envelope.    
 
Protocol version: 5 5OCT2020  
Template updated 9.24.14  6 • Contact information will be obtained at time of study enrollment/consent in order to remind 
participants daily to complete stu dy document .  The reminders will be via telephone call by 
study personnel and/or via text messaging depending on participant preference. Participants 
may also be contacted to complete the final questionnaire over the phone if the document if 
this section i s incomplete when received by the study team.  
 
 
Ambulatory 
Appointment  Preoperative 
Assessment   Day of 
Surgery  Recovery 
Rm PO-
0 PO-
1 PO-
2 PO-
3 PO-
4 
Study flyer  
 
 Study flyer  
 
Informed  
Consent   
R 
Informed 
Consent  O1 
X O2 
X O3 
X O4 
X O5 
X O6 
X 
O1 O2 O3 O4 O5 O6 
Note: O= Observation; R = Randomization, X = Acupressure pellet  placement and/or activation with 
manual pressure.  
 
Outcome Measure(s)  
1) Pain:  Both inpatient and outpatient pain scores will be measured using the VAS as documented 
on the particip ant study questionnaire .  
a. am pain score on rising aggregated over 4 days (post -op day 1 –post-op day 4) 
b. pm (worse pain throughout the day) pain score aggregated over 5 days (post -op day 0 –  
post-op day 4)  
c. trajectory of am and pm pain scores  
2) Inpatient  opioid pain medication will be collected via the MAR in  WakeOne.  Outpatient usage 
will be self -reported in study questionnaire . Inpatient and outpatient total opioid use will be 
converted to total Morphine equivalent .  
a. Total morphine equivalent  aggregated o ver day 0 -4 
b. Trajectory of morphine equivalent from day 0 - 4 
3) Overall participant satisfaction will be measured on post -op day 4 via participant questionnaire.  
4) Nurse time will be measured in minutes from time AA nurse enters room to place acupressure 
pads to when AA nurse exits room.  Qualitative questions will be used to assess overall feasibility 
of nurse initiated auricular acupressure.  
 
 
Protocol version: 5 5OCT2020  
Template updated 9.24.14  7 Outcome  Measure  Baseline  Post-op Day 1 -2 Post-op days  
         1-4  
Pain  Visual Analogue  X  X 
     
Medication 
Inpatient  WakeOne MAR  
Participant 
Questionnaire   X X 
Medication Use 
Outpatient  Participant  
Questionnaire    X 
Pellet  Retention 
Days  Participant  
Questionnaire   X X 
Pain 
Management 
satisfaction  Participant  
Questionnaire    X 
Nurse Time  Questionnaire   X  
Nurse Feasibility  Questionnaire   X  
 
Analytical Plan  
 
Results will be analyzed  initially  using descriptive statistics.  Comparison between groups will be done 
using chi square tests for proportions, and t -tests or ANOVA proce dures for continuous variables.  
Multilevel modeling will be used to determine difference in pain and morphine equivalents over time.  
 
Human Subjects Protection  
 
Subject Recruitment Methods  
 
Several strategies will be implemented to assist with recruitment. Participants may be identifie d by 
screening  provider schedules. They will be recruited by mailed recruitment letter , myWakeHealth 
message, telephone, and/or in person when presenting for their surgical consent or p re-operative 
assessment visit (as allowed by institutional and governme nt policies).  
Informational flyers  describing the study will be disseminated  to the orthopedic  clinics  at Davie Medical  
Center .  Recruitment will also be done  through the orthopedic clinic at the time of a patient’s pre -
operative assessment visit in one of  three ways: 1 ) patients  will be given an informational flyer and 
instructed to call study phone line if interested in participating , 2) they may ask to receive a call from the 
study team , or 3) they may meet directly with a study team member the day of th eir pre -operative 
assessment visit if  a study team member is available . 
 Study personnel will review eligibility questionnaire with participant (confirm age, date of pre -
assessment appointment, date of surgery, type of surgery, presence of pacemaker or oth er electrical 
device, hearing aid use, skin disorder or allergies, current medications).  I f eligible  based on phone or in 
person screen, study personnel will do second stage eligibility screen via WakeOne chart review to 
calculate current morphine equival ent, medical history for delirium, ASA status,  and cognitive 
impairment or delirium . If eligible , participant will be consented by study personnel at their pre -
assessment anesthesia visit or on the day of surgery . The study  personnel will maintain  a record  of 
eligible study participants .  This list will include name, MRN, surgery type, pre -assessment appointment, 
and surg ery date will be kept in a secure file on a secure computer. The file of eligible participants will be 
destroyed at the end of recruitment . 
 
Informed Consent  
 
Protocol version: 5 5OCT2020  
Template updated 9.24.14  8 Signed informed consent will be obtained from each subject.  The study personnel  will obtain informed 
consent at the time of the pre -operative assessment  or on the day of surgery . The AA nurse will be 
contacted to come and speak with p atient to answer any questions prior to signing consent. During 
COVID -19, we plan to  obtain consent remotely  in cases where the study team is not able to have face to 
face contact with the participant . In order to obtain legally effective consent, the inve stigator or  member 
of the study team will  provide two copies of the approved consent form  for documentation . After 
received, the study team member will speak with the participant , presenting the elements of consent, the 
content of the study, and answer any  questions. At the end of the disc ussion, the study team member will 
advise the participant to sign and date one form  and return the signed consent form to  the study team .  
The study team will clarify that the second consent form should be ke pt by the part icipant  for 
documentation. Upon receipt of the signed form, the study team member will sign and date with the 
current date, and add a note detailing the date discrepancy. No study procedures will begin until the IRB 
approved method of obtaining consent is completed.  Participants will be reminded that if the signed 
consent form is not received prior to the surgery and if there is not a study team member available to 
consent prior to the surgery, they will not be able to participate in the study.  
 
 
 
Confident iality and Privacy  
Confidentiality will be protected by collecting only information needed to assess study outcomes, 
minimizing to the fullest extent possible the collection of any information that could directly identify 
subjects, and maintaining  all stud y information in a secure manner .  To help ensure subject privacy 
and confidentiality, only a unique study identifier will appear on the  stored  data collection form s.  
Any collected p atient identifying information corresponding to the unique study identifi er will be 
maintained on a linkage file, store separately from the data .  The linkage file  will be kept secure, with 
access limited to designated study personnel.  Following data collection , subject identifying 
information will be destroyed  three years aft er closure of the study, and files will be erased . Each 
study participant will be assigned a unique identifier that will be linked to their name.   The 
participant study questionnaire  will contain the patient’s name and after collection of the study 
questi onnaire  from the patient, the study coordinator will replace the name on the study questionnaire  
with the participant’s unique identifier and data will be transferred to the study data base with data 
validation producing an anonymous analytical data set.  Data access will be limited to study staff.  
Data and records will be kept locked and secure d with any computer data password protected .  No 
reference to any individual participant will appear in reports, presentations, or publications that may 
arise from the study.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
The principal  and co - investigator will be responsible for  the overall monitoring of the data and safety 
of study participants .  They  will be assisted by oth er members of the study staff.   Although no serious 
safety e vents have been reported in the literature related to auricular acupressure, participants will be 
asked to report any events to study personnel.  Participants will be instructed to monitor and report 
any concerns related to acupressure pad s to the AA nurse  on-call and these will be escalated to the PI 
and then to the C o-investigator for evaluation , if needed .  The co -investigator or a licensed 
acupuncture  provider at the Center for Integrative Medicine will serve as consulting 
physician /acupuncturist  for an y adverse event that is determined to be potentially related to the study, 
including physical examination and treatment if necessary . 
 
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events or Deviations  
Any unanticipated problems, serious and unexpected adve rse events, deviations or protocol changes 
will be promptly reported  by the principal investigator or designated member of the research team  to 
the IRB and sponsor or appropriate g overnment agency if appropriate.  
Protocol version: 5 5OCT2020  
Template updated 9.24.14  9  
References  
1. Alam, A., Gomes, T, Zheng, H., Mandani, M. M., Juurlink, D. N., & Bell, C. M. (2012). Long -
term analgesic use after low -risk surgery: A retrospective cohort study.  Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 172(5), 425 -430.  
2. Hah, J.M., Bateman, B.T., Ratliff, J., Curtin, C., & Sun , E. (2017).  Chronic opioid use after 
surgery: Implications for perioperative management in the face of the opioid epidemic.  
Anesthesia & Analgesia, 125 (5), 1733 -1740.  
3. He, B. J., Tong, P. J., Li, J., Jing, H. T., & Yaom X. M. (2013).  Auricular acupressure  for 
analgesia in peri -operative period of total kne e arthroplasty, Pain Medicine, 14 , 1608 -1613.  
4. North Carolina Board of Nursing (2013). Complimentary Therapies: Position statement for RN 
and LPN practice.   
5. The Joint Commission (2017 , August 29 ). Pain a ssessment and management standards for 
hospitals. R3 Report , 11.  
6. Yeh, C.H., Chien, L -C, Huang, L. C., Suen, L. (2014).  Auricular  point acupressure for chronic 
pain: A feasibility study of 4 -week treatment protocol. Holistic Nursing Practice, 28 (3), 184 -194.  
7. Zhong, Q., Wang, D., Bai, Y -M., Du, S., Song, Y -L., & Zhu, J. (2019).  Effectiveness of auricular 
acupressure for acute postoperative pain after surgery: A systematic review and meta -analysis, 
Chinese Journal of Integrative Medicine, 25(3), 225 -232.  
 
Appendix  
1. Participant Study Questionnaire   
2. Nurse q uestionnaire  
3. Consent form   
4. Acupressure Sites  
5. Davie Medical Center Total Joint Program Inclusion Criteria  
 
 