Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  1 of 27  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Randomized  Controlled  Assessor  Blinded  Clinical  Trial of Sugammadex  versus  
Neostigmine /Glycopyrrolate  for Reversal  of Rocuronium  Induced  Neuromuscular  
Blockade:  Time  to Discharge  From  Post  Anesthesia  Care  Unit and Assessment  of 
NMB Recovery  
 
Principal  
Investigator/Department:  German  Echeverry,  MD Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Co-Principal 
Investigator(s)/Department : Florence  Grant,  MD 
Luis Tollinche,  MD 
Cindy  Yeoh,  MD Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Investigator(s)/Department:  Gregory  W. Fischer,  MD 
Dawn  Desiderio,  MD 
William  Marx,  MD 
Kay See Tan, PhD 
Garrett  Nash,  MD 
Paul Russo,  MD 
Yukio  Sonoda,  MD 
Oliver  Zivanovic,   MD 
Peter  Allen,  MD 
Meghan  Decker,  NP 
Megan  Abate,  NP 
Omotara  Adewale,  NP 
Jennifer  Aviado -Langer,   NP 
Maria  Cantos,  NP 
Laura  Conti -Harrigan,  NP 
Alison  Costalos,  NP 
Stacey  Cuomo,  NP 
Leslie  Eadon  Blades,  NP 
Danielle  Escaleira,  NP 
Glenda  Espinosa,  NP 
Chakia  Faniel,  NP 
Christine  Ferrari,  NP 
Evlyn  Hinds,  NP 
Laura  James,  NP 
Stacey  Kaufman,  NP 
Kenny  Lacossiere,  NP 
John Lezoli,  NP 
Marie  Helene  Lofland,  NP 
Margaret  McSweeney,  NP 
Rosemary  Ortiz, NP 
Dilnoza  Portnoy,  NP 
Gina Prior,  NP 
Celeste  Springer,  NP 
Margaret  Smith,  NP Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Epidemiology/Biostatistics  
Surgery/Colorectal  
Surgery/Urology  
Surgery/  Gynecology – Manhattan   & West  Harrison  
Surgery/  Gynecology  – Manhattan   & Commack  
Surgery/  HPB 
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Page  2 of 27  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gy and CCM  
gy and CCM  
gy and CCM  
gy and CCM  Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
 
 
 
Theresa  Hall, NP Nursing  
Laryn  Cullen,  NP Nursing  
Rebecca  Repetti,  NP Nursing  
Victoria  Tague,NP  Nursing  
Elizabeth  Polcha,  NP Nursing  
Deidre  Stiehler,  NP Nursing  
Ewa Chauvin,  NP Nursing  
So Kim, NP Nursing  
Oksana  Ditwell,  NP Nursing  
Lauren  Picarde,  NP Nursing  
Anahita  Dabo -Trubelja,  MD Anesthesiolo  
Cosmin  Gauran,  MD Anesthesiolo  
Roger  Padilla,  MD Anesthesiolo  
Monique  James,  MD Anesthesiolo  
Patricia  Spellman,  RN Nursing  
Natalie  Kostelecky,  RN Nursing  
Sera Senturk,  NP Nursing  
Christine  Gillins,  RN Nursing  
Lily Polskin,  RN Nursing   
Consenting  
Professional(s)/Department:  German  Echeverry,  MD Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Florence  Grant,  MD Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Luis Tollinche,  MD Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Cindy  Yeoh,  MD Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Gregory  W. Fischer,  MD Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Dawn  Desiderio,  MD Anesthesiology  and CCM  
William  Marx,  MD Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Garrett  Nash,  MD Surgery/Colorectal  
Paul Russo,  MD Surgery/Urology  
Yukio  Sonoda,  MD Surgery/  Gynecology – Manhattan   & West  Harrison  
Oliver  Zivanovic,   MD Surgery/  Gynecology – Manhattan   & Commack  
Peter  Allen,  MD Surgery/  HPB 
Nancy  Collado,  NP Nursing  
Meghan  Decker,  NP Nursing  
Megan  Abate,  NP Nursing  
Omotara  Adewale,  NP Nursing  
Jennifer  Aviado -Langer,  NP Nursing  
Maria  Cantos,  NP Nursing  
Laura  Conti -Harrigan,  NP  Nursing  
Alison  Costalos,  NP Nursing  
Stacey  Cuomo,  NP Nursing  
Leslie  Eadon  Blades,  NP Nursing  
Danielle  Escaleira,  NP Nursing  
Glenda  Espinosa,  NP Nursing  
Chakia  Faniel,  NP Nursing  
Christine  Ferrari,  NP Nursing  
Evlyn  Hinds,  NP Nursing  
Laura  James,  NP Nursing  
 
Page  3 of 27 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019   
  
 
 
Stacey  Kaufman,  NP 
Kenny  Lacossiere,  NP 
John Lezoli,  NP 
Marie  Helene  Lofland,  NP 
Margaret  McSweeney,  NP 
Rosemary  Ortiz, NP 
Dilnoza  Portnoy,  NP 
Gina Prior,  NP 
Celeste  Springer,  NP 
Margaret  Smith,  NP 
Theresa  Hall, NP 
Laryn  Cullen,  NP 
Rebecca  Repetti,  NP 
Victoria  Tague,  NP 
Elizabeth  Polcha,  NP 
Deidre  Stiehler,  NP 
Ewa Chauvin,  NP  
So Kim, NP 
Oksana  Ditwell,  NP 
Lauren  Picarde,  NP 
Anahita  Dabo -Trubelja,  MD 
Cosmin  Gauran,  MD 
Roger  Padilla,  MD 
Monique  James,  MD 
Sera Senturk,  NP  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Nursing  
Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Anesthesiology  and CCM  
Nursing  
 
 
 
Please  Note:  A Consenting  Professional  must  have  completed  the mandatory  Human  
Subjects  Education  and Certification  Program . 
 
 
OneMSK  Sites  
Manhattan  
Westchester  (consent  only) 
Basking  Ridge  (consent  only) 
Commack  (consent  only) 
Page  4 of 27 Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019   
  
 
Memorial  Sloan  Kettering  Cancer  Center  
1275  York Avenue  
New York,  New York 10065  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  5 of 27  
  
 
Table  of Contents  
1.0 PROTOCOL SUMMARY AND/OR SCHEMA ................................ ................................ ...... 6 
2.0 OBJECTIVES AND SCIENTIFIC AIMS ................................ ................................ ...............  8 
3.0 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE ................................ ................................ .....................  8 
4.0 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY DESIGN/INTERVENTION  ................................ ................................ . 10 
4.1 Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  10 
4.2 Intervention  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  11 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC AGENTS ................................ ................................ ...........  12 
6.0 CRITERIA  FOR  SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ..............  13 
6.1 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 13 
6.2 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 13 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  13 
8.0 PRETREATMENT EVALUATION ................................ ................................ ......................  14 
9.0 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN ................................ ................................ ...............  15 
10.0 EVALUATION DURING TREATMENT/INTERVENTION ................................ ....................  16 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE EFFECTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 17 
12.0 CRITERIA FOR THERAPEUTIC RESPONSE/OUTCOME ASSESS MENT ........................  18 
13.0 CRITERIA FOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY ................................ ................................ ....... 18 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  18 
15.0 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION PROCEDURES21 
15.1 Research  Participant  Registration  ................................ ................................ .........................  21 
15.2 Randomization  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  21 
16.0 DAT A M ANAGEMENT ISSUES ................................ ................................ ........................  21 
16.1 Quality  Assurance  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  22 
16.2 Data and Safety  Monitoring  ................................ ................................ ..............................  22 
17.0 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS ................................ ................................ ............  22 
17.1 Privacy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  23 
17.2 Serious  Adverse  Event  (SAE) Reporting  ................................ ................................ .........  23 
17.2.1....................................................................................................................... ..................24  
18.0 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ..................  24 
19.0 REFEREN CES ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  25 
20.0 APPENDICES ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  27 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  6 of 27  
  
 
1.1 PROTOCOL  SUMMARY  AND/OR  SCHEMA  
 
Study  Title: Randomized  Controlled  Assessor  Blinded  Clinical  Trial of Sugammadex  versus  
Neostigmine/Glycopyrrolate  for Reversal  of Rocuronium  Induced  Neuromuscular  Blockade:  
Time  to Discharge  From  Post Anesthesia  Care  Unit and Assessment  of NMB Recovery  
 
Objectives:  
 
1) To compare  the difference  in duration  from administration  of NMB reversal  agent  to the 
time the patient  is ready  for discharge  from PACU  after NMB reversal  with sugammadex  
versus  neostigmine.  
2) To measure  the quality  of recovery  from anesthesia  and NMB and subjective  patient  
assessment  after reversal  with SUG  or NEO.  
3) To compare  the differences  in costs  in PACU  stay associated  with the use of each  drug.  
 
Patient  Population:  Patients  greater  than or equal  to 18 years  of age scheduled  to undergo  
moderate  length  surgeries  (scheduled  for < 6 hours)  requiring  neuromuscular  blockade.  
 
Design:  Prospective  randomized  controlled  assessor  blinded  trial. 
 
Treatment  Plan:  Patients  will be randomized  to receive  either  SUG  or NEO  NMB reversal  
after rocuronium  (ROC)  induced  muscle  paralysis  at the conclusion  of their surgical  
procedure.  They  will be assessed  for time to ready  to discharge  from PACU,  difficulty  with 
breathing,  the presence  of diplopia  or other  visual  disturbances,  difficulty  speaking,  difficulty  
swallowing,  the presence  of nausea  or vomiting,  the presence  of pain, feeling  worried  or 
anxious  (all indicators  of post operative  muscle  weakness)  and muscle  strength  at the biceps  
brachii  muscle  (Oxford  Scale,  Appendix  1) 
 
Time  to Completion:  We will need  to accrue  202 patients  and expect  the study  to be 
completed  and reported  within  1- 2 years.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Page  7 of 27 
Patient  Transferred  to PACU  Where  
Data  is Collected  by Blinded  Assessor  
at 30, 60 and 120 minutes  after arrival  
Patient  Transferred  to PACU   Where  
Data  is Collected  by Blinded  Assessor  
at 30, 60 and 120 minutes  after arrival  
 
Time  from Reversal  to TOF 4/4 without  
fade 
 
Time  from Reversal  to Extubation  
Recorded  
NMB  Reversed  at End of Case  with 
Neostigmine  0.05mg/kg  (max5mg)  and 
Glycopyrrolate  0.01mg/kg  
 
NMB  Reversed  at End of Case  with 
Sugammadex  2mg/kg  
During  Surgery  NMB is 
Maintained   at 1-2 Twitches  
During  Surgery  NMB is 
Maintained  at 1-2 Twitches  
 
Randomized  to Reversal  with 
Neostigmine/Glycopyrrolate  
 
Randomized  to Reversal  with 
Sugammadex  
 
Patients  Assessed  and Consented  in 
Surgical  Clinic  or PST 
 
Time  from Admission  to PACU  to Ready  
to Discharge  from PACU  Recorded  
 
Time  from Admission  to PACU  to Ready  
to Discharge  from PACU  Recorded  
 
Time  from Reversal  to TOF 4/4 without  
fade 
 
Time  from Reversal  to Extubation  
Recorded  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  8 of 27  
  
 
2.1 OBJECTIVES  AND SCIENTIFIC  AIMS  
 
The protocol  objectives  are to compare  the time for and quality  of recovery,  both subjective  
and objective  (muscle  strength),  after reversal  of NMB comparing  2 different  reversal  agents  
(SUG  versus  NEO)  in patients  undergoing  moderate  length  surgical  procedures  requiring  
paralysis.  
Primary  Objective  
 
To compare  the difference  in duration  from administration  of NMB reversal  agent  to the time 
the patient  is ready  for discharge  from PACU  after NMB reversal  with sugammadex  versus  
neostigmine.  
Secondary  Objectives  
 
1) To compare  the patient -reported  quality  of post operative  recovery  using  standard  
symptoms  of subclinical  weakness  or paralysis  after NMB reversal  with SUG vs NEO,  
specifically:  
a. difficulty  with breathing  
b. presence  of diplopia  or other  visual  disturbances  
c. difficulty  with speaking  
d. difficulty  with swallowing  
e. the presence  of nausea  or vomiting  
f. the presence  of pain 
g. feeling  worried  or anxious  
h. presence  of muscle  strength  at the biceps  brachii  muscle  (Oxford  Scale,  Appendix  1) 
 
2) To compare  the differences  in PACU  costs  associated  with use of each  drug 
 
3.0 BACKGROUND  AND RATIONALE  
 
Neuromuscular  transmission  is the transfer  of a chemical  impulse  between  a nerve  and a 
muscle  at the neuromuscular  junction,  causing  muscle  contraction. Transmission  occurs  
when  an action  potential  reaches  the presynaptic  terminal  and opens  calcium  channels  
allowing  calcium  ions to enter  the neuron.  The release  of the neurotransmitter  acetylcholine  
(ACh)  diffuses  across  the synaptic  cleft and binds  to the nicotinic  receptors  on the muscle  
fiber causing  muscle  contraction.  
 
Non-depolarizing  neuromuscular  blocking  agents  (NMBA)  work  at the neuromuscular   
junction  by binding  to the acetylcholine  (ACh)  receptor  and acting  as competitive  antagonists,  
preventing  Ach from generating  an action  potential,  causing  reversible  paralysis  of skeletal  
muscle.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  9 of 27  
  
 
Neuromuscular  blockade  (NMB)  is used  by anesthesia  providers  in the operating  room  (OR)  
to facilitate  endotracheal  intubation  and mechanical  ventilation  and to provide  improved  
surgical  conditions.1  The level of blockade  is routinely  measured  by stimulating  a peripheral  
motor  nerve  and evaluating  the muscle  response  to a supramaximal  stimulus  (20-25% above  
that required  for a maximal  response).  
After administration  of a neuromuscular  blocking  agent,  the muscle  response  decreases  in 
parallel  with the number  of fibers  blocked,  corresponding  to the degree  of blockade.  There  
are several  patterns  used  to evaluate  neuromuscular  function.  We will be using  the train-of- 
four (TOF)  count  where  four supramaximal  stimuli  are given  every  0.5 seconds.2-4 The 
muscle  contracts  with each  stimulus  and the “fade”  is assessed  either  visually  or tactilely.  
Prior to administration  of a NMB agent,  all four twitches  are the same  (control)  without  fade.  
 
Recovery  from NMB begins  with the return  of the fourth  twitch.  Trials  of NMB reversal  have 
led to the general  agreement  that the quantitative  assessment  of a TOF ratio of 0.9 at the 
end of surgery  should  be the goal5,6. Clinically  this correlates  with no perceived  fade,  
indicating  sufficient  neuromuscular  recovery.7-17 
 
Residual  weakness  from incomplete  metabolism  or inadequate  reversal  with a 
neuromuscular  blockade  antagonist  occurs  frequently  in the postoperative  period18-22  adding  
increased  morbidity  to recovery23  and delaying  discharge  from the PACU  and increasing  
costs.21,24 
 
Presently  in our ORs we use the acetylcholinesterase  inhibitor  neostigmine  (NEO)  to reverse  
NMB.  Cholinesterase  inhibition  increases  availability  of acetylcholine  in the postsynaptic  
cleft. Neostigmine  binds  to cholinesterase  and blocks  enzymatic  cleavage  of Ach. This 
increase  in Ach concentration  leads  not only to activation  of nicotinic  but also to stimulation  
of muscarinic  receptors.  Consequently,  neostigmine  is usually  administered  with an 
anticholinergic  such  as glycopyrrolate  or atropine  to counteract  the muscarinic  side effects.  
These  include  nausea  and vomiting,  bradycardia,  bronchospasm  and miosis.  Of interest,  
high dose  neostigmine  or administration  after the TOF ratio returns  to 0.9 may increase  the 
incidence  of pulmonary  complications  and increase  PACU  length  of stay.19,25 -29 
 
Recently  available  on formulary  at MSK is the gamma -cyclodextrin  NMB reversal  agent  
sugammadex,  which  inactivates  non depolarizing  aminosteroid  based  NMB agents  by 
forming  tight complexes  in the vascular  system  and releasing  the Ach receptors,  reversing  
relaxation.30  Due to its direct  mechanism  on the NMB agent,  there  is no effect  on the nicotinic  
or muscarinic  receptors  and therefore  no cholinergic  side effects,  allowing  reversal  of deeper  
levels  of neuromuscular  blockade.  31  Several  studies  have shown  that sugammadex  more  
rapidly  reverses  rocuronium  block  than neostigmine.31-33  In addition,  sugammadex  has been  
shown  not to impair  upper  airway  muscle  activity.34 
 
We propose  to evaluate  the patient’s  objective  and subjective  post operative  recovery  from 
neuromuscular  blockade  in the PACU  following  reversal  from rocuronium  paralysis  with 
either  sugammadex  or neostigmine  in a randomized  assessor  and patient  blinded  fashion  
and to assess the impact  on PACU  length  of stay and medication  costs.  Our goal is to 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  10 of 27  
  
 
determine  whether  SUG  results  in improved  patient  safety  and comfort  with NMB reversal  
post operatively,  and decreases  the time it takes  for the patient  to be ready  to discharge  from 
the PACU.  The trial will be performed  in a single  center  major  cancer  center.  The effects  of 
SUG  vs NEO  have not been  studied  in this patient  population  before  in the current  literature.  
 
4.1 OVERVIEW  OF STUDY  DESIGN/INTERVENTION  
 
4.2 Design  
 
This will be a prospective,  randomized,  assessor  and patient  blinded  study.  Patients  eligible  
for the trial will be those  scheduled  for surgical  procedures  expected  to last ≤ 6 hours  which  
require  muscular  paralysis.  There  will be a total of 101 cases needed  in each  arm. We  
expect  to be able to complete  the trial within  1-2 years.  Eligible  patients  will be consented  
and registered  for the trial during  a pre-operative  clinic  appointment.  Patients  will be 
randomized  to either  the SUG  group  or the NEO  group.  Randomization  will occur  through  the 
Clinical  Research  Database  (CRDB)  per institutional  protocol.  The process  will be accessible  
only for un-blinded  team  members,  ie those  members  taking  care of the patient  in the OR. 
The patients  will also be blinded  to which  group  they are in. 
 
In the operating  room  general  anesthesia  will be induced  and maintained  in a standard  
fashion.  The NMB agent  used  for this trial will be rocuronium,  an aminosteroid  type of non 
depolarizing  NMB.  At the conclusion  of surgery,  the patient  will be reversed  with either  SUG 
or NEO/GLYCO,  and the time from reversal  to extubation  criteria  are met will be documented  
along  with time to extubation.  
 
The patient  will then be transferred  to the PACU  where  s/he will be evaluated  by a trained  
clinician  assessor  blinded  to the reversal  agent  at 30, 60 and 120 minutes  (+/- 5 minutes  and 
until the patient  is ready  for PACU  discharge)  after admission  for quality  of post operative  
recovery  including:  
 
a. difficulty  with breathing  
b. presence  of diplopia  or other  visual  disturbances  
c. difficulty  with speaking  
d. difficulty  with swallowing  
e. the presence  of nausea  or vomiting  
f. the presence  of pain 
g. feeling  worried  or anxious  
h. presence  of muscle  strength  at the biceps  brachii  muscle  (Oxford  Scale,  Appendix  1) 
i. readiness  for discharge  from PACU  (time  patient  meets  PACU  discharge  criteria  
(Appendix  1) 
At discharge  from PACU,  the cost of the study  drugs  will be compared  along  with the time of 
the PACU  stay from admission  to ready  to discharge  (RTD).  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  11 of 27  
  
 
 
 
4.3 Intervention  
 
The goal of this study  is to compare  objective  and subjective  post operative  recovery  from 
rocuronium  neuromuscular  blockade  with sugammadex  (SUG)  to that with neostigmine  
(NEO/GLYCO).  
 
Patients  will be consented  in either  the pre anesthesia  or surgical  clinics  and randomized  by 
the CRDB  prior to surgery  to receive  reversal  of NMB with either  SUG or NEO/GLYCO  at the 
conclusion  of the surgical  procedure.  The patient  and assessors  will be blinded  as to the 
randomization  assignment.  
 
On the day of surgery,  the patient  will be brought  to the OR and secured  onto the operative  
table after appropriate  identification.  Routine  monitors  will be placed  (EKG,  NIBP,  SpO2,  
NMT [SunStim™ Peripheral  Nerve  Stimulator  by SunMed]).  The TOF count  pattern  of 
stimulation  will be used,  where  four supramaximal  stimuli  are generated  at 0.5 second  
intervals,  to quantify  the muscle  response.  The TOF count  (number  of detected  muscle  
responses)  will be used  to guide  subsequent  ROC  administration  for maintenance  of 
neuromuscular  blockade.  
 
The NMT electrodes  will be placed  on the wrist along  the ulnar  nerve  5 cm apart.  Since  
different  muscle  groups  have different  sensitivities  to NMB35  we will use this location  only for 
assessment  of depth  of blockade  prior to reversal  agent  administration.  As the ulnar  nerve  is 
more  sensitive  than the diaphragm  to NMB,  this will provide  a margin  of safety  at reversal  
since  there  will be less residual  neuroblockade  at the diaphragm.  The distal  electrode  will be 
placed  1 cm proximal  to the flexion  crease  on the volar side of the wrist.  The proximal  
electrode  will be placed  5 cm proximal.36 For robotic  and laparoscopic  cases,  facial  nerve  
TOF will be used  for intraoperative  monitoring  of depth  of blockade  as the arms will be  
tucked  for these  procedures.  This will be done  exclusively  for purposes  of intraoperative  re- 
dosing  of neuromuscular  blocker.  Ulnar  nerve  TOF will be assessed  and documented  prior to 
reversal  administration  in all cases.  
 
An intravenous  catheter  will be placed  if not already  present  and a crystalloid  solution  will be 
started.  Antibiotics,  heparin  and other  medications  will be administered  as ordered  by the 
surgical  service.  If an epidural  is present,  it will be used  at the standard  post operative  
analgesic  rate. 
 
Anesthesia  will be induced  in a standard  fashion.  Prior to paralysis,  a baseline  twitch  
response  will be elicited  (TOF  count  4/4 with no perceived  fade).  Then  neuromuscular  
blockade  will be achieved  with rocuronium  0.6mg/kg.  A Time  Out will be performed  and the 
patient  will be positioned,  prepared  and draped  for surgery.  
 
Anesthesia  will be maintained  in accordance  with the current  standard  management  
technique.  Patients  on an ERAS  protocol  will continue  on pathway.  Anti-emetic  medication  
will be given  per institutional  protocol  unless  contraindicated.  The TOFcount  will be  
measured  at 15 minute  intervals   and will be recorded  in the anesthetic  record.  After recovery  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  12 of 27  
  
 
from the induction  dose,  additional  doses  of ROC  (0.1-0.2 mg/kg)  will be administered  when  
the TOF count  reaches  3 to maintain  the TOF count  at 1-2 twitches  throughout  the surgical  
procedure.  In the event  that deeper  paralysis  is required  for surgical  exposure,  we will delay  
reversal  until at least one twitch  has returned.  It should  be possible  to bring  the patient  back 
to one twitch  during  surgical  closure  and before  reversal.  Acetaminophen  and ketorolac  will 
be used  at the discretion  of the attending  surgeon.  
 
Ketamine,  if used,  will be discontinued  at the beginning  of surgical  closure  to prevent  
interference  with emergence.  At the conclusion  of the operation,  NMB will be reversed  after 
fascial  closure  and when  the patient  has at least TOF count  1-2/4 at the ulnar  nerve.  The 
anesthesia  provider  will reverse  the patient  with either  sugammadex  (2 mg/kg)  or  
neostigmine  (0.05mg/kg  up to 5mg)  and glycopyrrolate  (0.2mg  [1ml]  for each  ml of 
neostigmine  used),  after which  the patient  will be emerged  from anesthesia.  The reversal  
agent  will be listed  as IRB Protocol  17-207 Study  Drug  A (NEO/GLYCO)  or  B (SUG),   in the 
anesthesia  record  to maintain  blinding  to those  other  than the intraoperative  anesthesia  care 
team.  At the time of reversal  agent  administration,  the TOF count  and fade assessment  will 
be performed  every  minute  until TOF count  4/4 with no perceived  fade is achieved.  When  the 
patient  has recovered  to a TOF count  4/4 (with no perceived  fade),  the patient  will be 
extubated.  The time from administration  of reversal  agent  (fascial  closure)  to TOF count  4/4 
with no perceived  fade,  as well as extubation  will be recorded.  The patient  will then be 
transferred  to the postoperative  bed and taken  to the PACU.  If the TOF count  does not reach  
4/4 with no perceived  fade after a reasonable  time (approximately  30 minutes  after reversal),  
the patient  may be extubated  and transferred  to the PACU  at the discretion  of the anesthesia  
provider  after traditional  extubation  criteria  have been  met (Appendix  1). 
 
Upon  arrival  to the PACU,  the patient  will be admitted  and vital signs  recorded.  The patient  
will be evaluated  by a clinician,  trained  by the PI, who will act as a blinded  assessor  at 30, 
60, and 120 minutes  following  arrival  (+/- 5 minutes  until the patient  meets  discharge  criteria)  
for the following.  S/he may be assisted  by a trained  PACU  RN or APP if necessary.  The 
parameters  being  assessed  are: 
 
a. difficulty  with breathing  (yes/no)  
b. presence  of diplopia  or other  visual  disturbances  (yes/no)  
c. difficulty  with speaking  (yes/no)  
d. difficulty  with swallowing  (yes/no)  
e. the presence  of nausea  or vomiting  (yes/no)  
f. the presence  of pain (yes/no)  
g. feeling  worried  or anxious  (yes/no)  
h. presence  of muscle  strength  at the biceps  brachii  muscle  (Oxford  Scale,  Appendix  1) 
 
At discharge  from PACU,  the cost of the study  drugs  will be compared  along  with the time of 
the PACU  stay from admission  to ready  to discharge  from PACU  (RTD).  
 
 
5.0 THERAPEUTIC/DIAGNOSTIC  AGENTS  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  13 of 27  
  
 
There  will be no new therapeutic  or diagnostic  agents  used  as part of this study.  All drugs  
and materials  will be obtained  through  the standard  source  of supply  at MSKCC.  The 
reversal  agents  used  for this study,  sugammadex  and neostigmine/glycopyrrolate,  are 
routinely  stocked  in the Omnicell  machines  in the operating  rooms  and are directly  available  
to the anesthesia  provider  to dispense  per the randomization.  The medication  will be listed  
on the anesthesia  record  as IRB protocol  17-207 Study  Drug  A (NEO/GLYCO)  or  B (SUG),  
and therefore  will be blinded  to everyone  but the intraoperative  anesthesia  care team.  
 
 
6.1 CRITERIA  FOR SUBJECT  ELIGIBILITY  
 
6.2 Subject  Inclusion  Criteria  
 
1) Adult  patients  age 18 years  of age or greater  who are capable  of giving  consent  
2) Undergoing  surgical  procedures  of expected  length  ≤ 8 hours  requiring  NMB 
 
6.3 Subject  Exclusion  Criteria  
 
1) Pregnancy  
2) History  of documented  anaphylaxis  or contraindication  to any of the study  medications  
3) Active  coronary  disease  with a positive  cardiac  stress  test 
4) History  of severe  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease  (COPD)  defined  as an FEV1  < 
50% of predicted  
5) Serum  Creatinine  ≥ 2.0 mg/dL  
6) Severe  hepatic  dysfunction  accompanied  by coagulopathy  
Definiton:  
 
• Known  liver diease  AND 
• INR >1.5 (except  for patients  on anticoagulants)  AND 
• Platelet  count  <100,000/ µL without  other  obvious  cause  
7) Chronic  sustained -release  opioid  use for > 2 weeks  duration  pre op (in the 30 days prior 
to surgery)  
8) Use of toremifene  
9) Significant  cognitive  impairment  or documented  psychologic  impairment  
10) Myasthenia  gravis  or other  neuromuscular  disease  
11) Patients  who are not eligible  for standard  anesthetic  induction,  eg, those  needing  rapid  
sequence  induction  or awake  fiberoptic  bronchial  intubation.  
12) American  Society  of Anesthesiologists  (ASA)  Status  > 3 
 
 
 
7.0 RECRUITMENT  PLAN  
 
Potential  research  subjects  will be identified  by a member  of the patient’s  treatment  team,  the 
protocol  investigator,  or research  team  at MSKCC.  If the investigator  is a member  of the 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  14 of 27  
  
 
treatment  team,  s/he will screen  their patient’s  medical  records  for suitable  research  study  
participants  and discuss  the study  and their potential  for enrolling  in the research  study.  
 
The principal  investigator  may screen  the medical  records  of patients  with whom  they do not 
have a treatment  relationship  for the limited  purpose  of identifying  patients  who would  be 
eligible  to enroll  in the study and to record  appropriate  contact  information  in order  to 
approach  these  patients  regarding  the possibility  of enrolling  in the study.  
 
All patients  scheduled  to undergo  surgical  procedures  booked  for ≤ 6 hours  who meet  
eligibility  criteria  will be approached  for participation  in the study  during  the surgical  or 
anesthesia  preoperative  visit by a member  of the research  team. Patients  using  hormonal  
contraceptive  therapy  will be cautioned  to use another  method  of birth control  for 7 days 
postoperatively.  
The eligibility  and exclusion  criteria  do not discriminate  either  explicitly  or implicitly  against  
gender,  race or ethnicity.  Consent  will be obtained  by the attending  surgeon.  Details  
pertinent  to the trial, expected  outcomes  and potential  risks and adverse  outcomes  will be 
discussed  in detail  before  enrollment.  Informed  consent  will be obtained  and documented  in 
the patient’s  chart.  The patients will then be registered  and assigned  a unique  identification  
number.  Study  subjects  will not receive  any compensation  for participation  in the study.  
There  will not be any additional  costs  for the patients  derived  from participation.  
 
During  the initial  conversation  between  the investigator/research  staff and the patients,  the 
patient  may be asked  to provide  certain  health  information  that is necessary  to the 
recruitment  and enrollment  process.  The investigator/research  staff may also review  portions  
of their medical  records  at MSKCC  in order  to further  assess eligibility.  They  will use the 
information  provided  by the patient  and/or  medical  record  to confirm  that the patient  is  
eligible  and to contact  the patient  regarding  study  enrollment.  If that patient  turns  out to be 
ineligible  for the research  study,  the research  staff will destroy  all information  collected  on the 
patient  during  the initial  conversation  and medical  records  review,  except  for any information  
that must  be maintained  for screening  log purposes.  
In most  cases,  the initial  contact  with the prospective  subject  will be conducted  either  by the 
treatment  team,  investigator  or the research  staff working  in consultation  with the treatment  
team.  The recruitment  process  outlined  presents  no more  than minimal  risk to the privacy  of 
the patients  who are screened  and minimal  PHI will be maintained  as part of a screening  log. 
For these  reasons,  we seek a (partial)  limited  waiver  of authorization  for the purposes  of (1) 
reviewing  medical  records  to identify  potential  research  subjects  and obtain  information  
relevant  to the enrollment  process;  (2) conversing  with patients  regarding  possible  
enrollment;  (3) handling  of PHI contained  within  those  records  and provided  by the potential  
subjects;  and (4) maintaining  information  in a screening  log of patients  approached  (if 
applicable).  
 
 
8.1 PRETREATMENT  EVALUATION  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  15 of 27  
  
 
All patients  will be evaluated  by an attending  surgeon  from the appropriate  service.  Once  
eligibility  is assessed,  the patient  will be approached  regarding  participation  in the trial. Prior 
to the operation,  the following  will be performed  (all standard  before  any operation).  
 
• The patient  will sign informed  consent  for the surgery  
• The patient  will have a complete  history  and physical  examination  within  4 weeks  of 
surgery  
• Patient  demographics  will be recorded  
• Preoperative  testing,  which  may include  a basic  metabolic  panel,  complete  blood  
count,  and coagulation  profile  per surgical  service  guidelines  will be performed  within  
4 weeks  of surgery  
• Electrocardiogram  and chest  xray will be obtained  if required  per institutional  
guidelines  
• Formal  medical  evaluation  for preoperative  clearance  will be obtained  for any patient  
whose  history  warrants  
• For women  between  the ages of 11 and 50, a negative  serum  pregnancy  test within  
30 days prior to surgery  or a negative  urine  pregnancy  test on the morning  of surgery  
will be required,  as per MSKCC  guidelines  
 
 
9.1 TREATMENT/INTERVENTION PLAN 
 
Patients  participating  in this trial will undergo  routine  anesthetic  and perioperative  care.  None  of the 
interventions  are outside  the scope  of standard  perioperative  care.  
• An intravenous  catheter  will be placed.  
• An arterial  line will be placed  if deemed  necessary.  
• Continuous  monitoring  of heart  rate, blood  pressure,  ECG  (leads  II, V5), end tidal 
CO2 (etCO2),  oxygen  saturation  (SpO2),  depth  of neuromuscular  blockade,  
temperature,  urine  output  and blood  loss will be recorded.  
• The anesthetic  will proceed  according  to current  standard  management  using  
rocuronium  as the paralytic  agent.  
• NMB will be maintained  at a TOF count  of 1-2 twitches  after recovery  from the 
induction  dose.  
• Intraoperative   labs will be drawn  as deemed  necessary  by the anesthesia  provider.  
• If the intraoperative  trigger  for blood  products  is reached  (7mg/dl),  or the attending  
surgeon  or anesthesia  provider  deems  it necessary,  appropriate  blood  products  will 
be transfused.  
• At the conclusion  of fascial  closure,  NMB will be reversed  with the trial drug,  
sugammadex  (2 mg/kg)  or neostigmine  (0.05mg/kg  up to 5mg)  and glycopyrrolate  
(0.2mg  [1ml]  for each  ml of neostigmine  used)  both of which  are approved  reversal  
agents  on the MSKCC  formulary.  The drugs  will be labeled  in the anesthetic  record  at 
IRB Protocol  17-207 Study  Drug  A (NEO/GLYCO)  or B (SUG).  
• The patient  will be emerged  and extubated  when  TOF count  reaches  4/4 with no 
perceived  fade and traditional  extubation  criteria  are met. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  16 of 27  
  
 
• If the patient  has not reached  extubation  criteria  by 30 minutes  after administration  of 
study drug,  s/he may be transported  to the PACU  with the ETT in place  and timing  of 
extubation  will be documented  in PACU.  
• Additional  dosing  of reversal  agents  will not be allowed.  
• At 30 minutes  (+/-5) after arrival  to the PACU,  after routine  vital signs  are assessed,  
the patient  will be questioned  and examined  by a trained  clinician  who is blinded  to 
the study  drug for the quality  of post operative  recovery  as described  above.  A PACU  
RN or APP,  blinded  to randomization  and also trained  by the PI, may assist  in the 
assessments.  
• The same  parameters  will be assessed  at 60 and 120 minutes  (+/- 5) after admission  
to the PACU  then RTD will be assessed  every  30 minutes  until the patient  meets  
eligibility   criteria.  
• Time  to RTD from PACU  will be documented  (Primary  Outcome)  and PACU  costs  will 
be calculated.  
• The subjective  parameters  will be scored  out of 7 and muscle  strength  will be 
recorded.  
 
The trial period  is concluded  in the PACU  when  the patient  meets  PACU  discharge  criteria.  
 
10.1 EVALUATION  DURING  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION  
 
Preoperative  data 
• Name  
• Medical  record  number  
• Case  number  
• Date of birth 
• Weight  
• Height  
• Laboratory  values  (basic  metabolic  panel,  CBC,  coags  if requested  by surgeon)  
• Medications  
Intraoperative   data 
• Standard  intraoperative  monitoring  will be carried  out for all patients  
• Volume  and types  of fluids  given  intraoperatively  
• Estimated  blood  loss and urine  output  
• Total  dose  of rocuronium  used  and time of last dose  
• Time  of surgical  fascial  closure  
• Intraoperative   complications,  if any 
• Depth  of NMB (TOF  count)  at the time of reversal  agent  administration  
• Time  and quality  of NMB reversal  (TOF  count,  presence  of fade)  
• Time  extubation  criteria  are met (See  appendix  1) 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  17 of 27  
  
 
• Time  of extubation  whether  or not TOF count  4/4 with no perceived  fade is metTime  
patient  leaves  OR (or is deemed  ready  to leave  OR by intraoperative  anesthesia  care 
team  in the event  of PACU  hold)  
• Time  of arrival  to PACU  
 
At 30, 60 and 120 minutes  (+/-5) after arrival  to the PACU,  the patient  will be assessed  for 
symptoms  and complications  relevant  to this patient  population.    In addition  to the below,  patients  
will be assessed  for the presence  of any adverse  events  per MSKCC  standard  PACU  care.  In the 
PACU,  the patient  is covered  by nursing  at a ratio of 1:1 or 1:2 with continuous  bedside  evaluation  of vital 
signs,  hemodynamics  and telemetry  in a critical  care setting.  Patients  are assessed  as per nursing  protocol  and 
any adverse  events  that come  up are addressed  and documented  by the nurse  and the APP,  possibly  the 
attending  and a CIS event  note is written.  This is the standard  of MSK  post operative  care and documentation  
in the PACU. We will review  these  records  for inclusion   in our adverse  events  reporting.  
 
Patients  will be asked  to report:  
 
a. difficulty  with breathing  (yes/no)  
b. presence  of diplopia  or other  visual  disturbances  (yes/no)  
c. difficulty  with speaking  (yes/no)  
d. difficulty  with swallowing   (yes/no)  
e. the presence  of nausea  or vomiting   (yes/no)  
f. the presence  of pain (yes/no)  
g. feeling  worried  or anxious  (yes/no)  
h. presence  of muscle  strength  at the biceps  brachii  muscle  (Oxford  Scale,  
Appendix  1) 
 
Except  for the evaluation  of muscle  strength,  the assessments  will be made  in a binary  fashion.  
 
• Time  PACU  discharge  criteria  (Appendix  1) are met 
At discharge  from PACU  
• Cost of PACU  stay from admission  to Ready  to Discharge  
 
 
 
11.0 TOXICITIES/SIDE  EFFECTS  
 
The potential  toxicities/side  effects  of this study  pertain  to those  potentially  and specifically  
associated  with each  operative  procedure.  Side effects  from each  of the study  drugs  are 
infrequent  and may include  bradycardia,  nausea,  anaphylaxis   and hypersensitivity.  Patients  
will be assessed  in PACU  for any adverse  events  and documented  as described  above.  
 
All complications  will be prospectively  recorded  and any complication  felt to be due to the 
reversal  medication  will be reported  to the IRB within  5 days.  An anesthesia  research  study  
assistant  will query  the Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Surgical  Secondary  Events  Program  
Database  at 30 days post-operatively  for any potential  morbidity  data for patients  enrolled  in 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  18 of 27  
  
 
the study.  We do not expect  any adverse  events  or side effects  from the study  medications  
that are not evident  immediately  after administration.  
 
 
12.1 CRITERIA  FOR THERAPEUTIC  RESPONSE/OUTCOME  ASSESSMENT  
 
The primary  objective  of this study  is to determine  whether  SUG,  as compared  to NEO  
decreases  time for patients  to be ready  for discharge  from the PACU and  associated  cost 
savings  as well as quality  of patient  recovery  from NMB.  
 
Secondary  patient -reported  parameters  being  evaluated  are: 
 
a. difficulty  with breathing  
b. presence  of diplopia  or other  visual  disturbances  
c. difficulty  with speaking  
d. difficulty  with swallowing  
e. the presence  of nausea  or vomiting  
f. the presence  of pain 
g. feeling  worried  or anxious  
h. presence  of muscle  strength  at the biceps  brachii  muscle  (Oxford  Scale,  
Appendix  1) 
• Time  patient  meets  PACU  discharge  criteria  (Appendix  1) 
 
All questions  except  the Oxford  Scale  muscle  strength  assessment  will be answered  in a 
binary  yes/no  fashion.  
 
These  parameters  will be evaluated  in the PACU  at 30, 60 and 120 minutes  (+/- 5) after 
arrival.  RTD from PACU  will be assessed  at 30 minute  intervals  until criteria  are reached.  
At discharge  from PACU,  the cost of the PACU  stay from admission  to ready  to discharge  
will be calculated  including  the cost of the study  medication  when  unblinding  occurs.  
We do not anticipate  any obstacles  to assessing  patient  response  or inclusion  in the study  
results.  
 
 
13.0 CRITERIAFOR REMOVAL FROM STUDY 
 
A subject  may be removed  from the study  at any time if the attending  surgeon  or  anesthesia  
provider  deems  it necessary  for patient  safety,  or if the patient  expresses  desire  to be removed.  We 
do not expect  any toxicity  associated  with the study  intervention.  
 
 
14.0 BIOSTATISTICS 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  19 of 27  
  
 
This is a randomized  assessor  blinded  study  comparing  two reversal  agents:  neostigmine  (NEO,  
control  arm) and sugammadex  (SUG,  intervention  arm) in terms  of time for and quality  of recovery  
after reversal  of NMB.  We plan to enroll  202 patients  (101 in each  treatment  arm) with planned  
moderate  length  surgical  procedures  requiring  paralysis.  The primary  outcome  is the duration  
between  administration  of NMB reversal  agent  and the time the patient  is ready  for discharge  from 
PACU  (PACU  discharge  criteria,  Appendix   1). 
 
The sample  size calculation  is first based  on a hypothesized  ratio of 0.80 in SUG  to NEO  mean  
duration  (i.e., the mean  duration  between  NMB reversal  agent  and ready  for PACU  discharge under  
SUG   is 20% shorter  than the mean  duration  under  NEO).  This hypothesis  based  on the ratio of 
means  can then be translated  into a hypothesis  about  the difference  in mean  duration  on the log 
scale  for the purpose  of sample  size calculation  and interim  and final analyses.  This approach  was 
used  because  there  is no published  literature  with the necessary  statistics  in this particular  
population  of interest.  
 
Stating  the hypothesis  as a ratio requires  specification  of (1) the hypothesized  ratio and (2) the 
coefficient  of variation  (CV = standard  deviation  divided  by mean)  to describe  the amount  of 
variability  relative  to the mean.  The hypothesized  ratio of 0.80 in SUG  to NEO  mean  duration  is 
within  the range  of estimated  reduction  in other  populations37,38. Literature  also report  CV between  
0.2 and 0.4 in the outcome  measures  among  other  populations,  so we proceed  with a more  
conservative  choice  of CV of 0.5 for this study.  Hence,  the hypothesis  based  on the ratio of 0.8 and 
CV of 0.5 is equivalent  to a two-sample  t-test assuming  logged -mean  of 0 under  NEO  versus  -0.223  
under  SUG,  with the standard  deviation  of 0.472.  
Based  on the two-sample  t-test of two means  on log scale  and two-sided  alpha  of 0.05,  a total 
sample  size of 192 patients  who undergo  surgery  yields  90% power  to detect  the desired  differences  
in logged -means,  or equivalently,  a ratio of 0.8 in SUG  to NEO  mean  duration.  This sample  size also 
allows  for an interim  analysis  halfway  through  enrollment,  using  O’Brien -Fleming  boundaries  with 
Lan de Mets spending  function  for both efficacy  and futility.  If p≤0.002  at the interim  analysis,  
enrollment  will stop with the conclusion  that PACU  stay is significantly  different  between  the 
treatments.  If 0.002<p<0.846,  the trial will continue  to full enrollment,  and we will conclude  that the 
treatments  are significantly  different  if p<0.049.  We increase  the sample  size by 5% (total  202 
patients)  to address  drop outs or missing  primary  outcomes  due to any reason  (e.g.,  surgery  did not 
occur).  Evaluable  patients  are those  randomized,  completed  surgery,  and are able to provide  the 
primary  outcome  of duration  between  administration  of NMB reversal  agent  and ready  to discharge  
from PACU.  
Analysis  of the primary  outcome  will utilize  the two-sample  t-test to compare  the two randomized  
treatment  arms in terms  of the mean  duration  between  reversal  of NMB to ready  for PACU  
discharge  on the log scale.  The conclusion  will also be presented  in terms  of the ratio.  The primary  
analysis  will be performed  under  the intent -to-treat (ITT) principle,  including  all randomized  patients  
in the evaluable  set. The analysis  of the primary  outcome  will be repeated  with modified  ITT to 
exclude  patients  with intraoperative/PACU  complications  (e.g.,  unable  to extubate).  
 
In reviewing  institutional  data,  the average  number  of patients  who die in the PACU  is 1 every  5+ 
years,  and return  to OR from PACU  is approximately  1 every  year.  In the rare case  that patients  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  20 of 27  
  
 
could  only contribute  only partial  information  on the primary  endpoint,  we may pursue  survival  
analysis  approach  instead,  comparing  the duration  until ready  to PACU  discharge,  and censored  at 
time of PACU  exit other  than meeting  discharge  criteria,  taking  into account  potential  informative  
censoring.  Accrual  rate is 8-16 per month,  and the study  is expected  to be completed  in 
approximately  one to two years.  
Secondary  outcomes  related  to the quality  of post-operative  recovery  during  PACU  stay will be 
measured  at 30, 60 and 120 minutes  (+/-5) after arrival  to the PACU.  Secondary  patient -reported  
outcomes  will be analyzed  using  the mixed -effects  models  with random  effects  (patient -level)  and 
fixed effects  (time  point of measurement  and arm assignment).  Outcomes  measured  on a 
continuous  scale  will be analyzed  with the identity  link in the longitudinal  models,  while  binary  
outcomes  will be analyzed  with logit link: Oxford  scale  of muscle  strength  at the biceps  brachii  
muscle  (0-5 likert scale,  Appendix  1); quality  of life measures  relevant  to the current  study  will be 
summarized  analyzed  separately,  such  as difficulty  with breathing,  presence  of pain, and feeling  
worried  or anxious  (yes/no  for occurrence  of each  item,  Appendix  1). These  analyses  are  
exploratory  because  they are of secondary  interest  and we do not estimate  statistical  power.  The 
age of patients  in the oncological  surgical  category  may be higher  than general  anesthesia  cases  as 
a whole.  Age affects  pharmacokinetics  and pharmacodynamics  and hence  may bias the treatment  
effect  (Br J Anaesth  2011  PMID  21531745).  As an exploratory  objective,  we will perform  subgroup  
analyses  of the primary  and secondary  objectives  only among  the elderly  patients  (>70 years  old).39 
As such,  randomization  of patients  will be stratified  by age (<70 years  vs ≥ 70 years).  
 
Costs  associated  with the use of each  drug and relationship  to the duration  of PACU  stay will be 
compared  between  the two treatment  arms.  Costs  of drugs  and PACU  stay (from  arrival  to ready  for 
discharge)  will be obtained  from pharmacy  and administration.  As of June 19, 2016,  the cost of each  
reversal  medication  is $80 for NEO  ($50 NEO  and $30 Glyco  prefilled  syringes)  and $90 for SUG  
200mg.  Cost of PACU  stay from admission  to ready  for discharged  will be estimated  based  on the 
15-minute  PACU  costs  quoted  by administration  (includes  surgeon  and anesthesia  provider’s  
reimbursement,  facility  fees etc.).  The net cost of SUG  (and NEO)  is calculated  as the drug’s  
acquisition  cost minus  the value  of any reduction  in PACU  recovery  with the drug.  Cost analyses  will 
be conducted  based  on pairwise  threshold  analyses,  which  addresses  the question  “how much  
reduction  in recovery  time would  SUG  need  to achieve,  and with what value  per minute  of staff time,  
to justify  its additional  acquisition  price?”  40 
The rate of removal  will be reported  with the study  results.  Patients  who are removed  from the study  
intraoperatively  will be continued  to be followed  unless  consent  is withdrawn.  Pulmonary  and airway  
complications  in the PACU  will be summarized  by arms.  Any complications  which  occur  will be 
documented  and submitted  as potential  SAEs  as outlined  in Section  17.2.  
 
The evaluable  criterion  also includes  the type of recording  device  used  intraoperatively:  randomized  
patients  who are on any recording  device  other  than the SunStim  monitors  will be considered  
inevaluable  (and excluded  from anlyses)  due to non-reproducible/unreliable   recordings.  These  
patients  will be replaced  in the study.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  21 of 27  
  
 
15.1 RESEARCH PARTICIPANT REGISTRATION AND RANDOMIZATION PROCEDUR ES 
 
15.2 Research  Participant  Registration  
 
 
Confirm  eligibility   as defined  in the section  entitled   Inclusion/Exclusion   Criteria.  Obtain  
informed  consent,  by following   procedures   defined  in section  entitled   Informed   Consent  
Procedures.  During  the registration   process  registering   individuals   will be required  to 
complete  a protocol  specific  Eligibility   Checklist.  The individual   signing  the Eligibility  
Checklist  is confirming  whether  or not the participant   is eligible   to enroll  in the study.  
Study  staff are responsible   for ensuring  that all institutional   requirements   necessary  to 
enroll  a participant   to the study  have been  completed.  See related  Clinical  Research  
Policy  and Procedure  #401  (Protocol  Participant   Registration).  
 
 
15.3 Randomization  
 
This is an assessor  and patient  only blinded  randomized  trial comparing  sugammadex   
versus  neostigmine.  There  will be a total of 202 patients  recruited  for this study,  101 in each  
arm, consented  during  a preoperative  clinic  appointment.  Randomization  will be stratified  by 
age (<70 years  vs ≥ 70 years).  After eligibility  is established  and consent  is obtained,  patients  
will be registered  by the CRCs  in the Clinical  Trials  Management  System  (CTMS)  and 
randomized  using  the Clinical  Research  Database  (CRDB).  Only the anesthesia  research  
team  (CRMs  and CRCs)  and the anesthesia  care team  in the OR will have access  to the 
unblinded  treatment  assignments.  
16.1 DATA MANAGEMENT ISSUES 
 
A clinical  research  coordinator  (CRC)  will be assigned  to the study.  The responsibilities  of the 
CRCinclude  project  compliance,  patient  registration,  assistance  with data collection,  
abstraction  and entry,  data reporting,  regulatory  monitoring,  problem  resolution  and 
prioritization  and coordination  of the activities  of the protocol  study  team.  The CRC  will be 
integrated  into current  weekly  and monthly  meetings  where  complications  are recorded,  
procedures  reviewed  and outcomes  documented.  The PI’s will personally  meet  with the CRC  
on a weekly  basis  to assist  with and review  the collection  and entry  of data.  
 
All data to be collected  are listed  within  Section  10.0,  and will only be used  for the purposes  
of the study.  It will be maintained  in a confidential  clinical  research  database  by research  
study  personnel  only under  the direct  supervision  of the principal  investigator.  The database  
will be kept in a password  protected  computer  and will not be transferred  outside  the hospital  
network.  A minimum  dataset  will be kept in CRDB.  The data will be linked  to the patients  by 
means  of unique  tracking  subject  numbers,  the key to which  will also be password  protected  
and only to be accessed  by research  personnel.  Data will be reported  to the IRB as required.  
We estimate  accrual  to be approximately  2-4 patients  per week  allowing  completion  and 
reporting  of the study  within  1-2 years.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  22 of 27  
  
 
16.2 Quality Assurance 
 
Weekly  registration  reports  will be generated  to monitor  patient  accruals  and completeness  
of registration  data.  Routine  data quality  reports  will be generated  to assess  missing  data 
and inconsistencies.  Accrual  rates  and extent  and accuracy  of evaluations  and follow  up will 
be monitored  periodically  throughout  the study  period  and potential  problems  will be brought  
to the attention  of the study  team  for discussion  and action.  
 
Random  sample  data quality  and protocol  compliance  audits  will be conducted  by the study  
team  at a minimum  of two times  per year,  more  frequently  if indicated.  
 
The principal  investigator  will maintain  final responsibility  for the maintenance,  quality  and 
integrity  of all data collection  during  the study  and during  the final analysis  of data.  Breaches  
of protocol,  problems  with eligibility,   informed  consent  or discrepancies  in data accuracy  will 
be reported  to the IRB at MSKCC  as required.  
16.3 Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
 
The Data and Safety  Monitoring  (DSM)  Plans  at Memorial  Sloan -Kettering  Cancer  Center  
were  approved  by the National  Cancer  Institute  in September  2001.  The plans  address  the 
new policies  set forth by the NCI in the Document  entitled  ”Policy  of the National  Cancer  
Institute  for Data and Safety  Monitoring  of Clinical  Trials,” which  can be found  at:  
http://cancer.gov/clinicaltrials/conducting/dsm  -guidelines . The DSM  Plans  at MSKCC  were  
established  and are monitored  by the Office  of Clinical  Research.  The MSKCC  Data and 
Safety  Monitoring  Plans  can be found  on the MSKCC  Intranet  at:  
http:/mskweb5.mskcc.org/intranet/assets/tables/content/359709/DSMPlans07.pdf . 
 
There  are several  different  mechanisms  by which  clinical  trials are monitored  for data,  safety  
and quality.  There  are institutional  processes  in place  for quality  assurance  (e.g. protocol  
monitoring,  compliance  and data verification  audits,  therapeutic  response,  and staff 
education  on clinical  research  QA) and departmental  procedures  for quality  control.  In 
addition,  there  are two institutional  committees  that are responsible  for monitoring  the 
activities  of our clinical  trials programs.  The committees:  Data and Safety  Monitoring  
Committee  (DSMC)  for Phase  I and II clinical  trials,  and the Data and Safety  Monitoring  
Board  (DSMB)  for Phase  III clinical  trials,  report  to the Center’s  Research  Council  and 
Institutional  Review  Board.  
 
During  the protocol  development  and review  process,  each  protocol  will be assess  ed for its 
level of risk and degree  of monitoring  required.  Every  type of protocol  (e.g. NIH sponsored,  in 
house  sponsored,  industrial  sponsored,  NCI cooperative  group,  etc.) will be addressed  and 
the monitoring  procedures  will be established  at the time of protocol  activation.  
17.1 PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 
 
▪ The responsible  principal  investigator  (PI) will ensure  that this study  is conducted  in 
agreement  with the declaration  of Helsinki  (Tokyo,  Venice,  Hong  King,  Somerset  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  23 of 27  
  
 
West  and Edinburgh  amendments).  The study  will seek to protect  the rights  of human  
subjects  in every  way. 
▪ The potential  risks,  including  adverse  drug reactions  and potential  benefits  in terms  of 
post operative  recovery  will be discussed  in detail  with the patients.  
▪ Potential  side effects  will also be discussed  with the patients.  
▪ No patient  will be required  to participate  in the study  and participation,  or refusal  to do 
so, will not affect  the patient’s care or treatment.  
▪ The patient  will not incur  any financial  cost as a result  of participation  in the study.  
▪ Participation  will be purely  voluntary,  and subjects  will not be reimbursed  for 
participation  in the study.  
▪ Throughout  the study,  patient  confidentiality  will be maintained.  No results  of the 
study will  be presented  or discussed  in a fashion  that will allow  identification  of a 
particular  patient  in the study.  
▪ All adverse  events  will be fully disclosed  to the IRB in a timely  fashion  as required.  
 
17.2 Privacy  
 
The consent  indicates  that individualized   de identified  information  collected  for the purposes  
of this study  may be shared  with other  qualified  researchers.  Only researchers  who have 
received  approval  from MSK will be allowed  to have access to this information  which  will not 
include  protected  health  information,  such  as the participant’s  name,  exce pt for dates.  It is 
also stated  in the Research  Authorization  that their research  data may be shared  with other  
qualified   researchers.  
MSK’s Privacy  Office  may allow  the use and disclosure  of protected  health  information  
pursuant  to a completed  and signed  Research  Authorization  form.  The use and disclosure  of 
protected  health  information  will be limited  to the individuals  described  in the Research  
Authorization  form.  A Research  Authorization  form must  be completed  by the Principal  
Investigator  and approved  by the IRB and Privacy  Board  (IRB/PB).  
17.3 Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Reporting 
 
An adverse  event  is considered  serious  if it results  in ANY of the following  outcomes:  
• Death  
• A life-threatening  adverse  event  
• An adverse  event  that results  in inpatient  hospitalization  or prolongation  of existing  
hospitalization  
• A persistent  or significant  incapacity  or substantial  disruption  of the ability  to conduct  
normal  life functions  
• A congenital  anomaly/birth  defect  
• Important  Medical  Events  (IME)  that may not result  in death,  be life threatening,  or 
require  hospitalization  may be considered  serious  when,  based  upon  medical  judgment,  
they may jeopardize  the patient  or subject  and may require  medical  or surgical  
intervention  to prevent  one of the outcomes  listed  in this definition  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  24 of 27  
  
 
Note: Hospital  admission  for a planned  procedure/disease  treatment  is not considered  an 
SAE.  
 
SAE reporting  is required  as soon  as the participant  starts  investigational  
treatment/intervention.  SAE reporting  is required  for 30-days after the participant’s  last 
investigational  treatment  or intervention.  Any events  that occur  after the 30-day period  that is 
unexpected  and at least possibly  related  to protocol  treatment  must  be reported.  
 
Please  note:  Any SAE that occurs  prior to the start of investigational  treatment/intervention  
and is related  to a screening  test or procedure  (i.e., a screening  biopsy)  must  be reported.  
 
All SAEs  must  be submitted  in PIMS.  If an SAE requires  submission  to the HRPP  office  per 
IRB SOP  RR-408 “Reporting  of Serious  Adverse  Events’,  the SAE report  must  be submitted  
within  5 calendar  days of the event.  
 
. 
 
The report  should  contain  the following  information:  
 
• The date the adverse  event  occurred  
• The adverse  event  
• The grade  of the event  
• Relationship  of the adverse  event  to the treatment(s)  
• If the AE was expected  
• Detailed  text that includes  the following  
o A explanation  of how the AE was handled  
o A description  of the subject’s  condition  
o Indication  if the subject  remains  on the study  
• If an amendment  will need  to be made  to the protocol  and/or  consent  form 
• If the SAE is an Unanticipated  Problem  
 
 
17.2.1  
 
There  is no additional  SAE reporting  information  required  by the drug supplier.  
 
18.1 INFORMED  CONSENT  PROCEDURES  
 
Before  protocol -specified  procedures  are carried  out, consenting  professionals  will explain   
full details  of the protocol  and study  procedures  as well as the risks involved  to participants  
prior to their inclusion  in the study.  Participants  will also be informed  that they are free to 
withdraw  from the study  at any time.  All participants  must  sign an IRB/PB -approved  consent  
form indicating  their consent  to participate.  This consent  form meets  the requirements  of the 
Code  of Federal  Regulations  and the Institutional  Review  Board/Privacy  Board  of this Center.  
The consent  form will include  the following:  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  25 of 27  
  
 
1. The nature  and objectives,  potential  risks and benefits  of the intended  study.  
2. The length  of study  and the likely follow -up required.  
3. Alternatives  to the proposed  study.  (This  will include  available  standard  and 
investigational  therapies.  In addition,  patients  will be offered  an option  of supportive  
care for therapeutic  studies.)  
4. The name  of the investigator(s)  responsible  for the protocol.  
5. The right of the participant  to accept  or refuse  study  interventions/interactions  and to 
withdraw  from participation  at any time.  
Before  any protocol -specific  procedures  can be carried  out, the consenting  professional  will 
fully explain  the aspects  of patient  privacy  concerning  research  specific  information.   In 
addition  to signing  the IRB Informed  Consent,  all patients  must  agree  to the Research  
Authorization  component  of the informed  consent  form.  
Each  participant  and consenting  professional  will sign the consent  form.  The participant  must  
receive  a copy of the signed  informed  consent  form.  
 
 
19.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. Zhang  B, Hepner  DL, Tran MH, Friedman  M, Korn JR, Menzin  J. Neuromuscular  blockade,  
reversal  agent  use, and operating  room  time:  retrospective  analysis  of US inpatient  
surgeries.  Curr Med Res Opin.  2009;25(4):943 -950. 
2. Ali HH, Utting  JE, Gray C. Stimulus  frequency  in the detection  of neuromuscular  block  in 
humans.  Br J Anaesth.  1970;42(11):967 -978. 
3. Ali HH, Utting  JE, Gray  TC. Quantitative  assessment  of residual  antidepolarizing  block.  II. Br 
J Anaesth.  1971;43(5):478 -485. 
4. Ali HH, Utting  JE, Gray  TC. Quantitative  assessment  of residual  antidepolarizing  block.  I. Br 
J Anaesth.  1971;43(5):473 -477. 
5. Kopman  AF, Yee PS, Neuman  GG. Relationship  of the train-of-four fade ratio to clinical  signs  
and symptoms  of residual  paralysis  in awake  volunteers.  Anesthesiology.  1997;86(4):765 - 
771. 
6. Debaene  B, Plaud  B, Dilly MP, Donati  F. Residual  paralysis  in the PACU  after a single  
intubating  dose  of nondepolarizing  muscle  relaxant  with an intermediate  duration  of action.  
Anesthesiology.   2003;98(5):1042 -1048.  
7. Eikermann  M, Groeben  H, Husing  J, Peters  J. Predictive  value  of mechanomyography  and 
accelerometry  for pulmonary  function  in partially  paralyzed  volunteers.  Acta 
anaesthesiologica   Scandinavica.  2004;48(3):365 -370. 
8. Naguib  M, Kopman  AF, Ensor  JE. Neuromuscular  monitoring  and postoperative  residual  
curarisation:  a meta -analysis.  Br J Anaesth.  2007;98(3):302 -316. 
9. Lien CA, Kopman  AF. Current  recommendations  for monitoring  depth  of neuromuscular  
blockade.  Current  opinion  in anaesthesiology.  2014;27(6):616 -622. 
10. Berg H, Roed  J, Viby-Mogensen   J, et al. Residual  neuromuscular  block  is a risk factor  for 
postoperative  pulmonary  complications.  A prospective,  randomised,  and blinded  study  of 
postoperative  pulmonary  complications  after atracurium,  vecuronium  and pancuronium.  Acta 
anaesthesiologica   Scandinavica.  1997;41(9):1095 -1103.  
11. Eikermann  M, Groeben  H, Husing  J, Peters  J. Accelerometry  of adductor  pollicis  muscle  
predicts  recovery  of respiratory  function  from neuromuscular  blockade.  Anesthesiology.  
2003;98(6):1333 -1337.  
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  26 of 27  
  
 
12. Engbaek  J, Ostergaard  D, Viby-Mogensen   J, Skovgaard  LT. Clinical  recovery  and train-of- 
four ratio measured  mechanically  and electromyographically  following  atracurium.  
Anesthesiology.   1989;71(3):391 -395. 
13. Eriksson  LI. Evidence -based  practice  and neuromuscular  monitoring:  it's time for routine  
quantitative   assessment.  Anesthesiology.  2003;98(5):1037 -1039.  
14. Eriksson  LI, Lennmarken  C, Wyon  N, Johnson  A. Attenuated  ventilatory  response  to 
hypoxaemia  at vecuronium -induced  partial  neuromuscular  block.  Acta anaesthesiologica  
Scandinavica.  1992;36(7):710 -715. 
15. Eriksson  LI, Sato M, Severinghaus  JW. Effect  of a vecuronium -induced  partial  
neuromuscular  block  on hypoxic  ventilatory  response.  Anesthesiology.  1993;78(4):693 -699. 
16. Eriksson  LI, Sundman  E, Olsson  R, et al. Functional  assessment  of the pharynx  at rest and 
during  swallowing  in partially  paralyzed  humans:  simultaneous  videomanometry  and 
mechanomyography  of awake  human  volunteers.  Anesthesiology.  1997;87(5):1035 -1043.  
17. Viby-Mogensen   J. Postoperative  residual  curarization  and evidence -based  anaesthesia.  Br J 
Anaesth.  2000;84(3):301 -303. 
18. Murphy  GS. Residual  neuromuscular  blockade:  incidence,  assessment,  and relevance  in the 
postoperative  period.  Minerva  anestesiologica.  2006;72(3):97 -109. 
19. McLean  DJ, Diaz-Gil D, Farhan  HN, Ladha  KS, Kurth  T, Eikermann  M. Dose -dependent  
Association  between  Intermediate -acting  Neuromuscular -blocking  Agents  and Postoperative  
Respiratory  Complications.  Anesthesiology.  2015;122(6):1201 -1213.  
20. Maybauer  DM, Geldner  G, Blobner  M, et al. Incidence  and duration  of residual  paralysis  at 
the end of surgery  after multiple  administrations  of cisatracurium  and rocuronium.  
Anaesthesia.  2007;62(1):12 -17. 
21. Butterly  A, Bittner  EA, George  E, Sandberg  WS, Eikermann  M, Schmidt  U. Postoperative  
residual  curarization  from intermediate -acting  neuromuscular  blocking  agents  delays  
recovery  room  discharge.  Br J Anaesth.  2010;105(3):304 -309. 
22. Fortier  LP, McKeen  D, Turner  K, et al. The RECITE  Study:  A Canadian  Prospective,  
Multicenter  Study  of the Incidence  and Severity  of Residual  Neuromuscular  Blockade.  
Anesthesia  and analgesia.  2015;121(2):366 -372. 
23. Eikermann  M, Vogt FM, Herbstreit  F, et al. The predisposition  to inspiratory  upper  airway  
collapse  during  partial  neuromuscular  blockade.  Am J Respir  Crit Care  Med.  2007;175(1):9 - 
15. 
24. Brueckmann  B, Sasaki  N, Grobara  P, et al. Effects  of sugammadex  on incidence  of 
postoperative  residual  neuromuscular  blockade:  a randomized,  controlled  study.  Br J 
Anaesth.  2015;115(5):743 -751. 
25. Grosse -Sundrup  M, Henneman  JP, Sandberg  WS, et al. Intermediate  acting  non- 
depolarizing  neuromuscular  blocking  agents  and risk of postoperative  respiratory  
complications: prospective  propensity  score  matched  cohort  study.  BMJ.  2012;345:e6329.  
26. Sasaki  N, Meyer  MJ, Malviya  SA, et al. Effects  of neostigmine  reversal  of nondepolarizing  
neuromuscular  blocking  agents  on postoperative  respiratory  outcomes:  a prospective  study.  
Anesthesiology.   2014;121(5):959 -968. 
27. Herbstreit  F, Zigrahn  D, Ochterbeck  C, Peters  J, Eikermann  M. Neostigmine/glycopyrrolate  
administered  after recovery  from neuromuscular  block  increases  upper  airway  collapsibility  
by decreasing  genioglossus  muscle  activity  in response  to negative  pharyngeal  pressure.  
Anesthesiology.   2010;113(6):1280 -1288.  
28. Eikermann  M, Fassbender  P, Malhotra  A, et al. Unwarranted  administration  of 
acetylcholinesterase  inhibitors  can impair  genioglossus  and diaphragm  muscle  function.  
Anesthesiology.   2007;107(4):621 -629. 
29. Kopman  AF, Eikermann  M. Antagonism  of non-depolarising  neuromuscular  block:  current  
practice.  Anaesthesia.  2009;64  Suppl  1:22-30. 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
IRB Number: 17 -207 A(7)  
Approval date: 17 -Jul-2019  
Page  27 of 27  
  
 
30. Caldwell  JE, Miller  RD. Clinical  implications  of sugammadex.  Anaesthesia.  2009;64  Suppl  
1:66-72. 
31. Jones  RK, Caldwell  JE, Brull SJ, Soto RG. Reversal  of profound  rocuronium -induced  
blockade  with sugammadex:  a randomized  comparison  with neostigmine.  Anesthesiology.  
2008;109(5):816 -824. 
32. Sorgenfrei  IF, Norrild  K, Larsen  PB, et al. Reversal  of rocuronium -induced  neuromuscular  
block  by the selective  relaxant  binding  agent  sugammadex:  a dose -finding  and safety  study.  
Anesthesiology.   2006;104(4):667 -674. 
33. Sacan  O, White  PF, Tufanogullari  B, Klein  K. Sugammadex  reversal  of rocuronium -induced  
neuromuscular  blockade:  a comparison  with neostigmine -glycopyrrolate  and edrophonium - 
atropine.  Anesthesia  and analgesia.  2007;104(3):569 -574. 
34. Eikermann  M, Zaremba  S, Malhotra  A, Jordan  AS, Rosow  C, Chamberlin  NL. Neostigmine  
but not sugammadex  impairs  upper  airway  dilator  muscle  activity  and breathing.  Br J 
Anaesth.  2008;101(3):344 -349. 
35. Donati  F, Antzaka  C, Bevan  DR. Potency  of pancuronium  at the diaphragm  and the adductor  
pollicis  muscle  in humans.  Anesthesiology.  1986;65(1):1 -5. 
36. Brull SJ, Silverman  DG. Pulse  width,  stimulus  intensity,  electrode  placement,  and polarity  
during  assessment  of neuromuscular  block.  Anesthesiology.  1995;83(4):702 -709. 
37. Carron  M, Baratto  F, Zarantonello  F, Ori C. Sugammadex  for reversal  of neuromuscular  
blockade:  a retrospective  analysis  of clinical  outcomes  and cost-effectiveness  in a single  
center.  ClinicoEconomics  and outcomes  research  : CEOR.  2016;8:43 -52. 
38. Unal DY, Baran,  I., Mutlu,  M., et al. Comparison  of Sugammadex  versus  Neostigmine  Costs  
and Respiratory  Complications  in Patients  with Obstructive  Sleep  Apnoea.  Turk J Anaesth  
Reanim.  2015;43:387 -395. 
39. Suzuki  T, Kitajima  O, Ueda  K, Kondo  Y, Kato J, Ogawa  S. Reversibility  of rocuronium  - 
induced  profound  neuromuscular  block  with sugammadex  in younger  and older  patients.  Br J 
Anaesth.  2011;106(6):823 -826. 
40. Paton  F, Paulden  M, Chambers  D, et al. Sugammadex  compared  with 
neostigmine/glycopyrrolate  for routine  reversal  of neuromuscular  block:  a systematic  review  
and economic  evaluation.  Br J Anaesth.  2010;105(5):558 -567. 
 
 
20.0 APPENDICES 
 
• Appendix  1: Postoperative  Assessment  Form  