Study Cover Page 
Official Study Title: Treatment of Prolonged Grief Disorder in Combat Veterans 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Protocol date: August 4, 2014 
Data Analytic Plan Baseline data were compared across groups using t-tests for continuous variables and chi-square tests for proportion variables to examine differences in demographic factors, pre-treatment symptom intensity (i.e., grief, depression, and PTSD), and co-variates that are particularly relevant to research with veterans (i.e., social support, time since death, and overall number of sessions completed). No differences in scores or proportionate representation were noted in terms of any demographic, baseline symptoms, or potential covariates. Next, repeated measures analysis of variance were conducted to determine the relative effectiveness of BATE-G vs. CT-G in terms of grief (i.e., ICG-R), depression (i.e., BDI-II) and PTSD (i.e., PCL-5) symptom outcomes. Although no covariation control (i.e., ANCOVA) was employed because covariates did not differ between groups. Baseline scores on primary dependent measures were included in the ANOVA model to test overall effects of time. The intent to treat (ITT) sample served as the primary analytic sample, and missing data were conservatively replaced through total sample mean substitution, which shares variance of missing data across groups and lessens likelihood of finding spuriously significant results. All analyses were repeated with the ‘per protocol’ sample, here defined as those who completed at least 5 of the 7 sessions specified in each treatment protocol. No differences in statistical significance were noted for any variable between ITT and per protocol samples, and thus the ITT sample data alone are reported.  
Protocol  
SIGNIFICANCE  
Prevalence of Prolonged Grief Disorder (PGD) (also referred to as complicated grief 
or complicated bereavement) in returning OEF/OIF/OND Veterans appears to equal that 
of Post -Traumatic Stress Di sorder (PTSD). This is not altogether surprising, given that 
loss is widespread in most combat theatres. For example, Toblin et al. (2012) recently 
studied a sample of over 1,500 OIF/OEF Veterans and found that 77% “knew someone 
who was killed.” Similarly,  Thomas et al. (2010) found that 80% “knew someone who 
had been seriously injured or killed” and Hoge et al. (2004) reported that 75% lost 
someone in their immediate unit and 68% personally saw dead or seriously injured 
Americans. These numbers are also ve ry reflective of the Vietnam Veterans’ experience 
(Currier & Holland, 2012).  
Perhaps even more important is the finding that fully 21.3% of the Toblin OIF/OEF 
sample reported significant difficulty coping with grief over combat death. These authors 
also n oted that this difficulty predicted negative emotional and health outcomes. 
Specifically, those reporting difficulty coping with grief were 2.4 times as likely to report 
health problems, and significantly more likely to report both missing work and increas ed 
medical care use. Even more striking was the finding that effects of grief were 
independent of either PTSD or Major Depression (MDD), in that, after controlling for 
both PTSD and MDD, risk of reporting poor health was doubled among those reporting 
high grief (Toblin et al., 2012).  
These findings are not unique to Veterans of the current conflict. Indeed, Pivar and 
Field (2004) also found that grief was distinct from depression symptoms in a sample of 
Vietnam Veterans (Pivar & Field, 2004). This is consi stent with a large body of work by 
Prigerson, Boelen and others in civilian samples (Boelen et al., 2010; Bonanno et al., 
2007; Prigerson et al., 2009; Prigerson et al., 2008) demonstrating that PGD is distinct 
from depression and PTSD, both in terms of it s symptoms and treatment response 
(Boelen et al., 2010; Currier & Holland, 2012; Papa, Neria, & Litz, 2008), and if 
untreated, represents a significant risk of functional impairment in physical and mental 
health areas, as well as suicidality.   
 There may b e even greater cause for concern about PGD and its effects in military 
populations, particularly those experiencing combat, than in civilian populations. This is 
because the context of loss facing military personnel is significantly different from 
bereavem ent typically experienced by civilians who, for example, face losing one's 
spouse to a prolonged illness. That is, combat Veterans experience not only loss of a 
person close to them, but experience this loss in the context of severe personal danger 
and tra uma. Thus, combat Veterans experience a ‘Dual Burden’ (Iverson et al., 2005; 
Papa, Neria, & Litz, 2008) of (a) loss and (b) trauma exposure, in which the potentially 
added negative impact of repeated significant life threat combines with loss of close 
attachment and support.  Moreover, loss in the context of combat is often extremely 
violent, and the especially violent nature of the person’s death may further complicate 
the bereavement process . 
Prolonged Grief in Combat Veterans: Relevant Treatment Targets for this 
Population . Several recent reports outline features of PGD in combat Veterans that are 
relevant targets for intervention, and may be somewhat unique to this patient 
population. Most obvious is the aforementioned ‘dual burden’ of loss in th e context of 
trauma exposure (Papa, Neria, & Litz, 2008), involving both the impact of significant life 
threat events and loss of close attachment and support. Given that social support is 
protective against PTSD (Acierno et al., 2010; Iversen et al., 2005 ) and that, by 
definition, PGD is in response to an event that diminishes one’s social support network, 
treatment strategies that enhance social interaction and diminish withdrawal will be key 
for Veterans with prolonged grief disorder. . Thus, activity -focused behavioral 
interventions, particularly activities of a social nature, will be key in treatment strategies 
with this group.  
 With respect to distinction between PTSD treatment targets and PGD treatment 
targets in Veterans, Pivar et al. (2004) found th e following thematic areas loaded high 
on measures of PGD and low on measures of PTSD, indicating treatment targets for the 
former: difficulty accepting the death of a friend, images and thoughts of the death, and 
distress associated with this, along with feelings of overwhelming loss and separation. 
Boelen et al. (2007) were successful in targeting these areas through exposure based 
strategies in which subtle avoidance strategies were identified and countered. For 
example, withdrawal from activities involv ing other Veterans, or withdrawal from social 
activities with mutual friends of lost service personnel are forms of avoidance that might 
be employed in order to escape from reminders of loss. Exposure to these cues in a 
repeated and structured format was s uccessful in reducing the impact of these triggers 
on functioning. Thus, in addition to active, behaviorally based activities that counter 
social withdrawal, therapeutic exposure strategies will play a key role in treatment of 
PGD in military personnel.   
Existing Treatment Options . Few controlled trials of interventions for PGD and grief 
related problems exist, and none exist with Veterans, for whom the context of loss (e.g., 
combat violence) may present additional problems.  The VA’s National Center for 
PTSD, in collaboration with the DoD, developed the Iraq War Clinician Guide, 2nd ed. 
and included a chapter dedicated to traumatic grief and its treatment. Despite these 
guidelines, i n practice, most VA -based treatment for PGD is offered in the form of 
suppo rtive counseling, or, if evidence based treatments are available, for related 
comorbid conditions (i.e., MDD). As mentioned, very little research on treatment of PGD 
in Veterans exists independent of treatments for MDD or PTSD. Unfortunately, as is the 
case for PTSD and MDD, non -directive supportive therapies appear largely ineffective 
in the context of severe bereavement reactions (Allumbaugh & Hoyt, 1999), and there is 
some evidence that these treatments might worsen symptoms (Farberow et al., 1992; 
Witto uck et al., 2011). Moreover, evidence based treatments for PTSD and MDD, when 
offered individually, do not seem to effectively diminish PGD symptoms (Bonanno et al., 
2007; Neria et al., 2007). By contrast, pilot data by Acierno et al. (2012) suggest that 
focused integration of key components of these evidence -based treatments might be 
useful (See Pilot Studies, below).  
 Given the need for evidenced -based treatments for PGD, Shear and colleagues 
developed an intervention based upon Interpersonal Psychotherap y for depression 
(Shear & Frank, 2006; Weissman, Markowitz, & Klerman, 2000) and modified it to 
incorporate imaginal exposure such as used in Prolonged Exposure for PTSD (Foa, 
Keane, & Friedman, 2000). This treatment used a dual processing model of coping with 
loss as proposed by Stroebe and Schut (2007), and was delivered over 16 sessions 
targeting personal goals, psychoeducation, resolution of prolonged grief symptoms, 
imaginal exposure, and future planning (Shear & Frank, 2006; Shear & Mulhare, 2008) . 
Data supported the efficacy of this approach (Shear et al., 2005). However, this 
intervention also has significant limitations in that it may not be readily accessible to the 
majority of adults with PGD due to the relatively high costs associated with delivering a 
16-session, 4 -month protocol. A second intervention consistent with the dual process 
model of coping was evaluated in a controlled trial by Wagner et al. (2006). This study 
used the internet to deliver a combination treatment in which exposure based 
components (e.g., to avoided bereavement cues) were offered along with cognitive 
reappraisal training and memory integration. Unfortunately, more than half the 
participants never returned questionnair es, and the constitution of the final sample was 
in question, leading to some concern regarding the generalizability of the results.  
Another study by Boelen et al. (2007) similarly described a 12 session cognitive 
behavioral treatment (6 cognitively orien ted sessions plus 6 exposure based sessions) 
vs. supportive counseling vs. a third group in which the order of cognitive and exposure 
session was reversed. This controlled trial showed that treatment was mildly effective in 
reducing symptoms of bereavement , and exposure based therapy components 
appeared particularly effective with this group of patients. However, Veterans were not 
included in the study sample, and the length of treatment was again perhaps longer 
than that which is optimal for dissemination and completion by Veterans. Thus, while 
some effective intervention components (e.g., exposure) have proven effective with 
PGD, none of these controlled studies included Veterans with combat related 
bereavement foci.  
 
Behavioral Activation and Therapeutic Exposure for Prolonged Grief Disorder 
(BATE -G). Behavioral  
Activation and Exposure therapies are in widespread use with Veterans, and it makes 
sense to use these strategies as applied to PGD.  In order to assure greater access to 
effective PGD treatment, Acierno and colleagues (Acierno et al., 2012) designed a 
componential intervention focusing on the ‘active ingredients’ of evidence based 
treatments for disorders with characteristics and symptoms similar to PGD (i.e., PTSD 
and Depression). This  packaged intervention leveraged technology by creating a video 
component of the treatment and by delivering sessions 2 -6 via televideo in order to: (1) 
maintain intervention standardization through video summary of key treatment 
components for joint viewi ng by patients and counselors so that the treatment could be 
delivered by minimally trained peer counselors, as well as in order to: (2) increase 
contextual relevance of treatment components while reducing stigma, and logistical and 
cost barriers associate d with obtaining standard office based treatments by using 
televideo to deliver 5 of the 7 sessions into patients’ homes. This treatment was 
designed to address effects of withdrawal and isolation, and incorporated core 
components of both Behavioral Activa tion (BA) and Therapeutic Exposure (TE). Note 
that BA is hypothesized to reduce depression via formal attempts to increase the 
frequency of positively reinforcing and/or less enjoyable albeit functional (negatively 
reinforcing) activities, particularly tho se of a social nature. This has the effect of 
decreasing social isolation and inactivity, two commonly noted problematic behaviors in 
combat Veterans experiencing grief. This shift in balance of activities (and subsequent 
reinforcement density) has long be en posited to facilitate increased positive mood and 
cognitions (see Lejuez,et al., 2011 and Lewinsohn, 1973). In combination, exposure is 
considered therapeutic when extinction/habituation of negative stress responses to 
environmental cues, memories, and emotions results following repeated presentation of 
these cues. Exposure also seems to provide a cognitive forum for integration of 
memories of the lost comrade that may allow for adaptive responses related to guilt and 
longing. The goal of BATE -G is to co ncurrently address avoidance/withdrawal 
behaviors commonly observed in Veterans of combat, while promoting active and 
social coping behaviors to reduce symptoms associated with PGD.  
 BATE -G is structured as a very behaviorally based, active treatment desi gned to be 
delivered via both in person and televideo forums. These aspects may both be 
appealing to active -duty personnel and Veterans, who frequently forgo traditional mental 
health treatment. Therefore, BATE -G follows a format that: (1) is highly export able and 
affordable to those agencies providing grief services, such as informal Veterans support 
agencies and non -profits; Veterans Administration sponsored “Vet Centers” staffed by 
paraprofessionals and peers, (2) maintains standardization and treatment quality 
through use of video modules available via dvd or internet and developed for 
simultaneous viewing by counselors and patients, and (3) is implemented in only 7 
sessions using a multi -context delivery format (in person sessions and home based 
televid eo sessions) to limit costs and maximize usability of the treatment for both 
patients and providers. Results of the non -randomized clinical trial were encouraging, 
with improvements noted on virtually all measures of both mental health and general 
health s elf-report ratings. Whereas this treatment demonstrated high feasibility and 
produced promising effects with respect to symptom outcomes in the open trial pilot, no 
formalized, randomized controlled trial (RCT) has been conducted to date to evaluate 
the ef ficacy of BATE -G among Veterans suffering with PGD.  
 
PRELIMINARY STUDIES  
We have recently published BATE -G pilot data from our National Institutes of Health 
funded R21 project ( R21AG023495 ) that supports the proposed treatment (Acierno et 
al., 2012). This treatment includes a video component as well as an accompanying 
brochure to reinforce the intervention content. The present proposal will involve specific 
adaptations of the video portion of the intervention for Veterans, followed by a 
randomized controlle d trial (RCT) to evaluate its effectiveness in reducing PGD. Pilot 
study participants were 22 women and 4 men (M age = 65.6 years; SD = 10.5) referred 
by agencies that served bereaved individuals, university hospital nurse supervisors, or 
self-referred in response to posted brochures . Mean number of days since death upon 
study enrollment was 180 (SD = 196.1; range = 24 -884), indicating the intervention is 
applicable both to recent and delayed loss reactions. One week following completion of 
an initial assessment battery by the study int erviewer, participants met with a BATE -G 
study therapist in person for about 75 minutes for the initial session. To demonstrate the 
exportability of this treatment to counselors of various degrees of training, therapists 
ranged from BA level community agen cy counselors to PhD intern candidates. At pre-
treatment, 34.6% met full criteria for complicated bereavement / PGD (not considering 
the 6 month post -death requirement). By post -treatment, only 7.7% met criteria. Figures 
1-4 (below) provide graphical illus tration of the most relevant outcome data in the form 
of pre -post treatment overlaid scatter plots for each continuous dependent measure, 
illustrated in terms of the number of days post -death, which served as the covariate in 
all analyses. Note that each p articipant’s pre - and post -treatment scores are joined by a 
vertical line illustrating change after treatment; note also that virtually every participant 
improved.  
 
 
   
 ANCOVAs revealed that neither the covariate (days since death) nor its interaction 
with the independent variable was significant. Therefore, focus was turned to the main 
effect of time (pre -post treatment change). Complicated Grief (CGA -I) scores were 
reduced from a mean of 23.4 (SE = 1.3) to a mean of 18.2 (SE = 1.2) p < .001, effect 
size partial η2 = .46; PTSD  symptom count scores were reduced from 8.0 (SE = 0.6) to 
4.3 (SE = 0.7) p < .001, η2 = .41; MDD  symptom count scores were reduced from 5.2 
(SE = 0.4) to 2.8 (SE = 0.5), p < .01, η2 = .38. BDI scores were reduced from 19.9 (SE = 
2.4) to 12.7 (SE = 2.0) p < .01, η2 = .27; the SF-36 Social Functioning  scale was 
significant ly improved  from 52.7 (SE = 5.6) to 64.7 (SE = 5.4) p ≤ .05, η2 = .17  
  These data support the feasibility and initial efficacy of BATE -G, a highly portable 
intervent ion for PGD designed around the principles of behavioral activation and 
therapeutic exposure, as well as logistic aspects of the treatment such as patient safety 
protections for home based treatment and patient use of technology.  
 
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  

We will use a 2 x 4 (treatment by time) randomized controlled trial design to compare 
the BATE -G treatment for PGD to the VA/DoD recommended treatment for PGD: 
Cognitive Restructuring and Supportive Grief Counseling  (from the Iraqi War Clinician  
Guide, 2nd ed.) currently the best practices treatment advocated by VA/DoD for 
Veterans at Veterans Affairs Medical Center (VAMC) facilities with bereavement . 
Dependent measures will include assessment of both psychological and health -related 
functioning at pre- treatment, post -treatment (approx 8 weeks later), and at 3 & 6 
months post treatment follow up to demonstrate effectiveness of the treatment. 
Participants will be 140 active duty Veterans of OIF/OEF/OND o r discharged Veterans 
of OEF/OI F/OND service wh o meet PGD cutoff criteria, but not criteria for PTSD, and 
who present for services at the VA Medical Center, Charleston . The componential 
BATE -G treatment (15 -minute video and therapy), offered in a combined in person / 
televideo package, will be compared  to individual Cognitive Restructuring and 
Supportive Grief Counseling  delivered in the same number of sessions & format (a 
combination of in person and televideo). Participants who complete treatment and 
follow -up assessments will be 140 OEF/OIF/OND V eterans who meet PGD cutoff 
criteria outlined below.  Assignment to treatment condition will be evenly distributed and 
randomly determined using a method identical to that of our two ongoing treatment 
outcome studies for PTSD in Veterans and d escribed below.  
 
Participants  and Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria . Participants will be 140 Active Duty 
Service Personnel / Veterans of OIF, OEF, or OND : Participants will be male or female, 
age 21 and above, with PGD. Actively psychotic or demented persons, individuals with 
both suicidal ideation and clear intent, or individuals with significant homicidal ideation 
and or intent, and individuals meeting criteria for substance dependence will be 
excluded from participation; however, in order to maximize generalization of results, 
presence of other forms  of psychopathology will not be a basis for exclusion. All 
structured interviews will be audiotaped to calculate inter -rater reliability on a randomly 
selected 20%. A 4 -week medication stabilization will be required.  
 
Recruitment and Retention Procedures . The RHJ VAMC is home to a large number 
of mental health treatment outcome studies, including several studies on suicide, 
depression, and anxiety. As such, all RHJ VAMC Mental Health Clinic staff are cross 
trained in research referral to study staff for all  potential participants, and research staff 
are housed alongside clinic staff.  Specifically, treatment outcome studies conducted at 
the RHJ VAMC typically use the following recruitment plan, which involves multiple 
potential entry paths to the project. We  will post IRB -approved recruitment flyers in 
prominent locations in VA hospitals and clinics within the Charleston VAMC catchment 
area, as well as using various wide -range advertising techniques and popular social 
media websites (i.e., facebook, twitter, craigslist, radio and tv ads, billboards, etc.).  
Each of the advertisements will provide information about the study and a telephone 
number that interested subjects can call to receive detailed information about the study. 
Furthermore, Veterans for whom P GD is suspected by primary care and mental health 
clinicians may be referred to the study by these clinicians. In the latter scenario, the 
Veteran will be informed that researchers at the VA are evaluating a treatment for PGD 
and the Veteran will be asked for permission to release contact information only to study 
personnel.  
 Recruitment Estimates : As mentioned, several initial local sites under the PI’s 
authority are proposed for recruitment. The PI of this proposal is the Associate Dean of 
Research in the  College of Nursing at the Medical University of South Carolina, and the 
coordinating liaison for 3 local satellite VA mental health clinics, and the local Vet 
Center mental health clinic. Moreover, the VA PTSD Clinic, to which the PI is a staff 
clinician and senior researcher, also treats active duty service personnel from Joint 
Base Charleston, and the Charleston Naval Weapons Station. OIF/OEF/OND patient 
referrals from these clinics in aggregate is between 8 and 15 per week for PTSD and 
15-20 per week fo r MDD. We expect that about 20 -25% of these referrals (about 5 -6 per 
week, 20 -24 per month) are actually misdiagnosed cases of PGD, as indicated by a 3 
month retrospective review of these clinic referral data and intake reports. Therefore, 
access to Vetera ns experiencing PGD will be relatively constant and referrals are made 
directly to the PTSD Clinical Team. Based on past clinical research recruitment data 
from this study site and the PI’s 2 ongoing treatment outcome studies, and adopting a 
conservative p erspective, we predict that approximately 20% of those eligible for 
participation will do so (20% of the 24 per month), yielding 4 -5 participants per month 
during recruitment phases.  
Minority and Female Recruitment :  The inclusion of minorities in PTSD research with 
Veterans is recognized as being of critical importance (Freuh, Brady, & de Arellano, 
1998). Based on our previous VA data (Acierno, 2012; Magruder et al., 2005),  we will 
have satisfactory minority representation: 35 -50% African American,  8-10% Hispanic, 
and 4 -6% Asian American. We also will include female participants; however, the 
percentage of female Veterans appearing for services in our catchment area is low 
relative to males (< 15%).  
 
Randomization Procedures . A random size block randomization schedule will be 
generated. In Aggregate, p articipants will be randomly assigned (1:1) to one of the two study 
conditions.  After determining eligibility, enrolled patients will be assigned to treatment groups by 
the Project Coordinator and research assistant using a web -based computer generated 
randomization scheme. Specifically, n umbered, sealed envelopes containing a sheet of 
paper with the randomly generated condition assignment by the study statistical 
coordinator (Knapp) will be cre ated. After consent and assessment, the envelope for 
each participant will be opened to randomly assign the participant to his/her 
condition.  The randomization results then will be recorded on the master tracking 
table  by the research assistant (independen t evaluators are blind), overseen by the 
Project Coordinator.  Randomization will occur at the patient level. Once a patient is 
randomized and attends the first session, he or she will be entered into the study and included 
in the intent -to-treat analysis p lan. The only members of the research team who will be aware of 
randomization assignment will be the project therapists, the Research Assistant, and the 
statistical analyst in charge of randomization.   
 
Participant Payment .  All participants will receive $ 30 for the baseline assessment, 
$30 for the post -treatment assessment, $35 for the 3 -month follow -up assessment, and 
$45 for the 6 -month follow -up assessment for a combined possible total of $140.  In 
some cases where financial difficulty associated with s tudy completion can be mitigated 
by small increases in study payment, we request to do so, up to $60.  
 
Treatments  
Decision Point  - Selection of the Comparison Condition : Two comparison treatment 
conditions were considered for this study: Shear et al.’s 15 -20 session protocol for 
complicated grief vs. the treatment suggested by the VA / DoD in the Iraqi War Clinician 
Guide, 2nd ed. for VA populations. The former treatment has not been tested with 
Veterans, is not currently used in VA settings, and, if offered per protocol, represents a 
significant confound with respect to overall number of treatment sessions compared to 
the proposed 7 session experimental treatment. The latter treatment has not been 
empirically evaluated, but is specifically directed  toward treatment of Veterans, is 
actually outlined on the VA’s National Center for PTSD website is distributed to VA and 
DoD clinicians in the Iraq War Clinicians Guide, 2nd ed. and represents what should be, 
if VA recommendations were followed nationwide , the most commonly offered 
treatment. Thus, our decision balanced the advantages of (a) comparing our new 
treatment to a one that may well be effective but will rarely be offered, and if offered, 
rarely completed in VA settings, due to its complexity and length, vs. (b) comparing our 
treatment to one that is actually suggested and advised to be offered across VA 
settings.  Setting aside the obvious problem of confound regarding number of sessions, 
we concluded that comparing our intervention to one that is  not offered now, and is 
unlikely to be offered in the future would provide less direction to VA clinicians than 
comparing our treatment to what is actually being suggested, and more likely to be 
implemented in VA clinics the future, unless some equally ra pid, easily disseminated 
alternative were demonstrated to be more effective. However, our decision was finalized 
by consistent findings that the modal number of mental health treatment sessions 
received by Veterans with mental health diagnoses was one (Cully et al., 2008; see 
also Gibbons et al., 2011).  Thus, this treatment, albeit brief, is 7 times longer than the 
modal number of treatments typically received by Veterans. As such, we chose 
Cognitive Restructuring and Supportive Grief Counseling interventi on, as suggested 
and outlined by the VA/DoD Iraq War Clinician Guide, 2nd edition, is far more 
representative of the type of treatment that might ever be used in the VA and by 
Veterans.  
Decision Point - Use of Televideo delivery of treatment sessions : We u nderstand 
that, while preserving the ‘typical’ treatment content we are adding an innovation to the 
grief counseling approach suggested by the VA/DoD Clinician Guide insofar as the 
Cognitive Restructuring and Supportive Grief Counseling  is here being deliv ered via 
televideo for sessions 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. We felt it necessary to experimentally balance 
the delivery of services insofar as this technology is concerned because the PI’s data 
from ongoing clinical trials indicates lower attrition and missed appoi ntments in persons 
receiving home based televideo delivered treatment (e.g., in our current RCT of BATE -
G for PTSD in Veterans, individuals in the televideo condition evinced 45.8% fewer 
missed appointments (Acierno, 2012)) . As differential attrition was c onsidered a greater 
threat to experimental validity than novelty of treatment delivery modality, and as the 
content of the control treatment is exactly that of typically offered bereavement 
supportive counseling, we feel that this decision is well justifie d. 
 
Home -Based Televideo Procedures for Both Conditions:  We will follow the VA 
approved home based telemedicine procedures for delivering evidence based 
psychotherapy. We will also follow VA policy for home -televideo patient protection, in 
part validated by Dr. Acierno’s VA HSRD study (See Gros et al., 2011) and approved 
nationally ( see http://vaww.visn20.portal.va.gov/sites/clinical/BH/HBTMH/default.aspx  
note, must access from within VA firewall).  One procedural, not skill, modification 
centers on r eviewing homework (daily planners, thought lists, etc.). VA offers two 
current solutions: encrypted file transfer or simply holding the completed worksheet up 
to the camera for a screen shot. In past 3 telemedicine trials, the latter solution was 
overwhelm ingly adapted. However, there may be instances where signal degradation 
causes such screenshots to be difficult to read. In these instances, participants simply 
read responses to therapists. Therapists using this approach report that they feel they 
are val idating their patients’ efforts more significantly, and patients report similar 
experiences. Thus, all participants are initially given this option, as well as the 
aforementioned two options.  With respect to technical procedures: for participants who 
do not have a tablet or computer with internet connection, Dr. Acierno’s telemental 
health research lab has 175 tablets available for study use and software (VA approved 
JABBER) is preloaded. All one must do is turn on the tablet, touch the icon for JABBER, 
and touch the therapist name to initiate session. For those who prefer to use their own 
equipment, a download link for JABBER or AKSummit (a FIPS encryption level, VA 
approved televideo software package for non -Mac computers) is given. Downloads 
require a gr and total of 2 clicks of the mouse and selection of a username and 
password, and are initiated much like a skype session.  
 
Experimental Condition - Behavioral Activation and Therapeutic Exposure for 
Prolonged Grief Disorder (BATE -G) (Acierno et al., 2012;  Lejuez et al., 2011) . The 
BATE -G treatment of PGD includes two components that will assure its relevance to 
military mental health experts and the services personnel they serve while maintaining 
its standardization and cost effectiveness. First, a video -based outline and rationale of 
BATE -G is given to maintain integrity and standardization of the intervention. This video 
will be complemented by the 7 session BATE -G intervention designed to treat the 
symptoms that comprise PGD. Second, BATE -G will be deliv ered via both televideo and 
in person modalities to optimize military and Veteran participation and satisfaction. 
Thus, standard office based sessions 1 and 7 will be complemented by televideo home -
based sessions (sessions 2, 3, 4, 5, & 6) to increase cont extual relevance of treatment 
components and reduce travel and time burden on participants, resulting in increased 
likelihood of session attendance. By delivering treatment into the environmental context 
in which treatment strategies will be used, we hope to enhance generalizability of 
techniques for both conditions. Our extensive research on home based televideo -
delivered treatment for PTSD with Veterans and Active Duty personnel indicates that 
they prefer this modality for its time and cost savings, conve nience, and confidentiality 
(Acierno, 2012).  
  The recorded video and accompanying brochure components of the BATE -G 
treatment for PGD outline the core treatment strategies and their rationales, and thus 
serve the dual purpose of (1) educating participants  regarding effective interventions, as 
well as (2) ‘centering’ mental health providers on treatment components (i.e., preventing 
therapist drift) such that a significant focus of their therapeutic work remains consistent 
with the intervention as specified.  This video and accompanying brochure are 
complemented by an active therapy component, based on principles of Behavioral 
Activation for depression, and Therapeutic Exposure for stress and anxiety. This 
treatment incorporates daily planners and worksheets u sed to generate, rate and 
monitor positively and negatively reinforcing behaviors, as well as lists of stimuli avoided 
since the death of one’s fellow service member (e.g., going to military related memorial 
events, looking at pictures of the deceased). Fo r the present study, a list of activities 
and resources for military and Veteran personnel will also be generated for each 
Veteran (see below), and specific video scenes reshot with characters and locations 
more relevant to Veteran actors. Note that n o cha nges to the therapeutic content or key 
points of the existing video script will be made. The current video compliment to the 
intervention was purposefully created with a core Behavioral Activation and Therapeutic 
Exposure component that is uniformly applic able across populations, combined with 
specific opportunities for nuances in scene construction and actor representation to 
enhance relevance for specific populations. Thus, a nearly identical overall script and an 
identical therapeutic component script is  used, and can subsequently be complimented 
by population -specific actors and scenes to enhance personal relevance. We have 
created such “context modifiable” video interventions before, most notably in our 
cognitive -behavioral treatment to reduce PTSD and Substance Abuse symptoms in 
rape victims presenting to the emergency room in which we adapted the initial video by 
altering scenes and narrators to be tailored for a Native American audience.  Therefore, 
the major modifications to the existing treatment wi ll be to the video, using Veteran and 
Active duty scenes and actors, and the brochure. Scenes will be revised to reflect 
typical Veteran avoidance patterns in PGD such as avoiding crowds). The video serves 
to review core treatment components in a standardi zed fashion, requiring therapists to 
cover each point, and offering consistent explanation of treatment component rationale.  
 After the video presentation, the behavioral activation intervention begins with a 
review 5 of life areas and identification of v alues they hold as important in each area: 
Personal Relationships, Education/Career, Recreation/Interests, Mind/Body/Spirit, and 
Daily Responsibilities. From each value, participants derive specific behaviors in which 
they can engage to support that value (e.g., if the patient states “Time with Family” as a 
value, the specific behavior might be “throw the football with my son for 30 minutes”). 
Each participant subsequently uses the values form as a prompt to generate 10 to 20 
highly defined activities that are either positively reinforcing or functional (i.e., negatively 
reinforcing in that an aversive but necessary task was completed, leading to a sense of 
relief or accomplishment). Each activity will be rated in terms of desirability and 
difficulty, with r elatively easier and more desirable activities entered on daily planners 
before equally desirable, but more difficult activities.  
 In addition to valued activities, a second list of behaviors will also be generated that 
focuses on the often subtle avoidan ce responses of most individuals with PGD. This list 
will be highly personalized for each Veteran, but often includes things such as looking at 
pictures of the deceased, avoiding reminders of the deceased, etc. Thus, as with every 
correctly implemented BA treatment, tailoring to the individual, be he or she Veteran or 
construction worker or police officer, is necessary and central. Therefore, major 
modifications to the treatment are not done per class of individuals, but rather, for each 
and every individua l. It is for this reason that generic ‘activity lists’ are no longer used, 
and are in fact, antithetical to the interventions core learning theory basis (Learning 
theory holds that the organism determines the reinforcer).  
 Next, these two lists will be us ed to generate activities for the following two days (to 
be repeated each night, so that the participant is always planning two days in advance). 
A pocket sized daily planner (or smart phone, if patient prefers and already uses) is 
used to guide behaviors,  and is kept by patients throughout the day so that planned 
activities are known in advance, and any changes to activities recorded. In this way, 
activities that are ineffective in altering mood, or that are routinely not accomplished 
despite being schedul ed are removed or modified. Treatment is delivered in 7, once 
weekly, 75 -minute sessions over 7 weeks, consistent with the following general outline:   
 
Session 1: (OFFICE -BASED) In the first session, the rationales for Behavioral 
Activation and Therapeutic  Exposure are given in the video and again in the 
accompanying brochure. The core points made are that (1) what one does often plays a 
role in how one feels and (2) if one develops patterns of avoidance, specifically as it 
relates to the memories of lost c omrades and the military, the pain of loss may endure 
longer and more intensely than it has to. After playing the video, this rationale is 
restated by the counselor, and any questions answered. Participants are asked to 
describe the rationale in their own words. Therapists then proceed to outline the first 
step in the intervention, which is daily monitoring of all behaviors in order to get a 
‘snapshot’ of their day on a calendar form. The importance of knowing exactly what they 
do each day, all day is outli ned, and the rationale that this foundation will be used to 
define and modify the behavioral structure of each day in the future in order to maximize 
reinforcing and exposure based activities, and minimize withdrawal is reviewed. The 
session ends with a re view of the televideo equipment. If patients have their own 
computer and internet connection, they are given the HIPAA compliant encryption 
software offered by MUSC/RHJ VA clinical services. If they do not have equipment or 
connection, they are given a “ta blet” (these are already in the PI’s possession) with 
HIPAA compliant software to use for the duration of the treatment.  
 
Session 2:  (TELEVIDEO) Session 2 is conducted via televideo directly into the 
participant’s home and begins with a review of homework and verbal reinforcement of 
completed daily assessment monitoring forms, restatement of the rationale, and 
problem solving. Next, th e five values areas are discussed (relationships, vocation, 
recreation, physical/spiritual, and responsibilities) and specific values under these 
categories generated and listed. These are then used to derive highly specific behaviors 
that illustrate these  values, and these specific, values -consistent behaviors are placed 
on the Values and Activities form. Behaviors are classified as either positively 
reinforcing (i.e., enjoyable behaviors), negatively reinforcing (e.g., behaviors such as 
chores that, when completed, result in reduction of stress or aversiveness), or 
exposure -based, such as behaviors that are incompatible with bereavement -related 
avoidance (e.g., looking at photos of the deceased, going to a military -focused event). 
Each reinforcing behavior  is rated from 0 - 10 in terms of its reinforcing potential as well 
as its difficulty to complete. Whenever possible, behaviors are framed in a social 
context. It is at this point that the daily monitoring form the patient used in the first 
session is tran slated into a daily planning form. Thus, participants are instructed to 
select activities that they have just generated from the Values and Activities form, and 
use them to plan events for the remainder of the current day, and the next two days, 
with the o bjective of at least 3 hours of reinforcing activities and 30 minutes of exposure 
behaviors planned each day. Participants are instructed to plan ahead to the next day, 
and keep ahead one day.  
 A discussion of the bereaved and how they are currently playing a part in the 
patient’s life is also initiated. The concept of exposure to these memories and thoughts 
as a way of honoring those who did not make it home, not simply as a way to become 
desensitized to these memories, is reviewed. We fram e the grief processing in this way 
because we have noted that many bereaved individuals state that they do not want to 
‘heal’ and that they equate lessening of negative affect related to the loss of their 
comrade with ‘forgetting’ him or her. We are very c areful to validate feelings of loss and 
assure patients that ‘getting better’ is not the same as ‘forgetting’, with focus placed on 
what their friend would have wanted for them, which is probably good memories, rather 
than painful memories. Thus, as an exp osure exercise the therapist and patient review 
in extensive detail the thoughts and feelings experienced with respect to the bereaved. 
This also helps to identify any actual behavioral avoidance (e.g., military events) that 
may be taking place and these a re also addressed.  
 
Session 3 : (TELEVIDEO) These sessions begin with a review of homework, followed 
by asking the participant to state, in their own words, their interpretation of the rationale 
for Behavioral Activation and Therapeutic Exposure. Obstacles to completing scheduled 
behaviors are discussed and additional exposure based and reinforcing behaviors are 
generated, consistent with participant values, and placed on the Values and Activities 
form. The need to constantly update this form is stressed, an d therapists illustrate that 
this form should be used in conjunction with the daily planner so that planning is easier, 
and values -consistent. If a participant failed to use the planner, therapists address the 
difference between planning for a good day and  ‘hoping’ for a good day, comparing this 
to planning for effective combat based on training and hard work vs. “hoping” for 
successful combat outcomes based on only hope. Behaviors that were consistently 
planned on the daily planner but not completed are re moved and alternative behaviors 
suggested. A discussion of avoidance behaviors related to bereavement is held, and 
exposure activities derived from this are added to the list. The next day’s activities are 
planned. Following the behaviorally focused work, the discussion / processing of 
bereavement related memories and feelings is reviewed, with a focus on the events up 
to and including the death of the friend, and the ensuing days and months. Again, the 
major emphasis is on exposure to, rather than avoidanc e of these cognitions and 
feelings. The next 2 days of activities are planned.  
 
Sessions 4, 5, and 6: (TELEVIDEO) Homework is reviewed with an emphasis on 
reinforcing the participant for following the daily planner. Values and Activities lists are 
expanded , as is the list of avoided behaviors. Each behavior that was planned but not 
completed is addressed, and those that are consistently planned but not completed are 
removed from the planner. Each session is focused on problem solving and 
implementing both p lanning, and execution of planned, exposure -oriented activities. The 
last half of each session is again devoted to an in depth discussion of the bereaved and 
processing the thoughts and feelings associated with this discussion. At the end of each 
session, the next 2 days of activities are planned as per above.  
 
Session 7:  (OFFICE -BASED) The final session includes discussion of the rationale and 
treatment gains obtained thus far. Discussion is also centered on the need to continue 
planning activities and usi ng a daily planner for at least 6 months. Relapse prevention 
strategies are reviewed.  
 
Comparison Condition: Cognitive Restructuring and Supportive Grief Counseling 
as Outlined by the VA/DoD Iraq War Clinician Guide (Chapter 11) : The primary 
purpose of thi s condition is to serve as a ‘current standard of care’ comparison control 
condition, matched to the experimental condition in both duration and modality of 
treatment delivery. Therefore, specific components of the Experimental treatment, such 
as focused a nd specific activity scheduling will not be present. The same counselors will 
deliver this treatment according to the same schedule of in person and televideo 
sessions as the experimental intervention (1 in person, followed by 5 televideo, followed 
by a fi nal in person).  
 As with BATE -G, sessions will be conducted once per week for 75 minutes. The VA’s 
National Center for PTSD Iraq War Clinician Guide, 2nd ed. offers the following summary (Pivar, 
2007) of treatment for traumatic grief, which overlays highl y with standard supportive grief 
counseling. The Guide Summarizes:  
“There have been no outcome studies of treatments of veterans for prolonged and complicated 
grief symptoms at this time. Clinical experience supports the importance of education about 
normal and complicated grief processes, education about the cognitive pro cesses of guilt, 
restructuring of cognitive distortions of events that might lead to excessive guilt, looking at the 
function of anger in bereavement, restoring positive memories of the deceased, restoration and 
acknowledgment of caring feelings towards th e deceased, affirming resilience and positive 
coping, retelling the story of the death, and learning to tolerate painful feelings as part of the 
grieving process. Regardless of the techniques that are used, what is central to treating 
veterans for prolonge d and complicated grief is recognition of the significance of their losses, 
provision of an opportunity to talk about the deceased, restructuring distorted thoughts of guilt, 
and validation of the pain and intensity of their feelings.”  
 
Session 1:  (OFFICE -BASED) The first session will involve review of the Veteran’s loss, and 
recognition that the loss was significant, enduring and painful. In addition, education about 
normal vs. problematic grief reactions will be discussed. The parameters of the loss, its meaning 
and its current impact will be explored. A discussion of positive memories of the deceased will 
be initiated and the Veteran will determine the course of this discussion.    
 
Session 2:  (TELEVIDEO) The second session will focus on a review of point s raised in the first 
session, followed by further discussion of cognitive processes of guilt often associated with 
bereavement.  Positive memories of the lost comrade will be explored, and the meaning of guilt 
in the context of these positive images outli ned and discussed.    
 
Sessions 3 -6: (TELEVIDEO) The third through sixth sessions will review points raised in the 
prior session, and then address the function of anger in bereavement. This is often a sensitive, 
guilt-facilitating issue, and sufficient tim e will afforded to process these conflicting feelings of 
guilt, loss, longing and anger. Again, the concept of restoring positive memories about the 
deceased, a common thread across these sessions, will be raised. Discussion of the story of the 
death will take place, with attention directed to specific cognitive distortions in the context of the 
aforementioned conflicting emotions addressed.   
 
Session 7:  (OFFICE -BASED) will focus on restoring positive memories of the deceased, 
focusing on the concept of to lerating painful or mixed feelings in the context of these memories.  
In addition, integration of ‘lessons learned’ from prior sessions regarding guilt, anger, sadness, 
and also positive emotions attached to the memory of the lost comrade will be reviewed.  
 
Treatment Integrity and Training . Counselors will receive the video and brief treatment 
manual and will be asked to review these prior to a 4 -hour training with the study PI. At this 
training, the study PI will go over key points of the intervention outlined above. A key treatment 
tool, th e video, has been specifically designed as a treatment training mechanism in itself. In 
addition, all treatment sessions will be audio taped and 20% of case tapes will be reviewed for 
treatment integrity by two trained independent raters according to sessi on checklists. In this 
way, we will assure that directive treatment procedures found in the BATE -G condition are not 
delivered in Cognitive Restructuring and Supportive Grief Counseling .  
 
Treatment Providers . Treatment providers will be master’s level counselors with at least 2 
years of experience providing bereavement counseling to adults. All providers will perform both 
treatments.  
 
HIPAA Compliance for Home -Based Televideo Equipment . In order to assure patient 
Confidentiality and HIPAA complian ce, we will use the MUSC/Charleston VAMC contracted 
version of HIPAA compliant software for televideo patient care. If participants do not have a 
computer, we will supply them with a tablet for use during the study, as we have done with our 
two ongoing tel emedicine treatment studies with Veterans.  
 
 
 
Dependent Measures & Interviewers . All measures will be administered by master's level 
research assistants who are blind to experimental condition and who achieve interrater reliability 
on 5 practice assessments of 90%. All participants in both conditions will complete most 
measures at pre -treatment/baseline (at least 6 months post -death), post -treatment, and 3 & 6 
months post -treatment. The timing of assessments with study procedures is described in the 
diagram below. In pilot testing of the assessment battery, 42 minutes was the average t ime of 
completion for self report, with another 30 -40 minutes necessary for the selected modules of the 
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM 5.  
DOMAIN  MEASURE  DESCRIPTION  TIMING  
Demographics  Race Gender etc .  Descriptive self -report  Baseline  
Prolonged Grief 
Disorder  Inventory of 
Complicated Grief, 
Revised (Prigerson, et 
al, 2001)  34item self -report; total intensity score; high reliability, 
concurrent validity with BDI & satisfactory criterion 
validity (Prigerson et al., 1995; 1997; Silverman e t al., 
2000 ; 2001 ) Base , Post -Tx,  
3 & 6 month  
Selected Axis I 
Mental 
Diagnoses  Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM -5 (To 
Be released)  Clinician administered, gold standard; Dx: Major 
Depression, Panic Disorder, Generalized Anxiety 
Disorder, PTSD, Sub. Use Disorder. (Last version TBA)  Base, Post -Tx,  
3 & 6 month  
 
Power Analysis . The primary longitudinal efficacy outcome variables are: intensity  of 
PGD symptoms (ICG), and depression symptom severity (BDI)  and PTSD (PCL) 
variables.  In  several studies of behavioral activation for mood disorders by Lejuez and 
colleges (Hopko, Lejuez, & Hopko, 2004; Hopko et al., 2003; Lejuez et al., 2011, 
Lejuez, Hopko, & Hopko, 2001; MacPherson et al., 2010), effect sizes of .7 to 1.5 were 
obtained. In addition to behavioral activation, the present intervention also includes a 
video -based treatment for PTSD -like symptoms of complicated bereavement based on 
our existing treatment for PTSD in combat Veterans. In the pilot study, this treatment 
achieved an effect size of 0.7 on psychological outcomes, and .25 -.3 on health 
outcomes.  For comparing the longitudinal profile of continuous outcomes for the BATE -
G versus Comparator  groups across the study period [assuming 4 measurement time 
points, level of signifi cance alpha=0.05, two -tailed comparison, correlation between 
pairs of measurements within subjects (interclass correlation) no larger than p=0.5], we 
estimate that with 44 subjects per group (88 total), we will have approximately 90% 
power to detect a stan dardized effect size of at least 0.35 (difference in comparison 
group means in units of standard deviation (sd)). For outcome variables having 
standard deviations (sd) in the range 5 -15, for example, the raw effect sizes that can be 
detected range from app roximately 2.3 to 6.9 raw units. To account for attrition during 
treatment (28%), and loss to followup (10 -15%), we inflate the sample size accordingly 
to achieve a final sample size of approximately 140 subjects: 140 x 28% attrition = 101; 
101 x 12% loss = 89 total participants completing all measures (note, ITT sample size 
will be 28% larger than power estimate requires, as treatment dropouts are included in 
ITT analyses).  
 
Data Management . Charleston is the site of a VA HSRD COIN, of which Dr. Acierno is  an 
Executive Committee Member. The COIN provides all Charleston VA researchers, including Dr. 
Acierno, with VA server space, data cleaning and management services, and when requested, 
statistical consultation. Data entry will be by the project assistants using SPSS with range 
violation parameters and will follow double entry protocols (the same value must be entered 
twice for acceptance at two different times by two different data entry personnel for each entry). 
Data will be compiled using codes in lieu o f personal identifiers. Access to study data 
will be limited to research personnel. Development of and security oversight for the 
electronic database for this study will be performed by study personnel trained for this 
purpose using a secure VA approved so ftware to support data capture. Only de -
identified case report forms will be entered into the electronic database. Thus, no 
protected health information (PHI) will be entered into the database. The data entry 
management system will be accessed and housed a t the VAMC. Although no PHI will 
be entered into the database, data system security will be ensured by implementing 
multiple layered firewalls and a network intrusion prevention system for identifying and 
blocking malicious network activity in real time. A  hard copy study log linking patient 
names with study ID numbers will be kept in a locked cabinet in a secure room at the 
VAMC, and access to this log will be limited to only key study personnel  
 Depression  
 Beck Dep  Inventory -II 
(Beck et al, 1996)  21 item self -report; high reliability and concurrent 
validity (Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996)  Base, Post -Tx,  
3 & 6 month  
PTSD  PTSD  Symptom Scale 
(Foa et al., 1993)  17 item self -report; 3 subscales. High reliability and 
concurrent validity (Foa et al., 1993)  Baseline, Post -Tx,  
3 & 6 month  
LITERATURE CITED  and RELEVANT LITERATURE :  
Acierno R, Hernandez MA, Amstadter AB, et al. Prevalence and correlates of emotional, 
physical, sexual, and financial abuse and potential neglect in the United States: the 
National Elder Mistreatment Study. Am J Public Health. Feb 2010;100(2):292 -297. 
Acierno R, Resnick H, Kilpatrick DG, Saunders B, Best CL. Risk factors for rape, physical 
assault, and posttraumatic stress disorder in women: examination of differential 
multivariate relationships. J Anxiety Disord. Nov-Dec 1999;13(6):541 -563. 
Acierno R, Rhei ngold A, Amstadter A, et al. Behavioral activation and therapeutic exposure for 
bereavement in older adults. The American journal of hospice & palliative care. Feb 
2012;29(1):13 -25. 
Acierno R, Ruggiero KJ, Kilpatrick DG, Resnick HS, Galea S. Risk and prote ctive factors for 
psychopathology among older versus younger adults after the 2004 Florida hurricanes. 
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. Dec 2006;14(12):1051 -1059.  
Acierno R. UPDATE: Secondary prevention of PTSD in at risk OIF -OEF service men and 
women: BA -TE via H OME based telemedicine. MOMRP/CDMRP PTSD IPR Meeting . 
Bethesda, MD2012, March.  
Ali, R, Awwad, E, Babor, T, et al.  The Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening 
Test (ASSIST): development, reliability and feasibility. Addiction. Sep 2002;97(9):1 183-
1194.  
Allumbaugh DL, Hoyt WT. Effectiveness of grief counselling: a meta -analysis. Journal of 
Counselling Psychology. 1999;46(3):370 -380. 
Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory (2nd edition) . 2 ed. 
San Antonio, TX: The Ps ychological Corporation; 1996.  
Beck AT, Steer RA. Manual for the Beck Anxiety Inventory . San Antonio, TX: Psychological 
Corporation; 1990.  
Boelen PA, de Keijser J, van den Hout MA, van den Bout J. Treatment of complicated grief: a 
comparison between cognit ive-behavioral therapy and supportive counseling. J Consult 
Clin Psychol. Apr 2007;75(2):277 -284. 
Boelen PA, J. vdB, J. dK. Traumatic grief as a disorder distinct from bereavement -related 
depression and anxiety: a replication study with bereaved mental hea lth care patients. 
American Journal of Psychiatry. 2003;160:1339 -1341.  
Boelen PA, van de Schoot R, van den Hout MA, de Keijser J, van den Bout J. Prolonged Grief 
Disorder, depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder are distinguishable syndromes. 
J Affec t Disord. Sep 2010;125(1 -3):374 -378. 
Boelen PA, van de Schoot R, van den Hout MA, de Keijser J, van den Bout J. Prolonged Grief 
Disorder, depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder are distinguishable syndromes. 
J Affect Disord. 2010;125(3):374 -378. 
Bonanno GA, Neria Y, Mancini A, Coifman KG, Litz B, Insel B. Is there more to complicated 
grief than depression and posttraumatic stress disorder? A test of incremental validity. 
Journal of abnormal psychology. May 2007;116(2):342 -351. 
Brazier JE, Harper R, J ones NM, et al. Validating the SF -36 health survey questionnaire: new 
outcome measure for primary care. BMJ. Jul 18 1992;305(6846):160 -164. 
Coifman KG, Bonanno GA. When distress does not become depression: emotion context 
sensitivity and adjustment to bereavement. Journal of abnormal psychology. Aug 
2010;119(3):479 -490. 
Cully, Jeffrey A.; Tolpin, Laura; Henderson, Louise; Jimenez, Daniel; Kuni k, Mark E.; 
Petersen, Laura A. (2008). Psychotherapy in the veterans health administration: 
Missed opportunities? Psychological Services , 5, 320 -331.  
Currier JM, Holland JM. Examining the role of combat loss among Vietnam War Veterans. 
Journal of traumatic stress. Feb 2012;25(1):102 -105. 
Dijkstra BAG, Roozen HG. Patients' improvements measured with the Pleasant Activities List 
and the Community Reinforc ement Approach Happiness Scale: Preliminary results. 
Addictive Disorders & Their Treatment. 2012;11(1):6 -13. 
Edelman D, Williams GR, Rothman M, Samsa GP. A comparison of three health status 
measures in primary care outpatients. J Gen Intern Med. Dec 1999;1 4(12):759 -762. 
Farberow NL, Gallagher -Thompson D, Gilewski M, Thompson L. Changes in grief and mental 
health of bereaved spouses of older suicides. J Gerontol. Nov 1992;47(6):P357 -366. 
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A., & Lang, A. -G. (2009). Statistical  power analyses 
using G*Power 3.1: Tests for correlation and regression analyses. Behavior 
Research Methods , 41, 1149 -1160.  
Foa EB, Keane TM, Friedman MJ. Effective treatments for PTSD . New York: Guilford Press; 
2000.  
Foa EB, Riggs DS, Dancu CV, Rothbaum B O. Reliability and validity of a brief instrument for 
assessing post -traumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress. 1993;6:459 -473. 
Frank E, Prigerson HG, Shear MK, Reynolds CF, 3rd. Phenomenology and treatment of 
bereavement -related distress in t he elderly. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. Dec 1997;12 
Suppl 7:S25 -29. 
Friedman L, Furberg C, DeMets D. Fundamentals of clinical trials (3rd ed.) . New York: Springer; 
1998.  
Frueh BC, Brady KL, de Arellano MA. Racial differences in combat -related PTSD: empirical 
findings and conceptual issues. Clinical psychology review. Apr 1998;18(3):287 -305. 
Galea S, Vlahov D, Resnick HS, et al. Trends of probable post -traumatic stress diso rder in New 
York City after the September 11 terrorist attacks. American Journal of Epidemiology. 
2003;158:514 -524. 
Gibbons,  MBC, Rothbard,  A. , Farris,  KD,  Stirman,  SW,  Thompson,  et al (2011).  
Changes in Psychotherapy Utilization Among Consumers of Serv ices for Major 
Depressive Disorder in the Community Mental Health System.  Adm Policy Ment 
Health , 38, 495–503. Gros, D., Veronee, K., Strachan, M., Ruggiero, K, & Acierno, R. 
(2011). Journal of Telemedicine and Tel ecare, 17, 332 -335. 
Hendin H, Haas AP. Suicide and guilt as manifestations of PTSD in Vietnam combat veterans. 
Am J Psychiatry. May 1991;148(5):586 -591. 
Hoge CW, Castro CA, Messer SC, McGurk D, Cotting DI, Koffman RL. Combat duty in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, mental health problem s, and barriers to care. The New England journal of 
medicine. Jul 1 2004;351(1):13 -22. 
Hopko DR, Lejuez CW, Hopko SD. Behavioral Activation as an intervention for coexistent 
depressive and anxiety symptoms. Clinical Case Studies. 2004;3(1):37 -48. 
Hopko DR,  Lejuez CW, LePage JP, Hopko SD, McNeil DW. A brief behavioral activation 
treatment for depression. A randomized pilot trial within an inpatient psychiatric hospital. 
Behav Modif. Sep 2003;27(4):458 -469. 
Hsieh FY, Lavori PW, Cohen HJ, Feussner JR. An overv iew of variance inflation factors for 
sample -size calculation. Evaluation & the health professions. Sep 2003;26(3):239 -257. 
Humeniuk R, Ali R, Babor TF, et al. Validation of the Alcohol, Smoking And Substance 
Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST). Addiction.  Jun 2008;103(6):1039 -1047.  
Hyer L, McCranie EW, Woods MG, Boudewyns PA. Suicidal behavior among chronic Vietnam 
theatre veterans with PTSD. Journal of clinical psychology. Nov 1990;46(6):713 -721. 
Iversen A, Dyson C, Smith N, et al. 'Goodbye and good luck’ : the mental health needs and 
treatment experiences of British ex -service personnel. British Journal of Psychiatry. 
2005;186:480 –486. 
Jacoby A, Baker GA, Steen N, Buck D. The SF -36 as a health status measure for epilepsy: a 
psychometric assessment. Qual Li fe Res. Jun 1999;8(4):351 -364. 
Joung IM, Stronks K, van de Mheen H, Mackenbach JP. Health behaviours explain part of the 
differences in self reported health associated with partner/marital status in The 
Netherlands. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1995;49(5) :482-488. 
Kilpatrick DG, Edmunds CN, Seymour AK. Rape in America : National Victim Center; April 23, 
1992 1992.  
Kilpatrick DG, Koenen KC, Ruggiero KJ, et al. The serotonin transporter genotype and social 
support and moderation of posttraumatic stress disorder and depression in hurricane -
exposed adults. Am J Psychiatry. Nov 2007;164(11):1693 -1699.  
Lejuez CW, Hopko DR, Acierno R, Daughters SB, Pagoto SL. Ten year revision of the brief 
behavioral activation treatment for depression: revised treatment manual. Behav Modif. 
Mar 2011;35(2):111 -161. 
Lejuez CW, Hopko DR, Hopko SD. A brief behavioral activation treatment for depression. 
Treatment manual. Behav Modif. Apr 2001;25(2):255 -286. 
Lewinsohn P. Innovative treatment methods in psychotherapy. In: Calhoun KS, Adams HE, 
Mitchell KM, eds. Clinical and theoretical aspects of depress ion. New York: Wiley; 1973.  
MacPherson L, Tull MT, Matusiewicz AK, et al. Randomized controlled trial of behavioral 
activation smoking cessation treatment for smokers with elevated depressive symptoms. 
J Consult Clin Psychol. Feb 2010;78(1):55 -61. 
Magruder  KM, Frueh BC, Knapp RG, et al. Prevalence of posttraumatic stress disorder in 
Veterans Affairs primary care clinics. General hospital psychiatry. May-Jun 
2005;27(3):169 -179. 
Mendes de Leon CF, Kasl SV, Jacobs S. A prospective study of widowhood and change s in 
symptoms of depression in a community sample of the elderly. Psychol Med. Aug 
1994;24(3):613 -624. 
Neria Y, Gross R, Litz B, et al. Prevalence and psychological correlates of complicated grief 
among bereaved adults 2.5 -3.5 years after September 11th at tacks. Journal of traumatic 
stress. Jun 2007;20(3):251 -262. 
O'Connor M, Lasgaard M, Shevlin M, Guldin MB. A confirmatory factor analysis of combined 
models of the Harvard Trauma Questionnaire and the Inventory of Complicated Grief -
Revised: are we measuring  complicated grief or posttraumatic stress? J Anxiety Disord. 
Oct 2010;24(7):672 -679. 
Ott CH. The impact of complicated grief on mental and physical health at various points in the 
bereavement process. Death Stud. 2003;27(3):249 -272. 
Papa A, Neria Y, Litz B. Traumatic bereavement in war veterans. Psychiatric Annals. 
2008;38(10):686 -691. 
Pasternak RE, Reynolds CF, Frank E, et al. The temporal course of depressive symptoms and 
grief intensity in late -life spousal bereavement. Depression. 1993;1(1):45 -49. 
Pivar, IL. XI. Traumatic grief: Symptomatology and treatment in the Iraq war Veteran.  Iraq War 
Clinican Guide  (2007 update). Availabe at 
http://www.ptsd.va.gov/profession al/manuals/iraq -war-clinician -guide.asp    
Pivar IL, Field NP. Unresolved grief in combat veterans with PTSD. J Anxiety Disord. 
2004;18(6):745 -755. 
Prigerson HG, Bierhals AJ, Kasl SV, et al. Complicated grief as a disorder distinct from 
bereavement -related depression and anxiety: a replication study. Am J Psychiatry. Nov 
1996;153(11):1484 -1486.  
Prigerson HG, Bierhals AJ, Kasl SV, et al. Traumatic grief as a risk factor for mental and 
physical morbidity. Am J Psychiatry. May 1997;154(5):616 -623. 
Prigerson HG, Frank E, Kasl SV, et al. Complicated grief and bereavement -related depression 
as distinct  disorders: preliminary empirical validation in elderly bereaved spouses. Am J 
Psychiatry. Jan 1995;152(1):22 -30. 
Prigerson HG, Horowitz M, Jacobs S, et al. Prolonged grief disorder: psychometric validation of 
criteria proposed for GSM -V and ICD -11. PLoS M edicine. 2009;6(8):1 -9. 
Prigerson HG, Maciejewski PK, Reynolds CF, 3rd, et al. Inventory of Complicated Grief: a scale 
to measure maladaptive symptoms of loss. Psychiatry Res. Nov 29 1995;59(1 -2):65 -79. 
Prigerson HG, Maciejewski PK, Rosenheck RA. Combat tr auma: trauma with highest risk of 
delayed onset and unresolved posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms, unemployment, 
and abuse among men. J Nerv Ment Dis. Feb 2001;189(2):99 -108. 
Prigerson HG, Maciejewski PK, Rosenheck RA. Preliminary explorations of the h armful 
interactive effects of widowhood and marital harmony on health, health service use, and 
health care costs. Gerontologist. Jun 2000;40(3):349 -357. 
Prigerson HG, Maciejewski PK. Grief and acceptance as opposite sides of the same coin: 
setting a resear ch agenda to study peaceful acceptance of loss. Br J Psychiatry. Dec 
2008;193(6):435 -437. 
Prigerson, HG, Vanderwerker, LC, Maciejewski, P. "A case for inclusion of prolonged grief 
disorder in DSM -5". In Stroebe, Margaret S.; Hansson, Robert O.; Schut, Henk  et 
al. Handbook of Bereavement Research and Practice: Advances in Theory and 
intervention . Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. .  2008; 
pp. 165–86.  
Reed MD. Predicting grief symptomatology among the suddenly bereaved. Suicide Life Threat 
Behav. Fall 1998;28(3):285 -301. 
Resnick HS, Kilpatrick DG, Dansky BS, Saunders BE, Best CL. Prevalence of civilian trauma 
and posttraumatic stress disorder in a representative national sample of women. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 1993;61: 984-991. 
Resnick, H. S., et al. "Trauma assessment for adults."  Charleston, SC, Medical 
University of South Carolina, Department of Psychiatry, Crime Victims Research 
and Treatment Center  (1993).  
Roozen HG, Wiersema H, Strietman M, et al. Development and psychometric evaluation of the 
pleasant activities list. Am J Addict. Sep-Oct 2008;17(5):422 -435. 
Shear K, Frank E. Treatment of Complicated Grief. In: Follette VM, Ruzek JI, eds. Cognitive -
Behavioral Therapies for Trauma, 2nd ed.  New York: Guilford Press; 2006.  
Shear MK, Frank E, Houck P, Reynolds CF. Treatment of complicated grief: a randomized 
contr olled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association. 2005;293:2601 -2659.  
Shear MK, Mulhare E. Complicated grief. Psychiatric Annals. 2008;38(10):662 –670. 
Silverman GK, Jacobs SC, Kasl SV, et al. Quality of life impairments associated with diagnostic 
criteria for traumatic grief. Psychol Med. Jul 2000;30(4):857 -862. 
Silverman GK, Johnson JG, Prigerson HG. Preliminary explorations of the effects of prior 
trauma and loss on risk for psychiatric disorders in recently widowed people. Isr J 
Psychiatry Relat Sci. 2001;38(3 -4):202 -215. 
Steer RA, Ranieri WF, Beck AT, Clark DA. Further evidence for the validity of the Beck Anxiety 
Inventory with psychiatric outpatients. J Anxiety Disord. 1993;7:195 -205. 
Stroebe M, Schut H, Stroebe W. Health outcomes of bereavemen t. Lancet. Dec 8 
2007;370(9603):1960 -1973.  
Szanto K, Gildengers A, Mulsant BH, Brown G, Alexopoulos GS, Reynolds CF, 3rd. 
Identification of suicidal ideation and prevention of suicidal behaviour in the elderly. 
Drugs Aging. 2002;19(1):11 -24. 
Thomas JL, Wil k JE, Riviere LA, McGurk D, Castro CA, Hoge CW. Prevalence of mental health 
problems and functional impairment among active component and National Guard 
soldiers 3 and 12 months following combat in Iraq. Arch Gen Psychiatry. Jun 
2010;67(6):614 -623. 
Toblin RL, Riviere LA, Thomas JL, Adler AB, Kok BC, Hoge CW. Grief and physical health 
outcomes in U.S. soldiers returning from combat. J Affect Disord. Feb 2012;136(3):469 -
475. 
Ventura J, Liberman RP, Green MF, Shaner A, Mintz J. Training and quality assu rance with the 
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV (SCID -I/P). Psychiatry Res. Jun 15 
1998;79(2):163 -173. 
Wagner B, Knaevelsrud C, Maercker A. Internet -based cognitive -behavioral therapy for 
complicated grief: a randomized controlled trial. Death Stud . Jun 2006;30(5):429 -453. 
Ware JE, Jr., Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36 -item short -form health survey (SF -36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Medical care. Jun 1992;30(6):473 -483. 
Ware JE, Snow KK, Kosinski M, Gandek B. SF-36 Health Survey: Manual i ntepretation and 
guide.  Boston, MA: Nimrod Press; 1993.  
Weinberger M, Samsa GP, Hanlon JT, et al. An evaluation of a brief health status measure in 
elderly veterans. J Am Geriatr Soc. Jul 1991;39(7):691 -694. 
Weissman MM, Markowitz JC, Klerman G. Comprehens ive Guide To Interpersonal 
Psychotherapy . New York: Basic Books; 2000.  
Williams BR, Sawyer P, Roseman JM, Allman RM. Marital status and health: exploring pre -
widowhood. J Palliat Med. Jul 2008;11(6):848 -856. 
Windholz MJ, Marmar CR, Horowitz MJ. A review of  the research on conjugal bereavement: 
impact on health and efficacy of intervention. Compr Psychiatry. Sep-Oct 
1985;26(5):433 -447. 
Wittouck C, Van Autreve S, De Jaegere E, Portzky G, van Heeringen K. The prevention and 
treatment of complicated grief: a me ta-analysis. Clinical psychology review. Feb 
2011;31(1):69 -78. 
Zivin K, Christakis NA. The emotional toll of spousal morbidity and mortality. Am J Geriatr 
Psychiatry. Sep 2007;15(9):772 -779. 
 
 
 