FULL PROTOCOL TITLE  
A Pilot Study of Terazosin for Parkinson’s Disease  
SHORT PROTOCOL TITLE 
TZ-P D 
Protocol Version: 2.0 
Protocol Date: 12th November 2019
 
Protocol Principal Investigator (PPI); 
Jordan Schultz, PharmD 
Assistant Professor of Psychiatry and Neurology 
Carver College of Medicine at the University of Iowa 
Nandakumar Narayanan, MD, PhD 
Associate Professor of Neurology 
Assistant Director: Clinical Neuroscientist Training Program in Neurology 
Assistant Director: Residency Program in Neurology 
University of Iowa – Carver College of Medicine 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Supported by: 
Institute of Clinical and Translational Science at the University of Iowa  
Pag
e 2 of 44 LIST OF ACRONYMS, ABBREVIATIONS, AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS  
AE Adv
erse Event  
AZ Alfuzosin  
CCC  Clinical Coordination Center  
CDE  Common Data Elements  
CFR Code of Federal Regulations  
CIRB Central Institutional Review Board 
CRF Case report form  
CS Clinically Significant 
CSS PI  Clinical Study Site PI  
DCC  Data Coordination Center  
DM Data Management  
DSMB  Data Safety  Monitoring Board  
DZ Doxazosin  
eCRF  Electronic Case Report Form  
EDC  Electronic data capture  
FDA   Food and Drug Administration 
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
ICH International Conference on Harmonization  
IMM Independent Medical Monitor 
MDS -UPDRS TMS  Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale 
Total Motor Score  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MPTP  1-methyl -4-phenyl -1,2,3,6- tetrahydropyridine
NINDS   National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
PD Parkinson’s Disease
Pgk1  Phosphoglycerate kinase 1
PPI Protocol Principal Investigator
PPMI  Parkinson’s Progr ession Markers Initiative
PSC Protocol Steering Committee
SAE Serious adverse event
SNc Substantia nigra pars compacta
SOA Schedule of Activities
TZ Terazosin
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
Page 3 of
 44 SYNOPSIS 
Rationale: 
Parkinson’s di sease (PD) i s a dev astating ne urodegenerative disease affecting ~1 m illion 
Americ ans w ith ~60, 000 new di agnoses  made annually1. There are no interventions t hat s low the 
inexorabl e progression of PD. Thus, ther e is a critical need t o devel op novel disease -modifying 
therapies for P D. We have discovered that a ctivation of phosp hoglycerat e kinase 1 ( Pgk1) ca n 
reverse ene rgy de ficits that co ntribute to the p athology o f PD.  Mor e importantly, w e have 
discovered that t erazos in (TZ) ca n activate Pgk1 t hroug h a novel mechanism t hat is independent 
of its pr edicted α- adrenergic r eceptor antagonism and slow t he progression of P D.  The 
procedures ou tlined in t he protocol w ill allow us t o 1) quantify ener gy deficits i n the br ains o f 
patients w ith PD and 2) d etermine if t he administration of TZ can alter ene rgy def icits ov er a s hort 
time peri od and longer tim e period. Thi s study will test t he saf ety and tolerability of T Z in 
patient s wit h PD as well as test the feasibility of thi s protoco l whil e providin g vital 
informati on to gui de future clinical trials of T Z in P D.   
Study T itle 
A Fe ASibiliT y study of T eraZosin as a d isease m odifyi ng treatment f or PD : FAST TZ -PD 
Objectives 
Primary obj ective: 
To ass ess the safety o f TZ in patients w ith PD as well as t he feasibility of the study pr otocol.  The 
active treatment gr oup ( TZ 5mg daily) w ill be compared to a placebo g roup. The pr imary o utcome 
measure w ill be the s afety and tolerability o f TZ i n the select pa tient po pulation.  This  will be 
assessed by co mpari ng the number of pa rticipants i n eac h group that ex perience dr ug-related 
adverse dr ug ev ents as well as asse ssing t he rate of dr op out i n eac h group. 
Secondary obj ective: 
Orthostatic hypotens ion is more common in PD2, so it is possible that TZ could exac erbate this 
symptom of PD. To assess the change in blood pressure (systolic and diastolic) from baseline to 
week 6 and from baseline to week 12.   
Exploratory O bjective: 
To quantify A TP levels i n 1) r ed blood cells a nd 2) i n the br ain be fore and after the adm inistration 
of TZ and after taking TZ for 12 weeks. 
Design and Outcomes 
We will randomize 20 PD patients to receive TZ or placebo. Ten of the participants will be 
randomized t o receive TZ 5mg daily f or 12 weeks and 10 par ticipants w ill be randomized to 
receiv e a daily  place bo for 12 weeks. This aim will generate data on safety and tolerability of TZ 
in a population of patients wit h PD. As an exploratory outcome , we aim t o det ermine if t reatment 
with TZ in patients w ith PD i mproves m arkers of ener gy m etabolis m.  Furthermore, w e will 
determine if cellular and cerebral A TP levels correlate with disease se verity and progress ion. 
Partic ipants w ill also par ticipate i n an ass essment that w ill include, bu t is not l imited t o a motor 
exam, a neuropsyc hological assessment, and functional assessments. Clinical findings will be 
used to g uide future cl inical trials.  
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
Page 4
 of 44 Interventions and Duration 
Participants in this study will be randomized to receive either TZ 5 mg by mouth once daily  or a 
matched plac ebo once daily.  Once randomiz ed, each participant will receive their ass igned 
treatment for 12 weeks.  Participants will be assessed via telephone for 3 weeks after their 2 
week visit, then 6 weeks months after their baseline visit, then via telephone 9 weeks after 
their baseline v isit, and their last visit will occur 12 weeks from their baseline visit.  We 
anticipate that this study c an be completed (study open to end of data analys es) within 9 
months. 
= Stu
dy Visit
X = Telephone call
Sample Size and Population 
This study will randomize 20 participants: 10 participants will be randomized to receive 5mg of TZ 
daily and 10 participants will be ra ndomized to the placebo group.  It is anticipated that no more 
than 35 participants will need to be screened to enroll these participants.  
This s
tudy will include participants who are  ≥ 40 years old who have a confirmed diagnosis of PD 
made by a neurologist and a Hoehn & Yahr score at baseline of < 4 .  Participants will be excluded 
from this study if any of the following are true:  
•Participants has ort hostatic hypotension or a sitting blood pressure of ≤90/60
•Participant is pregnant
•Participant has a deep brain stimulation device implanted
•Participant has a known allergy or sensitivity to terazosin
•Participant is concomitantly taking doxazosin, alfuzosin, prazosin, urapadil, or tamsulosin
•Participant has active drug or alcohol use or dependence that, in the opinion of the site
investigator, would interfere with adherence to study requirements
•Participant is unable or unwilling to give written informed consentDay 0 1 wk 2 wk 3 wk 4 wk 5 wk 6 wk 7 wk 8 wk 9 wk 10 wk 11 wk 12 wk
 X  X   X X 
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
Page 5
 of 44 1 STUDY OBJECTIVES 
1.1 Primary O bjectives 
To assess the safety an d efficacy of TZ i n patients wit h PD as well as t he feasibility of t he study 
protocol.  The primary o utcome meas ure w ill be t he safety and tolerabilit y of TZ i n the select 
patient population.   
1.2 Secondary Objectives 
To as sess the mean change in systolic and dias tolic blood pressures at 6 weeks and 12 weeks 
between the active and placebo groups . 
1.3 Exploratory O bjectives 
1)To uti
lize magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) to quantify ATP levels in the brain at
baseline, after a single dose of study drug, and after 12 weeks of treatment with study
drug
2)To explore the effect of TZ on ATP levels in red blood cells.
2 BACKGROUND 
2.1 Rationale  
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease affecting ~1 million 
Americans with ~60,000 new diagnoses made annually1. Patients with PD suffer debilitating motor 
symptoms affecting all aspects of their ability to function, communicate, and care for themselves3. 
In addition, PD patients can suffer non- motor symptoms including dementia, depression, sleep 
disorders, and a range of autonomic dysfunctions4. Because age is a primary risk factor for PD, 
PD-related morbidity and mortality will surge in the coming decades as Americans live longer5. 
There are no interventions that slow the inexorable progression of PD. Thus, there is a critical 
need to develop novel disease- modifying therapies for PD.  
A key pathogenic factor in Parkinson’s disease is impaired energy metabolism5.  Several 
observations support this conclusion.  a) Aging, a major risk factor for PD, impairs cerebral 
glucose metabolism, reduces mitochondrial biogenesis, and decreases ATP levels6, 7.  b) 
Glycolysis and mitochondrial function and numbers are decreased in people with PD8-12.  c) 
Mitochondri al toxins (MPTP &  rotenone) induce PD and PD -like phenotypes in cells and animals, 
including humans13.  d) Mutations associated with familial PD ( PINK1, Parkin, DJ -1, CHCHD2, α-
synuclein, LRRK2) disrupt various aspects of mitochondrial  function and/or energy balance14.  
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
Pag
e 6 of 44 We recently discovered that terazosin (TZ) binds and 
activates phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (Pgk1), the fi rst 
ATP- generating enzyme in glycolysis ( Fig. 1)15.  TZ 
is an α 1-adrenergic  antagonist that is prescribed to 
treat benign prostatic hypertrophy and  rarely  
hypertension16.  However, biochemical and 
functional studies show that TZ has an additional 
target, Pgk1, that is independent of α 1-adrenergic  
antagonism15.  Our earlier crystal structure of Pgk1 
with TZ revealed that the 2,4 -diamino- 6,7-
dimethoxyisoquinazoline motif of TZ binds Pgk1 
adjac ent to the ADP/ATP binding site15.  In earlier 
work and our current unpublished data, we found that TZ increases glycolysis and cellular levels of ATP in cultured cells and in vivo  in mice and rat 
brain
15.  Measurements of brain TZ levels also 
indicate that TZ readily crosses the blood- brain 
barrier .  These findings and the impaired energy 
production in PD, suggested the possibility that TZ 
activation of Pgk1 might improve cellular energy metabolism, prevent progressive cell death, and restore dopamine production and motor function in PD.  Of note,  case reports have identified 
mutations in the PGK1  gene that are associated with early onset PD
17. 
Based on this information, we believe that TZ has the potential to be repurposed for use as the 
first disease modifying treatment of PD.  This would have enormous implications for patients and society.  TZ has the potential to provide a safe and  low-cost treatment option for  patients with PD.  
The information collected in this study will provide vital information to guide future clinical trials of TZ in PD.    
Regardi ng the chosen treatment regimen, oral administration was chosen based on the exi stence 
of Phase 1 studies that have evaluated the safety of oral TZ in healthy subjects.  The decision to utilize a dose of 5mg daily of TZ was primarily based on information obtained from human data 
(see Section 2.2).  Two separate databases were evaluated (Parkinson’s Progression Markers 
Initiative and Truven) to test the effect of TZ on PD.  In both datasets, TZ was associated with 
improvements in progression and complications of PD. The mean dose of TZ being used by 
participants in both databases was approximately 5mg daily.  Based on results from the Truven 
data, the use of TZ at this dose was not associated with a significantly increased risk of falls or orthostatic hypotension.  TZ can be used at higher doses (up to 20 mg/day) for the treatment of 
benign prostatic hyperplasia and (rarely) hypertension.  However, the antihypertensive action of 
TZ could potentially exacerbate the autonomic instability that can occur in PD
18.  Therefore , 5mg 
daily that was chosen represents a dose that is 1) already FDA approved, 2) is used safely in 
patients with PD, and 3) has been shown to provide benefit for the treatment of PD.  After 
randomization, patients will remain on therapy for 12  weeks  in this  study.   Fig. 1. Aging, genetic mutations & 
predispositions, and environmental 
factors contribute to PD in several 
ways. A common feature is energy 
deficits. Terazosin (TZ) enhances phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK1) 
activity to decrease energy deficits and 
halt neurodegeneration in models of 
PD. 
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 7 of 44 2.2 Supporting Data  
a)Preclinical Data
TZ increases brain ATP levels in vivo.  
We recently discovered that terazosin (TZ) binds and 
enhances PGK1 activity in cell lines, thereby increasing ATP 
levels15.  To test if TZ  increases brain energy production in 
vivo, we administered it to mice.  TZ increased levels of 
pyruvate, the product of glycolysis, increased oxidative phosphorylation, and elevated ATP levels ( Fig. 2a-2c).  Like 
previous in vitro  data, the dose- response was biphasic; at low 
but not high concentrations, TZ may enhance ATP release from PGK1.   
We also asked if TZ would increase energy production in mice 
that received 1-methyl -4-phenyl -1,2,3,6 -tetrahydropyridine 
(MPTP), which is often used to model PD in mice.  Seven 
days after administering MPTP to mice, ATP levels,  pyruvate 
levels ( Fig. 2d,2e), and mitochondrial numbers  fell, consistent 
with impaired energy production.  TZ partially prevented the 
energy deficits, and mitochondrial content was partially maintained.   These data indicate that TZ activates glycolysis 
in vivo .  Together with measurements of brain TZ levels, they 
also indicate that TZ readily crosses the blood- brain barrier.   
TZ enhances PGK1 activity to protect dopamine neurons  
in toxin -induced models of PD.  
MPTP causes PD in  humans19.  We delivered MPTP to mice, 
administered 
TZ for the next 7 days, and then assayed on day 7 ( Fig. 3a).  
Because PD patients present after onset of neuron degeneration, we also asked if delayed TZ 
administration would slow neuron loss and 
functional decline.  Therefore, we also delivered MPTP to mice, waited 7 days, then started 7 days 
of TZ treatment, and assayed on day 14 ( Fig. 3a).  
Over the course of 14 days, MPTP progressively decreased levels of TH protein, dopamine content, 
numbers of TH -positive cells in the substantia nigra 
pars compacta ( SNc), TH staining of their striatum 
projections, and increased apoptosis of the TH -
positive  SNc neurons in vehicle- treated mice ( Fig 
3b).  Initiating TZ treatment when MPTP was 
delivered, attenuated these defects at day 7. Delayed TZ delivery also improved the day 14 
abnormalities.  Accordingly, TZ prevented deficits 
in motor function at day 7 and improved motor 
performance at day 14 after delayed administration 
(Fig. 3c). Fig. 2. TZ increases  striatum 
pyruvate and ATP levels  in vivo .  
Mice were given vehicle or MPTP 
and then TZ once a day for 1 week.  
Data points are individual  mice.
Fig. 3. TZ slows cell death, increases 
dopamine levels, and improves motor 
peformance in mice given MPTP (a-c) and 
rats given 6 -OHDA (d -g). 
FAST TZ -PD 
Version 2.0 
Version date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 8 of 44 6-hydroxydopamine (6- OHDA) is delivered to rats can model dopamine neuron degeneration20.
We injected 6 -OHDA into the right striatum, waited 2- 5 weeks, and then initiated a two- week
course of TZ ( Fig. 3d).  In vehicle -treated rats, evidence of SNc cell apoptosis prog ressively
increased from 2 to 7 weeks ( Fig. 3e).  However, irrespective of the delay until beginning
treatment, TZ protected against further cell loss.  Correspondingly, dopamine content and TH
reverted toward control values ( Fig. 3f).  Seven weeks after injecting 6 -OHDA into the right
striatum, use of the left forepaw had fallen ( Fig. 3g).  However, when rats received TZ between
weeks 5 and 7, they used both forepaws equally.
As an additional model of PD, we treated Drosophila  with rotenone, a mitochondrial complex I 
inhibitor implicated in sporadic PD21.  Rotenone exposure reduced brain ATP levels and disrupted 
motor function.  PGK1 is highly conserved in flies, and supplying TZ together with rotenone minimized decrements in ATP content and motor performance.  Knocking -down Pgk1  by RNAi in 
TH-neurons abolished the protective effect of TZ.  Conversely, overexpressing PGK1 in 
Drosophila and rat TH neurons phenocopied TZ’s energy effects
15, 22.  These in vivo  results 
suggest that TZ slows or prevents neurodegeneration by enhancing PGK1 activity and increasing ATP
15, 22. 
TZ pr
events or slows neurodegeneration in genetic models of PD.  
We tested Drosophila  
PINK 15 and LRRKex1 
mutants; PINK1  and 
LRRK2  mutations 
cause PD in humans23,
24. TZ attenuated
biochemical and motor
deficits in these models.
Abnor
mal accumulation 
of α-synuclein, a major 
constituent of Lewy bodies, is a key feature of PD
25. Transgenic 
mice overexpressing 
wild-type human α -
synuclein ( mThy1 -
hSNCA ) exhibit PD- like 
neurodegeneration26.  When they were 3 months -old, we began 
treating mice with vehicle or TZ.  When 15 months old, vehicle-treated mice had substantial α -synuclein in the striatum and SNc 
and impaired motor performance on the rotarod and pole test ( Fig. 
4).  TZ partially reversed these abnormalities.  
We
 also tested the effect of TZ on dopamine neurons differentiated 
from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs).  LRRK2G2019S is the 
most common LRRK2  mutation and is associated with ~4% of 
familial and ~1% of sporadic PD27.  Dopamine neurons derived 
from LRRK2G2019S iPSCs recapitulate PD features including 
abnormal α-synuclein accumulation28.  We studied such neurons 
generated from two Spanish patients.  After thirty days of Fig. 4. TZ reduces accumulation of α-
synuclein in transgenic mice over -
expressing WT human α-synuclein.  
Fig. 5. TZ reduces  SNCA 
aggregation in DA neurons 
derived from human iPSCs 
(LRRK2G2019S and normal).  
30-day old DA neurons
received TZ and were
studied 3d later.
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 9 of 44 differentiation, ~60% of the LRRK2G2019S dopamine neurons had accumulated α -synuclein 
compared to ~15% of dopamine neurons from healthy individuals ( Fig. 5).  Adding TZ for 24 hr 
reduced the percentage of LRRK2G2019S dopamine neurons with increased α -synuclein 
accumulation.   
b)C
linical Data
TZ use is associated with slower disease progression in people with PD.
PD incidence increases markedly after age 6029.
T
Z is prescribed for benign prostatic hyperplasia,
which also affects older men.  Therefore, t o
det
ermine if some patients with PD used TZ, we
interrogated the Parkinson’s Progression Markers
Initiative (PPMI) database.  Compared to PD
patients not taking TZ (n=269), patients taking TZ
had a slower rate of motor function decline
assayed by the Movement Disorder Society’s
Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale Part 3.Although statistically significant (P=0.039), only
 7
pat
ients with PD used TZ.   To increase the sample
size, we tested related drugs with quinazolinestructures and found that  doxazosin and alfuzosin
increased glycolysis and tyrosine hydroxylase i
n
MP
TP-treated mice.  In patients using TZ,
doxazosin, or alfuzosin (TZ/DZ/AZ, n=13),
progression of motor disability slowed (P=0.012)
(Fig. 6).  In contrast, the non- quinazoline α1-
adrenergic antagonist tamsulosin did not rescue
tyrosine hydroxylase levels in MPTP -
treated mice and failed to slow motor function decline.  These data also support 
the conclusion that enhanced glycolytic 
activity and attenuation of cell death are 
medi ated by TZ’s effect on PGK1 and not 
α1-adrenergic receptors.  
W
e also interrogated the IBM 
Watson/Truven Health Analytics MarketScan database from 2011 to 2016. The database includes longitudinal, de -Fig. 6. TZ/DZ/AZ  reduced motor function 
decline assayed by MDS -UPDRS  Part 3. Data 
are scores at PPMI entry through ~1 year for 
patients taking TZ /DZ/AZ (n=13 , red) , 
tamsulosin (n=24, green),  or neither  (n=269, 
blue). Lines are linear mixed effect regression analyses. Slopes of TZ/DZ/AZ group differed by maximum likelihood estimation  compared to 
controls  (p=0.0 12). 
Fig. 7.  TZ reduces risk of ICD9 diagnostic codes  
associated with P D.  Data are means and 
confidence intervals for relative risk in PD  patients 
taking TZ/DZ/AZ vs.  tamsulosin.  Codes were a 
curated set developed by physicians treating P D.  
2,885 enrollees were taking TZ/DZ/AZ; 15,417 were 
on tamsulosin.  
 
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
i
dentified diagnoses (ICD- 9/ICD -10 codes) and pharmaceutical claims.  We identified 2,880 PD 
patients taking TZ/DZ/AZ and 15,409 taking tamsulosin.  Among 79 PD -related diagnoses,  we 
found a reduced relative risk in 69 codes among patients taking TZ/DZ/AZ vs. tamsulosin.  
Moreover 41 were significantly decreased, whereas only 2 were significantly increased.   To 
estimate PD -related benefits/risks attributable to TZ/DZ/AZ vs. tamsulosin, we calculated the odds 
ratio for each of the 79 PD -related codes.  Relative to PD patients taking tamsulosin, those on  
TZ/DZ/AZ had reduced clinic/hospital encounters for motor symptoms (odds ratio 0.77 (95% 
CI:0.70 -0.84)), non -motor symptoms (odds ratio 0.78 (95% CI:0.73- 0.83)), and PD complications 
(odds ratio 0.76 (95% CI:0.71 -0.82)) ( Fig. 7).  These data suggest that under real -world 
conditions, TZ and related drugs that enhance PGK1 activity reduced PD signs, symptoms and 
complications.  
R
elationship between PGK1 enhancement and PD. 
PGK1  mutations cause recessive hemolytic anemia, myopathy, seizures, and intellectual  
disability; P arkinsonism has also been reported17, 30.  The authors speculated that reduced ATP 
gene ration in the SNc was responsible.  It may also be worth noting that PD occurs 1.5 times 
more frequently in men than women31, and PGK1  is located on the X- chromosome.  
Fi
nding that TZ increases glycolysis and prevents progressive neurodegeneration supports the 
concept that energy deficits are a critical factor in the pathogenesis of PD5, 14.  The increased ATP 
levels produced by TZ may be key.  ATP has properties of a hydrotrope32, 33.  It can prevent 
aggregate formation and dissolve previously formed protein aggr egates, and the transition 
between aggregate stability and dissolution occurs in a narrow range of  physiological ATP 
concentrations.  We speculate that by elevating ATP levels, TZ facilitates solubilization of 
aggregates, including α -synuclein,  and prevents the neurodegeneration of PD .  However, other 
mechanisms are possible, including ATP -dependent chaperones (such as HSP90) and 
disaggregases15, 32, 33. 
S
ummary of supporting data.  
It is uncertain which preclinical models of PD will accurately predict therapeutic benefit.  These 
data have the advantage that they identify TZ efficacy in multiple different animal models of PD, 
including toxin- induced and genetic.  Moreover, probing two independent databases suggested 
efficacy in humans with PD.   As a potential PD therapeutic, TZ has the advantages of a defined 
mode of action, blood- brain  barrier penetration, oral availability, and extensive safety experience 
in humans su ggestin g feasibility of l ong-term ad ministration. 
2.3 Risk/Benefit Assessment 
As menti oned previously, T Z is associat ed wit h an increase d risk for orthostatic hypotensi on (OH). 
This is especially important i n the setting of PD wher e the prevalence  of OH is significantly  
increase d compar ed to healthy controls.   Patients  with PD ar e also  mor e susceptibl e to calls,  
which  coul d also  be exacerbat ed by t he presenc e of OH.  T he results from t he Truv en database  
outlined abov e demonstrat ed that patients wit h PD w ho wer e using TZ di d not hav e significantly 
increased prevalence of I CD-9 codes related t o falls co mpared to PD pa tients w ho were not using 
TZ.  However, t his s tudy will di rectly asse ss whether o r not the use  of TZ in PD significantly 
increases  the occu rrence of o rthostatic hy potension and r elated ev ents, su ch as falls.   TZ i s 
associa ted with additional adv erse effects, such as pe ripheral ede ma, pal pitations,  nause a, 
asthenia, di zziness,  head ache and so mnolence.  Despit e these  risks, t he potential bene fit that TZ 
may pr ovide is si gnificant giv en that there a re no currently av ailable treatments t o slow t he 
progression of PD.   
Page 10 of 44 FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
FAST TZ- PD 
Version 1.8  
Version date: 2/7/2019  
Page 11  of 44 3 STUDY DESIGN  
3.1 Scientific Rationale for Study Design 
The primary goal of this study is  to assess the safety and efficacy of TZ in PD and to assess the 
feasibility of using TZ in patients with PD.  Our hope is that the results of this pilot study will guide 
future clinical trials of TZ in PD.  
3.2 Justification for D ose 
Terazosin is used as an α 1-adrenergic antagonist in humans with benign prostatic hyperplasia 
or, largely in the past, hypertension.  The typical dosing range for use in these conditions is 1mg 
per day up to 20 mg/day.  The average daily dose of TZ that participants from the PPMI and Truven databases were using was approximately 5 mg/day.  In both of these databases, TZ was 
associated with beneficial outcomes for patients with PD.  Therefore, it is reasonable to assume 
that a dose of 5 mg/day of TZ in patients with PD will provide benefit.  This also represents a dose 
that will minimize antagonism of α -1 receptors that could lead to a decrease in BP, which could 
potentially exacerbate the autonomic instability that can occur in PD
18.   
A
s outlined in Figure 2c, the dose of TZ that produced the optimal results was approximately 1 
microgram/kg to 100 micrograms/kg.  This translates into a dose of 0.001 mg/kg to 0.1 mg/kg.  If we assume that the average participant will weight approximately 100 kg, a reasonable dose 
would be 0.1 to 10 mg/day.  Figure 2c also demonstrates that the benefits of TZ are still significant 
at higher doses but begin to decrease.  Taken together, our pre -clinical and clinical data suggest 
that the choice of optimal dose would most reasonably be between doses of 1mg, 5mg or 10mg 
daily.  The choice to eliminate a dose of 10 mg/day was based on 1) the increased risk of 
orthostatic hypotension in PD at higher doses and 2) the fact that higher doses may blunt the 
potential benefit of TZ relative to lower doses.  Because the average dose of TZ used in both the 
PPMI and Truven datasets was ~ 5mg/day, and this dose is very reasonable based on the pre-
clinical data, this dose was chosen.  
3.3 End of Study Definition 
A subject is considered to have completed the study if he or she has completed all phases of the study including the last visit shown in the Schedule of Activities (SoA).   
4 SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT OF SUBJECTS  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
1.Men or women aged 40 and older with the diagnosis of idiopathic PD per UK Brain Bank
criteria
2. Hoehn- Yahr Stage I -III, on stable dopaminergic treatment regimen for ≥4 weeks prior to
baseline.
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
1.Subjects unwilling or unable to give informed consent
2.Secondary parkinsonism (e.g., drug induced)
3. Parkinson- plus syndromes
4.History of brain surgery for PD such as deep brain stimulati
on
5.N
o confounding acute or unstable medical, psychiatric, orthopedic condition. Subjects
who have hypertension, diabetes mellitus, depression, or other common age -relate d
illnes
s will be included if their disease under control with stable treatment regimen for at 
least 30 days.  
6.Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension defined as symptomatic decrease in BP > 20mmHg
systolic or > 10mmHg diastolic and HR increase < 20bpm on supine to sitting or standing.
7.Clinically significant traumatic brain injury or post-traumatic stress disorder
8.Presence of other known medical or psychiatric comorbidity that in the investigator’s
opinion would compromise participation in the study
9.Presence of dementia per Movement Disorder Society Level I criteria
10.Major depression, bipolar affective disorder, or other mental health disorders that are
sufficiently severe to increase adverse event risk or impact neuropathy assessment in the
opinion of the responsible site principal investigator.
11.Current suicidal ideation within one year prior to the baseline visit as evidenced by
answering “yes” to Questions 4 or 5 on the suicidal ideation portion of the Columbia-
Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS), Beck Depression score >21, Beck Anxiety score
>22.
12.History of exposure to typical or atypical antipsychotics or other dopamine blocking agents within
6 months prior to the baseline visit
13.Use of investigational drugs within 30 days before screening
14.Subjects have to be on a stable regimen of central nervous system acting medications
(benzodiazepines, antidepressants, hypnotics) for 30 days prior to the baseline visit
15.Use of doxazosin, alfuzosin, prazosin, or tamsulosin
16.For female participant, pregnancy, or plans for child-bearing during study period
17.Participant is restricted from traveling to and from the study site
4.3 Lifestyle Considerations 
No specific restrictions on lifestyle and/or diet will be placed on the subject during the study.  If a 
participant is prescribed an α- 1 antagonist that is indicated for their care, they will be withdrawn 
early from the study to 1) avoid the risk for harmful side effects and 2) to maintain the integrity of 
blinding.   
4.4 Subject W ithdrawal C riteria 
Subjects are free to withdraw from the study at any point.  Subjects will be withdrawn from the  
study if they experience  serious and/or persistent side effects during  the study t hat, in the opinion 
of the site PI, are thought to be related to the study drug.  Examples include but  are not limited to 
persistent and symptomatic orthostatic hypotension, persistent peripheral edema, persistent 
drowsiness that significantly affects activities of daily living, significant weakness, or falls.  If any 
of these side effects occur, the site PI will be asked to make a recommendation regarding whether  
continuation of the study treatment will place the subject at any undue risk.  If so, the subject will 
be immediately withdrawn from the study.   
Withdrawn subjects will not be replaced.  Should  a subject withdraw from the study despite all 
efforts to maintain follow- up every effort should be made to obtain an in- person final visit, which 
should include all assessments that would be obtained in the final drug visits (see Section 6).  
4.5 Study E nrollment P rocedures 
Only su bjects w ho meet al l the inclusion and none of the exclusion criteria will be eligible for 
enrollment and subsequent randomization i n the study.  No protocol w aivers w ill be allow ed for 
eligibility cr iteria.  Subjects w ill be deemed el igible for enr ollment by the PI.  If eligible f or 
enrollment, the site investigators will review the informed consent documents with the subject.  If 
Page 12
 of 44 FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
Page 
13 of 44 the subject si gns the i nformed co nsent docu ment, t hey w ill be considered as bei ng enrolled i n the 
study.   
Once a participant has been enrolled, they will be assigned a Subject Identific ation Number by 
the site.  After a s ubject is enrolled and has a Subject Identification Number, they will undergo a 
screening visit.  If they fail the screening, their Subject  Identification Number will be documented 
and their reason for screening failure will be documented.   If a subject fails their initial sc reening 
visit, they will not be eligible for re- screening for the study.  If a subject is deemed eligible after 
their screening vis it, they will be randomized to treatment.  
4.5.1 Subject R ecruitment and Retention 
Subjects will be rec ruited from the U niversity o f Iowa Neurology clinic as  well as f rom referrals 
from o ther pr oviders w ithin the University o f Iowa.   
4.5.2 Screening Logs 
Screening logs will be collected for all enrolled participants.  Screening logs to doc ument reasons 
for ineligibility and reasons  for nonparticipation of eligible subjects will be stored by the PIs.  
Screening logs of all participants  will include information regarding how the subject learned of the 
trial, reasons for s creen failure (if applicable), and reasons for not participating in study (if 
applicable). 
4.5.3 Informed Consent 
Written informed consent will be obtained from each study subject  before any study -specific 
procedures or assessments are done and after the aims, methods, anticipated benefits, 
and potential hazards are explained. The s ubject’s willingness  to participate in the study 
will be documented in writing in a consent form approved by the IRB at the University of Iowa, 
which will be signed by the subject with the date of that signature indicated. The investigator 
will keep the original consent forms  and a c opy will be given  to the subject. It will also be 
explained to the s ubject that they  are free to refuse entry into the study  and free to withdraw 
from the s tudy at any time without prejudice to future treatment. Written and/or oral 
information about the study in a language understandable by the subject will be given to all 
subjects. 
If a participant is unable to read the consent forms, the consent form will be read in its 
entirety to the subject.  If the s ubject  is willing and able to prov ide verbal cons ent to 
participate in the study,  but is physically  unable to provide  their signature, the s ubject’s 
authorized representative may sign the subject’s name while also providing their name 
and relationship to the study participant.   
4.5.4 Randomization/Treatment Assignment 
Participants will be randomized in a 1:1 fashion to TZ 5mg daily and placebo.  
Randomization will be performed by NuCara Pharmacy in Coralv ille, Iowa.   
Randomization codes  will be made available only to the dispensing pharmac ist.  
The randomization code will not be made available to the investigators, study centers, study 
subjects, or other representatives.  Only after the study is complete, will randomization 
codes  be made available to the investigators.   
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
Page 14  of 44 5 STUDY I NTERVENTIONS/STUDY M EDICATION/STUDY DRUG O R DEVICE 
5.1 Study Medications/Interventions, Administration, and Duration 
Once randomized, all participants will receive a one-mo nth titration packet.  For participants 
who 
are randomized to receive TZ, it is important to titrate the dose  slowly  to avoid higher 
incidences of orthostatic hypotension.  All participants will undergo a dummy titration schedule 
to maintain blinding.  The titration schedule is outlined below: 
Placebo TZ 5mg per day  
Week 1 (days 1-7) P A 
Week 2 (days 8-1 4) P + P  A + A  
Week 3 (days 15-21) P + P + P  A + A + A  
Week 4 (days 22-2 8) P + P + P + P  A + A + A + A  
Day 28 and beyond P AA 
P = 1 Placebo Capsule  
A = 1 capsule containing 1mg of TZ 
AA = 1 capsule containing 5mg of TZ 
Participants will be informed of the titration schedule at randomization and all participants will 
be informed that they will be switched to a single capsule starting on Day 28 and beyond.  This 
will maintain blinding and avoid the need for participants to have a 4 capsule pill burden for 
the remainder of the study.   
Participants will be provided with the entire study supply of 1mg and 5mg terazosin or 
placebo. The first bottle will contain a one month supply of 1mg capsules  for the titration 
period. The second bottle will contain a two month supply of 5mg capsules. The participant 
will be instructed to take their dose of medication once daily .  The participant will be 
instructed to take their dose of medication before bedtime to maintain the same dosing 
schedule, as doses should be separated by at least 23 hours. Each treatment will be 
administered by the participant in their home by mouth. Each participant will be maintained 
on their dosage schedule for the duration of the study (3 months).  Dose escalation 
schedules will not be employed.   
5.2 Handling of Study Medications/Interventions 
Study treatment will be compounded and shipped to the University  of Iowa IDS Pharmacy 
by NuCara Pharmacy. All treatment capsules will be compounded to have similar 
appearance, color, taste, and markings between active treatment capsules and placebo 
capsules. The NuCara Pharmacy will be responsible for all regulatory requirements for 
dispensing of treatment, including packaging and labeling requirements. Additionally, 
the NuCara Pharmacy will be responsible for documenting the codes of the treatment 
bottles that are dispensed.
On Day 1 of the study, the participant will be given a 1 month supply for their initial titration 
medication, either terazosin or placebo per randomization, and a 2 month supply of the 5mg 
capsules. At each visit, participants will bring their medication bottles to the investigator 
who will be responsible for counting the reamining capsules and checking medication 
compliance.
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
Page 15  of
 44 An investigator is responsible for ens uring product accountability  records are maintained 
throughout the course of the study. The inventory will include details of treatment bottles received 
and dispens ed to subjects, batc h, and ID numbers. All unused capsules  must be kept 
until reconc iliation of delivery records with accountability logs  by the monitor. An accounting 
must be made of any drug deliberately or accidentally destroyed. Dis crepancies between the 
number o f capsules r eceived and dis pensed drug must be reconciled. 
5.3 Concomitant I nterventions 
5.3.1 Requir ed Concomitant M edications/Interventions 
No specific  concomitant medications/interventions  are required for this study.   Participants will 
continue to receive their normal level of care from their providers, and any concomitant 
medications initiated by outside providers will be dis pensed by the subject’s preferred pharmacy. 
Any time that a new medication is prescribed to a participant, they are to contact their site to report 
this change in therapy to ensure that it is allowed.  
5.3.2 Prohibited Medications/Interventions 
Subjects are prohibited from taking doxazosin, alfuzosin, prazosin, terazos in, urapadil,  or 
tamsulosin during  this study.  If  one of these medications is prescribed during the course of the 
study, the participant will be informed that initiation of any of these treatments will result in their 
immediate withdrawal from the study.  They may dec ide if they wish to receive the prescribed 
treatment from their outside provider.  If the subject decides to not initiate the prohibited treatment, 
they may remain in the study.   
5.4 Subject compliance 
Subject compliance will be assessed at each study vis it via pill counts. Specifically, study 
intervention will be dispensed in prescription bottles and subjects will be asked to bring 
their bottles  to each visit s o that compliance can be assessed.    See section 5.2 for additional 
information. 
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
Page 16  of 44 6 CLI
NICAL AND LABORATORY EVALUATIONS/STUDY PROCEDURES  
6.1 Schedule of Activities 
Evaluation  Screening  
(-90 days)  Day 
1 2 
 wks6 
wks 9 
wks 12 
wks 
Written Informed Consent  X 
Inclusion/Exclusion Review  X X 
Documentation of Disease/Disorder  X X 
Hoehn & Yahr  X X X X 
Medical History  
•Overall Medical History
•Medical History of PDX X X X 
Concomitant medication review  X X X X 
Orthostaticsa X X X X 
Physical examination  X X X X 
RandomizationcX 
Dispense Study DrugdX 
Blood Draw Xc
MRI Xc
Neurological examination X X X X 
Body weight and height  X X X X 
Vital signs  X X X X 
FAST TZ-P D 
Versi
on 2.0
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 FAST TZ-P D 
Versi
on 2.0  
Version date: 11/12 /2019 X 
X 
X 
X X 
X 
X X MDS-U PDRS Motor assessmentbX X X X X 3
 wks4
 wks5
 wks
Page 17  of 44 X X X 
Behavioral Assessments 
•Columbia Suicide Severity
Rating Scale Questionnaire for
Compulsive Disorders (C-SSRS)
• Beck Anxiety Inventory
• Beck Depression Inventory
• Parkinson's Disease
Questionnaire (PDQ-39)X X X 
Sleep assessment  
•Pittsburgh Sleep Quality IndexX X X 
Recent Falls  X X X X 
Cognitive Assessments Xe
X X X 
Auditory/Speech Assessment X X X 
Pregnancy Test for Women of Child -Bearing 
potential  X X X 
Drug Accountability/ Compliance  X X X X 
Adverse Event Review  X X X X 
a)Participants will l
ie in the supine position for 5 minutes and have their blood pressure checked.  The patient will then sit up for
1 minute and have their blood pressure re -checked.  The patient will then stand for 3 minutes and have their blood pressure
checked.  If the participant has a decrease in the systolic blood pressure by 20 or more mmHg after standing for 3 minutes, or
a decline of 10 or more mmHg in the diastolic blood pressure, they will be considered to have orthostatic hypotens ion.
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version date: 11/12/2019 •Hopkins Verbal Learning Test (HVLT)
•Symbol Digit Modalities Test (SDMT)
•MoCaX 
Xf 
X Finger Tapping Assessments 
Timed Up and Go AssessmentX 
X 
X X 
X X X 
X X X X 
X X X 
Page 18  of 44 b)All MDS-UPDRS Motor Assessments will be collected when the participant is in the prac tically defined OFF state, meaning
they 
have not taken their dopaminergic PD medications for > 6 hours at the time of assessment; this assessment will be video
recorded 
to ensure rater reliability
c)Baseline assessments on day 1 will occur PRIOR to randomization or the study drug being dispensed after the site
coordinator 
has determine the subject is still eligible for participation.
d)This 
will be performed twice at the baseline visit: prior to administration of TZ and 3 hours after administration of TZ
e)Only the Beck Depression, Beck Anxiety, and C-SSRS will  be assessed at the screening visit, per exclusion criteria
f) At the Week 2 visit only the PDQ-39 will be assessed.
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version date: 11/12/2019 
Page 19  of
 44 6.2 Timing of Study Activities  
6.2.1 Screeni
ng/Pre -Randomization Evaluations/procedures 
Individuals identified at each site to potentially  be eligible for inclusion will first be informed about the study and 
asked if they wish to receive more information.  If the subject answers in the affirmative, approved staff will first 
go through the informed consent document with the subject and answer  any questions that the subject may 
have.  Specifically, the participant will be informed that signing this informed consent document does not 
guarantee that they will included in the study.  It simply allows the study sites to perform the necessary screening 
procedures to determine if the participant is eligible for randomization.  If the participant signs the informed 
consent document, the participant will then be screened.  This will include the following assessment s: 
•Review of inclusion/exclusion criteria
•Documentation of  P
D
•Hoehn & Yahr
•Review of concomitant medications/prohibited medications
•Orthostatics
•Medical hi
story
•A physical exam
•Neurological ex
am
•Body weight and height
•Vital signs
•MDS-U PDRS Motor assessment
•Beck Depression Inventory, Beck Anxiety Inventory, Columbia-
Suicide Severity Rating Scale
If the participant is found to be eligible for randomization based on this screening visit, their first baseline visit 
will be scheduled.  The baseline visit must be scheduled within 90 days of the initial screening visit.  If 
the participant is unable to schedule their baseline visit within 90 days of the screening visit, they may still be 
eligible for inclusion, but they will need to be re-s creened. 
After all assessments are completed, the site investigator  will review the available data and ensure that the 
participant is eligible for randomization.  If so, the participant will be randomized at Day 1.  They will then be 
dispensed their study treatment packs.  The participants will then have their blood drawn and then have their 
MRI. Immediately following this initial MRI, they will take their first dose of TZ 1mg or placebo.  They will then 
wait 3 hours from that time, during which the other study assessments may be completed.  After three hours 
from the time 
that they took their TZ, they will have their blood drawn again, and will then undergo another MRI 
study.  
6.2.2 On-Study
/On-Interventions Evaluations/procedures 
At each study visit, subjects will undergo the following assessments:  
•Hoehn & Yahr
•Concomitant medication review
•Orthostatics
•Height and weight
•Vital signs
•Physical examination
•Neurological examination
•MDS-U PDRS Motor Assessment
•Cognitive Assessments
•Behavioral Assessments
•Sleep Assessments
•Fall Assessments
•Speech Assessments
•Motor Assessments
FAST TZ-PD
Version 2.0
Version date: 11/12 /2019
Page 20  of
 44 •Blood Draw
•Drug accountability/compliance
•Adverse Event  Review
The likelihood of adverse events is highest near the initiation of study drug or at the time of dose escalation34.  
Therefore, subjects will be contacted via telephone the following 3 weeks (weeks 3, 4 & 5) after starting study 
drug and after the 2 week visit.  They will then be seen halfway through the study at 6 weeks.  They will again 
be contacted 9 weeks after their baseline visit via telephone by the research coordinator, and their final visit will 
be 12 weeks after their b aseline visit.  
6.2.3 Study Medication  Discontinuation Evaluations/procedures  
Study medication discontinuation will occur under the following circumstances:  
•Completion of study
•Presence of orthostatic hypotension
•Blood pressure of ≤90/60
•Participant initiates prohibited medication
•Participant reports unwillingness to continue with study due to intolerable side effects
If any o
f the above occurs, participants will be asked to come in for an end- of-study visit as soon as possible. 
All assessments outlined in the SoA will be performed at the end -of-study visit.  Participants will not be required 
to continue for future fol low-up appointments after discontinuation of treatment.  Participants who experience 
adverse effects will immediately discontinue study treatment and will not be considered for inclusion in further 
evaluations.  
6.2.4 On Study/Off -Intervention Evaluations  
This tr ial will follow an intention- to-treat design.  Subjects who discontinue study medication (see section 6.2.3) 
will be asked to continue to be followed for the remainder of the study, but will not be taking a study intervention. 
The following assessments will be performed at all on study/off -intervention visits:  
•Hoehn & Yahr
•Concomitant medication review
•Orthostatics
•Height and weight
•Vital signs
•Physical examination
•Neurological ex
amination
•MDS-U PDRS Motor Assessment
•Cognitive Assessments
•Behavioral Assessments
•Sleep Assessments
•Fall
 Assessments
•Speech Assessments
•Motor Assessments
•Blood draw
If pa
rticipants are unable or unwilling to continue with the regularly- scheduled assessments after discontinuation 
of the study intervention, they will be encouraged to return to the study site for a final  evaluation that will include 
the same assessments as listed above.  
6.2.5 Final On -S tudy Evaluations  
The final On- Study Evaluation will be comprised of the following assessments: 
•Hoehn & Yahr
•Concomitant medication review
•Orthostatics
•Height  
and weight
•Vital Signs
FAST TZ-P D
Version 2.0
Version date: 11/12 /2019
Page 21  of
 44 •Physical examination
•Neurological examination
•MDS-U PDRS Motor Assessment
•Cognitive assessments
•Behavioral Assessments
•Sleep assessments
•Fall Assessments
•Speech Assessment
•Motor Assessments
•Blood draw
•Drug accountability/compliance
•Adverse Event  Review
6.2.6 Off-St
udy Requirements 
No off -study requirements after the final evaluation will be employed for this study.  
6.2.7 Pregnancy 
Per the exclusion criteria, female who are pregnant  will be excluded from this study.   Terazosin has been 
designated a pregnancy category C medication by the FDA.  Therefore, if a subject were to become pregnant 
while taking the active treatment, it is unclear if this would pose a risk to the developing fetus.  As a result, 
females who are capable of becoming pregnant during the study should be screened with a urine-
dipstick pregnancy test at their screening visit, prior to randomization, and at their 6-week visit.  Females 
participants must 
also practice a highly effective method of contraception (i.e., oral contraceptives, a barrier 
method 
of birth control such as condoms or a diaphragm, intrauterine devices, partner with vasectomy, or 
sexual abstinence). 
6.3
 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF EVALUATIONS 
6.3.1 Informed Consent 
Written informed consent will be obtained from each subject before any study-s pecific procedures 
or assessments are performed and after the aims, methods, anticipated benefits, and potential hazards 
are explained.
 Written informed consent will be obtained from each participant by authorized personnel 
prior to undergoing screening and prior to randomization.  The subject’s willingness to participate in the 
study will be documented in writing in a consent form, which will be signed by the subject with the date of 
that signature indicated. The investigator will keep the original consent forms and copies will be given to the 
subjects. It will also be explained to the subject s that they are free to refuse entry into the study and free to 
withdraw from the study at any time without prejudice to future treatment. Written and/or oral information 
about 
the study in a language understandable by the subject will be given to all subjects. HIPAA guidelines for 
confidentiality and the principles of medical ethics will be adhered to during the study. 
6.3.2 Pr
otocol Violations  
Protocol violations will be defined as any of the following:  
•Inadequate or delinquent informed consent
•Inclusion/exclusion criteria not met
•Unreported serious adverse events
•Improper breaking of blinding
•Use of prohibited medications
•Missed visits
•Inadequate record keeping
•Non-compliance with study requirements
FAST TZ-P D
Version 2.0
Version d ate: 11/12/2019
Pag
e 22 of 44 6.3.3 Documentation of Parkinson’s Disease  
P
articipants must have a document ed diagnosis of PD that fits with the UK  Brain Bank Diagnostic Criteria 
(Appendix A).  
6.3.4 Medical History  
As part of the initial screening for inclusion in the study, participants will provide all comorbidities and their 
approximate time of diagnosis  (Appendix B).  At each visit, the participant will be asked to provide any newly 
diagnosed comorbidities.   
6.3.5 Treatment History  
Participants will be asked to provide a full history of any medications, over -the-counter products, herbal 
supplements, nutraceuticals, or devices that  have been used for the treatment of PD or PD -related symptoms .  
They will also be asked to recollect (to the best of their knowledge) the timing of these treatments (i.e. when did 
they start the medication, when were dosage adjustments made, when was the treatment stopped).  For 
medications that were used specifically for the treatment or relief of symptoms of PD, participants will be asked 
what the reason for discontinuation was, if applicable.  Participants will also be asked to provide information 
about dosages, dosage form (capsule, tablet, etc) route of administration, dosing schedule (Appendix C)  
6.3.6 Concomitant Medications/Treatments  
In addition to PD -related treatment history, all concomitant medications they are currently taking.  Participants 
will also be asked to provide information about dosages, dosage form (capsule, tablet, etc) route of 
administration, dosing schedule(Appendix D). 
6.3.7 Protocol Amendments and Study Termination  
All revisions and/or amendments to this protocol must be approved in writing by IRB . The Investigator will not 
make any changes to the conduct of the study or the protocol without first obtaining written approval from the 
IRB, except where necessary to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to a study subject.  
Any revisions to the protocol that will change the number or frequency of evaluations that a participant undergoes will require the participant to sign an updated written informed consent. 
6.3.8 Clinical Assessments 
•Hoehn & Yahr
oCollected to measure disease severity as well as progression throughout study
•Orthostatics
oCollected to measure if participants are having worsening orthostatic hypotension.
oIf orthostatic hypotension is present, this assessment will NOT be able to determine if it is
secondary to the study medication or autonomic failure that occurs in PD.
•Physical examination
oThis will be a simple physical exam to measure the general health of the participant independent
of their PD
•MDS UPDRS Part 3
oThis portion of the MDS -UPDRS specifically measures motor function.  This will only be collected
when subjects are in the practically defined “off -period” meaning that they have not taken their
PD medica tions within 6 hours of the assessment
•MDS -UPDRS Part 4
oThis portion of the MDS -UPDRS will use historical and objective information to assess the motor
complications of dyskinesia and motor fluctuations including off -state dystonias
•Vital signs/Height & We ight
FAST TZ-P D
Version 2.0
Version d ate: 11/12/2019
Page 
23 of 44 oParticipants will have their heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, and core body
tem
peratures measured as well as their height and weight
•Neurological Exam
6.3.9 Laboratory E valuations 
Women of child-b earing potential will have a urine-d ipstick pregnancy  test performed at their screening visit, 
their baseline/randomization 
visit, and at their 6 week visit.  The site PI must verify each result and indicate 
that the results are “Negative” or “Positive”.  If the results are “negative”, this indicates that the subject is not 
pregnant. If the results are “positive” this indicates that the subject is pregnant and must discontinue study 
drug. 
The
 MRI studies are being conducted to perform MR Spectroscopy in an attempt to quantify ATP levels in the 
brain. 
The
 blood draws are being conduc ted to collect red blood cells.  These samples will be sent immediately  to 
the
 lab of Dr. Michael Welsh, where they will be analyzed to quantify ATP levels in the red blood cells. 
6.3.10 Pharmacokinetic Studies 
N/A 
6.3.11 Other Laboratory Studies 
All randomized partic ipants will have the option of having their blood drawn at each visit.  Within the 
informed consent documents, subjects will have the option to donate blood or not.  The subjects will be 
informed 
that the blood samples are being collecting for the sake of bio-b anking meaning that the blood is 
being collected without a specific assay in mind.  It is possible that these samples will be used for genome-
wide studies in the future as well as assays aimed at quantifying ATP levels in red blood cells.   
6.3.12
 Questionnaires 
•MDS-U PDRS Part 1
oThis will measure Non-m otor experiences  of daily living
•MDS
-UPDRS Part 2
oThis will measure Motor experiences of daily living
•The following cognitive as sessments will be performed
oHopkins
 Verbal Learning Test (HVLT)
oSymbol 
Digit Modalities Test (SDMT)
oMontreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)
•Pittsburgh
 Sleep Quality Index
oAssessment of sleep quality
•The following behav ioral assessments will be performed to test depression, compulsiveness & anxiety
oBeck 
Depression Inventory (BDI)
oBeck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)
oColumbia 
Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS)
oParkinson's 
Disease Questionnaire (PDQ-39)
6.3.13  Subject
 Adherence Assessments  
The site pharmacies will document subject adherence at each visit by pill count.  
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
Pag
e 24 of 44 7 MANAGEMENT OF ADVERSE EXPERIENCES  
T
he expected adverse experiences from use of TZ include orthostatic hypotension, palpitations, peripheral 
edema, nausea, asthenia, dizziness, headache, somnolence, nasal congestion, syncope, intraoperative floppy 
iris syndrome, and priapism.  Participants who experience side effects that are found to be intolerable by the 
subject or the site investigator will discontinue study drug.  If discontinuation of the study drug occurs in between 
visits, subjects will be encouraged to return to the site for their end of study assessment.   
8 CRITERIA FOR INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION 
Study medication discontinuation will occur under the following circumstances:  
•Completion of study
•Presence of orthostatic hypotension
•Blood pressure of ≤90/60
•Participant initiates prohibited medication
•Participant reports unwillingness to continue with study due to intolerable side effects
Par
ticipants who discontinue study medication will be encouraged to undergo all remaining study assessments.  
9 ST
ATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
9.1 Outcomes  
9.1.1 Primary Outcome (including definition)  
The primary outcome measure will be the safety and tolerability of TZ in the select patient population.  This will 
be assessed by comparing the number of participants in each group that experience drug -related adverse drug 
events as well as assessing the rate of drop out in each group. 
To assess the mean change in systolic  and diastolic blood pressures at 6 weeks and 12 weeks between the 
active and placebo groups.  
9.1.2 Secondary Outcome(s)  
•Mean change in systolic and diastolic blood pressure from baseline to 6 weeks and 12 weeks
•Prevalence of falls between placebo and active gr oup
•Prevalence of intolerable side effects between placebo and active group
•Prevalence of study discontinuation between placebo and active group
•Differences in overall compliance between placebo and active group
9.1.3 Exploratory  Outcome(s)  
•Difference in ATP levels in red blood cells and brain within subjects before and after taking study drugon day 1
•Difference in ATP levels in red blood cells and brain within subjects at 6 and 12 weeks compared tobaseline reading
•Difference in ATP levels in red blood cells  and brain between groups at 6 weeks and 12 weeks
•Slope of change over 12 weeks of the MDS -UPDRS Part 1
•Slope of change over 12 weeks  of the MDS -UPDRS Part 2
•Slope of change over 12 weeks  of the MDS -UPDRS Part 3  (OFF)
•Slope of change over 12 weeks of the MDS -UPDRS Part 4  (OFF)
•Absolute change  over 12 weeks  of the MDS -UPDRS Parts 1, 2, 3, 4, and TMS  (OFF)
FAST TZ-P D
Version 2.0
Version d ate: 11/12/2019
P
age 25  of 44 •Slope of change over 12 weeks  o f MDS -UPDRS TMS (OFF) (direct comparison for efficacy)
•Slope of change over 12 weeks  of the Hoehn & Yahr Score
•Slope of change over 1 2 weeks  of all cognitive assessments between placebo and active group
•Slope of change over 12 weeks  of sleep assessments between placebo and active group
•Slope of change over 12 weeks  of behavioral assessments between placebo and active group
9.2 S
ample Size and Accrual  
This is a pilot study and the sample size was chosen based on available funding and resources 
9.3 D
ata Monitoring  
All aspects of the study will be monitored by the PI of the study .  Monitoring will be conducted according to Good 
Clinical Practice and applicable government regulations.  The investigator agrees to allow monitors access to 
the clinical supplies, dispensing and storage areas, and to the clinical files of the study subjects, and, if requested, 
agrees to assist the monitors.  
An adverse event (AE) is any unfavorable and unintended sign (including a clinically significant abnormal laboratory finding, for example), symptom, or disease temporally associated with a study, use of a drug product or device whether or not considered r elated to the drug product or device.  FDA  and Office of Human Research 
Protection (OHRP ) requirements for reporting AEs will be followed. Subjects will be monitored for AEs from the 
time they sign consent until 30 days following permanent discontinuation of study drug. At that point, all ongoing 
AEs will be followed to resolution, but no new AEs will be recorded.  
The PI  and research team (co- Investigators, research nurse, clinical trial coordinator) are responsible for 
identifying and reporting AEs and determining the relationship of the event to the study drug/study procedures.  
9.4 Data Analyses  
The following outcome measures will be analyzed under an intention- to-treat protocol.  All randomized individuals 
will be included regardless of their final treatment status.   
•Pri
mary Outcome
oRate of drop out between groups
Chi-square
oRate of adverse events between groups
Chi-square
•Secondary outcomes
oPrevalence of orthostatic hypotension between placebo and active group
Chi-square
oPrevalence of falls between placebo and active group
Chi-square
oDifferences in overall compliance between placebo and active group
Linear mixed effect models that includes compliance at each study visit for each
participant
•Exploratory outcomes
oDifference in ATP levels in red blood cells and brain within subjects before and after taking study
drug on day 1
Paired samples t -test
oDifference in ATP levels in red blood cells and brain within subjects at 6 and 12 weeks comparedto baseline reading
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 26  of 44 Paired samples t -t est
oDifference in ATP levels in red blood cells and brain between groups at 6 weeks and 12 weeks
Independent samples t -test
oSlope of change over 12 weeks  of the MDS -UPDRS Part 1
LMER
oSlope of change over 12 weeks  of the MDS -UPDRS Part 2
LMER
oSlope of change over 12 weeks  of the MDS -UPDRS Part 3
LMER
oSlope of change over 12 weeks  of the MDS -UPDRS Part 4
LMER
oAbsolute change over 12 weeks  of the MDS -UPDRS Parts 1, 2, 3, 4, and TMS
Independent samples t -tests
oSlope of change over 12 weeks  of MDS -UPDRS TMS (direct comparison for efficacy)
LMER
oSlope of change over 12 weeks  of the Hoehn & Yahr Score
LMER
oSlope of change over 12 weeks  of all c ognitive assessments between placebo and active group
LMER
oSlope of change over 12 weeks  of sleep assessments between placebo and active group
LMER
oSlope of change over 12 weeks  of behavioral assessments between placebo and active group
LMER
10 D
ATA COLLECTION, SITE MONITORING, AND ADVERSE EXPERIENCE REPORTING  
10.1 Data Management  
Site personnel will collect, transcribe, correct, and transmit the data onto source documents, CRFs, and other 
forms used to report, track and record clinical research data.  The PI  will monitor clinical sites to ensure 
compliance with data management requirements and Good Clinical Practices. The  PI is responsible for 
developing, testing, and managing clinical data management activities . 
10.1.1  Data Entry  
Data will be entered in RedCap. Data quality assurance and analyses will be performed by the PI .  
Dat
a colle ction for this study will be accomplished with paper forms that will be transcribed into RedCap.  The 
paper forms will be stored in a locked filing cabinet in a locked office, in a badge -access area.   
10.2 R
ole of Data Management  
Data Management (DM) is the development, execution and supervision of plans, policies, programs, and 
practices that control, protect, deliver, and enhance the value of data and information assets.  
All data will be managed in compliance with University of Iowa  policies, and applicable Sponsor and regulatory 
requirements. 
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
Pag
e 27 of 44 10.3 A dverse Experience Reporting 
The adverse event (AE) definitions and reporting procedures provided in this protocol comply with all applicable 
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulations and International Conference on Harmonization 
(ICH) guidelines.  The PI will carefully monitor each subject throughout the study for possible adverse events. 
All AEs will be documented on CRFs designed specifically for this purpose.  It is important to report all AEs , 
especially those that result in permanent discontinuation of the investigational product being studied, whether 
serious or non-s erious. 
Receipt will be kept in the investigator’s study file. 
An adverse event is de fined as:  “an unfavorabl e and unintended sign, sy mptom, or di sease associated with a 
subject’s participation i n this r esearch  trial.” 
Serious adverse events  include those events that:  “result in death; are life- threatening; require inpatient 
hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization; create persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or 
a congenital anomaly/birth defects.”  
Unexpected adverse event is de fined a s any a dverse experience…the specificity or se verity o f which is no t 
consistent w ith the risks described i n the protocol.  
Expect ed adverse  events ar e those  that ar e know n to be associated wit h or hav e the potential t o arise  as a 
consequence of pa rticipation in the s tudy. 
On-line A dverse Event Reporting S ystem 
Serious adverse events: The site investigator determines causality (definitely not related, probably not related, 
possibly related, probably related, definitely related) of the adverse event. The PI  will prepare a Medwatch safety 
report for submission to the FDA.  
Non-serious adv erse events : Non-serious adv erse events t hat ar e report ed to or ob served by t he investigator or 
a member o f his research team w ill be submitt ed to the PI w ithin 24 hours.   
10.3.1 Definitions of Adverse Events, S uspect ed Adverse Drug R eactions & Seri ous Adverse Events 
10.3.1.1 Adverse Event and Suspect ed Adverse Drug Reactions 
An a dverse event (AE) is any unfavorable and unintended sign (including a clinically significant abnormal 
laboratory finding, for example), symptom, or disease temporally associated with a study, use of a drug product 
or device whether or not considered related to the drug product or device.  
Adverse drug reactions (ADR) are all noxious and unintended responses to a medicinal product related to any 
dose.  The phrase “responses to a medicinal product” means that a causal relationship between a medicinal 
product  and an adverse event is at least a reasonable possibility, i.e., the relationship cannot be ruled out. 
Therefore, a subset of AEs can be classified as suspected ADRs, if there is a causal relationship to the medicinal 
product.  
Examples of adverse events  include: new conditions, worsening of pre -existing conditions, clinically significant 
abnormal physical examination signs (i.e. skin rash, peripheral edema, etc), or clinically significant abnormal test 
results (i.e. lab values or vital signs), with the exception of outcome measure results, which are not being 
recorded as adverse events in this trial (they are being collected, but analyzed separately). Stable chronic 
conditions (i.e., diabetes, arthritis) that are present prior to the start of the study and do not worsen during the 
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
trial are NOT considered adverse events. Chronic conditions that occur more frequently (for intermittent 
conditions) or with greater severity, would be considered as worsened and therefore would be recorded as 
adverse events.  
Adv
erse events are generally detected in two ways:  
Clin
ical  symptoms reported by the subject or signs detected on examination. 
A
ncillary Tests   abnormalities of vital signs, laboratory tests, and other diagnostic procedures (other than the 
outcome measures : the results of which are not being captured as AEs).  
I
f discernible at the time of completing the AE log, a specific disease or syndrome rather than individual 
associated signs and symptoms should be identified by the Site Investigator and recorded on the AE log. 
However, if an observed or reported sign, symptom, or clinically significant laboratory anomaly is not considered 
by the Site Investigator to be a component of a specific disease or syndrome, then it should be recorded as a 
separate AE on the AE log.  Clinically significant laboratory abnormalities, such as those that require intervention, 
are those that are identified as such by t he Site Investigator.  
A
n unexpected adverse event is any adverse event, the specificity or severity of which is not consistent with the 
current Investigators Brochure or package insert or described in the protocol.  An unexpected, suspected 
adverse drug r eaction is any unexpected adverse event that, in the opinion of the Site Investigator or Sponsor, 
there is a reasonable possibility that the investigational product caused the event.  
10.3.1.2  Serious Adverse Events 
A serious adverse event (SAE) is defined as an adverse event that meets any of the following criteria:  
1.Results in death.
2.Is life threatening: that is, poses an immediate risk of death as the event occurred.
a.This serious criterion applies if the study subject, in the view of the Site Investigator or Sponso r, is at
immediate risk of death from the AE as it occurs.  It does not apply if an AE hypothetically might have
caused death if it were more severe.
3.Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization.
a.Hospitalization for an elective procedure (including elective PEG tube/g -tube/feeding tube placement)
or a routinely scheduled treatment is not an SAE by this criterion because an elective or scheduled
“procedure” or a “treatment” is not an untoward medical occurrence.
4.Results in p ersistent or significant disability or incapacity.
a.This serious criterion applies if the “disability” caused by the reported AE results in a substantialdisruption of the subject’s ability to carry out normal life functions.
5.Results in congenital anomaly or birth defect in the offspring of the subject (whether the subject is male orfemale).
6.Necessitates medical or surgical intervention to preclude permanent impairment of a body function or
permanent damage to a body structure.
7.Important medical events that may not result in death, are not life -threatening, or do not require
hospitalization may also be considered SAEs when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, may
jeopardize the subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of  the outcomes list
ed
i
n this definition.  Examples of such medical events include blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result
in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse.
An inpatient hospital admission in the absence of a precipitating, treatment -emergent, clinical adverse event may 
meet criteria for "seriousness" but is not an adverse  experience, and will therefore, not be considered an SAE. 
An example of this would include a social admission (subject admitted for other reasons than medical, e.g., lives 
far from the hos pital, has no place to sleep). 
Page 28 of 44 FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 29  of 44 A
 serious, suspected adverse drug reaction is an SAE that, in the opinion of the Site Investigator or Sponsor, 
suggests  a reasonable possibility that the investigational product caused the event.  
T
he Site Investigator is responsible for classifying adverse events as serious or non- serious.  
10.3.1.3  Assessment and Recording of Adverse Events  
Assessment of Adverse Events 
At each visit (including telephone interviews), the subject will be asked “Have you had any problems or symptoms 
since your last visit?” in order to determine the occurrence of adverse events. If the subject reports an adverse 
event, the Investigator will determine:  
1.T
ype of event
2.Date of onset and resolution (duration)
3.Severity (mild, moderate, severe)
4.Seriousness (does the event meet the above definition for an SAE)
5.Causality, relation to investigational product and disease
6.Action taken regarding investigational product
7.Outcome
Relatedness of Adverse Event to Investigational Product  
The relationship of the AE to the investigational product should be specified by the Site Investigator, using the following definitions:  
1.Not Related: Concomitant illness, accident or event with no reasonable association with tr eatment.
2.Unlikely: The reaction has little or no temporal sequence from administration of the investigational product,and/or a more likely alternative etiology exists.
3.Possibly Related: The reaction follows a reasonably temporal sequence from administrati on of th
e
i
nvestigational product and follows a known response pattern to the suspected investigational product; the
reaction could have been produced by the investigational product or could have been produced by the
subject’s clinical state or by other modes of therapy administered to the subject. (suspected ADR)
4.Probably Related:  The reaction follows a reasonably temporal sequence from administration of
investigational product; is confirmed by discontinuation of the investigational product or by re -challe nge; and
cannot be reasonably explained by the known characteristics of the subject’s clinical state. (suspected ADR)
5.Definitely Related:  The reaction follows a reasonable temporal sequence from administration of
investigational product; that follows a known or expected response pattern to the investigational product; and
that is confirmed by improvement on stopping or reducing the dosage of the investigational product, andreappearance of the reaction on repeated exposure. (suspected ADR)
Recording of Adverse Events  
A
ll clinical adverse events are recorded in the Adverse Event (AE) Log in the subject ’s study binder. The site 
should fill out the AE Log and enter the AE information into the online Adverse Event Reporting System within 5 
working days of the site learning of a new AE or receiving an update on an existing AE.   
P
lease Note: Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) must be reported to the NeuroNEXT Data Coordinating Center 
within 24 hours of the site learning of the SAE.  
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 30  of 44 Entries on the AE Log (and into the online Adverse Event Reporting System) will include the following: name 
and s
everity of the event, the date of onset, the date of resolution, relationship to investigational product, action 
taken, and primary outcome of event.  
Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events - Reportable Events 
The following are considered reportable events and must be reported to the PI within 24 hours of the site being 
notified of the event.  
•A
ll events that meet the above criteria for Serious Adverse Events (SAEs)
A
ll occurrences of Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) must be reported within 24 hours of discovery of the event.  
All other Adverse Events (AEs) must be reported within insert timeline for reporting (of discovery of the event).  
11
 HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Documented approval from the IRB will be obtained for all participating centers prior to clinical trial start, 
according local laws, regulations and organization. When necessary, an extension, amendment or renewal of 
the IRB approval must be obtained. 
Evidence of training in responsible conduct of research shall be on file for each PI and co -investigator.  
11.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review and Informed Consent  
This protocol and the informed consent document (Appendix A) and any subsequent modifications will be 
reviewed and approved by the University of Iowa IRB  responsible for oversight of the study.  A signed consent 
form, approved by the IRB, will be obtained from the subject.   For subjects who cannot provide consent for 
themselves, such as those below the legal age, a parent, legal guardian, or person with power of attorney, must sign the consent form; additionally, the subject's assent must also be obtained if he or she is able to understand 
the nature, significance, and risks associated with the study.  The consent form will describe the purpose of the 
study, the procedures to be followed, and the risks and benefits of participation.  A copy of the consent form will 
be given to the subject, parent, or legal guardian, and this fact will be documented in the subject’s record.  
11.2 Subject Confidentiality  
All laboratory specimens, evaluation forms, reports, video recordings, and other records that leave the clinical study site will be identified only by the study specific Subject Identification Number (SID) to maintain subject 
confidential ity.  All records will be kept in a locked file cabinet.  All computer entry and networking programs will 
be done using study specific SIDs only.  Clinical information will not be released without written permission of the subject, except as necessary for monitoring by IRB, the FDA, the OHRP, the sponsor, or the sponsor’s designee.  
11.2.1   Certificate of Confidentiality 
T
o further protect the privacy of study subject s, a Certificate of Confidentiality will be issued by the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH).  T his certificate protects identifiable research information from forced disclosure. It 
allows the investigator and others who have access to research records to refuse to disclose identifying 
information on research participation in any civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceeding, 
whether at the federal, state, or local level. By protecting researchers and institutions from being compelled to 
disclose information that would identify research subjects , Certificates of Confidentiality help achieve the 
research objectives and promote participation in studies by helping assure confidentiality and privacy to subjects . 
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
Page 31  of 44 11.3 Study Modification/Discontinuation 
The study may be modified or discontinued at any time by the IRB, the sponsor, the OHRP, the FDA, or other 
government agencies as  part of their duties to ensure that research subjects are protected. If the study 
is terminated or sus pended, the PI will promptly inform study subjects, the IRB, and sponsor and provide 
the reason(s) for the termination or temporary suspension. 
12  FUTURE USE OF STORED SP ECIMENS AND DATA 
Within the informed cons ent documents, participants will have the options to either opt in or opt out of 
having their blood drawn and stored for future use.  For subjects who opt to have their blood drawn and 
stored, the biospecimens will be stored at the University of Iowa.  The tubes  will be stored with only the 
subject’s ID number to protect confidentiality.  Future s tudies that will require use of clinical data that was 
obtained during the course of this study will require review by the institutional IRB to ensure proper actions 
are taken to protect confidentiality.  All clinical data will be deidentified and include only the subject ID as the 
primary identifier.  Samples will be stored fo r up to five y ears.  
13 STUDY RECORDS RETENTION 
All records pertaining to this study will be made publicly available, in accordance with NIH Policies.  
Therefore, all available data will be made electronically available for a time period specified by the NIH.  In 
addition, all records related to this study will be kept for a minimum of five y ears by the investigator.  
Destruction of records after five years will be done only after permission has been requested and granted from 
the NINDS.   
14 PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS 
Publication of the results of this trial will be governed by the policies of the ICTS at the University of Iowa. 
15 CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY 
Any actual c onflict of interest of persons who have a role in the des ign, conduc t, analy sis, publication, or 
any aspect of this  trial will be disclosed and managed. Furthermore, persons who have a perceived conflict of 
interes t will be required to hav e such c onflicts managed in a way that is appropriate to their participation in 
the design and conduct of this trial.  The study leadership in conjunction with the NINDS has es tablished 
policies and procedures for all study group members to disclose all conflic ts of interest and will establish a 
mechanism for the management of all reported dualities of interes t.
16 RE FERENCES 
1. de Lau LM, Breteler MM. Epidemiology of Parkinson's disease. The Lancet Neurology 2006;5:525-535.
2. Senard JM, Rai S, Lapeyre-Mestre M, et al. Prevalence of orthostatic hypotension in Parkinson'sdisease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1997;63:584-589.3. Chaudhuri KR, Odin P. The challenge of non-motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease. Prog Brain Res2010;184:325-341.4. Collier TJ, Kanaan NM, Kordower JH. Ageing as a primary risk factor for Parkinson's disease: evidence
from studies of non-human primates. Nat Rev Neurosci 2011;12:359-366.
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
Pag
e 32 of 44 5. Saxe
na U. Bioenergetics failure in neurodegenerative diseases: back to the future. Expert Opin Ther
Targets 2012;16:351-354.
6. Cunnane S, Nugent S, Roy M, et al. Brain fuel metabolism, aging, and Alzheimer's disease. Nutrition2011;27:3-20.7. Hoyer S. Brain  glucose and energy metabolism during normal aging. Aging (Milano) 1990;2:245-258.
8. Firbank MJ, Yarnall AJ, Lawson RA, et al. Cerebral glucose metabolism and cognition in newlydiagnosed Parkinson's disease: ICICLE-PD study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2017;88:310-316.9. Hattingen E, Magerkurth J, Pilatus U, et al. Phosphorus and proton magnetic resonance spectroscopydemonstrates mitochondrial dysfunction in early and advanced Parkinson's disease. Brain 2009;132:3285-3297.10. Schapira AH, Cooper JM, Dexter D, Clark JB, Jenner P, Marsden CD. Mitochondrial complex Ideficiency in Parkinson's disease. J Neurochem 1990;54:823-827.11. Pyle A, Anugrha H, Kurzawa -Akanbi M, Yarnall A, Burn D, Hudson G. Reduced mitochondrial DNA
copy number is a biomarker of Parkinson's disease. Neurobiol Aging 2016;38:216 e217-216 e210.12. Mortiboys H, Johansen KK, Aasly JO, Bandmann O. Mitochondrial impairment in patients withParkinson disease with the G2019S mutation in LRRK2. Neurology 2010;75:2017-2020.13. Blesa J, Phani S, Jackson-Lewis V, Przedborski S. Classic and new animal models of Parkinson's
disease. J Biomed Biotechnol 2012;2012:845618.14. Schapira AH. Mitochondria in the aetiology and pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. The LancetNeurology 2008;7:97-109.15. Chen X, Zhao C, Li X, et al. Terazosin activates Pgk1 and Hsp90 to promote stress resistance. NatChem Biol 2015;11:19-25.16. Achari R, Laddu A. Terazosin: a new alpha adrenoceptor blocking drug. J Clin Pharmacol 1992;32:520-523.17. Sakaue S, Kasai T, Mizuta I, et al. Early -onset parkinsonism in a pedigree with phosphoglycerate kinase
deficiency and a heterozygous carrier: do PGK-1 mutations contribute to vulnerability to parkinsonism? NPJParkinsons Dis 2017;3:13.18. Kaufmann H, Goldstein DS. Autonomic dysfunction in Parkinson disease. Handb Clin Neurol2013;117:259-278.19. Heikkila RE, Hess A, Duvoisin RC. Dopaminergic neurotoxicity of 1- methyl -4-phenyl -1,2,5,6-
tetrahydropyridine in mice. Science 1984;224:1451-1453.20. Ungerstedt U. 6-Hydroxy-dopamine induced degeneration of central monoamine neurons. Eur JPharmacol 1968;5:107-110.21. Coulom H, Birman S. Chronic exposure to rotenone models sporadic Parkinson's disease in Drosophilamelanogaster. J Neurosci 2004;24:10993-10998.22. Boyd PJ, Tu WY, Shorrock HK, et al. Bioenergetic status modulates motor neuron vulnerability andpathogenesis in a zebrafish model of spinal muscular atrophy. PLoS Genet 2017;13:e1006744.23. Clark IE, Dodson MW, Jiang C, et al. Drosophila pink1 is required for mitochondrial function andinteracts genetically with parkin. Nature 2006;441:1162-1166.24. Lee SB, Kim W, Lee S, Chung J. Loss of LRRK2/PARK8 induces degeneration of dopaminergicneurons in Drosophila. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007;358:534-539.25. Spillantini MG , Crowther RA, Jakes R, Hasegawa M, Goedert M. alpha-Synuclein in filamentous
inclusions of Lewy bodies from Parkinson's disease and dementia with lewy bodies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A1998;95:6469-6473.26. Rockenstein E, Mallory M, Hashimoto M, et al. Differential neuropathological alterations in transgenicmice expressing alpha- synuclein from the platelet -derived growth factor and Thy -1 promoters. J Neurosci Res
2002;68:568-578.27. Lill CM. Genetics of Parkinson's disease. Mol Cell Probes 2016;30:386-396.
FAST TZ-P D
Version 2.0
Version d ate: 11/12/2019
Pag
e 33 of 44 28. Ng
uyen HN, Byers B, Cord B, et al. LRRK2 mutant iPSC-derived DA neurons demonstrate increased
susceptibility to oxidative stress. Cell Stem Cell 2011;8:267 -280.
29. Driver JA, Logroscino G, Gaziano JM, Kurth T. Incidence and remaining lifetime risk of Parkinson
disease in advanced age. Neurology 2009;72:432-438.30. Sotiriou E, Greene P, Krishna S, Hirano M, DiMauro S. Myopathy and parkinsonism inphosphoglycerate kinase deficiency. Muscle Nerve 2010;41:707-710.31. Wooten GF, Currie LJ, Bovbjerg VE, Lee JK, Patrie J. Are men at greater risk for Parkinson's disease
than women? J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2004;75:637-639.32. Patel A, Malinovska L, Saha S, et al. ATP as a biological hydrotrope. Science 2017;356:753-756.33. Hayes MH, Peuchen EH, D ovichi NJ, Weeks DL. Dual roles for ATP in the regulation of phase
separated protein aggregates in Xenopus oocyte nucleoli. Elife 2018;7.34. Lowe FC. Safety assessment of terazosin in the treatment of patients with symptomatic benign prostatic
hyperplasia: a combined analysis. Urology 1994;44:46-51.
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
Pag
e 34 of 44 
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 17 Appendix A  
UK Parkinson’s Disease Society Brain Bank Clinical Diagnostic Criteria  
P
age 35  of 44 18 Appendix B  
Medical History of PD  
Date Medical History Taken (m m/d d/yyyy): 
1.Year of first symptoms as confirmed by history obtained by the physician?
2.Year of Initial Diagnosis?
3.Diagnostic Features/Criteria (as evident on clinical assessment of the patient):
a.4-6 Hz Rest Tremor:  Present   Absent  Unknown 
b.Bradykinesia:   Present   Absent  Unknown 
c.Rigidity:  Present   Absent   Unknown 
d.Asymmetric Onset:  Present   Absent  Unknown 
e.Substantial Response to Dopaminergic Therapy:  Present   Absent  Unknown 
4. Degree of Certainty of Diagnosis of PD:
90-100%  Certain  50-89% Certain   10-49% Certain 0-9 % Certain
Other important diagnostic alternative(s) (give reason ): 
5.Initial motor symptoms, i.e., as described by the patient (Please check all that apply):
 Tremor (including internal tremor)  
 Stiffness  
 Change in facial expression  
 Disturbances of dexterity   Micrographia 
 Weakness  
 Dystonia (specify symptoms)  
a.Ambulatory/Axial Difficulties:
 Freezing  
 Lack of arm swing  
 Leg Dragging  
 Shuffling of gait 
 Postural imbalance (excluding falls)  
 Falls  
 Slowness of gait 
 Other abnormality of posture or gait (other, 
specify)  
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 36  of 44 6. S
ide of Body of Initial Symptoms:
 Right   Left  Bilateral   Midline   Unknown 
7. Motor symptoms developing over the course of illness (Please check all that applies):
 Tremor (including internal tremor) - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Stiffness - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Micrographia - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Change in facial expression - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Disturbances of dexterity - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Weakness - Approximate date of onset ( m m/dd/y yyy):  Unknown 
 Dystonia - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
a.Ambulatory/Axial Difficulties:
 Freezing - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Lack of arm swing - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Leg Dragging - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Shuffling of gait - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Postural imbalance (excluding falls)  - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Falls - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Slowness of gait - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Stooped posture - Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ):  Unknown 
 Othe r abnormality of posture or gait (other, specify) – Approximate date of onset (m m/dd/yyyy ): 
U
nknown 
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 37  of 44 General Instructions  
Medical history data are collected to help verif y the inclusion and exclusion criteria (e.g., no history of 
cognitive disabilities), ensure the participant/subject receives the appropriate care, and describe the study 
population. The Parkinson’s disease Medical History CRF captures conditions specifical ly related to PD as 
opposed to a more general Medical History which captures conditions that occurred at some point in time within a protocol-defined period. Important note: None of the data elements included on this CRF Module are classified as Core (i.e., strongly recommended for all Parkinson’s disease clinical studies to collect).  The remaining data elements are classified 
as supplemental (i.e., non Core) and should only be collected if the research team considers them appropriate for their study.  Please see the Data Dictionary for element classifications.  
Specific Instructions  
Please see the Data Dictionary for definitions for each of the data elements included in this CRF Module.  
History can also be obtained from a family member, friend, or chart/ medical record.  If the informant is unable 
to answer the question or is deemed unreliable (e.g., the participant/ subject has dementia) the history should be obtained from the medical record. Additional instructions for the elements are already included on the CRF.  
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 38  of 44 19 Appendix C  
PD Medication History  
Did the subject ever take any non-study PD medications?  
 Yes (Follow instructions below)  
 No   Unknown 
Please record all PD medications the subject has ever taken (including PD medications the subject has taken 
while participating in the study). Enter each dose change on a new line. All other medications (i.e., non- PD 
medications) should be recorded on the Non- PD Medications Log.  
PD Medication Class Reference  
Parkinson’s Disease- Medication Class Reference.  
Class Reference Table  
Levodopa Dopamine 
agonists  MAO -B 
inhibitors  COMT 
inhibitors  Antiglutamat 
agents  Anticholinergics Other, 
specify  
PD Medication Name Reference  
Parkinson's Disease Medication Name Reference  
Name Reference Table  
1 Alpha-Dihydroergocryptine Budipine L-DopaMethylesterLisuride Pramipexole  
Selegiine 
standard 
oral 
Amantadine  Cabergoline  L-Dopa Slow
ReleaseMematine  Rasagiline  Selegiline 
patch  
Apomorphine  Entacapone  L-Dopa
SolublePergolide  Ropinirole  Selegiline 
sublingual  
Bromocriptine  L-Dopa Duel
ReleaseL-Dopa
StandardPiribedil  Rotigotine  Tolcapone  
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
Pag
e 39 of 44 Parkinson's Disease Medication Log.  
Medication Log Table  
Line 
# Medication Class  Medication 
Name (Trade or generic 
name)  Maximum Dose (Specify units) Estimated Total Duration of Exposure (Check units) Medication Use Ongoing?  If Applicable, Reason for Discontinuation 
Data 
to be filled out by 
site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site  Years  
 Months 
 Week s 
 Days   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Lack of efficacy  
*Side Effect:
Other:
Data 
to be filled out by 
site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site  Years  
 Months 
 Weeks  
 Days   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Lack of efficacy  
*Side Effect:
Other:
Data 
to be filled out by 
site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site  Years  
 Months 
 Weeks  
 Days   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Lack of efficacy  
 1Side Effect:  
 Other:  
Data 
to be filled out by 
site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site  Years  
 Months 
 Weeks  
 Days   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Lack of efficacy  
 2Side Effect:  
 Other:  
Data 
to be filled out by 
site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site  Years  
 Months 
 Weeks  
 Days   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Lack of efficacy  
 3Side Effect:  
 Other:  
1 Common Side Effects  
2 Common Side Effects  
3 Common Side Effects 
FAST TZ-P D 
Version 2.0  
Version d ate: 11/12/2019 
P
age 40  of 44 Li
ne 
# Medication 
Class  Medication 
Name (Trade or generic 
name)  Maximum Dose (Specify units) Estimated Total Duration of Exposure (Check units) Medication Use Ongoing?  If Applicable, Reason for Discontinuation 
Data 
to be filled out by 
site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site  Years  
 Months 
 Weeks  
 Days   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Lack of efficacy  
 4Side Effect:  
 Other:  
Data 
to be filled out by 
site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site Data to be 
filled out by site  Years  
 Months 
 Weeks  
 Days   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Lack of efficacy  
 5Side Effect:  
 Other:  
Side Effects Table 
AA = Motor offs 
(including wearing off and sudden off) DD = 
Cognitive impairment – 
not dementia  GG = 
Autonomic dysfunction JJ = ICD (including 
Gambling, Hypersexuality, Binge 
eating, Shopping)  MM=Dopamine 
agonist withdrawal  
BB = Dyskinesia  EE= Non -
motor offs, 
specify:  HH= Daytime 
sleep 
abnormalities  KK=Punding  OT = Other 
important side 
effects, specify  
CC = 
Hallucination/psychosis FF - Behavioral 
disturbances 
specify:  II = Nighttime 
sleep 
abnormalities  LL=Dopadysregulation 
syndrome 
4 Common S ide Effects 
5Common Side Effects from Medication 
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 41  of 44 General Instructions  
The Parkinson’s disease medication log provides information about current non- study PD medications the 
participant/ subject has taken in his/her lifetime. Study PD medications should not be listed on this CRF.  
The PD Medication Log was created as an alternative to the Prior and Concomitant Medication CDEs that are 
available under the General CDE Data Standards. For example, in a PD population, patients may be able to recall ‘duration’ with greater accuracy than they can recall specific medication start and stop dates.  
Important note: Three of the data elements included on this CRF Module are classified as Core (i.e., strongly recommended for all Parkinson’s disease clinical studies to collect). The remaining data elements are classified as supplemental (i.e., non Core) and should only be collected if the research team considers them appropriate for their study. Please see the Data Dictionary for element classifications.  
Specific Instructions  
Please see the Data Dictionary for definitions for each of the data elements included in this CRF Module.  
The majority of the data elements on the CRF have the following instructions: History can be obtained from participant/ subject, family member, friend, or chart/ medical record. In some studies it may be possible to ask the subject/ participant or a family member to bring in the pill bottles for all current medications.  
Medication name – Please refer to the PD Medication Name Reference Chart. Addi tionally, please include the 
genric name or trade name of the medication.  
Side effects – Please refer to the Common Side Effects chart for the codes of the possible side effects experienced from PD medications. Only capture the side effects code on this form. Specifics of the side effect (i.e., Severity, Relatedness, Outcome, etc) should be recorded on the General Adverse Events form if they occur during the study. There are no other specific instructions for the data elements not already included on the CR F. 
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 42  of 44 20 Appendix D  
Non-PD Medication Log  
Note: This is a template form. Please consider whether your study needs to collect additional data (e.g., exact 
timing for PRN medications) and if additional data are required add fields to this template or capture them on a separate form.
 
Did the subject take any medications before or during the study? (days ): 
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 43  of 44  Yes ( Follow instructions below)  
 No  Unknown 
In the table below please record all non- Parkinson’s Disease medications the participant/subject was taking at the time of the protocol- specified 
period indicated above. These can include prescription medications, over the counter drugs, vitamins, supplements, minerals, 
complementary/alternative medications etc.  
Table 1: Non-Parkinson’s Disease medications 
Line #  Medication Name (Trade or generic name)  Total Daily 
Dose or PRN Dose  (with 
units)  Start Date  
(M M/D  
D/Y Y Y 
Y) End Date  
(M M/D  
D/Y Y Y 
Y) Medication Use Ongoing?  *PRN Med?If PRN,  Average 
Frequency  (with 
units e.g., times 
per month)  Indication 
Data to 
be filled 
in by site  Data to be filled 
in by site  Data to be 
filled in by site  Data to be 
filled in by 
site Data to be 
filled in by 
site  Yes 
 No 
 Unknown   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Data to be filled 
in by site  Data to be 
filled  in by 
site 
Data to 
be filled 
in by site  Data to be filled 
in by site  Data to be 
filled in by site  Data to be 
filled in by 
site Data to be 
filled in by 
site  Yes 
 No 
 Unknown   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Data to be filled 
in by site  Data to be 
filled in by 
site 
Data to 
be filled 
in by site  Data to be filled 
in by site  Data to be 
filled in by site  Data to be 
filled in by 
site Data to be 
filled in by 
site  Yes 
 No 
 Unknown   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Data to be filled 
in by site  Data to be 
filled in by 
site 
Data to 
be filled 
in by site  Data to be filled 
in by site  Data to be 
filled in by site  Data to be 
filled in by 
site Data to be 
filled in by 
site  Yes 
 No 
 Unknown   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Data to be filled 
in by site  Data to be 
filled in by 
site 
Data to 
be filled 
in by site  Data to be filled 
in by site  Data to be 
filled in by site  Data to be 
filled in by 
site Data to be 
filled  in by 
site  Yes 
 No 
 Unknown   Yes 
 No 
 Unknown  Data to be filled 
in by site  Data to be 
filled  in by 
site 
* “PRN Med?” asks whether the medication is taken on an as needed basis. NO should be answered for chronic medications that a r e taken on a
regular basis.
FAST T Z-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 
P
age 44  of 44 General Instructions  
The non-Parkinson’s disease medication log provides information about non- PD medications the 
participant/ subject was taking prior to or during the study. Collecting non- PD medications taken 
prior to the study in a defined time window is important when there may be potential interactions 
with th e study intervention. Thus, a potential subject may need to stop a medication prior to 
starting the study intervention (washout period). The study exclusion criteria may identify drugs that cannot be taken during the study and so prior medications are identified to determine whether an individual may be eligible for the study. Important note: None of the data elements included on this CRF Module is classified as Core (i.e., strongly recommended for all Parkinson’s disease clinical studies to collect). All data elements are classified as supplemental (i.e., non Core) and should only be collected if the research team considers them appropriate for their study. Please see the Data Dictionary for element classifications.  
Specific Instructions  
Please see the Data Dictionary for definitions for each of the data elements included in this CRF Module. The majority of the data elements on the CRF have the following instructions: History can be obtained from participant/ subject, family member, fri end, or chart/ me dical 
record. In some studies it may be possible to ask the subject/ participant or a family member to 
bring in the pill bottles for all non -PD medications.  
There are no other specific instructions for the data elements not already included on the CRF. 
FAST TZ-PD 
Version 2.0  
Versi on date: 11/12/2019 