PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
1   
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
2 PROTOCOL TITLE: 
Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing liposomal bupivacaine to bupivacaine 
interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery   
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR or FACULTY ADVISOR:  
Name : Benjamin Matelich   
Department of Anesthesiology  
Phone 612 -624-9990  
Email Address : mate0053 @umn.edu  
STUDENT INVESTIGATOR:  
Name : NA  
Current Academic Level (e.g., Medical Student, Resident)  
Department  
Telephone Number  
Email Address (must not be a personal email address)  
VERSION NUMBER/DATE:  
5 5/21/19  
6 9/24/19  
7 12/4/19  
8 5/11/20  
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
3 REVISION HISTORY  
 
Revision #  Version Date  Summary of Changes  Consent Change?  
2 6/29/18  Clarified drug dosages and explained 
phone calls  yes 
3 8/10/18  Removed one drug from preop 
multimodal regimen  yes 
4 12/19/18  Added FV MG ASC as a site  no 
5 5/21/2019  Added pregnant women to section 
8.2 exclusion criteria and multiple 
consent changes per IRB review  yes 
6 9/24/19  Updated enrollment numbers and 
removed “pilot” from title  yes 
7 12/4/19  Decreased discharge opioid amount  no 
8 5/11/20  PI update  yes 
   
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
4 1.0 Table of Contents  
 1.0
 7 
2.0 7 
3.0 7 
4.0 7 
5.0 8 
6.0 12 
7.0 12 
8.0 12 
9.0 12 
10.0  13 
11.0  13 
12.0  14 
13.0  14 
14.0  16 
15.0  16 
16.0  17 
17.0  17 
18.0  18 
19.0  18 
20.0  18 
21.0  19 
22.0  19 
23.0  20 
24.0  20 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
5 ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINITIONS  
● LB/ liposomal bupivacaine  
● RCR/rotator cuff repair  
● QOR/Quality of Recovery  
●  
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
6 STUDY SUMMARY 
 
Study Title  Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing 
liposomal bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene 
blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
Study Design  Prospective randomized double blind study  
Primary Objective  Total opioids in 72 hours  
Secondary Objective(s)  Pain scores within 72 hours, QOR at 72 hours, Number 
of phone calls to surgeon, adverse events, time to 
discharge  
Research 
Intervention(s)/Investigational 
Agents  Liposomal bupivacaine and bupivacaine vs bupivacaine  
Scientific Assessment  HRPP facilitated scientific assessment  
IND/IDE # (if applicable)  Study Medication has been approved for use in 
shoulder surgery April 6, 2018 
IND/IDE Holder  n/a 
Investigational Drug Services 
# (if applicable)  n/a 
Study Population  Adult patients aged 18 and older who are undergoing 
arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
Local Sample Size (number of 
participants recruited locally)  90 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
7 2.0 Objectives  
Purpose: To determine if LB plus bupivacaine provides superior pain control 
compared to bupivacaine alone when injected in an interscalene block for patients 
undergoing arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery.  
2.1  
3.0 Background  
3.1 Significance of Research Question/Purpose: LB has not been adequately 
studied in peripheral nerve blocks. One study has been done in RCR surgery and showed superior analgesia compared to bupivacaine.   
3.2 Preliminary Data: It is our standard  of care to use this medication in an 
interscalene block at the U of MN for patients undergoing RCR.  A retrospective study performed showed superior analgesia and less opioids 
for those who had LB plus bupivacaine.  
3.3 Existing Literature: Vandepitte et al s howed that LB plus bupivacaine was 
superior to bupivacaine when used in interscalene nerve block for patients 
undergoing major shoulder surgery (both RCR and TSA).   
4.0 Study Endpoints/Events/Outcomes  
4.1 Primary Endpoint/Event/Outcome: To determine if LB plus bupivacaine in an interscalene block results in less opioid use over 72 hours compared to bupivacaine only for RCR surgery.  
4.2 Secondary Endpoint(s)/Event(s)/Outcome(s):  
- To determine if LB plus bupivacaine in an interscalene block re sults in 
less pain over 72 hours as compared to bupivacaine only in an 
interscalene block for RCR surgery.  Assessed via total pain scores  
- To determine if LB plus bupivacaine in an interscalene block results in improved QOR at 72 hours as compared to bupivacaine only in an interscalene block for RCR surgery.  Assessed via QOR 15 patient survey.  
- To determine if LB plus bupivacaine in an interscalene block results in fewer phone calls to the surgeon within 72 hours as compared to bupivacaine only in an inte rscalene block for RCR surgery.   
- To determine if LB plus bupivacaine in an interscalene block hastens readiness for hospital discharge compared to bupivacaine only in an interscalene block for RCR surgery. Study Intervention(s)/Investigational Agent(s) 
4.3 Description: LB is a long acting local anesthetic.  It is liposome encapsulated 
bupivacaine which allows for prolonged release of bupivacaine over a 72 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
8 hour period.  Bupivacaine is a medium acting local anesthetic which 
provides between 6 and 24 hours of a nalgesia when used in a peripheral 
nerve block.  Both medications are standard of care for use in interscalene blocks here at the U of MN. Acetaminophen is a medication used to treat pain, gabapentin is a gabapentinoid which is used to treat postoperative pain.   
4.4 Drug/Device Handling: The LB will be stored in a locked pyxis fridge in a 
box labeled study LB.  It will be retrieved by the PI and sub I’s for use in the interscalene blocks.  
● The LB will be stored in a locked pyxis fridge in a box labeled 
Liposom al Bupivacaine.  The anesthesiologists in charge of 
regional anesthesia the day the procedure will be informed will write the order for dispensing the medication and the block per standard of care.  It will be retrieved by the PI and sub I’s for use in the interscalene blocks.  
4.5 Biosafety: n/a  
4.6 Stem Cells: n/a  
 
5.0 Procedures Involved  
5.1 Study Design: Level I randomized prospective outcomes study 
comparing two groups of patients.  One group will receive LB plus bupivacaine for an interscalene block.  The other will  receive 
bupivacaine for an interscalene block injection.  
Study Procedures: Patients will be identified in the pre -operative time period by the 
surgeons and if possible will be consented by the research coordinator or research assistant.  If that is unable to be accomplished the patient will be introduced to the study and given a copy of the consent form to evaluate prior to surgery.  On the day of surgery, the research coordinator, research assistant or primary or sub investigators will determine if the p atient has any questions so that they can be answered.  After discussion with the 
person obtaining consent, consent will be obtained in the pre-operative area. A random number generator will be used to determine if the patient will have LB plus bupivacaine or bupivacaine for their interscalene block.  The primary investigator will access the number generator in the pre-op area immediately prior to block placement.  The website www.random.org  will be used as the random number generator.   
 
Treatment technique:  
All patients will receive preoperative oral multimodal medications consisting of 
acetaminophen 975 mg and gabapentin 300 mg.   After completion of the preoperative process the patient will be placed in the supine position with the head of the bed elevated 30 degrees with standard ASA monitors applied.  Sedation will be provided with midazolam 0-2 mg and propofol 50 mg. The 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
9 interscalene groove will be identified with the ultrasound.  Using sterile technique, a 21g Nerve block needle will then be inserted and advanced under ultrasound guidance until it 
is in the interscalene groove.  Once in the interscalene, 20 mL of local anesthetic will be injected, with 10 mL deposited at the top of the brachial plexus and 10 mL at the bottom.  In the study group, 5 mL of each 0.5% bupivacaine and LB will be injected at each location.  The control group with have 20 mL of 0.5% bupivacaine divided between the injection sites (10 mL at each site). The patient will be monitored in the p reoperative area 
until he/she is brought into the operating room for their procedure. A working block prior to surgery will be confirmed via sensory testing of the shoulder.  All patients will undergo a standard induction with propofol 1.5-3.0 mg/kg, ondansetron 4 mg, dexamethasone 10 mg and ketamine 0.25 mg/kg.  A MAC or general with LMA or ETT will be placed and an opioid sparing technique will occur. Standardized maintenance will be a propofol infusion without neuromuscular blockers.   25-50 mcg of IV Fentanyl will be utilized for increases in heart rate greater than 20% or increases in systolic blood pressure above baseline.    Once in the operating room the surgeon will use an additional 10 mL of 0.25% bupivacaine for skin, subcutaneous, and intraarticular injection.   When the operation is complete, the patient will be woken up and brought to the PACU.  There the patient will receive IV fentanyl for a pain score of greater than 7 (50 mcg of Fentanyl x 2 if needed).  If more than 100 mcg of fentanyl is given and pain still remains above a 7 then IV hydromorphone will be used (max dose of 1 mg and given in increments of 0.3 mg q 10 minutes prn severe pain). Once the patient is able to tolerate oral medications a dose of 5 mg of oral oxycodone (or 2 mg of oral hydromorphone if allergic to oxycodone) will be given i f their pain score is greater than 4 (on the Visual 
Analog Scale).  Once the patient meets discharge criteria, they will be discharged home 
where each day they will fill out a pain diary.  Additionally, a member of the research team will call the patient for signs of complications and ask the patient their current pain score, total opioid pills taken and non-opioid pain medication taken at 24, 48, and 72 hours postoperatively.  Additionally, they will perform a Quality of Recovery Score survey at 72 hours, and 14 days postoperatively. An Ultrasound of the diaphragm will be completed by a blinded anesthesiologist in the PACU to assess diaphragm function. All patients will be discharged with instructions to take acetaminophen 975 mg q8 hours & ibuprofen 600 mg q6 hours. Additionally they will have opioid pain medication to take 
as needed for pain greater than 4.  They will either have hydromorphone 2mg, 30-40 
pills, with dosing being 1-2 pills q4 hours prn severe pain.  Or they will have a prescription for oxycodone 5 mg, 30-40 pills, dosing 1-2 pills q 4 hours prn severe pain.     Enrollment procedures : Patients will be ide ntified in the pre-operative time period by 
the surgeons and if possible will be consented by the research coordinator or research assistant.  If that is unable to be accomplished the patient will be introduced to the study 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
10 and given a copy of the consent form to evaluate prior to surgery.  On the day of surgery, the research coordinator, research assistant or primary or sub investigators will determine if the patient has any questions so that they can be answered.  After discussion with the person obtaining consent, consent will be obtained in the pre-operative area. Subjects interested in the study will be presented with consent and Health and Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) forms.  The patient will review the forms with the surgeon, r esearch staff, or anesthesiologist.  Subjects will be reminded that 
participation is completely voluntary, and that they may stop participation at any time without question or penalty.  The surgeon, research staff, or anesthesiologist will answer any quest ions that the subjects may have about the study.  If the patient decides to 
participate, they will be asked to sign the consent and HIPAA forms.  One copy will be saved for study records, and the subject will be provided with a copy of the forms for their own records.  The patient will then have an opportunity to ask any questions of the surgeon regarding the treatment option that has been selected. All forms will be locked and stored in a file cabinet in the research department.  Enrollment will proceed fr om July 
2018 to July 2019.  Enrolling consecutive patients will help reduce selection bias.  
 
Assessments:  Post-operatively patients will be evaluated at 2 and 6 hours post-
operatively by a blinded research staff.  This person will not be aware of the pati ent’s 
mode of analgesia. The patients will be contacted via in person assessment or via 
telephone at 24, 48, and 72 hours +/- 5 hours.  Patients will be asked to rate their pain on scale of 0 -10.  The amount of opioids used by the patient will be recorded as will any 
other adjuvant pain medication used. The time in phase 1 and phase 2 of PACU will be recorded. The patients will be asked at 72 hours post-injection if they would undergo interscalene block with their medication again or if they would opt for a different form of pain management. Patients will fill out a Quality of Recovery Survey at 72 hours and 14 days, and be assessed for block related complications at this time.  All complications will be recorded including:  
● Failure of the block  
● Wound infections 
● Subsequent procedures 
● Complications related to placement of the interscalene block including nerve injury, prolonged sensory loss greater than 3 days, prolonged arm weakness greater than 3 days 
● Opioid related side effects of nausea and/or vomiting 
● Local anesthetic toxicity as evidenced by seizures or cardiovascular 
collapse without other reasonable etiology 
Patients will be asked in the daily phone call if they or their family contacted anyone (any 
health care professional) regarding their pain over night and that will be documented.   
 All data will be recorded on the Clinical Diagnostic Sheet and will then be given to the research coordinator for manual data entry.  Data collection will continue until POD #14.  At that time study participation will be terminated.  Should patients be re- admitted to the 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
11 hospital in the next two weeks (Up to POD #30) for pain, a notation will be made in study records.  An analysis of the total cost of analgesics will be tabulated at the conclusion of the study to determ ine the most cost effective treatment option as this will be added into the cost of 
hospitalization including the number of days each patient spent in the hospital.    Blinding Procedure:  The research assistant in this study will be blinded to the method of analgesia for the patient.   The research assistant will assess pain one time per day.  
This person will not be responsible for any clinical testing and will record all data in the protected database daily.  They will not have any access to the patients’  clinical records 
or chart.   Any questions from the patient will be referred to the on -call resident or 
staff on call.   
 
5.2  
Describe:  
● The interscalene block is standard of care for patients and would be 
performed regardless of patient’s participation in the study.  All patients still would get preoperative multimodal treatment as well as an opioid sparing anesthetic.   
● Patients would be required to take a dose of acetaminophen 975 mg oral and gabapentin 300 mg oral prior to surgery.  They would then be required to receive an interscalene block with either liposome bupivacaine and bupivacaine or bupivacaine.  Intraoperatively they would be required to receive propofol, lidocaine, ondansetron, dexamethasone, and ketamine for induction of anesthesia.    
● In addition to the surveys used to measure subjective and objective outcome, other data will be collected during patient interviews including:
o Demographic data  
o Age 
o Weight  
o ASA class  
o Duration of surgery  
o Pain Score at 2, and 6 hrs after surgery and once a day thereafter 
o Length of stay in recovery room both phase 1 and phase 2 
o Amount of opioids given intraoperatively and post- operatively  
o Satisfaction with treatment 
o Quality of recovery survey at 72 hours and 14 days 
o Non opioids used 
o Adverse events  
o Length of hospital stay  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
12 5.3 Study Duration: We anticipate the study to take from June 2018 to June 
2019.  Patients will be in th e study for 14 days and then their chart 
monitored for up to 30 days post surgery.  The data analysis should take 
one month after full enrollment of the study.  
5.4 Individually Identifiable Health Information:This study involves the use of 
individually identi fiable health information. Please see attached HIPAA 
authorization form.  
5.5 Use of radiation : n/a   
5.6 Use of Center for Magnetic Resonance Research : n/a 
6.0 Data and Specimen Banking  
6.1 Storage and Access: All study data will be stored on excel spreadsheets 
stored in Box. Only the PI and members of the research team will have access to the data.  
6.2 Data: The data from this study will be collected both from Epic and directly 
from the patient. The data collected includes: demographic data, age, weight, ASA class, duration of surgery, length of stay in recovery room both phase 1 and 2, amount of opioids given intraoperatively and post-operatively, non-opioid pain medication, pain score (0-10) at 2, 6, 24, 48, and 72 hours, satisfaction with treatment, Quality of Recovery survey at 72 hours and 14 days, and any adverse events. 
6.3 Release/Sharing: N/A  
 
7.0 Sharing of Results with Participants  
Results will not be shared with participants.  
 
8.0 Study Population  
8.1 Inclusion Criteria: All adult patients aged greater than 18 years of age that 
are undergoing arthroscopic rotator cuff surgery  
8.2 Exclusion Criteria: Patients with allergy to local anesthetics, daily use of opioids for more than 3 weeks prior to surgery, patient refusal, patien t 
with coagulopathy, non- english speaking patients, patients who are 
currently pregnant, and those who do not have access to a telephone.  
8.3 Screening: Patients will be screened at their preoperative visit either in the surgeon’s office or pre assessment cen ter.   
9.0 Vulnerable Populations  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
13 9.1 Vulnerable Populations:  
☐ Children 
☐ Pregnant women/Fetuses/Neonates  
☐ Prisoners  
☐ Adults lacking capacity to consent and/or adults with diminished 
capacity to consent, including, but not limited to, those with acute 
medical conditions, psychiatric disorders, neurologic disorders, developmental disorders, and behavioral disorders 
☐ Approached for participation in research during a stressful situation such 
as emergency room setting, childbirth (labor), etc. 
☐ Disadvantaged in the distribution of social goods and services such as 
income, housing, or healthcare 
☐ Serious health condition for which there are no satisfactory standard 
treatments  
☐ Fear of negative consequences for not participating in the research (e.g. 
institutionalization, deportation, disclosure of stigmatizing behavior) 
☐ Any other circumstance/dynamic that could increase vulnerability to 
coercion or exploitation that might influence consent to research or 
decision to continue in research 
☐ Undervalued or disenfranchised social group 
☐ Members of the military  
☐ Non -English speakers 
☐ Those unable to read (illiterate)  
☐ Employees of the researcher  
☐ Students of the researcher  
x None of the above 
9.2 Additional Safeguards:  
10.0 Local Number of Participants  
10.1 Local Number of Participants to be Consented: 90 patients as we expect a 
dropout or loss to follow up of 20%   
11.0 Local Recruitment Methods  
11.1 Recruitment Process:  Patients will be recruited from the group of adult 
surgical patients at the University of Minnesota undergoing RCR and receiving an interscalene block. Patients will be approached at the preoperative assessment clinic at the Clinic and Surgery Center if p ossible by a research staff member to 
determine their interest in participation.  If they decide to be a participant they will be consented and given a copy of their consent form for their records and a consent will be scanned and placed into EPIC.  If the patient is scheduled for a midday surgery, the research staff will approach them in the preoperative surgical 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
14 area.  These patients will have significant time to review the study with research staff as well as the physicians performing the procedure due to the fact they arrive several hours prior to their scheduled surgery.  All subjects will have enough time to ask questions about the study and the potential risks involved regardless of which venue they are consented.  
11.2 I
dentification of Potential Particip ants:  Patients will be identified by 
members of the treatment team in either the surgeon’s clinic, pre -assessment 
clinic, or preoperative area. Patients who have opted out of research will not be 
asked to participate in the study. Patients will be approached to consent for the study by a surgeon, anesthesiologist, or member of the research team. Patients who agree to participate in the study will sign both a study consent and HIPAA authorization allowing the use of specified information contained in medical records for research purposes. 
11.3 Recruitment Materials: N/A  
11.4 Payment: No payment will be provided to patients.   
12.0 Withdrawal of Participants  
12.1 Withdrawal Circumstances:.  Subjects who have consented prior to the 
day of surgery and for some reason choose not to participate will be withdrawn 
and a notation will be made in the study records and these people will be considered screen failures.  The surgeon may choose to withdraw the patient from the study prior to surgery for  any medical reason or if they suffer a major life threatening  adverse event.  
12.2 Withdrawal Procedures:  I
 f the patient is withdrawn from study prior to the 
procedure, they will be noted in study records as screen failures. If they undergo 
the procedure and they decide they no longer want to be a part of the study or withdrawn by the physician, they will be withdrawn and no further data will be collected.  This will also be noted in the study documentation. 
12.3 Termination Procedures:  If the study is terminated for any reason, or there 
is more than 5 % major adverse events the data that is already collected will be 
stored in a secure location only accessible to research personnel on this study. No further data will be collected if the study is terminated.  
13.0 Risks to Participants  
13.1 Foreseeable Risks:  The st udy has the following risks:  
·      infection  
·      bleeding 
·      nerve injury 
·      cardiac arrhythmias (irregular heartbeat)  
·      respiratory complications  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
15 ·        
These complications all fall within the standard risks of surgery and the performance of the interscalene injection. Any intervention being provided as a part of this study falls within the standard of care as both medication options are within the standard treatments for post- operative pain and are currently used as 
analgesic o ptions at UMMC. 
  
EXPAREL contains bupivacaine. Serious side effects related to bupivacaine are 
not common, but may occur if too much is given or if it is accidentally injected into a blood vessel. When given incorrectly, side effects may involve the brain or the heart.  
  
The effects on the brain and central nervous system may include: ·
      Restlessness (< 2%)  
·      Anxiety (<2%)  
·      Dizziness (<2%)  
·      Tinnitus (ringing in the ears) (<2%)  
·      Blurred vision (<2%) 
·      Tremors (shaking) possibly proceeding to convulsions (<2%). 
  The effects on the heart appear when too much bupivacaine is given or when 
bupivacaine is injected in a blood vessel by accident. These effects cause a decrease of the heart function, including low heart rate or abnormal heart rhythm, decreased blood flow, low blood pressure, and, in extreme cases, heart attack. (<2%)  
  
The numbing sensation caused by bupivacaine may be persistent, with slow, 
incomplete, or no recovery. Sometimes a tingling sensation may appear in the area treated with bupivacaine. When injected next to a large nerve, bupivacaine may cause weakness or paralysis.  
  
Allergic reactions are rare, but may include rash, itching and redness of the skin, 
sneezing, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, fainting, sweating, fever, and low blood pressure.  
  
Other side effects of liposomal bupivacaine when given into the wound include: 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
16 ·      Nausea  (22.6%) 
·      Constipation (8.7%) 
·      Vomiting (6%) 
·      High temperature (5.5%) 
·      Dizziness (<2%)  
·      Swell ing (<1%) 
·      Low blood pressure (<2%) 
·      Anemia (<1%)  
·      Itching (2.4%) 
·      High heart rate (1.3%) 
·      Headache (5%)  
13.2 R eproduction Risks: 
If the patient were pregnant we would not perform the study on them.  If they were to become pregnant there are no known risks to the patient. 
13.3 R
isks to Others:  N/A 
 
14.0 Potential Benefits to Participants  
Potential Benefits: The potential benefits of participating in this study 
include reduced pain following shoulder surgery and shortened hospital 
stay.   
 
15.0 Statistical Considerations  
15.1 Data Analysis Plan:  We plan to collect our data using excel, which will be 
maintained in box.  When the study is completed and ready for statistical 
analysis the data will be shared with our staff statistician.  
  
15.2 P ower Analysis:  Using the power analysis from our other ongoing 
interscalene block study (for total shoulder arthroplasty cases) we plan to 
continue to enroll to 70 total patients to reach an estimated 80% power.  
15.3 Statistical Analysis:  T his study will be analyzed by our s taff biostatistician.  
The data will be deidentified and shared with him in box.  The statistician will be provided the protocol so they are able to analyze for primary and secondary objectives.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
17 15.4 Da ta Integrity:   All patients will be assigned a unique patie nt identifier. The 
data that will be sent to the statistician will be deidentified.   
. 
16.0 Confidentiality  
16.1 Data Security:  All paper documents and consent forms will be stored in a 
locked cabinet in the anesthesia research office in B573 Mayo. All study data w ill 
be stored electronically in Box and only the PI and members of the research team will have access to the data.  
 
17.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of 
Participants  
 
17.1 Data Integrity Monitoring.  
The PI, co- investigators, and research assistants will all have access to the study 
data stored in the University’s Box storage system. All the research assistants 
have experience collecting pain scores and other relevant study information. The PI of the study will periodically review the study  data to ensure accuracy and 
completeness of study data.  
17.2 Da
ta Safety Monitoring:  The Department of Anesthesiology has 
established a Data and Safety Monitoring Committee consisting of several staff anesthesiologists which include persons who are board certi fied as pain 
specialists. Data will be transmitted in box to persons on the board on a monthly basis for review.  If there are patterns of adverse events, the board will meet as needed and provide recommendations.  
All safety data will be collected on a case report form and transferred into an e
xcel spread sheet that will be stored in box. Also, all phone call data will be 
collected on a case report form and transferred into excel in box.   
All data will be collected by research assistants on a daily basis.  Subjects are monitored at several intervals on day of surgery and daily up to 72 hours.  If the patient is discharged prior to 72 hours they will Who will review the data.  
The data will be reviewed on a regular basis (weekly) by the PI and research staff.  If there are consistent complications noted a meeting will be convened by 
the DSMB for recommendations.  
The statistical tests for analyzing the safety data to determine whether harm is occurring.  
The statistician uses R or SAS for analysis.  Most likely  a regression analysis will be performed to see which event is most likely the contributor for the 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
18 complications  Also a chi -square analysis can be performed.  All is very 
dependent on data variability.  
A fatal or serious adverse event that is attributable to either the delivery or the 
study medication itself.  
  
18.0 Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Participants  
18.1 Protecting Privacy:  
Patients will be asked if this is a good time to answer questions.  All patients will 
have the right to refuse to answer questions when called. All calls will be done in a secure office and the data is deidentified when entered.  It will be stored using a unique study identifier.  
  
18.2 A
ccess to Participants:  
All patients are required to sign a consent that states their privacy of the data 
being collected.  In addition, they are required to sign a HIPAA consent that further describes the data being collected.  It also describes that all data is 
deidentified and stored in a secure database.  They will be informed that data is stored and reviewed in box which is HIPAA compliant and that only study personnel have accesss.  
 
19.0 Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
19.1 Compensation for Research -Related Injury:  
In the event that this research activity results in an injury, treatment will be 
available, including first aid, emergency treatment and follow -up care as needed. 
Care for such injuries will be billed in the ordinary manner, to the patient and/or 
insurance company.   
19.2 Contract Language:  N/A  
 
20.0 Consent Process 
● Consent Process (when consent will be obtained):  Patients will be 
identified in the pre -operative time period by the surgeons and if 
possible will be consented by the research coordinator or 
research assistant.   If patients have more questions and do not want to sign at their clinic will be asked if it  is allowable for  a 
study staff member to contact them prior to surgery via phone to clarify if they have any questions.  On the day of surgery, if the 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
19 patient has not already signed consent and is still interested in 
participating in the study will be presented with consent and Health and Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) forms.  The patient will review the forms with the surgeon, research staff, or anesthesiologist.  Subjects will be reminded that participation is completely voluntary,  and that they may stop 
participation at any time without question or penalty.  The surgeon, research staff, or anesthesiologist will answer any questions that the subjects may have about the study.  If the patient decides to participate, they will be aske d to sign the 
consent and HIPAA forms.  One copy will be saved for study records, and the subject will be provided with a copy of the forms for their own records.  
● W
aiver or Alteration of Consent Process:  N/A 
● Non -English Speaking Participants:  N/A- No Non -English speaking 
patients will be enrolled in this study.  
● Participants Who Are Not Yet Adults:  N/A 
● Cognitively Impaired Adults, or adults with fluctuating or 
diminished capacity to consent:  N/A 
● Adults Unable to Consent: N/A 
●   
21.0 Setting 
21.1 Research Sites: Patients will be consented in the surgeon’s clinic or pre assessment clinic.  The surgical procedures will take place at the M health 
Ambulatory Surgery Center or Fairview riverside campus or Fairview Maple 
Grove Clinics Ambulatory Surgery Center.   
21.2 Intern ational Research:n/a 
 
22.0 Multi -Site Research N/A  
23.0 Resources Available:  
Research assistants are available to aid in consent and data acquisition. All research assistants 
will be familiar with the study protocol and have experience working with similar studies.  
  
We plan to enroll 70 subjects.  The plan is to screen 90 subjects to research this target 
population.  This center performs approximately 300 RCRs annually. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Prospective Randomized controlled study comparing lipos omal 
bupivacaine to bupivacaine interscalene blocks for arthroscopic rotator cuff repair surgery  
 
VERSION DATE:  8 5/11/2020 
20 We plan to conduct this study over 3 months.  Enrollment and data collection will be completed 
at this time.  Statistical Analysis will take approximately two months to complete.  
  
All procedures will be performed in the clinical facilities at the MHealth Clinics and Surgery 
Center and at the West and East Bank. Data storage and analysis will be done using 
desktop equipment which is available at the Research Office B573 Mayo.  
  
  
In the event that this research activity results in an injury, treatment will be available, including 
first aid, emergency treatment and follow- up care as needed. Care for such injuries will 
be billed in the ordinary manner, to the patient and/or insurance company.   
All study personnel will be adequately trained by the Principle Investigator on the study protocol 
and study conduct.  A log will be maintained to track which personnel are trained.  A 
delegation of authority log will also be maintained to track which personnel are responsible for specific duties. 
 
24.0 References  
1. Vandepitte C, Kuroda M, Witvrouw R et al.  Addition of liposome bupivacaine 
to bupivacaine HCl versus bupivacaine HCl alone for interscalene brachial plexus block in patients having major shoulder surgery. Reg Anesth Pain Med . 
2017;42:334- 341.  