IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0760 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/19/2019    
 
                 
Truncal ultrasound guided regional anesthesia for implantation and revision of 
AICDs and pacemakers in pediatric patients 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 12/19/2019  
 
                
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0760 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/19/2019   Title: Truncal ultrasound guided regional anesthesia for implantation and revision of AICDs 
and pacemakers in pediatric patients. 
 
PI: Olga Pawelek (Anesthesiologist)  
Co PIs : Mohammed Numan (Electrophysiologist), Chandra Srinivasan (Electrophysiologist), 
Richard Hubbard (Anesthesiologist), Evelyn Griffin (Anesthesiologist), Anil DeSilva 
(Anesthesiologist), Nischal Gautam (Anesthesiologist)  
 
Population : Children undergoing pac emaker and/or Automatic Implantable Cardioverter 
Defibrillator implantation at Children’s Memorial Hermann  Hospital  
 
Study Duration: Data will be collected from procedure for 48  hours  
 
Purpose  
The purpose of this study is to determine the efficacy and safe ty of truncal blocks for pacemaker 
and Automatic Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator implantation in children  
 
Hypothesis Truncal block is effective, safe and feasible for implantation of AICDs and pacemakers in children.  
 
Research Design and Procedures  to be Used  
Written  consent  for the study will be obtained from  a parent.  We will also obtain consent  from  the 
patient if they are older than 10 years together with their  parents.  
The patients  will be simply  randomized  by a pre-determined  computer  generated  random  numbers 
and allocated  to one of two groups. The group allocation  (LA group or B group)  will be concealed 
in sealed opaque envelopes that will be opened after enrollment of the patients. In one group (the LA group), only the local anestheti c infiltration will be performed. In the block group (the B 
group), PECS and TTP blocks will be performed. The ultrasound- guided nerve blocks will be 
performed by the anesthesiologist after induction of anesthesia and endotracheal intubation. The left uppe r extremity angiogram will be performed prior to block to ensure the correct side for the 
implant. The local anesthetic group will have wound infiltration as routine care by the electrophysiologist  at the time of wound closure.  Both of these blocks  have  been used successfully 
in our institution and the purpose of the study is to prospectively evaluate whether there is a decrease in amount of narcotic medications need and track complications. There is no deviation from the standard of care as currently  pract iced.  
 
At our institution, the incision is typically made below the clavicle on the left anterior chest wall and a subcutaneous (pre -pectoralis major) pocket or sub- muscular pocket is created between 
pectoralis major and minor muscles with sharp and blunt dissection and electrocautery by the electrophysiologist. Based on the literature this area is best covered by a PECS block combined with the transversus  thoracic muscle  plane  block to help cover  medial  anterior  nerve  branches.  (5) 
The adult literature describes mainly a combination of serratus plane block combined with transversus thoracic plane block as the generator is placed in the mid axillary line. (4). The dose of 0.2% ropivacaine is 1ml/kg and so for the block group the dose is divided into halves for the PECS block and TTP block (2 injections). For ultrasound- guided peripheral nerve block, we  will 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0760 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/19/2019   use a 22 -gauge 4 cm Pajunk needle and a linear probe of the SonoSite. The skin will be cleaned 
with chlorhexidine prep solution and aseptic technique followed.  
 
Pecs Block  
The goal of the Pecs block is to infiltrate the fascial compartment with local anesthetic 
ropivacaine between the pectoral nerves (the pectoral fascia and clavipectoral fascia). The local 
anesthetic should cover  the pectoral  compartment  with the pectoral  nerves. The block  is performed 
with the patient supine, either with the arm abducted 90 degrees or by his or her side. The transducer is then moved laterally until the pectoralis minor and serratus anterior are identified. With further lateral transducer movement, the third and fourth rib can then be identified. The injection of 0.5 mL/kg of 0.2% ropivacaine is made between the pectoralis major and minor muscles.(Figure  2). 
 
TTP block 
A transversus  thoracic plane  block is added  to provide  sufficient  analgesia to the area around 
the sternum. The ultrasound is placed on the left parasternal border at T3- 4 level and moved 
medially until the plane between the internal intercostal and transversus thoracis muscles is identified immediately medial to the sternal border. Usin g an in- plane technique, 0.5mL/kg of 
0.2%  ropivacaine  is injected  between  the internal  intercostal  and transversus  thoracis  muscle  plane. 
(Figure 3).  
 
The adjunctive  medication  protocol  will include  scheduled  alternating  ibuprofen and tylenol 
unless  contraindicated  by renal  impairment.  Both groups  of patients  will also have  oral oxycodone 
available as needed for moderate breakthrough pain and IV morphine for severe  pain.  
The total dose of local anesthetic for group B will be same as that of group LA. 
 
Primary outcome: We will compare the two groups on their total narcotic dose in milligram morphine equivalents (MME) needed for 48 hours after procedure. This is calculated as intravenous fentanyl (mcg) x0.03+intravenous hydromorphone (mg)x20+intravenous morphine(mg)x3+[number  of oral oxycodone  5 mg/acetaminophen  325 mg tabs equivalen ts ]. The 
48 hour mark  is picked  since  the local  anesthetic  duration for either  local  infiltration  or block  is 6- 
12 hours and most patients would be discharged prior to the 48 hour mark. This also allows for sufficient time for complications to develop and tracked as secondary  outcomes.  
 
Secondary outcome : VAS pain score in PACU, incidence of pruritus, nausea/vomiting, 
respiratory depression, local anesthetic toxicity and pneumothorax, these complications would arise early in the post procedure period but would be tracked for 48 hours.  
 
Statistical Analysis  
Data will be analyzed  within  one month after completion  of data collection  for all enrolled  patients. 
The de-identified  data will be uploaded to PI’s UTH- Share account  and shared  with the statistician. 
We will report the summary statistics of demographics and disease -related characteristics for two 
groups. The primary endpoint, amount of morphine equivalent administered intra -operative and 
during the first 24 hours after procedure, will be summarized as median and inter -quartile, and 
depicted  as side-by-side boxplot. Comparison between  two groups  will be evaluated  by Wilcoxon 
rank sum test. We will report  the incidence  rates  of side effects  including pruritis  and nausea,  as 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0760 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/19/2019   well as complications  including local  anesthetic toxicity  and pneumothorax.  The Wald  test will be 
used for comparing incidence rates between two  groups. 
At our institution we performed 24 implants in the last 2 years (aicd/ppm,external, 4 were lead 
revisio ns, generator  changes  or pocket  revisions.  The most  common approach used is the left intra- 
clavicular subcutaneous (pre -pectoral). We anticipate at least 12 patients per year going forward. 
Based on a 5% two -sided two- sample t test, the size of 12 patients per group provides the power 
of 94% for detecting difference for effect size 1.5 assuming that the primary endpoint follows a normal distribution  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring:  
 
Both groups will be followed for signs of local anesthetic toxicity, pneumothorax or infection, these will be reviewed at quarterly intervals with the cardiologist/anesthesiologist PIs.  
 
Risks and Potential Benefits  
The risks of wound infiltration (LA group) is the potential use of higher doses of narcotic which is associated  with more  nausea,  pruritis  and potential  for respiratory  depression. The block  groups 
use has the risks  of insufficient  analgesia with the need  for rescue medications,  the use of a longer 
block needle has the theoretical risk of injury to deeper  structures such as the lung but the use of 
ultrasound and experience with ultrasound of the anesthesiologist makes it a minimal risk. Risks with either technique are those associated with any injection: infection, bleeding and damage to surrounding struct ures. Both groups have the risk of local anesthetic  toxicity.  
The benefit  of the block group is the improved analgesia and decrease in the narcotic dose needed 
with a resulting decrease in narcotic associated side effects.  
The secondary outcomes will be incidence of pruritus, nausea/vomiting 
 
Importance of Knowledge That May Be Reasonably Expected To Result  
Truncal ultrasound guided blocks are gaining popularity due to their efficacy in the adult 
population for implantation  of pacemakers  and AICDs  and so far there is a lack of reports  of these 
being used in the pediatric population. Based on our experience wi th effectiveness of truncal 
blocks so far we anticipate encouraging other centers to integrate this modality and offer better pain control to their  patients.  
 
Ethics  
The study has obtained departmental IRB approval and is seeking institutional IRB approval . 
Given very positive results from the adult population, we believe delaying this study will deprive large groups  of children  at other  institutions  from  receiving  a pain management  technique  that will 
improve their comfort and decrease the amount of narcot ic needed.  
 
The consent and assent will be explained to family and patient and alternatives which include no randomization will be offered.  
 
A linking log will be used to deidentify data and a data sheet have been attached for review. The data sheets will be securely destroyed as soon as deidentified data is transferred to a electronic form on a secure server. The linking log will be stored in a locked cabinets within a locked office at the medical school.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0760 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/19/2019   Any complications will be reviewed quar terly with the EP cardiology/anesthesiology group and 
will be referred for departmental quality review if there is an increase in the number of 
complications compared to current base line when both the pain management injections are currently performed as standard of care.  
 
References  
 
1.Miller, Marc ; Garg, Jalaj ; Salter, Benjamin ; Brouwer, Thomas ; Mittnacht, Alex ; 
Montgomery, Morgan ; Honikman, Rafael ; Arkonac, Derya ; Choudry, Subbarao ; Dukkipati, Srinivas ; Reddy, Vivek ; Weiner, Menachem. Feasibility of subcutaneous 
implantable cardioverter -defibrillator implantation with opioid sparing truncal plane 
blocks and deep sedation. Journal of Cardiovascular Electrophysiology, Jan 2019, 
Vol.30(1), p.141  
 
2.(Bashandy, GM and Abbas, DN. Pectoral nerves I and II blocks in multimodal anal gesia for 
breast  cancer  surgery:  a randomized  clinical  trial. Reg Anesth  Pain Med.  2015;  40: 68–74;  
 
3. Wijayasinghe, N, Andersen, KG, and Kehlet, H. Analgesic and sensory effects of the pecs 
local anesthetic block in patients with persistent pain after breast cancer surgery: a pilot study. Pain Pract. 2016;  10.1111/papr.12423).  
 
4. Raza, Syed M. ; Vasireddy, A ppa Rao ; Candido, Kenneth D. ; Winnie, Alon P. ; Masters, 
Robert W. A complete regional anesthesia technique for cardiac pacemaker insertion. Journal of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia, 1991, Vol.5(1), pp.54- 56 
 
5. Bhatt, Himani V. ; Hernandez, Nadia ; Shariat, Ali. Successful Use of Serratus and 
Transversus Thoracic Plane Blocks for Subcutaneous Implantable Cardioverter - 
Defibrillator Placement. Journal of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia, February 2018, Vol.32(1), pp.e22- e23 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-19-0760 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 12/19/2019    
