Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
 
Protocol Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator 
Cuff Surgery : A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Docume nt Date: October 20,  2020  
Principal Investigator:  Jacques E. Chelly, MD, PhD, MBA  
   Professor of Anesthesiology  
   UPMC Shadyside  
   5230 Centre Avenue  
   Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15232  
   412.623.6904  
      
 
 
   
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
Introduction  
The current opioid epidemic has led to a renewed interest in exploring non -pharmacological 
techniques to treat post -operative pain. An increasing number of patients are suffering from the adverse 
effects of opioid use following surgery, including post -oper ative nausea and vomiting, respiratory 
depression, immunosuppression, constipation, and most recently, addiction. In the United States, over 
$600 billion is spent every year on opioid addiction, including $79 billion related to opioid addiction 
following s urgery. Despite many initiatives to decrease the use of opiates in the preoperative setting, 
opioids continue to be regularly prescribed before, during and after surgery. Although the risk of opioid 
addiction following surgery is recognized, the percentage  of patients becoming addicted to opioids 
following surgery is not well understood.  To date, there has been virtually no agreement regarding the 
duration and dosage that qualify for opioid dependence following surgery, nor that a clear estimation  of 
the fa ctors such as biological, psychosocial and socioeconomic that increase the risk of using opioids for 
extended periods of time after surgery .  
The interscalene block is the gold standard for postoperative pain management following 
shoulder surgery. However,  the duration of the block  does not cover rehabilitation, and i n most cases, 
patients are discharged from the hospital with an opioid prescription. Therefore, there is a growing need 
to investigate complementary pain -management methods  that offer a non -pharmacological solution to 
managing post -operative pain. Auriculotherapy is such a technique that has been shown  in previous 
studies  to provide  significant  analgesia without the adverse effects of opioids or other pain -relieving 
medications. The objective of this  trial is to investigate the efficacy of auriculotherapy in reducing post -
operative narcotic consumption in participants undergoing rotator cuff surg ery. Enrolled participants 
will be randomized to a control or interventional arm of the study, where they will either receive an 
active auriculotherapy treatment with nitrogen gas  (intervention) or non-active auriculotherapy 
treatment without nitrogen gas  (placebo).  
Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
Background  
Auriculortherapy is an ancient technique initially used to treat back pain and was rediscovered 
in the 1940s by French physician Dr. Paul Nogier, who postulated that the ear contains a complete 
representation of the body with the hea d down. The theory is that any pathological condition is 
associated with a corresponding modification of the ear point. The technique consists of invalidating the 
pathologic or dysfunctional ear point, which generates an impulse  that is transmitted to the brain, 
where the brain tries to reset the ear point to homeostasis. The brain also tries to reset the 
corresponding point of the body to h omeostasis . 
Auriculotherapy is grounded in the concept that the ear can be considered a keyboard of the 
computer, with  the brain being the hard drive , due to its embryologic origin and innervation. From an 
embryologic perspective, the conchae originate from the ectoderm, the lobe and ascending part of the 
helix, tragus and anti -tragus originated from the endoderm, Helix o riginated from the mesoderm. From 
the innervation perspective, specific parts of the ear are innervated by a specific branch of cranial 
nerves and plexus. These nerves carry impulses from the body to the ear, from the ear to the brain, and 
then back from b rain to the ear . The fundamental princip le of action of Auriculotherapy  is based on a 
temporary and reversible invalidation of the somatotopic representation zones  on the auricular 
cartography  innervating the different section of the ear .  
Auriculotherapy is neuro -physiologically based —a functional MRI study conducted in 2002 and 
duplicated in 2014 showed that the pain associated with the clamp of the thumb corresponded with 
illuminated sections of the brain. Over the last decades, several different cartogr aphy of the ear have 
been proposed —the most recent and scientifically -based cartography is using a segmentogram with a 
corpus collosum as the center of symmetry. Validation of this cartography has been obtained in studies 
using functional MRI.   
Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
Specific Ai ms 
1. This study  will prospectively investigate the efficacy of auriculotherapy  in reducing perioperative 
opioid consumption in participants undergoing rotator cuff surgery   
3. To prospectively investigate role that auriculotherapy  may have in reducing opi oid consumption 
after discharge and facilitating functional recovery  
Study Design  
The study will be conducted as a  prospective , randomized, placebo -controlled trial at the University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC) Shadyside Hospital  and Montefiore hospitals . Institutional review 
board approval will be obtained before eligible patients are recruited and consented. Trial will be 
registered at www.clinicaltrial.gov before beginning recruitment.  
Recruitment  
Potential subjects will be re cruited in the pre-operative area of Shadyside hospital on the day of their 
scheduled rotator -cuff surgery. Patients who agree to participate in the trial will sign an IRB approved 
Informed Consent Form.  
Randomization Process  
Participating patients will be randomized by computer generated random numbers to either the control 
or intervention group.  
 
 
 
 
Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
Treatment Groups  
Control Arm : Control group will receive  an auriculotherapy placebo - this placebo  involves using the 
auriculotherapy cryopunct ure device without  the compressed nitrogen gas  to invalidate innervated 
points on the ear, plus the standard of care  interscalene block  and post -operative pain management 
protocol  
Interventional Arm:  Intervention group will receive  actual auriculotherapy p rocedure, which involves 
using the auriculotherapy cryopuncture device with  the nitrogen gas  to invalidate innervated points on 
the ear, plus the standard of care interscalene block  and post -operative pain management protocol  
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Subject is greater than 18 years of age  
2. Subject is willing and able to provide informed consent  
3. Subject is scheduled to undergo elective rotator cuff surgery  
4. Subject has consented to an interscalene block  
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Opioid dependence  
2. Any subject di agnosed with a chronic pain condition  which daily opioid use is needed  
3. Anatomical malformation, which in the investigator's opinion may interfer e with the placement 
of the nerve block  
4. Raynaud's disease  diagnosis  
5. Patient refusal  
 
 
Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
Data Collection and Outcom e Measures  
Once patient has signed the Informed Consent to participate in this trial, demographic information and 
medical history will be collected from each participant on the day of surgery. Research staff will record 
this information from the medical chart.  The Medical Outcomes Study Questionnaire 12 -Item Short 
Form Health Survey (SF -12) will also be administered  at this time to obtain baseline value.  
Randomization will occur by assigning the participant a subject ID number, and this ID numbe r will 
correspond to a treatment allocation based on a pre -designed randomization schema. This treatment 
allocation (intervention/control) will be contained in a sealed, opaque, envelope with the subject ID 
number that is designated on envelope. The master  randomization list will be created and held by an 
independent data monitor who will both create and hold the master randomization list.  
Once patient is randomized to a treatment group by research staff, Auriculotherapy will be performed 
using a cryopunct ure device in the post -operative  setting, either with nitrogen gas (intervention group), 
or an empty cryopunture with no gas (control group). Dr. Chelly is formally certified in auriculotherapy 
(diploma attached). After proper disinfection of the designate d ear, the treatment consists of the 
stimulation of 9 ear points on the ipsilateral ear. These points include: -Ω2 (the master point for the 
mesoderm), the shoulder point, 6 points involved with the pain pathway (the stellar ganglion, the 
sensory and motor C7 branches, the sensory master point (MSP), the reticular master point (RMP) and 
the point corresponding to the Thalamus).   
Finally, the stimulation of the ACTH point completes the treatment. The total time required to complete 
auriulotherapy treatment i s approximately 10 minutes  
 
Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
The enrolled  subject  will also receive an interscalene block as per standard of care.  The patient will 
receive standard of care treatment for surgery, post -operative pain management, and physical therapy.  
After surgery, the su bject will be assessed at time of hospital discharge to review how to complete the 
subject diary, administer pain satisfaction questionnaire (0 -6) and obtain NRS pain at rest and with 
movement scores (0 -10).  
When the patient is discharged from the hospita l, the subject will be asked to take home and complete 
a subject diary where they will record their total narcotic/pain medication consumption, pain 
satisfaction score (0 -6), and NRS pain score (0 -10), and adverse events daily for first 5 days post -
dischar ge, and then at post op day 14 and once a month for three months (post op days 30, 60 and 90). 
The subject will be instructed to complete the diary just before bedtime on these days. The patient will 
be contacted via telephone on Day 5 post -operatively  as a remi nder to return their pain diary . On the 
post -operative Day 14, 30, 60 and 90 telephone calls, functional recovery will be measured using the 
Medical Outcomes Study Questionnaire 1 2-Item Short Form Health Survey (SF -12). The subject will also 
be asked to assess their overall patient satisfaction at the Day 90 call, on a scale of 0 (least satisfaction) 
to 10 (most satisfaction) . 
Analgesic efficacy in both groups will also be evaluate d by the amount of total narcotic consumption 
(measured with  oral morphine equivalent doses of analgesics used to provide pain relief). Secondary 
outcome measures will include total non -narcotic pain medication consumption for 5-days post -
discharge, time to readiness for discharge from PACU, time to hospital discharge, readmission  to the 
hospital  because of pain -related  issues, incidence of post operative comp lications, overall patient 
satisfaction, patient satisfaction relating to pain management and functional recovery. Functional 
recovery will be measured using the Medical Outcomes Stud y Questionnaire 12 -Item Short Form Health 
Survey (SF -12). 
Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
Auriculotherapy Technique  
After proper disinfection of the designated ear, the treatment consists of the stimulation of 9 ear points 
on the ipsilateral ear.  
These points include : 
-Ω2 (the master point f or the mesoderm), the shoulder point , 6 points involved with the pain pathway 
(the stellar ganglion, the sensory and motor C7 branches, the sensory master point (MSP), the reticular 
master point (RMP) and the point corresponding to the Thalamus).   
Finally, the stimula tion of the ACTH point c ompletes  the treatment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
Statistical Analysis  
A non -paired  T-test w ill be  performed to determine the significance of the difference between 
the 2 groups. P value less than 0 .1 will be  considered significant. Data for each ou tcome measure 
will be  expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD) . Confidence intervals and relative risks will 
be defined wherever appropriate.  
Sample size power was based on a reduction of 60% of opioids during the 2 weeks followin g 
surgery and discharge. To allow for up t o 10% dropout rate, 5 subjects have been added to each 
group to bring total to 50 subjects. Incidence of complications and other binary variables 
between the groups will be analyzed by Chi Square test or Fisher exact test.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
References  
Alimi D., Geissmann A., Gardeur  D., Bahr F. Study in fMRI of the stimulation of the auricular areas of the 
knee as the French –German and Chinese localizations. The Journal of Radiology. Photon 2014; 
125, 133 -141.  
Alimi, D., & Chelly, J. E. (2018). New Universal Nomenclature in Auriculo therapy. The Journal of 
Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 24(1), 7-14. doi:10.1089/acm.2016.0351  
Asher, G. N., Jonas, D. E., Coeytaux, R. R., Reilly, A. C., Loh, Y. L., Motsinger -Reif, A. A., & Winham, S. J. 
(2010). Auriculotherapy for Pain Managemen t: A Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis of 
Randomized Controlled Trials. The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 16(10), 
1097 -1108. doi:10.1089/acm.2009.0451  
Buckley, N. (2007). Auricular acupuncture for analgesia after arthroscopy. Canadia n Medical Association 
Journal, 176(2), 193 -194. doi:10.1503/cmaj.061594  
Karst, M., Winterhalter, M., M??nte, S., Francki, B., Hondronikos, A., Eckardt, A., . . . Fink, M. (2007). 
Auricular Acupuncture for Dental Anxiety: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Anes thesia & 
Analgesia, 104(2), 295 -300. doi:10.1213/01.ane.0000242531.12722.fd  
Kolodny, A., Courtwright, D. T., Hwang, C. S., Kreiner, P., Eadie, J. L., Clark, T. W., & Alexander, G. C. 
(2015). The Prescription Opioid and Heroin Crisis: A Public Health Approa ch to an Epidemic of 
Addiction. Annual Review of Public Health, 36(1), 559 -574. doi:10.1146/annurev -publhealth -
031914 -122957  
Mora, B., Iannuzzi, M., Lang, T., Steinlechner, B., Barker, R., Dobrovits, M., . . . Kober, A. (2007). Auricular 
Acupressure as a T reatment for Anxiety Before Extracorporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy in the 
Elderly. The Journal of Urology, 178(1), 160 -164. doi:10.1016/j.juro.2007.03.019  
Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
National Institute on Drug Abuse. (2018, January 25). Prescription Opioids. Retrieved April 16, 2018, 
from https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/prescription -opioids  
Narongpunt V, P, Attali JR Cornillot, Molinier F, Alimi D, Datcu S et al. Infrared thermographic 
visualization of the Traditional Chinese Acupuncture Meridian Points. Medical Acupun cture 
2005; 16: 32 -37 
Opioid Addiction: 2016 Facts and Figures. (2016). American Journal of Addiction Medicine. Retrieved 
April 16, 2018.  
Sator -Katzenschlager, S. M., Wölfler, M. M., Kozek -Langenecker, S. A., Sator, K., Sator, P., Li, B., . . . Sator, 
M. O . (2006). Auricular electro -acupuncture as an additional perioperative analgesic method 
during oocyte aspiration in IVF treatment. Human Reproduction, 21(8), 2114 -2120. 
doi:10.1093/humrep/del110  
United States for Non -Dependence: An Analysis of the Impact o f Opioid Overprescribing in America 
(Publication). (2017, September 26). Retrieved April 16, 2018.  
Usichenko, T. I., Dinse, M., Hermsen, M., Witstruck, T., Pavlovic, D., & Lehmann, C. (2005). Auricular 
acupuncture for pain relief after total hip arthroplas ty – a randomized controlled study. Pain, 
114(3), 320 -327. doi:10.1016/j.pain.2004.08.021  
Usichenko, T. I., Kuchling, S., Witstruck, T., Pavlovic, D., Zach, M., Hofer, A., . . . Wendt, M. (2007). 
Auricular acupuncture for pain relief after ambulatory knee surgery: A randomized trial. 
Canadian Medical Association Journal, 176(2), 179 -183. doi:10.1503/cmaj.060875  
Wetzel, B., Pavlovic, D., Kuse, R., Gibb, A., Merk, H., Lehmann, C., . . . Usichenko, T. I. (2011). The Effect 
of Auricular Acupuncture on Fentanyl Requirement During Hip Arthroplasty. The Clinical Journal 
of Pain, 27(3), 262 -267. doi:10.1097/ajp.0b013e3181fd516c  
Title:  The Effect of Auriculotherapy for Post -Operative P ain Management following Rotator Cuff Surgery : 
A Randomized, Placebo -Controlled Study  
      
 
 
 
    
     
 
 
 