Cover Page  
 
Protocol  
 
Study Title: Equity Using Interventions for Pain and Depression (EQUIPD) - Phase 1  
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date:  11/11/202 4 
 
IRB Approval Date:  11/14 /2024 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 1 of 27 Equity Using Interventions for Pain and Depression 
(EQUIPD) – Phase 1  
 
Principal Investigator:  
Mariann e Matthias, PhD  
Research Scientist, Regenstrief Institute  
Professor, Indiana University School of Medicine 
 
 
Support Provided by:  
National Institutes of Health  
  
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 2 of 27 Table of Contents:  
1.0 Background & Rationale  
2.0 Specific Aims , Study Design, Recruitment,  & Eligibility  
3.0 Measures  
4.0 Data Analysis  Plan  
5.0 Study Calendar  
6.0 Reportable Events  
7.0 Data Safety Monitoring  
8.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
9.0 Data Management  and Confidentiality  
10.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
11.0 References from Grant  
  
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 3 of 27 1.0 Background & Rationale  
Nonpharmacological pain treatments (NPTs) are increasingly supported by evidence and 
are widely recommended in treatment guidelines. However, these approaches remain 
underused. Even as access increases, several patient -related barriers remain, including lack of 
knowledge about NPT availability and effectiveness, poor patient -provider communication, and 
challenges to engagement and adherence. This last barrier is particularly important as NPTs typically require more commitment, time, and effort than taking medications. These patient -level 
barriers may be especially difficult for patients with comorbid pain and depression, since 
depressive symptoms can interfere with engaging in pain management. Such patients may 
require additional support and structure to successfully use and benefit from NPTs. These challenges are further exacerbated for Black patients , who continue to experience disparities in 
pain treatment, such as being offered fewer treatment options —including NPTs —compared to 
their White counterparts. Therefore, NPT use may be especially difficult for Black patients with comorbid pain and depressi on, given the unique challenges that depression adds to pain 
management and the persistence of racialized disparities in pain care.  
The overall goal of this proposal is to refine, test, and prepare to implement a novel 
approach to overcoming patient -related barriers to NPT use that is tailored to Black patients with 
comorbid pain and depression. EQUIPD ( Equity Using Interventions for P ain and Depression) 
combines 1) a decision aid focused on NPTs to increase their use, and 2) a coach to foster patient engagement and NPT adherence. Drawing on a heuristic model of multi -level 
mechanisms of racial injustice in pain outcomes, EQUIPD is centered at the individual and 
interpersonal levels, while laying the groundwork for later intervention at the structural level (i.e., 
clinic/healthcare system) through subsequent system -wide implementation.  
The EQUIPD coaching manual and decision aid have been pilot tested with patients for 
acceptability, but not in the context of a randomized pilot. Procedures for a full trial, including 
recruitment strategies that may differ in a randomized controlled trial  (RCT), need to be piloted. 
In addition, although the decision aid has been useful for patients, it is essential that we also 
learn from providers how it might better be used in the context of clinic visits. Finally, while we 
have incorporated patient pers pectives throughout the development of EQUIPD, their continued 
involvement is critical for this next phase of our work in order to sustain use and achieve 
meaningful impact. This research will take place at Eskenazi Health, an urban safety -net health 
syste m that provides healthcare to underserved, socioeconomically disadvantaged patients.  
 
Chronic pain is prevalent, burdensome, and costly. Chronic pain affects tens of millions 
of Americans and is associated with depression, anxiety, reduced quality of life, and increased 
suicide risk.
1, 2  Musculoskeletal pain is considered the most common, disabling, and costly of all 
pain complaints.3  
Depression is present in 30- 50% of patients with pain and has additive effects on 
adverse health outcomes.4-6 Depression can increase pain and pain- related disability, 
ultimately reducing quality of life.1, 5 Depression can also interfere with effective pain 
management, especially nonpharmacological pain management approaches, which require 
active, consistent participation and engagement.7, 8 1 Indeed, depression has been identified as 
a significant barrier to engaging in pain self -management, with patients feeling overwhelmed by 
their pain, unable to focus on or engage in pain management activities, and feeling hopeless about being able to manage their pain.
9 Clearly, depressive symptoms can reduce patients’ 
motivation to be active participants in their own care.10-12  
Non-pharmacological treatments (NPTs) for chronic pain are recognized as safe and 
effective. NPTs include both traditional (e.g., cognitive- behavioral therapy, exercise/movement) 
and complementary or integrative approaches (e.g., acupuncture, yoga).13 In response to high-
quality evidence supporting NPTs for chronic pain,13-16 the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, the American College of Physicians, Department of Defense, and Veterans Health 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 4 of 27 Administration have released guidelines or adopted policies recommending multi -modal 
approaches that prioritize evidence- based NPTs.13, 17, 18 These guidelines are grounded in 
evidence from numerous studies and systematic reviews demonstrating safety and 
effectiveness.13, 14, 19- 29 For example, the American College of Physicians strongly recommends 
that NPTs, including exercise, cognitive- behavioral therapy, yoga, and spinal manipulation, be 
considered as first -line treatments for chronic low -back pain.16  Thus, NPTs are a promising 
approach for patients seeking safe and effective pain treatment. Moreover, increasing NPT use is consistent with calls from the National Academy of Medicine and the National Pain Strategy to 
equip patients with tools to play an active role in managing pain.
1, 30 
Despite the promise of NPTs, numerous barriers lead to  their continued underuse.30-35 
Recent studies indicate notable gaps between patients’ interest in NPTs and actual use.34, 36 
Even in integrated healthcare systems such as Kaiser Permanente and the Veterans Health 
Administration, which have made concerted efforts to increase NPT access, patient -related 
barriers remain.31, 33, 36, 37 These barriers include (1) lack of knowledge about NPT options, (2) 
poor patient -provider communication about NPT options, and (3) challenges to 
engagement/motivation (because NPTs require more time and commitment than many other treatments, such as analg esics).
13, 31, 33- 35, 38, 39 Moreover, barriers such as skepticism and 
reduced motivation impact not just initial use, but long- term adherence—which is critical for 
NPTs to be effective.1, 13, 33  
Barriers to NPT use are exacerbated for Black patients. Disparities in pain treatment are 
well-documented and persist despite national priorities focusing on health equity. Minoritized 
groups, particularly Black patients, continue to experience greater pain severity, worse pain outcomes, and inadequate pain treatment.
40-42 This includes being offered fewer treatment 
options —including NPTs —than their White counterparts.43-46 Racialized disparities in 
communication compound these disadvantages. Black  patients report poorer quality 
communication with healthcare providers; they receive less health information and show reluctance to share health concerns and articulate their opinions and treatment preferences. 
47-50 
These disparities have direct implications for pain care, particularly NPT use, which requires 
thoughtful evaluation of options and effective communication with providers to understand 
patients’ goals and preferences and find the NPT(s) that are the best fit for each patient.31, 33, 38, 
51, 52 Thus, the barriers to NPT use are intensified for Black patients compared to their White 
counterparts.  
In summary, NPTs represent a safe and effective —but underused— means to manage 
chronic pain. However, there are numerous barriers to NPT use, and these barriers are especially pronounced for Black patients and further exacerbated for patients with comorbid 
depression. Interventions are needed that address these disparities and provide tools for 
minoritized patients with comorbid pain and depression to benefit from NPTs. Notably, multi -
level factors, such as those at the structural and cultural levels, work t ogether to create and 
maintain racial injustices, and these factors exert influence on individual experiences.
53 
Therefore, to fully address these injustices, intervention at multiple levels is needed. EQUIPD begins this process by equipping individuals with tools to exercise autonomy and control over their pain care. Such patient -level empowerment is a necessary step in the multi -step process of 
achieving equity in chronic pain care. If effective, we will build on this work to effect change at the structural level in a follow -up project focused on implementing EQUIPD’s coaching and 
decision aid into everyday clinical practice at Eskenazi Health (see letter of support from 
Eskenazi leadership).  
Decision aids are promising tools for overcoming barriers to NPT use and improving 
pain- related outcomes.  Decision aids (DAs) are evidence- based tools that help patients make 
choices among treatment options. They help facilitate discussions with providers and are often 
used prior to clinic visits to promote shared decision- making.
54-56 DAs are typically used when 
there is no clear “best” choice, but rather when decisions are “preference- sensitive,” meaning 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 5 of 27 there is a need to weigh features of different options to evaluate how these options align with a 
patient’s own values and priorities.57 In other words, “patient decision aids may help clinicians 
and patients to come to quality decisions, grounded in patients’ values and taking into account 
the potential trade- offs in benefits and risks of different options.”56 
DAs can help overcome the barriers to NPT use described above. A 2017 Cochrane review 
of 105 studies56 found high to moderate quality evidence that DAs (1) improve patient 
knowledge about treatment options, including helping them to have more accurate treatment expectations; (2) engage patients by helping them clarify what goals and priorities are most 
important to them; (3) improve patient -provider communication by facilitating greater patient 
participation in decision- making; and (4) can be used in time- limited clinic visits. Of note, 
Cochrane review authors found that DAs added only 2.6 minutes, on avera ge, to the clinic visit, 
indicating that these benefits are attainable without exacerbating existing clinic time constraints.  
Decision aids are especially well -s
 uited for chronic pain and NPTs. First, as noted 
above, DAs are useful for preference- sensitive decisions and when different treatments may 
need to be tried. This is especially true for chronic pain because no single chronic pain treatment works for everyone, and frequently treatments must be used in combination (multi -
modal care).
1, 58 Second, DAs facilitate communication, which is critical to foster shared 
decision -making.56, 57 This is especially important because minoritized patients experience 
poorer quality communication with providers ,47-50 and because communication is often difficult in 
chronic pain care.59-62 Third, DAs provide a means to weigh different options, which is especially 
important when deciding among NPTs. Numerous NPTs are available, and they vary widely; consequently, patients and providers have indicated difficulty navigating NPT options.
33, 38 
Moreover, unlike pharmacological treatments, such as pills or injections, NPTs require varying 
levels of patient participation and commitment, which patients need to consider as they choose among options. For example, a patient with long work hours might not have time for a series of 
chiropractor appointments, but might choose an NPT with flexible scheduling or that can be done on one’s own (e.g., walking). DAs help to make these tradeoffs explicit so patients can evaluate how different options fit into th eir lives. Fourth, DAs can help alleviate provider burden 
regarding informing, encouraging, and making decisions about NPT use with patients. By helping patients to define and state their goals and priorities for treatment, informing them of NPT options, and helping them to weigh these options against their own values and priorities, DAs equip patients to come to the visit prepared and primed to engage in a productive decision-
making process.  
Although some studies have trained physicians in shared decision- m
 aking for pain and a 
few have used DAs for patients with pain, these studies focused on specific conditions or clinical situations such as chest pain, orthopedic surgery, fibromyalgia, opioids, or medications for 
rheumatoid arthritis.
63-67 Despite the importance of promoting NPT use for chronic pain and the 
demonstrated effectiveness of DAs, there have been no studies examining the effectiveness of 
a DA focused on NPTs for chronic pain.  
Patients need support to use and remain adherent to NPTs. In addition to the barriers to 
NPT use discussed above, once an NPT is selected, adherence can become challenging. In 
contrast to treatments such as analgesics, NPTs typically require considerably more time, effort, 
patience, and commitment.1, 13 Moreover, NPTs often take several months to show effects, 
which can be discouraging to patients.33 Indeed, challenges to adherence have been widely 
recognized in pain treatment, particularly those that are nonpharmacologic.1 Furthermore, these 
challenges are compounded for patients experiencing comorbid depression, who may need 
additional structure and support to maintain a treatment plan.9-12 In light of these challenges, the 
National Academy of Medicine recognizes the need to optimize adherence in pain management, 
especially for behavioral approaches such as NPTs.1 Our own work has highlighted the integral 
role of coaching to help patients in their daily efforts to manage pain. In multiple studies, 
including studies of patients with comorbid pain and depression, patients have noted that such 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 6 of 27 support is essential to their adherence to treatment regimens: coaching provides accountability 
toward goals and pain management activities, as well as encouragement to keep going when 
motivation is low.9, 68- 71  Given the unique challenges associated with NPT uptake, which are 
compounded for minoritized patients with comorbid depression, additional support is needed to enhance the potency of the DA. Individual, tailored coaching can serve to (1) overcome initial  
barriers to NPT use, in conjunction with the DA; and (2) improve NPT adherence.  
 
Despite guidelines that encourage NPTs as first -line treatments, challenges to NPT use and 
adherence persist. These challenges are particularly resonant for minoritized patients with depression. This is the first study to tailor a patient -centered approach to empower Black 
patients with comorbid pain and depression to use and benefit from NPTs. EQUIPD’s approach 
takes an evidence- based tool – decision aid – pairs it with motivational coaching, and applies it 
to the problem of chronic pain. This is innovative for several reasons. First, although DAs are 
typically used in the context of one- time decisions, such as cancer treatment,
56 DAs contain 
relevant features that have largely been overlooked in chronic pain. DAs facilitate side- by-side 
comparison of different options. This is essential for NPTs because they vary widely in delivery and what is expected of patients —including time c ommitment, flexibility, and delivery mode 
(self- versus provider -delivered). When patients are not given the opportunity to weigh these 
different features against what they prioritize as important —and what they are realistically able 
to accomplish —they are  more likely to discontinue treatment. Second, DAs are typically 
designed only for use in a provider visit. This is a major constraint on their impact. By contrast, 
EQUIPD uses a DA in an innovative way —with a coach—who takes the time to explore the 
partic ulars of different NPTs and how they align with a patient’s values and lifestyle. Third, a 
DA-coaching model is novel and may be especially effective for patients with depressive 
symptoms. By using the DA with a motivational interviewing style, coaches hel p patients find 
treatments that best match their goals and lifestyle and work with them to build the self -efficacy 
to self -manage and adhere to treatment —thereby helping to overcome pain management 
barriers related to depression and ultimately leading to improved outcomes.  
 
Project Overview.  This is phase 1 of a two -phase, 5 -year project with the overarching goal 
of testing a decision aid/coaching intervention, tailored to Black patients with comorbid chronic 
pain and depression, to encourage use of and adherence to NPTs. Guided by the chronic care 
model and a heuristic model of multi -level mechanisms of racial injustice in pain outcomes, we 
begin by centering at the intrapersonal and interpersonal levels, while laying the groundwork for 
further intervention at the structural (i.e., clinic/healthcare system) level through subsequent 
system- wide implementation. Toward this end, we propose a Hybrid Type 1 trial
99 , which will 
test for effectiveness while assessing factors relevant for system -wide implementation in a 
subsequent project.  
Conceptual Frameworks . O ur overall approach is guided by a heuristic model of multi -level 
mechanisms of racial injustice (Figure 1).53 This model posits that injustice at the cultural, 
structural, interpersonal, and intrapersonal levels interact, thereby creating and maintaining 
racialized pain experiences and outcomes. As a result, intervention at multiple levels is needed 
to target the  compounding injustices experienced by minoritized individuals. EQUIPD was 
developed with these levels in mind. EQUIPD begins at the intrapersonal and interpersonal 
levels, while laying the groundwork for moving into the structural level (i.e., clinic and healthcare 
system) as we make plans for system -wide implementation to change clinical practice.  
Figure 1  
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 7 of 27 The 
intervention itself 
is guided by the Chronic Care 
Model  (Figure 2), 
which emphasizes productive 
interactions 
between patients and providers 
within the larger 
context of the 
health system and community. Of particular relevance is collaborative management , which 
takes place when patients and providers have productive relationships, well -articulated goals, 
and shared understandings of their roles.100 With collaborative care, patients and providers work 
together through sharing information and decisions, to find treatments best aligned with patients’ 
needs and goals. This requires an informed, activated patient , who is aware of options, asks 
questions, and gives information that reflects their priorities.100, 101 The emphasis on patients’ 
roles in collaborative management is supported by evidence that patients who are informed and engaged are better equipped to participate in treatment decisions,
87, 102 which leads to greater 
adherence and better patient outcomes .103 EQUIPD, with its focus on providing patients with 
tools for optimal NPT use, will help patients with chronic pain and depression to become better informed about NPT options and benefits, align these options with their goals, discuss with providers, and ul timately adhere to a mutually agreed upon NPT plan.  
The EQUIPD Intervention . The
  
EQUIPD intervention includes two elements: (1) individual coaching and (2) 
a decision aid (DA) focused on NPTs for 
chronic pain
. 
Coaching.  
Timing . The EQUIPD intervention 
consists of four sessions, lasting about 
30-45 minutes, over approximately 12 
weeks. Three sessions occur before the 
patient’s next scheduled PCP visit; the final session occurs after the visit. About 
3 months  (+/- 1 month)  before their next 
scheduled PCP visit, patients will be enrolled, and those randomized to the intervention will be scheduled for their 
first coaching session. Table 1 
summarizes the approximate timing and content of each session.  Notably, flexibility is built into 
the coaching intervention to allow for potential missed sessions to be made up. In addition, coaches will schedule sessions on a more compressed schedule or combine content from 
sessions with the patient ’s permission if sessions are missed. Attendance at all sessions will be 
tracked, and, if warranted, considered in further analysis (e.g., examining a dose effect within the intervention group). All efforts will be made to cover all content; however, i f missing a 
session or  part of a session is  unavoidable, it will be  documented and considered when 
examining dose effects within the intervention group.  
Figure 2 

IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 8 of 27  
Table 1. EQUIPD  Intervention Sessions  
 
Content . EQUIPD coaching is manualized and has been iteratively refined with local pilot 
funding. In these sessions, coaches elicit goals and priorities; discuss specific NPT options, including what is expected of patients; help patients align these options with their 
goals/priorities; and ultimately prepare patients for decision- making and long- term adherence. 
By eliciting and discussing what is important to patients, coaches can tailor the content and approach for each patient, allowing for variations in pain management goals, preferences, the 
impact of depression on pain and pain management, and sociocultural factors. The EQUIPD 
intervention uses a motivational interviewing (MI) approach in recognition that patients likely experience ambivalence about modifying their current treatment plan.
104 MI techniques are 
associated with better treatment adherence among patients with chronic pain and reduced use of a variety of substances.
105-107 This approach may be especially beneficial for patients 
suffering from comorbid depression, given that they may be more ambivalent about modifying 
their treatment plan and may require additional motivation and encouragement to adhere to a 
new plan.68 Specifically, coaches will (1) express empathy; (2) foster patient self -efficacy; (3) 
explore resistance to change; (4) discover discrepancies between patients’ current treatment plan and their stated values, goals, and preferences; (5) using the DA, help patients identify 
their goals and values and compare how different NPTs align with these goals/values; (6) using the DA, prepare the patient to discuss NPT preferences in the upcoming PCP visit (including role play); and, after the visit, (7) debrief about the PCP appointment and discuss treatment 
decisions; and (8) provide motivation and encouragement to adhere to the NPT plan, including Session 1 - Orientation (Build empathy, motivation, & look for discrepancies)  Week 1  
1.  Ask patient  how pain is problematic in life  (i.e., interferes with daily activities and things patient finds important) . 
2.  Understand current treatments  and how they help.  
3.  Identify patient’s  values and goals related to pain treatment  & interference with function (including Section 1 & 2 
of Decision Aid) —to build empathy and explore discrepancies between values and current treatments . 
Session 2 - Review  Life & Treatment Goals , Patient Values. Discuss  Treatment 
Options and Expectancies (Look for discrepancies, enhance motivation & self -
efficacy)  Week 3  
1. Discuss different treatments, including pharmacological treatments and NPTs.  
2. Introduce and begin discussing Section 3 of Decision Aid, which shows side -by-side comparison of 4 NPTs 
available at Eskenazi  (study site).  
3. In this context, discuss expectancies for NPTs (e.g., may take longer to work than analgesics). Focus on 
exploring patients’  perspectives (empathy), looking for unmet needs (discrepancy), and helping patient identify  
ways to align treatment with their values, goals, and preferences (self -efficacy and motivation).  
4. Ensure primary care appointment is scheduled.  
Session 3 - Work on Connecting Goals and Values to Treatment Options and 
Preparing Patients to Discuss Preferences with Primary Care Provider (PCP)  Week 5  
1. Revisit goals and NPT options.  
2. Discuss what options patients  are leaning toward and why (Decision Aid Section 4).  
3. Prepare patient  to discuss NPT preferences with provider (Section 5: Questions for PCP). 
4. Practice/role play of provider appointment . 
5. Have patients take a photo of the DA.  
PCP Appointmen t Week s 5-10 
Session 4 - Reinforcement, Motivation, Self -Efficacy, Adherence  Week s 10-12 
1. Review patient goals and treatment preferences.  
2. Discuss recent PCP visit, including treatment decisions (using Section 6 of Decision Aid).  
3. Provide motivation and encouragement to stick with NPT plan, including reminding patient that NPTs may take 
more time.  
     OR  
4. If NPT was not chosen, revisit goals, values, current treatments, barriers and discrepancies between current 
treatment and values and goals.  
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 9 of 27 reminding patients that NPTs often take time to work. If an NPT was not chosen, the coach 
revisits goals, values, current treatments, and barriers to NPT use, and encourages patients to 
continue these conversations with their PCP. This encouragement may be particularly effective for these patients, given that  evidence shows that patients who receive recommendations for 
behavioral approaches to chronic pain are more likely to be interested in trying these 
approaches.
34 
The DA is integrated into the first three coaching sessions in preparation for their primary 
care visit. After Session 3, the patient will attend their scheduled primary care visit. In addition to the preparation through coaching, we will also use the foll owing strategies to encourage patients 
to bring and use their DA: (1) a research assistant will attempt to call patients the day before 
their visit to remind them to bring their DA (including a copy for the PCP) to the visit; and (2) in Session 3, coaches will ask patients to take a photo with their phones of the entire DA, as a 
backup, since they would be unlikely to attend the visit without their phone. After this visit, 
Session 4 will take place. In this session, the coach reviews patient goals and treat ment 
preferences, and discusses what occurred during the patient’s appointment. The coach will also 
provide motivation and encouragement to stick with the NPT plan or encourage patients to 
continue considering NPTs if one was not chosen in their PCP visit.   
Delivery .
 Consistent with many of our other studies with patients with pain, all sessions 
will be delivered by phone. Consented p atients  deemed eligible and assigned to the intervention 
group will receive two copies of the DA (one to give to their PCP)  after they complete the 
baseline assessment s. Consented patients deemed eligible and assigned to the wait -list control 
group will receive the DA after the final assessment at 6 months. See section 2.0, Aim 1.3 for more  information.  
 T
able 2. EQUIPD Decision Aid  
Decision Aid Section  Content  
1. What is Important to 
You Guides patients through important reasons (goals) related to improving 
their pain (e.g., better sleep, ability to work).  
2. What Matters Most to 
You about Choosing a 
Treatment?  Patients answer questions about their priorities in choosing a treatment 
(e.g., how flexible their schedules are, whether they prefer to work on their own, with a provider, or in a group) to further help them align treatment (s) 
with their goals and lifestyles.  
3. Get the Facts  Side-by-side comparison of 4 NPTs available at Eskenazi Health, the study 
site (walking, chiropractic treatment, physical therapy, and cognitive-behavioral therapy)  to see potential pros and cons, and what is expected of 
them for each treatment.  
4. Where are You 
Leaning Now?  Lists all 4 NPTs, with spaces for additional treatments patients may write in, 
and asks patients to indicate on a continuum whether they are leaning toward, against, or are undecided on each treatment. Space is included 
after each treatment for them to not e reasons for their inclinations.  
5. What Questions Do 
You Have for Your 
Doctor ? Provides space for questions related to each treatment option (plus space 
for additional treatments) that they can bring to their visit.  
6. Making the 
Decision/Plan with Your 
Doctor  Provides space for patients to write down the specific treatment plan 
decided upon, including when, where, how long, and how often they will 
engage in the treatment, and plans for follow -up. 
 
Decision Aid (DA) . According to the International Patient Decision Aids Standards (IPDAS) 
Collaboration, DAs are evidence- based tools that prepare patients to make informed, values -
based decisions with their providers.54 According to IPDAS, DAs (1) explicitly state the decision 
to be considered; (2) provide evidence- based information about treatment options; and (3) help 
patients to recognize the values -sensitive nature of the decision to help them align their values 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 10  of 27 with treatments being considered.54 The EQUIPD DA accomplishes this in 6 sections (Table 2) 
and is administered in a simple paper -and-pencil format with the coach.  
 D A Content and Development . Our DA was developed in consultation with research experts 
in chronic pain and treatment decision- making, clinical experts in chronic pain (including our 
grant Co-Is), and patients. In addition, we consulted systematic reviews and evidence- based 
practice guidelines. While numerous NPTs exist, it is not possible to include all potential options. 
Consequently, we focused on NPTs with high- quality evidence of safety  and effectiveness that 
are readily available (at the study site in particular). We also sought to include a variety of 
options. For example, we chose both provider -delivered (e.g., chiropractic) and self -delivered 
(e.g., walking) approaches to accommodate different patient preferences. We also included more traditional NPT approaches (physical therapy) and psychological approaches (cognitive-
behavioral therapy) to accommodate a variety of preferences. We did not include some 
evidence- based complementary and integrative health therapies, such as acupuncture and 
yoga, as they are not yet widely available at Eskenazi Health (study site), but they can easily be added as availability changes.  
Moreover, choices do not have to be confined to the options on the DA. The purpose of a 
D
A is not to limit options, but to facilitate discussions about treatments that are grounded in 
patients’ goals and values, helping “clinicians and patients come to quality decisions…and 
taking into account the potential trade- offs” of different options —even if some of these options 
are not included on the DA.56 That is why there is space on the DA for patient questions and 
consideration of other NPT options. Also of note, the DA is flexible. Treatment options can be modified according to (1) emerging evidence and (2) the needs/resources of individual health 
systems (in an implementation scenario), without changing the overall structure of the DA. This 
is important because it is likely that evidence will change as research on NPTs continues, and access to NPTs continues to expand.  
Supporting Data. Coaching: Thus far, through local pilot funding, we have iteratively 
developed and refined the coaching manual. We also have good evidence of adherence to coaching sessions, based on our COOPERATE study. Although COOPERATE’s coaching 
content was different, the study was conducted with 250 Black patients with chronic pain 
(almost half of whom had at least moderate depression) using 6 telephone- delivered coaching 
sessions. 85% of patients attended the majority of sessions, providing preliminary evidence that such coaching is feasible and acceptable. Aim 1.3 will facilitate further testing of this new 
coaching model for Black patients with comorbid depression.  
Decision Aid : 
 We have 3 aspects of preliminary data from patients for the DA. The first  
involved obtaining and incorporating feedback from a 12- member Patient Advisory Board, half 
of whom are from minoritized groups. In the next , we pilot tested the revised DA with 12 Black 
patients, eliciting additional feedback and making changes as appropriate. Lastly, we conducted 
a larger pilot study (N=30, 21 of whom are Black) at the study site (Eskenazi). In this sample, 91% indicated that the EQUIPD DA made them think more about using one of the listed NPTs; 
93% said they were likely or very likely t o talk about one of the NPTs with their doctor; and 89% 
thought the DA would be helpful for other people with pain. Qualitatively, patients said: “This is a very good tool to identify and refine goals and give the patient vocabulary to speak to their 
doctor.” “It gives the patient power. It’s empowering.” “It gives you a plan for discussing chronic 
pain treatment with your doctor.” “This [decision aid] gives you hope—and actual solutions.” This preliminary work demonstrates high patient enthusiasm for the D A, indicating feasibility of 
use and acceptability of content/format. Our next step, which will be accomplished in Aim 1.2, is to elicit PCPs’ perspectives on the DA, including feasibility and acceptability of use in clinic appointments and adaptation where needed before the pilot RCT. 
PLANNING (Phase 1, Years 1 -2
 ). In preparation for a future fully powered  clinical trial 
(phase 2) , we have three specific aims. Each aim and associated activities are described below.  
 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 11  of 27 2.0 Specific Aims, Study Design, Recruitment, Eligibility  
 
AIM 1.1 :  Establish an engagement panel comprised of Black patients with lived 
experiences of chronic pain and depression to provide consultation . The objective of our 
engagement plan is to create a partnership between our team and patients with lived 
experiences of racialized pain treatment and depressive symptoms. This will ensure that our 
research is relevant to the needs of these individuals and will maximize the likelihood of positive 
outcomes. This panel will be formed during the beginning of the proj ect, with plans to meet 
approximately quarterly .  
Recruitment . W e will work with our consultant , Dr. Robles  (or delegate (s)), who is  the clinic chief 
at one of the Eskenazi Primary Care Clinics, to identify Black Eskenazi Primary Care patients 
with chronic pain and depressive symptoms  to serve on this panel  for our research team to 
recruit . Dr. Robles will facilitate recommendations from primary care clinicians  throughout the 
health system. We have used a similar approach in prior studies. Eskenazi primary care 
patient s who previously participated in a pain study with Dr. Matthias or other faculty research 
personnel may also be contacted for recruitment. We aim to recruit up to 6 patients  (up to 12 
throughout the study to allow for replacements in case of withdrawals)  to partner with us as 
stakeholders throughout our project.  
Engagement Panel Me etings . Members of the research team will meet with Patient 
Engagement Panel members up to 4 times annually for a total of up to 8 meetings  during this 
study.  Meetings may be held in person, by phone, or virtually depending on group preference 
and pandemic protocols  and will last up to 90 minutes each . Meetings may  be recorded (audio 
only if by phone or in person; audio and video if virtually). Recordings will only be used internally by research team members for  those who missed meetings or to help draft  notes from the 
meetings . Meeting materials may be sent to participants by mail or email.  Participants may be 
contacted about scheduling meetings and for reminders of meetings by phone  (including texts),  
email , and/or mail . If patients withdraw (actively or passively), they  may be replaced during the 
study as needed.  
Eligibility  Cr
 iteria  for Engagement Panel Patient Participants. 
Eligible patients must  (verified by self -report): 
• be at least 18 years old,  
• ha ve chronic pain,  
• ha ve depressive symptoms,  
• identif y as Black, and 
• be willing and able to participate in Engagement Panel meetings .  
Compensation . P atient panel members will be paid $ 30 for each meeting attended for a 
potential total of $ 240.  
Collaboration with the Panel . We will elicit the panel’s input on the study’s decision aid and the 
feedback obtained from PCPs on the decision aid (Aim 1.2), including advising on proposed modifications. For our pilot RCT (Aim 1.3), we will consult with the panel on (1) recruitment 
strategies, including advertising materials, mode of contact (e.g., mail , email), and language 
describing the study; (2) data collection materials, including appropriateness of questionnaire 
items and length; (3) intervention materials (e.g., welcome material,  decision aid); and (4) 
potential future modifications for the follow -up fully powered trial .  
 
AIM 1.2 :
 Elicit primary care providers’ (PCPs) perspectives on the EQUIPD decision aid 
content and structure to optimize its use in PCP appointments . We will recruit up to 15 
PCPs to obtain their opinions on the DA. This sample size is consistent with published 
recommendations on qualitative sampling for a relatively homogeneous group (PCPs),108 as well 
as our team’s experience. In these  one-time interviews, we will use a semi- structured interview 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 12  of 27 protocol  for individual interviews or  focus groups  to elicit feedback on the DA, including content, 
structure, and use in clinic visits. Individual interviews or focus groups may be completed by 
phone, virtually, or in person and will be recorded. We expect the interview or focus group to last up to 30  minutes. We will conduct a rapid qualitative analysis with interview/focus group 
data to facilitate timely revisions in preparation for the pilot trial.
109 Toward this end, the analytic 
team (comprised of research team members) will review each interview or focus group 
transcript  and enter notes into a data matrix. The matrix columns will correspond to interview 
questions and elements of the DA. Each column will be comprised of summary points from each 
interview. We will seek input from our patient advisory panel  during this process, particularly as 
we finalize the DA.  
Recruitment .  We will work with our consultant, Dr. Robles (or delegate(s)), who is the clinic chief 
at one of the Eskenazi Primary Care Clinics, to identify potential participants for our research 
team to recruit.  Eligibility Criteria for PCP  Qu
 alitative Interview Participants. 
Eligible PCPs must:  
• be a Primary Care Provider  (prescriber), and  
• work in an Eskenazi Health Primary Care Clinic . 
Compensation . P articipating PCPs  be paid $150 for participating in an interview or focus group.  
 
AIM 1.3 Conduct a 2 -a rm pilot randomized controlled trial (RCT; N= 40) to test and refine 
data extraction, recruitment, intervention delivery, and data collection protocols.  
Overview of Study Design.  This 2 -arm pilot trial will aim to  enroll  up to  40 Black patients with 
comorbid chronic musculoskeletal pain and depression in primary care from an urban safety -net 
health system (Eskenazi)  with the end goal of at least 30 patients completing the trial . After the 
baseline assessment, patients randomized to the intervention will be asked to participate in 4 
coaching sessions over approximately 12 weeks. See Coaching Section  and Table 1. Sessions 
will use Motivational Interviewing principles to foster openness to NPTs and self -efficacy by 
helping patients identify their goals and priorities, understand their NPT options, prepare them to 
discuss and choose options with their primary care providers (PCPs), and reinforce these 
choices to foster maintenance of these changes (Table 1). DA contents will be integrated into 
these sessions (Table 2), which will facilitate discussion of these options with their PCP. Ideally, 
the first 3 sessions  will take place prior to the patient’s next scheduled PCP visit  with the final 
session occur ring after this PCP visit. Assessments will be conducted at baseline, 3 months 
(i.e., after completing the final coaching session), and 6 months.  Coaching session and PCP 
visit attendance will be tracked; participants will not be withdrawn for non -attendance  and 
missing  either is  not considered to be a protocol deviation. Participants may be contacted about 
scheduling/completing  assessments and/or coaching sessions and for reminders by phone 
(including texts), email, and/or mail.  
Wait-List Control Group. Patients randomized to wait -lis t control will receive usual care  (in 
addition to study  assessments at baseline, 3 months, and 6 months) . After completing the final 
assessment, they will then be given the DA along with a 20- minute coaching session to walk 
them through it  (patients may decline the  DA and/or  coaching session or schedule for a future 
time) . We are using this approach so that all patients have an opportunity to benefit from 
participation.  
Coach Training.  C oaches have at least a Bachelor’s degree in psychology or related field. 
Training will involve didactics, demonstrations, and role- plays. All intervention and control 
sessions will be audio -recorded with participants’ permission , and a random subset reviewed for 
fidelity and quality control. During individual and group supervision, adherence scores and fidelity will be discussed.  
Intervention Fidelity . We
  will use treatment fidelity strategies consistent with the NIH 
Behavior Change Consortium recommendations,110 which include (1) using standardized 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 13  of 27 intervention protocols and training; (2) monitoring audio- recorded sessions; (3) using coach 
adherence checklists to track protocol deviations; and (4) holding regular meetings to address 
problems or concerns. Although there are no clear guidelines on the optimal level of adherence, 80% integrity typically constitutes high fidelity.
111-114 Thus, we will set a minimum threshold of 
80% on the coach adherence checklists used to evaluate the audio- recorded sessions (where 
adherence is the ratio of the number of required topics discussed to the total number of session topics). Ongoing corrective feedback will be provided, as needed, during supervision to maintain 
fidelity.  
Participant Recruitment. Similar to our other studies at Eskenazi, including Dr. Matthias’ 
NIDA -funded R21, eligible patients will be identified by Regenstrief Institute’s Data Core, which 
has agreements with Eskenazi to access patient data for research. Eskenazi PCPs may also 
refer patients who may be eligible to contact the study team or may provide the study team with  
patient  referrals . Patients will be mailed or emailed a letter explaining the study, followed by a 
phone call approximately one week later .  
Eligibility  Cr iteria  for Patient Pilot RCT .  
Eligible patients must : 
• have musculoskeletal pain in the low back, cervical spine, or extremities (hip, knee, 
shoulder) for ≥3 months,  
• have at least moderate pain intensity  and interference with function, defined by a 
score ≥4 (possible range: 0- 10) on the PEG, a 3- item measure of pain intensity, 
interference with enjoyment of life, and interference with general activity,115  
• have at least mild depression, defined as PHQ -8 score ≥ 5,  
• identify as Black,  
• have consistent access to a telephone,  
• indicate openness to new pain treatments, and  
• have a scheduled appointment with their PCP in the next  approximate 2- 4 months  
Patients are excluded : 
• if previously participated in Dr. Mat thias’ past pilot study (IRB #12885) or 
participation as a Patient Engagement Panel member  for this project  (Aim 1.1), 
• if medical records indicate severe medical conditions likely precluding participation 
(e.g., NY Heart Association Class III or IV heart failure), or  
• if the eligibility screener reveals (1) active suicidal ideation, or (2) severe 
hearing/speech or cognitive impairment.  
Feasibility of Recruitment . A ccording to a data pull by Regenstrief Data Core, Eskenazi has 
approximately 6,500 patients with chronic musculoskeletal pain (identified by ICD codes from 
our prior work), over half of whom (>4,000) are Black. Given that 30- 50% of chronic pain is 
accompa nied by depressive symptoms,5 we have a pool of 1,200- 2,000 potential participants.  
Participant Compensation.  P articipants will be paid $30 for each assessment completed 
(baseline, 3 and 6 months), for a possible total of $90.  
 
3
.0 Measures  
 
Measures  are patient -reported, widely used in pain studies, and brief, creating low burden. 
They are also consistent with IMMPACT (Initiative on Methods, Measurement, and Pain 
Assessment in Clinical Trials) recommendations116 for key outcome domains in chronic pain 
trials. The baseline assessment will also gather socio- demographic data and review the 
patient’s history, particularly current and past pain treatments. Baseline assessments will be 
conducted prior to randomization. Outcomes will be assessed at baseline, approximately 3 
months (intermediate effects) and approximately 6 months (primary endpoint). Six months is our 
primary endpoint because NPTs typically take time to work.1, 13 Based on our prior studies, we 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 14  of 27 estimate the screening and baseline assessment s to take about 1 hour and 3 and 6 month 
assessments  to take  about  45 minutes.  
 
Pain Interference (Primary Outcome)  w ill be measured with the Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) 
Interference Scale, which is recommended for pain studies116 and has been validated in primary 
care.117 The pain interference score averages seven ratings, 0 (does not interfere) to 10 
(interferes completely), of interference with general activity, mood, walking ability, normal work, 
relations with other people, sleep, and enjoyment of life. The BPI is highly responsive to change 
in clinical trials118 and has strong internal consistency (Cronbach’s α = 0.77).117 
Satisfaction wi th the  coaching sessions and coach will be measured by asking two 
satisfaction questions during the 3- month assessment (coaching group only).  
Pain Self -Efficacy  w ill be measured using the P ain Self-Efficacy Questionnaire (PSEQ) . The 
PSEQ  is a 10 -item questionnaire developed to assess the confidence people with ongoing pain 
have in performing activities while in pain.   
Pain Intensity  wi ll be measured with the Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) Intensity Scale which has 
4 items with ratings from 0 (no pain) to 10 (pain as bad as you can imagine). 
Depression (S econdary Outcome)  will be measured with the PHQ -8,119 a widely -used, 
validated 8- item measure of depression severity. Notably, improvements in pain are associated 
with similar improvements in depression.6  
Anxiety  (Secondary Outcome)  w ill be measured with the GAD -7,120 which has demonstrated 
good reliability and validity.  
Pain catastrophizing  (S econdary Outcome)  will be measured with the Pain Catastrophizing 
Scale, a 13 -item scale that assesses catastrophizing— a cognitive- emotional factor that predicts 
poor treatment response. Validation studies support its criterion, concurrent, and discriminant 
validity.121  
Patient engagement  (S econdary Outcome)  will be measured with the 12 -item Altarum 
Consumer Engagement (ACE) Measure,122 which has 3 subscales: 1) commitment to manage 
one’s health, 2) informed choice, and 3) confidence to participate in treatment decisions. Items 
are assessed on a 5- point Likert scale. The ACE is internally consistent and has demonstrated 
convergent, predictive, and criterion validity.  
NPT Use  (Secondary Outcome).  W e will use the NSCAP (Use of Nonpharmacological and 
Self-Care Approaches) to assess NPT use. This measure was developed by the NIH/DoD/VA 
Pain Management Collaboratory, comprised of national experts on NPTs and pain; two EQUIPD 
Co-Is (Taylor and Burgess)  are members. The NSCAP asks about 9 NPT modalities, including 
the 4 that are in our DA, and assesses details of use such as frequency, location/source of 
service, and patients’ judgments of effectiveness. Space is also provided for other NPTs that 
are used but not listed. The number of modalities for which patients answer “yes” will be 
summed for descriptive purposes .  
Tobacco, alcohol, and drug use, as well as prescription medication misuse  in the last year 
will be assessed using the 4- item screening tool, Tobacco, Alcohol, Prescription medications, 
and other Substance (TAPS) measure.  
Communication self -effi cacy (Secondary Outcome)  will be measured with the Perceived 
Efficacy in Patient -Physician Interactions Scale (PEPPI -5), a 5- item scale that measures 
patients’ self -efficacy in obtaining medical information and getting their most important health 
concern discussed in a clinic visit.  
Shared decision making (S econdary Outcome)  will be measured with C ollaboRATE, a 3-
item measure assessing provider effort from the patient’s perspective to engage in shared-
decision making during a recent appointment.  
Working Alliance (S econdary Outcome) . The Working Alliance Inventory (WAI) Client Short 
Form assesses patient -provider agreement on treatment goals, collaboration to achieve these 
goals, and degree of emotional bond (liking and trust) between patients and providers. The WAI 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 15  of 27 has shown high reliability (α > .90 for WAI total) and demonstrated convergent, discriminant, 
concurrent, and predictive validity.139, 140, 
Perceived Discrimination .  We will measure perceived discrimination in healthcare settings 
with the 7- item “Perceived Discrimination in Healthcare” Scale.42 Participants are asked, “When 
getting healthcare, how often do the following things happen to you because of your race or color?” Sample items include “You are treated with less respect than other people,” and “You feel like a doctor or nurse is not listening to what you were saying.” Response categories are Never, Rarely, Sometimes, Most of the Time, and Always. This measure has shown good reliability (Cronbach’s α=.89).
141  
Physical functioning will be  assessed with the PROMIS Physical Function Short Form 6b  
which assesses universal physical functioning with a 6- item, self -report scale.  
Sleep disturbance wi ll be measured with the PROMIS Sleep Disturbance Short Form and 
sleep duration will be measured by asking about the number of hours and minutes of actual 
sleep in the last month.   
Patient -reported impression of change w ill be measured using the Patient Global Impression 
of Change ( PGIC ). This one- item measure reflects a patient’s perception of change after the 
start of an intervention.  
Opioid use wi ll be assessed for enrolled patients taking prescribed opioids. Regenstrief  
Institute’s  Data Core will extract opioid prescriptions from patients’ medical records, and daily 
doses will be described as morphine- milligram equivalent (MME), calculated with the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention’s conversion tables.142 Average daily doses will be 
calculated within 30- day windows. For each opioid prescribed within each window, the dose in 
MME will be multiplied by the number of pills dispensed, then divided by the number of days supplied. The average daily dose for each window will be the sum of the daily doses for all opioids dispensed during the window.  
 
4.
0 Data Analysis Plan  
 
Data Analysis for Pilot RCT. Descriptive statistics such as proportions and 95% CIs will be 
estimated to assess milestones. Only descriptive statistics (N, mean, SD, median, minimum, 
and maximum or frequency and percent) will be estimated by study group and timepoint. This 
will allow us to test coding of instrument s. 
 
5.0 Study Calendar  
 
 Screening  Baseline  Coaching 
Sessions 1 -3 
over 
approximately 5 
weeks  Coaching 
Session 4 at 
approximately 
10-12 weeks  3 Month  
Visit^  6 Month  
Visit^  
Eligibility Checklist  X         
Informed Consent and 
Authorization   X         
Contact Information  X         
Demographics   X     
BPI (Interference + 
Intensity Scales)   X   X X 
Satisfaction^^      X  
PSEQ   X   X X 
PHQ -8   X    X X 
GAD -7   X    X X 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 16  of 27 Pain Catastrophizing 
Scale    X    X X 
ACE Measure    X    X X 
NSCAP    X    X X 
TAPS  X   X X 
WAI  X   X X 
PEPPI -5  X   X X 
CollaboRATE   X   X X 
Perceived 
Discrimination in 
Healthcare     X      
PROMIS Physical 
Function Shor t Form   X   X X 
PROMIS Sleep 
Disturbance Short Form 
+ Sleep Duration   X   X X 
PGIC      X X 
Intervention*   X X   
*For participants randomized to the  intervention. Ideally, PCP visit  (non-research)  to occur between coaching sessions 3 
and 4.   
^Three- month a ssessments may occur at 10 weeks  – 4 months so long as it is after coaching session 4. Six -month 
assessments may occur at 5 -7 months (+/- 1 month).  
^^For participants randomized to the intervention (coaching group).  
 
6.0 Reportable Events  
We do not anticipate more than minimal risk to subjects who participate in this study and 
adverse events will not be systematically collected from participants.  If a research team member 
becomes aware of any adverse events possibly related to study procedures, they will be assessed and reported to the Indiana University (IU) IRB according to the IU Standard 
Operating Procedures for Research Involving Human Subjects  and to the study sponsor as 
required. Any unanticipated problems involving risk to participants or others will also be reported 
according to the IU Standard Operating Procedures for Research Involving Human Subjects.  
Suicidal Ideation. Participants will be screened for thoughts of suicidal ideation during 
assessment of eligibility to participate in the study by asking, “Over the last two weeks, have you thought that you would be better off dead or that you want to hurt yourself in some way?” If the participant responds with yes, the assessment continues with the P4 Suicidal Ideation Screener  
to assess risk level . 
• Based on the participant’s responses to this interview, they are characterized as: low to minimal suicidal risk or possible suicidal risk.  
o For possible suicide risk, the RA will provide the potential participant the Suicide 
Prevention Lifeline phone number as well as other relevant phone numbers (e.g., Suicide and Crisis Lifeline, Eskenazi Mental Health Emergency Line) and then 
will discuss with one of our two investigators who are licensed clinical 
psychologists ( Hirsh , Rand)  who will contact the subject and/or  facilitate follow- up 
with their primary care or mental health provider as appropriate.  
 Such a participant, per exclusion criteria, would then be ineligible for 
study participation.   
o For low to minimal suicidal risk, participants are likely eligible to participate.  
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 17  of 27 Study coaches will have regular contact with enrolled subjects during the active (intervention) 
phase of the study. The PI and 2 co- investigators (Hirsh and Rand) will meet approximately 
monthly with study coaches during this time and will discuss any problems or concerns that 
arise and how to address them —this will include continued training to implement safety 
protocols as necessary. If any immediate concerns arise during the coaching sessions, coaches 
will contact the PI along with Dr. Hirsh and/or Dr.  Rand, who will be available to address any 
instances of worsening mental health or suicidality. In addition, RAs will be in contact with 
subjects for screening/ baseline, 3-, and 6- month assessments and will report concerns to the 
project manager  and/or PI . If safety concerns arise (e.g., mention of self -harm or suicidality),  Dr. 
Hirsh and/or Rand  will be consulted and will contact the subject and/or  facilitate follow- up with 
their primary care or mental health provider as appropriate. All personnel will be trained in study suicide  assessment and referral  protocols.  
 
7.0 Data Safety Monitoring  
 
We will use an Independent Safety Monitor (ISM), defined as a physician, nurse, or other 
appropriate expert who is independent of the study and available in real time to review and recommend appropriate action regarding adverse events and other safety issu es. This role will 
be filled by Dr. Matthew Bair, M.D., M.S.,  who is a Professor of Medicine at Indiana University 
School of Medicine and Research Scientist at the Roudebush VA Medical Center. He is a primary care physician, general internist, and pain researcher who has led multiple clinical trials 
ranging from opioid management to use of nonpharmacological pain strategies  
 Monitoring Schedule: Investigators will conduct continuous review of data and subject 
safety. Approximate quarterly review meetings with the PI, Project Manager (PM), grant co-
Investigators  as available and appropriate, and ISM will take place during the pilot RCT while 
subjects are active in the intervention. Meeting summaries will be documented with notes and 
will include a review of data, number of subjects enrolled, and number of subjects who have 
completed the study.  
Requirements/conformance with informed consent documents:  In preparation for 
these quarterly review meetings, the PM or delegate will randomly select study identification codes for approximately 5% of enrolled subjects to review . This review will include examining 
consent documentation for completion and accuracy, as well as ensuring all study materials are 
properly and securely stored (see data monitoring plan below).  
 8.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
Participants may withdraw from the study at any time  and may  communicate their intent to 
withdraw to the study team either verbally (in person, over the phone) or in writing. An attempt may be made to obtain their permission to complete any remaining assessments. Once the 
study team has been informed by the participant that they wish to withdraw  (either  just from the 
intervention or from the study entirely) , a note will be made in the participant’s study record. If 
the participant  chooses to withdraw from the study entirely, no further data will be c ollected.  All 
data collected from the participant prior to their withdrawal from the study may continue to be used and stored by the study team.  
 
9.0 Data Management  and Confidentiality  
 All documentation will be stored on a secure university server , on Regenstrief’s secure network 
drive,  or locked file cabinets behind locked doors. All electronic databases housing subject data 
will be password -protected with access limited to approved study personnel only. Identifying 
information will be separated from all data provided by subjects  used in analysis  through a 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 18  of 27 unique subject identification code assigned by study personnel  with the linking file only 
accessible to research team members . 
All data entry will be done by trained personnel. Electronic databases will be constructed to 
include forms for data entry that mirror paper  or computer -based  questionnaires and have 
restricted field ranges and values to prevent errors as much as possible. In addition, quality of 
data entry will be monitored by the PM, who will attempt to ensure complete and accurate data 
is entered while  addressing any potential interview or data entry problems promptly . The study 
statistician or delegate will periodically generate reports for the entire dataset to identify outliers, 
missing data, or other potential proble ms. All data will be imported into statistical analysis 
package (e.g., SAS, SPSS) data sets for analysis. Analyses will include only summaries of data; 
personal identifiers will be omitted.  
 A data manager and/or delegate will create and maintain all databases. The data manager , PM, 
and RAs, supervised by the PI, will be responsible for data management.  Each subject  will be 
assigned a unique study ID number, and all data will be entered into a database  only accessible 
to research team members , using these unique ID numbers.  
 Primary data will be collected primarily by phone, directly entered and stored electronically in  
REDCap  and/or statistical analysis software packages . If needed, data may also be recorded on 
paper (either by research staff using who interview participants or by a research participant who 
receives a paper copy of the data collection form by mail and sends back in a prepaid envelope) 
and then entered into REDCap and/or statistical analysis software packages.  Enrolled 
participants may also complete REDCap surveys ( invitation only, using unique links) for 3 
and/or -6-month data.  The storage locations will be  backed up automatically  on a frequent and 
regular basis . Manual back -up copies may be made of data collection events (e.g., PDF of 
completed REDCap survey) and stored on a secure university server or Regentrief’s secure 
network drive. Other data sources  may include paper data (recorded by research personnel 
when talking to a subject on the phone) , audio/video  recordings, and data extracted from 
medical records  that will be stored using the study ID numbers in files on a secure university 
server or Regenstrief’s secure network drive. For qualitative data, transcribed interviews and/or focus groups will be checked for accuracy, de- identified, and  may be  entered into  Atlas.ti or 
other appropriate qualitative data analysis program.   
 
10.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
This study will last approximately 2 years.  Records will be retained according to all applicable 
laws and regulations.  
  
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 19  of 27 12.0 References from Grant  
 
1. Medicine Io. Relieving pain in America: a blueprint for transforming prevention, care, 
education, and research . National Academies Press; 2011.  
2. Dahlhamer J, Lucas J, Zelaya C, et al. Prevalence of chronic pain and high- impact 
chronic pain among adults --United States 2016. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report . 
2018;67(36):1001- 6.  
3. Schappert SM. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey:  1989 summary National 
Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat . 1992 1992;13(110)Not in File.  
4. Ohayon MM, Schatzberg AF. Using chronic pain to predict depressive morbidity in the 
general population. Archives of General Psychiatry . 2003;60:39- 47.  
5. Bair MJ, Robinson RL, Katon W, Kroenke K. Depression and pain comorbidity: a 
literature review. Archives of Internal Medicine. 11/10/2003 2003;163(20):2433 -2445. Not in 
File.  
6. Kroenke K, Wu J, Bair MJ, Krebs EE, Damush TM, Tu W. Reciprocal relationship 
between pain and depression: a 12- month longitudinal analysis in primary care. Journal of Pain  
2011;12:964- 73.  
7. Bair MJ, Wu J, Damush TM, Sutherland JM, Kroenke K. Association of depression and 
anxiety alone and in combination with chronic musculoskeletal pain in primary care patients. 
Psychosomatic Medicine70(8):890- 7,. 10/2008 2008;Not in File.  
8. Damush TM, Jingwei W, Bair MJ, Sutherland JM, Kroenke K. Self -management 
practices among primary care patients with musculoskeletal pain and depression. Journal of Behavioral Medicine . 8/2008 2008;31(4):301- 307. Not in File. doi:Article  
9. Bair MJ, Matthias MS, Nyland KA, et al. Barriers and facilitators to chronic pain self -
management: a qualitative study among primary care patients with comorbid musculoskeletal pain and depression. Pain Medicine. 2009 2009;10:1280 -1290. Not in File.  
10. Pang MYC, Eng JJ, Lin KH, Tang PF, Hung C, Wang YH. Association of depression and 
pain interference with disease- management self -efficacy in community -dwelling individuals with 
spinal cord injury. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine. 2009;41(13):1068 -73. 
doi:10.2340/16501977- 0455 
11. Maly MR, Costigan PA, Olney SJ. Determinants of self efficacy for physical tasks in 
people with osteoarthritis. Arthritis and Rheumatism . 2006;15:94 -101.  
12. Middleton J, Tran Y, Craig A. Relationship beween quality of life and self -efficacy in 
persons with spinal cord injuries. Archives of Physical Medicine Rehabilitation. 2007;88:1643 -8.  
13. Kligler B, Bair MJ, Banerjea R, et al. Clinical policy recommendations from the VHA 
State -of-the-Art Conference on Non- Pharmacological Approaches to Chronic Musculoskeletal 
Pain. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2018;33:S16- S23.  
14. Chou R, Deyo RA, Friedly J, et al. Nonpharmacologic therapies for low back pain: a 
systematic review for an American College of Physicians Clinical Practice Guideline. Annals of 
Internal Medicine. 2017;166(7):493- 505.  
15. Noninvasive nonpharmacological treatment for chronic pain: A systematic review . Vol. 
Comparative Effectiveness Review Number 209  
2018. Accessed August 13, 2019.  16. Qaseem A, Wilt TJ, McLean RM, Forciea MA. Clinical Guidelines Committee of the 
American College of Physicians. Noninvasive Treatments for Acute, Subacute, and Chronic Low Back Pain: A Clinical Practice Guidelilne from the American College of Physicians . Annals of 
Internal Medicine. 2017;166(7):514- 30.  
17. Becker WC, DeBar L, Heapy AA. A research agenda for advancing non- pharmacological 
management of chronic musculoskeletal pain: findings from a VHA state- of-the-art conference. 
Journal of General Internal Medicine . 2018;33((Suppl 1)):11- 15.  
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 20  of 27 18. Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Chou R. CDC guideline for prescribing opioids for chronic 
pain--United States, 2016. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report . 2016;65(1):1- 49.  
19. Hoffman BM, Papas RK, Chatkoff DK, Kerns RD. Meta- analysis of psychological 
interventions for chronic low back pain. Health Psychology . 2007;26(1):1- 9. doi:10.1037/0278-
6133.26.1.1  
20. Stewart MO, Karlin BE, Murphy JL, et al. National dissemination of cognitive behavioral 
therapy for chronic pain in veterans: therapist and patient -level outcomes. Clinical Journal of 
Pain. 2015;31:722- 9.  
21. Chiesa A, Serretti A. Mindfulness -based interventions for chronic pain: a systematic 
review of the evidence. Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine . 2011;17(1):83- 93. 
doi:10.1089/acm.2009.0546  
22. Cherkin DC, Sherman KJ, Balderson BH, et al. Effects of mindfulness -based stress 
reduction vs. cognitive behavioral therapy or usual care on back pain and functional limitations 
in adults with chronic low back pain: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA . 2016;315(12):1240- 9. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2016.2323  
23. Fransen M, McConnell S, Harmer AR, Van der Esch, M., Simic M, Bennell KL. Exercise 
for osteoarthritis of the knee. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2015;CD004376 
24. Hayden JA, Van Tulder MW, Tomlinson G. Systematic review: strategies for using 
exercise therapy to improve outcomes in chronic low back pain. Annals of Internal Medicine . 
2005;42( ):7765- 85.  
25. Cramer H, Lauche R, Haller H, Dobos G. A systematic review and meta- analysis of yoga 
for low -back pain. Clinical Journal of Pain . 2013;29(5):450- 60.  
26. Saper RB, Lemaster C, Delitto A, et al. Yoga, physical therapy, or education for chronic 
low back pain: a randomized noninferiority trial. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2017;167:85- 94. 
doi:10.7326/M16- 2579  
37. Weiland LS, Skoetz N, Pilkington K,  
27. MacPherson H, Vertosick EA, Foster NE, et al. The persistence of the effects of 
acupuncture after a course of treatment: a meta- analysis of patients with chronic pain. Pain . 
2017;158(5):784- 93. doi:10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000747  
28. Trinh K, Graham N, Irnich D, Cameron ID, Forget M. Acupuncture for neck disorders. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2016;5(CD004870)  
29. Qaseem A, McLean RM, O'Gurek D, Batur P, Lin K, Kansagara DL. Nonpharmacologic 
and Pharmacologic Management of Acute Pain From Non– Low Back, Musculoskeletal Injuries 
in Adults: A Clinical Guideline From the American College of Physicians and American Academy of Family Physicians. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2020;173:739- 48. 
doi:10.7326/M19- 3602  
30. Committee NIoHIPRC. National Pain Strategy: a comprehensive population health- level 
strategy for pain. Accessed January 13, 2021, http://iprcc.nih.gov/docs/DraftHHSNationalPainStrategy  
31. Giannitrapani KF, Ahluwalia SC, McCaa M, Pisciotta M, Dobscha S, Lorenz KA. Barriers 
to using nonpharmacologic approaches and reducing opioid use in primary care. Pain Medicine. 
2018;19(7):1357- 64. doi:10.1093/pm/pnx220  
32. Donaldson MT, Polusny MA, MacLehose RF, et al. Patterns of conventional and 
complementary non- pharmacological health  practice use by US military veterans: a cross -
sectional latent class analysis. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 
2018;18(246)doi:10.1186/s12906- 018-2313 -7 
33. Becker WC, Dorflinger L, Edmond SN, Islam L, Heapy AA, Fraenkel L. Barriers and 
facilitators to use of non- pharmacological treatments in chronic pain. BMC Family Practice . 
2017;18(41)doi:10.1186/s12875- 017-0608-2 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 21  of 27 34. Brunkow A, Cannon M, Graff FS, Martin JL, Hausmann LR, McAndrew LM. Doctor 
recommendations are related to patient interest and use of behavioral treatment for chronic pain 
and addiction. Journal of Pain. 2020;21(9- 10):979- 87. doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2019.12.008  
35. National Academies of Sciences E, and Medicine Committee on Pain Management and 
Regulatory Strategies to Address Prescription Opioid Abuse. The role of nonpharmacological 
approaches to pain management: proceedings of a workshop. National Academies Press; 2019.  
36. Taylor SL, Hoggatt KJ, Kligler B. Complementary and integrated health approaches: 
what do veterans use and want. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2019;34(7):1192- 9. 
doi:10.1007/s11606- 019-04862 -6 
37. DeBar LL, Elder C, Ritenbaugh C, et al. Acupuncture and chiropractic care for chronic 
pain in an integrated health plan: a mixed methods study. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine . 2011;11(118)  
38. Giannitrapani K, McCaa M, Haverfield M, et al. Veteran experiences seeking non-
pharmacological approaches for pain. Military Medicine . 2018;183:e628 -34. 
doi:10.1093/milmed/usy018  
39. Matthias MS, Donaldson MT, Jensen AC, Krebs EE. "I was a little surprised": Qualitative 
insights from patients enrolled in a 12- month trial comparing opioids to non- opioid medications 
for chronic musculoskeletal pain. Journal of Pain. 2018;19(9):1082- 90. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2018.04.008  
40. Meints SM, Cortes A, Morais CA, Edwards RR. Racial and ethnic differences in the 
experience and treatment of noncancer pain. Pain Management . 2019;9:317- 34.  
41. Craig KD, Holmes C, Hudspith M, et al. Pain in persons who are marginalized by social 
conditions. Pain. 2020;161:261- 5.  
42. Morales ME, Yong RJ. Racial and ethnic disparities in the treatment of chronic pain. 
Pain Medicine. 2021;22:75- 90.  
43. Tick H, Nielson A, Pelletier KR, et al. Evidence -based nonpharmacologic strategies for 
comprehensive pain care: the Consortium Pain Task Force white paper. Explore. 2018;14:177 -
211.  
44. Green C. Disparities in pain management and palliative care. In: Moore RJ, ed. 
Handbook of Pain and Palliative Care . Springer; 2013:795- 808:chap 41.  
45. Khoja SS, Almeida GJ, Freburger JK. Recommendation rates for physical therapy, 
lifestyle counseling, and pain medications for managing knee osteoarthritis in ambulatory care settings: a cross- sectional analysis of the national ambulatory care survey (2 007-2015). Arthritis 
Care Research. 2020;72(2):184 -92. doi:doi:10.10 02/acr.24064  
46. Ghoshal M, Shapiro H, Todd K, Schatman ME. Chronic noncancer pain management 
and systemic racism: time to move toward equal care standards. Journal of Pain Research. 
2020;13:2825- 36.  
47. Saha S, Freeman M, Toure J, Tippens KM, Weeks C, Ibrahim SA. Racial and ethnic 
disparities in the VA health care system: a systematic review. Journal of General Internal Medicine . 2008;23(5):654- 71.  
48. Woodard LD, Hernandez MT, Lees E, Petersen LA. Racial differences in attitudes 
regarding cardiovascular disease prevention and treatment: a qualitative study. Patient 
Education and Counseling. 2005;57(2):225- 31.  
49. Gordon HS, Street RL, Kelly PA, Souchek J, Wray NP. Physician- patient communication 
following invasive procedures: an analysis of post -angiogram consultations. Social Science and 
Medicine . 2005;61(5):1015- 25.  
50. M.E. P, Odoms -Young A, Quinn MT, Gorawara- Bhat R, Wilson SC, Chin MH. Race and 
shared decision- making: perspectives of African Americans with diabetes. Social Science and 
Medicine . 2010;71:1- 9.  
51. Matthias MS, Talib TL, Huffman MA. Managing chronic pain in an opioid crisis: What is 
the role of shared decision- making? . Health Communication . 2020;35(10):1239- 47.  
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 22  of 27 52. Taylor SL, Giannitrapani K, Yuan A, Marshall NJ. What patients and providers want to 
know about complementary and integrative health therapies. Journal of Alternative and 
Complementary Medicine . 2018;24(1):85- 9.  
53. Mathur VA, Trost Z, Ezenwa MO, Sturgeon JA, Hood AM. Mechanisms of injustice: what 
we (do not) know about racialized disparities in pain. Pain . 
2022;doi:10.1097/j.pain.0000000000002528  
54. Elwyn G, O'Connor A, Stacey D, et al. Developing a quality criteria framework for patient 
decision aids: online international Delphi consensus process. BMJ . 2006;333(7565):417.  
55. Joseph- Williams N, Newcombe R, Politi M, et al. Toward minimum standards for 
certifying patient decision aids: a modified Delphi consensus process. Medical Decision Making . 
2014;34(6):699- 710.  
56. Stacey D, Legare F, Lewis K, et al. Decision aids for people facing health treatment or 
screening decisions. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 
2017;4(CD001431)doi:0.1002/14651858.CD001431.pub5  
57. Makoul G, Clayman ML. An integrative model of shared decision making in medical 
encounters. Patient Education and Counseling . 3/2006 2006;60(3):301- 312. Not in File. doi:doi: 
10.1016/j.pec.2005.06.010  
58. Kerns RD, Krebs EE, Atkins D. Making integrated multimodal pain care a reality: a path 
forward. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2018;33:1 -3.  
59. Matthias MS, Johnson N, Shields CG, et al. "I'm not gonna pull the rug out from under 
you": patient -provider communication about opioid tapering. Journal of Pain . 2017;18(11):1365-
73. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2017.06.008  
60. Kenny DT. Constructions of chronic pain in doctor -patient relationships: bridging the 
communication chasm. Patient Education and Counseling . 3/2004 2004;52(3):297- 305. Not in 
File. doi:doi: DOI: 10.1016/S0738- 3991(03)00105-8 
61. Upshur CC, Bacigalupe G, Luckmann R. "They don't want anything to do with you": 
patient views of primary care management of chronic pain. Pain Medicine . 2010 
2010;11(12):1791- 1798. Not in File.  
62. Matthias MS, Parpart A, Nyland KA, et al. The patient -provider relationship in chronic 
pain care: providers' perspectives. Pain Medicine . 2010;11:1688- 97.  
63. Bozic KJ, Belkora J, Chan V, et al. Shared decision making in patients with osteoarthritis 
of the hip and knee: results of a randomized controlled trial. The Journal of Bone and Joint 
Surgery . 2013;95:1633- 9. doi:10.2106/JBJS.M.00004 
64. Fraenkel L, Peters E, Charpentier P, et al. Decision tool to improve the quality of care in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care and Research. 2012;64(7):977- 85. doi:10.1002/acr.21657  
65. Stacey D, Hawker G, Dervin G, et al. Decision aid for patients considering total knee 
arthroplasty with preference report for surgeons: a pilot randomized controlled trial. BMC 
Musculoskeletal Disorders . 2014;15(54)  
66. Hochlehnert A, Richter A, Bludau HB, et al. A computer -based information- tool for 
chronic pain patients. Computerized information to support the process of shared decision-making. Patient Education & Counseling61(1):92- 8,. 4/2006 2006;Not in File.  
67. Sullivan MD, Leigh J, Gaster B. BRIEF REPORT: Training internists in shared decision 
making about chronic opioid treatment for noncancer pain. JGIM: Journal of General Internal Medicine . 4/2006 2006;21(4):360- 362. Not in File. doi:Article  
68. Matthias MS, Bair MJ, Nyland KA, et al. Self -management support and communication 
from nurse care managers compared to primary care physicians: a focus group study of patients with chronic musculoskeletal pain. Pain Management Nursing. 2010 2010;11(1):26- 34. Not in 
File.  
69. Matthias MS, Miech EJ, Myers LJ, Sargent C, Bair MJ. An expanded view of self -
management: patients' experiences with self -management education and support in an 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 23  of 27 intervention for chronic musculoskeletal pain. Pain Medicine . 2012 2012;13:1018- 1028. Not in 
File.  
70. Matthias MS, Miech EJ, Myers LJ, Sargent C, Bair MJ. "There's more to this pain than 
just pain": how patients' understanding of pain evolved during a randomized controlled trial for 
chronic pain. The Journal of Pain. 2012 2012;13:571 -578. Not in File.  
71. Matthias MS, Evans E, Porter B, McCalley S, Kroenke K. Patients’ experiences with 
telecare for chronic pain and mood symptoms: a qualitative study. Pain Medicine. 2020;21(10)doi:10.1093/pm/pnz345  
72. Hirsh AT, Hollingshead NA, Bair MJ, Matthias MS, Kroenke K. Preferences, experrience, 
and attitudes in the management of chronic pain and depression: a comparison of physicians and medical students. Clinical Journal of Pain . 2014;30:766 -74.  
73. Hirsh AT, Hollingshead NA, Bair MJ, Matthias MS, Wu J, Kroenke K. The influence of 
patient sex, race, and depression on clinician pain treatment decisions. European Journal of 
Pain. 2013;17:1569- 79.  
74. Hirsh AT, Hollingshead NA, Matthias MS, Bair MJ, Kroenke K. The influence of provider 
sex, patient sex, and sexist attitudes on pain treatment decisions. Journal of Pain . 
2014;15(5):551- 9.  
75. Hollingshead NA, Matthias MS, Bair MJ, Hirsh AT. Healthcare providers' perceptions of 
socioeconomically disadvantaged patients with chronic pain: a qualitative investigation. Journal of Heallth Disparities Research and Practice . 2016;9(3):35 -44.  
76. Burgess D, Crowley -Matoka M, Phelan SM, et al. Patient race and physicians' decisions 
to prescribe opioids for chronic low back pain. Social Science & Medicine . 2008 2008;67:1852-
1860. Not in File.  
77. Burgess DJ, Grill J, Noorbaloochi S, et al. The effect of perceived racial discrimination 
on bodily pain among older African American men. Pain Medicine. 2009;10(8):1341 -52. 
doi:10.1111/j.1526- 4637.2009.00742.x  
78. Burgess DJ, Nelson DB, Gravely AA, et al. Racial differences in prescription of opioid 
analgesics for chronic noncancer pain in a national sample of veterans. Journal of Pain. 
2014;15(4):447- 455.  
79. Burgess DJ, van Ryn M, Crowley -Matoka M, Malat J. Understanding the Provider 
Contribution to Race/Ethnicity Disparities in Pain Treatment: Insights from Dual Process Models of Stereotyping. Pain Medicine . 4/2006 2006;7(2):119- 134. Not in File. doi:Article  
80. Eliacin J, Coffing JM, Matthias MS, Burgess DJ, Bair MJ, Rollins AL. The relationship 
between race, patient activation, and working alliance: implications for patient engagement in mental health care. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services 
Research . 2018;45:186 -92.  
81. Eliacin J, Rollins AL, Burgess DJ, Salyers MP, Matthias MS. Engaging African- American 
veterans in mental health care: patients' perspecties. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease. 2016;2014(4):254- 60. doi:10.1097/NMD.0000000000000479 
82. Eliacin J, Rollins AL, Burgess DJ, Salyers MP, Matthias MS. Patient activation and visit 
preparation in African American veterans receiving mental health care. Cultural Diversity and 
Ethnic Minority Psychology . 2016;22(4):580- 7.  
83. Matthias MS, Evans E, Porter B, McCalley S, Kroenke K. Patients’ experiences with 
telecare for chronic pain and mood symptoms: a qualitative study. Pain Medicine. 2020;21(10):2137- 45. doi:10.1093/pm/pnz345 
84. Salyers MP, Godfrey JL, McGuire AB, Gearhart T, Rollins AL, Boyle C. Implementing the 
Illness Management and Recovery Program for consumers with severe mental illness. Psychiatric Services. 2009;60(4)( ):483- 90.  
85. Salyers MP, McGuire AB, Kukla M, Fukui S, Lysaker PH, Mueser KT. A randomized 
controlled trial of Illness Management and Recovery with an active control group. Psychiatric 
Services . 2014;65(8):1005- 11.  
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 24  of 27 86. Salyers MP, Tsemberis S. ACT and recovery: integrating evidence- based practice and 
recovery orientation on assertive community treatment teams. Community Mental Health 
Journal . 2007 2007;43(6):619- 641. Not in File.  
87. Matthias MS, Fukui S, Salyers MP. What factors are associated with consumer initiation 
of shared decision making in mental health visits? Administration and Policy in Mental Health 
and Mental Health Services Research. 2017;44(1):133- 40.  
88. Matthias MS, Salyers MP, Rollins AL, Frankel RM. Decision making in recovery -oriented 
mental health care. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal . 2012 2012;35:305- 314. Not in File.  
89. Matthias MS, Krebs EE, Bergman AA, Coffing JM, Bair MJ. Communicating about 
opioids for chronic pain: A qualitative study of patient attributions and the influence of the 
patient -physician relationship. European Journal of Pain. 2014;18:835 -43. doi:10.1002/j.1532 -
2149.2013.00426.x  
90. Henry SG, Matthias MS. Patient -clinician communication about pain: A narrative review 
and conceptual model. Pain Medicine . 2018;19(11):2154- 65. doi:DOI: 10.1093/pm/pny003  
91. Henry SG, Bell RA, Fenton JJ, Kravitz RL. Goals of chronic pain management: do 
patients and primary care physicians agree and does it matter? Clinical Journal of Pain. 2017;33(11):955- 61. doi:10.1097/AJP.0000000000000488 
92. Henry SG, Chen M, Matthias MS, Bell RA, Kravitz RL. Development of the Chronic Pain 
Coding System (CPCS) for characterizing patient -clinician discussions about chronic pain and 
opioids. Pain Medicine . 2016;17(10):1892- 1905.  
93. Henry SG, Paterniti DA, Feng B, et al. Patients' experience with opioid tapering: a 
conceptual model with recommendations for clinicians. Journal of Pain. 2019;20(2):181- 91. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2018.09.001  
94. Giannitrapani K, Holliday JR, Miake -Lye IM, Hempel S, Taylor SL. Synthesizing the 
strength of evidence of complementary and integrative health for pain  
Pain Medicine. 2019;20(9):1831- 40. doi:10.1093/pm/pnz068  
95. Federman DG, Thomas ER, Carbone GF, Zeliadt SB, Taylor SL. Battlefield acupuncture 
in the Veterans Health Administration: effectiveness in individual and group settings for pain and pain comorbidities. Medical Acupuncture . 2018;30(5)doi:10.1089/acu.2018.1296  
96. Taylor SL, Herman PM, Marshall NJ, et al. Use of complementary and integrated health: 
a retrospective analysis of US veterans with chronic musculoskeletal pain nationally. Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine. 2019;25(1)doi:10.1089/acm.2018.0276  
97. Taylor SL, Bolton R, Hyunh A, et al. What should health care systems consider when 
implementing complementary and integrative health: lessons from the Veterans Health Administration. Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine . 2019;25:S52- 60. 
doi:10.1089/acm.2018.0445  
98. Taylor SL, Giannitrapani K, Ackland PE, et al. Challenges and strategies for 
implementing battlefield acupuncture in the VA: a qualitative study of provider perspectives. Medical Acupuncture. 2018;30(5)doi:10.1089/acu.2018.1286  
99. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation 
hybrid designs: combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public health impact. Medical Care. 2012 2012;50(3):217 -226. Not in File.  
100. Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Grumbach K. Improving primary care for patients with 
chronic illness. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association. 10/9/2002 2002;288(14):1775- 1779. Not in File.  
101. Wagner EH, Bennett SM, Austin BT, Greene SM, Schaefer JK, Vonkorff M. Finding 
common ground: patient -centeredness and evidence- based chronic illness care. Third American 
Samueli Symposium, Developing Healing Relationships, April 21- 22, 2005. Journal of 
Alternative & Complementary Medicine. 12/2/2005 2005;11:S7 -S15. Not in File.  
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 25  of 27 102. Salyers MP, Matthias MS, Spann CL, Lydick JM, Rollins AL, Frankel RM. The role of 
patient activation in psychiatric visits. Psychiatric Services . 11/1/2009 2009;60(11):1535- 1539. 
Not in File.  
103. Joosten EA, DeFuentes -Merrilas L, de Weert GH, Sensky T, van der Staak CP, de Jong 
CA. Systematic review of the effects of shared decision- making on patient satisfaction, 
treatment adherence, and health status. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics . 2008 
2008;77(4):219- 226. Not in File.  
104. Miller WR, Rollnick S. Motivational Interviewing: helping people change 3rd ed. Guilford 
Press; 2013.  
105. Alperstein D, Sharpe L. The efficacy of motivational interviewing in adults with chronic 
pain: a meta- analysis and systematic review. Journal of Pain . 2016;17:393 -403.  
106. DiClemente CC, Corno CM, Graydon MM, Wiprovnick AE, Knoblach DJ. Motivational 
interviewing, enhancement, and brief interventions over the last decade: a review of reviews of 
efficacy and effectiveness. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors . 2017;3:862 -87. 
doi:10.1037/adb0000318  
107. Smedslund G, Berg RC, Hammerstrom KT, et al. Motivational interviewing for substance 
abuse. Campbell Systematic Reviews . 2011;6doi:10.4073/csr.2011.6  
108. Kuzel AJ. Sampling in qualitative inquiry. In: Crabtree BF, Miller WL, eds. Doing 
Qualitative Research. Sage; 1999:33- 45:chap 2.  
109. Beebe J. Rapid assessment process: an introduction. Altamira Press; 2001.  
110. Bellg AJ, Borrelli B, Resnick B, et al. Enhancing treatment fidelity in health behavior 
change studies: best practices and recommendations from the NIH Behavior Change Consortium. Health Psychology . 2004;23:443 -51.  
111. Holcombe A, Wolery M, Snyder E. Effects of two levels of procedural fidelity with 
constant time delay on children’s learning. Journal of Behavioral Education. 1994;4:49 -73.  
112. Carroll C, Patterson M, Wood S, Booth A, Rick J, Balain S. A conceptual framework for 
implementation fidelity. Implementation Science. 2007;2(40)  
113. Borrelli B. The assessment, monitoring, and enhancement of treatment fidelity in public 
health clinical trials. Journal of Public Health Dentistry . 2011;71(s1):S52- S63.  
114. Noell GH, Gresham FM, Gansle K. Does treatment integrity matter? A preliminary 
investigation of instructional implementation and mathematical performance. Journal of Behavioral Education. 2002;11:51- 67.  
115. Krebs EE, Lorenz KA, Bair MJ, et al. Development and initial validation of the PEG, a 3-
item scale assessing pain intensity and interference. Journal of General Internal Medicine . 
2009;24(6):733- 8.  
116. Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Farrar JT, et al. Core outcome measures for chronic pain clinical 
trials: IMMPACT recommendations. Pain . 1/2005 2005;113(1- 2):9-19. Not in File. doi:doi: 
10.1016/j.pain.2004.09.012  
117. Cleeland CS, Ryan KM. Pain assessment: global use of the Brief Pain Inventory. Annals 
of the Academy of Medicine Singapore. 1994;23:129 -38.  
118. Krebs EE, Bair MJ, Damush TM, Tu W, Wu J, Kroenke K. Comparative responsiveness 
of pain outcome measures among primary care patients with musculoskeletal pain. Medical 
Care . 2010;48:1007 -14.  
119. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depression severity 
measure. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2001;16:606- 13.  
120. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB. A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety 
disorder: the GAD -7. Archives of Internal Medicine . 2006;166:1092 -7.  
121. Sullivan MJL, Bishop SR, Pivik J. The Pain Catastrophizing Scale: Development and 
validation. Psychological Assessment . 12/1995 1995;7(4):524- 532. Not in File.  
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 26  of 27 122. Duke DC, Lynch WD, Smith B, Winstanley J. Validity of a new patient engagement 
measure: The Altarum Consumer Engagement (ACE) Measure. Patient 2015;8:559- 68. 
doi:10.1007/s40271- 015-0131-2 
123. Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Wyrwich KW, et al. Interpreting the Clinical Importance of 
Treatment Outcomes in Chronic Pain Clinical Trials: IMMPACT Recommendations. The Journal 
of Pain . 2/2008 2008;9(2):105- 121. Not in File. doi:doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2007.09.005  
124. Little RJA, Rubin DB. Statistical Analysis with Missing Data, Second Edition . Wiley 
Series in Probability and Statistics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2002.  
125. Little RJ, D'Agostino R, Cohen ML, et al. The prevention and treatment of missing data 
in clinical trials. New England Journal of Medicine . 2012;367(14):1355 -60.  
126. Liang KY, Zeger SL. Longitudinal data analysis of continuous and discrete responses for 
pre-post designs. Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of Statistics . 2000;62(1):134- 48.  
127. Lu K. On efficiency of constrained longitudinal data analysis versus longitudinal analysis 
of covariance. Biometrics . 2010;66(3):891- 6.  
128. Liu GF, Lu K, Mogg R, Mallick M, Mehrotra DV. Should baseline be a covariate or 
dependent variable in analyses of change from baseline in clinical trials? . Statistics in Medicine . 
2009;28(20):2509- 30.  
129. Wijnhoven HAH, De Vet HCW, Picavet HSJ. Prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders is 
systematically higher in women than in men. Clinical Journal of Pain . 2006;22(8):717- 24.  
130. Valente MJ, MacKinnon DP. Comparing models of change to estimate the mediated 
effect in the pretest -posttest control group design. Structural equation modeling : a 
multidisciplinary journal . 2017;24(3):428- 50.  
131. Valeri L, VanderWeele TJ. Mediation analysis allowing for exposure- mediator 
interactions and causal interpretation: theoretical assumptions and implementation with SAS 
and SPSS macros. Psychological Methods . 2013;18(2):137- 50.  
132. VanderWeele TJ. A unification of mediation and interaction: a 4- way decomposition. 
Epidemiology . 2014;25(5):749- 60.  
133. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health impact of health 
promotion interventions: the RE -AIM framework. American Journal of Public Health . 1999 
1999;89(9):1322- 1327. Not in File.  
134. Matthias MS, Kukla M, McGuire A, Bair MJ. How do patients with chronic pain benefit 
from a peer -supported pain self -management intervention?  A qualitative study. Pain Medicine. 
2016;17(12):2247- 2255. doi:10.1093/pm/pnw138 
135. Matthias MS, Kukla M, McGuire A, Gill N, Damush TM, Bair MJ. Facilitators and barriers 
to peer support for veterans with chronic pain. Clinical Journal of Pain . 2016;32(6):534- 40.  
136. Charmaz K. Constructing grounded theory: a practical guide through qualitative analysis . 
Sage; 2006.  
137. Glaser BG, Strauss AL. The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative 
research. Aldine de Gruyter; 1967.  
138. Borkan J. Immersion/crystallization. In: Crabtree BF, Miller WL, eds. Doing qualitative 
research. Sage; 1999:179- 194:chap 10.  
139. Horvath AO, Greenberg LS. Development and validation of the Working Alliance Inventory. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology. 1989;36(2):223 -233. 
140. Munder T, Wilmers F, Leonhart R, Linster HW, Barth J. Working Allilance Inventory -Short 
Revised (WAI -SR): psychometric properties in outpatients and inpatients. Clinical Psychology 
and Psychotherapy. 2010;17(3):231- 239. 
141. Bird ST, Bogart LM, Delahanty DL. Health- related correlates of perceived discrimination in 
HIV care. AIDS Patient Care & STDS. 2004;18:19 -26. 
IRB#:  16571 
Version Date: 11/11 /2024 Page 27  of 27 142. Prevention CfDCa. MME for commonly prescribed opioids. Accessed March 10, 2020, 
https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/prescribing/guideline.html#anchor_1561563251  