Page  1 of 7
Adult Consent Form
Version: July 25, 2016
IRB Template Version  9.24.14Department of Epidemiology and Prevention
HEALTHY L IVING P ARTNERSHIPS TO PREVENT DIABETES IN VETERANS 
Informed Consent Form  to Participate in Research
Mara Z. Vitolins, DrPH, MPH,  RDN, Principal Investigator
INTRODUCTION
You are invited to be in a  research study. Research  studies are designed  to gain scientific  
knowledge that  may help other  people in the future. You  are being asked to  take part in this 
study because you weigh  more than is ideal and  you may be at risk for developing diabetes. Your 
participation is voluntary.  Please take your  time in making  your  decision  as to  whether or not 
you wish to  participate.  Ask your doctor  or the study staff to explain any words or information 
contained in this informed consent  document that you do not  understand. You  may also discuss 
the study with your friends  and family.
WHY I S THIS STUDY BEING DONE?
The Healthy Living Partnerships to Prevent Diabetes  in Veterans, or HELP PD Vets pilot study, 
will test two strategies to prevent the  development  of diabetes  in Veterans who  are overweight 
and at risk.  Previous studies have  shown that weight loss  has many benefits,  including  
preventing diabetes. Most of these  studies  have been  conducted in strictly research  settings using  
professional staff like dietitians and  doctors working one-on-one with  participants.   We don’t  
know if  a group-based program led by a lay (non-professional) person  and delivered in a  real 
healthcare setting like the  VA would also  help people lose weight. 
HOW M ANY  PEOPLE WILL TAKE P ART IN THE STUDY?
Fifty (50) people from  the Kernersville Health Care Center will take part in this study. In order to 
identify the 50 participants needed, we may need  to screen  as many  as 200 because some  people  
will not qualify  to be  included in the study.
WHAT IS INVOLVED IN THE STUDY ?
The HELP PD Vets  pilot  study will consist of two groups of volunteers.  You will be randomized 
into one of  the groups described below. Randomization means that you are put  into a group by 
chance. It  is like  flipping  a coin. You will have an equal chance of being placed  in either group.  
Group A will be  involved  in a weight loss program that combines  individual meetings with a  
registered dietitian with group sessions led by a trained member of the community known as  a 
community health  worker. Group B will receive two individual sessions  with a registered  
dietitian and written information  about  resources for weight loss  and healthy  living in  the local 
area.   Both groups  will receive the same medical monitoring.  
WFU School of Medicine 
Institutional Review Board 
IRB Number:IRB00033688
Meeting Date Approved 5/8/2017          
Version Valid Until: 5/7/2018
Page  2 of 7
Adult Consent Form
Version: July 25, 2016
IRB Template Version  9.24.14If you are randomized  to Group  A, you will receive three individual sessions with  a registered 
dietitian during months  1, 3,  and 6 at the Kernersville Health Care Center. You will  also meet 
once a week with  a group of other participants and your community health worker for 6 months.  
These meetings will take place at a  local  location  that is convenient for your group, like a  church  
or community center.   Information about  diet, exercise, and weight loss will either  be delivered 
by your  community health worker, an  expert  from  the community, or by a DVD  presentation.  
As a part of  this group, you  will be asked to start  your  own walking or other exercise program 
and to make changes to the food you eat.  You will also be  asked to  write-down  the type  and 
amount of  foods  you eat and the number of minutes you walk or do other exercise each day. 
If you are randomized  to Group  B, you will have two individual  meetings  with  a registered  
dietitian at the Kernersville  Health  Care  Center  during the first three  months  of the study and 
then you will be  given  information on a variety  of community programs. You  will also receive a 
newsletter monthly  with information about healthy  living. At the end of the study, we will share 
the information  we have learned about successful strategies to  change lifestyle  and reduce the 
risk of developing  diabetes with you. 
If you take part in this study, we will collect some information from  your doctor  and your 
medical record about your  health.   We  will collect:
Results from recent bloodwork including glucose (blood sugar), cholesterol, and  
triglycerides
Medical history and information about  your health behaviors like  diet and exercise
Information about your health-related quality of life
Information about your use of healthcare and other resources
If you decide to participate, you will also complete  a baseline visit and  a 6-month visit.  Both of 
these visits will be  conducted in the Kernersville Health Care Center. During these visits, we will 
measure or collect:
Height and weight
Waist  circumference or waist size
Blood  pressure  and pulse
Information about your health  behaviors like diet and exercise and  health-related  quality 
of life
HOW LONG WILL I BE IN THE STUDY ?
You will be in the  study for about 6 months. 
You can stop participating  at any time. If  you decide  to stop participating in  the study we 
encourage you  to talk to the investigators or  study  staff first to  learn about any potential health or  
safety consequences.
WHAT ARE THE R ISKS OF  THE  STUDY?
Being in this study involves some risk to you. You should discuss the risk of being in  this study 
WFU School of Medicine 
Institutional Review Board 
IRB Number:IRB00033688
Meeting Date Approved 5/8/2017          
Version Valid Until: 5/7/2018
Page  3 of 7
Adult Consent Form
Version: July 25, 2016
IRB Template Version  9.24.14with the study staff. Risks and side effects  related to participating in  this study include:
Risks of Increasing Physical Activity:  Increasing  your  physical activity may increase your risk 
of injuries  to the muscles, ligaments, tendons and  joints of the body.  Other risks include  
abnormal blood pressure, fainting,  dizziness, disorders of heart rhythm, and very  rare instances 
of heart attack, stroke, or even  death.   To help ensure your safety, the study will check your  
readiness to become more active.  A study  doctor  will see you if  your readiness  is in doubt.   
Risks of Hypotension (Low Blood Pressure):   If you do lose  weight  while you take  medicines to  
control your blood pressure, there is a chance  you may have episodes of feeling light-headed, 
dizzy or  nauseous from a  drop in blood pressure.   Low blood pressure is also known as 
hypotension.  To reduce the chance  of hypotension, please report any feelings  dizziness, nausea, 
or light-headedness to study staff.   If you develop  low blood  pressure, the study doctors will 
contact your doctor to  discuss adjustment of  your blood pressure  medicine. 
Taking part  in this research study may involve  providing information that  you consider 
confidential or private.  Efforts, such  as coding research records, keeping  research  records secure  
and allowing only authorized people  to have  access to research records, will be  made to  keep 
your information safe.
REPRODUCTIVE R ISKS TO  PARTICIPATING IN  RESEARCH
Due to unknown  risks  and potential  harm to the unborn fetus, sexually active  women of 
childbearing potential must use a reliable method  of birth  control while participating in this  
study. Reliable  methods of birth control are: abstinence (not having sex), oral contraceptives, 
intrauterine device (IUD), DepoProvera, tubal ligation, or vasectomy  of the partner (with  
confirmed negative sperm counts) in a monogamous relationship (same  partner). An  acceptable, 
although less reliable,  method involves the careful use of condoms  and spermicidal  foam or gel 
and/or a cervical  cap or sponge. We  encourage  you to  discuss this issue further  with your 
physicians if  you have any questions.
Pregnant women  are excluded from participation  in this study. If you are a sexually  active 
woman of childbearing  potential and have  not been using a reliable  method of birth control, two 
negative pregnancy tests performed 15 days apart  are required to  check for possible early 
pregnancy prior  to starting treatment.
ARE THERE B ENEFITS  TO TAKING PART IN THE STUDY ?
If you agree  to take part in this study, there may or may not  be direct benefit to  you. We hope the 
information learned from this study will benefit  other people in the future. The  benefits  of 
participating in  this study may include losing  weight,  a decrease in  your risk for  developing 
diabetes or  cardiovascular  disease,  and improvements in your  quality of life.   
WHAT OTHER CHOICES  ARE THERE?
This is  not a treatment  study. Your alternative is to not participate in this  study.
WFU School of Medicine 
Institutional Review Board 
IRB Number:IRB00033688
Meeting Date Approved 5/8/2017          
Version Valid Until: 5/7/2018
Page 4 of 7
Adult Consent Form
Version: July  25, 2016
IRB Template Version 9.24.14WHAT ABOUT MY HEALTH INFORMATION?
In this research study, any new information we collect from you and information we get from 
your medical records or other facilities about your health or behaviors is considered Protected 
Health Information.  The information we will collect for this research study includes height, 
weight,
 waist circumference, blood pressure, laboratory results, and information about your 
medical history, health behaviors, and health-related quality of life.   
We will make every effort to  keep your Protected Health Information private. We will store 
records of your Protected Health Information in a cabinet in a locked office or on a password 
protected computer. Only the following people or organizations will be granted access to your 
Protected Health Information:
1) The  study investigator and his/her staff, or others at Wake Forest University Health 
Sciences who oversee research
2) Other  people or laboratories providing services for this research project on behalf of 
Wake Forest University Health Sciences and Wake Forest University Baptist Medical 
Center 
3) Investigators  and staff at the Department of Veteran’s Affairs who are affiliated with the 
study team.  
If required  by law or court order, we might also have to share your Protected Health Information 
with a judge, law enforcement officer, government agencies, or others. If your Protected Health 
Information is shared with any of these groups it may no longer be protected by federal or state 
privacy rules.
Any Protected Health Information collected from you in this study that is maintained in the 
research records will be kept for at least six years after the study is finished. At that time any 
research information not already in your medical record will either be destroyed or it will be de-
identified. This authorization does not expire and any research information entered into your 
medical record will be kept for as long as your medical record is kept by the Medical Center. 
You will not be able to obtain a copy of your Protected Health Information in the research 
records until all activities in the study are completely finished. 
You can tell Dr. Mara Vitolins that you want to take away your permission to use and share your 
Protected Health Information at any time by sending a letter to this address:
Mara Z. Vitolins, DrPH, MPH, RD
However, if you take away permission to use your Protected Health Information you will not be 
WFU School of Medicine 
Institutional Review Board 
IRB Number:IRB00033688
Meeting Date Approved 5/8/2017          
Version Valid Until: 5/7/2018

Page 5 of 7
Adult Consent Form
Version: July  25, 2016
IRB Template Version 9.24.14able to be in the study any longer. We will stop collecting any more information about you, but 
any information we have already collected can still be used for the purposes of the research 
study.
By signing this form you give us permission to use your Protected Health Information for this 
study.
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov,  as required 
by
 U.S. Law.  This website will not include information that can identify you.  At most, the 
website will include a summary of the results.  You can search this Web site at any time. 
WHAT ARE THE C OSTS ?
There are no costs to you for taking part in this study. All study costs, including any study 
medications and procedures related directly to the study, will be paid for by the study. Costs for 
your regular medical care, which are not related to this study, will be your own responsibility.
WILL YOU B E  PAID FOR P ARTICIPATING?
You will receive a $25 gift card for  completing your baseline visit and your 6-month visit. Both 
of these visits will be conducted in the Kernersville Health Care Center.
WHO IS SPONSORING THIS S TUDY?
This study is being sponsored by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney 
Diseases (NIDDK), part of the National Institutes of Health. The sponsor is providing money or 
other support to Wake Forest University Health Sciences to help conduct this study. The 
researchers do not, however, hold a direct financial interest in the sponsor or the product being 
studied.
WHAT HAPPENS IF YOU EXPERIENCE AN INJURY OR ILLNESS AS A 
RESULT OF PARTICIPATING IN THIS S TUDY ?
Should you experience a physical injury or illness as a direct result of your participation in this 
study, Wake Forest University School of Medicine maintains limited research insurance 
coverage for the usual and customary medical fees for reasonable and necessary treatment of 
such injuries or illnesses. To the extent research insurance coverage is available under this policy 
the reasonable costs of these necessary medical services will be paid, up to a maximum of 
$25,000. Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center holds the insurance policy for this 
coverage. It provides a maximum of $25,000 coverage for each claim and is limited to a total of 
$250,000 for all claims in any one year. The Wake Forest University School of Medicine, and 
the North Carolina Baptist Hospitals, Incorporated do not assume responsibility to pay for these 
medical services or to provide any other compensation for such injury or illness. Additional 
information may be obtained from the Medical Center’s Director of Risk and Insurance 
Management, at .
If you  are injured, the insurer may require information such as your name, social security 
number, and date of birth in order to pay for your care.  This is because the insurer is required by 
law to report any payments made to cover the care of any persons who are members of a 
WFU School of Medicine 
Institutional Review Board 
IRB Number:IRB00033688
Meeting Date Approved 5/8/2017          
Version Valid Until: 5/7/2018

Page 6 of 7
Adult Consent Form
Version: July  25, 2016
IRB Template Version 9.24.14government insurance plan to the Department of Health and Human Services.
You do not give up any legal rights as a research participant by signing this consent form. For 
more information on medical treatment for research related injuries or to report a study related 
illness, adverse event, or injury you should call Dr. Mara Vitolins at  or 
 after hours.
WHAT ARE MY R IGHTS AS A R ESEARCH STUDY PARTICIPANT?
Taking part in this study is voluntary. You may choose not to take part or you may leave the 
study at any time. Refusing to participate or leaving the study will not result in any penalty or 
loss of benefits to which you are entitled. If you decide to stop participating in the study we 
encourage you to talk to the investigators or study staff first to learn about any potential health or 
safety consequences. The investigators also have the right to stop your participation in the study 
at any time. This could be because it is in your best medical interest, new information becomes 
available, you failed to follow instructions, or because the entire study has been stopped. You 
will be given any new information we become aware of that would affect your willingness to 
continue to participate in the study.
WHOM DO I CALL IF I HAVE QUESTIONS OR PROBLEMS?
For questions about the study or in the event of a research-related injury, contact the study 
investigator, Dr. Mara Vitolins, at  or the Project Manager, Caroline Blackwell, at 
.  After hours, please call Dr. Mara Vitolins at .
The Institutional Review Board (IRB) is a group of people who review the research to protect 
your rights. If you have a question about your rights as a research participant, or you would like 
to discuss problems or concerns, have questions or want to offer input, or you want to obtain 
additional information, you should contact the Chairman of the IRB at .
You will be given a copy of this signed consent form. 
SIGNATURES
I agree  to take part in this study. I authorize the use and disclosure of my health information as 
described in this consent and authorization form.  If I have not already received a copy of the 
Privacy Notice, I may request one or one will be made available to me.  I have had a chance to 
ask questions about being in this study and have those questions answered.   By signing this 
consent and authorization form, I am not releasing or agreeing to release the investigator, the 
sponsor, the institution or its agents from liability for negligence.
Subject Name (Printed): _____________________________
WFU School of Medicine 
Institutional Review Board 
IRB Number:IRB00033688
Meeting Date Approved 5/8/2017          
Version Valid Until: 5/7/2018

Page  7 of 7
Adult Consent Form
Version: July 25, 2016
IRB Template Version  9.24.14Subject Signature: _________________________________ Date:  ________Time:_______  am pm 
Person Obtaining  Consent:___________________________ Date:_________ Time:________ am pm
    
WFU School of Medicine 
Institutional Review Board 
IRB Number:IRB00033688
Meeting Date Approved 5/8/2017          
Version Valid Until: 5/7/2018