TITLE:  DESIGNING OPTIMAL PREVENTION  AND MANAGEMENT OF  POSTOPERATIVE NAUSEA AND 
EMESIS  FOR  PATIENTS  UNDERGOING LAPAROSCOPIC SLEEVE  GASTRECTOMY.  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Konstantinos Spaniolas, MD 
Co-investigator: Dr.  Pryor Aurora, Dr.  Daryn Moller
I. SUMMARY 
Bariatric surgery remains the most effective therapy forobesity and the metabolic syndrome. Postoperative nausea and
vomiting  (PONV) are commonly  reported following bariatric surgery; our preliminary  results  suggest that 90.8% of 
patients  report PONV during their  index  hospital stay,  and 30.4% of readmitted  patients  report PONV as  the reason for re-
hospitalization.  Importantly, we have previously found that 49% of patients  are unable to  be discharged on time due to  
oral intake intolerance attributed  to PONV. Multiple small  studies  have attempted  to introduce single-level intervention  to 
decrease PONV with  limited  success  in this patient population. The proposed study focuses on the most common  bariatric 
procedure performed, laparoscopic sleeve  gastrectomy  (LSG), and  aims  to assess the effect  of a PONV-specific 
intervention  using a multimodal contemporary approach. We hypothesize that the PONV-intervention group will 
experience a more than  50% relative risk reduction  of PONV-related prolonged hospital stay  and significantly  improve 
patient-reported  quality  of recovery from surgery and  quality  of life.  To test this hypothesis, subjects  undergoing LSG  will 
be prospectively  randomized  to two groups: control (physician driven prophylaxis) vs PONV-intervention group (two 
anti-emetic agents  prior to  surgery, total intravenous anesthesia,  two additional  anti-emetic agents  during surgery, and  
sugammadex  as reversal agent).  The primary  end-point will be PONV-related prolonged hospital length  of stay,  using 
postoperative day  1 as the target for hospital discharge as  per clinical  pathway. Serial assessments  of PONV, quality  of 
life and  quality  of recovery, will  allow  us to  identify  an effect of the PONV-intervention on PONV incidence  and severity.  
Importantly, we will evaluate for an  impact  in patient-reported  measures  of quality  of life.  Our proposal is  extremely  
innovative,  because it  addresses a high impact topic,  evaluates  the effect of PONV-intervention in  all phases of recovery, 
and includes  instruments  to measure self-reported patient experience with  surgery. 
II. SPECIFIC AIMS
PONV is associated  with  delayed  hospital discharge and  readmissions following LSG. The impact of PONV on patient 
experience,  self-reported outcomes,  and overall  recovery is  unknown for this  patient  population. The proposed study aims 
to assess the effect of a PONV-specific intervention  using a multimodal contemporary approach in  subjects  undergoing 
LSG. The PONV intervention  will include specific steps  using total intravenous anesthesia and  staged  anti-emetic 
medications,  in the pre-, intra-  and post-operative phase of care.  We hypothesize that a comprehensive multi-level PONV 
intervention  will decrease the incidence and  severity  of PONV, increase successful patient  hospital discharge on 
postoperative day  (POD) 1, facilitate late phase postoperative recovery and  positive patient experience.  
Specific Aim  1: Evaluate the impact of a PONV-specific  intervention on PONV-related  prolonged length of 
hospital stay following LSG surgery. Subjects  will be serially  assessed for the presence and  scale of nausea and  emesis  
during their  early,  intermediate and  late phases of recovery, measured  with  a PONV-specific survey. Time from 
completion  of the index  procedure until patient hospital discharge will be assessed; subjects  who remain  in the hospital 
past POD 1 due to  PONV will  be considered as  having a prolonged length  of stay,  which  is the primary  endpoint for this  
aim. We will also assess the  effect of a PONV-specific intervention  on post-discharge PONV-related resource utilization  
following LSG. Patients  will be followed to  capture  hospital readmissions, emergency  department visits  and outpatient 
intravenous hydration for PONV. We hypothesize that the PONV-intervention group will experience  a higher rate of 
successful POD 1 discharge, and  a decrease  in incidence and  severity  of both nausea and  emesis.  
Specific Aim  2: Assess the effect  of a PONV-specific intervention on patient reported  outcomes (PRO). Patient-
reported outcome measures  will be collected  to evaluate recovery from surgery and  health-related  quality  of life  at 2- and  
4-weeks following LSG. We hypothesize that a PONV-specific intervention  will allow  patients  to have improved self-
assessed recovery and  quality  of life  during the first 30-days following surgery. Approved: 5/22/2019
Expiration Date: 5/21/2020Stony Brook University Human Subjects Committee (IRB)
III. SIGNIFICANCE 
Bariatric surgery is  the most effective method  to treat obesity  and associated  diseases.  Currently, the  LSG  is the most 
common  bariatric  procedure performed (1). In this  patient population, however, PONV occurs commonly.  Published 
studies  suggest a 59-87% incidence of PONV during the hospital stay  following LSG  (2, 3). 
The burden of PONV in  the bariatric  population, and  specifically  after  LSG, is  particularly  high. We  have previously 
demonstrated that PONV is the most common cause for hospital readmission following LSG, with 30.4% of readmitted
LSG  patients  reporting PONV and  oral intake  intolerance as  their  primary  reason for readmission  (4). This  is markedly  
different in  gastric bypass patients,  where only 18% of readmitted  patients  reported PONV as  their  primary  complaint.  
Additionally,  our preliminary  data suggest that half  of LSG  patients  experience  a delay  in pathway-expected  hospital 
discharge due to  PONV (see Preliminary  Data section  under Approach). With  the drive to  minimize  hospital length  of 
stay, PONV control is  paramount to  achieve safe early  hospital discharge. 
The impact on PONV on PRO  is unclear.  One third  of patients  who received  double PONV prophylaxis and  routine anti-
emetics  for the first two  days at  home following ambulatory  laparoscopic surgery reported that nausea had  a negative 
effect on their  quality  of life,  during  self-assessment on POD 5 (5). Following ambulatory  surgery, the  incidence of PONV 
increases  over time;  16.1% of patients  experience PONV in  early  recovery, and  31.2% of patients  report PONV on POD 
5, during late recovery at home (6). These rates  are almost double for patients  undergoing ambulatory  laparoscopic surgery, 
suggesting that PROs after  discharge are of high value for the  assessment of a PONV-related effect.  Importantly, PONV 
at home significantly  impairs  the ability  to perform activities  of daily  living,  which  is an important  goal of recovery for 
patients  (7). Since  PONV is  reported commonly  in LSG  patients,  we anticipate that  improvement  in PONV will affect 
PROs and  overall experience  during the intermediate (from post-anesthesia care  unit until hospital discharge) and  late 
(from hospital discharge to  return to  usual activity)  phases of recovery. 
Although the benefit of a multimodal approach to  PONV prevention has  been  well  established  (8), evidence in  the 
bariatric,  and specifically  the LSG  population is  not clear.  A study evaluating  a triple-agent protocol in  96 LSG  patients,  
using ondansetron, dexamethasone and  haloperidol, demonstrated  improvement  in PONV incidence,  but no effect  on 
hospital length  of stay  (3). The lack  of effect on hospital discharge may  be related  to the use of short half-life preventive 
agents,  the lack  of aggressive postoperative anti-PONV management or the  implementation  of a post-care pathway  with  
less emphasis  in early  hospital discharge. This  would possibly underline the  value  of longer lasting  antiemetic agents,  as 
prevention. The only study to  date evaluating  the use of aprepitant,  an agent  with  half-life exceeding  12 hours, in  bariatric 
surgery demonstrated  significant decrease in  the rate  of emesis  compared  to controls (3.1% vs 15%, p=0.021), but is  
limited  by the  non-inclusion of LSG  patients,  and the lack  of triple prophylaxis as  control (9). Furthermore, the use of 
sugammadex  has emerged  as a modality  to decrease  pain  and PONV. A randomized  study of 88 bariatric surgery patients  
assigned to  this agent vs neostigmine demonstrated  a significant  decrease  in the early  incidence  of PONV (6.8% vs 
18.2%, p<0.05)(10). Studies  evaluating  the longer-term effect of this  reversal approach to  PONV in  this patient  population 
are not available.   
Recently  published recommendations  from European societies  for the  enhanced  recovery of bariatric surgery include 
multimodal PONV prevention, but the  evidence,  as also noted  in the article,  is lacking  (11). Despite  the significant  impact 
of PONV in  this patient  population, there  is no consensus on the  optimal approach in  PONV prevention. Given  the 
proportion of LSG  procedures performed, the effect of PONV in  this patient population and  the paucity  of high quality  
data,  the proposed study will allow  us to  advance  science in  bariatric surgery, change the  standard of care and  improve 
patient experience.  A standardized  anti-PONV intervention  with  proven efficacy  could  minimize  length  of stay  and 
readmissions after  LSG, minimizing  costs  and improving patient experience.  Approved: 5/22/2019
Expiration Date: 5/21/2020Stony Brook University Human Subjects Committee (IRB)
IV. INNOVATION  
Multiple studies  suggest that PONV is  a significant postoperative problem for bariatric surgery patients  (4). Despite this,  
nostudies  have addressed PONV in  this patient population in  a systematic  fashion, or using a multilevel  approach. 
Furthermore, PONV is  this patient  population has  likely  different pathophysiology compared  to similar  symptoms in  
colectomy  and other  gastrointestinal patients.  Development  of a program specific to  bariatric surgery for the prevention 
and management of PONV using interventions before, during andfollowing surgery isa novel approach to this clinical
problem. Furthermore, the current proposal is  innovative in  a three-fold way: 
a. Evaluation  of PONV during the  late phase of recovery from surgery for patients  undergoing LSG  hasn’t been  
previously reported. The proposed study will try  to fill this  knowledge gap, which  is especially  important given  that 
PONV is the most common  cause for hospital readmission  in this group. 
b. Although PONV has  a significant impact on patient  experience during recovery from surgery, this  hasn’t been  
explored, especially  in patients  undergoing LSG, despite the high incidence of PONV in  this setting.  Using standardized  
questionnaires, patients  following LSG  will be able to  provide PROs on quality  of life  and quality  of recovery. The use of 
PROs, including  instruments  of quality  of life assessment,  for the  evaluation  of PONV is  novel, and  will afford us the 
ability  to assess if  a PONV-specific intervention  can have a patient-centered  impact.  
V. APPROACH 
Overall design: We will conduct a randomized  controlled  trial  to evaluate the effect of a multi-level  PONV-specific 
intervention  (pre-, intra-  and post-operative) for patients  undergoing LSG. Patients  will be followed for 30 days to  assess 
the benefit of this  intervention  on all phases of postoperative recovery (early,  intermediate and  late).  
Pre-op
Intra-op
Post -opPatients Scheduled for Sleeve 
Gastrectomy
Randomization 1:1
Control
None
Dexamethasone  8mg
Ondansetron 4mgPONV 
Intervention
Apprepitant 80mg
Scopolamine patch
TIVA
Dexamethasone  8mg
Ondansetron 4mg
Sugammadex  reversal
Ondansentron  4mg  q6
Metoclopramide  10mg  q6
Compazine  10mg  oral Approved: 5/22/2019
Expiration Date: 5/21/2020Stony Brook University Human Subjects Committee (IRB)
Human Subjects: Adult patients  (18 years  and older) undergoing LSG  will be assessed for eligibility  to participate in  this 
study. Subjects  will be recruited  at the Stony Brook University Bariatric and  Metabolic  Weight Loss Center  by study 
personnel. Patients  with  documented  allergy  to the study medications,  history of chronic nausea and  emesis  requiring 
medication,  poorly controlled  diabetes  (HgA1c>9 mg/dl),  or history of previous bariatric or gastro-esophageal surgery 
will be excluded  from this  study. 
Study Groups: Eligible  subjects  for this  study will be randomized  to two groups using an  online random number 
generator. Randomization  will occur  during the last outpatient visit prior to  undergoing LSG. Subjects  will be assigned to  
two groups: control vs PONV-intervention (Figure). 
Intervention: A) Pre-operatively: The  experimental  group will undergo treatment with  aprepitant 80 mg  orally  and 
scopolamine transdermal  patch  one hour prior to  scheduled  surgery (figure 1). 
B) Intra-operatively : Anesthetic parameters : Induction of anesthesia will be performed with  propofol (1-2.5 mg/Kg  IV) 
and succinylcholine  (1-1.5 mg/Kg  IV) or rocuronium (0.5-1 mg/Kg  IV) after  pre-oxygenation as  standard practice  for 
both groups. In the PONV-intervention group, total 
intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) will be maintained  with  
IV infusions of propofol, and  dexmetomidate infusion 
or intermittent bolus dosing of fentanyl after  induction. In the  control group, inhalation  anaesthetics  (sevoflurane or 
desflurane) and  intermittent opioid boluses will be used for maintenance of anesthesia,  as standard practice  in our 
institution  and across the country. Muscle relaxation  will be maintained  with  boluses of rocuronium (10-20 mg)  or 
vecuronium (1-2 mg)  to provide optimal  surgical conditions for both groups. Sugammadex  (2-4 mg/Kg  IV) will be used 
for reversal of neuromuscular blockade in  both groups. Anti-emetic  regimen : In the  PONV-intervention group, a single 
dose of dexamethasone 8 mg  IV will be administered  after  induction, and  a single dose of ondansetron 4 mg  IV will be 
administered  approximately  20 minutes  prior to  the end  of operation. PONV prevention measures  in the control group will 
be limited  to dexamethasone  8 mg  and ondansetron 4 mg.  This contrasts  with  the PONV-intervention group, which  will 
undergo multimodal therapy  (8, 12). At any  point during the study, clinical  mandates  by either  surgeon or anesthesiologist 
can allow  for subject cross-over, or subject withdrawal from the  study. 
C) Post-operatively:  PONV control will include scheduled  ondansetron and  metoclopramide every  6 hours, using 
Compazine as  a rescue medication  (Figure 1). This  step will be common  for both groups. 
Surgery will be performed in  a standardized  way: antral  division will commence  at 4 cm from the pylorus, and  the gastric 
sleeve will be calibrated  over a 38 Fr bougie (or double channel endoscope, equivalent to  37.6 Fr). All patients  will be in  
the current standardized  LSG  pathway  that includes: avoidance of routine nasogastric decompression or surgical drainage,  
avoidance of routine urinary catheter  placement,  early  ambulation  the same  day, early  initiation  of oral intake as  soon as  
patient is  awake,  and no routine contrast radiologic studies. Per  pathway  design, all patients  who undergo non-revisional 
LSG  are planned  for hospital discharge on POD 1. Pain  control consists of scheduled  acetaminophen  and as needed  IV 
opioids for the day  of surgery, followed by as  needed  oral opiods starting  on early  morning POD 1. 
Specific Aim  1: Evaluate the impact of a PONV-specific  intervention on PONV-related  prolonged length of 
hospital stay following SG surgery. 
Hypothesis: We hypothesize that  the PONV-intervention group will experience a more than  50% relative risk reduction  
of PONV-related prolonged hospital stay.  We hypothesize that a PONV-specific intervention  will lead  to decrease  in 
incidence and  severity  of PONV. Figure 1: Study protocol for PONV  preventionApproved: 5/22/2019
Expiration Date: 5/21/2020Stony Brook University Human Subjects Committee (IRB)
Rationale : All patients  undergoing LSG  are high-risk for PONV (13). By implementing  a series  of interventions  that 
individually  have been  proven efficacious  in decreasing  nausea or emesis,  we anticipate a significant  reduction  in the 
incidence of PONV in  the experimental  group. The  impact of nausea and  emesis  individually  on the ability  of LSG  
patients  to tolerate oral intake and  maintain  hydration is  unclear.  Inability  to tolerate oral intake  and subsequent 
dehydration pronounce the  effects  of PONV, so we anticipate that an  early  intervention  to prevent the incidence and  
severity of PONV will allow forearly hospital discharge without an increased risk for hospital readmission. All items on
the PONV-intervention program have been  suggested to  decrease  PONV in  bariatric or other  high-risk populations (2, 3, 9, 
10, 14).  
Preliminary  data: We have previously completed  a prospective cohort study of 65 patients  undergoing isolated  non-
revisional laparoscopic bariatric surgery (subjects  undergoing concurrent procedures were excluded), and  serially  assessed 
for PONV using a 10-point Likert scale  (presented at 2017 SAGES Annual Conference). Using a standardized  
postoperative PONV management algorithm,  we identified  that 59 of 65 (90.8%) of patients  experienced  PONV at  some 
point during their  hospitalization  following LSG. The study was  conducted  in a clinical  setting  with  routine radiographic 
imaging  on POD 1 and  pathway-targeted  hospital discharge on POD 2. We  identified  that 20.7% of LSG  patients  
experienced  a prolonged hospital length  of stay  (past POD 2) and  6.9% were re-admitted  within  30-days for PONV. In a 
more contemporary clinical practice without routine imaging  and early  oral intake  initiation,  the effect of PONV is  more 
pronounced. In our current pathway  with  these elements  of care,  patients  undergoing LSG  are expected  to meet criteria for 
hospital discharge on postoperative day  1. In the  2015-2016 academic year,  we identified  that 49% of SG patients  were 
unable to  be discharged to  home on POD 1. 
Experimental design: This  is a prospective randomized  trial of subjects  undergoing LSG  for morbid obesity. Subjects  
will be randomized  to two groups (control vs PONV-intervention) as  described  above. Assessments : Subjects  will be 
assessed for the presence and  severity  of PONV at  1, 4, 12, 24 hours, and  3 weeks  following the end  of the surgical 
procedure (table 1). Nausea will be defined  as an unsettled  feeling  in the stomach  and urge to  vomit.  Vomiting  will be 
defined  as oral expulsion of gastric contents,  and retching  as expulsive attempts  without any  oral content.  We will use a 
10-point verbal rating  scale (VRS ) for the assessment of nausea as  used previously (3, 9). Vomiting  and retching  will be 
assessed in  a binary way. The Rhodes Index of nausea and  emesis , an 8-question survey (composite score range 0-32), 
will be used as  an additional assessment instrument at the later  time points (12 h and  later)  since  it evaluates  PONV over 
12-hour intervals  (15). This  index  has been  previously used for the  assessment of PONV following LSG  (16). At each  time 
point, total  opioids (converted to  morphine equivalents)  and rescue anti-emetics  used will be noted. Visits  to the 
emergency  room and  hospital re-admissions will be captured; these will be considered PONV-related if  the patient  
presents with  inability  to tolerate oral intake secondary to  PONV, and/or signs and  symptoms of dehydration, who are not 
found to  have other  pathology during evaluation  (i.e. readmission  for a patient  with  nausea due to  a systemic infection  will 
not be considered PONV-related). Outcome  measures : Primary  outcome for this  aim will be PONV-related delay  in 
hospital discharge, defined  as inability  to be discharged from the hospital on POD 1 due to  PONV. Secondary outcomes  
will be hospital length  of stay  (measured  as hours from the end  of the  surgical procedure), incidence of PONV (incidence 
of nausea and  emesis  will also  be assessed separately),  severity  of PONV (based on the VRS  and Rhodes Index), PONV-
related  resource utilization  (individually  measured  presentation  to the emergency  room and  hospital readmission  for 
PONV). 
Interpretation, Potential Pitfalls  and Alternative 
Strategies:  We anticipate a significant  reduction  
in PONV incidence and  PONV-related delayed  
hospital discharge in  the PONV-intervention 
group. Although unlikely,  it is possible that  we will 
be unable to  identify  a difference in  POD1 
discharge, as  the time of performance of LSG  may  
be a confounder and  bias the results  (i.e. patients  
undergoing SG earlier  in the day  may  be more likely  Time points Specific Aim 1: PONV Specific Aim 2: PRO
Baseline VRS, Rhodes Index GIQLI, EQ-5D 
1 hr VRS
4 hr VRS  
12 hr VRS, Rhodes Index
24 hr VRS, Rhodes Index QoR-15, GIQLI
3 wk VRS, Rhodes Index QoR-15, GIQLI, EQ-5D
Table 1: Patient  study assessments for each  time point.Approved: 5/22/2019
Expiration Date: 5/21/2020Stony Brook University Human Subjects Committee (IRB)
to be discharged to  home on POD1). In our current practice,  LSG  procedures are performed earlier  in the operating  room 
day, to  facilitate  earlier  hospital discharge the  following day. Despite this,  we have identified  a 49% failure rate for POD1 
discharge. In addition,  our secondary measures,  including  incidence/severity  of PONV and  length  of stay  (measured  in 
hours from the end  of surgery) are  not affected  by operating  room timing,  and will allow  for efficacy  assessment of our 
PONV-intervention, independent of time  of day  of LSG  completion.  It is also possible that we identify  no difference 
between the groups in terms of longer term PONV incidence. Our study will still provide valuable insight on the
epidemiology  of PONV after  hospital discharge following LSG, which  is currently  poorly characterized.  By allowing  us 
to assess the overall incidence of PONV at different timepoints,  this study will afford us the opportunity to  identify  a time 
period of high incidence and  further adjust our prevention efforts accordingly  in future studies. 
Specific Aim  2: Assess the effect  of a PONV-specific intervention on patient reported  outcomes (PRO). 
Hypothesis: We hypothesize that  a PONV-specific intervention  will significantly  improve patient-reported  quality  of 
recovery from surgery and  quality  of life.  
Rationale : PONV significantly  affects  the late phase of recovery (from hospital discharge to  return to  baseline),  because 
it impairs  the ability  to perform activities  of daily  living,  which  patients  value  as an important  goal of recovery (7). In a 
postoperative survey of 469 patients  evaluated  two weeks  after abdominal  surgery, visceral function (including PONV) 
correlated  with  physical and  functional impairment  during recovery.  Additionally,  one third  of patients  following 
ambulatory  laparoscopic surgery reported that nausea had  a negative effect on their  quality  of life,  during self-assessment 
on POD 5 (5). Since  PONV is  reported commonly  in LSG  patients,  we anticipate that improvement in  PONV will 
significantly  improve quality  of life and  overall  experience during the  intermediate (from post-anesthesia care unit until  
hospital discharge) and  late phases of recovery. Additionally,  the ability  to resume physical activity  is an important 
outcome of patient recovery (17). This  is particularly  important after  bariatric surgery, as  an adjunct for weight loss, and  
recommended  as part of clinical  practice guidelines  (18). It is  plausible that improvements  in PONV for SG patients  would 
have a significant  benefit in  terms  of progressive physical activity  and resumption of activities  of daily  living.   If the 
PONV intervention  is associated  with  improved patient experience and  PROs, it could  improve clinical decision  making  
for patients  considering LSG. 
Experimental design: Subjects  randomized  to control versus PONV-intervention from Specific  Aim 1, will be assessed 
in terms  of quality  of recovery and  quality  of life at  the intermediate and  late phases. Assessments : PROs will be obtained  
at 24 hours, and  3 weeks  following LSG  surgery (table  1). The Gastrointestinal Quality  of Life Index (GIQLI) is  a 
validated  instrument for the  assessment of quality  of life  following gastrointestinal surgery, previously used in  bariatric 
surgery research  (19-23). The  QoR-15 is  a validated  reliable instrument to  assess the quality  of a patient’s  postoperative 
recovery (24). This  survey has  been  also used for quality  of recovery assessment in  the late  phase, up to  30 days following 
gastrointestinal surgery (25, 26). The Part A of QoR-15 assesses overall  patient experience,  as well as  physical and  
functional status  without direct assessment of symptoms (e.g. nausea)  which  are evaluated  in Part B.  Broad  coherent 
assessment of quality  of life will  be performed using the EQ-5D index. This  is a validated  standardized  brief  instrument 
that provides a simple descriptive profile in  five domains  (mobility,  self-care,  usual activities,  pain  and anxiety)  and a 
single index  value for health  status,  designed for self-completion.  The EQ-5D Crosswalk index  calculator  will be used to  
convert the descriptive profiling into  a single index. EQ-5D has  been  extensively  used for quality  of life assessment in  
bariatric surgery (27-29). 
Outcome measures: Primary  outcome from this  aim will be difference in  the GIQLI index  at 2 weeks  postoperatively. 
Secondary outcomes  will be difference in  GIQLI at 24 hours and  3 weeks, difference in  QoR-15 at  each  time point, 
difference in  QoR-15 Part A at each  time point, difference in  EQ-5D self-assessed visual score, difference in  EQ-5D 
profiling (score in  each  category), and  difference in  EQ-5D index  at 3 weeks. 
Interpretation, Potential Pitfalls  and Alternative Strategies:  We  anticipate a significantly  higher GIQLI in  the PONV-
intervention  group. It is  likely  that an improvement  in PONV will a priori lead  to improvements  in the quality  of life 
indices  selected,  since these surveys include assessment of PONV. Although this  could  be considered bias,  we believe that Approved: 5/22/2019
Expiration Date: 5/21/2020Stony Brook University Human Subjects Committee (IRB)
improvement in  these validated  indices  would remain  a significant finding. However, to  further assess for global 
improvements  in quality  of life,  we will be separately  analyzing  Part A of the QoR-15 survey, which  doesn’t capture 
severity  and presence of PONV. Additionally,  the EQ-5D instrument includes  no direct  measurement of PONV, and  
would allow  us to  control for bias.  It is also possible that the PONV-intervention group experiences  no significant 
improvement in  quality  of life.  If we identify  an improvement in  PONV incidence  and severity  (specific  aim 1) without a 
concomitant improvement in quality oflife after recovery, thisfinding would suggest the limited impact of PONV on
quality  of life early  after  LSG. Such finding would allow  us to  focus our subsequent PONV intervention  methods  in the 
intermediate phase of recovery. The  EQ-5D instrument was  used over the more widely  used Short Form-36 due to  the 
ease of use for patients  (five vs 36 questions) and  the non-inferiority for postoperative patients.  
Statistical analysis : For continuous variables,  data distribution will be assessed using the  Shapiro-Wilk test.  Two-sided t-
test (means,  standard deviation)  and Wilcoxon  rank sum test  (median,  25th-75th percentiles)  will be used accordingly. 
Categorical variables  will be compared  using chi-square testing.  VRS  assessments  for all time points combined  will be 
co
mpared  using repeated  measures  ANOVA. 
Sample Size Considerations: The  primary  outcome  of the study will be incidence of PONV-related delay  of hospital 
discharge following LSG. Change in  proportion will be assessed with  chi-square testing.  We expect a decrease in  delay  of 
POD1 discharge from 49% to  20% (3, 8). Based  on the  data above, with  two-tailed  a=0.05 and  b=0.2, we would require 41 
subjects  per group (total N=82) to  detect  a significant difference with  the PONV-prevention. The Stony Brook Bariatric 
and Metabolic Weight  Loss Center  performs 100-150 LSG  procedures annually,  so we anticipate  that the proposed study 
will be completed  within  2 years. 
VI. TIMELINE 
Months Milestones
  1-3   4-6   7-9  9-12 13-15 16-18 19-21 22-24
IRB approval X
Study staff  training  X
Subject recruitment X X X X X X
Data analysis  X X
Manuscript preparation  X X
VII. INSTITUTIONAL APPROVALS   
Institutional approval will be obtained  from the Stony Brook University Institutional Review  Board. The  review  board 
meets  regularly  on a bi-monthly basis. 
VIII. REFERENCES  
1. Spaniolas  K, Kasten  KR,  Brinkley  J, Sippey ME,  Mozer  A, Chapman  WH,  Pories WJ.  The Changing Bariatric Surgery 
Landscape in  the USA. Obes Surg. 2015 Aug;25(8):1544-6. 
2. Ziemann-Gimmel P, Goldfarb AA, Koppman J, Marema  RT. Opioid-free total intravenous anaesthesia  reduces  
postoperative nausea and  vomiting  in bariatric surgery beyond triple prophylaxis. Br  J Anaesth. 2014 May;112(5):906-11. 
3. Benevides  ML,  Oliveira SS, de Aguilar-Nascimento  JE. The combination  of haloperidol, dexamethasone,  and 
ondansetron for prevention of postoperative nausea and  vomiting  in laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: a randomized  
double-blind trial.  Obes Surg. 2013 Sep;23(9):1389-96. Approved: 5/22/2019
Expiration Date: 5/21/2020Stony Brook University Human Subjects Committee (IRB)
4. Sippey M, Kasten  KR,  Chapman  WH,  Pories WJ,  Spaniolas  K. 30-day readmissions after  sleeve gastrectomy  versus 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2016 Jun;12(5):991-6. 
5. Pan  PH, Lee SC,  Harris LC.  Antiemetic prophylaxis for postdischarge nausea and  vomiting  and impact  on functional 
quality  of living  during recovery in  patients  with  high emetic risks: a prospective, randomized,  double-blind comparison 
of two  prophylactic antiemetic regimens.  Anesth Analg. 2008 Aug;107(2):429-38. 
6. Carroll NV, Miederhoff P, Cox  FM, Hirsch JD. Postoperative nausea and  vomiting  after  discharge from outpatient 
surgery centers.  Anesth Analg. 1995 May;80(5):903-9. 
7. Urbach DR,  Harnish JL,  McIlroy JH, Streiner  DL. A measure of quality  of life  after  abdominal  surgery. Qual Life Res.  
2006 Aug;15(6):1053-61.
8. Apfel CC,  Korttila K, Abdalla M, Kerger H, Turan  A, Vedder I, Zernak  C, Danner K, Jokela R,  Pocock SJ, Trenkler  S, 
Kredel M, Biedler  A, Sessler  DI, Roewer  N; IMPACT Investigators. A factorial trial  of six  interventions  for the 
prevention of postoperative nausea and  vomiting.  N Engl J Med. 2004 Jun 10;350(24):2441-51. 
9. Sinha AC,  Singh PM, Williams  NW,  Ochroch EA,  Goudra BG.  Aprepitant's prophylactic efficacy  in decreasing  
postoperative nausea and  vomiting  in morbidly obese patients  undergoing bariatric surgery. Obes Surg. 2014 
Feb;24(2):225-31. 10. Castro  
DS Jr, Leão  P, Borges S, Gomes  L, Pacheco  M, Figueiredo P. Sugammadex  reduces  postoperative pain  after  
laparoscopic bariatric surgery: a randomized  trial.  Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan  Tech.  2014 Oct;24(5):420-3. 
11. Thorell A, MacCormick  AD, Awad S, Reynolds N, Roulin  D, Demartines  N, Vignaud M, Alvarez A, Singh PM, Lobo 
DN. Guidelines  for Perioperative Care in  Bariatric  Surgery: Enhanced  Recovery  After  Surgery (ERAS) Society  
Recommendations.  World  J Surg. 2016 Sep;40(9):2065-83. 
12. Gan  TJ, Diemunsch  P, Habib  AS, Kovac A, Kranke P, Meyer  TA, Watcha  M, Chung F, Angus S, Apfel CC,  Bergese  
SD, Candiotti KA, Chan  MT,  Davis  PJ, Hooper VD, Lagoo-Deenadayalan  S, Myles  P, Nezat G, Philip  BK,  Tramèr  MR; 
Society  for Ambulatory Anesthesia.. Consensus guidelines  for the management of postoperative nausea and  vomiting.  
Anesth Analg. 2014 Jan;118(1):85-113. 13. Apfel CC,  Philip  BK,  Cakmakkaya  OS, Shilling  A, Shi YY, Leslie  JB, Allard  M, Turan  A, Windle  P, Odom-Forren J, 
Hooper VD, Radke OC,  Ruiz J, Kovac A. Who  is at risk for postdischarge nausea and  vomiting  after  ambulatory  surgery? 
Anesthesiology. 2012 Sep;117(3):475-86. 14. Apfel CC,  Zhang  K, George E,  Shi S, Jalota L,  Hornuss C,  Fero KE,  Heidrich  F, Pergolizzi  JV, Cakmakkaya OS, 
Kranke P. Transdermal scopolamine  for the prevention of postoperative 
 nausea and  vomiting: a systematic  review  and 
meta-analysis.  Clin Ther.  2010 Nov;32(12):1987-2002. 
15. Rhodes VA, McDaniel RW.  The Index of Nausea,  Vomiting,  and Retching: a new  format of the lndex  of Nausea and  
Vomiting.  Oncol Nurs Forum. 1999 Jun;26(5):889-94. 
16. Afaneh C,  Costa R,  Pomp A, Dakin  G. A prospective randomized  controlled  trial assessing the  efficacy  of 
omentopexy during laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy  in reducing postoperative gastrointestinal symptoms. Surg Endosc. 
2015 Jan;29(1):41-7. 17. Feldman  LS, Lee L,  Fiore J Jr. What outcomes  are important in  the assessment of Enhanced  Recovery  After  Surgery 
(ERAS) pathways? Can  J Anaesth. 2015. Feb;62(2):120-30. 
18. Mechanick  JI, Youdim A, Jones DB,  Timothy  Garvey W,  Hurley DL,  Molly  McMahon M, Heinberg LJ,  Kushner R,  
Adams  TD, Shikora S, Dixon JB,  Brethauer  S. Clinical practice guidelines  for the perioperative  nutritional,  metabolic,  and 
nonsurgical support of the bariatric surgery patient--2013 update: cosponsored by American  Association  of Clinical  
Endocrinologists, the Obesity  Society,  and American  Society  for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 
2013 Mar-Apr;9(2):159-91. Approved: 5/22/2019
Expiration Date: 5/21/2020Stony Brook University Human Subjects Committee (IRB)
19. Eypasch  E, Williams  JI, Wood-Dauphinee S, Ure BM,  Schmülling  C, Neugebauer E,   Troidl H. Gastrointestinal  
Quality  of Life  Index: development,  validation  and application  of a new  instrument.  Br J Surg. 1995 Feb;82(2):216-22. 
20. Lee WJ,  Huang MT,  Yu PJ, Wang  W, Chen  TC. Laparoscopic vertical banded gastroplasty and  laparoscopic gastric 
bypass: a comparison. Obes Surg. 2004 May;14(5):626-34. 
21. Freys SM, Tigges  H, Heimbucher  J, Fuchs KH, Fein  M, Thiede  A. Quality  of life following laparoscopic gastric  
banding in  patients  with  morbid obesity. J Gastrointest Surg. 2001 Jul-Aug;5(4):401-7. 
22. Ignat M, Vix  M, Imad  I, D'Urso A, Perretta S, Marescaux  J, Mutter  D. Randomized  trial of Roux-en-Y gastric  bypass 
versus sleeve gastrectomy  in achieving  excess  weight loss. Br  J Surg. 2016 Nov 30. 
23. Nickel F, Schmidt  L, Bruckner T,  Billeter  AT, Kenngott HG, Müller-Stich  BP, Fischer  L. Gastrointestinal  Quality  of 
Life Improves Significantly  After  Sleeve Gastrectomy  and Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass-a Prospective Cross-Sectional 
Study Within  a 2-Year Follow-up. Obes Surg. 2016 Nov 22. 
24. Stark  PA, Myles  PS, Burke JA. Development and  psychometric evaluation  of a postoperative quality  of recovery 
score: the QoR-15. Anesthesiology. 2013 Jun;118(6):1332-40. 
25. Shida D, Wakamatsu  K, Tanaka Y, Yoshimura A, Kawaguchi M, Miyamoto  S, Tagawa K. The postoperative patient-
reported quality  of recovery in  colorectal cancer  patients  under enhanced  recovery after  surgery using QoR-40. BMC 
Cancer.  2015 Oct 26;15:799. 
26. Kleif  J, Vilandt J, Gögenur I. Recovery  and convalescence after  laparoscopic surgery for appendicitis: A longitudinal 
cohort study. J Surg Res.  2016 Oct;205(2):407-18. 
27. Tarride JE,  Breau  R, Sharma AM, Hong D, Gmora S, Guertin  JR, O'Reilly  D, Xie F, Mehran A. The Effect of 
Bariatric Surgery on Mobility,  Health-Related  Quality  of Life,  Healthcare Resource Utilization,  and Employment Status.  
Obes Surg. 2017 Feb;27(2):349-356. 28. Sauerland  S, Weiner  S, Dolezalova  K, Angrisani L,  Noguera CM,  García-Caballero  M, Rupprecht F, Immenroth  M. 
Mapping utility  scores from a disease-specific quality-of-life measure in  bariatric surgery patients.  Value  Health.  2009 
Mar-Apr;12(2):364-70. 29. Date RS,  Walton  SJ, Ryan  N, Rahman  SN, Henley  NC.  Is selection  bias toward super obese patients  in the rationing  
of metabolic  surgery justified?--A  pilot study from the United  Kingdom. Surg Obes Relat  Dis. 2013 Nov-Dec;9(6):981-6. Approved: 5/22/2019
Expiration Date: 5/21/2020Stony Brook University Human Subjects Committee (IRB)
Approved: 5/22/2019
Expiration Date: 5/21/2020Stony Brook University Human Subjects Committee (IRB)