Portola Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  1 A PHASE  1/2A OPEN- LABEL,  MULTI -DOSE,  MULTI -CENTER  ESCALATION 
AND EXPLORATORY STUDY OF CERDULATINIB  (PRT062070) IN PATIENTS  
WITH RELAPSED/REFRACTORY CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA  
(CLL)/SMALL LYMPHOCYTIC LYMPHOMA  (SLL)  OR B-CELL  OR 
T-CELL NON- HODGKIN  LYMPHOMA  (NHL)
DRUG  NAME:  Ce rdulatinib  (PRT062070) 
PROTOCOL  NUMBER:  13-601
PHASE:  1/2a 
IND NUMBER:  118394 
EUDRACT  NUMBER:  2016-002182-65 
TRIAL  SPONSOR:  Port ola Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. 
270 East  Grand  Avenue 
South San Francisco, CA 94080 
MEDICAL  MONI TORS:   
Portola Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. 
 
Syneos Health  
PROTOCOL  DATE:  Or iginal: 14 August 2013 
Amendment 1: 26 September  2013 
Amendment 2: 19 November 2013 
Amendment 3: 02 April  2015 
Amendment 4: 06 April  2016 
Amendment 5: 12 October  2016 
Amendment 6: 05 May 2017 
Amendment 7*: 06 March 2019 
Amendment 8: 04 April 2019 Amendment 9: 14 October 2019 
*Amendment 7 was superseded by Amendment 8 prior to
distribution/operationalization.NCT #[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Clinical Study 13-6 01 
 
Pharmaceuticals, I nc. 

Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  2  
  
 
CONFIDENDIALITY  STATEMENT  
This  protocol  is the property  of Portola Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. It is a confidential  communication.  
Acceptance implies an agreement not to disclose information contained herein that is not otherwise publicly  
available, with the exception that it may be disclosed  to an Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent  
Ethics Committee (IEC) for the purpose of obtaining approval to conduct the study.  The IRB/IEC is 
requested  and expected  to maintain  confidentiality.  This document  may not be used or  published without  the 
consent  of Portola  Pharmaceuticals, Inc.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  3  
  
 
INVESTIGATOR’S  AGREEMENT  
I have received and read the Investigator’s Brochure for cerdulatinib. I have read Amendment 9 
to Protocol number 13-601 entitled A Phase 1/2A Open-Label, Multi-Dose, Multi- Center  
Escalation and Exploratory Study of Cerdulatinib (PRT062070) in Patients with 
Relapsed/Refractory Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)/Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma 
(SLL)  OR B -Cell or T -Cell Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma. I agree to conduct the study as outlined. 
I agree to maintain the  confidentiality  of all  information received or  developed  in connection 
with this  protocol. 
 
   
 
     
 
Signature of Investigator  Date  
Printed  Name  of Investigator    
 
  
Cerdulatinib  Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceutical s, Inc. 
 
 
 
SPONSOR'S AGREEMENT  
I have rea
d Amendment 9 to Protocol  number 13-601 entitled  A Phase  112A Open -Label,  Multi - 
Dose, Multi -Center Escalation and Exploratory Study of Cerdulatinib (PRT062070) in Patients  
with Relapsed/Refractory Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia  (CLL)/Small  Lymphocytic Lymphoma  
(SLL)  ORB -Cell or T-Cell Non-Hodgkin  Lymphoma  and agree  to abide  by all provisions  set 
forth  therein.  
 
I agree to comply with the ICH Tripartite Guideline on Good Clinical Practice (GCP), applicable  
Food and Drug  Administration (FDA)  regulations  set forth  in 21 CFR Parts  11, 50, 54, 56, 
312 and all locally  applicable laws.  
 
 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. 
South San  Francisco,  CA 
USA  
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
  
 
Confidential   
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Page4  

Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  5  
  
 
STUDY CONTACT  INFORMATION AND  PROCEDURES  IN CASE  OF EMERGENCY  
 
Table 1: Study  Contact Information  and 24- Hour  Emergency  Contact 
 
Role  in Study  Name  Contact  Information  
Portola Responsible  
Physician/Medical  Monitor   Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. 
270 East Grand Avenue  
South San Francisco,  CA 94080  
Phone:   
Email:  
Drug  Safety  Physician,  
Syneos  Health  Medical  Monitor   Phone:   
Email: 
 
24-Hour  SAE  Reporting  
Procedures  Not applicable  Report SAEs using the methods described on  
the SAE  cover  form, e.g., email  
to  
General Study Inquiries and  
Communication, Pre -screening  
Information,  Enrollment  Forms  Cerdulatinib  Clinical  Study  
Mailbox   
IP Requests and Complaints  13601 Drug  Mailbox   
Lab Kit Requests and Lab 
Shipment Notifications  13601 Lab Mailbox   

Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  6  
  
 
Table 2: Summary  of Key  Changes from  Original Protocol (14  August  2013): 
Amendments  1 through 9 
 
Protocol Version:  
Date   
Key Changes  
Original: 
14 August  2013  • The original version of Protocol Number 13- 601, a clinical study that investigated  
PRT062070 (hereafter referred to as “cerdulatinib”), was entitled A Phase I Open- Label, Multi- Dose, Dose -Escalation Study of PRT062070 in Patients with 
Relapsed/Refractory Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)/Small Lymphocytic  
Lymphoma (SLL)  or B-Cell Non- Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) . 
Amendment  1: 
26 September  2013  Incorporated  changes  to the protocol  as recommended  by FDA  in response  to the Original  
Investigational  New Drug  (IND) Application  118394 for  PRT062070, as  follows: 
• Changed starting  dose from  15 mg BID to 15 mg QD. 
• Clarified  DLT  criteria  regarding the exclusion of patients  for DLT  evaluation  and AEs 
leading  to treatment  discontinuation.  
• Modified  DLT hematologic  criteria  and made  additional changes  to DLT criteria.  
• Added of  CBC and serum chemistry  testing  on Days  1 and 15 for Cycles  2 through  4. 
Amendment  2: 
19 November  2013  • Added additional PK monitoring during  the first cycle.  In order  to do this the cycle 
length was  changed from  21 days to 28 days throughout.  
• Changed the schedule of tumor assessments from every 4 cycles after the first  
assessment  at Cycle  3 to every  3 cycles.  This  maintained  tumor  assessments at every  
12 weeks  with the  new cycle length  of 28 days.  
• Started  QD dosing and allowed  for flexibility  to test BID dosing,  depending on 
available  PK data from  prior cohorts.  
• Added a list of strong  CYP3A  inhibitors  and inducers  and caution  the Investigator  as to 
their use.  
Amendment  3: 
02 April  2015  • Changed the design of the study  so as to conduct  Part 2 (Dose  Expansion phase)  of the 
study using a 45 mg QD dose in 2 Groups  of up to 40 patients  each:  
o Group 1 was planned for patients  with CLL/SLL who had progressed or relapsed  
on prior therapy with any Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor (such as  
ibrutinib)  or any phosphatidylinositide  3 kinase (PI3K) inhibitor  
(such  as idelalisib)  
o Group 2 was planned  for patients  with FL who had progressed  or relapsed  on prior  
therapy.  
• Substituted the name cerdulatinib for PRT062070 throughout the protocol.  Note : The 
title of the study was not changed and still read A Phase I Open -Label, Multi- Dose,  
Dose  Escalation.  
 
Study of PRT062070 in Patients with Relapsed/Refractory Chronic Lymphocytic  
Leukemia (CLL)/Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma (SLL) or B -Cell Non -Hodgkin  
Lymphoma (NHL)  
1 Patients  with FL Grade  1 to 3A/iNHL  who have  received  ≥ 1 prior  treatment 
regimen.  
2 Patients with FL Grade 1 to 3A/iNHL  who have received ≥ 1 prior treatment  
regimen.  In addition  to receiving  cerdulatinib,  this cohort  will also receive rituximab  
IV at 375 mg/m2 during Cycle  1 on Days  1, 8, 15, and 22 of Cycle  1 and  during  
Cycles  4, 6, 8, and 10 on Day 1 only.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  7  
  
 
Protocol Version:  
Date   
Key Changes  
 3 Patients with aggressive NHL (aNHL), defined as DLBCL, FL 3B, MCL, and  
transformed NHL.  These patients have relapsed from ≥ 1 but ≤ 3 prior cytotoxic  
chemotherapy regimens with  an anti CD20  antibody,  (e.g.,  R-CHOP,  BR).  Patients  
must have received an anthracycline based therapy unless anthracyclines were  
deemed inappropriate in the judgement  of the investigator.  
Patients  must  have  either  relapsed  following  ASCT or  not be candidates  (ineligible)  
for ASCT,  defined as meeting any  of the following  criteria  [1]: a) age ≥ 70 years;  
b) DLCO < 50% by pulmonary function tests; c) FEV1/FVC < 60% predicted by 
pulmonary function tests;  d) LVEF  < 45% by MUGA or echocardiogram;  
e) uncontrolled arrhythmia;  f) calculated  creatinine  clearance  (Cockcroft -Gault)  
≤ 60 mL/min; g) other comorbidities (e.g., medical conditions or psychosocial  
conditions)  that would  likely  result  in an unacceptably  high probability  of treatment/ 
transplant related morbidity and mortality in the judgement of the investigator  (e.g., 
high HCT -CI, CIRS, scores);  h) refusal of  ASCT.  
(Note : Antibody drug conjugates  (ADC)  count  as cytotoxic  chemotherapy.  Salvage 
chemotherapy prior to ASCT with or without maintenance therapy counts as one  
regimen.)  
4 Patients  with CLL/SLL who have  received  ≥ 1 prior  treatment regimen.  
5 Patients  with PTCL  NHL  who have  received  ≥ 1 prior  systemic  treatment  regimen  
for PTCL.  
6 Patients  with CTCL  NHL  who have  received  ≥ 1 prior  systemic  treatment  regimen  
for CTCL.  
Amendment  4: 
06 April  2016  • Changes to the study design:  Updated the overall study design so that Protocol 13 -601 
was described as an open -label, Phase 1/2a, multi- dose, multi -center trial of orally  
administered  cerdulatinib with  2 distinct phases  (note  that at the time of implementation  
of Amendment 4, the Phase  1 portion of the study is closed  to enrollment).  
o Expanded Phase  2a (Exploratory) portion  to include  6 cohorts,  each defined by 
cancer  type and  prior therapy:  
• Title Change:  Changed title of protocol to A Phase I/2a Open- Label, Multi- Dose,  
Multi- Center Escalation and Exploratory Study of Cerdulatinib (PTR062070) In 
Patients with Relapsed/Refractory Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) /Small 
Lymphocytic  Lymphoma  (SLL) or B-Cell or T-Cell Non Hodgkin  Lymphoma  (NHL).  
• Updated/clarified  Phase  2 objectives  to address  6 cohorts.  
• Updated/clarified  Phase  2 endpoints  to address  6 cohorts.  
• Updated  Phase  2a cancer -specific  Inclusion  Criteria.  
• Updated  Exclusion Criteria  to apply to patients  in Phase  2a. 
• Updated  the Statistical Analysis  Plan to  apply  to Phase  2a. 
• Updated or  added  the following  appendices:  
o Appendix 3, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status ; 
Appendix 4, Table of Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors and Inducers (and also added 
Table of CYP3A Sensitive Substrates); Appendix 5, added response definitions  
for B -cell NHL, PTCL, CLL, CTCL, and WM; Appendix 6, added prognostic  
indices  for the following:  Follicular  Lymphoma  International  Prognostic  Index-1 
(FLIPI) Criteria, International Prognostic Index (IPI) Criteria, Age -adjusted  
International Prognostic Index, Simplified Mantle -Cell Prognostic Index (MIPI),  
International Prognostic Scoring System for Waldenst röm’s Macroglobulinemia  
(IPSSWM); Appendix 7, added decision tree for differential of ABC vs. GCG  
type of DLCBL by ICH -Hans methodology; Appendix 8, added the following 
staging  systems:  Rai staging  system  for CLL,  Binet  staging system  for CLL,  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  8  
  
 
Protocol Version:  
Date   
Key Changes  
Amendment  4: 
06 April 2016  
(Cont’d)  Lugano Modification of Ann Arbor staging system for nodal lymphoma; and  
Appendix  9, updated  to clarify  Global  Health  Assessment  scale  for patients  to 
report  their level  of health  and added  that patients  could decline  to answer.  
• Established  a Study Committee  for Protocol  13-601. 
Amendment  5: 
14 Oct  2016  • Reduced  starting  dose of cerdulatinib  from  35 mg BID to 30 mg  BID,  with subsequent  
reductions to 25 mg BID and then 20 mg BID permitted (Section 3.1.2.2.1 and 
throughout  protocol).  
• Added pre- and post-study  drug plasma  sampling  at C1D15  time point  (Section  7.2.2.2).  
• Allowed  unscheduled plasma samples  for PK analyses  to be collected  at the discretion  
of the Investigator (e.g.,  in the event  of an AE) (Section  9.1.2).  
• Added instruction  to record date and time of last dose and last meal  prior  to PK  
sampling  (Section  7.2.2.1 and throughout  Section  7.2.2).  
• Modified Phase 2a General Inclusion Criteria, Section 4.1.2, item 5, to clarify the types  
of prior therapy  allowed.  
• Modified  Phase  2a General  Inclusion  Criteria,  Section  4.1.2,  item 7, to specify  ANC  
and platelet criteria for CLL  patients.  
• Modified Phase 2a General Inclusion Criteria, Section 4.1.2, item 8, to redefine  
adequate renal clearance.  
• Mandated prophylaxis for Pneumocystis carinii (PCP, aka Pneumocystis jirovecii  
Pneumonia) as well as prophylaxis for other opportunistic infections, per local standard of care or NCCN guidelines for all CLL enrolled patients; all other enrolled patients  
should receive prophylaxis  described  above  (Section  7.6.2).  
• Identified  AEs that may indicate  potential drug toxicity  (Section  10.1.3).  
• Updated  routine  chemistries  to include  assays for amylase and lipase  (throughout  
Section  7.2.2  and Section  10.2.1).  
• Placed  methodology applicable to the Phase  1 (Dose -Escalation)  portion  of the study  
(now  closed  to enrollment) in  Appendix  12. 
• Added Table  2: Summary  of Key Protocol  Changes.  
• Made additional  clarifications,  deletions,  and administrative  corrections  throughout  the 
document  and Appendices  to improve  clarity  and consistency.  
Amendment  6: 
05 May 2017  • Dose  reductions  to 15 mg BID permitted  (after  reducing  from  30 mg BID starting  dose 
to 25 mg BID and then 20 mg BID)  (Section  3.1.2.2.1) 
• Dose escalations permitted after a dose reduction (up to a maximum dose of 30 mg BID) at the discretion of the investigator based upon clinical judgement and with Sponsor  Medical Mo nitor approval.  
• Modified Study Methods to remove visit -by-visit instructions and instead provide  
details  on each assessment  (Section  7.0). The visit- by-visit instructions  can be found in 
Appendix 1 . 
• Added the option for patients to have a reduced on- site visit cycle after Cycle 12 in the  
event of a treatment response at Investigator’s discretion and with Sponsor Medical  
Monitor  approval.  The visit schedule  can be reduced from  on-site from  Day 1 of every  
new cycle to every 3 cycles.  Site staff should conduct phone visits for the cycles when 
the patient  is not on-site (Section 7.3.2.1).  
• Clarified that patients should be on-site for Day 1 of all new cycles after Cycle 2  
(Section  7.3.2).  
• Modified  Inclusion Criteria, Section  4.1.2,  item 8 to decrease minimum  creatinine  
clearance from  ≥ 60 mL/min  to ≥ 50 mL/min  and allow  for urine  collection  to measure 
creatinine  clearance.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  9  
  
 
Protocol Version:  
Date   
Key Changes  
Amendment  6: 
05 May 2017  
(Cont’d)  • Modified  Exclusion  Criteria,  Section  4.2, item 11 to prohibit  any active  infection  
requiring systemic treatment (not limited to  IV treatment).  
• Changed overdose  reporting  requirements, including  specifying  the timeframe  to 
require  reporting within  24 hours  of awareness  (Section  10.2.4.11 ). 
• Addition  of DNA and MRD  sampling  time points  (Appendix 1 ). 
• Reduced  post-dose Vital Signs  collection  to only 1 hour post-dose for all cohorts  except  
Cohort  2 (Section 7.1.6 ). 
• Clarified that bone marrow biopsy and aspiration should only be repeated as clinically 
indicated  in patients  who were marrow -positive  for lymphoma  at baseline  and to verify  
response  in CLL  patients  (Section  7.1.12.1).  
• Removed  the criteria  governing cohort  expansion  (Section  11.2.2 ). 
• Changed long- term survival follow -up from “a minimum of 2 years” to “up to 2 years”  
(Section  7.3.2.3).  
• Clarified  that serum  protein  electrophoresis  (SPEP)  and serum  immunoelectrophoresis  
(SIEP) are required for Cohort  1 WM patients  (Appendix  1) 
• Removed  60 mg cerdulatinib  formulation  as well as 50-count  bottle  packaging  
(Section  6.1.1).  
• Added visit windows  and visit guideline  clarification  based upon previous  Global  
Memo #2  (Section  7.3.3  and Appendix  1). 
• Clarified  that PPIs are a prohibited medication  (Section  7.5.1 ). 
• Made additional  clarifications,  deletions,  and administrative  corrections  throughout  the 
document  and Appendices  to improve  clarity  and consistency.  
Amendment  7: 
06 March  2019  • Additional starting dose options were added for cerdulatinib.  Starting doses are 30, 25,  
or 20 mg BID (Section  5.1.3 ). 
• Additional  PK sampling  was added  at C1D1  and C1D8  at 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 24  hours  
post-dose,  and the  C1D15 post -dose sample  was removed  (Section  7.1.11).  
• Changes  to Phase  2a general  inclusion criteria  (Section  4.1.2 ): 
o Prior  therapy  (IC #5) was updated  to require  patients with  known  
CD30 -expressing PTCL to have had at least one prior therapy that included a  
CD30 -directed antibody (e.g.,  brentuximab vedotin).  
o Contraception requirements  (IC #6) for Cohort  2 were  aligned  with the rituximab  
label, requiring patients use effective contraception during treatment with  
rituximab and for 12 months  after the last dose of rituximab.  
o Adequacy of bone marrow reserves (IC #7) was updated to specify no limit on  
ANC  or platelet count  required  for patients  with leukemic forms  of PTCL  (ATLL, 
PLL,  LGL) or hepatosplenic T -cell lymphoma (HSTCL). 
o Renal  function inclusion (IC #8) was modified  to require a creatinine  clearance  
≥ 30 mL/min  (previously:  serum  creatinine  level  ≤ 2 upper  limit of normal  [ULN]  
and a creatinine clearance ≥ 50  mL/min).  
o Cohort 1 will no longer enroll patients with marginal zone lymphoma (MZL) or  
Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia  (IC #11).  
• Changes  to Phase  2a exclusio n criteria  (Section  4.2): 
o Acid reducing agent (ARA) (EC #4) consumption was removed as an exclusion  
(e.g., ARAs are permitted), and it was clarified that intake of CYP3A4 -sensitive  
substrates  was also prohibited.  
o Prior therapy (EC #8) with alemtuzumab must have been greater than 3 weeks  
prior  to C1D1  (previously: 8 weeks). 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  10  
  
 
Protocol Version:  
Date   
Key Changes  
Amendment  7: 
06 March 2019 
(Cont’d)  o HIV and hepatitis (EC #10): positive/negative status must be known, with  
additional testing required if a patient does not have documentation of prior  
negative  hepatitis  panel  or negative  HIV history  for patients.  
o Removed  the directive  to administer  cerdulatinib  under  fasting  conditons;  
cerdulatinib  may be administered with  food (Section 5.1.1 ). 
o Peripheral blood quantitative EBV polymerase chain reaction assay (PCR) was  
added to the baseline assessment and should be performed post -baseline for any  
unexplained fevers  if there is clinical suspicion of EBV  reactivation  
(Section  5.2.1.4).  
o Guidance  on the management  of Grade  1 and 2 diarrhea,  nausea and vomiting  was 
added  (Sections 5.2.1.5 and 5.2.1.6 ). 
o The guidelines  for dose reductions  for cerdulatinib  were  updated ( Table  8). 
• Clarified  that rituximab  is not provided by the Sponsor  as it is considered  standard  of 
care (Section 5.3). 
• Added collection  of molecular/mutation  profile  if obtained  as standard of  care 
(Section  7.1.9.2).  
• Clarified  that patients  may continue  adjuvant  hormonal  therapy for prostate  or breast  
cancer  (Section 7.5.1 ). 
• Immunosuppressive agents was removed as a prohibited medication group (Section 7.5.1 ). 
• Restrictions  on the administration  of anti-emetic  agents  were  removed  (Section 7.5.2).  
• Description of the Study Committee composition and function was revised to reflect  
current  review  practice (Section 7.6). 
• Assessement  of Safety  (Section  10.0) was revised  for clarity.  No new information  was 
added.  
• For Cohort  1 iNHL  patients  only, whole  blood  sample  collection  for immune  flow 
chemistry  was removed from  the protocol  (Section  7.1.10.2 and Appendix 1 ). 
• Whole  blood sample  collection  (all patients)  for isolation  of cell-free tumor  DNA 
(ctDNA)  was added  (Section  7.1.10.1  and Appendix 1 ). 
• Post-dose vital signs  assessments  was removed from  Cycle  2, Day 1 in the Schedule  of 
Assessments  (Appendix 1); a post-dose assessment  was added in error to Cycle  2, 
Day 15. 
• Medical  Monitor  changed to  Syneos  Health  
(previously:   Medical  Monitor,  INC Research). 
• Administrative  Sections  12.0 – 16.0 were  updated to align  with company  standard.  
• Appendix 12 was removed.  This  appendix contained the methodology applicable  to the 
Phase 1 portion of the study which is closed, but may be referenced in earlier versions  
of the protocol.  
Amendment  8: 
04 April 2019  • Clarified instructions for the management of EBV reactivation (Section 5.2.1.4 ): in 
select  cases,  patients may  continue  to receive  cerdulatinib  with the Medical  Monitor  
approval.  
• Clarified  recording persistent  versus  recurrent  adverse  events  (Section 10.2.4.3).  
• The Schedule of Assessments ( Appendix 1 ) was updated  for the following: 
a. Addition of a line item for HIV/HBV/HCV infection testing required as part of  
EC #10. 
b. Correction  of pharmacodynamics  sampling time  point:  removed  at C1D9  and 
added at C1D8.  

Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  11  
  
 
Protocol Version:  
Date   
Key Changes  
Amendment  9: 
14 October  2019  • Updated this Summary of Key Changes table (Amendment 7) based on omissions  
identified and  communicated in  Global Study  Memo  #14. 
• Added an exception to the statement that any patients with a dose interruption of > 28  
days should  be permanently  discontinued from  cerdulatinib  therapy  (Section  5.2.1.3.1 ). 
• Updated  Table  8 Guidelines for  Dose  Reductions  for Cerdulatinib  to state “may  restart”  
instead of “restart” for consi stency with language in Section 5.2.1.3.1 Dose  
Modifications  to Cerdulatinib  During Phase  2a. 
• Updated Section 5.2.1.5 Management of Diarrhea and Section 5.2.1.6 Management of  
Nausea and Vomiting to indicate that cerdulatinib can be restarted at the same dose  
level  or at the next  lower  dose level.  
• Added details  on new presentations  of cerdulatinib  that may  be provided by Portola  
Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. in Amendment  9 (Section  6.1.1 ). 
• Updated  language  in Section  7.1.6  Vital Signs  for clarity  and to allow  post-dose vital 
sign measurements for  Cohort  2 to be  performed per standard of care.  
• Updated vital sign assessment window from ±5 minutes to ± 10 minutes in 
Section  7.1.6  Vital Signs  for consistency with the Schedule  of Assessments.  
• Deleted whole blood sample collection for pharmacodynamics and isolation of cell -free 
tumor DNA, as this is no longer needed (Section 7.1.10.1 and Schedule of Assessments  
[Appendix 1 ]) per  Global Study  Memo  #15. 
• Deleted  assessments for MRD (Sections 7.1.10.2, 7.1.12.2, 7.3.2.4, and 8.2.2;  
Schedule  of Assessments [ Appendix 1 ]) per Global  Study Memo #15.  
• Updated Section 7.1.12.1 Bone Marrow Biopsy and Aspiration and the Schedule of  
Assessments  (Appendix 1 ) for clarity  and accuracy.  
• Removed the 2 -year long -term follow -up from the study (Section 7.3.2.3 ; Schedule of  
Assessments [ Appendix 1]), changed the definition of End of Study (Section 3.1.3) to  
reflect removal of the long -term follow -up, and changed the estimated study duration 
(Section 3.1.4; synopsis) to reflect removal of the long- term follow -up; removed 
references  to long-term follow -up in Sections  5.2.1.3.1 and  5.2 .1.3.2 . 
• Updated  language for  flexibility  in Section  7.6 Study Committee,  since  Principal 
Investigators  may not be part of the Study  Committee in  Phase  2a. 
• Updated  Section  3.1.5  Assessments,  Section  9.2 Pharmacodynamic  Assays,  and 
Synopsis  to accurately  reflect  sample collection.  
• Updated  the causality  categories  and definitions  of each category  for adverse  events  
(Section  10.2.3) 
• Updated the AE reporting term to “Disease Progression” for a death that is attributed solely to progression of the underlying malignancy (Section 10.2.4.7) to clearly  
distinguish  between  progression of an underlying malignan cy (disease  progression)  and 
a new malignancy (new AE).  
• Corrected  the rituximab  infusion  timepoints  in the Schedule  of Assessments  
(Appendix 1 ) for consistency  with the protocol  body and synopsis.  
• Deleted  the post dose vital signs assessment  at C2D15 in the Schedule  of Assessments  
(Appendix 1) for consistency with the protocol body, as this was incorrectly added to 
the Schedule  of Assessments  in Amendment  7, but this assessment  is not needed.  
• Added AE assessment at C1D9 and deleted AE assessment at long -term follow -up in 
the Schedule  of Assessments in  Appendix  1 (these  were  errors  in Amendment  8). 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  12  
  
 
SYNOPSIS  
 
Name  of Sponsor/Company:  Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. 
Name  of Investigational  Product:  Cerdulatinib  (PRT062070)  
Name  of Active  Ingredient:  Cerdulatinib  (PRT062070)  
Title:  A Phase 1/2a Open -Label, Multi- Dose, Multi- Center Escalation and Exploratory Study of Cerdulatinib 
(PRT062070)  in Patients  with Relapsed/Refractory  Chronic  Lymphocytic  Leukemia (CLL)/Small  Lymphocytic  
Lymphoma  (SLL) or B -Cell or T-Cell Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL)  
Study  Centers:  Phase  1: 7 sites in the United  States.  Phase  2a: Approximately 40 sites  in the United States.  
Phase  of Development:  1/2a 
Study  Duration:  The duration  of the study is approximately 6 years  (Phase  1 and Phase 2a combined).  
Objectives  and Endpoints:  
Phase  1 (Escalation  portion)  
Primary  Objective  
• To determine the maximum tolerated dose/maximum administered dose (MTD/MAD) of cerdulatinib in 
patients  with relapsed/refractory  chronic  lymphocytic  leukemia  (CLL),  small  lymphocytic  lymphoma  (SLL)  or 
B-cell non Hodgkin  lymphoma (NHL).  
 
Secondary  Objectives  
• To make  a preliminary  assessment  of the antitumor  activity  of cerdulatinib  in patients  with relapsed/refractory  
CLL/SLL or B -cell NHL, as assessed by overall response rate (ORR), defined as complete response (CR) + 
partial response (PR).  
• To assess the safety  and tolerability  of cerdulatinib.  
• To determine  the pharmacokinetic  (PK)  profile  of cerdulatinib.  
• To evaluate the pharmacodynamics  (PD)  of cerdulatinib.  
 
Phase  2a (Exploratory portion)  
Primary  Objective  
• To assess the antitumor activity of cerdulatinib in patients with specific subtypes of B -cell or T -cell NHL, or  
CLL/SLL,  as a single agent  and in  combination with rituximab  for B- cell NHL.  
 
Secondary  Objectives  
• To assess the duration of antitumor  activity  of cerdulatinib,  amount  of time to achieve tumor  response,  and 
magnitude  of response.  
• To further evaluate the PK profile of cerdulatinib  in patients with specific subtypes of B -cell or T -cell NHL,  
alone  or in combination  with rituximab for B -cell NHL.  
• To further evaluate the PD of cerdulatinib in patients with specific subtypes of B -cell or T -cell NHL, alone or  
in combination with rituxima b for B -cell NHL.  
• To assess tumor  phenotype  and genotype  in relation  to clinical response.  
• To further evaluate the safety and tolerability of cerdulatinib in patients with specific subtypes of B -cell or  
T-cell NHL  or CLL/SLL.  
• To evaluate the safety  and tolerability  of the combination  of cerdulatinib  with rituximab  for B-cell NHL.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  13  
  
 
Exploratory  Objectives  
• To evaluate the relationship  between  markers  of inflammation  with clinical outcome  and overall  health  as 
determined by the Global Health  Assessment.  
• To assess Minimal Residual Disease (MRD) status in CLL patients achieving a complete response/complete 
response incomplete blood count recovery/partial response (CR/CRi/PR) by flow cytometry.  MRD negativity  
(MRD -) is defined as < 1 CLL cell in 10,000 leucocytes.  MRD+ (MR positivity) is defined as ≥ 1 CLL cell in  
10,000 leucocytes.  
Design  and Methodology:  This is an open -label,  Phase  1/2a, multi- dose,  multi- center  trial of orally  administered  
cerdulatinib  with 2 phases:  
• Phase 1 (closed to enrollment) : Dose -escalation, during which patients will receive single -agent cerdulatinib at 
their assigned  dose level.  
− Patients will have histologically confirmed diagnosis of CLL/SLL or B -cell non -Hodgkin lymphoma.  In 
addition,  they will meet all other  eligibility  criteria  as specified  in Section  4.0 and applicable  subsections.  
− The starting  dose of cerdulatinib  will be 15 mg once  daily  (15 mg QD).  
− Cerdulatinib  will be administered in increasing dose levels until the MTD/MAD is identified (see  
definitions,  Table  3). If the MTD  is not achieved, the highest  studied  dose will be declared  the MAD and 
become the recommended  Phase 2  dose (RP2D).  
− To allow for a single -dose PK assessment, patients on a QD regimen will take their first dose of cerdulatinib  
on Day 1 and their  second  and subsequent  doses  daily  beginning on Day 4. Patients  will receive cerdulatinib  
once daily for a total of  28 days (one cycle) to assess the MTD/MAD, except on Days 2 and 3, when they 
will not take cerdulatinib.  Patients in twice daily (BID) dosing regimens will start cerdulatinib on Day 1 and  
will not skip any days.  
− One patient will be enrolled  in each dose cohort  until the first report  of a Grade  2 or greater  adverse event  
(AE).  
 In the event  of any Grade  2 or greater  AE in a single  patient,  an additional  2 patients,  for a total of 3, 
will be enrolled  in that dose cohort,  and all subsequent  dose cohorts  will follow  a “3 + 3” design.  
 Dose escalation will be in 100% increments until a drug- related AE of Grade ≥ 2 occurs.  Thereafter, 
dose escalation will be in increments of up to 50% as determined following review by the Study 
Committee.  
 If a dose-limiting  toxicity  (DLT) occurs  in 1 of the first 3 patients  in a cohort,  that cohort will be 
expanded to at least  6 patients.  
o If ≤ 33%  of 6 or more  patients  in a cohort  experiences  DLT,  dose escalation may  proceed.  
o If in any cohort 2 or more of the first 3 patients or ≥ 33% of patients in a cohort develop DLT, dose  
escalation  will cease, and that dose  level  will be declared  intolerable.  The prior  dose level will either  
be declared the  MTD,  and the cohort  may be expanded to as  many  as 6 patients  if fewer  than 
6 patients  had been treated previously  at that dose level  in order  to further characterize the PK and 
PD at that level.  
• The study is currently  in Phase  2a: Exploratory, consisting of 6 cohorts,  each defined by cancer  type and 
prior therapy  
− Under Amendment 7, the starting dose of orally administered cerdulatinib is either 30, 25, or 20 mg BID.  
Subsequent de -escalations to 25, 20, and then 15 mg BID are permitted.  A patient who has been de - 
escalated may be re- escalated at the di scretion of the Investigator based upon clinical judgement and with 
Sponsor  Medical  Monitor  approval  per the Dose  Modification  Guidelines for  Phase  2a (Section  5.2.1.3).  
− The 6 cohorts  are defined below:  
 Cohort 1: Patients with follicular lymphoma Grade 1 to 3A who have received ≥ 1 prior treatment  
regimen.  
 Cohort  2: Patients with  FL Grade  1 to 3A who have  received  ≥ 1 prior  treatment  regimen.  In addition  
to receiving cerdulatinib, this cohort will also receive rituximab IV at 375 mg/m2 during Cycle 1 on 
Days  1, 8, 15, and 22 and during Cycles  4, 6, 8,  and 10 on Day 1 only.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  14  
  
 
 Cohort 3: Patients with aggressive NHL (aNHL), defined as diffuse large B -cell lymphoma (DLBCL), 
follicular lymphoma Grade B (FL 3B), Mantle Cell lymphoma (MCL), and transformed NHL.  These  
patients have relapsed from ≥ 1 but ≤ 3 prior cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens with an anti CD20 
antibody, (e.g., R -CHOP, BR).  Patients must have either relapsed fol lowing autologous stem cell  
therapy (ASCT) or not be candidates (ineligible) for ASCT, defined as meeting any of the following criteria [ 1]: a) age ≥ 70 years; b) DLCO < 50% by pulmonary function tests; c) forced expiratory 
volume  in 1 second/forced vital capacity;  (FEV
1/FVC)  < 60% predicted by  pulmonary function  tests;  d) 
left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) < 45% by multiple gated acquisition (MUGA) or  
echocardiogram;  e) uncontrolled arrhythmia,  f) calculated creatinine  clearance (Cockcroft -Gault)  
≤ 60 mL/min; g) other comorbidities (e.g., medical conditions or psychosocial conditions) that would 
likely result in an unacceptably high probability of treatment/transplant related morbidity and mortality  
in the judgement  of the investigator  (e.g., high Hematopoietic  Cell Transplantation  Co-Morbidity  Index 
(HCT -CI), Cumulative  Illness  Rating  Scale (CIRS) scores);  h) refusal of ASCT.  
(Note : Antibody drug conjugates  (ADC)  count  as cytotoxic chemotherapy.  Salvage chemotherapy  
prior  to ASCT  with or without  maintenance therapy  counts  as one regimen.)  
 Cohort  4: Patients  with CLL/SLL who  have  received  ≥ 1 prior  treatment  regimen.  
 Cohort 5: Patients with peripheral T -cell lymphoma (PTCL) NHL who have received ≥ 1 prior  
systemic treatment regimen for PTCL. In patients with CD30 -expressing PTCL, prior treatment must  
include a CD30- directed  antibody (e.g., brentuximab vedotin).  
 Cohort  6: Patients  with cutaneous  T-cell lymphoma  (CTCL) NHL  who have  received  
≥ 1 prior  systemic  treatment  regimen  for CTCL.  
Number  of Patients  (Planned):  
Phase  1: 43 patients were enrolled and dosed.  Enrollment to Phase 1 is closed.  
Phase  2a: Approximately 240 patients.  
Total: Up to 283 patients  dosed  for the entire  study 
Diagnosis  and Main  Criteria  for Inclusion:  
Phase  1 Cancer- Specific  Inclusion  Criteria  
1. Patient must  have  a histologically  confirmed  diagnosis  of 1 of the following:  
− CLL/SLL  
− B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma,  any of the types  specified  below,  all with  relapsed  or refractory  disease:  
 Diffuse  Large  B-cell lymphoma  (DLBCL) 
 Follicular  lymphoma  (FL) 
 Mantle  cell lymphoma  (MCL) 
 Mucosa Associated  Lymphoid  Tumor  (MALT)  
 Marginal  zone  lymphoma  (MZL) 
 Lymphoplasmacytic  lymphoma  (LPL) 
 
Phase  1 General  Inclusion  Criteria  
1. Patient has failed  at least 1 prior  established  treatment regimen  (e.g., progressed  during,  or refractory  to), and no 
other standard therapy exists for that patient, or patient is intolerant of existing standard therapy or is not a  
candidate for such  standard  therapy.  
2. Patient must have  an Eastern  Cooperative  Oncology Group  (ECOG)  Performance Score  of 0 or 1. 
3. Patient must be 18 years  or older,  of either sex,  and of  any race.  
4. Patient (and/or  parent/guardian for patients  who otherwise  are unable  to provide  independent  consent) must  be 
willing  to give  written  informed consent  and be  able to adhere  to dose  and visit schedules.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  15  
  
 
5. Female patients of childbearing potential and male patients must agree to abstain from sexual intercourse or t o 
use an effective method of contraception during the study and for 90 days following the last dose of protocol  
therapy (examples of effective methods of contraception include oral contraceptives or double barrier methods  
such as condom  plus spermicide or condom  plus diaphragm).  
6. Patient must  have  adequate bone  marrow  reserve as evidenced  by an absolute  neutrophil  count  
(ANC) ≥  1,000/µL  AND platelet count  ≥ 75,000/µL.  
7. Patient must have  adequate  renal  function  as evidenced  by a serum  creatinine  level  ≤ 1.5 × upper  limit of 
normal  (ULN)  or a calculated  creatinine  clearance > 60  mL/min.  
8. Patient must have adequate hepatic function as evidenced by a serum bilirubin level ≤ 2.0 mg/dL AND serum 
aspartate aminotransferase/alanine aminotransferase (AST/ALT) levels ≤ 2.5 × the ULN for the reference 
laboratory.  Serum  bilirubin must be ≤ 2.5  mg/dL  when  increase is  clearly  documented as  due to  
Gilbert’s  syndrome.  
 
Phase  2a Cancer- Specific  Inclusion  Criteria  
Patient must  have  a histologically  confirmed  diagnosis  of 1 of the following:  
Note : Definitions  for “relapsed” and “refractory” disease  are provided in Table  3. 
• FL Grade  1 to 3A, with  relapsed  or refractory  disease.  
• Aggressive  NHL  (aNHL), defined  as DLBCL,  FL Grade  3B, MCL,  and transformed  NHL  with 
relapsed  disease.  
• CLL/SLL,  with relapsed  or refractory  disease.  
• PTCL,  with relapsed  or refractory  disease.  
• CTCL  with relapsed  or refractory  disease.  Only  CTCL  patients with  MF/SS are allowed.  
Patients  who received  any BCR pathway  inhibitor  (e.g.,  BTK  inhibitors  such as ibrutinib,  or PI3 Kinase  inhibitors  
such as idelalisib) and/or BCL2 pathway inhibitors (e.g., venetoclax), and were either intolerant to therapy or had relapsed/refractory  disease following therapy are also eligible.  
 
 
Phase  2a General  Inclusion Criteria  
1. Patient must have  an Eastern  Cooperative  Oncology Group  (ECOG)  Performance Score  of 0 or 1. 
2. Patient must be 18 years  or older,  of either sex,  and of  any race.  
3. Patient (and/or  parent/guardian for patients  who otherwise  are unable  to provide  independent  consent) must  be 
willing  to give  written  informed consent  and be  able to adhere  to dose  and visit schedules.  
4. Patient has had prior  treatment  for lymphoid malignancy requiring  treatment  for progressive  disease/refractory  
disease  (per guidelines  for diagnosis  and treatment  of CLL  [2] and revised response  criteria  for 
malignant  lymphoma  [3]). 
5. Patient has had  ≥ 1 prior systemic treatment regimen administered for at least 2 cycles (unless the patient was  
intolerant or experienced documented progression on therapy) that must have involved either: (1) an anti -CD20  
agent (such as rituximab) WITH chemotherapy for B -cell NHL, unless contraindicated in the judgement of the  
investigator  (e.g.,  the patient was not a candidate for chemotherapy  and received  ibrutinib  as firstline  treatment);  
(2) a cytotoxic chemotherapy drug for T -cell NHL; (3) an anti- CD20  agent (such as rituximab) with 
chemotherapy for CLL, unless contraindicated in the judgement of the investigator (e.g., the patient was not a  
candidate for chemotherapy and received ibrutinib as firstline treatment); or (4) in  patients  with 
CD30 -expressin g PTCL, a  CD30 -directed  antibody (e.g.,  brentuximab  vedotin).  
6. Female patients of childbearing potential and male patients must agree to abstain from sexual intercourse or to  
use an effective method of contraception during the study and for 90  days following the last dose of protocol  
therapy  (examples  of effective  methods  of contraception  include  oral contraceptives  or double  barrier  methods  
such as condom plus spermicide or condom plus diaphragm).  Patients enrolled into Cohort 2 should use  
effective  contraception  during  treatment with  rituximab  and for 12 months  after the last dose of rituximab.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  16  
  
 
7. Patient  must  have  adequate  bone marrow  reserve  as evidenced  by an absolute  neutrophil  count  
(ANC) ≥ 1,000/µL, platelet count ≥ 75,000/µL.  Platelet count must be without transfusion support within 
7 days  of the first dose of  cerdulatinib.  
Note : CLL patients only:  ANC ≥ 750/µL and platelet count ≥ 30,000/µL are acceptable.  There are no limits  
on ANC or platelet count required for patients with leukemic forms of PTCL (ATLL, PLL, LGL) or  
hepatosplenic  T-cell lymphoma (HSTCL)  as long as cytopenia,  if present, is secondary  to disease.  
8. Patient must  have  adequate  renal  function  as evidenced  by a creatinine  clearance ≥ 30 mL/min (calculated  using 
the Cockcroft -Gault equation  or based  on a 24-hour urine  specimen).  
9. Patient must have adequate hepatic function as evidenced by a serum bilirubin level ≤ 2.0 mg/dL AND serum 
AST/ALT levels ≤ 2.5× the ULN for the reference lab.  Serum bilirubin ≤ 2.5 mg/dL when increase clearly 
documented as due to Gilbert’s  syndrome.  
10. Where  available,  ability  to submit  a formalin -fixed  paraffin  embedded tissue  (FFPE)  block  or a minimum  of 
10 unstained, freshly cut FFPE tissue slides from lymph node or other biopsies that were collected as part of  
patient diagnosis.  If samples  are unavailable  the patient is still eligible for  enrollment.  
11. Measureable disease for  a given  tumor  type,  defined  as: 
a. The presence of ≥ 1 lesion  that measures  ≥ 1.5  cm in a single  dimension as assessed by  CT, CT/PET  for 
patients with  nodal  or mass  lesions  (e.g., FL, DLBCL, other  NHL), or  
b. Quantifiable  circulating  tumor  cells for patients with  circulating  tumor  (e.g., Sézary  Syndrome  [SS]), or 
c. For CTCL:  mSWAT  score  > 0. 
12. Ability to provide redacted copies of pathology reports and radiology reports used for the diagnosis of NHL or CLL.  In addition,  for CTCL,  ability  to provide  redacted  photographs  of skin  responses.  
 
Phase  2a Cohort -Specific  Inclusion  Criteria  
• Cohort  1 (FL):  Grades  1 to 3A (Single -Agent Cerdulatinib): Received  ≥ 1 prior  treatment regimen.  
• Cohort  2 (Combination):  FL, Grades  1 to 3A (Cerdulatinib +  Rituximab): Received  ≥ 1 prior  treatment 
regimen.  
• Cohort 3 (aNHL):  aNHL  (Single -Agent Cerdulatinib): Aggressive non- Hodgkin lymphoma (aNHL) is  
defined as DLBCL, FL Grade 3B, Mantle Cell Lymphoma (MCL), and transformed NHL.  Patients had  
relapsed from ≥ 1 but ≤ 3 prior cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens with an anti CD20 antibody,  (e.g., R -CHOP,  
BR).  Patients must have received an anthracycline based therapy unless anthracyclines were deemed  
inappropriate in the judgement of the investigator.  Patients must have either relapsed following autologous  
stem cell therapy (ASCT), or not be candidates (ineligible) for ASCT, defined as meeting any of the following criteria [ 1]: a) Age ≥  70 years; b) DLCO < 50% by pulmonary function tests; c) FEV
1/FVC < 60% predicted  
by pulmonary function tests; d) LVEF < 45% by MUGA or echocardiogram; e) uncontrolled arrhythmia; f) calculated creatinine clearance (Cockcroft -Gault) ≤ 60 mL/min; g) other comorbidities (e.g., medical 
conditions or psychosocial conditions) that would likely result in an unacceptably high proba bility of  
treatment/transplant related morbidity and mortality in the judgement of the investigator (e.g., high HCT -CI, 
CIRS,  scores);  h) Refusal of  ASCT.  
• Note : Antibody drug conjugates  (ADC)  count  as cytotoxic  chemotherapy.  Salvage chemotherapy  prior  to 
ASCT  with or without  maintenance therapy  counts  as one regimen.  
• Cohort  4 (CLL/SLL):  CLL/SLL (Single -Agent  Cerdulatinib): Received  ≥ 1 prior  treatment regimen.  
• Cohort 5 (PTCL NHL):  Peripheral T -cell NHL (PTCL) (Single -Agent Cerdulatinib): Received ≥ 1 prior  
systemic treatment regimen for PTCL. In patients with CD30 -expressing PTCL, prior treatment must include a  
CD30 -directed antibody (e.g., brentuximab vedotin).  
• Cohort 6 (CTCL NHL):  Cutaneous T -cell NHL (CTCL, MF/SS only) (Single -Agent Cerdulatinib): 
Received  ≥ 1 prior  systemic treatment  regimen  for CTCL. 
 
Phase  1 and Phase  2a Exclusion  Criteria  
A patient meeting  any 1 of the Exclusion Criteria  listed  below  will be excluded from  the trial, whether enrolled  in 
Phase  1 or Phase 2a of  the study.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  17  
  
 
1. Patient  has Richter’s  syndrome,  Burkitt’s  lymphoma,  or Burkitt -like Lymphoma.  Patients  with transformed  
DLBCL  from  Follicular  NHL are eligible.  
2. Patient has undergone prior allogeneic or autologous transplant with infusion of stem cells within 90 days  
before  Cycle  1 Day 1 (C1D1),  or on active  immunosuppressive  therapy  for graft -versus -host disease  (GVHD)  
or GVHD prophylaxis  within  8 weeks  before C1D1.  
3. Patient has received  prior  therapy  with a spleen  tyrosine kinase  (SYK)  inhibitor.  
4. Patient requires  chronic  treatment  with a strong  CYP3A4  inhibitor  or inducer  or CYP3A4 -sensitive  substrate  
(Appendix 3 ). 
5. Patient has known lymphomatous  involvement  of the central nervous  system  (CNS).  
6. Patient has a known  hypersensitivity  to any of the components  of cerdulatinib.  
7. Patient has persistent, unresolved NCI CTCAE v5.0 ≥ Grade 2 clinically significant (in the judgement of the  
investigator) drug- related toxicity (except alopecia, erectile impotence, hot flashes, libido, neuropathy)  
associated  with previous  treatment.  
8. Prior  monoclonal  antibody (Mab)  (including  alemtuzumab),  radioimmunoconjugate,  antibody drug conjugate  
(ADC), pho totherapy, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, immunosuppressive therapy, or any 
investigational agent  for the  purposes  of treating  cancer  within  3 weeks  before  Cycle  1 Day 1. 
9. For CTCL patients only:  total skin electron beam therapy (TSEBT) within 12 weeks, or initiation of topical  
steroid,  nitrogen  mustard,  or topical  retinoid within  2 weeks  before  Cycle  1 Day 1. Patients  with CTCL  who are 
on a stable topical  regimen  for ≥ 4 weeks  prior to C1D1 are allowed.  
10. The patient has a known infection with HIV, hepatitis B virus (HBV), or hepatitis C virus (HCV) or is a carrier  
of HBV or HCV.  Patients who are seropositive for HCV antibody must test negative for HCV by polymerase  
chain reaction (PCR) assay to be eligible.  Patients with an occult or prior  HBV infection (defined as being  
seropositive for total hepatitis B core antibody [HBcAb] and seronegative for HBsAg) may be included if his or 
her HBV DNA is undetectable or if it is undetectable with antiviral therapy.  These patients must be willing to  
undergo additional testing per local standard of care if this data is unavailable.  Additional testing will be  
performed if the patient does not have documentation of a negative hepatitis panel and negative HIV history 
within  the 12-week  period  prior to  enrollment.  
11. Patient has an active  infection  requiring  systemic  treatment, defined  as requiring antimicrobial,  antifungal,  or 
antiviral agents.  Prophylactic  antimicrobial treatment is permitted.  
12. Patient has significant gastrointestinal disease that may interfere with absorption of the study drug or that  
predisposes  him/her to GI  adverse  effects,  or has had major  gastric  or bowel  surgery.  
13. Patient has difficulty  swallowing  or malabsorption  syndrome.  
14. Patient has any other  medical, social, or psychiatric  condition  that might  interfere with  the patient’s  
participation  in the trial or interfere  with the interpretation  of trial results.  
15. Patient has undergone  major  surgery  within  4 weeks  prior  to first study drug administration.  
16. Patient has a history (within 2 years prior to first study drug administration) of another malignancy unless  
malignancy treated with curative intent and likelihood of relapse is small (< 5% in 2 years in the judgement of  
the investigator).  Patients  with a history  of squamous  or basal  cell carcinoma of the skin or carcinoma  in situ of 
the cervix  may be enrolled.  
17. Patient is receiving systemic steroids at doses greater than the equivalent of prednisone, 20 mg daily, with the  
exception  of intermittent use for the treatment  of emesis.  
18. Patient is female and is breast -feeding,  pregnant,  or intends  to become  pregnant.  
19. Patient is participating  in any other  therapeutic  clinical study (observational  or registry  trials  are allowed).  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  18  
  
 
Investigational  Product,  Dosage  and Mode  of Administration:  
Cerdulatinib,  administered  orally  (po) during both phases:  
• Phase  1 (dose -escalation):  Starting  dose is 15 mg QD in increasing  dose levels  until the MTD/MAD is 
identified.  
• Phase  2a (exploratory):  Six cohorts  are planned.  Five cohorts will receive single -agent  cerdulatinib  and 
1 cohort  will receive cerdulatinib  plus rituximab  IV at 375 mg/m2 during Cycle  1 on Days  1, 8, 15, and 22 and 
during  Cycles  4, 6, 8, and 10 on Day 1 only.  
• Cerdulatinib  will be administered at  the following  starting  dose levels: 30, 25, or 20 mg BID.  
Duration  of Treatment  for Individual  Patients  and Duration  of Study:  
Patients enrolled under Phase 1 and Phase 2a portions of this study may continue to receive cerdulatinib in the  
absence of disease progression or intolerable toxicity or until they meet any other wit hdrawal criteria (Section 4.4). 
The total duration  of the study  (Phase 1  and Phase 2a)  is expected  to be ~6 years.  
Reference Therapy,  Dosage,  and Mode  of Administration:  None.  
Criteria  for Evaluation:  
Efficacy  (Primary  and Secondary)  
Response Criteria:  Response in NHL patients will be evaluated using The Lugano Classification [ 4]; in CLL 
patients using the Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (IWCLL) Guidelines for the Diagnos is and  
Treatment of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia [ 2]; and in CTCL patients using the modified Severity Weighted 
Assessment Tool (mSWAT) and other measures as appropriate [ 5]. Appendix 4 provides definitions and detailed 
descriptions of response criteria as well as guidance on selection of lesions for evaluation.  Redacted copies of  
radiology reports  will be sent  to the Sponsor  for review.  
Tumor/Lymph Node Biopsies:  If tumor or lymph node or skin biopsies (including CTCL patients) biopsies are  
obtained during the course of the patient’s treatment, redacted copies of the pathology reports should be sent to the  
Sponsor for review.  In addition,  a portion  of the tumor  block  or at a minimum  of 10 unstained slides  should be  sent 
for review  as discussed  in earlier  sections  of the protocol.  
Exploratory Efficacy : Global Health Questionnaire and detection of minimal residual disease in CLL patients  
achieving a CR or CRi or PR using 4- color flow cytometry.  MRD negativity (MRD -) is defined as < 1 CLL cell in  
10,000 leucocytes.  MRD  positivity  (MRD+) is  defined as  ≥ 1 CLL  cell in 10,000 leucocytes.  
Pharmacokinetic Assessments: Phase  1: Blood  samples will be obtained at frequent  intervals for  determination  of 
cerdulatinib concentration.  Parameters calculated for all patients will be:  plasma half -life (t ½); time to maximum  
observed plasma concentration (T max); maximum observed plasma concentration (C max); minimum observed plasma  
concentration  (Cmin); area under the  plasma  concentration- time curve  from  0 to last  measurable concentration  
(AUC 0-last) computed using the linear trapezoidal rule;  total area under the plasma concentration -time curve from  
time 0 to infinity (AUC 0-∞); clearance of cerdulatinib (CL/F); volume of distribution of cerdulatinib at steady state  
(Vss/F); amount of drug excreted in urine over the sampling interval (Ae) for those patients for whom total volume  
of urine was collected; accumulation ratio, calculated by AUC 0-12 at steady -state/AUC 0-12 following the first dose for  
those  patients  for whom  the 12 -hour sample  was collected.  
Phase 2a: In order to further characterize the PK of cerdulatinib (specifically, C min), serial plasma PK samples will 
be collected on  Cycle  1 Days  1 and 8 at  pre-dose and 1,  2, 4, 6, 8, and 24 hours  post-dose.  PK samples  will also be  
taken pre -dose at Cycle 1 Day 15 , Cycle 2 Day 1, and prior to Cycles 3, 6, 9, and every 3 cycles thereafter (to 
correspond with tumor  assessment).  Additional unscheduled PK plasma  samples may  be taken  at the discretion  of 
the Investigator (e.g.,  in the event  of an AE or dose change).  
Pharmacodynamic  Assessments: Serum  will be obtained  at various  time points  throughout  the trial to determine  
the effects of cerdulatinib on markers of inflammation.  DNA and RNA (DNA only for Phase 2a) will be isolated  
from optional tumor biopsy specimens to assess genetic mutations relevant to the disease and the mechanism of  
action of cerdulatinib.  The following will be assessed:  quantification of serum proteins, quantitative polymerase  
chain reaction (PCR) for tumor relevant transcripts; hybridization of RNA to gene arrays, and DNA sequencing to 
identify  disease -relevant  mutations.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  19  
  
 
Safety : Safety  will be monitored  by serial  physical  exams, vital  signs, hematology  and chemistry  laboratory  studies,  
concomitant medications, and reported AEs (including deaths and other serious adverse events [SAEs] and 
treatment -related  AEs).  
Study Committee : Select study participants will comprise the Study Committee (e.g., selected Principal 
Investigators, Portola’s Medical Monitor, Clinical Study Manager, and Drug Safety Medical Monitor).  Other  
Portola  or outside  personnel may be called  or consulted as  needed.  The Study  Committee  composition and 
functions are fully defined in Section 7.6. During P hase 1, the Study Committee will meet after all patients in any  
cohort have completed Cycle 1 to determine whether it is safe to escalate to the next dose of cerdulatinib or whether 
the MTD/MAD dose has been reached.  If it is safe to continue, the committee will determine the next dose level to  
be studied.  During Phase 2a, the Study Committee will meet periodically to review available safety and efficacy  
data from the study.  Following the first meeting of the Study Committee, subsequent meetings will be held 
periodically as needed.  Data to be evaluated may include (but are not limited to):  deaths, other SAEs, AEs,  
including treatment -related AEs; reasons for treatment discontinuation or dose modification/interruption, trends in 
laboratory evaluations, and efficacy. For the combination cohort with rituximab, the Study Committee will evaluate  
(using the assessments as outline  above)  the first 3 to 6 patients  who have  completed  Cycle 1  before  allowing  further 
enrollment  in the cohort.  Afterwards, the cohort  can be evaluated  with the rest of the other cohorts  as above.  
Statistical  Methods:  
General Considerations:  Statistical summaries are expected to be performed using SAS software Version 9.3  
(SAS Institute,  Inc., Cary,  NC, USA)  or higher.  Additional software  may be used for the production  of graphics.  
Analysis Populations:  The safety analysis population will consist of all patients treated with at least 1 dose of study  
medication (cerdulatinib).  Safety data will be summarized by dose level, based on the original assigned dose of  
study drug.  The efficacy analysis population for the primary and secondary efficacy endpoints will consist of all  
patients who have taken at least 1 dose of study medication and have had at least 1 post -baselin e tumor assessment.  
Efficacy will be summarized separately for Phase 1 and 2a, and within Phase 2a will be summarized by cohort and  
dose level. The PK and PD analysis populations will consist of all patients who have received the requisite  
treatments and h ave data at the required time points.  In order to determine cohort comparability, baseline and 
demographic characteristics of the Phase 1 and 2a cohorts will be summarized by dose cohort and overall.  No 
formal  analyses  of these  data are planned,  but descri ptive  statistics  may be used to aid in interpreting  results.  
Analysis of Efficacy Endpoints:  Responses will be classified as complete response (CR), partial response (PR),  
stable disease (SD), disease progression (PD), or not evaluable.  The overall response rate (ORR, defined as  
CR+PR) and clinical benefit rate (CR+PR+SD) will be summarized along with two -sided exact 95% confidence  
intervals.  Responses will be based on computed tomography (CT) or computed tomography/positron emission 
tomography (CT/P ET), evaluated per revised IWG Criteria [3 ] for patients with lymphoma and on peripheral  
lymphocyte counts and bone marrow biopsy results for patients with CLL [ 2]. Listings of tumor response for each  
patient will also be provided.  Responses will  be summarized  separately  for each dose level  in Phase  1 and for each 
cohort and dose level in Phase 2a.  Due to differences in underlying disease and prior treatment, response rates  
considered clinically significant and that would prompt further study will depend on the cohort.  Such summaries  
will also depend on the safety and tolerability profile observed.  While it is anticipated that a 30 to 40% response  
rate will be sufficient to support  further investigation,  no criteria  for success  in this study are specified.  
In addition to the tumor response rates described above, the following efficacy endpoints will be assessed:  duration 
of response (DOR), progression -free survival (PFS), lymph node response (LNR), and time -to-treatment response 
(TTR) (see definitions  in Table  3). 
Exploratory Efficacy  – Phase  2a Only  
As an exploratory assessment, patients will be asked to complete a Global Health Assessment ( Appendix 8 ) to 
assess  whether  patients  feel their overall  health  is improving  on this study.  The correlation  between  markers  of 
inflammation  with clinical response  and the overall health  (Global  Health  Assessment)  will be assessed.  
An additional  exploratory assessment,  detection  of minimal residual  disease  (MRD)  in CLL  patients  achieving  a CR 
or CRi or PR will also be performed using at least 4 color flow cytometry by either local lab or a designated central  
lab in blood an d/or marrow. MRD - (MRD negativity) defined as < 1 CLL cell in 10,000 leucocytes.  MRD+ (MRD  
positivity)  is defined as ≥ 1 CLL  cell in 10,000  leucocytes.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  20  
  
 
Pharmacokinetic Analyses : PK parameters will be calculated for each patient for which adequate samples are  
available  and summarized.  
Pharmacodynamic Analyses, Phase 1 and 2a: A number of PD parameters (described above) will be measured  
serially.  At each time point,  each of these  parameters will be summarized by  dose level.  In addition , the parameters  
over time  will be plotted for  each patient and dose  cohort.  No formal  statistical analyses  are planned.  
Safety,  Phase  1 and 2a:  For the Phase 1 portion  of the study,  the primary  safety  endpoint is  the incidence of DLT  by 
dose level and the secondary safety endpoints are the AE profile (classified by NCI- CTCAE v5.0), clinically  
significant changes in vital signs and physical exams by dose level, and changes in hematology and chemistry 
laboratory parameters  by dose level.  The incidence  of DLT  will be summarized and listed  by dose cohort  for 
Phase  1. 
For the Phase 1 and Phase 2a portions of the study, AEs will be graded according to the National Cancer Institute  
Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI -CTCAE) v5.0 and coded according to the latest Medical  
Dictionary  for Regulatory Activities  (MedDRA)  version available  at the time of database creation. The number  and 
percent of patients with any AE will be presented by System Organ Class (SOC) and preferred term for each cohort  
will be summarized by dose cohort for Phase 1 and by Cohort for Phase 2a.  An additional summary will include all 
patients who received the dose used in Phase 2a.  Vital signs, laboratory parameters, and ECG intervals will be  
summarized and listed by time point for each dose cohort for Phase 1 and by cohort for Phase 2a.  No formal  
statistical analyses  are planned.  
Sample  Size Considerations  
Phase 1:  The sample size is based on clinical judgment and is typical of studies of this type.  A total of  
approxi mately  40 to 50  patients will be studied  in Phase 1, depending on the number  of dose levels  evaluated. 
To date,  52 patients  have been enrolled  with 43 dosed in sites in North  America. 
Phase 2a:  For the initial opening of this portion of the study, patients will be enrolled into 3 cohorts only:  
Cohorts 1 (FL), 3 (aggressive NHL [aNHL]), and 4 (CLL/SLL).  Further cohorts may be opened or closed and the  
starting  dose for patients  may be  adjusted  at the discretion  of the Sponsor,  and the  Sponsor  will notify  the 
Investigators/site when the other cohorts will be open or closed to enrollment or when the starting dose is adjusted.  
Initial enrollment  into any cohort will be up to 20  patients; cohorts may  be expanded  to 40-50 evaluable  patients.  
A total of a pproximately 240 patients is planned in the Phase 2a portion of the study.  If fewer than 2 responses are 
seen in the first 20 patients,  enrollment in the cohort will be closed, as the upper  bound (UB)  of the 95% confidence  
interval would be approximately  25%.  If 2 or more  responses  are seen, the cohort  may be expanded.  With  
40 patients in a cohort, an observed response rate of 30% will have a 2- side d exact 95% confidence interval (CI) of  
(16.6%,  46.5%);  an observed  response  rate of  20% will have  a 2-sided exact  95% CI of  9.1%,  35.7%.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  21  
  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Page  
INVESTIGATOR’S  AGREEMENT ......................................................................................................... 3 
SPONSOR’S AGREEMENT  ..................................................................................................................... 4 
STUDY CONTACT  INFORMATION AND PROCEDURES IN CASE  OF EMERGENCY ............. 5 
SYNOPSIS  ................................................................................................................................................. 12 
1.0 INTRODUCTION  ........................................................................................................................ 34 
1.1. CERDULATINIB  (PRT062070) .............................................................................................. 34 
1.2. PHARMACOLOGY STUDIES OF CERDULATINIB  ........................................................... 34 
1.3. SAFETY  PHARMACOLOGY STUDIES ................................................................................ 36 
1.4. NONCLINICAL  TOXICOLOGY STUDIES  ........................................................................... 37 
1.5. CERDULATINIB  PHASE  1 INTERIM R ESULTS  ................................................................. 40 
1.6. BACKGROUND ON THE NHL  IN THE STUDY  .................................................................. 42 
1.6.1.  Aggressive B- cell Lymphomas  ........................................................................................ 43 
1.6.2.  Rituximab  in the  Treatment  of B- cell NHL  ..................................................................... 43 
1.6.3.  T-cell NHL (PTCL, CTCL)  ............................................................................................. 44 
1.6.4.  Follicular  Lymphoma  and Other Indolent Lymphomas (iNHL);  (FL/iNHL)  .................. 45 
1.6.5.  Chronic Lymphocytic  Leukemia (CLL)/Small Lymphocytic  Lymphoma (SLL) ............ 46 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND ENDPOINTS  ............................................................................................. 47 
2.1. OBJECTIVES  ........................................................................................................................... 47 
2.1.1.  Phase 1 Objectives (Escalation)  ....................................................................................... 47 
2.1.1.1.  Pr
imary  Objective ................................................................................................... 47 
2.1.1.2.  Secondary Objectives .............................................................................................. 47 
2.1.2.  Phase  2a Objectives (Exploratory)  ................................................................................... 47 
2.1.2.1.  Primary  Objective ................................................................................................... 47 
2.1.2.2.  Secondary Objectives .............................................................................................. 47 
2.1.2.3.  Exploratory Objectives  ........................................................................................... 48 
2.2. ENDPOINTS  ............................................................................................................................ 48 
2.2.1.  Phase 1 Endpoints ............................................................................................................ 48 
2.2.1.1.  Primary  Endpoint .................................................................................................... 48 
2.2.1.2.  Secondary Endpoints .............................................................................................. 48 
2.2.2.  Phase  2a Endpoints .......................................................................................................... 49 
2.2.2.1.  Primary  Endpoint .................................................................................................... 49 
2.2.2.2.  Secondary Endpoints .............................................................................................. 49 
2.2.3.  Exploratory Endpoints ..................................................................................................... 49 
3.0 INVESTIGATIONAL  PLAN  ......................................................................................................  50
 
3.1. OVERALL  STUDY DESIGN AND STUDY SCHEMA  ......................................................... 50 
3.1.1.  Phase 1 ............................................................................................................................. 50 
3.1.1.1.  Overall Description  ................................................................................................. 50 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  22  
 3.1.1.2.  Rationale for Dose  Selection  in Phase  1 and Dose -Escalation  Methods ................ 51 
3.1.2.  Phase  2a ........................................................................................................................... 51 
3.1.2.1.  Overall Description,  Including Rationale for  Inclusion of T- cell 
Malignancies  ........................................................................................................... 51 
3.1.2.2.  Rationale for Initial Starting  Dose  and Individual Dose  Reductions ...................... 54 
3.1.3.  End of Study .................................................................................................................... 60 
3.1.4.  Total  Number  of Patients,  Cessat ion of Treatment,  and Total  Duration  of 
the Study .......................................................................................................................... 60 
3.1.5.  Assessments  ..................................................................................................................... 60 
3.2. RANDOMIZATION AND BLINDING  ................................................................................... 60 
4.0 SELECTION,  ENROLLMENT,  AND WITHDRAWAL  OF PATIENTS  ............................. 61 
4.1. INCLUSION CRITERIA  .......................................................................................................... 61 
4.1.1.  Phase 2a Cancer -specific  Inclusion Criteria  .................................................................... 61 
4.1.2.  Phase 2a General Inclusion  Criteria  ................................................................................. 61 
4.1.3.  Phase 2a Cohort- specific  Inclusion Criteria  ..................................................................... 63 
4.1.3.1.  Cohort 1 (FL) – Grades 1 to  3A (Single-agent Cerdulatinib) ................................. 63  
4.1.3.2.  Cohor t
 2 (Combination)  – FL, Grades 1  to 3A ( Cerdulatinib  + Rituximab)  ........... 63 
4.1.3.3.  Cohort 3 (aNHL)  – aNHL  (Single-agent Cerdulatinib) .......................................... 63 
4.1.3.4.  Cohort 4 (CLL/SLL) – CLL/SLL (Single -agent Cerdulatinib)  ............................... 64 
4.1.3.5.  Cohort 5 (PTCL NHL) – Peripheral T -cell NHL (PTCL) (Single -agent  
Cerdulatinib) ........................................................................................................... 64 
4.1.3.6.  Cohort 6 (CTCL  NHL) – Cutaneous T- cell NHL  (CTCL,  MF/SS  only)  
(Single -agent Cerdulatinib)  ..................................................................................... 64 
4.2. PHASE  1 AND PHASE  2A EXCLUSION CRITERIA  ........................................................... 64 
4.3. ENROLLMENT PROCESS ..................................................................................................... 65 
4.4. WITHDRAWAL  CRITERIA AND REPLACEMENT OF  PATIENTS  .................................. 66 
4.4.1.  General  Withdrawal Criteria  ............................................................................................ 66 
4.4.2.  Specific  Withdrawal  Criterion  and Replacement  Procedure for Phase  1 ......................... 67 
4.4.3.  Specific  Withdrawal Criteria  and Replacement  Procedure  for Phase  2a ......................... 67 
4.5. WITHDRAWAL AND/OR REPLACEMENT CRITERIA FOR SITE OR PRINCIPAL  
INVESTIGATOR  ..................................................................................................................... 67 
4.6. SPONSOR  STUDY  DISCONTINUATION  ............................................................................. 67 
4.7 PROTOCOL  VIOLATIONS  AND DEVIATIONS  .................................................................. 67 
5.0 TREATMENTS  ADMINISTERED  ........................................................................................... 68 
5.1. C
ERDULATINIB  STUDY  DRUG ADMINISTRATION ....................................................... 68 
5.1.1.  General  Instructions ......................................................................................................... 68 
5.1.2.  Phase  1 Cerdulatinib Dosing  ............................................................................................  68
 
5.1.2.1.  Initial Dosing with Cerdulatinib  ............................................................................. 68 
5.1.3.  Phase  2a Cerdulatinib  Dosing .......................................................................................... 70 
5.2. DOSE -LIMITING TOXICITY, DOSE MODIFICATIONS, AND OTHER  
DOSING/MONITORING GUIDANCE  ................................................................................... 70 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  23  
 5.2.1.  Cerdulatinib ...................................................................................................................... 70 
5.2.1.1.  Definitions  of Dose -limiting  Toxicity for Cerdulatinib  during Phase  1.................. 70 
5.2.1.2.  Phase  2a: Monitoring  for Toxicity  in Phase  2a ...................................................... 71 
5.2.1.3.  Dose  Modifications for Cerdulatinib  ...................................................................... 71 
5.2.1.4.  Management  of Potential Epstein -Barr Virus  Reactivation  .................................... 73 
5.2.1.5.  Management  of Diarrhea  ........................................................................................ 74 
5.2.1.6.  Management of  Nausea and Vomiting .................................................................... 74 
5.3. RITUXIMAB  INFORMATION AND DOSE  MODIFICATIONS  .......................................... 74 
5.3.1.  Prescribing Information ................................................................................................... 74 
5.3.2.  Management  of Rituxima b Infusion Toxicity  .................................................................. 74 
5.3.3.  Dose  Modifications  to Rituximab  .................................................................................... 75 
6.0 STUDY MATERIALS  AND MANAGEMENT ......................................................................... 76 
6.1. CERDULATINIB  ..................................................................................................................... 76 
6.1.1.  Identity of Product ........................................................................................................... 76 
6.1.2.  Dispensing  and Accountability  ........................................................................................ 76 
6.1.3.  Dose  Regimens ................................................................................................................ 76 
6.2. RITUXIMAB  (FOR  COMBINATION COHORT 2,  RITUXIMAB  AND  
CER
DULATINIB)  .................................................................................................................... 77 
6.2.1.  Identity of Product ........................................................................................................... 77 
6.2.2.  Dispensing  and Accountability  ........................................................................................ 77 
6.2.3.  Rituximab  Dose  Regimen  (Cohort 2 Only ) ..................................................................... 77 
6.2.3.1.  Premedication  and Prophylactic Medication  .......................................................... 77 
6.2.3.2.  Dose  Rationale  ........................................................................................................ 77 
6.2.3.3.  Dosage .................................................................................................................... 77 
7.0 STUDY METHODS  ..................................................................................................................... 78 
7.1. STUD Y ASSESSMENTS  ......................................................................................................... 78 
7.1.1.  Informed Consent ............................................................................................................. 78 
7.1.2.  Global Health  Assessment  ............................................................................................... 78 
7.1.3.  Medical  History ............................................................................................................... 78 
7.1.4.  Concomitant Medications  ................................................................................................ 78 
7.1.5.  Physical  Examination, Height, and Weight  ..................................................................... 78 
7.1.6.  Vital Signs  ........................................................................................................................ 79 
7.1.7.  Eastern  Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)  Performance  Status  ............................... 79 
7.1.8.  Electro cardiogram (ECG)  ................................................................................................  79
 
7.1.9.  Local Laboratory  Tests and  Response Assessments  ........................................................ 79 
7.1.9.1.  Serum  Chemistry, Hematology, Urinalysis,  Coagulation, and Pregnancy  
Tests ................................
........................................................................................ 79 
7.1.9.2.  Other  Local  Labs/Assessments  for All Patients  ...................................................... 80 
7.1.9.3.  Other Local Labs/Assessments for Specific Patients  .............................................. 80 
7.1.10.  Central Laboratory  Assessments ...................................................................................... 81 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  24  
 7.1.10.1.  Central Laboratory  Assessments for All  Patients: .................................................. 81 
7.1.11.  Pharmacokinetics  ............................................................................................................. 81 
7.1.12.  Biopsies ............................................................................................................................ 82 
7.1.12.1.  Bone Marrow Biopsy  and Aspiration ..................................................................... 82 
7.1.12.2.  Skin Punch Biopsy (Cohort 6, CTCL Only) ........................................................... 82 
7.1.12.3.  Optional Biopsies  .................................................................................................... 82 
7.2. SCREENING  VISIT  ................................................................................................................. 82 
7.3. DOSING CYCLES  ................................................................................................................... 83 
7.3.1.  Phase  2a Dosing Cycles ................................................................................................... 83 
7.3.2.  Patient  Visits After  Cycle  2 ............................................................................................. 83 
7.3.2.1.  Visit Reduction  for Response Patients after Cycle 12  ............................................ 84 
7.3.2.2.  30 Days Post -Last Treatment  .................................................................................. 84 
7.3.2.3.  Unscheduled  Assessments  ...................................................................................... 84 
7.3.3.  Visit  Windows ................................................................................................................. 85 
7.3.3.1.  Visit Window and Timeline  Guidance ................................................................... 85 
7.4. BLOOD COLLECTION  ........................................................................................................... 85 
7.5. CONCOMITANT MEDICATIONS AND OTHER  GUIDANCE  ........................................... 85 
7.5.1.  Prohibited Medications/Procedures  ................................................................................. 85 
7.5.2.  Permitted  or Mandated Medications  ................................................................................ 86 
7.5.2.1.  Ant
imicrobial Prophylaxis ...................................................................................... 86 
7.5.3.  Cerdulatinib  and CYP3A4  ............................................................................................... 86 
7.6. STUDY COMMITTEE ............................................................................................................. 87 
8.0 ASSESSMENT  OF EFFICACY  ................................................................................................. 88 
8.1. RESPONSE CRITERIA  ........................................................................................................... 88 
8.2. EXPLORATORY EFFICACY  ................................................................................................. 88 
8.2.1.  Global Health Questionnaire ............................................................................................ 88 
9.0 PHARMACOLOGY ASSESSMENTS  ....................................................................................... 89 
9.1. PHARMACOKINETIC  ASSAYS  ............................................................................................ 89 
9.1.1.  Phase 1 Pharmacokinetic Analysis .................................................................................. 89 
9.1.2.  Phase  2a Pharmacokinetic Analysis ................................................................................. 90 
9.2. PHARMACODYNAMIC ASSAYS  ......................................................................................... 90 
10.0 ASSESSMENT  OF SAFETY  ...................................................................................................... 91 
10.1. SAFETY  PARAMETERS AND DEFINITIONS  ..................................................................... 91 
10.1.1.  Adver
se Events ................................................................................................................ 91 
10.1.2.  Serious  Adverse Event  (SAE)  .......................................................................................... 91 
10.1.3.  Suspected  Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSARs)  ....................................... 92 
10.2. METHODS  AND TIMING  FOR  CAPTURING  AND  ASSESSING  SAFETY  
PARAMETERS ........................................................................................................................ 93 
10.2.1.  Adverse Event  Reporting Period  ...................................................................................... 93 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  25  
 10.2.2.  Assessment  of Severity  of Adverse Events  ...................................................................... 94 
10.2.3.  Assessment  of Causality  of Adverse Events  .................................................................... 95 
10.2.4.  Procedures for Recording  AEs ......................................................................................... 96 
10.2.4.1.  Diagnosis versus  Signs and Symptoms  ................................................................... 97 
10.2.4.2.  Adverse Events  that are Secondary to Other Events ............................................... 97 
10.2.4.3.  Persistent  or Recurrent Adverse  Events  .................................................................. 97 
10.2.4.4.  Abnormal Laboratory Values  ................................................................................. 98 
10.2.4.5.  Abnormal Vital Sign  Values  ................................................................................... 98 
10.2.4.6.  Abnormal Liver Function Tests  .............................................................................. 99 
10.2.4.7.  Deaths  ..................................................................................................................... 99 
10.2.4.8.  Lack  of Efficacy  or Worsening of Underlying  Malignancy ................................. 100 
10.2.4.9.  Preexisting  Medical Conditions ............................................................................ 100 
10.2.4.10.  Hospitalization  or Prolonged Hospitalization  ....................................................... 100 
10.2.4.11.  Adverse Events  Associated  with an Overdose  or Error in Drug  
Administration  ...................................................................................................... 100 
10.2.4.12.  Adverse Events  in Individuals Not Enrolled  in the Study  .................................... 101 
10.2.4.13.  Pregnancy Exposure and  Birth  Events  .................................................................. 101 
11.0 S
TATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  AND DATA ANALYSIS  ........................................... 102 
11.1. GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS ........................................................................................... 102 
11.1.1.  Analysis Populations ...................................................................................................... 102 
11.1.2.  Cohort Comparability  .................................................................................................... 102 
11.1.3.  Efficacy  Endpoints and  Analyses ................................................................................... 102 
11.1.4.  Pharmacokinetic Analyses,  Phase 1 and 2a ................................................................... 103 
11.1.5.  Pharmacodynamic Analyses,  Phase  1 and  2a ................................................................ 103 
11.1.6.  Safety  Analyses, Phase 1 and 2a .................................................................................... 103 
11.2. SAMPLE SIZE CONSIDERATIONS  .................................................................................... 104 
11.2.1.  Phase 1  Sample Size  ...................................................................................................... 104 
11.2.2.  Phase  2a Sample Size  ..................................................................................................... 104 
11.3. MISSING  DATA  .................................................................................................................... 104 
11.4. MULTIPLICITY  ..................................................................................................................... 104 
11.5. DATA SAFETY  MONITORING  ........................................................................................... 104 
12.0 INVESTIGATOR AND SPONSOR  OBLIGATIONS  ............................................................ 105 
12.1. DOCUMENTATION REQUIRED FOR  STUDY INITIATION  ........................................... 105 
12.2. DATA REPORTING  AND  CASE  REPORT  FORMS  (CRF)  ................................................  105 
12.3. DEVI AT
ION FROM  THE  PROTOCOL  ................................................................................ 105 
12.4. STUDY MONITORING  ......................................................................................................... 106 
12.5. AUDITS  AND INSPECTIONS  .............................................................................................. 106 
12.6. INSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW  BOARD (IRB)  OR INDEPENDENT ETHICS  
COMMITTEE (IEC)  ............................................................................................................... 107 
12.7. DRUG ACCOUNTABILITY ................................................................................................. 107 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  26  
 12.8. DISCLOSURE OF  DATA  ...................................................................................................... 107 
13.0 QUALITY CONTROL  AND ASSURANCE  ........................................................................... 108 
14.0 ETHICS  ....................................................................................................................................... 109 
14.1. ETHICS REVIEW  .................................................................................................................. 109 
14.2. ETHICAL  CONDUCT  OF THE  STUDY  .............................................................................. 109 
14.3. WRITTEN  INFORMED CONSENT ...................................................................................... 109 
15.0 DATA HANDLING  AND  RECORD RETENTION  ............................................................... 110 
15.1. INSPECTION  OF RECORDS  ................................................................................................ 110 
15.2. RETENTION  OF RECORDS  ................................................................................................. 110 
16.0 PUBLICATION POLICY  ......................................................................................................... 111 
17.0 LIST OF REFERENCES  .......................................................................................................... 112 
18.0 APPENDICES  ............................................................................................................................ 116 
APPENDIX 1. SCHEDULE  OF ASSESSMENTS ─ PHASE  2A (EXPLORATORY)  ............... 117 
APPENDIX 2. EASTERN  COOPERATIVE  ONCOLOGY GROUP  (ECOG)  
PERFORMANCE  STATUS ................................................................................. 119 
APPENDIX 3. STRONG CYP3A4  INHIBITORS  AND INDUCERS  AND CYP3A  
SENSITIVE  SUSBSTRATES ............................................................................... 120 
APPENDIX 4. RESPONSE DEFINITIONS  FOR  B-CELL NHL  AND PTCL,  CLL,  AND 
CTCL  ..................................................................................................................... 122 
APP
ENDIX 5. PROGNOSTIC  FACTORS  ................................................................................... 137 
APPENDIX 6. DIFFERENTIAL OF ABC VS. GCG TYPE OF DLBCL BY IHC -HANS  
METHODOLOGY  ................................................................................................ 139 
APPENDIX 7. STAGING SYSTEMS FOR CLL  AND NHL  ....................................................... 140 
APPENDIX 8. GLOBAL  HEALTH  ASSESSMENT ................................................................... 142 
APPENDIX 9. COCKCROFT -GAULT METHOD FOR EVALUATING CREATININE  
CLEARANCE  ....................................................................................................... 143 
APPENDIX 10.  LIKERT SCALE  ................................................................................................... 144 
APPENDIX 11.  T-CELL LYMPHOMA CLASSIFICATIONS  ...................................................... 145 
 
 
List of Tables  
Table  1: Study Contact  Information  and 24- Hour Emergency  Contact ............................................ 5 
Table  2: Summary  of Key  Changes from Original Protocol (14 August 2013):  
Amendments  1 through 9 .................................................................................................... 6 
Table  3: Protocol- specific List  of Specialist  Terms  and Terms  Used  for Response Criteria  .......... 33 
Table  4: Grade  ≥ 3 Adverse Events Related  to Cerdulatinib by MedDRA  Preferred  Term:  
Phase 1  Portion  (Completed) of Study 13-601 (N=43)  ..................................................... 41 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  27  
  
 
Table  5: All Serious  Adverse Events  Related  to Cerdulatinib by MedDRA  Preferred  Term:  
Phase 1  Portion  (Completed) of Study 13-601 (N=43)  ..................................................... 42 
Table  6: By-Cohort Inclusion Criteria  for Phase  2a Cohorts ........................................................... 53 
Table  7: Estimated  Concentrations of Twice  Daily  (BID)  Doses  from  PK Modeling .................... 59 
Table  8: Guidelines for Dose  Reductions for Cerdulatinib  ............................................................. 73 
Table  A3-9: Strong  CYP3A4  Inhibitors and Inducers ................................................................. 120 
Table  A3-10: CYP3A Sensitive  Substrates  ................................................................................... 120 
Table  A4-11: Lugano Criteria  (Revised  Criteria)  for Response  Assessment  in NHL  ................... 123 
Table  A4-12: Response Criteria  for ATLL  .................................................................................... 130 
Table  A4-13: Response Criteria  for LGL  ...................................................................................... 131 
Table  A4-14: Global Response  Score  ............................................................................................ 132 
Table  A4-15: Response in Skin ..................................................................................................... 132 
Table  A4-16: Response in Lymph Nodes ...................................................................................... 133 
Table  A4-17: Response in Viscera  ................................................................................................ 133  
Tabl
e A4-18: Response in Blood ................................................................................................... 134 
Table  A4-19: Calculating  Skin Scores ........................................................................................... 135 
Table  A4-20: mSWAT  Response Assessment  .............................................................................. 136 
Table  A5-21: Follicular  Lymphoma International Prognostic Index -1 (FLIPI -1) Criteria  ........... 137 
Table  A5-22: International Prognostic Index  (IPI)  ........................................................................ 137 
Table  A5-23: Age-Adjusted International Prognostic Index ......................................................... 137 
Table  A5-24: Simplified  Mantle- Cell Prognostic Index (MIPI) .................................................... 138 
Table  A7-25: Rai Staging  System  for Chronic Lymphocytic Lymphoma  ..................................... 140 
Table  A7-26: Binet Staging  System  for Chronic Lymphocytic Lymphoma ................................. 140 
Table  A7-27: Lugano Modification  of Ann Arbor  Staging System (for Primary  Nodal 
Lymphomas) ............................................................................................................ 141 
Table  A11-28: Mature  T- and NK- cell Neoplasms in  the 2008 WHO Classification  
of Lymphoid Tumors  ............................................................................................... 145 
List of  Figures  
Figure 1: Cerdulatinib  Pathway  Inhibition in Peripheral  Blood ....................................................... 55 
Figure 2: Individual Trough Levels (Cmin) for Tolerated  (40-65 mg  QD) and Non -tolerated  
(45 mg BID
) Dose  Regimens of  Cerdulatinib  on Day  29 (First  Day of Cycle 2) ............. 57 
Figure 3: Steady -State Cerdulatinib  Plasma Concentrations and Treatment -related Grade 2 +  
Adverse Events  .................................................................................................................. 58 
Figure 4: Change in Sum  of Tumor Volumes from  Computed Tomography Scans  ......................... 58 
Figure A6-5: Decision  Tree for Immunoperoxida se Tissue Microarray  (TMA)  .......................... 139 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  28  
 LIST  OF ABBREVIATIONS  AND DEFINITIONS  OF TERMS  
The following abbreviations used in this study protocol are shown in the table below. Specialist  
terms,  including response criteria, are defined in  Table 3. 
 
Abbreviation  Expansion 
ABC  Activated  B-cell like diffuse  large  B-cell lymphoma  
Ae Amount of  drug excreted  in urine  over the sampling  interval  
AE Adverse  event  
ALKP  Alkaline  Phosphatase  
ALT  Alanine  aminotransferase  
ANC  Absolute neutrophil count 
aNHL  Aggressive  non-Hodgkin  lymphoma  
aPTT  Activated  partial  thromboplastin  time 
ASCO  American  Society  of Clinical Oncology  
ASCT  Autologous  stem  cell therapy  
AST  Aspartate  aminotransferase  
Au Amount of  drug excreted  into urine  
AUC  Area  under the curve 
BCR B-cell Receptor  
BID Twice a  day 
BR Bendamustine  and rituximab  
BRAT  bananas,  rice, applesauce,  toast  
BTK  Bruton’s  tyrosine  kinase  
BUN  Blood  urea nitrogen  (chemotherapy  regimen)  
CBC Complete  blood count  
CFR Code of Federal  Regulations  
CHOP  Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride, vincristine (formerly 
oncovin) and prednisolone  (chemotherapy regimen)  
CIRS  Cumulative Illness Rating  Scale  
CL Clearance  
CLL  Chronic lymphocytic leukemia  
CLr Renal  clearance  
Cmax/min  Maximum/minimum  observed  concentration  
CNS  Central  nervous  system  
CO 2 Carbon  dioxide  
CR Complete  response  
CRP  C-reactive  protein  
CRF  Case  report  forms  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  29  
  
 
Abbreviation  Expansion  
CRO  Contract  research  organization  
CT Computed Tomography 
CTCAE  Common Toxicity  Criteria  for Adverse Events  
CTCL  Cutaneous T- cell lymphoma  
DSMB  Data Safety  Monitoring  Board  
dL Deciliter  
DLBCL  Diffuse  Large  B-cell Lymphoma  
DLCO  Diffusion  capacity  of carbon  monoxide 
DLT  Dose -limiting  toxicity  
DNA  Deoxyribonucleic Acid  
EBV  Epstein -Barr virus 
EC Ethics  Committee  
ECG  Electrocardiogram  
ECOG  Eastern  Cooperative  Oncology  Group  
eCRF  Electronic  Case  Report  Form  
EDTA  Ethylenediaminetetraacetic  Acid  
ESR Erythrocyte  sedimentation  rate 
FcR Fc Receptor  
FDA Food and  Drug  Administration  
FEV 1 Forced  expiratory  volume in  1 second  
FFPE  Formalin -fixed  paraffin  embedded  tissue  
FISH  Florescence  in situ hybridization  
FL Follicular  Lymphoma  
FLIPI  Follicular  Lymphoma  International Prognostic Index 
FVC  Forced  vital capacity  
GCB  DLBCL  Germinal  center  B-cell like Diffuse  Large  B-cell Lymphoma  
GCP  Good  Clinical  Practice  
G-CSF Granulocyte  Colony  Stimulating  Factor  
GLP  Good  Laboratory  Practices  
HCO 3 Bicarbonate  
HCT -CI Hematopoietic  Cell Transplantation Co-Morbidity  Index 
HDPE  High  Density  Polyethylene 
hERG  human ether -à-go-go- related  gene 
HIV Human Immunodeficiency  Virus  
HNSTD  Highest  Non-Severely  Toxic  Dose  
hr Hour  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  30  
  
 
Abbreviation  Expansion  
HSCT  Hematopoietic  stem  cell transplant  
IB Investigator’s Brochure 
IC50 Half maximal  inhibitory  concentration  
IC90 90% maximal inhibitory concentration  
ICH International  Conference  on Harmonisation  
ID Identification  
Ig Immunoglobulin  
IgE Immunoglobulin  E 
IgM Immunoglobulin M 
IHC Immunohistochemistry  
IND Investigational New Drug 
iNHL  Indolent  non-Hodgkin  lymphoma  
INR International  Normalized  Ratio  
IRB Institutional  Review  Board  
IR Immediate  Release  
ITP Immune  Thrombocytopenic  Purpura  
IV Intravenous 
IWCLL  International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia  
IWG  International  Working  Group  
JAK Janus  kinase  
kg Kilogram  
LCMS  Liquid  Chromatography  Mass  Spectrometry  
LDH Lactic dehydrogenase 
LPL Lymphocytoplasmacytic lymphoma  
LLN  Lower  Limit  of Normal  
LVEF Left ventricular  ejection  fraction  
MAD  Maximum  Administered  Dose  
MALT  
lymphoma Mucosa  Associated  Lymphoid  Tumor  
MCL  Mantle  Cell Lymphoma  
MedDRA  Medical  Dictionary  for Regulatory  Activities  
MF Mycosis  fungoides  
mSWAT  Modified  Severity  Weighted  Assessment Tool  
mg Milligram  
min Minute  
MITT  Modified  Intent to Treat  
mL Milliliter  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  31  
  
 
Abbreviation  Expansion  
MRD  Minimal  Residual  Disease  
MTD  Maximum  Tolerated  Dose  
MZL Marginal  zone  lymphoma  
NCI National  Cancer  Institute  
NHL  Non-Hodgkin  Lymphoma  
ng Nanogram  
NOAEL  No Observed  Adverse  Effect  Level  
ORR  Overall  response  rate (CR + PR) 
PCP Pneumocystis carinii  (aka Pneumocystis jirovecii ) Pneumonia 
PTCL Peripheral  T-cell lymphoma  
PCR Polymerase Chain  Reaction  
PD Progressive  disease  or Pharmacodynamic  
PET Positron -Emission  Tomography  
PK Pharmacokinetic  
PI Principal  Investigator  
PMA  Phorbol  12-myristate  13-acetate  
PO Orally  
PR Partial  response  
PT Prothrombin  time 
PTT Partial  thromboplastin  time 
q12h  Every  12 hours  
q24h  Every  24 hours  
Q Every  
QD Once  daily 
R-CHOP  Rituximab  + CHOP  (defined  earlier)  
RBC Red Blood Cells  
RNA  Ribonucleic  Acid  
RP2D  Recommended  Phase  2 Dose  
SAE  Serious  Adverse  Event  
SAP Statistical  Analysis  Plan 
SD Stable  disease  
SGOT  Serum  glutamic -oxaloacetic transaminase  
SGPT Serum  glutamic  pyruvic  transaminase  
SIEP  Serum  immunoelectrophoresis  
SPEP  Serum  protein  electrophoresis  
SLL Small  lymphocytic  lymphoma  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  32  
  
 
Abbreviation  Expansion  
SOC  Standard  of care  or (MedDRA) system  organ class  
SS Sézary  Syndrome 
ss Steady  state 
SPD Sum of the perpendicular  diameters 
STD 10 Severely  toxic dose  in 10%  of rodents  
SUSAR  Suspected  unexpected  serious  adverse  reaction  
SYK  Spleen  Tyrosine  Kinase  
t½ Half-life 
Tmax/min  Time  to maximum/minimum observed  concentration  
TEAE Treatment  emergent  adverse event  
μL Microliter  
μM Micromolar  
ULN  Upper  limit  of normal  
USP United  States  Pharmacopeia  
VS Vital  signs  
Vss Volume  at steady  state 
WBC White  blood cell(s)  
WM Waldenström's macroglobulinemia  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  33  
  
 
Table 3: Protocol- specific List of Specialist Terms and Terms Used for 
Response  Criteria  
 
Specialist  Term  Expansion  and Definition  
aNHL  Aggressive  Non-Hodgkin  lymphoma,  defined  as DLBCL,  FL3B,  MCL,  and transformed  
NHL  (definitions  provided below).  
Clinical Benefit  CR + PR + SD, PFS,  and DOR.  
CR Complete  response.  Criteria  vary by disease  type.  
DLBCL  Diffuse  large  B-cell lymphoma.  
DOR  Duration  of response:  Time  from  the first documentation  of PR or CR to the earlier  of the 
first documentation  of disease  progression or death  from  any cause. 
Intolerant  Discontinuation  due to previous  therapy  due to a  clinically  significant adverse event.  
FL/iNHL  Follicular  lymphoma/indolent  Non-Hodgkin  lymphoma.  
FL Grade  3B Follicular  lymphoma, Grade  3 B. 
LNR  Lymph node response:  The proportion of patients who achieve a ≥ 50% decrease from  
baseline  in the sum of the products  of the greatest  perpendicular diameters  (SPD) of  index  
lymph nodes.  
MAD Maximum  administered  dose:  The MAD is defined  as the highest  dose level  achieved  in this 
study suitable for further investigation and will be declared the RP2D.  If the MTD is not  
achieved, the highest  studied  dose will be declared the  MAD and become  the RP2D.  
MCL  Mantle  cell lymphoma.  
MRD - Minimum  residual  disease  negativity: < 1 CLL  cell in 10,000 leucocytes.  
MRD+  Minimum  residual  disease  positivity: ≥ 1 CLL  cell in 10,000 leucocytes.  
MTD  Maximum tolerated dose:  Per the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Dictionary of Cancer  
terms,  the MTD  is “the highest  dose of a drug or treatment that does not cause unacceptable 
side effects [ 6].” 
ORR  Overall  response  rate: Defined  as CR+PR.  
PFS Progression- free survival time: Time from the start of cerdulatinib treatment to the earlier of  
the first documentation of disease progression or death  from  any cause.  
PR Partial  response:  Criteria  vary by disease  type.  
Relapsed  Disease  Progression or recurrence of disease after documentation of response (CR or PR) ≥ 6 months  
since  last treatment.  
Refractory  Disease  Progression on treatment, SD, or PR, or better, with progression < 6 months after any prior  
treatment.  
RP2D  Recommended Phase 2 dose:  The RP2D is the beginning dose recommended for Phase 2  
clinical trials.  For the purposes  of this protocol,  the MTD  will be declared the RP2D.  If the 
MTD  is not declared,  the MAD  will be declared  the RP2D.  
SD Stable  disease:  Criteria vary  by disease  type.  
TTR  Time  to treatment  response:  Time  from  the start of cerdulatinib  treatment  to the  first 
documentation of CR or PR.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  34  
  
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1. Cerdulatinib  (PRT062070) 
Cerdulatinib  (PRT062070) is an orally available, reversible, small molecule ATP competitive 
inhibitor of Spleen Tyrosine Kinase (SYK) and the Janus kinase (JAK) family that will be 
developed for the treatment of patients with B-cell malignancies, including non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma (NHL)  and chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma CLL/SLL.  
 
SYK, as a key component of Fc receptor signaling and of the BCR signaling pathway, has been 
demonstrated  to be an important target  in the disruption of cell survival sign als mediated  through 
BCR.  It has been suggested that SYK may mediate survival signals in DLBCL, Mantle Cell 
Lymphoma (MCL), and FL [ 7-9]. The JAK/STAT pathway, important in cytokine signaling has 
also been reported to be activated in B cell lymphomas and the resistance of some DLBCL  
appears related to mutations that drive NFkB- mediated JAK/pSTAT3 activation [ 10]. CLL is  
another B- cell malignancy  that appears to be dependent on BCR and thus S YK signaling [ 11]. 
Additionally, several  cytokines have been reported to  be increased  in CLL and may  be important 
in promoting CLL cell survival and proliferation through interaction with the tumor microenvironment [ 12]. The cytokines, IL-2, IL 4, and INF-α have been shown  to promote 
CLL cell survival through the anti-apoptotic effects of up-regulation of BCL2 family proteins 
[13-15].  Studies have also shown that disruption of cytokine signaling via inhibition of JAK has  
the potential to reverse  the cytoprotection provided to CLL cells by the tumor  
microenvironment [ 16]. 
 
Please refer  to the Investigator’s  Brochure  (IB) for more  details.  
 
1.2. Pharmacology Studies  of Cerdulatinib  
Multiple in vitro and in vivo pharmacology studies have been undertaken to evaluate the activity 
of cerdulatinib. Cerdulatinib was studied in vitro against a panel of purified kinase assays  
followed by specific  cellular  potency assays against SYK, JAK1,  JAK2,  JAK3, and TYK2. 
Significant potency was observed against signaling pathways utilizing SYK, JAK1, JAK3, and 
TYK2.  SYK-dependent BCR signaling and functional responses were inhibited with a half 
maximal inhibitory concentration  (IC 50) in the  range of 0.1 to 0.5 µM.  In cytokine signaling and 
functional response assays,  inhibition against  pathways  utilizing  JAK1/3  (Interleukin  (IL)-2, 
IL 4) and  JAK1/JAK2/TYK2 (IL -6) was observed, with IC50 values ranging from  0.15 to 
0.9 µM. Cerdulatinib induces growth arrest and apoptosis in B- cell tumor cell lines and the  
viability  of primary  CLL cell cultures was also adversely  affected in a dose dependent manner. 
 
The in vivo effects of cerdulatinib have been studied in B-cell tumor xenografts, in a rodent 
model of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), and in rodent models of arthritis. In the subcutaneous xenograft study, Ramos (Burkitt’s lymphoma line) tumor growth was measured at various intervals. Inhibition of tumor growth was found to be comparable to that of vehicle 
controls. The lack of efficacy  was likely  the result  of inadequate exposure of cerdulatinib, where  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  35  
  
 
Cave plasma  and tumor concentrations at the highest dose were below the level  known to  
demonstrate inhibition of Ramos cell viability  in vitro . 
 
In an effort to overcome the challenges of the poor pharmacokinetics (PK) in mice, an 
intravenous (IV) tumor model was utilized, in which mice received an IV injection of Ramos 
cells, followed by cerdulatinib after 3 days of tumor growth. Time to hind limb paralysis, a  
marker  of tumor growth  and the primary  efficacy  endpoint, was  significantly  delayed  in animals  
treated  with cerdulatinib at a  dose of 30 mg/kg twice  daily  (BID).  
 
Cerdulatinib was also studied in a model of chronic BCR stimulation and splenomegaly. BCR stimulation  and subsequent splenomegaly were induced in mice following  injections of an  
anti-mouse BCR antibody. Doses of 15 mg/kg or greater were effective in reducing the 
splenomegaly compared to that observed in vehicle- treated animals.  In a murine model of ITP, 
Fc receptor (FcR) mediated antibody -induced platelet clearance was significantly inhibited by 
treatment with cerdulatinib at a dose of 30 mg/kg, affirming the ability of this compound to 
interfere with SYK -dependent FcR signaling. 
 
Two rodent models of arthritis have demonstrated the ability of cerdulatinib to interfere with  
SYK and JAK- mediated inflammation.  In the mouse passive anti-collagen antibody induced 
arthritis (CAIA) model, inflammation and swelling were completely inhibited following cerdulatinib treatment at 30 mg/kg BID.  In the rat collagen -induced arthritis model (CIA), 
treatment  with cerdulatinib  was initiated  following  the observation of paw inflammation.  
Progression of the arthritis  and inflammation  were completely  suppressed in  animals  treated  with  
cerdulatinib  at doses of 5 mg/kg BID or  higher. 
 
The PK properties of cerdulatinib were evaluated in mouse, rat, dog, and monkey following IV and oral (po) dosing. Systemic clearance (CL
ss) was much higher in the mouse compared with  
CLss in rat, dog, and monkey. The volume of distribution (V ss) was also highest in the mouse 
compared to other species. The apparent terminal half -life (t ½) ranged from 1.16 to 15.9 hours 
after IV administration.  Cerdulatinib  was well absorbed in rat  and monkey (oral  bioavailability; 
F = 22.3-30.9%) and completely  absorbed in dog (F = 113%). 
 
In the rat, the PK of cerdulatinib was non-linear following both IV and po administration. 
Between  1 and  10 mg/kg IV,  the clearance of cerdulatinib  decreased  from  14.4 mL/min/kg  to 
7.81 mL/min/kg. Following po dosing at 1, 10, or 50 mg/kg, AUC 0-∞ increased greater than  
dose-proportionally from 1  to 50 mg/kg. These data suggest that  certain elimination  pathways 
may be saturated at higher doses, resulting in a greater  than dose-proportional increase 
in exposure. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  36  
  
In the dog, non-linear PK was observed following po dosing at 25 mg/kg. After 5 days of 
dosing, the exposure of cerdulatinib on Day 5 was higher than expected when comparing AUC
0-24 on Day 5 to AUC 0-∞ on Day 1. However, when compared to the exposure following 
administration  of single po doses of 5, 15, or 50 mg/kg, the dose- normalized AUC 0-∞ of the 
15 and 50 mg/kg were lower than that of the 5 mg/kg. Therefore, the PK of cerdulatinib in the 
dog is possibly influenced by both some type of saturation of clearance process(es) and the 
limited  absorption of the compound. 
 
Protein  binding for cerdulatinib  in mouse, rat, dog, cynomolgus monkey, and  human plasma was  
91.7, 95.6, 83.2, 88.1, and 89.5%, respectively. Studies of bile-duct cannulated rats have shown that the major route of elimination for cerdulatinib appears to be metabolism.  Cerdulatinib can  
be metabolized by CYPs 1A1, 1B1, 2J2, and 3A4. Oxidative metabolism appears to be the 
major  route of metabolism of cerdulatinib  by rat,  dog, monkey, and human liver microsomes  
and hepatocytes.  
 
The capacity of cerdulatinib to inhibit the major human liver CYP isozymes (CYPs 1A2, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, and 3A4) was evaluated using pooled human liver microsomes and isozyme 
specific probe substrates.  Cerdulatinib did not demonstrate significant inhibition at 
concentrations up to 50 µM. With respect to time -dependent inhibition, cerdul atinib  
demonstrated significant inhibition (≥ 30%) of CYP3A4 at 50 µM but not at 10 µM. 
Subsequently, it was found that cerdulatinib 0.3 to 1 µM decreased CYP3A4 mRNA and activity 
levels.  Therefore, it is possible that cerdulatinib  could affect the levels of co-administered drugs 
that are metabolized by  CYP3A4  similar to a  CYP inhibitor. 
 
1.3. Safety  Pharmacology Studies  
The cardiovascular safety of cerdulatinib was assessed in both in vitro and in vivo studies. In a 
non-Good Laboratory Practices (GLP) human ether -à-go-go- related gene (hERG) radio -ligand 
binding displacement assay, cerdulatinib (10 and 50 μM) generated 10% and 34% inhibition of 
binding to the hERG receptor. In a non- GLP in vitro patch clamp study using transfected HEK 
293 cells, cerdulatinib (50 μM) inhibited the potassium channel by 42%, compared to 69% for the positive control. In the subsequent GLP patch clamp study, 30 μM cerdulatinib resulted in a 38% inhibition of IKr tail current density. A non- GLP in vitro study of the effect of cerdulatinib  
on action potential duration was conducted in isolated Purkinje fibers from canine hearts.  
Cerdulatinib did not prolong action potential durations up to 50 µM concentration. Additionally, no changes were observed in action potential amplitude or resting membrane potential of the  
Purkinje fibers. These data suggest there is low potential for cerdulatinib to interact with the  
hERG  or other cardiac ion channels. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  37  
  
 
In vivo studies included a non-GLP study of the effect of cerdulatinib on hemodynamic 
parameters in anesthetized rats.  The IV infusion of cerdulatinib had no effect on heart rate and 
blood pressure  up to plasma  concentrations of 5 to 10 μM. In a non- GLP  study telemetrized  
dogs received 25 mg/kg cerdulatinib or vehicle. Telemetry data for QT interval, heart rate,  
systolic, diastolic and mean arterial blood pressure were recorded from 17 hours pre- to 48 hours post study drug. Mean plasma levels at C
max were 4.7 µM and were maintained > 2 μM for up to 
6 hours. No changes in QTc  interval were observed, heart rate increased  by ~20 beats per  minute  
for 7  hours but remained  within  the normal range,  diastolic  and mean  arterial  blood pressure  
were unchanged, and systolic blood pressure showed sporadic decreases (3 and 20 hours) that were not considered biologically meaningful. A GLP cardiovascular safety study was also  
performed in dogs. Dogs maintained normal sinus rhythm and no consistent changes in QT 
morphology were observed.  A number of changes in R-R interval and in diastolic, systolic, and 
mean arterial pressure were noted, however, although statistically significant these changes were 
generally considered incidental and not adverse. The no adverse effect level (NOAEL) for this  
study was determined to  be 50 mg/kg. 
 
A GLP respiratory safety study was also conducted. Male rats received cerdulatinib at 0, 25, 30, 
or 60 mg/kg.  There were no  statistically  significant changes in respiratory rate for any group. 
Non dose-dependent but statistically significant changes in tidal volume between 1 to 6 hours 
post dose, and changes in  minute  volume 24 hours post dose were considered spurious, and  the 
no observed adverse effect level  (NOAEL)  for this study was determined to  be 60 mg/kg. 
 
A GLP central nervous system (CNS) safety pharmacology study was conducted in rats. Low  
arousal/reactivity to environment was observed at dose levels of 30 and 60 mg/kg. Statistically  
significant changes in motor activity were noted for males given 60 mg/kg. Similar but not statistically  significant changes were observed in female rats. The NOAEL for  cerdulatinib was 
considered  to be 30 mg/kg in males and 60 mg/kg in females.  
 
A non- GLP Side Effect Panel screen was performed to assess the ability of cerdulatinib to  
interact with neurotransmitter related receptors, steroid receptors, ion channels, prostaglandins, 
growth factors/hormones, brain/gut peptides, and enzymes. Of the 63 tested, cerdulatinib at a  
concentration of 10 μM significantly  inhibited ligand binding to only 2 (adenosine 
[non- selective]  neurotransmitter  receptor  [58%] and  sodium [site  2] ion channel [47%]). 
 
1.4. Nonclinical Toxicology Studies  
Single dose toxicity  studies of cerdulatinib, given by oral gavage,  were conducted in mouse, rat, 
and dogs. Deaths occurred  in mice  receiving  1,000 mg/kg or more,  and in rats receiving  
300 mg/kg. Additional observations included scruffy  coat,  piloerection, and  abnormal gait  in 
mice receiving 300 mg/kg, and weight loss in rats receiving 100 mg/kg. Dogs developed 
vomiting, loose stools, and a transient decrease in neutrophils at a dose of 50 mg/kg; all symptoms/signs recovered within 24 hours. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  38  
  
 
Non-GLP repeat dose, dose-ranging studies were conducted in mouse, rat, and dog. In mice  
given 30, 100, or 300 mg/kg daily for 12 days, the NOAEL was 30 mg/kg/day. Body weight 
loss, bone marrow hypoplasia, enteropathy, lack of splenic germinal centers, and thymic 
depletion were noted at doses of 100 mg/kg or greater. In a similar study, rats received 4, 10, 30, or 100 mg/kg/day given in divided doses BID for 11 days. The NOAEL  was determined  to be 
30 mg/kg. Deaths  occurred  at 100 mg/kg/day. Additionally,  AST/ALT  increased  by 2 to 3×, 
and animals given 100 mg/kg/day were observed to have myocardial necrosis, hepatic necrosis, 
thymic lymphoid depletion, and severe bone marrow hypoplasia. Bone marrow hypoplasia was 
also observed in 25% of animals given 30 mg/kg/day, along with mild thymic lymphoid depletion and  a decrease in body  weight gain. Two non- GLP  studies were conducted  in dogs. 
Dogs were given 25 mg/kg/day for 5 days or 10, 15, or 20 mg/kg/day for 11 days. In the 5 -day 
study reversible decreases in neutrophils and total WBC were observed without clinical chemistry  changes.  In the 11- day study, dogs given 20 mg/kg/day had decreased  WBC, without 
effects  on other hematological parameters.  
 
GLP -compliant toxicology studies were conducted in the rat and dog. Sprague- Dawley rats were  
given 0, 2.5, 6.0, or 15 mg/kg/day of cerdulatinib by oral gavage for 28 days. Recovery animals  
were included in the 0 and 15 mg/kg/day groups; recovery group animals given 15 mg/kg/day died or were euthanized during the recovery period (Study Days 29 and 38), but the deaths were attributed to phlebotomy procedure. The primary finding in male rats receiving 15 mg/kg/day 
was a statistically significant decrease in body weight gain. All dose groups had fewer mean 
WBC, lymphocyte, neutrophil, monocyte, eosinophil, basophil, and reticulocyte numbers compared to vehicle treated animals, however the changes were within the reference range and  
thus not considered biologically meaningful. Both male and female rats had statistically  
significant increases in alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), and alkaline phosphatase (ALKP), however the magnitude of the change was < 2x and findings did not correlate with gross or micr oscopic findings. All cerdulatinib -treated rats had spleen and thymus 
weights less than vehicle- treated rats.  Changes related to the pharmacologic activity of 
cerdulatinib, or that were not dose-dependent or associated with gross or microscopic pathologic 
findings were considered  not adverse.  T-cell immune response was  also assessed in  this study. 
All main study animals were immunized with 0.5 mg Keyhole Limpet Hemocyanin (KLH) on 
Day 12. Analysis for Immunoglobulin G (IgG) and Immunoglobulin M (IgM) showed both an IgM and IgG response that did not appear to be affected by administration of cerdulatinib. The  
NOAEL was considered to be 6.0 mg/kg in male rats and > 15 mg/kg in female rats. Mean  
C
max/AUC for male rats at 6.0 mg/kg/day was 445 ng/mL/4,886 ng*hr/ mL, while the mean  
Cmax/AUC  for female rats at 15 mg/kg/day was 2,737 ng/mL/31,391 ng*hr/mL. 
A 28 -day repeat dose study was also conducted in dogs. Dogs received 0, 0.75, 2.5, 5.0, or 
50/20/15 (multiple dose reductions) mg/kg/day of cerdulatinib by oral gavage. One death  
occurred on Day 7 in the 50 mg/kg/day group; the remaining animals in this group were dose 
reduced to 20 mg/kg/day on Day 10, then again to 15 mg/kg/day on Day 13 and Days 16 to 22. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  39  
  
 
This group was terminated on  Day  22. Vomiting  and fecal  changes  were  present in  dogs treated  
at 2.5 mg/kg/day or more. Decreased activity was observed in animals receiving 5.0 mg/kg/day 
or more.  T-lymphocyte counts were decreased in a dose-dependent fashion in all animals 
receiving cerdulatinib at doses of 0.75 mg/kg/day or more. B-lymphocyte counts were also 
generally lower. Reductions in indicators of erythroid mass and in reticulocyte counts were observed in the high dose group and in animals from the  2.5 and 5.0 mg/kg dose groups. 
Reductions in WBC, including neutrophil and lymphocyte counts were also seen in these 3 dose 
groups. All hematologic changes showed complete recovery by the end of the recovery period. 
Thymus and spleen weights were decreased in the 2.5 and 5.0 mg/kg dose groups. Microscopic findings considered related to cerdulatinib included hypertrophy of the zona fasciculata of the adrenal glands; changes, including atrophy of the submucosal glands, of the esophagus; 
multifocal necrosis of the epithelium of the kidney proximal convoluted tubules and basophilia 
of the proximal tubules (5.0 and 50/20/15 mg/kg); lymphoid depletion of the cervical lymph nodes, thymus, and  spleen;  multifocal degeneration  of the epithelium of the seminiferous tubules 
of the testes, and multinucleated  spermatids of the seminiferous tubules (2.5, 5.0, and 
50/20/15 mg/kg). Changes in the bone marrow, including hypocellularity, increased myeloid to erythroid ratio, and reduced total erythroid counts were observed in animals from the 5.0 and 50/20/15 mg/kg dose groups. The NOAEL for cerdulatinib was determined to be 2.5 mg/kg/day for females and 0.75 mg/kg/day for males. The NOAEL was determined to be 0.75 mg/kg/day. 
At 0.75 mg/kg mean C
max ranged from 216 to 231 ng/mL while AUC ranged from 1,219 to 
1,751 ng*hr/mL. At 2.5 mg/kg, the mean C max in females was  733 ng/mL and AUC was  
4,430 ng*hr/mL. 
 
The genotoxic/mutagenic potential of cerdulatinib was studied in both a GLP- compliant AMES  
assay  and in a GLP -compliant rat bone marrow micronucleus assay  with Liver Comet  Assay.  
Cerdulatinib showed a low potential for mutagenicity in the AMES assay. Similarly, results of  
the rat bone marrow micronucleus assay  showed a  low probability that cerdulatinib  is genotoxic 
or mutagenic (no DNA breaks or increased  nuclear fragments).  
 
For the Phase 1 trial, a starting dose of 15 mg QD has been proposed based on the STD 10 in rats  
of 15 mg/kg. This dose is predicted to provide a steady state C max and AUC of approximately 
28 ng/mL (0.06 µM) and  225 ng*hr/mL, respectively, which  is expected to  yield  Cmax and AUC  
exposures of 8-fold and 7-fold lower than the no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) in the 
dog of 0.75 mg/kg/day. 
 
Thus, the pharmacology and nonclinical safety data described above support this initial proposed 
clinical trial of cerdulatinib, which is designed to identify the maximum tolerated dose (MTD),  
evaluate the safety  profile,  and assess the  pharmacokinetic (PK) profile  of cerdulatinib  in patients  
with relapsed/refractory  lymphoid malignancies. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  40  
  
 
1.5. Cerdulatinib Phase  1 Interim  Results  
The Phase 1 portion of the  study is closed to enrollment. 
 
Cerdulatinib  data were presented at the 2015 American Society of Clinical Oncology meeting in 
June 2015 [ 17]. Doses studied included 15 to  65 mg po daily. Data for 30  patients  demonstrated  
multiple  nodal responses, and 4 patients demonstrated partial responses (PRs): at 30  mg in 
1 patient with del 17p CLL who had relapsed after 6 prior therapies; at 45 mg in 1 patient with 
CLL who had received 4 prior therapies and 1 patient with follicular lymphoma (FL) who had 
received 3 prior th erapies; and at 65 mg in 1 patient with a transformed diffuse large B- cell 
lymphoma (DLBCL; MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 expression by immunohistochemistry [IHC]) who 
had relapsed approximately 1 year after 1 prior therapy. No dose- limiting toxicities (DLTs) were  
observed  as of that time.  The PK parameters, specifically  the half -life (t½ of ~24  hours) and  a 
2:1 peak-trough ratio, indicated the suitability of once-daily dosing with cerdulatinib. Evidence of pharmacodynamic (PD) activity was observed for multiple markers of inflammation and cytokines, as well  as complete inhibition  of peripheral  blood SYK and JAK signaling pathways. 
 
After evaluation of the 65 mg dose cohort was completed, dose escalation proceeded to the 
100 mg dose level.  Pharmacokinetic (PK) findings from the 100 mg daily  dose level  were  
consistent with those from the 40 to 65 mg dose levels, indicating a plateau in exposure. Further analysis  indicated the likely  cause of this  was cerdulatinib solubility.  
 
A 45 mg twice daily (BID) dosing cohort was studied, which showed an increase in AUC and 
minimum and maximal concentrations (C min and C max, respectively).  The 45 mg BID level  
roughly doubled the exposure relative to the 40 to 100 mg once daily (QD) average, achieving steady- state C
min and C max of 1.5 and 1.8 µM, respectively. Under this dose regimen, 1 patient 
with FL achieved  a PR,  with what  appeared  to be a rapid  (within  1 week)  onset of palpable 
tumor reduction. Another patient with CLL experienced rapid lymphocytosis, whereas a 
refractory FL patient demonstrated stable disease (SD).  The 45 mg BID dose regimen, however, 
resulted in 2 DLTs: 1 patient experienced pancreatitis within 2 weeks of dosing, and a second 
patient experienced Grade 3 fatigue.  These f indings were discussed at regularly scheduled 
conferences with the Investigator, during which it was determined that this dose regimen was not 
tolerated.  Of note, the 2 patients with DLTs at 45 mg BID did not achieve the highest exposures 
at this dose leve l. Thus, we aggregated all data from the escalation portion of the study to date to 
explore the PK  profile.  
 
All AEs of Grade 3 or higher and all SAEs (including 2 fatal SAEs) considered to be related to 
cerdulatinib reported during the Phase 1 portion of the study in 43 dosed patients are summarized 
in Table 4  and Table 5 , respectively.  (Data cutoff is of 25 March 2016; although Phase 1 is 
closed to enrollment, dosing with cerdulatinib is still ongoing in several patients enrolled under 
Phase 1 who have been rolled over into the Phase 2a portion of the study.) 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  41  
  
 
Table 4: Grade ≥ 3 Adverse Events  Related  to Cerdulatinib by  MedDRA  Preferred  
Term:  Phase  1 Portion (Completed)  of Study 13 -601 (N=43) 
 
 
 
AEs by MedDRA  Preferred  Term  Total  Number  of Patients  (N=43)  
Number (%) of Patients with  
Grade  ≥ 3 AE (N=43)  Number (%) of Patients with AE  
Any Grade  (N=43)  
Diarrhea  4 (9.3)  27 (46.5)  
Nausea 1 (2.3)  11 (25.6)  
Abdominal  pain 2 (4.7)  8 (18.6)  
Pancreatitis  1 (2.3)  1 (2.3)  
Fatigue  5 (11.6)  15 (34.9)  
Anemia  3 (7)  5 (11.6)  
Neutropenia  3 (7)  5 (11.6)  
Thrombocytopenia  1 (2.3)  3 (7)  
Febrile  Neutropenia  1 (2.3)  1 (2.3)  
Pancytopenia  1 (2.3)  1 (2.3)  
Neutrophil  count  decreased  2 (4.7)  3 (7)  
LDH increased  1 (2.3)  2 (4.7)  
AST  increased  1 (2.3)  1 (2.3)  
Decreased  appetite  1 (2.3)  7 (16.3)  
Hyponatremia  1 (2.3)  2 (4.7)  
Pneumonia  2 (4.7)  2 (4.7)  
Lung infection  1 (2.3)  1 (2.3)  
Pneumocytsis  jirovecii pneumonia a 1 (2.3)  1 (2.3)  
Macular  rash 1 (2.3)  1 (2.3)  
Hypotension  1 (2.3)  2 (4.7)  
AE = Adverse event;  MedDRA  = Medical  dictionary  for regulatory  activities  
Note : Data cutoff:  25  March  2016.  
a Fatal.  
Source:  Data  on file at Portola  (clinical study database).  The Phase  1 portion  of the study is  closed  to enrollment; 
however,  some  patients  enrolled under  Phase  1 are still receiving  cerdulatinib  in Phase 2a.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  42  
  
 
Table 5: All Serious  Adverse Events  Related  to Cerdulatinib  by MedDRA  Preferred  
Term:  Phase  1 Portion (Completed)  of Study  13-601 (N=43) 
 
Serious  Adverse  Event  by MedDRA  Preferred  Term  Number  (%) of Patients  (N=43)  
Anemia  1 (2)  
Blood  and Lymphatic  System  Disorders  - Other,  specify:  Pancytopenia  1 (2)  
Diarrhea  1 (2)  
Febrile  Neutropenia  1 (2)  
Fever  1 (2)  
Hypotension  1 (2)  
Lung  infection  a 1 (2)  
Nausea 1 (2)  
Pancreatitis  1 (2)  
Pneumonia  1 (2)  
Pneumocytsis  jirovecii pneumonia  a 1 (2)  
AE = Adverse event;  MedDRA  = Medical  dictionary  for regulatory  activities  
Note : Data cutoff:  25 March  2016.  
a Fatal.  
Source:  Data  on file at Portola  (clinical study database).  The Phase  1 portion  of the study is  closed  to enrollment; 
however,  some  patients  enrolled under  Phase  1 are still receiving  cerdulatinib  in Phase 2a.  
 
 
Pharmacokinetic modeling and exploration of the PK/PD and PK/AE data from the Phase 1 
portion indicated that a dose of 35 mg BID should provide adequate exposure as well as 
inhibition  of the desired  targets  of cerdulatinib.  Further explanation  of the data and  rationale  for 
dosing during Phase 2a portion of the study is provided in Section 3.1.2.2. 
 
During Phase 1, PRs have been observed in CLL (including 17p deleted CLL), FL, and transformed follicular lymphoma.  CR was observed in 2 FL patients. Responses typically  
occurred  after 2  cycles and have been durable in several patients  [18]. 
 
1.6. Background on the  NHL  in the Study  
The non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs) are a diverse group of disorders of proliferating  B, T, or 
NK cells, and collectively, NHL is the seventh leading site of new cancer cases in the United  
States (US) in men and women [ 19]. In the US, B -cell lymphomas are diagnosed in 
approximately 85 to 90% of people, and T- cell NHL comprises the majority of the remaining  
10 to 15%. In 2015, approximately 72,000 people in the US will be diagnosed with NHL, and there will be  nearly  20,000 deaths. 
 
The overall incidence of NHL has increased since the 1970s through the 1990s, partially due to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). However, the incidence of NHL in older individuals is 
also increasing, and thus the median age of patients with NHL has increa sed as well.  Many of 
these older patients  have multiple comorbid  conditions that complicate  NHL  treatment  [19, 20 ]. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  43  
  
 
In the past 10 to 15 years, the treatment of NHL and CLL/SLL has changed from treatment 
regimens comprising a variety of combinations of cytotoxic therapeutics to the introduction of 
multiple  novel therapeutic modalities.  Perhaps  the most significant of these have been  the anti- 
CD20+ antibodies (most prominently rituximab); however, novel purine/pyrimidine analogues 
(fludarabine) and alkylating agents (bendamustine) have also resulted in significant changes to the treatment paradigms for both NHL and CLL/SLL. More recently, novel tyrosine kinase inhibitors targeting components of the B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling pathway (fostamatinib, 
idelalisib, ibrutinib) have entered clinical trials.  Response rates have demonstrated the 
dependency  of many of the NHL  subtypes, and particularly  CLL/SLL, on  BCR signaling 
for survival [ 20-23].  
 
1.6.1. Aggressive B- cell Lymphomas 
Diffuse large B -cell lymphoma (DLBCL) accounts for 30 to 40% of B- cell NHL [ 19, 24].  
Follicular lymphoma, Grade 3B (FL3B), accounts for < 10% of all FLs and behaves similarly to DLBCL [ 25]. Similarly, transformed NHL refers to a typically more indolent lymphoma that has  
transformed to a more aggressive lymphoma, with varying reported rates of transformation [ 26]. 
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) accounts for 6% of NHL and often can have a more aggressive 
course [ 19]. The underlying biology behind the various aggressive lymphomas is diverse and 
may involve mutations or overexpression of MYC, BCL2, and other oncogenes [ 19, 24, 26, 27].  
SYK inhibition, as well as inhibition of various cytokines in the JAK-STAT pathway, demonstrated  activity  against various B- cell lymphoma cell lines  [1]. 
 
The typical treatment for the more aggressive lymphoma consists of an anti -CD20 antibody, 
rituximab, combined with cytotoxic chemotherapy such as cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride, vincristine (formerly oncovin), and prednisolone (CHOP; i.e., the R- CHOP  
regimen).  This can  produce durable remissions  in a number of patients  and lead  to cure.  
Patients  who relapse are often treated with  a variety  of salvage regimens and may  receive  
high-dose chemotherapy with stem  cell rescue,  which  in some cases  may  also be curative  
[19, 24-26].  Unfortunately, not all patients are candidates for high-dose chemotherapy  with stem  
cell rescue due to a variety of factors such as age and organ dysfunction (cardiac, pulmonary, 
renal,  hepatic); thus, these patients  are in need of alternative  therapies  [28]. 
 
Unfortunately, limited treatment options exist for the patient who has a disease relapse or is  
refractory  to therapy. In the case of MZL,  ibrutinib, an inhibitor of BTK,  has been  approved for 
relapsed/refractory patients [ 29]. There are limited treatment options for patients with  
relapsed/refractory DLBCL, transformed NHL, MCL, cell lymphoma, or FL3B [ 19, 26, 30, 31].  
Newer  agents are needed.  
 
1.6.2. Rituximab in  the Treatment  of B- cell NHL  
Rituximab  is a chimeric  monoclonal ant ibody directed  against  the CD20 antigen  expressed on 
normal and  malignant B- cells [32, 33].  Rituximab’s  mechanism  of action involves antibody 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  44  
  
 
dependent cellular  cytotoxicity  (ADCC), complement mediated cytotoxicity  (CDC), and direct 
induction of apoptosis [ 33]. 
 
Rituximab was originally approved by the US FDA in 1997 for the treatment of relapsed or 
refractory low -grade NHL.  Subsequently, it was approved in combination with chemotherapy 
for both front- line follicular NHL, diffuse large B -cell NHL, and as chemotherapy in previously 
treated or untreated CLL [ 32, 34, 35].  Rituximab is also approved as a maintenance therapy for 
low-grade NHL.  It has also been used in the treatment of other B- cell NHL such as relapsed  
Waldenstrom’s  macroglobulinemia (WM)  and MCL [ 19, 32, 36].  
 
The drug is given in a variety of doses and schedules and is generally well tolerated. Several  
types of adverse events  (AEs)  have been  observed  with  rituximab  administration  when  used  for 
the treatment of NHL, including infusion reactions, tumor lysis syndrome, hematotoxicity, and increased  incidence of infections [ 33, 34 ]. 
 
In combination with chemotherapy, rituximab-containing regimens have consistently 
demonstrated  improvements in  overall  survival (OS),  and overall  response rate (ORR)  vs. 
chemotherapy  alone.  It is now a mainstay  of B- cell NHL  therapy  [19, 37 ]. 
 
1.6.3. T-cell NHL  (PTCL,  CTCL)  
T-cell NHL comprises approximately 10 to 15% of the total cases of NHL, resulting in 
approximately 7,000 to 10,000 cases/year in the US [ 19, 38].  The 2008 World Health 
Organization (WHO) classification has a multitude of subtypes of PTCL, and the majority of 
them  are peripheral T- cell lymphoma not otherwise  specified (PTCL -NOS), anaplastic large cell 
lymphoma (ALCL), and angioimmunoblastic T- cell lymphoma.  In general, patients with PTCL 
have an inferior survival rate as compared to patients with B- cell NHL [ 19, 38, 39].  SYK is  
expressed in PTCL samples, a SYK -ITK fusion gene has been identified in PTCL, and the 
JAK/STAT  pathway  has been implicated in this disease  as well [40-42].  
 
Typical front -line treatment of PTCL consists of CHOP or other intense chemotherapy, albeit 
with inferior outcomes as mentioned above. There are several agents approved for treatment in  
the relapsed/refractory setting, but all have response rates of 25 to 30% and response durations of approximately 1 year or less [ 19, 38, 39, 43-45].  Both autologous and allogeneic stem cell 
transplantation  have also been  used  as salvage therapy  for relapsed  patients with  PTCL with 
some evidence of efficacy,  but little,  if any  randomized data exists  [46, 47].  
 
For patients who relapse after, or are refractory to multiple therapies, the prognosis is dismal and new therapies  are needed.  
 
The cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCL) are a heterogeneous group of skin-homing lymphomas. The majority  of CTCLs comprise  Mycosis Fungoides (MF)  and Sézar y Syndrome 
(SS) [19, 48].  In the early  stages  of CTCL,  skin directed  therapies  such as phototherapy, 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  45  
  
 
steroids, or nitrogen mustard are administered [ 19, 48, 49].  For patients whose disease has  
progressed after  treatment  with the  skin- directed  therapies  mentioned above, systemic  therapies  
are used.  Several ther apies are currently approved or used for CTCL and include bexarotene, 
vorinostat, and romidepsin [ 19, 43, 48, 50].  Systemic chemotherapy is also used as a treatment  
for patients with advanced disease and SS [ 19]. Patients with CTCL have a number of 
supportive care concerns and comorbid conditions, including pruritus and infectious 
complications.  Pruritus can have a major impact on patients’ quality of life and may be related 
to several cytokines [ 51-53].  Multiple genomic aberrations have been described in CTCL that  
involve the JAK/STAT pathways [ 54]. 
 
There  is no standard  agreed  upon algorithm for the treatment  of advanced  CTCL,  and for patients  
with advanced  disease whose disease relapses  after  standard  therapy, newer therapies  are needed.  
 
1.6.4. Follicular  Lymphoma and Other Indolent  Lymphomas (iNHL); (FL/iNHL)  
Follicular lymphoma is the most common indolent NHL (iNHL), accounting for about 20 to 30% 
of all B -cell NHL [ 19, 55 ]. Nearly 90% of cases have a translocation [ 15, 19 ], resulting in 
deregulated expression of BCL2. Follicular lymphoma has several grades depending on various 
histologic features; however, Grade 3B is usually treated like DLBCL [ 19, 25, 55].  Although 
they have differing histologies, the other iNHLs such as SLL (discussed below), Waldenström's 
macroglobulinemia (WM), and marginal zone lymphoma (MZL) often have similar clinical 
presentations, histories, and treatments as does FL, and are often included in the iNHL category along with FL [56]. 
 
Although advance d disease is not curable, effective therapy is available for this disease.  Therapy  
is usually initiated when symptoms are present or certain criteria are met [ 55]. Rituximab has 
had a major  influence on the treatment of  follicular lymphoma and other iNHLs. Typical  
front -line treatments  include rituximab  as a single agent,  or combined with chemotherapy such as 
CHOP, bendamustine, or other agents  [19, 55, 57].  These agents may  also be used in the 
relapsed setting.  High dose chemotherapy with autologous or allogenic stem cell rescue has also 
been  used as  a salvage therapy  with some success  as well  [57, 58].  
 
A certain percentage of FLs will transform into DLBCL, which is associated with a poor clinical  
outcome. The underlying reasons for transformation are unknown, and the risk of transformation is about 2 to 3% per year [26]. These patients  are treated  like patients  with  DLBCL.  
 
For patients whose disease has progressed after multiple therapies, several agents have been  
used, and the PI3 kinase inhibitor, idelalisib, has been approved by the US FDA and other regulatory agencies for use in patients with FL whose disease has progressed after 2 prior therapies [ 19, 58, 59 ]. This agent has a response rate of over 50% and a median duration of 
response of 12.5 months [ 59]. Further agents are needed for patients with multiple re lapsed  
and/or refractory  FL and other iNHLs.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  46  
  
 
1.6.5. Chronic  Lymphocytic Leukemia  (CLL)/Small  Lymphocytic Lymphoma  (SLL)  
CLL is the most prevalent leukemia in the western world.  SLL is essentially a more nodal form 
of the disease without peripheral blood involvement [ 19, 55].  In 2015, there were an estimated 
14,620 cases and  4,650 deaths from CLL/SLL. 
 
CLL/SLL is grouped with the indolent lymphomas and is incurable; however, t ypically it is  
treatable.  Depending on the  stage,  genetic/other  prognostic factors  and symptoms  at diagnosis, 
patients may be observed initially and only treated when symptoms such as adenopathy or 
cytopenias develop [ 19, 55, 60].  
 
There are a multitude  of regimens  available for therapy  and the choice of 1 regimen  or agent  
over another depends on the patient’s  prognostic factors,  performance  status,  and symptoms. For 
more elderly patients with comorbidities, chlorambucil (alone or in combination with  
obinituzumab or ofatumumab, both anti-CD20 antibodies) can be used. The combinations have shown superior outcomes vs. single-agent chlorambucil [ 19, 60, 61].  Alternatively,  
bendamustine with rituximab can also be used. For more fit patients, fludarabine may be used in combination with rituximab and cyclophosphamide (for both upfront and relapsed/refractory 
patients)  [19, 60, 61].  
 
Unfortunately, patients will ultimately relapse or become refractory to most therapies.  In some 
cases, patients may have a histologic transformation of their CLL to DLBCL (Richter’s 
syndrome), and these patients have a poor prognosis [ 19, 62, 63].  For patients who relapse from 
previous cytotoxic therapies, such as bendamustine and rituximab, or fludarabine, cyclophosphamide and rituximab, the options are limited especially if the duration of response is 
fewer than 2 to 3 years [ 64]. Newer agents are available:  Ibrutinib, an inhibitor of Bruton’s 
tyrosine kinase (BTK) was recently approved for the treatment of CLL for patients with 
relapsed/refractory disease [ 21, 61, 65].  In addition, idelalisib, an inhibitor of PI3 kinase, was 
also approved for the treatment of CLL in combination with rituximab for patients with relapsed  
CLL with comorbidities [ 49, 66].  Lastly, venetoclax, an inhibitor of BCL2, has shown dramatic 
activity in relapsed/refractory CLL, although the patients treated in this study had CLL that was  
relapsed/refractory to fludarabine or alkylator -based therapy [ 67]. However, patients will relapse  
from or be refractory to these newer agents, and in the case of relapse from ibrutinib, the prognosis is dismal, with a median survival of approximately 3 months [ 68]. New therapies are  
needed  for patients who progress or are refractory  to the current ones. 
 
In CLL, the detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) is an independent predictor of OS and  
PFS in patients treated with chemoimmunotherapy [ 69]. The prognostic value of achieving 
MRD negativity is unknown with newer pathway inhibitors, and it remains a patient of clinical investigation. MRD assessment has traditionally been done by flow cytometry (typical limit of 
detection at 1 in 10,000 cells), although other assessments that are perhaps more sensitive are being studied [ 69-71].  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  47  
  
 
2.0 OBJECTIVES  AND ENDPOINTS  
See Table 3  for definitions of the specialist terms and response criteria used in the sections  
that follow. 
 
2.1. Objectives  
2.1.1. Phase  1 Objectives  (Escalation) 
2.1.1.1. Primary  Objective  
• To determine  the maximum tolerated  dose/maximum administered  dose (MTD/MAD)  of 
cerdulatinib in patients with relapsed/refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), 
small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL)  or B -cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).  
 
2.1.1.2. Secondary Objectives  
• To make a preliminary assessment of the antitumor activity of cerdulatinib in patients  
with relapsed/refractory  CLL/SLL or B- cell NHL,  as assessed  by overall response rate 
(ORR),  defined  as complete response (CR)+  partial  response (PR).  
• To assess the safety  and tolerability  of cerdulatinib. 
• To determine  the pharmacokinetic (PK) profile  of cerdulatinib. 
• To evaluate the pharmacodynamics (PD) of cerdulatinib.  
 
2.1.2. Phase  2a Objectives  (Exploratory) 
2.1.2.1. Primary  Objective  
• To assess the antitumor  activity  of cerdulatinib  in patients  with  specific subtypes of 
B-cell or T- cell NHL,  or CLL/SLL, as  a single agent  and in combination with  rituximab  
for B- cell NHL.  
 
2.1.2.2. Secondary Objectives  
• To assess the duration of antitumor activity  of cerdulatinib,  amount of time  to achieve  
tumor response, and magnitude of response. 
• To further evaluate the PK  profile  of cerdulatinib  in patients  with  specific subtypes of 
B-cell or T- cell NHL,  alone or in combination with rituximab  for B- cell NHL.  
• To further evaluate the PD of cerdulatinib in patients with specific subtypes of B- cell or  
T-cell NHL,  alone or  in combination with rituximab for B- cell NHL.  
• To assess tumor  phenotype and  genotype in  relation to  clinical response.  
• To further evaluate the safety and tolerability of cerdulatinib in patients with specific  
subtypes of B- cell or T -cell NHL,  or CLL/SLL.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  48  
  
 
• To evaluate the safety  and tolerability  of the combination of cerdulatinib with rituximab  
for B- cell NHL.  
 
2.1.2.3. Exploratory Objectives  
• To evaluate the relationship between markers of inflammation with clinical outcome and  
overall  health  as determined by  the Global Health Assessment.  
• To assess Minimal Residual Disease (MRD) status in CLL/SLL patients achieving a  
complete response/complete response incomplete blood count recovery/partial response 
(CR/CRi/PR) by flow cytometry. MRD negativity (MRD- ) is defined as < 1 tumor cell  
in 10,000 leucocytes. MRD+  (MRD positivity) is  defined as  ≥ 1 tumor cell in  
10,000 leucocytes.  
 
2.2. Endpoints  
2.2.1. Phase  1 Endpoints  
2.2.1.1. Primary  Endpoint 
• The primary  safety  endpoint will be the incidence  of DLT  by dose level.  
 
2.2.1.2. Secondary Endpoints 
• ORR,  defined  as CR+PR.  
• Clinical benefit  rate,  defined  as CR  + PR + SD, PFS,  and DOR.  
• Adverse event  profile (classified  by National  Cancer Institute  Common Toxicity  Criteria  
for Adverse Events  [NCI- CTCAE  v4.0]) by dose level.  
• Clinically  significant changes in  vital signs, physical exams  by dose level.  
• Changes in hematology and chemistry laboratory parameters by  dose level.  
• PK endpoints: PK profile  at each dose level  and overall, including C max, AUC, and t ½. 
• PD endpoints: Changes in  biomarker data for a  range of ex vivo  assays.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  49  
  
 
2.2.2. Phase  2a Endpoints  
2.2.2.1. Primary  Endpoint 
• The primary  efficacy  endpoint is ORR, defined as CR+PR. 
 
2.2.2.2. Secondary Endpoints 
• Duration of response (DOR),  progression- free survival (PFS),  time  to treatment  response 
(TTR),  and lymph node response (LNR).  
• Clinical benefit rate,  defined as  CR +  PR + SD. 
• Adverse event profile (classified by  NCI-CTCAE  v5.0) by dose level.  
• Clinically  significant changes in  vital signs, physical exams  by dose level.  
• Changes in hematology and chemistry laboratory parameters by  dose level.  
• PD endpoints: Changes in  biomarker data for a  range of ex vivo  assays.  
 
2.2.3. Exploratory Endpoints  
• Correlation in markers of inflammation with clinical response and overall health  
(Global Health Assessment).  
• Assessment of percentage of CLL/SLL patients with status of MRD - in CLL/SLL 
patients  achieving  a CR/CRi/PR by  flow cytometry. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  50  
  
 
3.0 INVESTIGATIONAL  PLAN 
 
3.1. Overall  Study  Design and Study  Schema  
This is an open-label, Phase 1/2a, multi-dose, multi- center trial of orally administered  
cerdulatinib  with 2 phases: 
• Phase 1:  Dose -escalation portion, during which patients will receive single- agent  
cerdulatinib at their assigned dose level.  The starting dose for this portion of the study 
will be 15 mg QD, administered in  increasing  doses until the MTD/MAD is identified.  
• Phase 2a:  Exploratory portion, consisting of 6 cohorts, defined by cancer type and prior 
therapy. Five cohorts will receive single -agent cerdulatinib, and 1 cohort will receive 
cerdulatinib  plus rituximab administered IV during Cycle 1 on Days 1, 8, 15, and 22 and 
during Cycles 4, 6, 8, and 10 on Day 1 only. The starting  dose of cerdulatinib during this 
portion of the study will be 30, 25, or 20 mg BID.  
 
The Schedule of Assessments  for Phase  2a is provided in Appendix 1.  
 
3.1.1. Phase  1 
3.1.1.1. Overall  Description  
Patients:  The Phase 1 portion of the study will include  patients with  a histologically  confirmed  
diagnosis of CLL/SLL or B- cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. 
 
Design: Eligible patients enrolled in sequential dose cohorts will receive once -daily, orally 
administered single -agent cerdulatinib at starting dose of 15 mg (15 mg po QD) in increasing 
dose levels until the MTD/MAD is identified.  An exception occurs on Days 2 and 3, during 
which patients on a QD schedule will not take study drug (see next paragraph).  If the MTD  
is not achieved, the highest studied dose will be  declared the MAD  and become the RP2D.  
(See Table 3 for definitions of cancer types.)  
 
To allow for a single-dose PK assessment, patients on a QD dosing regime will take their first 
dose of cerdulatinib on Day 1 and their second and subsequent doses daily beginning on Day 4. 
They will not take cerdulatinib on D ays 2 or 3. Starting with Day 4, patients will receive  
cerdulatinib once daily for a total of 28 days (one cycle) to assess the MTD/MAD. Patients on  
BID dosing schedules can dosing begin on Day 1 and continue cerdulatinib without interruption 
(i.e., these patients will not skip any days of the cycle). If cerdulatinib is well tolerated, patients  
may continue to  receive cerdulatinib at  their  assigned  dose in  the absence of disease progression, 
unacceptable toxicity, or meeting  of any other withdrawal criteria (Section  4.4). 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  51  
  
 
One patient will be enrolled in each dose cohort until the first  report of a Grade 2 or greater  
adverse event  (AE).  In the  event of any Grade ≥ 2 AE in the single patient,  an additional 
2 patients, for a total of 3, will be enrolled in that dose cohort, and all subsequent dose cohorts 
will follow a “3 + 3” design. Dose escalation w ill be in 100% increments until a drug- related AE  
of Grade 2 or greater severity occurs.  Thereafter, dose escalation will be in increments of up to 
50% as determined following review by the Study committee. If a dose- limiting toxicity (DLT)  
occurs  in 1 of the first 3  patients in  a cohort, that cohort will be expanded to at least  6 patients.  
If ≤ 33% of six or more patients in a cohort experiences DLT, dose escalation may proceed. If in 
any cohort 2 or more of the first 3 patients or ≥ 33% of patients in a cohort develop DLT, dose escalation will cease,  and that dose level  will be declared intolerable.  The prior dose level will 
be declared the MTD,  and the cohort may be expanded to as many  as 6 patients if fewer than  
6 patients  had been  treated  previously at that dose level  in order to  further characterize the PK  
and PD at that level.  A total of 43 patients have been dosed. The study is closed to Phase 1 
enrollment.  
 
3.1.1.2. Rationale for Dose  Selection  in Phase  1 and Dose -Escalation Methods 
The starting dose for the Phase 1 portion of the study was based on the severely toxic dose in 10% of rodents (STD
10) from a 28 -day toxicology study in the rat, the most sensitive species, as 
defined  by the S9 Guidance to Industry “Nonclinical Evaluation for Anticancer  
Pharmaceuticals.” One-tenth of the STD 10 of 15 mg/kg is recommended by the guidance to be  
the appropriate starting dose. After allometric scaling, and accounting for the average weight of  
human patients (70 kg), the total daily starting dose for cerdulatinib was determined to be 15 mg po once daily  (QD).  The dose- escalation  methods accord  with the principles described by 
Le Tourneau et al.,  for Phase  1 clinical trials  [6]. 
 
3.1.2. Phase  2a 
3.1.2.1. Overall  Description,  Including Rationale for Inclusion  of T- cell Malignancies  
Patients:  The Phase 2a portion of the study will include patients with B- and T -cell malignancies  
(Table 6) who are believed to be able to tolerate therapy and who will provide interpretable 
results to further guide the development of cerdulatinib. In general, the malignancies being  
studied in this portion of the study were chosen based on the role of BCR signaling and/or the 
role of the JAK/STAT pathway in their disease as discussed in Section 1.0. The decision to 
include T-cell malignancies in the Phase 2a cohorts was based on SYK expression in PTCL, as well as the role of the JAK/STAT pathway in PTCL described in Section 1.6.3. A rituximab  
combination cohort (Cohort 2, see Table 6 ) was  added to  explore the activity  of cerdulatinib  with  
a known effective agent in the treatment  of B- cell NHL.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  52  
  
 
Design: The Phase 2a portion will investigate 6 cohorts, each defined by cancer type and 
therapy  (Table 6).  Five cohorts will receive single- agent  cerdulatinib administered  orally, and  
1 cohort with B -cell NHL  (No. 2) will receive orally  administered  cerdulatinib  and rituximab  
administered  IV at 375 mg/m2 during Cycle 1 on Days  1, 8, 15, and 22 and  during Cycles 4,  6, 8, 
and 10 on Day  1 only. 
 
Initial enrollment into any of the 6 cohorts will be up to 20 patients; each cohort may be 
expanded for  a total of  approximately 240 patients in the Phase 2a portion of the  study. 
 
Throughout the duration of the study, Portola will inform Investigators and sites regarding which cohorts are open and what starting dose of cerdulatinib (i.e., 30, 25, or 20 mg BID) should be administered to patients at the time of enrollment.  Dose Modification Guidelines for Phase 2a 
are provided in Section 5.2.1.3. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  53  
  
 
Table 6: By-Cohort Inclusion Criteria  for Phase  2a Cohorts 
 
Cohort Number  
(short  descriptor)   
Inclusion  Criteria  
1 
(FL) Patients  with FL Grade  1 to 3A who have  received  ≥ 1 prior treatment regimen.  
2 
(Combination  
Cohort)  Patients  with FL Grade  1 to 3A who have  received  ≥ 1 prior  treatment  regimen.  In addition  
to receiving cerdulatinib, this cohort will also receive rituximab IV at 375 mg/m2 during 
Cycle  1 on Days  1, 8, 15,  and 22 and during Cycles  4, 6, 8, and 10  on Day 1 only.  
3 
(aNHL)  Patients with aggressive NHL (aNHL), defined as DLBCL, FL 3B, MCL, and transformed  
NHL.  These  patients  have  relapsed  from  ≥ 1 but ≤ 3 prior  cytotoxic  chemotherapy  regimens  
with an anti CD20 antibody, (e.g., R -CHOP, BR).  Patients must have received an  
anthracycline based therapy unless anthracyclines were deemed inappropriate in the 
judgement  of the investigator.  
Patients must have either relapsed following ASCT or not be candidates (ineligible) for  
ASCT,  defined as meeting  any of the following criteria  [1]: a) age ≥ 70 years;  b) DLCO  
< 50%  by pulmonary function tests; c) FEV 1/FVC  < 60% predicted  by pulmonary function 
tests;  d) LVEF  < 45%  by MUGA or echocardiogram;  e) uncontrolled arrhythmia;  
f) calculated creatinine clearance (Cockcroft -Gault) ≤ 60 mL/min; g) other comorbidities  
(e.g., medical conditions or psychosocial conditions) that would likely result in an unacceptably  high probability  of treatment/transplant related  morbidity  and mortality  in the 
judgement  of the investigator  (e.g., high  HCT -CI, CIRS,  scores);  h) refusal  of ASCT. 
(Note : Antibody drug conjugates (ADC) count as cytotoxic chemotherapy.  Salvage 
chemotherapy prior  to ASCT  with or without maintenance  therapy  counts  as one regimen.)  
4 
(CLL/SLL) Patients  with CLL/SLL  who have  received  ≥ 1 prior  treatment  regimen.  
5 
(PTCL NHL)  Patients  with PTCL  NHL  who have  received  ≥ 1 prior  systemic  treatment  regimen  
for PTCL. In patients with CD30 -expressing PTCL, prior treatment must include a CD30- 
directed antibody (e.g., brentuximab vedotin).  
6 
(CTCL  NHL)  Patients  with CTCL  NHL  who have  received  ≥ 1 prior  systemic  treatment  regimen  
for CTCL. 
ADC = Antibody drug conjugate; ASCT = Autologous stem cell therapy; aNHL = Aggressive non- Hodgkin 
lymphoma; BCR  = B- cell receptor;  BR = Bendamustine  and rituximab; BTK  = Bruton tyrosine  kinase;  
CLL = Chronic lymphocytic leukemia; CIRS = Cumulative Illness Rating Scale; CTCL = Cutaneous T -cell 
lymphoma; DLBCL = Diffuse Large B -cell lymphoma; DLCO = Carbon monoxide diffusion capacity;  
FEV 1/FVC  = Forced expiratory  volume  in 1 second/forced  vital capacity;  FL = Follicular  lymphoma;  
FL 3B = Follicular lymphoma, Grade 3B; HCT -CI = Hematopoietic cell transplantation co -morbidity index;  
HSCT =  Hematopoietic  stem  cell transplant; LEVF = Left ventricular  ejection  fraction; MUGA = Multiple gated  
acquisition; PR = Partial response; PTCL = Peripheral T -cell lymphoma; R -CHOP = Rituximab +  
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride, vincristine (formerly oncovin), and prednisolone; SLL = Small  
lymphocytic  lymphoma  
Note : Patients who received any BCR pathway inhibitor (e.g., BTK inhibitors such as ibrutinib, or  PI3 Kinase  
inhibitors  such as idelalisib)  and/or  BCL2  pathway  inhibitors  (e.g., venetoclax),  and were either  intolerant to therapy  
or had relapsed/refractory  disease following  therapy  are also  eligible.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  54  
  
 
3.1.2.2. Rationale for Initial Starting  Dose  and Individual Dose  Reductions  
3.1.2.2.1. Rationale for Starting  Dose  
Under Amendment 4 the starting  dose of cerdulatinib  in the Phase 2a portion of the study was 
35 mg BID based on the PK/PD and PK/AE relationships and PK modeling of the Phase 1 study 
(Section 1.5). Clinical PK/PD evaluations demonstrated that IC 50s in the 0.2 to 0.6 µM range 
suppress BCR and cytokine JAK/STAT signaling pathways ( Figure 1).  However, under 
Amendment 5, the starting dose was changed to 30 mg BID (rationale below), with subsequent dose reductions to  25 mg  BID, 20 mg  BID,  and then 15 mg  BID permitted  (the rationale  for 
individual dose titration strategy is in Section 3.1.2.2.2).  Under Amendent 7 starting doses of 30, 
25, or 20 mg BID may be explored to further investigate the relationships between cerdulatinib 
exposure, extent of SYK/JAK pathway inhibition, anti-inflammatory response, clinical response, 
and safety.  The data overall will be used in the final determination of the appropriate dose for 
registration  studies. 
 
IC90 for BCR signaling is approximately 0.8 µM, and for JAK/STAT  signaling ranges  from  
0.75 to 1.25 µM. The  pathway  inhibition is selective, as no inhibition of JAK2 - or 
PKC -dependent signaling  was observed. These data reflect pathway  inhibition  in peripheral  
blood, and therefore do not predict the level of  inhibition in solid tumor. 
Clinical Study 13 -601
Portola Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Cerdulatinib
Protocol Amendment 9
14 October 2019 Confidential Page 55Figure 1:       Cerdulatinib Pathway Inhibition in Peripheral  Blood 
Conc  = Concentration; IC50= Half maximal inhibitory concentration; PK/PD  = Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
Notes : PK/PD relationships are shown from peripheral whole blood assays. Percent inhibition relative to pre -dose
signaling onDay 1 is plotted on the  Y-axis, cerdulatinib plasma concentration in molar on the  X-axis. Clinical
PK/PD evaluations have demonstrated IC 50s in the 0.2to0.6µMrange tosuppress BCR and cytokine JAK/STAT
signaling pathways. IC90forBCR signaling isapproximately 0.8 µM, andforJAK/STAT signaling ranges from
0.75 to 1.25 µM.

Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  56  
  
 
Cerdulatinib  was studied at multiple QD and BID dose levels and exhibited nonlinear PK at 
doses higher than 30 mg QD, with the exposure increasing approximately 3-fold as the dose was 
increased from 30 to 40 mg QD. Daily dose levels ranging from 40 to 65 mg demonstrat ed an  
exposure plateau above 30 mg QD, resulting in average steady- state C min and C max 
concentrations of 0.8 and 1.6 µM, respectively. The 100 mg QD dose resulted in lower overall 
exposure, possibly a consequence of drug precipitation in the gut. The 40 to 65 mg dose levels resulted in greater than 90% inhibition of the BCR signaling pathway, and greater than 75% 
inhibition of various JAK/STAT pathways (IL2, IL4, IL6) at steady- state C
min. Two PRs were  
observed at the 45 mg QD dose level, and a third at the 65 mg QD dose. The t ½ at these doses  
was approximately 24 hours. Hence, the drug  properties are suitable for once daily  dosing. 
 
Based on pre- clinical tumor models, 1 µM cerdulatinib is sufficient to reduce viability in the  
majority of cell lines and primary leukemia samples tested.  Therefore, a method was sought to 
increase steady -state C min concentrations in humans to 1 µM or above. Given the saturated  
exposure achieved with QD dosing, we utilized a physiological-based PK model to determine the 
potential reasons for the plateau in the QD schedule.  This model indicated that pH-dependent 
drug solubility was likely the limiting factor and that BID dosing should overcome this plateau, resulting  in higher exposures. 
 
The 45 mg BID regimen roughly doubled the exposure relative to the 40 to 65 mg QD average, achieving steady -state C
min and C max of 1.5 and 1.8 µM, respectively. One PR was observed in a 
patient with FL, with what appeared to be a rapid (within 1 week) onset of palpable tumor reduction. Another patient with  CLL experienced  rapid  lymphocytosis, whereas a refractory  
FL patient  demonstrated  stable  disease.  This exposure  level,  however, resulted in  2 DLTs:  
1 patient experienced pancreatitis within 2 weeks of dosing, and a second experienced Grade 3  
fatigue.  Therefore,  it was determined  that the exposure range was not tolerated.  Of note, the 
2 patients with DLT did not achieve the highest exposures at this dose level. We, therefore,  
aggregated  all data from  the escalation study  to explore PK/AE  relationships. 
 
The major difference in exposure between tolerated (40-65 mg QD) and non-tolerated (45 mg 
BID) doses was the C min, increasing from 0.8 µM to 1.5 µM (steady- state C min by dose level is 
summarized in Figure 2).  Therefore, we explored the relationship between incidences of all 
treatment -related  Grade ≥ 3 AEs  with steady -state Cmin. No relationship  was observed up to 
1.25 µM steady- state C min. However, above this concentration, there appeared to be some 
evidence (in the limited number of patients) for increased incidence of Grade 3 AEs ( Figure 3).  
In the context of tumor response, we have observed  more  consistent anti- tumor activity  in the 
0.75 to 1.25 µM steady- state C min concentration range, including 3 patients achieving PR 
(Figure 4).  Hence,  it appears that  steady -state C min of 0.75 to 1.25 µM  is likely  to be efficacious 
and well tolerated.  Furthermore, our dosing experience thus far indicates that a more consistent 
steady -state C min is obtained across patients with BID dosing. Thus, under Amendment 4 we 
recommended  a 35 mg BID dosing schedule that targets  steady -state Cmin within the  range of 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  57  
  
 
0.75 to 1.25 µM. Following an initial safety review of 12 patients dosed in the Phase 2a study, it 
was observed that whereas the majority of patients did achieve steady- state C min in the desired  
exposure range, 3 patients (25%) continued to accumulate plasma exposure to drug beyond Day 8 (the expected time to steady -state); this resulted in exposures greater than originally modeled 
from the data gathered during once-daily dosing (i.e., in the 2-4 µM range and exceeded the modeled C
max target by 1.5- to 2.5- fold).  Of these 3 patients, 2 experienced Grade 5 infections 
(i.e., with fatal outcomes), and 1 patient experienced Grade 3 chemical pancreatitis.  Although 
causality between cerdulatinib exposure and the observed SAEs cannot be determined, as of Amendment 5 the starting dose was lowered from 35 mg BID to 30 mg BID to correct for this unexpected  accumulation  in cerdulatinib  exposure and to provide an extra margin of safety  
for patients.  
 
Figure 2: Individual Trough Levels (C min) for Tolerated (40 -65 mg QD) and 
Non-tolerated (45 mg BID) Dose Regimens of Cerdulatinib on Day 29 
(First  Day  of Cycle 2) 
 
BID = Twice daily; C min = Minimum concentration (i.e., trough level); PK = Pharmacokinetic; QD = Once daily  
Notes : Individual trough (pre -dose) concentrations are shown for patients on Day 29, the first day of Cycle 2.  The 
horizontal  bar is the mean  value  and the  longitudinal  bar shows  the range  for each dose cohort.  The PK-modeled  
estimates  for trough (Cmin) concentrations  are shown  as dashed lines  for reference purposes.  The predicted  mean  for 
the 45 mg BID dose is very close to the actual mean value.  The QD dose cohorts of 40, 45, 50, and 65 mg had mean 
values close to the predicted C min for 30 mg BID. The predicted C min level for the 35 mg BID schedule is slightly 
higher, and if tolerated, should provide the best opportunity to minimize variability and increase the number of 
observed responses.  

Clinical Study 13 -601
Portola Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Cerdulatinib
Protocol Amendment 9
14 October 2019 Confidential Page 58
0.25 0.50 1.25Figure 3: Steady -State Cerdulatinib Plasma Concentrations and Treatment- related
Grade 2 + Adverse Events
5
43
2
1
0
AE= Adverse event;  Cmin = Minimum concentration (i.e., trough level)
Notes: Treatment -related Grade 2+ AEs are shown on y -axis, with steady -state cerdulatinib
plasma concentration at Cminon the x-axis. The red dashed line depicts the exposure (~1.25 µM)
atwhich there may be a concentration -effect on AE profile.
Figure 4: Change in Sum of Tumor Volumes from Computed  Tomography Scans
100
50
0 
-50
-100
Cerdulatinib SSCmin  (µM)
Cmin= Minimum concentration (i.e., trough level); CT = Computed tomography; SS = Steady state
Notes: Thebestpercent change in sum of tumor volumes from CTscans isshown on the y-axis.
Cerdulatinib steady -state plasma concentrations at  Cminareonthe x-axis. Thereddashed
boxhighlights the greater consistency in anti- tumor activity in the 0.75-1 µMrange.0.75 1.00
0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00
Steady -State Cmin (µM)Grade ofRelated AEs %Change inTumor Volume
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  59  
  
 
An estimate  of cerdulatinib  concentrations from PK  modeling for the  proposed doses is  detailed  
in Table 7. 
 
Table 7: Estimated  Concentrations  of Twice Daily  (BID) Doses  from  PK Modeling  
 
BID Dose  
(mg)  Cmin 
(µM)  Cmax 
(µM)  Cave 
(µM)  
20 a 0.38 ± 0.02 0.89 ± 0.16 0.52 ± 0.09 
25 0.66 0.89 0.75 
30 0.83 1.09 1.0 
35 a 1.06 ± 0.50 1.26 ± 0.70 NA 
45 1.43 1.78 1.6 
BID = Twice  daily; C ave = Average concentration;  Cmax = Maximum  
concentration;  Cmin = Minimum  concentration  (i.e., trough level);  
PK = Pharmacokinetic  
a Observed  concentrations.  
 
 
A PK model was developed to estimate steady -state concentration for BID dosing. This model 
used the average steady -state concentrations for previous BID dose cohorts at dose levels  15, 20, 
and 45 mg. In addition, the plasma concentrations from the patient who received 30 mg BID as 
part of a dose reduction was included in the model. The model incorporated the saturated clearance previously observed for cerdulatinib. The results are consistent with the data obtained  
to date for the 45 mg BID dose and are close to that observed with the single patient who  
received  30 mg BID. 
 
3.1.2.2.2. Rationale for Individual  Dose  Titration  in Phase  2a 
Given the variability of cerdulatinib levels investigated to date, it is possible that some patients  
may be able to tolerate higher doses of cerdulatinib than others.  Therefore, under Amendment 4 
patients were allowed to escalate to 40 mg BID after undergoing one 28-day cycle without Grade 3 or higher clinically significant toxicity.  In addition, modeling data in Table 7  suggested 
that this dose regimen would provide C
min in the acceptable range of between 0.75 and 1.25 μM. 
As shown in the literature, this dose titration approach based on clinical tolerability has been 
used with other tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and patients who tolerated the higher doses often 
achieved higher response rates [ 72]. However given the SAEs observed in the first 12 patients 
dosed at 35 mg BID (the starting dose under Amendment 4), both the starting dose and dose titration s trategy  were modified. The starting  doses are 30, 25, or 20 mg BID.  
 
Dose  reductions and subsequent dose escalations back to a maximum  dose of 30 mg BID  may  be 
permitted per the Dose Modification Guidelines for Phase 2a (Section 5.2.1.3).  As indicated in  
Table 6, the dose reductions are expected to lower  overall exposure in a step -wise fashion. 
The dose of 20 mg BID  was studied  in 3 patients in  the Phase 1 portion of this study and was 
well tolerated.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  60  
  
 
3.1.3. End of Study  
The end of study will occur when all patients have completed the follow-up visit at 30 days post- 
treatment, or until all patients have died, have been discontinued (under advice of the physic ian, 
at the request of the Sponsor), have withdrawn consent, or are lost to follow-up, whichever 
occurs  first.  
 
3.1.4. Total Number of Patients, Cessation of Treatment, and Total Duration of 
the Study  
Under Phase 1 (closed to enrollment), 52 patients were enrolled, and 43 were dosed. Under 
Phase 2a, approximately 240 patients can be enrolled. Thus, a total of up to 283 patients can be 
dosed in the study. 
 
Patients enrolled under Phase 1 and Phase 2a may continue to receive cerdulatinib or cerdulatinib 
in co mbination with rituximab (in the combination cohort No. 2; see Table 6 ) in the absence of 
disease progression or intolerable toxicity, until they meet any  other withdrawal criteria,  
(Section  4.4) or until the end  of study (defined  in Section  3.1.3).  
 
The total duration of the study is expected to  be approximately 6 years.  
 
3.1.5. Assessments 
Safety will be monitored by serial physical exams,  vital signs, hematology, and chemistry 
laboratory studies, and by reported AEs. 
 
Blood samples will be obtained at frequent intervals for determination of cerdulatinib concentration. 
 
Serum  will be obtained for analysis  of the PD effects  of cerdulatinib. 
 
Antitumor  activity  will be  assessed  every  8 to 12 weeks according  to the revised  International 
Working Group (IWG) criteria [ 3] or the International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic 
Leukemia (IWCLL) criteria  [2]. 
 
3.2. Randomization and Blinding  
This is an open- label,  unblinded study. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  61  
  
 
4.0 SELECTION,  ENROLLMENT,  AND WITHDRAWAL  OF PATIENTS  
During the Phase 1 portion (now closed to enrollment), the study was conducted in  patients with  
relapsed or refractory CLL/SLL or B -cell NHL.  During the Phase 2a portion, the study will be 
conducted in patients with various B- and T- cell NHL (see Section 3.1.2 for the rationale for 
including patients with T -cell malignancies).  
 
4.1. Inclusion  Criteria  
4.1.1. Phase  2a Cancer- specific Inclusion  Criteria  
1. Patient  must have a histologically  confirmed diagnosis of 1 of the following: 
○ (Note : Definitions  for “relapsed” and  “refractory”  disease are provided in  Table 3 ). 
○ FL Grade 1 to 3A, with relapsed or refractory  disease.  
○ Aggressive NHL (aNHL) defined as DLBCL, FL Grade 3B, MCL, and transformed 
NHL  with relapsed disease, relapsed  and refractory  after 1  to 3 prior 
chemotherapy  regimens.  
○ CLL/SLL, with  relapsed  or refractory  disease.  
○ PTCL,  with relapsed  or refractory  disease.  
○ CTCL with relapsed or refractory disease.  Only CTCL patients with MF/SS  
are allowed.  
 
Patients who received any BCR pathway inhibitor (e.g., BTK inhibitors such as ibrutinib, or PI3 
Kinase inhibitors such as idelalisib) and/or BCL2 pathway inhibitors (e.g., venetoclax), and were either intolerant to  therapy  or had  relapsed/refractory  disease following therapy  are also  eligible.  
 
4.1.2. Phase  2a General  Inclusion  Criteria  
1. Patient must have an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Score 
of 0 or 1. 
2. Patient  must be 18 years or  older, of either sex,  and of any  race.  
3. Patient (and/or parent/guardian for patients who otherwise are unable to provide independent consent) must  be willing  to give written  informed  consent and be  able to  
adhere to dose and visit schedules. 
4. Patient has had prior treatment for lymphoid malignancy requiring treatment for progressive disease/refractory  diseas e (per guidelines for diagnosis and  treatment of 
CLL [ 2] and revised response criteria for  malignant lymphoma [ 3]). 
5. Patient has had ≥ 1 prior systemic treatment regimen administered for at least 2 cycles  
(unless the patient was intolerant or experienced documented progression on therapy) that must have involved either: 1) an anti-CD20 agent (such as rituximab) WITH 
chemotherapy  for B- cell NHL,  unless contraindicated  in the judgement of the investigator 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  62  
  
 
(e.g., the patient was not a candidate for chemotherapy and received ibrutinib as first- line 
treatment); 2) a cytotoxic chemotherapy drug for T- cell NHL; 3) an anti -CD20 agent 
(such as rituximab) with chemotherapy for CLL, unless contraindicated in the judgement 
of the investigator (e.g., the patient was not a candidate for chemotherapy and received 
ibrutinib  as first -line treatment); or  4) in  patients with  CD30 -expressing PTCL, a  
CD30 -directed  antibody (e.g., brentuximab vedotin). 
6. Female patients of childbearing potential and male patients must agree to abstain from 
sexual  intercourse or to use an  effective method of contraception during the study and for 
90 days following the last dose of protocol therapy (examples of effective methods of  
contraception include oral contraceptives or double barrier methods such as condom plus spermicide or condom plus diaphragm). Patients enrolled into Cohort 2 should use 
effective contraception during treatment with rituximab and for 12 months after the last 
dose of rituximab.  
7. Patient  must have adequate bone marrow  reserve as evidenced  by an absolute neutrophil 
count (ANC) ≥ 1,000/µL, platelet count ≥ 75,000/µL. Platelet count must be without 
transfusion support within 7 days of the first dose  of cerdulatinib. 
Note: CLL patients only: ANC ≥ 750/µL and platelet count ≥ 30,000/µL are  
acceptable.  There are no limits on ANC or platelet count required for patients with 
leukemic  forms  of PTCL  (ATLL, PLL,  LGL)  or HSTCL as  long as cytopenia, if present,  
is secondary to disease. 
8. Patient  must have adequate renal  function as  evidenced  by a creatinine clearance  
≥ 30 mL/min (calculated using the Cockcroft-Gault equation or based on a 24-hour urine specimen).  
9. Patient  must have adequate hepatic function as evidenced by a serum  bilirubin  level  
≤ 2.0 mg/dL AND serum AST/ALT levels ≤ 2.5× the ULN for the reference lab. Serum  
bilirubin  ≤ 2.5 mg/dL when  increase clearly  documented  as due to  Gilbert’s  syndrome. 
10. Where available, ability to submit a formalin -fixed paraffin embedded tissue (FFPE) 
block or a minimum of 10 unstained, freshly cut FFPE tissue slides from lymph node or 
other biopsies that  were collected  as part of patient  diagnosis. If samples  are unavailable 
the patient is still eligible  for enrollment.  
11. Measureable disease for a given tumor type, defined as:  
a. The presence  of ≥ 1 lesion  that measures  ≥ 1.5 cm  in a single dimension as  assessed  
by CT, CT/PET for patients with nodal or mass lesions (e.g., FL, DLBCL, other NHL),  or 
b. Quantifiable circulating tumor cells for patients with circulating tumor (e.g., Sézary  
Syndrome [SS]), or  
c. For CTCL:  mSWAT score > 0. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  63  
  
 
12. Ability  to provide redacted  copies of pathology reports and radiology reports used  for the 
diagnosis of NHL or CLL. In addition, for CTCL, ability to provide redacted 
photographs of skin responses. 
 
4.1.3. Phase  2a Cohort- specific Inclusion  Criteria  
4.1.3.1. Cohort 1 (FL) – Grades 1 to  3A (Single -agent Cerdulatinib)  
1. Received  ≥ 1 prior treatment  regimen.  
 
4.1.3.2. Cohort 2 (Combination) – FL,  Grades 1 to  3A (Cerdulatinib  + Rituximab) 
1. Received  ≥ 1 prior treatment  regimen.  
 
4.1.3.3. Cohort 3 (aNHL) – aNHL  (Single -agent Cerdulatinib)  
Aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma (aNHL)  is defined as  DLBCL,  FL Grade  3B, Mantle  Cell 
Lymphoma (MCL),  and transformed  NHL.  
1. Relapsed from ≥ 1 but ≤ 3 prior cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens with an anti CD20 antibody, (e.g., R- CHOP, BR).  Patients must have received an anthracycline based  
therapy unless anthracyclines were deemed inappropriate in the judgement of the investigator. Patients must have either relapsed following autologous stem cell therapy 
(ASCT), or not be candidates (ineligible) for ASCT, defined as meeting any of the 
following criteria [ 1]: 
a. Age ≥ 70 years.  
b. Carbon monoxide diffusion capacity  (DLCO)  < 50% by pulmonary function tests.  
c. Forced expiratory volume in 1 second/forced vital capacity FEV
1/FVC < 60%  
predicted by pulmonary function tests.  
d. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) < 45% by multiple gated acquisition  
(MUGA)  or echocardiogram. 
e. Uncontrolled arrhythmia. 
f. Calculated  creatinine clearance (Cockcroft -Gault) ≤ 60 mL/min.  
g. Other comorbidities (e.g., medical conditions or psychosocial conditions) that would likely result in an unacceptably high probability of treatment/transplant related morbidity and mortality in the judgement of the investigator (e.g., high Hematopoietic 
Cell Transplantation Co -Morbidity Index [HCT- CI], Cumulativ e Illness Rating Scale 
[CIRS] scores).  
h. Refusal  of ASCT.  
Note : Antibody drug conjugates (ADC) count as cytotoxic chemotherapy. Salvage 
chemotherapy prior to ASCT with or without maintenance therapy counts as one 
regimen.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  64  
  
 
4.1.3.4. Cohort 4 (CLL/SLL)  – CLL/SLL (Single -agent Cerdulatinib)  
1. Received  ≥ 1 prior treatment  regimen.  
 
4.1.3.5. Cohort 5 (PTCL NHL) – Peripheral T -cell NHL (PTCL) (Single -agent 
Cerdulatinib)  
1. Received ≥ 1 prior systemic treatment regimen for PTCL. In patients with CD30- 
expressing PTCL, prior treatment must include a CD30-directed antibody (e.g., brentuximab vedotin). 
 
4.1.3.6. Cohort 6 (CTCL NHL) – Cutaneous T -cell NHL (CTCL, MF/SS only)  
(Single -agent Cerdulatinib) 
1. Received  ≥ 1 prior systemic  treatment  regimen  for CTCL.  
 
4.2. Phase  1 and Phase  2a Exclusion Criteria  
A patient meeting  any 1 of the Exclusion Criteria  listed below  will be  excluded  from the trial.  
1. Patient has Richter’s syndrome, Burkitt’s lymphoma, or Burkitt-like Lymphoma. Patients  with transformed  DLBCL  from  Follicular  NHL  are eligible.  
2. Patient  has undergone prior allogeneic or autologous transplant with  infusion of stem  
cells within 90 days before Cycle 1 Day 1 (C1D1), or on active immunosuppressive 
therapy for graft -versus-host disease (GVHD) or GVHD prophylaxis within 8 weeks 
before  C1D1. 
3. Patient  has received prior therapy  with a spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK)  inhibitor. 
4. Patient requires chronic treatment with a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor or inducer or 
CYP3A4 -sensitive  substrate ( Appendix 3).  
5. Patient  has known lymphomatous involvement of the  central  nervous system  (CNS).  
6. Patient  has a known hypersensitivity to any of the components of cerdulatinib. 
7. Patient has persistent, unresolved NCI-CTCAE v5.0 ≥ Grade 2 clinically significant (in the judgement of the investigator) drug- related toxicity (except alopecia, erectile 
impotence,  hot flashes, libido, neuropathy) associated with  previous treatment. 
8. Prior monoclonal antibody (mAb) (including alemtuzumab),  radioimmunoconjugate, 
antibody drug conjugate (ADC), phototherapy, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, immunosuppressive therapy, or any investigational agent for the 
purposes of treating  cancer within  3 weeks before Cycle 1 Day 1. 
9. For CTCL patients only: total skin electron beam therapy (TSEBT) within 12 weeks, or initiation of topical steroid, nitrogen mustard, or topical retinoid within 2 weeks before 
Cycle 1 Day 1. Patients with CTCL who are on a stable topical regimen for ≥ 4 weeks 
prior to C1D1 are allowed.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  65  
  
 
10. The patient has a known infection with HIV, HBV, or HCV or is a carrier of HBV or 
HCV.  Patients who are seropositive for HCV antibody must test negative for HCV by 
PCR assay to be eligible.  Patients with an occult or prior HBV infection (defined as 
being seropositive total hepatitis  B core antibody [HBcAb] and  seronegative for HBsAg)  
may be included if his or her HBV DNA is undetectable or if it is undetectable with 
antiviral therapy. These patients must be willing to undergo additional testing per local 
standard of care if this data is unavailable. Additional testing will be performed if the  
patient does not have documentation of a negative hepatitis panel and a negative HIV 
history within  the 12-week period prior to enrollment. 
11. Patient has an active infection requiring systemic treatment, defined as requiring  
antimicrobial,  antifungal, or antiviral agents.  Prophylactic antimicrobial treatment is 
permitted.  
12. Patient has significant gastrointestinal disease tha t may interfere with absorption of the 
study drug or that predisposes him/her to GI adverse effects, or has had  major gastric  or 
bowel surgery. 
13. Patient  has difficulty  swallowing  or malabsorption syndrome. 
14. Patient  has any other medical,  social,  or psychiatric condition that  might interfere with  
the patient’s  participation  in the trial or interfere  with the  interpretation  of trial results.  
15. Patient has undergone major surgery within 4 weeks prior to first study drug administration.  
16. Patient has a histo ry (within 2 years prior to first study drug administration) of another 
malignancy unless malignancy treated with curative intent and likelihood of relapse is  
small (< 5% in 2 years in the judgement of the investigator). Patients with a history of  
squamous or basal cell  carcinoma of the skin or carcinoma in situ of the cervix  may be 
enrolled. 
17. Patient  is receiving  systemic  steroids at  doses greater  than  the equivalent  of prednisone, 
20 mg  daily, with the exception of intermittent use for  the treatment of emesis.  
18. Patient  is female and  is breast -feeding, pregnant, or intends to become pregnant. 
19. Patient is participating in any other therapeutic clinical study (observational or registry  
trials  are allowed).  
 
4.3. Enrollment  Process  
After informed consent is obtained, the required screening procedures are performed, and the 
results known, the site PI/designee will complete the enrollment form and send it to the 
Sponsor/designee, along with supporting documentation as listed in the study manual.  After 
Sponsor/designee review,  if eligible,  the Sponsor/designee will assign  a patient  study number to 
the patient and inform the site  PI/designee.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  66  
  
 
4.4. Withdrawal Criteria  and Replacement  of Patients  
Patients are free to withdraw from the study at any time for any reason; however, to the extent 
possible, all patients should continue to participate in the study once they have enrolled, even if 
they discontinue study drug. The Investigator also has the right to withdraw a patient from the 
study in case of events such as inter-current illness, AEs, progression, protocol violation, other 
procedures needed for treatment of their disease, or other medical conditions, administrative reasons  or for other reasons (detailed in Section 4.4.1).  
 
An excessive rate of withdrawals can render the study un -interpretable; therefore, unnecessary  
withdrawal  of patients  should be avoided. Should a patient  decide to  withdraw,  all efforts  will be 
made to complete and report the observations as thoroughly as possible. Reasons for all  
discontinuation of study drug and withdrawals from the study will be recorded. If a patient  
discontinues the study drug due to  an AE, that AE must be evaluated  to determine if  it is a 
serious adverse event (SAE; see Section 10.1.2).  The Investigator must report all SAEs to the 
Syneos Safety Department (the Sponsor’s Safety Designee) on the SAE form within 24 hours 
from the point in time when the Investiga tor becomes aware of the SAE.  The procedures  
described under 30 Days Post- Last Treatment (Section 7.3.2.2) will be performed upon 
discontinuation/withdrawal, whenever possible. If a patient withdraws consent, no further 
information  will be collected after the  study termination visit.  
 
Normal  study termination is  defined  as the 30 Days  Post- Last Treatment  visit in Section  7.3.2.2. 
 
4.4.1. General  Withdrawal Criteria  
Discontinuation of study drug and/or withdrawal from the study will occur  if any  of the 
following apply: 
• The patient  experiences  disease progression requiring other therapy. 
• The patient  develops intolerable toxicity.  
• The patient  develops an  intercurrent  condition precluding further administration  
of cerdulatinib. 
• The patient withdraws  consent  for further participation  in the trial.  
• The patient  becomes  pregnant. 
• The patient fails to  comply  with study drug administration, dosing evaluations, or other 
requirements  of the study. 
• The patient  needs  a concomitant medication  that makes  the patient  ineligible  for further 
participation  in the study. 
• The Investigator believes it is no longer in the best interest of the patient to  
receive cerdulatinib. 
• The Sponsor discontinues the trial.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  67  
  
 
4.4.2. Specific Withdrawal Criterion  and Replacement  Procedure for Phase  1 
• Patients who discontinue from treatment prior to the completion of Cycle 1 or who do not 
receive at least 80% of the intended dose in Cycle 1 for reasons other than toxicity will be 
replaced.  Dose escalation will not take place until the appropriate number of patients has  
completed  Cycle 1 at the designated dose level.  
 
4.4.3. Specific Withdrawal Criteria  and Replacement  Procedure  for Phase  2a 
• Patients  who  do not have at least 1 post  baseline assessment for  efficacy  will be  
withdrawn from the study and may  be replaced.  
• Patients  who  are found to  have protocol violations that substantially  impair  the evaluation  
of safety  and efficacy  may be replaced.  
 
4.5. Withdrawal and/or Replacement  Criteria  for Site or Principal  Investigator 
The site or Principal Investigator may  be withdrawn or replaced from the study due to  poor 
compliance with the  study protocol or poor accrual. 
 
4.6. Sponsor  Study  Discontinuation 
The Sponsor has the right to terminate the  entire  study or study cohorts at any time.  Reasons for 
terminating  the study or study cohorts may include, but are not limited to,  the following: 
• Excessive toxicity  indicating  a potential health hazard to patients.  
• Poor patient  enrollment.  
 
The Sponsor will notify the Investigator if the study is placed on hold (or if individual cohorts 
are placed on hold), or if  the Sponsor decides  to discontinue the study or program. 
 
4.7 Protocol Violations and Deviations 
Protocol violations are defined as significant departures from protocol-required processes or procedures that affect patient safety or benefit potential, or confound assessments of safety or clinical activity.  A protocol deviation is a departure from the protocol that does not meet the 
above criteria.  Protocol violations or deviations may be grouped into  the following categories:  
• Enrollment criteria.  
• Study activities  (e.g., missed evaluations or visits, data  verification  issues).  
• Noncompliance with  dose or schedule,  including dose calculation,  administration,  
interruption, reduction, or delay, or  discontinuation criteria.  
• Investigational product handling, including storage and accountability. 
• Informed  consent and  ethical  issues.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  68  
  
 
5.0 TREATMENTS  ADMINISTERED  
Treatments  administered  during the study are listed below.  Administration of  study drug and  
related dose modifications are described in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 for cerdulatinib and in 
Section  6.2 for rituximab.  
• Phase 1 ( closed ): single- agent  cerdulatinib  
• Phase 2a: 
○ Cohorts 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6: single-agent cerdulatinib 
○ Cohort 2: cerdulatinib and  rituximab  
 
5.1. Cerdulatinib  Study  Drug  Administration  
5.1.1. General  Instructions  
Cerdulatinib may be taken with food, unless otherwise specified. Missed doses may be made up  
if given within 4 hours of the missed scheduled dosing time. Cerdulatinib may not be taken 
fewer  than 8 hours prior to the next scheduled  dose. Patients  who vomit following 
administration of cerdulatinib should not repeat that dose of cerdulatinib but should resume study 
drug with the next scheduled dose. In the event of toxicity, dosing may be interrupted at the discretion of the treating physician until sufficient resolution of the toxicity is attained and then 
may be restarted at a lower dose level (see Section 5.2 for guidelines for cerdulatinib toxicity and 
subsequent dose modifications).  
 
In order to assess cerdulatinib compliance, patients will be instructed to keep patient diaries to  
document self-administration of study drug doses, and will include documentation of time study  
dose was taken, any missed doses and reason(s) why missed, and/or any wasted doses and 
reason(s) why. The  diary  will be reviewed by  the appropriate study staff during study visits.  
 
5.1.2. Phase  1 Cerdulatinib  Dosing  
5.1.2.1. Initial Dosing  with Cerdulatinib  
Following screening and confirmation of eligibility, patients will be sequentially assigned to the next open dose cohort. For QD dosing regimens, to allow for single-dose PK assessments during the Phase 1 portion of the study, patients will take their first dose of cerdulatinib on Day 1 and their second and subsequent doses daily beginning on Day 4. During Part 1 of the study, 
cerdulatinib will be taken orally once daily in the AM. For BID dosing regimens, BID dosing 
can beg in on Day 1. 
 
The initial dose cohort will begin treatment at a dose of 15 mg po QD. Subsequent total daily dose levels that  may  be studied include 30 mg, 60 mg, 90 mg, 120 mg, and  150 mg daily. 
Intermediate  or higher dose levels  may  be studied, as appropriate, given the safety  and 
PK profiles of cerdulatinib observed during the ongoing conduct of this study.  Depending on the 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  69  
  
 
PK profile, twice -daily administration (BID) may be considered during the course of dose 
escalation.  Single-dose PK assessment will not be conducted for BID cohorts. Increments of  
dose escalation will be adjusted as needed to accommodate available capsule strengths. Every  
effort  should be made to  administer study  drug at the  same times each  day. 
 
Patients who do not receive at least 80% of their cerdulatinib doses in the first 28 days of 
treatment (Cycle 1) due to non- compliance will be withdrawn from the s tudy. Beyond Cycle 1, 
dose holds may be permitted for reasons not related to disease progression or drug- related  
toxicity  (e.g., elective procedures, vacations) with the permission of the Sponsor’s 
Medical  Monitor. 
 
Intra -patient  dose escalation  will not b e permitted during Phase 1. 
 
The dose-escalation scheme described in this and the following paragraph accords with the principles described by Le Tourneau et al [ 6]. One patient will be enrolled in each dose cohort 
until the first report of a Grade 2 or greater adverse event (AE). In the event of any Grade 2 or greater AE in the single patient, an additional 2 patients, for a total of 3, will be enrolled in that dose cohort, and all subsequent dose cohorts will follow a “3 + 3” design.  Dose escalation will 
be in 100% increments until a drug- related adverse event of Grade 2 or greater severity occurs.  
Thereafter, dose escalation will be in increments of up to 50% as determined following review by the safety committee.  If a dose -limiting toxicity (DLT) occurs in 1 of the first 3 patients in a  
cohort, that cohort will be expanded to at least 6 patients. If ≤ 33% of six or more patients in a 
cohort experiences DLT,  dose escalation may  proceed. If in any cohort 2 or more  of the first 
3 patients or ≥ 33% of patients in a cohort develop DLT, dose escalation will cease. That dose 
level will be declared intolerable, and either the prior dose level will be declared the MTD,  
and/or the cohort may be expanded to as many as 6 patients if fewer than 6 patients had previously been treated at that dose level in order to further characterize the PK and PD at that level.  A total of 43 patients have been enrolled in the Phase 1 (escalation) portion of this study, 
and Phase 1 is now closed to enrollment. 
 
All patients in a cohort must have been treated for 28 days (one cycle) prior to treatment of 
patients at the next higher dose level. In addition to DLTs defined below, the safety committee 
will also take into consideration the totality of available safety data in determining whether a  
given dose level should be deemed tolerable. Additional patients may be enrolled in individual cohorts if the Sponsor’s Medical Monitor or safety committee deems it necessary to obtain additional safety  information  prior to  proceeding with dose escalation.  In addition, intermediate  
dose levels may  be used  to allow for further exploration of safety.  
 
As of Amendment 4, Phase 1 dose escalation has concluded at 45 mg po BID (per Sections 1.5 and 3.1.2.2).  The dose selected for Phase 2a is 35 mg po BID based on PK modeling and 
accumulated  safety  data (Section 3.1.2.2).  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  70  
  
 
5.1.3. Phase  2a Cerdulatinib  Dosing  
Following confirmation of eligibility, patients will receive oral cerdulatinib at a starting dose of  
30, 25, or 20 mg BID. Every effort should be made to administer study drug at the same time 
each day. The drug will be administered  in cycles  of 28 days with no days off therapy  
between  cycles.  
 
In the event of toxicity (see Section 5.2.1 for the definition of toxicity ), dosing may be 
interrupted at the discretion  of the Investigator until sufficient resolution  of the toxicity  is 
attained and then restarted at a lower dose level (dose modifications to cerdulatinib are summarized  in Table 8).  The lowest dose of cerdulatinib that may  be administered  is 
15 mg BID.  
 
Dosing information for rituximab is described in Section 6.2 (for Cohort 2, the combination cohort of cerdulatinib and rituximab). 
 
5.2. Dose -limiting Toxicity, Dose Modifications, and other Dosing/Monitoring 
Guidance  
5.2.1. Cerdulatini b 
5.2.1.1. Definitions  of Dose -limiting  Toxicity  for Cerdulatinib  during  Phase  1 
 
DLT will be defined as any of the following toxicities, possibly or probably related to 
cerdulatinib, and clinically significant (in the judgement of the investigator) that occurs in the 
first 28 days (one cycle) of treatment. For patients to be evaluable for DLT, they must have 
received  80% of the doses in the first 28 days of Cycle 1, or been withdrawn from study therapy  
due to a drug- related toxicity.  Patients who withdraw without meeting these criteria should be 
replaced.  Toxicity  will be  graded  according to the NCI-CTCAE v4.0. 
 
Hematologic 
• Febrile  neutropenia (ANC <  1,000/μL and temperature ≥ 38.5°C). 
• Grade 4 neutropenia for > 5 days. 
• Grade 4 thrombocytopenia with  or without bleeding. 
• Grade 3 thrombocytopenia with bleeding. 
• Grade 4 anemia, unexplained by underlying disease.  
 
Non-hematologic 
• Grade 3 or greater  nausea,  vomiting, or diarrhea if persistent  despite optimal antiemetic  
or anti-diarrheal therapy. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  71  
  
 
• Grade 3 or greater  increase  in transaminases  lasting  > 5 days. 
• Grade 3 or greater  fatigue  persisting > 7 days in the absence of any other 
underlying cause.  
• Any other Grade 3 or greater  non-hematologic toxicity  (except  fatigue as noted  above) 
considered  clinically  significant by the investigator. 
• Toxicity  of any grade resulting  in dose delay of more than 7 days.  
• Toxicity  resulting  in study drug discontinuation prior to the completion of Cycle 1.  
 
5.2.1.2. Phase  2a: Monitoring for Toxicity in Phase  2a 
Patients will be monitored for toxicity throughout Phase 2a. For the purposes of this protocol, 
toxicity is defined as any Grade 3 or higher adverse event (AE) and/or any clinically significant AE (refer to Table 8 ). Patients experiencing a toxicity may be considered for a dose interruption 
or reduction. Enrollment in a cohort may be suspended at any time depending on the overall toxicity profile within that cohort, pending a review by the Study Committee, and consideration 
will be given to discontinuing enrollment in that cohort or providing a global dose reduction for 
that cohort. 
 
Physicians should monitor for infections and clinically significant decreases in leukocyte counts  
(e.g., ALC, ANC) and should consider holding cerdulatinib and/or dose modifications per Section 5.2.1.3 if clinically significant toxicity occurs.  Also see Section 10.1.3, Adverse Events 
that May  Indicate Potential Drug  Toxicity. 
 
5.2.1.3. Dose  Modifications for Cerdulatinib  
5.2.1.3.1. Dose  Modifications to  Cerdulatinib During  Phase  2a 
Dose  reductions and interruptions are permitted  during all cycles.  Guidelines for dose 
modifications  are provided in Table 8.  
 
In general, for Grade 1 or 2 adverse events that are medically manageable, the Investigator is encouraged to continue dosing and institute standard of care support or hold dosing and institute standard of care support, and then restart dosing at the same dose after the event has resolved to baseline.  Specific guidance for management of Grade 1 and 2 diarrhea and nausea and vomiting 
is provided in Sections 5.2.1.5 and 5.2.1.6. 
 
For adverse events ≥ Grade 3, rather than dose interruption or dose reduction, the Investigator is encouraged to hold dosing and institute standard of care support, and then restart dosing at the same dose after the event has resolved to baseline, as clinically appropriate.  Table 8  provides 
further guidance on Grade 3 toxicities. A dose interruption does not necessitate a subsequent 
dose reduction. In the case of a dose interruption, once the toxicity  has resolved to Grade < 2 or 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  72  
  
 
baseline, the Investigator should use clinical judgement when deciding to restart the patient at the 
same dose level or  at a reduced dose.  
 
Patients may be dose- reduced in increments from their starting  dose, one level at a time, to the 
lowest dose level of 15 mg BID. A patient experiencing a toxicity at 15 mg BID should be 
discontinued from cerdulatinib and removed from the study (after completing  the 30 Day 
Post- Last Treatment  Visit  in Section 7.3.2.2).  
 
Patients who experience dose interruptions > 28 days in duration should be permanently 
discontinued from  cerdulatinib therapy (after completing  the 30 Day  Post- Last Treatment Visit in  
Section 7.3.2.2).  Exceptions that would allow such patients to continue study treatment may be 
allowed at the discretion of the Investigator based upon clinical judgement and with Sponsor Medical  Monitor approval. 
 
5.2.1.3.2. Dose  Re-escalations  During  Phase  2a 
In Phase 2a, a patient who has been dose reduced from their starting dose may be re- escalated  
incrementally to the next higher dose level at the discretion of the Investigator based upon 
clinical judgement and with Sponsor Medical Monitor approval. Dose re -escalation to the next 
higher dose level should occur  at the  start  of the next cycle.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  73  
  
 
Table 8: Guidelines  for Dose  Reductions  for Cerdulatinib  
 
Toxicity  Occurrence Action  1 
Hematologic  
Grade 3 or 4 febrile neutropenia  
Grade  4 neutropenia  for ≥ 7 days,  or 
Grade  4 thrombocytopenia  1st Hold study drug.  Once toxicity has resolved to 
Grade  < 2 or baseline, may restart  cerdulatinib  at 
the next lower  dose level.  
2nd Hold study drug.  Once toxicity has resolved to  
Grade  < 2 or baseline, may restart  cerdulatinib  at 
two dose levels  below  the starting  dose.  
3rd Discontinue  cerdulatinib  
Gastrointestinal  
Grade 3 or 4 nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea if  
persistent despite optimal antiemetic or  
antidiarrheal  therapy  
Grade  3 or greater  increase in ALT/AST,  total 
bilirubin  1st Hold study drug.  Once toxicity has resolved to  
Grade  < 2 or baseline, may restart  cerdulatinib  at 
the next lower  dose level. 
2nd Hold study drug.  Once toxicity has resolved to  
Grade  < 2 or baseline, may restart  cerdulatinib  at 
two dose levels  below  the starting  dose.  
3rd Discontinue  cerdulatinib  
Other  
Any other related Grade 3 or 4 non- laboratory  
toxicity  
Any other related Grade 3 or 4 laboratory 
toxicity  considered  clinically  significant by the 
Investigator  (e.g.,  symptomatic)  
(Do not dose reduce or hold study drug for  
asyptomomatic  amylase  or lipase elevations 2) 1st Hold study drug.  Once toxicity has resolved to  
Grade  < 2 or baseline, may restart  cerdulatinib  at 
the next lower  dose level.  
2nd Hold study drug.  Once toxicity has resolved to  
Grade  < 2 or baseline, may restart  cerdulatinib  at 
two dose levels  below  the starting  dose.  
3rd Discontinue  cerdulatinib  
AE = Adverse  event;  ALT =  Alanine  aminotransferase;  AST  = Aspartate  aminotransferase 
Note : Grading is NCI CTCAE v5.0.  
1 Do not  dose reduce  below  15 mg BID.  At 15 mg BID,  if any toxicity  (Grade  3 or greater  AE and/or  any clinically  
significant AE) occurs, discontinue cerdulatinib (and rituximab for the combination cohort of cerdulatinib and rituximab) after  completing  the 30 Day  Post-Last Treatment  Visit in Section  7.3.2.2 . 
2 ≥ Grade  3 asymptomomatic e levations  in amylase and lipase  have  been  observed in this study without  
clinical pancreatitis.  
 
 
5.2.1.4. Management of Potential Epstein -Barr Virus  Reactivation  
EBV reactivation has been observed in connection with cerdulatinib administration and should 
be viewed as a potential adverse effect of treatment.  For this reason, peripheral blood 
quantitative EBV polymerase chain reaction assay (PCR) has been added to the baseline assessment of subjects and should be performed post-baseline for any unexplained fevers if there 
is clinical suspicion of EBV reactivation.  
 
If unexplained fever  and increased  EBV  PCR raise clinical  suspicion of EBV  reactivation  or 
infection, the investigator should take the following action  *: 
1. Hold  cerdulatinib  dosing. 
2. Continue monitoring the patient’s  EBV  viral load with  quantitative  PCR per local  
standard  of care (typically  weekly).  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  74  
  
 
3. Administer  symptomatic treatment per  local  standard of care.  
4. Consider therapy with rituximab at a dose of 375 mg/m2 once weekly until normalization 
of the patient’s viral load.  Typically, one to four doses of rituximab are used [ 73, 74].  
The use of rituximab does not require study discontinuation. 
5. After  symptoms resolve,  resume cerdulatinib  treatment at  the same dose level or  one dose 
level below the current dose level and continue monitoring the patient ’s EBV viral load  
with quantitative  PCR per  local standard of care (typically  monthly). 
 
* Cerdulatinib dosing may continue while rituximab therapy is administered, with the Medical 
Monitor approval. For asymptomatic  increased  EBV  PCR,  consider treatment  with  rituximab  
(per local standard of care) and continuing cerdulatinib. 
 
5.2.1.5. Management of Diarrhea  
Grade 1 or 2: The patient may continue receiving study drug. Institute anti- diarrheal treatment  
(e.g., loperamide [Imodium®] or diphenoxylate/atropine [Lomotil®]) and consider BRAT 
(bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast) diet.  Persistent Grade 2 diarrhea despite optimal therapy 
may be managed with dose reduction. 
 
Grade ≥ 3: Hold study drug. Once  toxicity  has resolved  to Grade < 2 or baseline, restart  
cerdulatinib  at the same dose level or at the next lower dose level.  
 
Also,  if clinically  indicated,  the patient  should be assessed  for C. difficile  infection. 
 
5.2.1.6. Management of Nausea  and Vomiting  
Grade 1 or 2: The patient may continue receiving study drug. Institute anti -emetic treatment 
(e.g., ondansetron [Zofran®] or prochlorperazine [Compazine®]), consider sucralfate (Carafate®), 
and institute standard of care support. Persistent Grade 2 nausea/vomiting despite optimal 
therapy  may be managed  with dose reduction. 
 
Grade ≥ 3: Hold study drug. Once toxicity  has resolved to Grade < 2 or baseline, restart  
cerdulatinib  at the same dose level or at the  next lower dose level.  
 
5.3. Rituximab Information and Dose  Modifications 
For patients enroll ed in Cohort 2, rituximab will be  provided as standard of care by the 
Investigator. Rituximab  will not be provided by the Sponsor. 
 
5.3.1. Prescribing  Information  
Please refer to local  prescribing information for further details on  rituximab  (e.g., USPI, SmPC).  
 
5.3.2. Management  of Rituximab Infusion Toxicity 
Please refer to local  prescribing information for further details on  rituximab  (e.g., USPI, SmPC).  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  75  
  
 
5.3.3. Dose  Modifications to  Rituximab  
Please refer to local  prescribing information for further details on  rituximab  (e.g., USPI, SmPC).  
 
Escalations and reductions in rituximab dosing are not planned nor permitted. Repeat rituximab  
administrations may be delayed to allow patients to recover from rituximab- related AEs or  
intercurrent  illness.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  76  
  
 
6.0 STUDY MATERIALS  AND MANAGEMENT  
 
6.1. Cerdulatinib  
6.1.1. Identity  of Product  
Cerdulatinib, an investigational drug, is supplied by Portola Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Portola), as 
an immediate release (IR) capsule for oral administration in 2 strengths: 5 mg and 15 mg. Each  
gelatin  capsule will contain cerdulatinib  HCl,  microcrystalline  cellulose,  croscarmellose sodium, 
silicon dioxide, and magnesium stearate. The 5 mg capsules will be size 4 and dark green  
opaque in color, the 15 mg capsules will be size 4 and Swedish orange opaque in color. The  
study product will be supplied in 35 capsules/bottle in 60 cc high density polyethylene (HDPE) bottles  and should be stored at room temperature.  
 
In Amendment 9, additional drug will be provided in the following new presentations: 
 
 
Cerdulatinib Dose  (mg)  
Capsule  Size  
Capsule  Color  Bottle  
configuration  
15 Size 3 Blue  opaque  30 capsules/bottle  
in 40 cc HDPE  
bottles  20 Size 3 White  opaque  
25 Size 2 Swedish orange  
opaque  
 
 
6.1.2. Dispensing  and Accountability  
The dispensing pharmacist or designated qualified individual will write the date dispensed, dose 
dispensed, and the patient’s identification number or initials on the Drug Accountability Source 
Documents. All medication supplied will be acco unted for on the Drug Accountability Record. 
All partially used or unused drug supplies will be destroyed at the site in accordance with approved written site procedures, or returned to the drug depot as described in the Study Drug 
Supply Process Manual. The Investigator will maintain a record of the amount, reason, and dates 
when unused supplies were either destroyed or returned to Portola.  All records will be retained  
as noted in Section 15.2. 
 
6.1.3. Dose  Regimens  
Patients will receive cerdulatinib at a starting dose of 30, 25, or 20 mg BID (Section 3.1.2.2).  
Patients may be dose-reduced to a minimum dose of 15 mg BID (Section 5.2.1.3.1).  Missed  
doses may be made up if given within 4 hours of the scheduled dosing time. Cerdulatinib may  
not be taken fewer than 8 hours prior to the next scheduled dose. Patients who vomit following  
administration  of cerdulatinib  should not repeat  that dose of cerdulatinib  but should resume  study 
drug with the  next scheduled dose. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  77  
  
 
6.2. Rituximab (for  Combination Cohort 2, Rituximab  and Cerdulatinib)  
6.2.1. Identity  of Product  
Rituximab  is commercially  available.  Please refer to  local  prescribing information  for further 
details  on rituximab (e.g., USPI, SmPC). 
 
6.2.2. Dispensing  and Accountability  
Please refer to  local  prescribing information  for further details  on rituximab  (e.g., USPI,  SmPC).  
 
Acquisition, storage, control, and disposal of rituximab used in the study should be performed 
according to institutional procedures and policies. The dispensing pharmacist or designated 
qualified individual will write the lot number, date dispensed, dose/amount dispensed, and the 
patient’s identification number or initials on the Drug Accountability Source Documents.  All 
medication supplied will be accounted for on the Drug Accountability Record. All partially used  
or unused drug supplies will be destroyed at the site in accordance with approved written site 
procedures. The Investigator will maintain a record of the amount and dates when unused 
supplies were either  destroyed or returned to Portola. All records  will be  retained per  
Section  15.2 of the protocol. 
 
6.2.3. Rituximab Dose  Regimen ( Cohort 2 Only ) 
6.2.3.1. Premedication  and Prophylactic Medication 
Please refer to  local prescribing  information  for further details  on rituximab (e.g., USPI,  SmPC).  
 
6.2.3.2. Dose  Rationale 
Please refer to  local  prescribing information  for further details  on rituximab  (e.g., USPI,  SmPC).  
 
6.2.3.3. Dosage 
Please refer to  local  prescribing information  for further details  on rituximab  (e.g., USPI,  SmPC).  
 
Cerdulatinib should  be taken  before the rituximab infusion . 
 
Rituximab  will be administered  intravenously (IV) in  the clinic.  Dosing will be based  on mg/m2 
of body surface area (BSA).  The dose calculation of BSA will be based on the patient’s height 
and actual body weight prior to therapy. After establish ment of BSA based on the patient’s 
pretreatment body weight, do not alter the total dose of rituximab for the patient, despite fluctuations in the patient’s body weight. 
 
Rituximab will be administered IV at 375 mg/m2 on Days 1, 8, 15, and 22 of Cycle 1, and during 
Cycles  4, 6, 8, and 10 on Day 1 only. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  78  
  
 
7.0 STUDY METHODS  
A summary of the patient visits and clinical evaluations for Phase 2a is provided in Appendix 1. 
Please refer  to the Study Laboratory Manual  for further instructions on specimen  processing 
and shipping. 
 
7.1. Study  Assessments  
7.1.1. Informed  Consent  
Written informed consent for participation in the study must be obtained before performing any  
study- specific screening procedures. Informed Consent Forms for all consented patients will be  
maintained at the  study site. 
 
7.1.2. Global Health  Assessment  
The Global Health Assessment should be administered after obtaining informed consent but prior 
to any other protocol procedures.  It should be performed before any protocol -related information  
is communicated to the patient.  
 
7.1.3. Medical  History  
Medical  history should include previously determined prognostic factors, including (but not 
limited to):  
• Follicular  Lymphoma International Prognostic Index  (FLIPI)  
• International Prognostic Index (IPI) score for NHL  
• Mantle  Cell International Prognostic Index (MIPI)  
• Others  (see Appendix 4, Appendix 5, Appendix 6, and Appendix 7) 
 
Medical history should also include a redacted copy of the pathology report and any supporting 
pathology information, including the original pathology report from the diagnosis (which may include additional mutational analysis by sequencing, FISH, IHC, cytogenetics, etc.) to be available for Sponsor review. 
 
7.1.4. Concomitant Medications  
All medications, including over -the- counter preparations, herbals, and vitamins taken within  
14 days prior to Day 1 and throughout the study should be recorded. Additional information  
about prohibited and allowed concomitant medications can be found in Section 7.5. 
 
7.1.5. Physical Examination,  Height,  and Wei ght 
Physical examinations should include heart, lungs, and abdomen. Height and weight may also be required  at certain  visits (as  defined  in Appendix 1).  In patients  with  CLL,  the physical exam  
should include bi-dimensional measurements of  all lymph nodes and measurement of  
spleen  size.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  79  
  
 
7.1.6. Vital Signs  
Vital signs (temperature,  respiratory  rate, blood pressure,  and heart rate)  should be obtained after  
at least 5 minutes in the  sitting  or semi -recumbent  position. Vital signs  should be obtained 
pre-dose at  the visits  defined  in Appendix 1. 
 
Vital signs should also be obtained post-dose at the visits defined in Appendix 1 at the following 
time points:  
• Cohorts 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 (cerdulatinib only): obtain  vital  signs at 1.0 hour post- cerdulatinib  
administration  
• Cohort 2 (cerdulatinib + rituximab) on visits rituximab is administered: obtain additional 
vital signs at 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, and 4.0 hours post-cerdulatinib administration (or per 
standard  of care), and then as clinically  indicated.  
 
The window for collection of vital signs is ± 10 minutes. 
 
7.1.7. Eastern  Cooperative Oncology Group  (ECOG)  Performance Status  
The ECOG performance status  scale can be found in Appendix 2. 
 
7.1.8. Electrocardiogram  (ECG) 
12-lead ECG will be required for all patients (single tracing acceptable, or triplicate ECGs as  
clinically  indicated).  
 
7.1.9. Local Laboratory Tests  and Response  Assessments 
7.1.9.1. Serum  Chemistry,  Hematology,  Urinalysis,  Coagulation, and Pregnancy Tests  
Serum chemistry, hematology, urinalysis, and PT/PTT/INR assessments should be performed at 
the local lab.  Urine or serum for pregnancy testing should be performed for women of child- 
bearing potential only. During Screening, these assessments should be completed within 7 days 
prior to Day 1. The results should be obtained and reviewed prior to enrollment to confirm 
eligibility.  
• Hematology - hemoglobin, hem atocrit,  WBC,  platelet  count, CBC with  differential.  
• Serum Chemistry - sodium, potassium, chloride, magnesium, CO 2 (HCO 3), glucose, 
BUN, creatinine, aspartate aminotransferase (AST, i.e., serum glutamic- oxaloacetic  
transaminase [SGOT]), alanine aminotransf erase (ALT, i.e., serum glutamic pyruvic  
transaminase  [SGPT]),  lactate dehydrogenase (LDH),  total protein, albumin,  alkaline  
phosphatase, calcium, phosphorous, bilirubin, uric  acid, amylase,  and lipase.  
o Grade 3 or greater increases in ALT or AST require liver function testing to be  
repeated  within 72 hours of initial test.  
• Complete urinalysis - urine will be obtained at selected time points for the following  
laboratory tests: specific  gravity, pH,  glucose, protein, and hemoglobin. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  80  
  
 
○ Microscopic analysis for urine sediment to be performed as  clinically  indicated.  
○ Urinalysis  will be analyzed  at the local  laboratory. Analysis results  will be captured  
on study case report forms (CRF).  
• Pregnancy Test - Urine or serum will be obtained at Screening and on Day 1 of all cycles 
from all female patients of child -bearing potential and analyzed at the local laboratory to  
determine  their pregnancy status.  
 
7.1.9.2. Other  Local Labs/Assessments for  All Patients  
The following additional assessmen ts should also be performed  locally  for all patients: 
• Pre-dose blood sample  for C- reactive protein  (CRP)  and ESR -Westergren.  
• Whole blood for Beta-2-microglobulin, lymphocyte subsets, and immunoglobulin 
levels  including: 
○ Quantitative  immunoglobulins - quantitative  levels  of IgA, IgE, IgG, and IgM. 
○ Lymphocyte subsets - quantitation of absolute numbers (or %) of CD3+, CD4+, 
CD8+,  CD16/56+, and CD19+ by flow cytometry, WBCs, and  lymphocyte count. 
• CT or CT/PET of chest,  abdomen, pelvis, plus any  other areas of  lymphoma/CLL 
involvement (within 28 days prior to Day  1) and then as indicated in Appendix 1. 
○ Note : for CTCL  patients,  if baseline  scan is negative for nodal/visceral/other disease 
a repeat CT or CT/PET is not necessary except to confirm CR and may be done as 
clinically  indicated.  
○ For all patients, redacted copies of radiology reports should be sent to the Sponsor 
for review.  
○ Copies of scans should be  made available to  Sponsor upon request. 
• Obtain  copy of molecular/mutation profile  if obtained as standard  of care.  
○ Examples  of molecular/mutation  profiles:  FoundationOne, Caris,  MSKCC IMPACT,  
or other local or commercial profiles.  
7.1.9.3. Other  Local Labs/Assessments for  Specific Patients  
The following additional assessments  should be performed locally for specific patients  
as indicated:  
• For Cohort 4 CLL/SLL  patients only , samples  should be obtained at Day  1 for prognostic 
factor  determination including: 
○ Cytogenetics (FISH)  del(13q), del(11q), del(17p), del(6q)  
○ IgVH  mutational status;  results  obtained within 3  months prior to C1D1  
are acceptable  
○ Zap70 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  81  
  
 
○ CD38  
• If these tests were completed  prior to  Screening,  the historic  results  should be recorded  in the 
database within th e appropriate eCRF.  The tests should then be repeated locally  at Day  1. 
• For Cohort 6 CTCL  patients  only: 
○ Skin punch biopsy – 1, ≥ 5 mm punch biopsy of a representative lesion. A biopsy 
should be obtained from 2 different areas of disease, if possible (e.g., plaque and 
nodular lesions) 
○ Peripheral  blood flow  cytometry  – for assessment of  Sézary  cells 
○ Modified Severity  Weighted Assessment Tool  (mSWAT)  
○ Likert  Scale assessment  
○ Photographs of skin involvement per local  standard of care  (SOC)  
 
7.1.10. Central  Laboratory Assessments 
• Details regardin g the central laboratory collection procedures can be found in the Study 
Laboratory Manual.  All post-dose central laboratory  samples should be collected  
2.0 hours after  administration  of cerdulatinib  unless ot herwise specified.  Before  
obtaining lab samples,  date and  time  of patient’s  last mean should be recorded.  
7.1.10.1. Central Laboratory Assessments for All  Patients:  
• Serum  sample  for cytokine biomarker analysis. 
 
7.1.11. Pharmacokinetics  
Plasma samples for cerdulatinib pharmacokinetic (PK) assessments should be obtained at the 
time points as indicated in Appendix 1. Serial PK samples will be collected at the following  
time points: 
• Cycle 1 Day 1: pre- dose (i.e., within 60 minutes prior to the dose), and 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 
24 hours post-dose (collection window is ± 10 minutes, except for the 24-hour post-dose 
timepoint [± 30 minutes]).  Collect the C1D1 24-hour post-dose sample prior to 
administering  the C1D2 dose. 
• Cycle 1 Day 8: pre-dose (i.e., within 60 minutes prior to the dose), and 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 
24 hours post-dose (collection window is ± 10 minutes, except for the 24-hour post-dose 
timepoint [± 30 minutes]).  Collect the C1D8 24-hour post-dose sample prior to 
administering  the C1D9 dose. 
 
If a patient  is not dosed at  a particular  visit but is due  to be dosed, a trough PK assessment  should 
still be performed.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  82  
  
 
7.1.12. Biopsies  
7.1.12.1. Bone Marrow Biopsy and Aspiration 
For CLL patients only, a bone marrow biopsy and aspiration will be completed before Day 1 
(within 6 weeks/42 days prior to Day 1) through the local lab and be repeated as clinically 
indicated.  For all  other patients with a  history of bone marrow  involvement prior to entering the 
study, a repeat biopsy should be performed to confirm a complete response or as  
clinically  indicated.  
 
7.1.12.2. Skin Punch Biopsy (Cohort 6, CTCL  Only)  
Skin punch biopsy is mandatory for all patients with CTCL and should be a ≥ 5 mm punch biopsy of a representative lesion.  A biopsy should be obtained from 2 different areas of disease 
if possible (e.g., plaque and nodular lesions). Subsequent biopsies should be from the same 
general  site if possible. At least  10 unstained slides or  a FFPE  tissue  block should be submitted.  
 
7.1.12.3. Optional Biopsies 
The following optional biopsies may be obtained from all patients  at the  discretion of the 
Investigator or as  clinically  indicated:  
• Optional tumor Block/Unstained Slides (Screening) – During Screening, obtain tumor 
block/unstained slides that were previously collected as part of patient diagnosis if 
consent given (in selected  patients, once eligibility  is confirmed).  A minimum of  
10 (preferably 20) unstained slides or Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tis sue (FFPE)  
block should be sent to Portola. A fresh tumor biopsy is not required; archival tissue may 
be used. 
• Optional Fresh Tumor Biopsy (Any time during study) – obtain a fresh lymph node or 
tumor biopsy. Submit a formalin -fixed paraffin embedded tissue (FFPE) block or a  
minimum of 10 (preferably 20) unstained, freshly cut FFPE tissue slides from lymph 
node or other biopsies. 
 
If tumor or lymph node or skin biopsies (including CTCL patients) are obtained during the 
course of the patient’s treatment, redacted copies of the pathology reports should be sent to the Sponsor for review.  Biopsy processing instructions can be found in the Study 
Laboratory Manual.  
 
7.2. Screening  Visit  
All screening  assessments will  be conducted within 21 days prior to  the first dose of study drug. 
Redacted copies of pathology reports used for the diagnosis of NHL or CLL/SLL, or other 
documents noted in the enrollment form,  should be obtained during Screening. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  83  
  
 
Additionally, the patient’s pathology reports used to make the original diagnosis or diagnosis of 
relapse/progression  should be examined  to determine  if the markers  below were assess ed: 
• For patients with DLBCL, assessment of germinal center B -cell-like DLBCL (GCB) vs.  
non-GCB by Hans methodology [ 75]; MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 if previously assessed; 
assessment of  mutational profiling  if previously assessed.  
• For patients with FL, assessment of t(14;18), BCL2, BCL6, and MYC if previously 
assessed;  assessment of  mutational profiling  if previously assessed.  
• For patients  with  MCL,  assessment  of t(11;14), Cyclin  D1 expression, and  BCL2  if 
previously asses sed; assessment of mutational profiling  if previously assessed.  
• For patients with  CLL,  assessment  of del (17p), del(13q), del  (11q), del  (6q),  trisomy  12, 
IgVH, CD38, and Zap70 if previously assessed; assessment of mutational profiling if 
previously assessed (e.g., mutations that confer resistance to BTK inhibitors/ibrutinib 
such as Cys -481 or phospholipase C gamma  2 [PLCG2]).  
• For patients with PTCL, assessment of SYK by IHC, SYK-ITK fusion, or presence of t(5;9)(q33;q22) by cytogenetics or other methodology if previously assessed; assessment  
of mutational profiling  if previously assessed.  
 
7.3. Dosing  Cycles  
7.3.1. Phase  2a Dosing  Cycles  
On days where pre-dose assessments are completed, patients should wait to take the study drug 
until they  are on- site. 
 
Patients receiving ibrutinib should continue ibrutinib for 5 days after the start of cerdulatinib, with both drugs administered  at the  same time.  Patients should discontinue ibrutinib  after  the 
first 5 days. 
 
7.3.2. Patient  Visits  After  Cycle  2 
All patients enrolled in the Phase 2a portion of the study are expected to be on- site for Day  1 of 
every cycle (e.g., C3D1, C4D1, C5D1, C6D1) except with Sponsor permission described in 
Section  7.3.2.1. 
 
Certain assessments will be performed on Day 1 of every cycle throughout the duration of the 
study, as indicated in Appendix 1 under “All Other Cycles.” These include assessment of AEs  
and con meds, cerdulatinib administration, and local safety labs (e.g., chemistry, hematology, urinalysis, urine or serum pregnancy as required). Study drug dispensation and accountability by site staff will also occur at these Day 1 visits, as well as the distribution and collection of  
completed  patient diaries  and other study materials.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  84  
  
 
Additional assessments will be performed every 3 cycles only, as indicated in Appendix 1 under 
“Additional Tests Every 3 Cycles.” These include (but are not limited to) c entral labs and  
disease response assessments.  
 
7.3.2.1. Visit Reduction  for Response  Patients  after  Cycle 12 
If a patient  experiences  a treatment  response while  on study treatment,  the patient  may be 
eligible for a reduced visit schedule after Cycle 12 or at the discretion of the Sponsor. At the  
discretion of the Investigator based upon clinical judgement and with Medical Monitor approval, 
the patient’s  visit cycle may  be reduced  from every  cycle (e.g., C12D1, C13D1, C14D1) to every 
3 cycles (C12D1, C15D1, C18D1), corresponding with the “Additional Tests Every 3 Cycles” 
schedule in Appendix 1. 
 
If a patient experiences a response and their visit reduction is approved by the Medical Monitor 
to every 3 cycles, the site will call the patient and conduct a telephone visit for every cycle when 
the patient  is not on- site. During this call, site staff should obtain information about the patient’s  
overall health, any reportable adverse events, or other relevant clinical information that would normally  be collected on -site. 
 
In these cases, patients may be dispensed enough study drug and study materials (e.g., patient diaries)  to accommodate the reduced visit frequency. 
 
7.3.2.2. 30 Days Post- Last Treatment  
30 days after the last cerdulatinib dose administered, patients should return to the site for a 
follow-up visit consisting  of a number of safety  and response assessments  as indicated  
in Appendix 1. 
 
7.3.2.3. Unscheduled  Assessments 
At any  time throughout the study, the following asssessments may  be performed as  
clinically  indicated:  
• Unscheduled plasma PK samples may be obtained at the discretion of the Investigator 
upon the decision to reduce dose, interruption or discontinuation of study drug, or other (e.g., AEs that may indicate potential drug toxicity [see Section 10.1.3]).  When taking 
unscheduled samples for PK, please note the time since the last dose and last meal in  
source documents. 
○ In the event of a study drug interruption or dose-change, pre-dose PK samples should 
be collected the day  study drug is restarted  or a new dose is started, as well  as 
7 days later.  
• Cohort 6 - CTCL patients only (local laboratory ): 1, ≥ 5 mm skin punch biopsy of a 
representative lesion as clinically indicated may be performed; subsequent biopsies 
should be from the same  general site, if possible. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  85  
  
 
7.3.3. Visit  Windows 
Due to scheduling conflicts and the burden of study visits, patients may  attend  their  scheduled  
visits  within a  visit window as  indicated in Appendix 1. 
 
7.3.3.1. Visit Window and Timeline  Guidance 
• A standard  treatment  cycle is defined  as 28 days of  treatment,  and each  new cycle should 
start 29 days from the  previous Day 1 visit (e.g., C2D1  starts 29  days from  C1D1). 
• Each  new cycle “resets” the timeline.  This means  that C2D15 is  measured from  C2D1. 
• Dose  interruptions that extend beyond the end  of a cycle (e.g.,  after Day  28 of that cycle)  
will delay  the start of  the next cycle.  Cycles should not be started  during an interruption. 
• Subjects  should continue to administer study drug daily until the new  cycle is started.  
• For safety  monitoring purposes, if a scheduled  visit must be  changed it is preferred  that a  
patient  comes in for a visit early  instead of late.  
 
7.4. Blood Collection  
The maximum amount of blood to be drawn at a visit is ~104 mL and the total amount of blood 
to be drawn over a 50-week study period (including the 2- week screening period and through 
Week 48 of the study including a possible end-of-therapy visit) is ~548.5 mL. For a 40-kg person (the smallest participant expected to enroll in the study), this equates to maximum blood volume per body weight per visit of ~2.4 mL/kg and a total blood volume per body weight per average 6- week  period of ~1.6 mL/kg. These quantities of blood are within accepted  limits of  
3.0 mL/kg  of body weight for a single blood draw and 7.0 mL/kg of body weight for a 
6-week  period [ 76]. 
 
7.5. Concomitant Medications  and Other Guidance  
All concomitant medications used during the study and within 14 days prior to Screening  must 
be reported on the appropriate CRF.  
 
7.5.1. Prohibited  Medications/Procedures  
• Chemotherapy, radiation therapy, hormonal therapy or any investigational anti-neoplastic 
agent  for the  active  treatment  of cancer  are prohibited. Patients  may continue on 
adjuvant hormonal therapy for prostate or breast cancer, as long as there is no detectable disease at  study entry. 
• Systemic steroids, at doses greater than the equivalent of 20 mg prednisone daily, with the exception of intermittent use for the treatment of emesis, are pro hibited. Steroid  
inhalers for medical conditions are permitted.  Patients needing pulse corticosteroids for 
other medical conditions should be discussed  with the Sponsor’s  Medical Monitor. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  86  
  
 
• Nasal flu vaccine is prohibited because the nasal vaccine is a live, attenuated virus;  
however, flu injections,  which  are nonviable antigens, are permitted  (see Section 7.5.2).  
 
7.5.2. Permitted  or Mandated  Medications  
• Anti-emetic  agents  for the treatment  of nausea and  vomiting are permitted.  
○ No constraint will be placed on the use of growth factors during subsequent 
treatment; however, prophylactic use is discouraged and adherence to American  
Society  of Clinical Oncology (ASCO)  guidelines is recommended. 
 
7.5.2.1. Antimicrobial Prophylaxis 
• Pneumocystis prophylaxis is required in all patients receiving cerdulatinib, and study patients should be monitored closely with frequent cell counts for evidence of infection or bone marrow suppression. Bactrim™ (sulfamethoxozole /trimethoprim) 1 DS tab/day  
is the recommended prophylaxis regimen and will cover both Pneumocystis jirovecii and  
Nocardia. Other recommendations may  be found in the National  Comprehensive Cancer 
Network (NCCN) guidelines [ 77]. For patients unable to take Bactrim, atovaquone, or 
pentamadine (inhaled or IV) may be considered. Dapsone is not recommended because 
of the potential for drug interactions and methemoglobinemia. 
• Patients should also receive prophylaxis for herpes simplex virus infection per NCCN  guidelines [ 77]. 
• Immunizations or vaccinations (for such things as influenza or pneumonia) are encouraged prior to study entry. Note that nasal flu vaccines should not be administered 
to patients because the nasal vaccine is a live, attenuated vaccine, whereas flu shots are 
nonviable antigens (see Section 7.5.1).  
• Prophylaxis for tumor lysis syndrome is permitted at the discretion of the treating 
physician, based on clinical characteristics.  
 
7.5.3. Cerdulatinib  and CYP3A4  
Cerdulatinib is a substrate for CYP3A4 and may also decrease expression levels of CYP3A4 
enzyme activity in patients, thus potentially augmenting the AE profile of other drugs. To avoid 
possible drug-drug interactions, strong inhibitors, CYP3A sensitive substrates, and inducers of CYP3A4 should be avoided in patients receiving cerdulatinib. An inhibitor of CYP3A4 would 
reduce the metabolism of cerdulatinib and could result in high concentrations that could cause 
AEs.  An inducer of CYP3A4 could result  in lower than  desired levels  of cerdulatinib  and lessen  
the likelihood of efficacy. Additionally, cerdulatinib can cause other medications to accumulate to levels that result in toxicity  due to lower levels of CYP3A4 being expressed. Because of this  
effect CYP3A sensitive substrates need to be considered. If the Investigator feels that use of a 
strong inhibitor or strong inducer of CYP3A4 is necessary, this should be discussed with the Sponsor’s Medical  Monitor. Appendix 3 provides a list of such CYP3A4 substrates  and strong 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  87  
  
 
inhibitors/inducers. Physicians should monitor for potential drug- drug interactions, and a dose  
adjustment (lowering) for CYP3A sensitive substrates should be considered on a case -by-case 
basis by the treating  physician. 
 
7.6. Study  Committee  
Select study participants will comprise the Study Committee (e.g., the selected Principal 
Investigators, Portola’s Medical  Monitor, Clinical Study Manager,  and/or Drug  Safety  Medical  
Monitor). Other  Portola or outside personnel may be called or consulted as  needed.  
• Phase 1:  Upon the completion of the initial 28- day treatment period (Cycle 1) for all  
patients in any cohort, the Study Committee will convene via teleconference or in person 
to review  all available DLT, AE,  and any other clinical  or laboratory  data for the patients  
in that cohort. The Study Committee will determine whether it is safe to escalate to the  
next dose level of cerdulatinib or whether the MTD or MAD has been reached. If it is  
safe to continue, the Study Committee  will determine the  next dose level to be studied. 
• Phase 2a:  The Study Committee will meet periodically to review available safety and 
efficacy data from the study.  Following the first meeting of the Study Committee,  
subsequent meetings will be held periodically as needed. Members of the Portola study team, such as representatives from Biostatistics, Drug Safety, Clinical Development, and 
Clinical Operations may participate in the meetings as needed.  Data to be evaluated may  
include (but are not limited to): deaths, other SAEs; AEs, including treatment- related  
AEs; reasons for treatment discontinuation or dose modification/ interruption, trends in laboratory evaluations, and efficacy. 
• For the combination cohort with rituximab, the Study Committee will evaluate (using the assessments as outline above) the first 3 to 6 patients who have completed Cycle 1 before 
allowing further enrollment in the cohort. Afterwards, the cohort can be evaluated with  
the rest of the other cohorts as above. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  88  
  
 
8.0 ASSESSMENT  OF EFFICACY  
 
8.1. Response  Criteria  
Response in NHL  patients  will be evaluated  using The Lugano Classification  [4]; in CLL 
patients using the Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (IWCLL) Guidelines for the 
Diagnosis and Treatment of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia [ 2]; in leukemic forms  of PTCL  
(ATLL, PLL, LGL) using disease appropriate response criteria [ 77]; and in CTCL patients using 
the modified Severity Weighted Assessment Tool (mSWAT) and other measures as appropriate [5]. Appendix 4 provides definitions and detailed descriptions of response criteria as well as 
guidance on selection of lesions for evaluation. Redacted copies of radiology reports will be sent 
to the Sponsor for review.  
 
8.2. Exploratory Efficacy  
8.2.1. Global Health  Questionnaire  
Patients will be asked to complete a Global Health Questionnaire ( Appendix 8) to assess whether  
patients feel their overall health is improving on this study. The correlation between markers of  
inflammation  with clinical response and the Global  Health Assessment will be evaluated.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  89  
  
 
9.0 PHARMACOLOGY ASSESSMENTS  
9.1. Pharmacokinetic Assays 
Plasma  samples  will be obtained  at selected  time  points (detailed  in Appendix 1) and analyzed  
for the concentration of cerdulatinib and possible metabolite identification. Sample assay for  
drug concentrations will be performed using a validated LCMS method. Details on the  
collection,  processing, storage,  and shipment of samples  are contained  in the Study 
Laboratory Manual.  
 
9.1.1. Phase  1 Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
The following PK parameters  of cerdulatinib  will be calculated  for all  patients:  
• Plasma half -life (t ½), determined by linear regression of the log concentration on the 
terminal portion of the plasma concentration- time curve.  Terminal half -life is calculated  
as ln(2)/(-β), where β is the slope of the terminal portion of the log concentration- time 
curve.  
• Time  to maximum  observed plasma  concentration  (Tmax). 
• Maximum observed plasma concentration  (Cmax). 
• Minimum observed plasma concentration (C min). 
• Area under the plasma concentration -time curve from  0 to last measurable concentration  
(AUC 0-last) computed using the linear trapezoidal rule.  
• Total area under the plasma concentration -time curve from time 0 to infinity (AUC 0-∞), 
computed as:  
AUC 0-∞ = AUC 0-last + C plast /(- β) 
 
where AUC 0-last is the area under the curve from time 0 to the time point of the last 
measurable concentration above the quantitation limit; C plast is the last measurable  
concentration  above the quantitation  limit; and β is defined as  above. 
• Clearance of cerdulatinib (CL/F).  
• Volume of distribution of cerdulatinib at steady  state (V ss/F). 
• Amount of drug excreted in urine over the sampling interval (Ae) for those patients for 
whom total volume of urine was collected.  
• Accumulation ratio, calculated by AUC 0-12 at steady -state/AUC 0-12 following the first 
dose for those patients for whom th e 12 hour sample was collected.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  90  
  
 
9.1.2. Phase  2a Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
In order to further characterize the PK of cerdulatinib (specifically, C min), plasma samples during 
the Phase 2a portion of the study will be taken pre- and post-dose at various visits during the 
study as described in  Appendix 1. 
 
The date and time  of last cerdulatinib  dose prior to  any PK assessment  should be recorded.  
 
Unscheduled plasma samples  may  also be collected  at the discretion  of the Investigator (e.g., in  
the event of an  AE) as described in  Section 7.3.2.3 . 
 
9.2. Pharmacodynamic Assays 
Serum will be obtained at various time points throughout the trial (detailed in Appendix 1) to  
determine the effects of cerdulatinib on markers of inflammation.  DNA and RNA will be  
isolated from optional tumor biopsy specimensto assess genetic mutations relevant to the disease and the mechanism  of action  of cerdulatinib (see Appendix 1 and the Study Laboratory Manual).  
• Quantification  of serum  proteins. 
• Quantitative  PCR for tumor  relevant  transcripts.  
• Hybridization of RNA to  gene arrays.  
• DNA sequencing to identify disease- relevant mutations.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  91  
  
 
10.0        ASSESSMENT OF  SAFETY  
Safety and tolerability will be monitored and determined by serial physical exams, vital signs, 
hematology and chemistry laboratory studies, and reported AEs (including deaths and other serious adverse events  [SAEs] and  treatment- emergent  AEs).  
 
10.1. Safety  Parameters  and Definitions  
Safety assessments will consist of monitoring and recording adverse events, including serious  
adverse events and pregnancies; performing protocol -specified safety laboratory assessments;  
measuring protocol-specified vital signs; and conducting other protocol- specified tests that are  
deemed  critical to the safety  evaluation of the study. 
 
Certain types of events require immediate reporting to the Syneos Safety Department, as outlined in Section 10.2.1. 
 
10.1.1. Adverse Events  
According to the ICH guideline for Good Clinical Practice, an adverse event (AE) is any 
untoward medical occurrence in a patient administered a pharmaceutical product, which may or  
may not have a causal relationship with the treatment.  An AE can be any  of the following: 
• Unfavorable and unintended sign (e.g., including an abnormal laboratory finding), 
symptom, or disease temporally  associated with  the use of the study drug, whether  or not 
it is considered to be study drug- related  
• Any newly  occurring event or exacerbation o f previous condition (e.g., increase in  
severity  or frequency) since the administration of  study drug 
• Recurrence of an  intermittent medical  condition (e.g., headache)  not present  at baseline 
• Any deterioration in a laboratory value or other clinical test (e.g., ECG, X- ray) that is  
associated with symptoms or leads to a change in study treatment or concomitant 
treatment or discontinuation from study drug.  
• AEs that are related to a protocol -mandated intervention, including those that occur prior 
to assignment of study treatment (e.g., screening invasive procedures such as biopsies). 
 
10.1.2. Serious  Adverse Event  (SAE)  
An SAE is  any AE, occurring at  any dose of any study medication,  regardless  of causality  that: 
• Is fatal  (i.e., the adverse event  actually  causes  or leads  to death).  
• Is life-threatening  (i.e., in  the opinion of the Investigator or Study Sponsor, the patient  
was at immediate risk of  death  from the  reaction as it occurred).  
• Requires  inpatient hospitalization  or prolongation of existing  hospitalization.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  92  
  
 
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity.  Disability is defined as a  
substantial disruption of a person’s ability  to conduct normal life  functions. 
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect in a neonate/infant born to a mother who was 
exposed to study drug or where the father was exposed to study drug before conception. 
Is an important medical event in the investigator's judgment (i.e., may jeopardize the 
patient or may require medical/surgical intervention to p revent one of the outcomes listed 
above). Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions 
that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.  
 
Clarification should be made between the terms “serious” and “severe,” since these terms are 
NOT synonymous. The term “severe” is often used to describe the intensity (severity) of a 
specific event (according to NCI CTCAE criteria per section 10.2.2); the event itself, however, 
may be of relatively minor medical significance.  This is NOT the same as “serious,” which is  
based on the strict regulatory  definitions listed above and serves as a guide for defining 
regulatory reporting obligations. A severe adverse event does not necessarily need to be considered serious. For example, persistent nausea of several hours duration may be considered severe nausea but not an SAE if the event does not meet the serious criteria.  On the other hand, a 
stroke resulting in only a minor degree of disability may be considered mild, but would be defined as an SAE based on the above noted serious criteria. Thus, severity and seriousness need 
to be independently assessed for  each AE  recorded  on the eCRF. 
 
10.1.3. Suspected  Unexpected  Serious  Adverse Reactions  (SUSARs)  
SUSARs are serious AEs that are both unexpected (i.e., the nature or severity is not expected from the information provided in the IB) and assessed by the Investigator or Portola Medical 
Monitor to have a reasonable possibility of a causal relationship to the investigational medical product(s). SUSARs require reporting to the Competent Authorities, and Ethics Committees within an expedited timeline (7 calendar days for fatal / life -threatening SUSARs, 15 calendar 
days for all other SUSARs).  Thus it  is required  that the Investigator complete  the SAE  form  and 
report all SAEs within 24 hours of his/her awareness of the event to the Syneos Safety Department.  Additionally, Syneos Safety Department, on behalf of Portola, will immediately 
notify the Investigator if any additional safety or toxicology information that impacts patient 
safety becomes available during the study. All SUSARs will be provided to all Investigators for 
submission to their respective IRBs per local requirements and when information that impacts  
patient safety becomes available during the study. It is the responsibility of the Investigator to  
promptly notify the IRB/Independent Ethics Com mittee (IEC) of all SUSARs involving risk to  
human patients.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  93  
  
 
10.2. Methods  and Timing  for Capturing  and Assessing  Safety  Parameters  
The investigator is responsible for ensuring that all AEs (Section 10.1.1 for definition) are 
recorded  on the Adverse Event eCRF  and reported  to the Sponsor in  accordance with  instructions 
provided in this section.  
 
For each AE recorded  on the Adverse Event eCRF,  the investigator will make an assessment  of 
seriousness (Section 10.1.2), severity  (Section 10.2.2), and causality  (Section  10.2.3).  
 
10.2.1. Adverse Event  Reporting  Period  
To comply with regulatory requirements, all SAEs, regardless of causality, that occur from the date of signing of informed consent until 30 days after the last study drug treatment (or initiation 
of the next therapeutic regimen prior to the 30 days), must be reported to Syneos Safety 
Department  within 24 hours from  Investigator awareness of  the SAE.  
 
After  informed  consent  has been obtained but  prior to initiation  of study  drug , only SAEs  
caused by  a protocol-mandated intervention (e.g., invasive procedures such as biopsies, 
discontinuation of medications)  should be reported to Syneos Safety  Department.  These 
pre-dose adverse events will be collected on the AE eCRF and assessed as not related to study 
drug, but will be assessed  for relationship  to study procedures/tests and  interventions. 
 
After initiation of study drug , all treatment emergent adverse events (TEAE), regardless of  
relationship to study drug, will be reported until 30 days after the last dose of study drug. Any  
SAE that occurs with an onset date later than 30 days after completion of the study and that the Investigator considers to be related to study medication must be reported to the Syneos Safety Department.  
 
To report any SAEs, the SAE Report Form provided to the clinical study site must be completed with the available information.  The information collected must include at minimum the  
following: patient  number, study drug(s) received,  the event  term, the  serious criteria  met for the  
AE, a narrative description of the event, and an assessment by the Investigator of the severity/intensity of the event and relationship to study drug(s).  The SAE report should be sent 
to Syneos Safety Department by email (see contact information below). Follow-up information on the SAE should be sent promptly by the Investigator to Syneos Safety Department when any additional relevant information about the SAE becomes known to the Investigator, or as requested  by Syneos Safety Department.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  94  
  
 
 
 
 
All AEs and SAEs should be monitored until they are resolved or the patient dies.  
Additionally,  the Investigator must  determine both  the severity  of the  event  and the 
relationship of the  event to study drug.  
 
10.2.2. Assessmen t of Severity  of Adverse Events  
The AE severity  grading scale for  the NCI  CTCAE (v5.0) will be  used  for assessing  AE severity. 
The table below will be used for assessing severity for AEs that are not specifically listed in the  
NCI CTCAE.  
 
 
NCI CTCAE  = National Cancer  Institute  Common  Terminology Criteria for  Adverse  Events.  
Note: Based on the most recent version of NCI CTCAE (v5.0), which can be found at:  
http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm  
a Instrumental  activities  of daily  living  refer  to preparing meals,  shopping for groceries  or 
clothes,  using  the telephone, managing money, etc.  
b Examples of self -care activities of dai ly living include bathing, dressing and undressing,  
feeding  oneself, using the toilet,  and taking  medications,  as performed  by patients  who are 
not bedridden.  
c If an event  is assessed  as a "significant medical event,"  it must be reported  as a serious  
adverse event,  per the definition  of serious  adverse  event  in Section  10.1.2.  
d Grade  4 and 5 events  must  be reported  as serious  adverse events, per the definition  of serious  
adverse event  in Section 10.1.2.  SAE  Reporting  Contact Information 
Syneos Safety Department 
 
Please
 refer  to the SAE  reporting form  for 
more  information. 

Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  95  
  
 
10.2.3. Assessment  of Causality of Adverse Events  
Investigators should use their knowledge of the patient,  the circumstances surrounding the event,  
and an evaluation of any potential alternative causes to determine whether or not an adverse 
event is considered to be related to the study drug, indicating "yes" or "no" accordingly. The 
following guidance should be taken into consideration: 
• Temporal  relationship of event onset to the initiation of study drug 
• Course of the event, considering especially the effects of  dose reduction, discontinuation 
of study drug, or reintroduction of study drug (as applicable)  
• Known  association of the event  with the study drug or with similar treatments  
• Known  association  of the event  with the disease  under study 
• Presence of risk factors in the patient or use of concomitant medications known to 
increase the occurrence of the  event  
• Presence of non -treatment -related fact ors that are known to be associated with the 
occurrence of the event  
 
 
The following categories  should be used in the causality  assessment of  adverse events:  
Related  
The AE: 
• Follows a reasonable temporal sequence from the time  of study drug administration; 
and/or 
• Follows a known response pattern to the study drug; and  
• Cannot be explained  by other factors,  such  as the subject’s  clinical  state, therapeutic  
intervention, or concomitant therapy. 
• The response to withdrawal of the drug (dechallenge) should be clinically plausible and 
the event reoccurs on rechallenge if patient is re -exposed. 
 
Probably Related  
The AE: 
• Follows a reasonable temporal sequence from the time  of study drug administration; 
and/or 
• Follows a known response pattern to the study drug; and  
• Was unlikely to have been  produced by other factors,  such  as the subject’s  clinical state,  
therapeutic intervention, or  concomitant therapy. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  96  
  
 
Possibly Related  
The AE: 
• Follows a reasonable temporal sequence from the time  of study drug administration; 
and/or 
• Follows a known response pattern to the study drug; but 
• Could have been  produced by other factors,  such  as the subject’s  clinical  state,  
therapeutic intervention, or  concomitant therapy. 
 
Unlikely  
The AE: 
• Does not follow a reasonable temporal sequence from the time of study drug 
administration; and  
• Was most likely  produced by other factors,  such  as the subject’s  clinical  state,  therapeutic 
intervention, or concomitant therapy. 
 
Unrelated  
This categ ory is applicable to  those AEs that are judged to be clearly  and incontrovertibly due 
only to extraneous causes (e.g., the patient’s clinical state, therapeutic intervention or 
concomitant therapy) and do not meet the criteria for study drug relationship listed under Probable, Possible, or Unlikely. 
 
An AE with causal relationship not initially determined will require follow -up to assign 
causality.  
 
10.2.4. Procedures  for Recording  AEs 
Investigators should use correct medical terminology/concepts when recording AEs on the Adverse Event eCRF.  Avoid colloquialisms and abbreviations. Only one AE term should be 
recorded  in the event field on the Adverse Event eCRF. 
 
All AEs spontaneously reported by the patient and/or in response to an open-ended question 
from study personnel or revealed by observation, physical examination or other diagnostic 
procedures will be  recorded on the appropriate forms in the eCRF. 
 
Only one AE term should be recorded in the event field on the Adverse Event eCRF.  When  
possible, a unifying diagnosis, or signs and symptoms indicating a common underlying 
pathology should be noted as one comprehensive event. For example, the combination of 
general malaise, mild fever, headache and rhinitis should be described as a “common cold” rather  than listing  each symptom separately.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  97  
  
 
10.2.4.1. Diagnosis versus  Signs  and Symptoms  
A diagnosis (if known) should be recorded on the Adverse Event eCRF rather than individual 
signs and symptoms (e.g., record only liver failure or hepatitis rather than jaundice, asterixis, and elevated transaminases; record Tumor Lysis Syndrome rather than hypocalcemia, hyperkalemia, 
hyperuricemia, etc.). However, if a constellation of signs and/or symptoms cannot be medically 
characterized as a single diagnosis or syndrome at the time of reporting, each individual event should be recorded on the Adverse Event eCRF. If a diagnosis is subsequently established, all previously reported AEs based on signs and symptoms should be nullified and replaced by one 
AE report based on the single diagnosis, with a starting date that corresponds to the starting date 
of the first symptom of the  eventual diagnosis. 
 
10.2.4.2. Adverse Events  that are Secondary to Other  Events  
In general, AEs that are secondary to other events (e.g., cascade events or clinical sequelae)  
should be identified by their primary cause, with the exception of severe or serious secondary events.  A medically  significant secondary  AE that is separated  in time  from  the initiating  event  
should be recorded  as an independent event on the Adverse Event eCRF.  For example:  
• If vomiting  results  in mild  dehydration with  no additional treatment  in a healthy adult, 
only vomiting  should be reported on the eCRF  
• If vomiting  results  in severe dehydration, both events  should be reported  separately  on 
the eCRF  
• If a severe gastrointestinal hemorrhage leads  to renal  failure,  both events  should be 
reported  separately  on the eCRF  
• If dizziness  leads  to a fall and consequent fracture,  all three  events  should be reported  
separately  on the eCRF  
• If neutropenia is accompanied by an infection, both events should be reported separately 
on the eCRF  
 
All AEs should be recorded  separately  on the Adverse Event  eCRF  if it is unclear  as to whether  
the events are associated.  
 
10.2.4.3. Persistent  or Recurrent  Adverse Events  
A persistent  AE is one that extends continuously, without resolution, between  patient  evaluation  
time points.  Such events should only be recorded once on the Adverse Event eCRF with the  
severity  (intensity  or grade) of the events recorded at the time the  event is  first reported.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  98  
  
 
A recurrent AE is one that resolves between patient evaluation time points and subsequently 
recurs, or  notes a change in severity or seriousness. Each recurrence of an AE should be 
recorded  as a separate event on  the Adverse Event eCRF.  For example:  
• If Grade 1 vomiting has worsened to Grade 2 five days after onset, the Grade 1 vomiting 
is resolved on the date when this severity changed, and Grade 2 vomiting is recorded as a 
new event on the eCRF with onset date reflecting the change  in severity.  
• If non -serious event of neutropenia required hospitalization five days after onset, the 
event  is resolved  on the hospitalization  date,  and a new SAE  of neutropenia is  recorded  
on the eCRF  with start date reflecting  when the event required hospitalization. 
 
10.2.4.4. Abnormal Laboratory Values  
Not every  laboratory  abnormality  qualifies  as an  AE. A laboratory test result must be reported as  
an AE if it meets any  of the following criteria:  
• Is accompanied  by clinical symptoms 
• Results  in a change in study treatment  (e.g., dosage modification,  treatment  interruption, 
or treatment discontinuation) 
• Results  in a medical  intervention (e.g., potassium supplementation for hypokalemia) or a 
change in concomitant therapy 
• Is clinically  significant in the investigator’s in the investigator’s judgment 
○ Note:  For oncology trials, certain abnormal values may  not qualify as AEs.  
 
It is the investigator’s responsibility to review all laboratory findings. Medical and scientific  
judgment should be exercised in deciding  whether an isolated laboratory abnormality  should be 
classified  as an  AE. 
 
If a clinically  significant laboratory abnormality  is a sign of a disease or syndrome (e.g., alkaline  
phosphatase and bilirubin 5 × ULN associated with  cholestasis), only the diagnosis 
(i.e., cholestasis)  should be recorded  on the Adverse  Event eCRF.  
 
10.2.4.5. Abnormal Vital Sign Values  
Not every vital sign abnormality qualifies as an AE.  A vital sign result must be reported as an 
AE if  it meets any  of the following criteria:  
• Is accompanied  by clinical symptoms 
• Results  in a change in study  treatment  (e.g., dosage modification,  treatment  interruption, 
or treatment discontinuation) 
• Results  in a medical  intervention or a change in concomitant therapy  
• Is clinically  significant in the investigator’s judgment 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  99  
  
 
It is the investigator’s responsibility to review all vital sign findings. Medical and scientific  
judgment should be exercised in deciding whether an isolated vital sign abnormality should be 
classified  as an  AE. 
 
If a clinically  significant vital sign abnormality  is a sign of a  disease or syndrome (e.g., high 
blood pressure), only the diagnosis (i.e., hypertension) should be recorded on the Adverse Event eCRF.  
 
Observations of the same clinically significant vital sign abnormality from visit to visit should  
only be recorded once on the Adverse Event eCRF (Section 10.2.4.3 provides details on recording persistent AEs).  
 
10.2.4.6. Abnormal Liver  Function  Tests  
The finding of an elevated ALT or AST (> 3 × baseline value) in combination with either an elevated  total bilirubin  (> 2 × ULN)  or clinical jaundice  in the absence of cholestasis or other 
causes  of hyperbilirubinemia is  considered to be an indicator of severe liver injury. 
Therefore,  investigators  must report  as an AE the occurrence of either  of the following: 
• Treatment -emergent  ALT o r AST  > 3 × baseline  value in combination with total bilirubin  
> 2 × ULN (of which ≥ 35% is direct bilirubin)  
• Treatment -emergent ALT or AST > 3 × baseline value in combination with 
clinical  jaundice 
 
The most appropriate diagnosis or (if a diagnosis cannot be established) the abnormal laboratory values should be recorded on the Adverse Event eCRF and reported to the Sponsor immediately  
(i.e., no more than 24 hours after learning  of the event). 
 
10.2.4.7. Deaths  
Death should be considered an outcome and not a distinct event. All deaths (including deaths due to progression of the underlying malignancy) that occur during the protocol- defined adverse  
event period should be reported as SAEs, regardless of attribution to study drug. The event or 
condition th at caused or  contributed to the fatal  outcome should be recorded  as the single 
medical concept (e.g., respiratory failure) with a fatal outcome. When the event that led to death  
cannot be identified (e.g., sudden death of unknown origin) report “sudden death”  as the adverse  
event and update it when new information clarifies the event that led to death. Only one AE can be reported with a fatal outcome for each patient who dies. Other AEs that continued up to time of death should be reported with an outcome of not recovered/resolved. In the event that the death is attributed solely to progression of the underlying malignancy, the AE term should be 
reported  as “Disease Progression.” 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  100  
  
 
10.2.4.8. Lack  of Efficacy or Worsening  of Underlying  Malignan cy 
Events that are clearly consistent with the expected pattern of progression of the underlying 
disease should not be recorded as AEs (except deaths; see Section 10.2.4.7).  Example: a patient  
with disease progression documented by metastatis/new tumors in the liver also has concurrent 
increases in transaminases.  Every effort should be made to document progression through use of 
objective criteria.  If there is any uncertainty as to whether a change in the patients condition, is 
due to disease progression, it should be reported as an AE. Example:  a patient with disease 
progression documented by metastatis/new tumors in the liver also has concurrent new onset 
kidney failure  (scan does not reveal kidney metastas is). 
 
10.2.4.9. Preexisting  Medical  Conditions 
A preexisting medical condition should be recorded as an AE only if the frequency, severity, or 
character of the condition worsens during the study. When recording such events on the Adverse 
Event eCRF, it is important to convey the concept that the preexisting condition has changed by 
including applicable descriptors (e.g., "more  frequent  headaches").  
 
10.2.4.10. Hospitalization  or Prolonged Hospitalization  
The following hospitalizations  are not considered SAEs  in this clinical  trial: 
• Admissions per protocol for a planned medical/surgical procedure. Planned hospital  
admissions or planned surgical  procedures  for an illness  or disease that existed  before  the 
patient was enrolled in the trial or before study drug was given are not to be considered 
AEs, unless they occur at a time other than the planned date for a reason such as a 
worsening of the underlying disease/illness/symptoms.  
• Routine health assessment requiring admission for baseline/trending of health status (e.g., routine colonoscopy). 
• Medical/surgical  admission  for purpose other than remedying ill health  state  and was 
planned prior to entry into the study.  Appropriate documentation is required in 
these cases.  
• Admission  encountered  for another life circumstance that carries  no bearing  on health 
status and requires no medical/surgical intervention (e.g., lack of housing, economic inadequacy, care -giver respite, family  circumstances, administrative).  
 
10.2.4.11. Adverse Events  Associated  with an  Overdose or  Error in  Drug  Administration  
Overdose is defined as  any dose in excess  of the assigned dose of cerdulatinib  greater  than or 
equal  to 90 mg total dose in one day or greater  than 375 mg/m2 of rituximab per day. 
All overdoses meeting  the above criteria  must be recorded  as an AE (Verbatim  term  = accidental  
overdose) on the eCRF. All overdoses must be reported to the Syneos Safety Department within  
24 hours of awareness  including information for dose received vs.  dose assigned, and treatment  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  101  
  
 
given to the patient whether or not there are any  signs or symptoms.  Any signs or symptoms 
resulting from an overdose must also be recorded as an AE on the eCRF and reported on the  
SAE  form (medically  important event) as separate adverse event(s) (see Section  10.2).  
 
Any dose that exceeds the assigned dose of cerdulatinib but is less than the 90 mg total dose in 
one day threshold for Overdose should be reported  to the Sponsor Medical Monitor and  captured  
appropriately in the Cerdulatinib Administration eCRF.  
 
All other significant dosing or medication  errors  that may  not meet  AE criteria (e.g., inadvertent 
dosing of non-study subject) should be reported to  the Syneos Safety  Department within  
24 hours of awareness.  
 
10.2.4.12. Adverse Events  in Individuals Not Enrolled  in the Study  
If an AE inadvertently occurs in an individual not enrolled in the study (e.g., during 
administration of study drug), the Adverse Event Form provided to investigators should be 
completed  and submitted  to Syneos SafetyDepartment, by scanning and emailing  the form  using 
the email address provided to investigators. 
 
10.2.4.13. Pregnancy Exposure and Birth Events  
If a female study patient becomes pregnant during study drug administration or within 16 weeks after date of  last dose,  the Investigator should be informed immediately  and study treatment  must 
be discontinued if not already terminated. The Investigator must urgently email a completed  
Pregnancy  Form to Syneos Safety  Department (Section 10.2).  
 
If a female partner of a male study patient is pregnant or suspects she is pregnant by the male 
study patient (between study drug administration and up to 16 weeks after the termination visit), 
the Investigator should be informed immediately. The Investigator must advise the male patient 
to have his female partner inform her treating physician immediately, and the Investigator must urgently email a  completed Pregnancy  Report Form to Syneos Safety D epartment.  
 
In all cases, the pregnancy must be followed up through delivery or other fetal outcome. Newborns should be monitored until at least 8 weeks of age for any potential congenital 
anomalies.  The Investigator should promptly report any abnormal fetal outcome (i.e., congenital 
anomaly or birth defect, spontaneous or therapeutic abortion, stillbirth, pre-mature birth or 
outcome other than live normal birth) on an SAE form. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  102  
  
 
11.0 STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  AND DATA ANALYSIS  
 
11.1. General  Considerations 
It is anticipated  that all statistical summaries  will be performed  using SAS software  Version  9.3 
(SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC, USA) or higher. Additional software may be used for the 
production of graphics. 
 
11.1.1. Analysis Populations 
The safety analysis population will consist of all patients treated with at least 1 dose of study  
medication  (cerdulatinib). Safety  data will be summarized  by dose level, based  on the original 
assigned  dose of study drug. 
 
The efficacy analysis  population for the primary and secondary efficacy endpoints will consist of 
all patients who have taken at  least  1 dose of study medication  and have had at least 1  
post- baseline tumor assessment.  Efficacy will be summarized separately for Phase 1 and 2a, and  
within  Phase 2a, efficacy  will be  summarized by  cohort and dose level.  
 
The PK and PD analysis populations will consist of all patients who have received the requisite treatments and have data at the required time points.  Any windows for timing of measurements,  
etc., will be  specified in the SAP.  
 
11.1.2. Cohort Comparability 
Baseline and demographic characteristics will be summarized for Phase 2a by dose cohort and 
overall.  No formal statistical analyses of these data are planned, but descriptive statistics may be 
used to aid in interpreting  results.  
 
11.1.3. Efficacy  Endpoints  and Analyses 
Responses will be summarized with patients classified as CR, PR, SD, PD, or not evaluable. 
The overall response rate (CR+PR) and clinical benefit rate (CR+PR+SD) will be summarized  
along with 2 -sided exact 95% confidence intervals.  Responses will be  based  on CT  or CT/PET,  
evaluated  per IWG  Criteria  [3] for patients with  lymphoma and on peripheral  lymphocyte counts 
and bone marrow biopsy results for patients with CLL [ 2]. Listings of tumor response for each 
patient will also be provided. Responses will be summarized separately for each dose level in  
Phase 1 and for each  cohort and dose level  in Phase  2a. Due to differences  in underlying disease 
and prior treatment, response rates considered clinically significant and that would prompt further study will depend on the cohort. Such summaries will also depend on the safety and 
tolerability profile observed. While it is anticipated that a 30 to 40% response rate in a future 
study will be  sufficient to support further investigation, no criteria for success in this study 
are specified.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  103  
  
 
In addition to  the tumor response rates  described above, the following efficacy  endpoints will be 
assessed  (defined in Table 3  and reproduced below): 
• DOR (duration of response) – defined as the time from the first documentation of PR or 
CR to the earlier  of the first documentation of disease progression or death  from  
any cause.  
• PFS (progression- free survival) – defined as the time from the start of cerdulatinib  
treatment  to the earlier  of the first  documentation of disease progression or death  from  
any cause.  
• LNR (lymp h node response) – defined as the proportion of patients who achieve a ≥ 50% 
decrease from baseline in the sum of the products of the greatest perpendicular diameters  
(SPD)  of index lymph nodes. 
• TTR (time -to-treatment response) – defined as the time from the start of cerdulatinib  
treatment  to the first documentation of CR or PR.  
 
11.1.4. Pharmacokinetic Analyses,  Phase  1 and 2a 
Pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters (described in Section 9.1.1 and Section 9.1.2) will be  
calculated  for each patient  and summarized  for patients  with  sufficient  samples  available.  
During Phase 2a, plasma samples will be  taken  as described  in Appendix 1.  
 
11.1.5. Pharmacodynamic Analyses, Phase  1 and 2a 
A number of PD parameters will be measured serially as described in Section 9.2. At each  
time point, each of these parameters will be summarized by dose level.  In addition, the 
parameters over time will be plotted for each patient and dose cohort. No formal statistical 
analyses  are planned. 
 
11.1.6. Safety  Analyses, Phase 1  and 2a 
The primary safety endpoint is the incidence of Grade 3 or higher clinically significant toxicity 
by dose level,  and the secondary safety  endpoints are as  follows: 
• Adverse event  profile (classified  by NCI-CTCAE v5.0). 
• Clinically  significant changes in vital signs, physical exams by dose level.  
• Changes in hematology and chemistry laboratory parameters by  dose level.  
 
The incidence of Grade 3 or higher clinically significant toxicity will be summarized and listed  
by dose cohort for Phase 1. 
 
Adverse events (AEs) will be graded according to the NCI-CTCAE v4.0 (Phase 1) and 
NCI_CTCAE v5.0 (Phase 2a)  and coded  according  to the latest  MedDRA  version available at 
the time  of database creation.  The number and percent of patients  with any AE will be  presented  
by System Organ  Class  (SOC) and  preferred term  for each cohort will be summarized  by dose 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  104  
  
 
cohort for Phase 1 and by Cohort for Phase 2a.  An additional summary will include  all patients  
who received the dose used in Phase 2a.  
 
Vital signs, laboratory parameters, and ECG intervals will be summarized and listed by time  
point for each dose cohort for Phase 1 and by Cohort for Phase  2a. No formal  statistical analyses  
are planned. 
 
11.2. Sample  Size Considerations 
11.2.1. Phase  1 Sample  Size 
The sample size is based on clinical judgment and is typical of studies of this type. 43 patients 
were dosed with cerdulatinib.  The Phase 1 portion of the study is closed  to enrollment.  
 
11.2.2. Phase  2a Sample  Size 
Each of the 6 cohorts will consist of approximately 20 to 50 patients with relapsed or refractory 
disease.  Initial enrollment into  any cohort will be up to  20 patients; cohorts may be expanded  to 
40 to 50 evaluable patients.  A total of approximately 240 patients are planned. If fewer than 2  
responses are seen in the first 20 patients, enrollment in the cohort will be closed, as the upper bound (UB) of the 95% confidence interval would be approximately 25%. If 2 or more  
responses are seen, the cohort may be expanded. 
 
Patients in Cohorts 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6 will receive single-agent cerdulatinib. Patients in the  
Cohort 2 will receive cerdulatinib in  combination with rituximab.  The composition of each  
cohort is described in  Table 6 . 
 
11.3. Missing  Data  
No imputation of missing data will be performed.  Patients who do not have sufficient 
information  for evaluation of response will be listed with  the reason  for missing  response, and  
the count will be summarized.  
 
11.4. Multiplicity  
With multiple doses investigated in Phase 1 and multiple cohorts investigated in Phase 2a, there is an inflated chance of making an incorrect conclusion from this study. No adjustments will be 
made to the efficacy summaries in Phase 1 or to the safety summaries in Phase 2a to account for  
multiplicity.  If 6 cohorts are assessed in Phase 2a, the difference between the observed rate and  
the underlying population rate will be  biased if only the cohort with the  observed rate most above 
an expected rate is considered. This will be  informally  considered when evaluating the data.  
 
11.5. Data  Safety  Monitoring  
There will be no formal DSMB for this trial.  The composition of the Study Committee and its 
functions are specified in  Section 7.6. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  105  
  
 
12.0 INVESTIGATOR AND  SPONSOR  OBLIGATIONS  
 
12.1. Documentation Required  for Study  Initiation  
Before initiation of the study, the Investigator must provide the following documentation 
required by FDA regulations, including but not limited to, (copies of which must be maintained by the Investigator): 
1. FDA  Form  1572. 
2. Curriculum vitae  of the Investigator. 
3. A signed copy of the IRB or Ethics  Committee  approval notice for protocol and informed 
consent. 
4. A copy of the IRB or Ethics Committee  approved informed consent. 
5. Completed  financial  disclosure form  for the Investigator. 
 
12.2. Data  Reporting  and Case  Report  Forms  (CRF)  
eCRFs are to be completed using a Sponsor- designated EDC system.  Sites will receive training  
and have access to help text for appropriate eCRF completion. eCRFs will be submitted  
electronically to the Sponsor and should be handled in accordance with instructions from the 
Sponsor. Data entered into an eCRF will be processed in a US 21 CFR Part 11-compliant 
system.  
 
All eCRFs should be completed by designated, trained site staff. It is the Investigator’s  
responsibility  to ensure the accuracy,  completeness,  legibility,  and timeliness  of the da ta reported  
on the subject’s eCRF. Source documentation supporting the eCRF data should indicate the 
patient’s participation in the study and should document the dates and details of study procedures, AEs,  and patient’s clinical status.  
 
The Investigator or designated  representative should complete  the eCRF  as soon as  possible after 
information is collected, preferably on the same day that a study patient is seen for an examination, treatment, or any other study procedure. Any outstanding entries must be completed immediately after the final examination.  eCRFs should be reviewed and 
electronically  verified, signed, and dated by the Investigator or designee. 
 
12.3. Deviation from  the Protocol 
The Investigator should not deviate from  the protocol. In medical  emergencies,  the Investigator 
will use medical judgment and will remove the patient from immediate hazard, then notify the  
Sponsor’s MM, the Safety Monitor, and the IRB immediately regarding the type of emergency 
and course of action taken. Any action in this  regard will be recorded on the appropriate CRF. 
The Sponsor will not assume any  responsibility  or liability  for any  deviation or change from  
the protocol. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  106  
  
 
12.4. Study  Monitoring  
Before an investigational site can enter a patient into the stu dy, a representative of Portola will 
visit the investigational study site to perform the  following: 
• Determine  the adequacy  of the facilities.  
• Discuss with the Investigator(s) and other personnel their responsibilities with regard to 
protocol adherence, and the responsibilities of Portola or its representatives. This will be  
documented in  a Clinical  Study Agreement between  Portola and the Investigator. 
 
During the study, a monitor from Portola or representative will have  regular  contacts  with  the 
investigational site, for the  following: 
• Provide information  and support  to the Investigator(s). 
• Confirm  that facilities  remain  acceptable.  
• Confirm that the investigational team is adhering to the protocol, that data are being 
accurately recorded in the case report forms, and that investigational product 
accountability  checks are  being performed. 
• Perform source data verification.  This includes a comparison of the data in the case 
report forms with the patient’s medical records at the hospital or practice, and other records relevant  to the study. This will require  direct  access  to all original records for  
each patient (e.g., clinic charts).  
• Record and report any protocol deviations not previously sent to  Portola. 
• Confirm AEs and SAEs have been properly documented on CRFs and confirm any  SAEs  
have been forwarded to Portola and those SAEs that met criteria for reporting have been forwa rded to the IRB.  
 
The monitor will be available between  visits if  the Investigator(s) or other staff  needs 
information  or advice.  
 
12.5. Audits  and Inspections  
Authorized representatives of Portola, a regulatory agency, an Independent Ethics Committee or 
an Institutional Review Board may visit the site to perform audits or inspections, including source data verification.  The purpose of a Portola audit or inspecti on is to systematically and  
independently examine all study- related activities and documents to determine whether these 
activities were conducted, and data were recorded, analyzed, and accurately reported according  
to the protocol, International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) Guideline for Good Clinical Practice, and any applicable regulatory requirements. The Investigator should contact Portola immediately  if contacted  by a regulatory agency  about an inspection. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  107  
  
 
12.6. Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB) or  Independent  Ethics  Committee  (IEC) 
The Investigator must obtain IRB/IEC approval for the investigation. Initial IRB/IEC approval,  
and all materials approved by the IRB/IEC for this study including the patient consent form and 
recruitment  materials  must be maintained  by the Investigator and  made available  for inspection. 
 
12.7. Drug  Accountability  
The Investigator must maintain accurate records of the amounts and dates study drug was received from Portola and dispensed to the patients. All drug supplies must be accounted for 
during the study and at the termination of the study and a written explanation provided for any 
discrepancies.  All partially used or unused drug supplies will be destroyed at the site in 
accordance with site standard operatin g procedures approved by Portola or returned to Portola 
(or designated depot) after written authorization is obtained. The Investigator will maintain a  
record  of the amount, reason and dates  when unused supplies were either  destroyed  or returned  
to Portola .  All records will be retained as noted in  Section 15.2. 
 
12.8. Disclosure of Data  
Individual patient medical information obtained as a result of this study is considered confidential and disclosure to third parties other than those noted below is prohibited. Patient  
confidentiality will be further assured by utilizing patient identification code numbers to  
correspond to treatment data in the computer files. The study personnel, employees of the regulatory agencies, including the FDA and the study Sponsor, Portola, and its agents and representatives will need to review patient medical records in order to accurately record  
information  for this study. If results  of this  study are reported  in medical  journals or at  meetings,  
the patient’s identity  will remain confidential.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  108  
  
 
13.0 QUALITY CONTROL  AND ASSURANCE  
To ensure compliance with Good Clinical Practice and  all applicable regulatory requirements,  
Portola may conduct a quality assurance audit. Please see Section 12.5 for more details  
regarding the audit process. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  109  
  
 
14.0 ETHICS  
 
14.1. Ethics  Review  
The final study protocol, including the final version of the Informed Consent Form, must be 
approved or given a favorable opinion in writing by an IRB or IEC as appropriate. The  
Investigator must submit written approval to Portola before he or she can enroll any 
patient/patient into the study. 
 
The Investigator is responsible for informing the IRB or IEC of any amendment to the protocol 
in accordance with local requirements.  In addition, the IRB or IEC must approve all advertising 
used to recruit  patients for  the study. The protocol must be re-approved by the IRB  or IEC upon 
receipt  of amendments and annually, as local regulations require.  
 
The Investigator is also responsible for providing the IRB with reports of any reportable serious  
adverse drug reactions from any other study conducted with the investigational product. Portola will provide this information to the Investigator. 
 
Progress  reports  and notifications of serious adverse drug reactions  will be provided to  the IRB 
or IEC according to local  regulations and guidelines. 
 
14.2. Ethical  Conduct  of the  Study  
The study will be performed in accordance with ethical principles that have their origin in the  
Declaration of Helsinki and are consistent with ICH Guideline for Good Clinical Practice, applicable regulatory requirements and the Portola’s policy on Bioethics. 
 
14.3. Written  Informed  Consent  
The Investigator(s) at  each  center  will ensure that the patient  is given full and  adequate oral and  
written information about the nature, purpose, possible risk and benefit of the study. Patients  
must also be notified that they are free to discontinue from the study at any time. The patient  
should be given the opportunity to ask questions and allowed time to consider the information provided. 
 
The patient’s signed and dated informed consent must be obtained before conducting any study 
procedures.  
 
The Investigator(s) must maintain the original, signed Informed Consent Form. A copy of the 
signed Informed Consent Form  must be given to the patient.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  110  
  
 
15.0 DATA HANDLING  AND RECORD RETENTION  
 
15.1. Inspection  of Records  
Portola will be allowed to conduct site visits to the investigation facilities for the purpose of  
monitoring any aspect of the study. The Investigator agrees to allow the monitor to inspect the 
drug storage area, study drug stocks, drug accountability records, patient charts and study source 
documents, and other records relative to study conduct. 
 
15.2. Retention  of Records  
The Investigator must maintain all documentation relating  to the study for a period of 2 years  
after the last marketing application approval, or if not approved 2 years following the discontinuance of the test article for investigation. If it becomes necessary for Portola or the 
regulatory agency to review any documentation relating to the study, the Investigator must permit access to such records.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  111  
  
 
16.0 PUBLICATION POLICY 
The results  of this study may be published or presented at  scientific  meetings.  If this is foreseen,  
the Investigator agrees to submit all manuscripts or abstracts to the Sponsor prior to submission. 
This allows the Sponsor to protect proprietary information and to provide comments based on 
information  from other studies that may  not yet be available to  the Investigator. 
 
The Sponsor will comply with the  requirements  for publication of study results.  In accordance 
with standard editorial and ethical practice, the Sponsor will generally support publication of 
multicenter studies only in their entirety and not as individual center data. In this case, a 
Coordinating Investigator will be designated by mutual agreement.  
 
Authorship will be determined  by mutual agreement  and in line  with International Committee  of 
Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) authorship requirements. Any formal publication of the study in which contribution of Sponsor personnel exceeded that of conventional monitoring will be 
considered  as a joint publication by the Investigator and the appropriate Sponsor personnel. 
 
Any inventions and resulting patents, improvements, and/or know-how originating from the use of data from this study will become and remain the exclusive and unburdened property of the 
Sponsor, except where agreed otherwise.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  112  
  
 
17.0 LIST  OF REFERENCES  
1. Coffey  G, et al., The Novel  Kinase Inhibitor PRT062070 (Cerdulatinib) Demonstrates 
Efficacy in Models of Autoimmunity and B -Cell Cancer. J Pharmacol Exp Ther, 2014. 
351: p. 538–548. 
2. Hallek  M, Cheson BD, and Catovsky D, Guidelines  for the diagnosis and treatment of 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a report from the InternationalWorkshop on Chronic 
Lymphocytic Leukemia updating the National Cancer Institute–Working Group 1996 guidelines. Blood, 2008. 111: p. 5446-5456. 
3. Cheson, B., Pfistner  B, Juweid  ME,  Gascoyne,  RD,  Specht  L, Horning SJ, Coifferier B,  
Fisher RI, Hagenbeek A, Zucca E, Rosen ST, Stroobants, S, Lister TA, Hoppe RT, Dreling M, Tobinai K, Vose JM, Connors JM, Federico M, Diehl V., Revised Response 
Criteria  for Malignant Lymphoma. J Clin Oncol, 2007. 25(5): p. 579-586. 
4. Cheson, B., et al., Recommendations for Initial Evaluation, Staging, and Response 
Assessment of Hodgkin and Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma: The Lugano Classification. J Clin  
Oncol, 2014. 32(27): p. 3059-3067. 
5. Olsen,  E.A., et  al., Clinical End Points and Response Criteria  in Mycosis  Fungoides and 
Se´zary Syndrome: A Consensus Statement of the International Society for Cutaneous 
Lymphomas, the United States Cutaneous Lymphoma Consortium, and the Cutaneous 
Lymphoma Task Force of the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer.  J Clin O ncol, 2011. 29(18): p. 2598-2607. 
6. Le Tourneau, C., J.J.  Lee,  and L.L.  Siu, Dose  Escalation Methods in  Phase I Cancer  
Clinical Trials.  J Natl Cancer  Inst, 2009. 101: p. 708-720. 
7. Rinaldi, A., et al., Genomic and expression profiling identifies the B- cell associated  
tyrosine kinase Syk as a possible therapeutic target in mantle cell lymphoma. Br J  
Haematol,  2005. 132(3):  p. 303-16. 
8. Leseux, L., et al., Syk-dependent mTOR activation in follicular lymphoma cells. Blood, 
2006. 108(13): p. 4156-62. 
9. Gurura jan, M., C.D. Jennings, and S. Bondada, Cutting edge: constitutive B cell receptor  
signaling is critical for basal growth of B lymphoma. J Immunol, 2006. 176(10): p. 5715- 9. 
10. Wilson, W.H., et al., The Bruton's Tyrosine Kinase (BTK) Inhibitor, Ibrutinib (PCI- 
32765), Has Preferential Activity in the ABC Subtype of Relapsed/Refractory De Novo 
Diffuse  Large B- Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL): Interim  Results  of a Multicenter,  Open -Label, 
Phase 2 Study , in American  Society Hematology . 2012, Blood: Atlanta  Geo rga. 
11. Quiroga, M.P., et  al., B-cell antigen receptor  signaling enhances chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia cell migration and survival: specific targeting with a novel spleen tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor, R406. Blood, 2009. 114(5): p. 1029-37. 
12. Mahadevan, D., et al., Gene Expression and Serum Cytokine Profiling of Low Stage CLL Id
entify WNT/PCP, Flt- 3L/Flt- 3 and CXCL9/CXCR3 as Regulators of Cell Proliferation, 
Survival and Migration. Hum  Genomics Proteomics, 2009. 2009: p. 453634. 
13. Jewell, A.P., et al., Interferon -alpha up- regulates bcl -2 expression and protects B- CLL 
cells from apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. Br  J Haematol,  1994. 88(2): p.  268-74. 
14. Panayiotidis, P., et al., Interleukin -4 inhibits apoptotic cell death and loss of the bcl-2 
protein in B- chronic lymphocytic leukaemia cells in vitro. Br J Haematol, 1993. 85(3): p.  
439-45. 
15. Castejon,  R., et  al., Modulation of apoptosis by cytokines  in B-cell chronic lymphocytic  
leukemia.  Cytometry, 1999. 38(5): p. 224-30. 
16. Steele,  A.J., et  al., The JAK3 -selective inhibitor PF- 956980 reverses  the resistance  to 
cytotoxic agents induced by interleukin- 4 treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia  
cells: potential for reversal of cytoprotection by the microenvironment. Blood, 2010. 116(22):  p. 4569-77. 
17. Flinn, I.W., et al., Phase 1 open-label dose escalation study of the dual SYK/JAK 
inhibitor cerdulatinib (PRT062070) in patients with  relapsed/refractory B- cell 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  113  
  
 
malignancies: Safety profile and clinical activity. J Clin Oncol, 2015. 33(suppl; abstr 
8531). 
18. Hamlin, P.A., et.al., Clinical and Correlative Results of a Phase 1 Study of Cerdulatinib (PRT062070) a Dual SYK/JAK Inhibitor in Patients with Relapsed/Refractory B Cell  
Malignancies. Blood, 2015. 126(23): p. 3929-3929. 
19. Zelenetz, A.D., et al., NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Non -Hodgkin's 
Lymphomas. National Comprehensive Cancer Network,  2015. March  3, 2015. 
20. Friedberg JW, S.J., Sweetenham J, et al. , Inhibition of Syk with fostamatinib disodium 
has significant clinical activity in non -Hodgkin lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia.  Blood, 2010. 115(13): p. 2578-2585. 
21. Byrd, J.C., Barrientos J.C., Devereux S., Brown J.R., Kay N.E., Reddy N.M., O'Br ien 
S.M., Kipps T.J., Furman R.R., Schuster  S.J., Bloor  A., Gill D.S., Thornton P., Dearden  
C.E., Jäger U., Barker C., Lin J., Kunkel L.A., James D.F., Hillmen P. , A randomized, multicenter, open-label, phase III study of the Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor 
ibrutinib (PCI- 32765) versus ofatumumab in patients (pts) with relapsed or refractory  
(RR) chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)/small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL): 
RESONATE.  J Clin Oncol, 2013. 31(15 Suppl): p. 1. 
22. Byrd, J.C., Furman RR, Coutre SE, Flinn IW, Burger JA, , Targeting BTK with Ibrutinib 
in Relapsed Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia.  NEJM,  2013. 369: p. 32-42. 
23. Hoellenriegel, J., et al., The phosphoinositide 3' -kinase delta inhibitor, CAL-101, inhibits 
B-cell receptor signaling and chemokine networks in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood, 2011. 118(13): p. 3603-12. 
24. Martelli, M., et al., Diffuse large B -cell lymphoma. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol, 2013. 87: p. 
146-171. 
25. Salaverria,  I. and R. Siebert,  Follicular  lymphoma grade 3B. Best  Practice & Research  
Clinical Haematology, 2011. 24: p. 111-119. 
26. Casulo, C., B.  W.R., and  Friedberg  JW, Transformed follicular  non-Hodgkin lymphoma. 
Blood, 2015. 125(1): p.  40-47. 
27. Johnson, N.A.,  et al., Concurrent Expression  of MYC  and BCL2 in  Diffuse  Large B- Cell 
Lymphoma Treated With Rituximab Plus Cyclophosphamide, Doxorubicin, Vincristine, and Prednisone. J Clin Oncol, 2012. 30: p. 3452-3459. 
28. Hamadani,  M., et.  al., How  we approach patient evaluation for hematopoietic stem  cell 
transplantation. Bone Marrow  Transplant, 2010(45): p. 1259-1268. 
29. AbbVie,  U.S. FDA  Approves IMBRUVICA®  (ibrutinib) as First  Treatment  Specifically  
Indicated for Relapsed/Refractory Marginal Zone Lymphoma (MZL) - a Rare Type of  
Non- Hodgkin's Lymphoma. 2017: https://news.abbvie.com/news/us- fda-approves- 
imbruvica- ibrutinib -as-first-treatment -specifically -indicated -for-relapsedrefractory - 
marginal -zone-lymphoma- mzl--rare-type-non-hodgkins-lymphoma.htm. 
30. Wang, M.L., et al., Targeting BTK with Ibrutinib in Relapsed or Refractory Mantle- Cel
 l 
Lymphoma. N Engl J Med, 2013. 369(6): p. 507-16. 
31. Vaidyanathan, G. and M.S. Czuczman, Follicular Lymphoma Grade 3: Review and Updates. Clinical Lymphoma, Myeloma &  Leukemia,  2014. 14(6):  p. 431-435. 
32. Dotan, E., C. Aggarwal, and M.R. Smith, Impact of Rituximab (Rituxan) on the Treatment of B- Cell Non -Hodgkin’s Lymphoma. Pharmacy & Therapeutics, 2010. 35(3):  
p. 148-157. 
33. Held, G., V. Poschel, and M. Pfreundschuh, Rituximab for the treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther,  2006. 6(8): p.  1176-1186. 
34. RITUXAN® (rituximab) injection, [package insert]. South San Francisco, CA: 
Genentech,  Inc., 2014. 
35. Stilgenbauer, S., R.R. Furman, and C.S. Zent,  Management of Chronic Lymphocytic 
Leukemia.  2015 ASCO EDUCATIONAL  BOOK,  2015: p. 164-175. 
36. Treon, S.P., et al., Extended  rituximab  therapy in Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia. 
Ann Oncol, 2005. 16: p. 132-138. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  114  
  
 
37. Feugier,  P., A review  of rituximab, the first  anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody used in the 
treatment  of B non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. Future Oncol, 2015. 11(9):  p. 1327-1342. 
38. O'Connor, O.A., et al., Changing the Paradigms of Treatment in Peripheral T- cell 
Lymphoma: From Biology to Clinical Practice. Clin Cancer Res, 2014. 20(20): p. 5240- 
5254. 
39. Foss,  F.M., et  al., Peripheral T- cell lymphoma. Blood, 2011. 117(25):  p. 6756-6767. 
40. Feldman, A.L., et al., Overexpression of Syk tyros ine kinase in peripheral T- cell 
lymphomas. Leukemia, 2008. 22: p. 1139-1143. 
41. de Leval, L. and P. Gaulard, Tricky and Terrible T -Cell Tumors: These are Thrilling 
Times for Testing: Molecular Pathology of Peripheral T-Cell Lymphomas. Hematology Am Soc Hemato l Educ Program, 2011. 2011: p. 336-43. 
42. Furqan, M., et al., Dysregulation of JAK-STAT pathway in hematological malignancies 
and JAK inhibitors for clinical application. Biomarker Res, 2013. 1 (1): p. Article number 
5. 
43. Foss, F.M., et al., A Phase II trial of Belinostat (PXD101) in patients with relapsed or  
refractory peripheral or cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Br J Haematol, 2015. 168: p. 811- 
819. 
44. O'Connor, O.A., et al., Pralatrexate in Patients With Relapsed or Refractory Peripheral  
T-Cell L ymphoma: Results From the Pivotal PROPEL Study. J Clin Oncol, 2011. 29(9):  
p. 1182-1189. 
45. Coiffier B., et al., Therapeutic options in relapsed or refractory peripheral T- cell 
lymphoma. Cancer Treat  Rev, 2014. 40: p. 1080–1088. 
46. Giulia, P.  and P. Corradini, Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation for T- Cell 
Lymphomas. Semin Hematol, 2014. 51: p. 59-66. 
47. Schmitz,  N., H.-S. Wu,  and B. Glass, Allogeneic Transplantation in T-Cell Lymphomas. 
Semin  Hematol,  2014. 51: p. 67-72. 
48. DeSimone, J.A., et al., Recent advances in primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Current  
Opinion Oncology, 2015. 27(2): p. 128–133. 
49. Furman, R.R., et al.,  Idelalisib  and Rituximab  in Relapsed  Chronic Lymphocytic 
Leukemia.  N Engl J Med, 2014. 370(11):  p. 997-1007. 
50. Duvic, M., et al., Responses to Romidepsin in Patients with Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma (CTCL) and Prior Treatment with Systemic Chemotherapy: Subanalysis from the Pivotal  
Phase 2 Study. Blood, 2014. 124(21): p. 4451 - 4451. 
51. Kim,  Y.H.,  et al., Clinically  meaningful reduction in pruritus in  patients  with cutaneous 
T-cell lymphoma treated with  romidepsin. Leuk  Lymphoma, 2013. 54(2):  p. 284–289. 
52. Hwang, S.T., et al., Mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome. Lancet, 2008. 371:
  p. 945- 
957. 
53. Meyer,  N., C. Paul,  and L. Misery,  Pruritus in Cutaneous T- cell Lymphomas: Frequent, 
Often  Severe and Difficult to Treat. Acta Derm Venerol, 2010. 90: p. 12-17. 
54. Choi, J., et al.,  Genomic  landscape of cutaneous T cell lymphoma. Nature Genet, 2015. 
published online  20 July  2015; doi:10.1038/ng.3356. 
55. Word, Z.H. and M.J.  Matasar,  Advances in  the diagnosis and management of lymphoma. 
Blood and Lymphatic Cancer:  Targets  and Therapy,  2012. 2: p. 29-55. 
56. Pileri, S.A., et. al., Indolent lymphoma: the pathologist's viewpoint. Ann Oncol, 2004. 15: 
p. 12-18. 
57. Izutsu, K., Treatment of Follicular Lymphoma. J Clin Exp Hematop, 2014. 54(1): p. 31- 
37. 
58. Kritharis, A., J. Sharma, and A.M. Evens, Current Therapeutic Strategies and New Treatm ent Paradigms for Follicular Lymphoma. Cancer Treat Res, 2015. 165: p. 197- 
226. 
59. Gopal, A.K.,  et al., PI3Kδ  inhibition by idelalisib  in patients with  relapsed  indolent 
lymphoma. N Engl J Med, 2014. 370(11):  p. 1008-1018. 
60. Ghia, P. and H. M, Management of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia. Haematologica,  
2014. 99(6): p. 965-972. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  115  
  
 
61. Byrd, J.C., et al., Entering the Era of Targeted Therapy for Chronic Lymphocytic 
Leukemia:  Impact on the Practicing  Clinician.  J Clin  Oncol, 2014. 22(27):  p. 3039-3047. 
62. Jamroziak, K., et al., Richter syndrome in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: updates on biology, clinical features  and therapy. Leuk  Lymphoma, 2015. Early  Online : p. 1-10. 
63. Parikh, S.A., N.E. Kay, and T.D. Shanafelt, How we tr eat Richter syndrome. Blood, 
2014. 123(11): p. 1647-1657. 
64. Tam, C.S., et al., Long- term results of first salvage treatment in CLL patients treated  
initially with FCR (fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, rituximab). Blood, 2014. 124(20): p. 
3059-3064. 
65. IMBRUVICA(R)  and (ibrutinib),  [package insert].  Sunnyvale, CA: Pharmacyclics,  Inc.,, 
2015. 
66. ZYDELIG®  and (idelalisib), [package insert].  Foster  City,  CA: Gilead  Sciences, Inc.  , 
2014. 
67. Roberts, A., et. al., Targeting BCL2  with  Venetoclax in Relapsed  Chronic Lymphocytic  
Leukemia.  The New  England Journal of Medicine,  2016. 374(4):  p. 311-322. 
68. Jain, P., et  al., Outcomes  of patients with  chronic lymphocytic  leukemia  after  
discontinuing ibrutinib. Blood, 2015. 125(13): p. 2062-2067. 
69. Rawstron , A.C., et. al., A complementary role of multiparameter flow cytometry and 
high-throughput sequencing for minimal residual disease detection in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: An European Research Initiative on CLL study. Leukemia 2016. 
30(4):  p. 929-936. 
70. Bottcher, S., et al.,, Standardized MRD flow and ASO IGH RQ- PCR for MRD  
quantification in CLL patients after rituximab-containing immunotherapy: a comparative analysis. Leukemia, 2009. 23: p. 2007-2017. 
71. Halleck, M., Chronic lymphocytic leukemia: 2015 update on diagnosis, risk 
stratification,  and treatment.  Am J Hematol, 2015. 90(5):  p. 447-460. 
72. Rini, B., et al.,, Axitinib with or without dose titration for first- line metastatic renal- cell 
carcinoma: a randomised double-blind phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol , 2013. 14(12): p. 
1233-1242. 
73. Styczynski, J., et al., Management of Epstein-Barr Virus infections and post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders in patients after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation: Sixth European Conference on Infections in Leukemia (ECIL -6) 
guidelines. Haematologica, 2016. 101(7): p. 803-11. 
74. Coppoletta, S., et al., Rituximab treatment for Epstein -Barr virus DNAemia after 
alternative -donor hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow  
Transplant, 2011. 17(6):  p. 901-7. 
75. Hans, C.P., et al., Confirmation of the molecular classification of diffuse large B- cell 
lymphoma by immunohistochemistry using a tissue microarray. Blood, 2004. 103: p. 275- 
282. 
76. National Institutes  of H
 ealth. Guidelines for blood drawn for research  purposes in  the 
clinical center.  2003: http://www.cc.nig.gov/ccc/pedweb/pedsstaff/index2.html.  
77. NCCN, Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: T-Cell Lymphomas , in NCCN 
Guidelines . 2018, National Comprehensive Cancer Network.  
78. Bareau, B., Rey J, Hamidou M, Donadieu J, Morcet J, Reman O, Schleinitz N, Tournilhac O, Roussel M, Fest T, and Lamy T. , Analysis of a French cohort of patients with large granular lymphocyte leukemia: a report on 229 cases. Haematologica, 2009. 
95(9):  p. 1534-1541. 
79. Hoster,  E., et. al., A new  prognostic index (MIPI) for patients with adavanced-stage 
mantle cell lymphoma. Blood, 2008. 111(2): p. 558-565. 
80. Cockcroft, D.W. and M.H. Gault, Prediction of creatinine clearance from serum 
creatinine.  Nephron, 1976. 16(1): p. 31-41. 
81. Campo, E., et al., The 2008 WHO classification  of lymphoid neoplasms and beyond: 
evolving  concepts and practical applications. Blood, 2011. 117(19):  p. 5019-5032. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  116  
  
 
18.0 APPENDICES  
The following appendices are provided: 
 
Appendix 1: Schedule of Assessments  – Phase 2a (Exploratory)  
 
Appendix 2: Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status  
Appendix 3: Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors and Inducers and CYP3a Sensitive Substrates  
Appendix 4: Response Definitions for B- cell NHL and PTCL, CLL, and CTCL 
Appendix 5: Prognostic Factors  
Appendix 6: Differential of ABC vs. GCG type of DLBCL by IHC-Hans Methodology 
Appendix 7: Staging Systems for CLL and NHL  
Appendix 8: Global Health  Assessment  
 
Appendix 9: Cockcroft- Gault  Method for Evaluating Creatinine  Clearance 
Appendix 10: Likert Scale  
Appendix 11: T- cell Lymphoma Classifications  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  117  
  
APPENDIX 1. SCHEDULE  OF ASSESSMENTS ─  PHASE  2A (EXPLORATORY)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROCEDURES  Pre-Treatment  Phase  2A Treatment  Period  Follow -up 
 
 
SCREENING   
 
CYCLE  1  
 
CYCLE  2 CYCLE  3 
(and C6, C9, C12,  
C15,  C18+)  CYCLES 4 & 5  
(and C7, C8, C10,  
C11,  C13,  C14+)   
 
30 Days  
Post-last 
Treatment  D1 D2 D8 D9 D15 D22 
Cohort  2 Only  D1 D15 D1 D1 
 
D -21  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose   
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose   
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose 
Visit  Windows  (Days)  Within  21 Days  
Prior to C1D1  N/A N/A ±1 N/A ±2 ±2 ±3 ±2 ±3 ±3 ±3 
General/Safety  Assessments  
Obtain  Informed  Consent  X                    
Review  Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria X X                   
Medical  History  and Prognostic  Factors  1 X X                   
Physical  Examination  X X   X   X    X    X    X 
Height  X                    
Weight  X X          X    X  X  X 
Vital Signs  2 X X X  X X  X X X X X  X  X  X  X 
12-Lead ECG  X                   X 
ECOG  Performance Status  X X          X    X    X 
Global  Health  Assessment  3 X X   X   X    X    X     
Concomitant  Medications  X 4 X 4   X   X  X  X  X  X  X   
Adverse  Events  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Cerdulatinib  Administration  5  X X X X X X X X X X  
Rituximab Administration  (Cohort 2 Only)  6   X   X   X  X      X 7  X 7  
Local  Disease  Assessments  and Laboratory  Tests  
Bone  Marrow  Biopsy  and Aspirate  8 X               X  X   
CT or CT/PET 9 X               X     
Optional Lymph/Tumor  Node  Biopsy 10  At any time throughout  the study  
Optional Tumor  Block/Unstained  Slides  10 X                    
EBV PCR 11 X                    
HIV/HBV/HCV  infection  testing  12 X                    
Serum  Chemistry  and Hematology  13 X X   X   X    X  X  X  X  X 
Urinalysis  (microscopic  analysis as  clinically  indicated)  X X          X    X  X  X 
Urine  or Serum  Pregnancy 14 X X          X    X  X  X 
PT/PTT/INR  X                   X 
Beta-2 Microglobulin,  Lymphocyte  Subsets,  Immunoglobulin Levels  15 X 16 X   X   X    X    X     
CRP and  ESR-Westergren  (Sed.  Rate)   X   X   X    X    X     
Prognostic  factors:  cytogenetics  (FISH),  IgVH,  Zap70,  CD38  
(Cohort 4 - CLL/SLL Only)  17  
X                   
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  118  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROCEDURES  Pre-Treatment  Phase  2A Treatment  Period  Follow -up 
 
 
SCREENING   
 
CYCLE  1  
 
CYCLE  2 CYCLE  3 
(and C6, C9, C12,  
C15,  C18+)  CYCLES 4 & 5  
(and C7, C8, C10,  
C11,  C13,  C14+)   
 
30 Days  
Post-last 
Treatment  D1 D2 D8 D9 D15 D22 
Cohort  2 Only  D1 D15 D1 D1 
 
D -21  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose   
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose   
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose  
Pre-dose  Post- 
dose 
Visit  Windows  (Days)  Within  21 Days  
Prior to C1D1  N/A N/A ±1 N/A ±2 ±2 ±3 ±2 ±3 ±3 ±3 
CTCL Disease Assessment  – mSWAT  and Likert  Scale 
(Cohort 6 - CTCL Only)  X           
X    
X  
X   
CTCL Disease Assessment – Flow  Cytometry  for Sézary  Cells  and 
Photographs  of Skin Involvement  (Cohort 6 - CTCL Only)  X               
X     
Response  assessment  for leukemic  subtypes  X               X     
Skin Punch Biopsy  (Cohort  6 - CTCL  Only) 18 X           X         
Central  Laboratory  Tests 
Plasma PK 19  X X 19 X 19 X X 19 X 19 X    X  X  X     
Serum  Cytokine  Biomarker Analysis   X   X       X    X     
CLL = Chronic lymphocytic lymphoma; CT = Computed tomography; EBV = Epstein-Barr virus; ECG = Electrocardiogram; ECOG = Eastern cooperative oncology group; FISH = Florescence in situ hybridization; iNHL = indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma; lab = Laboratory; PC R = polymerase 
chain reaction;  PET = Positive -emission tomography; PK  = Pharmacokinetic;  PT/PTT/INR  = Prothrombin time,  partial thromboplastin  time/international normalized ratio;  SOC  = Standard  of care 
1. 
 
 
2. 
 
 
 
 
3. 
 
4. 
5. 
 
6. 
 
7. 
 
8. 
 
 
9. 
 
 
 
 
10. 
 
 
11. 
 
12. 
 
13. 
 
 
14. 
 
15. 
 
16. 
 
17. 
 
18. 
 
 
19. Medical history should include a redacted copy of the pathology report and any supporting pathology information, including the original pathology report from the diagnosis (which may include additional mutational analysis by sequencing, FISH, IHC, cytogenetics, etc.,) to be available for 
Sponsor  review.  
Vital signs include temperature, respiration, blood pressure and heart rate, and should be obtained after at leas t 5 minutes in the sitting or semi-recumbent position. Post -dose vital signs should be obtained at 1.0 hour post -cerdulatinib administration for all patients except those in Cohort 2 for all 
onsite visits.  For patients in Cohort 2 (cerdulatinib + rituximab ), on visits when rituximab is administered, post -dose vital signs should be obtained at 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, and 4.0 hours post -cerdulatinib dosing (or per standard of care), and then as clinically indicated.  The collection window for  
vital signs is ± 10  minutes.  
Administer  Global  Health  Assessment  before any other  protocol  procedures  are performed  and before  any protocol -related  information  is communicated.  
Record all medications  including  over the  counter preparations,  herbals,  and vitamins taken in  the 14 days prior to Cycle 1 Day 1. 
Dosing begins on Day 1 and continues daily until treatment interruption or study discontinuation.  
Rituximab  dose is 375 mg/m2. Rituximab infusion should  start immediately  after cerdulatinib  is taken.  
After  Cycle 1, rituximab should  be administered  on Day  1 only of Cycles  4, 6, 8, and 10. 
For CLL  patients  only, a  bone  marrow  biopsy  and aspiration will be  completed before Day 1 (within  6 weeks/42  days prior  to Day 1) through the  local  lab and  be repeated as  clinically  indicated.  For all other  patients  with a history  of bone  marrow  involvement  prior to entering the study,  a repeat  
biopsy should be performed  to confirm a complete response  or as clinically  indicated.  
CT or CT/PET of chest, abdomen, pelvis, and any other areas of lymphoma may be obtained within 28 days prior to Cycle 1 Day 1; redacted copy of the report(s) to be available to the Sponsor for review.  Subsequent CT or CT/PET assessments may be performed within 7 days prior to the  
scheduled visit and as clinically indicated.  For CTCL patients, if baseline scan is negative for nodal/visceral/other disease, a repeat CT or CT/PET is not necessary except to confirm CR and may be done as clinically indicated.  In the event of a Complete Response, confirmatory scans should be  
obtained no less than  4 weeks following  determination  of response.  Copies  of scans should  be made available to  Sponsor  upon request.  Additionally, obtain copy of molecular/mutation  profile  if obtained  as standard  of care.  
Optional: An archival tissue block or unstained slides may be submitted during Screening after eligibility has been confirmed.  Tumor biopsies may also be obtained at the discretion of the treating physician as clinically indicated.  For all tumor biopsies a nd samples, submit a formalin -fixed  
paraffin embedded  tissue  (FFPE)  block  or a minimum  of 10 (preferably 20) unstained, freshly cut FFPE  tissue  slides from  lymph  node  or other  biopsies.  Additional information  available in  the Lab Manual.  
Obtain EBV PCR at screening.  If EBV PCR was not obtained at screening, it should be obtained at the next visit.  In addition, post -baseline EBV PCR should be obtained for any patient with an unexplained fever if there is clinical suspicion of EBV reactivat ion. 
Testing  for HIV, HBV,  and HCV will be performed  if the patient  does not have  documentation of  a negative  hepatitis  panel  and negative  HIV history  within the  12-week  period prior  to enrollment.  
Serum  chemistry  includes:  sodium,  potassium,  chloride,  magnesium,  CO 2 (HCO 3), glucose,  blood urea nitrogen  (BUN), creatinine,  AST  (SGOT), ALT  (SGPT), lactate dehydrogenase,  total protein,  albumin,  alkaline phosphatase,  calcium,  phosphorous,  bilirubin,  uric acid,  amylase,  and lipase.  
Hematology  includes: hemoglobin, hematocrit,  WBC, platelet count, complete  blood  count  (CBC) with differential.  Grade  3 or greater increases  in ALT  or AST  require liver  function testing  to be repeated  within 72  hours  of initial test. 
Results  of urine  or serum  pregnancy  testing  must  be available prior  to study  drug administration.  
Quantitative immunoglobulins: quantitative levels of IgA, IgE, IgG, and IgM Lymphocyte subsets:  quantitation of absolute numbers (or %) of CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, CD16/56+, and CD19+ by flow  cytometry.  
Results  obtained  within  60 days prior to C1D1  may be used in lieu of the Screening  assessment.  
For IgVH,  results  obtained within  3 months  prior  to C1D1 may  be used.  
Skin punch biopsy is mandatory for all patients with CTCL and should be a ≥ 5 mm punch biopsy of a representative lesion.  A biopsy should be obtained from 2 different areas of disease if possible (e.g., plaque and nodular lesions).  Subsequent biopsies should be from the same general site if  
possible.  At least 10  unstained  slides or a FFPE tissue  block  should  be submitted.  
Serial PK samples will be collected on C1D1 and C1D8 at pre- dose (i.e., within 60 minutes prior to the dose), and 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 24 hours post -dose (collection window is ± 10 minutes, except for the 24- hour post -dose timepoint [± 30 minutes]).  The 24 hours post -dose PK samples collected  
on C1D2 and C1D9 should be collected prior to dosing in-clinic that day.  If a patient is not dosed at a particular visit but is due to be dosed, a trough PK assessment should stil l be performed.  In addition to times specified in this row, obtain a PK sample whenever a patient experiences a dose 
reduction/interruption,  study  drug discontinuation, and any AE that may  indicate potential drug  toxicity.  Section  7.3.2.3  provides additional  information.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  119  
 APPENDIX 2. EASTERN  COOPERATIVE  ONCOLOGY  GROUP  (ECOG)  
PERFORMANCE  STATUS  
 
Status  
1. Fully  active, able to carry  on all pre -disease performance without restriction.  
2. Restricted in physically  strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry  out work of a 
light or sedentary  nature (e.g., light housework, office work).  
3. Ambulatory and capable of all self -care, but unable to carry out any work activities. 
Up and about more than  50% of waking hours. 
4. Capable of only limited self -care, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of 
waking hours. 
5. Completely  disabled. Cannot carry  on any self-care.  Totally  confined to bed or chair.  
6. Dead.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  120  
 APPENDIX 3. STRONG CYP3A4 INHIBITORS AND INDUCERS AND CYP3A 
SENSITIVE  SUSBSTRATES  
 
To avoid possible drug-drug interactions, strong inhibitors and inducers of CYP3A4 and CYP3A 
sensitive  substrates should be avoided in patients  receiving  cerdulatinib  (Table  A3-9 and  
Table A3-10).  If the Investigator feels  that use of these medications  is necessary,  this should be 
discussed with the Medical Monitor. A dose adjustment (lowering) for CYP3A sensitive 
substrates  may  be considered on a case-by- case basis.  
 
Table A3-9: Strong  CYP3A4  Inhibitors  and Inducers  
 
Strong  Inhibitors  Strong  Inducers  
Clarithromycin  Barbiturates  
Telithromycin  Efavirenz  
Ketoconazole  and Posaconazole  Nevaripine  
Itraconazole  Pioglitazone  
Fluvoxamine  Rifampin  
Nefazodone  Rifabutin  
Ritonavir,  Lopinavir  Carbamazepine  
Indinavir  Phenytoin  
Nelfinavir  Modafinil  
Sequinavir  St. John’s  Wort  
Atazanavir   
Grapefruit/Grapefruit  Juice   
 
 
Table A3-10: CYP3A Sensitive  Substrates  
 
Generic  (Trade  Name)  
Albendazole  (Albenza®)  Levomilnacipran  (Fetzima®)  
Alfentanil (Alfenta®)  - 
drug has narrow  therapeutic  index  Lopinavir  and Ritonavir  
(Kaletra®)  
Aliskiren  (Tekturna®)  Lovastatin  (Mevacor®)  
Almotriptan  (Axert®)  Lurasidone  (Latuda®)  
Alprazolam  (Xanax®)  Maraviroc  (Selzentry®)  
Aprepitant  
(Emend®)  Medroxyprogesterone acetate 
(Depo -Provera®)  
Aripiprazole  (Abilify®)  Methadone  
Avanafil  (Stendra®)  Midazolam  (Versed®)  
Brexpiprazole  (Rexulti®)  Mirtazapine  (Remeron®)  
Bromocriptine  (Cycloset®,  Parlodel®)  Nevirapine  (Viramune®)  
Budesonide  (Entocort®,  Pulmicort®)  Nisoldipine  (Sular®)  
Buprenorphine  (Suboxone®,  Butrans®,  etc.) Ospemifene  (Osphena®)  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  121  
  
Generic (Trade  Name)  
Buspirone  (Buspar®)  Oxycodone  (Percocet®, Oxycontin®)  
Cariprazine  
(Vraylar®)  Paritaprevir  
(Viekira  Pak™,  Technivie™)  - major  substrate  
Clonazepam  
(Klonopin®)  (probable)  Pimozide  (Orap®)  - 
drug has narrow  therapeutic  index 
Conivaptan (Vaprisol®)  Praziquantel  (Biltricide®)  
Cyclophosphamide  (Cytoxan®)  Propafenone  (Rythmol®)  
Cyclosporine  
(Neoral®, Gengraf®, Sandimmune®) - 
drug has narrow  therapeutic  index  Quetiapine  
(Seroquel®)  
Daclatasvir  (Daklinza™)  Quinidine  - drug has narrow  therapeutic  index  
Darifenacin  (Enablex®)  Roflumilast (Daliresp®)  
Darunavir  (Prezista®)  Salmeterol  (Serevent®)  
Dasatinib  (Sprycel®)  Saquinavir  (Invirase®)  
Diazepam  (Valium®)  Sildenafil (Viagra®)  
Dienogest  (progesterone  in oral contraceptives)  Simeprevir  (Olysio®)  
Dihydroergotamine (DHE -45®, Migranal®) – 
drug has narrow  therapeutic  index  Simvastatin  
(Zocor®)  
Dronedarone  
(Multaq®)  Sirolimus  (Rapamune®)  - 
drug has narrow  therapeutic  index  
Drospirenone  
(progesterone  in oral contraceptives)  Suvorexant  
(Belsomra®)  
Elbasvir  
(Zepatier®)  Tacrolimus  (Prograf®) - 
drug has narrow  therapeutic  index  
Eletriptan  (Relpax®)  Tadalafil  (Cialis®)  
Eplerenone  (Inspra®)  Tamsulosin  (Flomax®)  
Ergotamine  (Cafergot®)  Temsirolimus  (Torisel®)  
Eszopiclone  (Lunesta®)  Ticagrelor  (Brilinta®)  
Ethinyl  Estradiol (oral  contraceptives, 
Ortho  Evra®, NuvaRing®)  Tinidazole  
(Tindamax®)  
Etonogestrel  
(Implanon®,  Nexplanon®,  NuvaRing®)  Tofacitinib  
(Xeljanz®)  (major  substrate)  
Everolimus  (Afinitor®)  Tolvaptan  (Samsca®)  
Felodipine  (Plendil®)  Tipranavir  (Aptivus®)  
Fentanyl  (Duragesic®)  - 
drug has narrow  therapeutic  index Triazolam  
(Halcion®)  
Flibanserin  (Addyi®)  - major  substrate  Vardenafil  (Levitra®)  
Fluticasone  
(Flovent®,  Arnuity  Ellipta®)  Verapamil  
(Calan®, Covera -HS®,  Verelan®,  etc.) 
Grazoprevir  (Zepatier®)  Vilanterol  (Anoro  Ellipta®)  
Guanfacine  (Intuniv®)  Vilazodone  (Viibryd®)  
Hydrocodone  (Norco®,  Vicodin®,  etc.) Vorapaxar  (Zontivity®)  
Iloperidone  (Fanapt®)  Zolpidem  (Ambien®)  
Indinavir  (Crixivan®)  Levomilnacipran  (Fetzima®)  
Lapatinib  (Tykerb®)  Lopinavir  and Ritonavir  (Kaletra®)  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  122  
 APPENDIX 4. RESPONSE DEFINITIONS FOR B -CELL NHL AND PTCL, CLL,  
AND CTCL  
 
1. Response  Criteria  for NHL  
Radiographic (including PET scan)  and clinical  assessments  will be evaluated  in accordance with 
The Lugano Classification  [4]. The criteria are  summarized  in Table A4 -11. 
 
PET- CT is preferred for FDG -avid lymphomas and CT scan is preferred in other lymphomas. 
For patients staged with PET-CT, focal uptake in nodal and extranodal sites that is in keeping 
with lymphoma, according to the distribution and/or CT characteristics, is considered involvement with lymphoma, including spleen, liver, bone, thyroid, etc. 
 
For patients  staged with  CT: 
• Selection  of target (measured)  lesions is  as follows: 
○ Up to 6 of the largest  nodes, nodal masses,  and extranodal lesions selected  to be 
clearly  measurable in 2 diameters:  
○ A measurable node must have a longest transverse diameter of  a lesion  (LDi) 
> 1.5 cm. 
○ A measurable extranodal  lesion  (e.g., hepatic nodules) should have an LDi > 1.0 cm.  
○ Preferably,  nodes should be disparate regions of the body and should include, where 
applicable,  mediastinal and retroperitoneal areas.  
○ Non-nodal lesions include those in  solid  organs (e.g., liver,  spleen,  kidneys, and  
lungs), gastrointestinal (GI) involvement, cutaneous lesions, or those noted on 
palpation. If possible, they should: 
○ Be from  disparate regions  of the body. 
○ Include mediastinal and retroperitoneal areas  of disease whenever  these sites 
are involved. 
• Selection  of non- target  (non- measured)  lesions: 
○ Any lesions not selected as target (measured) and truly assessable lesions should be 
considered  not measured. 
○ These lesions include any  nodes, nodal masses,  and extranodal lesions not selected  as 
target (measured) or that do not meet the requirements for measurability but are still considered abnormal, as well as truly assessable lesions, which are any sites of 
suspected disease that would be difficult to follow quantitatively with measurement,  
(e.g., cutaneous, GI, bone, spleen, liver, kidneys, pleural or pericardial effusions, 
ascites, leptomeningeal lesions/dise ase) and other lesions that cannot be confirmed 
and followed by imaging.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  123  
  
 
Table A4 -11: Lugano Criteria  [4] (Revised  Criteria)  for Response  Assessment  in NHL  
 
Response  and Site PET -CT–Based  Response  CT-Based  Response  
Complete  Complete  metabolic  response  Complete  radiologic  response  (all of the following):  
Lymph nodes and 
extralymphatic sites  Score  1, 2, or 3 a with or without  a residual  mass  on 5PS  b 
It is recognized  that in Waldeyer’s  ring or extranodal  sites with high 
physiologic  uptake  or with activation within  spleen  or marrow  
(e.g., with chemotherapy or myeloid colony- stimulating factors),  
uptake may be greater than normal mediastinum and/or liver.  In this  
circumstance,  complete  metabolic  response  may be inferred  if uptake  
at sites of initial involvement is no greater than surrounding normal  
tissue even if the tissue has high  physiologic uptake.  Target nodes/nodal masses must regress to < 1.5 cm in  
LDi No extralymphatic sites  of disease.  
Nonmeasured lesion 
Organ enlargement  
New lesions  
Bone  marrow  Not applicable  
Not applicable  
None  
No evidence of FDG -avid disease in marrow  Absent  
Regress  to normal  
None  
Normal  by morphology;  if indeterminate,  IHC negative  
Partial  
Lymph nodes  and extralymphatic  
sites Partial  metabolic  response  
Score  4 or 5 b with reduced uptake  compared  with baseline and residual  
mass(es)  of any size: 
At interim,  these findings  suggest  responding  disease.  
At end of  treatment,  these  findings  indicate  residual  disease.  Partial  remission  (all of the following):  
> 50% decrease in SPD of up to 6 target  measurable nodes  
and extranodal  sites.  
When a lesion  is too small  to measure on CT, assign  5 mm 
× 5 mm as the default  value.  
When no longer  visible,  0 × 0 mm. 
For a node  > 5 mm ×  5 mm,  but smaller  than normal,  use 
actual  measurement  for calculation.  
Nonmeasured lesions  
Organ  enlargement  
 
New lesions  
Bone  marrow  Not applicable  
Not applicable  
 
None  
Residual uptake higher than uptake in normal marrow but reduced 
compared  with baseline (diffuse  uptake  compatible  with reactive changes  
from chemotherapy allowed). If there are persistent focal changes in the 
marrow in the context of a nodal response, consideration should be given 
to further  evaluation with  MRI  or biopsy or an interval  scan.  Absent/normal,  regressed,  but no increase.  
Spleen must have regressed by > 50% in length beyond normal.  
None  
Not applicable  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  124  
  
 
Response  and Site PET -CT–Based  Response CT-Based  Response  
No response or stable disease 
Target nodes/nodal masses, 
extranodal lesions  
 
 
Nonmeasured lesions  
Organ enlargement  
New lesions  
Bone  marrow  No metabolic  response  
Score  4 or 5 with no significant change  in FDG  uptake  from  baseline at 
interim  or end of treatment  
 
 
Not applicable  
Not applicable  
None  
No change from  baseline  Stable  disease  
< 50% decrease from baseline in SPD of up to 6 dominant,  
measurable nodes and extranodal sites; no criteria for  
progressive  disease are met 
 
No increase consistent  with progression  
No increase consistent  with progression  
None  
Not applicable  
Progressive  disease  
 
Individual target nodes/nodal  
masses  
Extranodal  lesions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nonmeasured  lesions  Progressive  metabolic  disease  
 
Score  4 or 5 with an  increase in intensity  of uptake  from  baseline and/or  
New FDG -avid foci consistent with lymphoma at interim or end- of- 
treatment assessment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
None  Progressive  disease requires  at least 1 of the  following  PPD 
progression:  
An individual  node/lesion  must  be abnormal  with:  LDi 
> 1.5 cm, and 
Increase by > 50%  from  PPD nadir  and an increase in LDi  
or SDi from nadir  
0.5 cm for lesions  < 2 cm  
1.0 cm  for lesions >  2 cm  
In the setting of splenomegaly, the splenic length must  
increase by > 50% of the extent of its prior increase beyond  
baseline (e.g.,  a 15-cm spleen  must  increase to > 16 cm). If 
no prior splenomegaly, must increase by at least 2 cm from  
baseline  
New or recurrent  splenomegaly 
New or clear  progression  of preexisting  nonmeasured  
lesions  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  125  
  
 
Response  and Site PET -CT–Based  Response CT-Based  Response  
New lesions  New FDG -avid foci consistent with lymphoma rather than another  
etiology  (e.g., infection,  inflammation).  If uncertain  regarding  etiology  of 
new lesions, biopsy or interval  scan may  be considered.  Regrowth  of previously  resolved  lesions  
A new node  > 15 cm  in any axis 
A new extradnodal site > 1.0 cm in any axis; if < 1.0 cm in 
any axis, its presence must be unequivocal and must be attributable  to lymphoma  
Assessable  disease of any size unequivocally attributable  to 
lymphoma  
New or recurrent  lymphoma  
5PS = 5 -point scale; CT = Computed tomography; FDG = Fluorodeoxyglucose; GI = Gastrointestinal; IHC = Immunohistochemistry; LDi = Longest  
transverse diameter of a lesion; MRI = Magnetic resonance imaging; PET = Positron emission tomography; PPD = Cross product of the LDi and perpendicular  diameter; SDi =  Shortest  axis perpendicular  to the  LDi;  SPD =  Sum  of the product  of the perpendicular  diameters for multiple lesion
 
a A score of 3 in many patients indicates a good prognosis with standard treatment, especially if at the time of an interim scan.  However, in trials involving 
PET where de -escalation is investigated, it may be preferable to consider a score of 3 as inadequate  response (to avoid under treatment).  Measured  
dominant  lesions: Up to  six of the largest  dominant  nodes,  nodal  masses,  and extranodal  lesions selected  to be clearly  measurable  in two  diameters.  Nodes  
should preferably be from disparate regions of the body and should include, where applicable, mediastinal and retroperitoneal  areas.  Non-nodal lesions  
include those in solid organs (e.g., liver, spleen, kidneys, lungs), GI involvement, cutaneous lesions, or those noted on palpation.  Nonmeasured lesions:  
Any disease not selected as measured, dominant disease and truly assessable disease should be considered not measured.  These sites include any nodes,  
nodal masses, and extranodal sites not selected as dominant or measurable or that do not meet the requirements for measurability but are still considered abnormal, as well as truly assessable disease, which is any site of suspected disease that would be difficult to follow quant itatively with measurement,  
includ ing pleural effusions, ascites, bone lesions, leptomeningeal disease, abdominal masses, and other lesions that cannot be confirmed and followed by 
imaging.  In Waldeyer’s ring or in extranodal sites (e.g., GI tract, liver, bone marrow), FDG uptake may be gr eater than in the mediastinum with complete  
metabolic response, but should be no higher than surrounding normal physiologic uptake (e.g., with marrow activation as a result of chemotherapy or  
myeloid growth  factors).
 
b PET 5PS:  1, no uptake  above  background;  2, uptake  < mediastinum;  3, uptake >  mediastinum but  < liver; 4, uptake  moderately  > liver; 5, uptake  markedly 
higher  than liver and/or  new lesions; X,  new areas  of uptake  unlikely to be related  to lymphoma.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  126  
 2. Response  Criteria  for CLL  
Radiographic and clinical assessments in accordance with the criteria established by IWCLL [ 2] 
will be used to determine response. CT scan is the preferred method for evaluating tumor 
response. The spleen and liver  shoul d also be assessed by  physical examination.  
• Selection  of target (measured)  lesions for imaging  or physical examination: 
○ Up to six of the largest nodes, nodal masses, and extranodal lesions selected to be 
clearly  measurable in  2 diameters at baseline.  
○ A measurable node must have a longest transverse diameter  of a lesion  (LDi) 
> 1.5 cm.  A measurable  extranodal lesion  (e.g., hepatic nodules) should have an LDi 
> 1.0 cm. 
○ Nodes should preferably be from  disparate regions of the body and should include, 
where applicable, mediastinal and  retroperitoneal areas.  
○ Non-nodal lesions include those in solid  organs (e.g., liver,  spleen,  kidneys, and  
lungs), gastrointestinal (GI)  involvement, cutaneous lesions, or those noted 
on palpation. 
○ If possib le, they  should be  from disparate regions of the body. 
○ If possible, they  should include mediastinal and  retroperitoneal  areas  of disease 
whenever these sites are involved. 
• Selection  of non- target  (non -measured)  lesions for imaging  or physical examination: 
○ Any lesions not selected as target (measured) and truly assessable lesions should be 
considered  not measured. 
○ These lesions include any  nodes, nodal masses,  and extranodal lesions not selected  as 
target (measured) or that do not meet the requirements for measurability but are still 
considered abnormal, as well as truly assessable lesions, which are any sites of 
suspected disease that would be difficult to follow quantitatively with measurement,  
(e.g., cutaneous, GI, bone, spleen, liver, kidneys, pleural or pericardial effusions, ascites, leptomeningeal lesions/disease)  and other lesions that cannot be confirmed 
and followed by imaging.  
 
3. Complete Response  (CR)  
To satisfy the criteria for CR, all of the following criteria must be met and must persist  
for ≥ 8 weeks:  
• No evidence of new disease  
• ALC  in peripheral blood of < 4 x 109/L 
• Regression of all target nodal masses to normal size (i.e., ≤ 1.5 cm in the longest diameter for
 nodes that were considered large at baseline and ≤ 1.0 cm in the longest perpendicular 
diameter  for nodes that were considered small at baseline)  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  127  
 • Normal  spleen  and liver size 
• Regression to normal of all nodal non- target disease and disappearance of all detectable 
non-nodal, non- target disease  
• No disease -related  constitutional symptoms 
• Peripheral  blood counts meeting  all of the following criteria:  
○ ANC ≥ 1.5 x 109/L without need  for exogenous growth factors  (e.g., G- CSF)  
○ Platelet  count ≥ 100 x 109/L without need for exogenous growth factors 
○ Hemoglobin ≥ 110 g/L (11.0 g/dL) without red  blood cell  transfusions or need  for 
exogenous growth factors (e.g., erythropoietin) 
Notes : 
• Morphologically negative bone marrow is defined as < 30% of nucleated cells and no  
lymphoid nodules in a bone marrow  sample  that is normocellular  for age.  
• Patients  who  fulfill  all the criteria  for a CR (including bone marrow criteria) but  who  
have a persistent anemia, thrombocytopenia, or neutropenia that is related to prior or 
ongoing drug toxicity (and not to CLL) will be considered as a CR with incomplete 
marrow  recovery  (CRi).  
 
4. Partial Response  (PR)  
To satisfy  criteria  for PR,  all of  the following criteria  must be met  and must persist for 
≥ 8 weeks:  
• No evidence of new disease  
• Decrease in peripheral blood ALC  by ≥ 50% from  baseline  
• A decrease by ≥ 50% from  the baseline in the SPD (sum  of the products) of the target  
nodal lesions 
• In patients  with  enlargement  of the spleen  or liver at  baseline:  
○ Normal spleen size, or a decrease by ≥ 50% from baseline in the pretreatment 
enlargement  of the vertical  dimension below the left costal margin  (by palpation) or 
in total vertical dimension (by  imaging) 
○ Normal liver size, or a decrease by ≥ 50% from baseline in the pretreatment enlargement of the liver total vertical dimension at the right costal margin (by  
percussion) or a qualitative decrease in liver  size (by imaging) 
• No increase in  the size of the liver or spleen  
• No increase  in the size of non- target  disease  
• No persistent  (lasting  > 4 weeks)  worsening of disease- related  constitutional symptoms 
• Peripheral  blood counts meeting  any of the following  criteria:  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  128  
 ○ ANC  ≥ 1.5 x 109/L or ≥ 50% increase  over baseline without need for exogenous 
growth factors  (e.g., G- CSF)  
○ Platelet count ≥ 100 x 109/L or ≥ 50% increase over baseline without need for 
exogenous growth factors 
○ Hemoglobin ≥ 110 g/L (11.0 g/dL) or ≥ 50% increase over baseline without red  blood 
cell transfusions or need  for exogenous growth factors (e.g., erythropoietin) 
 
Note : Patients who achieve a PR by IWCLL 2008 criteria [ 2] in all parameters  
except lymphocyte count will be considered PR with lymphocytosis.  Patients  
with  a PR  with  lymphocytosis  will not be considered  to have achieved  a PR  until  
there is a 50% reduction in ALC  from  baseline  was achieved or ALC  
< 4 × 109/L. 
 
Note : Marrow should have at least  a 50% reduction  in marrow infiltrate or 
B-lymphoid nodules  
 
5. Stable  Disease  (SD)  
To satisfy  the criteria for  SD, the following  criteria  must be met: 
• No evidence of new disease, i.e., there is neither sufficient evidence of tumor shrinkage 
to qualify for PR nor sufficient  evidence of tumor growth to qualify for definitive  disease 
progression. 
 
6. Progressive Disease (PD) 
• The occurrence of any of the following events indicates definitive PD: 
Evidence of any new disease that was  not present as baseline:  
• A new node that measures > 1.5 cm in any diameter  
• A new node that measures > 1.0 cm to ≥ 1.5 cm in the longest diameter and > 1.0 cm in 
the longest perpendicular diamete r 
• New hepatomegaly  or splenomegaly 
• New  non- target  disease (e.g., effusions, ascites,  or other organ abnormalities related  
to CLL)  
Note : Isolated new effusions,  ascites,  or other organ abnormalities are not  sufficient  
evidence alone of PD unless histologically confirmed. Thus, a declaration of PD 
should  not be made if this  is the only  manifestation  of apparently new disease.  
 
• Evidence of worsening of lymph nodes, spleen  or liver,  or non- target disease:  
○ Increase by ≥ 50% from the nadir in the SPD  of target  lesions. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  129  
 ○ Increase by ≥ 50% from the nadir in the product of the perpendicular diameters for 
any individual node; progression of a single lesion requires that the lesion 
demonstrates a ≥50% in the product of its diameters and tha t the lesion now meets the  
definition of abnormal (a node that was considered large at baseline must now measure > 1.5 cm in the longest diameter and a node that was considered small at  
baseline must now measure > 1.0 cm  in the longest diameter  perpendicul ar to the long 
diameter  of the lesion). 
○ Increase by ≥ 50% from the  nadir in the longest diameter  for any  individual node if  
the node now has a longest perpendicular diameter that is  >1.0 cm. 
○ In a patient with an abnormal spleen, an increase by ≥ 50% from the nadir 
enlargement of the spleen vertical dimension below the left costal margin (by  
palpation) or in total vertical dimension (by  imaging). 
○ In a patient  with  an abnormal liver,  an increase by  ≥ 50% from  the nadir enlargement  
of the liver total ver tical dimension at the right costal margin (by percussion) or a 
unequivocal qualitative  increase in liver  size (by  imaging). 
○ Unequivocal increase in the size of non- target  disease (e.g., effusions, ascites,  or 
other organ abnormalities related to CLL).  
○ Transformation  to a more  aggressive histology (e.g., Richter  syndrome) as  established  
histologically.  
 
7. Treatment -related  Lymphocytosis 
Treatment -related lymphocytosis, for the purpose of this protocol, is defined as an elevation in 
blood lymphocyte count of ≥ 50% compared to baseline which occurs in the setting of 
unequivocal improvement in at least 1 other disease-related parameter including lymph node size, spleen size, hematologic parameters or disease symptoms.  Patients with isolated  
lymphocytosis in the setting of reduced disease burden or improvement in hematologic 
parameters  should not be considered to have progressive disease [ 2]. 
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page 130   
 Clinical Study 13-601 
Cerdulatinib  Portola  Pharmaceutical s, Inc. 
 
 
 
8. Response  Criteria  for Leukemic Forms  of Peripheral  T-cell Lymphoma (PTCL)  (ATLL,  PLL,  LGL)  
A. Response  Criteria  for ATLL  
 
Table A4 -12: Response  Criteria  for ATLL  
 
Source:  NCCN  2018 [ 77]. 

Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  131  
 B. Response  Criteria  for PLL  
Investigators are encouraged to use the Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (IWCLL)  
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia [ 2] for CLL  
(Appendix 4-2 ). 
 
C. Response  Criteria  for LGL  
Response to treatment should be determined by periodic clinical assessments and blood counts 
(Table A4-13).  
 
Table A4-13: Response  Criteria  for LGL  
 
Complete  Response  The complete  normalization  of blood  counts:  
• hemoglobin >12 g/dL, platelets >150×109/L, 
absolute neutrophil count >1.5×109/L, and  
lymphocytosis  <4×109/L, and  
• a circulating LGL  count  of <0.5×109/L. 
Partial Response  An improvement  in blood counts:  
• hemoglobin >8 g/dL,  platelets  >50\109/L, and 
neutrophils  >0.5\109/L, and  
• the absence of transfusion requirements.  
Treatment  Failure  Any response  not meeting  the above  criteria  within  3 
months  after the  beginning of the treatment.  
Source:  Bareau, et al [78]. 
 
 
9. Response  Criteria  for Cutaneous  T-Cell Lymphoma (CTCL)  
All relevant  clinical  and radiographic information  required  to make an assessment  should be 
considered. Nodes/lesions should be selected  based  on criteria  described by  Olsen,  et al [5]. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  132  
 Table A4-14: Global Response  Score 
 
Global  Score a Definition  Skin Nodes,  Blood,  Viscera  
CR Regression  of measurable  disease  CR All categories  have  CR/NI  
PR Regression  of measurable  disease  CR All categories  do not have  a CR/NI  and 
no category  has a PD  
PR No category  has a PD  and if  any category  
involved at  baseline, at  least 1 has 
a CR or PR 
SD Failure  to attain  CR, PR, or PD 
representative of all disease  PR No category  has a PD  and if  any category  
involved  at baseline, no CR  or PR in any 
SD CR/NI,  PR, SD in any category  and 
no category  has a PD  
PD Progressive  disease  PD PD in any category  
Relapse  Recurrence disease  in prior  CR  Relapse  in any category  
CR = Complete response; NI = Noninvolved; PR = Partial response; PD = Progressive disease; SD = Stable disease  
Note : It is recommended that not only the proportion of patients who achieve a response or an unfavorable outcome  
be calculated but  a life table  account for  the length  of the interval  during  which  each patient is under observation  
also be generated.  
 
 
Table A4-15: Response  in Skin  
 
Response  Definition  
CR - Complete  Response  100%  of skin lesions a 
PR - Partial Response  50 to 99% clearance of skin disease from baseline without new tumors (T3) in patients  
with T1, T2, or T4 only skin disease  
SD - Stable  Disease  < 25% increase to < 50%  clearance in skin disease  from  baseline  without new  tumors  
(T3) in patients  with T1, T2, or  T4 only skin disease,  or 
PD - Progressive  Disease b ≥ 25%  increase in skin disease  from  baseline, or 
New tumors  (T3) in patients  with T1, T2, or T4 only skin disease,  or 
Loss  of response:  in those  with complete  or partial response, increase of skin score  
of greater  than the sum  of nadir  plus 50% baseline score  
Relapse  Any disease  recurrence in those with  complete  response  
Note : Based on  modified Severity  Weighted  Assessment  Tool  score.  
a A biopsy of normal appearing skin is unnecessary to assign a complete response.  However, a skin biopsy should 
be performed  of a representative area of the skin if there  is any question of residual  disease (persistent  erythema or 
pigmentary change) where otherwise a complete response would exist.  If histologic features are suspicious or  
suggestive  of mycosis  fungoides/Sézary  syndrome,  the response  should be considered  a partial response  only.  
b Whichever  criterion  occur s first.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  133  
 Table A4-16: Response  in Lymph  Nodes  
 
Response  Definition  
CR – Complete  Response  All lymph nodes a are now ≤ 1.5 cm in greatest transverse (long axis) diameter by  
method used to assess lymph nodes at baseline or biopsy negative for lymphoma; in 
addition,  lymph nodes  that were  N3 classification  and ≤ 1.5 cm in their long axis and 
> 1 cm  in their short  axis at baseline,  must  now be ≤ 1 cm  in their short  axis or biopsy 
negative  for lymphoma  
PR - Partial Response  Cumulative  reduction  ≥ 50%  of the SPD of each abnormal  lymph  node  at baseline  and 
no new lymph node > 1.5 cm in the diameter of the long axis or > 1.0 cm in the  
diameter of  the short  axis if the long  axis is 1-1.5 cm in diameter  
SD - Stable  Disease  Fails  to attain  the criteria for  CR, PR, and PD  
PD - Progressive  Disease b ≥ 50%  increase in  SPD from  baseline of  lymph  nodes, or  
Any new node >  1.5 cm  in the long axis or > 1 cm  in the short  axis if 1-1.5 cm in the 
long axis that is  proven  to be N3 histologically,  or 
Loss  of response:  >  50% increase from  nadir  in SPD of lymph nodes  in those  with PR 
Relapse  Any new lymph node  > 1.5 cm  in the long axis in those  with CR proven to be  N3 
histologically  
PD = Progressive  disease;  SPD = Sum of the maximum linear  dimension (major  axis)  x longest  perpendicular  
dimension (minor axis)  
a Peripheral  and central  lymph nodes.  
b Whichever  criterion  occurs  first. 
 
 
Table A4-17: Response  in Viscera  
 
Response  Definition  
CR - Complete  Response  Liver  or spleen  or any organ considered involved  at baseline  should not be enlarged  on 
physical exam and should be considered normal by imaging; no nodules should be  
present on imaging of liver or spleen; any post treatment mass must be determined by 
biopsy to be negative for lymphoma.  
PR - Partial  Response  ≥ 50% regression in any splenic or liver nodules, or in measurable disease (SPD) in  
any organs  abnormal  at baseline;  no increase in size  of liver or spleen  and no new sites 
of involvement  
SD - Stable  Disease  Fails  to attain  the criteria for  CR, PR, and PD  
PD - Progressive  Disease a ≥ 50% increase in size (SPD) of any organs involved at baseline, or  
New organ involvement,  or 
Loss  of response:  >  50% increase from  nadir  in the size (SPD) of  any previous  organ 
involvement  in those  with PR 
Relapse  New organ involvement  in those  with CR 
PD = Progressive  disease;  SPD = Sum of the maximum  linear  dimension (major  axis)  x longest  perpendicular  
dimension (minor axis)  
a Whichever  criterion  occurs  first. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  134  
 Table A4-18: Response  in Blood a 
 
Response  Definition  
CR - Complete  Response b B0 
PR - Partial Response  c ≥ 50% decrease in quantitative  measurements  of blood  tumor  burden from  baseline  in 
those  with high tumor  burden at baseline  (B2). 
SD - Stable  Disease  Fails  to attain  the criteria  for CR, PR, and PD.  
PD - Progressive  Disease d B0 to B2, or 
> 50% increase from baseline and at least 5,000 neoplastic cells/µL, or 
Loss of response:  B2 at baseline,  > 50% increase from nadir  and at least 
5,000  neoplastic cells/µL.  
Relapse  Increase of neoplastic  blood lymphocytes  to ≥ B 1 in those  with CR 
a As determined  by absolute numbers  of neoplastic  cells/µL.  
b If a bone  marrow  biopsy was performed  at baseline  and determined  to unequivocally be indicative  
of lymphomatous involvement, then to confirm a global CR where blood assessment now meets criteria for B0, a  
repeat  bone  marrow  biopsy must  show  no residual  disease  or the response  should be considered a PR only.  
c There  is no PR in those  with B1 disease  at baseline  as the difference within  the range  of neoplastic  cells that define  
B1 is not considered significant  and should not affect  determination  of global  objective response. 
d Whichever  criterion  occurs  first. 
 
 
10. Modified  Severity  Weighted  Assessment  Tool (mSWAT) for CTCL  
D. Total Body Surface Area  (TBSA)  Involvement by Skin Disease  
The body is divided into 12 regions with pre-assigned %TBSA based on the burn literature. The  
extent  of skin disease in each  region is  quantified by using the patient’s palm to measure the 
%TBSA involvement within region: patient’s palm with 4 fingers (excluding the thumb) is 1% 
of TBSA.  Patient’s palm without fingers is 0.5% of TBSA. The patient’s palm with 4 fingers is  
traced  on a transparency  sheet at  the baseline visit,  using a permanent  marker that  will not rub  off 
or smear.  The transparency of the patient’s palm should be used in all mSWAT assessments  
during the course of the clinical study. The transparency will be labeled with the patient’s study  
ID number kept in the patient’s study file on site. Using the baseline visit transparency of the patient’s palm, the investigator will measure and record on the electronic case report form 
(example of table from eCRF is given below) the %TBSA for each lesion type within each of the 
12 regions. 
 
E. Severity  Weighting Factor 
The severity  weighting factors will be  the following: 
1. = patch (flat erythema  or erythema with mild  infiltration), multiply  by 1. 
2. = plaque (elevated  erythema or erythema with moderate infiltration), multiply  by 2. 
3. = tumor or ulceration (erythema with fissuring, ulceration or tumor), multiply  by 4. 
 
Patch is defined as abnormal skin not elevated from normal skin. A plaque is defined as 
abnormal  skin elevated from normal skin by < 5 mm.  A plaque elevated ≥  5 mm is a  tumor. 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  135  
 F. Calculating  Skin Scores  
The sum of %TBSA by lesion is derived by summing the %TBSA from all regions affected by 
the lesion. The sum of %TBSA across lesion types (patches, plaques, and tumors) within each region cannot exceed the %TBSA for the region. For example, the %TBSA for the head region 
is 7%.  The sum of %TBSA across lesion types from head can only range from 0 to 7%. The 
skin score subtotal by lesion type are derived by multiplying the sum of %TBSA for patches 
from  all regions by 1, sum of %TBS of plaques from all regions by 2, and the sum of %TBSA  of 
tumors or ulcers from all regions by 4. The skin score total is derived from summing the skin 
score subtotals for patches, plaques, and tumors or ulcers. The skin score total is dimensionless  
with a scale of  0 to 400. See Table A4 -19. 
 
Table A4-19: Calculating  Skin  Scores  
 
 
 
 
 
Region   
 
 
% TBSA  
for the  region   
 
 
% TBSA Patch  
(or flat erythema)   
% TBSA  Plaque  
(or elevated/  
indurated 
erythema)  % TBSA  
Tumor/Ulceration  
(or erythema  
w/fissuring,  
ulceration)  
Head  7    
Neck  2    
Anterior  Trunk  13    
Posterior  Trunk  13    
Buttocks  5    
Genitalia  1    
Upper  Arms  8    
Forearms  6    
Hands  5    
Thighs  19    
Lower  Leg 14    
Feet 7    
% BSA  by Category  100    
Severity  Weighting  Factor   X 1 X 2 X 4 
Skin Score  Subtotal      
BSA  = Body surface area;  TBSA  = Total body surface  area 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  136  
 Responses will be determined  by the criteria  described  in Table A4 -20. 
 
Progression of disease while on treatment should be confirmed by a second assessment 1 to  
4 weeks later so that patients who experience a temporary flare of disease due to skin infection 
or other intercurrent illnesses are not removed from the study prematurely.  
 
Table A4-20: mSWAT  Response  Assessment  
 
Assessment  Description  Status  
Completely  Clear  No evidence of disease;  100%  improvement  CR 
Marked  Improvement  Greater  than or equal  to 50% decrease in skin scores  compared  to baseline  
and improvement  is maintained  for 4 weeks  PR 
Slight Improvement  Less than 50% decrease in skin scores  compared  to baseline  SD 
Worse  ≥ 25% increase  in skin scores  compared  to baseline  while  the patient  is 
actively  taking  the study  drug 
or 
≥ 50% increase in the sum of the products of the greatest diameters of  
pathologically positive lymph  nodes  (should  be documented by biopsy)  
compared  to baseline  while  the patent  is actively  taking  the study drug.   
 
PD 
CR = Complete  response;  PD = Progressive  disease;  PR = Partial response;  SD = Stable  disease  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  137  
 APPENDIX 5. PROGNOSTIC  FACTORS  [19] 
 
The following prognostic indices are presented:  Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic 
Index (FLIPI, Table A5 -21), International Prognostic Index ( Table A5 -22), and Age-Adjusted 
Prognostic Index ( Table  A5-23),  and Simplified  Mantle -Cell Prognostic Index (MIPI)  
(Table A5-24). 
 
Table A5-21: Follicular  Lymphoma  International Prognostic Index -1 (FLIPI -1) 
Criteria  
 
Age ≥ 60 years  
Ann Arbor Stage  III-IV 
Hemoglobin Level  < 12 g/dL  
Serum  LDH Level  > ULN 
Number  of Nodal  Sites  ≥ 5 
Risk  Group  According  to FLIPI  Chart  
 Number  of Factors  
Low 0-1 
Intermediate  2 
High  ≥ 3 
FLIPI -1 = Follicular  Lymphoma  International  Prognostic  Index;  
LDH = Lactic  dehydrogenase;  ULN = Upper  limit of normal  
 
 
Table A5-22: International Prognostic Index  (IPI)  
 
All Patients  International  Index,  All Patients  
Age ≥ 60 Years  Low 0 or 1 
Serum  LDH > Normal  Low-intermediate  2 
Performance Status  2-4 High -intermediate  3 
Stage  III or IV High  4 or 5 
Extranodal  Involvement  > 1 Site   
LDH = Lactic  dehydrogenase; ULN =  Upper  limit of normal  
  
Table A5-23: Age-Adjusted  International Prognostic Index  
 
Patients  ≤ 60 Years  of Age International  Index,  ≤ 60 Years  of Age 
Stage  III or IV Low 0 
Serum  LDH > normal  Low-intermediate  1 
Performance  Status  2-4 High -intermediate  2 
 High  3 
LDH  = Lactic  dehydrogenase; ULN  = Upper limit  of normal  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  138  
 Table A5-24: Simplified  Mantle- Cell Prognostic Index  (MIPI)  [79] 
 
Points  Age in Years  ECOG  Status  LDHULN  WBC,  109/L 
0 < 50 0-1 < 0.67  < 6.700  
1 50-59 Not Applicable  0.67– 0.99 6.700 –9.999  
2 60-69 2-4 1.000 –1.49 1.000 –14.999 
3 ≥ 70 Not Applicable  ≥ 1.5000  ≥ 1.5000  
ECOG  = Eastern  Cooperative  Oncology  Group;  LDH = Lactic dehydrogenase;  ULN = Upper  limit of normal;  
WBC = White blood cell 
Note : For each prognostic factor, 0 to 3 points were given to each patient, and points were summed up to a  
maximum of 11. Patients  with 0 to 3  points  n summary  were  classified  as low risk, patients with  4 to 5  points  as 
intermediate  risk, and patients  with 6 to 11 points  has high risk. ECOG  performance  status  was weighted  with 
2 points  if patients  were  unable  to work  or bedridden  (ECOG  2–4). LDH was weighted according  to the ratio to 
the ULN.  Thus, for  a ULN  of 240  U/L, the  cutpoints were  180 U/L, 240  U/L, and  360 U/L,  for example.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  139  
 GCB  APPENDIX 6. DIFFERENTIAL OF ABC VS. GCG TYPE OF DLBCL BY 
IHC -HANS  METHODOLOGY  
 
Figure A6-5: Decision  Tree for Immunoperoxidase Tissue  Microarray  (TMA)  [75] 
 
 
 
CD10  
 
BCL-6 
 
 
 
 
 
DLBCL  = Diffuse  large  B-cell lymphoma;  GCB = Germinal  center  B-cell–like (a subclassification  
of DLBCL);  non-GC = Non -germinal  cell + 
─ Non -GC 
+ 
─ 
GCB  MUM1  
+ 
─ 
Non -GC 
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  140  
 APPENDIX 7. STAGING  SYSTEMS  FOR CLL  AND NHL  [4, 19] 
 
The Rai and Binet  staging  systems for CLL are presented  Table  A7-25 and  Table A7-26, 
respectively.  The Lugano Modification of the Ann Arbor Guidelines is presented in 
Table A7-27. 
 
Table A7-25: Rai Staging System  for Chronic  Lymphocytic Lymphoma 
 
Rai Stage  Description  Risk  Factor  
0 Lymphocytosis  and no enlargement  of the lymph  nodes,  spleen,  or liver,  and 
with near  normal  red blood cell  and platelet counts.  Low Risk 
I Lymphocytosis  plus enlarged  lymph  nodes.  The spleen  and liver are not 
enlarged  and the red blood cell and platelet counts  are near normal.  Intermediate  Risk 
II Lymphocytosis  plus an enlarged  spleen  (and possibly an enlarged  liver), with  
or without enlarged lymph nodes.  The red blood cell and platelet counts are  
near normal.  Intermediate  Risk 
III Lymphocytosis plus anemia (too few red blood cells), with or without  
enlarged  lymph  nodes,  spleen,  or liver.  Platelet counts  are near normal.  High  Risk 
IV: Liver  Lymphocytosis  plus thrombocytopenia  (too few blood  platelets),  with or 
without  anemia,  enlarged lymph nodes,  spleen,  or liver.  High  Risk 
 
 
Table A7-26: Binet  Staging System  for Chronic  Lymphocytic Lymphoma  
 
Binet  Stage  Description  
A Fewer  than 3 areas  of lymphoid  tissue  are enlarged, with  no anemia  or thrombocytopenia.  
B 3 or more  areas  of lymphoid  tissue  are enlarged, with  no anemia  or thrombocytopenia.  
C Anemia  and/or  thrombocytopenia  are present.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  141  
 Table A7-27: Lugano Modification of Ann Arbor Staging System  (for Primary  
Nodal Lymphomas) 
 
Stage  Involvement  Extranodal  “E” Status  
Limited  
Stage  I One node  or group  of adjacent  nodes  Single  extranodal  lesions  without  nodal  
involvement  
Stage  II 2 or more nodal groups on the same side of the  
diaphragm  Stage  I or II by nodal  extent with  limited  
contiguous  extranodal  involvement  
Stage  II “bulky”  a Stage  II as above with “bulky”  disease  Not applicable  
Advanced  
Stage  III Nodes  on both sides  of the diaphragm  Not applicable  
 Nodes above the diaphragm with spleen  
involvement   
Stage  IV Additional  non-contiguous  extralymphatic  
involvement  Not applicable  
CT = Computed  tomography;  PET = Positive -emission  tomography  
Notes : Extent  of disease  is determined  by PET-CT for avid lymphomas  and CT for non-avid lymphomas.  Tonsils,  
Waldeyer’s ring, and spleen are considered nodal tissue.  Categorization “A” or “B” has been removed from the  
Lugano Modification  of Ann Arbor Staging.  
a Whether  stage  II bulky  disease  is treated  a limited  or advanced  disease  may be determined  by histology  and a 
number  of prognostic factors.  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  142  
 APPENDIX 8. GLOBAL  HEALTH  ASSESSMENT  
 
To be completed  by the patient.  Patient may  decline  to answer.  
 
 
 
Circle  the number that best represents  your level  of health  today. 
 
0 means the worst state of health you can imagine 
10 means  the best state  of health  you can imagine  
   
 
Worst State  
of Health         Best State  
of Health  
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
( _ ) decline to answer  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  143  
 APPENDIX 9. COCKCROFT -GAULT METHOD FOR EVALUATING  
CREATININE  CLEARANCE  [80] 
 
For serum  creatinine concentration  in mg/dL:  
CrCl  = (140- age+)  × (wt) x  0.85 (if female),  or × 1.0 (if male)  
(mL/min)  72× serum creatinine  (mg/dL) 
For serum  creatinine concentration in  μmol/L:  
CrCl  = (140- age+)  × (wt) ×  0.85 (if female),  or ×  1.0 (if male)  
 
(mL/min)  0.81 × serum  creatinine = (μmol/L)  + age in years,  weight (wt) in kilograms 
 
CrCl  = Creatinine  clearance;  wt = Weight  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  144  
 APPENDIX 10. LIKERT SCALE  
 
Likert Scale for Pruritus Evaluation  
To be completed  by patient.  
 
 
 
 
No Itch         Worst Itch  
Imaginable 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
 
Circle  the number that best represents  your level  of itching. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
( _ ) decline to answer  
Clinical Study 13 -601 
Portola  Pharmaceuticals,  Inc. Cerdulatinib  
Protocol  Amendment  9 
14 October  2019  Confidential  Page  145  
 APPENDIX 11. T- CELL LYMPHOMA  CLASSIFICATIONS  
 
Table A11-28: Mature T - and NK -cell Neoplasms in the 2008 WHO Classification  
of Lymphoid Tumors  [81] 
 
Leukemic or 
Disseminated  T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia  
T-cell large  granular  lymphocytic  leukemia  
Chronic  lymphoproliferative  disorders  of NK cells a 
Aggressive  NK-cell leukemia  
Adult  T-cell lymphoma/leukemia  (HTLV1 -positive)  
Systemic  EBV -positive T- cell lymphoproliferative disorders  of childhood 
Extranodal Extranodal NK/T -cell lymphoma,  nasal  type 
Enteropathy- associated  T-cell lymphoma  
Hepatosplenic  T-cell lymphoma  
Cutaneous  Mycosis  fungoides  
Sézary  syndrome  
Primary  cutaneous  CD30_  lymphoproliferative  disorders  
Primary  cutaneous  anaplastic  large  cell lymphoma 
Lymphomatoid  papulosis  
Subcutaneous panniculitis -like T-cell lymphoma  
Primary  cutaneous  gamma -delta  T-cell lymphoma 
Primary  cutaneous  aggressive  epidermotropic  CD8_  cytotoxic  
T-cell lymphoma  a 
Primary  cutaneous  small/medium  CD4_ T -cell lymphoma  a 
Hydroa  vacciniforme -like lymphoma  
Nodal Angioimmunoblastic T- cell lymphoma  
Anaplastic large  cell lymphoma,  ALK-positive 
Anaplastic  large  cell lymphoma,  ALK -negative  
Peripheral  T-cell lymphoma,  not otherwise  specified  
a Provisional  entity.  