IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 1 of 22 PROTOCOL  
Background  
1. Provide the scientific background, rationa le and relevance of this project.   
INSTRUCTIONS  
• This should include a referenced systematic evidenced -based review when possible.   
• If this study involves qualitative research explain the major  constructs of your study.  
• Do not state in this section what you plan to do in this study.  This information 
should be entered later under “What will be done in this protocol?”  
• Do not include the bibliography in this section.  
• For studies submitted under t he Expedited review criteria, this section need not be 
more than a few paragraphs.  
• For those studies where data will be analyzed collaboratively by multiple sites doing 
a similar study for which there is no common protocol (Collaborative Site Analysis 
Study) include a description of the common scientific goals/ procedures/data points.  
• If this is an update to current templates from Protocol Builder make sure the 
information throughout the protocol includes the most current information.  
Answer/Response:   
• includes the most current information.  
   The scope of the healthcare challenge posed by stroke is massive, both in the 
number of affected persons and the related cost burden. There were an estimated 
892,300 stroke -related hospitalizations in the U.S. in 20 05, representing 77.3 stays 
per 10,000 persons over 45 years of age [1]. Approximately 50% of these 
individuals suffer from chronic deficits in UE function [2]. As the leading cause of 
disability in the U.S., the long -term financial impact of stroke is exo rbitant. From 
2005 to 2050, the total stroke -related burden on the U.S. economy is expected to 
exceed $2 trillion, including costs due to hospitalization, rehabilitation, nursing 
home stays, outpatient care, medications, and lost earnings [3].  
   Modern s troke rehabilitation practice is based on the principle of brain plasticity 
– the formation of new circuits and changes to internal structures that remap 
existing synapses to perform functions previously accomplished by injured 
cortical tissue [4]. Plastic ity may strengthen redundant pathways to restore lost 
functionality, in effect remodeling the lesioned brain [5]. This process requires 
that the affected neurological pathways be exercised through interactions that 
involve the stroke -impacted functions [6], [7]. Consequently, research suggests  
that intensive, repetitive, task -directed therapy can encourage the desired cortical 
plasticity [8], [9], [10]. Training specificity is also an important component, 
whether targeting specific functional movements (e.g . squeezing a tube of 
toothpaste) or an integrated skill (e.g. self -grooming) [11], [12]. Repetitive ADL 
practice, by definition, satisfies these critical requirements for brain plasticity 
supporting UE recovery.  
   Weakness in grip strength and finger ext ension are leading causes of hand 
motor control deficits following stroke [13]. In particular, a loss of ability to 
extend the fingers is a key indicator for poor grasping performance [14]. 
Additionally, an inability to bring the hand and wrist into a neut ral pose can 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 2 of 22 prevent participation in the task -directed functional practice necessary for 
neuroplasticity to occur.  A common technique to enable stroke patients to 
achieve a functional hand pose (and thus participate in rehabilitation) is a 
dynamic splint  that supports finger and/or wrist extension. When larger forces 
are necessary (i.e. to overcome abnormal muscle tone), an outrigger -type splint 
may be employed. One example is the spring -based SaeboFlex system [15]. For 
patients lacking finger extension d ue to weakness or mild hypertonicity, a low 
profile device such as the SaeboGlove [16] is preferable. SaeboGlove () is a 
commercially -available, passive glove orthosis that employs a plastic splint to 
support the wrist and a rubber band -based tensioner sys tem to support finger 
extension and enable patients to engage in task -specific training. These Saebo 
products are used in over 2,000 clinics and hospitals (and by 10,000 trained 
clinicians) worldwide.  
   Numerous past efforts to apply technology to hand t herapy have focused on the 
use of active assistance including cables, pneumatics, and robotics [17], [18], 
[19], [20], [21], [22],[23] [24]. The cost of these complex systems is typically very 
high, and many never find application beyond the research labor atory. On the 
other end of the spectrum are adaptations of hand tracking systems for therapy 
that do not provide any assistance to the wrist, hand, or fingers [25] [26] [27]. 
Hand movements elicited by these tracking system games are not ADL -oriented 
and e xperiences do not correlate to real -world tasks, which is a central tenet of 
brain plasticity In summary, previous systems are limited by: (1) not providing the 
finger extension and wrist support necessary to enable a stroke patient to bring 
the hand and w rist into the neutral position required for functional tasks; (2) 
limitations of sensor and software design that do not permit hand or arm 
involvement in virtual practice of ADLs; and (3) childish arcade -type user 
experiences do not involve mental imagery and cognitive challenges that are 
representative of real -world activities.  
    Although there is substantial literature on adaptations of “virtual reality” for 
rehabilitation [28], low -cost commercial sensors and commercial game engine 
technology have onl y very recently enabled the development of sophisticated 
systems at a price point that is compatible with at -home use. Moreover, it is also 
only recently that researchers have begun to unravel the relationship between 
game design and patient motivation. Ad herence is an essential aspect of any 
treatment program. A perhaps -obvious, but often -overlooked, reality is that to 
realize gains through rehabilitation, a patient must accept and adhere to the 
prescribed treatment regime. The challenge of adherence is co mpounded by the 
fact that the intensive, repetitive, task -directed therapies associated with brain 
plasticity can be mundane, fatiguing, and even painful for stroke patients. 
Without the direct encouragement of a therapist, adherence is a particular 
challe nge for home -based therapy.   
    The effectiveness of stroke therapy may be further bolstered by incorporating 
mental practice of relevant activities [33]. During mental practice of UE motor 
tasks, neural activation patterns may occur as if the impaired l imb were actually 
performing the intended action [34], [35]. One approach to promoting this effect is 
by use of a mirror to present the image of an unaffected hand as if it were the 
paretic one [36]. The resulting enhancement in cortical representation of the 
impaired extremity appears to lead to tangible improvement in motor function. 
Empirical evidence of the benefit of mental imagery can, in part, be explained by a 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 3 of 22 model of cognitive psychology in which subliminal activation of the motor system 
is embedd ed in “covert” stages of action that precede actual motor response 
[37]. These precursor stages encompass visualization of intended outcomes, 
recognition of environmental factors, and learning by observation – elements that 
are directly facilitated by task -oriented virtual world -based ADL training. In the 
virtual world, limitations of impairment can be artificially mitigated, permitting the 
patients to visualize task completion in the appropriate environmental context, 
with meaningful tasks that map to real -world experience.  
The purpose of this research study is to assess the effectiveness of a novel 
ADL-centered  virtual reality system that is able to incorporate tracking and 
assistance to the hand for the purposes of stroke rehabilitation.  The Glove 
Rehabi litation Application for Stroke Patients (GRASP) system enhances a 
commercial glove orthosis, the SaeboGlove (see Figure 1) , with finger tracking 
sensors to enable a patient to manually interact with a virtual environment for UE 
motor practice . 
 
 
Figure 1. GRASP sensors on SaeboGlove orthosis  
 
The GRASP system, developed by Barron Associates, Inc., comprises the sensor -
enhanced glove orthosis, a Kinect sensor, a Windows 10 computer, and software 
for virtual world -based practice o f activities of daily living. Using the Kinect and 
the glove sensors, GRASP software tracks a patient’s UE movements and 
translates them into equivalent movements of a graphical avatar that represents 
the patient in a virtual environment rendered on the co mputer display monitor. 
Figure 2 shows examples of virtual activities provided by GRASP software.  

IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 4 of 22 
 
Figure 2. Virtual Activities of Daily Living (ADLs)  
 
A completed GRASP Phase I study (IRB -HSR 19952) involving use of the GRASP 
device by 15 stroke patient s demonstrated the criterion validity of UE 
performance measures derived from the system, as well as the usability of the 
device by the targeted patient population.  The results of the completed GRASP 
Phase I study are documented in the following journal p aper.  
Adams, R. J., Ellington, A. L., Armstead, K., Sheffield, K., Patrie, J. T., & 
Diamond, P. T. (2019). Upper Extremity Function Assessment Using a 
Glove Orthosis and Virtual Reality System. OTJR: Occupation, Participation 
and Health, 39(2), 81 –89. https://doi.org/10.1177/1539449219829862  
The GRASP Phase II study builds on the Phase I results, targeting demonstration 
of efficacy of a home exercise program (HEP) for UE stroke therapy employing 
the GRASP system. The GRASP Phase II device has been improved to address 
lessons learned in the Phase I study. Notably, the glove sensor system is now 
wireless (Bluetooth) and the GRASP software incorporates a wider range of 
virtual activities to support pract ice over an 8 -week intervention.  
Objectives/Hypothesis  
INSTRUCTIONS:    
If this study involves biomedical research clearly state the objectives and hypotheses and 
clearly define the primary and any secondary outcome measures.  If this study involves 
quali tative research clearly state your research hypothesis or question.  
 
This section should not include information already included in other sections such as 
background information or information from the procedures section.  
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 5 of 22 Answer/Response:  
Objective s: 
• Investigate the efficacy of GRASP therapy for recovery of hand function  
• Acquire evidence of system usability and user acceptance  
 
Hypotheses  
• Use of GRASP for UE practice in a Home Exercise Program (HEP)  will 
improve motor function in a cohort of adult stroke  patients  
• Subjects assigned to the GRASP HEP will experience improved motor 
function compared to those assigned to a Usual Care Treatment (UCT) 
group  
• GRASP will be found to be usable and well-accepted by participants who 
have sustained a stroke.  
 
Study Des ign: Biomedical  
1.  Will controls be used?  
Answer/Response:  
YES  
►IF YES, explain the kind of controls to be used.  
Answer/Response:  
Half of subjects will be randomized to a UCT group.  
Half of subjects will be randomized to a GRASP HEP group . 
 
2. What is the st udy design?  
Example:  case series, case control study, cohort study, randomized control study, single -
blind, double -blind, met -analysis, systematic reviews, other.  You may also view the IRB -HSR 
Learning Shot on this topic to help you answer this question .  
https://hrpp.irb.virginia.edu/learningshots/Writing_protocol_June09/player.html  
Answer/Response:  
Rater -blinded  randomized control study  
 
3. Does the study invo lve a placebo?  
Answer/Response:  
NO 
 
►IF YES, provide a justification for the use of a placebo  
Answer/Response:  
 
Human Participants  
Ages:  18 years or greater  
Sex:  Any 
Race:  Any 
 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 6 of 22 Subjects - see below  
INSTRUCTIONS:  For question 1 -4 below insert an exact #.  Ra nges or OPEN is not 
allowed.  This # should be the maximum # you expect to need to enroll (i.e. sign 
consent) If you are only collecting specimens the number of participants should equate 
to the # of specimens you need.  If you are collecting only data fro m a chart review the 
number should designate the number of subjects whose medical records you plan to 
review.  Age/ Sex/Race criteria should designate the demographics of participants from 
whom you will obtain the specimen/data.  
1.  Provide target # of sub jects (at all sites) needed to complete protocol.  
INSTRUCTIONS: If this is NOT a database protocol, this number should be the same as 
the number of subjects needed to obtain statistically significant results.    
Answer/Response:   
40  
 
2.  Describe expected  rate of screen failure/ dropouts/withdrawals from all sites.   
Answer/Response:   
20%  
 
3.  How many subjects will be enrolled at all sites?    
INSTRUCTIONS:  This number must be the same or higher than the # from question # 1 
in order to account for the # o f screen failures, dropouts, withdrawals described in 
question # 2.  
Answer/Response:   
40  
 
4.  How many subjects will sign a consent for m under this UVA protocol?     
INSTRUCTIONS: If the protocol does not have a consent form - the number listed here 
shoul d reflect such things as the number of subjects from whom specimens will be 
obtained, the number of charts to be reviewed etc.  
Answer/Response:   
40  
 
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
INSTRUCTIONS:  
• The inclusion and exclusion criteria should be written in bul let format.  
• This item applicable if the study will require consent (verbal or written).        Unless there 
is a scientific reason for not recruiting a certain type of vulnerable population(e.g. not 
enrolling fetuses, neonates or children in a study regard ing Alzheimer’s) list the 
following vulnerable populations under either Inclusion or Exclusion criteria below:  
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 7 of 22 pregnant women, fetuses, neonates, children, prisoners, cognitively impaired, 
educational or economically disadvantage, non - English speaking su bjects .  
• If you will not enroll subjects who do not speak English because certain procedures 
cannot be carried out if the subject does not speak English (e.g. a survey is not validated 
in other languages) insert the following as an Inclusion Criteria:  Wil lingness and ability 
to comply with scheduled visits and study procedures.   
• If this is a collection of only retrospective* specimens or data, the inclusion criteria must 
include a start and stop date for when specimens/ data will be collected.   
• The stop date must be prior to the version date of this protocol.  
• *Retrospective:  all specimens are in a lab at the time this protocol is approved by the 
IRB.  All data exists in medical records or records from previous studies at the time this 
protocol is approve d by the IRB.   
1.  List the criteria for inclusion   
Answer/Response:  
1. Participant has had a right or left hemispheric stroke affecting normal hand function  
2. Participant has sufficient active finger flexion at the MCP joint in at least one finger to be  
detected by visual observation by a study therapist.  
3. Participant has visual acuity with corrective lenses of 20/50 or better.  
4. Participant’s affected hand fits within sizing available in the SaeboGlove (see Figure 2). 
5. Participant must have active movement against gravity of at least 30 degrees shoulder 
flexion, 45 degrees elbow flexion, elbow extension to within 30 degrees of full extension, 
and 15 degrees shoulder internal and external rotation.  
6. In the opinion of a study therapist, participant can independently and safely use the 
system at home or has an at -home caregiver who is willing and able to assist.  
7. In the opinion of a study therapist, participant has a suitable and safe space in their home 
for using the GRASP system.  
8. Participant is willing and able to provide informed consent.  
 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 8 of 22 
 
Figure 3. Hand measurement procedure and available sizes for SaeboGlove.  
 
2.  List the criteria for exclusion  
Answer/Response:  
1. Withholding or withdrawal of consent by the participant;  
2. Inability to u nderstand and follow verbal directions;  
3. Determination by the Principal Investigator that participation would result in 
overexertion or significant discomfort or pain;  
4. A psychological diagnosis that in the determination of the Principal Investigator 
could significantly impact subject’s participation or that could be aggravated by 
study participation (Principal Investigator will consult with candidate’s personal 
physician as appropriate);  
5. Determination by the Principal Investigator that participation  would result in 
significant agitation or elevated stress;  
6. Visual field deficit in either eye that impairs the ability to view the computer 
monitor;  
7. Significant stiffness or contractures of the  muscles, joints, tendons, ligaments, 
or skin that restri cts normal upper extremity movement;  
8. More than mild tone/spasticity (measured on modified Ashworth, 5 -point scale);  
9. Severe contractures or joint deformities in the fingers;  
10. Open wound or infection, severe edema, or excessive swelling which might 
interfere with wearing the glove ; 
11. Severe pre -stroke co -morbidities, such as cardiovascular, neurological, 
orthopedic, or rheumatoid impairments before stroke that may interfere with 
task performance;  
12. Severe sensory deficits from the involved UE; or  
13. Hemispatial neglect that impairs the ability to process and perceive visual 
stimuli provided through the computer monitor.  
 
3.  List any restrictions on use of other drugs or treatments . 
INSTRUCTIONS:  List only those drugs or treatments that are prohi bited while on study, not 
those listed as an exclusion criteria.   
Answer/Response:  
NA 
 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 9 of 22 Statistical Considerations  
1. Is stratification/randomization involved?  
Answer/Response:  
YES 
 
►IF YES, describe the stratification/ randomization scheme.  
INSTRUCTIONS:  
The stratification factors and/or the randomization plan should be identified. If there is 
no randomization component or important patient characteristics that will be used in 
treatment allocation or data analysis, a statement to this effect should be included . 
 
Stratification factors: These are pretreatment patient characteristics which could be 
balanced across treatment arms by design or may be used to determine starting dose or 
treatment allocation.  
 
If randomization is going to be used, the details of the r andomization plan should be 
described.  
 
The description should include:  
--the method and timing of randomization  
--the type of randomization scheme that will be used in the study  
--whether or not the randomization masked/blinded/if so, then to whom is it 
masked/blinded  
--who has access to the randomization scheme  
Answer/Response:  
  To ensure that an approximately equal number of subjects are randomized to the 
GRASP HEP and UCT groups throughout the Phase II enrollment period, we will 
randomly assign the pa tients to the two study -groups in accordance with a permuted 
block  randomization scheme.  The randomization list will be generated by PLAN 
procedure of SAS (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).      
  The group assignment will be blinded to the t herapists (raters ) who perform the pre - 
and post -assessments. The group assignment will be not be blinded to the 
participants.  
  The non -rater members of the IRB -approved study team will have access to the 
randomization list.  
 
 
►IF YES, who will generate t he randomization scheme?  
_____  Sponsor  
__X__ UVA Statistician.   Insert  name  Answer/Response : Mr. Jim Patrie  
_____  UVA Investigational Drug Service (IDS)  
_____  Other :  Specify    Answer/Response:  
 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 10 of 22 2.  What are the statistical co nsiderations for the protoco l?  
The objectives section and the statistical section should correspond, and any objective for 
which analysis is unfeasible should be deleted.  Also, the estimates and non -statistical 
assumptions of the statistical section shou ld be supported by discussio n in the background 
section.  
 
The answer to this question should include:  
--Study Design/Endpoints  
--Recap of study objectives and endpoint definitions. An assessment of how study objectives 
will be assessed by identifying & def ining which endpoints will b e used to assess each 
component of the study objectives.  
--The study design should include contingencies for early stopping, interim analyses, 
stratification factors (If applicable), and any characteristics to be incorporated in  analyses.  
--The power/prec ision of the study to address the major study endpoint(s), the assumptions 
involved in the determination of power/precision.  
--If statistical hypothesis testing is included then specify the null and alternative hypotheses, 
the t est statistic, and the type I and II error rates  
--If precision of an estimate, then provide a definition for precision  
--If other, then specify  
Answer/Response:  
 
  Following an initial visit (in outpatient clinic) for consent administration and screening , 
participants will be asked  to return for a pre -assessment visit involving a battery of gold -
standard UE function tests including: the Fugl -Meyer assessment of UE motor function 
(FMUE); the Wolf Motor Function Test (WMFT) assessment of UE motor function; the Box 
and Blocks Test; and  the Motor Activity Log (MAL). Permuted  block randomization will be 
employed . Subjects assigned to GRASP HEP will be asked to employ the GRASP system 
for UE practice at home ove r an 8 -week period. Patients in the UCT group will not receive 
any treatment through the study and will continue to receive any previously prescribed 
therapy services. After 8 weeks, all participants will be asked to return for a post -
assessment visit repe ating the  same battery of tests.  Additionally, subj ects will be asked 
to respond to a set of questionnaire -based instruments including the System Usability 
Scale (SUS); a technology acceptance model (TAM) questionnaire; and a Player 
Experience of Needs Sat isfaction  (PENS) questionnaire; and participate in a structured 
interview.  
 
   The pre - to post -intervention change in the composite assessment scores will be the 
primary endpoint for the GRASP Phase II study. Pre -intervention scores will be 
subtracted fro m post -intervention scores to produce a set of delt a values which will be 
analyzed via Analysis of Covariance. One null hypothesis will test if the mean pre - to 
post -intervention change in scores is equal to zero, while the second null hypothesis will 
test if the m ean pre - to post -intervention change in sc ores is the same between groups. 
For both null hypotheses, a p≤0.05 decision rule will be utilized as the rejection criterion.  
  
3.  Provide a justification for the sample size used in this protocol.   
Include samp le size calculations or statistical power estimation.  If not applicable, please 
provide explanation.   
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 11 of 22 Also i nclude the anticipated accrual rate, the accrual goal for the study, including accrual goals 
by strata if appropriate, adjustments for dr op-outs e tc. and study duration.  
Answer/Response:  
  The first row of Table 1 provides the minimum detectable within -intervention changes in the 
composite Fugl -Meyer Upper Extremity (FMUE) scores that would lead 80%  of the t ime to 
rejecting the null hypothesis, list ed according to patient retention rate. The second row of 
Table 1 provides the minimum detectable between -intervention difference. Note that 
accounting for a 20% d ropout ra te, recruitment of a total of 40 subjects provides sufficient 
power to detect a pre - to post -intervention change of 2.4 units, a value that is consistent with 
previous studies of hand therapy interventions [60].  
 
Table 1. Phase II power analysis  
comparison type  Phase II St udy Patient Retention Rate  % (n)  
 100% (20)  95% (19)  90% (18)  85% (17)  80% (16)  
within -intervention  1.5 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.7 
between -
intervention  2.1 2.2 2.2 2.3 2.4 
 
4.  What is your plan for primary vari able anal ysis?  
Include primary outcome(s)/predictor  variable(s), statistical methods/models/tests to be 
employed, or descriptive summaries as appropriate.  If not applicable, please provide 
explanation.   
Answer/Response:  
   The pre - to post -intervention c hange in the composite FMUE score will be the prima ry 
endpoint for the Phase II efficacy study. Each of the seven tasks in the hand portion of the 
FMUE will be scored on a scale of 0 to 2 [53] and summed to produce a composite score. The 
pre-intervention s cores wil l be subtracted from the post -intervention  scores to produce a set 
of delta values. These delta values scores (Δ) will be analyzed via Analysis of Covariance 
(ANCOVA). One null hypothesis will test if the mean pre - to post -intervention change in t he 
compos ite FMUE score is equal to zero, while the second null hypothesis will test if the m ean 
pre- to post -intervention change in the composite FMUE score is the same for patients who 
undergo 8 -weeks of GRASP therapy and patients who undergo 8 weeks of intensity -balanced 
standard care. For both null hypotheses, a p≤0.05 decision rule will be ut ilized as the rejection 
criterion.  
 
 
5.  What is your plan for secondary variable analysis?  
Include the following:  
--Secondary outcome(s)/predictor variables, statistical methods/models/tests to be employed, 
or descriptive summaries as appropriate.  If not applicable, please provide explanation.  
--For phase III studies, the power/precision of the study to address the secondary objective(s).  
Answer/Response:  
  The pre - to post intervention changes in the composite Wolf Motor Function Test ( WMFT ) 
scores w ill be analyzed in exactly the same way as the pre to post -intervention change in the 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 12 of 22 composite FMUE scores, and the same method of analysis will be used to analyze the pre - to 
post -intervention changes in Box and Blocks Test scores, and the pre - to post -intervention 
changes in the Motor Activity Log ( MAL ) scores.  
 
6. Have you been working with a statistician in designing this protocol?  
Consultation with a professional statistician is highly recommended to ensure good science of 
the study and facilitate the  review process.  
 
Answer/Response:  
YES 
IF YES, what is their name?   
Answer/Response:  
Mr. James Patrie  
 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 13 of 22  
7.  Will data from multiple sites be combined during analysis?   
Answer/Response:  
INSTRUCTIONS:  IF YES, answer the following questions  
NA 
 
Study Pro cedures -Biomedical Research  
 
1.  What will be done in this protocol?    
INSTRUCTIONS:   
This should include everything that will be done as part of this protocol. Do not repeat 
information that is included in other sections such as Background or Hypothesis 
sections.  
This section  should include an indication of which research interventions if any offer a 
prospect for direct benefit and which interventions (invasive measurements, collection 
of blood, tissue, data, surveys, etc.) are being done solely to answe r a research question 
and generate generalizable knowledge. If the interventions done solely for research 
purposes are associated with greater than minimal risk they need to be justified. 
Describe and justify any control and experimental arm and include me thod, dose, and 
duration of drug administration. Reference any claim of clinical equipoise  if applicable.   
 
If you are  obtaining specimens or data, provide information regarding the type of 
specimen/data, amount of specimen needed and how the specimen/dat a will be 
obtained and what analysis will be done with the specimen/data.  
 
Special note for studies with waiver of consent/waiver of documentation of consent:   
Include a statement regarding how subjects will be recruited. For other studies this 
information  is captured in Recruitment does not need to be duplicated in this section.  
Answer/ Response:   
 
Participants meeting study criteria will be recruited from the population of current and 
former stroke patients of the University of Virginia Health System.  
 
Prior to consent, potential candidates will be contacted by phone and asked to respond to 
questions pertaining to eligibility (inclusion/exclusion criteria). For example:  
• Do you continue to experience weakness or impaired function in your stroke affected 
hand? 
• Are you able to bend your fingers partially on your stroke affected hand?  
• Are you able to move your stroke affected arm and flex your elbow about halfway?  
• Is your corrected vision good enough to comfortably watch a TV show for 30 minutes?  
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 14 of 22 The final list  of questions will be included in a telephone recruitment scripts that will be 
submitted for IRB approval prior to use. After pre -screening using the IRB-approved script, 
candidates will be scheduled for a remotely -administered consent and screening  telehe alth 
visit and for a pre -assessment visit  at UVA .  
 
ALL – Remotely -administ ered consent visit  (will last about 45 minutes)  
- Participant will take part  in remotely -administered  telehealth visit with a study 
coord inator or a study therapis t by phone or HIPAA compliant video co nferencing  (e.g. a 
Zoom Health account through UVA) . 
- Participa nt will be asked  pre-screen ing questions  to verify  inclusion  and exclusion criter ia 
- Participant will complete  infor med consent process  and, if consent is provided,  sign using 
DocuSign  or alternative  institutionally -approv ed method.  
 
ALL - Outpatient Vis it 1 at UVA : Pre-Assessment (will last about 90 mi nutes ) 
- Blinded s tudy therapist  will review consent and re -verify inclusion and e xclusion criter ia 
- Blinded s tudy therapist will administer a battery of hand function tests including: the 
Fugl -Meyer assessment of UE function (FMUE ), the Wolf Motor Function Test (WMFT), the 
Box and Blocks Test , and the Mo tor Activ ity Log (MAL) . 
- If admin istrati on of the t est instruments cannot be comp leted for any reason (e.g. subject 
becomes fatigued), the participant may be asked to return for an a dditional visit to 
complete the procedures.  The participant will be provid ed the no rmal per -visit stipend 
for the  additional  visit.  
- Study therapist will take hand measurements for SaeboGlove fitting . 
- Subject will be assigned to either  the GRASP HEP or the UCT group employing the study 
randomization procedure and schedule d for remaining visits.  
 
GROUP 1: GRAS P HEP GROUP  
 
GRAS P HEP Home Visit 1 (will last about 90 minutes)  
- A non -blinded  stud y ther apist will conduct a home visit at the patient’s residence . 
- The thera pist will set up the  GRASP system and verify the patient’s ability to safe ly 
and successfully use  the system at hom e. 
- The therapist will provide the patient with an appropriately sized SaeboGlove . 
- The therapist will assist the patient in learning to don and do ff the  SaeboGlove  
with GRASP sensors .  
- The patient will practi ce using  the GRASP system for v irtual world pract ice of ADLs 
and IADLs . 
 
GRASP HEP Home Visit 2 (will last about 60 minutes ) 
- A non -blinded  study therapist will conduct a  second  home v isit at the patient’s 
residence . 
- The ther apist will verify safety of the system setup in the patient ’s home.  
- The therapist will assist the patient in learning to don and doff the Saeb oGlove  
with GRASP sensors .  
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 15 of 22 - The patient will practi ce using the GRASP sys tem for virtual world p ractice of ADLs 
and IADLs . 
- If on the study therapist’s recommend ation, the study PI determines an ad ditional 
visit is warranted t o ensure a patient  can safely a nd suc cessfully use the system at 
home , an ad ditional home visit will be conducted.  
GRASP HEP Independent Prac tice at Home   
- Participa nts will be asked to employ the GRASP system for UE practice a t home 45 
minutes/session, 4 sessions/week over an 8 -week period.  
- Patients will continue to perfor m any previously prescribed therapy.  
- Once pe r week during this period, non-blinded study staff will employ an 
authorized web application on a UVA computing s ystem to remotely monitor de -
identified participant data (see Data Security Plan for details) that  inclu des 
exercise adherence (duration perfor med), movement repetitions a ccomplished 
(exercise r eps), and exercise  intensity (speed).  
- At least once every two  weeks, non-blinded study sta ff will contact the participant 
by phone or HIPAA compliant video co nferencing  to collect self -reported 
adherence  data  and confirm that no cha nge in med ical status h as occurred that 
would impact continued participation .  
GRASP HEP Home Visit 3 (will last a bout 90 m inutes)   
- At the end of the 8-week HEP period , a non-blinded study therapist will conduct a 
home visit at the patient’s residence to  observe p atients’ inde pendent use of the  
system and recover the system hardware.  
- Participants will respond to quest ionnaire -based instruments including the Syste m 
Usability Scale (SUS), a technology acceptance model (TAM ) ques tionnaire, and a 
Player Exper ience of N eeds Satisfac tion (PENS) questi onnaire, as well as 
participate in a structured interview.  These assessment s will be audiotaped.  
 
The participant will be  encouraged to invite his or her home care provider (e.g. s pouse or 
family member, if applicab le) to att end the GRASP  HEP visits, so that this individual is able to 
assist the patient during independent practic e.  
 
GROUP 2: UCT GROUP : 
- Participants in the control group will continue to receive any pr eviously prescribed 
therapy s ervices. T hese patients  will not receive any treatment services through 
the study as UCT group participants.  
- At least once every two wee ks during the 8 week peri od, non-blinded study staff  
will contact the participant by  phone  or HIPAA compliant video co nferencing  to 
collect se lf-reported adhere nce dat a and confirm that no change in medical status 
has occurred that would impact continued p articipation.  
 
ALL – Final Outpatient Visit at UVA: Post -Asses sment (will last about 90 minutes)  
- Study therapist will adm iniste r the same bat tery of tests used  in pre -assessment.  
- If administration of the test instruments cannot be completed for any reaso n (e.g. 
subject becomes fatigued), the participant may be asked  to return for an 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 16 of 22 additional visit to complete the proce dures.  T he participant  will be provided the 
normal per -visit stipend for the additional visit.  
 
A graphical summary of the GRASP Phase II study is provided below.  
 
 
 
2. If this protocol involves study  treatment, explain how a subject will be transitioned  from 
study treatment when they have comp leted t heir participation in the study.   
Example:  If the subject will be taking an investigatio nal drug, will they need to be put 
back on an approved drug when  they have completed the study?  If yes, explain how 
this will be accomplishe d and who will cov er the cost.  If the subject has a device 
implanted will it be removed?  Again - who will cover th e cost of the removal?   
Instructions:  Answer NA if this study d oes not involve a study treatment.   
Answer/Response:   
At the c onclusion of t his study, partici pants assigned to  the GRASP HEP group  will stop 
using the GRASP system . No further transition is needed.    
 
To promote equipoise, participants in the UCT group w ill be offered  free access to the 
GRASP software syste m followi ng completion of the study. The GRASP s ystems will be 
made available to UCT participants for 8 weeks, once the  units  are no longe r needed 
for the GRASP HEP -assigned participants.  
 
If the UCT p articipant wishes to take advantage of this offer, whe n a syste m becomes 
avai lable, a  study the rapist will conduct a home visit at the participant’s  residence to 
assist in system setup and training to  safely and successfully use the system at home.  
A study  staff member will recover the system after an 8 week period.  
 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 17 of 22 If on the stu dy therapist’s rec ommenda tion, the study PI determines an additional 
visit is warranted to ensure a patient  can safely and successfully use the system at 
home , an additional home visit will be conducted.  
 
All participants (both GRAS P HEP and  UCT) will be able to keep the S aeboGlo ve 
(without the GRASP system)  following completion of the protocol.  
(https://www.saebo.com/shop/sae boglove/ )  
 
 
Bibliography  
INSTRUCTIONS:   Provide a cu rrent bib liography supp orting the hypothe sis, ba ckground and 
methodology including references to papers and abstracts that have resulted f rom previous 
work by the investigator and references to the work  of others.  
 
Bibliography  
 
[1]  C. Russo and R. Andrew s, "Hospi tal Stays for Stroke and Other C erebrov ascular Disease, 
2005," 2008.  
[2]  G. Kwakkel, B. Kollen, J. van der Grond and A. Prevo, "Probability of regaining dexterity 
in the flaccid upper limb: i mpact of severity of paresis and time since onset in a cute stro ke," 
Stroke, vol. 34, no. 9, pp.  2181 -6, 2003.  
[3]  D. Brown et. al., "Projected Costs of Ischemic Stroke in the United States, " Neurolog, vol. 
67, no. 8, pp. 1390 -1395, 2006.  
[4]  S. Carmi chael, "Plasticity of Cortical Projections after Strok e," The N euroscientist,  vol. 9, 
no. 1, pp . 64-75, 2003.  
[5]  T. Murphy and D. Corbett, "Plasticity during stroke recovery: from synapse to behaviour," 
Nat Rev Neurol, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 861 -72, 2009 .  
[6]  T. Schallert, J. Leasure and B. Kolb, "Experi ence-associated structu ral events, 
subepe ndymal cellular proliferative activity, and functional recovery after injury to the 
central nervo us system," Cerebr Blood F Met, vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 1513 -1528, 2000.  
[7]  N. Ward and R. Frackowiak, "The functiona l anatomy  of cerebral r eorganization afte r focal  
brain injury," J Physiology -Paris, vol. 99, no. 4 -6, pp. 425 -36, 2006.  
[8]  P. Lindberg , C. Schmitz, M. Engardt, H. Forssberg and J. Borg, "Use -depende nt up - and 
down -regulation of sensorimotor brain circu its in stroke patients, " Neurorehab Neura l 
Repai r, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 315 -26, 2007.  
[9]  M. Hallett, "Plasticity of the Human Motor Cor tex and Recovery from Stroke," Brain Res., 
Vols. 36(2 -3), pp. 16 9-174, Oct 2001.  
[10]  L. Sawaki, A. Butler, X. Leng , P. Wass enaar, Y. Moha mmad, S. Blanton, K. Sath ian, D. 
Nichols -Larsen, S. Wolf, D. Good and G. Wittenberg, "Constraint -induced movement 
therapy results in increased motor map area in subjects 3 to 9 mo nths after stroke," 
Neurorehab Neural Repair, vol. 22,  no. 5, p p. 505 -13, 200 8.  
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 18 of 22 [11]  B. Joha nsson, "Current trends in stroke rehabilitation. A review with focus on brain 
plasticity," Acta N eurol. Scand., vol. 123, no. 3, p. 147 –159, 2011.  
[12]  J. Lie pert, H. Bauder, W. Miltner, E. Taub and C. Weiller, " Treatment -induced corti cal 
reorganization  after stroke in humans," Stroke, pp. 1210 -1216, 2000.  
[13]  D. Kamper, H. Fischer, E. Cruz and  W. Rymer, "Weakness is the primary contributor to 
finger impair ment in chronic stroke," rch Phys Med Rehabil., vol. 8 7, no. 9,  pp. 1262 -9, 
2006.  
[14]  C. E.  Lang, S. L. DeJong and J. A. Beebe1, "Recovery of Thumb and Finger Extension and 
Its Relation to  Grasp Performance After Stroke," J Neurophysiol., vol. 102, no.  1, p. 451–
459, 2009.  
[15]  SaeboFlex, http://www.sa ebo.com/p roducts/saebof lex/. 
[16]  Saebo Glove, http://www.saebo.com/products/saeboglove/.  
[17]  J. Ochoa, M. Listenberger, D. Kamper and  S. Lee, "Use of an electromyographically driven 
hand orthosis f or training after stroke," in IEEE Int Conf Rehabil Ro bot., Zur ich, 2011.  
[18]  M. Delph, S. Fischer , P. Gauthier, C. Luna, E. Clancy and G. Fischer, "A soft robotic 
exomusculature glove wit h integrated sEMG sensing for hand rehabilitation," in IEEE Int 
Conf Rehabil Robot , Seattle, 2013.  
[19]  L. Connelly , Y. Jia, M. Toro, M. S toykov, R. Kenyon and D. Kamper, "A pneumatic glove 
and immersive virtual reality environment for hand rehabilitati ve training after stroke," 
IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 551 -9, 2010.  
[20]  D. Jack, R. Bo ian, A. M erians, M. Tre maine, G. Burdea, S. Adam ovich, M. Recce and H. 
Poizner, "Virtual reality -enhanced stroke rehabilitation," IEEE, vol. 9, pp. 308 -18, 2001.  
[21]  I. Sarakoglou, N. G. Tsagarakis and D. G. Caldwell, "Occupational and physical therapy  
using a hand exoskelet on based exerciser ," in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 
Intelligent Robots and Systems , Sendai, Japan, 2004.  
[22]  P. Sale, S. Mazzoleni, V. Lombardi, D. Galafate, M. Massi miani, F. Posteraro, C. Damiani 
and M. Franceschini, " Recovery of hand functi on with robot -assisted th erapy in acute stroke 
patients: a randomized -controlled trial," Int J Rehabil Res, vol. 37 , no. 3, pp. 236 -42, 2014.  
[23]  L. Masia, H. Krebs, P. Cappa and N. Hogan, "Design and characterization of hand mod ule 
for w hole-arm rehab ilitation followin g strok e," IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 12, p. 
399–407, 2007.  
[24]  O. Lambercy, L. Dovat,  R. Gassert, E. Burdet, C. Teo and T. Milner, "A haptic knob for  
rehabilitation of hand function," IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Reh abil. Eng., vol. 15, no. 3, p. 
356–366, 2007.  
[25]  E. Carmeli, S. Peleg, G. Bartur, E. Elbo and J. Vatine, "HandTutor enhanced  hand 
rehabilitation after stroke --a pilot study," Physiother Re s Int., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 191 -200, 
2011.  
[26]  V. Chan, A. Reinkensmeyer,  A. Beroukhim, G. Zambran o, M. Bachman and D. 
Reinkensmeyer, "Retraining and assessing hand movement after stroke u sing the 
MusicGlove: comparison with conventional hand therapy a nd isometric grip training," 
Journal of NeuroEngineeri ng and Re habilitation, vol. 11, p. 76, 20 14.  
[27]  A. Ellington, R. Adams, M. White and P. Diamond, "Behavioral intention to use a virtu al 
instrumental activities of daily living system among people w ith stroke," American Journal 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 19 of 22 of Occupational Therapy,  vol. 69,  no. 3, 2015.  
[28]  E. Deci an d R. Ry an, Intrinsic motivation and self -determination in human behavior, New 
York: Plenum, 1985.   
[29]  R. Ryan and E. Deci, "Intrinsic and extrinsic motivatio ns: Classic definitions and new 
directions," Contempor ary Educa tional Psychol ogy, vol. 25, pp. 54-67, 2000.  
[30]  R. Ryan and E. Deci, "Self -determination theory and the facilitation of intr insic motivation, 
social development, and well -being," American Psychologist, vol. 55, p. 68 –78, 2000.  
[31]  R. Ryan , C. Rigby and A. Przyb ylski, "The Motivational Pull of Video Games: A Self -
Determination Theory Approach," Motivation and Emotion, vol. 3 0, no. 4, pp. 344 -360, 
2006.  
[32]  S. Page, J. Szaflarski, J. Eliassen, H. Pan and S. Cramer, "Cortical plast icity f ollowing 
motor skill le arning during mental practice in stroke," Neurorehab Neural Repair, vol. 23, 
no. 4, p. 382, 2009.  
[33]  J. A. Ste vens and M. E. P. Stoy, "Using Motor Imagery in the Rehabilitation of 
Hemiparesis," Arch Phys Med Rehabil, vol. 84, pp . 1090 -2, July 2003.  
[34]  S. Page, J. Szaflarski, J. Eliassen, H. Pan and S. Cramer, "Cortical plasticity following 
motor skil l learnin g during mental practice in stroke.," Neurorehabil Neural Repair, vol. 23, 
no. 4, pp. 382 -8, 2009.  
[35]  C. D ohle, J . Püllen, A. Nakaten, J . Küst, C. Rietz and H. Karbe, "Mirror Therapy Promotes 
Recovery From Severe Hemiparesis: A Randomized Con trolled T rial," Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair, vol. DOI:10.1177/1545968308324786, Dec 2008.  
[36]  M. Jeannerod, "Neural S imulati on of Action: A Unifyin g Mechanism for Motor Cognition," 
NeuroImage, vol. 14, pp. 103 -109, 2001.  
[37]  S. Housman, K. Scott and  D. Reink ensmeyer, "A randomized controlled trial of gravity -
supported, computer -enhanced arm exercise for individuals w ith sev ere hemiparesis," 
Neuro rehabil Neural Repair, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 505 -14, 2009.  
[38]  A. R. Fugl -Meyer, L. Jaasko, I. Leyman, S . Olsson and S. Steglind, "The Post Stroke 
Hemiplegic Patient, A Method for Evaluation of Physical Performance," Scandin avian 
Journal of Rehabilitatio n Medicine, vol. 7, pp. 13 -31, 1975.   
 
 
APPENDIX:  Non - UVa Personnel  
Instructions:  This section is NOT required if the researcher will be on UVa grounds and has 
completed a “SOM Volunteer in Research Form”.  Return to Protocol Builder and answer YES to 
the question:  Are all personnel listed on  this study UVA employees or students?  
 
1. Explain the duties of non -UVA pers onnel on this protocol.  
Answer/Response:  
 
Dr. Ellin gton (OTR/L, DOT)  will serv e as non -blinded study st aff providing remote 
monitoring and remote check -ins with pati ents as described in Study Procedures : 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 20 of 22  
- Once pe r week during this period, non-blinded stud y staff will employ an 
authorized web application on a UVA computing s ystem to remotely monitor de -
identified participant data that  inclu des exercise adherence (duration perfor med), 
movement repetitions a ccomplished (exercise r eps), and exercise  intensity 
(speed).  
- At least once every two  weeks, non-blinded study sta ff will contact the participant 
by phone or HIPAA compliant video co nferencing  to collect self -reported 
adherence  data  and confirm that no cha nge in med ical status h as occurred that 
would impact  continued participation .  
 
 
2.  Explain your plans for training and oversight of these personnel .  
Answer/Response:  
 
For the purposes of this study, Dr. Ellin gton (OTR/L, DOT)  will fall und er the supervision of 
the GRASP Phase II PI, Dr . Regan Royer, UVA PM&R.  
 
In suppor ting the above described role of remote monitoring and remote check -ins with 
study participants, Dr.  Ellin gton will closely coordinate with the GRASP study coordinator  
and the non-blinded  stud y ther apist  conducting the GRASP HEP home  visits.  
 
Dr. Ellin gton is highly experience d in conducting IRB -supervised research, having s erved as 
study st aff on mu ltiple previous UVA IRB-HSR protocols of similar s cope ( notabl y 16117  
and 17591 ). She is very well -versed in the details and procedures of th e GRASP Phase II 
protoco l, and in human subject protections.  
 
3.  How do you plan to access any study records th e non -UVA personnel might maintain?   
Answer/Response:  
 
Self-reported adherence  data collecte d during remote check -ins will be documented on a 
printed form and st ored in a locking do cument bag. The adherence data forms will be 
transferred to the study coordinator approximately once every 2 -3 weeks.   
 
4.  Will the non - UVA personnel be exposed to any additional risk while working on this 
protocol?   
Answer/Response:  
 
No. All interaction with patient s will be remote.  
 
5.  List name of any other institution with which they have an affiliation .   
Answer/Response:  
 
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 21 of 22 Mary Baldwin University  (Program Director of the Doctor o f Occupational T herapy 
Program)  
Barron Associates , Inc. (Consultant o n the NIH-funded GRASP Phase II  program)  
 
6.  Will the non - UVa personnel  have access to UVa patients or their health information  along 
with any HIPAA identifier s prior to consent ?   
Answer/Response : 
Answer is N O to al l for “prior to consent ” 
 
►IF YES, check  the HIPAA  identifiers  below  they  will have  access  to:  
YES NO  
 X 1.  Name  
 X 2.  All geographic subdivisions smaller than a state, including street 
address, city, county, precinct, zip code, and their equivalent geocodes, 
except for the i nitial three digits of the zip code if, according to the 
current publicly available data from the Bureau of the Census: (1) The 
geographic unit formed by combining all zip codes with the same 3 initial 
digits contains more than 20,000 people and (2) The in itial 3 digits of a zip 
code for all such geographic units containing 20,000 is changed to 000.  
 X 3.  All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an 
individual, including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of 
death; and all ages over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) 
indicative of such age, except that su ch ages and elements may be 
aggregated into a single category of age 90 or older.  
[This means you may record the year but not record the month or day of 
any date related to the subject if the subject is under the age of 89.  In 
addition if the subject is over the age of 89 you may not record their age 
and  you may not record the month, day or year of any  date related to the 
subject ]  
 X 4.  Telephone numbers  
 X 5.  Fax numbers  
 X 6.  Electronic mail addresses  
 X 7.  Social Security number  
 X 8.  Medi cal Record number  
 X 9.  Health plan beneficiary numbers  
 X 10.  Account numbers  
 X 11.  Certificate/license numbers  
 X 12.  Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers , including license plate 
numbers  
 X 13.  Device identifiers and serial numbers  
 X 14.  Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)  
 X 15.  Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers  
 X 16.  Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints  
IRB-HSR #22386: Glove Rehabilitation Application f or Stroke Patients (GRASP) Phase II  
 
Versio n Date: 09-18-20 
Page Number: 22 of 22  X 17.  Full face  photographic images and any comparable images  
 X 18. Any other unique identifying num ber, characteristic, code that is 
derived from or related to information about the individual (e.g. 
initials, last 4 digits of Social Security #, mother’s maiden name, first  3 
letters of last name.)  
 X 19. Any other information that could be used alone or in combination 
with other information to identify an individual. ( e.g. rare disease, 
study team or company has access to the health information and a 
HIPAA identifier or the key to the code  . ) 
 
7.  If any items above are checked  YES, list names of  non- UVa affiliated individuals who will 
have access.  
Answer/Response:  
NA 
 
NOTE:  
• If any item other t han 2 or 3 is checked  in the Table under Question # 6 and the 
individual listed under # 7  tracking of the disclosure by the study team will be required 
via EPIC.  
• If only item 2 or 3 is noted a HIPAA Data Use Agreement will be required in a contract/ 
agreem ent between the una ffiliated investigator and UVa.  
 
 
 