 
JHMIRB Modifie d eFormA  
Version 1 Dated:   01/30/2019  
Page 1 of 7 
  
Protocol Title: Ideal STeroids for Asthma Treatment in the PICU ( iSTAT PICU ): A prospective , 
comparative , single -arm study assessing dexamethasone versus methylprednisolone in severe status 
asthmaticus admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit . 
 
Short  Title : Ideal STeroids for Asthma Treatment in the PICU  [Acronym: iSTAT PICU ] 
 
Protocol / J ohns Hopkins All Children ’s Ho spital (JHAC H) IRB Number: IRB00187813  
 
National Clinical Trial (NCT) Identified Number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]    
 
Amendment Number:  n/a 
 
Date of  Protocol Approval:  3/28/2019  
 
Study Summary:  
Title  Ideal STeroids for Asthma Treatment in the PICU (iSTAT PICU): a 
prospective, single center, open -label, parallel -group, nonrandomized clinical 
trial. 
Short Title  Ideal STeroids for Asthma Treatment in the PICU [Acronym: iSTAT PICU]  
IND N/A 
Phase  4 
Desig n Prospective, open -label, parallel -group, nonrandomized clinical trial 
Study Duration  24 months  
Study Center(s)  Single -center  
Objectives  Determine  if differences in (1) length of stay , (2) continuous nebulized 
albuterol duration,  (3) a composite  outcome of rate of advanced asthma 
pharmacologic and respiratory adjunctive therapies , and (4) cortico steroid -
related adv erse event  rate for children hospitali zed with critical asthma  
enrolled to receive  IV dexamethasone  (Intervention  Arm) or 
methylprednisolone  (Standard Care Arm ). 
Number of Participants  Minimum of 90  subjects will be enrolled  allocated 2:1 to standar d care to 
interventional arms  
Diagnosis and Main Eligibility 
Criteria  Critical Asthma Admission ( Status Asthmati cus / Acute Asthma 
Exacerbation ) hospitalized in the pediatric intensive care unit  (PICU).  
Study Product, Dose, Route, Regimen  Dexamet hasone, 0. 25mg/kg/dose (Max 1 5 mg) every 6 hours , intravenous  
Duration of Administration  Maximum of 48 hours  
Statistical Methodology  Descriptive statistics , comparative statistics (Wilcoxon rank sum, Fisher’s 
exact, and student’s t tests). Type I error will be set at 0.05. All data will be 
analyzed using Stata v15.1 (Statacorp©, College station, TX).  
 
 
JHMIRB Modifie d eFormA  
Version 1 Dated:   01/30/2019  
Page 2 of 7 
 STUDY PROTOCOL  
1. Study Team Members:  
a. Senior  Investigator :  
i. Anthony A. Sochet, MD, MS (JH U, JH -ACH , Critical Care Medicine)  
b. Principal  Investigator :  
i. Meghan Roddy, PharmD (JH -ACH, Critical Care Medicine ) 
c. Coinvestigators / Collaborators : 
i. Kristina K. Darville, ARNP ; (JH -ACH, Critical Care Me dicine)   
ii. Neil Goldenberg, MD; ( JHU, JH-ACH, Director of Research)  
iii. Meghan M artin, MD; (JH -ACH, Pediatric Emergency Medicine)  
iv. Scott McKinley, MD; (JH -ACH, Pulmonology  and Sleep Medicine ) 
v. Thomas A. Nakagawa, MD; ( Unive rsity of Florida , Critical Care Medicine ) 
vi. Austin Sellers, MD ; (JH -ACH,  Institute for C linical and Translational R esearch ) 
vii. Beatriz Teppa, MD; (JH -ACH, Critical Care Medicine)  
 
2. Abstract  
Critical asthma is disease of immune dysregulation that is acu tely treated with inhale d beta -agonists 
and systemic corticosteroids. Steroid agents are chosen at the discretion of clinical providers based upon a 
child's capacity to tolerate enteral medications and the specific clinical setting (outpatient vs. general 
inpatient vs. critical i npatient). Intravenous methylprednisolone (MP) is unanimously used in the critical 
care (PICU) literature and population s but little data exists comparing MP to other potent intravenous 
corticosteroids such as dexamethasone (DM). Both dr ugs have been F DA approved for the acute treatment 
of inflammatory disorders including asthma, but no superiority trials have been conducted in the inpatient 
setting for this specific population.  
 
Our research group has conducted a retro spective study over a 2 -year period to assess if differences 
in clinical outcomes or adverse events exist in cohorts defined by DM exposure in the ER. Our data 
revealed none, but most children were switched to MP during their PICU stay making data analyses  
severely confo unded by exposure to the defining characteristics of the comparative cohort. As both agents 
are FDA approved and in an effort to appropriate power sample size calculations for a prospective non -
blinded clinical trial of DM vs MP in status as thmaticus, we s eek to first prospectively study  individuals 
enrolled into an inte rventional arm ( DM) during their PICU asthma treatment and compare outcomes to 
PICU asthmatics concurrently admitted to the PICU enrolled into a parallel g roup, standard care  arm (MP). 
This research will provide much  needed epidemiologic and b asic comparative data required to power and 
conduct a definitive, trials of DM vs. MP  assessing other clinical efficacy en dpoints  
 
3. Study Endpoints : 
Primary  endpoints include (1) length of stay , (2) continuous albuterol duration , (3) a composite 
outcome including frequency  of critical asthma adjunctive pharmacologic  and respiratory -based 
interventions, and (4 ) corticosteroid -related adverse events  
 
4. Background  
As the pathophysiology of an critical  asthma  is dysregulated inflammatory pathways, standard 
treatment includes the prompt initiation of intravenous systemic corticosteroids. Glucocorticoids are the 
mainstay of therapy for children treated for critical asthma  (Taylor, 1993). Furthermore, corticosteroids 
 
JHMIRB Modifie d eFormA  
Version 1 Dated:   01/30/2019  
Page 3 of 7 
 improve the efficacy of beta -2 agonists, such as albuterol (Svedmyr, 1990), a nebulized medication used for 
bronchodilation in acute asthma exacerbations. There remains an o ngoing dialogue among the expert 
medical community regarding the superiority of specific IV corticosteroid, dosing, route and delivery. This 
debate continues secondary to a lack of definitive comparative data in the literature. While the benefits of 
receiv ing systemic corticosteroids has been demonstrated in multiple studies (Scarfone, 1993; Ho, 1994; 
Connett, 1994; Sto rr, 1987; Younger 1987; Gleeson, 1990; Kattan, 1980), to date, no superiority trials have 
been conducted comparing IV systemic corticostero ids in the PICU setting .  
While many  systemic corticosteroids are FDA approved for the treatment of asthma exacerbation 
including prednisone, prednisolone, MP and DM, standard care in management o f critical asthma is IV MP  
1mg/kg/dose (max 60mg)  every 6 hours for a 5 -day course . Recent data from emergency room literature 
would suggest there is equipoise in use of dexamethasone as an alternative for methylprednisolone due to 
its increased glucocorticoid (anti -inflammatory) potency  and long  elimin ation half -life (Keeney, 2 014; 
Paniagua, 2017). Steroid s are chosen at the discretion of clinical providers based upon a child's capacity to 
tolerate enteral medications and clinical setting (outpatient vs. general inpatient vs. critical inpatient).   
Our research  group has conducted a retrospective study over a 2 -year period to assess if differences 
in clinical efficacy endpoints or safety endpoints exist in cohorts defined by DM exposure in the ER. Our 
data revealed no dif ferences, but many  children were switched to MP durin g their PICU stay making data 
analyses severely confounded by exposure to the defining characteristics of the comparative cohort. We 
seek to prospectively consent individuals to receive DM (intervention arm) during their PICU stay and 
compare outcomes to  a standard care arm (MP) . The JH-ACH admits approximately 150 asthmatics per 
year in the PICU and we aim to enroll 90 subjects  (30 intervention and 60 standard care) to detect a 1 -day 
change in length of stay with a power of 0.8 and alpha set at 0.05. Primary outcomes include (1) length of 
stay, (2) continuous nebulized albuterol duration , (3) a composite outcome including rate of critical asthma 
adjunctive pharmacologic  and respiratory  interventions , and ( 4) rates for corticosteroid -related adverse 
events. We plan to use the  finding s of our study to inform the methodology of upcoming superiority trials 
to better understand  how choice of corticoste roid may impact clinical, mol ecular, physiology efficacy  
endpoin ts.  
 
5. Study Procedures  
a. Study design : After IRB approval, we will conduct a prospective , parallel -arm, non -randomized , 
open labe l, single-cente r, cohort  study  in children 5 to 17 years of age admitted to the JH -ACH 
PICU with critical asthma . Children consented  to the int erventional arm will receive  intravenous 
(IV) DM 0.25 mg/kg/ dose (max dos e 15 mg per dose ) every 6 hours  for up to 2 days  and those 
enrolled into st andard care arm will receive  IV MP 1 mg/kg/dose (max dose 60mg  per dose ) 
every 6 hours for  up to  5 days .  
b. Study duration : Up until 30 -days a fter hospital d ischarge  following study enrollment .  
c. Blinding : None . 
d. Justification of why participants wil l not receive routine care or will have current therapy 
stopped . DM has an  FDA approved indication for asthma  exacerbation  management . The use of 
DM has been adopted in the emergency room  and inpatient  acute care setting as standard care.  
e. Definition of treatment failure or participant removal criteria .: As the half -life for DM is such 
that 2 days of dosing is the  equivalent of 5 days of steroid exposure, at the completion of day 4, 
if a child is still  severely ill (at the discretion of the clinical provider  in consultation with 
pediatric Pulmonlogy  as part of standard care ) was define d as treatment failure. Standard care 
would dictate further steroid administration at this time with either IV or PO corticosteroids 
beyond  5 days with planned taper in the inpatient/outpatient setting . If treatment failure occurs 
and IV steroids are elected to be continued b eyon d the pres pecified duration, the cli nicians 
could choose  the corticosteroid type at their discr etion.  
 
JHMIRB Modifie d eFormA  
Version 1 Dated:   01/30/2019  
Page 4 of 7 
 f. Description of what happens to participants receivi ng therapy when study ends or if a 
participant’s participation in the study ends prematurely : After children receive up to 2 days of 
DM, no further corticosteroids are indicated as the elimination half-life is such th at it is an 
equivalent of 5 days of treatment with MP. Standard care for children admitted to the PICU for 
critical asthma includes the route modification from IV to enteral  largely dependent on 
respirato ry and mental status  improvements . At that time, a child may be transition ed to enteral  
prednisone or prednisolone  during standard care managemen t (MP). If a child enrolled into the 
intervention  arm (D M) receives < 2 days of  IV DM but are ready to initiat e enteral medications , 
then they will be switch to enteral  DM 0.5mg/kg/dose daily  for a total  duration  of exposure not 
to exceed 2 -days during protocolized treatment . 
g. Inclusion/E xclusion Criteria : Inclusion criteria are  children 5 to 17 years of age with primary 
admission diagnoses of  critical asthma (including both  acute asthma exacerbation or st atus 
asthmaticus  in the PICU setting) . Exclusion criteria are children with existing tracheostomy, 
cystic fibrosis, malignancy, transplantat ion status, and pulmonary hypertension . 
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices  
 
ARM Name  Intervention  Arm 
Intervention Type  Dexamethasone (Intervention)  
Dose Route  Intravenous  
Dose Units  mg/kg  
Dose Strength  0.25/dose (Max 1 5mg) 
Dose Frequency  Every 6 hours  
Sourcing  Clinical  pharmacy  
Packaging/Labeling  Per clinical standard  
 
ARM Name  Intervention  Arm 
Intervention Type  Dexamethasone (Intervention)  
Dose Route  Enteral  
Dose Units  mg/kg  
Dose Strength  0.5/dose (Max 1 6mg) 
Dose Frequency  Daily  
Sourcing  Clinical  pharmacy  
Packaging/Labeling  Per clinical standard  
 
ARM Name  Standard Care  Arm 
Intervention Type  Methylprednisolone  
Dose Route  Intravenous  
Dose Units  mg/kg  
Dose Strength  1/dose (Max 60mg) 
Dose Frequency  Every 6 hours  
Sourcing  Clinical  pharmacy  
Packaging/Labeling  Per clinical standard  
 
JHMIRB Modifie d eFormA  
Version 1 Dated:   01/30/2019  
Page 5 of 7 
  
ARM Name  Standard Care  Arm 
Interventio n Type  Prednisone / Prednisolone  
Dose Route  Enteral  
Dose Units  mg/kg  
Dose Strength  1/dose  
Dose Frequency  Every 12 hours  
Sourcing  Clinical  pharmacy  
Packaging/Labeling  Per clinical standard  
 
a. Justification and safety information if FDA approved drugs will be administered for non -FDA 
approved indications or if doses or routes of administration or participant populations are 
changed : Not appli cable . 
b. Justification and safety information if non -FDA approved drugs without an IND will be 
administered. : Not a pplicable  
 
7. Study Statistics  
a. Primary outcome variable s: Primary outcomes include (1) length of s tay, (2) continuous 
nebulized albuterol duration, (3) a composite outcome including rate of critical asthma 
adjunctive pharmacologic and respiratory intervention s (i.e., magnesium, methylxanthines,  
terbutaline , ketamine, inhaled anesthetics , invasive mechanical ventilation, non -invasive 
ventilation, extracorporeal life support , and heliox ), and (4) rates for corticosteroid -related 
adverse events  (corticosteroids  (i.e., clinically relevant  gastrointestinal bleeding, gastritis,  
necrotizing enterocolitis,  hypertension, hyperglycemia,  altered mentation [hallucinations  and 
delirium ], and adrenal suppression)  
b. Other study data to be collected : anthropometrics, demographics, Pediatric Risk of Mortality -3 
score  Probability of  Mortality , Pediatric Asthma Severity Score, Natio nal Heart Lung and Blood 
asthma classification, Pediatric Index of Mortality -3 score Risk of Mortality, comorbidities,  and 
unplanned  same-cause hospital readmission within  30 days  
c. Statistical pla n: Descriptive statistics such as proportions/frequencie s, means ± standard 
deviation, and medians [interquartile range]. Comparative statistics will include Wilcoxon rank 
sum, Fisher’s exact, and student’s t tests where appropriate. Type I error will be set at 0.05. All 
data will be analyzed using Stata v1 5.1 (Statacorp©, College station, TX).  
  
8. Risks  
a. Medical risks, listing all procedures, their major and min or risks and expected frequency : 
i. There always exists a potential risk for data leak, loss of privacy and breach of 
confidentiality.  All measures (described below) will be taken to minimize these risks.  
b. Steps taken to minimize the risks : 
i. Patient data will be stored for res earch purposes as a HIPAA defined limited data set in a 
secure, password protected electronic database and analyzed with Stata v15.1.  Each 
patient will be assigned a unique Participant ID number in the system.  Access to the 
system will be restricted to r esearch team members listed above.  Data extractions as 
well as modifications or edits to data will be logged.  
 
JHMIRB Modifie d eFormA  
Version 1 Dated:   01/30/2019  
Page 6 of 7 
 ii. Serio us adverse events will be followed throughout study , officially reported within 24 -
hours, and adjudicated within the co -investigator and steering committee. In the even t 
that > 5% of children have a serious adverse event  during enrollm ent, trial enrollment 
will be halted to prevent potential harm .  
c. Plan for reporting unanticipated problems or study deviations : 
i. The principal investigator will meet on a monthly  basis with study members either face -
to-face or via telecommunications to discuss study management, education / re -
education of team members and mentorship. This will include any discussion related to 
unanticipated problems or study deviations. This will n ot exclude team members from 
meeting with the principal investigator on other occasions to discuss matters as it relates 
to this stud y protocol. These meetings will be confidential and take place in a secure 
meeting room in the Johns Hopkins All Children’s  Hospital Pediatric Critical Care 
Medicine office in the OCC Suite 702.  Any deviations from the study protocol will be 
logged and im mediately reported to the local JH -ACH IRB for review.  
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be associated with breach o f confidentiality : see above.  
e. Financial risks to the participants : none  
 
9. Benefits  
a. This research will provide the needed epidemiologic  and basic comparative data required to 
power and conduct a definitive, head -to-head trial of DM vs. MP. As a result of the se data, 
definitive study with a randomized, RCT could be conducted to confirm superiority or non -
inferiority of DM vs MP  as well as assessment of other rel evant endpoints.   
b. We expe ct that given  the shorter treatment duration and  potent glucocorticoid activi ty, DM will 
offer poten tial advan tages related to patient compliance . 
 
10. Payment and Remuneration : None  
 
11. Costs : None  
 
12. Discontinuation of Study Intervention and Participant Withdrawal:  
a. If a patient has a serious or non -serious adverse event thought to be associated with DM, then 
the IRB, subject, and family will be notified of an y adverse events immediately .  
b. A participant may voluntarily withdraw from the study at any time at his/her own request  (or 
consenting fam ily member’s request) .  
 
13. Regulatory and Ethical Considerations:  
a. The investigator will be responsible for the foll owing:  
i. Providing written summaries of the status of the study to the IRB/IEC annually or more 
frequently in accordance with the requirements, p olicies, and procedures established by 
the IRB/IEC  
ii. Notifying the IRB/IEC of SAEs or other significant safety find ings as required by 
IRB/IEC procedures  
iii. Providing oversight of the conduct of the study at the site and adherence to requirements 
of 21 CFR, ICH  guidelines, the IRB/IEC, European regulation 536/2014 for clinical 
studies (if applicable), and all other applic able local regulation s 
 
JHMIRB Modifie d eFormA  
Version 1 Dated:   01/30/2019  
Page 7 of 7 
  
14. Informed Consent Process : 
a. The investigator or his/her authorized designee  will explain the nature of the study to the 
participant or his/her legally authorized representative and answer all questions regarding the 
study.  
b. Participant s must be informed that their participation is voluntary. Participants or their legally 
authorized representative will be required to sign a st atement of informed consent that meets the 
requirements of 21 CFR 50, local regulations, ICH guidelines, Health I nsurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) requirements, where applicable, and the IRB/IEC or study center.  
c. The medical record must in clude a statement that written informed consent was obtained before 
the participant was enrolled in the study and  the date the written consent was obtained. The 
authorized person obtaining the informed consent must also sign the informed consent form 
(ICF). 
d. Participants must be re -consented to the most current version of the ICF(s) during their 
participation in the s tudy.  
e. A copy of the ICF(s) must be provided to the participant or the participant’s legally authorized 
representative.  
 
15. Protocol Deviations  
a. A protocol deviation is any departure from the defined procedures and treatment plans as 
outlined in the protocol ve rsion submitted and previously approved by the IRB. Protocol 
deviations have the potential to place participants at risk and can also undermine  the scientific 
integrity of the study thus jeopardizing the justification for the research.   
b. The JHM IRB requir es the prompt reporting of protocol deviations which are:  
i. Emergency deviations (when immediate deviations are required to protect the life or 
physical well -being of a participant)  
ii. Major (representing a major change in the approved protocol), non -emergent d eviation 
occurring without prior IRB approval  
c. Minor or administration deviations, which do not affect the scientific soundness of the research  
plan or the rights, safety, or welfare of human participants, are reported to the JHM IRB at the 
time of continu ing review.   