Study	Protocol	&	Statistical	Analysis	Plan		Title:	At-home	Transcranial	Alternating	Current	Stimulation	During	Multitasking	NCT#:	[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]	Last	Updated:	08/11/21						
Participants.	In	this	preregistered	study	(ClinicalTrials.gov	identifier:	[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]),	40	younger	adult	participants	(Mean	age:	25.2,	standard	deviation	(SD):	4.38,	25	females)	completed	the	baseline,	home-training,	and	follow-up	sessions	of	this	study	over	the	course	of	one-week.	All	participants	provided	informed	consent	as	approved	by	the	University	of	California,	San	Francisco	Institutional	Review	Board	and	were	compensated	$20	per	hour	for	participation	with	a	$50	bonus	for	completion	of	the	study.	Participants	had	no	history	of	neurological	or	psychiatric	disease,	were	not	currently	on	medications	that	modulate	neural	excitability,	and	had	corrected-to-normal	vision.	All	participants	were	native	English	speakers.	Participants	were	randomly	assigned	to	one	of	two	stimulation	frequency	groups,	which	received	20	minutes	of	6	Hz	(Mean	age:	25.8,	SD:	4.56,	12	females)	or	1	Hz	tACS	(Mean	age:	24.55,	SD:	4.21,	13	females)	over	five	consecutive	days.	The	participants,	researchers,	and	outcomes	assessor	were	all	blinded	to	the	tACS	conditions.		Neurostimulation.	The	tACS	was	delivered	through	a	Starstim	device	(Neuroelectrics,	Spain)	with	NG	Pistim	electrodes	(contact	area:	3.14	cm2)	placed	over	the	PFC	at	1	mA	(baseline	to	peak;	2mA	peak-to-peak)	with	a	180-degree	phase	offset.	Participants	applied	the	electrodes	themselves	within	a	neoprene	EEG	head	cap	where	the	only	two	holes	corresponded	to	the	electrode	locations	F3	and	F4.	Participants	were	given	instructions	to	self-apply	conductive	gel	within	the	Pistim	electrodes,	which	screw	open	for	easy	access	to	the	scalp	underneath.	Following	self-monitored	impedance	check,	the	participants	were	able	to	begin	the	stimulation	through	a	secondary	tablet	(Windows	Surface	3)	that	had	wireless	Bluetooth	connectivity	to	the	tACS	device,	which	was	Velcro-attached	on	the	back	of	the	head	cap.	The	current	was	ramped	up	and	down	over	the	course	of	10	seconds	at	the	beginning	and	end	of	20	minutes	of	stimulation,	respectively.	Participants	began	the	stimulation	then	immediately	began	the	training	task	on	five	consecutive	days.	Researchers	were	able	to	remotely	monitor	adherence	to	the	tACS	sessions	as	well	as	any	reported	side	effects	in	real	time.		Baseline	&	follow-up	session.	To	measure	multitasking	performance,	participants	were	assessed	in	the	laboratory	with	NeuroRacer,	a	gamified	task	where	they	must	continuously	perform	visuomotor	tracking	(driving	a	car)	while	simultaneously	performing	visual	discrimination	(detect	a	target	sign)	with	a	button	press	(for	details	see:	Anguera	et	al.,	2013).	On	both	in-lab	sessions	(baseline	and	follow-up),	participants	first	completed	thresholding	of	the	visual	discrimination	(sign)	and	visuomotor	tracking	(drive)	tasks,	to	establish	a	difficulty	level	where	participants	scored	~80%	accuracy.	Target	signs	appeared	every	2-3	seconds	and	lasted	for	400	ms.	Next,	in	a	counterbalanced	order,	participants	completed	two	runs	of	only	the	NeuroRacer	sign	task,	two	runs	of	only	the	NeuroRacer	drive	task,	and	three	multitasking	runs	of	the	NeuroRacer	sign	and	drive	task	together.	Furthermore,	participants	had	to	respond	within	their	individual	reaction	time	window	as	determined	by	single	task	thresholding	during	the	baseline	session	to	be	counted	as	correct	(participant	range:	320	-	490	ms).	Perceptual	discrimination	performance	was	measured	during	each	multitasking	run	using	a	metric	of	discrimination	(d’),	which	was	estimated	for	each	participant	by	comparing	hit	(correct	responses	to	target	signs)	rates	and	false	alarm	(responses	to	non-targets)	rates	and	calculated	as	d’	=	Z(hits)–Z(false	alarms).	Finally,	we	calculated	multitasking	cost	by	measuring	the	difference	in	d’	between	sign	only	and	multitask	runs	within	each	session	((multitask	d’/sign	only	d’)-1).	The	total	number	of	signs	to	respond	to	on	both	the	sign	only	and	multitask	tasks	portions	totaled	216	trials	with	33%	target	trials.	Following	the	NeuroRacer	tasks,	participants	completed	a	computerized	continuous	performance	task	(CPT)	that	tests	sustained	attention	performance.	The	CPT	was	a	well-validated	modified	version	of	the	Test	of	Variables	of	Attention	(TOVA;	Greenberg	and	Waldmant,	1993),	which	tests	sustained	attention	by	measuring	reaction	time	(RT)	and	reaction	time	variability	(RTV)	to	stimuli	(white	squares)	which	appear	on	a	black	background	on	either	the	top	or	bottom	half	of	the	screen.		Participants	were	instructed	to	press	the	space	bar	as	quickly	as	possible	when	the	white	square	appeared	on	the	top	half,	but	not	the	bottom	half	of	the	screen.	The	ratio	of	targets	to	non-targets	was	25%	(1	target	for	every	4	non-targets).	Participants	completed	two	blocks	of	125	trials	with	25	targets	per	block,	resulting	in	50	total	target	trials.	This	version	of	the	CPT	has	been	previously	employed	in	multiple	studies	from	our	
research	group1,3–6.	Lastly,	participants	were	trained	on	how	to	apply	the	neurostimulation	for	use	on	the	following	at-home	sessions.		Training	sessions.	On	five	consecutive	days	participants	began	the	self-applied	tACS	and	immediately	began	the	training	task,	AKL-T01	(Akili	Interactive	Labs,	Inc).	AKL-T01	is	a	proprietary	system	based	on	the	NeuroRacer	paradigm	that	challenges	cognitive	control	by	requiring	multitasking	performance	(for	more	details	see:	7.	During	the	intervention,	participants	must	guide	a	character	down	a	path	by	tilting	the	iPad	similar	to	a	steering	wheel	(visuospatial	tracking).	At	the	same	time,	participants	are	engaged	in	a	feature	discrimination	task,	where	they	must	tap	on	the	screen	during	target	items	(e.g.,	green	fish)	and	ignore	all	distractors	(e.g.,	blue	fish).	AKL-T01	is	developed	on	the	iPad	with	high-quality	graphics	and	rewards	designed	to	be	more	engaging	than	standard	laboratory	cognitive	tasks.	Importantly,	AKL-T01	employs	algorithms	that	continuously	adapts	to	individual	drive	and	target	performance	in	real	time	with	feedback	provided.	Participants	completed	five	missions	per	day,	which	last	roughly	the	same	length	as	the	20-minute	tACS	protocol.	Participants	were	instructed	to	administer	the	tACS	and	play	AKL-T01	at	the	same	time	of	day	during	all	five	training	sessions.	Researchers	were	able	to	remotely	monitor	adherence	to	the	training	sessions	as	data	is	uploaded	online	during	each	session.	Given	the	adaptive	nature	of	AKL-T01,	which	maintains	accuracy	as	participants	improve,	we	did	not	analyze	performance	between	groups.		Statistical	analyses.	Outcome	measures	(d’,	d’	cost,	RT,	RTV)	during	the	follow-up	session	were	each	separately	submitted	to	an	analysis	of	covariance	(ANCOVA)	as	the	dependent	variable	and	group	as	a	fixed	factor	(6Hz,	1Hz).	Furthermore,	we	included	baseline	performance	as	a	covariate	to	test	for	the	main	effects	of	tACS	condition	and	to	control	for	baseline	variability.			References	1.	Anguera,	J.	A.	et	al.	Video	game	training	enhances	cognitive	control	in	older	adults.	Nature	501,	97–101	(2013).	2.	Greenberg,	L.	M.	&	Waldmant,	I.	D.	Developmental	Normative	Data	on	The	Test	of	Variables	of	Attention	(T.O.V.A.TM).	J.	Child	Psychol.	Psychiatry	(1993).	doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.1993.tb01105.x	3.	Anguera,	J.	A.,	Gunning,	F.	M.	&	Areán,	P.	A.	Improving	late	life	depression	and	cognitive	control	through	the	use	of	therapeutic	video	game	technology:	A	proof-of-concept	randomized	trial.	Depress.	Anxiety	34,	508–517	(2017).	4.	Anguera,	J.	A.	et	al.	A	pilot	study	to	determine	the	feasibility	of	enhancing	cognitive	abilities	in	children	with	sensory	processing	dysfunction.	PLoS	One	12,	1–19	(2017).	5.	Mishra,	J.,	de	Villers-Sidani,	E.,	Merzenich,	M.	&	Gazzaley,	A.	Adaptive	Training	Diminishes	Distractibility	in	Aging	across	Species.	Neuron	84,	1091–1103	(2014).	6.	Ziegler,	D.	A.	et	al.	Closed-loop	digital	meditation	improves	sustained	attention	in	young	adults.	Nat.	Hum.	Behav.	3,	746–757	(2019).	7.	Davis,	N.	O.,	Bower,	J.	&	Kollins,	S.	H.	Proof-of-concept	study	of	an	at-home,	engaging,	digital	intervention	for	pediatric	ADHD.	PLoS	One	(2018).	doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0189749		