A comparative study of electric toothbrushes for the efficacy of single use plaque removal 
and the effect on plaque accumulation and gingivitis.  
 
Whiteman, Y; Mann,R; Thakkar, A;  Pi -Anfruns J  
 
NCT0341 6985  
November 15, 2019   
A comparative study of electric toothbrushes for the efficacy of single use plaque removal 
and the effect on plaque accumulation and gingivitis.  
 
Whiteman, Y;  Mann,R; Thakkar, A;   Pi-Anfruns J  
 
 
It is well accepted that the greatest contributor to the health of the periodontium and dentition 
is regular and thorough dental plaque removal, typically by means of adequate toothbrushing. 
Although patients are typically informed about the risks of subst andard oral hygiene and the 
contributing factors in oral/dental disease by dental professionals, research has shown that an 
undesirably high proportion of adults find thorough toothbrushing with a standard manual 
toothbrush to achieve a plaque -free state c hallenging, as evidenced by high worldwide levels of 
gingivitis and/or periodontitis .  
The purpose of this study is to clinically evaluate the plaque removal efficacy of two electric 
powered toothbrushes after a single use, as well as the effect on plaque accumulation and 
gingivitis after 14 days and 30 days period.  
 
Materials and Methods  
 
Study design :  randomised, single blinded , parallel.   
 
After the screening procedure and based on inclusion  requirements , all subject s will receive oral 
prophylaxis  (T0) to ensure a baseline of 0 P laque Index (PI)  prior to the first appointment  (T1). 
The subject s will be instructed  not to use  a tooth brush or any mechanical cleaning  device until 
the initial PI and Gingival Index es (GI) are taken  at 24 hours  after T0.  
The subjects  will be randomized  into 3 groups , and the will be provided  one of  the two evaluated  
toothbrush es, as well as  toothpaste. All subjects will be using identical toothpaste and will receive 
oral hygiene instructions based on the manufacturer ’s recommendations .  
At T1 initial GI and PI will be taken prior to brushing followed by a second PI reading immediately 
after the first use of the power driven toothbrush.  
The subject s will be instructed to brush twice a da y for a period of 2 minutes (follo wing the 
programmed toothbrush timer) and refrain from using  dental floss, t ooth pick or any  mechanical 
oral hygiene aid for the period of the study . 
On the second visit  at 14 days (T2) and  third visit at  30 days ( T3), additional GI and PI reading s 
will be  taken  and data will be  recorded . All measurements and clinical examinations  will be 
performed by  a single  blinded examiner.  Evaluation on teeth will be  made on six teeth  
#3,7,12,19,23 and 28 (mesio -buccal, buccal, disto -buccal and mesio -lingual, lingual, disto -lingual)  
following the  Silness -Loe Index.  
Other  effect s on hard and soft tissue will also be recorded such as cervic al abrasion, gingival 
abrasion and effect on dental restorations.   
 
Toothbrushes:  Oral B (A) , BURST Oral care  (B), manual toothbrush (C)  
 
Dentifrice:   Colgate Total  
 
Duration  of study:  32 days period  
 
Baseline , data & Indices : oral prophylaxis will be performed to establish  baseline scores to  0. 
Plaque indices  and gingival indices  (Silness -Löe Index ) will be collected  24 hour prior to  
toothbrush delivery  and the subjects will be instructed not to brush or used ant device within this 
period. After the 24 hours abstinence period a n initial G.I records will be collected prior to first 
use of the brushes followed by a second G.I record immediately  after the first use of the 
toothbrush.  
 
Sample Size : 90 healthy subjects  age group 18 -60 years old . Each group  will contain  30 subjects.  
 
Inclusion criteria  
 
1. Good overall  health  
2. At lea st 20 teeth present , not including 3rd Molars  
3. Non -smoker  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 
1. Poor manual dexterity or mentally handicap;  
2. Presence of removable intra -oral prosthesis  
3. Current orthodontic therapy  
4. Severe Periodontal condition  or caries teeth in need of immediate attention  
5. Pregnant women  
6. Subjects that use medications that may effect oral health  
7. No Systemic diseases/condit ions such as diabetes  mellitus , heart disease.  
8. Use of plaque inhibiting toothpaste, mouthwash, interdental flossing  in the period of the 
study  
 
Subject Compensation  
 
Study  participants will receive $100 for their participation. $50 will be given at T2 and $50 at T3.  
 
Statistical Analysis   
ANOVA : 
 Compare the plaque level between the three groups after 30 days  
 Compare the gingitis level between the three groups after 30 days  
 