Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 1 of 43  User Performance of the CONTOUR® NEXT and CONTOUR TV3  Blood 
Glucose Monitoring Systems  
Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Sponsor:  Ascensia Diabetes Care     
Global Clinical Affairs  
100 Summit Lake Drive  
Valhalla, NY  10595  
 
 
       
Maria Teresa Viggiani, MS , CCRA  
Sr. Clinical Research Scientist,  
Global Clinical Affairs   Date   Colleen Burdel  
Regulatory Affairs Manager,  
Global Regulatory Affairs   Date  
 
       
Scott Pardo, PhD, PStat® 
Deputy Director,  Statistics and Data 
Management  
Global Medical and Clinical Affairs   Date   James Venosky  
Global Program Leader,  
LIGHTNING/THUNDER Project    Date 
 
    
    
Jane F. Wallace, CCRA  
Deputy Director,  
Global Clinical Affairs  
  Date      
 
 
  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 2 of 43  I have read this protocol and agree to conduct the study as outlined.  I also agree that prior to seeking 
approval from an Institutional Review Board (IRB), the Ascensia Diabetes Care study manager must approve any changes to the protocol.  
 
SITE:  AMCR Ins titute  
  
Principal 
Investigator:   Timothy Bailey, MD  
AMCR Institute  
625 West Citracado Parkway,  
   Suite 112 
Escondido, CA  92025  Phone: (760) 466- 1530  
Fax: (760) 466- 1525  
Email: tbailey@amcrinstitute.com 
 
 
 
__________________  _______________________     _____________ 
             Signature  Printed Name         Date  
  SITE:  Rainier Clinical Research Center, Inc.  
 
Principal 
Investigator:   Leslie J. Klaff,  MD  
Rainier Clinical Research Center, Inc.  
723 SW 10
th Street, Suite 100 
Renton, WA  98057  Phone: (425) 251- 1720  
Fax: (425) 251- 1723  
Email: ljklaff@rainier -research.com  
 
  
__________________  _______________________     _____________ 
             Signature  Printed Name         Date  
  
This protocol and the data obtained from the study are confidential and may not be disclosed without prior 
written consent of Ascensia Diabetes Care.  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 3 of 43    
Table of Contents  
 
1.0 BACKGROUND INFORMATION            5  
2.0 STUDY OBJECTIVES             5  
3.0 STUDY DESIGN            8  
4.0 SUBJECT RECRUITM ENT, INCLUSION/EXCLUSION CRITERIA            9  
5.0 MATERIALS AND ME THODS           10  
6.0 RISK / BENEFIT A SSESSMENT           22  
7.0 ADVERSE EVENT MANAGEMENT AND MEDICAL  DEVICE REPORTING          23  
8.0 STUDY TERMINATIO N AND SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL CRITERIA          26  
9.0 REGULATORY           26  
10.0 DATA COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT           27  
11.0 DATA ANALYSIS           28  
12.0 ADMINISTRATION          35  
APPENDIX A -  INSTR F OR CLEANING AND DISI NFECTING METERS           36  
APPENDIX B -   INSTR FOR COLLECTION/PROCE SSING BLOOD FOR YSI          37  
APPENDIX C -  INSTR F OR HCT SAMPLE PREPAR ATION & TESTING           39  
APPENDIX D -  HYPOGLY CEMIA PROTOCOL AT AM CR INSTITUTE           40  
APPENDIX E -  HYPOGLY CEMIA PROTOCOL AT RAINIER CRC           42  
ATTACH 1:   PROPER H ANDLING OF ASCENSIA YSI SERUM CONTROLS          43  
 
 
  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 4 of 43   
List of Abbreviations  
 
 
AE Adverse Event  
AST  Alternative site test  
BG Blood Glucose  
BGM  Blood Glucose Meter  
BGMS  Blood Glucose Monitoring System  
CCRA  Certified Clinical Research Associate  
CLSI  Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute  
CSR  Clinical Study Report  
EDC  Electronic Data Capture  
 
FDA SMBG: 
2016  Self-Monitoring Blood Glucose Test Systems for Over -the-Counter Use, 
Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff. 
Issued 11Oct2016, Food and Drug Administration, USA.  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
ISO 
15197:2013 (and EN ISO 15197:2015)  In vitro diagnostic test systems – Requirements for blood –glucose monitoring 
systems for self -testing in managing diabetes mellitus. Issued 15May2013, 
International Organization for Standardization, Switzerland. 
Note:  All references to ISO:15197:2013 in this protocol also encompass EN 
ISO 15197:2015.  
PI Principal Investigator  
QRG  Quick Reference Guide  
SMBG  Self-Monitoring of Blood Glucose  
UADE  Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect  
UG User Guide  
YSI YSI Glucose Analyzer™ (YSI Life Sciences, Yellow Springs, OH)  
   
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 5 of 43  1.0 Background Information  
CONTOUR® NEXT is the proposed name of a blood glucose monitoring system (BGMS) 
consisting of a new meter and marketed CONTOUR NEXT® test strip.  The development name  of 
the meter  is LIGHTNING NEXT.  CONTOUR TV3  is the proposed  name of a BGMS consisting 
of a new meter  and new V3 test strips.  The development name of the meter is THUNDER TV3.  
The meters can wirelessly transmit BG results using Bluetooth Low Energy to the CONTOUR 
mobile application that will be available on specified versions of the iOS and Android mobile 
platfo rms.   
This clinical trial will assess the performance (accuracy) of the CONTOUR  NEXT and 
CONTOUR  TV3 meters by lay users enrolled as subjects in the study, and by health care 
professionals (also called study staff).  The trial will follow the requirements  and procedures 
described in FDA Guidance on Self -monitoring Blood Glucose Test Systems: 2016 (FDA 
SMBG:2016) 1 and ISO 15197:2013 International Standard, Section 82.  Results will be evaluated 
and reported for each of the two BGMS according to each of the  two standards (FDA and ISO), 
for a total of four reports.  CONTOUR  NEXT results and CONTOUR  TV3 results will not be 
compared to one another.  
2.0  Study Objectives    
Study objectives 2.1 and 2.2 are in accordance with FDA SMBG: 2016 , Section C. Method 
Compari son / User Evaluation, and apply to data collected from all subjects : people with diabetes 
and a smaller number of naïve users (defined as people  without diabetes).   The objectives apply to 
both CONTOUR  NEXT and CONTOUR  TV3 BGMS, and the results from the t wo meter systems 
will not  be compared to each other.  
2.1   Primary Objective (FDA SMBG: 2016) , all subjects : 
2.1.1 Fingerstick Test: Obtain BGMS performance data in the hands of lay users with diabetes 
and naïve users  (without diabetes) from fingerstick capillary blood using Microlet NEXT® 
lancing device.  
• 95% of glucose results shall fall within ±15% of laboratory method across the 
entire tested range  
• 99% of glucose results shall fall within ±20% of laboratory method across the entire tested range  
2.1.2 Samples will adequately span the claimed measuring range.   At least ten unaltered samples 
with blood glucose concentration at the lower limits of the measuring range (less than 80 mg/dl)  and at least ten unaltered samples at  the upper limit measuring range (greater than 
250 mg/dl) will be obtained for each anatomical site (i.e. fingerstick & palm).  
 
                                                           
1 Self-Monitoring Blood Glucose Test Systems for Over -the-Counter Use, Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug 
Administration Staff. Issued 11Oct2016, Food and Drug Administration, USA. (abbreviated FDA SMBG:2016)  
2 In vitro diagnostic test systems –  Requir ements for blood-glucose monitoring systems for self -testing in managing diabetes 
mellitus. Issued 15 May2013, International Organization for Standardization, Switzerland. (abbreviated ISO 15197:2013)  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 6 of 43  2.2   Secondary Objectives (FDA SMBG: 2016) , all subjects : 
2.2.1 Alternative Site Test (AST) : Obtain BGMS performance data in the hands of lay users 
with diabetes and naïve users  (without diabetes) from the palm site using the Microlet 
NEXT lancing device with the AST endcap.  Acceptance criteria will be the same as 
fingerstick 2.1.1.   
2.2.2 Subject Q uestionnaire 1:   The questionnaire will include statements about the BGMS 
instructions for use (product labeling) and ease of use of the basic blood testing operations 
of the meter system.  These statements will be given a rating by all of the subjects 
(1=strongly disagree, 2=disagree, 3=neutral, 4=agree, 5=strongly agree), and frequency 
distributions will be tabulated.  Results will be compared to the following criteria:  
• Acceptance criteria: At least 90% of the applicable statement responses from the 
quest ionnaire must be ≥ 3 to pass*. 
 
Study objectives 2.3.1 and 2.3.4 below are in accordance with ISO 15197:2013, Section 8, and 
apply to data collected ONLY from subjects who have diabetes .  Objectives 2.3.2 and  2.3.3 also 
apply to subjects who have diabetes.  The objectives apply to both CONTOUR  NEXT and 
CONTOUR  TV3 BGMS, and the results from the two meter systems will not  be compared to each 
other. 
2.3   Secondary Objectives , only subjects with diabetes : 
2.3.1 Fingerstick Test: Obtain BGMS performance data in the hands of lay users with diabetes  
using fingerstick capillary blood obtained with Microlet NEXT lancing device.  
• 95% of glucose results shall fall within ±15mg/dL of laboratory method at glucose 
concentration <100 mg/dL a nd within ±15% at glucose concentrations ≥100 
mg/dL  
2.3.2 Alternative Site Test (AST): Obtain BGMS performance data in the hands of lay users with 
diabetes using capillary blood from the palm site obtained with Microlet NEXT lancing 
device with the AST endcap.  Acceptance criteria will be the same as fingerstick 2.3.1.  
2.3.3 Venous Blood Test:  Obtain BGMS  performance data using venous blood from lay users 
with diabetes.  Acceptance criteria will be the same as fingerstick 2.3.1.  
2.3.4 Subject Questionnaire 1:   The questionnaire will include statements about the BGMS 
instructions for use (product labeling) and ease of use of the basic blood testing operations 
of the meter system.  These statements will be given a rating by the subjects with diabetes 
(1=strongly disagree, 2=di sagree, 3=neutral, 4=agree, 5=strongly agree), and frequency 
distributions will be tabulated.  Results will be compared to the following criteria:  
                                                           
*This is a “total population” (hypothesis test) require ment for the pool of all subjects.  
 
 
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 7 of 43  • Acceptance criteria: There must be at least a 90% probability that a user would 
respond with a score of 3 or higher to statements concerning instructions for use 
or ease of use.** 
 
 
Study objectives 2.4 below are internal objectives and apply to data collected from all subjects OR 
subjects who have diabetes , as specified for each objective.  The objectives apply to CONTOUR  
NEXT and CONTOUR  TV3 BGMS  as noted , and the results from the two meter systems will not  
be compared to each other. 
2.4   Secondary Objectives (internal objectives) : 
2.4.1 Fingerstick Test (only subjects with diabetes ):  Obtain BGMS  performance data in the 
hands  of lay users with diabetes using fingerstick capillary blood obtained with Microlet 
NEXT lancing device.  
CONTOUR NEXT:  
• 95% of glucose results shall fall within ± 10.5mg/dL  of laboratory method at 
glucose concentrations <100 mg/dL and within ± 10.5% at glucose concentrations 
≥100 mg/dL** 
CONTOUR TV3:  
• 95% of glucose results shall fall within ±12.5 mg/dL of laboratory method at 
glucose concentrations <100 mg/dL and within ±12.5%  at glucose concentrations 
≥100 mg/dL** 
2.4.2 Study staff  test (both BGMS; two analyses, one for all subjects  and one for only 
subjects with diabetes ):  Obtain BGMS performance data in the hands  of trained study 
staff testing subjects’  fingerstick  blood obtained with Microlet NEXT lancing device.  
• 95% of glucose results shall fall within ±15mg/dL of laboratory method at glucose 
concentrations <100 mg/dL and within ±15% at glucose concentrations ≥100 
mg/dL*,** 
2.4.3 Subject Questionnaire 2 ( both BGMS; only subjects with diabetes ):  This questionnaire  
for subjects with diabetes will include statements about user preferences and feedback 
regarding the features of the BGMS in routine diabetes management.  These statements 
will be given a rating by the subj ects (1=strongly disagree, 2=disagree, 3=neutral, 4=agree, 
5=strongly agree), and frequency distributions will be tabulated.  
• Acceptance criteria: There are no pass/fail criteria for Questionnaire 2.    
 
                                                           
**This is a “total population” (hypothesis test) requirement for the pool of all subjects with diabetes.  
 
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 8 of 43  3.0 Study Design Summary  
This study was designed to satis fy both the FDA SMBG:2016 and the  ISO 15197:2013, Section 
8 requirements.  Besides different analysis criteria, the main difference between these regulations 
is that FDA SMBG:2016 requires that both naïve users (people without diabetes) and pe ople with 
diabetes are included in the study population.  The ISO 15197:2013 standard states that the study 
population shall be pe ople with diabetes.  
The study will be conducted at two clinical sites and enroll a total of approximately 370 lay users. 
Ten to fifteen per cent (10 -  15%) of the enrolled subjects will be pe ople without diabetes and the 
remaining subjects will be pe ople with diabetes.   
For this study, there must be at least 350 total evaluable fingerstick  self-test results and at least 350 
total evaluable AST palm self -test results for each BGMS, CONTOUR  NEXT and CONTOUR  
TV3.  In addition, per FDA SMBG:2016, at least 10 unaltered fingerstick blood samples will be < 
80 mg/dL and 10 will be > 250 mg/dL.  Subject enrollment will continue until the required 
evaluable samples are collected.   
Sites are not required to replace subjects with diabetes who did not have evaluable venous blood 
results.  
The subjects will be 18 years and older.  Each subject will make one visit, lasting approximately 
2 hours, to the clinical trial site.  Study sessions will be conducted by study staff members who 
have been trained on all aspects of the protocol, forms, the use of the CONTOUR  NEXT and 
CONTOUR  TV3 systems, data collection,  and GCP.   
All subjects will complete the informed consent process before performing any study procedures.   
Procedures -  All Subjects  
According to a randomization schedule, subjects will be assigned to: 1) use either the CONTOUR  
NEXT or CONTOUR  TV3 meter first, and 2) use one of three test strip lots corresponding to each 
meter throughout the visit.   
The untrained subjects, who have never used either of the systems previously, will be sequestered 
in such a way that they cannot observe or be influenced by the testing technique of other study 
participants.  They will learn to use the assigned meter by reading the corresponding User Guide 
(UG) and Quick Reference Guide (QRG).  Each subject will perform one fingerstick self -test using 
a Microlet NEXT or similar lancing device and the assigned meter.  Immediately following the 
subject self -test, a Tenderlett ™ or similar device will be used by the study staff on the subject’s 
finger (same hand) to collect a capillary sample for testing on the YSI Glucose Analyzer.   
Immediately following the Tenderlett lancing, subjects will lance their palm using the Microlet 
NEXT lancing device (with AST clear  endcap) and will perform a self -test using the meter.   
Immediately following the AST test, the staff person will perform a fingerstick test on the subject. All subject self -test results and study staff results will be compared to YSI results from blood 
obtained from the Tenderlett fingerstick.  
Hematocrit will be measured for all subjects.    
All Subjects will then complete a questionnaire (Questionnaire 1) to provide feedback on the meter 
system and instructions for use (UG and QRG).   
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 9 of 43   
Procedures -  Only Subjects with Diabetes  
Subjects with diabetes will be given a venipuncture.  The venous blood will be tested by the study 
staff using the CONTOUR  NEXT and CONTOUR  TV3 systems, maintaining randomized first 
meter order, and the YSI lab analyzer.  The venipuncture may be performed any time after the 
subject is enrolled (i.e. completed informed consent and passed inclusion/exclusion criteria). 
After all testing is completed, staff will demonstrate to the subjects with diabetes several features 
of the met er system that would not necessarily be experienced during the brief accuracy testing. 
These subjects will be given a second questionnaire (Questionnaire 2) to provide feedback about the new features of the system.   
 
Procedures repeated with second BGMS  
After completing study procedures for one BGMS, subjects will then repeat all of these procedures 
using the second BGMS, except the hematocrit and venipuncture procedures.  (Hematocrit is 
measured on a separate instrument and is not meter -specific; venipunc ture is performed once and 
measured on both meters, as previously described.)  
4.0 Subject Recruitment, Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Subject Recruitment:   At least 370 subjects will be enrolled into the study.  These will be people 
with diabetes (type 1 or typ e 2) and a smaller number , 10 - 15%, without diabetes.  The subjects 
will be members of the local communities.  
4.1  Inclusion Criteria:  
4.1.1 Males and females, 18 years of age and older  
4.1.2 Ability to speak, read and understand English.  Subjects must demonstrate ability to read a 
paragraph from the first page of the UG to qualify for the study.  
4.1.3 Willing to complete all study procedures  
4.2 Exclusion Criteria:  
4.2.1 Hemophilia or any other bleeding disorder  
4.2.2 Pregnancy (self -reported)  
4.2.3 Physical, visual or neurological impairments that would make the person unable to perform 
testing with the BGM S.  
4.2.4 Previous participat ion in a blood glucose monitoring study using the Ascensia CONTOUR  
NEXT or CONTOUR  TV3 BGMS.  
4.2.5 Working for a medical laboratory, hospital or other clinical setting that involves training on 
or clinical use of blood glucose monitors. 
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 10 of 43  4.2.6 Working for a competitive medical device company, or having an immediate family member 
or someone who is not a family member but is living within the household of someone who 
works for such a company.   
• Immediate family members are the subject’s parents, spouse, children, and siblings, including the parent’s spouse; step- children and adopted children and their spouses.   
• A competitive medical device company is a company that provides a medical device or components of a device that is related to diabetes.   
For example, people who are not eligible are those who work for companies that create or manufacture the following (or a company that is in a partnership with a company that provides such devices): lancing devices, blood glucose monitoring systems, continuous glucose monitoring systems, insulin pens, or systems related to the measurement of HbA1c.   
People who are eligible are those who work for companies associated with products such as wound dressings, medications or dietary products.  
4.2.7 A condition, which i n the opinion of the investigator or designee, would put the person or 
study conduct at risk.  The reason for exclusion will be clearly documented by investigator 
or designee on the subject disposition form.  
 
4.3 General Enrollment Details -  Combined across sites  
4.3.1 The following additional population criteria are study goals with each site recruiting to meet 
these goals:  
1. At least 70% of subjects will be younger than age 65.  
2. Ten to fifteen % (10 -15%) of subjects will be people without diabetes . 
3. At least 20% of subjects (with diabetes) will have type 1 diabetes.  
4.3.2 No laboratory tests (e.g., pregnancy) are required to assure qualification.  Subjects’ verbal 
responses will be accepted and recorded on forms which will serve as source documents for the electron ic data capture (EDC) system.  
4.3.3 Subject venipuncture may be performed at any time during the subject visit.   
5.0 Materials and Methods  
5.1 Resources Supplied by Investigational Site  
5.1.1 Staffing  
1. Principal Investigator and , as needed,  Sub- Investigator (s) 
2. Study Coordinator  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 11 of 43  3. Two or more study staff to conduct the study  
4. Staff person(s) to measure hematocrit, prepare samples for YSI analysis, and perform YSI 
analysis of venous and capillary blood (plasma) and serum controls (per site: sponsor agreement)  
5. Data entry p erson for EDC data entry (Note: This requires EDC training.)  
5.1.2 Other 
1. Final informed consent forms (ICF), and other necessary supporting documents, as appropriate  
2. Computer with internet connection for site and monitor access to EDC system  
3. Facility with adequa te space for conducting all testing.  Site facilities for conducting 
subject visits must allow sufficient privacy so subjects cannot observe other subjects’ BGM S testing procedures.  Testing area must also be conducive to allowing subjects to 
focus on test ing (i.e. background distraction to be kept to a minimum) . 
4. YSI analyzers, reagents, and supplies  
5. Supplies to treat any hypoglycemic events  
6. Venipuncture supplies  
7. Laboratory supplies including: disposable pipets, gloves, alcohol wipes, band aids, gauze, parafilm, disposable benchtop covers   
8. Tenderlett™ or similar single -use lancing device  
9. Micro collection tubes with lithium heparin anticoagulant (no gel separator)  
10. Hand warmers  
11. Biohazardous bags and sharps containers  
 
5.2 Resources Supplied by Ascensia  
5.2.1 Staffing  
1. Ascensia Study Manager  
2. Study Monitor(s)  
5.2.2 Materials  
1. Protocol, EDC system, paper case report forms (CRF) and questionnaires, as needed  
2. ICF template  
3. CONTOUR  NEXT meters (Note: Meters will have Bluetooth turned ON throughout the 
study .) 
4. CONTOUR  NEXT User Guides (UG) and Quick Reference Guides (QRG)  
5. CONTOUR NEXT test strips -  3 lots labeled as RED, GREEN, BLUE (R, G, B).  A 
minimum of 10 vials of test strips pe r lot will be provided. 
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 12 of 43  6. CONTOUR  TV3 meters  (Note: Meters will have Bluetooth turned ON throughout the 
study .) 
7. CONTOUR  TV3 UGs and QRGs  
8. V3 test strips – 3 lots labeled as RED, GREEN, BLUE (R, G, B).  A minimum of 10 vials 
of test strips per lot will be prov ided.  
9. CONTOUR  NEXT /CONTOUR  TV3  (Normal level) control solution  
10. Microlet NEXT lancing device systems including clear, AST endcap.  (All subjects will 
be provided new lancing devices and lancets; lancing devices will not be shared among subjects.)  
11. Thermomet er / hygrometer  
12. Statspin™ microcentrifuge and tube rotors  
13. Microhematocrit tube reader (or equivalent hematocrit measurement system), hematocrit rotors, sealant  
14. Microhematocrit  tubes without anticoagulant (for testing venous blood)  
15. Microhematocrit tubes with anticoagulant (for testing capillary blood)  
16. Clocks with 24- hr time option  
17. Ascensia serum glucose traceability controls (four levels)  
18. Disposable microtubes,  disinfectant wipes for meters  
19. Package delivery forms and envelopes (UPS or Fed Ex)  
 
5.3 Site Staff Pre -Study Orientation  
The Ascensia Study Manager, or designee, will review all study d ocuments, procedures (including 
procedures for data collection and management), GCP, and usage of the CONTOUR  NEXT and 
CONTOUR  TV3 BGMS with the site staff.  All site staff involved in subject testing sessions will 
successfully perform at least one control  solution test with each of the two BGMSs.  Study -specific 
EDC training will also be provided to study staff as necessary.  
5.4 Safety and Disinfection Procedures:  
1. Universal precautions will be used throughout the study.  
2. Only study staff will perform disinfection procedures.  Subjects will not perform disinfection.  
3. A new CONTOUR  NEXT and CONTOUR  TV3 meter will be provided to each subject. At 
the end of the subject’s visit, the meters will be disinfected and stored until they are returned to Ascensia.  
4. A new Mic rolet NEXT or similar lancing device will be provided to each subject.  At the end 
of the subject’s visit, the lancing device will either be discarded or offered to the subject to take home.  
5. The lancets used in the study (Tenderlett and Microlet lancets) w ill be disposed of in a 
biohazard sharps container after use.  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 13 of 43  6. Microlet lancets must be changed for each lancing by the subject.   (Insert, remove, and 
discard into sharps container.)   
7. Disposable exam gloves will be worn by site staff during study procedur es where the risk of 
transmission of disease is present.  These procedures include performing blood glucose 
measurements, sample processing, and laboratory procedures involving blood samples.  A new pair of gloves will be used when working with each subjec t and will be changed between 
subjects.  
8. All test strips are single -use and will be appropriately discarded after use.  
9. Disposable bench top covers should cover the work area and must be changed between subjects.  
10. A marketed BGM device may be used for determining the subject’s glucose level during the study as needed for safety reasons or to ascertain the glucose level for study reasons.  The meter will be disinfected after use with each subject.  
5.5 Study Staff Quality Control Testing of Meters  
Prior to enrollment of the first subject, the study staff will perform testing with Contour  normal level control solution on all CONTOUR  NEXT and CONTOUR  TV3 meters.  All staff control 
testing will be done out of sight  of the study subjects.  If the resul ts are out of range, troubleshooting 
will be performed (see meter UGs) and the test will be repeated.   If the meter tests are out of range 
after troubleshooting is complete, the meter will be removed from the study.  This will be documented on the Problem Reporter form, as described in Section 5.15 ‘Device Problem 
Reporting’.  
5.6 Subject Enrollment  
5.6.1 At least 185 untrained subjects , who have never previously used the Ascensia CONTOUR  
NEXT or CONTOUR  TV3 BGMS , should be enrolled into the study at each site in order to 
have a total of at least 350 evaluable fingerstick  and 350 evaluable AST palm  blood results 
for each BGMS.  Of the fingerstick blood samples, 10 samples should be < 80 mg/dL and 10 samples > 250 m g/dL (by YSI assay).  If this requirement is not achieved with 350 subjects, 
additional subjects should be enrolled to meet this fingerstick requirement.  Note that the goal at each site should be approximately five capillary fingerstick blood results < 80 mg/dL 
and five > 250 mg/dL.  
5.6.2 The site study staff will perform the following when the subject arrives at the clinical trial 
site: 
1. Complete the informed consent process.  
2. Assign a unique number to each subject.  
5.6.3 The study staff will document subject demograp hics (including both screen -failed and 
enrolled subjects), diabetes history, medical conditions and medications information.  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 14 of 43  Subjects will also be asked when they last  ate, took diabetes medications, and performed 
vigorous exercise.  
5.6.4 If the subject does not have diabetes, the outside of the subject folder will be labeled to 
indicate that venipuncture should NOT be performed. 
5.6.5  According to a randomization schedule, subjects will be assigned to: 1) use either the 
CONTOUR  NEXT or CONTOUR  TV3 meter first, and 2) use one of three test strip lots 
corresponding to the meter throughout the visit  (lot R, B, or G) . 
5.7 Tests  (See Table 5.2 for test scheme.)  
Each subject will be provided with all the materials needed for self -testing during the visit: one 
CONTOUR  NEXT meter, one CONTOUR  TV3 meter, a Microlet NEXT or similar lancing 
device, lancets, Contour NEXT test strips, V3 test strips, CONTOUR  NEXT and CONTOUR  TV3 
UGs and QRGs.  The subject will be given time to review the UG and QRG to learn how to use 
the system but no training will be provided.   
The subject will wash his/her hands thoroughly with warm water and soap, rinse and dry well.   
5.7.1 Fingerstick Testing   
1. The subject will perform a fingerstick using the Microlet NEXT lancing device and test his/her blood on Meter 1.  The study staff person will record the time and test result of the 
successful meter test on the appropriate form.  For instructions on handling error codes and repeat testing, refer to protocol section 5.10 ‘Errors’.  
2. Immediately, but at least within 5 min utes of the fingerstick self -test, the study staff person 
will lance the subject’s finger (preferably the same hand as above) with a Tenderlett device 
in order to collect enough blood for testing on the YSI Analyzer (approx. 200–300 uL).  The time of this Tenderlett lancing will be recorded.  
3. If adequate blood is not obtained from the Tenderlett lancing, 2 additional Tenderlett lancings 
are allowed (total of up to 3 Tenderlett lancings).  The blood is to be combined into one tube 
for YSI analysis.  
4. The blood sample will be centrifuged as soon as possible after sample collection but not 
longer than 15 minutes  after the meter test.  The study staff person will record the time of 
centrifugation.  
5. In order to reduce glycolysis of the plasma, it is recommended tha t the plasma be transferred 
from the microtainer tube to a micro/dispo tube or similar container, prior to analysis on the 
YSI Analyzer.  
6. The plasma sample will be assayed on the YSI Analyzer: 1 sip = 1 result from black probe 
and 1 result from white probe.  See 5.12.3  for details on testing of plasma samples.  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 15 of 43  7. Immediately following the subject plasma sample, a serum control close to the level of the  
subject plasma will be tested. (No re -calibration is required).  The serum control test result 
should be within the range shown in Table 5.1.  See 5.12.3  for details.  
8. Additional details regarding processing of blood samples for the YSI Analyzer are found in 
Appendix B.  
9. If the time from meter test to blood centrifugation exceeds 15 minutes,  the test is considered non-evaluable.   This will not be considered a protocol deviation.  Times of meter tests and 
centrifugation will be recorded.  
5.7.2  AST (palm) testing  
1. Only proceed to AST testing if an adequate blood sample is obtained from Tenderlett lancing for YSI analysis.  
2. The same meter and test strip lot used for fingerstick testing will be used for AST testing.  
3. Immediately following Step 5.7.1, the subject will perform an AST (palm) stick using the lancing device (new lancet), preferably on the same hand as the fingerstick lancing, and test 
his/her blood on Meter 1.  
4. If adequate blood is not obtained from the Microlet palm lancings for the meter test, up to 2 
additional Microlet palm lancings are allowed (total of up to 3 AST palm lancings).  
5. The time of the successful AST meter test will be recorded.  The time interval between the blood centrifugation and the AST meter test should be as soon as possible, and within 15 minutes or less.  
6. If the time from meter test to blood centrifugation exceed s 15 minutes, the test is considered 
non-evaluable.   This will not be considered a protocol deviation.  Times of meter tests and 
centrifugation will be recorded.  
5.7.3 Study Staff test  
1. Immediately following the AST testing, the study staff person will perform a fingerstick lancing using the same Microlet lancing device (new lancet) on the subject, preferably on the same hand as the other fingerstick lancing.  
2. The staff person will test the fingerstick blood using the same meter and test strip lot used by the subje ct.   
3. The study staff will record the time of the meter test.  The time interval between the blood centrifugation and the final staff meter test should be as soon as possible, and within 15 
minutes or less .    
4. If the time from meter test to blood centrifug ation exceeds 15 minutes, the test is considered 
non-evaluable.   This will not be considered a protocol deviation.  Times of meter tests and 
centrifugation will be recorded.  
 
5.8 Venous Blood Testing by Study Staff   (Only subjects with diabetes)  
5.8.1 The venipuncture and subsequent test may be performed at any time during the subject visit.   
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 16 of 43  5.8.2 A venipuncture will be performed by a trained site phlebotomist.  The subject’s blood will 
be collected into one 4 mL heparin- coated Vacutainer tube.   
5.8.3 The study staff person w ill place one drop of venous blood onto Parafilm®, then immediately 
perform one test with the same lot of test strips and the same meter used for capillary tests.  
Record the time of the successful venous meter test.  
5.8.4 Refer to Section 5.10 for information on handling error codes and repeat testing.  
5.8.5 The venous blood will be centrifuged as soon as possible after the meter test (within 15 
minutes or less).  Record the centrifugation time . If the time from meter test to blood 
centrifugation exceeds 15 minutes, the test is considered non -evaluable.   This will not be 
considered a protocol deviation.  Times of meter tests and centrifugation will be recorded.  
5.8.6 Additional details regarding processing of blood samples for the YSI Anal yzer are found in 
Appendix B.   
5.8.7 The venous  plasma sample will be assayed on the YSI Analyzer: 1 sip = 1 result from black 
probe and 1 result from white probe.  See 5.12.3 for details on testing of plasma samples.  
5.8.8 Up to three venipuncture attempts are allowed per subject, if subject and study staff agree, 
in order to obtain sufficient venous blood.  If the venipuncture is ultimately unsuccessful, this will be recorded and will not be considered a protocol deviation.  
5.9 General  
5.9.1 All fingerstick  and AST meter test results will be compared to the capillary YSI laboratory 
results.   
5.9.2 All venous blood meter test results will be compared to the venous blood YSI laboratory 
results.   
5.9.3 If adequate blood is not obtained from the subject or staff Microlet lancings, up to 2 
additional lancings are allowed in each case (up to a total of 6 fingertip Microlet lancings).  
5.9.4 If adequate blood is not obtained from the staff Tenderlett lancing, up to 2 additional lancings 
are allowed in each case (up to a total of 3 f ingertip Tenderlett lancings).  
5.9.5 If adequate blood is not obtained from the Microlet AST palm lancings, up to 2 additional 
palm lancings are allowed (total of up to 3 AST palm Microlet lancings).  
5.9.6 If adequate blood is not obtained from the first venipuncture  attempt, up to 2 additional 
attempts are allowed if subject and study staff agree (total of up to 3 venipuncture attempts).  
5.9.7 If the time from meter test to blood centrifugation exceeds 15 minutes, the test is 
considered non -evaluable.  This will not be considered a protocol deviation.  Times of meter 
tests and centrifugation will be recorded.   
5.9.8  Hand warmers may be used throughout the testing to increase blood flow.  
5.9.9  It is preferred that all fingerstick and AST lancings are from the same hand if possible, for 
each meter.  
5.9.10 Study staff will record all meter results on the appropriate form.  If meters have turned off, 
meter memory will be reviewed and the results will be obtained from meter memory.  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 17 of 43  5.9.11 Study staff will record every instance of second chance sampling  by checking the box 
provided on the CRF.  
5.9.12 Study staff will record in the comments section of the meter testing form, any obvious 
testing errors by the subject or staff as appropriate for staff tests, and any abnormalities 
observed in the testing procedure or BGMS. 
5.9.13 Note that once the fingerstick testing is started in 5.7.1, the subject should not eat, or use 
medications until the capillary/AST testing is completed in 5.7.2 to avoid changing glucose levels.  The subject can eat/take medicines at any time to avoid o r treat hypoglycemia or 
hyperglycemia .  If the subject eats o r takes medications, results obtained after eating or 
medicating will be non- evaluable.   
 
5.10 Errors  
5.10.1 If the meter reports an error code, the instructions shown in the UG should be followed.   
Re-testing is recommended (per the UG).  No more than a total of 3 a ttempts are allowed.  
5.10.2 If the subject feels that he/she made an error while testing, without any prompting from the 
study staff, he/she will repeat the test.  The reason for the repeated test will be documented in the comments section of the form.  
5.10.3 If the study staff feels that he/she made an error while performing staff fingerstick or venous 
testing, he/she will repeat the test.  The reason for the repeated test will be documented in the comments section of the form.  
5.10.4 The study staff will record all non- numeric codes -  QNS (Quantity not sufficient), NO (Not 
obtainable), and meter error codes as appropriate for the meter tests.  
   
5.11 Hematocrit   
Two hematocrit tubes will be filled with either the subject’s venous or capillary blood, and then centrifuged.  The hematocrit will be measured from only one tube; the second tube will be collected 
as a backup in case the first tube is not measureable (i.e., tube spun out, broken tube, clay seal compromised, etc.) .  Subject hematocrit measurement should be within 0 -70% in order for the 
subject BG results to be considered evaluable.  
Note:  Microhematocrit tubes with  anticoagulant will be used for capillary blood hematocrit 
measurements collected directly off the fingertip and microhematocrit tubes without anticoagulant 
will be used for venous blood. 
Additional details regarding hematocrit measurements are found in Appendix C.  
 
5.12 YSI Glucose Analyzer   
5.12.1 YSI Analyzer Operation and Control Tests  
The YSI Glucose Analyzer will be maintained and operated according to the instr uctions in the 
manufacturer’s operating manual.   
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 18 of 43  Before the study begins, the YSI will be set up and appropriate maintenance will be performed.  
The YSI clock will be set to 24 hour format using an accurate time device, such as site central 
clock or atomi c clock.  
A set of four glucose control sera3 that have been assayed by a method traceable to one proposed 
for use as a national glucose reference method developed through the combined efforts of the Center for Disease Control, the National Bureau of Standards, the American Association for Clinical C hemistry, and the FDA will be provided by Ascensia and used to verify the accuracy of 
the YSI Glucose Analyzer
4.  These controls will be run for pre -study and daily control tests, and 
will be within the lower and upper limits of the target levels noted in Table 5.1.   The procedure for proper thawing and handling of the serum controls is found in Attachment 1.  
Table  5.1: YSI serum control target values and limits , mg/dL   
LOT#  LEVEL  TARGET  Lower 
Limit Upper 
Limit 
7AP204 2 49.1 46.6 51.6 
7AP304 3 96.8 92.0 101.6 
7AP404 4 193.5 183.8 203.2 
7AP505  5 390.2  370.7  409.7  
 
5.12.2 Pre Study and Daily Control Tests  
These four glucose control sera will be used to verify the accuracy of each YSI analyzer before the study begins (Pre -study testing).  Six  (6) pre -study runs will be performed on each YSI that will 
be used in the trial : 2 runs per day  for 3 days .  The Ascensia Study Manager or designee will review 
the YSI pre -study glucose control data before the study begins.  
The daily controls  will be tested: 1 sip = 1 result from white probe and 1 result from black probe.  Any YSI use d on a given day to test subject blood samples will be monitored by assaying the 4 
glucose control s at the beginning of the day .  The YSI will be calibrated before each serum control 
sample is tested.   The sequence of testing will be:  
1. Calibrate the YSI  
2. Test Control 2 (1 sip)  
3. Calibrate  
4. Test C ontrol 3 (1 sip)  
5. Calibrate  
6. Test Control 4 (1 sip)  
7. Calibrate  
8. Test Control 5 (1 sip)  
                                                           
3 Caution:  The glucose traceability controls are human serum -based and must be handled using universal precautions.  
4 Neese J, Duncan P, Bayse D, et al.   Development and evaluation of a hexokinase/glucose-6 -phosphate dehydrogenase procedure 
for use as a national glucose reference method. HEW Publication No. (CDC) 77 -8330. 1976. Atlanta, Centers for Disease Control.  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 19 of 43  Site staf f will keep a maintenance log for each YSI, including daily operational checks, 
maintenance and membrane changes.   A full set of serum controls should also be tested after YSI 
parts are changed (such as buffers, probes, or membranes).    
5.12.3 Testing of Subject  Plasma Samples  
The subject plasma samples (capillary and venous) will be tested using 1 sip per test (=2 results, 1 
from white and 1 from black probe) with calibration of the YSI before the first sip.  A serum control (1 sip) will be tested after each subject plasma sample to verify the YSI Analyzer has remained in control during the plasma sample test.  The control with target value close to the concentration of the subject plasma sample will be tested.  The average of the black and white probe results wi ll be verified to be within the ranges shown in Table 5.1.  
If the control result is out of range, the YSI will be recalibrated and the control sample will be retested.  If the control result is now within the appropriate range (Table 5.1), the control sam ple 
is conf irmed as appropriate for use.  The YSI analyzer will then be re- calibrated, the plasma will 
be re- tested, and the control will be tested per the protocol’s plasma testing procedure already 
described.  
If the control result is not within the appr opriate range after the plasma sample has been tested 
twice, the results for this subject sample will be non -evaluable.  
The sequence of testing for each subject sample will be:  
1. Calibrate the YSI  
2. Test plasma sample (1 sip)  
3. Test control (1 sip)  
4. Verify control result (mean of black and white probe results)  is within limits in Table 
5.1.  If it is, stop and record result. 
5. If not, repeat Steps 1, 3 and 4 to verify control sample is satisfactory for use. 
6. When control result is shown to be within rang e in Table 5.1,  repeat Steps 1 -3. 
If the control is again outside the limits, the results for this subject sample are non -evaluable.  
Glucose values of the YSI replicates (both controls and plasma) should be within 4 mg/dL or 4% 
of each other (i.e. 4 mg/dL  for values < 100 mg/dL and 4% for values ≥ 100 mg/dL).  If they are 
not, an additional assay should be run.  
 
5.12.4 Recording YSI Results  
The YSI source documents will be labeled as follows throughout the study to facilitate matching glucose results on the sour ce document with results recorded on the CRF:  
Sample identification will include: 
1) Ascensia serum traceability control level or  
2) Subject ID plus either ‘capillary’ or ‘venous’ blood 
NOTE:  If glucose results are not to be used due to operator errors, insufficient sample, etc., this should be clearly marked on the YSI source document. 
The YSI operator or designee will label all samples on YSI tape and record YSI results for all 
plasma and control sample runs on the appropriate source documents.  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 20 of 43  The YSI operator will record all non- numeric codes -  QNS (Quantity not sufficient), NO (Not 
Obtainable), and error codes as appropriate for the YSI tests.  
 
5.13 Subject Questionnaires  
Site staff will administer two questionnaires to subjects.  Questionnaire 1 will be given to all 
subjects and Questionnaire 2 will be given only to subjects with diabetes.  
5.13.1 Questionnaire 1: Evaluation of Instructions for Use.  (All subjects)  
Staff will administer a questionnaire to all subjects who perform fingerstick self -testing after the 
individual meter testing is completed.   
The questionnaire will include statements for which a numerical score or rating will be provided 
by subjects (1=strongly disagree, 2=disagree, 3=neutral, 4=agree, 5=strongly agree).  These 
numerically scored statements will be tabulated into frequency distributions.   The following 
statements will be subject to the pass/fail criteria listed in the study objectives section: 
• I find it easy to do a fingerstick blood test with this meter.  
• The meter display is easy to see and read.  
• It was easy to understand my test results.  
• The instructions (User Guide and Quick Reference Guide) were easy to understand.  
• The instructions clearly explain how to run a test. 
• The instructions clearly explain what to do if an error message  is displayed by the 
meter.    Note: an error message will be demonstrated by the study staff if the subject 
does not experience an error message during his/her testing. 
Per ISO 15197:2013, Section 8.8.2, t he questionnaire will also contain a section whereb y the 
subject can provide unrestricted comments on their ex perience about using the BGMS.  This 
questionnaire will be administered by the staff who will record the subject’s responses.  The subject 
will be given an example questionnaire to assist with providing the responses.  
5.13.2 Questionnaire 2: BGMS Features.  (Only subjects with diabetes)  
After all testing and the first questionnaire ha ve been completed, the study staff will demonstrate 
to only the subjects with diabetes several features of the BGMS  that would not necessarily be 
experienced during the brief accuracy testing.  This will ensure that the subjects are able to 
understand the features, and answer questions in the questionnaire.  
There are no acceptance criteria for this questionnaire.  This questionnaire may be 1) administered 
by the staff who will record the subject’s responses or 2) completed by the subjects and verified 
by the study staff, as per site procedures.   In the first scenario, the subject will be giv en an example 
questionnaire to assist with providing the responses. 
5.14 Procedures repeated on BGMS 2 
After completing study procedures for the first BGMS randomly -assigned to them, subjects will 
then repeat all of these procedures using the second BGMS, except the hematocrit and venipuncture procedures.   (Hematocrit is measured on a separate instrument and is not meter -
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 21 of 43  specific; venipuncture is performed once and measured on both meters, as previously described.) 
Therefore, for BGMS 2, subjects will complete a  fingerstick test; a YSI sample will be collected 
by a Tenderlett stick from subject; subject will complete a palm AST; study staff will perform a 
fingerstick test from the subject; study staff will administer Questionnaire 1; and, if the subject has diabe tes, study staff will administer Questionnaire 2.   
Table 5.2 – Subject Testing Schematic  
Step BGMS  Test type  Operator  Description  
1 1 Fingerstick 
Self-test Subject   Subject lances finger – Microlet NEXT lancing device .  
 Test meter with 1 lot of test strip  (Repeat 2 more times, only if needed) . 
 Record time of successful meter test . 
2 1 Tenderlett 
deep stick  Study 
staff  Immediately following Step 1 meter  test (≤  5 min), staff lances subject fingertip 
(up to 3 lancings allowed) . 
 Record time of lancing .  
 Collect blood in Li Heparin tube (approx. 200 –  300 uL) .  
 Centrifuge blood and record time (should be within 15 min of meter test in step 
1). 
3 1 AST palm 
Self-test Subject   Immediately following Step 2, subject lances palm  – Microlet NEXT lancing 
device.  
 Test with same test strip lot and meter as above.  (Repeat 2 more times, only if 
needed .) 
 Record time of successful met er test (should be within 15 min of centrifugation 
in Step 2) . 
4 1 Study staff 
test Study 
staff  Immediately following Step 3, staff lances subject fingertip - Microlet NEXT 
lancing device.  
 Test with same test strip lot and meter as above.  (Repeat 2 more times, only if needed .) 
 Record time of successful meter test (should be within 15 mi n of centrifugation 
in Step 2).  
5 1 then 
2 Venous test 
(only 
subjects with diabetes)  Study 
staff  May be done prior to  Steps 1 -4. 
 Staff performs venipuncture on  subjects with diabetes (up to 3 attempts allowed) . 
 Collect blood in 4 ml Vacutainer tube with heparin anticoagulant.  
 Staff  tests blood  (out of view of subject) with same meter and  strip lot as fingerstick test . 
 Centrifuge blood and record ti me (should be within 15 min of  venous blood 
meter test) .  
6 na Hematocrit  Study 
staff   Fill 2 microhematocrit tubes  (only 1 tube to be measured) .  
 Blood is from capillary or venous blood.  
7 na Questionnaire 
1 Study 
staff  Study staff administers Questionnaire 1 to all subjects . 
8 na Questionnaire 
2 (only 
subjects with 
diabetes ) Study 
staff  Study staff demonstrates BGMS features  to subjects with diabetes .  
 Study staff administers Questionnaire 2 to subjects with diabetes . 
9-14 2 all all  Repeat steps 1 –  4 (meter tests) and 7 -8 (questionnaires) with BGMS 2 . 
 
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 22 of 43  5.15 Device Problem Reporting  
Any functional problems with the CONTOUR  NEXT or CONTOUR  TV3 BGMS will be 
documented by the study staff.  The study staff should be specific about describing the problem 
and the sequence of events that led to it.  All information will be documented on the Problem 
Reporter Form , including the meter type, serial number and test strip lot.  Malfunctioning BGMs 
will be replaced and this wi ll be documented for study tracking.  If appropriate, such meters will 
be disinfected and shipped back to Ascensia for evaluation. 
5.16 Temperature and Humidity Monitoring  
The study staff will measure the temperature and humidity of the meter and YSI testing a rea(s) 
twice a day (AM and PM) using an audited thermometer/hygrometer supplied by Ascensia, and record the results on the appropriate form.   
5.17  Miscellaneous  
Ascensia representatives may observe subject visits as part of study staff training, study monitoring or for troubleshooting problems with the investigational devices.  This will be done under 
supervision of the investigator.  
Ascensia representatives may assist with disinfection of the meters, and perform centrifugation of blood samples and measurement of hematocrit.   
Ascensia representatives will not train or interact in any way with the subjects.  The presence of Ascensia representatives will be noted in the ICF.  
Subjects will receive nominal compensation for their time and inconvenience.  
6.0  Risk / Benefit Assessment  
Risks associated with this study include those associated with obtaining blood from finger, palm and venipuncture.   
The following risks are anticipated  and will not  be reported as Adverse Events (AE). ( See section 
7.0 for further details .) 
1) Bleeding: Mild bleeding similar to being stuck with a pin  
2) Swelling (Edema): A mild swelling similar to a mosquito bite  
3) Bruising: Less t han one inch across (fingerstick) or less than 2 inches across (venipuncture)  
4) Redness (Erythema): Mild reddening or darkening of the skin in the immediate area around the puncture site  
5) Soreness: Mild discomfort at the puncture site resolving (going away) w ithin one to two days 
(fingerstick or palm) or within hours (venipuncture)  
The following risks are unlikely, but possible, and will be  reported as anticipated Adverse Events:  
1) Bleeding: Continued bleeding requiring changing a bandage  
2) Bruising: A worsening bruise that is firm to the touch  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 23 of 43  3) Redness (Erythema): Bright redness or skin darkening spreading across the area (fingerstick 
or palm) or across the arm (venipuncture)  
4) Soreness: Worsening pain and/or pain that interferes with activity  
5) Infection: B right redness or skin darkening spreading across the area with warmness and/or 
swelling, and/or red streaking 
6) Nerve injury: Numbness or shooting pain in the forearm  
7) Numbness in the area of the puncture wound  
8) Dizziness  
9) Fainting    
Subjects should be instructed to report such events to the investigator or designee.  
Benefits  
A benefit associated with the study is the sense of well -being gained by contributing to the 
development of improved or new blood glucose monitoring systems, whi ch may be beneficial to 
people with diabetes or other diseases or conditions. 
7.0  Adverse Event Management and Medical Device Reporting   
The procedures to be performed under this protocol are considered to be low risk. 
7.1 Description and Classification  
7.1.1. An AE during a clinical evaluation is “any untoward medical occurrence, unintended 
disease or injury, or untoward clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory findings) in subjects, 
users or other persons, whether or not related to the investigational medi cal device.”  It is not 
dependent on whether the event is considered to be related to the investigational product or the study.  An AE includes events not seen at the beginning of the study, or worsened if present at the beginning.  Adverse events can be classified as presented in Table 7.1.  
7.1.2. The next classification to consider is whether or not the AE is Anticipated or Unanticipated.  
In order for an AE to be considered ‘anticipated’ it must be listed in the protocol and ICF prior to any occurrence.  
7.1.3. For studies on products that have not yet been cleared for market, it is important that all 
AEs be documented and included in the study file.  
7.1.4. An unanticipated adverse device effect (UADE) is:  Any serious adverse effect on health 
or safety or  any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with a device, if that 
effect, problem or death was not previously identified in nature, severity or degree of incidence in the investigational plan or application (including a supplementary plan or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety or welfare of subjects [21CFR812.3(s)]. 
7.1.5. All AEs observed by the Investigator or reported by the subject will be documented on the 
AE form (including all symptoms) and included in the study file.  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 24 of 43  7.2 Events related to hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia 
Hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia can be a common occurrence with subjects who have diabetes.   
If it is found that a subject has a hypogly cemic event, as determined by the Principal Investigator 
(PI) during a study visit, the subject will be treated by the site staff accordingly . Appendices D and 
E note  each site’s treatment plan .  
Classification of the hypoglycemic or hyperglycemic event is at the discretion of the PI or 
designee.  If the hypoglycemic or hyperglycemic event is considered by the PI as an AE, it will be considered to be an anticipated AE and will be recorded on the AE Form.  
Subjects who are hypo-  or hyperglycemic may continue with fingerstick testing if they so choose, 
and if the PI determines that it is safe.  The PI will define what is considered to be a hypoglycemic or hyperglycemic state.  
 
Table 7.1: Classification of Adv erse Event  
Serious*  Non-Serious  
An adverse event that leads to:  
a) death;  
b)  a serious deterioration in health of the subject that,  
1) resulted in a life -threatening illness or 
injury,  
2) resulted in a permanent impairment of a 
body structure or a body function,  
3) required in -patient hospitalization or 
prolongation of existing hospitalization,  
4) resulted in medical or surgical intervention 
to prevent permanent impairment to body 
structure or a body function;  
c) fetal distress or a congenital abnormality or birth 
defect.  
May be anticipated or unanticipated.  
*EN ISO 14155.  Clinical investigation of medical 
devices for human subjects – Good Clinical Practice  All adverse events not reported as ser ious.  At each visit, all adverse 
events observed by the investiga tor/designate or reported by subject 
must be evaluated and recorded on an adverse event form.   
A non -serious adverse event is further classified with respect to severity 
and relationship to the trial product.  A non -serious adverse event may 
be anticipated or unanticipated.  
Further classification with regard to severity  
• Mild : Transient symptoms, easily tolerated, no interference with 
subjects daily activities.  
• Moderate:  Marked symptoms, moderate interference with 
subjects daily activities, and tolerable.  
• Severe:  Considerable interference with subject’s daily activities, 
not tolerable.  
Relationship to trial product: 
• Definitely Related: Causal relationship has been established  and documented 
• Probably Related: Good reasons and sufficient documentation to assume causal relationship have been established  
• Possibly Related: Causal relationship is likely and cannot be excluded  
• Probably Not Related: Good reasons and sufficient documentation not established to assume causal relationship  
• Not Related: The event is most likely related to an etiology other than the trial treatment  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 25 of 43   
7.3 Procedure for Reporting an Adverse Event  
Adverse events will be documented during this study by completing the AE Form.  During the 
visit, AEs will be evaluated by a member of the study staff.  The nature of each event and date of onset, outcome, course, maximum intensity and action taken with re spect to treatment should be 
established.  Details of any corrective treatment should be recorded on the AE Form.  Investigators should follow -up on the status of subjects experiencing an ongoing AE  until the event has been 
resolved, or until the condition has stabilized.   
7.3.1. The Investigator or designee will notify the Study Manager or Monitor within 24 hours of 
any Serious Adverse Event that occurred during the study.  The sponsor will promptly review all information relevant to the safety of the investigational device . 
7.3.2. The investigator or designee must notify the sponsor and reviewing IRB by phone or fax 
of Unanticipated Serious Device -Related Adverse Events within 24 hours of learning of the event, 
followed by a written a report within 10 wor king days after learning of the event.   
7.3.3.   Upon receipt of a report of an UADE by the Ascensia Study Manager or Monitor, the report will be immediately forwarded to : 
Andreas Stuhr, MD  
Ascensia Director of Medical and Scientific Affairs  
5 Wood Hollow  Road  
Parsippany, NJ  07054 
Phone: 973- 906-3613 
e-mail: Andreas.Stuhr @Ascensia.com  
 
7.3.4. The sponsor (Ascensia) must report UADEs to the FDA, all participating investigators, and 
reviewing IRBs within 10 working days after the sponsor first receives notice of the event.  
7.3.5. Regardless of the above definitions, any additional adverse experience that the investigator 
considers serious, and/or of concern in relationship to the study must be documented and reported 
to the Study Manager or Moni tor within 24 hours. 
7.4 Medical Device Reporting  
The Microlet NEXT lancing device system is an Ascensia- marketed product in the US.  If an AE 
occurs that is directly caused by the marketed product, the AE should be reported immediately, but in any case within  24 hours, to the Customer Service Department at 1 -800-348-8100.  Also 
contact the Ascensia representative listed in Section 1 2.0.   
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 26 of 43  8.0 Study Termination and Subject Withdrawal Criteria  
8.1 Criteria to Withdraw / Discontinue a Subject from Study  
Subjects may be  withdrawn from the study at their own request for any reason, or at the discretion 
of the PI (or designee) for one of the following reasons:  
1) Adverse Event  
2) Illness of a subject  
3) Subject non- compliance with protocol requirements  
4) Other, at the discretion of the investigator  
In such cases, the subject will be withdrawn from further study participation.  Data collected from 
withdrawn subjects will be analyzed and results will be retained for safety assessments.   If 
available, data will be retained  in analyses related to the primary objective of the study unless there 
is a valid reason to believe that the data may be biased, incorrect, or confounded.  
9.0 Regulatory  
9.1 Regulatory Status of the Investigational Devices  
In addition to the regulations outline d in the Ascensia Diabetes Care Global Clinical Affairs 
standard operating procedures, this protocol also complies with the clinical trial regulations of 
British Standard BS EN 13612:2002, “Performance evaluation of in vitro diagnostic medical devices.”  
9.2 Investigational Review Board (IRB) Approval  
Prior to study initiation, a n IRB must review this protocol, the ICF, and any other supporting study 
documents which impact subject safety.   The investigational site may not begin the study until the 
IRB has given  its written and dated approval via a letter that identifies the version/date of the 
protocol and ICF.  A copy of the IRB approval letter and approved ICF must be provided to the Investigator and to Ascensia prior to the Study Initiation Visit.  
9.3 Informed Co nsent Requirement  
Each subject must provide informed consent before she/he can participate in the study.  The 
informed consent process fully apprises the subjects of the risks and benefits to them and to society for participating in the study.   The ICF wi ll clearly state that designated study personnel will be 
able to view the subject’s medical records.   The ICF will also state that Ascensia representatives 
may observe some subjects as part of study staff training, study monitoring or for troubleshooting problems with the investigational devices.  
If the subject understands and agrees to participate in the study, she/he will sign the ICF.  All 
subjects will be given a copy of the ICF.  If a subject has a question about his/her rights, he/she 
may contact a m ember of the IRB at any time during or after study participation.  
9.4 Study Documentation Procedures  
The investigator will keep study records for a minimum of three years.  Alternatively, other 
arrangements may be made with Ascensia for study document storage.  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 27 of 43  9.5 Study Monitoring   
The study will be monitored by Ascensia representatives.  A monitoring plan will be completed 
by the Study Manager/designee prior to the study.  The Study Manager or designee will conduct a 
study initiation visit, at least 1 monitoring  visit, and a close -out visit.   Note: the latter two visits 
may occur within a continuous timeframe.  
Ascensia representatives may observe some subject visits as part of study monitoring.  This will 
be done under supervision of the investigator.  Ascensia representatives will maintain subject 
confidentiality and will not interfere with rights of human subjects, sa fety or bias study conduct.  
9.6 Investigator’s Report of Study Closure  
Ascensia representatives will send a letter to the site informing them that the study is closed.  The 
study will be considered closed when the data has been locked for data analysis.  
The Investigator or designee will submit a report summarizing subject disposition and other study details, as appropriate, to the Ascensia Study Manager and the reviewing IRB.  This report will be completed within 3 months of the study closure date.  
 
In addit ion, the Ascensia Study Manager, or designee, will report the completion of the study to 
the IRB within 6 months of study closure.  
9.7 Registration of Trial  
The clinical trial will be registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov as required.  
9.8 Clinical Study Reports (CSR)  
Four CSRs will be written by the sponsor.  Two CSRs will be written for CONTOUR NEXT: one report will evaluate data according to ISO 15197:2013 criteria and one report according to FDA SMBG:2016 criteria.  Two CSRs will be written for CONTOUR TV3: one repo rt will evaluate 
data according to ISO 15197:2013 criteria and one report according to FDA SMBG:2016 criteria.   
10.0 Data Collection and Management  
A unique number will identify each subject.  The unique number will be the only identifying 
information entered.  A master list of subject names, with their subject IDs, will be kept by the 
Investigator at the study site.  The Investigator will retain all signed IC documents.  
Clinical data will be primarily collected through an EDC system used by Ascensia.  Study da ta 
will be recorded on forms that will serve as source documents for the EDC system.  These original Forms will be retained by the site.  
In addition to data collection, the EDC system will be used for data cleaning as well as monitoring operations.  Site a nd sponsor users will be trained on the system prior to the study start, and their 
access to EDC system will be contingent upon successful completion of training requirements. Study personnel will complete and sign all appropriate source document forms in compliance with Good Clinical Practice (GCP).  Source documents (Forms) should be completed legibly, in black 
or blue ink.  If it is necessary to make corrections, a single line should be drawn through the original 
entry, the new entry written in, and the correction initialed and dated by the individual making the correction. 
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 28 of 43  The original forms will be retained by the Investigator for a minimum of three years.  
The Investigator or designee will sign and date an AE Form for each AE experienced by any 
subject . 
YSI source documents (tapes) will be photocopied to preserve the image on the thermal paper.  Site staff or designees who photocopy the YSI tapes will certify (with signature, date, and YSI ID) 
that the copy is a true and accurate representation of the o riginal.  
11.0 Data Analysis 
The following analyses apply to both CONTOUR NEXT  and CONTOUR TV3 meters, with 
analyses for each meter independent of the other.  
 
11.1 Accuracy Objectives  
Primary Objective – Accuracy with All Subjects Included  
Let MeterBG  = meter blood glucose result;  
LabBG = laboratory method (YSI) comparator blood glucose result.  
 
For the primary accuracy objective, a result (MeterBG) is considered accurate if:  
|RD| = 100*|MeterBG – LabBG| / LabBG ≤ 15%, regardless of the value of LabBG.  
With n = 350 evaluable results, Xc  = 333 results would be required to satisfy the accuracy criteria.  
At P 0 = 96.65%, there is approximately a 95% chance of satisfying the primary objective.  
Conversely, at P a = 92.81%, there is approximately a 95% chance  of failing to satisfy this accuracy 
objective.  
In addition to the ±15% accuracy definition, at least 99% of the n = 350 fingerstick results must 
satisfy:  
|RD| = 100*|MeterBG – LabBG| / LabBG ≤ 20%, regardless of the value of LabBG.  
 
Thus at least 347 out of n = 350 results must satisfy the ±20% accuracy definition.   
With n = 350 evaluable results, Xc = 347 results would be required to satisfy the accuracy criteria.  
At P 0 = 99.61%, there is approximately a 95% chance of satisfying this objective.  Conversely, at 
Pa = 97.80%, there is approximately a 95% chance of failing  to satisfy this accuracy objective.  
Secondary Objectives   
Assume 315 evaluable results from people with diabetes.  The ISO 15197:2013 acceptance 
criterion is that 95% of those evaluable results must satisfy the accuracy criteria:  
|D| = |MeterBG – LabBG | ≤ 15 mg/dL, for LabBG < 100 mg/dL  
or 
|RD| = 100*|MeterBG – LabBG| / LabBG ≤ 15%, for LabBG ≥ 100 mg/dL. 
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 29 of 43  With n = 315, Xc = 300 results would be required to satisfy the accuracy criteria.  At P 0 = 96.79%, 
there is approximately a 95% chance of satisfying the primary objective.  Conversely, at P a = 
92.77%, there is approximately a 95% chance of failing to satisfy this objective. 
 
Secondary Objective – Internal Requirements  
1.  ±10.5% or ±10.5mg/dL  (CONTOUR  NEXT ) 
The hypothesis:  
H0: Pr{|RD| ≤ 10.5% when YSI ≥ 100mg/dL or |D| ≤ 10.5mg/dL when YSI < 100mg/dL} < 0.95  
Will be tested against the alternative:  
H1: Pr{|RD| ≤ 10.5% when YSI ≥ 100mg/dL or |D| ≤ 10.5mg/dL when YSI < 100mg/dL} ≥ 0.95  
 With n = 315, the critical number of “successes” is Xc = 294.  That is, at least 294 out of n = 315 
results must satisfy the requirement: 
|RD| ≤ 1 0.5% when YSI ≥ 100mg/dL or |D| ≤ 10.5mg/dL when YSI < 100mg/dL  
 This acceptance criterion (cr itical value) gives about a 92.62% chance of rejecting H
0 in favor of 
H1 if the actual probability of “success” is 0.95.  
 
2.  ±12.5% or ±1 2.5mg/dL  (CONTOUR  TV3)  
 
The hypothesis:  
H0: Pr{|RD| ≤ 12.5% when YSI ≥ 100mg/dL or |D| ≤ 12.5mg/dL  when YSI < 100mg/dL} < 0.95  
Will be tested against the alternative:  
H1: Pr{|RD| ≤ 12.5% when YSI ≥ 100mg/dL or |D| ≤ 12.5mg/dL when YSI < 100mg/dL} ≥ 0.95  
 With n = 315, the critical number of “successes” is Xc = 294.  That is, at least 294 out of n = 315 
results must satisfy the requirement: 
|RD| ≤ 1 2.5% when YSI ≥ 100mg/dL or |D| ≤ 12.5mg/dL when YSI < 100mg/dL  
 This acceptance criterion (critical value) gives about a 9 2.62% chance of rejecting H
0 in favor of 
H1 if the actual probability of “success” is 0.95.  
 3.  Study Staff Test  
 
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 30 of 43   
Two tests of the hypotheses will be performed.  
 
The hypothesis:  
H0: Pr{|RD| ≤ 15% when YSI ≥ 100mg/dL or |D| ≤ 15mg/dL when YSI < 100mg/dL} < 0.95  
will be tested against the alternative:  
H1: Pr{|RD| ≤ 15% when YSI ≥ 100mg/dL or |D| ≤ 15mg/dL when YSI < 100mg/dL} ≥ 0.95  
 One test will be done using data from all subjects, and another using data only from PWD 
subjects.  In the case of all subjects, if n = 350, the critical value is 327.  For  PWD subjects only, 
if n = 315, the critical value is 294.  As in all cases, critical values may require adjustment due to differences in sample sizes.  The critical values are chosen so that the least upper bound on the probability of passing under minima lly acceptable conditions is 95%. 
 
Table 11.1 summarizes critical values for satisfying objectives described in section 2.   The 
column labeled P
o is the minimally acceptable condition (probability) for each objective listed.  
 
Table 11.1  Sample Sizes and Critical Values for Satisfying Objectives  
 
 Note that error distribution tables will be constructed, to reflect the numbers and percentages of 
results falling within various error ranges (e.g., ±5%, ±7%, ±10%, ±12.5%, ±15%, ±20%).  Tables will be by c linical site and overall.  
 
11.2 Other  Statistical Computations  
Some data analysis follows analyses and presentations described in ISO Section 15197:2013, Section 8.  See Table 11.2 for scheme of data analysis, including capillary fingerstick blood and 
venous blood.    Objective Sample Size, n Critical Value, Xc Po Derivation of Critical Value*
2.1.1(95%), 2.2.1 350 333 96.65% 95% of n
2.1.1(9%) 350 347 99.61% 99% of n
2.3.1, 2.3.2, 2.3.3 315 300 96.79% Pr{PASS|Xc,Po} ≈ 95%
2.4.1 315 294 95.00% Pr{PASS|Xc,Po} ≈ 95%
2.4.2 (all subjects) 350 327 95.00% Pr{PASS|Xc,Po} ≈ 95%
2.4.2 (PWDs) 315 294 95.00% Pr{PASS|Xc,Po} ≈ 95%
2.2.2 (Questionnaire 1, All Subjects) 350 307 90.00% Pr{PASS|Xc,Po} ≈ 95%
2.3.4 (Questionnaire 1, PWDs) 315 276 90.00% Pr{PASS|Xc,Po} ≈ 95%
*Critical Values may change depending on actual sample size
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 31 of 43  Other data analysis follows analyses and presentat ions described in the FDA SMBG: 2016.  See 
Table 11.3 for scheme of data analysis, including capillary fingerstick blood and venous blood per 
the FDA SMBG:2016.    
Linear regression will be performed on data comparisons as shown in Tables 11.2 and 11.3.  
Modified Bland -Altman Plots – Modified Bland- Altman plots (difference between evaluation 
device results and reference results plotted against reference results) will be constructed for all 
comparisons described in Tables 11.2 and 11.3.  
 
Confidence Intervals  
Confidence intervals (95%, two- sided) for all primary and secondary objective proportions 
(percents) will be computed using the Clopper -Pearson5 (1934) formula:  
 
𝑃𝑃𝐿𝐿=𝑋𝑋∗𝐹𝐹𝛼𝛼/2−1(2𝑋𝑋,2(𝑛𝑛−𝑋𝑋+1))
𝑛𝑛−𝑋𝑋+1+𝑋𝑋∗𝐹𝐹𝛼𝛼/2−1(2𝑋𝑋,2(𝑛𝑛−𝑋𝑋+1)) 
and: 
𝑃𝑃𝑈𝑈=𝑋𝑋∗𝐹𝐹1−𝛼𝛼/2−1(2𝑋𝑋,2(𝑛𝑛−𝑋𝑋+1))
𝑛𝑛−𝑋𝑋+1+𝑋𝑋∗𝐹𝐹1−𝛼𝛼/2−1(2𝑋𝑋,2(𝑛𝑛−𝑋𝑋+1)) 
PL = lower limit 
PU = upper limit  
X = number of “accurate” results (per the relevant definition of “accurate”)  
 Regression and Outlier Analysis  
A linear regression of the BGMS results against the YSI reference method results via weighted 
least squares (WLS) will be performed, with weights:
 
 
𝑤𝑤=1
𝑌𝑌𝑌𝑌𝑌𝑌2used to account for the proportional variance nature of blood glucose measurements (Draper and Smith, 
1998)6. 
Studentized residuals from the regression w ill be computed, i.e.,  
 
𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖=𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖−𝑦𝑦�𝑖𝑖 
                                                           
5 Clopper, C.J., Pearson, E.S. (1934) The use of confidence or fiducial limits as illustrated in the 
case of the binomial, Biometrika, 26, 404- 413 
6 Draper, N. R., Smith, H., (1998) Applied Regression Analysis, 3rd Ed., John Wiley and Sons  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 32 of 43   
𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖=𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖
𝑠𝑠𝜀𝜀 
That is, a studentized residual, 𝜀𝜀 , is the residual, e , divided by the standard error of residuals, sε 
𝑠𝑠𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖=𝜎𝜎��1−ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 
𝜎𝜎�= root mean square error (RMSE) from the regression model. 
and h ii is the leverage for the ith observation.  
 
A BGMS result will be considered an “outlier” if its corresponding studentized residual is outside 
the interval (Φ−1(0.005),Φ−1(0.995) ) ≈ (-2.576, +2.576), corresponding to a 99% interval for 
a standard normal variate.  By this statistical definition of “outlier”, results that may satisfy 
accuracy requirements may be considered “outliers”.  
Confidence bands (95% and 99%) for the regression li ne will be computed.  Scatter plots of 
MeterBG vs. LabBG will be constructed, with the regression line, the confidence bands, and the line of identity (Y = X) will all be plotted.   Outliers will be identified.  
 
Error Grid Analyses  
Parkes consensus error  grids will be constructed for combined strip lots, and combined sites as 
described in Tables 11.2 and 11.3.  There are no criteria for percentages of values within the error 
grid zones.  
 Data Analysis S chemes    
Table 11.2 Data Analysis Scheme (per ISO 15197:2013)  
Blood 
Type  Data Comparison  Regression Tables  
 Bland Altman Plots  Accuracy  Error Grid  Error Interval tables (5, 10, 12.5, 15, 20,  >20%)  
Capillary Fingerstick  
 Subject vs. YSI  x* x***  x** x* x* 
Staff vs YSI  x* x***  x** x* x* 
AST 
(Palm)  Subject vs. YSI  x* x***  x** x* x* 
Venous  Results vs. YSI  x* x***  x** x* x* 
* Combined sites  
** By site and combined sites  
*** Plots with different symbols denoting the site, and whether observations are outliers  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 33 of 43  Table 11.3 Data Analysis Scheme (per FDA SMBG: 2016)  
Blood 
Type  Data Comparison  Regression 
Tables  
 Scatter 
Plots  Accuracy  Error Grid  Error Interval tables (5%, 7%, 10%, 15%, 20, >20%)  
Capillary 
Fingerstick  
 Subject vs. 
YSI x* x***  x** x* x* 
Staff vs YSI x* x***  x** x* x* 
AST 
(Palm)  Subject vs. 
YSI x* x***  x** x* x* 
* Combined sites  
** By site and combined sites  
*** Plots with different symbols denoting the site, and whether observations are outliers  
Note : Samples outside +/ - 20% will be identified and listed in the stat istics report (per FDA 
SMBG: 2016).  
 
11.3 Subject Questionnaires 1 and 2   
Subject questionnaires 1 and 2 will consist in part of questions/statements for which a numerical 
score or rating (1=strongly disagree, 2=disagree, 3=neutral, 4=agree, 5=strongly agree) will be provided by the subjects and entered by the study staff.  For these numerically -scored questions, 
frequency distributions will be tabulated.   
For Questionnaire 1 only:  Hypothesis tests for selected statements will be performed.   The hypotheses are:  
𝐻𝐻
0:𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃{𝑃𝑃𝑒𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑛𝑛𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑒≥3}<90%   versus the alternative:  
𝐻𝐻𝑎𝑎:𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃{𝑃𝑃𝑒𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑛𝑛𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑒≥3}≥90%  
The critical number of responses greater than or equal to 3, Xc, is a function of the actual sample 
size, and will be chosen such that 0.95 = sup Pr {X≥ Xc|100p% = 90%}.  For example, if n = 350, 
then Xc = 307, so that Pr{X≥ Xc|100p% = 90%}≈ 0.9316 ≤ 0.95.  That is, 307 is the number of 
responses ≥ 3 which yields the largest value of Pr {X≥ Xc|100p% = 90%} ≤ 0.95 for n = 350. For 
n = 315, the critical value is Xc  = 300 (power ≈ 0.95).   
 
11.4 Demographic, Diabetes History, Medications and Medical Conditions Data, 
Questionnaires 1 and 2  
Descriptive statistics for Demographics, Diabetes History, Medications and Medical Conditions, 
and subject questionnaires will be computed as appropriate.  Hist ograms will be constructed where 
appropriate.  A percentage of subjects < 65 years of age will be calculated.  
 
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 34 of 43  11.5 Hematocrit Analysis  
Hematocrit will be measured in singlet for each subject.  Subjects with a hematocrit determination 
that is out of range cannot be used for blood glucose measurement comparisons.    
Subject hematocrit measurement should be within 0- 70% in order for the subject BG results to be 
considered evaluable for the ISO 15197 analysis.  For the analysis according to the FDA SMBG: 
2016, al l subjects will be considered evaluable.  
The mean, median, minimum, maximum, and standard deviation, will be computed for hematocrit determinations, for subjects with diabetes and for all subjects, by site and for both sites combined.  
 
11.6 Temperature and Humidity  
Means, medians, standard deviations, minimum and maximum room temperatures and humidities will be computed by site and for both sites combined. 
 
11.7 Glucose distribution 
The distribution of YSI glucose and a histogram (combined sites) for both capillary and venous 
blood will be provided.  The mean, median, minimum, maximum, and standard deviation will be computed for glucose distributions, for subjects with diabetes and for all subjects, by site and for both sites combined. 
In addition, the number of capillary samples with concentrations <80 and > 250 mg/dL will be 
reported.  
 
11.8 Data Listing  
A listing of the data (excel sheet) is needed for the CSR.  The listing should include:  subject and 
staff fingerstick meter results, AST (palm) meter  results, venous meter results, capillary and 
venous mean YSI results, subject ID, hematocrit. 
A listing of subject comments including subject IDs from the Ease of Use Questionnaire is needed 
for the CSR.   
Note: If supplemental or unplanned analyses are r equested , they will be presented in a 
supplemental report.    
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 35 of 43  12.0 Administration  
All investigator and site staff communications regarding the study should be directed to the 
Ascensia Study Manager.  Please contact the Ascensia Study Manager noted below for any questions or problems concerning the clinical trial.  
Maria Teresa Viggiani, MS , CCRA  
Phone: 914- 296-2876   Cell: 914- 673-7675 
Fax: 1- 914-462-4285@efaxsend.com  
e-mail: Maria.V iggiani@Ascensia.com  
Documents to be collected prior to the start of the study include, but are not limited to:  
1) CVs of Investigator and Sub- Investigators  
2) Signature of PI on page 2 of protocol  
3) IRB approval letter  
4) IRB-approved ICF 
5) Financial Disclosures for PI and Sub-  Investigators  
6) Clinical Trials Agreement (including Investiga tor Agreements for PIs and Sub- Investigators)  
7) Site staff GCP training documentation  
Data / documents to be collected during or after completion of the study include, but are not limited to:  
1) EDC database  
2) Progress Notes  
3) Signature and Delegation Log (for all study staff)  
4) Investigator’s Report of Study Closure and IRB acknowledgement  
5) Study -related training documentation  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 36 of 43  Appendix A -  Instructions for Cleaning and Disinfecting Meters   
Single -use items, such as test strips, test strip vials or lancing devices, shall not be used with 
multiple subjects and will be discarded in biohazardous containers after use.  Blood glucose meters 
will be single -use, and will be cleaned and disinfected before returning to Ascensia by study staff 
only.  Study staff will disinfect meters using the EPA -registered disinfectant noted in the UG and 
below that is suitable for use on hard, non -porous surfaces.  Ascensia will provide the disinfectant.  
  
EPA Regist ration  Manufacturer  Product Name  Active Ingredient  
67619- 12 Clorox Professional 
Products Company  Clorox Bleach Germicidal Wipes  0.55% sodium hypochlorite  
 
1. Follow the manufacturer’s directions printed on the container.  Wear gloves.  
2. If the meter is soiled, clean until all soil is removed before disinfecting.  
3. Disinfect by wiping the meter with the disinfectant wipe until wet, and continue wiping for 60 second s.  Take care to prevent solution from running into the test strip port or around the 
buttons.  
4. Dry the meter with a clean paper towel.  
5. Dispose of all materials used in the cleaning and disinfecting procedure according to current lab biohazard procedures. 
 
References  
 Protection of laboratory workers from occupationally acquired infections; approved guideline – third edition.  CLSI document M29- A3.  ISBN1 -56238- 567-4. 
 Rutala W, Weber D, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee.  Guideline  for 
disinfection and sterilization in healthcare facilities, 2008.  CDC.  
FDA, Processing/Reprocessing Medical Devices in Health Care Settings: Validation Methods and Labeling, May 2, 2011. 
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 37 of 43  Appendix B -   Instructions for Collection/Processing of Blood for YSI  
Capillary Blood Collection  
1. The study staff will perform a deep finger puncture using a Tenderlett, or similar, lancing 
device, on the subject’s finger.  
2. The study staff will express the blood and collect approximatel y 200 -  300 µL in a blood 
collection tube (e.g. BD Microtainer with lithium heparin).  A hand warmer may be used to improve blood flow and facilitate sample collection.   Detailed instructions are as follows: 
• Typically the best finger to choose is the middl e finger.   It is recommended to practice the 
finger massaging technique prior to puncture.  
• Give subject a hand -warmer to hold for several minutes prior to puncture.  Note that the 
hand- warmer should be moved to the subject’s wrist when ready for puncture a nd kept 
there during the whole collection procedure.  
• Angle finger with tip slightly downward and squeeze fingertip gently prior to puncture.  
• Consider placement of finger puncture device:  Choose a puncture site that will allow you to use your dominant hand to collect the blood.  The device should be aligned so that the 
opening (where the blade comes out) is perpendicular to the grooves of the fingerprint and so that the opening is placed to the side of the finger (not too close to the nail). 
• While continuing to hold the fingertip, squeeze firmly, hold device firmly against side of finger and trigger the blade.  Then turn the finger so that the nail is facing up. 
• Remove pressure from fingertip (to allow capillaries to fill with blood) and collect the first drop. 
• Begin massaging motion – continuous message of sides of the finger – this is critical.  
• Continue massaging finger from base to tip as you continue to collect the blood drops into 
the tube.  If blood flow reduces it may help to press on the nail a bit in between massaging 
the finger.  Having the subject stand up and drop their hand may also help. 
 
Processing of Capillary or Venous Blood for YSI Analysis  
1. Once collected, process the microtainer tube for laboratory glucose analysis as follows:   
• Label all  tubes with the subject number and a C or a V (Capillary or Venous) as appropriate 
using a Sharpie marker.  Also include a pre -determined notation for the capillary samples 
as to which meter test the sample corresponds ( CONTOUR  NEXT or CONTOUR  TV3). 
• Gently  invert the microtainer tube several times to mix the anticoagulant.  
• Centrifuge the whole blood immediately to separate the plasma from the red blood cells.  
Centrifugation must occur within 15 minutes of first meter blood test.  Timing of all meter testing/centrifugation will be recorded on the appropriate CRF.   
• It is recommended that after centrifugation, the plasma is transferred from the microtainer tube to a micro/dispo tube or similar container.  Ensure the container is labeled and the cap is secured.  
• The capped plasma sample may be kept at room temperature for up to 4 hours before testing.  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 38 of 43  2. If testing on the YSI Analyzer is not completed within 4 hours of sample collection, the plasma 
should be refrigerated for up to 24 hours, after which it should be frozen until the sample is 
tested.  
3. Shipment of samples to Ascensia for glucose determinations may be recommended if YSI Analyzers do not meet the accuracy guidelines for the Ascensia traceability control sera. 
Arrangements will be made to ship the samples with dry ice via prepaid express mail should it 
become necessary.  
4. Glucose values of the YSI replicates (controls and plasma) should be within 4 mg/dL or 4% of 
each other; if not, an additional assay should be run.  
5. Insufficient (or suspected to be insuf ficient) samples, missing samples, and other sample issues 
should be recorded in the CRF and on the YSI printout as appropriate.  If a sample is 
hemolyzed, record in the CRF.   
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 39 of 43  Appendix C -  Instructions for Hematocrit Sample Preparation & Testing  
 
Staff  performing the hematocrit will be trained in this procedure during the initiation visit by the 
study manager or designee.    
1. Two hematocrit tubes will be obtained from each subject’s blood.  One tube will be measured 
and the result recorded on the form.   The second tube will be measured only if the first tube 
was not adequate for measurement.  Note:  
• Sample that is collected from venous blood will be collected in un- treated micro -
hematocrit tubes .   
• Samples collected from capillary fingerstick blood will be collected in treated micro -
hematocrit tubes.    
2. Place a microhematocrit tube against the surface of the blood drop.  Do not place the opening 
of the tube flush against the skin or it will be occluded. 
3. Fill the microhematocrit tube about halfway.  Do not over -fill.  Then immediately place one of 
the microhematocrit tube openings in the clay sealant.  Press into the clay 2 -3 times to make 
sure enough sealant is transferred.  
4. Place the sealed microhematocrit tube into the micro -centrifuge.   Note: it is ve ry important to 
place the microhematocrit tube in centrifuge rotor with clay side pointed outward.   Spin for 
approx. 2 mins.  Use dialed setting on StatSpin centrifuge.  
5. Reading of hematocrit using StatSpin Crit- reader  
• After collection and centrifugation of hematocrit, place tube rotor in StatSpin Crit- reader, 
with clay side to the right.   
• Slide the marker on the crit -reader to the exact line where the clay and red blood cells meet 
(this is the “0” line).  Press set button until “0” shows in the display.   
• Then move marker all the way over to the other end of the tube to the exact line where the plasma ends – press the set button until “100” shows in the display.   
• Now you are ready to read the hematocrit result.  Slide the marker to the exact line where the red blood cells meet the plasma.  
• The result in the display is the hematocrit percentage for that sample.  
6. An alternative to Step 5 is manual reading of the hematocrit by the operator using Manual StatSpin  Micro Hematocrit Capillary Tube Reader.    
7. Record hematocrit result on the appropriate form.  
  
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 40 of 43  Appendix D - Hypoglycemia Protocol at AMCR Institute  
 
 

Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 41 of 43   

Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 42 of 43  Appendix E -  Hypoglycemia Protocol at Rainier Clinical Research Center  
 
Rainier Clinical Research Center  
HYPOGLYCEMIA ACTION PLAN  
 
CLINICAL CONDITION  HYPOGLYCEMIA ACTION PLAN  
• Blood glucose <70 mg/dL, but ≥50 mg/dL  
• With or without symptoms  • Treat if patient exhibits neuroglycopenic 
symptoms, patient requests or 
investigator discretion  
• No treatment if asymptomatic. If blood 
glucose has not incre ased to ≥70 mg/dL 
after 2 hours, then treat.  
• Treat hypoglycemia with glucose tabs: 16 
grams initially, with repeat treatment every 15 -20 minutes at discretion of 
investigator until blood glucose is 
increasing or blood glucose ≥100 mg/dL  
• Blood glucose <50 mg/dL  
• With or without symptoms  
• Subject able to self -administer glucose 
tabs  • Treat hypoglycemia with glucose tabs: 
16-32 grams (amount at investigator 
discretion) initially , with repeat treatment every 15 -20 minutes at 
discretion of investigator until blood glucose is increasing or blood glucose 
≥100 mg/dL  
• Blood glucose <50 mg/dL  
• Subject is NOT able to self -administer 
glucose tabs  Severe hypoglycemia (defined as a hypoglycemic 
event requiring assistance of another individual to 
activ ely administer treatment)  
• Treat hypoglycemia with 1 mg 
intramuscular glucagon or intravenous 
glucose 20cc of 50% glucose  
• Monitor vital signs and blood glucose 
until glucose returns to normal range and patient regains full consciousness  
• If on an insulin pu mp, suspend insulin 
delivery until glucose is ≥70 mg/dL  
• Transfer to acute care facility at 
discretion of the investigator  
 
Rev. 1/31/18  
 
 
Clinical Trial Protocol GCA -PRO -2018- 006-01 vs 06Jul2 018  Ascensia Diabetes Care 
Project DDC5P -00096   CONFIDENTIAL  
 
 Page 43 of 43  Attachment 1:   Proper Handling of Ascensia YSI Serum Controls  
 
 
Ascensia R&D completed characterization of six -level serum controls purchased from Bio-
Techne® (formerly Bionostics).  During the characterization, staff observed that sample 
stratification during thawing can occur if the control vials are not handled judiciously.  The 
recommended procedure is as follows. 
 
1. Thaw the frozen control amber glass vials at 2 -8ºC for 2- 3 days in the refrigerator.  Each vial 
holds approximately 2.0 mL.  
2. Before opening, mix the vials well by gently inverting them at least 10 times.  
3. Prepare an aliquot of each level in capped microcentrifuge tubes.  Cap tightly.  We prefer Fisherbrand
™ Microcentrifuge 0.5mL tubes (PN 02- 681-333) with O -ring seal caps (PN 02 -
681-358).  
4. Store any remaining control in the amber glass vials at 2 -8ºC. 
5. Before  running a control sample on the YSI, mix the aliquot tubes by gently inverting them.  
6. At the beginning of each day, remix the amber glass vials and refill the aliquot tubes.  When not in use, store the aliquots at 2- 8ºC. 
7. The thawed control use life is two weeks.  Discard all thawed control —aliquot tubes and amber 
glass vials —after two weeks.  
8. Since slow thawing for 2 -3 days is recommended, it is advisable to keep an extra thawed set 
available for testing.  