Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 1 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    1) Abstract of the study   
 
Post-discharge hospital utilization, i.e., readmissions within 30 days of 
discharge (30d readmissions) and emergency department (ED) visits, are a high -
priority quality measure and target for cost reduct ion. Patients with diabetes are 
disproportionately over -represented in 30d readmissions, especially among racial 
minorities and urban populations. We have developed and  validated a tool, the 
Diabetes Early Readmiss ion Risk Indicator (DERRI), to predict 30d readmission 
risk among diabetes patients , which is a critical prerequisite for targeting limited 
resources for reducing readmission risk to those most in need. Currently , there 
are no proven interventions to reduc e the risk of 30d readmission specifically 
among patients with diabetes. This proposal will assess  the feasibility and 
acceptability of a nov el, multifactorial intervention, the Diabetes Transition of 
Hospital Care Program (DiaTOHC or “ My Temple Extra Care  Service ”), designed 
to reduce  post-discharge hospital utilization rates  in a pilot randomized controlled 
trial. The intervention will include inpatient diabetes and discharge education, 
comprehensive discharge planning and coordination of care, A1c -based 
adjustment of diabetes therapy, and post -discharge support.  Hospitalized 
patients with diabetes  identified as high risk for  readmission based on the DERRI  
will be randomized to the intervention or the  control group , which  will receive 
usual care. Such wor k is highly relevant in the current era of soaring health care 
costs and national health care reform.  
 
2) Protocol Title  
A Pilot Trial to Prevent Hospital Readmission  of Patients with 
Diabetes  ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ) 
3) Investigator  
Daniel Rubin, MD, MSc  
4) Objectives  
We have retrospectively developed and validated a tool to predict the 
risk of all -cause 30d re admission among patients with diabetes called  the 
Diabetes Early Readmission Risk Indicator  (DERRI ).[1] Based on easily obtained 
clinical and sociodemographic information available prior to the time of 
discharge, the DERRI  accurately stratifies patients by risk of 30d readmission.  
The proposed study will use the DERRI  to identify diabetic patients at 
high-risk of readmission who will be provided with a novel intervention  designed 
to reduce hospital utilization rates  within 30 days of discharge . This multifactorial 
intervention builds on techniques effectively used in other inpatient populations, 
specifically, patient -centered discharge education, peri -discharge coordination of 
care, and post -discharge support by nurses and community health work ers 
(CHWs), and adapts them to  patients with diabetes .[2-8] In addition, the 
intervention includes adjustment of diabetes therapy upon d ischarge based on 
the admission A1c, which improves post -discharge glycemic control and is 
associated with a lower risk of 30d readmission. [9, 10]  
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 2 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    We propose  a pilot randomized controlled trial  to address  the following 
aims:   
  
Aim 1: To explore the feasibility, acceptability , and efficacy  of a novel 
multifactorial intervention designed to reduce all -cause readmission or ED visit 
rates  within 30 days of discharge among  hospitalized  patients with diabetes  who 
are identified as high risk based on the DERRI  
 
Aim 2 : To prospectively validate the readmission risk predictions generated by 
the DERRI  
 
The usual care control  group  will provide the baseline risk of 30d post-discharge 
hospital utilization in the patient population predicted to be at high risk by the 
DERRI. Furthermore, we will prospe ctively follow patients who are predicted to 
be at lower risk to validate the DERRI in this population.  
 
5) Background   
 
Significance  
Post -discharge hospital utilization, i.e., readmissions and ED visits, 
represent a costly failure of medical care, especially  among diabetic 
patients. [11-13] Patients with diabetes represent about 9% of the US 
population, [14]  but they account for 23% of hospitalizations (over 8 million per 
year). [15, 16]  The number and proportion of hospitalized patients with diabetes 
has increased steadily over the past two decades, [15, 17, 16]  mirroring the 
increasing incidence and prevalence of diabetes in the general population. [18, 
19, 14]  While the overall 30d readmission rate is 8.5 -13.5%, [20, 21]  the 30d 
readmission rate of diabetic patients is 14.4 -21.0%. [22-25] In 2012, costs 
associated with the hospitalization of diabetic  patients in the US were $124 billion 
of which an estimated $25 billion was attributable to 30d readmissions. [26, 27, 
15] ED visits of patients with diabetes also impose significant costs to health 
systems. [28] Reducing 30d readmissions among diabetic patients has the 
potential to greatly reduce healthcare costs. A modest 5% reduction in the 30d 
readmission rate would result in  82,754 fewer admissions per year, 
translating into an estimated annual cost savings of $1.2 billion. [26, 16]  
Starting October 1, 2012, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
decreased payments to hospitals that have greater -than-expected 30d 
readmission ra tes, reflecting an effort to improve  care while reducing costs. [29] 
These data and the widespread interest in healthcare reform have prompted 
recent calls for more research on how to prevent 30d readmissions in this 
important group of patients. [30-32]  
 
Identifying and intervening in the highest risk diabetic patients to reduce 
readmission rates may have a large impact.  Such an approach, colloquially 
known as “medical hot -spotting,”  has been successfully applied in a 
socioeconomically disadvantaged population to reduce hospital utilization in 
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 3 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    Camden, NJ. [33]  Identifying high risk patients, i.e., the “hot spots”, is the first 
step. However, there had been  no published, validated tools to predict the risk of 
30d readmission among patients with diabet es.  Most prediction models among 
hospitalized patients have relatively poor discriminative ability (C -statistic 
<0.7). [34] Furthermore, most studies of readmission risk factors in diabetic 
patients are limited by the use of administrative rather than clinical data, lack of 
clinical utility at the point of care, and/or a narrow f ocus on a primary discharge 
diagnosis of diabetes. [35-37, 22, 38, 23]  Identifying high -risk diabetic patients 
will enable targeting of interventions to those at greatest need, which may 
optimize the cost -benefit ratio for the health care system.   
 
To date, preventive interventions targeting 30d readmissions have included 
multiple components but have not focused on diabetic patients.   Several 
trials have shown sign ificant relative risk reductions in 30d readmissions ranging 
from 30% to 75%. [2-8] Of the successful studies, all except one tested multi -
component discharge bundles, suggesting that bundled interventions may realize 
an additive effect beyond that seen with a single intervention. Common 
components of these interventions were patient -centered discharge education, 
peri-discharge coordination of care, and post -discharge support. The majority of 
trials that targeted higher risk patients showed a benefit in reducing 
readmissions. [3, 5, 6, 4]  In contrast, trials that failed to reduce readmission risk 
did not focus on higher risk patients. [2, 39]  This suggests that targeting higher 
risk patients is an important component of an effective intervention, and efforts to 
reduce readmissio ns may be more effective in a high risk population.  A major 
limitation of these studies, however, is that they did not report data stratified by 
diabetes status or address diabetes management. Our proposal will address 
important knowledge gaps concerning readmission risk prediction and 
prevention strategies in patients with diabetes.   
 
Innovation  
This research proposal consists of important innovations.  There are no 
proven strategies specifically developed for patients with diabetes to reduce the 
risk of 3 0d readmission. This proposal combines elements of successful 
readmission risk reduction interventions designed for other populations to create 
a novel multi -component intervention for a high -risk diabetic population.  
Furthermore,  the DERRI will be used to  select patients at the highest risk of 30d 
readmission to receive the intervention, which has a higher likelihood of success 
than testing the intervention without regard for predicted readmission risk. 
Readmission interventions in other populations that f ocused on higher risk 
patients have been successful; [3, 5, 6, 4]  however, none  of these used a 
validated model specifically developed to predict 30d readmission risk. This 
approach could serve as a model to test and target interventions in other 
populations at high risk of readmission.   Lastly, although the DERRI has been 
internally validated in a retrospective sample, the proposed study will test the 
model prospectively in a new population. External prospective validation is 
important for demonstrating generalizability. [40, 41]  Achieving these aims 
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 4 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    would represent a major advance in the peri -discharge care of hospitalized 
diabetes patients, reducing 30d readmissions, socioeconomic disparities, 
and healthcare costs.  
 
Preliminary studies  
Qualitative assessment of readmission risk factors and causes  
We conducted semi -structured interviews of 20 adult inpatients with 
diabetes readmitted to TUH within 30 days of discharge and performed thematic 
analysis. [42] In 76% of cases, reasons for the index admission and the 
readmission were similar.  While 65% of patients felt they needed help after 
discharge, only 47% reported getting the help they needed. Only 29% of patients 
were aware of the A1c test.  Despite 65% of discharge instructions listing a 
scheduled follow -up visit , only 41% of patients recalled having a scheduled 
follow -up visit. Most patients said they followed the discharge instructions but did 
not accurately answer questions about them. Few could list their medications or 
the reasons for taking them. Discharge i nstructions rarely addressed diabetes 
care other than medications, even for patients with a diabetes -related primary 
discharge diagnosis.  
We concluded that recurring reasons for admission of patients with 
diabetes are not being sufficiently addressed to p revent 30d readmission, and 
many patients do not get adequate discharge support. Furthermore, readmitted 
patients lack important knowledge about their diabetes and medications. The 
discharge process does not successfully communicate instructions to patient s, 
and instructions often fail to address diabetes. These findings inform the planned 
intervention , and a similar qualitative method will be used to assess the 
intervention.  
  
6) Setting of the Human Research  
Potential subjects will be recruited at Temple University Hospital. All research 
procedures will be performed on the Temple Health Science Center Campus.  
 
7) Resources Available to Conduct the Human Research  
We estimate that in order to meet the desired final sample size, up to 
300 subjects will need to b e enrolled. Approximately 27,500 patients with 
diabetes are hospitalized at TUH annually. Assuming 25% of them will not 
meet eligibility criteria, there will be 20,600 potential subjects remaining 
over 1 year.  We will therefore need to recruit 1.14% of potential subjects.  
This work is being funded by an NIH K23, which covers  75% of the PI’s 
total effort through February  of 2019 . A majority of the PI’s research effort 
will be devoted to this project. One full -time Resea rch Specialist 
(Shaneisha Allen ) will support the study, including screening, consenting, 
and enrolling patients, entering data, and managing regulatory 
requirements. Our base of operation is at the General Clinical Research 
Center  (GCRC) , located at Rock Pavilion, room 422.  Shaneisha Allen  will 
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 5 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    supervise the following  research assistants  for screening, consenting, and 
enrolling patients, and entering data ( Samantha Watts, Felicia Dillard,  
Madeline Amberge, Dominic Recco, and Samuel Tanner). Dr. Cherie Vaz,  
one of the PI’s colleagues in the Section of Endocrinology, will serve as a 
co-investigator to help with the clinical management of patients in the 
study.  
In addit ion to the research specialist, a Nurse Navigator in the TUH 
Care Transitions Program  (Jeff Slocum ) will deliver parts of the 
intervention, including diabetes education, coordination of care, and post -
discharge follow -up.  
All persons on the team administering the  trial will be fully trained on 
the protocol and their study -related duties and func tions.  The Nurse 
Navigators have participated in protocol development.  
 
8) Study Design  
a) Recruitment Methods  
We will recruit study subjects as follows:  
1. We will review a daily computer -generated admission log of patients 
admitted to medical -surgical units at TU H who have been ordered for 
routine glucose testing. This captures most patients with recognized 
diabetes.  
2. We will review the medical chart of patients on the admission log to 
determine potential eligibility. We request a waiver of consent and 
HIPAA to ide ntify candidates. We will access only the minimum data 
needed to obtain this information.  
3. We will request permission to approach the potential subject about the 
study from a physician on the primary team  providing hospital care . 
4. Study participants will be  provided $ 50 after 30 days of follow -up has 
been completed and outcomes have been assessed.  Subjects who 
also provide an in -depth interview after the follow -up period will be 
given another $ 50. 
 
b) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Screen ing for eli gibility will be performed by chart review and brief 
history of the potential subject.  
Inclusion criteria  
1. Diabetes, defined by pre -admission use of a diabetes -specific medication  
and/or documentation of the diagnosis in the medical record.  
2. Age 18 years or older at the time of admission  
3. Admission to a non -critical care unit  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Female subjects who are pregnant and/or admitted to an obstetric service  
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 6 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    2. Binge drinking (5 or more alcoholic drinks for males or 4 or more alcoholic 
drinks for females on the same day) or drug abuse within 3 months before 
admission  
3. Receiving palliative care  during the hospitalization  
4. Participation in another readmission risk re duction program  
5. Inpatient death  
6. Planned or actual t ransfer to another hospital or subacute facility  
7. Discharge to hospice or a long -term care facility  
8. Discharge by signing out against medical advice  
9. Discharge expected within 12 hours  or admission to a short -stay unit  
10. Lack of access to a phone  
11. Living more than 30 miles away from TUH  
12. Mental condition rendering the subject unable to understand the nature, 
scope, and pos sible consequences of the study  
13. A1c <5.7%  
14. Inability to speak English  
 
c) Local Number of Subjects  
Up to 300  subjects will be enrolled  locally across the following study 
groups:  60 subjects in the intervention group, 60 in the high -risk 
control group, and 180 in the low -risk control group.  
We estimate that 25% of screened patients will not meet eligibility 
criteria, w hich means that at least 300 patients will be screened.  
 
d) Study Timelines  
Subjects will be enrolled during their hospital stay and will 
participate in the study  for 3 months  following hospital discharge.  
The intervention will be delivered during the 4 weeks following 
discharge. Final assessment for outcomes will be performed at 3 
months after discharge. We anticipate enrollment will occur 
between July and December of 201 9. We estimate that primary 
analyse s will be completed by June of 20 20.  
 
e) Study Endpoints   
The primary outcome will be the number  of initial hospital 
readmission s within 30 days of discharge. Secondary outcomes will 
also be assessed at 30 days of discharge unless otherwise 
specified. Secondary outcomes will include:  
1. time to first readmission   
2. number  of emergency department (ED) visits 
3. a composite of 30d readmission s and ED visits  
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 7 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    4. number  of primary care and specialist provider follow -up 
visits scheduled and attended  
5. incidence of medication review or reconciliation post -
discharge  
6. cost of post -discharge care as a sum of ED visits , 
readmission, home health services, and outpatient provider  
visits  
7. cost of the  intervention  
8. subject experience assessed by a brief questionnaire  
9. self-monitored blood glucose levels  and frequency of testing  
10. change in well-being  from baseline to 5 weeks  after 
discharge as measured by the World Health Organization 
Well-Being Index (WHO -5).[43] 
11. change in diabetes -related distress  at 5 weeks  after 
discharge as measured by the Problem Areas in Diabete s 
(PAID) scale .[44] 
12. change in perceived social support  at 5 weeks  after 
discharge as measured by the Multidimensional Scale of 
Perceived Social Support (MSPSS ).[45] 
13. change in perceived stress  at 5 weeks  after discharge as 
measured by the perceived stress scale (PSS ).[46] 
14. change in diabetes knowledge  at 5 weeks  after discharge as 
measured by the Diabetes Knowledge Test  (DKT2). [47]  
15. change in A1c level from base line to 3 months after the 
index discharge  
f) Procedures  Involved in the Human Research   
After enrollment, subjects will be sorted into 2 groups based on the predicted risk 
of readmission by the DERRI: high risk and low risk  (Figure 1) .  
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 8 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019     
Figure 1. Allocation of study participants  
 
Low-risk group:  
The low-risk group  will be followed in a prospective, observational arm of the 
study. About 5 weeks after hospital discharge, the  Temple medical record will be 
reviewed for the presence of any hospital or ED visits within 30 days after 
discharge. If no post -discharge acute visits are found, then the subject will be 
contacted to determine if any hospital or ED visits occurred at another institution.  
 The following data will be collected at baseline : sociodem ographics, 
medical history, including HIV, substance abuse, and mental health status, 
which are likely risk factors for admission, relevant laboratory results, 
admission diagnoses , well-being (WHO -5), diabetes -related distress 
(PAID scale), perceived socia l support (MSPSS), perceived stress (PSS), 
diabetes knowledge (DKT2) , depression screening by the  2-item Patient 
Health Questionnaire ( PHQ -2),[48] and health literacy by the  Brief Health 
Literacy Scale (BHLS ).[49, 50]  Subjects who score 3 or more on the PHQ -
2 will complete the PHQ -9.[51] Subjects with a PHQ -9 score of 5 or more 
will be referred to their primary care physician ( PCP) for evaluation and 
management of possible depression .[52] For subjects without a PCP, a 
study physician will begin medical therapy for depression as need ed. For 
subjects newly discovered to be suicidal, psychiatry  will be consulted  in 
the hospital . 
 The following data will be collected during follow -up: A1c, discharge 
diagnoses, hospital readmission (date, primary diagnosis), ED visits (date, 
primary diagno sis) and patient experience according to a brief 
questionnaire (Appendix Item 3 a). 
 
High -risk group:  

Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 9 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    For the  high -risk group , there are two phases in the protocol. Phase A is the 
pilot RCT to explore the feasibility, acceptability, and efficacy of the intervention. 
Phase B consists of in-depth interviews with intervention participants and 
research staff to further explore acceptab ility and effects of the intervention and 
to refine the protocol for future study.  Subjects in the high -risk group will be 
randomly assigned with a computer -genera ted randomization scheme 1:1 in  
randomly permuted blocks of 2, 4, or 6  to receive either the intervention , the 
Diabetes Transition of Hospital Care (DiaTOHC)  Program (“ My Temple Extra 
Care Service ”) or usual care (control).  
Phase A: RCT of readmission risk reduction intervention  
Intervention protocol : The multifactorial intervention is based on strategies  that 
reduce d 30d readmissions  in other populations , Temple’s successful readmission 
reduction program for heart failure patients  (Temple Advantage) , and the PI’s 
own preliminary studies.  There are four components of the intervention: 1) 
patient -centered discharge education, 2) peri -discharge coordination of care, 3) 
A1c-based adjustment of diabetes therapy upon discharge, and 4) post -
discharge support.  
 
1) Patient -centered discharge education : 
1a)  Standardized diabe tes discharge instructions  and education : A 
Navigator will review instructions containing basic diet, activity, and diabetes -
specific self -care guidance, as well as education on how to recognize and treat 
hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia  (Appendix Item 1 ). These instructions are 
based on the model published by one of the PI’s mentors , Dr. M ary Korytkowski, 
and others .[53] They also include a table that allows a provider to specify how 
and when insulin should be taken and discussion of the subject’s A1c level, of 
which many patients  are not aware according to Preliminary studies.  Lastly,  
patients  who have not completed a formal diabetes education program in the 
past year  will be referred  to a Certified Diabetes Educator at the Temple 
Diabetes Center, an American Diabetes Association -certified outpatient diabetes 
education center.  
 
1b)  Comprehensive discharge plan review:  Prior to discharge  or soon 
after discharge , a Navigator will review the discharge plan with participants, 
including medications, reasons for and importance of foll ow-up appointments and 
testing, and how to reach post -hospital providers.   
 
2) Peri-discharge coordination of care : Soon after discharge , a Navigator will 
assess and address barriers to following the discharge plan, including obtaining 
medications. A Navigator will confirm the scheduling of follow -up appointments 
and testing (including a visit with the primary care provider), help organize post -
discharge services, assess barriers to keeping appointments, and confirm plans 
to attend follow -up appointme nts including transportation . In addition, a Navigator 
will assist subject with obtaining  medications  if needed . See Appendix Item 2  for 
script.  
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 10 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    3) A1c-based adjustment of diabetes therapy : Upon hospital discharge, diabetes 
therapy will be determined by the PI or co -Investigator (Endocrinologists) based 
on an algorithm tested in patients with type 2 diabetes ,[9] and the American 
Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care guidelines  as follows  [54]: 
a) For A1c <7%, resume the pre-admiss ion treat ment regimen . 
b) For A1c 7 -7.9%  
 Patients who did not take insulin before admission, discharge on  
optimized pre-admission treatment regimen (see definition below) or 
add a non -insulin agent  if the prior regimen was already optimal .  
 Patients who took basal  insulin but not prandial insulin before 
admission, increase the home daily dose of basal insulin by 10 -15% in 
addition to any non-insulin pre -admission treatment s. Non-insulin pre -
admission treatment s should be optimized.  
 Patients who took multiple daily insulin injections (MDI) before 
admission, increase the home total daily dose of insulin by 10 -15% in 
addition to any non-insulin pre -admission treatment s. Non-insulin pre -
admission treatment s should be optimized.  
b) For A1c 8-9%  
 Patients who did not take  insulin  before admission , discharge on 50% 
of the last inpatient insulin glargine daily dose or 0.2 units/kg in 
addition to the pre -admission treatment regimen , which should be 
optimized .   
 Patients who took basal insulin but not prandial insulin before 
admission, discharge on 50 -80% of the last inpatient insulin glargine 
daily dose  or increase the home daily dose of basal insulin by 10 -15% 
and/or add rapid -acting insulin before the largest meal at 50 -80% of 
the last inpatient dose or 0.1 units/kg in addi tion to any non-insulin pre -
admission treatment s. Non-insulin pre -admission treatment s should be 
optimized.  
 Patients who took multiple daily insulin injections (MDI) before 
admission, discharge on 50 -80% of the last inpatient total daily insulin 
dose or in crease the home total daily dose of insulin by 10 -15% in 
addition to any non-insulin pre -admission treatment s. Non-insulin pre -
admission treatment s should be optimized.  
c) For A1c >9%  
 Patients who did not take insulin before admission, discharge on 80-
100% of the last inpatient insulin glargine daily dose or 0.3 units/kg  in 
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 11 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    addition to the pre -admission treatment regimen , which should be 
optimized .  
 Patients who took basal insulin but not prandial insulin before 
admission, discharge on 80-100% of the last inpatient insulin glargine 
daily dose  or increase the home daily dose of basal insulin by 20 -30% 
and/or add rapid -acting insulin before the largest meal at 80 -100% of 
the last inpatient dose or 0.1 units/kg in addition to any non-insulin pre -
admission treatment s. Non-insulin pre -admission treatment s should be 
optimized.  
 Patients who took multiple daily insulin injections (MDI) before 
admission, discharge on 80-100% of the last inpatient total daily insulin 
dose or increase the home total daily  dose of insulin by 20-30% in 
addition to any non-insulin pre -admission treatment s. Non-insulin pre -
admission treatment s should be optimized.  
Optimization of non -insulin diabetes therapy is defined as using the next higher 
dose up to the maximum tolerated dose. The maximum dose specified below will 
be used unless the subject must use a lower dose to avoid side effects or there is 
a contraindication.  
 DPP4 -inhibitors (i.e., linagliptin, saxagliptin, sitagliptin): FDA -approved 
maximum daily dose  
 GLP1 -analogues  (i.e., albiglutide, exenatide, dulaglutide, liraglutide): FDA -
approved maximum daily dose  
 Metformin: 2000 mg per day  
 Pioglitazone: 30 mg per day  
 Secretagogues (i.e., sulfonylureas, repaglinide, nateglinide): Half the FDA -
approved daily maximum dose. Pre -admission daily dose will be reduced by 
50% in patients starting prandial insulin or those at risk for hypoglycemia. 
Secretagogues will be discontinued in patients with inpatient hypoglycemia 
(BG <70 mg/dL) within 48 hours of discharge.  
 SGLT2 -inhibitors (i .e., canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, empaglizflozin): FDA-
approved maximum daily dose  
Patients who cannot use insulin glargine as outpatients will have the equivalent 
dose substituted with another basal insulin. Only FDA -approved diabetes 
therapies will be u sed in the study.  Pre-admission diabetes medications may 
be adjusted to optimize patient safety and benefit. Deviations from the above 
protocol will be allowed on a case -by-case basis if the PI or co -Investigator 
deems it necessary for patient safety.  
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 12 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    4) Post-discharge support : At 24 to 48 hours post -discharge, a nurse Navigator 
will call the patient to assess the patient’s status, confirm receipt of and 
compliance with medications, verify the follow -up appointment schedule, assess 
for barriers to followin g the discharge plan, determine the need for a community 
health worker (CHW) referral, and review blood glucose  control  (patients who are 
discharged on non -insulin regimens will be expected to test their blood glucoses 
at least once a day, and patients who  are discharged on an insulin regimen will 
be expected to test their blood glucoses at least twice a day). Similar phone calls 
will be made weekly for four weeks following discharge by a Navigator. If a 
patient reports significant high or low blood glucose  levels, then the PI or a co -
Investigator (Endocrinologist s) will call the patient to adjust diabetes therapy  (See 
Table s 1a and 1b for insulin dose adjustment protocols ). Eligible patients will 
receive a  referral for a nursing visit from a local home care agency to assess 
medical needs for support at home and medication reconciliation. Referral to a 
CHW may be made if subjects are found to have non -medical needs and/or 
obstacles to maintaining self -care and attending fol low-up appointments. Such 
non-medical support might include transportation to and from medical 
appointments, food, housing, or legal assistance, relief from utility bills, 
verification of insurance, support groups and delivery of durable medical 
equipment.   
Table 1 a. Outpatient basal  insulin dose adjustment:  
Basal Insulin  
If mean FBG > 180 mg/dL  for the last 2  consecutive days 
and no episodes of hypoglycemia  Increase daily basal dose by 
4 IU 
If mean FBG > 140 mg/dL  for the last 2  consecutive days 
and no episodes of hypoglycemia   Increase daily basal dose by 
2 IU 
If mean FBG between 100 to 140 mg/dL  for the last 
2 consecutive days and no episodes of hypoglycemia  No Change  
If any FBG between 70 – 99 mg/dl  Decrease by 4 IU or 10% of 
total daily basal dose  
If any FBG < 70 mg/dl  Decrease by 8 IU or 20% of 
total daily basal dose  
If any FBG < 40 mg/dl  Decrease total daily basal 
dose by 30%  
FBG=Fasting blood glucose ; Hypoglycemia=typical symptoms ( e.g., sweating , tremor , acute 
hunger, anxiety ) and/or blood glucose <70 mg/dL  
 
Table 1b. Outpatient prandial /pre-meal  insulin dose adjustment  based on 
subsequent mealtime/HS BG values :  
Pre-meal  Rapid  Insulin  
Pre-meal  Dose , U  BG 70 – 100 mg/dl*  BG 141-180 mg/dl**  
≤ 10 U  Decrease  by 1 U  Increase  by 1 U  
>11- 19 U  Decrease  by 2 U  Increase  by 2 U  
≥ 20 U  Decrease  by 3 U  Increase  by 3 U  
Pre-meal  Dose , U  BG 40-70 mg/dl x 1 BG 180-240 mg/dl x 1 
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 13 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    ≤ 10 U  Decrease  by 2 U  Increase  by 2 U  
>11- 19 U  Decrease  by 3 U  Increase  by 3 U  
≥ 20 U  Decrease  by 4 U  Increase  by 4 U  
Pre-meal  Dose , U  BG < 40 mg/dl x 1***  BG > 240 mg/dl x 1 
≤ 10 U  Decrease  by 4 U  Increase  by 3 U  
>11- 19 U  Decrease  by 6 U  Increase  by 4 U  
≥ 20 U  Decrease  by 8 U  Increase  by 5 U  
Pre-meal insulin dose adjustment is based on the subsequent BG value, e.g., pre -breakfast 
insulin dose is based on the pre -lunch BG.  
* If > ½ of the mealtime/HS BG values for the week were below target.  
**If > ½ of the mealtime/HS BG values for the week were above target.  
*** Decrease by 30 -40% in the event of severe hypoglycemia (mealtime/HS BG < 40 mg/dl).  
BG=blood glucose; Mealtime/HS=pre -lunch, pre -dinner, or bedtime  
 
The above algorithm provides recommended insulin doses and may be modified 
based on clinical judgment of the investigator or co -investigator.  
 
Usual care : Most aspects of 
the intervention go above -and-
beyond usual care.  Patients in 
the usual care group will 
receive the standard discharge 
instructions  and medication 
reconciliation process . Those 
who are new to diabetes 
receive training by a floor 
nurse on using a glucometer 
as well as a stock set of 
printed educational materials. 
The floor nurses also train 
patients who are new to insulin 
injections  as needed . Patients 
with diabetes are referred to  
outpatient diabetes education  
at Temple  on a case -by-case 
basis as determined by the 
primary hospital provider team.  
Diabetes therapy upon 
discharge is decided on a 
case -by-case basis by the 
primary team.  Discharge 
instructions are routinely sent 
to the primary care physician 
either by fax or E PIC. Most  
TUH patients receive a phone 
call 2 to 4 days after discharge from a CHW that includes checking on the status Table 2. Timeline for assessments of subjects      
Visit #  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
Time (w eeks) 0 2 days  1 2 3 4 5 13 
Intervention group          
Phone call /clinic visit        X  
Psychometric assessments  X      X  
Diabetes knowledge  X      X  
30d endpoints        X  
Interview        X  
A1C X       X 
Navigator call   X X X X X   
Blood glucose   X X X X X X  
Adverse events   X X X X X X  
Usual care group          
Phone call        X  
Psychometric assessments  X      X  
Diabetes knowledge  X      X  
30d endpoints        X  
A1C X       X 
Blood glucose        X  
Adverse events        X  
Low -risk group          
Chart review/phone call        X  
Psychometric assessments  X      X  
Diabetes knowledge  X      X  
A1C X       X 
30d endpoints        X  
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 14 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    of follow -up appointments, confirming access to medications, and answering  
questions.  
Data collection : The following d ata will be colle cted at baseline : A1c, 
sociodemographics, medical history , including HIV, substance abuse, and mental 
health status, which are likely risk factors for admission , relevant laboratory 
results, admission diagnoses , self-reported goals for health and diabetes, well-
being (WHO -5), diabetes -related distress (PAID scale), perceived social support 
(MSPSS), perceived stress (PSS), diabetes knowledge (DKT2) , depression 
screening by the PHQ -2/9, and health literacy by the  BHLS (Table 2) . 
The following data will be collected during follow -up: A1c, discharge diagnoses, 
hospital readmission  (date, primary diagnosis) , ED v isits (date, primary 
diagnosis) , physician follow -up appointments scheduled and/or attended, post -
discharge medication reconciliation (yes/no ), cost of post-discharge care, self-
monitored blood glucose levels, Nurse Navigator time to deliver the intervention  
(minutes) , well-being (WHO -5), diabetes -related distress (PAID scale), perceived 
social support (MSPSS), perceived stress (PSS), diabetes knowledge (DKT2), 
depression (PHQ), and patient experience  according to a brief questionnaire 
(Appendix Item 3 a [usual care] or 3b [intervention] ). These foll ow-up data will 
be collected during a phone call  about 5 weeks after the index discharge. 
Baseline and 3 -month post -discharge A1c levels will be obtained as part of 
standard -of-care.  A letter reminding patients to do the 3 -month blood draw for the 
A1c test  will be sent by mail.  
Data will be collected by phone interview s with subjects and review  of the 
electronic medical record (EMR) . The Research Specialist  will be primar ily 
responsible for screening and recruiting subjects, data collection  and data entry . 
 
Phase B: Qualitative evaluation of intervention  
In Phase B , in-depth individual interviews with intervention -group 
participants and  the Navigator s from Phase A will be conducted in -person to 
develop a better understanding of the intervention’s acceptability, feasibility and 
effects. The interviews will be conducted between one and two months after the 
index discharge. These findings will provide critical informa tion about the 
intervention to guide a future proposal for a definitive RCT. In addition to this 
formal qualitative work, the research team’s experience with implementing the 
study will help refine the manual of procedures for the trial.  
 
Study sample: Approximately  20 (maximum of 25)  intervention -group 
participants in the Phase A pilot trial  will be interviewed . The final sample size will 
be determined by achieving saturation of themes, the point at which no new 
information is being collected. This will be  based on continual assessment by the 
investigators as the interviews are analyzed. [55] In the PI’s prior study with a 
similar design (see Preliminary studies), 20 patients were included. [42] 
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 15 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    Data collection and analysis: The PI will use an  in-depth guide  for semi -
structured participant interviews that addresses the following topics: 1) the 
participants’ experience in the intervention; 2) the acceptability of written 
materials; 3) barriers and facilitators to working with the Navigator s and CHW s; 
and 4) suggestions for improving the intervention  (Appendix Item 4 ). In a semi -
structured interview, the interviewer uses the guide to address topics of interest 
and is encouraged to pursue relevant lines of questioning as they arise during 
the interview. Interviews will be conducted by the PI or research  staff. Each 
interview will take about 30  to 45  minutes and will be recorded with a portable 
digital  recorder. Hand -written observations and impressions during the interviews 
will complement the transcribed audio data. Thematic analysis will be used to 
identify common themes that reflect the underlying attitudes, values, and 
contextual constraints of par ticipants in the intervention. [56, 55]  Each interview 
will be coded by the interviewer then reviewed by the PI and research staff 
together to assure accuracy and consistency of coding. Initial codes will be 
standardized then organized into themes.   
g) Data and Specimen Banking   
All data collected by the research team will be considered part of the 
participant’s confidential record. Data collected on paper from research 
participants will be placed in a locked file cabinet in the GCRC within 24 
hours. The destruction date of paper  files will be at least 7 years from the 
termination of the study and will be authorized by the PI.  Access to 
research and confidential records will be li mited to clinical investigators 
and research coordinators . 
 
h) Data Management   
Statistical analysis:  Distributions of the data will be assessed by descriptive 
statistical and graphical methods. To assess the randomization procedure, 
baseline values of all variables will be compared between the in tervention and 
usual care group . Between -group differences for continuous variables will be 
compared using the Wilcoxon test. Proportions will be compared between groups 
using the chi -square test or exact tests when expected cell counts are less than 
5. The primary outcome of 30d readmission rate will be compared between 
intervention and control groups with the chi -square test. Point estimates of 30d 
readmission rates will be obtained and presented with 95% confidence intervals.  
Time to readmission will be estimated by Kaplan -Meier curve and compared 
between groups  by log -rank test. The composite of 30d readmission and ED 
visits  will be compared by Cox regression model. Continuous secondary 
outcomes will be compared using Wilcoxon test. Categorical secondary 
outcomes will be compared using chi -square test.  The prima ry analyses for all 
outcomes will be performed in the intention -to-treat (ITT) population. Secondary 
analyses for all outcome s will be performed in a per -protocol population restricted 
to subjects who complete  at least one follow -up phone call.  In addition, outcomes 
will be assessed for differences by the number of follow -up phone calls 
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 16 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    completed (dose -response analysis). Lastly, a ll outcomes will be assessed in the 
ITT subgroup of subjects with a baseline A1c >7%.  Statistical significance will b e 
claimed at an alpha level of 0.05.  
Power analysis:  The sample size for Phase 2A was based on an expected drop -
out and post -enrollment exclusion rate of 25% as well as the capacity of the 
research team.  Because this is a pilot feasibility trial, the study  is not powered to 
detect a difference in outcomes.  
 
Data Entry Re quirements:  All data will be coded by the research 
assistant prior to entry. The research assistant s will maintain a log of any 
reviewed data issues so that future occurrences of problems will be 
handled in the same manner. The data entry system (REDCap) will 
require a login identification and password to gain access to the data. 
When appropriate, valida tion and range rules will be applied to the actual 
entry fields. Only the research assistant s will be able to view the data in its 
raw state. All other authorized personnel (i.e. the PI, statistician and Data 
Safety Officer ) will view data via forms and re ports c reated by the 
research assis tants. 
Audit/Verification of Entered Data:  
Primary Outcome Data : Data designated as primary outcome date (i.e., presence 
or absence of 30d readmission) will be subject to a 100% cross -reference check 
with original hard co pies. This audit must have an error rate less than 0.5%. If the 
verification fails the audit, all data will be re -entered, the original computer files 
discarded, and the newly re -entered data audited. This process will continue until 
the audit no longer ex ceeds the maximum allowable error rate. All audits will be 
supervised and documented by the study’s research assistant.  
 
All Other Information : All other entered information will be subject to a 20% 
sample that will be cross -referenced with the original pa per copy. This audit must 
have an error rate less than 0.5%. If the sample fails  the audit, all data will be 
verified against the paper originals. If the error rate of the complete audit is 
greater  than 0.5%, all data will be re -entered, the original computer files 
discarded, and the newly re -entered data  audited. This process will continue until 
the audit no longer exceeds the maximum allowable error rate. At the  discretion 
of the PI, the full audit may be omitted in favor of a complete re -entry of th e 
original paper data. All  audits will be supervised and documented by the research 
assistant.  
 
Storage of Data: Data collected on paper from research participants will be 
placed in a locked file cab inet in the locked GCRC office . The destruction date of 
paper files will be at least 7 years from the termination of the study and will be 
authorized only by the PI. Electronic data will not include personal identifiers 
other than the unique study ID. Audio fi les for the in -depth interview s will be 
stored on the  Research Specialist’s password -protected computer and erased 
from the digital recorder after storage. All data will remain confidential. Access to 
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 17 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    research and confidential records will be limited to trained clinical investigators 
and research coordinator s. 
 
Access to Cleaned Computer Data: Once the study is complete and data have 
been collected, entered, and  passed the audit process, the Research Specialist  
will make the data available to the PI and anyone he  designates. Only the PI can 
give permission  for the release of aggregated study data. No confidential 
information may be released without the expressed  written consent of the study 
participants. Only copies of the finalized , aggregated  data will be released so that 
original data  can remain confident ial. 
 
i) Confidentiality   
Only trained research staff will have access to individually  identifiable information 
under supervision of the PI. Staff will be trained to collect data for the study and 
maintain participants’ confidentiality.  Printed materials with  identifiable participant 
information will be stor ed in a locked filing cabinet in the GCRC . The destruction 
date of paper files will be at least 7 years from the termination of the study and 
will be authorized only by the PI. Electronic data will be enter ed into REDCap, 
which requires a login identification and password to gain access. Electronic data 
will not include personal identifiers other than the unique study ID. Audio fi les for 
the in -depth interview s will be stored on the Research Specialist’s password -
protected computer and erased from the digital recorder after storage.  
Presentation of the study results at regional or scientific meetings or in 
publications will not identify the subjects.  
j) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of 
subject s 
All participants will be given unique study identifiers. Data with personally 
identifiable information will be stored securely on HIPAA -compliant TUH servers. 
Data exported for statistical analysis will be stripped of personal identifiers. 
Partici pants will be free to withdraw from the study at any time.  
 
Phase A : To minimize the risk of hypoglycemia, only patients with uncontrolled 
diabetes according to an elevated A1c will have their diabetes therapy adjusted. 
Patients will be followed closely fo r 30 days after discharge with weekly phone 
calls, and glycemic control will be monitored. Patients discovered to have 
hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia will be referred for adjustment of their diabetes 
therapy by the PI, an Endocrinologist.  
 A Data Safety Of ficer (DSO) not otherwise directly involved with the 
research, a senior diabetologist  and clinical investigator  with inpatient diabetes 
research experience, Dr. Boris Draznin at the University of Colorado Denver, will 
review de-identified data every 3 mont hs. Adverse events will be reported to the 
Temple Institutional Review Board and the NIH according to standard policy.  
 
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 18 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    Phase B:  Every effort  will be made to ensure that all qualitative data are kept 
confidential. The digital audio files produced will be  used only for the purpose of 
this study. They will be downloaded from the recording devi ce and stored on a  
secure computer in the research assistant’s private GCRC office . The audio files 
will be transcribed. In the transcript, each subject will be assigned  an anonymous 
study identification number. The data file linking personal identifiers and study 
identification  numbers will be stored separately from the transcript data. The files 
with the transcribed data will have no  personal identifiers and will contai n no 
information linking an individual participant with their study code. The DSO will 
not monitor Phase B because there is minimal risk involved with this phase.  
 
The following procedures will be implemented to ensure data safety and 
adequate monitoring:  
• The PI will monitor study progress on an on -going basis and ensure the 
protection of human subjects, including the safe and secure collection and 
storage of data. An annual review will include assessment of  accrual, 
adverse events , and data management prac tices.  
• All data linking subjects to de -identified information will be maintained in a 
password -protected, encrypted computer with access limited to only those 
research personnel with a reasonable need to have such information.  
 
• Reporting Adverse Events  
o Definitions:  
 Adverse Event : Any medical problem that manifests during 
the course of the study, as a result of an assessment or an 
aspect of the study intervention.  
 Serious Adverse Event : An adverse event that is fatal or life -
threatening, results in significant or persistent disability, or 
requires hospitalization.  
 Unexpected Serious Adverse Event : Any event that has not 
been described in the protocol or informed consent 
document.  
o Reporting Mechanisms  
 All adverse events will be discussed at weekly op erations 
meetings and reported to the PI and IRB according to 
standard operating procedure . 
 Serious adverse events (expected and unexpected) will be 
reported to the PI immediately and to the IRB in writing 
within 1 business day.  
 The NIH procedure for Repo rting Clinical Study Serious 
Adverse Events will be followed for the reporting of expected 
and unexpected serious adverse events to the study 
sponsor.  
• The DSO  will review the protocol and study procedures every 3 months  to 
ensure that proper regulatory pro cesses are followed during study  
execution. In this role, he will : 
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 19 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    o Review all adverse events or complications related to the study and 
make recommendations for protocol changes if indicated.  
o Assure scientific integrity of the study by providing regulatory 
oversight.  
o Assure participants’ confidentiality and informed consent by 
reviewing study procedures.  
o Provide advice, as requested, on quality assurance measures.  
k) Withdrawal of Subjects  
Subject s may withdraw at will at any time. Subject s may be withdrawn from the 
trial at the discretion of the PI due to a safety concern, if judged non -compliant 
with trial procedures , or p regnancy  during the primary follow -up period (30 days 
after discharge) . For subjects in the intervention group, we will  obtain permission 
to continue to collect data from the electronic medical record . 
 
9) Risks to Subjects  
The study  involves low risk from interviews and the intervention, which entails 
education, coordination of care, and post -discharge support. A1c -based 
adjustment of diabetes therapy poses the usual risk of hypoglycemia associated 
with diabetes therapy. However, only patients with uncontrolled diabetes 
according to an elevated A1c will have their diabetes therapy adjusted. Patients 
will be followed closely f or 30 days after discharge and glycemic control will be 
monitored. Because the study will only be using FDA -approved medicines and 
checking routine A1C blood tests, it is unlikely that costs will be more than if a 
doctor was managing the subject outside the study.  
10) Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Participants in the intervention may have a lower risk of readmission and 
improved glycemic control with 30 days of discharge.  
11) Privacy and Confidentiality  
The study will use PHI and a HIPAA Authorization has been submitted . Paper 
data collection records with personal identifiers will be stored in locked file 
cabinets.  Electronic data will not include personal identifiers other than the 
unique study ID. Audio fi les for the in -depth interview s will be stored on the 
research assistant’s password -protected computer and erased from the digital 
recorder after storage. Access to research and confidential records will be limited 
to clinical investigators and research coordinators.  All data linking subject s to de -
identified information will be maintained in a password -protected, encrypted 
computer with access limited to only those research personnel with a reasonable 
need to have such information.  Staff will be trained to collect data for the study 
and main tain participants’ confidentiality.  Interviews with subjects will be 
conducted in private.  Presentation of the study results at regional or scientific 
meetings or in publications will not identify subjects.   
 
12) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 20 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    If study volunteers sustain injury as a result of their participation in this study, 
they will be advised to seek immediate medical attention.  However, there is no 
commitment by Temple University, Temple University Health System or its 
subsidiaries to provid e monetary compensation or free medical care in the event 
of a study -related injury. The study volunteers have not waived any of their legal 
rights which they would otherwise have as a participant in an investigational 
study.  
 
13) Economic Burden to  Subject s 
No additional cost to subjects  or the institution will be incurred for research 
purposes.  
 
14) Consent Process  
We will follow INVESTIGATOR GUIDANCE : Informed Consent  (HRP -802). 
15) Process to Document Consent in Writing  
We will follow INVESTIGATOR GUIDANCE : Documentation of Informed Consent  
(HRP -803). 
 
 
16) Drugs or Devices  
Most subjects will obtain their diabetes medications through insurance. 
For high -risk subjects in the intervention group who cannot afford their 
diabetes medication, the TUH research pharmacy  will provide medication 
for the duration of the study . 
 
17) Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Data obtained beyond standard of care will not be shared.  
 
References  
1. Rubin DJ, Handorf EA, Golden SH, Nelson DB, McDonnell ME, Zhao H.      
Development and Validation of a Novel Tool to Predict Hospital Readmission 
Risk Among Patients With Diabetes. Endocr Pract. 2016;22(10):1204 -15. 
doi:10.4158/e161391.or.  
2. Hansen LO, Young RS, Hinami K, Leung A, Williams MV. Interventions to 
reduce 30 -day rehospitalization: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med. 
2011;155(8):520 -8. doi:10.1059/0003 -4819 -155-8-201110180 -00008.  
3. Peikes D, Peterson G, Brown RS, Graff S, Lynch JP. How Changes In 
Washington University’s Medicare Coordinated Care Demonstration Pil ot 
Ultimately Achieved Savings. Health Affairs. 2012;31(6):1216 -26. 
doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0593.  
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 21 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    4. Watkins L, Hall C, Kring D. Hospital to home: a transition program for frail 
older adults. Prof Case Manag. 2012;17(3):117 -23; quiz 24 -5. 
doi:10.1097/NCM. 0b013e318243d6a7.  
5. Evans RL, Hendricks RD. Evaluating hospital discharge planning: a 
randomized clinical trial. Medical care. 1993;31(4):358 -70.  
6. Koehler BE, Richter KM, Youngblood L, Cohen BA, Prengler ID, Cheng D et 
al. Reduction of 30 -day postdisch arge hospital readmission or emergency 
department (ED) visit rates in high -risk elderly medical patients through delivery 
of a targeted care bundle. J Hosp Med. 2009;4(4):211 -8. doi:10.1002/jhm.427.  
7. Coleman EA, Parry C, Chalmers S, Min S. The care trans itions intervention: 
Results of a randomized controlled trial. Archives of Internal Medicine. 
2006;166(17):1822 -8. doi:10.1001/archinte.166.17.1822.  
8. Jack BW, Chetty VK, Anthony D, Greenwald JL, Sanchez GM, Johnson AE et 
al. A reengineered hospital disch arge program to decrease rehospitalization: a 
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150(3):178 -87.  
9. Kathie Hermayer, Dawn Smiley, Darin E. Olson, Amna N. Khan, Christopher 
Newton, Vivian Fonseca, Sol Jacobs, Limin Peng, Ingrid Pinzon, Maria Fereira, 
Ashwini Gore, Vickie Hunt, David Reyes, Monica Rizzo, Guillermo E. Umpierrez. 
Hospital Discharge Algorithm Based on Admission HbA1C for the Management 
of Patients with Type 2 Diabetes (10 -OR). American Diabetes Association 72nd 
Scientific Sessions  2012.  
10. Wei NJ, Wexler DJ, Nathan DM, Grant RW. Intensification of diabetes 
medication and risk for 30 -day readmission. Diabet Med. 2013;30(2):e56 -62. 
doi:10.1111/dme.12061.  
11. Axon RN, Williams MV. Hospital readmission as an accountability measure. 
JAMA. 2011;3 05(5):504 -5.  
12. Stone J, Hoffman, G. Medicare Hospital Readmissions: Issues, Policy 
Options and PPACA. Congressional Research Service, Penny Hill Press; 2010.  
13. Epstein AM. Revisiting Readmissions — Changing the Incentives for Shared 
Accountability. Ne w England Journal of Medicine. 2009;360(14):1457 -9. 
doi:doi:10.1056/NEJMe0901006.  
14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Statistics 
Report: Estimates of Diabetes and Its Burden in the United States, 2014. Atlanta, 
GA: U.S. Depart ment of Health and Human Services. 2014.  
15. HCUP Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS) [database on the Internet]. Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). 2011. Available from: 
http://hcupnet.ahrq .gov/HCUPnet.jsp . Accessed: August 11, 2013  
16. HCUP Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS) 2012. Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality (AHRQ). 2014. http://hcupnet.ahrq.gov/HCUPnet.jsp . 
Accessed Accessed  June 15, 2014.  
17. CDC. Number (in Thousands) of Hospital Discharges with Diabetes as Any -
Listed Diagnosis, United States, 1988 –2009 [database on the Internet]. Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), National Center for Health Statistics. 
Avail able from: http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/statistics/dmany/fig1.htm . Accessed: 
January 7, 2013  
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 22 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    18. Increasing prevalence of diagnosed diabetes - United States and puerto rico, 
1995 -2010. MM WR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012;61(45):918 -21.  
19. Jones AP, Homer JB, Murphy DL, Essien JD, Milstein B, Seville DA. 
Understanding diabetes population dynamics through simulation modeling and 
experimentation. American journal of public health. 2006;96(3):48 8-94. 
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2005.063529.  
20. Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council. Hospital Readmissions 
in Pennsylvania 2010. 2012.  
21. Friedman B, Jiang HJ, Elixhauser A. Costly hospital readmissions and 
complex chronic illness. Inquiry. 2008;45(4):408 -21.  
22. Robbins JM, Webb DA. Diagnosing diabetes and preventing 
rehospitalizations: the urban diabetes study. Med Care. 2006;44(3):29 2-6.  
23. Bennett KJ, Probst JC, Vyavaharkar M, Glover SH. Lower rehospitalization 
rates among rural Medicare beneficiaries with diabetes. J Rural Health. 
2012;28(3):227 -34. doi:10.1111/j.1748 -0361.2011.00399.x.  
24. Rubin DJ, Handorf E, McDonnell M. Predic ting Early Readmission Risk 
among Hospitalized Patients with Diabetes (7796). ENDO 2013: The Endocrine 
Society’s 95th Annual Meeting  2013.  
25. Chen JY, Ma Q, Chen H, Yermilov I. New bundled world: quality of care and 
readmission in diabetes patients. J Di abetes Sci Technol. 2012;6(3):563 -71.  
26. ADA. Economic Costs of Diabetes in the U.S. in 2012. Diabetes Care. 2013. 
doi:10.2337/dc12 -2625.  
27. HCUP Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS) [database on the Internet]. Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality (A HRQ). 2010. Available from: 
http://hcupnet.ahrq.gov/HCUPnet.jsp . Accessed: January 6, 2013  
28. Washington RE, Andrews RM, Mutter R. Emergency Department Visits for 
Adults with Diabetes, 2010: Statistical Brief #167.  Healthcare Cost and 
Utilization Project (HCUP) Statistical Briefs. Rockville (MD)2006.  
29. Kocher RP, Adashi EY. Hospital readmissions and the affordable care act: 
Paying for coordinated quality care. JAMA. 2011;306(16):1794 -5. 
doi:10.1001/jam a.2011.1561.  
30. Burke RE, Coleman EA. Interventions to decrease hospital readmissions: 
Keys for cost -effectiveness. JAMA Internal Medicine. 2013;173(8):695 -8. 
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.171.  
31. Draznin B, Gilden J, Golden SH, Inzucchi SE, Baldwin D, Bode BW et al. 
Pathways to quality inpatient management of hyperglycemia and diabetes: a call 
to action. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(7):1807 -14. doi:10.2337/dc12 -2508.  
32. Cook CB, Seifert KM, Hull BP, Hovan MJ, Charles JC, Miller -Cage V et al. 
Inpatient to out patient transfer of diabetes care: planing for an effective hospital 
discharge. Endocr Pract. 2009;15(3):263 -9.  
33. Gawande A. The Hot Spotters: Can we lower medical costs by giving the 
neediest patients better care? The New Yorker  2011.  
34. Kansagara D,  Englander H, Salanitro A, Kagen D, Theobald C, Freeman M 
et al. Risk prediction models for hospital readmission: a systematic review. JAMA 
: the journal of the American Medical Association. 2011;306(15):1688 -98. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2011.1515.  
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 23 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    35. Cook CB, Na ylor DB, Hentz JG, Miller WJ, Tsui C, Ziemer DC et al. 
Disparities in diabetes -related hospitalizations: relationship of age, sex, and 
race/ethnicity with hospital discharges, lengths of stay, and direct inpatient 
charges. Ethn Dis. 2006;16(1):126 -31.  
36. Cramer S, Chapa G, Kotsos T, Jenich H. Assessing multiple hospitalizations 
for health -plan-managed Medicaid diabetic members. J Healthc Qual. 
2010;32(3):7 -14.  
37. Kim H, Ross JS, Melkus GD, Zhao Z, Boockvar K. Scheduled and 
unscheduled hospital readmissi ons among patients with diabetes. Am J Manag 
Care. 2010;16(10):760 -7.  
38. Menzin J, Korn JR, Cohen J, Lobo F, Zhang B, Friedman M et al. 
Relationship between glycemic control and diabetes -related hospital costs in 
patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes m ellitus. J Manag Care Pharm. 
2010;16(4):264 -75.  
39. DeBusk RF, Miller NH, Parker KM, Bandura A, Kraemer HC, Cher DJ et al. 
Care management for low -risk patients with heart failure: a randomized, 
controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2004;141(8):606 -13.  
40. M oons KGM, Royston P, Vergouwe Y, Grobbee DE, Altman DG. Prognosis 
and prognostic research: what, why, and how? BMJ. 2009;338. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.b375.  
41. Altman DG, Vergouwe Y, Royston P, Moons KGM. Prognosis and prognostic 
research: validating a prognostic model. BMJ. 2009;338:1432 -5. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.b605.  
42. Rubin DJ, Donnell -Jackson K, Jhingan R, Golden SH, Paranjape A. Early 
readmission among patients with diabetes: a qualitative assessment of 
contributing factors. Journal of Diabetes and Its Complicatio ns. 2014;28(6):869 -
73. doi:10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2014.06.013.  
43. Heun R, Burkart M, Maier W, Bech P. Internal and external validity of the 
WHO Well ‐Being Scale in the elderly general population. Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica. 1999;99(3):171 -8. doi:10.1111/j .1600 -0447.1999.tb00973.x.  
44. Welch GW, Jacobson AM, Polonsky WH. The Problem Areas in Diabetes 
Scale: An evaluation of its clinical utility. Diabetes Care. 1997;20(5):760.  
45. Zimet GD, Dahlem NW, Zimet SG, Farley GK. The Multidimensional Scale of 
Perceived Social Support. Journal of Personality Assessment. 1988;52(1):30 -41. 
doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa5201_2.  
46. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. 
J Health Soc Behav. 1983;24(4):385 -96.  
47. Fitzgerald JT, Funnell M M, Anderson RM, Nwankwo R, Stansfield RB, Piatt 
GA. Validation of the Revised Brief Diabetes Knowledge Test (DKT2). The 
Diabetes Educator. 2016;42(2):178 -87. doi:doi:10.1177/0145721715624968.  
48. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The Patient Health Quest ionnaire -2: 
validity of a two -item depression screener. Med Care. 2003;41(11):1284 -92. 
doi:10.1097/01.mlr.0000093487.78664.3c.  
49. Wallston KA, Cawthon C, McNaughton CD, Rothman RL, Osborn CY, 
Kripalani S. Psychometric Properties of the Brief Health Litera cy Screen in 
Readmission Pilot Trial    
 Page 24 of 24 Revised on October 22, 2019    Clinical Practice. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2014;29(1):119 -26. 
doi:10.1007/s11606 -013-2568 -0. 
50. Cox SR, Liebl MG, McComb MN, Chau JQ, Wilson AA, Achi M et al. 
Association between health literacy and 30 -day healthcare use after hospital 
discharge in the heart failure population. Research in social & administrative 
pharmacy : RSAP. 2016. doi:10.1016/j.sapharm.2016.09.003.  
51. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JBW. The Patient Health Questionnaire -2: 
Validity of a Two -Item Depression  Screener. Medical Care. 2003;41(11):1284 -92.  
52. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JBW. The PHQ -9: Validity of a Brief 
Depression Severity Measure. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 
2001;16(9):606 -13. doi:10.1046/j.1525 -1497.2001.016009606.x.  
53. Laust er CD, Gibson JM, DiNella JV, DiNardo M, Korytkowski MT, Donihi AC. 
Implementation of standardized instructions for insulin at hospital discharge. J 
Hosp Med. 2009;4(8):E41 -2. doi:10.1002/jhm.489.  
54. ADA. Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes —2017: Summar y of Revisions. 
Diabetes Care. 2017;40(Supplement 1):S4 -S5. doi:10.2337/dc17 -S003.  
55. Long T, Genao I, Horwitz LI. Reasons for readmission in an underserved 
high-risk population: a qualitative analysis of a series of inpatient interviews. BMJ 
Open. 2013;3 (9):e003212. doi:10.1136/bmjopen -2013 -003212.  
56. Fereday JM -C, E. Demonstrating Rigor Using Thematic Analysis: A Hybrid 
Approach of Inductive and Deductive Coding and Theme Development. 
International Journal of Qualitative Methods. 2006;5(1):80 -91.  
 