Eﬀects of Reparel™ Knee Sleeve on Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
Study Protocol & Statisti cal Analysis Plan  
 
NCT0474392 1 
 
April 4th, 2022  
 
 
Amit Momaya , MD, Principal Investigator  
University of Alabama at Birmingham  
Birmingham, AL 35294  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objectives:   
Osteoarthritis (OA) is one of the most prevalent musculoskeletal ailments worldwide. Numerous 
conservative therapies exist, but evidence for such treatments remains conflicting.   Recently, there has 
been growing interest surrounding bioactive sleeves for m anaging knee arthritis. However, the literature 
on their efficacy for relieving pain and improving function in the setting of knee OA is limited. Therefore, 
we sought to investigate the effect of a bioactive sleeve on patient reported outcome measures 
(PRO Ms) in a small cohort of OA patients.  
Methods:  
Patient Recruitment and Inclusion  
Following institutional review board approval and registration with ClinicalTrials.gov, the 
authors will prospectively follow a series of patients at an outpatient orthopaedi c sports medicine clinic 
between February and July 2021. Patients who opt for non -operative management of knee OA will be 
informed and consented for the study.  Patients will be included if  they have radiographic evidence  of 
knee OA, no previous surgery on the symptomatic knee,  no corticosteroid knee injection  within  3 
months of the study, and  agree  to abstain from a  knee injection  during the 3 month study 
period.  Patients will be excluded if diagnosed with  bilateral symptomatic knee OA,  had previously 
under gone knee surgery,  were  grossly unstable  on physical  examination,  or had a history of 
knee  malignancy.  Patients will be  instructed  to wear the sleeve (Reparel, Chico, CA) as long as tolerated 
throughout the day and to  refrain from modifying  usual activitie s and diet.  
  
Patient Assessment  
Participants will be asked to complete the following patient reported outcome measures 
(PROM): the University of California, Los Angeles Activity Score(UCLA),11 which measures current activity 
level; the Lysholm Score(LKS),12 which measures joint stability and function; the Oxford Knee Score 
(OKS),13 which measures knee related health status;  the Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score 
(KOOS),14 which assesses difficulties with physical activity; the Single Assessment Numeric Evaluation 
(SANE),15 which assesses perceived functional level;  and the Visual Analog Scale (VAS),16 which assesses 
perceived pain level. These surveys will be administered at the initial visit and subsequently over the  
phone at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and 3 months  later. Patients will also be asked about average daily sleeve 
usage, product satisfaction, and complaints/issues.  
 
Osteoarthritis Severity Assessment  
OA severity will be defined by clinical radiographic imaging usin g the Kellgren -Lawrence (KL) 
classification system at the baseline clinical visit.17 The radiographs will be read and graded by a sports 
medicine fellowship trained orthopedic surgeon.  
 
Statistical Analysis  
Statistical analysis will be performed using SPSS ( IBM SPSS Statistics for Macintosh, Version 27.0. 
Armon k, NY: IBM Corp ). Mann -Whitney test will be used to compare baseline demographics between 
male and female patients. Wilcoxon Signed -Rank test will be used to compare baseline PROMs and 
hours of sleeve use with those at 2 week, 6 week, and 3 month time poin ts. Kruskal Wallis test will be 
performed to evaluate differences in PROs between the four time points. When analyzing PROs between 
time points within groups with differing population counts, only patient scores that are available 
between groups will be an alyzed. Significance will be set to an alpha of 0.05.  
 
 