 
 
 
 
QUX 16 -003, Implementing Guidelines for Shared Decision Making in Lung Cancer Screening , QUE 16 -003 
 
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
September 15,  2020 
 
  
 
This study was conducted as a non -research quality improvement initiative primarily to improve the quality of 
preventive services in the VA as part of an ongoing  partnership with the VA National Center for Health Promotion 
and Disease Prevention  (see letter from Linda Kinsinger, M D, MPH; Chief Consultant for Preventive Medicine) . 
Given the non -research quality improvement designation, this study did not have a protocol reviewed by an 
Institutional Review Board, but the following is an excerpt from the study proposal which was peer reviewed and 
approved for funding in June 2015 as part of a  VA Quality Enhancement Research Initiative field program at the VA 
Ann Arbor Healthcare System (aka PROVE QUERI). Th is document provides an excerpt from the nationally 
reviewed proposal that descr ibes the study aims, procedures, design, and analysis plan  for this trial .  
  
 
Excerpt from PROVE QUERI Program Proposal:  
  Project #1:  
Implementing  Guidelines  for Shared  Decision  Making  in Lung  Cancer  Screening  
1.0  Specific  Aims  
The goal of this project  is to test two  strategies for implementing  shared  decision  making  into clinical  practice  with 
the aid of the Decision  Precision  lung cancer screening  tool. To accomplish  this goal we have  three  aims:  
Aim 1:  To determine  effectiveness  of LEAP  plus Audit and Feedback  (A&F) versus  A&F alone.  Hypothesis :  
VAMCs  with LEAP  + A&F will have  better  implementation  outcomes  (defined by  RE-AIM104) than VAMCs  with 
A&F alone.  
Aim 2:  To determine  the effectiveness  of allowing  providers  to set risk  threshold  algorithms.  
Hypothesis :  Implementation  outcomes  will improve  when  providers  are allowed  to set risk  thresholds.  
Aim 3: To conduct  a formative  evaluation  to determine  the factors  most important  for successful  implementation  
of risk-based  shared  decision  making  tools.  
2.0  Rationale  
Lung  cancer is  both prevalent  and deadly.  It is the third most common  cancer  and is the leading  cause  of 
cancer -related  deaths  in the US. Lung  cancer is  both more  prevalent  and associated  with worse  outcomes  
among  Veterans  than among  the general US population.105,106 
Based  on the results  of the National  Lung  Screening  Trial (NLST),  the United  States  Preventive  Services  Task  
Force  (USPSTF) recommends  low-dose  computed  tomography  (LDCT)  screening  for patients  who meet  age and 
smoking  criteria.107,108  The NLST  found  that eligible  heavy  smokers  are significantly  less likely  to die from lung 
cancer if screened  with LDCT  vs. chest  x-rays.  For perspective,  the reduction  in deaths  from lung  cancer  with 
screening  is larger  than the reduction  in deaths from the target  cancers  of other common  screening  tests,  such  as 
mammograms  for breast cancer. In 2013,  VHA rolled  out a two-year clinical  demonstration  project  in eight VA  
medical  centers  to determine  the resources  needed to “provide  screening  and follow -up…with  accuracy,  
efficiency,  and safety  similar  to that achieved  in the NLST.”109 
However,  the NLST  also found  substantial  harms  associated  with LDCT  screening,  including  high false - positive  
rates  which  can lead to unnecessary  and harmful  invasive  procedures.   Because  lung cancer  screening  has 
substantial  benefits  and harms,  and the net benefit can  vary dramatically  across  eligible  smokers, the USPSTF  
strongly  advocated  for shared  decision  making  and asserted  that “the  decision  to begin  screening  should  be the 
result  of a thorough  discussion  of the possible  benefits, limitations,  and known  and uncertain harms.”110 
Furthermore, in  a February  5, 2015,  decision  memo,  the Centers  for Medicare  and Medicaid  Services  (CMS)  
required  a shared  decision  making  consultation  between  patients  and providers for payment  of initial  lung cancer  
LDCT  screening.  The role of shared  decision  making  was specified  within  CMS  guidelines  as “including  the use 
of one or more  decision  aids, to include  benefits  and harms  of screening,  follow -up diagnostic  testing,  over-
diagnosis,  false  positive  rate, and  total radiation  exposure.”  
Shared  decision  making  (SDM)  is the process  wherein  the provider  communicates  medical  information  about  the 
screening  options  and patients  are responsible  for sharing  their values  and screening  preferences.  
Following  the sharing  of information  by both parties,  patients  and providers  collaborate  to decide  on the course  
of screening  that reflects  both the best medical  evidence  as well as the patient’s  preferences  and values.111,112 
The mandate  for shared  decision  making  by the USPSTF  and CMS  is reflective  of the strong  evidence  that it can 
improve  patient -centered  outcomes. Research  has found  that patients  who participate  in medical  decisions  tend 
to be more  satisfied  with their care,113 report  a better quality  of life,114 and are more  adherent to  
recommendations115 than those  who do not. Furthermore, models  of informed  consent  and SDM  emphasize   the 
importance  of presenting  the pros and cons  of all treatment options  to patients,116 and shared  decision  making  is 
strongly  advocated  by many  as an optimal  method  to promote  patient -centered  care, including  in VA117 (e.g., 
2006 priorities  and patients’  rights  brochures).  
To meet this  need  for shared  decision  making,  we created  “Decision  Precision”,  a provider  facing  web-based  
decision  support tool.  This tool provides  a method  for providers  to implement  evidence -based  guidelines  for 
SDM  in lung cancer screening. Our goal  is to have  the tool facilitate  SDM within  the confines  of a busy  clinical  
schedule. This  web tool goes  beyond  current VA  patient materials  in several  ways. It provides: 1) personalized  
quantitative  risk assessment of the trade -offs; 2) patient -friendly  language;  3) graphics  that have  been  empirically  
demonstrated  to help patients  understand  their personalized  risks and benefits; and  4) quick  and easy  
documentation  of personalized  SDM  after using  the tool. 
“Decision  Precision”  Tool Development.  To determine  the best method  for communicating  the benefits  and 
harms  of lung cancer screening, we first conducted  a randomized  survey  experiment  with 1,612  adults  aged  18 
years  or older  who reported  smoking  daily or almost  daily.  We compared  comprehension  and perception  of lung 
cancer screening  benefits  and harms  when  the information  was presented  using  four different evidence - based  
formats,  including  the pictograph  currently  used  vin VHA’s  patient  lung cancer screening materials.  We found  
that participants  who viewed  the VHA pictograph  had better  knowledge  about the magnitude  of the benefit  and 
how this benefit  compared  with important harms.  Thus,  we used  the VHA pictograph  in the tool. In addition,  we 
iteratively  designed four versions  of the web tool based  on usability  testing  with decision  aid researchers,  PCPs, 
and patients.  The final version  will be developed  during  Year  1 and will incorporate  additional  content and 
features suggested  by front-line providers  and patients,  along  with a module  to enable  personalized  screening  
recommendations  based  on provider -determined  risk thresholds.  
3.1 Procedures  
3.2 Proposed  Implementatio n Strategies  
We will compare  the effect  of adding  the LEAP  implementation  strategy  (see Implementation  Core)  to more  
typical  and widely  studied strategies  that we will consider  standard  (i.e., audit  and feedback  and introductory  
webinar  discussing  use and benefits  of the tool).  We will also slowly  roll out risk  threshold  tailoring  to determine  if 
that improves  implementation  outcomes.  
Implementation  Strategies:   Control  
1. Webinar, Promotion, and Tool Access.  All sites will receive  a professionally  developed,  15-minute  webinar  that 
describes  the tool’s development  (e.g.,  how the algorithm  was designed)  and a tutorial  on how to use the web-
site. We will promote  the webinar  and using  the tool through  key local leaders.  A web-link to use the tool will be 
placed  within  the lung cancer screening  clinical  reminder.  
2. Audit  and Feedback.  Due to the demonstrated  importance  of audit  and feedback  for changing  provider  
behavior,  we will deploy  an audit  and feedback  system to all sites.102,118  This system  will provide  feedback  on 
the screening  and shared  decision  making  process  (e.g.,  number  of provider’s  eligible  patients  screened  for 
lung cancer,  use of the tool, patient  knowledge  and satisfaction  from patient  surveys).  When  we visit the 
intervention  sites to conduct  usability  testing  (see below),  our informationist from the Implementation  Core  will 
accompany  us and meet with  users  to identify  their needs  and preferences  for feedback  (see Implementation  
Core).  We will use this information  to design  an audit  and feedback  system to be implemented  in all of the sites.  
Implementation  Strategies:   Two Interventions  
1. An additional  part of LEAP  will be user-centered  design . Prior to the implementation  of the web-based  tool, 
we will also visit the “intensive”  implementation sites  and conduct usability  testing  on the tool.119 Usability  testing  
will be conducted  with providers,  nurses, lung cancer screening  coordinators,  and patients.  We will go through  
the tool page  by page  to get feedback  on the tool. We have  done  this in numerous  studies  and have  specific  
protocols  in place  to do so. To the extent  possible,  we will use this feedback  to modify  the tool for these  sites. 
Evidence  suggests  that when  providers  feel more  engaged  in the design  of the tool, they will be more  likely  to 
value and use it.124-126   During  this time we will also meet  with the local Clinical Applications  Coordinators  to 
discuss  adding  a link to the Decision  Precision  website  within  clinical  reminders.  
2. Risk Threshold  Tailoring.  Providers  at all sites will determine  their own risk thresholds  for making  personalized  
recommendations  within  the tool. This  will be done  in a stepped -wedge  design  and will add a new site every  two 
months  until providers  at all sites have  been  given  the opportunity  to tailor  their thresholds.  After completing  a risk 
tailoring  tutorial, they  will identify  two risk thresholds: 1)  a low risk/low  benefit threshold  below  which  the provider  
would  generally  suggest that most patients  not get screened  (e.g.,  a number  needed  to screen  of >500  to avoid  
one lung cancer  death) and 2) a high risk/high  benefit threshold  above  which  they would  generally  suggest  that 
most patients  get screened  (e.g.,  a number needed  to screen  of <100  to avoid  one lung cancer  death). In  
between  these  two thresholds  is a gray zone  where  screening  and not screening are  presented  as equally  good 
options.  We will provide  significant  leeway in allowing  providers  to make  these  cut-offs, but will impose  certain  
constraints  to make  sure the thresholds  do not violate  professional  standards.  Of course, every  screening  
recommendation  will be accompanied  by a recommendation  for shared  decision - making.  We believe  this strategy  
will address  several  potential  barriers  to implementation  of clinical  support  systems —including  provider’s  lack of 
comfort  with making  decisions  based  on numeric  risk-benefit information,  lack of agreement with tool  content, or  a 
feeling  of being taken  out of the decision  making  process.120-123 
 
3.3 Study  design  and methods  
Aim 1:   To determine  effectiveness of LEAP  plus Audit  and Feedback (A&F)  versus A&F  alone.  
We will use multi -site, cluster -based  randomization  to evaluate  the effect  of the LEAP  implementation  strategy.  
Currently, there  are eight  VHA sites involved  in the LDCT  demonstration  project  and each  site has agreed  to 
be involved  in our implementation  initiative  (see attached  letters  of support).  We decided  to only use these  
sites because  they already  have  a successful  lung cancer screening  program  in place  and thus provide  an 
ideal  situation  to test different implementation  strategies  for a decision  support intervention. NCP  will 
randomize  which  of the eight  sites receive  the LEAP  implementation  strategy.  
Aim 2:  To determine  the effectiveness  of allowing  providers  to set risk  threshold  algorithms.  
Once  the providers  have  experience  with using  the tool in practice,  we can then start to roll out the risk 
threshold  tailoring.  We will roll this out at a rate which  is limited  by our capacity  to do the tailoring  and 
accompanying  training  in only one site at a time, but eventually  reaching  all of the sites by 18 months  into the 
study.  We will evaluate  this additional  part of the implementation  strategy  by comparing  at different time points  
the sites that have  received  the training  and tailoring  to those  who have  not yet in what is effectively  a stepped  
wedge  analysis.  Thus, we  will enroll  one site every two months  into this strategy,  stratified  by whether the site 
is receiving  the LEAP  strategy,  over 16 consecutive  months.  
 
Evaluation  Framework.  We will use the RE-AIM framework  (Reach,  Effectiveness,  Adoption, Implementation,  
and Maintenance)  to evaluate  our two  implementation  strategies.  Specific  measures  for the implementation  
evaluation  are detailed  in Table  2. Our primary  goal is to determine  whether  these  strategies  lead to more  
frequent  use of the Decision  Precision  Tool and align screening  utilization  with the magnitude  of the mortality  
benefit from screening. While lung cancer screening  is a preference  sensitive  decision  and thus for any given  
patient, we cannot  assess  whether they  made  a “good  decision”, it  is possible  to evaluate  the strength  of the 
association  between  mortality  benefit  and screening  utilization.  If our tool is successful  in communicating  the 
benefit -harm information  to providers  and patients,  we would  expect  that those  with the largest potential  to 
benefit  would  be more  likely  to be screened  than those  patients  who have  limited  potential  to benefit (we are 
calling  this “precision  decision  making”). Based  on these  goals, our primary outcomes  will be:  1) the  proportion  
of eligible  Veterans  for whom  the Precision  Decision  tool is used; and  2) ability  of intensive  implementation  to 
promote  precision  decision  making.  
Data  Collection.  The majority  of the data will be collected  from Health  Factors  data within  the VA Corporate  
Data  Warehouse  (CDW)  and from ‘paradata’  automatically  generated  from use of the tool—i.e., data  recorded  
by the website,  which  allows  us to determine  use of the various  components  of the Decision  Precision  tool. We 
should  emphasize  that paradata  do not contain  PHI—rather it  includes  which  pages  were  viewed  and for how 
long. Patients  will also complete  surveys  to provide  data for the audit  and feedback  system.  We will query  the 
Health  Factors  table  on a weekly  basis  to identify  patients  who had initial  screening  conversations  with a 
provider  that week  (i.e., clinical  reminder  completed)  and will mail surveys  to these  patients.  
Table  2:  Implementation  Evaluation  Measures  using  RE-AIM 
RE-AIM Construct  Study  Measures  
Reach  
Participation  rate in the target  population  (patient  level).  Proportion  of eligible  patients  with documented  tool use after 
screening  discussions  (primary  outcome).  
Effectiveness  (Aim  1) 
The impact  of the intervention  on targeted  outcomes.  • Precision  decision  making  (primary  outcome)  
• High quality  decision  making  
• Patient  satisfaction  with decision  and process  
Adoption  (Aim  2) 
Percent  of providers  who adopted  the guidelines.  • # of tool assessments  for each  provider  
• % of provider’s  eligible  patients  with documented  tool use 
Implementation  (Aim  2) 
The quality  and consistency  with which  the guidelines  
were  followed.  # of tool assessments  where:  
• Patient  decision  aid was printed  
• Shared  decision  making  documentation  was copied  
• Dynamic  pictograph  depicting  personalized  benefit  and 
harm  was opened  for display  
Maintenance  (Aim  2) 
Degree  to which  the guidelines  were  followed  over time.  A re-assessment  of each  measure  defined  above  will be 
completed  during  the maintenance  phase.  
Outcome  measures. The outcome  measures  are specified  in Table  2. The proportion  of eligible  patients  with 
screening  discussions  is defined  as those  patients  without  documented  exclusions  for screening  who have  had 
initial  lung cancer  screening  clinical  reminders  resolved.   Documented  tool use is defined  as provider  selection  
of the “use tool” radio -button  that will be inserted  into the clinical  reminder  (‘Reach’  construct). “Precision  
decision  making” is  defined  as screening  utilization  aligning  with Veterans’  potential  screening  benefit.  This will 
be estimated  by inputting CDW  data into a validated  model.110,127,128  High quality  decision making,  obtained  
from patient surveys,  will be defined  as 1) adequate  knowledge  about  the benefits  and harms,  and 2) values  
consistent  with the screening  decision.129-131 Additional outcome  measures  include decisional  conflict,112 patient  
perception of communication with  physician,132 participation  in shared  decision  making,133 and satisfaction  with 
decision and decision  making  process.134 
Power  Considerations. Our unit of analysis  is site. Randomizing  interventions  by provider  or PACT  team  is 
not feasible  and would  also likely  result in  significant  contamination  between  arms. LEAP  Strategy:  Even  with 
our small  sample  size (n=4 in each  arm), we will still be able to detect an  absolute  difference  of 25-35% from a 
control  rate of 50% documented  tool use, for an ICC of .05 to .10 and 400 total patients  undergoing  screening  
discussions  in each  site. We believe  it would  be necessary  to see substantial  differences  in tool uptake  in this 
range  with the LEAP  strategy  relative  to the control  strategy  to justify  the resources  that would  be needed for 
widespread  dissemination.  We should  note that it should  be feasible  to achieve  this sample  size as roughly  50 
patients  were  eligible  for the tool per month at each  site during  January,  February,  and March  of 2015  (based  
on personal  communication  from NCP).  Risk Threshold  Tailoring  Strategy:  For this  the stepped -wedge  design  
with an average  of 400 total patients  undergoing  screening  discussions  per site, we can detect  a much  smaller  
absolute  difference  in documented  tool use of 7.5%  from a control  rate of 50%.  We can also readily  detect a 
small  effect size  (0.15  standard  deviations)  in any of our continuous  variables.  
Analysis.  To compare  statistical  differences  in outcomes  between  LEAP  implementation  and control  sites, we 
will use generalized  estimating  equations  (GEE) to control  for the clustering  of observations  within  sites.  
Models  will include  the specific  outcomes  from Table  2 as the dependent  variables  and each  of the two 
treatment  variables  (LEAP  and Risk Tailoring) as  we effectively  have  a form of factorial  design  that allows  us to 
separately  test the effects  of each  strategy while  conditioning  on the presence  of the other.  We will also include  
the estimated  lung cancer  risk for each  individual  patient  as a pre-specified,  pre-treatment  variable  in each  
regression.  As this variable  is likely  to be associated  with many  of our key outcome  variables  (like screening  
rate), it  can substantially  increase  our power  as described  by Raudenbush.135 For the models  examining  one of 
the primary  outcomes  for the risk tailoring  intervention,  precision  decision  making, we will look at whether the  
odds  of screening  as a function  of the patients  estimated  risk of cancer  increase  after the risk tailoring  
intervention.  This reduces  to testing  the significance  of the interaction  between  estimated  cancer risk  and the 
treatment  variable  indicating  the risk tailoring  strategy.  
Aim 3: To conduct a formative  evaluation  to determine  the factors  most important for successful  
implementation  of risk-based  shared  decision  making  tools.  
Near  the end of the study,  our qualitative  analysts  from the Implementation  Core  will conduct telephone  
interviews  with those  providers  at each  of the sites who identify  themselves  as participating  in the shared  
decision  making  process  with patients. Prior  to the meeting,  we will conduct  a separate  telephone  interview  
with the clinician from each  site who oversees  the lung cancer  screening  program.  The interview  will consist  of 
a survey  (Appendix  B) that briefly  describes  each  of the CFIR  constructs,  and the provider  will be asked  to 
consider  how important  each  factor  was in affecting  successful  implementation  of the Decision  Precision  tool. 
Those  items  that the lead clinicians  across  sites deem to be very important  in the successful  implementation  of 
the guidelines  will form the basis  for developing  our semi -structured  interview  guide  to use with the other  
participating  providers  at the sites. The purpose  of these  questions  will be to gain a  better understanding  of the 
barriers  that occurred, as  well as those  factors  that facilitated  implementation.  Coding  and analysis  of the 
responses  will be done  according  to the protocol  described  on the CFIR  website  and in Appendices  C and D. 
In addition, we will survey  all providers  for their feedback  on tool usability, including:   1) perceived  use of the 
tool, 2) satisfaction  with the tool, 3) satisfaction  with engaging  in shared  decision  making  with patients  where  
the tool was used,  and 4) their preference  to use the tool going  forward.  Finally,  we will ask providers  whether  
any of the implementation  strategies  we used  (audit  and feedback,  involvement in  user-centered  design,  
determination  of risk thresholds,  LEAP)  influenced  their use of the tool. 
4.0 Impacts  
Unfortunately,  even  though  there  is strong  evidence  of the benefits  of shared  decision  making, there  is 
equally  strong evidence  of the failure  to implement  SDM  into practice.136 While  research  studies  are able to 
use ample  resources  (e.g., research  assistants, participant incentives)  to successfully  use decision  aids or 
other  interventions  to facilitate  SDM,  implementation  of these  methods  often  fails without  the structure  of 
research.  A number of barriers  to implement ing SDM  within  primary  care have  been  consistently  
documented,  including  provider  perceptions  about  the time it will take and limited  provider  comfort  with risk 
communication  tasks.121,137,138  Within  the context  of lung cancer  screening  in VHA,  a pilot study  conducted 
by Dr. Wiener  on our team revealed  poor understanding  of the pros and cons  of LDCT  screening  among  
both Veterans getting  screened  and the VA PCPs  offering  the service.  Given  the critical importance  of 
shared  decision  making  in the context of LDCT  screening,  we must do  better.  
5.0 Partnerships/Management  
Expertise  and specific responsibilities  of the team are  detailed  in the budget  justification.  
PI:  Angela  Fagerlin,  PhD,  Core  Investigator, VA CCMR;  Associate  Professor  of Internal  Medicine,  
University  of Michigan,  and Co-Director of the Center for Bioethics  and Social  Sciences  in Medicine.  
Co-PI:  Tanner  Caverly,  MD, MPH,  HSR&D  Advanced  Fellow,  VA CCMR;  Clinical  Lecturer, Department  of 
Medicine,  University  of Michigan.  
Co-Investigator:   Renda  Wiener,  MD, MPH, Physician  and Core  Investigator,  Bedford/Boston  Center  for 
Healthcare  Organization  & Implementation  Research;  Assistant  Professor  of Medicine,  Boston  University  
School  of Medicine.  
Staff from the University  of Michigan  Center for Health  Communications  Research  (CHCR)  will be 
responsible  for making  changes  to the Decision  Precision  tool and will work  closely  with Drs. Caverly and 
Fagerlin  on changes  in content.  
Support for project management,  data management, and  data analysis  will come  from QUERI core  staff.  
Partnerships. As the office  responsible  for overseeing  the lung cancer screening  demonstration  project,  NCP 
(Linda  Kinsinger) has  already  informed  the sites that NCP  supports  the use of this tool and encourages  
participation  in this project. If the tool proves  to be successful, they will include  it as part of the lung cancer  
screening  guidelines  to be disseminated  throughout  VHA. Primary  Care  Services  (Gordon  Schectman)  will 
also indicate  their support to primary  care teams  for their participation  in LEAP. In addition, as  tools from this  
project  are vetted  by the sites and are viewed  positively  by providers  and patients,  Primary  Care  Services  
will work with us to design  ways  to promote  dissemination  throughout VHA.  We will schedule  annual  
conference  calls (at a minimum; more  frequently  as issues  and findings  of interest arise) with  our partners  to 
update  them  on our progress  and obtain  their input  on next steps.  
Figure  3 depicts  the proposed  timeframe  for the project.   Roll-out to all of the sites will be completed  by 
Y3Q4;  we plan to continue  with audit  and feedback  through  Y4 to allow  one year of follow -up to evaluate  
implementation  outcomes  over the longer term (maintenance).  
Figure  3:  Timeframe  for Project  Activities  
 
 Project  Period:  10/1/15–9/30/19  
Activity  Year  1 Year  2 Year  3 Year  4 
 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Materials  development                  
User  testing  of tool                 
Revision  of Decision  Precision                  
RA training                  
Implementation                  
Qualitative  interviews                  
Analysis                  
Manuscript  and report  writing                  
 
Letter of Support from Linda S. Kinsinger, MD, MPH, Chief Consultant for Preventive Medicine, VA National 
Center for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention, dated May 26, 2015 describing that this project is quality 
improvement and not research : 
providers on the quality of the decision process, including whether patients have an acc urate understanding of 
the benefits and harms, and whether the ultimate screening decision is consistent with patients’  values .   
 
Justification for Exemption of this Study under 5 CFR Part 1320.3:  
 
This is a Quality Improvement project designated by the National Center for Health Promotion and Disease 
Prevention (NCP)  and the Office of Primary Care Services  (PCS). Results from this study will be shared with 
NCP, PCS, and other policymakers and VA stakeholders. NCP supports  the use of the Decision Precision tool  
and encourages participation in this project.  If the tool proves to be successful, NCP will include it as part of 
the lung cancer screening guidelines to be disseminated throughout VHA. PCS will also indicate their support 
to primary care teams to participate in the project . In addition, as tools from this project are vetted by the sites 
and are viewed positively by providers and patients, P CS will work with us to design ways to promote 
dissemination throughout VHA.  
 
This research will prevent clini cal disorders by:  
Use of the Decision Precision Tool  with risk threshold tailoring will help align  lung cancer  screening utilization 
with the magnitude of the mortality benefit from screening. If our tool is successful in communicating the 
benefit -harm inf ormation to providers and patients, we would expect that those with the largest potential to 
benefit would be more likely to be screened than those patients who have limited potential to benefit . 
Justification that the Surveys are Not Duplicative:  
The sur vey is not duplicative because:  
QUERI  has funded this project based on its originality in addressing the specified RFA requesting  projects to 
improve the health of Veterans by supporting the more rapid implementation of effective clinical practices into 
routine care. This decision was based upon merit review. This quality improvement project  is unique in that it 
will implement and evaluate effectiveness and use of a shared decision making tool for lung cancer screening 
to inform practice in VA nationwide.  Patient surveys  conducted in this project  are not duplicative of any other 
survey with this population.  
 