1  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Title  Expanding  use of continuous  glucose  monitoring  beyond  
COVID  in critical  care:  Impact  on nurse  work  patterns  
and patient  outcomes   
NCT Number  N/A 
Document Description  Study Protocol and Statistical  Analysis Plan  
Date  April 26, 2022  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2  
 Research Protocol  
 
Expanding  use of continuous  glucose  monitoring  beyond  COVID  in critical  care:  
Impact  on nurse  work  patterns  and patient  outcomes  
 
I. Objectives  
 
The primary objective  of this mixed methods hybrid II implementation study is to assess the feasibility of 
real time continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) implementation using a CGM plus (+) point -of-care (POC) 
protocol among patients on IV insulin or those with hyperglycemia (> 250mg/dl) in the critical care  hospital 
environments. Use of the hybrid II implementation study design will allow simultaneous evaluation of 
implementation and effectiveness outcomes to promote more rapid adoption of CGM as routine care for 
hospitalized patients.  
The research Question s (RQ) we hope to address in this study are:  
 
RQ 1: Establish the clinical utility, fidelity, and adoption of Dexcom G6 CGM as a tool for making dosing 
decisions within a CGM+POC protocol among medical intensive care unit (MICU) patients. We will conduct 
a prospective observational cohort study among MICU patients using Dexcom G6 CGM therapy (N=100). Clinical 
utility criteria : Time to CGM validation within protocol parameters, mean percent of dosing decisions determined 
by CGM, changes in insulin dosing fro m standard guideline or outside standard times in response to alarm and/or 
trend data (as measured by manufacturer download data and corresponding  electronic health record  (EHR)  
documentation). Fidelity criteria : Proportion of times CGM used non -adjunctive ly/number of times non-adjunctive 
use indicated per protocol. Adoption criteria : Proportion of patients who consent to received initial C GM 
monitoring/number of patients eligible to receive initial CGM monitoring. Hypothesis:  The majority of insulin 
dosing decisions will be made using non -adjunctive CGM and CGM will alter nursing dosing decisions from 
standard guidelines.   
RQ 2: Assess the effects of CGM implementation on nursing workload and factors influencing nursing care 
delivery. We examine nursing workload and care delivery factors through surveys administered to MICU 
nurses and through a MICU staff nurse focus group (N=10). Nursing ca re delivery factors: Acceptability of 
CGM measured by the Acceptability of Intervention Measure (AIM), appropriateness of CGM measured by the 
intervention appropriateness measure (IAM), and feasibility, measured by the Feasibility of Intervention Measure 
(FIM). Nursing care delivery factors, evaluation of CGM support, and CGM knowledge will be evaluated through 
focus groups and CGM Satisfaction Questionnaire (modified for healthcare workers) . Hypothesis:  The use of 
CGM will significantly reduce nursing work load while increasing frequency of glucose monitoring.  
RQ 3: To assess glycemic control among patients receiving CGM in the CGM enabled MICU compared to 
historical control patients who received POC glucose monitoring in the MICU . Among critically ill patients on 
CGM (N=100) we will examine time in range (70 -180mg/dl), time 100 -180mg/dl, time 140 -180mg/dl, time in 
hypoglycemia (<55mg/dl, <70mg/dl), and time in hyperglycemia (180 -250mg/dl, >250mg/dl)  compared to 
matched historical control patients using 3 -tiered linear mixed models to control for patient, unit, and nurse specific 
variability. Hypothesis:  Patients with CGM will exhibit greater time in range (100 -180mg/dl, 140 -180mg/dl, 70 -
180mg/dl) and experience less frequent time in hypogl ycemia than patients on fingerstick POC.  
RQ 4: (exploratory) To assess hospitalization outcomes and conduct economic evaluation of the costs to 
deliver CGM implementation in the MICU.  We will track time and resources needed for CGM implementation 
including  personnel, training, facilities, materials, equipment, and other necessary inputs. Hospitalization outcomes 
criteria : Length of stay [ICU, total stay], cost of stay, cost of CGM vs. standard POC glucose monitoring, 
discharge level of care [home, SNF], 30 -day readmission, morbidity, and mortality. Hypothesis:  Patients with 
CGM will experience shorter length of stay, lowe r cost of stay, will be more likely to discharge to home vs. SNF, 
3  
 have lower 30 -day readmission rate, and experience lower mortality/morbidity than matched historical control 
patients receiving fingerstick POC in the MICU.  
 
II. Background and  Rationale  
 
During the COVID -19 pandemic, CGM has provided a  means for reducing  healthcare worker exposure to the virus  
and a reduction in care delivery burden during a period of staffing crisis . In April 2020, the FDA issued a statement 
indicating they would permit the use of these systems within the hospital setting during the pandemic.1 Since then, 
CGM has been integra ted into routine care within The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center (OSUWMC) 
MICU.2 OSUWMC began using CGM within a hybrid POC plus CGM protocol in May of 2020 and have 
demonstrated successful and saf e use of these devices within the health system for over 1 32 MICU patients.3 In 
concert, other health systems across the United States have used inpatient CGM and have disseminated valu able 
real-world data that demonstrates safe and effective inpatient use of the technology within a hybrid point -of-care 
(POC) plus CGM protocol.4-10 Across all of these studies, no adverse events were reported. While these studies did 
demonstrate a reduction in POC glucose testing, reasonable accuracy, and safe use among critically ill COVID -19 
patient , they were limited by small sample sizes and a r estricted patient population.  
At our institution  we examined  data from  the initial  cohort  of 19 COVID -19 patients  to use CGM  in 
OSUWMC  MICU.  Among these patients, 89% were on ventilators, 37% on vasopressors, and 42% on 
hemodialysis at the time of sensor placement.11 Despite the severity  of critical illness, MARD was 13.9% with no 
apparent association with oxygen saturation, mean arterial pressure, vasopressor use, renal replacement, 
anticoagulation, or ventilator support. Time in range (70 -180 mg/dl) on day 1 was 64+/ - 23%, and on days 2 -7 was 
72+/-16%. Time below range (<70 mg/dl) was 1.5+/ -4.1% on day 1 and 0.16+/ -0.35% on days 2 -7 11.  We have 
since expanded our analysis to include a larger cohort of the first 50 COVID -19 patients on CGM. Of these 
patients, 92% were on ventilators, 46% on vasopressors, 33% o n hemodialysis, and 74% were on steroids at the 
time of sensor placement. In our larger cohort, the aforementioned factors were again not associated with sensor 
accuracy. Hybrid protocols of POC glucose checks with CGM use have been used in other small stu dies of 
extremely critically ill ICU patients with COVID -19 (n=61 subjects total in four studies)5-7,10. One study did find 
decreased accuracy with cardiac arrest.5 Across these studies, MARD ranged between 11.1 -13.9% for Dexcom 
G66,10,11 and Clarke error grid analysis showed 98 -98.2% in zones A+B.6,10 In a recent larger study conducted 
among 218 hospitalized non -ICU patients, mild to moderate  anemia  was not shown  to impact  sensor  accuracy,  
however  more  severe  anemia  (hemoglobin  <7g/dL)  was found  to correlate  with higher  ARD  (17.8%).12 This same  
study  demonstrated  no association  between  hyperglycemia  and sensor  accuracy  but did demonstrated  a slight  
increase  in MARD  (18.8%)  and ARD  (14.5%)  with glucose  <70mg/dl .12 In a study by Boom et al. focused on 
hypoglycemia reduction, 177 medical ICU patients were randomized to CGM or standard of care. In this study, 
hypoglycemia and was reduced from 12 times per day to fewer than 1 time per day and overall glucose control was 
similar between groups.13 Other ICU studies have also showed acceptable accuracy in ICU patients, despite the use 
of older technologies.14,15 Moreover, there is evidence that accuracy can be offset by increased frequency of 
monitoring, as is the case with CGM.16 While  there  is some  concern  surrounding  the effects  of edema  or changes  in 
fluid  volume  on sensor  accuracy,  a study  among  congestive  heart  failure  patients  demonstrated  no association  
between  MARD  and BNP  or changes in plasma  volume,  this despite  the use of older  less accurate  technology.17  
 
Diabetes is a worsening  epidemic worldwide. In the United States, the prevalence has quadrupled between 
1980 and 2020 with an estimated 21.9 million adults living with diabetes 18.  Hospitalizations among patients with 
diabetes account for 30% of the total medical cost of inpatient care with more than 7.8 million hospital discharges 
in 2017 in the Un ited States 19.  Hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and glycemic variability in the hospital are 
associated with poor health outcomes including infection, acute renal failure, and death 20-24. Traditional POC 
capillary glucose monitoring measures glucose at one point in time and often misses hypoglycemia 23,25,26, 
especially overnight or asymptomatic episodes, whereas continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) can help provide 
details of glucose continuously as well as velocity and direction of change over time. The ability to visualize 
4  
 glucose trends or direction and velocity of glucose offers tremendous additional benefit over traditional discrete  
POC glucose monitoring.  
Additionally, CGM can improve efficiencies in the critical care environment and reduce nurs ing care 
burden.2,13 According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics the United States is facing an unprecedented nursing 
shortage which is expected to worsen over the upcoming decade. Intensive  inpatient POC glucose monitoring is an 
arduous , time-consuming task , often  resulting i n insufficient frequency of  testing and  testing that is mistimed with 
oral intake or insulin administration .27 The use of inpatient CGM holds tremendous promise to improve patient 
outcomes, reduce nursing workload, and associated healthcare costs, however, the inpatient implementation of 
CGM beyond the pandemic presents unique implementation challenges  and warrants further inquiry .  
Description of Technology.  
The Dexcom G6 CGM (Dexcom Inc) measures interstitial fluid glucose. The G6 system consists of 3  key parts: the 
sensor wire, a transmitter, and a display device. In addition, a CGM Dashboard will be used to display data at the 
nurse ’s stations.  
The sensor comprises a water -resistant sensor pod that is worn on the skin, and the sensor wire that is 
insert ed just under the skin ( depth is less than 0.5 inches)  using the single -use applicator. The sensor can be worn 
for 10  days and continuously measures glucose levels. In this study the sensor will be worn on the back of the arm.  
The transmitter attaches to the sensor pod and sends glucose information to the display device using 
Bluetooth. Interstitial glucose concentration estimates are sent from the transmitter to the receiving device at 
5-minute intervals and can be checked at any time.  
The G6  software app is downloaded onto the compatible smart device (Android phone), that is paired with 
the transmitter before use. The app continuously and automatically sends data to the Dexcom remote server, where 
the data are stored and displayed in the CLAR ITY diabetes management software. Alarms for hypoglycemia, 
hyperglycemia and predicted hypoglycemia will be set per the CGM + POC protocol. Android phones are kept just 
outside of the patient room s. The patient’s hospital identification label will be place d on the back of the phone  to 
ensure data is correctly matched to patient participant .  
In addition to the G6 app, g lucoses will be displayed on a laptop computer at the  nurse ’s station using  
investigational Dashboard  software . Investigational,  unapproved  Dashboard  software  will allow  continuous  remote  
monitoring  of Dexcom  G6 data from  multiple  patients  on a secondary  display  at the nurse ’s station.  Individual  
CGM  tracings  for each patient  wearing  Dexcom  G6 will be displayed  simu ltaneously  on the investigational  
Dashboard  software  for multiplex  remote  monitoring.  The Dashboard  is programmed  with trend  arrows,  an alarm,  
and glucose  threshold  alerts  to facilitate  real-time surveillance  of impending  hypo  and hyperglycemia  that warran ts 
prevention  or intervention.  Treatment  decisions  will not be made  using  data displayed  on this software;  glucose  
will be confirmed  on G6 app before  treatment  decisions  are made.  
 
CGM + POC Protocol.  
A CGM + POC protocol was developed and implemented within OSUWMC  MICU unit. The protocol, which  
allows for intermittent non -adjunctive CGM use with requisite initial validation within each patient and continued 
validation Q6 hours, proved successful in facilitating safe and effective CGM implem entation in over  132 critically 
ill patients with COVID -19. The CGM + POC protocol require comparison of paired sensor -meter readings. The 
comparison standard method ( Novo StatStrip POC meter) and source (capillary, arterial, venous) are FDA 
approved for inpatient use . In an effort to mitigate risk in this study among critically ill MICU patients, we propose 
a more conservative strategy with increased frequency of ongoing POC testing and validation every 4 hours. 
Additionally, more frequent testing at Q2 or  Q1 hour s will occur during periods of clinical change that could 
proceed a decline in CGM accuracy. The standard is compared to the CGM value obtained within 5 minutes. The 
threshold criterion for nonadjunctive (stand -alone) use of the CGM to inform insulin dosing decisions  appears in 
Table 1. CGM values will be used to determine insulin doses within s tandard OSUWMC guidelines (e.g., IV 
infusion guideline) and provider prescribed orders. Alert thresholds are set at 100 mg/dl (lower threshold) and 300 
5  
 mg/dl (upper threshold). In addition, the Urgent Low Soon alert w ill be  activated and designed to provide a 20-
minute advance warning of impending hypoglycemia, so nurses c an act quickly to avoid a potential severe 
hypoglycemic event.   
 
Table 1. Initial and Ongoing CGM Validation  
Stage  POC glucose testing procedures  
CGM validation  POC glucose testing Q1 hour compared to CGM glucose  
Proceed to Q 4 hour POC testing when two consecutive sensor -meter pairs approximately 1 -hour apart meet 
either of the following criteria:  
1) CGM <20% difference from the POC when the glucose is >100 mg/dl  
2) CGM <20 mg/dl difference from the POC when the glucose is <100 mg/dl  
Sustained use  Revert from Q 4 hour to Q1 hour POC testing if:  
1) CGM >20% difference from the POC when the glucose is >100 mg/dl  
2) CGM >20 mg/dl difference from the POC when the glucose is <100 mg/dl  
3) Revert back to Q4 hour POC testing when two consecutive sensor -meter pairs approximately 1 -hour 
apart meet the initial validation criteria  
Revert from Q 4 hour to Q2 hour POC testing for a duration of 6 hours for one of the following clinical status  
events occurring in  isolation:   
4) Intubation  
5) Pressor support initiated (Levophed dose <0.5 mcg/kg/min or equivalent)  
6) New cardiovascular event (MI, CVA)  
7) Initiation or discontinuation of nutrition support (i.e., enteral feed, total parenteral nutrition)  
8) Hemoglobin <7g/dL  
9) CGM or POC glucose <70mg/dl (follow OSUWMC hypoglycemia policy for initial treatment and 
monitoring)  
10) Predicted low alert (glucose predicted to be <55mg/dl in the following 20 minutes)  
11) Acidosis with pH <7.3  
12) Signs and symptoms do not match glucose readings, part icularly for hypoglycemia   
Revert from Q 4 hour to Q 1 hour POC testing for a duration of 6 hours for two or more of the above clinical 
status  events occurring together (example: patient is intubated and starts pressor support)  
If after 6 hours no additional clinical scenarios featured above have developed than Q4 hour POC testing can 
resume after initial validation using two consecutive sensor -meter pairs.  
Obtain 1 time POC glucose if:  
13) No glucose value appears on android screen  (due to signal loss, Low/High measure)  
14) Low threshold alert (<100mg/dl)  
Stop CGM use  Stop use of CGM for insulin titration or glucose monitoring and revert from Q4 hour to Q1 hour POC testing 
(do not remove CGM sensor until sensor expires ) for the following conditions:  
1) Refractory shock (Levophed dose >0.5 mcg/kg/min or equivalent)  
2) Cardiac arrest  
3) Newly developed diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) (pH <7.3 or serum bicarbonate <15 mEq/L in the 
setting of elevated ketones)  
4) Newly developed hypero smolar non -ketoacidosis (HONK)  
5) Pitting edema, anasarca, blue or purple discoloration to bilateral upper extremity  
6) Initiation of treatment with high dose acetaminophen (>1 gram Q6 hours)  
Initiation of treatment with hydroxyurea  
 
III. Procedures  
 
A. Research  Design  
 
Hybrid Research Design  
6  
 A hybrid research design that combines elements of effectiveness and implementation research will be used to 
enable more rapid adoption of CGM as standard of care. Traditional step -wise approaches to research which 
progress from clinical efficacy research, to clinical effectiveness research, and finally implementation research 
limit application and slow routine uptake in real -world environments. A hybrid research II design allows for two 
objectives within the research  with equal emphasis placed on (1) testing the effectiveness of the intervention and 
(2) determining feasibility and potential impact of the implementation strategy. The use of this design allows us to 
craft a blueprint for successful deployment of CGM the rapy within health systems, while at the same time 
gathering valuable real -world effectiveness data. It also allows us to examine how clinical outcomes relate to levels 
of adoption and fidelity.  
APPROACH . Overview : This proposal analyzes the feasibility o f inpatient real time CGM implementation 
through the use of a CGM + POC protocol as routine care for glycemic monitoring among patients with 
hyperglycemia (>250mg/dl). The research addresses essential components of ICU implementation including the 
clinical  utility of the system to inform glycemic management and insulin dose administration (Aim 1), effects on 
nursing workflow and care delivery (Aim 2), and effects on patient glycemic control compared to matched 
historical control patients from the  MICU who received fingerstick POC. Additionally, we propose an exploratory 
aim to examine the effects of CGM use on hospital associated outcomes including length of stay, cost of stay, cost 
of CGM vs. POC glucose monitoring, discharge level of care, 30 -day readmission rates, morbidity and mortality 
compared to matched historical control patients (Aim 4). The study will be conducted using a staggered enrollment 
of 20 patients in each wave (20% of target enrollment) with a respite between waves to allow anal ysis of safety and 
fidelity data prior to continued enrollment. The initial wave (n=20) will be conducted as a “pilot” with full analysis 
including examination of benchmark criteria study continuation. If pilot analysis demonstrates safe use and fidelity, 
then subsequent recruitment will proceed . The analytic approach for each Aim is described below. STATA 15.0 
(StataCorp, College Station, TX) will be used for quantitative analysis and NVIVO (version 10, Doncaster, 
Australia) will be used for qualitative da ta management.  
Table 2. Study Timeline  
Activity  Pre-award  Year 1  Year 2  
FDA & IRB submission & approvals                 
Nursing union approvals                 
Patient recruitment                  
CGM data collection                  
EHR data collection                 
Nursing recruitment                 
Nursing focus group & surveys                  
Analysis                 
Manuscript & conference dissemination                 
  Aim 1 & 3: ICU Clinical Utility/Implementation & 
Glycemic control                 
  Aim 2: Nursing workload and Care delivery                 
 Aim 4: Hospital outcomes                 
FDA  
 
Figure 1. Study Flow Diagram  
7  
 Prior to  
Enrollment  
 
 
 
MICU  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MICU  
Historical  
Controls  
 
 
 
 
                            -----------------------------------------------                             -------------------------------------------------  
 
Nursing  
Survey  
 
 
 
 
Nursing  
Focus Group  
 
 
B. Sample   
The study will take place at OSUWMC. At OSUWMC there are approximately 13,000 hospitalizations with a 
diagnosis code for diabetes each year and current annual inpatient diabetes consult service and diabetes educator 
consults are roughly 3000 per year. OSUW MC has implemented a comprehensive, hospital -wide inpatient diabetes 
program since 2006, including streamlined computerized diabetes related order sets, carbohydrate -based insulin 
dosing, education, and ongoing review of outcomes.  OSUWMC converted to EPIC  EHR in 2011 for both inpatient 
and outpatient electronic medical records. The medical centers MICU has been utilizing Dexcom G6 CGM for 
COVID -19 patients since May of 2020 and to date has utilized CGM in  over 132 critically ill COVID -19 patients. 
The stud y will take place in the MICU. The MICU is a 48 -bed critical care center and employs 152 staff nurses. 
Patients will be identified through daily screening of patients and associated glycemic control in the MICU to 
identify potential participants with hyper glycemia (glucose >250mg/dl)  or those currently on IV insulin . In 2019, 
prior to the COVID -19 pandemic, OSUWMC had 1,065 unique patient admissions in which the patient had a 
glucose >250mg/dl over the course of their MICU stay. Within the MICU patient popu lation, patients with more  
severe  illness  and those  with conditions  that may interfere  with CGM  sensor  accuracy  will be excluded  from  
participation.  Full inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  are as follows:   
Eligible individuals are:  
1) adults >18 years old,  
2) admitted to OSUWMC MICU and  N=100 MICU Patients:  Screen potential participants by inclusion and exclusion criteria. Obtain 
informed consent.  
Collect laboratory, treatment, and hospital cost data from HER. CGM glucose data will be collected 
from Dexcom Clarity Download Software. See Section 1.3, Schedule of Activities  for specific data to 
be collected and schedule  
 
Historical controls meeting the gateway criteria (glucose >250mg/dl or on IV insulin during admission) 
from the same MICU will be matched on the following factors: Diagnosis  and type of diabetes,  home  
insulin  use, steroid  use during  hospitalization,  vasopressor use , North  vs. South  MICU  wings  (NP team  
floor  vs. resident  team  floor,  respectively),  and diabetic  ketoacidosis  (DKA)/hyperosmolar  
hyperglycemic  syndrome  (HHS)  status.  Data  from  Section  1.3 Schedule  of Activities  will pulled  for 
historical  controls.   Place CGM sensor. Collect baseline data from EHR.  
A focus group will be c onducted among MICU staff nurses (N=10) to gage their experience using 
CGM.  All MICU staff nurses (N=152) will be recruited/consented for survey participation. Acceptability o f 
Intervention Measure (AIM), Intervention Appropriateness Measure (IAM), and Feasibility of 
Intervention Measure (FIM), CGM Satisfaction Questionnaire (modified for healthcare workers) will 
be administered.  
8  
 3) have hyperglycemia (glucose >250mg/dl) or are currently on IV insulin.  
 
Non-eligible individuals are:  
7) Current COVID -19 infection,  
8) Refractory shock ( Levophed  dose >0.5 mcg/kg/min or equivalent)  
9) Actively being treated for diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)  
10) Actively being treated for hyperosmolar non -ketoacidosis (HONK)  
11) Pitting edema, anasarca, blue or purple discoloration to left upper extremity  
12) Treated with high dose acetaminophen (>1 gram Q6 hours)  
13) Treated with hydroxyurea  
14) Are pregnant, patients  
15) Using home insulin pump therapy during hospitalization, or  
16) Reside in a corrections institution.  
 
Sample Size Justification. The primary outcome for the power analysis is the percentage of time spent in target 
(70-180mg/dl). We estimate from previous studies13,28 that these values may have a standar d deviation as high as 
25 percentage points, in which case with 100 patients in each group we will have 80% power to detect a difference 
of 10 percentage points in time in range (e.g., 65 vs. 75); a moderate effect size of 0.4. If the standard deviation is  
lower (e.g., 15 as has been true in some studies), we will have greater power (99%) to detect a 10 point difference 
and are still well powered to detect smaller differences (e.g., 90% power for a 7 point difference). All power 
calculations assume an alpha  of 0.05 and minimal statistical effects of clustering within the hospitals (e.g., unit or 
nurse level).   
 
C. Detailed study  procedures  
 
Recruitment:  Critical  care clinical research coordinator s will screen for preliminary eligibility and forward 
potential participant names to study team using a secure medical record in -basket process. The study team will 
determine eligibility. The study team will ask for permission for the patient to be approach ed. If permission is 
granted, the study team will verify eligibility and obtain informed consent from the patient or the patient’s legally 
authorized representative. Consent will be obtained prior to research participation and CGM placement. 
Recruitment is  expected at a rate of 5 patients per week over seven  months.  Our target recruitment will be 1 00 
MICU patients.   
Nurse training : OSUWMC MICU nurses have significant experience with CGM use in an extremely ill cohort of 
COVID -19 patients. Each nurse in the MICU receives training on CGM set -up, insertion, pairing, and CGM 
glucose monitoring features as part of their annual critical care competencies. OSUWMC MICU nurses are trained 
and experienced  in using POC glucose measurement to validate the CGM system , however the protocol at use in 
this study differs somewhat from the COVID -19 protocol currently at use in the MICU. Given that, nurses will 
receive training on distinctions between the two proto cols including changes to the frequency of POC testing, the 
addition of clinical status events that would warrant more frequent POC testing and validation (Q1 or Q2 hours 
depending on number of events present  for a duration of 6 hours ). New criteria to stop clinical use ( i.e., no use of 
CGM for  glucose monitoring , no use of CGM for  insulin titration) will be reviewed in detail with nursing along 
with plans for the sensor to remain in place only for data collection. Nursing trainings will be conducte d by PI 
(Faulds), Co -I (Jones), and study coordinator  during staff meetings and nursing huddles conducted on all shifts . All 
nurses will receive training on the new protocol prior to patient recruitment. The study protocol, along with 
currently avai lable training materials, will be kept at the bedside of all patient participants.  
Staggered enrollment and initial pilot: We will stagger  enrollment  with just 20 patient  participants  over a 4-week  
period  (target  5 participants/week  with a respite  between  enrollment  to allow  analysis  of safety  and fidelity  data 
prior  to the next round.  A robust  analysis  would  be conducted  after this first “pilot”  round  of enrollment.  Accuracy  
analysis  would  include  MARD  and Clark  Error  Grid.  A full assessment  of protocol  adherence  and evaluate  
adherence  to standard  insulin  dosing  guidelines  will be completed.  The pilot analysis  will include  evaluation  of 
9  
 benchmarks  for accuracy,  safety,  and adverse  event  monitoring  with benchmarks  that must  met prior  to subsequent  
enrollmen t. Pilot benchmarks  for study  continuation  are as follows:   
• Successful  initial  validation  criteria  within  24 hours  in 80% of participants  (16/20)  
• Clark  error  grid analysis  demonstrating  >95%  points  in zone  A (within 20% of reference glucose value) or 
zone B ( outside of 20% but would not lead to inappropriate treatment)  following  initial  validation . 
• No more  than 1 episode  of inappropriate  insulin  dose resulting  in severe  hypoglycemia  (glucose  <55mg/dl)  
after initial  sensor  validation   
• No more  than 1 episodes  of iatrogenic  DKA  (pH <7.3 or serum bicarbonate <15 mEq/L in the setting of 
elevated ketones) or hyperosmolar  nonketotic  state (osmolality  320mO sm/kg  with BG >600mg/dl  and 
pH >7.3 or serum bicarbonate >15 mEq/L )  
• No episodes  of severe  adverse  events  resulting  in prolonged  hospitalization,  or other  life-threatening  
complication  that attributed  to the study  intervention  
• No severe  adverse  events  resulting  in death,  or other  life-threatening  complication  that is attributed  to the 
study  intervention   
• No severe  adverse  event  resulting  in prolonged  hospitalization,  or other  life-threatening  complication  that 
attributed  to the study  intervention  and is expected  to recur  
 
Oversight  and monitoring.  Study  team  oversight  of nursing  use of the CGM  system  will be performed  through  a 
combination  of (1) daily  evaluation  of EHR  and CGM  Clarity  data and (2) through  rounding  on CGM  patient s 
(mon -Friday  by PI (Faulds),  Co-I (Jones)  and/or  study  coordinator  (to be named)  (Saturday,  Sunday  and holidays  
by the MICU  charge  nurse  who will communicate  that day with study  team  members.  Daily  rounds  will allow  the 
study team  to continuously  evaluate  protocol  fidelity  and identify  any safety  concerns.  The study  staff will evaluate  
CGM  use daily  through  Clarity  CGM  and EHR  data to determine  the following:   
3. Was initial  validation  criteria  achieved  correctly  and at what  frequency   
4. Is ongoing  validations  performed  Q4 hours  and according  to validation  criteria  
5. If validation is met did the nurse begin hybrid use with non -adjunctive CGM use  
6. Using clarity reports study staff will assess the presence of alarms (e.g., <100mg/dl, >300mg/dl, predictive 
hypoglycemia) Alarms  will be reviewed  daily  by research  staff to ensure  hypoglycemia  and hyperglycemia  
are being  treated  in accordance  with OSUWMC  guidelines.   
7. Those  patterns  of hyperglycemia  or hypoglycemia  assessed  every  24 hours,  will be reported  to primary  
team  via pager/direct  message  to allow  changes  to insulin  dosing  as needed  (e.g.,  max drip rate for IV 
insulin  titration).   
8. Assessment of c hange in clinical status criteria ( Table 1)  in which  per protocol  the nurse  would  increase  
frequency  of POC  testing  and validation.   
9. Assessment  of Stop CGM  use criteria  (Table  1) in which  per protocol  the nurse  would  no longer  use the 
CGM  for glucose  monitori ng or insulin  titration.  
 
RQ 1: Establish the clinical utility, fidelity, and adoption of Dexcom G6 CGM as a tool for making dosing 
decisions within a CGM+POC protocol among medical intensive care unit (MICU) patients.  
Rationale/Approach.  We will conduct a prospective cohort observation al analysis among critically ill patients on 
IV insulin or those with hyperglycemia (>250mg/dl) in OSUWMC MICU. The research will allow us to examine 
the clinical utility and implementation of CGM as the standard of care in a critical care environment. We 
hypothesis that the majority of insulin dosing decisions will be made using non -adjunctive CGM and CGM , with 
the availability of trend and alarm data, will alter nursing dosing decisions from standard guidelines.  
10  
 Procedures. Once consent is obtained, the MICU staff nurse will insert the Dexcom G6 sensor, set up the system, 
pair the transmitter on patients, and connect patient data to a centralized nurse ’s station CGM Dashboard in the 
MICU (N=100). The CGM + POC protocol will be used to validate at which time the CGM will be used for non -
adjunctive insulin dosing decisions. POC testing will be performed Q 4 hours for continued validation of the CGM  
with more frequent sustained POC validation during periods of rapid  clinical change  (Table 1).  
The Android phone, which will receive glucose data from the CGM transmitter, will be kept outside of the 
patient room allowing the staff nurse to visualize discrete values, trends and hear alarms without entering the 
patient’s room. OSUWMC  MICU  employs  a staffing  ratio maximum  of 1 nurse  for 2 patients.  MICU  staff nurses  
will only care for 1 patient  using  CGM  at a time.  Alarms  are visually  displayed  and audible  from  both the 
dashboard  and receiver  (Android  phone);  however  nurses  are instructed  to confirm  all glucose  values  and the 
presence  of alarms  on the receiver  devices  at the bedside  prior  to treatment.  All nurses  in the MICU  are trained  on 
CGM  alarm  recognition  and response.  In a  previous  analysis,  nurses  reported  alarms  were audible  throughout  the 
MICU  unit.2  If the nurse  assigned  to the CGM  patient  participant  is not immediately  available  when  an alarm  is 
sounding,  another  nurse  or the charge  nurse  is expected  to respond  to the alarm  and provide  appropriate  treatment.  
This same  alarm  response  delegation  is employed  for other  MICU  systems  including  cardiac  telemetry,  Pulse 
oximetry , and ventilator  alerts.  Nurses  will follow  standard  approved  OSUWMC  guidelines,  policies  and provider  
dosing  orders  for treatment  of hyperglycemia  and hypoglycemic  events.  Episod es of hypoglycemia  and 
hyperglycemia  will be responded  to in real time by nursing  staff.  Our hypoglycemia  guideline  (Table  3) treats  
glucose  <80mg/dl  with Dextrose  D50%  for critically  ill patients.  Dosing  is stratified  based  on degree  of 
hypoglycemia  with follow -up required  within  15 minutes.  For hypoglycemia  <60mg/dl  nurses  are instructed  to 
inform  the provider  via pager/direct  chat. Nurses  in the MICU  are experienced  in administration  dextrose  D50%  
using  the described  hypoglycemia  protocol.  If the patient  is ordered  to undergo  magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI),  computerized tomography (CT) radiographic procedures , or diathermy  than the sensor/transmitter  will be 
removed  prior  to the procedure  as these  procedures  could  potentially  interfere  with sensor  accuracy.29 A new 
sensor  will be inserted  after procedure  is completed  and will undergo  initial  validation  prior  to use.  
The patient will remain on CGM for the duration of their hospital stay and if discharged to home may 
transition to personal use of the Dexcom G6. The Dexcom G6 sensor is replaced every 10 days and will be 
removed and then replaced for some radiographic procedures or sensor failure. CGM data is automatically 
transferred to Dexcom’s cloud -based Clarity system.  
 
Table 3. OSUWMC Hypoglycemia Guideline, Patients Who are Not Alert, Are NPO, or on IV Insulin 
Infusion  
Blood Glucose 
(BG) Level*  Action  Follow -Up 
60-79 mg/dL  • Administer 7.5 g Dextrose D50% (15 ml) IV*  
• Consider calling House Officer if patient 
experiencing recurrent BG <70 mg/dL in past 12 h  • Recheck BG q 15 min following treatment 
and treat accordingly until  80mg/dl  
• Once  80mg/dl, recheck BG q1h x2 (x4 if 
<45mg/dL at onset), then resume POC 
glucose as previously ordered, Patients 
who are admitted with hyp oglycemia 
should be monitored at least q 4h for a 
minimum of 24h  
• If > 4h from initial event and BG  
80mg/dl for two consecutive readings, 
may consider reducing IV dextrose  45-59 mg/dL  • Administer 12.5 g Dextrose D50% (15 ml) IV*  
• Call House Officer to report BG and action taken  
<45 mg/dL  • Administer 25 g Dextrose D50% (15 ml) IV*  
• Call House Officer to report BG and action taken  
ALL  • Consider adding Dextrose 5% to maintenance IV 
fluids at a rate of 50ml/hr or increase rate of 
existing maintenance IV if dextrose source 
already present  
 
Variables and measures.  Clinical utility criteria : Time to CGM validation within hybrid protocol p arameters, 
mean percent of dosing decisions determined by CGM, changes in insulin dosing from standard guideline or 
outside standard times in response to alarm and/or trend data (as measured by manufacturer download data and 
corresponding EHR documentation ). Fidelity criteria : Proportion of times CGM used non -adjunctively/number of 
11  
 times non -adjunctive use indicated per protocol. Adoption criteria : Proportion of patients approached to received 
GCM monitoring/number of patients eligible to receive initial CGM monitoring.  
 
RQ 2: To assess the degree to which CGM implementation within the ICU environment effects nursing 
workload and care delivery.  
Rational/Approach. We will conduct a mixed method analysis to evaluate nursing workload and care delivery 
factors. Nursing care delivery factors including evaluation of CGM support, acceptance of CGM, perceived 
feasibility, and CGM knowledge, will be evalua ted using a combination of questionaries and focus groups.  
Procedures/Variables and Measures. We will evaluate nursing care delivery factors  related to CGM 
implementation support, acceptance of CGM, feasibility, appropriateness, CGM knowledge and satisfaction with 
CGM as measured by Acceptability of Intervention Measure (AIM), Intervention Appropriateness Measure (IAM), 
and Feasibility of Inte rvention Measure (FIM), CGM Satisfaction Questionnaire (modified for healthcare workers) 
and focus group conducted among nurses in the CGM -enabled MICU. The AIM, IAM, and FIM are brief 5 item 
Likert -scale questionaries with each showing a high degree of co ntent validity with alphas for the 3 questionnaires 
between 0.87 and 0.89 .30 CGM Satisfaction Questionnaire (CGM -SAT) is a 44 -item measuring satisfaction with 
CGM over the previous 6 months. The survey has a high degree of validity ( a≥0.94) in adults with type 1 diabetes 
using CGM.31 Several items will be modified for application in healthcare workers. All MICU staff nurses (N=152) 
will be informed of the study and invited to participate via email. Upon e -consent, the questionnaires will be 
administered via a REDCap survey. A focus group will be conducted among MICU staff nurses (N=10) to gage 
their experience using CGM. A semi -structured interview guide will focus o n areas of perceived CGM 
implementation support and education, CGM knowledge, and recommendations for future best practice. All Aim 2 
variables and measures appear in Table 2.  
RQ 3: To assess glycemic control among patients receiving CGM in the CGM enabled MICU compared to 
historical control patients who received POC glucose monitoring in the  MICU.  
Rational/Approach. We will analyze glycemic control factors among MICU patients on CGM  compared to 100 
historical control patients from the same  MICU who receiving only POC glucose monitoring. We hypothesis that 
patients with CGM will exhibit greater time in range (100 -180 mg/dl, 70 -180mg/dl, 140 -180mg/dl) and experience 
less frequent time in hypoglycemia than patients on fingerstick POC.  
Procedures. Glucose data will be directly transferred from the MICU patients (N=100) to Android mobile 
phones/Dexcom G6 app which captures and stores glucose values every 5 minutes (up to 288 values/day fo r 100% 
CGM wear).  CGM data is automatically transferred from phones/Dexcom G6 app to Dexcom Clarity. Individual 
patient discrete data will be downloads directly from the Clarity site. Historical controls meeting the gateway 
criteria (glucose >250mg/dl or on IV insulin during admission) from the same MICU will be matched on the 
following factors: Diagnosis  and type of diabetes,  home  insulin  use, steroid  use during  hospitalization,  vasopressor 
use, North  vs. South  MICU  wings  (NP team  floor  vs. resident  team  floor,  respectively),  and diabetic  ketoacidosis  
(DKA)/hyperosmolar  hyperglycemic  syndrome  (HHS)  status.  POC glucose values for historical controls (N=100) 
will be obtained directly from OSUWMC EHR. EHR dat a will be obtained through an information warehouse 
request providing time stamped, POC glucose value for each match patient. All data will be uploaded into STATA 
15.0 where it will be cleaned and merged prior to analysis.  
Variables and Measures.  Demographic, admission, and diabetes specific variables of interest appear in Table 2 
and will be collected from the EHR for MICU participants and for historical controls . Clinical condition variables 
will include presence of renal replacement, mechanical ventilation, ECMO, associated cardiac arrest or 
cerebrovascular accident and SOFA score. SOFA score was calculated, though noted to have limited discriminant 
function for predicting mortality.32 The SOFA  score  has been  validated  in critically  ill patients33, and is currently  
the scoring  system  recommended  by the Sepsis  3 definition.34 CGM  and POC  glucose  data will be aggregated  into 
glucose  ranges  and thresholds  as described  in Table  2.  
12  
 Exploratory aim:  
RQ 4: To assess hospitalization outcomes and conduct economic evaluation of the costs to deliver CGM 
implementation in the MICU.   
Rational/Approach. We will explore the impact of CGM therapy using a CGM + POC protocol on patient 
hospital outcomes and costs. Analyzes the economic aspects inpatient CGM on patient health and healthcare 
interactions, with a focus on the costs (inputs) an d consequences (outcomes) of CGM will enable full 
understanding of implementation effects. We hypothesize that patients with CGM will experience shorter length of 
stay, lower cost of stay, will be more likely to discharge to home vs. SNF, have a lower 30 -day readmission rate, 
and experience lower mortality/morbidity than matched patients receiving fingerstick POC.  
Procedures. Data will be retrospectively extracted from the EHR for patients using CGM in the MICU (N=100) 
along with  100 historical controls . Data will be obtained from the EHR and billing department through an 
information warehouse request. Data from the time in motion study will be evaluated to extrapolate the economic 
impact of nursing personnel time spent for CGM vs. POC glucose monitoring an d resources used in POC vs. CGM 
glucose monitoring.   
Variables and Measures. Hospital outcomes criteria include the following: Length of stay [ICU, total stay], cost 
of stay, discharge level of care [home, SNF], morbidity, mortality and readmission rate at 30 days. We will  conduct 
economic evaluation of the costs to deliver CGM implementation in the MICU . We will track resources needed for 
CGM implementation including personnel, training, facilities, materials, equipment, and other necess ary inputs. In 
addition to resources used, we will expand analysis to evaluate nursing productivity and burden. Resource 
outcomes criteria  include: nursing time spent in CGM vs. POC glucose monitoring and cost of CGM vs. standard 
POC glucose monitoring mat erials.  
Table 2. Patient Participant Schedule of Activities  
Aim  Concept  Variable  Frequency  Measure  
Aim 
1  Clinical utility 
criteria  Time to CGM validation (Aim 1 only)  Sensor placement 
(Q10 days)  • EHR  
• Clarity 
download  Mean percent of dosing decisions determined by CGM  Daily  
Changes in insulin dosing from guideline or outside 
standard times in response to alarm and/or trend data  Daily  
Aim 
1 Fidelity & 
Adoption 
Implementation 
criteria  Proportion of times CGM initiated or patient 
approached for study inclusion according to 
protocol/total number of initiations  Admission  • EHR  
• Study 
recruitment 
log Proportion of patients approached to received GCM 
monitoring/number of patients eligible to receive 
initial CGM monitoring  Admission  
Acceptability of CGM   
Appropriateness of CGM  
Feasibility of CGM  
CGM knowledge  
Aim 
3 Patient 
condition  Demographic data: Age, race/ethnicity, gender  Admission  • EHR  
Height, weight, and BMI  Admission  
Diagnosis and type of diabetes  Admission  
Home diabetes regimen  Admission  
Total daily insulin dose   Daily  
Past medical history: tobacco use, COPD, 
hypertension, heart failure, coronary artery disease  Admission  
Clinical condition: Admission/inpatient glucose, 
HbA1c, admission diagnosis, admitting service, MICU Admission  
13  
 location (North vs. South), DKA/HHS, sepsis, acute 
liver failure, acute heart failure  
Clinical condition:  SOFA score, dialysis, 
thromboembol ic events, ECMO mechanical 
ventilation, ICU/hospital length of stay, cardiac arrest, 
cerebrovascular accident, mortality  Daily  
Medications:  vasopressor use, steroids, 
anticoagulants, acetaminophen dose  Daily  
Creatinine, eGFR, ALT, AST, TBR, WBC, 
procalcitonin, ferritin, CRP, IL6, D -dimer, PTT, INR, 
troponin, pH, BHB, bicarbonate  Daily  
Enteral or parenteral nutrition  Daily  
O2 sat, pAO2, blood pressure  Daily  
Aim 
3 Glycemic 
control  Time in target for CGM patients (70 -180mg/dl)  Daily  • Clarity  
• EHR  Time 100 -180mg/dl for CGM patients  Daily  
Time 140 -180mg/dl for CGM patients  Daily  
Time above range for CGM patients (>180mg/d & 
>250mg/dl)  Daily  
Time in hypoglycemia for CGM patients (<70mg/dl & 
<55mg/dl)  Daily  
Percent POC in target (70 -180mg/dl) (matched 
controls)  Daily  
Percent POC 100 -180mg/dl (matched controls)  Daily  
Percent POC 140 -180mg/dl (matched controls)  Daily  
Percent POC above range (>180mg/dl & >250mg/dl) 
(matched controls)  Daily  
Percent POC in hypoglycemia (<70mg/dl & <5 5mg/dl) 
(matched controls)  Daily  
Glucose standard deviation  Daily  
Glucose coefficient of variation  Daily  
Aim 
4  Hospitalization 
outcomes and 
costs  Length of stay [ICU, total stay]  Discharge  • EHR  
• Clarity 
download  
 Cost of stay  Discharge  
Discharge level of care [home, SNF]  Discharge  
Morbidity  Discharge  
Mortality  Discharge  
Readmission rate [30 days]  30d s/p discharge  
Cost of CGM vs. standard POC glucose monitoring 
materials.  Discharge  
Table 3. Nurse Participant Schedule of Activities  
Aim  Concept  Variables  Frequency  Measure  
Aim 
2 Nursing care 
delivery factors  Evaluation of CGM support  Once  • Acceptability of Intervention Measure (AIM), 
Intervention Appropriateness Measure (IAM), 
and Feasibility of Intervention Measure (FIM)  
• CGM Satisfaction Questionnaire  
• Focus groups  
 
 
Data Management. All data will be labeled with unique identifiers for subject and study, date and time -stamped, 
and secured in locked filing cabinets in the project office, if hardcopy, on a server housed in a 24/7 offsite 
university -run networking facility, via web -based data capture, REDCap.  To facilitate the HIPAA compliant remote 
monitoring of CGM data, dummy clinical Clarity accounts will be created for each device/patient. Android phone 
set-up requires entry of individual Dexcom Clarity account information on each pho ne.  
14  
 D. Data  Analysis  
 
Descriptive statistics of central tendency (range, mean, median, and standard deviation) will describe variable 
characteristics and examine data distribution for normality and outliers. Descriptive statistics will summarize the 
sample characteristics and d istribution of each variable. Data will be screened for normality, outliers, and 
homogeneity. Continuous variables with normal distribution will be reported as mean (standard deviation) while 
non-normal distribution will be reported as median (interquartil e range). For RQ1 , multivariate linear models will 
be used to evaluate clinical utility and implementation variables while examining the effects of patient condition 
(i.e., sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score, renal replacement, ventilator sup port, pH) as covaries. For 
RQ 2 , For qualitative analysis of focus group data, a code book will be developed a priori based on the semi -
structured interview questions. Interview data, fieldnotes and memos were imported into NVivo 12.0 (Doncaster, 
Australia ) for data management and analyzed using a qualitative descriptive approach.35,36 Two researchers (Faulds 
and McNett) will perform qualitative analysis. Portions of text will be coded with terms that were low inference 
(“data close”); then grouped into thematic cat egories and subthemes.35 For RQ3,  hyperglycemic and hypoglycemic 
events will be identified for CGM and non -CGM users. Discrete CGM glucose values will be used to aggregate 
derived measures of glucose variability, including time in target (blood glucose value of 70 -180mg/dl), time 100 -
180mg/dl (representing a more conservative target used inpatient), time 140 -180mg/dl (representing institutions IV 
insulin gu ideline glycemic target), time above target (>180mg/dl & >250mg/dl), time in hypoglycemia (<70mg/dl 
& <5 5mg/dl), glucose standard deviation, and coefficient of variation. Daily percent time in target as well as 
cumulative time in target will be assessed. T ime in target will be derived from ADA glucose targets defining 
hypoglycemia as a blood glucose less than 70mg/dl and peak post -prandial glucose as <180mg/dl 37. The blood 
glucose range of 70 -180mg/dl is consistent with other studies examining time in target.38-41 Measures of 
hypoglycemia will be in accordance with ADA recommendations for measurement at <70mg/dl and <5 5mg/dl 
which is a marker of severe hypoglycemia.42 Days with ≥70% CGM percent wear, as recommended by ADA, will 
be included in daily time in target analysis.42 For matched historical control patients, percent POC in target (70 -
180mg/dl), 100 -180mg/dl, 140 -180mg/dl, percent POC >180mg/dl and percen t POC >250mg/dl, percent POC 
<70mg/dl and percent POC <5 5mg/dl will be evaluated consistent with other recent studies.43,44 For CGM daily 
glycemic control (i.e., time in range [70 -180mg/dl], time 100 -180mg/dl, time 140 -180mg/dl), linear mixed effect 
modeling (LMM) for repeated measures will be used to adjust for between subject and within subject variance. A 
3-tiered LMM will be used to control for patient, unit, and nurse specific variability. LMM will be repeated for 
analysis of daily POC glucose control for matched historical control patients for days with ≥3 POC fingersticks 
performed.  Two-sided significance level of 0.05 was used for all the statistical tests. For RQ4, the cost analysis for 
the proposed study will be conducted from the provider perspective. Cost estimation involves three major steps: (1) 
identify the relevant cost items; (2) measure the use of resources; a nd (3) place a value on the resources used. W e 
will obtain estimated costs for proposed CGM implementation. Direct benefits and savings tend to fall into one of 
two categories: either savings from enhanced efficiency and productivity, or savings from outco mes improvement 
(e.g., reducing length of stay, lower 30 day readmissions). Costs that do not vary with the number of patients will 
be categorized as fixed costs, whereas those that vary by the number of patients will be defined as variable costs. 
The cost s of the CGM implementation  will be compared to costs under a control scenario. We will estimate the 
potential costs and cost savings resulting from the CGM implementation.  
IV. Regulatory and Safety Monitoring  
A. OSU Center for Clinical and Translational Science Regulatory Oversight.  
The OSU Center for Clinical and Translational Science ( CCTS )-Regulatory Knowledge and Support Core assigned 
Data Safety Monitoring Board  (DSMB) will oversee safety activity of the study. The DSMB  will have expertise in 
either the scientific field of study, clinical trials, statistics, research ethics and/or epidemiology as is required of the 
study. The DSMB  will review protocol -specific reports  (Enrollment log s; device accountability logs; adverse event 
logs)  created by the research team. These standard reports will include an overview of study objectives, a review of 
actual and projected accrual rates, an evaluation of patient demographics for balance of rando mization, and a 
summary of the type, frequency, attribution, severity, seriousness and expectedness of adverse events. An interim 
15  
 analysis of study results may be performed and source documents void of any identifiers, may be reviewed to allow 
the DSMB  to independently judge whether the overall integrity and conduct of the protocol remain acceptable. The 
DSMB will make recommendations to the Principal Investigator that could include actions of continuation, 
modification, suspension, or termination.  
In provi ding oversight for the conduct of this study, the DSMB will meet at a minimum of every 6 (six)  months 
during the  2 (two) -year study to review all salient study information. Additional meetings may be scheduled as 
determined by the DSMB. The boundary for e xcess harm will equal  an observed excess harm which in the 
judgment of the DSMB, is excessive. All serious adverse events regardless of severity, attribution and/or 
expectedness will be reported to the DSMB   and the OSU  Institutional Review Board (IRB) in accordance with 
their reporting guidelines. The DSMB recommended actions and all pertinent regulatory information will be 
forwarded to the  Food and Drug Administration  (FDA ) appropriate Institutional Review Board(s), and Sponsor as 
appropriate.  
 
B. Medica l Device Accountability  
The devices will be  provided to  OSU  with permission to be used in this study by  Dexcom  LLC .  They are 
stored at OSU College of Nursing in a locked office dedicated to the study research team . Accountability of 
devices used will be maintained in a device accountability log that includes device identification ( transmitter 
serial number , sensor serial number , android phone serial number ), patient ID; date of initial CGM device 
placement, date of sensor replacement (if applicable), d ate range for use. Transmitter, sensor, and phone 
serial numbers will be linked to participant/patient in the study. Dummy clinical Clarity accounts will be 
created for each device/patient. Android phone set -up requires entry of individual Dexcom Clarity acco unt 
information on each phone.  The patient’s hospital identification label will be placed on the back of the 
Android phones once the device is placed to correctly match CGM device to the correct patient participant.  
CGM device orders from the manufacturer (Dexcom, LLC) will be  tacked with date of receipt and shipping 
logs.  Dexcom Expiration dates will be checked on initial receipt of items, monthly , prior to delivery to 
MICU,  and prior to  patient placement.   
 
C. Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  
 
Definition of Serious Adverse Events (SAE)  
All temporal medical events will be tracked by the study team. An adverse event (AE) or suspected adverse 
reaction is considered "serious" if, in the view of either the investigator or sponsor, it results in any of the following 
outcomes: death, a life -threatening adverse event, prolongation of existing hospitalization  or transfer to a more 
acute care environment , a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct 
normal life functions. Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or prolong  
hospitalization may be considered serious when, based  upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize 
the participant and may require medical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  
Severity of Event  
 
• Mild – Events require minimal or no treatment and do not interfere wi th the participant’s daily activities.  
• Moderate – Events result in a low level of inconvenience or concern with the therapeutic measures. 
Moderate events may cause some interference with functioning.  
• Severe – Events interrupt a participant’s usual daily a ctivity and may require systemic drug therapy or 
other treatment. Severe events are usually potentially life -threatening or incapacitating.  Of note, the term 
“severe” does not necessarily equate to “serious”.]  
Relationship to Study CGM  
Potential a dverse events (AEs) will be evaluated to determine their  relationship to study intervention assessed by 
the clinician who examines and evaluates the participant based on temporal relationship and his/her clinical 
16  
 judgment. The degree of certainty about cau sality will be graded using the categories below. In a clinical trial, the 
study product must always be suspect.  
 
• Related  – The AE is known to occur with the study intervention, there is a reasonable possibility that the 
study intervention caused the AE, or there is a temporal relationship between the study intervention and 
event. Reasonable possibility means that there is e vidence to suggest a causal relationship between the 
study intervention and the AE.  
• Not Related  – There is not a reasonable possibility that the administration of the study intervention caused 
the event, there is no temporal relationship between the study intervention and event onset, or an alternate 
etiology has been established.  
 
All AEs including local and systemic reactions not meeting the criteria for SAEs will be captured on the 
appropriate case report form (CRF). Information to be collected includes event description, time of onset, 
clinician’s assessment of severity, relationship to study product (assessed only by those with the training and 
authority to make a diagnosis), and time of resolution/stabilization of the event. All AEs occurring while on study 
must be documented appropriately regardless of relationship. All AEs will be followed to adequate resolution.  
 
Historically, few adverse events have been reported with Dexcom G6 CGM systems and have been isolated to mild 
skin irritation associated wi th the manufactures adhesive .45 
 
Any medical condition that is present at the time that the participant is screened will be considered as baseline and 
not reported as an AE. Participants are recruited from the MICU and are critically ill. Participants are not excluded 
based on the severit y of critical illness and it is not uncommon for patients to deteriorate in the natural course of 
treatment or illness. If  the study participant’s condition deteriorates for reasons related to the study intervention 
(e.g., hypoglycemia) at any time during the study, it will be recorded as an AE.  
 
Changes in the severity of an AE will be documented to allow an assessment of the duration of the event at each 
level of severity to be performed. AEs characterized as intermittent require documentation of onset a nd duration of 
each episode.  
Adverse Event Reporting  
Serious Adverse Event Reporting  
The study investigator shall complete an Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect Form and submit to the reviewing 
Institutional Review Board (IRB)  and the manufacturer  as so on as possible, but in no event later than 10 working 
days after the investigator first learns of the effect.  The study sponsor is responsible for conducting an evaluation 
of an unanticipated adverse device effect and shall report the results of such eval uation to the FDA and to all 
reviewing IRBs and participating investigators within 10 working days after the sponsor first receives notice of the 
effect. Thereafter, the sponsor shall submit such additional reports concerning the effect as FDA requests.  
D. Unanticipated Problems  
 
Definition of Unanticipated Problems (UP)  
This definition could include an unanticipated adverse device effect, any serious adverse effect on health or safety 
or any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, the CGM intervention , if that effect, 
problem, or death was not pre viously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational 
plan or application (including a supplementary plan or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem 
associated with a device that relates to the rights, safet y, or welfare of subjects (21 CFR 812.3(s)).]  
17  
 Unanticipated Problem Reporting  
The investigator will report unanticipated problems (UPs) to the reviewing Institutional Review Board (IRB) and 
to the Data Coordinating Center (DCC)/lead principal investigator (PI). The UP report will include the following 
information:  
 
An investigator shall submit to the sponsor and to the reviewing IRB a report of any unanticipated adverse device 
effect occurring during an investigation as soon as possible, but in  no event later than 10 working days after the 
investigator first learns of the effect (21 CFR 812.150(a)(1)), A sponsor who conducts an evaluation of an 
unanticipated adverse device effect under 812.46(b) shall report the results of such evaluation to the  FDA and to all 
reviewing IRB's and participating investigators within 10 working days after the sponsor first receives notice of the 
effect. Thereafter the sponsor shall submit such additional reports concerning the effect as FDA requests (21 CFR 
812.150( b)(1)).    
 
E. Study  and individual  participant  stopping  criteria:   
 
We plan to enroll  participants  in waves  of 20 with ongoing  analysis  between  waves.  We plan to stop the study  for 
the following  conditions  in consultation  with the data safety  monitoring  board  assigned  to oversee  safety  activities  
and the study:   
• Failure  to meet  initial  validation  criteria  within  24 hours  in 20% of participants  
• CGM -meter  pairs  obtained  during  routine  monitoring   following  initial  validation  without  a change  in 
clinical  status  prompting  hourly  monitoring  meeting  the following  criteria:  
o Failur e to detect  clinically  significant  hypoglycemia  ( 2 episodes):   CGM  value  >100  mg/dl  with 
no Urgent  Low Soon  alert while  POC  BG <70 mg/dl  
o Failure  to detect  severe  hyperglycemia  ( 2 episodes):   CGM  value  <180  mg/dl  when  POC  
BG >400  mg/dl  
o Inappropriate  treatment  ( 2 episodes):   CGM  value  triggers  the opposite  action  than the POC  BG 
value  (CGM  >180  mg/dl  while  POC  BG <70 mg/dl  or vice versa).  
•  2 episodes  of inappropriate  insulin  dose resulting  in clinically  significant  hypoglycemia  (glucose  
<55mg/dl)  after initial  sensor  validation   
•  2 episodes  of iatrogenic  DKA  (pH <7.3 or serum bicarbonate <15 mEq/L in the setting of elevated 
ketones) or hyperosmolar  nonketotic  state (osmolality  320mOsm/kg  with BG >600mg/dl  and pH >7.3 or 
serum bicarbonate >15 mEq/L )  
•  2 episodes  severe  adverse  events  resulting  in prolonged  hospitalization,  or other  life-threatening  
complication  that are attributed  to the study intervention  
• Any severe  adverse  event  resulting  in death,  or other  life-threatening  complication  that is attributed  to the 
study  intervention   
• Any severe  adverse  event  resulting  in prolonged  hospitalization,  or other  life-threatening  complication  that 
attributed  to the study  intervention  and is expected  to recur  
 
• Failure  to meet   
Patient  participation  in the study  will stop if any of the following  occur:   
• Failed  sensor  validation  x 2 sensors  (48 hours)  
• Transitioned  to hospice  care 
• Patient  participant  or patient’s legally authorized representative  withdraw consent  
 
 
 
 
18  
 Appendix A. Device label  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CAUTION Investigational Device. Limited by United States Federal law to investigational 
use 
Dexcom G6 Continuous Glucose Monitoring System (CGM)  
Manufacturer: Dexcom LLC, 6340 Sequence Drive  
San Diego,  CA 92121, USA  
Package contains: 1 sensor, 1 transmitter, 1 android phone  
 
Dexcom G6 CGM may fail to adequately detect high (hyperglycemia) or low (hypoglycemia) glucoses which  could 
result in adverse events including death. High dose acetaminophen (>1 gram Q6 hours) or treatment with 
hydroxyurea  may interfere  with device  accuracy.  May not be worn  during  magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),  
computerized tomography (CT) radiographic procedures, or diathermy.  
 
19  
 References  
1. FDA news release: FDA expands indication for continuous glucose monitoring system, first to 
replace fingerstick testing for diabetes treatment decisions, 2016. (Accessed March 13, 2020, 2020,  
2. Faulds ER, Jones L, McNett M, et al. Facilitators and Barrie rs to Nursing Implementation of 
Continuous Glucose Monitoring (CGM) in Critically Ill Patients With COVID -19. Endocr Pract 
2021;27:354 -61. 
3. Faulds ER, Boutsicaris A, Sumner L, et al. Use of Continuous Glucose Monitor in Critically Ill 
COVID -19 Patients R equiring Insulin Infusion: An Observational Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2021.  
4. Chow KW, Kelly DJ, Gupta R, Miller JD. Use of Continuous Glucose Monitoring to Assess 
Parenteral Nutrition -Induced Hyperglycemia in an Adult Patient With Severe COVID -19. J PEN J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 2021;45:208 -11. 
5. Davis GM, Faulds E, Walker T, et al. Remote Continuous Glucose Monitoring With a 
Computerized Insulin Infusion Protocol for Critically Ill Patients in a COVID -19 Medical ICU: Proof of 
Concept. Diabetes Care 20 21;44:1055 -8. 
6. Agarwal S, Mathew J, Davis GM, et al. Continuous Glucose Monitoring in the Intensive Care 
Unit During the COVID -19 Pandemic. Diabetes Care 2021;44:847 -9. 
7. Chow KW, Kelly DJ, Rieff MC, et al. Outcomes and Healthcare Provider Perceptions o f Real -
Time Continuous Glucose Monitoring (rtCGM) in Patients With Diabetes and COVID -19 Admitted to 
the ICU. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;15:607 -14. 
8. Gómez AM, Henao DC, Muñoz OM, et al. Glycemic control metrics using flash glucose 
monitoring and hospita l complications in patients with COVID -19. Diabetes Metab Syndr 2021;15:499 -
503. 
9. Longo RR, Elias H, Khan M, Seley JJ. Use and Accuracy of Inpatient CGM During the COVID -
19 Pandemic: An Observational Study of General Medicine and ICU Patients. J Diabetes  Sci Technol 
2021:19322968211008446.  
10. Sadhu AR, Serrano IA, Xu J, et al. Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Critically Ill Patients With 
COVID -19: Results of an Emergent Pilot Study. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:1065 -73. 
11. Faulds ER BA, Sumner L, Jone s L, McNett M, Smetana KS, May CC, Buschur E, Exline MC, 
Ringel MD, Dungan K. Use of Continuous Glucose Monitor in Critically Ill COVID -19 Patients 
Requiring Insulin Infusion: An Observational Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2021.  
12. Davis GM, Spanakis EK,  Migdal AL, et al. Accuracy of Dexcom G6 Continuous Glucose 
Monitoring in Non -Critically Ill Hospitalized Patients With Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1641 -6. 
13. Boom DT, Sechterberger MK, Rijkenberg S, et al. Insulin treatment guided by subcutaneous 
continuous glucose monitoring compared to frequent point -of-care measurement in critically ill patients: 
a randomized controlled trial. Crit Care 2014;18:453.  
14. De Block CE, Gios J, Verheyen N, et al. Randomized Evaluation of Glycemic Control in the 
Medical  Intensive Care Unit Using Real -Time Continuous Glucose Monitoring (REGIMEN Trial). 
Diabetes Technol Ther 2015;17:889 -98. 
15. Kosiborod M, Gottlieb RK, Sekella JA, et al. Performance of the Medtronic Sentrino continuous 
glucose management (CGM) system in t he cardiac intensive care unit. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 
2014;2:e000037.  
16. Krinsley JS, Bruns DE, Boyd JC. The impact of measurement frequency on the domains of 
glycemic control in the critically ill --a Monte Carlo simulation. J Diabetes Sci Technol 20 15;9:237 -45. 
17. Dungan K, Graessle K, Sagrilla C. The effect of congestive heart failure on sensor accuracy 
among hospitalized patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2013;15:817 -24. 
18. National Diabetes Statistics. Center for Disease Contro l Division of Diabetes Translation, 2020. at 
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/statistics .) 
20  
 19. American Diabetes A. 14. Diabetes Care in the Hospital: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes -
2018. Diabetes Ca re 2018;41:S144 -S51. 
20. van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Intensive insulin therapy in critically ill patients. 
N Engl J Med 2001;345:1359 -67. 
21. American Diabetes A. 15. Diabetes Care in the Hospital: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes -
2021. Diabetes Care 2021;44:S211 -S20. 
22. Clement S, Braithwaite SS, Magee MF, et al. Management of diabetes and hyperglycemia in 
hospitals. Diabetes Care 2004;27:553 -91. 
23. Moghissi ES, Korytkowski MT, DiNardo M, et al. American Association of Clinical 
Endocrinologists and American Diabetes Association consensus statement on inpatient glycemic control. 
Diabetes Care 2009;32:1119 -31. 
24. Bogun M, Inzucchi SE. Inpatient management of diabetes and hyperglycemia. Clin Ther 
2013;35:724 -33. 
25. Cardona S, Gomez PC, Vellanki P, et al. Clinical characteristics and outcomes of symptomatic 
and asymptomatic hypoglycemia in hospitalized patients with diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 
2018;6:e000607.  
26. Brod M, Christensen T, Thomsen TL, Bushnell DM . The impact of non -severe hypoglycemic 
events on work productivity and diabetes management. Value Health 2011;14:665 -71. 
27. Preiser JC, Chase JG, Hovorka R, et al. Glucose Control in the ICU: A Continuing Story. J 
Diabetes Sci Technol 2016;10:1372 -81. 
28. De Block C, Manuel YKB, Van Gaal L, Rogiers P. Intensive insulin therapy in the intensive care 
unit: assessment by continuous glucose monitoring. Diabetes Care 2006;29:1750 -6. 
29. Dexcom LLC. Dexcom G6 Continuous Glucose Monitoring System User Guide In: Dexcom 
LLC, ed. https://s3 -us-west-2.amazonaws.com/dexcompdf/G6 -CGM -Users -Guide.pdf2022 . 
30. Weiner BJ, Lewis CC, Stanick C, et al. Psychometric assessment of three new ly developed 
implementation outcome measures. Implement Sci 2017;12:108.  
31. Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous Glucose Monitoring Study G. Validation of 
measures of satisfaction with and impact of continuous and conventional glucose monitori ng. Diabetes 
Technol Ther 2010;12:679 -84. 
32. Raschke RA, Agarwal S, Rangan P, Heise CW, Curry SC. Discriminant Accuracy of the SOFA 
Score for Determining the Probable Mortality of Patients With COVID -19 Pneumonia Requiring 
Mechanical Ventilation. JAMA 202 1;325:1469 -70. 
33. Vincent JL, de Mendonca A, Cantraine F, et al. Use of the SOFA score to assess the incidence of 
organ dysfunction/failure in intensive care units: results of a multicenter, prospective study. Working 
group on "sepsis -related problems" of  the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Crit Care Med 
1998;26:1793 -800. 
34. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. The Third International Consensus Definitions 
for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis -3). JAMA 2016;315:801 -10. 
35. Sandelowski M.  Whatever happened to qualitative description? Res Nurs Health 2000;23:334 -40. 
36. Colorafi KJ, Evans B. Qualitative Descriptive Methods in Health Science Research. HERD 
2016;9:16 -25. 
37. American Diabetes A. Standards of medical care in diabetes -2015 abri dged for primary care 
providers. Clin Diabetes 2015;33:97 -111. 
38. Bergenstal RM, Garg S, Weinzimer SA, et al. Safety of a Hybrid Closed -Loop Insulin Delivery 
System in Patients With Type 1 Diabetes. JAMA 2016;316:1407 -8. 
21  
 39. Beck RW, Riddlesworth T, Ruedy  K, et al. Effect of Continuous Glucose Monitoring on 
Glycemic Control in Adults With Type 1 Diabetes Using Insulin Injections: The DIAMOND 
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2017;317:371 -8. 
40. Lind M, Polonsky W, Hirsch IB, et al. Continuous Glucose Monitor ing vs Conventional Therapy 
for Glycemic Control in Adults With Type 1 Diabetes Treated With Multiple Daily Insulin Injections: 
The GOLD Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2017;317:379 -87. 
41. Davidson MB. Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Patients With Type 1  Diabetes Taking Insulin 
Injections. JAMA 2017;317:363 -4. 
42. American Diabetes A. 6. Glycemic Targets: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes -2020. 
Diabetes Care 2020;43:S66 -S76. 
43. Vinals C, Quiros C, Gimenez M, Conget I. Real -Life Management and Effecti veness of Insulin 
Pump with or Without Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Adults with Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes Ther 
2019;10:929 -36. 
44. Beato -Vibora PI, Quiros -Lopez C, Lazaro -Martin L, et al. Impact of Sensor -Augmented Pump 
Therapy with Predictive Low -Gluc ose Suspend Function on Glycemic Control and Patient Satisfaction in 
Adults and Children with Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2018;20:738 -43. 
45. (HPRA) HPRA. Dexcom G6 Sensor. Priority 2 – Warning2021 23rd August 2021.  
 