UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         1 of 19 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSY LVANIA  
RESEARCH SUBJECT  
INFORMED CONSENT AND  HIPPA AUTHORIZATION FORM  
 
Protocol Title:   A Randomized Phase II/Genomic Trial of two 
chemotherapy regimens in patients with resected 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma  
Principal 
Investigator:  Peter O’Dwyer, MD  
Abramson Cancer Center of the University of 
Pennsylvania  
16 Penn Tower  
3400 Spruce St.  
Philadelphia, PA 19104  
215-662-7604  
Sub-Investigators:  Jeff Drebin, MD; Charles Vollmer, MD;  
Bruce Giantonio, MD; Ursina Teitelbaum, MD;  Arturo Loaiza -Bonilla, MD; Emma Furth, MD;  
James Metz, MD; Edgar Ben -Josef, MD;  
John Plastaras, MD; Grant Apisarnthanarax, MD;  
Km Reiss Binder, MD; Mark O'Hara, MD  
Emergency Contact:  24 Hour Emergency – Call 215 -662-6059  
Ask for Oncologist On -Call 
 
Why am I being asked to volunteer?  
You are being invited to participate in a research study. Your participation is voluntary 
which means you can choose whether or not you want to participate. If you choose 
not to participate, there will be no loss of benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. 
Before you can make your decision, you will need to know what the study is about, the 
possible risks and benefits of being in this study, and what you will have to do in this 
study. The research team is going to talk to you about the research study, and they will 
give you this consent form to read. You may also decide to discuss it with your family, 
friends, or family doctor. You may find some of the medical language difficult to 
understand. Please ask the study doctor and/or the research team about this form. If 
you decide to participate, you will be asked to sign this form.  
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         2 of 19 BACKGROUND  
You have been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. Treatment for pancreatic cancer 
involves surgery as well as chemotherapy (usually with a drug called Gemzar or 
gemcitabine), radiation therapy, or a combination of both (chemoradiotherapy) used 
after surgery (adjuvant therapy .  For patients like you with pancreatic cancer for whom 
surgery is an option, routine care is surgery followed by chemoradiation therapy.  
Doctors at the University of Pennsylvania, Abramson Cancer Center, are conducting a 
study looking at comparing two chemotherapy regimens given before and after chemoradiation.   All of the drugs used in this study are approved by the US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of cancer.  Both treatment regimens used in this study have been previously studied and shown to improve survival when 
comparerd to gemcitabine alone.  The first regimen is called FOLFIRINOX.  This is a regimen which includes 5 -flourouracil, leucovorin, irinotecan and oxapliplatin.  The 
other regimen being studied is gemcitabine and abrax ane.  
What is the purpose of this research study?  
The overall goal of this clinical trial is to learn which of these treatment regimens is more effective at reducing the risk of your pancreatic cancer recurring after surgery . 
This study also intends to look at blood and tissue samples to help doctors better understand who is at risk for cancer recurrence.  All patients will receive standard 
treatment for their disease: surgery followed by chemoradiation.  
How long will I be in the study? How many other people will be in the 
study?  
It is estimated that patients enrolled in this study will participate for about 6 months 
while on treatment. After you complete treatment, we will check on how you are doing by calling you or reviewing your medical record chart for the rest of your life. The study plans to enroll up to 50  patients with pancreatic cancer for whom surgery and 
chemoradiation is the recommended treatment plan.  
What am I being asked to do?  
Before you begin the study:  
You will need to have the following ex ams, tests or procedures to find out if you can be 
in the study. These exams, tests and procedures are part of routine cancer care, and may be done even if you do not join the study. These visits will occur in the outpatient clinic and will take approximat ely 30 -60 minutes.  If you have had some of these tests  
recently, they may not need to be repeated. This will be up to your study doctor and this will be discussed with you. These assessments must be done within 4 weeks of starting this study.  
  
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         3 of 19 These tests/procedures will be performed during the screening visit.  
• Review of your medical history including any medications that you may have 
taken recently or are currently taking, other medical problems you may have, and other treatments you have received fo r your cancer and how you 
responded to them.  
• Complete physical examination - including review of height/weight, blood 
pressure and heart rate  and an assessment of your ability to perform daily life 
activities (i.e. walking, house work, etc).  
• Routine blood tests - about 2 tablespoons of blood will be drawn to check for 
the following:  
o Blood cell counts (number of each type of blood cell)  
o Blood chemistry levels (to test your kidney and liver function and the minerals in your blood)  
o Tumor markers (CA19.9) : Tumo r markers are molecules occurring in blood 
or tissue that are associated with cancer and whose measurement or identification is useful in patient diagnosis or clinical management  
o Collection of one tube of blood, for research purposes only, to test for elem ents that might help predict who is at risk of disease recurrence  
• Pregnancy test - if you are a woman of child -bearing potential. A sample of 
your blood or urine will be needed to complete this test. This test must be done within 72 hours of starting the study drug. If you are pregnant, you cannot participate in this study.  
• Radiology tests – routinely used to assess your disease. These assessments may 
include a CT (computed tomography) scan, MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan, PET/CT (positron emission t omogr aphy/computed tomography) scan.  
These are routine procedures used to help doctors monitor your cancer. Your study doctor will explain these tests to you in more detail and let you know which type of scan(s) you will receive. The same type of scans wi ll be used 
throughout your participation on this study as these scans are standard of care for your disease.  
It is possible that after these tests are reviewed, you will not be able to take part in this study. There may be other reasons why you cannot participate. Your study doctor will 
discuss these with you. It is important that you answer all of the questions asked by the 
study staff honestly and completely.  
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         4 of 19 Study Treatment  
 
When all of the above tests have been completed, and if you have been found to b e 
eligible to enter this study, and you agree to participate, you will be scheduled to return 
to the clinic to begin treatment on this study.  Which treatment you receive will be 
determined by a process called randomization.  This means that you will be randomly (by chance) assigned to receive either FOLFIRINOX or gemcitabine/abraxane.  You will 
be informed of which treatment arm to which you are assigned.  If there are challenges with your insurance company, you will be offered the alternative treatment ar m.   If 
your insurance company fails to cover the cost of drugs on either arm, you will not be able to participate in this study.   
If you are randomized to receive FOLFIRINOX , treatment is as follows beginning on Day 
1 of each 2 -week treatment cycles for a total of 4 cycles or 8 weeks:  
   Oxaliplatin – 2 hour intravenous (IV, into a vein) infusion  
                 Irinotecan – 90 minute IV infusion  
                 Leucovorin – 2 hour IV infusion  
                  5Fluorouracil (5FU) – given 2 ways  
• As a quick (bolus) IV injection given by a nurse in the infusion suite through the IV tubing with a 5FU -filled syringe, followed by  
• An outpatient, 46 hour continuous IV infusion provided by a home IV infusion company.   The 5FU is delivered by a small pump worn in a 
fanny pack around the waist.   The home IV infusion company will 
arrange your disconnect at the end of the infusion.  If you do not already have one, you will need a “port” or pique line inserted into a 
vein.   
On Day 1 of each treatment cycle, you wil l be in the infusion suite for about 6 hours for 
treatment.  All drugs will be administered at standard doses and adjusted downward 
should you experience unacceptable or intolerable side effects.    
Following 8 weeks of FOLFIRINOX, you will wait at least 28 days, and then you will be referred to Radiation Oncology to receive chemoradiation as is standard of care for your disease. Doctors in Radiation Oncology will review the processes and procedures f or 
chemoradiation as well as the risks, and you will be asked to sign the University of 
Pennsylvania’s consent for chemoradiation therapy. Briefly, chemoradiation requires 
that you have a “port” or some form of IV access that allows for the continuous infusion of a drug called 5 -FU that is used to make radiation therapy even more effective. 
Radiation therapy will take 5 ½ weeks to complete. You will receive radiation therapy 5 days per week for 5½ weeks. During the time you are receiving radiation treatment  you 
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         5 of 19 will also be receiving chemotherapy daily by continuous infusion, (7 days per week) with 
the medication 5 -FU (Fluorouracil).  
After completed chemoradiation, you will repeat the 8  week s of  chemotherapy with 
FOLFIRINOX, as described above.   
 
If you a re randomized to receive gemcitabine/abraxane , treatment is as follows 
beginning on Day 1 of each 4 -week treatment cycle for a total of 2 cycles or 8 weeks:  
 
Gemcitabine – 30 minute intravenous (IV, into a vein) infusion , repeated days 8 
and 15   
  Abraxane  – 30 minute intravenous (IV, into a vein) infusion , repeated on days 8  
              and 15  
On Days 1, 8 and 15 of each treatment cycle, you will be in the infusion suite for about 
2-3  hours for treatment.  All drugs will be administered at standard doses and adjusted 
downward should you experience unacceptable or intolerable side effects.    
Following 8 weeks of gemcitabine/abraxane, you will wait at least 28 days, and then you 
will be referred to Radiation Oncology to receive chemoradiation as is standard of care for your disease. Doctors in Radiation Oncology will review the processes and procedures for chemoradiation as well as the risks, and you will be asked to sign the University of Pennsylvania’s consent for chemoradiation therapy. Briefly, chemor adiation requires that you have a “port” or some form of IV access that allows 
for the continuous infusion of a drug called 5 -FU that is used to make radiation therapy 
even more effective. Radiation therapy will take 5 ½ weeks to complete. You will receive radiation therapy 5 days per week for 5½ weeks. During the time you are receiving radiation treatment you will also be receiving chemotherapy daily by continuous infusion, (7 days per week) with the medication 5 -FU (Fluorouracil).  
After completed chemoradiation, you will repeat the 8 weeks of chemotherapy with gemcitabine/abraxane, as described above.   
 
 
Tests/Procedures:  
You will be asked to come into the clinic for tests/procedures  during the course of this 
study.  These exams, tests or procedures are part of routine cancer care for patients 
with pancreatic cancer.  In general, you will have a physical exam on day 1 of each 
treatment cycle, routine blood work every 1 -2 weeks and scans to assess your disease at 
end of treat ment and then every 4 -6 months as part of routine follow up.   
At each of these study visits you will be asked how you are feeling, if you have had any side effects, and about any medications you are taking. You must tell your study doctor about all the medications you are taking throughout your participation in this research 
study since the effects of this study drug taken with other medications are not known.
 
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         6 of 19 What are the possible risks or discomforts?  
While on the study, you are at risk for the followin g side effects. Some of these side 
effects may be potentially serious or life -threatening, and may include death. You 
should discuss these with the study doctor. There may be side effects that are currently 
not known to us. If you experience side effects from this treatment, your study doctor may delay or skip a dose of the study drug,  reduce the doses  or ask you to stop study 
treatment. Your doctors may also give you drugs to help lessen these side effects. Many side effects go away shortly after the treatment is stopped, but in some cases side 
effects can be serious, long lasting or permanent. You should talk to your study doctor 
about any side effects that you have while taking part in this study.  
Risks associated with 5 -FU: 
The following side effects are  common (occurring in greater than 30%) for patients 
taking 5 -FU: 
• Diarrhea.  
• Nausea and possible occasional vomiting.  
• Mouth sores.  
• Poor appetite.  
• Watery eyes, sensitivity to light (photophobia) . 
• Taste changes, metallic taste in mouth during infusion.  
• Discoloration along vein through which the medication is given.  
• Low blood counts.   Your white and red blood cells and platelets may temporarily 
decrease.   This can put you at increased risk for infection, anemia and/or bleeding.  
Nadir: Meaning low point, n adir is the point in time betwe en chemotherapy cycles in  
which you experience low blood counts.  
Onset:  7-10 days  
Nadir:  9-14 days  
Recovery:  21-28 days  
These side effects are less common side effects (occurring in about 10 -29%) of patients 
receiving 5 -FU:  
• Skin reactions: Dry, cracking, peeling skin.   Darkening of the skin (hyperpigmentation), 
darkening of the skin where previous radiation treatment has been given (radiation 
recall).  
• Hair thinning.  
• Nail changes - discoloration, loss of nails (rare) .  
  
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         7 of 19 • Hand -foot syndrome (Palmar- plantar erythrodysesthesia or PPE) -skin rash, swelling, 
redness, pain and/or peeling of the skin on the palms of hands and soles of feet.   Usually 
mild, starting 5 -6 weeks after start of treatment.   May require reductions in the dose of 
the medication.  
Serious adverse reactions  to 5-FU are; chest pain, EKG changes and increases in cardiac 
enzymes - which may indicate problems with the heart.   These symptoms are very rare 
but increased for patients with a prior history of heart di sease.    
 
The use of oxaliplatin in combination with 5 -FU has, in very rare cases, been associated 
with a risk of veno -occlusive disease (VOD) of the liver, a form of serious liver injury.  
Signs of VOD include enlarged liver, fluid accumulation in the abdomen and jaundice 
(yellowing of the skin and eyes). VOD can result in permanent liver damage, enlarged spleen, serious systemic hypertension (high blood pressure) and a twisting of the veins in the esophagus  (can cause bleeding, nausea, vomiting and may require surgical repair).  
 
Risks associated with Leucovorin (LV): Leucovorin is generally well tolerated with rare 
allergic reactions being the most common side effect.  LV can also cause nausea, diarrhea and mouth sores.  In rare cases, it may cause seizures or low blood calcium levels.  
 
Risks associated with Oxaliplatin :  
Oxaliplatin Infusion Related Side Effects:  
• The feeling of difficulty swallowing, shortness of breath , jaw spasm, abnormal tongue 
sensation and feeling of chest pressure.   This has been reported rarely (<5%).   It 
generally starts within hours of Oxaliplatin infusion and often occurs upon exposure to 
cold.   Avoiding exposure to cold helps to prevent this adverse reaction.   Future 
Oxaliplatin infusions may be given over a longer time frame to help reduce the 
incidence.     
The following Oxaliplatin side effects are common (occurring in greater than 30%) for 
patients taking Oxaliplatin : 
• Peripheral neuropathy  - Numbness and tingling and cramping of the hands or feet often 
triggered by cold.   This symptom will generally lessen or go away between treatments, 
however as the number of treatments increase the numbness and tingling will take 
longer to lessen or go a way.  Your health care professional will monitor this symptom 
with you and adjust your dose accordingly.  
• Nausea and vomiting   
• Diarrhea  
• Mouth sores   
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         8 of 19 • Low blood counts  - Your white and red blood cells and platelets may temporarily 
decrease.  This can put you at increased risk for infection, anemia and/or bleeding.  
• Fatigue   
• Loss of appetite  
• Shortness of breath  
• Lung disease  
• Kidney problems  
• Visual/hearing  loss 
The following are less common Oxaliplatin side effects (occurring in 10 -29%) for patients 
receiving Oxaliplatin:  
• Constipation  
• Fever  
• Generalized pain  
• Headache  
• Cough  
• Temporary increases in blood tests measuring liver function.  
• Allergic reaction: a rare side effect, however, call for help immediately if you suddenly 
have difficulty breathing, your throat feels like it is closing, or chest pain.   Other signs of 
allergic reaction include rash, hives, sudden cough, or swelling of the lips or tongue.  
 
Risks associated with irinotecan :   
The following side effects are common (occurring in greater than 30%) for patients 
taking Irinotecan:  
• Diarrhea; two types early and late forms.  
• Early diarrhea: Occurring within 24 hours of receiving drug, accompanied by  symptoms 
runny nose, increased salivation, watery eyes, sweating, flushing, abdominal 
cramping.  (This can occur while the drug is being administered.   If so, alert your 
healthcare professional promptly.   Medication can be given to stop and/or lessen this 
early side effect).  
• Late diarrhea: Occurring greater than 24 hours of receiving drug, usually peaks at about 
11 days after treatment.   Because of concerns of dehydration and electrolyte 
imbalances with diarrhea it is important to be in contact with health  care professionals 
for monitoring, and for medication and diet modifications  advice.    
• Nausea and vomiting.  
• Weakness.  
• Low white blood cell count. (This can put you at increased risk for infection).  
• Low red blood cell count (anemia).  
Nadir:  Meaning low point, nadir is the point in time between chemotherapy cycles in 
which you experience low blood counts.  
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         9 of 19 Onset:  10 days  
Nadir:  14-16 days  
Recovery:  21-28 days  
• Hair loss  
• Poor appetite  
• Fever  
• Weight loss  
These side effects are less common side  effects (occurring in about 10 -29%) of patients 
receiving Irinotecan : 
• Constipation  
• Shortness of breath  
• Insomnia (see sleep problems)  
• Cough  
• Headache  
• Dehydration  
• Chills (see flu -like symptoms)  
• Skin rash (see skin reaction)  
• Flatulence (see abdominal pain)  
• Flushing of face during infusion  
• Mouth sores  
• Heartburn  
• Swelling of feet and ankles  
 
Risks associated with Gemcitabine (also known as Gemzar) : 
The following side effects are common (occurring in more than 30%) for patien ts taking 
Gemcitabine:  
• Flu-like symptoms (muscle pain, fever, headache, chills, fatigue)  
• Fever   (within 6 -12 hours of first dose)  
• Fatigue   
• Nausea  (mild)  
• Vomiting   
• Poor appetite   
• Skin rash   
• Low blood counts .  Your white and red blood cells and platelets may temporarily 
decrease.   This can put you at increased risk for infection, anemia and/or bleeding.  
Nadir:  Meaning low point, nadir  is the point in time between chemo therapy cycles in 
which you experience low blood counts.  
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         10 of 19 Onset: none noted  
Nadir: 10 -14 days  
Recovery: day 21  
• Temporary increases in liver enzyme s  
• Blood or protein in the urine  
These are less common side effects (occurring in 10 -29%) for patients receiving 
Gemcitabine:  
• Diarrhea  
• Weakness  
• Hair loss  
• Mouth  sores  
• Difficulty sleeping  
• Shortness of breath  
• Hearing disorders   
 
Risks associated with Abraxane:  
The following side effects are common (occurring in greater than 30%) for patients 
taking Abraxane:  
• Low blood counts   (your white and red blood cells may temporarily decrease which can 
put you at increased risk for infection and/or anemia)  
• Hair loss   
• Nausea   
• Abnormal ECG (electrocardiogram)   
• Peripheral neuropathy  (numbness and tingling of hands and feet)  
• Arthralgias  and myalgias , pain in the joints a nd muscles (usually temporary occurring 2 -3 
days after Abraxane, and resolve within a few days)  
• Weakness and fatigue   
• Increases in blood tests measuring liver functio n (these return to normal once 
treatment is discontinued)  
The following are less common side effects for patients receiving Abraxane: 
• Infections   
• Diarrhea  
• Vomiting   
• Mouth sores   
• Swelling of feet or ankles   
• Shortness of breath  
• Eye problems  
 
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         11 of 19  
This lists above  include common and less common side effects for patients taking these 
drugs.   Side effects that are very rare -- occurring in less than about 10 percent of 
patients -- are not listed here.   But you should always inform your health care provider if 
you experience any unusual symptoms . 
 
Risks from the medications used along with chemotherapy  
• Before chemotherapy, you may receive dexamethasone (Decadron®) to help 
with any nausea you may experience. Dexamethasone may have any or none of 
the following side effects: increased blood sugars, elevation of blood pressure, increase in white blood cell count, difficulty sleeping, mania, hallucinati ons 
(seeing, hearing, feeling, or smelling things that do not exist), unreal thoughts and difficulty with reality.  
• You may receive loperamide to help prevent or treat diarrhea you may get from some of these chemotherapies. Loperamide may have any or none of the following side effects: fatigue, nausea, dizziness, vomiting, rash, difficulty emptying the bladder, headache, irritability, increased blood sugar, increase urine production. You may have received these medicines even if you were not 
enrolled in this  study if you decided to receive chemotherapy.  
 
Risks of Chemoradiation  
The risks of chemoradiation will be discussed with you when you meet with the 
radiation oncologist but they include:  
Risks of Radiation    
• nausea  
• stomach pain and intestinal discomfort (generally goes away 2 months after 
treatment is finished)  
• loss of appetite  
• weight loss  
• mild muscle aches in the area treated  
• hair loss  
• fatigue  
• low blood counts  
• skin rash  
• skin redness  
• inflammation of the mucous membranes, that is, painful sores in the mouth  
 
Rare but serious side effects related to the radiation include  
 
• change in liver or kidney function, which is unlikely to cause symptoms  
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         12 of 19 • bowel obstruction, resulting in abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting and may 
require surgery.  
 
• Risk of the chemotherapy (5 -FU) during the chemoradiation treatment  
 
(Occurring in >30% of patients)   
• diarrhea  
• mouth sores  
• poor appetite  
• nausea  
• possibly vomiting  
• fatigue  
• taste changes  
• low blood counts  
• watery eyes  
• eye sensitivity to light (photophobia)  
 These side effects are less common (occurring in about 10 -29%) of patients receiving 5 -
FU: 
• skin reactions such as dryness, cracking, peeling skin or darkening of the skin  
• hair thinning  
• nail changes  
• hand -foot syndrome – swelling, redness, pain and/or peeling of the skin on the 
palms of hands and soles of feet  
 
A separate consent form will be used and required for chemoradiation therapy.  
 
Risks of Blood Drawing  
Routine needle sticks for blood samples or starting IVs may cause pain, bruising, or 
infection at the site where the needle enters your body. It is also possible that you may feel lightheaded or faint.  
Reproductive Risks  
You should not become pregnant or father a child while on this study and for at least 90 days after your last dose of study treatment, because it is not known if these drugs have an effect on an unborn baby. In addition, women should not breastfeed while on this 
study as these drugs may also affect a breast -feeding child. Pregnant wom en and 
women who are breast -feeding are not allowed to participate in this study.  
Female Participants  
If you are a woman who is able to become pregnant, you will be asked to have a 
pregnancy test at the beginning of the study to determine if you are pregnant. If you are 
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         13 of 19 pregnant, you will not be able to participate in this study. You should not become 
pregnant while on this study, or for 90 days after receiving your last dose of study treatment.  
If you are able to become pregnant, you must agree to use a me dically accepted form of 
birth control during the course of this study and for at least 90 days after your final study treatment. Medically accepted forms of birth control include condoms, diaphragm, cervical cap, the placement of an intrauterine device (I UD), birth control 
pills, hormone implants or injections, OR a partner who has undergone a vasectomy (surgical sterility), OR you must agree to completely  abstain from intercourse for two 
weeks before you begin study treatment, during participation in this study, and for 90 days after your final study treatment. Abstinence at certain times of the cycle only, such as during the days of ovulation or after ovulation, and withdrawal are not  acceptable 
methods of birth control. Your study doctor must approve your form of birth control. 
Ask your study doctor about the contraceptive methods that are available and which 
might be the best for you.  
Even when you use a n approved contraceptive method, there is always a small risk that 
you could still become pregnant. If you do become pregnant during the course of this study, you must discontinue study treatment, tell the investigator immediately, and consult an obstetric ian or maternal -fetal specialist. The study doctor will also ask to 
follow -up on the pregnancy and the condition of your newborn.  
Men  
The effect of the investigational drugs on the male reproductive system (sperm) is unknown; therefore you should not father a child while participating in this study and for at least 90 days after your final study treatment. If your spouse or partner has the potential to become pregnant, you and your spouse/partner must agree to use a medically accepted form of birth con trol during the course of this study and for at least 
90 days after your final study treatment. If your partner does become pregnant, you 
must inform your study doctor immediately  
Medically accepted forms of birth control methods include condoms, diaphragm , 
cervical cap, the placement of an intrauterine device (IUD), birth control pills, hormone 
implants or injections, or surgical sterility (vasectomy). OR you must agree to completely abstain from intercourse for two weeks before you begin study treatment, during participation in this study, and for 90 days after your final study treatment. Abstinence at certain times of the month only, such as during the days of ovulation or after ovulation, or withdrawal are not acceptable methods of birth control. Your st udy doctor 
must approve your form of birth control. Ask your study doctor about the contraceptive methods that are available and which might be the best for you.  
You should also inform your partner of the potential harm to an unborn child. She should know that if a pregnancy should occur, you will need to report it to the study doctor immediately, and she should promptly notify her doctor  and consult an 
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         14 of 19 obstetrician or matern al-fetal specialist. The study doctor will also ask to follow -up on 
the pregnancy and the condition of your newborn.   For more information about risks 
and side effects, please ask your study doctor.  
What if new information becomes available about the study?  
During the course of this study, we may find more information that could be important 
to you. This includes information that, once learned, might cause you to change your mind about being in the study. We will notify you as soon as possible if such information becomes available.   A description of this clinical trial will be available on 
http://www,clinicaltrials.gov
, as required by U.S. Law. This website will not include 
information that can identify you. At most, the website will include a summary of results. You can search this websit e at any time.
 
What are the possible benefits of the study?  
Although benefit cannot be guaranteed, it is possible that your risk for recurrence of pancreatic cancer will be lessened. Also, what is learned from this study may benefit pancreatic cancer patients in the future.  
What other choices do I have if I do not participate?  
Participating in this study is completely voluntary. If you do not participate, you can still 
have chemoradiation, just chemotherapy or just radiotherapy.  
Will I be paid for being in this study?  
No, you will not be paid for participating in this clinical trial.  
Will I have to pay for anything?  
Blood samples that were identified as research samples will be paid for by the study.   All 
other tests, procedures, visits and treatments are co nsidered standard of care for your 
disease.  You and/or your health insurance will be billed for the costs of medical care 
during this study if these expenses would have happened even if you were not in the 
study, or if your insurance agrees in advance to pay. These include routine office visits, surgery, routine blood tests, gemcitabine, chemoradiation and scans to assess your disease.   All co -pays and deductibles will still apply. Please talk to your doctor and study 
team about putting you in touch with a  financial counselor to determine exactly what 
the deductible and co -pay will be for you; this is highly variable depending on type on 
insurance.    
What happens if I am injured from being in the study?  
If you have a medical emergency during the study you should go to the nearest emergency room. You may contact the Principal Investigator or Emergency contact listed on page one of this form. You may also contact your own doctor, or seek 
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         15 of 19 treatment outside of the University of Pennsylvania. Be sure to tell the doctor or his/her 
staff that you are in a research study being conducted at the University of Pennsylvania. Ask them to call the telephone numbers on the first page of this consent form for further instructions or information about your care.  
We will offer  you the care needed to treat injuries directly resulting from taking part in 
this research.  We may bill your insurance company or other third parties, if appropriate, for the costs of the care you get for the injury, but you may also be responsible for s ome of them.  
There are no plans for the University of Pennsylvania to pay you or give you other compensation for the injury.  You do not give up your legal rights by signing this form.  
If you think you have been injured as a result of taking part in this r esearch study, tell 
the person in charge of the research study as soon as possible. The researcher’s name and phone number are listed in the consent form.  
When is the Study over?  Can I leave the Study before it ends?  
Each subject’s participation is expected to last for 6 months.  Your participation is 
entirely voluntary and you are free to leave the study at any time without compromising your ongoing or future care.    
This study is expected to end after all participants have completed all visits, and all 
information has been collected. This study may also be stopped at any time by your 
physician or the Primary Investigator if it is necessary for your health or safety. S uch an 
action would not require your consent, but you will be informed if such a decision is 
made and the reason for this decision.  
 
Who can see or use my information?  How will my personal information 
be protected?  
If you decide to participate in this stu dy, the study doctor and staff will collect medical 
and personal information about you as part of completing the study. We will do our best 
to make sure that the personal information in your medical record will be kept private. However, we cannot guarantee  total privacy. Your personal information may be given 
out if required by law. If information from this study is published or presented at scientific meetings, your name and other personal information will not be used. This study is being overseen by the F ood and Drug Administration (FDA), therefore they may 
review your research records. The National Cancer Institute and associated agencies including the Cancer Immunotherapy Trials Network and the Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis may also review your research records. Please refer to the information below which explains more specifically how your personal information will be protected.  
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         16 of 19 What personal health information is collected and used in this study, and might also be 
disclosed?  
The following p ersonal health information will be collected and used for the purposes of 
this study.  
• Name, date of birth , medical 
record number  
• The history and diagnosis of your 
disease  
• Specific information about any  
treatments you received, including previous treatment(s) you may have had and your response to them  
• Information related to study visits and other tests/procedures performed while you are participating on this study.  
 • Information on side effects 
(adverse events) you may experience, and how these were treated  
• Information about other medical conditions that may affect your treatment  
• Medical data generated during this study - including physical exams, 
laboratory test results, and results of any other tests/procedures performed during the study  
While collected as  part of this study by your study doctor and study team, identifying 
information (including your name, address, telephone number, date of birth or any number/codes that will identify you [including medical record number]), will be kept as confidential as p ossible. It will not be sent outside of the University of Pennsylvania.  
You will be assigned a unique subject registration number upon enrollment. This number and your initials will be used to identify you throughout the course of this study so that your identity is protected. The key to this code (which links your name back t o 
the personal health information collected during this study) will be stored in a secure area and only the University of Pennsylvania study team will have access to this code.  
It is possible that blood samples obtained from you as part of this study may be shared with other researchers, including those at for -profit organizations, but if this occurs, no 
information identifying you will be shared with the samples.  
Why is your personal health information being used?  
Your personal contact information is impo rtant for the research team to contact you 
during the study. Your personal health information and results of tests and procedures are being collected as part of this research study, and will be used to conduct and oversee this research study, and to help guide your medical treatment.  
Which of our personnel  may use or disclose your personal health information?  
The following individuals may use or disclose your personal health information for this research study:  
• The Principal Investigator and the Investigator’s study team  
• Authorized members of the workforce of the UPHS and the School of Medicine, and University of Pennsylvania support offices, who may need to access your 
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         17 of 19 information in the performance of their duties (for example: for research 
over sight and monitoring, to provide treatment as part of this study or as part of 
your routine care, to manage accounting or billing matters, etc.). This includes members of the Institutional Review Board (IRB), an Ethics Committee at the University of Pennsy lvania who are responsible for reviewing and overseeing 
research studies to ensure that they are safe and being well managed.  
Who, outside of UPHS and the School of Medicine, might receive your personal health 
information?  
As part of the study, the Princ ipal Investigator, the study team and others listed above, 
may disclose your study -related records, including the results of the research study tests 
and procedures, to those listed below. In all disclosures outside of the University of Pennsylvania Health  System and School of Medicine, you will not be identified by name, 
medical record number, address, telephone number, or any other direct personal 
identifier unless disclosure of the direct identifier is required by law. In records and 
information disclose d outside of the University of Pennsylvania Health System and 
School of Medicine, you will be assigned a unique code number.  
Individuals or organizations responsible for supporting this study:  
• Funding from the state of Pennsylvania will be used to provide  support for this 
study.   
• Other funding may be made available from the Abramson Cancer Center  
 
Regulatory and safety oversight organizations  
• The Food and Drug Administration  
• DHHS (Department of Health and Human Services)  
• Other regulatory agencies and/or t heir designated representatives in the United 
States and other countries  
• The Cancer Center’s Data Safety and Monitoring Committee  
Once your personal health information is disclosed to others outside of UPHS or the 
School of Medicine, it may no longer be co vered by federal privacy protection 
regulations.  
The Principal Investigator or study staff will inform you if there are any additions to the 
list above during your active participation in the trial. Any additions will be subject to University of Pennsylvania procedures developed to protect your privacy.  
How long may UPHS and the School of Medicine be able to use or disclose your personal 
health information?  
Your authorization for use of your personal health information for this specific study does  not expire. If you sign this form, we will collect your health information until the 
end of the research study. We may collect some information from your medical records even after you finish taking part in this study. We will keep all of the information forever in case we need to look at it again. We will protect this information and keep it confidential.  
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         18 of 19 Your information may be held in a research database. However, UPHS and the School of 
Medicine may not re -use or re -disclose information collected in th is study for a purpose 
other than this study unless:  
• You have given written authorization to do so  
• The University of Pennsylvania’s Institutional Review Board grants permission 
after ensuring that appropriate privacy safeguards are in place  
• As permitted by  law 
The data from this study may be published in the medical literature; however you will not be personally identified in any publication.  Your identity will remain confidential unless disclosure is required by law.  
Can you change your mind?  
You have the  right to withdraw your permission for the use of your personal health 
information, but if you do so, you must stop taking part in this study. You must do so in 
writing to the Principal Investigator at the address on the first page. Even if you 
withdraw your permission, your personal health information that was collected before we received your written request may still be used and disclosed, as necessary for the study. If you withdraw your permission to use your personal health information, you will also b e withdrawn from the research study and no new information will be collected.  
Will you be able to access your research records?  
You have the right to see and get a copy of your medical records kept by the University of Pennsylvania. However, you will not b e able to review or receive some of your 
records related to the research study until after the entire study has been completed.  
By signing this document you are permitting the UPHS and the School of Medicine to use and disclose personal health information collected about you for research purposes as described above.  
What is an Electronic Medical Record?  
An Electronic Medical Record (EMR) is an electronic version of the record of your care 
within a health system. An EMR is simply a computerized version of a paper medical 
record.  
 
I
f you are receiving care or have received care within the University of Pennsylvania 
Health System (UPHS) (outpatient or inpatient) and are participating in a University of Pennsylvania research study, results of research
-r
elated procedures (i.e. laboratory 
tests, imaging studies and clinical procedures) may be placed in your existing EMR maintained by UPHS.  
 I
f you have never received care within UPHS and are participating in a University of 
Pennsylvania research study that uses U PHS services, an EMR will be created for you for 
the purpose of maintaining any results of procedures performed as part of this research study. The creation of this EMR is required for your participation in this study. In order to create your EMR, the study team will need to obtain basic information about you that 
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017
UPCC  03213  
 
 
Version 02-18-2016         19 of 19 would be similar to the information you would provide the first time you visit a hospital 
or medical facility (i.e. your name, the name of your primary doctor, the type of insurance you have). Res ults of research procedures performed as part of your 
participation in the study (i.e. laboratory tests, imaging studies  
and clinical procedures) may be placed in this EMR.  
 Once placed in your EMR, these results are accessible to appropriate UPHS workforce members that are not part of the research team. Information within your EMR may also be shared with others who are determined by UPHS to be appropriate to have access to your EMR (e.g. health insurance company, disability provider, etc).  
 
Who can  I call with questions, complaints or if I’m concerned about my 
rights as a research subject?  
If you have questions, concerns or complaints regarding your participation in this research study or if you have any questions about your rights as a research subject, you should speak with the Principal Investigator listed on page one of this form. If a member of the research team cannot be reached or you want to talk to someone other than 
those working on the study, you may contact the Office of Regulatory Affairs with any 
question, concerns or complaints at the University of Pennsylvania by calling (215)  898-
2614.  
When you sign this form, you are agreeing to take part in this research study. This 
means that you have read the consent form, your questions have been answered, and 
you have decided to volunteer. Your signature also means that you are permitting the 
University of Pennsylvania to use your personal health information collected about you for research purposes within our institution. You are also allowing the University of 
Pennsylvania to disclose that personal health information to outside organizations or 
people involved with the operations of this study.  
A copy of this consent form will be given to you.  
 
__________________________        ____________________________________  
Name of Subject (Please Print)  Signature of Subject              Date  
 
__________________________        ____________________________________  
Name of Person Obtaining   Signature                                   Date  
Consent (Please Print)  
 
IRB Approved from: 03/10/2016 to: 01/07/2017