 
IRB #101091 / Page 1 of 4  
Research Narrative 
(Version date 1Jan18)  
Study Title : Stereotactic Hypofractionated Radiotherapy of the Prostate  
 
Principal Investigator :  Geoffrey Weinstein, MD  
 
Explain the research project according to the outline below.  Be sure to complete all sectio ns – for the research to be 
conducted at Sharp HealthCare do not refer reviewer to attached protocol. If you build your research narrative from this 
template please delete all of the instructional directions given.  
 
Explanation/Purpose:  
Please provide a pr ecise statement of the purpose of this research and the hypotheses that serve as the basis for this research.  
Specific aims may be used if they clearly define the purpose and intent of the proposed research.  
 
External beam radiation therapy for prostate cancer, while effective, takes up to 9 weeks to deliver on a 
Monday through Friday basis.  Recent phase I/II studies out of Seattle and Palo Alto using stereotactic guidance to deliver high doses of radiation to the prostate over a 1 to 2 week period of tim e suggest that 
outcomes may be equal or superior to standard approaches (1,2).  These data, combined with markedly improved convenience for patients, make radiosurgery for early -stage prostate cancer an enticing option.  
The goal of this study is to offer a radiosurgical option to patients within the Sharp system under the umbrella of an IRB -approved study.  
 
 
Background and Significance : 
Please provide a succinct discussion of relevant background information and the rationale for the current study.  Appropr iate 
references should be included.  Please provide a summary of results obtained by others pertinent to this project.  Appropriat e 
references should be included.  
 
Use this section to provide an account of the Principal Investigator's previous or preliminary studies pertinent to this application and/or any information that will help to establish the experience of the principal investigator to pursue the proposed projec t.  If 
this is an extension of a previous project (by this researcher or another), please reference past research project(s) along with the IRB number, and summarize findings pertinent to this project.  
 
Radiobiology of prostate cancer indicates a low alpha/beta ratio which is suggestive of relative 
radioresistence (1,2).  One way to overcome ra dioresistence using standard daily doses is to increase the 
dose given each day and to shorten the overall duration of theapy.  This also is attractive from a patient standpoint, since the entire treatment can be done in one week rather than the traditiona l 8 to 9 weeks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB #101091 / Page 2 of 4 Research Design and Methods:  
Describe the research design and the procedures to be used to accomplish the specific aims 
of the project.  Define in clear terms exactly what will be done to the human subjects, including data to be collec ted or samples to be taken.  Be sure to indicate which procedures 
are part of the routine care and which are experimental.  Provide a precise description of the planned data collection, data analysis plan and anticipated study results.  This should include  criteria for determining statistical significance and sample size.  
 
All patients used in the study would have been referred to the Radiation Oncology department for standard 
consultation for a newly -diagnosed prostate cancer.  During the course of the ini tial consultation the patients 
will be given various options depending on their tumor characteristics.  If appropriate they would also be given the option of being treated on- protocol using the stereotactic body radiosurgery approach.   
 Inclusion criteria  include male gender of any age (typically 50 to 70 y/o) with a low risk disease.  This is 
defined as a Gleason’s score of 7 or less, clinical stage of T2a or less, and a PSA of less than or equal to 15. No patients with prior surgery or radiotherapy will be included.  
 Prostate localization will be accomplished each fraction using cone beam CT scanning  Micromultileaf collimation will be used to shape the radiation field and either VMAT technique or static field IMRT technique will be employed to maximize d ose conformality and limit dose to normal tissues, especially 
rectum and bladder.  Patients will be immobilized using vacuum -assisted devices. A rectal balloon will be 
used to minimize motion of prostate gland during each treatment.  
 Dose will be delivered  every other day at a 7 Gy/fraction for a total of 5 fractions. The Stanford data (DVH) 
on normal tissue tolerance will be used as a guideline for treatment planning (1).   We anticipate that each fraction will take approximately 30- 45 minutes.  
 A data col lection sheet (see attached) will be used for each patient.  This will summarize acute and late 
toxicity to the GU and GI systems based on the RTOG definitions.  In addition, the efficacy of treatment will be monitored.  Since this is not a randomized tria l there will be no need for a p- value or sample size 
determination but we anticipate accruing 20 patients. We expect a 1 -year biochemical control rate greater 
than 90%.
 
 
   
Protected Health Information (PHI)  
If the use of PHI is a necessary component of th is research, please list the information 
needed, who will be accessing the information, and via what process (i.e., Health 
Information Department, Electronic Record, Paper Record, etc.).   If PHI will be accessed, used or disclosed prior to or without individuals’ authorization (i.e., for recruitment, assessment of eligibility, or for studies where a waiver of informed consent is being 
requested), an explanation of who will access the PHI, what PHI will be used/disclosed, 
 
IRB #101091 / Page 3 of 4 where from or how the PHI is obtained, and the start and end dates (or timeframe) for the 
use/disclosure of the PHI.    
We will not be accessing PHI prior to having the patient enroll in the study.  All information used to follow 
efficacy and toxicity outcomes will be accrued after enrollment by one of the IRB -approved investigators 
and will therefore be implicitly approved by the study subject. 
 
 
Potential Risks:  
Describe and assess any potential or known risks - physical, psychological, social, legal or 
other, and assess their likelihood a nd seriousness.  Where appropriate, describe alternative 
treatments and procedures that might be advantageous to the subjects.  
 
The risks of radiosurgical approach are similar to those from standard radiotherapy in the sense of acute and 
chronic toxicity t o bladder, rectal and erectile function.  Our initial experience at Palomar suggests that 
acute toxicity, especially to the bladder, is less with the radiosurgery.  Stanford found higher rates of grade 3 toxicity with qd fractionation (38%) but this decrea sed to 0% with the qod approach.  Urinary frequency, 
nocturia, dysuria, rectal urgency, tenesmus, and rectal bleeding will all be managed aggressively in the same way as is done with patients undergoing standard 36- 40 fractions.  
 
Risk Management/Confidentiality:  
Describe the procedures for protecting against or minimizing any potential risks, including 
risks to confidentiality, use or disclosure of protected health information, and assess their 
likely effectiveness.  Where appropriate, discuss provisions for ensuring medical or professional intervention in the event of adverse effects to the subject.  Also, where appropriate, discuss the provisions for monitoring the data collected to ensure the safety of 
subjects.  
 
Only the listed investigators will be part icipating in data analysis and the data sheet will be kept in a locked 
physician’s office at all times so confidentiality should be well protected.  Patients’ treatment information is 
protected as per Sharp Healthcare policies.  
 
Potential Benefits:  
Discuss  potential benefits to be gained by the individual subject, as well as those benefits 
that may accrue to society in general.  If there is no direct benefit to the subject, this must be 
stated.  
 
Protocol participants will benefit from the significantly decr eased treatment time (5 fractions over 1 ½ 
weeks rather than 39 fractions over 8 weeks) while experiencing equivalent or superior outcomes to 
traditional XRT.  We expect toxicity to be similar to fully -fractionated courses of therapy.  
 
 
 
IRB #101091 / Page 4 of 4 Expense to Subject:  
If the research activity involves the possibility of added expense to the subject (longer 
hospitalization, additional tests, blood draws, etc.) indicate how this will be handled.  In cases where the FDA has authorized the drug or device company to charge the patient for 
the experimental drug or device, a copy of the authorization letter from the FDA must 
accompany the application.    
 
The radiosurgical approach will not be offered unless we receive authorization from the patient’s insurance 
company.  We ant icipate that coverage will be provided without difficulty with most insurance plans.  For 
those where coverage is an issue, enrollment on a national protocol may be necessary to ensure approval.  
  
REFERENCES  
 
1. King Christopher et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: 
interim results of a prospective phase II clinical trial. International Journal of 
Radiation Oncology Biology and Physics , 73(4) 1043- 1048.  
2. Madsen Berit et al.  Stereotactic hypofractionated accurate radiotherapy of the 
prostate (SHARP), 33.5 Gy in five fractions for localized disease: first clinical trial 
results. IJROBP , 67(4) 1009- 1105.  
3. Mantz et al. A phase II tiral of trilogy -based prostate SBRT: initial report of 
favorable acute toxicity outcomes. IJROBP , 69(3), S334.  
4. Olsen CC et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) vs. high -dose 
brachytherapy (HDR) as hypofractionated radiation therapy for prostate cancer: a 
comparison of achievable tumor and normal tissue tolerances. IJROBP  69(3), S383.  
5. Boike T et al. Intra -fraction and inter -fraction prostate motion associated with 
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) and image guided radiation therapy (IGRT). IJROBP  69(3) S355.  
6. Hara et al. Hypofractionated stereotactic radiotherapy for prostate cancer: early resul ts. IJROBP  66(3), S324.  
7. Pawlicki T et al. Investigatoin of linac -based image -guided hypofractionated prostate 
treatment. IJROBP  63(2) S518.  
8. Wiegner et al. Sexual function after stereotactic body radiotherapy for prostate cancer: results of a prospective clinical trial. IJROBP  (in press).  
9. Buyyounouski M et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for primary management of 
early -stage, low-  to intermediate -risk prostate cancer: report of the American society 
for therapeutic radiology and oncology emerging technolog y committee. IJROBP  
76(5) 1297- 1304.  
 