STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1SYNOPSIS 5
2INTRODUCTION 7
2.1 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 7
2.2 BENEFITS AND RISKS TO SUBJECTS 7
3OBJECTIVES AND ENDPO INTS 8
3.1 OBJECTIVES , HYPOTHESES ,AND ESTIMANDS 8
3.2 CO-PRIMARY ENDPOINTS 10
3.3 RANKED SECONDARY ENDPOINTS 10
3.4 NON-RANKED SECONDARY EFFICACY ENDPOINTS 10
3.5 OTHER ENDPOINTS 11
3.6 SAFETY ENDPOINTS 11
3.7 PHARMACOKINETIC AND IMMUNOGENICITY ENDPOINTS 12
4INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 12
4.1 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN 12
4.2 DISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN 18
5STUDY ACTIVITIES 19
5.1 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 19
5.2 CONTRACEPTION RECOMMENDATIONS 23
5.3 PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS AND THERAPY 24
5.4 PRIOR AND CONCOMITANT THERAPY 25
5.5 WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS AND DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY 26
5.6 FOLLOW-U P AFTER SUBJECT DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY DRUG OR FROM STUDY 27
5.7 STUDY DRUG 28
5.8 RANDOMIZATION /DRUG ASSIGNMENT 29
5.9 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 29
5.10 EUCTR PUBLICATION POLICY 29
6SAFETY CONSIDERATION S 30
6.1 COMPLAINTS AND ADVERSE EVENTS 30
Page 2 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.2 INDEPENDENT DATA MONITORING COMMITTEE 34
6.3 ANAPHYLAXIS ADJUDICATION COMMITTEE 34
7STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE 35
7.1 STATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 35
7.2 DEFINITIO N FOR ANALYSIS POPULATIONS 35
7.3 HANDLING POTENTIAL INTERCURRENT EVENTS FOR THE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY ENDPOINTS 35
7.4 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR EFFICACY 35
7.5 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR SAFETY 36
7.6 INTERIM ANALYSIS 36
7.7 MULTIPLICITY ADJUSTMENT AND OVERALL TYPE I ERROR CONTROL 37
7.8 SAMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION 37
8ETHICS 38
8.1 INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE /INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD 38
8.2 ETHICAL CONDUCT OF THE STUDY 38
8.3 SUBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 39
9SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM CO MPLETION 39
10DATA QUALITY ASSURAN CE 39
11COMPLETION OF THE ST UDY 40
12REFERENCES 40
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. IDENTITY OF INVESTIG ATIONAL PRODUCT 28
TABLE 2. SUPPLEMENTAL ADVERSE EVENTS ECRFS 33
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. PART 1 SCHEMATIC 13
FIGURE 2. PART 2 SCHEMATIC 15
Page 3 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.FIGURE 3. PART 3 SCHEMATIC 16
FIGURE 4. PART 4 SCHEMATIC 17
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS 41
APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 44
APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES 45
APPENDIX D. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE 46
APPENDIX E. SUMMARY OF CHANGES 52
APPENDIX F. OPERATIONS MANUAL 54
Page 4 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2INTRODUCTION
2.1 Background and Rationale
Risankizumab is a humanized monoclonal Antibody (Ab) of the immunoglobin G1 subclass directed 
towards interleukin (IL) -23p19.  The Ab has been engineered to reduce Fcγ receptor and complement 
binding and potential charge heterogeneity.  Risankizumab binds with high affinity to human IL -23.
Positive results were observed from 4 pivotal Phase 3 clinical trials that evaluated risankizumab 
compared with ustekinumab, placebo, and adalimumab for the treatment of adult patients with 
moderate to severe plaque psori asis (Ps).  Results from these pivotal studies demonstrated that 
risankizumab is highly effective for the treatment of Ps, meeting co -primary endpoints of achieving at 
least a 90% improvement in the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI 90) and static Ph ysician's Global 
Assessment (sPGA) score of clear or almost clear (0 or 1) versus comparator or placebo at Week 16 
across all 4 studies.1
Why Is This Study Being Conducted?
There is an unmet medical need for effective treatments in pediatric patients with chronic plaque Ps 
who are candidates for systemic therapy.  This study will evaluate the pharmacokinetics (PK), safety, and 
efficacy of risankizumab in subjects with moderate to severe plaque Ps from 6 to less than 18 years of 
age.
2.2 Benefits and Risks to Subjects
In Phase 3 studies of risankizumab in patients with Ps, the majority of subjects receiving risankizumab 
achieved 90% improvement of their disease, and risankizumab was well tolerated.  As with many 
immune modulating agents, risankizumab may impair immune function, resulting in a risk of infection.  
This will be monitored by collection of all adverse events (AEs) during the treatment and observation 
periods.  In addition, subjects with active systemic infection or clinically important infection will not be 
included in the study.
Subjects with a positive QuantiFERON® -tubercul osis (TB) (or interferon gamma release assay [IGRA] 
equivalent)/TB skin test result for TB must fulfill entry criteria as specified in Section 5.1ofthis protocol.  
Interleukin -23 inhibition is not known to increase the risk of TB infection or impair the response to TB 
infection in animal models.
Published literature indicates that inhibition of IL- 23 is unlikely to i ncrease the risk for cancer.  
Expression of IL -23 is increased in human tumors.4-6  Moreover, preclinical data have demonstrated a 
beneficial effect of IL -23 p19 inhibition in animal models, both for pre -existing and tumor -induction 
models.7  While there is not enough clinical inf ormation at this time to rule out a risk of cancer with 
risankizumab, this risk is considered small.
Although rare, a potential for hepatic AEs is under constant surveillance by sponsors and regulators.  
Therefore, this study requires timely detection, eva luation, and follow -up of laboratory alterations in 
selected liver laboratory parameters to ensure subjects' safety.
Page 7 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Potential Increases in major adverse cardiovascular (major adverse cardiac event) events, including 
myocardial infarction (MI), cerebrovasc ular accident, and cardiovascular death, reported initially with 
anti-IL-12/23 agents have not been observed in longer term studies with risankizumab.
Local reactions to subcutaneously administered biologic therapies are usually limited to redness, 
swellin g, or induration at the injection site.  Manifestations of systemic hypersensitivity reactions 
include anaphylaxis, pruritus, hypotension, and respiratory distress.  Both local and systemic 
hypersensitivity reactions are readily detectable, transient in na ture, and manageable with standard 
medical treatment.  Subjects will be closely monitored during study drug administration.  An 
independent Anaphylaxis Adjudication Committee (AAC) will adjudicate observed systemic 
hypersensitivity and anaphylactic events.   The AAC will remain blinded to treatment allocation 
(Section 6.3).
In conclusion, the benefit -risk profile of risankizumab is considered appropriat e for this stage of clinical 
development.8  Based on data from the integrated safety analyses, risankizumab is safe and 
well -tolerated and demonstrates a favorab le benefit -risk profile.
As this is the first study to use risankizumab in patients under the age of 18, specific risks for this 
population have yet to be identified; however, no significant risks are expected as planned dosing will be 
equivalent to the adult efficacious dose that is considered safe and well -tolerated.  Due to potential 
immunological issues in very young children, it was determined that children under the age of 6 should 
not be included in this study.
For further details on the safety profile of risankizumab, please see findings from completed studies 
including safety data in the current Investigator's Brochure (IB).1
In view of the coronavirus disease of 2019 (COVID -19) pandemic, the benefit -risk profile of various 
immunomodulatory therapies on COVID -19 is being evaluated bas ed on real world and clinical trial data.  
At this time, the effects of risankizumab on the course of COVID -19 are not well defined.
3OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
3.1 Objectives, Hypotheses, and Estimands
The objective of this study is to evaluate the PK, safety, a nd efficacy of risankizumab in subjects from 
6to less than 18 years of age with moderate to severe plaque Ps.
Primary Efficacy
The primary efficacy objective is to assess the rate of subjects who achieve a) PASI 75 (defined as at least 
75% improvement fro m baseline in PASI) and b) sPGA clear or almost clear (0 or 1) (US only: and 
≥ 2grade improvement from baseline) at Week 16 of initial treatment with study drug based on the 
Intent -to-Treat (ITT) population (as defined in Section 7.2).
There are no statistical hypotheses corresponding to the co -primary efficacy objectives as efficacy will 
be assessed descriptively, providing estimates with confidence intervals without performing statistical 
testing.
Page 8 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The estimands corresponding to the co -primary efficacy objectives are defined as follows for Part 1, 
Part 3, and Part 4:
Percentage of subjects achieving at least 75% reduction in PASI (PASI 75) from Baseli ne at 
Week 16 of initial treatment with risankizumab without the use of rescue medication and 
regardless of premature discontinuation of study drug in the ITT population
Percentage of subjects achieving sPGA clear or almost clear (0 or 1) (US only: and ≥ 2grade 
improvement from baseline) at Week 16 of initial treatment with risankizumab without the use 
of rescue medication and regardless of premature discontinuation of study drug in the ITT 
population
The estimands corresponding to the co -primary efficacy objectives are defined as follows for Part 2:
Difference in the percentage of subjects achieving at least 75% reduction in PASI (PASI 75) from 
Baseline at Week 16 of initial treatment with risankizumab compared to ustekinumab without 
the use of rescue med ication and regardless of premature discontinuation of study drug in the 
ITT population
Difference in the percentage of subjects achieving sPGA clear or almost clear (0 or 1) (US only: 
and ≥ 2grade improvement from baseline) at Week 16 of initial treatmen t with risankizumab 
compared to ustekinumab without the use of rescue medication and regardless of premature 
discontinuation of study drug in the ITT population
Secondary Efficacy
The secondary efficacy objectives are to assess the rate of subjects who ac hieve the ranked secondary 
endpoints specified in Section 3.3below in the ITT population.
There are no statistical hypotheses corresponding to the se condary efficacy objectives as efficacy will be 
assessed descriptively, providing estimates with confidence intervals without performing statistical 
testing.
The estimands corresponding to the secondary efficacy objectives are defined as follows for Part 1, 
Part 3, and Part 4:
Percentage of subjects achieving at least 90% reduction in PASI (PASI 90) from Baseline at 
Week 16 of initial treatment with risankizumab without the use of rescue medication and 
regardless of premature discontinuation of study drug i n the ITT population
Percentage of subjects achieving 100% reduction in PASI (PASI 100) from Baseline at Week 16 of 
initial treatment with risankizumab without the use of rescue medication and regardless of 
premature discontinuation of study drug in the IT T population
The estimands corresponding to the secondary efficacy objectives are defined as follows for Part 2:
Difference in the percentage of subjects achieving at least 90% reduction in PASI (PASI 90) from 
Baseline at Week 16 of initial treatment with risankizumab compared to ustekinumab without 
Page 9 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.the use of rescue medication and regardless of premature discontinuation of study drug in the 
ITT population
Difference in the percentage of subjects achieving 100% reduction in PASI (PASI 100) from 
Baseline at Week 16 of initial treatment with risankizumab compared to ustekinumab without 
the use of rescue medication and regardless of premature discontinuation of study drug in the 
ITT population
Percentage of subjects achieving sPGA clear or almost clear (0 or 1) (US only: and ≥ 2grade 
improvement from baseline) at Week 0 and Week 16 of the re -treatment phase in Part 2 with 
risankizumab without the use of rescue medication and regardless of premature discontinuation 
of study drug in the ITT population
Rescue medication for the purposes of this analysis will be considered any systemic (oral or parenteral) 
medication used specifically for the treatment of psoriasis .
3.2 Co-primary Endpoints
Achievement of PASI 75 (defined as at least 75% improvement from baseline in PASI) at 
Week 16 of initial treatment
Achievement of sPGA clear or almost clear (0 or 1) at Week 16 of initial treatment (US only: and 
≥ 2grade improvement from baseline)
3.3 Ranked Secondary Endpoints
Achievement of PASI 90 (defined as at least 90% improvement from baseline in PASI) at 
Week 16 of initial treatment
Achievement of PASI 100 (defined as 100% improvement from baseline in PASI) at Week 16 of 
initial treatment
Achievement of sPGA clear or almost clear (0 or 1) (US only: and ≥ 2grade improvement from 
baseline) at Week 0 and Week 16 of the re -treatment phase in Part 2
3.4 Non-ranked Secondary Efficacy Endpoints
Achievement of PASI 50 (defined as at least 50% improvement from baseline in PASI) at 
Week 16 of initial treatment
Achievement of PASI 50 (defined as at least 50% improvement from baseline in PASI) at Week 0 
and Week 16 of the re -treatment phase in Part 2
Achievement of PASI 90 (defined as at least 90% improvement from baseline in PASI) at Week 0 
and Week 16 of the re -treatment phase in Part 2
Achievement of PASI 100 (defined as 100% improvement from baseline in PASI) at Week 0 and 
Week 16 of the re -treatment phase in Part 2
Page 10 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Achievement of a PASI 75 (defined as at least 75% improvement from baseline in PASI) at 
Week 0 and Week 16 of the re -treatment phase in Part 2
Change in Children's Dermatology Life Quality Index (CDLQI) from Week 0 to Week 16 of initial 
treatment in Part 2
Change in CDLQI from Wee k 0 to Week 16 of re -treatment phase of Part 2
Change in Family Dermatology Life Quality Index (FDLQI) from Week 0 to Week 16 of initial 
treatment in Part 2
Change in FDLQI from Week 0 to Week 16 of re -treatment phase of Part 2
Change in Itch Numerical Rating Scale (Itch NRS) from Week 0 to Week 16 of initial treatment in 
Part 2
Change in Itch NRS from Week 0 to Week 16 of re -treatment phase in Part 2
Achievement of ≥ 4-point improvement from baseline in the Itch Numerical Rating Scale (in 
patients with Baseline score ≥4) at Week 16 of initial treatment in Part 2.
3.5 Other Endpoints
Achievement of PASI 75 at Week 12 during the treatment or withdrawal period of Part 2
Achievement of sPGA clear or almost clear (0 or 1) at Week 12 during the treatment or 
with drawal period of Part 2
Achievement of PASI 50/75/90/100 at all other visits collected
Achievement of sPGA clear (0) at all other visits collected
Achievement of sPGA clear or almost clear (0 or 1) at all other visits collected
Change in Itch Numerical Rat ing Scale (Itch NRS) at each study visit from Week 0
Achievement of ≥ 4-point improvement from baseline in the Itch Numerical Rating Scale (in 
patients with baseline score ≥ 4) at each study visit in Part 2
Change in CDLQI at each study visit from Week 0
Change in FDLQI at each study visit from Week 0
3.6 Safety Endpoints
Treatment emergent adverse events (TEAEs)
Serious adverse events (SAEs)
Areas of safety interest (ASI)
TEAEs leading to discontinuation
Vital signs and laboratory tests (hematology, chemistry , and urinalysis)
Page 11 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.7 Pharmacokinetic and Immunogenicity Endpoints
Serum risankizumab concentrations, antidrug antibody (ADA), and neutralizing antibody (nAb) will be 
determined at the visits indicated in the Study Activities Table ( Appendix D).
Serum risankizumab concentrations will be summarized at each timepoint by cohort using descriptive 
statistics.  Population PK analyses combining the data from thi s study and other studies may be 
performed.  Relationships between risankizumab exposure and efficacy or safety variables of interest 
may be explored.
The number and percentage of subjects (i.e., incidence) with positive ADA and nAb will be summarized 
by cohorts and study visits.  Anti -drug Abs titers will be tabulated for each subject by regimen at the 
respective study visits.  The effect of immunogenicity on risankizumab exposure, efficacy, and/or safety 
variables may be explored.
4INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan
The study consists of 4 parts, each with distinct patient populations.  Further details regarding study 
procedures are in the Operations Manual.  See Section 5for information regarding eligibility criteria.
Subjects who initially do not meet all eligibility criteria for the study may be permitted to repeat the 
Screening Visit one time following re -consent.  There is no minimum period of time that a subject must 
wait prior to the repeat Screening Visit.  The subject must meet all eligibility criteria on the repeat 
Screening Visit in order to qualify for the study.  A repeat of all screening procedures i s needed at this 
repeat Screening Visit with these exceptions:
If the repeat Screening Visit is within 30 days of the initial Screening Visit, clinical laboratory 
parameters assessed as normal at the initial Screening Visit do not need to be repeated at th e 
repeat Screening Visit
If the subject had a complete initial screening evaluation, including the assessment of an 
Interferon -Gamma Release Assay (IGRA; QuantiFERON TB Gold In Tube test) or a purified 
protein derivative (tuberculin) (PPD) test (or equival ent), and electrocardiogram (ECG), these 
tests do not need to be repeated at the repeat Screening Visit if they were completed within 
90days since the initial Screening Visit.
Part 1
Part 1 will be a sentinel (open -label) cohort of 12 adolescents (age 12 to less than 18 years) with severe 
disease.  At least 1 subject with a body weight less than 50 kg at baseline will be enrolled in Part 1 to 
ensure good representation of the lower body weight range.  Subjects will undergo PK sampling for 
16weeks and con tinue treatment until Week 40 (subjects will receive mg risankizumab 
subcutaneously [SC] at Weeks 0, 4, 16, 28, and 40).  A follow -up call will take place 20 weeks after the 
last dose of study drug (Week 40) if the subject does not enroll into Study M19- 973, the open -label 
Page 12 of 107 

STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.non-responders (sPGA ≥ 2) and subjects initially randomized to ustekinumab will enter Period B and will 
receive risankizumab every 12 weeks until Week 40 in order to collect additional safety information for 
risankizumab.  Risankizumab responders (sPGA =0 or 1) will enter Period B and will be re -randomized 
(1:1) to receive no medication until a disease flare or risankizumab every 12 weeks until Wee k 40.  
Subjects randomized to the withdrawal arm in Period B who experience a disease flare on or after 
Week 28 will enter Re -Treatment Period C to receive risankizumab at Weeks 0 and 4 of the 16 -week 
re-treatment period.  Randomization and re -randomizatio n will not be stratified due to the small sample 
size.
For subjects initially randomized to risankizumab in Period A, study duration will be up to approximately 
81 weeks:
Screening period of up to 35 days
Period A:  16 -week treatment period (dosing at Weeks 0 and 4)
Period B:  maximum of 36 -week treatment or withdrawal period
Risankizumab non -responders:  risankizumab dosed at Weeks 16, 28, and 40
Risankizumab responders:  either no treatment or risankizumab dosed at Weeks 16, 28, 
and 40
Period C:  16 -week re- treatment period if a disease flare occurs in subjects randomized to the no 
treatment group
The follow -up call with take place 20 weeks after the last dose of study drug unless the subject 
enrolls into Study M19 -973, the OLE study.
For subjects initially randomized to ustekinumab, study duration will be up to approximately 65 weeks:
Screening period of up to 35 days
52-week treatment period (16 weeks on ustekinumab followed by risankizumab with the last 
dose at Week 40)
The follow -up call will take place 20 weeks after the last dose of study drug unless the subject 
enrolls into Study M19 -973, the OLE study.
Subjects who complete either the Week 52 visit for those in Period B or 16 weeks of the re -treatment 
Period C have the option to enroll into Study M19 -973, the OLE study.
A schematic of Part 2 is shown in Figure 2.
Page 14 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.4.2 Discussion of Study Design
Choice of Control Group
In study Part 2, an active control group is used to assess efficacy and safety of risankizumab compared 
with an approved produ ct for the same indication.  Ustekinumab (Stelara®) is a human IL -12 and 
-23antagonist indicated for the treatment of moderate to severe plaque Ps.9
Appropriateness of Measurements
Standard statistical, clinical, and laboratory procedures will be utilize d in this study.  All efficacy 
measurements in this study are standard for assessing disease activity in subjects with plaque Ps.  All 
clinical and laboratory procedures in this study are standard and generally accepted.
Suitability of Subject Population
Pediatric subjects 6 through < 18 years of age with plaque Ps who meet all inclusion criteria and who do 
not meet any of the exclusion criteria are eligible for this study.  The specific subject population chosen 
was based on knowledge that IL -23 is involve d in the pathogenesis of Ps in the adult population.  Data 
from adult studies have shown that risankizumab is effective and well tolerated in the adult Ps 
population.  This study is intended to confirm safety and efficacy in pediatric subjects as well as t o 
identify the most appropriate dose based on subject weight.
Selection of Doses in the Study
Due to the similarity between children and adults in disease pathophysiology and the mechanism of 
action of risankizumab, the objective of dose selection in this study is to approximate a dose based on 
body weight in pediatric patients with plaque Ps to be equivalent to the adult exposure at the approved 
efficacious therapeutic dose of  mg SC at Week 0, 4, and every 12 weeks thereafter.  A population PK 
model of risankizumab identified body weight as the primary covariate and therefore body weight 
range -based dosing has been selected for this study.10  The population PK model was also used to 
identify a balance between maximizing the best approximate with adult exposure and minimizing 
complexity of dosing schemes.  Further rationale by study part is provided below.
Selection of doses for Part 2 and Part 3 is based on PK modeling from Part 1.  Subjects who weigh 
≥40kg will receive mg risankizumab, while subjects who weigh < 40kg will receive mg 
risankizumab.
During the conduct of the study, if any subject initially assigned to the lower dose of risankizumab has a 
recorded weight ≥40kg at a dosing visit, they w ill receive the standard risankizumab dose ( mg).
Part 1
The main objective of Part 1 is to evaluate the PK and safety of the proposed risankizumab pediatric 
dose based on extrapolation from adult data.  According to an adalimumab study in pediatric pat ients 
with Ps (Study M04 -717),11the median body weight of adolescent patients (age 12 to less than 18 years) 
was 59 kg with a minimum to maximum range of 38 kg to 108 kg.  This largely overlaps with the body 
weight range observed in t he risankizumab adult Phase 3 studies in Ps (38.5 kg to 193 kg) and supports 
the use of the same adult therapeutic dose of  mg risankizumab in Part 1 of this study without a 
Page 18 of 107 

STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.specific body weight cutoff.  Data collected up to Week 16 from subjects in Par t 1 will be useful for PK 
assessments and to guide dose selection for Parts 2 and 3.
Part 2
The risankizumab doses to be administered in Part 2 have been determined by the first 16 weeks of data 
from Part 1 and are mg for subjects who weigh ≥ 40kg and mg for subjects who weigh < 40kg.
Part 3
Similar to Part 1, the main objective of Part 3 is to evaluate PK and safety of the selected risankizumab pediatric doses in the 6 to < 12 -year -old patients based on extrapolation from adult data as well as th e 
available data from Part 1 of the study.  Due to the lower body weight in many of the younger patients compared with adult patients, body weight ranges will be used to determine the dose.  The doses to be administered in Part 3 have been determined by th e first 16 weeks of data from Part 1 and are mg 
for subjects who weigh ≥40kg and mg for subjects who weigh < 40kg.
Part 4
The doses to be administered in Part 4 have been determined by an updated population PK data analysis from Parts 1 -3 and are mg for subjects who weigh ≥ 40kg and mg for subjects who weigh 
<40kg.
During Parts 2, 3, and 4 of the study, the body weight measured prior to each dose administration will be used to determine the dose for each subject, with the exception of the doses administered at or prior 
to Week 4 in Part 3, when the baseline body weight will be used to determine the dose.
The target exposures at these doses will be within the range of the risankizumab exposures evaluated as 
safe and well -tolerated in ad ult programs across multiple indications.
5STUDY ACTIVITIES
5.1 Eligibility Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria in order to be included in the study.  Anything other than a positive response to the questions below will result in exclusion from study participation.
Consent
1.Subject's parent or legal guardian must voluntarily sign and date an informed consent , 
approved by an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB), prior to the initiation of any screening or study -specific procedures.  Subject will be included in all 
discussions to obtain verbal or written assent.
Page 19 of 107
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Demographic and Laboratory Assessments
2.Subject is judged to be in good general health, as determined by the investigator b ased upon 
the results of a medical history, physical examination, laboratory profile, and a 12 -lead ECG 
performed during the Screening period.
3.Subject is male or female, 6 to < 18 years old:
Parts 1 and 2:  ages include 12 to < 18 years at the time of enrollment; 
Parts 3 and 4:  ages include 6 to < 12 years at the time of enrollment.
4.Laboratory values meeting the following criteria within the screening period prior to the 
first dose of study drug:
Serum aspartate transaminase and se rum alanine transaminase ≤ 2 × upper limit of normal;
Serum total bilirubin ≤ 2.0 mg/dL; except for subjects with isolated elevation of indirect 
bilirubin related to Gilbert syndrome;
Total white blood cell count ≥ 3,000/µL;
Absolute neutrophil count ≥1,500/µL;
Platelet count ≥100,000/µL;
Hemoglobin ≥ 10 g/dL.
5.Subject is willing and able to comply with procedures required in this protocol and is not an 
employee of the sponsor and/or study site or a family member of an employee.
Disease/Condition Activity
6.Diagnosis of chronic plaque Ps for at least 6 months before the Baseline Visit.
7.Subject must be a candidate for systemic therapy as assessed by the investigator and meet 
the following disease activity criteria at both t he Screening and Baseline Visits:
Part 1:  Subject has severe disease defined as ≥ 20% body surface area (BSA) Ps involvement 
with sPGA score of 4; OR ≥ 10% BSA Ps involvement that includes facial or genital areas with 
sPGA score of 4; OR PASI ≥ 20;
Part 2:  Subject has moderate to severe disease defined as ≥ 10% BSA Ps involvement with 
sPGA score of ≥ 3 or PASI ≥ 12;
Part 3:  Subject has severe disease defined as ≥ 20% BSA Ps involvement with sPGA score of 
4; OR ≥ 10% BSA Ps involvement that includes facial or genital areas with sPGA score of 4; 
OR PASI ≥ 20;
Part 4:  Subject has moderate to severe disease defined as ≥ 10% BSA Ps involvement with 
sPGA score of ≥ 3 or PASI ≥ 12;
8.Subject must be a candidate for the treatment with ustekinumab according to local label. For 
Japan, this includes subjects ≥ 15 years old.
Subjects in Part 2 age < 15 years should meet the safety requirements of the local label.
Page 20 of 107
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Subject History
9.Subject must not have a history of clinically significant (per investigator's judgment) drug or 
alcohol abuse within the last 6 months.
10.Subject must not have a history of an allergic reaction or significant sensitivity to 
constituents of the study drug (and its excipients) and/or other products in the same class.
11.No history of:
Erythrodermic Ps, generalized or localized pustular Ps, medication -induced or medication-
exacerbated Ps, or new onset guttate Ps;
Active skin disease other than Ps that could interfere with the assessment of Ps;
Clinically significant (per investigator's judgment) drug or alcohol abuse within the last 
6months;
An allergic reaction or hypersensitivity to a biologic agent or its excipients;
A latex allergy;
An organ transplant that requires continued immunosuppression;
Any malignancy except for successfully treated non-melanoma skin cancer or localized 
carcinoma in situ of the cervix
12.No evidence of the following medical diseases or disorders:
Hepatitis B (HB) (hepatitis B virus [HBV]) or hepatitis C (hepatitis C virus [HCV]) infection, 
defined as
HBV:  Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBs antigen) positive (+) test or detected sensitivity 
on the HBV DNA polymerase chain reaction qualitative test for subjects who are HB core 
Ab (HB core Ab) positive (+) (and for HB surface Ab [HBs Ab] positive [+] subjects where 
mandated by local requirements);
HCV:  hepatitis C virus RNA detectable in any subject with ant i-hepatitis C virus 
antibody;
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), defined as confirmed positive anti -HIV antibody (HIV 
Ab) test.  Note:  In case a screened subject has a confirmed positive HIV Ab test, eligibility criterion 2 regarding good general health criteria should be selected in the electronic case 
report form (eCRF) as the reason for screening failure;
COVID -19: In subjects who test positive for COVID -19, at least 5 days have passed since a 
positive test result in asymptomatic patients. Subjects with mild/ moderate COVID -19 
symptoms can be enrolled if fever- free without use of antipyretics for 24 hours and 
improvement of other symptoms or 5 days have passed since the positive test result (whichever comes last). Subjects may be rescreened if judged to be in good general health, as determined by the investigator based on medical history and physical examination. 
Active TB:  For subjects with latent TB, pl ease see the Operations Manual for details;
Active systemic infection/clinically important infection during the last 2 weeks prior to Baseline Visit as assessed by the investigator.
Page 21 of 107
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Genetic deficiency in IL -12/IL- 23;
Active or suspected malignancy;
Recent (within past 6 months) cerebrovascular accident or MI;
Major surgery performed within 12 weeks prior to randomization or planned during the 
conduct of the study.
13.Subject does not have concurrent clinically significant medical conditions other t han the 
indication being studied or any other reason that the investigator determines would interfere with the subject's participation in this study, would make the subject an unsuitable candidate to receive study drug, or would put the subject at risk by participating in the study.
14.Subject has an updated immunization schedule according to local immunization guidelines
Contraception
15.For all females of child- bearing potential; a negative serum pregnancy test at the Screening 
Visit an d a negative urine pregnancy test at baseline prior to the first dose of study drug.
16.Female subjects of childbearing potential must practice at least 1 protocol -specified method 
of birth control , that is effective from Study Day 1 through at least 140 days (20 weeks or as 
guided by the local drug label, whichever is longer) after the last dose of study drug (local practices may require 2 methods of birth control).  Female subjects of non -childbearing 
potential do not need to use birth control.
17.Female subjects may not be pregnant, breastfeeding, or considering becoming pregnant 
during the study or for approximately 140 days (20 weeks or as guided by the local drug label, whichever is longer) after the last dose of study drug.
Concomitant Medications
18.Subject must not have received any live viral or bacterial vaccine except non -replicating live 
vaccines (e.g., JYNNEOS monkeypox vaccine) within 4 weeks prior to the first dose of study drug or expect the need for live vaccination during study participation including at least 140 days (20 weeks or as guided by the local drug label, whichever is longer) after the last dose of study drug.
19.Subject has not had any previous exposure to risankizumab (all study parts ) or ustekinumab 
(study Part 2).
20.Subject must not have been treated with any investigational drug within 30 days or 
5half-lives of the drug (whichever is longer) prior to the first dose of study drug or is currently 
enrolled in another interve ntional clinical study.
Page 22 of 107
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.2 Contraception Recommendations
Contraception Requirements for Females
Subjects must follow the following contraceptive guidelines as specified:
Females, Non -Childbearing Potential
A female who is considered of non- childbearing potential does not need to use birth control 
during or following study drug treatment.
Premenopausal female with permanent sterility or permanent infertility due to one of the 
following:
Permanent sterility due to a hysterectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, b ilateral 
oophorectomy;
Non -surgical permanent infertility due to Mullerian agenesis, androgen insensitivity, or 
gonadal dysgenesis; investigator discretion should be applied to determining study entry 
for these individuals.
Premenarchal female
Females who have not experienced menarche (at least one menstrual period).
(Note:  If the childbearing potential changes after start of the study [e.g., a 
premenarchal female participant experiences menarche], the participant must discuss 
this with the investigator, w ho should determine if a female participant must begin a 
highly effective method of contraception.  If reproductive status is questionable, 
additional evaluation should be considered.)
Females, of Childbearing Potential
Females of childbearing potential mu st avoid pregnancy while taking study drug(s) and for 
at least 140 days (20 weeks or as guided by the local risankizumab or ustekinumab label (if 
approved), whichever is longer) after the last dose of study drug.
Females must commit to one of the following methods of birth control:
Combined (estrogen and progestogen containing) hormonal birth control (oral, 
intravaginal, transdermal, injectable) associated with inhibition of ovulation initiated at 
least 30 days prior to study Baseline Day 1.
Progestogen -only hormonal birth control (oral, injectable, implantable) associated with 
inhibition of ovulation initiated at least 30 days prior to study Baseline Day 1.
Bilateral tubal occlusion/ligation (can be via hysteroscopy, provided a 
hysterosalpingogram confirms success of the procedure).
Intrauterine device.
Intrauterine hormone -releasing system.
Vasectomized sexual partner(s) (the vasectomized partner should have received medical 
assessment of the surgical success and is the sole sexual partner of the trial part icipant).
Page 23 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Practice true abstinence, defined as:  Refraining from heterosexual intercourse when 
this is in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject (periodic abstinence 
[e.g., calendar, ovulation, symptothermal, post -ovulation methods] and withdrawal are 
not acceptable).
If required per local practices, male or female condom with or without spermicide OR cap, diaphragm or 
sponge with spermicide should be used in addition to one of the birth control methods listed above 
(excluding true abst inence).
Contraception recommendations related to use of concomitant therapies prescribed should be based on 
the local label.
5.3 Prohibited Medications and Therapy
Prohibited medications and therapy are defined as using the following prohibited concomitant Ps
treatments within the specified timeframe prior to Baseline Visit and throughout the study.
1.Any systemic biologic therapy (other than the study drug);
2.Systemic non -biologic therapy for Ps, including but not limited to cyclosporine, corticosteroids, 
methotrexate, oral retinoids, apremilast, and fumaric acid derivatives within 4 weeks;
3.Phototherapy treatment, laser therapy, tanning booth, or extended sun exposure that could 
affect disease severity or interfere with disease assessments within 4 weeks;
4.Topical Ps treatments, including but not limited to corticosteroids, anthralin, calcipotriene, 
topical vitamin D derivatives, retinoids, urea, alpha -or beta-h ydroxyl acids, and medicated 
shampoos (for example those that contain > 3% salicylic acid, corticosteroids, coal tar or vitamin 
D3 analogues) within 2 weeks;
Exception:  Subjects are allowed to use bland (containing no Ps treatment) emollients and 
shampoos and/or low potency topical corticosteroids (US Class 6 -7) on the palms, soles, 
face, inframammary area, and groin only.  In areas where available topical corticosteroids 
are not easily identified by United States (US) Class, a list of acceptable low pot ency topical 
corticosteroids will be provided to sites.
5.Treatment with an experimental non -biologic for Ps within 4 weeks or five half -lives of the drug 
(whichever is longer);
6.Treatment with an experimental biologic for Ps within 12 weeks or five half-lives of the drug 
(whichever is longer);
7.Live attenuated vaccines (except non -replicating live vaccines (e.g., JYNNEOS monkeypox 
vaccine) are NOT allowed during the study and including up to 140 days (20 weeks or as guided 
by local drug label (if appr oved), whichever is longer) after the last dose of study drug.  
Examples of live attenuated vaccines include but are not limited to the following:
Bacille Calmette -Guérin;
Zoster vaccine live (Zostavax);
Page 24 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Measles -mumps -rubella or measles mumps rubella varic ella;
Monovalent live attenuated influenza A (intranasal);
Oral polio vaccine;
Rotavirus;
Seasonal trivalent live attenuated influenza (intranasal);
Smallpox;
Oral typhoid vaccine;
Varicella (chicken pox);
Yellow fever;
Dengue (Dengvaxia®) .
5.4 Prior and Conc omitant Therapy
Stable doses of concomitant therapies for chronic conditions, for which neither the condition nor the 
treatment are judged to exclude the patient from participation, are permissible.  Concomitant therapies 
should not be administered with th e intent to treat Ps or have demonstrated efficacy for the treatment 
of Ps (except for permitted low -potency topical corticosteroids).  All concomitant medications should be 
carefully evaluated by the investigator, and the clinical monitor should be contac ted when there are 
questions regarding concomitant medications.
Any medication or vaccine (including over -the-counter or prescription medicines, vitamins, and/or 
herbal supplements) that the subject has received from 4 weeks prior to screening or receives during 
the study must be recorded along with the reason for use; date(s) of administration, including start and 
end dates; and dosage information including dose, route, and frequency on the appropriate electronic 
case report form (eCRF).
A detailed history of all prior biologic use needs to be documented in the source notes and captured in 
the EDC.
Any questions regarding concomitant or prior therapy should be raised to the AbbVie emergency 
contact.  Information regarding potential drug interactions with ri sankizumab can be located in the 
risankizumab IB.
Subjects must be able to safely discontinue any prohibited medications (including biologics) 5 half -lives 
or 4 weeks prior to initial study drug administration.  Subjects must be consented for the study prior to 
discontinuing any prohibited medications for the purpose of meeting study eligibility.
Non -live vaccines may be administered during screening or treatment period, if not contraindicated or 
medically inappropriate.
When possible, fir st dose of study drug should be given at least ±7 days from non -live SARS -CoV-2 
vaccine administration.  The potential impact of risankizumab on SARS -CoV-2 vaccination is unknown.  
Page 25 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The decision to receive a locally available non -live vaccine should be bas ed on local guidance and an 
individual discussion between the treating physician and the subject and/or guardian.
5.5 Withdrawal of Subjects and Discontinuation of Study
A subject may voluntarily withdraw or be withdrawn from the study at any time for reasons including, 
but not limited to, the following:
The subject or the subject's parent or legal guardian requests withdrawal from the study.
The investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject.
Clinically significant abnormal laboratory results or AEs, which rule out continuation of the study 
drug, as determined by the investigator or the AbbVie Therapeutic Area Medical Director 
(TAMD).
Subject is non -compliant with TB prophylaxis (if applicable) or develops active TB at any time 
during the stud y.
Malignancy, except for localized NMSC or carcinoma in -situ of the cervix, where discontinuation 
is at the discretion of the Investigator.
The subject becomes pregnant while on study drug.
Eligibility criteria violation was noted after the subject starte d study drug and continuation of 
the study drug would place the subject at risk.
Introduction of prohibited medications or dosages and continuation of the study drug would 
place the subject at risk.
Subject is significantly noncompliant with study procedures, which would put the subject at risk 
for continued participation in the trial.
Post -Baseline occurrence of one or more of the following hepatic test abnormalities (confirmed 
on a second separate sample at least 48 hours apart):
ALT (alanine aminotransferase) or AST (alanine aminotransferase) > 8 × ULN (upper limit of 
normal);
ALT or AST > 5 × ULN for more than 2 weeks;
ALT or AST > 3 × ULN and Total Bilirubin > 2 × ULN or international normalized ratio [INR] 
>1.5;
ALT or AST > 3 × ULN with t he appearance of fatigue, nausea, vomiting, right upper quadrant 
pain or tenderness, fever, rash, and/or eosinophilia (> 5%).
Subjects who meet any of the above criteria should be evaluated for an alternative etiology of 
the ALT or AST elevation and manage d as medically appropriate.  If applicable, the alternative 
etiology should be documented (in the eCRF if reported as an AE).  If ALT or AST values return to 
the normal reference range or its Baseline value, study drug may be restarted.  If restarting 
stud y drug, documentation should include reason that rechallenge is expected to be safe.  If 
after clinically appropriate evaluation, no alternative etiology for ALT or AST elevation is found 
Page 26 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.or the ALT or AST elevation has not resolved or is not trending down toward normal, the subject 
should be discontinued from study drug.
For subjects to be considered lost to follow -up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain 
information on the subject's final status.  At a minimum, 2 telephone calls must be made and 1 certified 
letter must be sent and documented in the subject's source documentation.
AbbVie may terminate this study prematurely, either in its entirety or at any site.  The investigator may 
also stop the study at his/her site if he/she has safety concerns.   If AbbVie terminates the study for 
safety reasons, AbbVie will promptly notify the investigator.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modification
During the COVID -19 pandemic, it has been necessary to employ mitigation strategies to enable the 
investigator to ensure subject safety and continuity of care.  Acceptable mitigation strategies are 
identified and included in the Operations Manual in Appendix F.
The investigator should contact the sponsor medical contact before discontinuing a subject from the 
study for a reason other than described in protocol to ensure all acceptable mitigation steps have been 
explored.
Refer to the Operations Man ual in Appendix Ffor details on how to handle study activities/procedures.
Interruption/Discontinuation of Study Drug Due to COVID -19 Infection
Durin g the study drug dosing period, for a subject with confirmed (viral test positive) or suspected 
COVID -19 infection, the timing of next administration of study drug or possibility of premature 
discontinuation would be at the discretion of the investigator. Follow subsequent protocol Section 5.6
for subjects who discontinued study drug.
5.6 Follow -Up After Subject Discontinuation of Study Drug or from 
Study
Discontinuation of Study Drug and Continuation of Study Participation
To minimize missing data for efficacy and safety assessments, subjects who prematurely discontinue 
study drug treatment should continue to be followed for all regularly scheduled visits, unless the subject 
has decided to discontinue the study participation entirely (withdrawal of informed consent).  Subjects 
should be advised on the continued scientific importance of their data even if they discontinue 
treatment with study drug early.
Premature Discontinuation of Study (Withdrawal of Informed Consent)
If a subject prematurely discontinues study participation (withdrawal of informed consent), the 
procedures outlined for the Premature Discontinuation visit (PD visit) should be completed as s oon as 
possible, preferably within 2 weeks.
In addition, if subject is willing, a follow -up phone call 140 days (20 weeks) after the last dose of study 
drug may be completed to ensure all treatment -emergent AEs/serious adverse events (SAEs) have been 
Page 27 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.resol ved.  The 140 -day (20 week) follow -up phone call following the last dose of risankizumab study 
drug during the trial will not be required for any subject who initiates commercially available 
risankizumab after completion of the study Completion Visit or PD visit or enters Study M19- 973, the 
OLE study.
If a subject withdraws from study follow up or withdraws permission for the collection of their personal 
data, the study staff may still use available public records to obtain information about survival status
only, as appropriate per local regulations.
5.7 Study Drug
Information about the study drug used in this study is presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Identity of Investigational Product
Study Drug Dosage Form StrengthRoute of 
Administration Manufacturer
Risankizumab 
(ABBV -066)Solution for 
injection in pre -
filled syringe mg/ mL Subcutaneous 
injectionAbbVie
Risankizumab 
(ABBV -066)Solution for 
injection in pre -
filled syringemg/ mL Subcutaneous 
injectionAbbVie
Ustekinumab Solution for 
injection in pre -
filled syringe45 mg/0.5 mL Subcutaneous 
injectionJanssen
Ustekinumab Solution for 
injection in vial45 mg/0.5 mL Subcutaneous 
injectionJanssen
AbbVie will not supply drug other than risankizumab and ustekinumab.
Open- label risankizumab and ustekinumab will be packaged in quantities sufficient to accommodate 
study design.  Each kit will be labeled per local requirements and this label must remain affixed to the 
kit.  Upon receipt, study drug should be kept in the original packaging and stored as specified on the 
label in a secure, limited -access storage area.  Each kit will contain a unique kit num ber.
This kit number is assigned to a subject via interactive response technology (IRT) and encodes the 
appropriate study drug to be dispensed at the subject's corresponding study visit.  All blank spaces on 
the label will be completed by the site staff pr ior to dispensing to subjects.  Study drug will only be used 
for the conduct of this study.
Page 28 of 107 

STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.8 Randomization/Drug Assignment
All subjects will be assigned a unique identification number by the IRT at the screening visit.  For 
subjects who rescreen, the screening number assigned by the IRT at the initial screening visit should be 
used.
Study Parts 1, 3, and 4 are open -label single arm and all subjects will receive the same dose exposure 
equivalent based on body weight (Parts 3 and 4) and the same frequenc y of study drug.
For Part 2 only, the IRT will assign a randomization number that will encode the subject's treatment 
group assignment in Period A according to the randomization schedule generated by the statistics 
department at AbbVie.  For subjects re -randomized in Period B of Part 2, the IRT will assign a separate 
randomization number that will encode the subject's treatment group assignment in Period B according 
to a separate randomization schedule generated by the statistics department at AbbVie.  Randomization 
for Period A will be done in a 2:1 ratio of risankizumab vs. ustekinumab.  The re -randomization ratio of 
continued treatment with risankizumab vs. no treatment for Period B will be 1:1. Randomization and 
re-randomization will not be stratified due to the small number of subjects.
The blinded efficacy assessor must be independent from all other study activities.  The efficacy assessor 
will remain blinded to each subject's treatment, clinical laboratory results, and all subject safety data 
during th e course of the study.
5.9 Protocol Deviations
AbbVie does not allow intentional/prospective deviations from the protocol except when necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects.  The investigator is responsible for complying with all 
protocol requirements, written instructions, and applicable laws regarding protocol deviations.  If a 
protocol deviation occurs (or is identified, including those that may be due to the COVID -19 pandemic), 
the investigator is responsible for notifying IEC/IRB, reg ulatory authorities (as applicable), and AbbVie.
5.10 EU CTR Publication Policy
AbbVie as the sponsor has proprietary interest in this study. Authorship and manuscript composition will 
reflect joint cooperation between multiple investigators and sites and spon sor personnel. Authorship 
will be established prior to the writing of the manuscript. As this study involves multiple centers, no 
individual publications will be allowed prior to completion of the final clinical study report of the 
multicenter study except as agreed with the sponsor.
The sponsor will comply with the requirements for publication of study results. In accordance with 
standard editorial and ethical practice, the sponsor will generally support publication of multicenter 
studies only in their ent irety and not as individual site data.
Investigators are NOT employed by the organization sponsoring the study. There is an agreement 
between investigators and the sponsor (or its agents) that restricts the investigator's rights to discuss or 
publish study results after the study is completed.
Page 29 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.AbbVie requests that any investigator or institution that plans on presenting/publishing results, provide 
written notification of their request 60 days prior to their presentation/publication. AbbVie requests 
that no presentation/publication will be instituted until 12 months after a study is completed or after 
the first presentation/publication, whichever occurs first. A delay may be proposed for a 
presentation/publication if AbbVie needs to secure patent or proprieta ry protection.
6SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Complaints and Adverse Events
Complaints
A complaint is any written, electronic, or oral communication that alleges deficiencies related to the 
physical characteristics, identity, quality, purity, potency, durability, r eliability, safety, effectiveness, or 
performance of a product/device.  Complaints associated with any component of this investigational 
product must be reported to AbbVie.
Product Complaint
A product complaint is any complaint related to the biologic or d rug component of the product or to the 
medical device component(s).
For a product this may include, but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, labeling discrepancies/inadeq uacies in the 
labeling/instructions (e.g., printing illegible), missing components/product, device damage or not 
working properly, or packaging issues.
Product complaints concerning the investigational product and/or device must be reported to AbbVie 
withi n 24 hours of the study site's knowledge of the event.  Product complaints occurring during the 
study will be followed up to a satisfactory conclusion.
Medical Complaints/Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
An AE is defined as any untoward medical oc currence in a subject or clinical investigation subject 
administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with 
this treatment.  An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal 
(investigational) product, whether or not the event is considered causally related to the use of the 
product.
Such an event can result from use of the drug as stipul ated in the protocol or labeling, as well as from 
"special situations" as accidental or intentional overdose, medication error, occupational or accidental 
exposure, off -label use, drug abuse, drug misuse, or drug withdrawal, all which must be reported 
whet her associated with an AE or not.  Any worsening of a pre -existing condition or illness is considered 
an AE.  Worsening in severity of a reported AE should be reported as a new AE.  Laboratory 
abnormalities and changes in vital signs are considered to be A Es only if they result in discontinuation 
from the study, necessitate therapeutic medical intervention, and/or if the investigator considers them 
to be AEs.
Page 30 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The investigators will monitor each subject for clinical and laboratory evidence of AEs on a routin e basis 
throughout the study.  All AEs will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion.
An elective surgery/procedure scheduled to occur during a study will not be considered an AE if the 
surgery/procedure is being performed for a pre -existing condition and/ or the surgery/procedure has 
been pre planned prior to study entry.  However, if the pre- existing condition deteriorates unexpectedly 
during the study (e.g., surgery performed earlier than planned), then the deterioration of the condition 
for which the ele ctive surgery/procedure is being done will be considered an AE.
If an AE, whether associated with study drug or not, meets any of the following criteria, it is to be 
reported to AbbVie clinical pharmacovigilance or contract research organization (as appropriate) as an 
SAE within 24 hours of the site being made aware of the SAE (refer to Section 4.3 of the Operations 
Manual for reporting details and contact information):
Death of Subject An event that results in the death of a subject.
Life-Threatenin g An event that, in the opinion of the investigator, would have 
resulted in immediate fatality if medical intervention had not been 
taken.  This does not include an event that would have been fatal if it 
had occurred in a more severe form.
Hospitalization or 
Prolongation of 
HospitalizationAn event that results in an admission to the hospital for any length 
of time or prolongs the subject's hospital stay.  This does not include 
an emergency room visit or admission to an outpatient facility.
Congenital Ano maly An anomaly detected at or after birth, or any anomaly that results in 
fetal loss.
Persistent or Significant 
Disability/IncapacityAn event that results in a condition that substantially interferes with 
the activities of daily living of a study subject.  Disability is not 
intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
significance such as headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, 
and accidental trauma (e.g., sprained ankle).
Page 31 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Important Medical Event 
Requiring Medical or Surgical 
Intervention to Prevent 
Serious OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately 
life-threatening or result in death or hospitalization but based on 
medical judgment may jeopardize the subject and may require 
medical or surgical inte rvention to prevent any of the outcomes 
listed above (i.e., death of subject, life -threatening, hospitalization, 
prolongation of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity).  Additionally, any elective or 
sponta neous abortion or stillbirth is considered an important 
medical event along with any suspected transmission of an 
infectious agent via a medicinal product if no other serious criterion 
is applicable.  Examples of such events include allergic 
bronchospasm r equiring intensive treatment in an emergency room 
or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in 
inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.
All AEs reported from the time of study drug administratio n until 140 days (20 weeks) after 
discontinuation of study drug administration will be collected, whether solicited or spontaneously 
reported by the subject.  In addition, study procedure -related serious and non- serious AEs will be 
collected from the time the subject signs the study -specific informed consent.
The following definitions will be used for Serious Adverse Reactions (SAR) and Suspected Unexpected 
Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR):
SAR Defined as all noxious and unintended responses to an Investiga tional Medicinal 
Product (IMP) related to any dose administered that result in an SAE as defined 
above.
SUSAR Refers to individual SAE case reports from clinical trials where a causal 
relationship between the SAE and the IMP was suspected by either the sponsor 
or the investigator, is unexpected (not listed in the applicable Reference Safety 
Information [RSI]) and meets one of the above serious criteria.
AbbVie will be responsible for SUSAR reporting for the IMP in accordance with global and local 
requirements , including reporting to Eudravigilance database in accordance with EU Clinical Trial 
Regulation 536/2014.
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special interest that may 
indicate a trend or risk to subjects.
Areas of Safety Interest/Safety Topics of Interest
Subjects will be screened and monitored throughout the study for A reas of Safety interest (ASI)/Safety 
Topics of Interest.  Screening procedures are outlined in the Activity Schedule ( Appendix D).  In 
consideration of the ASI, the following supplemental eCRF(s) must be completed if AEs in any of the 
following areas are reported during the study ( Table 2).
Page 32 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Reasonable 
PossibilityAfte r consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic plausibility, 
clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is sufficient evidence 
(information) to suggest a causal relationship.
No Reasonable 
PossibilityAfter consideratio n of factors including timing of the event, biologic plausibility, 
clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is insufficient evidence 
(information) to suggest a causal relationship.
Pregnancy
While not an AE, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site 
becomes aware of the pregnancy.  Subjects who become pregnant during the study must be 
discontinued (Section 5.5).  If a pregnancy occurs in a study subject, information regarding the 
pregnancy and the outcome will be collected. The pregnancy outcome of an elective or spontaneous 
abortion, stillbirth or congenital anomaly is considered an SAE and must be reported to AbbVie within 
24 hours after the site becomes aware of the event.
6.2 Independent Data Monitoring Committee
An external DMC will review safety data throughout the course of the study.
A separa te DMC charter will be prepared outside of the protocol and will describe the roles and 
responsibilities of the DMC members, frequency and triggers of data reviews, and relevant safety data 
to be assessed.  Unblinded ASI events will be presented to the DMC for review on a periodic basis.
6.3 Anaphylaxis Adjudication Committee
While no concerns with anaphylaxis/systemic hypersensitivity have been identified with the use of 
risankizumab, the sponsor has established an independent, blinded, expert committee to adj udicate 
events of anaphylaxis based on pre -specified definitions.  This independent external AAC will adjudicate 
suspected anaphylactic reactions and will remain blinded to treatment allocation.  The event terms to 
be adjudicated and the adjudication proce ss are detailed in the AAC Charter.  A supplemental 
Hypersensitivity Reactions Signs and Symptoms eCRF will be used to collect information pertinent to the 
events.  In addition, the site may be contacted for additional source documentation.
If a suspected systemic hypersensitivity reaction occurs at the investigative site, in addition to testing 
tryptase and histamine levels, pharmacokinetic and ADA/nAb samples should also be collected.  If a 
systemic hypersensitivity reaction such as anaphylaxis is observe d or reported while the subject is not at 
the investigative site, every effort should be made to obtain tryptase and histamine levels from the 
treating facility to help better characterize the diagnosis.
Page 34 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE
7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
The statistical methods provided in this protocol will be focused on primary and secondary analyses.  
Complete and specific details of the statistical analysis will be described and fully documented in the 
Statistical Analys is Plan (SAP).
7.2 Definition for Analysis Populations
The Intent to Treat (ITT) Population in each study part includes all enrolled subjects from Parts 1, 3, and 
4, and all randomized subjects from Part 2.  The ITT Set will be used for all efficacy and baseli ne 
analyses.  For analyses by study period in Part 2, only subjects enrolled into the respective study period 
will be included for that period.
The Safety Analysis Population in each study part consists of all subjects who received at least 1 dose of 
study drug and will be used for all safety analyses.
7.3 Handling Potential Intercurrent Events for the Primary and 
Secondary Endpoints
The efficacy endpoints (defined in Section 3.2, Section 3.3, Section 3.4, and Section 3.5) will be analyzed 
on the ITT population to address the following pot ential intercurrent events:
1.Binary Endpoints
For subjects with the use of rescue medication, values after the start of rescue medication 
will be excluded from analysis and subjects will be considered non -responders at all time 
points after the start of res cue medication.
Data collected will be used regardless of premature discontinuation of study drug.
2.Continuous endpoints
Values after the use of rescue medication will be excluded.
Data collected will be used regardless of premature discontinuation of study drug.
7.4 Statistical Analyses for Efficacy
Descriptive statistics will include counts and proportions for categorical data, and median, mean, 
standard deviation, first and third quartiles, and minimum/maximum for continuous data.  In addition, 
two-sided 95% confidence intervals (CI) will be reported.  For continuous endpoints, CIs for means and 
differences between means, respectively, will be based on the normal distribution.  For dichotomous 
endpoints, exact CIs will be provided based on the Clopper -Pearson method for proportions and by the 
Miettinen -Nurminen method for differences in proportions.12
Page 35 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.No statistical testing will be performed in this study.
The efficacy analyses in the ITT population for the different study parts will be performed separately, as 
described in Section 7.6.
Primary Efficacy Analysis
The primary efficacy analyses will be conducted by providing descriptive statistics and 95% CI as 
described above.
Seco ndary Efficacy Analysis
Secondary efficacy analyses will be conducted by providing descriptive statistics and 95% CI as described 
above.
Other Efficacy Analyses
Other efficacy analyses will be conducted providing descriptive statistics and 95% CI as descri bed above.
Subgroup Analysis for Efficacy
Details regarding subgroup analyses will be specified in the SAP.
7.5 Statistical Analyses for Safety
The safety analyses will be carried out using the Safety Analysis Population and will be based on 
treatments the sub jects actually received.  Safety will be assessed by AEs, physical examination, 
laboratory assessments, and vital signs.  The safety analyses in the safety population for the different 
study parts will be performed separately as described in Section 7.6.  Analysis details will be specified in 
the SAP.
Adverse events will be coded using Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA).  Treatment -
emergent adverse events are defined as those that began or worsened in severity after the first dose of 
study drug and within 140 days/20 weeks after the last dose of study drug.  The number and percentage 
of subjects experiencing TEAEs will be t abulated using the MedDRA system organ class and preferred 
term, by severity, and by relationship to the study drug as assessed by the investigator.  Summaries 
(including percentages and events per 100 patient -years) of SAEs, deaths, AEs leading to discont inuation 
and ASI will be provided as well.  Pre -treatment AEs will be summarized separately.
For selected laboratory and vital signs, mean change from baseline and percentage of subjects with 
evaluations meeting criteria for pre -defined Potentially Clinica lly Significant values will be summarized.
7.6 Interim Analysis
No statistical test will be performed, therefore no formal interim analysis that would require type 1 
error control will be done.  Analyses will be performed at the following timepoints:
Page 36 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Part 1 da ta up to Week 16 will be cleaned and analyzed after all subjects have reached Week 16 or have 
prematurely discontinued the study.  Week 16 data will inform the dose(s) and the initiation for Part 2 
and Part 3.  A final analysis of Part 1 will be performed when all subjects have completed Part 2.
Part 2 data, Part 1 data, and all available Part 3 or Part 4 data will be analyzed separately when all 
subjects have completed Part 2 and will be submitted for regulatory purposes.
Part 3 data up to Week 16 have been cleaned and analyzed after all subjects have reached Week 16 or 
have prematurely discontinued the study.  Week 16 data informed the dose(s) and the initiation for Part 
4.  A final analysis of Parts 3 and 4 will be performed together when all subjects hav e completed Part 4 
or have prematurely discontinued from the study.
An external DMC composed of persons independent of AbbVie and with relevant expertise in their field 
will review unblinded safety data from the ongoing study.  The primary responsibility o f the DMC will be 
to protect the safety of the subjects participating in this study.
A separate DMC charter was prepared outside of the protocol and describes the roles and 
responsibilities of the DMC members, frequency of data reviews and relevant safety data to be 
assessed.
7.7 Multiplicity Adjustment and Overall Type I Error Control
Not applicable for this study.
7.8 Sample Size Determination
The sample sizes for the 4 study parts are per the risankizumab Ps pediatric investigational plan (PIP), in 
which it has also been agreed the study does not need to be powered to demonstrate superiority. The 
current study design meets the PIP commitment of at least 120 subjects evaluable for the primary 
endpoint of which at least 40 subjects are age 6 to less than 12 years a nd at least 80 subjects are age 
12to less than 18 years.13
All enrolled (for Part 2, all randomized) subjects will be considered evaluable for the primary endpoint.  
Subjects discontinued from the study prior to Week 16 will be included in the analysis as non -
responders.
Part 1 (age 12 to less than 18 years with severe Ps) and Part 3 (age 6 to less than 12 years with severe 
Ps) are being conducted primarily for PK purposes and will each enroll 12 subjects.  Enrollment of 
12subjects, a sample size typical of Phase 1 PK and safety/tole rability studies, will be sufficient to 
evaluate and confirm if the dosing is able to provide exposures in pediatric subjects consistent with 
exposures at the therapeutic dose in adult subjects, and to provide sentinel efficacy and safety data 
before expos ing additional subjects with moderate to severe disease.
Assuming observed response rates for each of the co -primary endpoints of 66.7% (8 of 12), 75% (9 of 12) 
or 83.3% (10 of 12), the 95% exact CI will have a width of 34.9 to 90.1, 42.8 to 94.5, or 51.6 to 97.9, 
respectively.
Page 37 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Part 2 will enroll 80 subjects ages 12 to less than 18 years in a 2:1 ratio (i.e., 53 subjects will be 
randomized to risankizumab, 27 subjects to ustekinumab).  The assumptions for response rates are 
based on the results for the 2 ustekinumab -controlled risankizumab studies in adult subjects with 
moderate to severe plaque Ps and apply to both co -primary endpoints, PASI 75 and sPGA clear or almost 
clear (0 or 1).  Assuming an observed response rate of 59% (16 of 27) or 70% (19 of 27) for the 
ustekinumab group and a response rate of 79% (42 of 53) for the risankizumab group, the 95% exact CI 
for the difference between treatment groups will have a width of –2.7 to 42.4 or – 13.9 to 31.9, 
respectively.
Part 4 will enroll 28 subjects (age 6 to less than 12 years). (Japan only: A pproximately 2 adolescents aged 
12to <18 years will be included. )As the design of Parts 3 and 4 only differs by the intensity of the PK 
sampling, the 40 subjects (aged 6 to <12 years) enrolled into Parts 3 and 4 ca n be analyzed together if it 
is confirmed in Part 3 that the same dosing regimen is used for both Parts 3 and 4.  Assuming observed 
response rates for each of the co -primary endpoints of 65% (26 of 40), 75% (30 of 40) or 85% (34 of 40), 
the 95% exact CI wi ll have a width of 48.3 to 79.4, 58.8 to 87.3, or 70.2 to 94.3, respectively. Results 
from the approximately 2 Japanese adolescents (ages 12 to < 18 years) will be assessed separately, as 
applicable.
8ETHICS
8.1 Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all subject materials will be 
submitted to the IEC/IRB for review and approval.  Approval of both the protocol and the informed 
consent form(s) must be obtained before any subject is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will 
require review and approval by the IEC/IRB before the changes are implemented to the study.  In 
addition, all changes to the consent form(s) will be IEC/IRB approved.
8.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study wil l be conducted in accordance with the protocol, Operations Manual, International Council 
for Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines, applicable regulations, and guidelines governing clinical study 
conduct and the ethical principles that have their origin in the De claration of Helsinki.  Responsibilities of 
the investigator are specified in Appendix B.
In the event a significant disaster/crisis (e.g., epidemic/ pandemic, natural disaster, conflict/combat) 
occurs leading to difficulties in performing protocol -specified procedures, AbbVie may engage with 
study site personnel in efforts to ensure the safety of subjects, maintain protocol compliance, and 
minimize ris ks to the integrity of the study while trying to best manage subject continuity of care.  This 
may include alternative methods for assessments (e.g., phone contacts or virtual site visits), alternative 
locations for data collection (e.g., use of a local la b instead of a central lab) and shipping investigational 
product and/or supplies to ensure continuity of treatment where allowed.  In all cases, these alternative 
measures must be allowed by local regulations and permitted by IRB/IEC.  Investigators should notify 
AbbVie if any urgent safety measures are taken to protect the subjects against any immediate hazard.
Page 38 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.8.3 Subject Confidentiality
To protect subjects' confidentiality, all subjects and their associated samples will be assigned numerical 
study identifier s or "codes."  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie.
For the personal data that AbbVie Deutschland GmbH & Co acting as sponsor of the submitted study 
("AbbVie") controls and maintains, AbbVie has developed a robust security program focuse d on due 
diligence in design, managed change, and information security governance. Information Security policies 
govern the Information Security functions including identity and access management, operations, 
infrastructure, application, and third -party se curity requirements. The risk -based AbbVie Data 
Classification Tool dictates the level of scrutiny and control required for the relevant activities per 
AbbVie's Information Security policies taking into account the sensitivity of the data.
Before patient data is shared with AbbVie, the study doctor and staff will replace any information that 
could directly identify a patient (such as name, address, and contact information) with a generic code 
which AbbVie cannot link to that patient's identity to protect t he confidentiality of the data.
AbbVie has a data protection impact assessment (DPIA) program to ensure and document the 
appropriate controls and safeguards stated above are in place for clinical trial data that it controls and 
maintains and these processi ng activities respect privacy of clinical trial subjects. AbbVie also maintains 
robust security incident response policies and procedures, including requirements for the containment 
of any data related incidents, the mitigation measures where needed, and n otification to authorities or 
affected individuals where required.
9SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM 
COMPLETION
The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the 
data reported. All source documen ts should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, 
accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data. Clinical site monitoring is conducted 
to ensure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are protected, that the report ed trial data 
are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial follows the currently approved 
protocol, ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable local regulatory requirement(s) including EU 
Clinical Trial Regulation 536/201 4. During the COVID -19 pandemic, remote data review and verification 
may be employed if allowed by the local regulatory authority, IRB/IEC, and the study site.
Supplemental study case report forms should be completed in the event of COVID -19 related 
missed /virtual visits, study drug interruptions or discontinuations, or adverse events (including capture 
of specific signs/symptoms of infection and testing results).
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE
AbbVie will ensure that the clinical trial is conducted with a quality management system that will define 
quality tolerance limits in order to ensure human subject protection and reliability of study results.  Data 
Page 39 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.will be generated, documented, and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP, and applicable 
regulatory requirements , including EU Clinical Trial Regulation 536/2014.
11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end- of-study is defined as the date of the last subject's last visit or the actual date of follow -up 
contact, whichever is later.
12 REFERENCES
1.AbbVie. Risankizumab Investigator's Brochure Edition 6. 11 May 2020.
2.Khader SA, Pearl JE, Sakamoto K, et al. IL -23 compensates for the absence of IL -12p70 and is 
essential for the IL -17 response during tuberculosis but is dispensable for protection and antigen -
specific IFN -gamma responses if IL -12p70 is available. J Immunol. 2005;175(2):788 -95.
3.O'Garra A, Redford PS, McNab FW, et al. The immune response in tuberculosis. Annu Rev Immunol. 
2013;31:475 -527.
4.Qian X, Gu L, Ning H, et al. Increased Th17 cells in the tumor microenvironment is mediated by IL -23 
via tumor- secreted prostaglandin E2. J Immunol. 2013;190(11):5894 -902.
5.Baird AM, Leonard J, Naicker KM, et al. IL-23 is pro -proliferative, epigeneticall y regulated and 
modulated by chemotherapy in non- small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer. 2013;79(1):83 -90.
6.Hu WH, Chen HH, Yen SL, et al. Increased expression of interleukin- 23 associated with progression of 
colorectal cancer. J Surg Oncol. 2017;115(2):208 -12.
7.Langowski JL, Zhang X, Wu L, et al. IL -23 promotes tumour incidence and growth. Nature. 
2006;442(7101):461 -5.
8.AbbVie. Data on File, RRT165055.
9.Stelara (ustekinumab) injection [prescribing information]. Horsham, PA; Janssen Biotech, Inc, 2019.
10.Suleiman AA, Minocha M, Khatri A, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of risankizumab in healthy 
volunteers and subjects with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis: integrated analyses of phase I -III 
clinical trials. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2019;58(10):1309 -21.
11.AbbVie. R&D/14/1263. A Multicenter, Randomized, Double -Dummy, Double -Blind Study Evaluating 
Two Doses of Adalimumab versus Methotrexate (MTX) in Pediatric Subjects with Chronic Plaque 
Psoriasis (Ps) (Study M04 -717). 2015.
12.Miettinen O, Nurminen M. Comparative analysis of two rates. Stat Med. 1985;4(2):213 -26.
13.Agency EM. P/0205/2016. Opinion of the Paediatric Committee on the agreement of a Paediatric 
Investigation Plan and a deferral and a waiver. 2016.
Page 40 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A.STUDY SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TER MS
Abbreviation Definition
AAC Anaphylaxis Adjudication Committee
Ab Antibody
ADA antidrug antibody
AE adverse event
Ag antigen
ASI areas of safety interest
BP blood pressure
BSA Body surface area
CDLQI Children's Dermatology Life Quality Index
CI confidence interval
COVID Coronavirus disease of 2019
CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
DMC Data monitoring committee
EC Ethics Committee
ECG electrocardiogram
eCRF electronic case report form
FDLQI Family Dermatology Life Quality Index
GCP Good clinical practice
HB hepatitis B
HBc Hepatitis B core
HBsAg hepatitis B surface antigen
HBV hepatitis B virus
HCT hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
HCV hepatitis C virus
HCV Ab hepatitis C virus antibody
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus
HIV Ab HIV antibody
IB Investigator's Brochure
ICH International Council for Harmonisation
IEC/IRB Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board
Page 41 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.IgA Immunoglobulin A
IgG Immunoglobulin G
IgM Immunoglobulin M
IGRA interferon gamma release assay
IL interleukin
IMP Investigational Medicinal Product
INR international normalized ratio
IRB Institutional review board
IRT Interactive response technology
ITT intent -to-treat
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MI myocardial infarction
nAb neutralizing antibody
NRS Numerical Rating Scale
OLE open- label extension
PASI Psoriasis Area Severity Index
PCR polymerase chain reaction
PD visit Premature Discontinuation visit
PE physical examination
PFS pre-filled syringe
PIP pediatric investigational plan
PK Pharmacokinetic(s)
PPD purified protein derivative (tuberculin)
PRO patient -reported outcome
Ps psoriasis
PT preferred term
q12w every 12 weeks
QOL quality of life
RBC red blood cell
RNA ribonucleic acid
RSI Reference Safety Information
SAE serious adverse event
SAP Statistical analysis plan
SARS -CoV-2 Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
Page 42 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.SC subcutaneous
SOC system organ class
sPGA Static Physician's Global Assessment
SUSAR Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reaction
TB tuberculosis
TBM T cells, B cells, and monocytes
TEAE Treatment emergent adverse event
WBC white blood cell
Page 43 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B.RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M19 -977:  OptIMMize -1:  A Randomized, Active -controlled, Efficacy Assessor -blinded Study to 
Evaluate Pharmacokinetics, Safety, and Efficacy of Risankizumab in Patients From 6 to Less Than 
18Years of Age With Moderate to Severe Plaque Psoriasis.
Protocol Date:  16October 2023
Clinical research studies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the ICH GCP and local regulations and 
guidelines governing the study at the site location.  In signing the Investigator Agreement, the 
investigator is agreeing to t he following:
1.Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GCP, the applicable regulatory requirements, 
current protocol and operations manual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying 
AbbVie and the appropriate IRB/IEC, except when necessary t o protect the subject from 
immediate harm.
2.Personally conducting or supervising the described investigation(s).
3.Informing all subjects, or persons used as controls, that the drugs are being used for 
investigational purposes and complying with the requireme nts relating to informed consent and 
ethics committees (e.g., IEC or IRB) review and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
4.Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investigation(s) to AbbVie.
5.Reading the information in the IB/safety mate rial provided, including the instructions for use 
and the potential risks and side effects of the investigational product(s).
6.Informing all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the study about 
their obligations in meeting the a bove commitments.
7.Maintaining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records 
available for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, 
and retaining all study -related documents until notification from AbbVie.
8.Maintaining records demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial 
clinical protocol and all of its amendments.
9.Reporting promptly, all changes in the research activity and all unanticipated problems involv ing 
risks to human subjects or others, to the appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, 
institution director) and/or directly to the ethics committees and AbbVie.
10.Providing direct access to source data documents for study -related monitoring , audits, IEC/IRB 
review, and regulatory inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed)
Page 44 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C.LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES
Name Title Functional Area
Clinical Program Development
Clinical Development, Immunology
Clinical Development, Immunology
Data and Statistical Sciences
Data and Statistical Sciences
Clinical Pharmacology
Page 45 of 107 

STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX E.SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Previous Protocol Versions
Protocol Date
Version 1.0 18 March 2020
Version 2.0 06 January 2021
Version 3.0 27 May 2021
Administ rative Change 1 24 June 2021
Version 3.1 (Japan Only) 25 June 2021
Version 4.0 02 February 2023
Administrative Change 2 23 February 2023
The purpose of this version is to correct minor typographical errors and to update the following 
sections:
Protocol
Updated the Spons or Emergency Medical Contact information onprotocol title page.
Rationale: To re flect perso nnel changes for this study .
The EU CT number was updated on the title page and footer throughout the protocol and 
operations manual.
Rationale: To provide the EU CT number .
Added " For European Union countries: the sponsor is AbbVie Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG "to 
title page.
Rationale: To clarify the MAH in the European Union.
Added Section 5.10 EU CTR Publication Policy .
Rationale:   To provide a binding sponsor statement that the clinical trial will be conducted in 
compliance with EU Clinical Trial Regulation 536/2014 .
In Section 6.1added that SUSAR reporting for the IMP will be done to the Eudravigilance 
database in accordance with EU Clinical Trial Regulation 536/2014 as par t of the global and local 
requirements that AbbVie is applying to.
Rationale: To describe the procedure for reporting of suspected unexpected adverse reactions 
(SUSAR) by the sponsor to the Eudravigilance database as per EU Clinical Trial Regulation 
536/20 14.
Updated to include new program lead, therapeutic area MD,and clinical pharmacology contacts 
Appendix C(List of Protocol Signatories) .
Rationale: To reflect personnel changes for this study.
Page 52 of 107 
STUDY M19 -977  |  Version 5.0 |  EUCT2023- 504156- 10-00 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Operations Manual
Updated the Sponsor Emergency Medical Contact in Section 1 and Section 4.3 .
Rationale: To reflect personnel changes for this study.
Removed the address and phone number for the Safety team from Section 1 .
Rationale: To remove unnecessary information from contacts .
In Section 3.14, under Table 1 -Clinical Laboratory Testing changed "gamma glutamyl 
transferase/ γ-genotype "to "GGT."
Rationale :To address a typographical error .
In Section 4.3and Section 5.1 , added that SUSAR reporting for the IMP will be done to the 
Eudravigilance database in accordance with EU Clinical Trial Regulation 536/2014 .
Rationale:   To describe the procedure for reporting of suspected unexpected adverse reactions 
(SUSAR) by the sponsor to the Eudravigilance database as per EU Clinical Trial R egulation 
536/2014 .
Page 53 of 107 