Ver 0721 2019    1 
  
 
 
The Effect of a Non -Opioid Multimodal Pain (NOMO) P rotocol in Decreasing N arcotic  Use after 
Urogynecologic S urgery  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
07212019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ver 0721 2019    2 
  
 
  
 The Effect of a Non -Opioid Multimodal Pain (NOMO) P rotocol in Decreasing N arcotic  Use after 
Urogynecologic S urgery  
A. Objective  
The objective of this study is to evaluate narcotic use  after implementation of a Non -Opioid Multimodal Pain (NOMO) 
protocol in patients who are undergoing  a urogynecologic procedure.  NOMO protocols seek to reduce the opioid usage  for 
patients in the postoperative period. Patients will receive multiple pain medications (usually referred to a s a “pain cocktail”) 
that work on various pain receptors throughout the body. These medications are approved for pain control; but they have 
few side effects and less addictive properties.  The study will also evaluate secondary outcomes, including: post-operative 
pain rating, length of hospital stay, postoperative antiemetic use, bladder catheterization at discharge, number of post -
operative phone calls, and rate of reported side effects of opioid use (nausea/constipation). Study participants will be aske d 
to utilize the validated Brief Pain Inventory (appendix A) scale to assess post -operative pain levels . Based on inpatient 
post-operative opioid use and number of opioid pills prescribed at discharge, an attempt will be made to develop an 
algorithm for re commended opioid prescribing patterns.  
Background  
Mortality from prescription opioids, heroin, and s ynthetic opioids (Fentanyl) has  increased six-fold since 1999. In 2017,  
more than 47,000 individuals died from opioids, with 36% of those deaths caused by intentional/unintentional overdose 
from prescription opioids1. Although  the overall prescribing rate  has declined since 2012, the amount of number of 
morphine milligram equivalents (MME) prescribed per patient is still 3 times higher than in 19992. Recent studies 
investigating post -operative opioid use and prescribing patterns have suggested that pr escribing practices may exceed what 
patient s need3. 
Increasing evidence has been published in the past decade to support  the use of multimodal pain regime ns in colorectal, 
spine, bariatric, spine, and gynecology/oncology surgeries. Utilization of these pain regimens has been shown to decrease 
immediate post -operative opioid use4, reduce opioid side effects (nausea/constipation), and improve post -operative p ain 
scores. Our study aims to evaluate a Non -Opioid Multimodal Pain (NOMO) protocol in the Urogynecology population.  
B. Methods  
This randomized control led trial will take place at Prisma Health – Upstate , a single tertiary -care institution. The trial will 
be registered at Clinicaltrials.gov. Recruitment will occur from July 2019 -May 2020. English -speaking females greater 
than 18 years of age , undergoing a scheduled inpatient or ext ended observation urogynecology  procedure will be  
approached for  inclusion  in the study. Consenting patients will sign written con sents at their preoperative visit  as well as 
complete a baseline Brief Pain Inventory .  
We are planning a study of a continuous response variable from independent control and experim ental sub jects with 1 
control  per experimental subject  (1:1) .  In a previous study the response within each subject group was normally 
distributed with standard deviation 20 ( 4).  If the true difference in the experimental and control means is 20, we will need 
to study 17 experimental subjects and 17 control subjects to be able to reject the null hypothesis that the population means 
of the experimental and control groups are equal with probability (power) 0.8.    The Type I error probability associated 
with this test  of this null hypothesis is 0.05.  
Ver 0721 2019    3 
 The study aims to enroll 20  patients in each arm  and accounts for a 15% dropout rate . Patients will undergo enrollment, 
randomization, and informed consent in the outpatient setting at a preoperative appointment. Consent will be obtained by 
the subject’s operating surgeon in the Division of Female Pelvic Medicine and Reconstructive Surgery. A research 
coordinator will assist in  identifying potential subjects for enrollment and data collection, consent collection/storage, 
marking medical records to reflect a patient’s research status , and follow up phone calls as outlined below . The coordinator 
will also perform monthly audits to ensure consents are within policy.  
Randomization will occur via a computer generated block randomization scheme in groups of 4 . Allocation will not be 
revealed unless requested by the patient, and will only be done after consent is obtained. Surgeons will not be blinded to 
randomization as they will be placing the pre - and post -operative orders.  
Patients in the standard postoperative pain regimen group will  undergo routine induction of anesthesia prior to surgery. 
They will not receive a pre -operative pain cocktail. These patients will receive  a postoperative regimen of  scheduled 
acetaminophen (Tylenol) 650mg orally every 6 hours, scheduled ibuprofen (Motrin) 600mg orally every 6 hours, 
oxycodone 5mg every 6 hours orally PRN moderate to severe pain  (pain rated as 4 -7 on a scale of 1 -10), IV morphine 4mg 
every 4 hours PRN breakthrough pain  (pain rated >7 on a scale of 1 -10), and diazepam (Valium) 5mg every 6 hours orally 
PRN rectal spasms/pressure.  
Patients randomized to  the NOMO treatment arm will receive a pre -operative pain cocktail in the pre-operative holding 
area prior to induction of anesthesia. This cocktail will include Celebrex PO 400mg, Lyrica PO 75mg, and Tylenol PO 
1000mg. These patients will receive intra -operative ketamine bolus of 0.5mg/kg over a ten minute period. Anesthesia teams 
will manage the administra tion of these medications per their standard protocols  that are already in place . These patients 
will receive a postoperative regimen of scheduled Lyrica 75mg orally every 12 hours, Celebrex 200mg orally every 12 
hours, and acetaminophen (Tylenol) 650mg or ally every 6 hours. As needed medications will be based on routine nursing 
assessment and evaluations. Patients reporting pain of 1 -3 will receive no medications as this will be acceptable for 
postoperative period. Patients reporting pain of 4 -7 will recei ve Toradol 15mg IV; pain of greater than 7 will warrant one 
time narcotic administration, starting with oxycodone 5mg  by mouth .  
NOMO  patients will not be prescribed opioids during their hospital -stay unless they report a pain score of > 7  (on a scale 
of 1-10) as ascertained by nursing during routine vital examination.  They will not be prescribed opioids at discharge unless 
they require more than 5 doses of opioids during their hospital stay. Patient s who require an opioid prescription at discharge 
will be prescribed a 3 -day opioid pain medication based on their opioid inpatient requirement. Their prescription will then 
be converted in morphine milligram equivalents for data analysis.  
Based on inpatie nt opioid requirement and number of pills at discharge , an attempt will be made to develop an algorithm 
for recommended opioid prescribing patterns.  A Brief Pain Inventory will be completed by all participants on the morning 
of POD#1 (>/= 12 hours after co mpletion of surgery) and again on POD#7. Patients will be contacted by phone to obtain 
the postoperative day 7 pain scores. The research coordinator will contact patients to collect data regarding day 7 pain 
scores  7-9 days after surgery. The range allows extra time should day 7 fall on a weekend  or holiday .  
Comparison Groups  
The study compares the NOMO protocol  to current post -operative routine care in patients undergoing a scheduled  extended 
stay observation or inpatient  urogynecologic procedure.  Regimens are described as above.   
C. Outcomes  
Primary outcome: Use of opioids during hospital stay  as measured in morphine milligram equivalents ,  
Ver 0721 2019    4 
 Secondary outcomes : post-operative pain scores on Days 1, and 7 as measured by the  Brief Pain Inventory Survey , 
length of hospital stay, prescription refills, and number of pills left in a prescription at the two week post -operative 
follow -up appointment. Postoperative antiem etic use, bladder catheterization at discharge, readmission rates  within 30 
days, number of post -operative phone calls, and rate of reported side effects of opioid use (nausea/constipation) . 
D. Inclusion Criteria  
The study population  includes English -speaking  females  greater than 18 years old scheduled for a urogynecologic 
procedure at GHS requiring inpatient stay or extended observation.  
E. Exclusion Criteria  
Exclusion criteria includes: Patients under 18 years of age, non -English speaking patients, unscheduled urogynecologic 
surgeries, patients expected to undergo a simple reconstructive surgery with same -day discharge, patients with a history of 
chronic pain,  patients with chronic Lyrica or Celebrex use,  psychiatric disorder, narcotic dependence or narcotic 
prescription in the past six weeks, patients with current liver disease, kidney disease  (defined as GFR <60),  malignancy, 
or patients with a sulfa allergy.  
F. Data Collection  
Demographic data, medical and surgical history, and degree of prolapse will be abstract ed from the medical chart. Data 
will be collected from chart review of primary and secondary end points  (opioid use, length of hospital stay, prescription 
refills, and number of pills left in a prescription at the two week post -operative follow -up appointment, antiemetic use, 
bladder catheterization, rate of readmission, number of phone calls, and rate of r eported side effects. Post -operative pain 
will be evaluated with the validated Brief Pain Inventory Survey .  
Analytic Plan  
Patients will be randomized to either the standard routine care ar m or the NOMO arm via a block randomization scheme 
in blocks of 4 ; data will be stored on Redcap . Subjects within these two arms will then be stratified by surgery type 
(laparoscopic surgery, total vaginal surgery, or abdominal surgery) based on surgery selected by the patient and surgeon 
through a shared deci sion making process. Data analyzed with an intention -to-treat analysis using an Obstetrics and 
Gynecology departmental statistician.  The statistician will be blinded to treatment arms.  
G. Risks  
Potential risks include: Loss of confidentiality  
H. Benefits  
Potential benefits include: Decreased opioid use in the NOMO arm,  reduced cost to the health system and patient, improved 
quality of care and overall patient satisfaction.  
I. Procedures to Maintain Confidentiality  
All research  and hospital  staff involved  in this study  will be trained  in patient  confidentiality  via Learning  Hub assigned  
HIPPA  module . Individual  chart  review  will be accessed  through  a password -protected  Epic log-on on Prisma  Health  – 
Upstate  computers.  Once  data has been  entered  into an electronic  excel  spreadsheet,  patient  information  will be de-
identified  using  a computer -generated  number . Data  will be maintained  on password -protected  electronic  files,  accessed  
through  password -protected  computers.  
 
Ver 0721 2019    5 
 J. References  
 
1. Scholl L, et al. Drug and Opioid -Involved Overdose Deaths – United States, 2013 -2017 . Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
ePub: 21 Decem ber 2018  
2. Centers for Disease Co ntrol and Prevention.  Vital Signs: Changes in Opioid Prescribing in the United States, 2006 –
2015. MMWR 2017 ; 66(26):697 -704. 
3. Hussein A, et al. Opioid use following gynecologic and pelvic reconstructive surgery. International Urogynecology 
Journal.  2017: pp1 -5 
4. Reagan, KM, et al. Decreasing  postoperative narcotics in reconstructive pelvic surgery: A randomized controlled 
trial. AJOG . 2017; 217 (3): 325  
 