PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 1 of 29INSTRUCTIONS:  
 Prepare  a document  with the following  sections.  Note  that, depending  on the nature  of what  
you are doing,  certain  sections  below  may not be applicable.  Indicate  this as appropriate.  
 For any items  described  in the sponsor’s  protocol  or other  documents  submitted  with the 
application,  you may reference  the title and page  numbers  of these  documents  (include  the 
Protocol  Version  date/number  and Section  number  and/or  heading).  If you reference  page  
numbers,  attach  those  pages  to this protocol.  Limit  attached  pages  to those  referenced  in this 
protocol.   
 When  you write  a protocol,  keep an electronic  copy  in iRIS.  You will need  to modify  this copy  
when  making  changes.  
 Omit  starred  (*) items  if this is the activation  of a protocol  at a new site or sites that will be 
overseen  by a principal  investigator  who will take separate  and full responsibility  for that 
site or those  sites.  Complete  by describing  information  specific  to the site(s).  Do not repeat  
information  in the approved  protocol  that applies  to all site(s).   
1) Protocol  Title  
Include  the full protocol  title as listed  on the application  form.  
Tolerability,  Safety,  and Efficacy  of Tedizolid  as Oral Treatment  for Bone  and Joint  Infections  
2) HSC  Review  History  
If you have  submitted  this protocol  for review  by an external  HSC,  provide  the previous  study  
identification  number  and provide  details  of the review  including  the HSC  name,  date of review,  
and HSC  contact  information.  
No previous  review.  
3) Investigator  
Include  the principal  investigator’s  name  as listed  on the Application  for Human  Research.  
Loren  G. Miller,  MD MPH  
4) Objectives*  
Describe  the purpose,  specific  aims,  or objectives.   
State  the hypotheses  to be tested.  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 2 of 29The objective  of our study  is to quantify  the tolerability  and safety  of tedizolid  for bone  and joint 
infections,  both hardware  and non-hardware  associated.  The study  will focus  on tolerability  (e.g.,  
gastrointestinal),  hematologic  toxicities,  and neurologic  toxicities.   
 
Tedizolid  is a FDA  approved  antibiotic  with an indication  for skin and soft tissue  infection.  It’s 
spectrum  of activity  is nearly  all gram  positive  cocci,  i.e., the primary  causes  of osteomyelitis.  Unlike  
the other  commercially  available  medication  in its class,  linezolid,  tedizolid  does not appear  to be 
associated  with hematologic  and neurologic  toxicities  in short  term and animal  studies.  However,  longer  
term studies  with tedizolid  have  not been  performed.  
 
This study  is a pilot study.  We realize  that efficacy  is of primary  concern  for treatment  of bone  and joint 
infection,  but the purpose  of this study  is more  exploratory  and will focus  primary  on the 
tolerability/toxicity  issues  outlined  above.   
 
Additional  outcomes  will be measured,  but these  are not primary  outcomes.  We will measure  efficacy  of 
tedizolid,  but comparative  efficacy  (e.g.,  compared  to non-tedizolid  based  regimens)  will not be 
measured  based  on small  sample  size and funding  limitations.  Of great  importance  to highlight  is that 
clinical  trials,  even  non-comparative  ones,  are extremely  rare for bone  and joint infection.  Randomized  
clinical  trials  comparing  one antibiotic  to another  for bone  and joint infection  are almost  never  
performed  in the current  era. 
 
Hypotheses:   
1. Tedizolid  is well tolerated  for prolonged  (> 4 weeks)  courses  of antibiotic  therapy  for patients  
with bone  and joint infection  
2. Tedizolid  is safe for prolonged  (> 4 weeks)  courses  of antibiotic  therapy  for patients  with bone  
and joint infection  
3. Tedizolid  is effective  for the treatment  of bone  and joint infection  
 
5) Background*  
Describe  the relevant  prior  experience  and gaps  in current  knowledge.   
Describe  any relevant  preliminary  data.   
Provide  the scientific  or scholarly  background  for, rationale  for, and significance  of the Human  
Research  based  on the existing  literature  and how will it add to existing  knowledge.   
 
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 3 of 29Bone  and joint infection  is a common  infection  seen in both general  practice  and in Infectious  Disease  
specialty  practices.  Recent  data suggest  the incidence  of bone  and joint infection  is increasing  
dramatically.  More  specifically,  population-based  U.S. data from  Olmstead  County  showed  that the 
incidence  of bone  and joint infection  has doubled  from  rates  30 years  prior.  The reasons  for this 
dramatic  increase  are unclear  but believed  to stem  from  the increased  prevalence  of co-morbidities,  such 
as diabetes,  in the general  population.  Bone  and joint infection  treatment  is particularly  problematic  
because  it requires  prolonged  therapy  for weeks  or months,  which  incurs  risk of treatment-related  
adverse  side effects.  
 
Treatment  for bone  and joint infection  is not standardized,  which  allows  a wide  range  of antibiotic  
therapy  to potentially  be given.  Treatments  include  medications  from  many  different  antibiotic  classes,  
which  may be administered  through  intravenous  (IV) therapy  or oral therapy.  Oral therapy  is 
increasingly  popular,  as recent  data suggest  that oral therapy  for bone  and joint infection  achieves  
similar  cure rates  to traditional  intravenous  therapies  while  avoiding  risks  associated  with IV catheters  
such as thrombosis,  clogged  catheters,  and catheter-associated  infections.  Oral therapies  also avoid  cost 
associated  with IV therapy  given  at home  or at infusion  centers.   
 
S. aureus  is the most  common  cause  of bone  and joint infection.  Methicillin  resistant  S. aureus  (MRSA)  
are increasingly  common  and currently  over half of all S. aureus  are MRSA  in most  U.S. and non-U.S.  
medical  centers.  Treatment  of S. aureus , MRSA,  and other  Gram-positive  bone  and joint infection  with 
oral therapy  has been  difficult,  as many  of these  organisms  are not susceptible  to oral antibiotics,  with 
the exception  of linezolid.  However,  linezolid  is used to treat bone  and joint infection  with great  
trepidation,  as prolonged  linezolid  therapy  is associated  with hematologic  toxicity  and neurologic  
toxicity  such as peripheral  and optic  neuropathy.  Most  concerningly,  these  neurologic  toxicities  may be 
irreversible.  Thus  many  patients  receive  IV therapy  to treat bone  and joint infection,  which  carries  risk 
of nephrotoxicity  (vancomycin),  requires  regular  monitoring  of renal  functions  and serum  levels  
(vancomycin),  and/or  has high associated  drug costs  (daptomycin,  ceftaroline).   
 
Trauma-associated  bone  and joint infection  is also a common  problem.  Victims  of major  trauma  often  
suffer  bone  fractures,  which  require  temporary  or permanent  use of orthopedic  devices  such as external-
fixation  pins,  plates,  and screws.  Approximately  5% of these  internal  fixation  devices  become  infected.  
Medical  and surgical  treatment  of these  infections  incur  significant  costs.  Coagulase  negative  
Staphylococci  are a common  cause  of these  infections,  and oral treatment  options  are similarly  limited  to 
linezolid,  which  again,  is highly  problematic  to use as a prolonged  therapy  that is required  for these  
infections.  
 
Tedizolid  is a new FDA-approved  oxazolidinone  antibiotic,  available  both intravenously  and orally.  
Tedizolid  has a favorable  adverse  event  profile  and low thrombocytopenia  rates  compared  to linezolid,  
due to its potency  against  Gram-positive  bacteria  that allows  it to be given  as a significantly  lower  daily  
drug dose compared  to linezolid,  its lower  systemic  free drug exposure  compared  to linezolid,  and its 
lower  duration  of treatment  compared  to linezolid . Further,  the lower  incidence  of thrombocytopenia  
rates  with tedizolid  compared  to linezolid  may be due to its differential  potential  to inhibit  mitochondrial  
protein  synthesis,  as shown  in pre-clinical  studies  (Flanagan  S, et al. Antimicrob  Agents  Chemother  
2014  58:6462-70).   At FDA-approved  doses,  tedizolid  has hematologic  side effects  similar  to that of 
placebo.  Additionally,  unlike  linezolid,  interactions  with SSRIs  appear  unlikely.  Drug-mitochondrial  
binding,  which  is believed  to be the mechanism  to which  mid-  and long-term  toxicities  of linezolid  such 
as neuropathy  are acquired,  is not seen with tedizolid,  suggesting  that the side effects  associated  with 
long-term  therapy  of linezolid  may not be found  with tedizolid.  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 4 of 29 
Given  the large  and increasing  burden  of disease  of bone  and joint infection  and the increasing  
acceptability  of oral antibiotics  for its management,  tedizolid  holds  promise  as a well-tolerated  
oral therapy  that can be used for patients  with bone  and joint infection  when  intravenous  options  
are not pursued  and other  oral options  are problematic.  Harbor-UCLA  Medical  Center  is a large  
tertiary  care medical  center  and 1 of only 4 Level  One trauma  centers  in the County  of Los 
Angeles,  the most  populous  County  in the United  States.  The Infectious  Disease  consult  service  
sees a high incidence  of non-trauma  and post-traumatic  device-associated  bone  and joint 
infection.  Use of prolonged  antibiotics  is common  in this setting.  We believe  tedizolid  addresses  
the unmet  need  for an oral antibiotic  that is well-tolerated  and efficacious  for use as a prolonged  
therapy  for bone  and joint infection.  
 
 
6) Setting  of the Human  Research  
Describe  the sites at which  your research  team  will conduct  the research.  If applicable,  describe:  
 Identify  the site(s)  where  your research  team  will identify  and recruit  potential  subjects.  
Potential  subjects  will be identified  and recruited  in the emergency  department,  outpatient  clinics  
including  the infectious  disease  clinic,  and inpatient  units  at Harbor-UCLA  Medical  Center.  
 Identify  the site(s)  where  your research  procedures  will be performed.  
Research  procedures  will be performed  in the Emergency  Department,  Outpatient  Clinics  
including  the Infectious  Disease  Clinic,  and Inpatient  units  at Harbor-UCLA  Medical  Center,  as 
well as in buildings  RB-2  and RB-3  on the Harbor-UCLA  Campus.  Specifically,  the CTRC  
outpatient  clinic  in RB-3  will be used for the screening  and enrollment  visits  as well as follow-up  
visits.  Lab work  will be performed  in Room  235 of RB-3.  
 Composition  and involvement  of any community  advisory  board.   
Not applicable.  
 For research  outside  of the organization  and its affiliates:  
o Site-specific  regulations  or customs  affecting  the research  for research  outside  the 
organization.  
o Local  scientific  and ethical  review  structure  outside  the organization.  
Not applicable.  
7) Resources  Available  to Conduct  the Human  Research  
Justify  the feasibility  of recruiting  the required  number  of suitable  subjects  within  the agreed  
recruitment  period.  For example,  how many  potential  subjects  do you have  access  to? What  
percentage  of those  potential  subjects  do you need  to recruit?  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 5 of 29We believe  the study  is very feasible  to enroll.  Based  on previous  rates  of presentation  of 
patients  with bone  and joint infection  (approx.  4-7 new cases  per week),  we believe  there  will be 
more  than an adequate  number  of eligible  subjects  for this study.  
 
Describe  the time that you will devote  to conducting  and completing  the trial within  the agreed  
trial period.   
 
Dr. Miller  will be contributing  a 10%,  or 1.2 month  time commitment  to the trial. A dedicated  
study  coordinator  will also help with the trial. A back  up study  coordinator  will be available  
when  the main  study  coordinator  is unavailable.  
 
Describe  the number  and qualifications  of your staff,  their  experience  in conducting  research,  
their  knowledge  of the local  study  sites,  culture,  and society.   
Study  staff will include  Dr. Loren  Miller,  Dr. Michael  Bolaris,  Dr. Pooja  Modi,  Bryn  Launer,  
and Margarita  Flores.  
 
Dr. Miller  has conducted  numerous  studies  on bone  and joint infection.  He has extensive  
research  experience  in the area of MRSA  infection  and colonization.  Over  the last 6 years,  Dr. 
Miller’s  group  has enrolled  over 3,500  subjects  into epidemiologic  studies  and clinical  trials  
focused  on infectious  diseases.  
 
Dr. Michael  Bolaris  is an Infectious  Disease  physician  at Harbor-UCLA  and currently  runs the 
antimicrobial  stewardship  program.  He has experience  in pharmaceutical  and investigator-
initiated  trials  as well as microbiological  research.  
 
Pooja  Modi,  MD has worked  as a clinical  research  associate  for the past two months  and has 
experience  enrolling  patients  into clinical  trials  during  this time.  She has completed  4 externships  
and observerships  in Internal  Medicine  and thus has extensive  experience  in the inpatient  setting  
from  which  we will recruit  patients.  
 
Bryn  Launer  has 3 years  of experience  recruiting  participants  into psychological  research  studies,  
and an additional  year of experience  recruiting  patients  at Harbor-UCLA.  She is familiar  with the 
hospital’s  online  medical  charting  system,  which  will be used to identify  potential  patients.  
 
Margarita  Flores  has over 8 years  of experience  recruiting  patients  into research  studies.  She is 
familiar  with the staff at the emergency  department  as well as an extremely  accomplished  
recruiter.  
Describe  your facilities.   
Study  recruitment  and procedures  related  to the initial  study  visit will be carried  out at Harbor-UCLA  
Medical  Center  in the Emergency  Department,  Inpatient  units  or Outpatient  Clinics.  Follow-up  visits  at 
week  1, week  2, week  3, week  4, week  5, week  6, week  7, week  8, week  9, week  10, week  11, week  12, 
and week  13 after the first visit,  will occur  at the CTRC  Outpatient  Clinic  in RB-3.  All laboratory  
procedures  will occur  in the Miller  lab in room  235 in RB-3.  Study  coordinators  will be based  out of the 
office  in room  228 in RB-2.  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 6 of 29 
Describe  the availability  of medical  or psychological  resources  that subjects  might  need  as a 
result  of an anticipated  consequences  of the human  research.   
There  are medical  and psychological  resources  available  through  Harbor-UCLA  Medical  Center  
and appropriate  referrals  will be made  should  a subject  experience  an anticipated  or 
unanticipated  consequence  of the research.  
Describe  your process  to ensure  that all persons  assisting  with the trial are adequately  informed  
about  the protocol,  the investigational  product(s),  and their  trial-related  duties  and functions.  
The study  team  will be kept informed  about  the protocol  with regular  study  team  meetings  during  which  
we will discuss  issues  surrounding  the study  including  any new findings,  any changes  to the protocol,  
subject  withdrawals  and assess  recruitment  efforts  with regards  to achieving  study  goals.  
 
8) Prior  Approvals  
Describe  any approvals  that will be obtained  prior  to commencing  the research.  (E.g.,  school,  
external  site. funding  agency,  laboratory,  radiation  safety,  or biosafety  approval.)  
This study  has been  approved  for funding  by Merck  Pharmaceuticals.  The grant  was a peer-
reviewed  by personnel  chosen  by Merck.  
9) Study  Design  
a) Recruitment  Methods  
Describe  when,  where,  and how potential  subjects  will be recruited.   
Dr. Loren  Miller,  the primary  investigator,  and his team  will inform  select  hospital  staff (e.g.,  
Orthopedic  Surgery,  Infectious  Diseases,  Trauma  Surgery/Limb  Salvage  Service)  of the study  
and seek their assistance  in identifying  and notifying  the study  staff of possible  subjects  who 
have  presented  to the Emergency  Department,  Inpatient  Units,  or Outpatient  Clinic  with bone  
and joint infection.   
The Investigator  and study  staff will also use the Harbor-UCLA  Medical  Center’s  Electronic  
Medical  Records  to screen  for potential  subjects.  Additionally,  the Investigator  and study  staff 
will review  clinical  cultures  from  the Harbor-UCLA  Microbiological  Laboratory  to identify  
wound  cultures  growing  gram  positive  organism   and review  the Electronic  Medical  Record  to 
identify  those  cultures  that were  taken  from  bone  and joint infections.  
After  identifying  a potential  patient,  the Investigator  or study  staff will approach  the subject’s  
primary  treatment  team  and ask for their permission  to introduce  the study  and the study  staff to 
the patient.  Study  staff will then present  information  about  the study  (See Recruitment  Script  
V1.0)  to see if they are interested.  Permission  will be sought  from  the subject  by their primary  
treatment  team  before  anyone  outside  the patient’s  primary  treating  team  approaches  them  about  
the study.  
Describe  the source  of subjects.   
Subjects  presenting  to the Emergency  Department,  inpatient  Units  ,Outpatient  Clinics   or 
referred  by a communityphysician  with bone  and joint infection  will be recruited.  
Describe  the methods  that will be used to identify  potential  subjects.   
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 7 of 29Either  the Investigator,  Dr. Loren  Miller,  who is an attending  physician  of Internal  Medicine  and 
Infectious  Diseases,  or other  study  staff or staff members  of Harbor-UCLA  Medical  Center  will 
identify  potential  subjects  based  on a clinical  culture,  chart  review  or diagnosis  of bone  and joint 
infection.  The providers  will first ask the subject  for permission  before  any non-treatment  team  
members  of the study  staff can approach  the subject.   
 
Describe  materials  that will be used to recruit  subjects.  Include  copies  of these  documents  with 
the application.  For advertisements,  submit  the final copy  of printed  advertisements.  When  
advertisements  are taped  for broadcast,  provide  the final audio/video  tape.  You may submit  the 
wording  of the advertisement  prior  to taping  to preclude  re-taping  because  of inappropriate  
wording,  provided  the HSC  reviews  the final audio/video  tape.   
No materials  will be used to directly  recruit  patients.  Flyers  will be given  to select  Inpatient  and 
Outpatient  Clinic  staff.  Flyers  will also be given  to physicians  outside  Harbor  UCLA  Medical  
Center.  Once  the physician  identifies  a potential  patient  and receives  verbal  consent  from  the 
patient,  the physician  will call the study  staff.  At that point  the study  staff will screen  the patient  
via phone  and a waiver  of written  consent  will be utilized  for screening  purposes  only.  
 
Describe  the amount  and timing  of any payments  to subjects.  
The subjects  will be paid in cash for their follow  up visits.  They  will be paid $30 for the visit on 
week  1, $35 for the visit on week  2, $40 for the visit on week  3, $40 for the visit on week  4, $45 
for the visit on week  5, $45 for the visit on week  6, and $50 each visit for visits  on weeks  7, 8, 9, 
10, 11, 12 and 13.  
The total amount  of compensation  will range  between  $240  and $585  based  on the number  of 
follow  up visits  the subject  completes.  All subjects  will complete  visits  on Weeks  1,2,3,4,5,  and 
12. Subjects  still taking  the study  drug at week  6 will be required  to return  for a Week  6 follow  
up visit.  Subjects  still taking  the study  drug at week  7 will be required  to return  for a week  7 
follow  up visit,  and so on- while  patients  are receiving  the study  drug they will return  for weekly  
follow  up visits  until they have  completed  the course,  or until they have  reached  12 weeks.  Once  
subjects  complete  the course  of the study  drug,  they will return  for one additional  weekly  follow  
up visit (e.g. if a patient  completes  the study  drug at 7 weeks,  they will return  for visits  on weeks  
1-8 and week  12). If subjects  take the study  drug for 12 weeks,  they will return  for a final follow  
up visit on week  13. 
 
b) Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria*  
Describe  how you will screen  for eligibility.   
Describe  the criteria  that define  who will be included  or excluded  in your final study  sample.   
For this investigation,  we will use strict  inclusion  and exclusion  criteria.   
 
Inclusion  criteria  will include:  
a) Treatment  of bone  and joint infection  in which  therapy  for Gram-positive  organisms  is 
suspected  or documented,  as determined  by the treating  physician  and treatment  of at least 4 
weeks  is planned.  Bone  and joint infection  and trauma-associated  bone  and joint infection  will 
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 8 of 29defined  clinically  using  radiologic  (e.g.,  MRI)  and/or  surgical  (e.g.,  intra-operative  findings)  
definitions.  All subjects  must  have  confirmation  (diagnosis  mentioned  in chart)  by the patient’s  
primary  physician  and consultants  that the patients  has or likely  has bone  and joint infection  and 
requires  prolonged  antibiotic  therapy.  
b) Aged  between  18 years  and 85 years.  
c) Plans  to treat bone  and joint infection  in outpatient  setting.  
d) No limited  planned  course  of antibiotics.  Co-administration  of other  antibiotics  that target  
other  causative  or potentially  causative  organisms  (e.g.,  fluoroquinolones)  is acceptable.  
e) Able  to come  to the research  clinic  for study  follow-up  visits  for the study  period.  
 
Exclusion  criteria  for subjects  will include:  
a) Planned  prolonged  hospitalization  (> 1 week).  
b) Pregnancy  (all female  subjects  of childbearing  age will be given  a pregnancy  test prior  to 
enrollment)  or breast  feeding.  If a women  is of childbearing  potential,  she must  consistently  use 
two acceptable  methods  of contraception  (IUD,  injectable  contraceptive,  birth  control  patch,  
OCP,  barrier  method,  abstinence)  from  baseline  through  the course  of antibiotics  (4-12  weeks).  If 
a male  patient’s  sexual  partner  is of childbearing  potential,  the male  patient  must  acknowledge  
that they will consistently  use an acceptable  method  of contraception  as defined  above  from  
baseline  through  the course  of antibiotics  (4-12  weeks).   
c) Comorbidities  that, in the opinion  of the investigator,  are uncontrolled  (e.g.,  diabetes,  
hypertension,  psychiatric  disease).  
d) Peripheral  or optic  neuropathy.  
e) Underlying  hematologic  cytopenias  (e.g.,  baseline  thrombocytopenia,  or severe  anemia,  or 
leukopenia)  as determined  by the following  limits  from  a baseline  CBC/CMP  obtained  within  the 
past 14 days.  Note  that if a CBC  has not been  performed  within  the past 14 days,  a CBC  will be 
performed  on the day of enrollment  prior  to any study  drug being  administered  to ensure  the 
patient  does not meet  exclusion  criteria.  Cytopenias  are defined  as: 
 - Hemoglobin  (Hgb)  < 8.0g/dL  
 - WBC  < 4,000  k/cumm  
 - Platelets  < 150,000  k/cumm  
f) Severe  hepatic  dysfunction  as defined  by liver function  tests (ALT,  ALP,  AST,  total bilirubin)  
> 3.0 times  the upper  limit  of normal.  as determined  by the following  limits  from  a baseline  
CMP  obtained  within  the past 7 days.  If a CMP  has not been  performed  within  the past 7 days,  
baseline  levels  may be used from  a CMP  performed  within  the past 2 months  as long as another  
CMP  is performed  on the day of enrollment  and the subject’s  levels  are within  the following  
limits.  
g) Hypersensitivity  to tedizolid  or other  oxazolidinone-class  antibiotics  or similar  compounds.  
h) Ongoing  antibiotic-associated  colitis.  
i) A diet high in tyramine-containing  foods  such as pickled  or fermented  meats  and cheeses,  wine,  or 
avocados  per investigator  discretion.  
j) Concurrent  use of sodium  picosulfate  (brand  names:  Sodipic  Picofast,  Laxoberal,  Laxoberon,  Purg-
Odan,  Picolax,  Guttalax,  Namilax,  Pico-Salax  and Prepopik).  
k) Concurrent  use of any monoamine  oxidase  inhibitors  (MAOIs)  or use of MAOIs  within  two weeks  of 
starting  the study  medication.  
l) Previous  participation  in the study.  
m) Use of tedizolid  for any condition  in the past 3 months.  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 9 of 29n) Any other  medical,  psychological,  or social  condition  that, in the opinion  of the Investigator,  
would  prevent  the patient  from  fully  participating  in the study  or would  represent  a concern  for 
study  compliance  or constitute  a safety  concern  to the patient.  
 
c) Local  Number  of Subjects  
Indicate  the total number  of subjects  to be accrued  locally.   
We will enroll  subjects  until we obtain  50 subjects  who are analyzable  and have  completed  all 
follow-ups  through  12 weeks.  The attrition  rate for this study  is unclear  but we estimate  a 
possible  attrition  rate of 10%,  which  would  require  enrollment  of approximately  55 subjects.   
If applicable,  distinguish  between  the number  of subjects  who are expected  to be enrolled  and 
screen,  and the number  of subjects  needed  to complete  the research  procedures  (i.e., numbers  of 
subjects  excluding  screen  failures.)  
We anticipate  enrolling  approximately  55 patients  as we anticipate  an approximate  10% attrition  
rate in order  to have  study  outcomes  for 50 subjects  in total.  However,  the attrition  rate for a 
study  of this length  is unclear  and we may need  to enroll  a different  number  of subjects  to 
achieve  our analyzable  population  of 50 subjects.  
d) Study-Wide  Number  of Subjects*  
If this is a multicenter  study,  indicate  the total number  of subjects  to be accrued  across  all sites.  
This is the only enrollment  site.  
 
e) Study  Timelines*  
Describe:  
 The duration  of an individual  subject’s  participation  in the study.  
Approximately  12 weeks  of in person  follow  up visits,  with a final phone  call three  months  after 
completion  of antibiotic  treatment.  Thus,  the total duration  of an individual  subject  will range  
from  16 weeks  to 24 weeks.   
 The duration  anticipated  to enroll  all study  subjects.  
Approximately  16 months.  
 The estimated  date for the investigators  to complete  this study  (complete  primary  analyses)  
Approximately  2 years.  
f) Study  Endpoints*  
Describe  the primary  and secondary  study  endpoints.  Describe  any primary  or secondary  safety  
endpoints.  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 10 of 29The primary  study  endpoint  is the tolerability  of prolonged  (> 4 weeks)  courses  of tedizolid  
antibiotic  therapy  for patients  with bone  and joint infection.  CBC  and a CMP  (comprehensive  
chemistry  panel  including  liver function  tests)  will be performed  at the following  intervals  after 
initiation  of tedizolid.  We will administer  standardized  surveys  about  drug side effects  and 
tolerability  at all follow-up  visits  (weeks  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 (optional),  7 (optional),  8 (optional),  9 
(optional),  10 (optional),  11 (optional),  12). Adverse  events  will be measured  using  the Medical  
Dictionary  for Regulatory  Activities  Terminology  (MedDRA)  version  18.1 (or the most  current  
version).  
 
The secondary  study  endpoint  is the safety  of prolonged  (> 4 weeks)  courses  of tedizolid  
antibiotic  therapy  for patients  with bone  and joint infection.  CBC  and a CMP  (comprehensive  
chemistry  panel  including  liver function  tests)  will be performed  at the following  intervals  after 
initiation  of tedizolid.  We will administer  standardized  surveys  about  drug side effects  at all 
follow  visits  (weeks  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 (optional),  7 (optional),  8 (optional),  9 (optional),  10 
(optional),  11 (optional),  12). Adverse  events  will be measured  using  the Medical  Dictionary  for 
Regulatory  Activities  Terminology  (MedDRA)  version  18.1 (or the most  current  version).  
 
The tertiary  study  endpoint  is efficacy,  which  will be defined  using  criteria  as determined  by the 
subject’s  primary  provider.  Specifically,  cure will be defined  as no need  for further  antibiotics  
beyond  the originally  planned  duration  (i.e., 6 weeks  for non-device  associated  bone  and joint 
infection  or until hardware  removal  for subjects  with implants).  Unplanned  surgical  procedures  
prompted  by inadequate  infection  control  will be categorized  as treatment  failure.  We will also 
measure  long-term  efficacy  by performing  a phone  survey  3 months  after completion  of 
antibiotics.  Recurrence  of signs  or symptoms  of bone  and joint infection  will be considered  a 
long-term  treatment  failure.  Confirmation  of subjects  self-report  with medical  record  review  will 
be performed  on an as needed  basis  when  categorization  of self-reported  outcomes  is not clear.  
g) Procedures  Involved  in the Human  Research*  
Describe  and explain  the study  design.   
The design  of this study  is a prospective,  open-label,  non-comparative  clinical  trial of tedizolid  for the 
treatment  of bone  and joint infection.  We will follow  patients  for between  16 and 24 weeks,  depending  
on the length  of their antibiotic  treatment,  for the purpose  of determining  tolerability,  safety,  and 
efficacy  of prolonged  use (> 4 weeks)  of tedizolid  in the treatment  of bone  and joint infection.  
Participants  will be enrolled  regardless  of race,  ethnicity,  or gender  (as long as they are within  18-85  
years  of age).   
 
Subjects  will be given  tedizolid  orally  200 mg once  daily  for duration  of therapy  of between  4 and 12 
weeks.  The exact  duration  of tedizolid  therapy  will be decided  by the subject’s  treating  physician.  In 
other  words,  the primary/consulting  physician  who is managing  the treatment  of the patient’s  bone  and 
joint infection  will be the one who decides  the length  of the tedizolid  treatment.   
 
Safety  and tolerability  of tedizolid  through  this study  will be guaranteed  for 12 weeks.  Provision  of 
tedizolid  therapy  beyond  12 weeks  is not guaranteed  by the clinical  trial as excessively  prolonged  
therapy  is associated  with increased  monitoring  cost (e.g.,  subject  payments,  laboratory  tests,  clinic  
utilization  costs).  If patients  require  greater  than 12 weeks  of therapy  for Gram-positive  pathogens,  study  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 11 of 29staff will contact  the subject’s  primary  provider  to arrange  alternative  oral or IV therapy.  Medications  
will be provided  by the Investigational  Drug  Service  (IDS)  on the LA BioMed/Harbor-UCLA  campus,  
which  supplies  all research  related  medications  to study  subjects  at our center.  
 
Subjects  will be enrolled  as outpatients  or as inpatients  when  discharge  is expected  in the near future  (< 
1 week).  Dr. Loren  Miller,  the primary  investigator,  and his team  will advise  the hospital  staff of the 
study  and seek their assistance  in identifying  and notifying  the study  staff of possible  subjects  who have  
presented  to the Emergency  Department,  Inpatient  Floors,  or Outpatient  Clinic  with bone  and joint 
infection.  The Investigator  or study  staff will approach  the subject’s  primary  treatment  team  and ask for 
their permission  to introduce  the study  and the study  staff to the patient.  Study  staff will then present  
information  about  the study  (See Recruitment  Script  V1.0)  to see if they are interested.  Permission  will 
be sought  from  the subject  by their primary  treatment  team  before  anyone  outside  the patient’s  primary  
treating  team  approaches  them  about  the study.   
 
 
Once  an interested  patient  is identified,  study  staff will explain  the details  of the study  to the 
subject.  If the patient  is interested  in participating,  study  staff will complete  the informed  consent  
process  in a private  setting  in the patient’s  preferred  language  (English  or Spanish).   
 
Once  informed  consent  is obtained,  we will collect  data on all subjects’  demographics,  co-morbidities,  
surgical  history,  pertinent  microbiology  results,  and all concomitant  medications  using  standardized  
forms.  For exclusion  criteria  e) and f) regarding  cytopenias  and liver function,  CBC/CMPs  from  the past 
14 days will be evaluated  through  a medical  chart  review.  Note  that if a CBC  has not been  performed  
within  the past 14 days,  a CBC  will be performed  on the day of enrollment  prior  to any study  drug being  
administered  to ensure  the patient  does not meet  exclusion  criteria  (see exclusion  criteria  e) and f)). 
 
Upon  confirmation  of eligibility,  the study  coordinators  will call the pharmacy,  which  will be the LA 
BioMed  Investigational  Drug  Service  (IDS).  The research  pharmacists  at the LABioMed  Investigational  
Drug  Service  (IDS)  will dispense  the medication  to the subject.  Subjects  will be given  detailed  verbal  
instructions  on the use of the medication  in either  English  or Spanish  as preferred  by the subject.  The 
subject  will be given  a medication  diary  and asked  to record  the time of day when  they take each pill as 
well as any side effects  or comments.  The subject  will be given  a small  card to keep  on their person  with 
information  about  the study  and study  staff and emergency  contact  information.  The study  staff will 
answer  any questions  that the subject  has at this time and will encourage  the subject  to contact  the study  
staff with any future  questions.  
 
The subject  will present  to the Clinical  and Translational  Research  Unit (CTRU),  the clinical  site of the 
UCLA  Clinical  and Translational  Science  Institute  (CTSI)  on the Harbor-UCLA  campus  for follow  up 
visits.  These  follow  up visits  will occur  at week  1, week  2, week  3, week  4, week  5, week  6, week  7, 
week  8, week  9, week  10, week  11, week  12 and week  13. All subjects  will return  for follow  up visitson  
weeks  1 – 5 and 12, and subjects  still taking  the study  drug after week  5 will continue  to return  for 
weekly  follow  up visits  until they complete  the course  or until they reach  12 weeks.  Once  subjects  
complete  the course  of the study  drug,  they will return  for one additional  weekly  follow  up visit (e.g. if a 
patient  completes  the study  drug at 7 weeks,  they will return  for visits  on weeks  1-8 and week  12). If 
subjects  take the study  drug for 12 weeks,  they will return  for a final follow  up visit on week  13. 
 
At each follow  up visit,  CBC  and CMP  (comprehensive  chemistry  panel  including  liver function  tests)  
will be collected  via a blood  draw.  This blood  sample  will be sent to Quest  Diagnostics  by the 
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 12 of 29CTSI/CTRU,  an outside  laboratory  that is contracted  with the CTSI/CTRU  to process  blood  samples.  
Additionally,  standardized  surveys  (See Data  Collection  Fields  V 1.0, Neuropathy  Scale  V 1.0, attached)  
will be administered  about  drug side effects  and tolerability,  and adverse  events  will be measured  using  
the Medical  Dictionary  for Regulatory  Activities  Terminology  (MedDRA)  version  18.1 (or the most  
current  version).  At these  follow  up visits,  we will also record  data points  relevant  to defining  the 
efficacy  of the treatment,  such as the duration  of the antibiotic  treatment,  any unplanned  surgical  
procedures  prompted  by inadequate  infection  control,  recurrence  of signs  or symptoms  of bone  and joint 
infection,  and any other  relevant  comments  or observations  from  the subject.  The subject  will also be 
asked  to bring  their study  drug medication  bottle  and medication  diary  in order  to assess  compliance.  If a 
subject  suspects  pregnancy  during  a follow  up visit,  they will be given  a pregnancy  test and the study  
team  will track  their reported  menstrual  cycle.  If the subject  does become  pregnant,  they will be 
discontinued  from  the study  drug.  Study  staff will follow  and collect  data on the course  of the pregnancy  
and the health  of the child  for at least 6-8 weeks  after delivery.  
 
Patients  with evidence  of myelosuppression  will continue  to have  weekly  CBCs  performed  until 
resolution  of the myelosuppression.  
 
Subjects  who are concurrently  taking  serotenergic  agents  while  receiving  the study  drug will be 
monitored  for signs  and symptoms  of serotonin  syndrome  at each scheduled  follow-up  visit.  Symptoms  
of serotonin  syndrome  include  agitation  or restlessness,  confusion,  rapid  heartbeat  and high blood  
pressure,  dilated  (big)  pupils,  loss of muscle  coordination  or twitching  muscles,  muscle  rigidity  
(stiffness),  heavy  sweating,  diarrhea,  headache,  shivering  and goose  bumps.  
 
The subjects  will be paid in cash for their follow  up visits.  They  will be paid $30 for the visit on 
week  1, $35 for the visit on week  2, $40 for the visit on week  3, $40 for the visit on week  4, $45 
for the visit on week  5, $45 for the visit on week  6, and $50 each visit for visits  on weeks  7, 8, 9, 
10, 11, 12 and 13. 
The total amount  of compensation  will range  between  $240  and $585  based  on the number  of 
follow  up visits  the subject  completes.  All subjects  will complete  visits  on Weeks  1,2,3,4,5,  and 
12. Subjects  still taking  the study  drug at week  6 will be required  to return  for a Week  6 follow  
up visit.  Subjects  still taking  the study  drug at week  7 will be required  to return  for a week  7 
follow  up visit,  and so on- while  patients  are receiving  the study  drug they will return  for weekly  
follow  up visits  until they have  completed  the course,  or until they have  reached  12 weeks.  Once  
subjects  complete  the course  of the study  drug,  they will return  for one additional  weekly  follow  
up visit (e.g. if a patient  completes  the study  drug at 7 weeks,  they will return  for visits  on weeks  
1-8 and week  12). If subjects  take the study  drug for 12 weeks,  they will return  for a final follow  
up visit on week  13. 
 
A phone  survey  3 months  after the subject’s  completion  of antibiotics  will be performed.  They  will be 
asked  about  their overall  well-being,  recurrence  of signs  or symptoms  of bone  and joint infection  and 
any self-reported  medical  conditions  or adverse  events  (medical  record  review  will be performed  on an 
as needed  basis  when  categorization  of self-reported  outcomes  is not clear).   
 
Provide  a description  of all procedures  being  performed  and when  they are performed,  including  
procedures  being  performed  to monitor  subjects  for safety  or minimize  risks.  Include  procedures  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 13 of 29being  performed  already  for diagnostic  or treatment  purposes  and differentiate  between  these  
and the procedures  performed  solely  for the research.   
All procedures  will be performed  either  in the Emergency  Department,  Inpatient  Wards  and 
Critical  Care  Units  (ICU,  MICU,  SICU,  CCU,  PCU)  or Outpatient  Clinics  during  study  Visit  1 
(enrollment).  Subsequent  study  visits  (week  1, week  2, week  3, week  4, week  5, week  6, week  7, 
week  8, week  9, week  10, week  11, week  12 and week  13) will take place  in the CTRC  
Outpatient  Clinic  in building  RB-3.  Laboratory  procedures  are performed  in RB-3,  room  235. 
 
Describe  procedures  taken  to lessen  the probability  or magnitude  of risks.   
We have  provided  access  to study  staff 24/7 so that if study  subjects  or parents  have  concern  of 
side effects  from  the treatment,  they can call a coordinator.  
 
Identify  which  procedures  are being  done  as part of the Human  Research  and which  are being  
conducted  anyway  for other  reasons.   
All blood  tests,  study  medications  and data collection  are being  done  as part of human  research.  
 
Describe  all drugs  and devices  used in the research  and the purpose  of their  use, and their  
regulatory  approval  status.   
Tedizolid  is a new FDA-approved  oxazolidinone  antibiotic,  available  both          intravenously  and 
orally.  Tedizolid  has a favorable  adverse  event  profile  and low thrombocytopenia  rates  compared  to 
linezolid,  due to its potency  against  Gram-positive  bacteria  that allows  it to be given  as a significantly  
lower  daily  drug dose compared  to linezolid,  its lower  systemic  free drug exposure  compared  to 
linezolid,  and its lower  duration  of treatment  compared  to linezolid . Further,  the lower  incidence  of 
thrombocytopenia  rates  with tedizolid  compared  to linezolid  may be due to its differential  potential  to 
inhibit  mitochondrial  protein  synthesis,  as shown  in pre-clinical  studies  (Flanagan  S, et al. Antimicrob  
Agents  Chemother  2014  58:6462-70).  At FDA-approved  doses,  tedizolid  has hematologic  side effects  
similar  to that of placebo.  Additionally,  unlike  linezolid,  interactions  with SSRIs  appear  unlikely.  Drug-
mitochondrial  binding,  which  is believed  to be the mechanism  to which  mid-  and long-term  toxicities  of 
linezolid  such as neuropathy  are acquired,  is not seen with tedizolid,  suggesting  that the side effects  
associated  with long-term  therapy  of linezolid  may not be found  with tedizolid.  Tedizolid  will be used in 
this research  to treat bone  and joint infection  in patients  who need  prolonged  antibiotic  treatment  for 4-
12 weeks.   
 
Because  the use of tedizolid  as prolonged  antibiotic  therapy  (4-12  weeks)  has not been  approved  by the 
FDA,  it is unknown  whether  this dosage  level  will significantly  increase  the risks  associated  with the use 
of the drug product.  Therefore,  we have  obtained  an IND from  the FDA.  We were  notified  that this IND,  
no. 133495  may proceed  on 1/12/17.  
 
Please  note that while  we are seeking  an IND,  this study  does not meet  the following  IND criteria:  
 - Tedizolid  is lawfully  marked  in the United  States  under  the brand  name  Sivextro  
- This research  is not intended  to be reported  to the FDA  as a well-controlled  study  in support  of a new 
indication  for use nor intended  to be used to support  any other  significant  change  in the labeling  for 
tedizolid  (Sivextro).  This is a pilot study  only.  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 14 of 29-This  research  is not intended  to support  a significant  change  in the advertising  for tedizolid  (Sivextro).  
- This research  is conducted  in compliance  with the marketing  limitations  described  in 21 CFR  §312.7.  
 
Describe  the source  records  that will be used to collect  data about  subjects.  Attach  all surveys,  
scripts,  and data collection  forms.   
All data will be captured  using  the REDCap  data collection  system  which  is an online,  secure  
database.  A list of the data fields  to be collected  is attached  (See Data  Collection  Fields,  V1.0).  
Surveys  administered  to patients  on enrollment  and follow  up visits  are attached  (See Data  
Collection  Fields,  V1.0,  Neuropathy  Survey  V1.0).  A script  for enrollment  is also attached  (See 
Recruitment  Script,  V1.0).  We will collect  lab (chemistry  and hematology)  and microbiological  
(culture)  reports  extracted  from  the patient’s  EMR,  including  values,  upper  and lower  limits  of 
normal,  and date and time of collection.  We will collect  a medication  diary  that each patient  will 
complete  that captures  the timing  of their daily  dosage  and any side effects  (See Medication  
Diary  V1.0,  attached).   
 
Describe  what  data will be collected  including  long-term  follow-up.  
Data  will be collected  for the initial  visit and all the follow  up visits.  All data for follow  up visits  
will be captured  using  the REDcap  data collection  system.  A complete  list of the data fields  to be 
collected  is attached  (See Data  Collection  Fields,  V1,0).   
 
 
h) Data  and Specimen  Banking*  
If data or specimens  will be banked  for future  use, describe  where  the specimens  will be stored,  
how long they will be stored,  how the specimens  will be accessed,  and who will have  access  to 
the specimens.   
All banked/stored  data will be kept in REDcap,  a secure  online  database.  Paper  copies  of PHI 
(contact  info and ICFs)  will be stored  separately  from  the paper  copies  of other  study  data.  The 
links  between  PHI and study  data will be kept in password-protected  computers  and in locked  
cabinet  files in room  228 of RB-2  on a locked  floor  of a secure  building  (RB-2).  Access  to study  
computers  and files will be limited  to study  personnel  approved  by the IRB.  Human  research  
records  including  signed  and dated  consent  forms  and other  PHI-containing  documents  will be 
stored  for at least three  years  after the study  has been  completed.  Only  study  personnel  approved  
by the IRB will have  access  to the locked  file cabinets.  
 
List the data to be stored  or associated  with each  specimen.   
The specimens  we collect  will be blood  draws  for the CBC  and CMP  tests,  which  are tests run on 
blood  to determine  the cellular  and chemical  makeup  of the blood.  The data associated  with each 
specimen  will be limited  to the subjects’  ID number  and visit number.   
All specimens  will be coded  meaning  these  items  will be labeled  the subjects  Study  ID number  
and will include  dates  (case  report  forms)  rather  than his/her  name  and/or  date of birth.  We will 
maintain  a separate  password-protected  key list/log  (electronic  file) linking  each subject  to their 
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 15 of 29Study  ID and a hardcopy  will be maintained  separate  from  individual  subject  files in a separate  
locked  filing  cabinet.  Access  to study  computers  and files will be limited  to study  personnel.  
 
 
Describe  the procedures  to release  data or specimens,  including:  the process  to request  a 
release,  approvals  required  for release,  who can obtain  data or specimens,  and the data to be 
provided  with specimens.  
If other  investigators  request  use of the data,  written  request  must  be performed  and use of the 
data will be approved  only by the Principal  Investigator.  Researchers  must  seek approval  from  
their IRB and provide  a copy  of the approval  to LABioMed  study  staff and HSC  before  any data 
is shared.  
 
i) Data  Management  * 
Describe  the data analysis  plan,  including  any statistical  procedures.  
The study  is descriptive  and thus no formal  statistical  analysis  plan has been  performed.  The number  of 
subjects  chosen  (n=50)  is based  on a sample  size believed  to have  sufficient  power  to reassure  clinicians  
that tedizolid  is safe, tolerable,  and efficacious  for the treatment  of native  bone  and hardware-associated  
bone  and joint infection.  
Of note,  confidence  intervals  for safety  and efficacy  will be calculated.  Confidence  intervals  for 
outcomes  of low incidence  (e.g.,  thrombocytopenia)  will be approximately  +/-3 - 7%. E.g., assuming  
n=50  subjects,  a low incidence  outcome  with a probability  of 2.5%  will have  95% confidence  intervals  
of <0.1%-6.8%.  Outcomes  with probabilities  farther  from  0% or 100%  will have  wider  confidence  
intervals.  For example,  we anticipate  cure rate will be 80%,  in which  assuming  n=50,  95% confidence  
intervals  will be 69%-91%.  
 
Provide  a power  analysis.  
Confidence  intervals  for safety  and efficacy  will be calculated.  Confidence  intervals  for 
outcomes  of low incidence  (e.g.,  thrombocytopenia)  will be approximately  +/-3 - 7%. E.g., 
assuming  n=50  subjects,  a low incidence  outcome  with a probability  of 2.5%  will have  95% 
confidence  intervals  of <0.1%-6.8%.  Outcomes  with probabilities  farther  from  0% or 100%  will 
have  wider  confidence  intervals.  For example,  we anticipate  cure rate will be 80%,  in which  
assuming  n=50,  95% confidence  intervals  will be 69%-91%.  
Describe  the steps  that will be taken  secure  the data (e.g.,  training,  authorization  of access,  
password  protection,  encryption,  physical  controls,  certificates  of confidentiality,  and separation  
of identifiers  and data)  during  storage,  use, and transmission.   
All source  documents  and specimens  will be coded  meaning  these  items  will be labeled  the 
subjects  Study  ID number  and will include  dates  (case  report  forms)  rather  than his/her  name  
and/or  date of birth.  We will maintain  a separate  password-protected  key list/log  (electronic  file) 
linking  each subject  to their Study  ID and a hardcopy  will be maintained  separate  from  
individual  subject  files in a separate  locked  filing  cabinet.  Access  to study  computers  and files 
will be limited  to study  personnel.  Human  research  records  including  Informed  Consent  Forms  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 16 of 29will be stored  in locked  file cabinets  for at least three  years  after the completion  of the study.  
Only  study  personnel  approved  by the IRB will have  access  to the locked  file cabinets.  
 
Describe  any procedures  that will be used for quality  control  of collected  data.   
All collected  data will be reviewed  by a second  study  coordinator  and the study  Principal  
Investigator  for internal  consistency  and validity.  
 
Describe  how data and specimens  will be handled  study-wide:  
 What  information  will be included  in that data or associated  with the specimens?   
All data and specimens  will be labeled  with the the subject  ID number.  Data  (including  
Subject  ID number  and dates  related  to study  procedures,  etc.) will be entered  into a secure  
online  computer  database,  REDCap.   
 Where  and how data or specimens  will be stored?  
      Data  will be stored  on an online,  secure  database  in password-protected  computers  in a 
locked  office.  Source  documents  including  consent  forms  will be stored  in locked  file 
cabinets  in a locked  office  of a secure  building  (room  228, RB-2).  Specimens  will be stored  
in a locked  laboratory  in a secure  building  (room  235, RB-3).  
 How  long the data or specimens  will be stored?  
De-identified  data will be banked  for 25 years  after the completion  of the study.  Source  
documents  and other  forms  and/or  data containing  PHI or linking  data with PHI will be 
stored  for at least 3 years  after the completion  of the study.  
 Who will have  access  to the data or specimens?   
The study  investigators  and the study  personnel  involved  in the conduct  of this research  and 
analysis  of the data.  
 Who is responsible  for receipt  or transmission  of the data or specimens?   
The study  coordinators/staff  as indicated  in the study  site Delegation  of Authority  Log is 
responsible  for receipt  or transmission  of the data.  The CTRU/CTSI  is responsible  for 
transmitting  all collected  blood  samples  from  the follow  up visits  to Quest  Diagnostics.   
 
How  data and specimens  will be transported?  
Any data if necessary  to be shared  amongst  the investigators  will be done  through  the use of 
the CTSI’s  REDCap  system,  an online  secure  database.  The specimens  will be transported  
per Quest  Diagnostics’  and the CTRU/CTSI’s  standards  for transporting  blood  samples,  as 
the CTRU/CTSI  sends  all blood  samples  collected  at follow  up visits  to Quest  Diagnostics  
for processing.  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 17 of 29 
 
j) Confidentiality  
 
Describe  the local  procedures  for maintenance  of confidentiality.  
 Where  and how data or specimens  will be stored  locally?  
All source  documents/data  will be maintained  in Room  228 of Building  RB-2  in a locked  file 
cabinet  in a locked  office.  Data  will be stored  digitally  via the REDCap  system,  an online  
secure  database.  Specimens  will be stored  in a locked  laboratory  in a secure  building  (room  
235, RB-3).  
 
 How  long will the data or specimens  will be stored  locally?  
All PHI or other  identifying  information,  including  the subject  log linking  the subject  name  and 
study  ID will be stored  for at least 3 years  after the completion  of the study.   De-identified  data and 
specimens  will be stored  for 25 years  after the completion  of the study.  
 
Who will have  access  to the data or specimens  locally?  
Only  persons  listed  on the Delegation  of Authority  Log will have  access  to the data locally.  
Who is responsible  for receipt  or transmission  of the data or specimens  locally?   
The Principal  Investigator  and main  study  coordinator(s)  are responsible  for receipt  or 
transmission  of the data.  The CTRC/CSTI  is responsible  for transmission  of the specimens  to 
Quest  Diagnostics.  The specimens  will be transported  per Quest  Diagnostics’  and the 
CTRU/CTSI’s  standards  for transporting  blood  samples,  as the CTRU/CTSI  sends  all blood  
samples  collected  at follow  up visits  to Quest  Diagnostics  for processing.  
How  data and specimens  will be transported  locally?  
Data  will be recorded  on paper,  using  a Case  Report  Form  Binder  (See Data  Collection  
Fields,  V1.0).   Source  documents  will be stored  in a locked  office  on a locked  floor  of a 
secure  building  in Room  228 of Building  RB-2.  
 
k) Provisions  to Monitor  the Data  to Ensure  the Safety  of subjects*  
This is required  when  Human  Research  involves  more  than minimal  risk to subjects.  
Describe  the plans  to periodically  evaluate  the data collected  regarding  both harms  and benefits  
to determine  whether  subjects  remain  safe.  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 18 of 29We will review  safety/tolerability  summary  data monthly.  On a quarterly  basis,  we will provide  
the reports  to the Data  and Safety  Monitor  for the study,  Dr. Scott  Filler.  
The plan might  include  establishing  a data monitoring  committee  and a plan for reporting  data 
monitoring  committee  findings  to the IRB and the sponsor.  
 
Describe:  
 The plan to periodically  evaluate  the data collected  regarding  both harms  and benefits  to 
determine  whether  subjects  remain  safe.  
Study  staff will review  all recorded  data at regular  monthly  intervals  with the primary  
investigator,  Dr. Loren  Miller.  If Dr. Loren  Miller  is not available,  the co-investigator,  Dr. 
Michael  Bolaris,  will review  the monthly  data.  
 
 The Data  Safety  Monitor  (Dr. Filler)  will review  safety  data including  labs, vital signs,  
results  of peripheral  neuropathy  scales,  and all reported  adverse  events,  side effects,  
complications,  or other  patient  feedback.  This review  will occur  on a quarterly  basis,  with the 
first review  happening  after either  three  months  or after 10 patients  have  been  enrolled,  
whichever  comes  first. 
 What  data are reviewed,  including  safety  data,  untoward  events,  and efficacy  data.   
All reported  adverse  events,  side effects,  or complications  will be reviewed.  
How  the safety  information  will be collected  (e.g.,  with case report  forms,  at study  visits,  by 
telephone  calls  with participants).  
Safety  information  will be recorded  by patients  in the medication  diary,  which  will be given  
to study  staff and reviewed  (See attached  Medication  Diary,  V1.0).  Additionally,  study  staff 
will inquire  with patients  at each visit (week  1, week  2, week  3, week  4, week  5, week  6 
(optional),  week  7(optional),  week  8 (optional),  week  9 (optional),  week  10 (optional),  week  
11 (optional),  week  12, and week  13 (optional)  and the phone  call at 3 months  after end of 
antibiotic  treatment)  about  safety  information  and any experienced  side effects  or adverse  
events.  This data will be recorded  on the Data  Collection  Form  by study  staff (See Data  
Collection  Fields,  V1.0)  and entered  into REDCap,  an online  secure  database.  
The frequency  of data collection,  including  when  safety  data collection  starts.  
Data  collection,  which  also includes  safety  data collection  (all reported  adverse  events,  side 
effects,  or complications)  will begin  at the initial  visit/time  of screening  and enrollment  and 
continue  at each follow  up visit (week  1, week  2, week  3, week  4, week  5, week  6 (optional),  
week  7(optional),  week  8 (optional),  week  9 (optional),  week  10 (optional),  week  11 
(optional),  week  12, week  13 (optional)  and the phone  call at 3 months  after end of antibiotic  
treatment).  
 
Who will review  the data.   
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 19 of 29The study  staff and study  investigators  will review  the data.   
 
Study  staff will review  all recorded  data at regular  monthly  intervals  with the primary  
investigator,  Dr. Loren  Miller.  If Dr. Loren  Miller  is not available,  the co-investigator,  Dr. 
Michael  Bolaris,  will review  the monthly  data.  
 
 The Data  Safety  Monitor  (Dr. Filler)  will review  safety  data including  labs, vital signs,  
results  of peripheral  neuropathy  scales,  and all reported  adverse  events,  side effects,  
complications,  or other  patient  feedback.  This review  will occur  on a quarterly  basis,  with the 
first review  happening  after either  three  months  or after 10 patients  have  been  enrolled,  
whichever  comes  first. 
 
 
The frequency  or periodicity  of review  of cumulative  data.  
 
Cumulative  safety  data will be reviewed  by the study  staff and study  investigators  as it 
becomes  available.   
The statistical  tests for analyzing  the safety  data to determine  whether  harm  is occurring.  
We will perform  reviews  once  per quarter  of the cumulative  side effects.  A summary  of these  
safety  data including  labs, vital signs,  results  of peripheral  neuropathy  scales,  and all reported  
adverse  events,  side effects,  complications,  or other  patient  feedback  will be shared  with the 
study’s  Data  Safety  Monitor,  Dr. Scott  Filler.  If there  is a statistically  significant  side effects,  
the Principal  Investigator  and/or  the Data  and Safety  Monitor  for the study,  will consider  
reporting  this to the IRB if the side effects  are felt to put subjects  at harm.  Any serious  
adverse  events  that pose a risk to the subject  or others  and are deemed  unexpected  and 
possibly  or probably  related  to the study  will be reported  to the IRB within  24 hours  of the 
study  staff being  aware  of this event,  in accordance  with HRP-214.  
 Any conditions  that trigger  an immediate  suspension  of the research.  
If, in the belief  of the Principal  Investigator  or the Data  and Safety  Monitor,  there  are events  
that put subjects  at undue  risk, due to either  cumulative  or individual  events  outlined  above,  
the study  will be immediately  suspended.  
 
l) Withdrawal  of Subjects*  
Describe  anticipated  circumstances  under  which  subjects  will be withdrawn  from  the research  
without  their  consent.   
Subjects  will be withdrawn  from  the study  without  their consent  if the principal  investigator  
determines  this is necessary  to protect  the safety  of the subject.   
Additionally,  subjects  may be withdrawn  in the following  circumstances  development  of significant  
cytopenias  and liver function  abnormalities,  symptoms  of neuropathy,  gastrointestinal  intolerance,  or, in 
the opinion  of the investigator,  any new severe  signs  or symptoms  that may be related  to the study  drug.   
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 20 of 29  
If a subject  becomes  pregnant  during  the study,  they will be discontinued  from  the study  drug.  Study  
staff will follow  and collect  data on the course  of the pregnancy  and the health  of the child  for at least 6-
8 weeks  after delivery.   
 
  
Describe  any procedures  for orderly  termination.   
Termination  of the study  will occur  based  on the primary  investigators  judgment.  Subjects  will 
be provided  referrals  for their medical  conditions,  if needed.   
 
Describe  procedures  that will be followed  when  subjects  withdraw  from  the research,  including  
partial  withdrawal  from  procedures  with continued  data collection.  
Subjects  who withdraw  from  the study  will be asked  to notify  the study  team.  No further  visits  
will be required.  Additionally,  if a subject  withdraws  from  the study,  a member  of the study  team  
will contact  their primary  treatment  physician  and/or  infectious  disease  consultant  to ensure  that 
the patient  is given  antibiotic  therapy  immediately  upon  discontinuation  of study  drug.   
 
10) Risks  to Subjects*  
List the reasonably  foreseeable  risks,  discomforts,  hazards,  or inconveniences  to the subjects  
related  the subjects’  participation  in the research.  Include  as may be useful  for the HSC’s  
consideration,  describe  the probability,  magnitude,  duration,  and reversibility  of the risks.  
Consider  physical,  psychological,  social,  legal,  and economic  risks.  
According  to the package  insert  for tedizolid  (Sivextro),  adverse  reactions  were  evaluated  for 
1050  patients  treated  with tedizolid  (200 mg oral/intravenous  once  daily  for 6 days)  in two Phase  
2 and two Phase  3 ABSSSI  (acute  bacterial  skin and soft structure  infection)  clinical  trials.  The 
median  age of patients  treated  with tedizolid  (200 mg oral/intravenous  once  daily  for 6 days)  in 
the Phase  2 and Phase  3 ABSSSI  trials  was 42 years,  ranging  between  17 and 86 years  old. 
Patients  treated  with tedizolid  (200 mg oral/intravenous  once  daily  for 6 days)  were  
predominantly  male  (65%)  and white  (82%).  
 
Serious  adverse  reactions  occurred  in 12/662  (1.8%)  of patients  treated  with tedizolid  (200 mg 
oral/intravenous  once  daily  for 6 days).  Tedizolid  (200 mg oral/intravenous  once  daily  for 6 
days)  was discontinued  due to an adverse  reaction  in 3/662  (0.5%)  of patients.  
 
The most  common  adverse  reactions  in patients  treated  with tedizolid  (200 mg oral/intravenous  
once  daily  for 6 days)  were  nausea  (8%),  headache  (6%),  diarrhea  (4%),  vomiting  (3%),  and 
dizziness  (2%).  The median  time of onset  of adverse  reactions  was 5 days for both tedizolid(200  
mg oral/intravenous  once  daily  for 6 days)  with 12% occurring  on the second  day of treatment.  
 
The following  selected  adverse  reactions  were  reported  in tedizolid-treated  patients  at a rate of 
less than 2% in the pooled  Phase  3 ABSSSI  clinical  trials:  
Blood  and Lymphatic  System  Disorders:  anemia  
Cardiovascular:  palpitations,  tachycardia  
Eye Disorders:  asthenopia,  vision  blurred,  visual  impairment,  vitreous  floaters  
General  Disorders  and Administration  Site Conditions:  infusion-related  reactions  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 21 of 29Immune  System  Disorders:  drug hypersensitivity  
Infections  and Infestations:  Clostridium  difficile  colitis,  oral candidiasis,  vulvovaginal  mycotic  
infection  
Investigations:  hepatic  transaminases  increased,  white  blood  cell count  decreased  
Nervous  System  Disorders:  hypoesthesia,  paresthesia,  VIIth  nerve  paralysis  
Psychiatric  Disorders:  insomnia  
Skin and Subcutaneous  Tissue  Disorders:  pruritus,  urticaria,  dermatitis  
Vascular  Disorders:  flushing,  hypertension  
 
Additionally,  hematology  laboratory  abnormalities  that were  determined  to be potentially  
clinically  significant  in the pooled  Phase  3 ABSSSI  clinical  trials  are provided  in Table  1. 
 
Table  1: Potentially  Clinically  Significant  Lowest  Laboratory  Values*†  in the Pooled  Phase  3 
ABSSSI  Clinical  Trials  
 
Laboratory  Assay  Tedizolid  
(200 mg oral/intravenous  
once  daily  for 6 days)  
(N=618)  ‡ 
Hemoglobin  
     (<10.1  g/dL  [M])  
     (<9 g/dL  [F]) 3.1%  
Platelet  count  
     (<112  × 103/mm3) 2.3%  
Absolute  neutrophil  
count  
     (<0.8  × 103/mm3) 0.5%  
M = male;  F = female  
* <75%  (<50%  for absolute  neutrophil  count)  of lower  limit  of normal  (LLN)  for values  normal  at baseline  
† Represents  lowest  abnormal  post-baseline  value  through  the last dose of active  drug 
‡ Number  of patients  with non-missing  laboratory  values  
 
Phase  1 studies  conducted  in healthy  adults  exposed  to tedizolid  (200 mg oral/intravenous  once  
daily)  for 21 days showed  a possible  dose and duration  effect  on hematologic  parameters  beyond  
6 days of treatment.   
 
Peripheral  and optic  neuropathy  have  been  described  in patients  treated  with another  member  of 
the oxazolidinone  class  for longer  than 28 days.  In Phase  3 ABSSSI  trials,  reported  adverse  
reactions  for peripheral  neuropathy  and optic  nerve  disorders  were  similar  between  both 
treatment  arms  (peripheral  neuropathy  1.2%  vs. 0.6%  for tedizolid  phosphate  and linezolid,  
respectively;  optic  nerve  disorders.  3% vs. 0.2%,  respectively).  No data are available  for patients  
exposed  to tedizolid  for longer  than 6 days.  
If applicable,  indicate  which  procedures  may have  risks  to the subjects  that are currently  
unforeseeable.   
Use of prolonged  tedizolid  treatment  (4-12  weeks)  has not yet been  studied  or approved  by the 
FDA,  which  may pose currently  unforeseeable  risks.  However,  tedizolid  has a favorable  adverse  
event  profile  and low thrombocytopenia  rates  compared  to linezolid  which  is approved  by the 
FDA  for prolonged  antibiotic  therapy.  Additionally,  at FDA-approved  doses,  tedizolid  has 
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 22 of 29hematologic  side effects  similar  to that of placebo.  Additionally,  unlike  linezolid,  interactions  
with SSRIs  appear  unlikely.  Drug-mitochondrial  binding,  which  is believed  to be the mechanism  
to which  mid-  and long-term  toxicities  of linezolid  such as neuropathy  are acquired,  is not seen 
with tedizolid,  suggesting  that the side effects  associated  with long-term  therapy  of linezolid  may 
not be found  with tedizolid.  Tedizolid  will be used in this research  to treat bone  and joint 
infection  in patients  who need  prolonged  antibiotic  treatment  for 4-12 weeks.   
Despite  these  promising  initial  results,  there  still may be currently  unforeseeable  risks.  For this 
reason,  Drs. Miller  and Bolaris  will closely  monitor  subject  data in monthly  reviews,  and a Data  
Safety  Monitor  (Dr. Filler)  will review  all safety  data (including  labs, vital signs,  results  of 
peripheral  neuropathy  scales,  and all reported  adverse  events,  side effects,  complications,  or 
other  patient  feedback)  every  three  months  or after 10 patients  have  been  enrolled,  whichever  
comes  first. 
If there  is a statistically  significant  side effects,  the Principal  Investigator  and/or  the Data  and 
Safety  Monitor  for the study,  will consider  reporting  this to the IRB if the side effects  are felt to 
put subjects  at harm.  Any serious  adverse  events  that pose a risk to the subject  or others  and are 
deemed  unexpected  and possibly  or probably  related  to the study  will be reported  to the IRB 
within  24 hours  of the study  staff being  aware  of this event,  in accordance  with HRP-214.  
Additionally,  if in the belief  of the Principal  Investigator  or the Data  and Safety  Monitor,  there  
are events  that put subjects  at undue  risk, due to either  cumulative  or individual  events  outlined  
above,  the study  will be immediately  suspended.  
If applicable,  indicate  which  procedures  may have  risks  to an embryo  or fetus  should  the subject  
be or become  pregnant.  
Per the Merck  Package  Insert,  there  are no adequate  and well-controlled  studies  of tedizolid  in 
pregnant  women.  In embryo-fetal  studies,  tedizolid  phosphate  was shown  to produce  fetal 
developmental  toxicities  in mice,  rats, and rabbits.  Fetal  developmental  effects  occurring  in mice  
in the absence  of maternal  toxicity  included  reduced  fetal weights  and an increased  incidence  of 
costal  cartilage  anomalies  at the high dose of 25 mg/kg/day  (4-fold  the estimated  human  
exposure  level  based  on AUCs).  In rats, decreased  fetal weights  and increased  skeletal  variations  
including  reduced  ossification  of the sternebrae,  vertebrae,  and skull  were  observed  at the high 
dose of 15 mg/kg/day  (6-fold  the estimated  human  exposure  based  on AUCs)  and were  
associated  with maternal  toxicity  (reduced  maternal  body  weights).  In rabbits,  reduced  fetal 
weights  but no malformations  or variations  were  observed  at doses  associated  with maternal  
toxicity.  The no observed  adverse  effect  levels  (NOAELs)  for fetal toxicity  in mice  (5 
mg/kg/day),  maternal  and fetal toxicity  in rats (2.5 mg/kg/day),  and rabbits  (1 mg/kg/day)  were  
associated  with tedizolid  plasma  area under  the curve  (AUC)  values  approximately  equivalent  to 
(mice  and rats) or 0.04-fold  (rabbit)  the tedizolid  AUC  value  associated  with the oral human  
therapeutic  dose.  In a pre-postnatal  study,  there  were  no adverse  maternal  or offspring  effects  
when  female  rats were  treated  during  pregnancy  and lactation  with tedizolid  phosphate  at the 
highest  tested  dose of 3.75 mg/kg/day,  with plasma  tedizolid  exposure  (AUC)  approximately  
equivalent  to the human  plasma  AUC  exposure  at the clinical  dose of 200 mg/day.  
 
For this study,  if a women  is of childbearing  potential,  she must  consistently  use an acceptable  
method  of contraception  (IUD,  injectable  contraceptive,  birth  control  patch,  OCP,  barrier  
method,  abstinence)  from  baseline  through  the course  of antibiotics  (4-12  weeks).  If a male  
patient’s  sexual  partner  is of childbearing  potential,  the male  patient  must  acknowledge  that they 
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 23 of 29will consistently  use an acceptable  method  of contraception  as defined  above  from  baseline  
through  the course  of antibiotics  (4-12  weeks).  
 
If applicable,  describe  risks  to others  who are not subjects.  
Tedizolid  is excreted  in the breast  milk of rats. It is not known  whether  tedizolid  is excreted  in 
human  milk.  Because  many  drugs  are excreted  in human  milk,  caution  should  be exercised  when  
tedizolid  is administered  to a nursing  woman.  In this study,  nursing  mothers  will be excluded.  
 
11) Potential  Benefits  to Subjects*  
Describe  the potential  benefits  that individual  subjects  may experience  from  taking  part in the 
research.  Include  as may be useful  for the HSC’s  consideration,  the probability,  magnitude,  and 
duration  of the potential  benefits.   
 
Given  the large  and increasing  burden  of disease  of bone  and joint infection  and the increasing  
acceptability  of oral antibiotics  for its management,  tedizolid  holds  promise  as a well-tolerated  
oral therapy  that can be used for patients  with bone  and joint infection  when  intravenous  options  
are not pursued  and other  oral options  are problematic.  Tedizolid  has been  shown  to have  less 
hematologic  and neurologic  side effects  in animals  compared  to similar  drugs  in its class,  
specifically  linezolid.  However,  these  advantages  have  not been  evaluated  in humans  and may 
not occur.   
Indicate  if there  is no direct  benefit.  Do not include  benefits  to society  or others.  
Not Applicable  
12) Provisions  to Protect  the Privacy  Interests  of Subjects  
Describe  the steps  that will be taken  to protect  subjects’  privacy  interests.  “Privacy  interest”  
refers  to a person’s  desire  to place  limits  on whom  they interact  or whom  they provide  personal  
information.   
Every  effort  will be taken  to make  subjects  feel at ease with the research,  and all interactions  
with subjects  will take place  in a private  setting.  
Describe  what  steps  you will take to make  the subjects  feel at ease with the research  situation  in 
terms  of the questions  being  asked  and the procedures  being  performed.  “At ease”  does not refer  
to physical  discomfort,  but the sense  of intrusiveness  a subject  might  experience  in response  to 
questions,  examinations,  and procedures.  
In an effort  to make  subjects  feel at ease with the research,  all interactions  with subjects  will take 
place  in a private  setting.  The study  procedures  (obtaining  health  information,  collection  of blood  
samples,  etc.) will be performed  in a private  setting,  such as an exam  room.  
 
Indicate  how the research  team  is permitted  to access  any sources  of information  about  the 
subjects.  
Only  study  team  members  and the study  investigator  will have  access  to the subjects’  
information  with permission  from  the subject  (See Protected  Health  Information  Form,  V1.0).  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 24 of 29 
13) Compensation  for Research-Related  Injury  
If the research  involves  more  than minimal  risk to subjects,  describe  the available  compensation  
in the event  of research  related  injury.  
Financial  compensation  for any injury  from  this research  is not available.   
 
Provide  a copy  of contract  language,  if any, relevant  to compensation  for research-related  
injury.  
Not Applicable  
14) Economic  Burden  to Subjects  
Describe  any costs  that subjects  may be responsible  for because  of participation  in the research.  
There  are no additional  costs  to subjects  participating  in this study.   
The study  drug will be provided  at no cost. Subjects  will be responsible  for costs  related  to their 
hospitalization  or visit to the Emergency  Department,  etc. and any other  costs  associated  with the 
management  of their condition  that is not part of this research.  
 
 
15) Consent  Process  
Indicate  whether  you will you be obtaining  consent,  and if so describe:  
Where  will the consent  process  take place   
The consent  process  will take place  in a private  setting  of the emergency  department,  
inpatient  wards,  or outpatient  clinics  at Harbor-UCLA  Medical  Center.  
 
Any waiting  period  available  between  informing  the prospective  subject  and obtaining  the 
consent.  
Subjects  will be given  ample  time to make  their decision  regarding  their participation.  We 
will encourage  subjects  to discuss  the research  study  with their family  members  and treating  
physician  before  making  a decision.  
 
Any process  to ensure  ongoing  consent.  
With  each contact  with the subject,  the subject  will be reminded  that participation  is 
voluntary  and of the procedures  required  at the contact/visit.  
 
 Whether  you will be following  “SOP:  Informed  Consent  Process  for Research  (HRP-090).”   
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 25 of 29We will follow  “SOP:  Informed  Consent  Process  for Research  (HRP-090)  
 
 Non-English  Speaking  Subjects  
 Indicate  what  language(s)  other  than English  are understood  by prospective  subjects  or 
representatives.   
We seek to enroll  Spanish  speaking  individuals  as well.  
 If subjects  who do not speak  English  will be enrolled,  describe  the process  to ensure  that the 
oral and written  information  provided  to those  subjects  will be in that language.  
The consent  document  and PHI authorization,  once  approved,  will be translated  into Spanish.  
Informed  consent  for Spanish-speaking  subjects  will be obtained  via one of the study  
physicians  or study  coordinators  fluent  in Spanish.   All consent  procedures  for Spanish-
speaking  individuals  will take place  in a private  setting  in the inpatient  floors,  emergency  
department,  or outpatient  setting  at Harbor-UCLA  Medical  Center.    
 
Waiver  or Alteration  of the Consent  Process  (consent  will not be obtained,  required  
information  will not be disclosed,  or the research  involves  deception)  
     Not Applicable  
 Review  the “CHECKLIST:  Criteria  for Waiver  or Alteration  of the Consent  Process”  to 
ensure  you have  provided  sufficient  information  for the HSC  to make  these  determinations.  
 If the Human  Research  involves  a waiver  the consent  process  for planned  emergency  
research,  please  review  the “CHECKLIST:  Criteria  for Waiver  of the Consent  Process  for 
Planned  Emergency  Research”  to ensure  you have  provided  sufficient  information  for the 
HSC  to make  these  determinations.  
Subjects  who are not yet adults  (infants,  children,  teenagers)  
 Describe  the criteria  that will be used to determine  whether  a prospective  subject  has not 
attained  the legal  age for consent  to treatments  or procedures  involved  in the Human  
Research  under  the applicable  law of the jurisdiction  in which  the Human  Research  will be 
conducted.  (E.g.,  individuals  under  the age of 18 years.)  
Not Applicable  
o For research  conducted  in the state,  review  “SOP:  Legally  Authorized  Representatives,  
Children,  and Guardians  (HRP-013)”  to be aware  of which  individuals  in the state  meet  
the definition  of “children.”  
o For research  conducted  outside  of the state,  submit  a statement  from  legal  counsel  
describing  which  persons  have  not attained  the legal  age for consent  to treatments  or 
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 26 of 29procedures  involved  in this Human  Research,  under  the applicable  law of the jurisdiction  
in which  this Human  Research  will be conducted.  To obtain  this statement,  have  legal  
counsel  review  the definition  of “children”  in 45 CFR  46.402(a)  or 21 CFR  50(0).  The 
HSC  can provide  you a copy  of these  regulations.  Also provide  legal  counsel  with a copy  
of the protocol  or other  document  describing  the procedures  involved  in the Human  
Research.  
 Describe  whether  parental  permission  will be obtained  from:  
Not Applicable  
o Both  parents  unless  one parent  is deceased,  unknown,  incompetent,  or not reasonably  
available,  or when  only one parent  has legal  responsibility  for the care and custody  of 
the child.  
o One parent  even if the other  parent  is alive,  known,  competent,  reasonably  available,  and 
shares  legal  responsibility  for the care and custody  of the child.  
 Describe  whether  permission  will be obtained  from  individuals  other  than parents,  and if so, 
who will be allowed  to provide  permission.  Describe  the process  used to determine  these  
individuals’  authority  to consent  to each  child’s  general  medical  care.  
 Indicate  whether  assent  will be obtained  from  all, some,  or none  of the children.  If assent  will 
be obtained  from  some  children,  indicate  which  children  will be required  to assent.  
 When  assent  of children  is obtained  describe  whether  and how it will be documented.  
Cognitively  Impaired  Adults   
 Describe  the process  to determine  whether  an individual  is capable  of consent.  
Study  population  is limited  to competent  adults.  
Adults  Unable  to Consent  
Study  population  is limited  to competent  adults.  
 List the individuals  from  whom  permission  will be obtained  in order  of priority.  (E.g.,  
durable  power  of attorney  for health  care,  court  appointed  guardian  for health  care 
decisions,  spouse,  and adult  child.)   
o For research  conducted  in the state,  review  “SOP:  Legally  Authorized  Representatives,  
Children,  and Guardians  (HRP-013)”  to be aware  of which  individuals  in the state  meet  
the definition  of “legally  authorized  representative.”  
o For research  conducted  outside  of the state,  submit  a statement  from  legal  counsel  
describing  which  individuals  are authorized  under  applicable  law to consent  on behalf  of 
a prospective  subject  to their  participation  in the procedure(s)  involved  in this Human  
Research.  To obtain  this statement,  have  legal  counsel  review  the definition  of “legally  
authorized  representative”  in 45 CFR  46.102(c)  or 21 CFR  50(l).  The HSC  can provide  
you a copy  of these  regulations.  Also,  provide  legal  counsel  with a copy  of the protocol  or 
other  document  describing  the procedures  involved  in the Human  Research.  
 Describe  the process  for assent  of the subjects.  Indicate  whether:  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 27 of 29o Assent  will be required  of all, some,  or none  of the subjects.  If some,  indicated,  which  
subjects  will be required  to assent  and which  will not. 
o If assent  will not be obtained  from  some  or all subjects,  an explanation  of why not. 
o Describe  whether  assent  of the subjects  will be documented  and the process  to document  
assent.  
16) Process  to Document  Consent  in Writing  
Describe  whether  you will be following  “SOP:  Written  Documentation  of Consent  (HRP-091).”  
If not, describe  whether  and how consent  of the subject  will be documented  in writing.  
We will be following  SOP:  Written  Documentation  of Consent  (HRP-091).  
If the consent  of the subject  will not be documented  in writing  (consent  will be obtained  but the 
subject  or representative  will not sign a consent  document)  review  “CHECKLIST:  Criteria  for 
Waiver  of Written  Documentation  of Consent”  to ensure  that you have  provided  sufficient  
information.  
Not Applicable  
 
17) Vulnerable  Populations  
If the Human  Research  involves  individuals  who are vulnerable  to coercion  or undue  influence,  
describe  additional  safeguards  included  to protect  their  rights  and welfare.  
Individuals  or populations  that might  be vulnerable  include,  but are not limited  to those  who:  
 Are susceptible  to coercion  or undue  influence  (e.g.,  the homeless,  prisoners,  students,  
patients  with limited  or no treatment  options,  socially  and economically  disadvantaged).  
 Lack  comprehension  of the research  and its risks  (e.g.,  educationally  disadvantaged,  
dementia,  schizophrenia,  or depression).  
 Are at risk for economic,  social,  or legal  consequences  from  the study  (e.g.,  individuals  who 
would  have  to answer  study  survey  questions  about  their  drug  use or HIV status).  
Indicate  specifically  whether  you will include  or exclude  each  of the following  special  
populations:  
 Adults  unable  to consent-EXCLUDED  
 Individuals  who are not yet adults  (infants,  children,  teenagers)-EXCLUDED  
 Pregnant  women-EXCLUDED  
 Prisoners-EXCLUDED  
(You  may not include  members  of the above  populations  as subjects  in your  research  unless  
you indicate  this in your  inclusion  criteria.)  
If the Human  Research  involves  cognitively  impaired  adults,  review  the “CHECKLIST:  Criteria  
for Research  Involving  Cognitively  Impaired  Adults”  to ensure  that you have  provided  sufficient  
information.  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 28 of 29If the Human  Research  involves  persons  who have  not attained  the legal  age for consent  to 
treatments  or procedures  involved  in the research  (“children”),  review  the “CHECKLIST:  
Criteria  for Research  Involving  Children”  to ensure  that you have  provided  sufficient  
information.  
If the Human  Research  involves  pregnant  women,  review  the “CHECKLIST:  Criteria  for 
Research  Involving  Pregnant  Women”  to ensure  that you have  provided  sufficient  information.  
If the Human  Research  involves  neonates  of uncertain  viability  or non-viable  neonates,  review  
the “CHECKLIST:  Criteria  for Research  Involving  Neonates”  to ensure  that you have  provided  
sufficient  information.  
18) Drugs  or Devices  
If the Human  Research  involves  drugs  or device,  describe  your plans  to store,  handle,  and 
administer  those  drugs  or devices  so that they will be used only on subjects  and be used only by 
authorized  investigators.  
Tedizolid  200 mg oral tablets  will be stored  at and dispensed  by the LA BioMed  Investigational  
Drug  Service  (IDS)  by trained  pharmacists  to the study  team  member  who will then provide  to 
the subjects.  The IDS will maintain  a drug dispensation  log and provide  to the investigator  at the 
end of the study.   
 
Because  this study  is using  tedizolid  for longer  than the FDA  approved  duration,  we have  
received  an IND (133495)  which  was approved  to proceed  on 1/12/17.  The study  drug will be 
prescribed/administered  as prolonged  antibiotic  therapy  for a duration  of time based  on the 
judgment  of the primary/consulting  physician  who is treating  the subject’s  bone  and joint 
infection.  
 
19) Multi-Site  Human  Research*  
 
Not Applicable  – not a multi-site  study.  
 
If this is a multi-site  study  where  you are the lead investigator,  describe  the processes  to ensure  
communication  among  sites,  such as: 
 All sites have  the most  current  version  of the protocol,  consent  document,  and HIPAA  
authorization.  
 All required  approvals  have  been  obtained  at each  site (including  approval  by the site’s  
HSC  of record).   
 All modifications  have  been  communicated  to sites,  and approved  (including  approval  by 
the site’s  HSC  of record)  before  the modification  is implemented.  
 All engaged  participating  sites will safeguard  data as required  by local  information  
security  policies.  
 All local  site investigators  conduct  the study  appropriately.  
 All non-compliance  with the study  protocol  or applicable  requirements  will reported  in 
accordance  with local  policy.  
Describe  the method  for communicating  to engaged  participating  sites:  
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018
PROTOCOL TITLE: Tolerability, Safety, and Efficacy of Tedizolid as Oral Treatment for Bone and Joint 
Infection 
Revised: 8/10/18   Version 1.6
 Page 29 of 29 Problems.   
 Interim  results.  
 The closure  of a study  
20) Community-Based  Participatory  Research  
Describe  involvement  of the community  in the design  and conduct  of the research.   
Note:  “Community-based  Participatory  Research”  is a collaborative  approach  to research  that 
equitably  involves  all partners  in the research  process  and recognizes  the unique  strengths  that 
each  brings.  Community-based  Participatory  Research  begins  with a research  topic  of 
importance  to the community,  has the aim of combining  knowledge  with action  and achieving  
social  change  to improve  health  outcomes  and eliminate  health  disparities.  
Not Applicable  
21) Sharing  of Results  with  Subjects  
Describe  whether  results  (study  results  or individual  subject  results,  such as results  of 
investigational  diagnostic  tests,  genetic  tests,  or incidental  findings)  will be shared  with subjects  
or others  (e.g.,  the subject’s  primary  care physicians)  and if so, describe  how it will be shared.  
Any clinically  significant  (as determined  by Dr. Loren  Miller  or Dr. Michael  Bolaris)  lab, 
culture,  or survey  results  (See Data  Collection  Fields,  V1.0  for a complete  list)  or other  
incidental  findings  will be shared  with the subject  and their primary  care providers  if clinically  
indicated.   
 
IRB NUMBER: 21814-01
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2018