1 
Version date: 02/18/2019   
A prospective,  randomized  clinical  trial to compare  
vestibular  incision  supraperiosteal  tunnel  access  (VISTA)  
and sulcular  tunnel  access  root  coverage  procedures  with  
coronally  advanced  flap and acellular  dermal  matrix  
(ADM)  to treat  teeth  with  gingival  recession  and lack of 
adequate  keratinized  tissue.  A pilot  study.  
 
 
Study  Protocol  & Statistical  Analysis  Plan  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
August  31, 2022  
 
 
 
Maria  L. Geisinger,  DDS,  MS, Principal  Investigator  
 
University  of Alabama  at Birmingham  
Birmingham,  Al 35294  
 
  
2 
Version date: 02/18/2019  A prospective,  randomized  clinical  trial to compare  vestibular  incision  supraperioste al tunnel  access  
(VISTA)  and sulcular  tunnel  access  root  coverage  procedures  with  coronally  advanced  flap and 
acellular  dermal  matrix  (ADM)  to treat  teeth  with  gingival  recession  and lack of adequate  keratinized  
tissue.  A pilot  study . 
 
 
1. Study  Protocol  1. Objectives/Specific  Aims:   
This investigator -initiated  study  will compare  two commonly  used  soft tissue  grafting  techniques  
[vestibular  incision  supraperiosteal  tunnel  access  (VISTA)  vs. sulcular  tunnel  access  root  coverage  
procedures  with the uses  of acellular  dermal  matrix  (ADM)]  to achieve  coronal  flap advancement  
and root  coverage  as well as augmentation  of soft tissue  at intraoral  tooth  sites.   Research  data  and 
daily  clinical  observations  reveal  that teeth  with  gingival  recession  and a lack of adequate  
keratinized  tissue  (KT) are more  prone  to persistent  gingival  inflammation,  dentinal  sensitivity,  
radicular  (root)  caries  (tooth  decay),  faster  periodontal  attachment  loss,  and compromised  plaque  
control.  Soft tissue  grating  (by various  techniques)  aims  at changing  the quality,  quantity  and 
placement  of the soft tissue  around  teeth  by covering  exposed  root  surfaces  and creating  or 
increasing  the zone  of keratinized  mucosa  (KM)  surrounding  the affected  teeth.  Both  techniques  
tested  have  shown  good  clinical  outcomes  with  regard  to root  coverage,  but clinical  reports  of the 
VISTA  technique  and other  similar  techniques  suggest  that patients  experience  a decrease  in site 
morbidity  and discomfort  post -operatively.  To our knowledge,  these  2 type s of grafting  techniques  
have  not been  compared  in a prospective  trial for differences  in clinical  (percentage  of root  
coverage,  amount  of KT increase,  tissue  thickness  increase,  and practitioner -assessed  esthetics)  and 
patient -centered  outcomes  (pain,  swelling,  change  in daily  activities,  and patient -assessed  esthetics)  
in a controlled  study.    
 
2. Materials  and Method:  
Study  population : 
A total  of 40 patients  seeking  treatment  at the UAB  SOD  Graduate  Periodontology  clinics  will be 
recruited  to participate  in this study.  The potential  candidates  will be approached  during  the 
treatment  planning  and/or  pre-surgical  visit in the periodontal  clinic.  The investigator/research  staff  
will give the IRB approved  consent  form  to the potential  participants,  explain  the study,  and obtain  
the patient  demographics  if the patient  participate  in the study .  
 
Procedures:  
Normal  dental  appointment:  Patients  that are seen at the school  of dentistry  for regular  dental  
care  and evaluation  may  be identified  as plausible  participants  for the study  based  on the 
inclusion  criteria,  they  will be scheduled  for a screening  appointment  to determine  eligibility  for 
inclusion  within  the study.   Screening/baseline  visit:  patient’s  electronic  records  will be reviewed  
to assess  radiographic  documentation.  If the x-ray is at least  one year  old a new  radiograph  will 
be obtained.  Two  trained  and calibrated  examiners  will conduct  clinical  and radiographic  
evaluations  to determine  eligibility  according  to the above  criteria.  Study  visits  and objectives  
will be explained  to all participants.   IRB approved  written  informed  consent  will be obtained  
from  all the participants.  Photos  will be obtain ed at the screening  visit and at each  subsequent  
visit (1-7) to evaluate  healing  of the tissue .  
 
Clinical  parameters  that will be captured  include:  
• Probing  depth  (PD)  measurements   
• Bleeding  on probing  (BOP)   
• Plaque Index (PI, Silness & Loe ): A modification of the Silness and Loe Plaque Index will be 
used full mouth. Categories 2 and 3 from the original index will be collapsed into a single 
3 
Version date: 02/18/2019  category so that examiners only have to distinguish between visible plaque and plaque 
that cannot be s een but is detectable with the probe.   A single score will be recorded for 
each tooth. A single score 0 to 2 will be recorded for buccal and lingual/palatal surface of 
each tooth examined as follows:  
0 = No plaque   
1 = A film of plaque  adhering  to the free gingival  margin  and adjacent  area  of the tooth  
which  cannot  be seen  with  the naked  eye.  But only  by using  disclosing  solution  or by 
using  probe . 
 2 = Moderate  accumulation  of deposits  within  the gingival  pocket,  on the gingival  margin  and/    
 or adjac ent tooth  surface,  which  can be seen  with  the naked  eye.   
 
• Gingival Index  (GI, Loe and Silness) at surgical site(s). A periodontal probe will be swept 
around the tooth sulcus at a depth of 1 -2 mm. The examiner will determine the status of 
tissue health. A  single score will be recorded for buccal and lingual/palatal surface of each 
tooth examined as follows:  
0 = healthy tissue  
1 = mild  inflammation  but no bleeding  
2 = moderate  inflammation  with  bleeding   
3 = severe  inflammation  with  a tendency  toward  spont aneous  bleeding  
 
• Width  of keratinized  tissue  (KT) will be measured  at tooth  site(s)  at the mid-buccal  
aspect  from  the mucosal  margin  to the mucogingival  junction . 
• Width  of attached  tissue  (AT) will be calculated  by subtracting  PD from  KM 
• Tissue  Thickness  (TT1  and TT2)  at the buccal  mucosa  will be measured  during  the 
surgical  visit by horizontal  transmucosal  probing  (sounding  the bone)  using  an 
endodontic  reamer  after  local  infiltration  of anesthetic  prior  to surgical  site preparation.  
TT1 and TT2 will be measured  at 2 mm and 5 mm from  the mucosal  margin,  
respectively .  
 
Clinical  photographs  of the tooth  site (s) will be obtained  with  one digital  SLR camera.   
 
Randomization:  two groups  (Participants  will be randomized  like the flip of a coin to one of the 
two groups  listed.)   Randomly  generated  treatment  groups  will be printed  on note  cards  and 
placed  in sealed  opaque  envelopes.   Once  the patient  consents  to participate  in the study  an 
envelope  is opened,  and the patient  is then  offered  the allocate d treatment  regimen.    
 
Group  1:  will receive  vestibular  incision  supraperiosteal  tunnel  access  (VISTA)  + 
Acellular  Dermal  Matrix  (ADM)  graft  around  teeth  with  gingival  recession  and lack of KT.  
 
Group  2: will receive  sulcular  tunnel  access  + Acellular  Dermal  Matrix  (ADM)  graft  
around  teeth  with  gingival  recession  and lack of KT.  
 
Surgical  visit (Visit  1): Patients  will be anesthetized  via infiltration  around  recipient  tooth/teeth  
site(s).   Study  surgeon  will confirm  measurements  taken  at baseline  with  relation  to width  of 
keratinized  tissue  (KT) and evaluate  thickness  of mucosa  (TT1  and TT2)  as described  above.   Surgeon  
will then  measure  the recipient  site to determine  the size of graft  needed  and ensure  that surgical  
treatment  will avoid  any vital  struc tures.  Soft tissue  grafting  procedures  will include  local  anesthesia,  
monitoring  of vital  signs  (bp, HR, O2 sat).  Study  surgeons  will follow  standard -of-care  procedures  for 
soft tissue  as follows:  
4 
Version date: 02/18/2019  • Group  1: vestibular  incision  supraperiosteal  tunnel  access  (VISTA)  + Acellular  Dermal  Matrix  
(ADM)  
The tooth/teeth  site(s)  will be prepared  utilizing  a vertical  vestibular  incision  beyond  the 
mucogingival  junction  and split -thickness  flap elevated  on buccal  aspect  leaving  a thin 
periosteum  as recipi ent bed.  Extension  of the flap to the gingival  margin  and laterally  to 
allow  for adequate  coronal  advancement  and coverage  of the ADM  graft  material  will be 
insured.  Mesio -distal  and apico -coronal  dimensions  will be measured  at recipient  site the 
ADM  mater ial trimmed  after  hydration  and washing  per package  instruction  to equal  
dimensions  and uniform  thickness  will be performed.  Exact  AMD  graft  dimensions  will be 
measured  with  a calibrated  UNC -15 periodontal  probe  and its thickness  will be measured  
using  a caliper  prior  to placement  within  the supraperiosteal  pouch  at the recipient  site.  
ADM  graft  will be secured  in position  and overlying  flap secured  in a coronal  position  with  
multiple  suture  techniques.   
 
VISTA  procedure : 
 Pt. presents  with  Miller  Class  I & II 
recession  defects  on upper  front  
teeth.12 
 Midline  incision  made  and tissue  
released. 12 
 Release  extended  to include  all 
involved  teeth. 13 
 Acellular  Dermal  Matrix  (ADM)  is 
guided  and manipulated  to cover  
all root  surfaces. 12 

5 
Version date: 02/18/2019   Tissue  is repositioned  at the 
desired  level.   Sutures  bonded  to 
the front  of each  tooth. 12 
 Midline  incision  sutured. 12 
 12 month  follow  up appt. 12 
 
• Group  2: sulcular  tunnel  access  + Acellular  Dermal  Matrix  (ADM)  graft  
The tooth/teeth  site(s)  will be prepared  utilizing  a papilla -sparing,  sulcular  incision  extending  
one tooth  mesial  and distal  to the tooth/teeth  site(s)  to be treated  and split -thickness  flap 
elevated  on buccal  aspect  leaving  a thin periosteum  as recipient  bed.  Extension  of the flap 
apically  and laterally  to allow  for adequate  coronal  advancement  and coverage  of the ADM  
graft  material  will be insured.  Mesio -distal  and apico -coronal  dimensions  will be measured  
at recipient  site the ADM  material  trimmed  after  hydration  and washing  per package  
instruction  to equal  dimensions  and uniform  thickness  will be performed.  Exact  AMD  graft  
dimensions  will be measured  with  a calibrated  UNC -15 periodontal  probe  and its thickness  
will be measured  using  a caliper  prior  to placement  within  the supraperiosteal  pouch  at the 
recipient  site.  ADM  graft  will be secured  in position  and overlying  flap secured  in a coronal  
position  with  multiple  suture  techniques.  
 
Table  2: Tunneling  and ADM  technique  
 Pt. presents  with  Miller  Class  II and 
III recession  defects.   

6 
Version date: 02/18/2019   Incision  made  on the front  of each  
tooth  to be treated.    
 Elevation  of the flap with  blunt  
dissection  to necessary  level.   
 Insertion  of acellular  dermal  
matrix.15  
 Positioning  of acellular  dermal  
matrix  with  sutures  overlying  root  
surfaces.    
 Flap positioned  at the desired  level  
and sutured  into place.    
 One month  post -operative  
evaluation  of healing.   
 
 
To help  guard  against  possible  infection,  a pre-surgical  antibiotic  loading  dose  will be dispensed  and 
prescriptions  for relief  of post -surgical  discomfort,  follow -up antibiotics  and written  home  care  
instructions  will be provided.  
 

7 
Version date: 02/18/2019  Follow  up visits:  The surgical  sites  will be examined  at 1 week  (visit  2) and 2 weeks  (visit  3) after  
surgical  visits  and loose  sutures  will be removed.   Exams  will then  be scheduled  at 1 month  (visit  4), 
3 months  (visit  5), 6 months  (visit  6), and 1 year  (visit  7).   
 
During  these  follow  up visits  the following  will take  place:  
 
1. Medical  history  review  (all visits)  
 
2. Assess  for adverse  events  experience  (all visits)  
 
3. Intra -oral photographs:  (all visits)  
 
4. Clinical  measurements:  
The width  of keratinized  tissue  (KT) will be assessed  at visits  4, 5, 6 and 7. Tissue  thickness  
(TT1  and TT2) will be evaluated  at visits  5, 6 and 7.  Clinical  measurements  will be collected  
by calibrated  examiners . Measurements  from  all visits  will be compared  to baseline  in order  
to evaluate  the progression  of healing  over  time  up to 12 month s post -op. 
 
5. Patient  satisfaction  survey  
This survey  will be performed  at visits  2 and 4 using  a visual  analogue  scale  (VAS)  based  
questionnaire  regarding  esthetic  appearance,  pain,  swelling,  bruising,  effects  on daily  
activities.  Esthetic  evaluation  by the patient  will also be assessed  at visits  6 and 7. 
 
6. Pink  Esthetics  Score  (PES)  
This standardized  assessment  of esthetics  will be performed  at visits  6 and 7 by blinded,  
calibrated  examiners .  
 
7. Study  participation  and satisfaction  survey  to be completed  at final  study  visit (visit  7) 
 
Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria : 
Inclusion  Criteria  Exclusion  Criteria  
English  speaking   
 Non -English  speaking  
At least  18 years  old Less  than  18 years  old 
Must  be a patient  of the UAB  Dental  School   Smokers/tobacco  users  (>10  cigarettes/day)  
Able  to read  and understand  informed  consent  
document.  
 Patients  with  systemic  pathologies  or conditions  
contraindicating  oral surgical  procedures  or adversely  
affecting  wound  healing.  
 
One or more  adjacent  teeth  (up to four ) with  
Miller  class  I or II gingival  recession  defects  and  
2mm  of KT at each  site to be treated.  
 Presence  of active  periodontal  disease  or radiographic  
interproximal  bone  loss or tooth  malposition,  which  
would  yield  a Miller  class  III or IV categorization  for the 
recession  defect.  
Presence  of periodontally  healthy,  non-carious  
neighboring  teeth,  healthy  implants,  or 
edentulous  ridges  on either  side of the involved  
site(s)  Presence  of frenulae  or other  soft tissue  anomalies  at 
the site(s)  to be treated  that,  in the opinion  of the 
investigators,  will interfere  with  successful  access  and 
treatment  of the soft tissue  defects.  
No anticipated  need  for restorat ive care  at the 
teeth  to be treated  during  the study  period.  Previous  soft tissue  grafting  at the site(s)  to be treated  
8 
Version date: 02/18/2019   
 
Group  Table:  
Group  Treatment  Number  of participants  
Group  1 Vestibular  incision  supraperiosteal  tunnel  access  
(VISTA)  + Acellular  Dermal  Matrix  (ADM)  graft  20 
Group  2 Sulcular  tunnel  access  + Acellular  Dermal  Matrix  
(ADM)  graft  20 
 
3. Study  Background:  
 
Soft tissue  grafting  for root  coverage  and alteration  of the quality  of gingival  tissue  surrounding  
teeth  was originally  described  in 1956  using  a Lateral  Pedicle  Flap.1 Since  that time,  myriad  
techniques  and materials  have  been  described  to improve  clinical  outcomes  and patient  
acceptance.2-6 Systematic  reviews  and meta -analyses  have  concluded  that root  coverage  and KT gain  
at sites  with  Miller  class  I or II defects  could  be reliably  achieved  with  the use of allogeneic  donor  
tissue  as well as autogenous  connective  tissue  harvested  from  a patient’s palate.7-9 Use of a tunnel  
technique  has also been  shown  to demonstrate  decreased  post -operative  discomfort  when  
compared  with  a standard  coronally  advanced  flap.10 Recently,  there  has been  renewed  interest  in 
vestibular  incisions,  originally  describe d in 191211, for the coronal  advancement  of gingival  tissues  
with  the use of graft  materials  due to purported  decrease  in post -operative  discomfort  and healing  
time.   
 
Given  the increase  in the number  of procedures  performed,  this study  seeks  to compare  two 
established  tunneling  technique  procedures  with  the use of allogeneic  soft tissue  graft  materials  to 
evaluate  clinical  and patient -centered  outcomes  to determine  if there  are any notable  differences  in 
post -operative  healing  and clinical  outcomes  associa ted with  each  technique.  
 
 
4. Outcomes  Measures  
Outcomes  will be measures  by an evaluation  of the following:  
• Percentage  previously  visible  root  surface  that has been  covered  by gingiva  at 6- and 12-
months  following  grafting  with  VISTA  and sulcular  tunnel  access  with  ADM  as compared  to 
the baseline  data.  
• KT width  as measured  in mm by practitioner  at 6- and 12-mont h following  grafting  with  
VISTA  and sulcular  tunnel  access  with  ADM  
• Change  in tissue  thickness  evaluated  with  gentle  intrasulcular  probing  and level  of 
transparency  of the grafted  sites  at 6 and 12 months . 
• Practitioner -assessed  esthetic  outcomes  using  a standardized  pink  esthetic  scale  (PES)  at 6 
and 12 months  postoperatively . 
• Patient -assessed  esthetic  outcomes  of root  coverage  and soft tissue  appearance  at 6 and 12 
months  post -operatively  
• Patient  centered  outcomes  including  pain,  bleeding,  swelling,  change  in daily  activities  at 1 
week  and 1 month  postoperatively,  see attached  Visual  Analog  Scale  (VAS)   
• Group  sample  sizes  of 20 and 20 achieve  92%  power  to detect  non-inferiority  using  a one-
sided,  two-sample  t-test.  The margin  of non-inferiority  is -1.0. The true  difference  between  
the means  is assumed  to be 0.1. The significance  level  (alpha)  of the test is 0.025.  The data  
are drawn  from  populations  with  standard  deviations  of 1.0 and 1.0. 
9 
Version date: 02/18/2019  • Regarding  patient -centered  outcomes,  there  is not adequate  data  avail able  to complete  an 
accurate  sample  size analysis  to determine  the proper  N, therefore  in this respect  this study  
serves  as a pilot  study.  
 
5. Benefits:  
Benefits  of this project  for individual  participants  include  enhancing  periodontal  soft tissue  health  
and thus  decreasing  the risks  of dentinal  sensitivity,  radicular  (root)  caries  (tooth  decay),  and tooth  
root  structure  wear  as well as a reduction  in progressive  recession  and periodontal  attachment  loss 
at the tooth  sites  to be treated.  Information  gained  from  this research  may  be used  by investigators  
to facilitate  a healthier  environment  around  teeth  with  gingival  recession  and a lack of keratinized  
tissue  (KT) with  therapies  that are well-accepted  with  low post -operative  morbidity.  
 
6. Risks 
The only  risks  associated  with  this protocol  involve  potential  loss of confidentiality  and 
randomization.   Precautions  will be taken  to ensure  that patient  confidentiality  is maintained.   All 
records  will be assigned  identifying  alphanumeric  codes  and the list linking  identifying  PHI to patient  
data  will be kept  on a password  protected  computer  and destroyed  immediately  after  statistical  
analysis  is completed.   All surveys  and consent  documents  will have  assigned  non-identifying,  alpha -
numeric  codes  and the list linking  personal  information  and patient  data  will be kept  on a password  
protected  computer  and destroyed  immediately  after  data  analysis  have  been  completed.   Intra -oral 
photos  will also be assigned  alphanumeric  codes  that link with  codes  assigned  to the demographic  
data  collection  form  and consent  documents.   Photos  will be stored  as digital  images  on encrypted  
computers  in the department  of Periodontology.  The photos  will be used  in the publication  and 
presentations.   
Regarding  the randomization  risk, patients  will be assigned  to a group  by chance,  which  may  prove  
to be less effective  than  the other.   Both  surgical  techniques  to be tested  have  been  shown  to result  
in clinical  improvements  in root  coverage  and soft tissue  quality.  There  is a chance  that one 
procedure  may  have  a risk of increased  post -operative  discomfort,  although  there  is considerable  
variability  in patient  reported  discomfort  after  having  received  the same  treatment  with  either  
group.   
Regarding  procedural  risks,  due to each  subject 's physical  and dental  conditions  being  unique,  the 
success  of tissue  grafting  cannot  be guaranteed.  Some  discomfort  after  treatment  can be 
expected.  This  may  include  pain,  bleeding,  inflammation,  and soreness.  These  discomforts  can 
be expected  to go away  within  approximately  48 hours.  The treatment  site could  become  infected.  If 
an infection  occurs,  the study  dentist  will treat  the area.  
Risks  associated  with  use acellular  dermal  matrix  (both  groups)  include  a low, theoretical  possibility  of 
viral or prion  contamination  of the materials.  No such  contamination  has ever  been  reported  and ADM  
has been  used  in many  medical  and dental  applications.  ADM  is processed  from  cadaveric  donor  skin 
and all donors  are tested  for nondetectable  levels  of HIV and HepC.  Furthermore,  it is processed  using  
proprietary  methods  to removal  all cells  and cellular  components  (and  this is histologically  verified  for 
each  processing  batch)  to allow  the collagenous  and extracellular  framework  to remain  without  the cells  
which  may  produ ce antigenicity.   
Risks  associated  with  dental  anesthesia  include  injury  to nerves,  which  may  cause  numbness  or 
tingling  of the lips, other  teeth,  chin,  face,  and tongue.   This is usually  temporary  but could  be 
permanent.  The mouth,  lips and tongue  may  remain numb  for up to four hours  after  the treatment.  
During  this time  there  may  be difficulty  eating,  drinking,  speaking,  and smiling.  
Some  subjects  may  experience  sensitivity  or allergy  to the anti-bacterial  mouth  rinse,  the local  
anesthesia,  the antibiotic s given,  or the post -treatment  medications  prescribed.   
A major  side effect  of the anti-bacterial  mouth  rinse  is staining  of the teeth.  This stain  is similar  to 
stains  left by coffee  or tea, or by smoking  and may  be removed  by professional  teeth  cleaning.  A less 
10 
Version date: 02/18/2019  frequent  side effect  may  include  temporary  changes  in taste.  This will disappear  once  use of the rinse  
is stopped.  
There  may  be other  risks  that are unknown.  
7. Confidentiality  
Data  will be stored  in a password -protected  study -specific  computer  database  within  the 
department  of Periodontology.  Photographs  of the teeth  and gums  will not be individually  
identifiable.   The computer  is backed -up by UAB  IT. Knowledge  of passwords  and access  to the 
database  will be strictly  limited  to study  personnel  who are working  with  the collected  data. 
 