Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 1 CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
A PHASE 1 MULTIPLE A SCENDING DOSE STUDY OF 
MILADEMETAN , AN ORAL MDM2  INHIBITOR, IN 
SUBJECTS WITH ADVANC ED SOLID TUMORS OR 
LYMPHOMAS  
 
PROTOCOL NUMBER : DS3032 -A-U101  
IND NUMBER: 118125  
 
VERSION 4.0 , 04 FEB  2020 
VERSION 3.0 , 29 SEP 2015  
VERSION 2.0 , 03 MAR  2015 
VERSION 1.0 , 25 MAR  2013  
 
DAIICHI SANKYO , INC. 
211 Mt. Airy Road  
Basking Ridge, NJ 07920 -2311  
United States  
 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT  
Information contained in this document is proprietary to Daiichi Sankyo, Inc .  The information is 
provided to you in confidence which is requested under an agreed upon and signed 
Confidentiality and Disclosure Agreement.  Do not give this document or any c opy of it or reveal 
any proprietary information contained in it to any third party (other than those in your 
organization who are assisting  you in this work and are bound by the Confidentiality and 
Disclosure Agreement ) without the prior written permission  of an authorized representative of 
Daiichi Sankyo, Inc . 
PPD
PPD
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 3 SUMMARY OF CHANGES  
Amendment Rationale:  
This amendment was prepared to allow evaluation of less frequent dosing schedules of once 
daily for 7 out of 28 days (QD  7/28) and QD for 3 out of 14 days (QD 3/14) repeated twice in a 
28-day cycle; remove restrictions on the timing of meal rela tive to the drug administration, 
remove the restriction of concomitant use of medications that are strong inhibitors of 
cytochrome  P450 ( CYP ) 3A. 
This amendment is considered to be substantial based on the criteria set forth in Article 10(a) of 
Directive 2001/20/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union.   
Changes to the Protocol:  
Please refer to the comparison document for  protocol Version 4.0 (dated, 04 Feb  2020) vs. 
protocol Version 3.0 (dated, 29  Sep 2015) for actual changes in -text.  The summary of changes 
below is a top -line summary of major changes in the current DS3032 -A-U101 clinical study 
protocol (Version 4.0) by section.  
CONVENTIONS USED IN THIS SUMMARY OF CHANGES  
All locations (Section numbers and/or paragraph/bullet numbers) refer to the current protocol version,  
which  incorporates the items specified in this Summary of Changes.  
Minor edits, such as updates to  language that do not alter original meaning, update to version numbering, 
formatting, change in font color, corrections to typographical errors, use of abbreviations, moving 
verbiage within a section or table, change in style, or changes in case, are not noted in the table below.  
Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
General  Changed DS -3032b to 
milademetan . International nonproprietary  
name provided . 
Cover Page  Company name and address 
changed . Company name changed and 
moved to new location . 
Sponsor Approval  Approver changed to Prasanna 
Kumar , PhD . Change in personnel . 
Protocol Synopsis (Part 1 
Secondary Objectives)  
Section 3.1.2. 1 Part 1 (Dose 
Escalat ion) Part 1 Secondary Objectives: 
moved from exploratory to 
secondary objective:  
To evaluate the response of solid 
tumors and lymphoma and their 
subtypes to milademetan using 
the Response Evaluation Criteria 
in Solid Tumors ( RECIST ) v 1.1 
or International Work ing Group 
(IWG ) criteria.  To include efficacy signals as 
one of the criteria to select the 
most optimal dosing schedule 
during dose escalation . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 4 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Protocol Synopsis (Part 1  
Exploratory Objectives)  
Protocol Synopsis (Part 2 Dose 
Expansion, Exploratory 
Objec tives)  
Section 3.1.3.1 Part 1 (Dose 
Escalation)  
Section 3.1.3.2 Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion)  Added assessment of blood and 
tumor samples for 
deoxyribonucleic  acid ( DNA ) and 
ribonucleic acid  (RNA ) analysis.  For molecular analysis of tumor 
DNA and RNA and circulating 
free DNA to identify predictors 
of response, resistance and 
toxicity to milademetan . 
Protocol Synopsis (Part 1 
Exploratory Objectives)  
Protocol Synopsis (Part 2 Dose 
Expansion, Exploratory 
Objectives)  
Section 3.1.3.1 Part 1 (Dose 
Escalation)   
Section 3.1.3.2 Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion)  Deleted specifics of assessing 
pharmacodynamic ( PDy) effect 
on reticulocyte and absolute 
neutrophil count and added if 
samples are available . Language edited for flexibility, 
since post -treatment tumor 
samples are no t always 
available . 
Protocol Synopsis (Part 2 Dose 
Expansion, Secondary Objectives)  
Section 3.1.2.2 Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion)  Deleted evaluation of relationship 
of tumor response to milademetan 
and predictive biomarkers.  Moved to exploratory objective 
becau se validated predictive 
biomarkers are not available 
yet. 
Protocol Synopsis (Part 2 Dose 
Expansion, Exploratory 
Objectives)  
Protocol Synopsis (Study Design)  
Protocol Synopsis (Study Design -
Part 2 Dose Expansion in Subjects 
with Advanced Melanoma or 
DLBCL)  
Figure 2: Flow Diagram of Food 
SubStudy Part 2   
Section 3.1.3.2 Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion)  
Section 7.3.2.2. Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion), Cycle 1/Day 1)  
Section 7.3.2.7. Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion), Cycle 2/Day 1)  
Section 7.3.2.8. Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion), Cycle 2/Day  2) Deleted food effect component of 
study; deleted from objective, 
study design . A separate food effect study on 
milademetan pharmacokinetic 
(PK) (DS3032 -A-U115) has 
been completed .  
Protocol Synopsis (Part 2 Dose 
Expansion, Exploratory 
Objectives)  Added evaluation of relationship 
between tumor response to 
milademetan and predictive Moved from secondary 
objective to exploratory 
objective ; the biomarkers are 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 5 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Secti on 3.1.3.2 Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion)  biomarkers in tumor samples.  still under exploration.  
Protocol Synopsis (Primary and 
Secondary outcome measure)  
Section 3. 2 Outcome Measures  
Section 3.2.1 Primary Outcome 
Measures  
Section 3.2.2 Secondary Outcome 
Measures  Added outcome measures and 
corresponding details for each; 
timeframe from start of study for 
approximately 6 years for all; end 
differs as detailed) .  Outcome 
measures are:  
Primary: number of subjects with 
treatment -emergent adverse 
events ( TEAEs ) during study  
until last subject last visit, 
maximum tolerated dose until 
final data base lock, number  of 
subjects with dose-limiting 
toxicities ( DLTs ) until the DLT 
evaluation of the last subject in 
dose escalation part, response 
rates in melanoma and diffuse 
large B -cell lymphoma ( DLBCL ) 
in dose expansion cohorts until 
last subject last tumor assessment 
in Dose Expansion . 
Secondary: PK parameters  and 
pharmacodynamic effect of 
milademetan  until final database 
lock. New Daiichi Sankyo, Inc.  
requirement to comply with 
CTgov and EudraCT disclosure 
guidelines . 
Protocol Synopsis (Study Design)  Added schedule for dose 
escalation:  
(eg, QD  28/28, QD  7/28, QD  3/14 
× 2). Clarification . 
Protocol Synopsis (Study Design -
Part 1 Dose Escalation)  
 Revised maximum tolerated dose 
(MTD ) model: removed modified 
continuous reassessment method 
(mCRM) throughout; kept 
Bayesian logistic regression 
model (BLRM).  
Replaced mCRM with BLRM 
throughout.  Clarification that the escalation 
is essentially based on BLRM . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 6 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Protocol Synopsis (Study Design -
Part 1 Dose Esca lation -Dose 
escalation using alternative drug 
administration schedule)  
Section 4.1.2.1 Part 1 (Dose 
Escalation)  Added less frequent dosing 
schedule to be evaluated with a 
starting dose of 120 mg that was 
the MTD d etermined in the 
QD × 21/28 -day schedule:  
QD for 7 out of 28 days (QD × 
7/28 days)  
QD for 3 out of 14 days (QD × 
3/14 days) repeated twice in a 
28-day cycle  Alternative less frequent dosing 
schedule to optimize 
milademetan treatment in dose 
escalation.  
Protocol Synopsis (Study Design -
Part 2 Dose Expansion in Subjects 
with Advanced Melanoma or 
DLBCL)  
Section 4.1.2.2 Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion in Subjects With 
Advanced Melanoma or DLBCL)  Revised text for definition of 
when dose expansion will begin 
to the establishment of 
MTD/tentative recommended 
Phase  2 dose ( RP2D ) and drug 
administration schedule in Part  1.  
Revised text from PDy response 
to PDy signals.  
Added assessment will be in 
approximately 20 subjects and 
added that tumors tested positive 
for wild type gene encoding p53 
(TP53 ) genotype.  Clarific ation . 
Protocol Synopsis (Study Design -
Part 2 Dose Expansion in Subjects 
with Advanced Melanoma or 
DLBCL)  
Section 4.1.2.2 Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion in Subjects With 
Advanced Melanoma or DLBCL)  Modified sentence:  
If the incidence of adverse events 
fulfilling the criteria of a DLT has 
exceeded that predicted by the 
escalation with overdose control 
(EWOC ) principle, after the 
initial 4 DLT -evaluable subjects 
or after further enrollment, no 
further testing at the 
MTD/tentative RP2D level 
established in Part 1 will be done 
and dose de -escalation or 
treatment at alternative dose 
schedules may be considered  for 
further evaluation of safety and 
efficacy.  Clarification.  
Protocol Synopsis (Study Design -
Part 2 Dose Expansion in Subjects 
with Advanced Melanoma or 
DLBC L) Edited the language to clarify that 
20 subject s each of melanoma and 
DLBCL with wild type TP53 will 
be enrolled in Part 2 classifier 
criteria.  Clarification . 
Protocol Synopsis (Study Design -Added to include dose expansion.  Clarified who needs to be 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 7 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Part 2 Dose Expansion TP53 
genotyping, subject enrollment 
and early discontinuation 
criteria) - Modified language that only the 
investigator will be informed if 
the test confirms the presence of 
inactivating TP53 mutations.  
Removed allowing subject to 
continue if genotyping 
indetermina te. 
Removed details of methodology 
of TP53 genotyping, 
specifications of type of samples, 
handling of results, and re -testing.  informed and the result that 
should be shared with the 
investigator as it pertains to the 
study conduct .  
Protocol Synopsis ( Part 2 [ Dose 
Expansion in Subjects with 
Advanced Melanoma or 
DLBCL ]) 
Section 4.1.2.2. Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion in Subjects With 
Advanced Melanoma or DLBCL)  Added to end of section:  
“for further evaluation of safety 
and efficacy. ” Clarification.  
Protocol Synopsis (Dose -Limiting 
Toxicity Definition)  
Section 4.1.5.2 Dose -limiting 
Toxicities  Deleted Grade ≥ 3 for febrile 
neutropenia.  Febrile neutropenia is already 
Grade ≥ 3.  
Protocol Synopsis (Study Design -
Part 2 Dose Expansion TP53 
genotyping, subject enrollment , 
and early discontinuation 
criteria) - 
Protocol Synopsis (Subject 
Eligibility Criteria)  
Section 5.1.2 Exclusion Criteria  
Section 5.2 Removal of Subjects 
from Therapy  
Section 5.2.1 Reasons for 
Withdrawal/Early Discontinuation  
Section  9.2.1. TP53 Status  In synopsis: deleted redundant 
text and added inclusion criterion 
14, applicable to Part 2 only: 
subject willing to undergo pre -
treatment tumor biopsies.  
Exclusion criteria header revised 
to indicate criteria apply to both 
Part 1 and Part 2.  
Deleted “contain s a 
nonsynonymous mutation”  
Added “ contain s an inactivating 
mutation”  
Added “contain s an inactivating 
mutation” to Part 1 and Part 2 
exclusion criteria.  
Added clarification that whenever 
subject withdraws, they will be 
followed  for 30 days or beyond 
until resolution of toxicity.  “Containing an inactivating 
mutation” or “contain an 
inactivating mutation” added 
for further clarity.  
Protocol Synopsis (Study 
Duration)  Changed from 3 to 6 years.  Update of study duration.  
Protocol Synopsis (Study Sites Modified that 5 sites to be used Clarification that the same sites 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 8 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
and Location)  for both escalation and expansion.  to be used for both parts.  
Protocol Synopsis (Planned 
Sample Size)  Changed text to potentially 
evaluate multiple dosing 
schedules.  
Added that sample size is not 
known because of the multiple 
dosing schedules to be evaluated 
to determine the most optimal 
schedule.  
Defined subject population 
further as advanced melanoma 
and DLBCL.  
Removed details on obtaining 10 
biomar ker positive subjects.  Update on sample size  
Protocol Synopsis (Planned 
Sample Size)  
Section 12.10 Sample size 
Determination  Removed : 
“with biomarker -positive tumors” 
from paragraph:  
For the Dose Expansion  phase 
(Part 2),  approximately 
20 subjects (each o f subjects with 
advanced melanoma and DLBCL) 
will be enrolled.   Clarification.  
Protocol Synopsis (Subject 
Eligibility Criteria)  
 
Section 5.1.1 Inclusion Criteria  For Part 2 Inclusion Criteria, 
removed text indicating additional 
inclusion criteria for sol id 
tumor/lymphoma expansion; 
revised to melanoma/DLBCL.  
For Part 1 and Part 2:  
Added bullet under criteria 1 that 
subjects with certain tumor types 
(eg, well-differentiated 
(WD)/dedifferentiated ( DD) 
liposarcoma) may be 
preferentially enrolled in Part 1.  Clarification.  
Protocol Synopsis (Statistical 
Analysis)  Added for tumor response that 
additional efficacy analyses, 
including progression free 
survival  and spider plots, will be 
detailed in the statistical analysis 
plan ( SAP). Clarification.  
Section 2.1. 1.5. Nonclinical 
Studies  Deleted nonclinical sections for 
pharmacology, safety 
pharmacology, absorption, 
distribution, metabolism, Clinical data are now available 
and this information moved to 
the c urrent Investigator’s 
Brochure (IB).  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 9 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
excretion , toxicokinetics, 
toxicology, and phototoxicity.  
Section 2.1.1.5.1 Human Starting 
Dose  
Section 2.1.1.6 Clinical 
Experience  
Section 2.3.1 Potential Risks 
Associated with Milademetan  
2.3.2 Potential Risk of Drug -Drug 
Interaction  Text added for reader to refer to 
curren t IB. Clinical data are now available 
in the current IB.  
Protocol Synopsis (Dosage Form, 
Dose and Route of 
Administration)  
Section 2.4 Population, Route, 
Dosage, Dosage Regimen, 
Treatment Period  
Section 6.1 Investigational 
Products  Two other capsule strengths of 30 
and 100 mg added.  Additional strengths now 
available.  
2.3.2 Potential Risk of Drug -Drug 
Interaction  Data added detailing completed 
Phase 1 study in healthy subjects 
evaluating the effect of co -
administration of strong CYP3A4 
inhibitors and  instructing the 
investigator to reduce dose of 
milademetan to half when 
concomitantly administered with 
strong CYP3A4 inhibitors.  Important safety data for 
CYP3A4 inhibitors available 
and the summary needed to be 
highlighted in the protocol.  
Section 3.3  Study Hypothesis  Revised to solid tumors and 
lymphomas vs. melanoma and 
DLBCL.  Clarification.  
Section 4.1.1 Study Type  New header and text added 
describing study and number of 
sites.  New template.  
Section 4.1.2 Treatment Groups  Section revised.  Text ad ded that 
safety and tolerability will be 
determined by the PDy response 
in tumor samples and preliminary 
efficacy will be determined in 
advanced melanoma or DLBCL.  
Dosing schedule specified as 
QD × 21/28  days but option based 
on results to use an alternati ve 
dosing schedule if there is clinical 
benefit.  Clarification.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 10 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Section 4.1.2.1 Part 1 (Dose 
Escalation)  Added text that the MTD will be 
guided by a BLRM following 
EWOC principle after an initial 
accelerated titration design (ATD) 
and that this will minimize the 
number of subject treated at sub -
therapeutic doses.  
Toxicity levels for decision 
making for enrollment of next 
dose and defining DLT for the 
ATD were specified.  
EWOC principle requirements for 
BLRM recommended dose for the 
next cohort of subje cts added.  
Identification of Sponsor’s 
clinical team and investigators as 
determining the selection of the 
dose to be tested in the next 
cohort of subjects.  
Defined that safety, PK and PDy 
data collected using 
QD × 21/28 -day schedule 
determines the alternative drug 
administration schedule.  Also 
added that if the alternative 
dosing schedule provides less 
toxicity and more benefit, this 
alternative dosing schedule will 
be used in lieu of or in parallel 
with the QD  × 21/28 -day 
schedule.  
Scenarios defin ing the situations 
where this would apply were 
defined; Case 1 (starting dose less 
frequent than QD  × 21/28 -day 
schedule) added.  
For Case 3, added that the first 
cohort to be evaluated will begin 
treatment with milademetan at 90 
mg QD  × 21/28  days, 
prefere ntially in subjects with 
liposarcoma.  
Added criteria for dose reduction 
in the case of platelet decrease or 
thrombocytopenia.  
Added less frequent dosing 
schedules to be considered if the Clarification.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 11 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
starting dose of 120  mg is the 
MTD.  
Both the original 
QD × 21/28  days and alternative 
dosing schedules are explored in 
parallel.  
The final MTD for each dosing 
schedule will be decided based on 
considerations of the respective 
MTDs estimated by the BLRM, 
and on an overall assessment of 
safety data from subsequent 
cycles and  PK/PDy information 
collected at all different doses 
tested.  Upon determining the 
final MTD of the original 
QD × 21/28  days and/or 
alternative dosing schedules, one 
dosing regimen will be selected 
for further evaluation in Part 2 
(Dose Expansion) and as t he 
tentative RP2D.   
Section 4.1.2.2 Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion in Subjects With 
Advanced Melanoma or DLBCL)  Added:  
Upon establishing MTD/tentative 
RP2D and drug administration 
schedule in Part  1, the Dose 
Expansion part will begin with 
the in tention of confirming the 
safety and tolerability of 
milademetan, determining the 
PDy signals in tumor samples, 
and evaluating preliminary 
efficacy of milademetan in 
approximately 20  subjects each 
with advanced melanoma and 
DLBCL whose tumors are tested 
positive for wild -type TP53 
genotype.   Clarification.  
Section 4.1.2.2 Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion in Subjects With 
Advanced Melanoma or DLBCL)  Tumor re -biopsy added:  
To search for possible 
mechanisms of acquired 
resistance to milademetan, an 
optional tumor re biopsy may be 
performed within 30 days 
following the last dose of 
milademetan treatment for 
subjects who have achieved an Clarification.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 12 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
initial complete response 
(CR)/partial response (PR) or 
stable disease for at least 6 
months by standard response 
criteria but later d eveloped 
progressive disease (PD) while on 
therapy (both in Dose Escalation 
and Dose Expansion), preferably 
prior to initiating new therapy.  
Section 4.1.2.2 Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion in Subjects With 
Advanced Melanoma or DLBCL)  
Section  9.2.1. TP53 Status  Added to TP53 genotyping, 
subject enrollment, and early 
discontinuation criteria:  
During Dose Escalation and Dose 
Expansion, tumor TP53 
genotyping will be performed in 
archived formalin -fixed paraffin -
embedded and, if available, fresh 
tumor bio psies in all enrolled 
subjects.  Confirmation of TP53 
wild-type status is NOT required 
prior to milademetan dosing.  The 
investigator will be informed if 
the genotyping confirms the 
presence of inactivating TP53 
mutations: testing result shows 
that a subje ct’s malignant cells 
contain  an inactivating mutation, 
insertion, or deletion in the TP53 
gene.  If study treatment has 
already begun, the subject may 
choose to discontinue study drug  
or continue study drug  as long as 
clinical benefit is noted per the 
investigator’s judgment.   Deleted text as there is not an 
established sensitive gene 
expression signature, nor do  all 
TP53 wild type represent a 
sensitive population . 
Section.9.2.1. TP53 Status  Revised during dose expansion 
that tumor samples may be 
analyzed for DNAseq and by 
RNAseq.   
Protocol Synopsis  
Section.9.2.1. TP53 Status  Deleted “Nonmutant PT53 
genotype and/or presence of a 
sensitive gene expression 
signature constitute the 
“biomarker positive” population.   
Section 5.2.2 Withdrawal 
Procedures  Deleted: Protocol -specified 
withdrawal procedures are the 
same as those to be performed at Clarification.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 13 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
the End -of-Treatment Visit . 
Section 5.2.4 Subject Re -
Screening Procedures  Added to end of paragraph:  
… re -screened subjects, except 
for those that were not repeated 
during re -screening (eg, tumor 
biopsies) or other tests that are 
still valid within the screening 
window per the medical monitor  Clarification.  
Section 6.2.1. Prohibited 
Concomitant 
Medications/Activities  Added that if drugs that are str ong 
inhibitors of CYP3A need to be 
taken concomitantly, then 
milademetan dose must be 
reduced to half the assigned dose.  
Added Seville oranges as 
prohibited.  Clarification.  
Section 7.3.1.5. Part 1 (Dose 
Escalation), Cycle 1/Day s 18 to 
21 Added:  
(For subjects enrolled in the 
QD × 7/28 days schedule, this 
visit is needed only if there are 
unresolved Grade ≥  3 adverse 
events ( AEs) or Grade ≥  2 
thrombocytopenia on Day  15 that 
need follow up).  Clarification (because there is 
no drug administration or other  
assessments at this time  point in 
the QD  × 7/28 day  schedule)  
Section 7.3.1.11. Part 1 (Dose 
Escalation), Cycle 4 and All 
Subsequent Cycles, Day  1 Added:  
For Cycle  4 Day  1 and beyond: 
subjects who completed more 
than 1 year of treatment with 
continued c linical benefit and no 
ongoing Grade ≥  3 TEAEs or risk 
thereof in the judgment of the 
investigator are allowed to 
continue on with the subsequent 
visits at every other cycle, and 
may have additional visits as 
clinically needed.  To allow  less frequent visit s for 
subjects after confirmation of 
safety, tolerance , and benefit for 
more than 1 year on treatment . 
Section 7.3.2.12. Part 2 (Dose 
Expansion), Cycle 4 and All 
Subsequent Cycles, Day 1  Added:  
For Cycle  4 Day  1 and beyond: 
subjects who completed more 
than 1 year of treatment with 
continued clinical benefit and no 
ongoing Grade ≥  3 TEAEs or risk 
thereof in the judgment of the 
investigator are allowed to 
continue on with the subsequent 
visits at every other cycle, and To allow  less frequent visits for 
subjects after confirmation of 
safety, tolerance , and benefit for 
more than 1 year on treatment . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 14 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
may have additional visits as 
clinicall y needed.  
Section 7.3.1.5. Part 1 (Dose 
Escalation), Cycle 1/Days 18  to 
21 Added:  
(For subjects receiving study drug  
under the QD  7/28  days or 
QD 3/14 days schedules, the 
blood sample collection 
[exploratory blood samples, PK 
samples, ad macrophage 
inhibitory cytokine -1 (MIC -1) 
induction] on Cycle  1 Days  18 to 
21 is not required)  Clarification that the sample 
collection in the said schedules 
are not need at this time  point 
due to time lag after the last 
dose. 
Section 8.1. Efficacy Variable(s)  Added:  
As a complementary approach to 
the exploratory objective #2 in 
Part 1 (Section 3.1.3.1), 
particularly in WD/DD 
liposarcoma that are preferentially 
enrolled in the study due to high 
prevalence of murine double 
minute 2  amplification, the 
growth rates of the target tumors 
before starting milademetan 
versus on -treatment with 
milademetan may be analyzed by 
capturing the  target tumor 
measurements by local reading in 
2 or more prior scans from the 
medical records, if available.  
Additionally, a digital or 
electronic copy of the computed 
tomography ( CT)/magnetic 
resonance imaging ( MRI) scans 
performed for RECIST  v 1.1 
assess ment may be collected by 
the sponsor for centralized 
analysis by sponsor -appointed 
radiologist(s) as a post -hoc 
exploration of the effect of 
milademetan on specific tumor 
histologies (eg,  WD/DD 
liposarcoma).  
Deleted:  
If feasible, multiple pre -screening 
CT/MRI scans may be collected 
and included in the analysis to Additional exploratory anal ysis 
of the tumor responses in solid 
tumor subp opulations (WD/DD 
liposarcoma).  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 15 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
compare the progression rate 
before milademetan treatment vs 
tumor response after starting 
milademetan.  Any additional 
results will also be data protected 
for privacy.  
Section 9.1 Pharmacokinetic 
Assessment(s)  Revised blood samples collected 
for PK analysis of milademetan.  
Added table  
Description of PK parameter 
analyses moved to Section  12.5.1. Clarification of the PK sample 
collections for the different 
dosing schedules with a table 
and footnotes . 
Section  9.2.1. TP53 Status  Revised to DNAseq and RNAseq 
vs sensitive gene expression 
signature .  Revised to the exploratory 
analysis by DNAseq and 
RNAse q, because a sensitivity 
gene expression signature was 
not available . 
Section 10.4.3 Grade Assessment  Added National Cancer Institute 
Common Terminology Criteria 
for Adverse Events guidelines for 
certain AEs and clarification that 
for each episod e, the highest 
severity grade attained should be 
reported.  
Life-threatening definition 
modified to include urgent 
intervention indicated.  Clarification.  
Section 12.2. 3 Biomarker 
Positive Analysis Set  Deleted.  Deleted because of the absence 
of a validated  sensitivity 
biomarker . 
Section 12.2.4. Dose -Limiting 
Toxicity Evaluable Set  Added to further define as 
milademetan doses during the 
first 3 weeks (21 days).  Clarification.  
Section 12.2.6.  Pharmacokinetic 
Analysis Set  Added that subjects in this 
analysis set had any amount of 
milademetan and had measurable 
plasma concentrations of 
DS-3032a  (the free form of 
milademetan).  Clarification.  
Section 12.2.7. Biomarker 
Analysis Set  New text:  
The PDy biomarker analysis set 
will include all subjects in th e 
enrolled analysis set who received 
any amount of milademetan and 
who had the baseline assessment Definition of PDy biomarker 
analysis set added.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 16 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
and where applicable, at least 
1 post-baseline assessment for 
biomarkers.  
Section 12.4.1. Primary Efficacy 
Analyses  Added:  
Change in tumor size comparing 
to pretreatment/historical data 
will be presented graphically.  
Additional details will be 
presented in the SAP.  Additional exploratory analysis 
of tumor response . 
Section 12.4.2. Secondary 
Efficacy Analyses  Added:  
In addition, the growth rates of 
the target tumors before starting 
milademetan based on prior scans 
from subjects’ medical records 
versus on -treatment with 
milademetan may be summarized.  
Additional analyses will be 
described in the SAP.  Additional exploratory analysis 
of tumor response.  
Section 12.5.1. Pharmacokinetic 
Analyses  Revised section that plasma 
concentration data will be 
summarized using descriptive 
statistics , and a table was added 
for the parameters to be analyzed 
in the dose escalation  and 
expansion phases using non -
compartmental analyses.  
Added that Population 
pharmacokinetic ( PopPK ) and 
exposure response may be 
developed but will be provided 
separately along with results.  Clarification with the table and 
footnotes to explain the PK 
sample collections for the 
different dosing schedules . 
Protocol Synopsis (Predictive 
Biomarker Parameters)  
Section 9.2.3. Exploratory 
Biomarker Analysis  
Section 12.5.3. Biomarker and 
Exploratory Analyses  Added that pre -treatment, on -
treatment, and end -of-treatment 
tumor samples will be examined.  
Deleted:  
“in the form of multi -gene and/or 
protein signature “ and p14, p16, 
and CDKN2A.   Clarified the biomarker analysis 
of tumor samples and removed 
the multigene and/or protein 
signature that is not available 
yet. 
Section 12.11. Specification of 
Bayesian Logistic Regression 
Model with Escalation with 
Overdose Control  Removed mCRM throughout . Clarification by replacing 
mCRM with BLRM.  
Table 18.2 Schedule of Events 
Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  Added to sampling for 
exploratory blood samples, PK Updates of the schedule of 
events and footnotes for all the 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 17 Section # and Title  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
collection and MIC -1 induction, 
that these samples are not 
required of subjects receiving 
study drug  under the 
QD 7/28 days or QD  3/14 days 
schedules, the blood sample 
collection on Cycle  1 Days  18 to 
21. different dosing schedules.  
Table 18.2 Schedule of Events 
Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  
Table 18.3 Schedule of Events 
Part 2 (Dose Expansion)  Abbreviations added and updated . 
Text added to electrocar diogram  
footnote regarding subjects 
enrolled per Case 3.  
PK sampling schedule updated . Updated to match updates in 
text. 
Table 18.4 Schedule of Events 
(Extension Phase)  New footnote added:  
For subjects who completed more 
than 1 year of study drug  with 
continued clinical benefit and no 
ongoing clinically significant 
TEAEs or at risk of clinically 
significant TEAEs in the 
judgment of the investigator, the 
subsequent visits every other 
cycle, and additional visits as 
clinically indicated, is allowed.  
Footnote  modified from every 
other cycle to every 3 cycles and 
as clinically indicated.  To allow  less frequent visits for 
subjects after confirmation of 
safety, tolerance , and benefit for 
more than 1 year on treatment . 
 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 18 1. PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
1.1. Protocol Synopsis  
IND Number:  118125  
Protocol Number:  DS3032 -A-U101  
Investigational Product:  Milademetan  (DS-3032b ) 
Active Ingredient(s)/INN:  (3'R,4'S,5'R) -N-[(3R,6S) -6-Carbamoyltetrahydro -2H-pyran -3-
yl]-6''-chloro -4'-(2-chloro -3-fluoropyridin -4-yl)-4,4-dimethyl -
2''-oxo-1'',2'' -dihydrodispiro[cyclohexane -1,2'-pyrrolidine -3',3''-
indole] -5'-carboxamide mono(4 -methylbenzenesulfonate) 
monohydrate  
Study Title:  A Phase 1 Multiple Ascending Dose Study of Milademetan , an 
Oral MDM2  Inhibitor, in Subjects with Advanced Solid Tumors 
or Lymphomas  
Study Phase:  Phase 1  
Indication Under Investigation:  Milademetan  will be evaluated  in subjects with advanced s olid 
tumors or lymphomas that are refractory to standard therapy or 
for which no standard therapy is available.  
Study Objectives:  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  
Primary Objectives:  
To assess the safety and tolerability of milademetan  in subjects 
with advanced solid tumors or lymphomas who have relapsed 
from or are refractory to standard therapy or for whom no  
standard therapy is available.  
To determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) or tentative 
recommended Phase 2 dose (RP2D) of milademetan  in subjects 
with advanced solid tumors or lymphomas.  
Secondary Objectives:  
1. To determine the plasma pharmacokinetics (PK)  of 
DS-3032 a (the free form of milademetan ). 
2. To determine the pharmacodynamic (PDy) effect of 
milademetan  on macrophage inhibi tory cytokine -1 
(MIC -1) levels in serum . 
3. To evaluate the response of solid tumors and lymphoma 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 19 and their subtypes to milademetan  using the 
corresponding standard response criteria (Response 
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors [RECIST ] v 1.1 or 
revised International Working Group [IWG] criteria , 
respectively ). 
Exploratory Objectives:  
1. To compare progression free survival  (PFS) between that 
observed with milademetan  treatment and that observed 
from the most recent therapeutic regimen . 
2. To bank  blood  samples  for deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 
analysis for the assessment of potential biomarkers  
(eg, murine double minute 2 [ MDM2 ] single -nucleotide 
polymorphism [ SNP] 309) that may be predictive of 
benefit or toxicity from milademetan . 
3. To assess blood and tumor samples for DNA or 
ribonucleic acid ( RNA ) analysis that may be predictive 
of benefit or toxicity from milademetan.  
4. To evaluate the relationship between tumor response to 
milademetan  and potential predictive biomarkers st udied 
in archived tumor samples , pre-treatment tumor biopsies , 
if available, and/or blood samples . 
5. To assess  the PDy effect of milademetan  on the 
expression levels of  p53, p21, MDM2, murine double 
minute 4 ( MDM4 ), Ki67, apoptosis markers , and/or 
other biomarkers in pre- and post -treatment solid 
tumor/lymphoma samples , if available .  
6. To characterize th e plasma metabolites of DS -3032a . 
Part 2 (Dose Expansion)  
Primary Objectives:  
1. To confirm the safety and tolerability of milademetan  at 
the MTD /tentative RP2D  in subjects with advanced 
melanoma or diffuse large B -cell lymphoma  (DLBCL) 
who have relapsed from  or are refractory to standard 
therapy or for whom no standard therapy is available.  
2. To assess  tumor response  in subjects with melanoma 
using RECIST v 1.1 and in subjects with DLBCL using 
the revised  IWG criteria.  
Secondary Objectives:  
1. To determine the PK profile of DS-3032a  at the 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 20 MTD/ tentative RP2D . 
To determine the PDy effect of milademetan  on MIC -1 levels in 
serum . 
Exploratory Objectives:  
1. To compare PFS between that observed with 
milademetan  treatment  and that observed from the most 
recent therapeutic regimen . 
2. To bank  blood samples for DNA analysis for the 
assess ment of potential biomarkers (eg, MDM2  
SNP 309) that may be predictive of benefit or toxicity 
from milademetan . 
3. To assess blood and tumor samples for DNA or RNA 
analysis that may be predictive of benefit or toxicity 
from milademetan.  
4. To assess the PDy effect of milademetan  on the 
expression levels of p53, p21, MDM2, MDM4, Ki67, 
apoptosis markers, a nd/or other biomarkers in pre - and 
post-treatment solid tumor/lymphoma samples , if 
available . 
5. To characterize the plasma metabolites of DS -3032 a. 
6. To evaluate the relationship between tumor response to 
milademetan  and biomarkers studied in archived tumor 
samples and pretreatment, on -treatment, and 
end-of-treatment tumor biopsies . 
Primary Outcome Measure  
Title:  Number of subjects with treatment -emergent adverse 
events ( TEAEs ) during the study  
Details:  Number of subjects with TEAEs by frequency and 
grade in each cohort of dose and dosing schedule and the 
total number of subjects with the TEAEs  
Timeframe:  From start of study until last subject last visit  
(approximately 6 years).  
 
Title:  Maximum tolerated  dose(s)  
Details:  MTD(s) identified at different dosing schedules  
Time frame:  From start of study until final database lock 
(approximately 6 years)  
 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 21 Title:  Number of subjects with dose-limiting toxicities 
(DLTs ) 
Details:  Number of subjects with DLTs at each dose [level 
/cohort] and the total number of subjects with DLTs  
Time frame:  From start of study until the DLT evaluation of 
the last subject in dose escalation part  (approximately 6 years  
or less ) 
 
Title:  Response rate s in melanoma and DLBCL in dose 
expansion cohorts  
Details:  Number and percentage of subjects with melanoma 
and DLBCL in dose expansion cohorts who achieved 
objective response per RECIST v  1.1 and IWG, respectively  
Time frame:  From start of study until last  subject last tumor 
assessment in Dose Expansion (approximately 6 years)  
 
Secondary Outcome Measure  
Title:  PK parameters of milademetan  
Details:  Determination of milademetan PK parameters 
(maximum plasma  conce ntration [C max], time to reach  
maximum plasma  concentration [ Tmax ], AUC, apparent 
clearance [ CL/F ], and half-life [ T1/2 ]). 
Timeframe:  From start of study until final data base lock 
(approximately 6 years)  
 
Title:  Pharmacodynamic effect of milademetan  
Details:  Pharmacodynamic effect of milademetan assessed 
by increase in serum MIC -1 levels over baseline.  
Time frame:  From start of study until final databa se lock 
(approximately 6 years)  
Study Design  This will be a Phase 1, open -label study of milademetan  to 
assess its safety and tolerability, identify a n MTD /tentative 
RP2D , and assess its PK/PDy properties in subjects with 
advanced solid tumors or lymphomas.  
Dose regimen  
Milademetan  will be administered once daily on Days  1 to 21 
of a 28 -day cycle  (once a day [QD] × 21 /28 days) .  An 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 22 alternative drug administration schedule for dose escalation 
may be considered based on safety, PK, and PDy data 
collected during Dose Escalation using the above schedule, 
and upon review by the Principal  Investigators and Sponsor  
(eg, QD 28/28, QD 7/28, QD 3/14  × 2). 
Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  
Dose  escalation of milademetan  to determine the MTD  will be 
guided by a Bayesian logistic regression model (BLRM) 
following escalation with ove rdose control (EWOC) principle  
following an initial accelerated titration design  (ATD) .  
Accelerated titration design for determining initial dose for 
escalation by BLRM with EWOC . 
Before starting BLRM , initial dose escalation will proceed 
following an ATD  in order to minimize the numb er of subjects 
treated at sub -therapeutic doses of the drug.  The proposed 
human starting dose of milademetan  is 15 mg/day .  Single 
subject s will be enrolled into sequential dose levels with a 
dose increment of 100% from the previous dose .  
Over-enrollment  in ATD up to 3  subjects per cohort is 
permitted .  The dose for ending  ATD will be the dose level in 
which one of the following occurs:  
 One Grade 2 or highe r milademetan -related  toxicity  
according to National Cancer Institute Common 
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v 4  
(NCI -CTCAE v4) during Cycle 1 , 3 to 6 subjects will be 
enrolled at the next dose level, which will be guided by 
BLRM1; or 
 If a DLT is observed during Cycle 1, the co hort will first 
be expanded to 3  DLT -evaluable subjects  and the next 
2 subjects in the expanded cohort will receive milademetan  
treatment starting at least 1 week apart.   If no further DLT 
is reported, the cohort will be expanded to include up to 3 
additional DLT -evaluable subjects prior to initiation of 
BLRM  in the next dose level.  
The information from the accelerated titration stage will be 
included in the Bayesian model for dose escalation.  
Dose  level increment during dose escalation by BLRM  with 
                                                 
1 For isolated NCI -CTCAE v4 Grade ≥ 2 laboratory abnormalities that are not associated with signs or symptoms, 
transition from ATD to BLRM will be at the discretion of the Investigator . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 23 EWOC  
The dose increment during BLRM  will be as follows:  
 The dose level increment should be no less than 30 % in 
order to have distinction among dose levels considering 
the inter -subject variability in exposure , but flexibility may 
be applied in selecting th e dose to accommodate the 
available dosage form strengths.  
 The dose level increment should be no more than 100% 
even if the model suggested a higher dose than 100% for 
the next cohort.  
 In the event of a DLT, the next 2 subjects in the expanded 
cohort will receive milademetan  treatment starting at least 
1 week apart.  
The dose escalation will be based on a BLRM  with EWOC 
principle.  The logistic regression model for the dose -toxicity 
(DLT rat e) relationships will include 2  parameters : the 
intercept and the slope.  After the first 3  subjects of each 
cohort complete  DLT evaluation  during Cycle 1, the posterior 
distributions of the DLT rate will be derived for all dose levels 
based on the BLRM using the DLT outcome data from all 
assessed exposure levels and a p re-specified prior distribution 
for the model parameters.  The posterior probability of the 
DLT rate in the following 4  intervals at each dose level: [0%, 
16%] as the DLT rate interval for under -dosing, [16%, 33%] 
as the target DLT rate interval, [33%, 60% ] as the DLT rate 
interval for excessive toxicity, and [60%, 100%] as the DLT 
rate interval for unacceptable toxicity will then be calculated, 
and used for dose recommendation for the next cohort 
according to the EWOC principle.  
The EWOC principle require s that the BLRM  recommended 
dose for the next cohort of subjects is the one with the highest 
posterior probability of the DLT rate in the target DLT rate 
interval of [16%, 33%] among all dose levels fulfilling the 
overdose control constraint: there is less  than 25% of 
probability for the DLT rate   33% (probability for excessive 
or unacceptable toxicity).  
The dose to be tested in the next cohort of subjects chosen by 
the Sponsor ’s clinical team and the investigator (s) involved in 
the clinical study will be based on the do se recommended by 
the BLRM , clinical assessment of toxicity profiles, and 
PK/PDy information observed thus far . 
Cohorts of 3 to 6 subjects will be enrolled and assessed for 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 24 DLT before escalation to a new higher dose.   As an exception, 
the mo del will be reevaluated before enrollment of any 
additional subjects to the cohort if 2 evaluable subjects in the 
cohort experience DLT before the enrollment of the next 
subject.  Enrollment of subjects to a new cohort requires 
completion of DLT evaluation of at least 3 subjects treated in 
the current cohort.  Subjects who have neither completed DLT 
evaluation nor experienced DLT will be censored and not 
included in the BLRM update .  In the event that subjects in the 
previous cohort experience DLT after the enrollment of 
subjects to a new cohort has begun, dose level assignment of 
the next subject in the new cohort will be based on an updated 
BLRM using DLT outcome data from all ass essed doses.  
For a subject to be considered evaluable for dose escalation 
decisions, the subject must have received 75% of the doses 
(ie, 16 days) during  Cycle 1 , or experienced a DLT in Cycle  1.  
The final MTD  will be decided based on considerations of th e 
respective MTD  estimated by the BLRM , and on an overall 
assessment of safety data from subsequent cycles and PK/PDy 
information collected at all different doses tested.  For dose 
determination, the following stopping rules will be 
implemented for the Dose Escalation  part: (a) at least 
6 evaluable subject s at MTD  level with at least 21  evaluable 
subjects in total enrolled in the Dose Escalation  part, or (b) at 
least 9  evaluable subjects  have been  enrolled at a dose level 
that is the model’s recommendation for the next dose cohort 
and for which the posterior probability of targeted toxicity is at 
least 50%, or  (c) dose level -1 is too toxic.  
Cohorts may be expanded at any dose level or at the MTD  for 
further elaboration of safety, PK, or PDy parameters as 
required.  
Dose escalation using alternative drug administration schedule  
Based on safety, PK, and PDy data collected during Do se 
Escalation using the QD  × 21/28-day schedule of 
milademetan , an alternative  drug administration schedule for 
dose escalation may be considered  following review by the 
Principal Investigators  and Sponsor .  Modeling and simulation 
will be performed to evaluate DS -3032a  exposure relationship  
to PDy and toxicity .  If the results indicate that using an 
alternative dosing schedule may provide less toxicity (eg, 
myelosuppression) while offering pharmacodynamic benefits 
based on available biomarkers or a better PK profile, dose 
escalation using this recommended alternative dosing schedule 
will be performed in lieu of, or in p arallel with the 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 25 QD × 21/28 -day schedule.  For example:  
 Case 1: If the recommended dosing schedule is less 
frequent than QD × 21/28 days, the starting daily dose of 
the new schedule will be same as the highest daily dose 
tested for the QD  × 21/28 -day sched ule that showed DLT 
in less than one -third of evaluable subjects.    
 Case 2: If the recommended dosing schedule is more 
frequent than QD  × 21/28 days (eg, QD continuous 
× 28 days) , the starting daily dose will be ≤ 75% of the 
highest daily dose tested for  the QD  × 21/28 -day schedule  
that showed DLT in less than one -third of evaluable 
subjects .  This starting dose of the new schedule will 
provide the same 4 -week cumulative dose while reducing 
daily exposure by ≥ 25%.  
 Case 3: If additional testing is suggested to optimize the 
dosing regimen (to maintain sufficient dose density over 
time without requiring frequent dose interruptions as a 
result of delayed toxicities ) after the MTD is identified , 
then dosing may initiate at a dose l evel lower than MTD in 
that dosing regimen .  Subject enrollment may be limited to 
one or a small number of cancer types or molecular sub -
types depending on available clinical data for milademetan  
with the dosing regimen and investigator experience  with 
this class of compound .  Up to 15 subjects may be enrolled 
in the cohort and enrollment may be conducted in parallel 
with Part 2 of the study.  
The first cohort to be evaluated will begin treatment with 
milademetan  at 90 mg QD × 21/28 days, preferentially in 
subjects with liposarcoma considering the existing data in 
this patient population at 120 mg QD × 21/28  days and 
90 mg QD × 2 8/28 days  for comparison of safety.  
The dose of 90 mg QD × 21/28 days  is evaluated to define 
a hematologically safe and tolerable regimen based on the 
safety data at the doses previously evaluated (15 mg 
through 30, 60, 120, 160 and 240 mg QD × 21/28 days , 
with the determination of MTD at 120 mg ) in this dosing 
schedule.  Most DLTs arose from myelosuppression, 
particularly thrombocytopenia, which  also resulted in dose 
delays and dose reductions in the subjects who continued 
in Cycle 2 and subsequent cycles.  Therefore to reduce the 
risk of progressing to more severe bone marr ow toxicities 
and dose interruptions during continued treatment, the 
following dose adjustment rules will be followed  for 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 26 Cycle  2 and subsequent cycles : 
 If platelets decrease to <  50% of baseline (the 
platelets measured at Cycle 1 Day 1) or 
Grade  ≥ 2 throm bocytopenia 
(Platelets  < 75 × 109/L) at the end of Cycle  1, 
then:  
o If platelets decrease by >  50% from 
baseline, but are ≥ 75 × 109/L, do not 
interrupt milademetan  dosing, but reduce 
the dose of milademetan  to 60  mg 
QD × 21/28 days.  
o If Grade ≥ 2 thrombocytopenia, hold 
dosing of milademetan .  When the 
platelets recover to ≥ 75 × 109/L, resume 
milademetan  at a reduced dose of 60 mg 
QD × 21/28 days.  
 Dose interruptions and further dose reductions 
due to toxicity will be allowed .  
After an initial cohort of 3 subjects has completed treatment 
in Cycle 1, the dose may be adjusted based on the safety 
results and discussion between the investigators and the 
Sponsor.  
In addition to the above dose dense schedules, the following 
less frequ ent dosing schedules will be evaluated in dose 
escalation with a starting dose of 120 mg that was the MTD 
determined in the QD  × 21/28 days schedule:  
 QD for 7 out of 28 days (QD × 7/28 days)  
  QD for 3 out of 14 days (QD × 3/14 days) repeated twice 
in a 28 -day cycle  
Both the original QD  × 21/28 days and alternative dosing 
schedules are explored in parallel.  
The final MTD for each dosing schedule will be decided based 
on considerations of the respective MTDs estimated by the 
BLRM , and on an overall assessment  of safety data from 
subsequent cycles and PK/PDy information collected at all 
different doses tested.  Upon determining the final MTD of the 
original QD  × 21/28 days and/or alternative dosing schedules, 
one dosing regimen will be selected for further eval uation in 
Part 2 (Dose Expansion) , which may also be  the tentative 
RP2D . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 27 Dose-Limiting Toxicity Definition  
A DLT is defined as any TEAE not attributable to disease or 
disease -related processes that occurs during the observation 
period ( Cycle  1) in each dose -level cohort and is Grade 3 or 
higher according to NCI -CTCA E v4, with the exceptions as 
defined below:  
For hematologic events, a DLT is defined as follows:  
 Grade 4 neut ropenia lasting  > 7 days  
 Febrile neutropenia  
 Grade 4 anemia  
 Grad e 4 thrombocytopenia or Grade ≥ 3 thrombocytopenia 
lasting more than 7 days or associated with bleeding  
 Dose delay > 7 days secondary to myelosuppression  
For elevations in hepatic function enzymes, a DLT is defined 
as follows : 
 Grade 4 aspartate aminotransferase (AST)/alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT) levels  
 AST/ALT  > 5  upper limi t of normal (ULN) lasting  
> 3 days without liver metastases  
 AST/ALT  > 5  ULN if accompanied by  ≥ Grade 2 
elevation in bilirubin  
 AST/ALT  > 5  ULN lasting  > 3 days, if the  baseline level 
was ≤ 3  ULN in subjects with liver metastases  
 AST/ALT  > 8  ULN lasting  > 3 days, if the baseline level 
was > 3  ULN in subjects with liver metastases  
The following adverse events are NOT considered DLTs:  
 Grade 3 fatigue lasting  < 3 days  
 Grade 3 nausea or vomiti ng that has resolved to Grade ≤ 2 
within 48 hours  after standard antiemetic therapies  
 Grade 3 diarrh ea that has resolved to Grade ≤ 2 within 48 
hours  after standard antidiarrheal therapies  
 Isolated laboratory findings not associate d with signs or 
symptoms including Grade 3/4 alkaline phosphatase, uric 
acid, amylase, and lipase elevations, and  Grade 3 
hyponatremia lasting  < 72 hours  developed from Grade 1 
at baseline  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 28  Grade  3/4 lymphopenia  
Subjects who are unable to complete at l east 75% of the 
prescribed dose  of milademetan  in the first 21  days as a result 
of nondisease -related ≥ Grade 2 adverse event s will be 
considered to have a DLT.  
 A delay of ≥ 1 week in initiating Cycle 2 secondary to a 
nondisease -related ≥ Grade 2 adverse event will be 
considered a DLT.  
Part 2 (Dose Expansion in Subjects w ith Advanced 
Melanoma or DLBCL)  
Upon establishing  MTD /tentative RP2D  and drug 
administration schedule  in Part 1 , the Dose Expansion part 
will begin with the intention of confirming the safety and 
tolerability of milademetan , determining the PDy signals  in 
tumor samples, and evaluating preliminary efficacy of 
milademetan  in approximately 20 subjects each with advanc ed 
melanoma and DLBCL  whose tumors are tested positive for 
wild-type TP53 genotype .   
Four subjects of each tumor type will initially be treated.  
Following the completion of the first cycle, a safety analysis 
will be conducted to allow the reevaluation of  the 
appropriateness of the dosing level.   If the incidence of 
adverse events fulfilling the criteria of a DLT has exceeded 
that predicted by the EWOC principle, after the ini tial 
4 DLT -evaluable subjects or after additional  enrollment, no 
further testing at the MTD/ tentative RP2D  level  established in 
Part 1 will be done , and dose de -escalation or treatment at 
alternative dose schedules may  be considered  for further 
evaluation of safety and efficacy . 
Tumor assessment (Part 1 and Part 2)  
Tumor assessment will be performed  according to the study 
schedule  at baseline, every 2 cycles while the subject remains 
on study for the first 8 cycles and then every 3  cycles 
thereafter (start of Cycles 3, 5, 7, and 9, then Cycles 12, 15, 
etc.).  
Tumor re -biopsy  
To search  for possible mechanisms of acquired resistance to 
milademetan , an optional tumor re -biopsy may be performed 
within 30 days following the last dose of milademetan  
treatment for subjects who have achieved an initial complete 
response ( CR)/partial response ( PR) or stable disease for at 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 29 least 6 months  by standard response criteria but later 
developed progressive disease (PD) while on therapy (both in 
Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion), preferably prior to 
initiating new therapy . 
TP53 genotyping, subject enrol lment , and early 
discontinuation criteria  
 During Dose Escalation  and Dose Expansion , tumor 
TP53 genotyping will be performed in archived 
formalin -fixed paraffin -embedded (FFPE) and, if 
available, fresh tumor biopsies in all enrolled 
subjects.  Confirmation  of TP53 wild -type status is 
NOT required prior to milademetan  dosing .  The 
investigator will be informed if the genotyping 
confirms the presence of inactivating TP53 mutations 
testing result shows that a subject’s malignant cells 
contain an inactivating m utation, insertion, or 
deletion in the TP53 gene.  If study treatment has 
already begun, the subject may choose to discontinue 
study drug  or continue study drug  as long as clinical 
benefit is noted per the investigator’s judgment .  
TP53 re -testing can be c onsidered.   
Study Duration:  The study duration is expected to last approximately 6 years 
from the time the first subject is enrolled in Part 1 of the study.  
The number of treatment cycles is not fixed in this study.  
Subjects  who continue to derive clinical benefit from treatment 
in the absence of withdrawal of subject consent, progression, or 
unacceptable toxicity may continue treatment.  Subjects in Part 1 
and Part 2 who are still on study at least 6 months after 
enrollment i s completed in both the parts will be eligible to 
continue receiving study drug in a separate extension phase of 
the protocol .  Data collected from those subject s may be 
captured in a separate database.  
Study Sites and Location:  Approximately  5 United Sta tes sites are planned for Part 1 ( Dose 
Escalation ) and  for Part 2 ( Dose Expansion ).  The same sites are 
planned to participate  for both parts.  
Planned Sample Size:  The Dose Escalation phase of this study (Part 1) consists of an 
ATD  followed by BLRM  + EWOC  design with at least 3 DLT -
evaluable subjects  per dose level .  At least 21 DLT -evaluable 
subject s are needed  to reach an accurate estimate of the MTD .  
However, to better define an RP2D that will be clinically 
beneficial to the subjects as well as hematol ogically safe and 
tolerable for prolonged treatment without dose delays , subjects 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 30 in additional cohorts and multiple dosing schedules may be 
added. 
Sample size for the dose escalation part of the study  is not 
known because of the multiple dosing schedules to be 
evaluated to determine the most optimal schedule .  No formal 
statistical assessment has been performed.  
For the Dose Expansion  part (Part 2),  approximately 
20 subjects (each of subjects with advanced melanoma and 
DLBCL ) will be enrolled .  If response  rate is more than  25% 
(null hypothesis: response rate  ≤ 0.25, alternative hypothesis: 
response rate  > 0.25) , then the probability  of no response out  of 
10 subjects  will be less than 10% .  The probability that 4 or 
more responders out of 10 subjects  are observed will be  less 
than 25%  under the null hypothesis but more than 80% under 
alternative hypothesis with response rate  = 0.50.  
The probability values for the sample size are derived based on 
binomial distribution using SAS Version 9.2.  
Subject El igibility Criteria:  Inclusion Criteria  
1a. Dose Escalation Cohorts ( Part 1)  
Has a histologically or cytologically documented 
advanced solid tumor or lymphoma that has relapsed 
from or is refractory to standard treatment, or for which 
no standard treatment is a vailable.   
 Subjects with melanoma who are ineligible to receive 
or have declined ipilimumab treatment , or who are 
refractory or intolerant to ipilimumab may enroll.  
 Subjects with certain tumor types such as those with 
high prevalence of MDM2 amplification or 
overexpression (eg, well-differentiated 
(WD)/dedifferentiated ( DD) liposarcoma) may be 
preferentially enrolled  in Part 1 . 
1b. Dose Expansion Cohort (Part 2)  
Has a his tologically or cytologically documented 
advanced melanoma or DLBCL, with measurable 
disease that is refractory to standard treatment or for 
which no standard treatment is available.  
Subjects with melanoma who are ineligible to receive or 
have declined ipil imumab treatment, or who are 
refractory or intolerant to ipilimumab may enroll.  
Subjects with DLBCL who have failed, been deemed 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 31 ineligible for, or refused autologous stem cell 
transplantation may enroll.  
2. Male or female ≥ 18 years old.  
3. Has an Eastern Coope rative Oncology Group (ECOG) 
performance status 0  to 1. 
4. Has adequate bone marrow function, defined as:  
 Platelet count ≥ 100  109/L 
 Hemoglobin  ≥ 9.0 g/dL  
 Absolute neutrophil count ≥ 1.5  109/L 
5. Has adequate renal function, defined as:  
 Creatinine clearance  ≥ 60 mL/min, as calcula ted using 
the modified Cockcroft -Gault equation,  ([140 - age (in 
years)] × weight (in kg)  / [serum creatinine (in mg/dL) × 
72]; multiply by 0.85 if female ), OR 
creatinine  ≤ 1.5  ULN  
6. Has adequate hepatic function, defined as:  
 AST/ALT  ≤ 3  ULN (if liver metastases are present,  ≤ 5 
 ULN)  
 Bilirubin  ≤ 1.5  ULN  
7. Has adequate blood clotting function, defined as:  
 International normalized ratio  (INR)  and activated partial 
thromboplastin time (aPTT) ≤ 1.5  ULN  
8. Subject should be able to provide written informed consent, 
comply with protocol visits and procedures, be able to take 
oral medication, and not have any active infection or 
comorbidity that would interfere with therapy.  
9. Subject (male and female) of childbearing/reproductive 
potential must agree to use double -barrier contraceptive 
measures or avoid intercourse during the study and for 90 
days after the last dose of study drug.  
10. Subject must be fully informed about their illness and the 
investigational nature of the study protocol (in cluding 
foreseeable risks and possible side effects) and must sign 
and date an Institutional Review Board -approved informed 
consent form (including Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act authorization, if applicable) before 
performance of any study -specific procedures or tests.  
11. Is willing to provide and there is confirmed availability of 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 32 pre-existing diagnostic or resected tumor samples, such as 
paraffin -embedded sections .  Providing  fresh tumor biopsy 
is optional  for subjects in Dose E scalatio n cohorts .  
12. Is willing to undergo tumor genotyping for TP53 mutation , 
insertion,  or deletion at screening.  Confirmation of TP53 
nonmutant  status is encouraged, but not required  prior to 
milademetan  dosing.  
13. Is willing to provide additional archived samples  for 
comprehensive genomic and/or proteomic analyses if the 
subject has a partial response ( PR)/complete response ( CR) 
to milademetan  treatment.  
14. (Applicable to Part 2 only) Is willing to undergo pre -
treatment tumor biopsies (post -treatment biopsies are 
requested ). 
Exclusion Criteria  
Part 1 and Part 2: Dose Escalation  and Dose Expansion  
1. Has a tumor that contains an inactivating mutation, 
insertion , or deletion  in the TP53 gene determined 
previously or at  screening.   
2. Has a history of primary central nervo us system 
malignancy.  
3. Has g astrointestinal condition s that could affect the 
absorption of milademetan  in the opinion of the 
investigator.  
4. Has an uncontrolled infection requiring intravenous 
antibiotics, antivirals, or antifungals, known human  
immunodeficiency virus infection, or active hepatitis B 
or C infection.  
5. Has received an allogeneic bone marrow or allogeneic 
stem cell transplant.  
6. Has a concomitant medical condition that would increase 
the risk of toxicity, in the opinion of the investigator or 
Sponsor.  
7. Has clinically active brain metastases, defined as 
untreated and symptomatic, or requiring therapy with 
steroids or anticonvulsants to control associated 
symptoms.  Subjects with treated brain metastases that 
are no longer symptomat ic and who require no treatment 
with steroids may be included in the study if they have 
recovered from the acute toxic effect o f radiotherapy.  A 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 33 minimum of 4  weeks must have elapsed between the end 
of whole brain radio therapy and study enrollment 
(2 weeks  for stereotactic radiotherapy).  
8. Has unresolved toxicities from previous anticancer 
therapy, defined as toxicities (other than alopecia) not 
yet resolved to NCI-CTCAE  v4, Grade ≤ 1 or baseline.  
Subjects with chronic Grade 2 toxicities may be eligible 
per the disc retion of the investigator and S ponsor (eg, 
Grade 2 chemotherapy -induced neuropathy) .   
9. Had an autologous transplant within 3  months of starting 
study drug treatment.  
10. Is receiving concomitant treatment w ith a strong inducer 
of cytochrome P450 ( CYP ) 3A. 
11. Had systemic treatment with anticancer therapy, 
antibody -based therapy, retinoid therapy, or hormonal 
therapy within 3 weeks before study drug treatment; or 
treatment with nitrosoureas or mitomycin C within 
6 weeks before study drug treatment; or tre atment with 
small -molecule targeted agents within 2 weeks before 
study drug treatment .  Previous and concurrent use of 
hormone replacement t herapy, the use of 
gonadotropin -releasing hormone modulators for prostate 
cancer, and the use of somatostatin analog s for 
neuroendocrine tumors are permitted if such therapy has 
not been changed within 8 weeks before study drug 
treatment.  
12. Had therapeutic radiation therapy or major surgery 
within 4 weeks before study drug treatment or palliative 
radiation therapy within 2 weeks before study drug 
treatment.  
13. Participated in a clinical study within 3  weeks before 
study drug treatment, or current participation in other 
therapeutic investigational procedures.  
14. Prolongation of corrected QT interval by Fridericia’s 
method (QT cF) at rest, where the mean QT cF interval is 
> 450 ms for males and >  470 ms for females  based on 
triplicate electrocardiogram (ECG).  
15. Pregnant or breastfeeding.  
16. Substance abuse or medical, psychological, or social 
conditions that, in the opinion of the investigator, may 
interfere with the subject’s participation in the clinical 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 34 study or evaluation of the clinical study results.  
17. Prior treatment with an MDM2  inhibitor.  
Dosage Form, Dose and Route 
of Administration:  Milademetan  will be administered as an or al caps ule.  It will be 
supplied in 5, 20, 80, and 200  mg capsules individually 
packaged in desiccant -embedded aluminum blisters .  Two other 
capsule strengths of 30 and 100 mg will also be supplied in 
high-density polyethylene bottles .  
Study Endpoints:  Safety Endpoint s: 
Safety parameters  will include serious adverse events , TEAEs, 
physical examination findings (including ECOG performance 
status), vital sign measurements, standard clinical laboratory 
parameters  (serum chemistry, hematology, urinalysis) , and ECG 
parameter s.  Adverse events  will be graded according to the 
NCI-CTC AE v4.  Dose escalation will be determined by plasma 
drug concentrations and rate of DLTs.  
Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Endpoints : 
Plasma PK and standard non -compartmental P K parame ters will 
be assessed.   Plasma samples for PK assessments will be taken 
at multiple time point s in the study.  Additionally, PK sample s 
may also be obtained outside of the specified time point s during 
the study if deemed clinically necessary.   
Induction of serum MIC -1 will be the primary PDy biomarker.  
Whole blood samples will be collected at multiple time point s in 
the study  to assess the effect of milademetan  treatment on 
MIC -1 induction.  Other exploratory PDy biomarkers including, 
but not l imited to, expression levels of p53, p21, MDM2 , 
MDM4 , Ki67, apoptosis markers , and/or other biomarkers  will 
also be assessed , if available . 
Efficacy Endpoints : 
In solid tumor subjects with measurable disease , tumor response 
will be evaluated using RECIST v 1.1.  In subjects with  
lymphomas, treatment response will be evaluated using the 
revised IWG criteria.  
Statistical Analyses  The primary analysis will occur either after all subjects in Part 1 
and Part 2 have disco ntinued the study or at least 6  months after 
enrollment  of the last subject .  After the primary analysis, the 
main study will be closed.  Subjects in Part 1 and Part 2 who are 
still on study drug at the time of the primary analysis will be 
eligible to continue receiving study drug in a separate  extension 
phase of the protocol , and data collected from those subject s 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 35 may be captured in a separate database.   
Descriptive statistics will be provided for selected demographic, 
safety, PK, and PDy data by dose and time as appropriate.  
Descriptive stati stics on continuous data will include means, 
medians, standard deviations, and ranges, while categorical data 
will be summarized using frequency counts and percentages.  
Graphical summaries of the data may be presented.  
Safety Endpoints : 
The safety profile  will be based on serious adverse events , 
TEAEs,  physical examination findings  (including ECOG 
performance status) , vital sign measurements, standard clinical  
laboratory endpoints  (serum chemistry, hematology, urinalysis) , 
and ECG endpoints .  All subjects receiving at least 1 dose of 
milademetan  will be included in the safety analyses.  
Tumor Response:  
Response assessment will be performed according to the 
Schedule of Events or if disease progression is suspected.  
Radiographic assessment should  include computed  tomography 
(CT) of all affected sites.  In addition, subjects with lymphoma 
should undergo a (18F) fluorodeoxyglucose -positron emission 
tomography  (FDG -PET) scan.  Tumor responses will be 
assessed by the investigator according to RECIST v 1.1 criteria 
for subjects with solid tumors and revised IWG criteria for 
subjects with lymphoma.  Descriptive statistics for the greatest 
percent change in the sum of longest dimensions (SLD) of 
measurable tumors will be provided.  A waterfall plot of the  
greatest percent change from screening in the SLD for each 
subject will be presented for subjects with advanced solid 
malignancies and lymphomas .  Additional efficacy analyses, 
including PFS  and spider plots, will be detailed in the Statistical 
Analysis Plan ( SAP).  In addition, descriptive statistics for 
FDG -PET scans will be provided for lymphoma subjects 
according to revised IWG criteria.  
Pharmacokinetic  Endpoints : 
Plasma concentrations of milademetan will be listed and 
summarized using descriptive sta tistics by dose cohort at each 
time point .  A non -compartmental analysis will be performed to 
estimate PK endpoints , which include Cmax , time to Cmax 
[Tmax], minimum plasma concentration (Cmin ), area under the 
curve until 8 hours [AUC0 -8h] and 24 hours [AU C0-24h], 
accumulation index [AI], as well as any other endpoints  deemed 
appropriate.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 36 A Population pharmacokinetic  [PopPK] analysis and exposure -
response analysis for various endpoints may be developed.  The 
analysis plan and the Technical Report will be provided 
separately.    
Pharmacodynamic  Endpoints : 
Changes in MIC -1 levels in serum and other PDy markers, if 
available, will be listed and summarized using descriptive 
statistics by dose level cohort.  
Predictive Biomarker Endpoints : 
Archived or pre-treatment , on-treatment, and end -of-treatment 
biopsied tumor samples will be examined for components of the 
p53 pathway , which may include, but are not limited  to, 
expression of p53, p21, MDM2 , MDM4 , and MDM2  copy 
number , and TP 53 mutations.   Additional biomarkers outside of 
the p53 pathway may  be included in order to better understand 
the responsiveness to therapy.  These may include protein, 
metabolite, gene expression, or genetic biomarkers.  
Analyses for potential biomarkers  that may be  predictive of 
benefit from milademetan  will be graphed and/or listed and 
summarized using descriptive statistics by dose level cohort .  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 37 1.2. Study Schema  
Figure  1.1: Flow Di agram of Dose Escalation Phase  
 
BLRM = Bayesian logistic regression model; DLT = dose -limiting toxicity; EWOC = escalation with overdose 
control; MTD = maximum tolerated dose; QD = once daily 
a Continue single subject cohort, 100% dose escalation until a non -DLT adverse event of Grade ≥ 2 or a DLT is 
observed.  
b Over -enrollment in ATD up to  3 subject s per cohort is permitted.  
c In total, there should be at least 21 DLT -evaluable subjects before c laiming the MTD.  
d Refer to  Section  4.1.5.1  for stopping criteria.  
Note: Alternative dosing schedules will be evaluated after reaching MTD at QD × 21/28 -day schedule  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 38 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
INVESTIGATOR AGREEME NT................................ ................................ ................................ ...2 
SUMMARY OF CHANGES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 3 
1. PROTOCOL SUMMARY  ................................ ................................ ............................ 18 
1.1. Protocol Synopsis  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 18 
1.2. Study  Schema  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 37 
LIST OF ABBREVIATION S ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 48 
2. INTRODUCTION AND BAC KGROUND INFORMATION  ................................ .....51 
2.1. Data Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 51 
2.1.1.  Investigational Product(s)  ................................ ................................ ............................. 51 
2.1.1.1.  Name  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 51 
2.1.1.2.  Description  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 51 
2.1.1.3.  Intended Use Under Investigation  ................................ ................................ ................. 51 
2.1.1.4.  Pharmacological Target(s)  ................................ ................................ ............................ 51 
2.1.1.5.  Nonclinical Studies  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......52 
2.1.1.6.  Clinical Experience  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......53 
2.2. Study Rationale  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 53 
2.3. Risks a nd Benefits for Study Subjects  ................................ ................................ .......... 53 
2.3.1.  Potential Risks Associated with Milademetan  ................................ .............................. 53 
2.3.2.  Potential Risk of Drug -Drug Interaction  ................................ ................................ .......54 
2.3.3.  Potential Benefit Associated with Milademetan  ................................ ........................... 54 
2.4. Population, Route, Dosage, Dosage Regimen, Treatment Period ................................ .54 
2.4.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  ................................ ................................ ................................ 55 
2.4.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion) ................................ ................................ ................................ 55 
3. STUDY OBJECTIVES AND  HYPOTHESES  ................................ ............................. 56 
3.1. Study Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 56 
3.1.1.  Primary Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 56 
3.1.1.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  ................................ ................................ ................................ 56 
3.1.1.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion) ................................ ................................ ................................ 56 
3.1.2.  Secondary Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....56 
3.1.2.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  ................................ ................................ ................................ 56 
3.1.2.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion) ................................ ................................ ................................ 56 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 39 3.1.3.  Exploratory Objectives ................................ ................................ ................................ ..57 
3.1.3.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  ................................ ................................ ................................ 57 
3.1.3.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion) ................................ ................................ ................................ 57 
3.2. Outcome Measures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 58 
3.2.1.  Primary Outcome Measure  ................................ ................................ ........................... 58 
3.2.2.  Secondary Outcome Measure  ................................ ................................ ....................... 58 
3.3. Study Hypothesis  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 59 
3.4. Study Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 59 
4. STUDY DESIGN  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 60 
4.1. Overall Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 60 
4.1.1.  Study Type  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 60 
4.1.2.  Treatment Groups ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 60 
4.1.2.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  ................................ ................................ ................................ 60 
4.1.2.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion in Subjects With Advanced Melanoma or  Diffuse 
Large B -cell Lymphoma)  ................................ ................................ .............................. 64 
4.1.2.3.  Intrasubject Dose Escalation  ................................ ................................ ......................... 65 
4.1.3.  Duration of the Study  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....65 
4.1.4. Duration of Subject Participation  ................................ ................................ .................. 65 
4.1.5.  Stopping Rules  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 65 
4.1.5.1.  Stopping Rule for Maximum Tolerated Dose Determination  ................................ .......65 
4.1.5.2.  Dose -limiting Toxicities ................................ ................................ ................................ 66 
4.1.6.  Maximum Tolerated Dose and Tentative Recommended Phase 2 
Dose Definition  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 67 
4.1.7.  Management of Subjects with Adverse Events  ................................ ............................. 67 
4.1.8.  Guidelines for Dose Delays  ................................ ................................ .......................... 67 
4.2. Selection of Doses  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 68 
4.2.1.  Experimental Treatments  ................................ ................................ .............................. 68 
4.2.1.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  ................................ ................................ ................................ 68 
4.2.1.2.  For the Study  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 68 
4.2.1.3.  For Individual Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................................ .68 
4.2.2.  Control Treatments ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 68 
5. STUDY POPULATION  ................................ ................................ ............................... 69 
5.1. Enrollmen t ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 69 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 40 5.1.1.  Inclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 70 
5.1.2.  Exclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 71 
5.2. Rem oval of Subjects from Therapy  ................................ ................................ .............. 72 
5.2.1.  Reasons for Withdrawal/Early Discontinuation ................................ ............................ 72 
5.2.2.  Withdrawal Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .73 
5.2.3. Subject Replacement  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....73 
5.2.4.  Subject Re -screening Procedures  ................................ ................................ .................. 73 
6. TREATMENTS ADMINISTE RED  ................................ ................................ ............. 74 
6.1. Investigational Products  ................................ ................................ ................................ 74 
6.1.1.  Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatments and Blinding  ................................ ......... 74 
6.1.1.1.  Randomization  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 74 
6.1.1.2.  Blinding  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 74 
6.1.2.  Method of Assessing T reatment Compliance  ................................ ............................... 74 
6.1.3.  Labeling and Packaging  ................................ ................................ ................................ 74 
6.1.4.  Preparation  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 75 
6.1.5.  Storage ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 75 
6.1.6.  Drug Accountability  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......75 
6.1.7.  Retention Samples  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 75 
6.2. Concomitant Medications  ................................ ................................ ............................. 75 
6.2.1.  Prohibited Concomitant Medications/Activities  ................................ ........................... 76 
7. STUDY PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ .............................. 77 
7.1. Screening  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 77 
7.1.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Screening (Pre -cycle)  ................................ ........................... 77 
7.2. Randomization  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 78 
7.3. Treatment Period  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 78 
7.3.1.  Treat ment Period, Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  ................................ ................................ ..78 
7.3.1.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 1/Day 1  ................................ ................................ .......78 
7.3.1.2.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 1/Day 2  ................................ ................................ .......79 
7.3.1.3.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 1/Day 8  ................................ ................................ .......80 
7.3.1.4.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 1/Day 15  ................................ ................................ .....80 
7.3.1.5.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 1/Days 18 to 21  ................................ .......................... 81 
7.3.1.6.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 2/Day 1  ................................ ................................ .......81 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 41 7.3.1.7.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 2/Day 8  ................................ ................................ .......82 
7.3.1.8.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 2/Day 15  ................................ ................................ .....82 
7.3.1.9.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 3/Day 1  ................................ ................................ .......83 
7.3.1.10.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 3/Day 15  ................................ ................................ .....83 
7.3.1.11.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 4 and All Subsequent Cycles, Day 1 .......................... 84 
7.3.1.12.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), End -of-Treatment (Post -cycle) ................................ ............. 84 
7.3.1.13.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation) End -of-Study Follow -up ................................ ....................... 85 
7.3.1.14.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation) Tumor Re -biopsy  ................................ ................................ ..86 
7.3.2.  Treatment Period, Part 2 (Dose Expansion)  ................................ ................................ ..86 
7.3.2.1.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Screening (Pre -cycle)  ................................ ........................... 86 
7.3.2.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 1/Day 1  ................................ ................................ ......87 
7.3.2.3.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 1/Day 2  ................................ ................................ ......88 
7.3.2.4.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 1/Day 8  ................................ ................................ ......88 
7.3.2.5.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 1/Day 15  ................................ ................................ ....88 
7.3.2.6.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 1/Days 18 to 21  ................................ .......................... 89 
7.3.2.7.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 2/Day 1  ................................ ................................ ......89 
7.3.2.8.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 2/Day 8  ................................ ................................ ......90 
7.3.2.9.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 2/Day 15  ................................ ................................ ....90 
7.3.2.10.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 3/Day 1  ................................ ................................ ......91 
7.3.2.11.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 3/Day 15  ................................ ................................ ....91 
7.3.2.12.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 4 and All Subsequent Cycles, Day  1 ......................... 92 
7.3.2.13.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), End -of-Treatment (Post -Cycle)  ................................ ........... 92 
7.3.2.14.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion) End -of-Study Follow -up ................................ ....................... 93 
7.3.2.15.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion) Tumor Re-biopsy  ................................ ................................ ..93 
8. EFFICACY ASSESSMENTS  ................................ ................................ ....................... 94 
8.1. Efficacy Variable(s)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......94 
9. PHARMACOKINETIC/PHAR MACODYNAMIC ASSESSME NTS  ........................ 95 
9.1. Pharmacokinetic Assessment(s)  ................................ ................................ .................... 95 
9.2. Pharmacodynamic/Predictive Biomarker Variable(s) ................................ ................... 96 
9.2.1.  TP53 Status  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 96 
9.2.2.  Pharmacodynamic Variables  ................................ ................................ ......................... 96 
9.2.3.  Exploratory Biomarker Analysis ................................ ................................ ................... 96 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 42 9.3. Pharmacogenomics  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......97 
10. SAFETY EVALUATION AN D REPORTING  ................................ ........................... 98 
10.1.  Adverse Event Collection and Reporting  ................................ ................................ ......98 
10.2.  Safety Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 98 
10.3.  Adverse Events of Special Interest  ................................ ................................ ............... 98 
10.4.  Adverse Event  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 99 
10.4.1.  Definition of Adverse Event  ................................ ................................ ......................... 99 
10.4.2.  Serious Adverse Event  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..99 
10.4.3. Grade Assessment  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......100 
10.4.4.  Causality Assessment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..100 
10.4.5.  Action Taken Regarding the Study Product  ................................ ............................... 101 
10.4.6.  Other Action Taken for Event  ................................ ................................ ..................... 101 
10.4.7.  Adverse Event Outcome  ................................ ................................ ............................. 101 
10.5.  Serious Adverse Event Reporting Procedure For Investigators  ................................ ..102 
10.6.  Notifying Regulatory Authorities, Investigators, IRB, and Competent 
Authorities  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 102 
10.7.  Exposure In Utero During Clinical Studies  ................................ ................................ 102 
10.8.  Clinical Laboratory Evaluations  ................................ ................................ ................. 103 
10.9.  Vital Signs  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 104 
10.10.  Electrocardiograms  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....104 
10.11.  Physical Examinations  ................................ ................................ ................................ 104 
10.12.  Other Safety Assessments  ................................ ................................ ........................... 104 
11. OTHER ASSESSMENTS  ................................ ................................ ........................... 105 
12. STATISTICAL METHODS  ................................ ................................ ....................... 106 
12.1.  General Statistical Considerations  ................................ ................................ .............. 106 
12.2.  Analysis Sets  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 106 
12.2.1.  Enrolled Analysis Set  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..106 
12.2.2.  Full Analysis Set  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 106 
12.2.3.  Biomarker Positive Analysis Set  ................................ ................................ ................. 107 
12.2.4.  Dose -Limiting Toxicity Evaluable Set  ................................ ................................ .......107 
12.2.5.  Safety Analysis Set  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....107 
12.2.6.  Pharmacokinetic Analysis Set  ................................ ................................ ..................... 107 
12.2.7.  Biomarker Analysis Set ................................ ................................ ............................... 107 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 43 12.3. Study Population Data  ................................ ................................ ................................ 107 
12.4.  Efficacy Analyses ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 107 
12.4.1.  Primary Efficacy Analyses  ................................ ................................ .......................... 107 
12.4.2.  Secondary Efficacy Analyses  ................................ ................................ ...................... 108 
12.4.3.  Exploratory Efficacy Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................... 108 
12.5.  Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Analyses  ................................ ........................... 108 
12.5.1.  Pharmacokinetic Analyses  ................................ ................................ .......................... 108 
12.5.2.  Pharmacodynamic Analyses  ................................ ................................ ....................... 109 
12.5.3.  Biomarker and Exploratory Analyses  ................................ ................................ ......... 109 
12.6.  Safety Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 110 
12.6.1.  Adverse Event Analyses  ................................ ................................ ............................. 110 
12.6.2.  Clinical Laboratory Evaluation Analyses  ................................ ................................ ...110 
12.6.3.  Vital Signs Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...110 
12.6.4.  Electrocardiogram Analyses  ................................ ................................ ....................... 111 
12.6.5.  Physical Finding Analyses  ................................ ................................ .......................... 111 
12.6.6.  Other Safety Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................................ .111 
12.7.  Other Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 111 
12.8.  Interim Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 111 
12.9.  Data and Safety Monitoring Board  ................................ ................................ ............. 111 
12.10.  Sample Size Determination  ................................ ................................ ......................... 111 
12.11.  Specification of Bayesian Logistic Regression Model with Escalation with 
Overdose Control  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 112 
12.11.1.  Bayesian Logistic Regression Model for Modified Continuous Reassessment 
Method  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 112 
12.11.2.  Prior Specification for Bayesian Logistic Regression Model Parameters  .................. 112 
12.11.3.  Escalation with Overdose Control Principle  ................................ ............................... 113 
13. DATA INTEGRITY AND Q UALITY  ASSURANCE  ................................ .............. 114 
13.1.  Monitoring and Inspections  ................................ ................................ ........................ 114 
13.2.  Data Collection ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 114 
13.3.  Data Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......115 
13.4.  Study Documentation and Storage  ................................ ................................ .............. 115 
13.5.  Record Keeping  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 116 
13.6.  Product Complaints  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....116 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 44 14. FINANCING AND INSURA NCE  ................................ ................................ ............. 117 
14.1.  Finances ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 117 
14.2.  Reimbursement, Indemnity, and Insurance  ................................ ................................ .117 
15. PUBLICATION POLICY  ................................ ................................ ........................... 118 
16. ETHICS AND STUDY ADM INISTRATIVE INFORMATION  .............................. 119 
16.1.  Compliance Statement, Ethics, and Regulatory Compliance ................................ ......119 
16.2.  Subject Confidentiality ................................ ................................ ................................ 119 
16.3.  Informed Consent  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 119 
16.4.  Regu latory Compliance  ................................ ................................ ............................... 120 
16.5.  Protocol Deviations  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....120 
16.6.  Supply of New Information Affecting the Conduct of the Study  ............................... 121 
16.7.  Protocol Amendments  ................................ ................................ ................................ .121 
16.8.  Study Termination  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......122 
16.9.  Data and Safety Monitoring Board  ................................ ................................ ............. 122 
16.10.  Address List  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 122 
17. REFERENC ES ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 123 
18. APPENDICES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 124 
18.1.  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status Scale  .............................. 124 
18.2.  National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, 
Version 4  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 124 
18.3.  Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, Version 1.1  ................................ ......125 
18.3.1.  Measurability of Tumor at Baseline  ................................ ................................ ............ 125 
18.3.1.1.  Definitions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 125 
18.3.1.2.  Specifications by Methods of Measurements  ................................ ............................. 126 
18.3.2.  Tumor Response Evaluation  ................................ ................................ ....................... 126 
18.3.2.1.  Assessment of Overall Tumor Burden and Measurable Disease  ................................ 126 
18.3.2.2.  Baseline Documentation of “Target” and “Nontarget” Lesions  ................................ .127 
18.3.2.3.  Response Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 127 
18.3.2.4.  Evaluation of Best Overall Response  ................................ ................................ .......... 130 
18.3.2.5.  Frequency of Tumor Reeva luation ................................ ................................ .............. 131 
18.4.  International Working Group Criteria  ................................ ................................ ......... 132 
18.5.  Cytokine P450 3A Inducers and Inhibitors  ................................ ................................ .132 
18.6.  Schedule of Events  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......135 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 45 18.7.  Extension Phase  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 141 
18.7.1.  Extension Phase Synopsis  ................................ ................................ ........................... 141 
 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 46 LIST OF TABLES  
Table  9.1: Blood Sample Collection for Milademetan Pharmacokinetics  ................................ ...95 
Table  12.1:  Pharmacokinetic Parameters for Non -Compartmental Analysis  .............................. 109 
Table  18.1:  Overall Response  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......130 
Table 18.2:  Schedule of Events Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  ................................ ........................... 135 
Table  18.3:  Schedule of Events Part 2 (Dose Expansion)  ................................ ........................... 138 
Table  18.4:  Schedule of Events (Extension Phase)  ................................ ................................ .....143 
 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 47 LIST OF FIGURES  
Figure  1.1: Flow Diagram of Dose Escalation Phase  ................................ ................................ ....37 
Figure  2.1: Targeted Mechanism of Milademetan Antitumor Activity  ................................ ........ 52 
 
 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 48 LIST OF ABBREVIATION S 
ABBREVIATION  DEFINITION  
AE Adverse events  
ALT  Alanine aminotransferase  
aPTT  Activated partial thromboplastin time  
AST  Aspartate aminotransferase  
ATD  Accelerated  titration d esign  
AUC0 -8h Area under the plasma concentration - time curve from time 0 to 8 hours  
AUC0 -24h Area under the  plasma  concentration - time curve from time 0 to 24  hours  
BLRM  Bayesian logistic regression model  
Cmax  Maximum plasma  concentration  
Cmin  Minimum plasma concentration  
CFR  Code of Federal Regulations  
CR Complete response  
CRF  Case report form  
CRO  Contract research organization  
CT Computed tomography  
CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
CYP  Cytochrome P450  
DCR  Disease control rate  
DD Dedifferentiated  
DLBCL  Diffuse large B -cell lymphoma  
DLT  Dose -limiting toxicity  
DNA  Deoxyribonucleic acid  
DNAseq  Deoxyribonucleic acid  sequence  
DS-3032a  The free form of milademetan  
DSI Daiichi Sankyo, Inc. 
EC Ethics committee  
ECG  Electrocardiogram  
ECOG  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group  
eCRF  Electronic case report form  
EDC  Electronic data capture  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 49 ABBREVIATION  DEFINITION  
EIU Exposure in utero  
EWOC  Escalation with overdose control  
FDG -PET (18F) fluorodeoxyglucose -positron emission tomography  
FFPE  Formalin -fixed paraffin -embedded  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
HNSTD  Highest nonseverely toxic dose  
IB Investigator’s Brochure  
ICF Informed consent form  
ICH International Council for  Harmonisation  
ICMJE  International Council of Medical Journal Editors  
INR International normalized ratio  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
IWG  International Working Group  
MDM2  Murine double minute 2  
MDM4  Murine double minute 4  
MIC -1 Macrophage inhibitory cytokine -1 
MRI  Magnetic resonance imaging  
MTD  Maximum tolerated dose  
NCI National Cancer Institute  
PD Progressive disease  
PDy  Pharmacodynamic  
PFS Progression free survival  
PGx  Pharmacogenomics  
PK Pharmacokinetic (s) 
PopPK  Population pharmacokinetic  
PR Partial response  
QD Once daily  
QT cB Corrected QT interval using Bazett’s formula  
QT cF Corrected QT interval using Fridericia’s formula  
RNA  Ribonucleic acid  
RNAseq  Ribonucleic acid  sequence  
RP2D  Recommended phase 2 dose  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 50 ABBREVIATION  DEFINITION  
RECIST  Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors  
RR Response rate 
SAE  Serious adverse event  
SAP Statistical analysis plan  
SAVER  Serious adverse event report  
SD Stable disease  
SID Subject identification number  
SLD  Sum of longest dimension s 
SNP Single -nucleotide polymorphism  
SOC  System Organ Class  
SOP Standard operating procedure  
SUSAR  Suspected unexpected serious adverse event reaction  
t1/2 Terminal e limination half -life 
Tmax Time to reach maximum plasma concentration  
TEAE  Treatment -emergent adverse event  
TP53  The gene encoding p53  
TTR  Time -to-response  
ULN  Upper limit of normal  
US United States  
WD Well-differentiated  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 51 2. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION  
2.1. Data Summary  
2.1.1.  Investigational Product(s)  
2.1.1.1.  Name  
Milademetan  
Chemical Name: (3'R,4'S,5'R) -N-[(3R,6S) -6-Carbamoyltetrahydro -2H-pyran -3-yl]-6''-chloro -4'-
(2-chloro -3-fluoropyridin -4-yl)-4,4-dimethyl -2''-oxo-1'',2'' -dihydrodispiro[cyclohexane -1,2'-
pyrrolidine -3',3''-indole] -5'-carboxamide mono(4 -methylbenzenesulfonate) monohydrate  
2.1.1.2.  Description  
Milademetan  is an orally available and highly selective inhibitor of the murine double minute  2 
(MDM2 )-p53 interaction.  
2.1.1.3.  Intended Use Under Investigation  
Milademetan  will be evaluated in subjects with advanced solid tumor s or lymphomas refractory 
to standard treatment or for which no standard treatment is available.   
2.1.1.4.  Pharmacolo gical Target(s)  
Milademetan , a novel, specific, small -molecule inhibitor of MDM2, disrupts interactions 
between MDM2 and the tumor suppressor protein p53 in tumor cells and i s being developed as 
an oral drug for the treatment of cancer .  The tumor suppressor protein p53 plays an essential 
role in preventing neopla sia by inducing cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in cells undergoing various 
types of physiological stress .  However,  inactivation of p53 by mutation occurs in a significant 
percentage of human tumors, resulting in a loss of tumor suppressor activity and thereby 
removing a pivotal barrier to neoplastic development.  
The mechanism of action of milademetan  is summarized in  Figure  2.1. 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 52 Figure  2.1: Targeted Mechanism of Milademetan Antitumor Activity  
 
Bax = Bcl-2–associated X protein; MDM2 = murine double minute 2;  
p21 = cyclin -dependent kinase inhibitor 1; puma = p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis; Ub  = ubiquitin.  
Note: Schematic of p53/ MDM2  intera ctions and impact on cell sig naling pathways altered in certain 
malignancies.  Milademetan  exerts anti tumor activity by inhibiting interactions between MDM2  and p53 and 
preventing p53 degradation.  The resulting increase in wild-type p53 activity activates signal transduction pathways  
important in inducing cell cycle arrest, apoptosis , and/or senescence in tumor cells.  
Source: Data on File  
In human tumors that retain wild -type p53 protein, its activity is frequently inhibited by 
intermolecular interactions between p53 and MDM2 .  MDM2 a nd p53 form a regulatory 
feedback loop in which MDM2 maintains low levels of p53 activity in normal, unstressed cells, 
by promoting export of p53 out of the nucleus and proteasome -mediated degradation of p53 
through its E3 ubiquitinization ligase activity.1 In the presence of stress, p53 becomes activated 
and subsequently acts as a transcription factor that modulates the expression of a variety of 
genes, including MDM2.2 The MDM2 binding domain on p53 overlaps with the transcriptional 
activation domain of p53, there by inhibiting the activity of p53 .  Thus, in human tumors , 
disruption of MDM2/p53 balance through overexpression and/or oncogenic activation of MDM2 
allows tumorigenesis and tumor growth by preventing p53 function .  Pharmacologic inhibition of 
the interact ion between MDM2 and wild -type p53 in tumor cells could result in sustained 
increases in p53 activity and subsequent antitumor effects.3,4 Therefore, pharmacologic 
restoration of the p53 pathway could be an effective strategy for cancer therapy targeting the 
wide array of human cancers that retain wild -type p53.5 
2.1.1.5.  Nonclinical Studies  
Please refer to the current milademetan Investigator's Brochure (IB)6 for nonclinical data 
supporting its use in clinical studies .6   

Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 53 2.1.1.5.1.  Human Starting Dose  
Based on the rat and dog repeat -dose toxicity studies, the dog proved to be the most sensitive 
species to milademetan -induced myelotoxicity .  The highest nonsever ely toxic dose ( HNSTD ) in 
dog was found to be 3 mg/kg /day (60 mg/m2/day; human equivalent dose 1.62 mg/kg or 
~ 100 mg in a 60 -kg patient) .  Applying a safety factor of 6, these data support ed a starting dose 
of 10  mg/m2 (~15 mg in a 60 -kg patient) .  The nonclinical pharmacology data suggest ed that 
pharmacologically  active exposures were likely to be  achieved through dose escalation .  To 
mitigate the risk of untoward toxicity , the use of a continuous reassessment method coupled with 
a dose -exposure model is proposed to guide dose escalation.   Additional details are provided in 
the current IB .6 
2.1.1.6.  Clinical Experience  
This is the first -in-human study of milademetan .  No prior clinical experience of milademetan  
was available when the study was initiated .  Additional details  of ongoing clinical studies  are 
provided in the current IB .6  
2.2. Study Rationale  
The tumor suppressor p53 is a transcription factor that plays a central role in preventing tumor 
development a nd progression by inducing cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, or senescence.  The gene 
encoding p53 (TP53) suffers disabling somatic mutations or deletions in about 50% of all 
malignant tumors.  In tumo rs expressing wild-type protein, the tumor suppressor function of p53 
may be attenuated by  other mechanisms, such as over -expression of MDM2 , a negative regulator 
of p53.  MDM2  binds p53 with high affinity and negatively modulates the transcriptional activ ity 
and stability of the tumor suppressor.  In tumors with functio nal p53, inhibition of the 
MDM2 -p53 interaction can restore p53 activity and is expected to offer a nove l strategy for 
cancer therapy.  
Milademetan  is an orally available and highly selective inhibitor of the MDM2 -p53 interaction .  
It shows antitumor efficacy against tumors with wild -type p53 via activation of the tumor 
suppressor in a variety of cell culture and xenograft models .  This ongoing Phase  1 
first-in-human study will be conducted to assess the safety and tolerability of milademetan , as 
well as to determine the pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic (PDy) profile and preliminary 
efficacy of the drug.  
2.3. Risks and Benefits for Study Subjects  
2.3.1.  Poten tial Risks Associated with Milademetan  
Investigators in the milademetan  program must be aware of the potential for hematologic and 
gastrointestinal toxicit ies and properly monitor for these toxicities and promptly manage subject s 
who experience these adverse events  (AEs) .  Please refer to the current IB6 for updated safety 
and risk/benefit assessment.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 54 2.3.2.  Potential Risk of Drug -Drug Interaction  
Nonclinical studies indicate that DS-3032a  (the free form of milademetan)  is metabolized by  
cytochrome P 450 (CYP ) 3A4 and CYP3A5 by using microsomes containing individual 
recombinant human CYP isoforms.  Drugs that are strong induce rs of CYP3A  may alter the 
pharmacokinetics of milademetan  and, therefore, should be avoided until formal drug -drug 
interaction s tudies have been conducted.  
A Phase 1 study in healthy subjects was conducted to evaluate the effect of co -administration of 
the strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (itraconazole and posaconazole) on milademetan PK 
(Study  U107).  Co-administration of milademetan 100 mg with itraconazole 200 mg at steady 
state increased milademetan geometric mean Cmax and AUCinf by 8% and 115% , respectively .  
Similarly, posaconazole 200 mg at steady state increased milademetan geometric mean Cmax by 
approximately 19% and AUCinf by appr oximately 149%.  Therefore, dose of milademetan is 
recommended to be reduced to half when it is concomitantly administered with strong CYP3A4 
inhibitors.  
Milademetan  showed direct inhibition on CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C 9, CYP2C19, 
CYP2D6, and CYP3A , but not on CYP1A2 and CYP2E1 ( half maximal inhibitory concentration  
range: 7.8  µM to 27.0  µM).  Milademetan  also showed metabolism -dependent inhibition on 
CYP3A  (both testosterone 6 β-hydroxylase and midazolam 1 ’-hydroxylase) .  The concentration 
required for  half maximal inactivation ( KI) and maximal rate of inactivation  at saturation  (kinact) 
values were calculated to be 60.5  µM and 0.0619 min-1 for CYP3A  (midazolam 1 ’-hydroxylase), 
respectively.  However, these levels of milademetan  are much higher than tho se expec ted to be 
achievable in humans .  Therefore concomitant use of CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C 9, CYP2C19, 
CYP2D6, and CYP3A  substrates will be permitted .  Please refer to the current IB for additional 
details on drug -drug interactions with milademetan.6  
2.3.3.  Potential Benefit Associated with Milademetan  
Milademetan  is a novel, specific, small -molecule inhibitor of MDM2 that disrupts interactions 
between  MDM 2 and p53 in tumor cells.  Nonclinical data demonstrated in human tumor cell 
lines expressing wild-type p53 that milademetan  inhibited cell growth in a 
concentration -dependent manner and induced apoptosis, and was  more potent than the 
well-characterized MDM2 inhibitor Nutlin -3a.  In vivo studies in mouse xenografts 
demonstrated that multiple doses of milademetan  produced statistically significant dose -related 
antitumor responses.  The highest dose of milademetan  yielded a 93% tumor reduction  relative to 
the control group.  These data demonstrate that in tumors with wild-type p53, inhibition of 
MDM2 -p53 interaction can restore p53 activity and is expected to offer a novel strategy for 
cancer therapy.  
2.4. Population, Route, Dosage, Dosage Regimen, Treatment Period  
Milademetan  will be administered as an oral capsule.  It will be supplied in 5, 20, 80, and 
200 mg capsules individually packaged in  desiccant -embedded  aluminum blisters .  Two other 
capsule strengths of 30 and 100 mg are also supplied in high density polyethylene ( HDPE ) 
bottles.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 55 2.4.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  
This study will enroll adult subjects with advanced solid tumors or lymphomas that are refractory 
to standard therapy or for which no standard therapy is available.  See Section  5.1.1  and 
Section  5.1.2  for a detailed description of all inclusion and exclusion criteria, respectively.  
2.4.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion)  
Although the subjects in the Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion parts of the study wi ll have 
common inclusion and exclusion criteria,  subjects with advanced melanomas or with diffuse 
large B -cell lymphomas ( DLBCLs ) in the Dose  Expansion part of the study will have additional 
inclusion criteria, as described in Section  5.1.1 .   
See Section  4.1 for a detailed description of the study drug administration schedule, treatment 
cycle duration, and follow -up after discontinuation.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 56 3. STUDY OBJECTIVES AND HYPOTHESES   
3.1. Study Objectives  
3.1.1.  Primary Objectives  
3.1.1.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation ) 
The primary objectives are a s follows:  
1. To assess the safety and tolerability of milademetan  in subjects with advanced solid 
tumors or lymphomas who have relapsed from or are refractory to standard therapy or for 
whom no standard therapy is available.  
To determine the maximum tolerat ed dose (MTD) or tentative recommended Phase 2 dose 
(RP2D) of milademetan  in subjects with advanced solid tumors or lymphomas . 
3.1.1.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion)  
The primary objectives are as follows:  
1. To confirm the safety and tolerability of milademetan  at the MTD/tentative RP2D in 
subjects with advanced melanoma or DLBCL who have relapsed from or are refractory to 
standard therapy or for whom no standard therapy is available.  
2. To assess tumor response  in subjects with melanoma using Response Evaluation Criteria  
in Solid Tumors ( RECIST ) v 1.1 and in subjects with DLBCL using the revised  
International Working Group ( IWG ) criteria.  
3.1.2.  Secondary Objectives  
3.1.2.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  
The secondary objectives are as follows:  
1. To determine  the plasma PK of DS -3032 a (the free form of milademetan) . 
2. To determine the PDy effect of milademetan  on macrophag e inhibitory cytokine -1 
(MIC -1) levels in serum . 
3. To evaluate the response of solid tumors and lymphoma and their subtypes to 
milademetan using the corresponding standar d response criteria (Response Evaluation 
Criteria in Solid Tumors [RECIST] v 1.1 or revised IWG  criteria, respectively).  
3.1.2.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion)  
The secondary objectives are as follows:  
1. To determine the PK profile of DS-3032a  at the MTD/tentative RP2D . 
2. To determine the PDy effect of milademetan  on MIC -1 levels in serum . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 57 3.1.3.  Exploratory Objectives  
3.1.3.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  
The exploratory objectives are as follows:  
1. To compare progression free survival (PFS) between that observed with milademetan  
treatment and that observed from the most recent therapeutic regimen . 
To bank  blood  samples for deoxyribonucleic acid  (DNA ) analysis for the assessment of potential 
biomarkers  (eg, MDM2 single -nucleotide polymorphism [SNP] 309 ) that may be predictive of 
benefit  or toxic ity from milademetan . 
To assess blood and tumor samples for DNA or ribonucleic acid ( RNA ) analysis that may be 
predictive of benefit or toxicity from milademetan.  
To evaluate the relationship between tumor response to milademetan  and potential predictive 
biomarkers studied in archived tumor samples, pre -treatment tumor biopsies, if available, and/or 
blood samples.  
To assess the PDy effect of milademetan  on the expression levels of p53, p21, MDM2, murine 
double minute 4 ( MDM4 ), Ki67, apoptosis markers, and/ or other biomarkers in pre - and 
post-treatment solid tumor/lymphoma samples , if available . 
To characterize th e plasma metabolites of DS -3032a . 
3.1.3.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion)  
The exploratory objectives are as follows:  
1. To compare PFS between that observed with milademetan  treatment and that observed 
from the most recent therapeutic regimen .  
To bank  blood samples for DNA analysis for the assessment of potential biomarkers (eg , MDM2  
SNP 309)  that may be  predictive of benefit or toxicity from milademetan . 
To assess blood and tumor samples for DNA or RNA analysis that may be predictive of benefit 
or toxicity from milademetan.  
To assess the PDy effect of milademetan  on the expression levels of p53, p21, MDM2, MDM4, 
Ki67, apoptosis markers, and/or other biomar kers in pre - and post -treatment solid 
tumor/lymphoma samples , if available . 
To characterize the plasma metabolites of DS -3032 a. 
To evaluate the relationship between tumor response to milademetan and biomarkers studied in  
archived tumor samples and pre treatment , on-treatment, and end -of-treatment  tumor biopsies.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 58 3.2. Outcome Measures  
3.2.1.  Primary Outcome Measure  
Title: Number of subjects with TEAEs during the study  
Details:  Number of subjects with TEAEs by frequency and grade in each cohort of dose and 
dosing schedule  and the total number of subjects with the TEAEs  
Timeframe:  From start of study until  last subject last visit (approximately 6 years)  
 
Title:  Maximum tolerated dose(s)  
Details:  MTD(s) identified at different dosing schedules  
Time frame:  From start of study until final database lock (approximately 6 years)  
 
Title:  Number of subjects with dose-limiting toxicities ( DLTs ) 
Details:  Number of subjects with DLTs at each dose [level /cohort] and the total number of 
subjects with DLTs  
Time frame:  From start of study until the DLT evaluation of the last subject in dose escalation 
part (approximately 6 years  or less )  
 
Title:  Response rates in melanoma and DLBCL in dose expansion cohorts  
Details:  Number and percentage of subjects with melanoma and DLBCL in dose ex pansion 
cohorts who achieved objective response per RECIST v  1.1 and IWG, respectively  
Time frame: From start of study until last subject last tumor assessment in Dose Expansion  
(approximately 6 years)  
3.2.2.  Secondary Outcome Measure  
Title:  PK parameters of milademetan  
Details:  Determination of milademetan PK parameters ( Cmax, Tmax, AUC, CL/F, and T ½). 
Timeframe:  From start of study until final database lock (approximately 6 years)  
 
Title:  Pharmacodynamic effect of milademetan  
Details:  Pharmacodynamic effect of milademetan assessed by increase in serum MIC -1 levels 
over baseline.  
Time frame:  From start of study until final databa se lock (approximately 6 years)  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 59 3.3. Study Hypothesis  
Milademetan  will be safe and well  tolerated and will exhibit  acceptable PK/PDy properties in 
subjects with advanced solid tumors or lymphomas who have relapsed from or  are refractory to 
standard therapy or for which no standard therapy is available.   Milademetan  will manifest 
activity as evidenced by objective resp onse in subjects with solid tumors and lymphomas . 
3.4. Study Endpoints  
The endpoints for the study include the following:  
 Safety endpoints:  
Serious adverse events  (SAEs) , treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs), physical 
examination findings (including Easter n Cooperative Oncology Group [ECOG] performance 
status), vital signs measurements, standard clinical laboratory parameters  (serum chemistry, 
hematology, urinalysis) , and electrocardiogram ( ECG ) parameters.  Adverse events will be 
graded according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse 
Events ( NCI-CTCAE ) v4.  Dose escalation will be determined by plasma drug concentrations 
and rate of DLTs.  
 Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic endpoints:  
Plasma PK and standard non -compartmental PK parameters will be assessed.  Plasma samples 
for PK assessments will be taken at multiple time point s in the study.  Additionally, a PK sample 
may also be obtained outside of the specified time point s during the study if deemed clinically 
necessary.   
Induction of serum MIC -1 will be the primary PDy biomarker.  Whole blood samples will be 
collected at multiple time point s in the study  to assess the effect of milademetan treatment on 
MIC -1 induction.  Other exploratory PDy biomarkers includi ng, but not limited to, expression 
levels of p53, p21, MDM2, MDM4, Ki67, apoptosis markers, and/or other biomarkers will also 
be assessed, if available.  
 Efficacy endpoints:  
In solid tumor subjects with measurable disease, tumor response will be evaluated u sing RECIST 
v 1.1.  In subjects with lymphomas, treatment response will be evaluated using the revised IWG 
criteria.7 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 60 4. STUDY DESIGN  
4.1. Overall Plan  
4.1.1.  Study Type  
This will be a Phase 1, open -label study of milademetan  to assess its safety and tolerability, 
identify an MTD/ tentative RP2D , and assess its PK/PDy properties in subjects with advanced 
solid tumors or lymphomas.  
Approximately 5 United States ( US) sites are planned for Part 1 (Dose Escalation ) and Part 2 
(Dose Expansion).   The same sites are planned to participate  for both parts.  
4.1.2.  Treatment Groups  
This 2 -part study will include both a Dose Escalation portion, to identify the MTD /tentative 
RP2D , and a Dose Expansion portion, to confirm the safety and tolerability of milademetan , by 
determining the PDy response in tumor samples and evaluating the preliminary efficacy of 
milademetan  in subjects with advan ced melanoma or DLBCL.  
Milademetan  will be administered once daily on Days 1  to 21 of a 28 -day cycle 
(QD × 21/28 days).  An alternative drug administration schedule for dose escalation may be 
considered to evaluate the DS-3032a  exposure relationship to PDy, toxicity , and efficacy .  If the 
results indicate that using an alternative dosing schedule may provide less toxicity 
(eg, myelosuppression) while offering PDy benefits based on available biomarkers, or better PK 
profile, dose  escalation using this recommended alternative dosing schedule will be performed in 
lieu of or in parallel with the QD  × 21/28 -day schedule .   
After discontinuation of the study drug , subjects will be contacted for an End -of-Study 
Follow -up V isit 30  (± 2)  days after the last dose of study drug.  
4.1.2.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  
Dose  escalation of milademetan  to determine the MTD will be guided by a Bayesian logistic 
regression model (BLRM) following escalation with overdose control (EWOC) principle  
following an init ial accelerated titration design (ATD) .   
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 61 Accelerated titration design for determining the initial dose for escalation by BLRM  with 
EWOC  
Before starting BLRM , initial dose escalation will proceed following an ATD in order to 
minimize the number of subjects  treated at sub -therapeutic doses of the drug.  The proposed 
human starting dose of milademetan  is 15  mg/day.  Single subject s will be enrolled into 
sequential dose levels with a dose increment of 100% from the previous dose .  Over -enrollment 
in ATD up to 3 subjects per cohort is permitted .  The dose for ending  ATD will be the dose level 
in which one of the following occurs:  
 One Grade 2 or higher milademetan -related toxicity according to NCI -CTCAE v4 
during Cycle 1 , in which case, 3 to 6  subjects will be enrolled at the next dose level, 
which will be guided by BLRM2; or 
 If a DLT  is observed during Cycle 1, the cohort will first be expanded to 
3 DLT -evaluable subjects , and the next 2 subjects in the expanded cohort will receive 
milademetan  treatment starting at least 1 week apart.  If no further DLT is reported, 
the cohort will be expanded to include up to 3 additional DLT -evaluable subjects 
prior to initiation of BLRM  in the next dose level . 
The information from the accelerated titra tion stage will be included in the Bayesian model for 
dose escalation.  
Dose level increment during dose escalation by BLRM  with EWOC  
The dose increment during the BLRM  will be as follows:  
 The dose level increment should be no less than 30% in order to have  distinction 
among dose levels considering the inter -subject variability in exposure , but f lexibility 
may be applied in selecting the dose to accommodate the available dosage form 
strengths . 
 The dose level increment should be no more than 100% even if the model suggested a 
higher dose than 100% for the next cohort.  
 In the event of a DLT, the next 2 subjects in the expanded cohort will receive 
milademetan  treatment starting at least 1 week apart.  
The dose escalation will be based on a  BLRM  with EWOC principle.  The logistic regression 
model for the dose -toxicity (DLT rate) relationships will include 2  parameters : the intercept and  
the slope.  After the first 3 subjects of each cohort complete DLT evaluation during Cycle 1, the 
posterior dis tributions of the DLT rate will be derived for all dose levels based on the BLRM 
using the DLT outcome data from all assessed exposure levels and a pre -specified prior 
distribution for the model parameters.  The posterior probability of the DLT rate in the  following 
4 intervals at each dose level  will then be calculated and used for dose recommendation for the 
next cohort according to the EWOC principle  [0%, 16%] as the DLT rate interval for 
                                                 
2 For isolated NCI -CTCAE v4 Grade ≥ 2 laboratory abnormalities that are not associated with signs or symptoms, 
transition from ATD to BLRM will be at the discretion of the Investigator . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 62 under -dosing, [16%, 33%] as the target DLT rate interval, [33%, 60 %] as the DLT rate interval 
for excessive toxicity, and [60 %, 100%] as the DLT rate int erval for unacceptable toxicity.  
The EWOC principle requires that the BLRM  recommended dose for the next cohort of subjects 
is the one with the highest posterior probabi lity of the DLT rate in the target DLT rate interval of 
[16%, 33%] among all dose levels fulfilling the overdose control constraint: there is less than 
25% of probability for the DLT rate   33% (probability for excessive or unacceptable toxicity).  
The dose  to be tested in the next cohort of subjects chosen by the Sponsor’s clinical team and the 
investigator(s) involved in the clinical study will be based on the dose recommended by the 
BLRM , clinical assessment of toxicity profiles, and PK/PDy information ob served thus far.  
Cohorts of 3 to 6 subjects will be enrolled and assessed for DLT before escalation to a new 
higher dose.   As an exception, the model will be reevaluated before enrollment of any additional 
subjects to the cohort if 2 evaluable subjects in the cohort experience DLT before the enrollment 
of the next subject.  Enrollment of subjects to a new cohort requires completion of DLT 
evaluation of at least 3 subjects treated in the current cohort.  Subjects who have neither 
completed DLT evaluation nor  experienced DLT will be censored and not included in the BLRM 
update .  In the event that subjects in the previous cohort experience a DLT after the enrollment 
of subjects to a new cohort has begun, dose level assignment of the next subject in the new 
cohort will be based on an updated BLRM using DLT outcome data from all assessed doses.  
Cohorts may be expanded at any dose level or at the MTD  for further elaboration of safety, PK, 
or PDy parameters as required.  
Dose escalation using alternative drug administration schedule s 
Based on safety, PK, and PDy data collect ed during Dose Escalation using  the QD  × 21/28 -day 
schedule of milademetan , an alternative drug administration schedule for dose escalation may be 
considered following review by the Princip al Investigators and Sponsor .  Modeling and 
simulation will be performed to evaluate DS -3032 a exposure relationship to PDy and toxicity .  If 
the results indicate that using an alternative dosing schedule may provide less toxicity 
(eg, myelosuppression) while offering pharmacodynamic benefits based on available biomarkers 
or a better PK profile, dose escalation using this recommended alternative dos ing schedule will 
be performed in lieu of or in parallel with the QD  × 21/28 -day schedule.  For example:  
 Case 1 : If the recommended dosing schedule is less frequent than QD  × 21/28  days, 
the starting daily dose of the new schedule will be the same as the h ighest daily dose 
tested for the QD  × 21/28 -day schedule that showed DLT in less than one -third of 
evaluable subjects.  
 Case 2: If the recommended dosing schedule is more frequent than QD  × 21/28 days 
(eg, QD continuous × 28 days), the starting daily dose w ill be ≤ 75% of the highest 
daily dose tested for the QD  × 21/28 -day schedule that showed DLT in less than 
one-third of evaluable subjects .  This starting dose of the new schedule will provide 
the same 4 -week cumulative dose while reducing daily exposure b y ≥ 25%.  
 Case 3: If additional testing is suggested to optimize the dosing regimen (to maintain 
sufficient dose density over time without requiring frequent dose interruptions as a 
result of delayed toxicities) after the MTD is identified, then dosing may initiate at a 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 63 dose level lower than MTD in that dosing regimen.  Subject enrollment may be 
limited to one or a small number of cancer types or molecular sub -types depending on 
available clinical data for milademetan  with the dosing regimen and investigator  
experience with this class of compound.  Up to 15 subjects may be enrolled in the 
cohort , and enrollment may be conducted in parallel with Part 2 of the study.  
The first cohort to be evaluated will begin treatment with milademetan  at 90  mg QD 
× 21/28 days, preferentially in subjects with liposarcoma considering the existing data 
in this patient population at 120 mg QD × 21/28  days and 90 mg QD × 28/28 days for 
comparison of safety.  
The dose of 90 mg QD × 21/28 days  is evaluated to define  a hematologically safe and 
tolerable regimen based on the safety data at the doses previously evaluated (15 mg 
through 30, 60, 120, 160 , and 240 mg QD  × 21/28 days, with the determination of 
MTD at 120 mg ) in this dosing schedule.  Most DLTs arose from my elosuppression, 
particularly thrombocytopenia, which  also resulted in dose delays and dose reductions 
in subjects who continued in C ycle 2 and subsequent cycles.  Therefore , to reduce the 
risk of progressing to more severe bone marrow toxicities and dose i nterruptions 
during continued treatment, the following dose adjustment rules will be followed  for 
Cycle 2 and subsequent cycles : 
 If platelets decrease to <50% of baseline (the platelets measured at Cycle 1 Day 1) 
or Grade ≥2 thrombocytopenia (Platelets < 7 5 × 109/L) at the end of Cycle 1, 
then:  
o If platelets decrease by >50% from baseline, but are ≥ 75 × 109/L, do not 
interrupt milademetan  dosing, but reduce the dose of milademetan  to 
60 mg QD × 21/28 days.  
o If Grade ≥2 thrombocytopenia, hold dosing of milademetan .  When the 
platelets recover to ≥ 75 × 109/L, resume milademetan  at a reduced dose of 
60 mg QD × 21/28 days.  
 Dose interruptions and further dose reductions due to toxicity will follow the 
same guidelines provided in Section 4.1.8 . 
After an initial cohort of 3 subjects has completed treatment in Cycle 1, the dose may be 
adjusted based on the safety results and discussion between the investig ators and the 
Sponsor.  
In addition to the above dose dense schedules, t he following less frequent dosing 
schedules will be evaluated in dose escalation with a starting dose of 120 mg that was the 
MTD determined in the QD 21/28 -day schedule:  
 QD for 7 out of  28 days (QD × 7/28 days)  
 QD for 3 out of 14 days (QD × 3/14 days) repeated twice in a 28 -day cycle  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 64 Notes:  
1. The QD 7/28 and QD 3/14 days schedules were initiated by a memo to the  
institutional review boards  (IRBs ) by referring to the above section in 
Protocol  v 3.0 allowing alternative dosing schedules.  
2. These alternative dose schedules were initiated in dose escalation after the dose 
expansion in the dose schedule QD 21/28 was evaluated in subjects with 
melanoma and DLBCL and found that the QD 21/28 sc hedule was not tolerated 
well for further development of the drug.  
Both the original QD  × 21/28 days and alternative dosing schedules can be  explored in parallel.  
The final MTD for each dosing schedule will be decided based on considerations of the 
respect ive MTDs estimated by the BLRM  and on an overall assessment of safety data from 
subsequent cycles and PK/PDy information collected at all different doses tested.  Upon 
determining the final MTD of the original QD  × 21/28 days and/or alternative dosing sche dules, 
one dosing regimen will be selected for further evaluation in Part 2 (Dose Expansion)  and as the 
tentative RP2D .   
4.1.2.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion in Subjects With Advanced Melanoma or  Diffuse Large 
B-cell Lymphoma )  
Upon establishing  the MTD /tentative RP 2D and drug administration schedule  in Part 1 , the Dose 
Expansion part will begin with the intention of confirming the safety and tolerability of 
milademetan , determining the PDy signals  in tumor samples, and evaluating the preliminary 
efficacy of milademeta n in approximately 20 subjects each with advanced melanoma and 
DLBCL  whose tumors tested positive for wild-type TP53 genotype .   
Four subjects of each tumor type will initially be treated.  Following the completion of the first 
cycle, a safety analysis wil l be conducted to allow the reevaluation of the appropriateness of the 
dosing level.  If the incidence of AEs fulfilling the criteria of a DLT has exceeded that predicted 
by the EWOC principle  after the initial 4  DLT -evaluable subjects or after further  enrollment , no 
further testing at the MTD /tentative RP2D  level established in Part 1 will be done , and dose 
de-escalation or treatment at alternative dose schedules may  be considered  for further evaluation 
of safety and efficacy . 
Tumor assessment (Part 1 and Part 2)  
Tumor assessment will be performed according to the study schedule at baseline, every 2  cycles 
while the subject remains on study for the first 8 cycles and then every 3 cyc les thereafter (start 
of Cycles  3, 5, 7, and 9, then Cycles 12, 15, etc.).  
Tumor re -biopsy   
To search for possible mechanisms of acquired resistance to milademetan , an optional tumor 
re-biopsy may be performed within 30 day s following the last dose of milademetan  treatment for 
subjects who have achieved an initial complete respon se (CR) /partial response  (PR)  or stable 
disease (SD) for at least 6 months  by standard response criteria but later developed progressive 
disease (PD) while on therapy (both in Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion), preferably prior to 
initiating new therapy.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 65 TP53 genotyping, subject enrollment , and early discontinuation criteria  
 During Dose Escalation  and Dose Expansion , tumor TP53 genotyping will be 
performed in archived formalin -fixed paraffin -embedded (FFPE) and, if available, 
fresh tumor biopsies in all e nrolled subjects.  Confirmation of TP53 wild -type status 
is NOT required prior to milademetan  dosing .  The investigator will be informed if 
the genotyping confirms the presence of inactivating TP53 mutations  testing result 
shows that a subject’s malignant cells contain an inactivating mutation, insertion, or 
deletion in the TP53 gene. If study treatment has already begun, the subject may 
choose to discontinue study drug  or continue study drug  as long as clinical benefit is 
noted per the investigator’s judgm ent.  TP53 re -testing can be considered.  
4.1.2.3.  Intrasubject Dose Escalation  
No intrasubject dose escalation will be permitted.  
4.1.3.  Duration of the Study  
The study duration is expected to last approximately 6 years from the time the first subject is 
enrolled in Part 1 of the study.  
4.1.4.  Duration of Subject Participation  
The number of treatment cycles is not fixed in this study.  Subjects who continue to derive 
clinical benefit from treatment in the absence of withd rawal of subject consent, progression, or 
unacceptable toxicity may continue treatment.  Subjects in Part 1 and Part  2 who are still on 
study at least 6 months after enrollment is completed in both parts will be eligible to continue 
receiving study drug in  a separate extension phase of the protocol  (see Section  18.7).  Data 
collected from those subject s may be captured in a separate database.  
4.1.5.  Stopping Rules  
The study may be terminated at any time at  Daiichi Sankyo, Inc.’s ( DSI’s) discretion.  
4.1.5.1.  Stopping Rule for Maximum Tolerated Dose Determination  
The final MTD  will be decided based on considerations of the respective MTD  estimated by the 
BLRM  and on an overall assessment of safety data from subsequent cycles and PK/PDy 
information collected at all different doses tested.  For MTD  determination, the following 
stopping rules will be implemented for the Dose Escalation  part: (a) at least 6  evalua ble subject s 
at MTD  level with at least 21  evaluable subjects in total enrolled in the Dose Escalation  part, or 
(b) at least  9 evaluable subjects have been enrolled at a dose level that is the model’s 
recommendation for the next dose cohort and for which t he posterior probability of targeted 
toxicity is at least 50%, or (c) dose level -1 is too toxic.  
Cohorts may be expanded at any dose level or at the MTD  for further elaboration of safety, PK, 
or PDy parameters as required.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 66 4.1.5.2.  Dose -limiting Toxicities  
A DLT i s defined as any TEAE not attributable to disease or disease -related processes that 
occurs during the observation period (Cycle  1) in each dose -level cohort and is Grade 3 or higher 
according to NCI -CTCAE, v 4, with the exceptions as defined below:  
For hem atologic events, a DLT is defined as follows:  
 Grade 4 neutropenia lasting  > 7 days  
 Febrile neutropenia  
 Grade 4 anemia  
 Grade  4 thrombocytopenia or Grade ≥ 3 thrombocytopenia lasting more than 7  days 
or associated with bleeding  
 Dose delay >  7 days secondary  to myelosuppression  
For elevations in hepatic function enzymes, a DLT is defined as follows:  
 Grade 4 aspartate aminotransferase (AST)/alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels  
 AST/ALT >  5  upper limit of normal (ULN) lasting >  3 days without liver 
metastases  
 AST/ALT >  5  ULN if accompanied by ≥ Grade 2 elevation in bilirubin  
 AST/ALT >  5  ULN lasting >  3 days, if the baseline level was  ≤ 3  ULN in 
subjects with liver metastases  
 AST/ALT >  8  ULN lasting >  3 days, if the baseline level was >  3  ULN in 
subje cts with liver metastases  
The following adverse events are NOT considered DLTs:  
 Grade 3 fatigue lasting <  3 days  
 Grade 3 nausea or  vomiting that has resolved to Grade ≤ 2 within 48 hours after 
standard antiemetic therapies  
 Grade 3  diarrhea that has resolve d to Grade ≤ 2 within 48 hours after standard 
antidiarrheal therapies  
 Isolated laboratory findings not associated with signs or symptoms including 
Grade 3/4 alkaline phosphatase, uric acid, amyla se, and lipase elevations, and Grade 3 
hyponatremia lasting  < 72 hours developed from Grade 1 at baseline  
 Grade  3/4 lymphopenia  
Subjects who are unable to complete at l east 75% of the prescribed dose  of milademetan  in the 
first 21  days as a result of nondisease -related ≥ Grade 2 adverse event s will be considered to 
have a DLT.  
 A delay of  ≥ 1 week in initiating Cycle 2 secondary to a nondisease -related ≥ Grade 2 
adverse event will be considered a DLT.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 67 4.1.6.  Maximum Tolerated Dose  and Tentative Recommended Phase 2 Dose  Definition  
Once the stopping criteria are met, the MTD  estimated by BLRM  + EWOC is the dose with the 
highest posterior probability of the DLT rate in the target DLT rate interval of [16%, 33%] 
among all doses fulfilling the overdose control constraint: there is less than 25% probability for 
the DLT rate  > 33% (probability for excessive or unacceptable toxicity) ( Section  4.1.2.1 ).  Since 
an alternative drug administration schedule may be explored in lieu of or in parallel with the 
original QD × 21/28 days schedule, separate MTDs may be identified for each regimen .  The 
final MTD for each dosing schedule will be decided based on considerations of the respective 
MTDs estimated by the BLRM  and on an overall a ssessment of safety data from subsequent 
cycles and PK/PDy information collected at all different doses tested .  Upon determining the 
final MTD of the original QD  × 21/28 days and/or alternative dosing schedules, one dosing 
regimen will be selected for fur ther evaluation in Part 2 (Dose Expansion) , which may also be 
the tentative RP2D .   
4.1.7.  Management of Subjects with Adverse Events  
Treatment -related toxicities meeting the DLT definition (see Section  4.1.5.2  for DLT definitions) 
occurring after Day 28 (ie, outside the DLT observation period) or o ccurring in Part 2 of the 
study  will result in interruption and/or discontinuation of therapy.  For subjects deriving clinical 
benefit from treatment, an option to resume the therapy at 1 dose level below that at which the 
toxicity occurred may be considered after the toxicity returns t o NCI -CTCAE v 4 Grade ≤ 1 or to 
baseline values.  However, subjects requiring more than 4 weeks to recover from acute toxicities 
will be withdrawn from the treatment.  If a subject experiences NCI -CTCAE v 4 Grade 3 or 4 
toxicity or an SAE that is unequivocal ly attributable to the underlying malignancy, milademetan 
treatment may be postponed until the toxicity has resolved to NCI -CTCAE v 4 Grade ≤ 1 or 
returns to baseline values.  
The window for recommencing treatment may be extended to up to 8 weeks, if subject  has 
obtained  clinical benefit from milademetan  treatment that continued during the recovery period 
of the AEs .  
4.1.8.  Guidelines for Dose Delays  
Dosing of milademetan  should be interrupted if the following adverse events develop any time 
during treatment:  
 Absolute neutrophil count <  1 × 109/L (1000/mm3). 
 Platelet count <  75 × 109/L. 
 All other NCI-CTCAE v4  Grade ≥ 2 nonhematological , non disease -related  toxicities, 
except alopecia and Grade ≥ 2 fatigue lasting <  48 hours . 
 For other NCI-CTCAE v4  Grade ≥ 2 laboratory abnormalities that are not DLT s, 
treatment continuation with milademetan  will be at the discreti on of the investigator.  
Commencing rules for milademetan  administration are:  
 Absolute neutrophil count  ≥ 1 × 109/L (1000/mm3). 
 Platelet count ≥ 75 × 109/L. 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 68  All other NCI -CTCAE v4  Grade ≥ 2 nonhematological toxicities (excluding alopecia) 
must have resolved to Grade ≤ 1 or baseline values.  
These parameters should be seen as guidelines and are not intended to supersede the clinical 
judgment of the treating physician.  All adjustments should be made in consultation with the 
Sponsor’s Medical Monitor.  
In the event of a dose delay occurring  prior to completion of the PK/PDy sampl ing in the study, 
investigator s should contact DSI for guidance regarding rescheduling these procedures.  
In the event of a dose delay due to noncompliance, the study site should notify DSI at the earliest 
possible time.  Subjects missing more than 25% of the scheduled doses in Cycle 1 for 
nontoxicity -related reasons may be removed from the study.  
4.2. Selection of Doses  
4.2.1.  Experimental Treatments  
4.2.1.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  
The study will enroll subjects into cohorts with dose escalation by BLRM  with EWOC principle 
as outlined in Section  4.1.2.1 .  The sta rting dose will be 15  mg/day  (see Section  2.1.1.5.1  for 
justification of the human starting dose) .  In the event of a DLT, the next 2 subjects in the 
expanded cohort will receive milademetan  treatment starting at least 1  week apart . 
Upon completion of Part 1 (Dose Escalation) and determination of the MTD/ tentative RP2D , 
Part 2 (Dose Expansion) will immediately begin.  Subjects will receive milademetan  at the 
MTD/ tentative RP2D  defined in Section 4.1.2.1 . 
4.2.1.2.  For the Study  
Please see Section  2.2 for further details.  
4.2.1.3.  For Individual Subjects  
Please see Section  2.4 for further details.  
4.2.2.  Control Treatments  
Not applicable.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 69 5. STUDY POPULATION  
The study population will comprise male and female subjects aged 18 years and older with a 
pathologically documented advanced solid tumor or lymphoma  that has relapsed from or is 
refractory to standard treatment , or for which no standard treatment is available.  Specific 
inclusion and exclusion criteria are available in Section  5.1.1 and Section  5.1.2 . 
5.1. Enrollment  
Investigators will maintain a confidential screening log of all potential study candidates that 
includes limited information of the subjects (i nitials, age, sex) , date, and outcome of screening 
process (eg, enroll in the study, reason for ineligibility, refused to participate).  
Investigators will be expected to maintain an Enrollment Log of all subjects enrolled in the study 
indicating their assi gned study number.  
Investigators will maintain a confidential subject identification code list.  This confidential list of 
names of all subjects who have been allocated to a subject identification number (SID) upon 
enrolling in the study allows the investi gator to reveal the identity of any subject when necessary.  
Each subject or legally acceptable representative will be provided with information about the 
study, will have all questions answered to their satisfaction, and will sign and date an informed 
consent form ( ICF).  This will be completed  before any study -specific procedures are performed.  
Additional information about informed consent procedures is provided in Section  16.3. 
A subject is considered enrolled in the study upon the Investigator  or designee obtaining written 
informed consent from the subject or the subject’s legally acceptable representative 
(Section  16.3) and upon determination that all inclusion and exclusion criteria have been 
satisfied.  After assigning a  SID to each subject at the timing of scr eening, investigator s will 
assess the eligibility of a subject based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria after obtaining 
written informed consent from the subject.  After assessment by investigator s, the inclusion 
criteria/exclusion criteria form will be completed for registration.  The Sponsor  will perform 
registration after verifying that the subject meets the inclusion/exclusion criteria provided by the 
Investigator .  If the Sponsor has any questions regarding the information sent by the investigator , 
he or she will immediately contact the investigator to check the details.  Directly after 
registration, the Sponsor  will forward the results of registration to the investigator .  At this time, 
the subject will be assigned to study drug treatment.  
The In vestigator must not prescribe or administer the study drug until the subject has completed 
registration.  If the Sponsor disqualifies a subject from participation in the clinical study, the 
investigator will be notified.  The investigator will then explain  this outcome to the relevant 
subject.  
Data for all study visits will be recorded on the electronic case report form ( eCRF ) for subjects 
who receive study drug treatment.  Only minimal data ( ie, demography  and reason for 
withdrawal) will be recorded on the eCRF for subjects who fail the inclusion/exclusion criteria 
and/or do not receive study drug.  Further data, such as adverse event s, will not be collected from 
subjects once they are considered screen failur es or have decided to withdraw prior to receiving 
study drug.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 70 5.1.1.  Inclusion Criteria  
Subjects must satisfy all of the following criteria to be included in the study:  
1a. Dose Escalation Cohorts (Part 1)  
Has a histologically or cytologically documented advanced solid tumor or lymphoma that 
has relapsed from or is refractory to standard treatment, or for which no standard 
treatment is available.   
 Subjects with melanoma who are ineligible to receive or have declined ipilimumab 
treatment or who are refractory or int olerant to ipilimumab may enroll.  
 Subjects with certain tumor types such as those with high prevalence of MDM2 
amplification or overexpression (eg, well-differentiated [ WD]/dedifferentiated [ DD] 
liposarcoma) may be preferentially enrolled  in Part 1 . 
1b. Dose E xpansion Cohort (Part 2)  
Has a histologically or cytologically documented advanced melanoma or DLBCL, with 
measurable disease that is refractory to standard treatment or for which no standard 
treatment is available.  
 Subjects with melanoma who are ineligib le to receive or have declined ipilimumab 
treatment or who are refractory or intolerant to ipilimumab may enroll.  
 Subjects with DLBCL who have failed, been deemed ineligible for, or refused 
autologous stem cell transplantation may enroll . 
2. Male or female  ≥ 18 years old . 
3. Has an ECOG performance status of 0 to 1. 
4. Has adequate bone marrow function, defined as:  
 Platelet count ≥ 100  109/L 
 Hemoglobin  ≥ 9.0 g/dL  
 Absolute neutrophil count  ≥ 1.5  109/L. 
5. Has adequate renal function, defined as:  
 Creatinine clearance  ≥ 60 mL/min, as calculated using the modified Cockcroft -Gault 
equation, ([140 - age (in years)] × weight (in kg) / [serum creatinine (in mg/dL) × 72 ]; 
multiply by 0.85 if female ), OR creatinine  ≤ 1.5  ULN . 
6. Has adequate hepatic function, defined as: 
 AST/ALT  levels  ≤ 3  ULN (if liver metastases are present,  ≤ 5  ULN)  
 Bilirubin  ≤ 1.5  ULN . 
7. Has adequate blood clotting function, defined as:  
 International normalized ratio  (INR) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)  
≤ 1.5  ULN . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 71 8. Subject sh ould be able to provide written informed consent, comply with protocol visits 
and procedures, be able to take oral medication, and not have any active infection or 
comorbidity that would interfere with therapy.  
9. Subject (male and female) of childbearing/rep roductive potential must agree to use 
double -barrier contraceptive measures or avoid intercourse during the study and for 
90 days after the last dose of study drug.  
10. Subject must be fully informed about their illness and the investigational nature of the 
study protocol (including foreseeable risks and possible side effects) and must sign and 
date an IRB-approved ICF (including Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act authorization, if applicable) before performance of any study -specific procedures or 
tests.  
11. Is willing to provide and there is confirmed availability of pre-existing diagnostic or 
resected tumor samples, such as paraffin -embedded sections .  Providing fresh tumor 
biopsy is optional for subjects in Dose Escalation cohorts .  
12. Is willing to undergo tumor genotyping for TP53 mutation, insertion, or deletion at 
screening .  Confirmation of TP53 nonmutant status is  encouraged but not required prior 
to milademetan  dosing . 
13. Is willing to provide additional archived samples for comprehensive genomic and/or 
proteomic analyses if the subject has a PR/CR to milademetan  treatment.  
14. (Applicable to Part 2 only) Is willing to u ndergo pre -treatment tumor biopsies 
(post -treatment biopsies are requested).  
5.1.2.  Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects who meet any of the following criteria will be disqualified from entering the study:  
1. Has a tumor that contains an inactivating mutation, insertion , or deletion  in the 
TP53  gene determined previously or at screening.   
2. Has a history of primary central nervous system malignancy.  
3. Has g astrointestinal conditions that could affect the absorption of milademetan  in the 
opinion of the  investigator . 
4. Has an uncon trolled infection requiring intravenous antibiotics, antivirals, or antifungals, 
known human immunodeficiency virus infection, or active hepatitis B or C infection.  
5. Has received an allogeneic bone marrow or allogeneic stem cell transplant.  
6. Has a concomitan t medical condition that would increase the risk of toxicity, in the 
opinion of the investigator or Sponsor.  
7. Has clinically active brain metastases, defined as untreated and symptomatic, or requiring 
therapy with steroids or anticonvulsants to control asso ciated symptoms.  Subjects with 
treated brain metastases that are no longer symptomatic and who require no treatment 
with steroids may be included in the study if they have recovered from the acute toxic 
effect of radiotherapy.  A minimum of 4  weeks must h ave elapsed between the end of 
whole brain radiotherapy and study enrollment (2  weeks for stereotactic radiotherapy).  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 72 8. Has unresolved toxicities from previous anticancer therapy, defined as toxicities (other 
than al opecia) not yet resolved to NCI -CTCAE v4, Grade ≤ 1 or baseline.  Subjects with 
chronic Grade 2 toxicities may be eligible per the discretion of the investigator and 
Sponsor (eg, Grade 2 chemotherapy -induced neuropathy) .   
9. Had an autologous transplant within 3 months of starting study drug treatme nt. 
10. Is receiving concomitant treatment w ith a strong inducer of CYP3A . 
11. Had systemic treatment with anticancer therapy, antibody -based therapy, retinoid 
therapy, or hormonal therapy within 3 weeks before study drug treatment; or treatment 
with nitrosoureas or mitomycin C within 6 weeks before study drug treatment; or 
treatment with small -molecule targeted agents within 2 weeks before study drug 
treatment .  Previous and concurrent use of hormone replacement therapy, use of 
gonadotropin -releasing hormone modul ators for prostate cancer, and use of somatostatin 
analogs for neuroendocrine tumors are permitted if such therapy has not been changed 
within 8 weeks before study drug treatment.  
12. Had therapeutic radiation therapy or major surgery within 4 weeks before stu dy drug 
treatment or palliative radiation therapy within 2 weeks before study drug treatment.  
13. Participated in a clinical study within 3  weeks before study drug treatment or current 
participation in other therapeutic investigational procedures.  
14. Prolongation  of corrected QT interval by Fridericia’s method ( QT cF) at rest, where the 
mean QT cF interval is >  450 milliseconds (ms)  for males and > 470 ms for females  based 
on triplicate ECG.  
15. Pregnant or breastfeeding.  
16. Substance abuse or medical, psychological, or social conditions that, in the opinion of the 
investigator, may interfere with the subject’s participation in the clinical study or 
evaluation of the clinical study results.  
17. Prior treatment with an MDM2  inhibito r. 
5.2. Removal of Subjects f rom Therapy  
Any subject may withdraw from the treatment or study at any time.   Subjects will be followed 
for a 30-day safety follow -up or beyond if there are unresolved drug -related toxicities.  
5.2.1.  Reasons for Withdrawal/Early Discontinuation  
Any subject who discontinues from the study drug  for any reason will have their study drug  
discontinuation recorded.    
Subjects may be withdrawn from the study after signing informed consent for the following 
reasons : 
 Adverse event  
 Lost to follow -up 
 Death  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 73  Protocol violation  
 Withdrawal of consent by subject  
 TP53 contain an inactivating mutation, insertion, or deletion  detected   
 Study terminated by Sponsor  
 PD (radiographic progression)  
 Other (eg, discretion of the investigator  or clinical pro gression  or start of new 
therapy ) 
If a subject withdraws from the study, the investigator will complete and report the observations 
as thoroughly as possible up to the date of withdrawal , including the date of last treatment and 
the reason for withdrawal.  
If the subject is withdrawn due to an adverse event, the investigator will follow the subject until 
the adverse event has resolved or stabilized.  
All subjects who are withdrawn from the study should complete protocol -specified withdrawal 
procedures ( Sectio n 5.2.2 ). 
5.2.2.  Withdrawal Procedures  
Protocol -specified withdrawal procedures will involve an End -of-Treat ment Visit and an 
End-of-Study F ollow -up Visit 30 (± 2) days later (Sections  7.3.1.12  and Section  7.3.1.13 ). 
5.2.3.  Subject Replacement  
During Part 1 of the study, any subject who discontinues study participation before completing 
the first cycle of treatment and is not evaluable for DLT may be replaced.  See Section  4.1.5.2  
for definitions of DLTs.  
5.2.4.  Subject Re -screening Procedures  
The study will allow re -screening for any subject who failed to meet eligibility criteria upon 
initial screening.  The Principal  Investigator  will consult w ith the Sponsor  before making the 
re-screen decision.  For both Parts 1 and 2, the  SID must remain the same at the time of 
re-screening .  The initial screening information and the reason why the subject is ineligible for 
the initial evaluation will be reco rded on the Screening Log.  No data from the initial evaluation 
will be entered into the clinical database for re -screen ed subjects , except for those that were not 
repeated during re -screening (eg, tumor biopsies)  or other tests that are still valid within the 
screening window per the medical monitor . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 74 6. TREATMENTS ADMINISTERED  
6.1. Investigational Products  
The investigator must ensure that the investigational product will be used only in accordance 
with the protocol.  
Milademetan  will be administered as an oral capsule.  It will be supplied in 5, 20, 80, and 
200 mg capsules individually packaged in  desiccant -embedded  aluminum blisters.   Two other 
capsule strengths of 30 and 100 mg will also be supplied in HDPE bottles.  
6.1.1.  Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatments and Blinding  
6.1.1.1.  Randomization  
Not applicable because this is a single -arm study.  
6.1.1.2.  Blinding  
Both parts of the study are open  label , and no blinding will be performed.  
6.1.2.  Method of Assessing Treatment Compliance  
The follow ing measures will be employed to ensure treatment compliance during dosing at the 
clinical site:  
 Milademetan  only to subjects participating in the study and complying with the 
instructions from the clinical study personnel.  
 Doses on the visit days of Cyc le 1 should be administered to subjects under the 
supervision of clinical study personnel at the site.  A mouth and hand check of all 
subjects should be completed to ensure that all capsules have been swallowed.  
 Milademetan  may be dispensed in amounts exce eding the minimum amount required 
for the period of time until the next visit.  Subjects will be instructed to return all 
unused milademetan  at the next visit.  Alternatively, to ensure compliance, the site 
personnel may choose to dispense only the adequat e amount of study drug required 
until the next scheduled visit.  Compliance with the study drug regimen will be 
determined by counting unused capsules  and needs to be ≥ 75% in the DLT 
evaluation period .   
 Milademetan  administration that occurs at clinic visits will be supervised by a 
member of the site staff.   
6.1.3.  Labeling and Packaging  
Milademetan  will be supplied in individually packaged desiccant -embedded aluminum blisters . 
The clinical site will dispense take -home med ication with labels and instructions.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 75 6.1.4.  Preparation  
Procedures for proper handling and disposal of anticancer drugs should be followed in 
accordance with the standard operating procedures (SOPs) of the study site.  
6.1.5.  Storage  
Drug supplies must be stored in a se cure, limited access storage area under the  recommended 
storage conditions listed below:  
 Stored at 2 °C to 8 °C (36 °F to 46 °F). 
If storage conditions are not maintained per specified requirements, Medpace  or DSI should be 
contacted.  
6.1.6.  Drug Accountability  
When a drug shipment is received, the investigator or designee will check the amount and 
condition of the drug, check for appropriate local language in the label  and drug expiration date, 
and sign the Receipt of Shipment Form provided.  The Receipt of Ship ment Form should be 
faxed as instructed on the form.  The original will be retained at the site.  In addition, the 
investigator or designee shall contact DSI as soon as possible if there is a problem with the 
shipment.  
A Drug Accountability Record will be provided for the investigational product.  The record must 
be kept current and should contain the dates and quantiti es of drug received, subject 
(identification number and/or initials or supply number as applicable ) for whom the 
investigational product was  dispensed, the date and quantity of investigational product dispensed 
and remaining, if from individual subject drug units , as well as the initials of the dispenser.  
At the end of the study, or as directed, all milademetan  capsules  including unused, parti ally used, 
or empty containers will be returned to a designee as instru cted by DSI.  Investigational p roduct 
will be returned only after the study monitor has completed a final inventory to verify the 
quantity to be returned.  The return of investigational  product must be documented and the 
documentation included in the shipment.  At  the end of the study, a final investigational p roduct 
reconciliation statement must be completed by the investigator or designee and provided to the 
Sponsor.  Unused drug supplies may be destroyed by the investigator when approved in writing 
by DSI/delegate , and DSI/delegate  has received copies of the site’s drug handling and disposition 
SOPs.  
All investigati onal product inventory forms must be made available for inspection by a DSI 
authorized representative or designee and regulatory agency inspectors.  The investigator is 
responsible for the accountability of all used and unused study supplies at the site.  
6.1.7.  Retention Samples  
Not applicable.  
6.2. Concomitant Medications  
Medications used within 30 days before screening will be recorded.  All concomitant 
medications will be recorded on the eCRF.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 76 6.2.1.  Prohibited Concomitant Medications /Activities  
The following medications a nd products will be prohibited:  
 Other anticancer therapy, including cytotoxic, antibody, retinoid, or hormonal 
treatment and small -molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors.   Concurrent use of hormone 
replacement therapy, the use of gonadotropin releasing hormon e modulators for 
prostate cancer, and the use of somatostatin analogs for neuroendocrine tumors are 
permitted if such therapy has not been changed within 8 weeks before study drug 
treatment.  Megestrol acetate as supportive care is also permitted.  
 Other in vestigational agents.  
 Nonclinical studies indicate that milademetan  is metabolized by CYP3A.  Drugs that 
are strong inducers of these enzymes may alter the PK of milademetan  and should 
therefore be avoided ( Section  18.5).  If drugs that are strong inhibitors of CYP3A 
need to be taken concomitantly, then milademetan dose must be reduced to half the 
assigned dose.  
 Milademetan  is metabolized by CYP3A .  St. John’s Wort (hypericin) therefore will 
not be permitted for 30 days before and during participation in the study.  
 Because milademetan  is a substrate for CYP3A  and grapefruit juice and Seville 
oranges contain  CYP3A inhibitor s, foods or beverages contain ing grapefruit or 
Seville oranges should be avoided within 48 hours before  initial dose of study drug  
and throughout the duration of  the study.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 77 7. STUDY PROCEDURES  
A study visit schedule in tabular format is provided in Section  18.6. 
7.1. Screening  
7.1.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Screening (Pre -cycle)  
The screening (Pre -cycle) period occurs within 14 days prior to starting study therapy.   
The following procedures  will be performed during  the Part 1 screening  period : 
 Obtain written (ie, signed and dated) informed consent . 
 Assign an SID number . 
 Record demographic, medical history information including PFS post the most recent 
prior therapy, and prior medication history information for cancer . 
 Perform a complete physical examination  and record weight and height . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate , 
respiratory rate,  body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functio nal status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain blood samples for safety laboratories ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a serum or urine sample for pregnancy testing  in women of childbearing 
potential . 
 Obtain a urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG in triplicate : 
 For subjects enrolled per Case 3 ( Section  4.1.2.1 ), 4 sets of triplicate ECGs should 
each be taken approximately 1 hour apart . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Obtain archived tumor samples for TP53 testing (approximat ely 25 FFPE sections or 
blocks)  (Section  9.2.1 ). 
 Perform a tumor biopsy (optional) within 21  days prior to the first dose of study drug  
(Section  9.2). 
 Perform a tumor assessment within 4 weeks  before the administration of the first dose 
of study drug ( Section  8.1). 
 For all subjects with lymphoma, perform a (18F) fluorodeoxyglucose -positron 
emission tomography ( FDG -PET) scan under f asting conditions at baseline.  
Assess bone marrow by aspirate and/or biopsy per investigator decision.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 78  Complete the Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria Form for subject registration . 
 The Sponsor  will perform registration after verifying that the subject meets the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria (Section  5.1) provided by the investigator .  If the 
Sponsor  has any questions regarding the information sent by the investigator , he 
or she will immed iately contact the investigator  to check the details.  Directly 
after registration, the Sponsor  will forward the results of registration to the 
investigator .  At this time, the subject will be assigned to study drug treatment.  
 The investigator  must not prescribe  or administer  the study drug  until the subject 
has completed registration.  If the Sponsor disqualifies a subject from 
participation in the clinical study, the investigator will be notified.  The 
investigator will then explain this outc ome to the relevant subject.  
7.2. Randomization  
Not applicable because this is a single -arm study.  
7.3. Treatment Period  
7.3.1.  Treatment Period, Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  
Unless otherwise stated, an activity occurs before drug administration.  
7.3.1.1.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycl e 1/Day 1  
The following procedures will be completed predose  during the Part 1, Cycle 1/ Day 1 visit .  If 
the screening visit for Part 1 is completed within 24 hours of Cycle 1/Day 1, the assessments do 
not need to be repeated.  
 Perform a complete physic al examination  and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ) both before administration of 
study drug and at 2  hours postdose . 
 Assess functional st atus using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1).  
 Obtain  blood sample s for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a PK blood s ample . 
 Obtain a blood sample for tumor markers as appropriate for the tumor type . 
 Obtain a blood sample for pharmacogenomics ( PGx).  Instructions for handling and 
shipping the PGx blood sample are included in the Study Manual . 
 Obtain MIC -1 serum sample . 
 Obtain blood samples for exploratory analysis  (Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG in triplicate . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 79  Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
The following procedures will be completed postdose  during the Part 1, Cycle 1/ Day 1 visit:  
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ) at 2 hours postdose . 
 Obta in PK blood samples at the following time point s: 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 6  to 8 hours 
postdose . 
 Obtain MIC -1 serum samples 6  to 8 hours postdose . 
 Obtain blood samples for exploratory analyses 6  to 8 hours postdose  (Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG at 2 hours postdose  in triplicate :  
 For subjects enrolled per Case 3 ( Section  4.1.2.1 ), triplicate ECGs will be taken at 
predose , 0.5, 1, 2, 3 , and 8 hours  postdose , corresponding to the PK time  points.  
The time  points for the ECG and PK sample collection should be as close a s 
possible within a 10 -minute window.  
7.3.1.2.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 1/Day 2  
The following procedures will be performed during  the Part 1, Cycle 1/ Day 2 visit .   
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a predose  PK blood sample . 
 Obtain a predose  MIC -1 serum sample . 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG in triplicate.  
 For subjects enrolled per Case 3 ( Section  4.1.2.1 ), triplicate ECGs will be taken at 
predose , corresponding to the PK time point .  The time  point  for the ECG and PK 
sample collection should be as close as possible within  a 10-minute window.  
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse event s. 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense a pill diary  with dose administration instructions  to assess tr eatment 
compli ance. 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 80 7.3.1.3.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 1/Day 8  
The following procedures will be performed during  the Part 1, Cycle 1/ Day 8 visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Obtain  a predose  PK blood sample . 
 Obtain a predose  MIC -1 serum sample . 
 Obtain a predose  urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG i n triplicate . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Obtain an optional tumor  biopsy  6 hours postdose . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense  and review  pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.1.4.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 1/Day 15  
The following procedures will be performed during  the Part 1, Cycle 1/ Day 15 visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measuremen ts (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a predose  PK blood sample . 
 Obtain a predose  MIC -1 serum sample . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diar y to assess treatment compliance . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 81 7.3.1.5.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 1/Day s 18 to 21 
The following procedures will be completed predose  during the Part 1, Cycle  1/Days 18 to 21 
visit:  
(For subjects enrolled in the QD × 7/28 days schedule, this visit is needed only if there are 
unresolved Grade ≥3 AEs or Grade ≥2 thrombocytopenia on Day 15 that need follow up).  
(For subjects receiving study drug  under the QD 7/28 days or QD 3/14 days schedules, the blood 
sample collection [exploratory blood samples, PK samples, ad MIC -1 induction] on Cycle  1 
Days 18 to 21 is not required)  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diasto lic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respirat ory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Obtain PK blo od samples at the following time  points: predose , 0.5,  1, 2, 3, and 6  to 
8 hours postdose . 
 Obtain a predose  MIC -1 serum sample . 
 Obtain  predose  blood samples for exploratory analysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a predose  urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 For subjects enrolled  per Case 3 ( Section  4.1.2.1 ), perform a 12 -lead ECG in 
triplicate.  
 Triplicate ECGs will be taken at predose  and 3 hours postdose , corresponding to 
the PK time points.  The time points for the ECG and PK sample collectio n 
should be as close as possible within a 10-minute window.  
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site).  
 Review pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.1.6.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), C ycle 2/Day 1  
The following procedures  will be performed during  the Part 1, Cycle 2/ Day 1 visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ) before administration of study 
drug. 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 82  Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Obtain PK blood samples at the following time point s: predose  and at 1, 3, and 6  to 
8 hours postdose . 
 For subjects enrolled per Case 3 ( Section  4.1.2.1 ), obtain a predose  MIC -1 serum 
sample.  
 Obtain a blood sample for  tumor markers as appropriate for the tumor type . 
 Obtain a predose  urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG in triplicate . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense  and review  pill diary  to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.1.7.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 2/Day  8 
The following procedures  will be performed at the Pa rt 1, Cycle 2/ Day 8  visit: 
 Perform a  complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site).  
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.1.8.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 2/Day 15  
The following procedures  will be performed at the Part 1, Cycle 2/ Day 15  visit: 
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respirat ory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 83  Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site).  
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.1.9.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 3/Day 1  
The following procedure s will be performed at the Part 1, Cycle 3/ Day 1  visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a serum or urine sample for pregnancy testing in women of childbearing 
potential . 
 Obtain a blood sample for tumor markers as appropria te for the tumor type . 
 Obtain a predose  urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG in triplicate . 
 Record concomitant medicatio ns. 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Perform a tumor assessment ( Section  8.1). 
 If the subject has a  lymphoma that is FDG -PET avid , post-treatment FDG -PET 
scans will be performed under fasting conditions .  If baseline bone marrow 
aspirate and/or biopsy was positive, it may be repeated at this time.  
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary  to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.1.10.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 3/Day 15  
The following procedures will be performed at the Part 1, Cycle 3/ Day 15  visit: 
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respirat ory rate, body temperature , and pulse ox imetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 84  Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site).  
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.1.11.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), Cycle 4 and All Subsequent Cycles , Day 1  
The following procedures will be pe rformed at the Part 1, Cycle 4/ Day 1  visit and all additional 
Cycle Day 1 v isits:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a blood sample for tumor markers as appropriate for the tumor type . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Perform a tumor assessment  at the time point s outlined in the Schedule of Events; 
every 2 cycles of treatment for the first 8 cycles and then every 3  cycles thereafter 
(ie, at start of Cycles 3, 5, 7, and 9, then Cycles 12, 15, etc.). ( Section  8.1). 
 If the subject has a lymphoma that is FDG -PET avid,  post-treatment FDG -PET 
scans will be performed  under fasting conditions .  If baseline bone marrow 
aspirate and/or biopsy was positive, it may be repeated at the same time as 
subsequent tumor as sessments .  
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
For Cycle 4 Day 1 and beyond: subjects who completed more than 1 year of treatment with 
continued clinical benefit and no ongoing Grade ≥3 TEAEs or risk thereof in the judgment of the 
investigator are allowed to continue on with the subsequent visits at ev ery other cycle and may 
have additional visits as clinically needed.  
7.3.1.12.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation), End-of-Treatment  (Post -cycle)  
This End-of-Treatment  Visit should occur at the earliest day possible within 30 (± 2)  days after 
the last administration of milade metan  but before beginning any other form of anticancer  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 85 therapy.  The same procedures will be performed when subjects roll over to the Extension Phase 
(Section  18.7). 
The following assessments will be performed at this visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight and height . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain blood samples for safety l aboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a serum or urine sample for pregnancy testing in women of childbearing 
potential . 
 Obtain a blood sample for tumor markers as appropriate for the tumor type . 
 Obtain PK blood sample . 
 Obtain blood samples for exploratory analyses ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a urine samp le for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG in triplicate . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Review  pill diary  to assess treatment compliance . 
 Record reason for treatment discontinuation . 
 Tumor re -biopsy (optional) ( Section  7.3.1.14 ). 
7.3.1.13.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation) End -of-Study  Follow -up 
The End -of-Study F ollow -up should occur 30 (±  2) days after the last administration of 
milademetan .  Follow -up information will be collected via a phone call or site visit.  If the 
subject begins another form of anticancer  therapy before the end of the 30  (± 2) -day period, 
every effort wi ll be made to complete all the E nd-of-Study assessments prior to commencing the 
new therapy.  The investigator should follow subjects with adverse events  until the event has 
resolved or the condition has stabilized.  In case of unresolved adverse events , including 
significant abnormal laboratory values at the End-of-Treatment assessment, these events wi ll be 
followed up until resolution or until they become clinically irrelevant . 
The following information will be collected at this follow -up: 
 Assessment of adverse events  
 Current medications  
 Subject survival status  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 86 If the End -of-Study F ollow -up is not perf ormed (ie, due to death, lost to follow -up, etc.), record 
the reason . 
7.3.1.14.  Part 1 (Dose Escalation) Tumor Re -biopsy  
To search for possible mechanisms of acquired resistance to milademetan , an optional tumor 
re-biopsy may be performed in subjects who have achiev ed an initial CR/PR or SD for at least 
6 months by RECIST v 1.1 or revised IWG  criteria to milademetan  but later develop PD while 
on therapy.  Tumor re -biopsy would be performed within 30  days following the last dose of 
milademetan  treatment , preferably prior to initiating new therapy . 
7.3.2.  Treatment Period, Part 2 (Dose Expansion)  
Unless otherwise stated, an activity occurs before study drug administration.  
7.3.2.1.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Screening (Pre -cycle)  
The screening (Pre -cycle)  period is within 14 days before starting study therapy.   
The following assessments will be performed during  the Part 2 screening period : 
 Obtain written (ie, signed and dated) informed consent . 
 Record demographic, medical history information  including PFS  post the most recent 
prior therapy , and prior medication history information for cancer . 
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight and height . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain blood samples for safety laboratories ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a serum or urine sample for pregnancy testing in women of childbearing 
potential . 
 Obtain a urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG  in triplicate . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Obtain archived tumor samples for TP53 testing (approximately 25 FFPE sections or 
block s) (Section  9.2.1 ). 
 Perform a pre -treatment tumor  biopsy  (Section  9.2).  
 Perform a tumor assessment within 4 weeks  before the admi nistration of the first dose 
of study drug ( Section  8.1). 
 For all subjects with DLBCL , perform a FDG -PET scan under fasting conditions 
at baseline.  Assess bone marrow by aspirate and/or biopsy per investigator 
decision .   
 Complete the Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria Form for subject registration . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 87  The Sponsor  will perform registration after verifying that the subject meets the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria  provided by the investigator .  If the Sponsor  has any 
questions regarding the information sent by the investigator , he or she will 
immediately contact the investigator  to check the details.  Directly after 
registration, the Sponsor  will forward the result s of registration to the investigator .  
At this time, the subject will be assigned to study drug treatment.  
 The investigator  must not prescribe the study drug  until the subje ct has completed 
registration .  If the Sponsor disqualifies a subject from partici pation in the clinical 
study, the investigator will be notified.  The investigator will then explain this 
outcome to the relevant subject.  
7.3.2.2.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 1/Day 1  
The following will be complete d during t he Part 2, Cycle 1/ Day 1 visit.  If the screening visit for 
Part 2 is completed within 24 hours of Cycle 1/ Day 1, the assessments do not need to be 
repeated.  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ) both before administration of 
study drug and at 2  hours postdose . 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance  Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a blood sample for tumor markers as appropriate for the tumor type . 
 Obtain PK blood samples at the following time point s: predose , and then at 0.5, 1, 2, 
3, 4, 6, and 8  hours postdos e.  All samples should  be collected within ±5 minutes of 
specified time point s. 
 Obtain a blood sample for PGx.  Instructions for handling and shipping the PGx 
blood sample are included in the Study Manual . 
 Obtain MIC -1 serum samples predose  and another sam ple between 6 and 8 hours 
postdose . 
 Obtain blood samples for exploratory analyses predose  and at 8 hours postdose  
(Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a predose  urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG  both predose  and at 2 hours postdose  in triplicate . 
 Administer mildemetan per protocol (at the site).  
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 88 7.3.2.3.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 1/Day 2  
The following procedures  will be performed during  the Part 2, Cycle 1/ Day 2 visit:  
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a predose  PK blood sample . 
 Obtain a predose  MIC -1 serum sample . 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG predose  and 2 hours postdose  in tri plicate . 
 Record concomitant  medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense a pill diary with dose administration instructions to assess treatment 
compliance . 
7.3.2.4.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 1/Day 8  
The following procedures  will be performed during  the Part 2, Cycle 1/ Day 8 visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1).  
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a predose  PK blood sample . 
 Obtain a predose  MIC -1 serum sample . 
 Obtain a predose  urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG in triplicate . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Perform a tumor  biopsy ( requested ) 6 hours postdose  (optional) . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site).  
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.2.5.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 1/Day 15  
The following procedures  will be performed during  the Part 2, Cycle 1/ Day 15 visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 89  Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a predose  PK blood sample . 
 Obtain a predose  MIC -1 serum sample . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site).  
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary  to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.2.6.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 1/Day s 18 to 21 
The following procedures will be performed during the Part 2, Cycle 1/ Days 18 to 21 visit:  
 Perform a compl ete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Sectio n 18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain PK blood samples at the following time point s: predose , 0.5,  1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 
8 hours postdose .  All samples should  be collected within ± 5 minutes of specified 
time point s.  
 Obtai n a predose  MIC -1 serum sample . 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for exploratory analyses ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a predose  urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Record concomitant me dications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site).  
 Review  pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.2.7.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 2/Day 1  
The following procedures  will be performed during  the Part 2, Cycle 2/Day 1 visit: 
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ) before administration of study 
drug.  
 Assess  functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 90   Obtain a blood sample for tumor markers as appropriate for the tumor type . 
 Obtain a predose  urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG in triplicate . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Obtain PK blood samples at the following time point s: predose , and then at 0.5, 1, 2, 
3, 4, 6 , and 8 hours postdose . 
 Administer mildemetan per protocol (at the site).  
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home ). 
 Dispense and review pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.2.8.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 2/Day 8  
The following procedures will b e performed during the Part 2, Cycle 2/ Day 8 visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Asses s functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary  to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.2.9.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 2/Day 15  
The following procedures will be performed during the Part 2, Cycle 2/ Day 15 visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site).  
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 91 7.3.2.10.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 3/Day 1  
The following procedures  will be performed at the Part 2, Cycle 3/ Day 1 visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (syst olic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate , body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a seru m or urine sample for pregnancy testing  in women of childbearing 
potential . 
 Obtain a blood sample for tumor markers as appropriate for the tumor type . 
 Obtain a predose  urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG in triplicate . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Perform a tumor assessment ( Section  8.1). 
 If the subject has DLBCL that is FDG -PET avid, post -treatment FDG -PET scans 
will be performed under fasting conditions .  If baseline bone marrow aspirate 
and/or biopsy was positive, it may be  repeated at this time . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary  to assess treatment compliance . 
7.3.2.11.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 3/Day 15 
The following procedures  will be performed during  the Part 2, Cycle 3/ Day 15 visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 92 7.3.2.12.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), Cycle 4 and All Subsequent Cycles , Day  1 
The following procedures  will be pe rformed at the Part 2, Cycle 4/ Day 1 v isit and all additional 
Cycle Day 1 v isits:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain predose  blood samples for safety laboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a blood sample for tumor markers as appropriate for the tumor type . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Perform a tumor assessment at the time point s outlined in the Schedule of Events ; 
every 2 cycles of treatment for the first 8 cycles and then every 3  cycles thereafter 
(ie, at start of Cycles 3, 5, 7, and 9, then Cycles  12, 15, etc.). ( Section  8.1). 
 If the subject has DLBCL that is FDG -PET avid, post -treatment FDG -PET scans 
will be performed under fasting conditions.  If baseline bone marrow aspirate 
and/or biopsy was positive, it may be repeated at the same time as subsequent 
tumor assessments.  
 Administer milademetan  per protocol  (at the site) . 
 Dispense milademetan  per protocol  (to take home) . 
 Dispense and review pill diary  to assess treatment compliance . 
For Cycle 4 Day 1 and beyond: subjects who completed more than 1 year of treatment with 
continued clinical benefit and no ongoing Grade ≥ 3 TEAEs or risk thereof in the judgment of 
the investigator are allowed to continue on with the subsequent visits at every other cycle and 
may have additional visits as clinically needed.  
7.3.2.13.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion ), End -of-Treatment (Post -Cycle)  
This End -of-Treatment Visit should occur at the earliest day possible within 30  (±2) days after 
the last administration of milademetan , but before beginning any other form of anticancer  
therapy.  The same procedures will be performed when subjects roll over to the Extension Phase 
(Section  18.7). 
The following assessments will be performed at this visit:  
 Perform a complete physical examination and record weight and height . 
 Obtain vital sign measurements (systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, 
respiratory rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry ). 
 Assess functional status using the ECOG Performance Status Scale ( Section  18.1). 
 Obtain blood samples for safety l aboratories  (Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a serum or urine sample for pregnancy testing in women of childbearing 
potential . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 93  Obtain a blood sample for tumor markers as appropriate for the tumor type . 
 Obtain blood samples for exploratory analyses ( Section  10.8). 
 Obtain a urine sample for urinalysis ( Section  10.8). 
 Perform a 12 -lead ECG in triplicate . 
 Record concomitant medications . 
 Assess subjects for adverse events . 
 Review pill diary to assess treatment compliance . 
 Record reason for treatment discontinuation . 
 Tumor r e-biopsy ( optional ) (Section  7.3.2.15 ). 
7.3.2.14.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion ) End -of-Study Follow -up 
The End -of-Study F ollow -up should occur 30 (±  2) days after the last administration of 
milademetan .  Follow -up information will be collected v ia a phone call or site visit.  If the 
subject begins another form of anticancer  therapy before the end of the 30  (± 2) -day period, 
every effort will be made to complete all  the End -of-Study assessments prior to commencing the 
new therapy.  The investigato r should follow subjects with adverse events  until the event has 
resolved or the condition has stabilized.  In case of unresolved adverse events , including 
significant abnor mal laboratory values at the End -of-Treatment assessment, these events will be 
followed up until resolution or until they become clinically not relevant.  
The following information will be collected at this follow -up: 
 Assessment of adverse events  
 Current medications  
 Subject survival status  
If the End -of-Study Follow -up is not performe d (ie, due to death, lost to follow -up, etc.), record 
the reason.  
7.3.2.15.  Part 2 (Dose Expansion) Tumor Re -biopsy  
Please see Section  7.3.1.14  for details reg arding performing tumor re -biopsy in Part 2.   
Re-biopsy in Part 2 will follow the same procedures used in Part 1.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 94 8. EFFICACY ASSESSMENTS  
8.1. Efficacy Variable(s ) 
Efficacy assessments will be based on tumor assessments  to be performed at screening and every 
2 cycles of treatment for the first 8 cycles and then every 3 cycles thereafter (ie, at start of 
Cycles  3, 5, 7, and 9, then Cycles 12, 15, etc.)  while the subject remains on study drug.  The 
clinical activity of milademetan  will be assessed  by evaluating tu mor response.  In subjects with 
solid tumors, tumor response will be evaluated using RECIST  v 1.1 (Section  18.3).  In subjects 
with lymphomas, tumor response will be evaluated using the revised IWG criteria 
(Section  18.4).7 
Computed tomography (CT) and/o r magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (spiral CT or MRI with 
≤ 5 mm cuts) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis should be used for tumor assessment unless 
another modality of disease assessment is necessary for the lesions.  Every effort should be made 
to use the  same assessment modality for all assessments for each subject.  
Subjects with lymphoma require an FDG -PET scan at baseline.  Subjects with lymphoma who 
are FDG -PET avid require FDG -PET scanning at each tumor assessment.  Bone marrow will be 
assessed at bas eline by aspirate and/or biopsy per the investigator ’s decision.  If positive, bone 
marrow assessments  may be repeated with subsequent tumor assessments.  
As a complementary approach to the exploratory objective #2 in Part 1 ( Section  3.1.3.1 ), 
particularly in WD/DD  liposarcoma that ar e preferentially enrolled in the study due to the high 
prevalence of MDM2 amplification, the growth  rates of the target tumors before starting 
milademetan versus on -treatment with milademetan may be analyzed by capturing the target 
tumor measurements by local reading in 2 or more prior scans from the medical records, if 
available.  
Additionally, a digita l or electronic copy of the CT/MRI scans performed for RECIST v 1.1 
assessment may be collected by the sponsor for centralized analysis by sponsor -appointed 
radiologist(s) as a post -hoc exploration of the effect of milademetan on spe cific tumor 
histologies  (eg, WD/ DD liposarcoma) . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 95 9. PHARMACOKINETIC/PHARMACODYNAMIC ASSESSMENTS  
9.1. Pharmacokinetic Assessment(s)  
Blood samples for PK analyses will be collected for the measurement of plasma concentrations 
of milademetan as shown in Table  9.1.  Additionally, PK sample s may be obtained at any time 
during the study if deemed clinically necessary.  At each time point , approximately 5 mL of 
blood will be collected for DS-3032a  analysis.  Instructions for the handling of blood samples 
and shipping of plasma samples for PK analyses are included in a separate document  
(eg, laboratory manual) .  The actual time of study drug administration and the exact time of 
blood samplin g for PK analysis must be recorded on the case report form ( CRF ).   
The PK samples will be shipped to a central laboratory for forwarding to a Sponsor -designated 
bioanalytical laboratory.  Plasma concentrations of DS-3032 a will be measured using a validate d 
assay at the bioanalytical laboratory.    
The PK parameters (eg , Cmax, area under the plasma concentration -time curve from time 0 to  
24 hours [AUC0 -24h], etc.) will be estimated by non -compartmental analysis as described in 
Section  12.5.1 . 
Table  9.1: Blood Sample Collection for Milademetan Pharmacokinetics  
Part  Dose  Escalation  
Cycle/Days  Cycle 1/ Days 1, 18  to 21 and  
Cycle 2/ Day 1e Cycle 1/ 
Days 2, 8, 
15 
 End-of-Treatment  
Hour  0a,d 0.5b 1b 2b 3b 6 to 8c 0a 0a 
Part  Dose Expansion  
Cycle/Days  Cycle 1/ Days 1, 18  to 21 and  
Cycle 2/ Day 1  Cycle 1/ 
Days 2, 8, 
15 
 End-of-Treatment  
Hour  0a,d 0.5b 1b 2b 3b 4b 6b 8b 0a 0a 
eCRF = electronic case report form; PK = pharmacokinetics; QD = once daily  
a Predose  within 2 hours prior to drug administration.  
b ± 15% of nominal time.  
c PK sample will be collected between time window of 6 and 8 hours postdose .  Actual time of sample collection 
must be recorded in eCRF.  
d 24-hour PK on Cycle 1 Day s 18 to 21 and Cycle 2 Day 1  will be imputed to its predose  PK.   
e Cycle 1 Day s 18 to 21 PK sample collection is not needed for subjects in QD x  7/28 days and QD 3/14 days dose 
schedules.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 96 9.2. Pharmacodynamic /Predictive Biomarker Variable(s)  
9.2.1.  TP53 Status  
 During Dose Escalation, tumor TP53 genotyping will be performed in archived FFPE 
and, if available,  fresh tumor biopsies in all enrolled subjects.  Confirmation of TP53 
wild-type status is NOT required prior to milademetan  dosing .  The investigator will 
be informed if the genotyping confirms the presence of inactivating TP53 mutations 
(ie, if the testin g result shows that a subject’s malignant cells contain an inactivating 
mutation, insertion, or deletion in the TP53 ).  If the testing result shows that a 
subject’s tumor contains an inactivating mutation, insertion, or deletion in the 
TP53  gene after milademetan  has begun, the subject may choose to discontinue from 
the study or continue treatment as long as the subject is deriving clinical benefit ( SD 
or objective response) in the absence of unacceptable toxicities per investigator 
assessment .  TP53 re -testing can be considered.  
 During Dose Expansion, TP53 genotyping will be performed in both fresh 
pre-treatment tumor biopsies and archived samples from sub jects with sarcoma and 
DLBCL.  In addition to TP53 genotyping, tumor samples may be analyzed for 
DNAseq  and RNAseq .  Confirmation of TP53 wild -type status is NOT required prior 
to milademetan  dosing, but the investigator will be informed if the genotyping 
confirms the presence of inactivating TP53 mutations .  If the testing result shows that 
a subject’s tum or contains an inactivating mutation, insertion, or deletion in the 
TP53  gene after milademetan  has begun, the subject may choose to discontinue from 
the study or continue treatment as long as the subject is deriving clinical benefit ( SD 
or objective respo nse) in the absence of unacceptable toxicities per investigator 
assessment .  TP53 re -testing can be considered.  
9.2.2.  Pharmacodynamic Variables  
Induction of serum MIC -1 will be the primary PDy biomarker.  Serum  samples will be collected 
at multiple time point s in the study  to assess the effect of milademetan  treatment on MIC -1 
induction.  Other exploratory PDy biomarkers including, but not limited to, expression levels of 
p53, p21, MDM2, MDM4, Ki67, apoptosis markers , and/or other biomarkers will also be 
assesse d, if available.  
9.2.3.  Exploratory Biomarker Analysis  
Archived or pre -treatment , on-treatment, and end -of-treatment  biopsied tumor samples will be 
examined for components of the p53 pathway , which may include, but are not limited to, 
expression of p53, p21, MDM2 , MDM4 , and MDM2 copy number , and TP53 mutations .  
Additional biomarkers outside of the p53 pathway may  be included in order to better understand 
the responsiveness to therapy.  These may include protein, metabolite, gene expression, or 
genetic biomarkers.  
Subjects should be willing to provide archived tumor samples.  During Part 1 (Dose Escalation), 
subjects will have the option to provide pre - and post -treatment biopsies  (baseline and 6 hours 
postdose  [± 2 hours] on Cycle 1 Day 8 [±  2 days]) .  During  Part 2 (Dose Expansion), subjects  are 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 97 required to provide a pre-treatment  biopsy  (baseline) .  Post-treatment tumor  biopsies will be 
requested to be obtained 6 hours postdose  [± 2 hours] on Cycle 1 Day 8.   Tumor biopsies may be 
obtained by skin punch biops ies (for melanoma), Tru -cut technique, or core needle biopsies 
under imaging guidance . 
Optional t umor re -biopsy will be performed within 30 days of the last dose of milademetan  in 
subjects who have achieved an initial CR/PR  or SD for at least 6 months  to milademetan  but 
later developed PD while on therapy.  
9.3. Pharmacogenomics  
As part of this study, a blood sample will also be banked for possible future PGx analysis in 
DNA.  All participants should be presented with the PGx ICF at screening.  Participation in t his 
portion of the study is optional for all subjects.  Thus, those who choose not to provide a sample 
for PGx analysis may still participate in the main portion of the study.  
In all parts of the study, on Day 1 of Cycle 1 prior to study drug administratio n, the blood PGx 
sample should be collected for subjects who sign the PGx ICF.  This sample may be analyzed 
only for genes suspected to contribute to the safety and efficacy of the study drug ( milademetan ).   
Results will provide information on how individ uals metabolize and /or react to the study drug or 
help to identify subjects who are more likely or less likely to benefit from the study drug.  The 
information may be useful in increasing the knowledge of differences among individuals in the 
way they metab olize the study drug, as well as helping in the development of new drugs or 
improvement of existing drugs.  
Because emerging information regarding the safety and efficacy of milademetan  may become 
available in the future, samples will be retained for possib le future analysis.  Samples will be 
retained until the DNA has been exhausted or until the Sponsor  instructs the genotyping 
contractor to destroy the sample (in accordance with laboratory procedures).  During the period 
of storage, the DNA sample will not  be immortalized or sold to anyone.  Subjects will have the 
right to withdraw consent and have their sample destroyed at any time.  
The samples will be shipped to a central laboratory for forwarding to Gentris Clinical Genetics, 
Inc., which has been contrac ted by the Sponsor  to process these blood samples.  
To ensure subject confidentiality, sample tubes will be identified only by a barcode label.  This 
barcode will be linked to the subject’s SID number.  
Refer to a separate document for instructions for sample collection, preparation, handling, 
storage, and shipment.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 98 10. SAFETY EVALUATION AND REPORTING  
10.1. Adverse Event  Collection and Reporting  
All clinical adverse events occurring after the subject sign s the ICF and up to 30  (±2) days after 
the last dose of stud y drug, whether observed by the investigator or reported by the subject , will 
be recorded on the adverse event eCRF page .  Medical conditions (including laboratory 
values/vital signs that are out of range) that were diagnosed or known to exist prior to inf ormed 
consent will be recorded as part of medical history.  All SAEs are to be reported according to the 
procedures in Section  10.5.  Investigators s hould r eport diagnosis as the adverse event  or SAE 
term; when the diagnosis is unavailable, they should report signs and symptoms as individual 
entries of adverse event  or SAE  until the diagnosis becomes available .  For events that are 
serious due to hospitalization, the reason for hospitalization must be reported as the SAE 
(diagnosis or symptom requiring hospitalization).  A procedure is not an adverse event or SAE, 
but the reason for the procedure may be an adverse  event or SAE.  Pre -planned (prior to signing 
the ICF) procedure or treatment requiring hospitalization for pre -existing conditions that do not 
worsen in severity should not be reported as SAEs (see Section  10.4.2  for definitions).  For 
deaths, the underlying or immediate  cause of death should always be reported as a n SAE.  
Disease progression is a study endpoint and consequently should not be reported  as an adverse 
event/SAE.  However, when a subject dies from disease progression with no other immediate 
causes, “disease progression ” should be reported as an SAE.  In addition, any serious , untoward 
event that may occur subsequent to the reporting period  that the investigator assesses as related 
to study drug should also be reported and managed as an SAE.  
At each visit, the investigator  will determine whether any adverse events have occurred by 
evaluating the subject.  Adverse events may be directly obser ved, reported spontaneously by the 
subject , or by questioning the subject at each study visit.  Subjects should be questioned in a 
general way, without asking about the occurrence of any specific symptoms.  All laboratory 
values must be appraised by the investigator as to clinical significance.  All post -baseline 
abnormal laboratory values considered clinically significant by the investigator must be recorded 
as an  adverse event on the eCRF and , if serious, report ed as an SAE following the procedures in 
Section  10.5. 
The investigator should follow subjects with adverse events until the event has resolved or the 
condition has stabilized.  In case of unresolved adverse events including significant abnormal 
laboratory values at the End-of-Treatment  assessment, these events wil l be followed up until 
resolution or until they become clinically irrelevant.  
10.2. Safety Endpoints  
Safety endpoints include SAEs , TEAEs, physical e xamination findings (including ECOG 
performance status), vital signs measurements, standard clinical laboratory p arameters  (serum 
chemistry, hematology, urinalysis) , and ECG parameters.   
10.3. Adverse Events of Special Interest  
Not applicable.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 99 10.4. Adverse Event  
10.4.1.  Definition of Adverse Event  
An adverse event is defined as a ny untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical 
investigation subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have 
to have a causal relationship with this treatment.  An adverse event can therefore be any 
unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory find ing, for example), 
symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal product, whether or not 
considered related to the medicinal product ( International Council for Harmonisation 
[ICH] E2A Guideline.  Clinical Safety Data Management: Def initions and Standards for 
Expedited Reporting, Oct 1994).  
It is the responsibility of investigators, based on their knowledge and experience, to determine 
those circumstances or abnormal lab oratory  findings that should be considered adverse events.  
10.4.2.  Seriou s Adverse Event  
Any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose:  
 Results in death  
 Is life -threatening  
 Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongat ion of existing hospitalization  
 Results in persistent or signifi cant disability/incapacity  
 Is a con genital  anomaly/birth defect  
 Is an important medical event  
Note: The term “life -threatening” in the definition of “serious” refers to an event in which the 
subject was at risk of death at the time of the event; it does not refer to an event that 
hypothetically mi ght have caused death if it were more severe (ICH E2A Guideline.  Clinical 
Safety Data Management: Definitions and Standards for Expedited Reporting, Oct 1994).  
Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether expedited reporting is 
appropriate in other situations, such as important medical events that may not be immediately 
life-threatening or result in death or hospitalization , but may jeopardize the subject or may 
require intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in the definition above.  
Examples include allergic bronchospasm, convulsions, and blood dyscrasias , or development of 
drug dependency or drug abuse.  
Note:  
 A procedure is not an adverse event  or SAE, but the reason for the procedure may be 
an adverse event . 
 Pre-planned (prior to signing the ICF) procedures or treatment requiring  
hospitaliz ations for pre -existing conditions that do not worsen in severity are not 
SAEs.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 100 10.4.3.  Grade Assessment  
The severity of AEs will be graded using NCI-CTCAE, v 4.0.  For each episode,  the highest 
severity grade attained should be reported.  
The NCI -CTCAE guidelines do not allow certain grades for certain AEs.  For example, pain can 
be Grade 1 to 3 only (ie, cannot be life -threatening or fatal), whereas sepsis can only be Grade 4 
or 5 (i e, can only be life -threatening or fatal).  In addition, alopecia can only be Grade 1 or 2.  
The NCI -CTCAE guidelines should be followed closely.  
 Grade 1 Mild adverse event  
 Grade 2 Moderate adverse event  
 Grade 3 Severe adverse event  
 Grade 4 Life -threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated  
 Grade 5 Death related to adverse event  
Severity vs. Seriousness:  Severity is used to describe the intensity of a specific event while the 
event itself, however, may be of relatively minor  medical significance (such as severe headache).  
This is not the same as “seriousness, ” which is based on subject /event outcome at the time of t he 
event.  For example, the NCI -CTCAE Grade 4 (life -threatening or disabling adverse event ) is 
assessed based o n unique clinical descriptions of severity for each adverse event , and these 
criteria may be different from those used for the assessment of adverse event  seriousness.  An 
adverse event  asses sed as Grade 4 based on the NCI -CTCAE grades may or may not be as sessed 
as serious base d on the seriousness criteria.  
10.4.4.  Causality Assessment  
The investigator  should assess causal relationship between an adverse event and milademetan  on 
the basis or his/her clinical judgmen t and the following definitions.  The causality assessment 
should be made based on the available information and can be updated as new information 
becomes available.  
 1 = Related:  
 The adverse event  follows a reasonable temporal sequence from study drug 
administration and cannot be reasonably explained by  the subject’s clinical state 
or other factors (eg, disease under study, concurrent diseases, and concomitant 
medications).  
Or 
 The adverse event  follows a reasonable temporal sequence from study drug 
administration and is a known reaction to the drug under  study or its chemical 
group or is predicted by known pharmacology.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 101  2 = Not Related:  
 The adverse event  does not follow a reasonable sequence from study product 
administration or can be reasonably explained by the subject’s clinical state or 
other factors ( eg, disease under study, concurrent diseases, and concomitant 
medications).  
10.4.5.  Action Taken Regarding the Study Product  
 1 = Dose Not Changed : No change in study drug dosage was made.  
 2 = Drug Withdrawn : The study drug was permanently stopped.  
 3 = Dose Reduced : The dosage of study drug was reduced.  
 4 = Drug Interrupted: The study drug  was temporarily stopped.  
 5 = Dose Increased: The dosage of study drug was increased.   
10.4.6.  Other Action Taken for Event  
 None  
 No treatment was required  
 Medication required  
 Prescription and/or over-the counter ( OTC ) medication was required to treat the 
adverse event.  
 Hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization required  
 Other  
10.4.7.  Adverse Event Outcome  
 1 = Recovered/Resolved  
 The subject fully recovered from the adverse event  with no residual effect 
observed.  
 2 = Recovered/Resolved with Sequelae  
 The residual effects of the adverse event are still present and observable.  
 Include  sequelae/residual effects.  
 3 = Not Recovered/Not Resolved  
 The adverse event itself is still present and observable.  
 4 = Fatal  
 Fatal should be used when death is a direct outcome of the adverse event . 
 5 = Unknown  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 102 10.5. Serious Adverse Event Reporting  Procedure For Investigators  
All AEs and SAEs will be reported in the eCRF.  Additionally, SAEs should be reporte d by the 
investigator on a serious adverse event report ( SAVER ) form with in 24 hours of awareness.  
Call Medpace study personnel immediately once notified of an SAE.  
Medpace SAE hotline - USA:  
Phone:  
Fax:  
E-mail:  
All events (serious and non -serious) must be reported with the investigator's assessment of the 
event's seriousness, severity, and causality to the study drug.  A detailed  narrative summarizing 
the course of the event, including its evaluation, treatment, and outcome , should be provided.  
Specific or estimated dates of event onset, treatment, and resolution should be included when 
available.  Medical history, concomitant me dications, and laboratory data that are relevant to the 
event should also be summarized in the narrative.  For fatal events, the narrative should state 
whether an autopsy was or will be performed and include the results if available.  Source 
documents (inc luding medical reports) will be retained at the study site and should not be 
submitted to the Sponsor for SAE reporting purposes.  
Urgent safety queries must be followed up and addressed promptly.  Follow -up information and 
response to non -urgent safety que ries should be combined for reporting to provide the most 
complete data possible within each follow -up.  
10.6. Notifying  Regulatory Authorities,  Investigators , IRB, and Competent 
Authorities  
DSI and/or Medpace  will inform investigators , IRBs, and regulatory auth orities of any suspected 
unexpected serious adverse event reactions (SUSARs) occurring in other study sites or other DSI 
studies of the investigational product, as appropriate  per local reporting requirements . 
In the US, upon receipt of the Sponsor’s notif ication of SUSARs that occurred with the study 
drug, unless delegated to the Sponsor, it is the investigator’s responsibility to inform the IRB per 
Sponsor’s instruction.  
10.7. Exposure In Utero During Clinical Studies  
DSI must be notified of any subject who becomes pregnant while receiving  study drug  or up to 
the End -of-Study Follow -up (at least 30 [± 2]  days after the last administration of study drug) or 
withdrawal from the study, whichever occurs later .   
Although pregn ancy is not technically an adverse event, all pregnancies must be followed to 
conclusion to determine their outcome.  This information is important for both drug safety and 
public health concerns.  It is the responsibility of the investigator, or designee,  to report any 
pregnancy in a subject using the Exposure In Utero (EIU) Reporting form.  Please contact your 
study monitor to receive the EIU Reporting Form upon learning of a pregnancy.  The 
investigator  should make every effort to follow the subject unti l completion of the pregnancy.  If 
the outcome of the pregnancy meets the criteria for immediate classification as a n SAE 
PPD
PPD
PPD
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 103 (ie, post-partum complications, spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, neonatal death, or congenital 
anomaly, including that in an aborted fetus), the investigator should follow the procedures for 
reporting SAEs  as outlined in Section  10.5. 
The potential for milademetan  to affect fertility and embryo -fetal development has not been 
tested.  Women of childbearing potential should be informed of the potential risk, have periodic 
pregnancy tests, and use highly effective methods of birth control during treatment and for an 
additional 90 days  after the end of treatment.  Women should not breastfeed during the study and 
for an additional 90 days  after the end of treatment.  
The potential of milademetan  to be transferred by semen and its effect on sperm is unknown.  
Male subjects  with partners of childbearing potential should inform their partners of their 
participation in the clinical study and use highly effective methods of birth control during 
treatment and for an additional 90 days  after the end of treatment.  
10.8. Clinical Laborat ory Evaluations  
The following clinical laboratory tests will be measured.  For clinical laboratory parameters, the 
reference range of the institution that performs the measurements will be used.  
Information will be entered in the eCRF  on whether or not measured, date of measurement, and 
measurement results for the following items.  
 Hematology tests 
 red blood cell count , hemoglobin , hematocrit, platelet count, and white blood cell 
count  with 5 -part differential, including absolute neutrophil count  and reticul ocyte 
count . 
 Serum  chemistry tests  
 sodium, potassium , bicarbonate, chloride, calcium, phosphorus, albumin, glucose, 
serum creatinine, uric acid, total protein, blood urea nitrogen, AST, ALT, alkaline 
phosphatase , and total and direct bilirubin . 
 Urinalysis  
 Creatinine clearance (screening only), protein, glucose, blood, microscopy 
assessments, and specific gravity . 
 Coagulation: INR and aPTT . 
 Serum or urine beta -human chorionic gonadotropin pregnancy test . 
 Tumor markers . 
All laboratory values must be appraised by the investigator  as to clinical significance.  All 
abnormal laboratory values considered clinically significant by the investigator  must be recorded 
in the adverse event page of the eCRF.  Abnormal laboratory valu es (NCI -CTCAE Grade 3 or 4) 
occurring during the clinical study will be followed until repeat test results return to normal (or 
baseline), stabilize, or are no longer clinically significant.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 104 10.9. Vital Signs  
Vital sign measurements will include systolic blood p ressure, diastolic blood pressure, 
respiratory rate, pulse rate, body temperature , and pulse oximetry . 
Blood pressure and pulse rate will be measured after the subject has rested in a recumbent 
position for 5 minutes or more.  
Whether or not measured, information will be entered in the eCRF  on date of measurement and 
measurement results for the following items : systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, 
pulse rate, respiratory rate, body temperature, and pulse oximetry . 
10.10.  Electrocardiograms  
Twelve -lead ECG s (in triplicate)  will be measured after the subject has rested in a recumbent 
position for 5 minutes or more.  Whether or not measure d, date performed, results, and findings 
will be recorded in the eCRF . 
Standard supine 12 -lead ECGs will be perfor med by qualified technicians in triplicate  as noted in 
the schedule of events .  ECGs  will be reviewed at the site for treatment of any urgent i ssues.  The 
clinical significance  of any ECG change must be assessed by the investigator in the context of 
the subject’s medical history, physical examination, and concomitant medications.  The 
investigator or delegated physician will review, sign, and date all ECGs.   Please refer to 
Table  18.2 and Table  18.3 for timing of ECG assessment s and specific instructions for subjects 
enrolled per Case 3 (Section  4.1.2.1 ). 
10.11.  Physical Examination s 
Physical examinations will evaluate the following body systems/organs: general appearance; 
dermatological; head and eyes; ears, nose, mouth, and throat; pulmonary; cardiovascular ; 
abdominal; genitourinary (optional); lymphatic; musculoskeletal/extremities;  and neurological.  
Weight and height will also be recorded in kilograms  and centimeters, respectively , and BMI 
calculated .  Clinically significant changes from baseline must be reported as AEs.   ECOG 
performance status will also be assessed as part of the  physical examinations.  
10.12.  Other Safety Assessments  
Not applicable.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 105 11. OTHER ASSESSMENTS  
Not applicable.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 106 12. STATISTICAL METHODS  
12.1. General Statistical Considerations  
The primary analysis is to summarize DLT during the D ose Escalation  part; efficacy in the Dose 
Expansi on part ; and safety, PK, and PDy data  in both study parts . 
The primary analysis will occur either after all subjects in Part 1 and Part 2 have discontinued the 
study or at least 6 months after enrollment of the last subject.  After the primary analysis, th e 
main study will be closed.  Subjects in Part 1 and Part 2 who are still on study drug at the time of 
the primary analysis may be eligible to continue receiving study drug in a separate extension 
phase of the protocol (see Section  18.7), and data collected from those subjects may be captured 
in a separate database.  
Descriptive statistics will be provided for selected demographic, safety, PK, and PDy data by 
dose and time as appropriate.  Descriptive statistics on continuous data will include means, 
medians, standard deviations, and ranges, while categorical data will be summarized using 
frequency counts and percentages.  Graphical summaries of the dat a may be presented.  
Assessments of change from baseline to post -treatment or the ratio of post -treatment to baseline 
will include only those subjects with both baseline and post -treatment measurements.  The last 
nonmissing value of a variable taken before the first dose of study drug will be used as the 
baseline value, unless otherwise specified.  In general, missing or dropout data will not be 
imputed for the purpose of data analysis, unless otherwise specified.   
Safety analyses will be performed based on  the safety analysis set.  Analysis of PK parameters 
will be based on the PK analysis sets , and biomarker analyses will be based on the PDy 
biomarker analysis sets.  Efficacy endpoints will be analyzed based on the full analysis set and 
the primary analysi s set.  Data from the Dose Escalation part will be summarized by dose level 
and overall.  
A detailed SAP describing the methodology to be used in the final analysis will be prepared and 
finalized before database lock.  Statistical methods described within t his document may be 
changed based on advances in research.  
12.2. Analysis Sets  
12.2.1.  Enrolled Analysis Set  
The enrolled analysis set will include all subjects who signed an ICF and were enrolled in either 
the Dose Escalation  part or the Dose Expansion  part of the study.  
12.2.2.  Full Analysis Set  
The full analysis set will include all subjects enrolled in  the Dose Escalation part or the  Dose 
Expansion  part who received any amount of milademetan . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 107 12.2.3.  Biomarker Positive Analysis Set  
The Biomarker Positive analysis s et will include all sub jects in the full analysis set who were 
biomarker positive . 
12.2.4.  Dose -Limiting Toxicity Evaluable Set  
The DLT -evaluable set will include all subjects enrolled in the Dose Escalation  part who had a 
DLT within the  first 4 weeks  (28 days)  on study , or without DLT but received at least 75% of 
scheduled Cycle 1 (28 days) milademetan  doses  and completed Cycle 1 safety assessments .  
12.2.5.  Safety Analysis Set  
The safety analysis set will include all subjects enrolled who received any amount of 
milademetan .  Subjects will be summarized according to treatment actually received.  
Three  groups of subjects will be identified within the safety  analysis  set: (1) subjects in the Dose 
Escalation  part, (2) subjects in the Dose Expansion  part, and (3) all s ubjects in the study.  
12.2.6.  Pharmacokinetic Analysis Set  
The PK analysis set will include all subjects in the enrolled analysis set who received any 
amount of milademetan  and had measurable plasma concentrations of milademetan .  
12.2.7.  Biomarker Analysis Set  
The PDy bi omarker analysis set will include all subjects in the enrolled analysis set who received 
any amount of milademetan  and who had the baseline assessment and , where applicable, at least 
1 post-baseline  assessment for biomarkers.  
12.3. Study Population Data  
Disposit ion and reasons for ending the treatment and discontinuing from the study will be 
summarized and listed for subjects in the enrolled analysis sets.  
Demographic and baseline characteristics such as age, sex, race, baseline ECOG performance 
status, histology , cancer stage, best response to prior chemotherapy, lines of prior regimens, and 
prior treatment type will be summarized for the enrolled analysis sets, full analysis sets,  primary 
analysis sets,  and safety analysis sets.  If 2 analysis sets within a part  of the study are identical to 
each other, the table will be presented only once.  
Study drug exposure, treatment duration, and compliance with study therapy will be summarized 
using descriptive statistics for the safety analysis sets.  
12.4. Efficacy Analyses  
12.4.1.  Primary Efficacy Analyses  
Not applicable for Part 1.  
For Part 2 ( Dose Expansion), primary efficacy variables will include objective response rate (the 
sum of CR and PR rates); disease control rate ( DCR ) (the sum of CR rate, PR rate, and SD rate 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 108 for a minimum  of 8 weeks from the first dosing date), response duration, duration of SD, and 
time-to-response ( TTR ), using RECIST v 1.1 or the revised IWG  criteria.  
The primary efficacy variables will be listed and summarized using descriptive statistics based 
on the full analysis set and the primary analysis set for the Dose Expansion part of the study.  For 
both objective response rate and DCR, point estimates and 9 5% exact binomial confidence 
intervals will be provided.  Time to event variables including PFS, response duration, and 
duration of SD will be summar ized descriptively using the Kaplan -Meier method.   PFS is 
defined as the time from the date of the first do se to the earlier of the dates of the first objective 
documentation of radiographic disease progression , death due to any cause , or the last 
radiographic assessment if no progression assessment occurs .  Censoring rules for the PFS 
analysis will be specifie d in the SAP.  
In addition to the above analysis, descriptive statistics for the percent change in the sum of 
longest dimensions (SLD) in measurable tumors will be provided for solid tumors.  A  waterfall 
plot of the greatest percent decreases from screening  in the SLD will be presented for each 
subject with an advanced solid malignancy.  In addition, the percent change  in the SLD  at each 
of the first 3 post -baseline assessments will be presented.   Change in tumor size comparing to 
pretreatment/historical dat a will be presented graphically .  Additional details will be presented in 
the SAP.  
12.4.2.  Seconda ry Efficacy Analyses  
For Part 1 (if feasible), objective response rate, DCR, response duration, duration of SD, TTR, 
PFS, and percent change in SLD of measurable tumors may also be analyzed using the same 
method as described above for the primary efficacy analyses.  
In addition,  the growth rates of the target tumors before starting milademetan based on prior 
scans from subjec ts’ medical records versus on -treatment with milademetan may be summarized.  
Additional analyses will be describ ed in the SAP.  
12.4.3.  Exploratory Efficacy Analyses  
For both Part 1 and Part 2, the growth modulation indices (the intrasubject ratio of PFS 
post-study drug  versus PFS post the most recent prior therapeutic regimen) will be summarized 
by dose level.  
12.5. Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Analyses  
12.5.1.  Pharmacokinetic A nalyses  
Plasma concentration data for milademetan will be summarized using descriptive statistics 
(number of subjects [n], mean, coefficient of variance [CV%], standard deviation, median, 
geometric mean, geometric CV%, minimum and maximum) by dose cohort a t each time point .  
The last PK time point  for Cycle 1 Day 1 (24 hr) is the predose  sample for Cycle 1 Day 2.  
For Dose Escalation and Dose Expansion, the PK parameters listed in Table  12.1 will be 
summarized descriptively by dose and cancer type calculated using non -compartmental analysis.  
The PK parameters will be listed and summarized using descriptive statistics (same as above) by 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 109 dose cohort and visit , except Tmax, where only n, median, minimum , and maximum will be 
presented . 
Table  12.1: Pharmacokinetic Parameters for Non -Compartmental Analysis  
PK Parameter  Definition of PK Parameter  
Cmax  Maximum plasma concentration  
Cmin  minimum plasma concentration  
Tmax  Time to reach maximum plasma concentration  
t1/2 Terminal e limination half -life 
t1/2,eff  Effective half -lifea 
AUCinf  Area under the plasma concentration -time curve up to infinity  
AUC0 -8h Area under the plasma concentration -time curve from time 0 to 8 hours  
AUC0 -24h Area under the plasma concentration -time curve from time 0 to 24 hours  
AUClast  Area under the plasma concentration -time curve up to the last recorded time point  
CL/F  Apparent clearance  
Vd/F  Apparent volume of distribution  
AI Accumulation indexa 
a AI and steady -state exposures will be calculated using the PK data from the 21/28 - and 28/28 -day dosing 
schedules.  
The dose proportionality of milademetan will be assessed for Cmax, area under the plasma 
concentration -time curve from time 0 to 8 hours (AUC0 -8h), and AUC0 -24h on Cycle 1 Day 1.  
A PopPK analysis and exposure -response analy sis for various endpoints may be developed.  The 
analysis plan and the technical report will be provided separately.  
12.5.2.  Pharmacodynamic Analyses  
Increase in MIC -1 levels over baseline in serum will be listed and summarized using descriptive 
statistics by dose  level  cohort . 
12.5.3.  Biomarker and Exploratory Analyses  
Archived or pre -treatment , on-treatment, and end -of-treatment  biopsied tumor samples will be 
examined for components of the p53 pathway , which  may include, but are not limited  to, 
expression of p53, p21, MDM2, MDM4 , and MDM2  copy number , and TP53 mutations .  
Additional biomarkers outside of the p53 pathway maybe included in order to better understand 
the responsiveness to therapy.  These may include protein, metabolite, gene expression, or 
geneti c biomarkers.  
Analyses for potential biomarkers  that may be  predictive of benefit from milademetan  will be 
graphed and/or listed and summarized using descriptive statistics by dose level cohort.  
Change in post -treatment biomarker expression from pre -treatm ent expression will be 
summarized by dose and cancer type if data warrant.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 110 12.6. Safety Analyses  
Safety parameters will include SAE s, TEAEs, physical examination findings (including ECOG 
performanc e status), vital sign  measurements, standard clinical laboratory parameters (serum 
chemistry, hematology, urinalysis), and ECG parameters.  Adverse events will  be graded 
according to the NCI -CTCAE v4.  In the Dose Es calation part, the incidence of DLTs  will also 
be evaluated . 
Safety analyses in general will be descriptive and will be presented in tabular format with the 
appropriate summary statistics.  In the Dose Escalation part, the number o f DLTs identified 
among the DLT -evaluable subjects in the DLT -evaluable set will be li sted and summarized for 
each dose of milademetan .   
12.6.1.  Adverse Event Analyses  
A TEAE is defined as an adverse event  that emerges during  the treatment period (from first dose 
date until 30 days after the last dosing date), having been absent at pre-treatment ; or reemerges 
during treatment, having been present at baseline but stopped prior to treatment; or worsens in 
severity after starting treatment relative to the pre-treatment  state, when the adverse event  is 
continuous.  
The number and percentage of subjects reporting TEAEs wil l be tabulated by the worst 
NCI-CTCAE grade, system organ class (SOC), and preferred term.   
Similarly, the number and percentage of subjects reporting treatment -emergent SAEs will be 
tabulated, as well as TEAEs/SAEs considered related t o milademetan .  
A by -subject adverse event  (including TEAE) data listing will be provided , including, but not 
limited to, verbatim  term, preferred term, SOC, NCI -CTCAE grade, and relationship to study 
drug.  
Deaths, other SAEs, and other significant AEs, in cluding those leading to permanent 
discontinuation from milademetan , will be listed.  
12.6.2.  Clinical Laboratory Evaluation Analyses  
Descriptive statistics will be provided for selected  clinical laboratory test results (hematology 
and blood chemistry) and changes from baseline by scheduled time of evaluation, including the 
End-of-Treatment  Visit, maximum post -treatment value, and minimum post -treatment value.  
Abnormal laboratory results will be graded according to NCI -CTCAE, v4, if applicable.  A shift 
table, presenting the 2 -way frequency tabulation for baseline and the worst post -treatment value 
according to the NCI -CTCAE grade, will be provided for selected clinical laboratory tests.  
Abnormal clinical laboratory test results that are deemed of clinical sign ificance or of Grade 3 or 
4 will be listed.  
12.6.3.  Vital Sign s Analyses  
Descriptive statistics will be provided for the vital signs measurements and changes from 
baseline by scheduled time of evaluation, including the End-of-Treatment  Visit and the 
maximum and mi nimum post -treatment values.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 111 12.6.4.  Electrocardiogram Analyses  
ECG  parameters (PR, RR, QRS, QT, corrected QT interval using Bazett’s formula [QT cB], and 
QT cF) will be summarized using descriptive statistics for actual values and for changes from 
baseline by sched uled time of evaluation, i ncluding the End -of-Treatment V isit and the 
maximum post -treatment value.  The corrected QT intervals using Bazett’s and Fridericia’s 
formula will be calculated as follows: QT cB = QT/(RR)1/2 and QT cF = QT/(RR)1/3. 
The incidence of  notable ECG changes in maximum absolute QT, QT cF, and QT cB intervals 
(> 450, >  480, and >  500 ms) over all post -treatment evaluations, as well as in QT, QT cF, and 
QT cB maximum ch anges from baseline (>  30 and >  60 ms) over all post -treatment evaluations 
will be summarized.  A listing of ECG data will be provided.  
The concentration -delta QTc relationship will be characterized by a linear mixed -effect model , 
and the slope and 90% CI will be estimated.  
12.6.5.  Physical Finding Analyses  
Physical examination findings wi ll be listed for the safety analysis sets.  
12.6.6.  Other Safety Analyses  
The ECOG performance status at baseline will be summarized for the safety analysis sets.  A 
shift table, presenting the 2 -way frequen cy tabulation for baseline and End -of-Treatment V isit, 
will be provided for ECOG performance status.  
12.7. Other Analyses  
Not applicable.  
12.8. Interim Analyses  
No formal interim analysis is planned, except for the assessment of the MTD  after each 
escalation cohort in the Dose Escalation  part. 
12.9. Data and Safety Monitoring Boar d 
Not applicable.  
12.10.  Sample Size Determination  
Cohorts of 3 to 6 subjects will be enrolled and assessed for DLT before escalation to a new 
higher dose.   As an exception, the model will be reevaluated before enrollment of any additional 
subjects to the cohort if 2 evaluable subjects in the cohort experience a DLT before the 
enrollment of the next subject.  For a subject to be considered evaluable for dose e scalation 
decisions, the subject must have received 75% of the prescribed doses within the DLT 
observation period in Cycle 1 or experienced a DLT  in Cycle 1.  Subjects who are unable to 
complete at least 75% of the prescribed doses of milademetan  within th e DLT observation period 
as a result of unequivocal progression of disease may be replaced.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 112 In total, there should be (a) at least  6 evaluable subjects at the MTD  dose level with at least  
21 evaluable subjects in total enrolled in the Dose Escalation  part, or (b) at least 9  evaluable 
subjects have been enrolled at a dose level that is the model’s recommendation for the next dose 
cohort and for which the posterior probability of targeted toxicity is at least 50% , or (c) dose 
level -1 is too toxic .  At least 21 DLT -evaluable subjects are needed  to reach an accurate estimate 
of the MTD .8,9,10  However, to better define an RP2D that will be clinically beneficial to the 
subjects as well as hematologically safe and tolerable for prolonged treatment without dose 
delays ,  subjects in additional cohorts and multiple dosing schedules  may be added.  
For the Dose Expansion  part (Part 2),  approximately 2 0 subjects (each for advanced melanoma 
and DLBCL ) will be enrolled .  If the response rate  is more than  25% (null hypothesis: response 
rate ≤ 0.25, alternative hypothesis: response rate  > 0.25) , then the probability  of no response out  
of 10 subjects  will be less than 10% .  The probability that 4  or more responders out of 10 
subjects  are observed will be  less than 25%  under the null hypothesis but more than 80% under 
alternative hypothesis with response rate  = 0.50.  
The probability values for the sample size are derived based on binomial distribution using  SAS 
v 9.2. 
12.11.  Specification of Bayesian Logistic Regression Model  with  Escalation 
with Overdose Control  
12.11.1.  Bayesian Logistic Regression Model for Modified Continuous Reassessment 
Method  
The dose -toxicity relationship for BLRM  with EWOC principle will be describ ed by a 
2-parameter BLRM:  
logit(π(d)) = log(α) + β log(d/d*),  α>0, β>0  
where logit(π(d))= ln ( π(d)/(1 -π(d))), π(d) is the probability of a DLT or the DLT rate  at dose d.  
Doses are rescaled as d/d* with the reference dose d* = 90 mg/day .  As a consequence,  α is equal 
to the odds of toxicity at d*.  Note that for a dose equal to zero, the probability of toxicity is zero.  
12.11.2.  Prior Specification for Bayesian Logistic Regression Model Parameters  
The Bayesian approach requires the specification of a prior distribut ion for the BLRM 
parameters.  A minimally  informative bivariate normal prior11 for the model para meters (log(α),  
log(β)) is obtained as follows:  
 Based on extrapolation of nonclinical toxicology studies in dogs, the MTD is 
projected to be greater than 90 mg/day  in humans (the HNSTD of dogs is 
3 mg/kg /day [60 mg/m2/day], and assuming humans and dogs are  equally sensitive, 
the MTD is projected to be greater than 90 mg/day  in humans ).  The median prior 
probabilities of DLT are set to be approximately 8.0% and 24.5% at 15 mg/ day 
(10 mg/m2/day) (projected starting dose for dose escalation using BLRM ) and at 
90 mg/day (60 mg/m2/day), respectively . 
 For the remaining doses, the prior medians of probability of DLT are assumed linear 
in log -dose on the logit -scale.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 113  Based on the above medians for the probability of DLT at each dose and wide prior 
credible intervals  (obtained from minimally informative Beta distributions11), the 
optimal parameters of the bivari ate normal distribution can be obtained as follows :  
Parameters  Means  Standard D eviations  Correlation  
log(α), log(β)  (-1.1286, -0.4947 ) (2.0244 , 1.0595 ) -0.4831  
12.11.3.  Escalation with Overdose Control Principle  
Dose recommendation for the next cohort will be based on summaries of the posterior 
probability of the DLT rate for provisional doses:  15, 30, 60, 90, 130, 200, 300, 440, 680 , and  
900 mg/day.  After each cohort of subjects completes DLT evaluation during Cycle  1, the 
posterior distributions of the DLT r ate are derived for all provisional dose levels based on the 
BLRM using the DLT outcome data from all assessed doses and a prespecified prior distribution 
for the model parameters.  The posterior probability of the DLT rate in the following 4  intervals 
at each dose level: [0 %, 16%] as the DLT rate interval for underdosing, [16%, 33%] as the target 
DLT rate interval, [33%, 60%] as the DLT rate interval for excessive toxicity, and [60 %, 100%] 
as the DLT rate interval for unacceptable toxicity will then be cal culated and used for dose 
recommendation for the next cohort according to the EWOC principle.  The above provisional 
doses are based on an initial estimate of the human MTD  of 90 mg/day  using the HNSTD of 
dogs in nonclinical toxicology studies ( 3 mg/kg/day ).  Of note, the HNSTD of rats was 
considerably higher (1000 mg/kg/d ay), and dog bone marrow cells were approximately 6-fold to 
7-fold more sensitive to milademetan -induced myelotoxicity than human in the colony -forming 
unit-granulocyte/macrophage  assay (see current IB ).  It is therefore conceivable that  the posterior 
probability of DLT rate for dose recommendation may be generated using alternative provisional 
doses as long as the predicted exposure increments are between 30% and 100% ( Section  4.1.2.1 ). 
The EWOC principle requires that the BLRM  recommended dose for the next cohort of subjects 
is the one with the highest posterior probabilit y of the DLT rate in the target DLT rate interval of 
[16%, 33%] among all doses fulfilling the overdose control constraint: there is less than 25 % of 
probability for the DLT rate  > 33% (probability for excessive or unacceptable toxicity).  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 114 13. DATA INTEGRITY AN D QUALITY ASSURANCE  
13.1. Monitoring and Inspections  
The DSI and Medpace  monitor and regulatory authority inspectors are responsible for contacting 
and visiting the investigator for the purpose of inspecting the facilities and, upon request, 
inspecting the various records of the study (eg, eCRFs , source data, and other pertinent 
documents).  
Verification of adherence to the protocol; completeness, accuracy, and consistency of the data; 
and adherence to ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP ) and local regulations on the conduct of 
clinical research will be accomplished through a combination of onsite visits by the monitor and 
review of study data remotely.  The frequency of the monitoring visit will vary based on the 
activity at each study site.  The monitor is responsible for visiting site(s) at regular intervals 
throughout the study to verify adheren ce to the protocol; completeness, accuracy, and 
consistency of the data; and adherence to ICH  GCP and local regulations on the conduct of 
clinical research.  The monitor is responsible for inspecting the eCRFs and ensuring 
completeness of the study essenti al documents.  The monitor should have access to subject 
medical records and other study -related records needed to verify the entries on the eCRFs.  
Detailed information is provided in the monitoring plan.  
The monitor will communicate deviations from the p rotocol, SOPs, GCP , and applicable 
regulations to the investigator and will ensure that appropriate action(s) designed to prevent 
recurrence of the detected deviations is taken and documented.  
The investigator agrees to cooperate with the monitor to ensure  that any problems detected in the 
course of these monitoring visits are addressed to the satisfaction of the sponsor and 
documented.  
In accordance with ICH GCP and the Sponsor’s audit plans, this study may be selected for audit 
by representatives from the  Sponsor.  Audit of study site facilities (eg, pharmacy, drug storage 
areas, laboratories) and review of study -related records will occur in order to evaluate the study 
conduct and compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP, and applicable regulatory requiremen ts.  
The investigator should respond to audit findings.  In the event that a regulatory authority 
informs the investigator that it intends to conduct an inspection, the Sponsor shall be notified 
immediately . 
13.2. Data Collection  
An eCRF must be completed for ea ch subject who signs an ICF and undergoes any screening 
procedure.  If a subject is not treated, the reason must be recorded on the eCRF.  
All data collected during the study will be recorded in this individual, subject -specific eCRF.  
Instructions will be  provided for the completion of the eCRF , and any corrections made will be 
automatically documented via an “audit trail.”  
The eCRF  should be kept current to enable the monitor to review the subject’s status throughout 
the course of the study.  Upon complet ion of the subject’s eCRF, it will be reviewed and signed 
off by the investigator via the electronic data capture ( EDC ) system’s electronic signature.  This 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 115 signature will indicate that the investigator reviewed the data in the eCRF, the data queries, and 
the site notifications , and agrees with the eCRF content .  Instructions for completion of the 
eCRFs will be provided.  Corrections to electronic forms will be automatically documented by 
using the software’s “audit trail.”  
All written information and other  material to be used by subjects and investigative staff must use 
vocabulary and language that are clearly understood.  
The extent or frequency of data collection during the extension period of the study may be the 
same as during the main period of the stud y or may be reduced at the Sponsor’s discretion 
considering the number of PFS and OS events, the number of subjects on study drug, and the 
value of additional data collection for evaluation of study endpoints.   
Refer to Schedule of Assessments, Extension Phase, for details  (Table  18.4). 
13.3. Data Management  
This is an open -label study.  Each subject will be identified in the database by a unique subject 
identi fier as defined by DSI. 
To ensure the quality of clinical data across all subjects and sites, a Clinical Data Management 
review will be performed on subject data according to specifications given to Sponsor/or 
designee .   
Each subject will be identified in  the database by a unique subject identifier as defined by the 
sponsor.  
To ensure the quality of clinical data across all subjects and study sites, a Clinical Data 
Management review will be performed on subject data accordi ng to specifications given to 
Sponsor/ or designee.  Data will be vetted both electronically and manually  for eCRFs , and the 
data will be electronically vetted by programmed data rules within the application.  Queries 
generated by rules and raised by reviewers will be generated within the  EDC application.  During 
this review, subject data will be checked for consistency, omissions, and any apparent 
discrepancies.  In addition, the data will be reviewed for adherence to the protocol and GCP.  To 
resolve any questions arising from the Clinica l Data Management review process, eCRF queries 
will be raised and resolved within the EDC application.  
Data received from external sources such as central labs will be reconciled to the clinical 
database.  
SAEs  in the clinical database will be reconciled wi th the safety database.  
All prior cancer therapy and prior/concomitant medications entered into the database will be 
coded by using the latest version of World Health Organization Drug Dictionary.  All adverse 
events will be coded using the latest version of Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities.  
13.4. Study Documentation and Storage  
The investigator will maintain a Signature List of appropriately qualified persons to whom 
he/she has delegated study duties.  All persons authorized to make entries and/or corrections on 
eCRF s will be included on the Signature List.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 116 Source documents are origin al documents, data, and records from which the subject’s eCRF  data 
are obtained.  These include but are not limited to hospital records, clinical and office charts, 
laboratory and pharmacy records, diaries, microfiches, X -rays, and correspondence.  
Records of subjects, source documents, monitoring visit logs, data correction forms, eCRFs, 
inventory of study drug, regulatory documents (eg, protocol and amendments, IRB/ ethics 
committee ( EC) correspondence and approvals, approved and signed ICFs , Investigator’s  
Agreement, clinical supplies receipts, distribution and return records), and other sponsor 
correspondence pertaining to the study must be kept in appropriate study files at the study site 
(Trial Master File).  Source documents include all recordings and o bservations or notations of 
clinical activities and all reports and records necessary for the evaluation and reconstruction of 
the clinical study.  These records will be retained in a secure file for the period required by the 
institution or study site pol icy.  Prior to transfer or destruction of these records, the Sponsor must 
be notified in writing and be given the opportunity to further store such records . 
13.5. Record Keeping  
The investigator and study staff are responsible for maintaining a comprehensive and  centralized 
filing system (Trial Master File) of all study -related (essential) documentation, suitable for 
inspection at any time by representatives from the Sponsor and/or applicable regulatory 
authorities.  Essential documents include:  
 Subject files con taining completed eCRFs, ICFs , and supporting copies of source 
documentation (if kept).  
 Study files containing the protocol with all amendments, Investigator’s Brochure, 
copies of relevant essential documents required prior to commencing a clinical study, 
and all correspondence to and from the EC/IRB and the Sponsor.  
 Records related to the study drug(s) including acknowledgment of receipt at study 
site, accountability records and final reconciliation and applicable correspondence.  
In addition, all original source documents supporting entries in the eCRFs must be maintained 
and be readily available.  
No study document should be destroyed without prior written agreement between Sponsor and 
the investigator.  Should the investigator wish to assign the study reco rds to another party or 
move them to another location, he/she must notify the Sponsor in writing of the new responsible 
person and/or the new location.  
13.6. Product Complaints  
A product complaint is any dissatisfaction with a product that may be attributed to t he identity, 
quality, durability, reliability, or safety of the product.  Individuals who identify a potential 
product complaint situation should immediately report the event.  Whenever possible, the 
associated product should be maintained in accordance wi th the label instructions pending 
further guidance from a quality representative form from the Sponsor.  For product complaints, 
refer to the Study Manual for instructions and details.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 117 14. FINANCING AND INSURANCE  
14.1. Finances  
Prior to starting the study, the Princ ipal Investigator and/or institution will sign a clinical study 
agreement with DSI.  This agreement will include the financial information agreed upon by the 
parties.  
14.2. Reimbursement, Indemnity, and Insurance  
The Sponsor provides insurance for study subjects  to make available compensation in case of 
study -related injury.  
Reimbursement, indemnity , and insurance shall be addressed in a separate agreement on terms 
agreed upon by the parties.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 118 15. PUBLICATION POLICY  
The Sponsor is committed to meeting the highest stan dards of publication and public disclosure 
of information arising from clinical studies sponsored by the company.  The Sponsor will 
comply with US, European Union , and Japanese policies for public disclosure of the clinical 
study protocol and clinical study results and for sharing of clinical study data.  The Sponsor will 
follow the principles set forward in “Good Publication Practice for Communicating 
Company - Sponsored Medical Research (GPP3)”, and  publications will adhere to the 
“Recommendations for the Conduct, Reporting, Editing, and Publication of Scholarly Work in 
Medical Journ als” established by the International Council of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE).  
In order to ensure compliance with th e public disclosure policies and the ICMJE 
recommendations, and to protect proprietary information generated during the study, all 
public ations (manuscripts, abstracts, or other public disclosure) based on data generated in this 
study must be reviewed and approved in writing by the Sponsor prior to submission.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 119 16. ETHICS AND STUDY ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION  
16.1. Compliance Statement, Ethics, and Regulatory Compliance  
This study will be conducted in compliance with the protocol, the ethical principles that have 
their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki, the ICH consolidated Guideline E6 for GCP 
(CPMP/ICH/135/95), and applicable regulatory requirement(s) including the following:  
 US Food and Drug Administration GCP Regulations: Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) Title 21, parts 11, 50, 54, 56, and 312, as appropriate, and  
 other applicable local regulations.  
16.2. Subject Confidentiality  
The investigators and the Sponsor, DSI, will preserve the confidentiality of all subjects taking 
part in the study, in accordance with GCP an d local regulations.  
The investigator must ensure that the subject’s anonymity is maintained.  O n the CRFs or other 
documents submitted to DS I or the contract research organization ( CRO ), subjects should be 
identified by a unique subject identifier as designated by DSI.  Documents that are not for 
submission to DSI and/or Medpace (eg, signed ICFs ) should be kept in strict confidence by the 
investigator.  
In compliance with ICH GCP guidelin es, it is required that the investigator and institution permit 
authorized representatives of the company, of the regulatory agency(s), and the IRB direct access 
to review the subject’s original medical records for verification of study -related procedures and 
data.  The investigator is obligated to inform the subject that his/her study -related records will be 
reviewed by the above -named representatives without violating the confidentiality of the subject.  
16.3. Informed Consent  
Before a subject’s participation i n the study, it is the investigator’s responsibility to obtain freely 
given consent, in writing, from the subject or legally acceptable representative after adequate 
explanation of the aims, methods, anticipated benefits, and potential hazards of the study  and 
before any protocol -specific screening procedures or any study drugs are administered.  Subjects 
should be given the opportunity to ask questions and receive satisfactory answers to their 
inquiries, and should have adequate time to decide whether or n ot to participate in the study.  
The written ICF should be prepared in the local language(s) of the potential subject population.  
In obtaining and documenting informed consent, the investigator should comply with the 
applicable regulatory requirements and should adhere to GCP and to the ethical principles that 
have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  The consent form and any revision(s) should be 
approved by the IRB prior to being provided to potential subjects.  
The subject’s written informed cons ent should be obtained prior to his/her participation in the 
study and should be documented in the subject’s medical records, as required by 
21 CFR  Part 312.62.  The ICF should be signed and personally dated by the subject or a legally 
acceptable representative and by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion (not 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 120 necessarily the investigator).  The original signed ICF should be retained in accordance with 
institutional policy, and a copy of the signed consent form should be provided to the subject.  
The date and time (if applicable) that informed consent was given should be recorded on the 
eCRF.  
If the subject cannot read, then according to ICH GCP Guideline, Section 4.8.9, an impartial 
witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion.  This witness should 
sign the ICF after the subject has consented to the subject’s participation and, if possible, signed 
the ICF.  By s igning the ICF, the witness attests that the information in the ICF and any other 
written information was adequately explained to and apparently understood by the subject or the 
legally acceptable representative and that informed consent was freely given b y the subject.  
Suggested model text for the ICF for the study and any applicable subparts (genomic, 
pharmacokinetic, etc) and assent forms for pediatric subjects (if applicable) are provided in the 
DSI ICF template for the investigator to prepare the docum ents to be used at his or her site.  
Updates to applicable forms will be communicated via letter from the Sponsor . 
The consent for PGx sampling for banking and tumor biopsies should be documented in the 
subject’s written informed consent.  The consent form  should be signed and personally dated by 
the subject or the subject's legal representative prior to his/her participation in the study.  
Participation for PGx sampling for banking is optional for all subjects.  Participation for pre - and 
post-treatment tu mor biopsies is optional for all subjects in Part 1, but for pre -treatment is 
mandatory in Part 2.  Participation for tumor re -biopsy upon progression is optional for all 
subjects.  Those subjects who choose not to provide a sample for PGx sampling for ban king or 
optional tumor biopsies may still participate in the main portion of the study.  
16.4. Regulatory Compliance  
The study protocol, subject information and consent form, the investigator Brochure, any subject 
diary card or written instructions to be given to  the subject, available safety information, subject 
recruitment procedures (eg, advertisements), information about payments and compensation 
available to the subjects, and documentation evidencing the investigator’s qualifications should 
be submitted to th e IRB for ethical review and approval according to local regulations prior to 
the study start.  The written approval should identify all documents reviewed by name and 
version.  
Changes in the conduct of the study or planned analysis will be documented in a  protocol 
amendment and/or the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).  
In addition, the investigator will inform the Sponsor immediately of any urgent safety measures 
taken by the investigator to protect the study subjects against any immediate hazard and of any 
suspected/actual serious GCP non -compliance that the investigator becomes aware of .   
16.5. Protocol Deviations  
The investigator should conduct the study in compliance with the protocol agreed to by DSI and, 
if required, by the regulatory authority(ies), and whi ch was given approval/favorable opinion by 
the IRB s/ECs . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 121 A devi ation to any protocol procedure  or waiver to any stated criteria will not be allowed in this 
study except where necessary to eliminate immediate hazard(s) to the subject.  The Sponsor  must 
be notified of all intended or unintended deviations to the protocol (eg,  inclusion/exclusion 
criteria, dosing, missed study visits) on an expedited basis.  
The investigator, or person designated by the investigator, should document and explain any 
deviation fr om the approved protocol.  
If a subject was ineligible or received the incorrect dose or investigational treatment, and had at 
least 1 administration of investigational product, data should be collected for safety purposes.  
The investigator should notify th e IRB of deviations from the protocol in accordance with local 
procedures.  
16.6. Supply of New Information Affecting the Conduct of the Study  
When new information becomes available that may adversely affect the safety of subjects or the 
conduct of the study, the  Sponsor will inform all investigators involved in the clinical study, 
IRBs /ECs , and regulatory authorities of such information, and , when needed, will amend the 
protocol and/or subject information.  
The investigator should immediately inform the subject wh enever new information becomes 
available that may be relevant to the subject’s consent or may influence the subject’s willingness 
to continue participation in the study.  The communication should be documented on medical 
records, for example, and it should  be confirmed whether the subject is willing to remain in the 
study.  
If the subject information is revised, it must be re -approved by the IRB /EC.  The investigator 
should obtain written informed consent to continue participation with the revised written 
information even if subjects were already informed of the relevant information.  The investigator 
or other responsible personnel who provided explanations and the subject should sign and date 
the revised ICFs.  
16.7. Protocol Amendments  
Any amendments to the study protocol that seem to be appropriate as the study progresses will 
be communicated to the investigator  by DSI.  Also, the Sponsor will ensure the timely 
submission of amendments to regulatory authorities.  
A global protocol amendment will affect study conduc t at all study sites in all regions of the 
world.  Such amendments will be incorporated into a revised protocol document.  Changes made 
by such amendments will be documented in a Summary of Changes document.  These protocol 
amendments will undergo the same  review and approval process as the original protocol.  
A local protocol amendment will affect study conduct at a particular study site(s) and/or in a 
particular region/country.  Sponsor approval of local amendments will be clearly documented.  
A protocol amendment may be implemented after it has been approved by the IRB/EC and by 
regulatory authorities where appropriate, unless immediate implementation of the change is 
necessary for subject safety.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 122 16.8. Study Termination  
The S ponsor has the right to  terminate the study at any time , and the study termination may also 
be requested by (a) competent authority/ies.  
Stopping criteria are noted in Section  5.2.1 . 
16.9. Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
Not applicable.  
16.10.  Address List  
A list of key study personnel (including personnel at the sponsor, CRO, laboratories, and other 
vendors) and their contact information (address, telephone, fax, email) will be kept on f ile and 
updated in study reference materials.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 123 17. REFERENCES  
1. Shangary S, Wang S. Small -molecule inhibitors of the MDM2 -p53 protein -protein 
interaction to reactivate p53 function: a novel approach for cancer therapy. Annu Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2009;49:223 -241. 
2. Levine AJ, Oren M. The first 30 years of p53: growing ever more complex. Nat Rev 
Cancer. 2009;9:749 -758. 
3. Vassilev LT, Vu BT, Graves B, et al. In vivo activation of the p53 pathway by small -
molecule antagonists of MDM2. Science . 2004;303:844 -848. 
4. Shangary S, Qin D, McEachern D, et al. Temporal activation of p53 by a specific MDM2 
inhibitor is selectively toxic to tumors and leads to complete tumor growth inhibition. 
PNAS. 2008;105:3933 -3938.  
5. Vassilev LT. MDM2 inhibitors for cancer therapy. Trends Mol Med 20 07;13:23 -31. 
6. Milademetan Investigator’s Brochure (v. 6.0, dated 29 Jul 2019)  
7. Cheson BD, Pfistner B, Juweid ME, et al. Revised response criteria for malignant 
lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:579 -586. 
8. O'Quigley J, Pepe M, Fisher L. Continual reassessment method: a practical design for 
Phase 1 clinical trials in cancer. Biometrics. 1990;46:33 -48. 
9. O'Quigley J, Shen LZ. Continual reassessment method: a likelihood approach. 
Biometrics. 1996;52:673 -684. 
10. Iasonos A, Wilton AS, Riedel ER, et al. A comprehensive co mparison of the continual 
reassessment method to the standard 3 + 3 dose escalation scheme in Phase  I dose -finding 
studies. Clin Trials. 2008;5:465 -477. 
11. Neuenschwander B, Branson M, Gsponer T. Critical aspects of the Bayesian approach to 
phase I cancer tri als. Stat Med. 2008;27:2420 -2439.  
12. Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, et al. Toxicity and response criteria of the Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol 1982;5:649 -655. 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 124 18. APPENDICES  
18.1. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status Scale  
Grade  Description  
0  Fully active, able to carry on all predisease performance without restriction  
1  Restricted in physically strenuous activity, but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a 
light or sedentary nature, eg, light house work, office work  
2  Ambulatory and capable of all self -care, but unable to carry out any work activities, up and 
about more than 50% of waking hours  
3  Capable of only limited self -care, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of waking  hours  
4  Completely disabled.  Cannot ca rry on any self -care.  Totally confined to bed or chair  
5  Dead  
Source: Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, et al. Toxicity and response criteria of the Eastern Cooperative 
Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol 1982;5:649 -655.12  
18.2. National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events, Version 4 
1. Toxicity grade should reflect the most severe degree occurring during the evaluated 
period, not an average.  
2. When 2 different criteria grades might be applicable for rating a particular toxicity, or 
similar toxicities, the more severe grade should be used.  
3. Any toxicity resulting in death is defined as Grade 5.  
4. The evaluator must attempt to discriminate b etween disease/treatment and related 
signs/symptoms.  
5. For links to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse 
Events, Version 4 , please refer to 
http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm#ctc_40  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 125 18.3. Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, Version 1.1  
18.3.1.  Measurability of Tumor at Baseline  
18.3.1.1.  Definitions  
At baseline, tumor lesions/lymph nodes will be categorized as measurable or nonmeasurable as 
follows:  
Measurable  
 Tumor lesions : Must be accurately measured in at least 1 dimension (longest diameter 
in the plane of measurement is to be recorded) with a minimum size of:  
 10 mm by computed tomography ( CT) scan (CT scan slice thickness no greater 
than 5 mm)  
 10-mm caliper measurement by clinical exam (lesi ons that cannot be accurately 
measured with cal ipers should be recorded as non measurable)  
 20 mm by chest X -ray 
 Measurable malignant lymph nodes: To be considered pathologically enlarged and 
meas urable, a lymph node must be ≥ 15 mm in short axis when assess ed by CT scan 
(CT scan slice thickness recommended to be no greater than 5  mm).  At baseline 
(ie, screening for this study) and in follow -up (ie, all measurements past screening for 
this study), only the short axis will be measured and followed.  See also notes below 
on “Baseline documentation of target and nontarget lesions ” for information on 
lymph n ode measurement  
Nonmeasurable  
All other lesions, including sm all lesions (longest diameter <  10 mm or pathological lymph 
nodes with ≥ 10 to <  15 mm short axis ), as well as truly nonmeasurable lesions.  Lesions 
considered truly nonmeasurable include  leptomeningeal disease, ascites, pleural or pericardial 
effusion, inflammatory breast disease, lymphangitic involvement of skin or lung, and abdominal 
masses/abdominal organomegaly identified by physical exam that is not measurable by 
reproducible imaging techniques.  
18.3.1.1.1.  Special Considerations Regarding Lesion Measurability  
Bone lesions, cystic lesions, and lesions previously treated with local thera py requi re particular 
comment.  
Bone Lesions  
 Bone scan, positron emission tomography scan , or plain films are not considered 
adequate imaging techniques to measure bone lesions.  However, these techniques 
can be used to confirm the presence or disappearance of bone  lesions.  
 Lytic bone lesions or mixed lytic -blastic lesions, with identifiable soft tissue 
components, that can be evaluated by cross -sectional imaging techniques such as CT 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 126 or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be considered as measurable lesions if the  
soft tissue component meets the definition of measurability described above.  
 Blastic bone lesions are nonmeasurable.  
Cystic Lesions  
 Lesions that meet the criteria for radiographically defined simple cysts should not be 
considered as malignant lesions (nei ther measurable nor nonmeasurable) since they 
are, by definition, simple cysts.  
 “Cystic lesions ” thought to represent cystic metastases can be considered as 
measurable lesions if they meet the definition of measurability described above .  
However, if non cystic lesions are present in the same subject, these are preferred for 
selection as target lesions.  
Lesions with Prior Local Treatment  
 Tumor lesions situated in a previously irradiated area, or in an area subjected to other 
loco-regional therapy, are not co nsidered measurable unless there has been 
demonstrated progression in the lesion.  
18.3.1.2.  Specifications by Methods of Measurements  
18.3.1.2.1.  Measurement of Lesions  
All measurements should be recorded in metric notation using calipers if clinically assessed.  All 
baseline evaluations should be performed as close as possible to the treatment start and NEVER 
more than 4 weeks before the beginning of the treatment.  
18.3.1.2.2.  Method of Assessment  
The same method of assessment and the same technique should be used to characterize each 
identified and reported lesion at baseline and during follow -up.  Imaging -based evaluation 
should always be performed  rather than clinical examination unless the lesion(s) being followed 
cannot be imaged but are assessable by clinical exam.  
CT, MRI : CT is the  best currently available and reproducible method to measure lesions selected 
for response assessment.  This guideline has defined measurability of lesions on CT scan based 
on the assumption that CT slice thickness is 5 mm or less.  When CT scans have slic e thickness 
greater than 5 mm, the minimum size for a measurable lesion should be twice the slice thickness.  
An MRI is also acceptable in certain situations (eg,  for body scans).  
18.3.2.  Tumor Response Evaluation  
18.3.2.1.  Assessment of Overall Tumor Burden and Measurable  Disease  
To assess objective response or future progression, it is necessary to estimate the overall tumor 
burden at baseline and use this as a comparator for subsequent measurements.  In this study, only 
subjects with measurable disease at baseline should  be included in the study.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 127 18.3.2.2.  Baseline Documentation of “Target ” and “Nontarget ” Lesions  
When more than 1 measurable lesion is present at baseline , all lesions up to a maximum of 
5 lesions total (representative of all involved organs ) should be identified as target lesions and 
will be recorded and measured at baseline (this means in instances where subjects have only 1 or 
2 organ sites involved a maximum of 2 and 4 lesions respectively will be recorded).  
Target lesions should be selected on the basis of their size (lesions with the longest diameter), be 
representative of all involved organs, but in addition should be those that lend themselves to 
reproducible repeated measurements.  It may be the case that, on occasion, the largest lesion does 
not lend itself t o reproducible measurement in which circumstance the next largest lesion that 
can be measured reproducibly should be selected.  
Lymph nodes merit special mention since they are normal anatomical structures that may be 
visible by imaging even if not involved  by tumor.  As noted above, pathological nodes that are 
defined as measurable and may be identified as target lesions must meet the  criterion of a short 
axis of   ≥ 15 mm by CT scan.  Only the short axis of these nodes will contribute to the baseline 
sum.  The short axis of the node is the diameter normally used by radiologists to judge if a node 
is involved by solid tumor.  Nodal size is normally reported as 2 dimensions in the plane in 
which the image is obtained (for CT scan , this is almost always the axi al plane; for MRI , the 
plane of acquisition may be axial, sagittal, or coronal).  The smaller of these measures is the 
short axis.  For example, an abdominal node that is reported as being 20 mm × 30 mm has a 
short axis of 20 mm and qualifies as a malignant, measurable node.  In this example, 20 mm 
should be recorded as the node measurement.  All other pathological  nodes (those with short axis 
≥ 10 mm but <  15 mm) should be considered non target les ions.  Nodes that have a short axis 
< 10 mm are considered non pathological and should not be recorded or followed.  
A sum of the diameters (longest for non -nodal lesions, short axis for nodal lesions) for all target 
lesions will be calculated and reported a s the baseline sum diameters.  If lymph nodes are to be 
included in the sum, then as noted above, only the short axis is added into the sum.  The baseline 
sum diameters will be used as reference to further characterize any objective tumor regression in 
the measurable dimension of the disease.  
All other lesions (or sites of disease) , including pathological lymph no des, should be identified as 
nontarget lesions and should also be recorded at baseline.  Measurements are not required , and 
these lesions should b e followed as “present ,” “absent ,” or in rare cases “unequivocal 
progression .”  In addition, it is possible to record multiple nontarget lesions involving the same 
organ as a single ite m on the case record form (eg, “ multiple enlarged pelvic lymph nodes ” or 
“multiple liver metastases ”).  
18.3.2.3.  Response Criteria  
This section provides the definitions of the criteria used to determine the objective tumor 
response for target lesions.  
18.3.2.3.1.  Evaluation of Target Lesions  
Complete Response (CR) : Disappearance of all target les ions.  Any pathological lymph nodes 
(whether target or nontarget) must ha ve reduction in short axis to <  10 mm.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 128 Partial Response (PR) : At least a 30% decrease in the sum of diameters of target lesions, taking 
as reference the baseline sum diameters.  
Progre ssive Disease (PD) : At least a 20% increase in the sum of diameters of target lesions, 
taking as reference the smallest sum on study (this includes the baseline sum if that is the 
smallest on study).  In addition to the relative increase of 20%, the sum mu st also demonstrate an 
absolute increase of at least 5 mm.  (Note: the appearance of 1 or more new lesions is also 
considered progression).  
Stable Disease (SD) : Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor sufficient increase to 
qualify for PD, takin g as reference the smallest sum diameters while on study.  
18.3.2.3.2.  Special Notes on the Assessment of Target Lesions  
Lymph nodes : Lymph nodes identified as target lesions should always have the actual short axis 
measurement recorded (measured in the same anatomical plane as the baseline examination), 
even if the nodes regress to below 10 mm on study.  This means that when lymph nodes  are 
included as target lesions, the “ sum” of lesions may not be zero even if CR criteria are met, since 
a normal lymph node is defi ned as having a short axis of < 10 mm.  For PR, SD, and PD, the 
actual short axis measurement of the nodes is to be included  in the sum of target lesions.  
Target lesions that become “too small to measure” : While on study, all lesions (nodal and 
non-nodal) recorded at baseline should have their actual measurements recorded at each 
subsequent evaluation, even when very small (eg,  2 mm).  However, sometimes lesions or lymph 
nodes that are recorded as target lesions at baseline become so faint on CT scan that the 
radiologist may not feel comfortable assigning an exact measure and may report them as being 
“too small to measure .”  Whe n this occurs , it is important that a value be recorded on the eCRF.  
If it is the opinion of the radiologist that the lesion has likely disappeared, the measurement 
should be recorded as 0 mm.  If the lesion is believed to be present and is faintly seen b ut too 
small to measure, a default value of 5  mm should be assigned (Note : It is less likely that this rule 
will be used for lymph nodes since they usually have a definable size when normal and are 
frequently surrounded by fat such as in the retroperitoneu m; however, if a lymph node is 
believed to be present and is faintly seen but too small to measure, a default value of 5 mm 
should be assigned in this circumstance as well).  This default value is derived from the 5 -mm 
CT slice thickness (but should not be  changed with varying CT slice thickness).  The 
measurement of these lesions is potentially nonreproducible ; therefore , providing this default 
value will prevent false responses or progressions based upon measurement error.  To reiterate, 
however, if the r adiologist is able to provide an actual measure, that should be recorded, even if 
it is below 5 mm.  
Lesions that split or coalesce on treatment : When non-nodal  lesions “ fragment ,” the longest 
diameters of the fragmented portions should be added together to  calculate the target lesion sum.  
Similarly, as lesions coalesce, a plane between them may be maintained that would aid in 
obtaining maximal diameter measurements of each individual lesion.  If the lesions have truly 
coalesced such that they are no longer  separable, the vector of the longest diameter in this 
instance should be the ma ximal longest diameter for the “ coalesced lesion .” 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 129 18.3.2.3.3.  Evaluation of Non target Lesions  
This section provides the definitions of the criteria used to determine the tumor response fo r the 
group of nontarget lesions.  While some nontarget lesions may actually be measurable, they need 
not be measured and instead should be assessed only qualitatively at the time point s specified in 
the protocol.  
CR: Disappearance of all nontarget lesion s and normalization of tumor marker level.  All lymph 
nodes mus t be nonpathological in size (<  10 mm short axis).  
NonCR/NonPD : Persistence of 1 or more nontarget lesion(s) and/or maintenance of tumor 
marker level above the normal limits.  
PD: Unequivocal progression (see comments below) of existing nontarget lesions (Note : the 
appearance of 1 or more new lesions is also considered progression).  
18.3.2.3.4.  Special Notes on Assessment of Progression of Nontarget Disease  
The concept of progression of nontarget disease r equires additional explanation as follows, when 
the subject also has measurable disease.  In this setting, to achieve “unequivocal progression ” on 
the basis of the nontarget disease, there must be an overall level of substantial worsening in 
nontarget dise ase such that, even in presence of SD or PR in target disease, the overall tumor 
burden has increased sufficiently to merit discontinuation of therapy.  A modest “increase”  in the 
size of 1 or more nontarget lesions is usually not sufficient to quality for  unequivocal progression 
status.  The designation of overall progression solely on the basis of change in nontarget disease 
in the face of SD or PR of target disease will therefore be extremely rare.  
18.3.2.3.5.  New Lesions  
The appearance of new malignant lesions denotes disease progression; therefore, some 
comments on detection of new lesions are important.  There are no specific criteria for the 
identification of new radiographic lesions; however, the finding of a new lesion should be 
unequivocal , ie, not attribu table to differences in scanning technique, change in imaging 
modality , or findings thought to represent something other than tumor ( eg, some “new”  bone 
lesions may be simply healing or flare of preexisting lesions).  This is particularly important 
when th e subject’s baseline lesions show PR or CR.  For example, necrosis of a liver lesion may 
be rep orted on a CT scan report as a “new”  cystic lesion, which it is not.  
A lesion identified on a follow -up study in an anatomical location that was not scanned at 
baseline is considered a new lesion and will indicate disease progression.  An example of this is 
the subject who has visceral disease at baseline and while on study has a CT or MRI brain 
ordered that reveals metastases.  The subject’s brain metastases are considered to be evidence of  
PD even if he/she did not have brain imaging at baseline.  
If a new lesion is equivocal, for example , because of its small size, continued therapy and 
follow -up evaluation will clarify if it represents truly new disease.  If re peat scans confirm there 
is definitely a new lesion, then progression should be declared using the date of the initial scan.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 130 18.3.2.4.  Evaluation of Best Overall Response  
The best overall response is the best response recorded from the start of the study drug  until the 
end of treatment.  No confirmatory measurement for CR, PR, or SD is required in the study.  
The subject’s best overall response assignment will depend on the findings of both target and 
nontarget disease and will also take into consideration the appear ance of new lesions.  
18.3.2.4.1.  Time Point  Response  
It is assumed that at each protocol -specified time point , a response assessment occurs.   
Table  18.1 provides a s ummary of the overall response status calculation at each time point  for 
subjects who have measurable disease at baseline.  
Table  18.1: Overall Response  
Time point  Response: Subjects with Target ( ± Nontarget) Disease  
Target Lesions  Nontarget Lesions  New Lesions  Overall Response  
CR CR No CR 
CR NonCR/NonPD  No PR 
CR Not evaluated  No PR 
PR NonPD or not all evaluated  No PR 
SD NonPD or not all evaluated  No SD 
Not all evaluated  NonPD  No NE 
PD Any Yes or No  PD 
Any PD Yes or No  PD 
Any Any Yes PD 
CR = complete response; NE = inevaluable; PD = progressive disease; PR = partial response;  
SD = stable disease.  
18.3.2.4.2.  Missing Assessments and Inevaluable Designation  
When no imaging/measurement is performed  at all at a particular time point , the subject is not 
evaluable at that time point .  If only a subset of lesion measurements are made at an assessment, 
usually the case is also considered not evaluable at that time point , unless a convincing argument 
can be made that the contribution of the individual missing lesion(s) would not change the 
assigned time point  response.  This would be most likely to happen in the case of PD.  For 
example, if a subject had a baseline s um of 50 mm with 3  measured lesions and at follow -up 
only 2 lesions were assessed, but those gave a sum of 80 mm, the subject will have achieved PD 
status, regardless of the contribution of the missing lesion.  
18.3.2.4.3.  Best Overall Response: All Time Point s 
The be st overall response is determined once all the data for the subject are known.  
Best response determination in studies where confirmation of CR or PR IS NOT required : Best 
response in these studies is defined as the best response across all time point s (eg,  a subject who 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 131 has SD at first assessment, PR at second assessment, and PD on last assessment has a best 
overall response of PR).  When SD is believed to be best response, it must also meet the 
protocol -specified minimum time from baseline, 6 weeks.  If th e minimum time is not met when 
SD is otherwise the best time point  response, the subject’s best response depends on the 
subsequent assessments.  For example, a subject who has SD at first assessment, PD at second , 
and does not meet minimum duration for SD will have a best response of PD.  The same subject 
lost to follow -up after the first SD assessment would be considered inevaluable.  
18.3.2.4.4.  Special Notes on Response Assessment  
When nodal disease is included in the sum of target lesions and the nodes decrease to “normal ” 
size (<  10 mm), they may still have a measurement reported on scans.  This measurement should 
be recorded even though the nodes are normal in order not to overstate progression should it be 
based on increase in size of the nodes.  As noted earlier, this means that  subjects with CR may 
not have a total sum of “zero” on the eCRF.  
Subjects with a global deterioration of health status requiring discontinuation of treatment 
without objective evidence of disease progression at that time should be reported as 
“symptomatic  deterioration .”  Every effort should be made to document objective progression 
even after discontinuation of treatment.  Symptomatic deterioration is not a descriptor of an 
objective response: it is a reason for stopping study therapy.  The objective resp onse status of 
such subjects is to be determined by evaluation of target and nontarget disease.  
For equivocal findings of progression (eg, very small and uncertain new lesions; cystic changes 
or necrosis in existing lesions), treatment may continue until t he next scheduled assessment.  If at 
the next scheduled assessment progression is confirmed, the date of progression should be the 
earlier date when progression was suspected.  
18.3.2.5.  Frequency of Tumor Reevaluation  
In this study, tumor measurement will be conducted every 2 cycles while the subject remains on 
study for the first 8 cycles and then every 3 cycles thereafter (start of Cycles  3, 5, 7, and 9, then 
Cycles 12, 15, etc.) until progression of disease, withdrawal of consent, death, or loss to 
follow -up.  Scan dates should not be adjusted or rescheduled due to dose interruption of any 
type.  
Baseline tumor assessments must be performed within 4 weeks (2 8 days) prior to the first dose of 
treatment.  
All efforts should be made to ensure consistency between  the baseline measurements and all 
subsequent measurements in reference to utilization of scanning method, equipment, technique 
(including slice thickness and field of view), and radiographic interpreter.  
The radiographic evaluation must include CT or MRI scanning of the chest, abdomen, and 
pelvis.  Any additional suspected sites of disease should also be imaged.  All evaluations should 
meet the standard of care for imaging of lesions in the respective organ(s) and should conform to 
the image acquisition gu idelines accordin g to institutional standards.  
All target and nontarget sites are evaluated at each time point  of tumor assessment.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 132 18.4. International Working Group Criteria  
 
Source: Cheson BD, Pfistner B, Juweid ME, et al. Revised response criteria for malign ant lymphoma. J  Clin Oncol . 
2007;25:579 -586.7 
18.5. Cytokine P450 3A Inducers and Inhibitors  
This table is created  using information from the hyperlinked source below.  Please refer to those 
sites for additional information . 
http://medicine.iupui.edu/clinpharm/ddis/table.aspx  
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/U
CM29236 2.pdf  
CYP3A  Inhibitors  CYP3A  Inducers  
HIV Antivirals: Indinavira 
Nelfinavira 
Ritonavira 
 
Boceprevira 
Clarithromycina 
Conivaptana 
Grapefruit Juicea 
Itraconazolea 
Ketoconazolea 
Lopinavira 
Nefazodonea HIV Antivirals:  
Efavirenze 
Nevirapine  
 
Avasimibed 
Carbamazepined 
Phenytoind 
Rifampind 
St. John's Wortd 
 
Bosentane 
Etravirinee 
Modafinile 

Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 133 CYP3A  Inhibitors  CYP3A  Inducers  
Posaconazolea 
Saquinavira 
Telaprevira 
Telithromycina 
 
Voriconazolea 
Amprenavirb 
Aprepitantb 
Atazanavirb 
Ciprofloxacinb 
Crizotinibb 
Darunavirb 
Dilitiazemb 
Erythromycinb 
Fluconazoleb 
Fosamprenavirb 
Grapefruit Juiceb 
Imatinibb 
Verapamilb 
Alprazolamc 
Amiodaronec 
Amlodipinec 
Atorvastatinc 
Bicalutamidec 
Cilostazolc 
Cimetidinec 
Cyclosporinec 
Fluoxetinec 
Fluvoxaminec 
Ginkgoc 
Goldensealc 
Isoniazidc 
Lapatinibc 
Nilotinibc 
Oral Contraceptivesc 
Pazopanibc 
Ranitidinec 
Ranolazinec Nafcilline 
 
Amprenavirf 
Aprepitantf 
Armodafinilf 
Clobazamechinaceaf 
Pioglitazonef 
Prednisonef 
Rufinamidef 
Vemurafenibf 
 
Barbiturates  
Glucocorticoids  
Modafinil  
Oxcarbazepine  
Phenobarbital  
Rifabutin  
Troglitazone  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 134 CYP3A  Inhibitors  CYP3A  Inducers  
Tipranavirc 
Ticagrelorc 
Zileutonc 
Not Azithromycin  
Chloramphenicol  
Delavirdine  
Diethyl -Dithiocarbamate  
Gestodene  
Mibefradil  
Mifepristone  
Norfloxacin  
Norfluoxetine  
Starfruit  
AUC = area under the plasma concentration -time curve; CYP = cytochrome P450; HIV = human immunodeficiency 
virus  
a Strong inhibitor: causes a ≥ 5 -fold increase in the plasma AUC values or more than 80% decrease in clearance.  
b Moderate inhibitor: causes a ≥ 2 -fold increase in the plasma AUC values or 50 % to 80% decrease in clearance.  
c Weak inhibitor: causes a ≥ 1.25 -fold but < 2 -fold increase in the plasma AUC values or 20 % to 50% decrease in 
clearance.  
d Strong inducer: causes a ≥ 80% decrease in the plasma AUC values.  
e Moderate inducer: causes a 50 % to 80% decrease in the plasma AUC values.  
f Weak inducer: causes a 20 % to 50% decrease in the plasma AUC value . 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 135 18.6. Schedule of Events  
Table  18.2: Schedule  of Events Part 1 (Dose Escalation)  
Cyclea Pre-
Cycle  1 2 3 4 and 
Beyond  Post-
Cycle  
Visit Number  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 and 
Beyond  TBD  
Visit Description  Screen -
ing Exam and 1st Dose  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  EOTb 
Cycle Day(s)  -14 to 0  1 2 8 15 18-21 1 8 15 1 15 1 ND 
Visit Window (days)  
   ± 2 ± 2 0 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 
Time Postdose  (hours) 
 Pre
dose  0.5 1 2 3 6-8 
   Pre
dose  0.5 1 2 3 6-8 Pred
ose 1 3 6-8  
     Informed consent  X 
                    
     Demographics  X 
                    
     Medical history  X 
                    
     Archive tumor sample  X 
                    
     Inclusion/exclusion criteria  X 
                    
     Pregnancy testc X 
                    
 X 
  X 
Adverse events  X X 
     X X X X 
     X 
   X X X X X X 
Concomitant medications  X X 
     X X X X 
     X 
   X X X X X X 
ECOG  X X 
      X X X 
     X 
   X X X X X X 
Physical examination  
and vital signsd X X 
  @ 
  @ X X X 
     X 
   X X X X X X 
Safety laboratorye X X 
     X X X X 
     X 
   X X X X X X 
Urinalysisf X X 
      X 
 X 
     X 
    
 X 
  X 
Tumor markersg 
 X 
              X 
    
 X 
 X X 
ECG (12 -lead)h X X 
  X 
  X X 
 X 
   X  X 
    
 X 
  X 
Tumor assessmenti X 
               
     
 X 
 X 
 Tumor  biopsy ( optional)j X 
       X 
       
     
     PGx blood samplek 
 X 
              
     
     
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 136 Table  18.2: Schedule of Events Part 1 (Dose Escalation) (Continued)  
Cyclea Pre-
Cycle  1 2 3 4 and  
beyond  Post-
Cycle  
Visit Number  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 and 
beyond  TBD  
Visit De scription  Screen -
ing Exam and 1st Dose  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  Exam  EOTb 
Cycle Day(s)  -14 to 0  1 2 8 15 18-21 1 8 15 1 15 1 ND 
Visit Window (days)  
   ± 2 ± 2 0 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 
Time Postdose  (hours)  
 Pre
dose  0.5 1 2 3 6-8 
   Pre
dose  0.5 1 2 3 6-8 Pred
ose 1 3 6-8  
     Exploratory blood samplel 
 X 
    X 
   X 
     
     
    X 
Milademetan  administrationm 
 X 
     X X X X 
     X 
   X X X X X 
 PK blood samplen 
 X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X     
 X 
MIC-1 serum sampleo 
 X 
    X X X X X 
     Xp 
    
     Dispense milademetan  
       X X X 
      X 
   X X X X X 
 Pill diaries dispensed/reviewed  
       X X X X 
     X 
   X X X X X X 
Optional tumor re -biopsyq 
                     
    X 
DLT = dose -limiting toxicity; ECG = electrocardiogram; ECOG = Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; EOT = end of treatment;  FDG -PET = (18F) fluorodeoxyglucose -positron emis sion tomography; 
IWG = International Working Group; MIC -1 = macrophage inhibitory cytokine -1; ND = not determined; PGx  = pharmacogenomic; PK = pharmacokinetic (s); QD = once daily; RECIST = Response 
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors  Version 1.1 ; TBD = to be determined  
Note: The End -of-Study Follow -up will occur 30 (±2) days after the last administration of milademetan.  If the subject begins another form of anticancer th erapy before the end of the 30 (±2) -day period, 
every effort will be made to complete a ll the End -of-Study assessments prior to commencing the new therapy.  
a Each cycle will last 28 days.  Cohort safety assessment for DLTs will be performed after Day 28 of Cycle 1.  
b The EOT  Visit will occur 30 (± 2) days after the last administration of milademetan .  If the subject begins another form of anticancer therapy before the end of the 30 (±2) -day period, every effort will 
be made to complete all the EOT  assessments prior to commencing the new therapy.  If there is an abnormality in need of monitoring beyond the EOT  Visit, subjects will be followed until resolution 
or confirmed stability of the abnormality.  
c Pregnancy test (urine or serum) will be perfor med in female subjects of childbearing potential at screening, Cycle 3 Day 1, and EOT  Visit.  
d Physical examination including vital signs will be performed on visit days indicated by X.  Height and weight will be recorded at Screening and EOT  Visits.  Weight will be recorded at all other visits.  
Vital signs will be performed on visit days indicated by X or @. 
e Safety laboratory samples for Day 1 predose  (complete blood count with differential and reticulocyte count, serum chemistry, urinalysis, and coagul ation profile) can be collected within 72 hours 
before the first dose.  Creatinine clearance will be performed at screening.  
f Urinalysis will be performed for the indicated visits up to Cycle 3 Day 1 and at EOT  Visit.   
g Tumor markers will be obtained as  appropriate for the tumor type at each cycle.  
h Twelve -lead ECGs (in triplicate) will be measured after the subject has rested in a recumbent position for 5 minutes or more . ECGs will be performed predose  except at additional 2 hours postdose  on 
Day 1.  Procedure window is ± 1 hour.  For subjects enrolled per Case 3 ( Section  4.1.2.1 ), at Screening 4 sets of triplicate ECGs should each be taken appro ximately 1 hour apart, then triplicate ECGs 
will be taken at predose , 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 8 , and 24 hours on Cycle 1 Day s 1 to 2, and at predose  and 3 hours post -dose on Day s 18 to 21, corresponding to the PK time points on Day 1, Day 2, and Day s 
18-21, respecti vely.  The time points for the ECG and PK sample collection should be as close as possible within a 10 -minute window.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 137 i Tumor assessment by physical examination and RECIST v 1.1 or revised IWG criteria will be performed at baseline within 4 weeks of the first dose of milademetan  and after every 2 cycles of 
treatment for the first 8 cycles and then every 3 cycles thereafter (ie, at start of Cycles 3, 5, 7, and 9, then Cycles 12 , 15, etc.).  Pre -treatment FDG -PET scans will be performed in all subjects with 
lymphoma under fasting conditions at baseline within 4 weeks of the first dose of milademetan .  In subjects with lymphoma that are FDG -PET avid, FDG -PET scans will be performe d every 2 cycles 
of treatment for the first 8 cycles and then every 3 cycles thereafter (ie, at start of Cycles 3, 5, 7, and 9, then Cycles 12 , 15, etc.).  Bone marrow will be assessed at baseline by aspirate and/or biopsy 
per the investigator’s decision.  If positive, bone marrow assessments may be repeated with the subsequent tumor assessment.  
j Optional paired tumor biopsies will be obtained by skin punch biopsies (for melanoma), Tru -cut technique, or core needle biopsies under imaging guidance . 
k Inform ed consent specifically allowing optional PGx testing must be obtained before collecting sample.  
l Exploratory blood samples drawn at Cycle 1 Day 1 predose  and 6 -8 hours postdose , Cycle 1 Day s 18-21 predose , and EOT  Visit for future analysis of circulating  biomarkers.   For subjects receiving 
study drug  under the QD 7/28 days or QD 3/14 days schedules, the blood sample collection on Cycle 1 Day s 18-21 is not required.  
m Milademetan  is administered per protocol at the clinical site at the indicated visit days .  Subjects in the alternative dosing schedules will receive milademetan according to their assigned schedule (QD 
7/28 days or QD 3/14 days) . 
n Pharmacokinetic samples will be collected predose  at the indicated visit  days (Cycle 1 Days 1, 2, 8, 15, 18 -21 and Cycle 2 Day 1) and as detailed in Table  9.1.  Subjects will be instructed not to take 
their dose until after sample has been collected on clinic days.   Additional PK samples will be collected at the indicated time point s.  On Cycle 1 Day 8, a predose  PK sample will be collected, and if 
tumor biopsy is performed, one additional PK samp le will be taken right before ( -1 hour) the tumor biopsy.  For subject s receiving study drug  under the QD 7/28 days or QD 3/14 days schedules, PK 
sample collection on Cycle 1 Day s 18-21 is not required.  The window for PK sample collection will be ± 15% unles s otherwise specified in Section  9.1.  Based on the PK profile established from the 
initial subjects treated in the study, PK sample collection time point s may be modified upon notifi cation by the Sponsor.  
o Serum for MIC -1 induction will be obtained at the indicated time point s (predose  on Cycle 1 Days  1, 2, 8, 15, and 18  to 21).  For subjects receiving study drug  under the QD 7/28 days or QD 3/14 
days schedules, MIC -1 sample collection on Cycle 1 Day s 18-21 is not required.  
p For subjects enrolled per Case 3 ( Section  4.1.2.1 ), an additional sample at Cycle 2 Day 1 predose  will be collected . 
q An optional tumor re -biopsy may be performed within 30 days of the last dose of milademetan  in subjects who have achieved an initial complete response/partial response or stable disease for at least 
6 months by RECIST v 1.1 or revised IWG criteria to milademetan  but later developed progressive disease while on therapy.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 138 Table  18.3: Schedule of Events Part 2 (Dose Expansion)  
Cyclea Pre-
Cycle  1 2 3 4 and 
Beyond  Post-
Cycle  
Visit Number  1  
2 3 4 5  
6 7  
7b 8 9 10 11 12 and 
Beyond  TBD  
Visit Description  
Screening  
Exam and 1st Dose  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  Exam  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  EOTb 
Cycle Day(s)  -14 to 0  1 2 8 15 18-21 1 2 8 15 1 15 1 ND 
Visit Window (days)  
  
 ± 2 ± 2 0 ± 2  ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 
Time Postdose  
(hours)  
 Pred
ose 0.5 1 2 3 4 6 8 
   Pred
ose 0.5 1 2 3 4 6 8 Predo
se 0.
5 1 2 3 4 6 8  
  
    Informed consent  X 
       
            
         
  
    Demographics  X 
       
            
         
  
    Medical history  X 
       
            
         
  
    Archive tumor sample  X 
       
            
         
  
    Inclusion/exclusion 
criteria  X 
       
            
         
  
    Pregnancy testc X 
       
            
         
  X 
  X 
Adverse events  X X 
      
 X X X X        X         X X X X X X 
Concomitant 
medications  X X 
      
 X X X X       
 X         
X X X X X X 
ECOG  X X 
      
  X X X        X         X X X X X X 
Physical examination 
and vital signsd X X 
  @ 
   
 @ X X X       
 X         
X X X X X X 
Safety laboratorye X X 
      
 X X X X        X         X X X X X X 
Urinalysisf X X 
      
  X 
 X        X         
  X 
  X 
Tumor markersg 
 X 
      
            X         
  X 
 X X 
ECG (12 -lead)h X X 
  X 
   
 X X 
         X         
  X 
  X 
Tumor assessmenti X 
       
            
         
  X 
 X 
 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 139 Table  18.3: Schedule of Events Part 2 (Dose Expansion) (Continued)  
Cyclea Pre-
Cycle  1 2 3 4 and 
beyond  Post-
Cycle  
Visit Number  1  
2 3 4 5  
6 7  
7b 8 9 10 11 12 and 
beyond  TBD  
Visit Description  
Screening  
Exam and 1st Dose  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  Exam  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  
Exam  EOTb 
Cycle Day(s)  -14 to 0  1 2 8 15 18-21 1 2 8 15 1 15 1 ND 
Visit Window (days)  
  
 ± 2 ± 2 0 ± 2  ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 ± 2 
Time postdose  
(hours)  
 Pred
ose 0.5 1 2 3 4 6 8 
   Pred
ose 0.5 1 2 3 4 6 8 Predo
se 0.
5 1 2 3 4 6 8  
  
    Tumor biopsyj X 
       
            
         
  
    PGx blood samplek 
 X 
      
            
         
  
    Exploratory blood 
samplel 
 X 
      
X 
   X       
 
         
  
   X 
Milademetan 
administration in 
clinicm 
 X 
      
 X X X X       
 X         
X X X X X 
 PK blood samplen 
 X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Xp 
  
    
MIC-1 serum sampleo 
 X 
      
X X X X X        
         
  
    Dispense milademetan  
        
 X X X         X         X X X X X 
 Pill diaries 
dispensed/reviewed  
        
 X X X X       
 X         
X X X X X X 
Optional tumor re -
biopsy  
        
  Xq 
        
 
         
  
   Xt 
DLBCL = diffuse large B -cell lymphoma; DLT = dose -limiting toxicity; ECG = electrocardiogr am; ECOG = Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; EOT = end of treatment; 
FDG -PET = (18F) fluorodeoxyglucose -positron emission tomography; IWG = International Working Group; MIC -1 = macrophage inhibitory cytokine -1; ND = not determined; 
PGx = pharmacogenomic;  PK = pharmacokinetic (s); QD = once daily;  RECIST = Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors; TBD = to be determined  
Note: The End -of-Study Follow -up will occur 30 (± 2) days after the last administration of milademetan.  If the subject begins another form of anticancer therapy before the end of the 30 (±2) -day 
period, every effort will be made to complete all the End -of-Study assessments prior to commencing the new therapy.  
a Each cycle will last 28 days.  Cohort safety assessment for DLTs will be performed after Day 28 of Cycle 1.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 140 b End-of-Treatment Visit will occur 30 (± 2) days after the last administration of milademetan.  If the subject begins another form of anticancer therapy before the end o f the 30 (±2) -day period, every 
effort will be made  to complete all the End -of-Treatment assessments prior to commencing the new therapy.  If there is an abnormality in need of monitoring beyond the End -of-Treatment Visit, 
subjects will be followed until resolution or confirmed stability of the abnormality . 
c Pregnancy test will be performed in female subjects of childbearing potential at screening, Cycle 3 Day 1, and End -of-Treatment Visit.  
d Physical examination including vital signs will be performed on visit days indicated by X.  Height and weight  will be recorded  at Screening and End -of-Treatment Visits.  Weight will be recorded at 
all other visits.  Vital signs will be performed on visit days indicated by X or @. 
e Safety laboratory samples for Day 1 predose  (complete blood count with differential and reticulocyte counts, serum chemistry, urinalysis, and coagulation profile) can be collected within 72 hours 
before the first dose.  Creatinine clearance will be calculated at screening.   
f Urinalysis will be performed for the indicated visits up to Cycle 3 Day 1 and at End -of-Treatment Visit.  
g Tumor markers will be obtained as appropriate for the tumor type at each cycle.  
h Twelve -lead ECGs (in triplicate) will be measured after the subject has rested in a recumbent position for 5 minutes or more .  ECGs will be performed predose  except at additional 2 hours postdose  on 
Day 1 and Day 2.  Procedure window is ± 1 hour.   
i Tumor assessment by physical examination and RECIST v 1.1 or revised IWG criteria will be performed at baseline within 4 week s of the fi rst dose of milademetan, and after every 2 cycles of 
treatment for the first 8 cycles and then every 3 cycles thereafter (ie, at start of Cycles 3, 5, 7, and 9, then Cycles 12, 1 5, etc.).  Pre -treatment FDG -PET scans will be performed in all subjects with 
DLBCL under fasting conditions at baseline within 4 weeks of the first dose of milademetan.  In subjects with DLBCL that are FDG -PET avid, FDG -PET scans will be performed every 2 cycles of 
treatment for the first 8 cycles and then every 3 cycles thereafter  (ie, at start of Cycles 3, 5, 7, and 9, then Cycles 12, 15, etc.).  Bone marrow will be assessed at baseline by aspirate and/ or biopsy per 
the investigator’s decision.  If positive, bone marrow assessments may be repeated with the subsequent tumor assessm ent. 
j Mandatory pre -treatment tumor biopsies will be obtained by skin punch biopsies (for melanoma), Tru -cut technique, or core needle biopsies under imaging guidance at baseline.  
k Informed consent specifically allowing optional PGx testing must be obtai ned before collecting sample.  
l Exploratory blood samples drawn at Cycle 1 Day 1 predose  and 6 -8 hours postdose , Cycle 1 Day s 18-21 predose , and End -of-Treatment Visit for future analysis of circulating biomarkers.  
m Milademetan is administered per protoc ol at the clinical site at the indicated visit days.  If an alternative dosing schedule than QD 21/28 is used for dose expansion, the subjects will receive 
milademetan according to their assigned schedule (eg, QD 3/14 days).  
n Pharmacokinetic samples will be collected predose  at the indicated visits (Cycle 1 Days 1, 2, 8, 15, 18 -21 and Cycle 2 Day 1)  and as detailed in Table  9.1.  Subjects will be instructed not to take their 
dose until after sample has been collected on clinic days.  Additional PK samples will be collected at the indicated time point s.  On Cycle 1 Day 8, a predose  PK sample will be collected, and if tumor 
biopsy  is performed, one additional PK sample will be taken right before ( -1 hour) the tumor biopsy.  The window for PK sample collection will be ± 15% unless otherwise specified in Section  9.1.  
Based on the PK profile established from the initial subjects treated in the study, PK sample collection time point s may be modified upon notification by the Sponsor.  
o Serum for MIC -1 induction will be obtained at the indicated time point s (predose  on Cycle 1 Days 2, 8, 15, and 18 -21). 
p Cycle 1 Day 8 (± 2 days) requested post -treatment re -biopsy should be obtained 6 hours postdose  (± 2 h).  
q An optional tumor re -biopsy may be performed within 30 days of the last dose of milademetan in subjects who have achieved an initial complete response/pa rtial response or stable disease for at least 
6 months by RECIST v 1.1 or revised IWG criteria to milademetan but later developed p rogressive disease while on therapy.  
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 141 18.7. Extension Phase  
18.7.1.  Extension Phase Synopsis  
Objective of the Extension 
Phase:  The primary objective of the Extension Phase is to allow 
continuation of milademetan treatment for those subjects in the 
milademe tan Phase 1 study who have tolerated the drug and 
whose disease has not progressed (ie, stable disease [SD] or 
better) at least 6 months after enrollment is completed in both 
parts . 
Design of the Extension Phase:  This is an open -label, nonrandomized extension phase of the 
main study phase, which is designed to allow subjects who have 
tolerated milademetan and demonstrated clinical benefit (SD or 
better) at the time of study closure during the main study phase 
to continue with milademetan monotherapy.  
Subjects will continue with the same dose of milademetan 
monotherapy treatment as in the main study phase until they 
commence new cancer therapy, experience unacceptable 
toxicity, withdraw consent, or have progressive disease.  
If study drug is withheld for  toxicity, periodic visits should 
continue to occur as clinically indicated.  These visits should 
include any procedures needed to ensure subject safety.  
Subjects enrolled in the Extension Phase will be assessed as 
outlined in Table  18.4.   
Data collected will be recorded in the individual, 
subject -specific electronic case report form (eCRF).  The extent 
or frequency of data collection into the eCRFs may be  reduced 
for the Extension Phase.  
Duration of the Extension 
Phase:  The start of the Extension Phase is at least 6  months after 
enrollment is completed in both Part 1 and Part 2.  Subjects who 
are receiving clinical benefit (SD or better) and have tolerated 
milademetan will continue to receive the drug.  It is not possible 
to predict the duration of the Extension Phase because subjects 
may continue treatment until disease progression, unacceptable 
toxicity, starting of new cancer therapy, or withdra wal of 
consent.  
Subject Eligibility:  Subjects must have tolerated milademetan and demonstrated 
clinical benefit (SD or better) at the time of closure of the main 
study phase (Part 1 and Part 2) in order to be eligible for this 
extended use phase of the st udy. 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 142 Safety Evaluations:  Safety evaluations include adverse events, serious adverse 
events, clinical laboratory evaluations, physical examinations, 
vital signs, as needed.   ECGs may be done at investigator 
discretion, as clinically indicated.  
Dose:  Subjects who participate in the Extension Phase will continue to 
take milademetan at the same dose as was taken in the main 
study phase.  
Statistical Analyses:  Data collected during the Extension Phase will be listed and 
appended to the Clinical Study Repo rt. 
 
Protocol  DS3032 -A-U101  
Version 4.0 04 FEB 2020 
 
Proprietary and Confidential  
Page 143 Table  18.4: Schedule of Events (Extension Phase)  
Assessment  All Cycles, Day 1a End-of-Treatment Visitb 
Visit Window (Days)  28 Days ± 3 Days from Day 1 of 
Previous Cyclec 30 to 45 Days After Last Dose 
Physical examination  X X 
Vital signsd X X 
Adverse events  X X 
CBC (with differential and 
platelet count)   Xd X 
Serum chemistries   Xd X 
Milademetan  administratione X  
Tumor assessment   Xf  
CBC = complete blood count ; TEAE = treatment -emergent adverse event  
a Assessments and laboratory tests indicated on Day 1 will occur before administration of milademetan .   
b End-of-Treatment Visit will occur 30 to 45 days after the last administration of milademetan in the Extension 
Phase.  If there is a clinically significant laboratory abnormality in need of monitoring beyond the 
End-of-Treatment Visit, subjects will be followed until resolution of the abnormality or until it is considered 
stable.  
c For subjects who comple ted more than 1 year of study drug  with continued clinical benefit and no ongoing 
clinically significant TEAEs or at risk of clinically significant TEAEs in the judgment of the investigator, the 
subsequent visits every 3 cycles and additional visits as cli nically indicated are allowed.  
d Clinical safety laboratory tests include hematology, chemistry, CBC, and platelet count.  The tests described in 
Section  10.8 will be conducted on Day 1 of all cycles and as clinically indicated by the investigator.  The subject’s 
weight will be recorded as part of the vital signs assessment  
e Milademetan  is to be administered at the same dosing schedule that the indiv idual subject was using as during the 
main study phase.   
f Tumor assessment will be performed every 3 cycles.  