  1 
2/2/2021  
 
 
 
2-Hydroxyben zylamine (2-HOBA)  to Prevent Early Recurrence 
of Atrial Fibrillation after Catheter -based Ablation  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  
 
Greg Michaud, MD 
Professor of Medicine 
Chief, Arrhythmia Section  
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine  
Vanderbilt University Medical Center  
 
 
Co-Principal Investigator:  
 
M. Benjamin Shoemaker, MD, MSCI  
Assistant Professor of Medicine  
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Arrhythmia Section  
Vanderbilt University Medical Center  
 
 
  
  2 
2/2/2021 Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
6.0 Study Procedures  
7.0 Risks of Investigational Agents/Devices (side effects)  
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants or Others 
9.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
10.0 Statistical Considerations 
11.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
12.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
13.0 References  
  3 
2/2/2021 1.0 B ACKGROUND  
 
1.1 New therapeutic strategies for atrial fibrillation (AF)  are needed. Current rhythm control therapies for 
AF include the antiarrhythmic drugs (sodium and potassium channel blockers) and AF ablation (catheter or surgical).
1 The recurrence rate for antiarrhythmic drugs is ~50%, while the recurrence rate for catheter ablation 
is up to 50% following a single procedure with 20- 40% of patients requiring a second procedure.2 The 
antiarrhythmic drugs not only have limited and unpredictable efficacy but also a narrow therapeutic window with potentially fatal ventricular arrhythmias as a major concern for all agents,
1 and clinical trials of catheter -based 
ablation have reported a rate of major complications of at least 1% including stroke, tamponade, and death.1 The 
limited efficacy and inherent risk of the antiarrhythmic drug class and AF ablation drive the need to develop 
alternative therapeutic strategies for AF.  
 
1.2 Inflammation and oxidative stress promote AF and its clinical risk factors. Numerous clinical risk 
factors such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes mellitus/metabolic syndrome, and aging are known to increase the risk of AF, but the molecular pathways linking these comorbidities to AF are incompletely understood.
3-5 It is 
well recognized that many of these comorbidities are associated with inflammation, which is believed to be a major shared mechanism.
6 Inflammation is the immune response to cellular injury generated by oxidative stress 
resulting in overabundance of reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide anions (O 2˙ˉ) and hydroxyl 
radicals. Inflammation and oxidative stress are closely related,  and each promotes the generation of the other. 
Oxidative stress is known to result in damage to lipids, proteins, and DNA, and is implicated in the development 
of a wide range of diseases including cancer, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, autoimmune disease, 
neurological disorders, as well as the pathogenesis and progression of AF.  
 
1.3 An optimal antioxidant or anti -inflammatory drug to treat AF has not been identified. As oxidative 
stress became increasingly recognized for its role in AF pathogenesis7-9, numerous studies were conducted 
investigating the use of dietary antioxidants such as vitamins C, E, and omega- 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (n- 3 
PUFAs or “fish oil”) for the treatment of AF. The major limitation of treatment with vitamins C and E are that they fail to significantly suppress oxidative stress, which is their therapeutic target.
10 This is also a problem for n -3 
PUFA.11 In a clinical trial conducted by our research group, 190 patients with AF were randomized to high dose 
n-3 PUFA or matching placebo and followed for 6- months for AF recurrence. The rate of AF recurrence was 59% 
in the n- 3 PUFA group compared to 47% in the placebo group with no difference in the primary endpoint of time -
to-AF recurrence (HR=1.2 [95% CI: 0.8- 1.8] P=0.39). Furthermore, there was no difference in the concentration 
of inflammatory cytokines (Interleukins 6, 8, 10; tumor necrosis factor alpha) or measures of oxidative stress (urinary F2- isoprostane) between n -3 PUFA and placebo groups.
11 Given a large amount of ROS can be 
generated by a variety of different cell types (neutrophils, monocytes, myofibroblasts), a major problem with the antioxidant drug class appears to be that they 
cannot achieve sufficient in- vivo concentrations to 
reduce ROS levels.
12 Anti-inflammatory drugs, 
steroids and colchicine, can both reduce AF after ablation or cardiac surgery, but the side- effects 
preclude widespread long- term use. Steroids are 
associated with immunosuppression, glucose 
intolerance, and agitation; and a meta -analysis of 
studies using colchicine for AF found a 21% rate of GI intolerance (diarrhea, nausea, abdominal pain) in the colchicine group compared to 8% in placebo 
(P<0.001).
13 
 1.4 Isolevuglandin scavengers are 
compounds that target oxidative stress but  are 
NOT anti -inflammatories or antioxidants.   
Given the failure of the anti -inflammatory and 
antioxidant drug classes to effectively treat AF in humans, the discovery of a new group of 
Figure 1 : The dicarbonyl motif of isolevuglandin (IsoLG) 
binds rapidly to lysine side chains to form a dysfunctional 
IsoLG -protein adduct. However, in the presence of an 
IsoLG scavenger such as 2 -HOBA, IsoLG preferentially 
binds to 2 -HOBA resulting in an inactive byproduct.  
 

  4 
2/2/2021 compounds that serve as downstream mediators of oxidative stress damage, the isolevuglandins ( IsoLG s), 
represents an important conceptual advance in attacking this pathway to AF. IsoLG s are the product of lipid 
peroxidation, which occurs when ROS react with polyunsaturated fatty acids present in cell membranes or freely 
circulating.14 IsoLG s are highly reactive and following their formation bind within seconds to macromolecules 
with lysine residues forming IsoLG  adducts ( Figure 1).15 IsoLG  adducts are irreversible modifications that cause 
dysfunction of protein targets, including structures relevant to cardiomyocyte homeostasis (e.g. ion channel proteins, proteasomes, chromatin, mitochondria). IsoLG s are so highly reactive that they cannot be measured 
in their unreacted form and must instead be measured as IsoLG -adducts.
15 The discovery of the IsoLG s has 
identified a critical component in the oxidative stress pathway that may be targeted therapeutically.16 IsoLG  
scavenger compounds, such as 2 -HOBA, can bind IsoLG  orders of magnitude more rapidly than IsoLG  can bind 
with the lysine on other macromolecules, thereby generating permanently inactivated IsoLG  compounds rather 
than IsoLG -adducts.16 This study  aims to test the efficacy of a therapeutic strategy targeting IsoLG  for treatment 
of AF using the IsoLG  scavenger 2 -HOBA.  
 
1.5 Early recurrence of AF after catheter -based 
ablation can be used to study AF due to inflammation and oxidative stress. Over the past decade, post -
operative AF has been studied extensively as a model of 
AF due to inflammation and oxidative stress.
17-20 
However, AF research in the post -cardiac surgery setting 
is complicated because the patients often have severe 
comorbid coronary and valvular heart disease, may be on 
a highly variable amount of vasopressors, may remain intubated and sedated for days, often have large volume shifts from intravenous fluids and blood products, and 
may have an unknown history of AF prior to surgery. We propose here to study early recurrence of AF in patients 
who have undergone catheter ablat ion for AF as an alternative to the post -cardiac surgery setting.  
 Early recurrence of AF is conventionally defined as any recurrence of AF, atrial flutter, or atrial 
tachycardia lasting >30 seconds within 90- days following ablation.
2 Approximately 50% of patients experience 
early arrhythmia recurrence and the vast majority of those recurrences are within the first 30- days.2,21 Compelling 
evidence supports oxidative stress and inflammation caused by ablation- related atrial tissue injury as the main contributor to early 
recurrence.
22-26 Up to 75% of patients experience symptoms from 
pericarditis following AF ablation, and numerous studies have demonstrated that the use of anti- inflammatory medications 
(corticosteroids, colchicine) reduces early AF recurrence (Table 1).
22-26  
Despite these promising results, common side -effects from steroids 
(immunosuppression, agitation, glucose intolerance) and colchicine (gastrointestinal intolerance) preclude widespread long- term use of 
these agents for AF.  
  
2.0 RATIONALE AND SPECIFIC AIMS  
 We hypothesize that oxidative stress causes AF through the 
production of isolevuglandins and that treatment with IsoLG  
scavengers will significantly reduce AF. The proposed studies will 
test this hypothesis by randomizing patients with AF to 2- HOBA or 
placebo 3 days prior to AF ablation to allow 2- HOBA to reach steady -
state levels. We hypothesize that tissue injury from AF ablation causes a large release of ROS that react with lipids to generate IsoLG s (Figure 
2). In the absence of 2 -HOBA, IsoLG s will react within seconds to form 
IsoLG -macromolecule adducts in atrial tissue, promoting early 
recurrence of AF. In the presence of 2- HOBA, IsoLG s will rapidly react 
to form IsoLG -macromolecule adducts in atrial tissue, promoting early Reference  N Study Drugs  Risk  
Koyama  128 Prednisone  -22% 
Kim 138 Methylprednisolone  -25% 
Deftereos  161 Colchicine  -18% 
Deftereos  223 Colchicine  -18% 
 
Table 1: Studies of early AF recurrence with anti -
inflammatories . 
Figure 2: Tissue injury from AF ablation 
generates oxidative stress resulting in 
IsoLG -adduct formation that contributes 
to early recurrence of AF.  
  5 
2/2/2021 recurrence of AF. In the presence of 2 -HOBA, IsoLG  will preferentially bind to and therefore be inactivated by 2 -
HOBA thereby sparing injury to the atrial tissue caused by oxidative stress and its contribution to early recurrence 
of AF. Early recurrence of AF will be measured by ECG s that are recor ded once per day by a smartwatch ( Apple 
Watch, Apple Inc., Cupertino, CA ) with additional ECG s recorded by the participant if they experience symptoms 
of AF, or if the smartwatch  alerts the participant of a possible AF episode via its auto -detection  AF monitoring 
algorithm.  The Apple Watch’s  AF algorithm is based on s ampl ing of  heart rate and variability  and will give an 
audible alarm if those parameters indicate a possible episode of AF. The smartwatch  record s a single -lead ECG  
if the participant touches the watch with their contralateral hand. The day and time of the episode is also stored 
by the smartwatch. At the end of the 28 -day follow -up period, study personnel will review the stored ECGs . Blood 
will be drawn prior to ablation and on post -procedure Day 1 for measurement of IsoLG -adduct levels . DNA will 
be extracted to explore a pharmacogenomic interaction with haplotypes at the chromosome 4q25 AF risk locus, which: 1) is strongly associated with the development of AF and the early recurrence of AF after ablation
27; and 
2) has been reported to be a regulator of an anti -oxidant gene program in response to cardiac injury.28  
 
The proposed double- blind, randomized, placebo -controlled trial of 
2-HOBA in patients undergoing AF ablation is designed to address the 
following Specific Aims:  
 Specific Aim 1 : To test the hypothesis that treatment with 2-
HOBA reduces early recurrence of AF (clinical 
endpoint)  
 Specific Aim 2:  To test the hypothesis that treatment with 2-HOBA reduces circulating levels of IsoLG -
adducts (biochemical endpoint)  
 
Specific Aim 3:  To explore the idea that genetic variation at the 
4q25 ( PITX2 ) AF susceptibility locus modulates 
the clinical and biochemical response to 2-
HOBA  
  
3.0 ANIMAL STUDIES AND PREVIOUS HUMAN STUDIES 
 
3.1. The IsoLG  scavenger, 2- HOBA, is remarkably effective in 
experimental models of AF  
Oxidative stress contributes to the development of numerous diseases 
through oxidative protein modification. Early results in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease and hypertension demonstrated that treatment using 
2-HOBA effectively reduced cognitive impairment in the Alzheimer’s model 
and lowered blood pressure in the hypertension model.
29,30 Our research 
group has been investigating the use of IsoLG  scavengers to treat AF in 
experimental mouse models.31 Obesity and hypertension are two of the 
strongest clinical risk factors for the development of AF and are well -
established states of high inflammation and oxidative stress.32 In a diet -
induced obesity mouse model, treatment with 2- HOBA significantly 
reduced AF inducibility compared to controls. The control group included 
mice treated with an inactive structural analog, 4 -HOBA, which does not 
scavenge IsoLG  (Figure 3). In an angiotensin- II hypertension mouse 
model, AF was readily induced and treatment with 2 -HOBA successfully 
reduced inducibility compared to 4 -HOBA while a group treated with 
antihypertensive medications (hydralazine and hydrochlorothiazide) also had l ess AF ( Figure 3 ).
31 AF is also inducible in a new mouse model of 
inflammation without hypertension. Further in the models of inducible AF, IsoLG  adducts elevated at baseline in 
Obesity Model
Hypertension Model
Figure 3: Murine models of obesity and 
hypertension have inducible AF with 
rapid atrial pacing. Treatment with an 
IsoLG scavenger, 2 -HOBA, reduces AF 
inducibility, but treatment with an 
inactive structural analog, 4 -HOBA, 
does not. (LFD=low fat diet, HFD=high 
fat d iet, angII=angiotensin II, 
hyd=hydralazine, 
HCTZ=hydrochlorothiazide).  
  6 
2/2/2021 the atria are lowered by 2- HOBA. Taken together, a therapeutic strategy aimed at reducing reactive IsoLG -
adduct levels through the use of scavenger compounds such as 2 -HOBA has yielded positive results in multiple 
mouse models of oxidative- stress induced AF and  provides the basis for advancing this line of research to 
humans.  
 
 3.2. A Phase I clinical trial of the IsoLG  scavenger 2- HOBA  
A first-in-humans Phase I clinical trial using oral 2- HOBA was recently completed to assess its safety and 
pharmacologic profile. A  single dose study (NCT- 3176940) and a multidose study (NCT- 03555682) were 
conducted. In the single dose escalation study, 6 ascending doses of 2 -HOBA were studied. Three participants 
were enrolled at each dose and 18 participants successfully completed the study.
33 The highest planned dose 
(825 mg) was reached. There were no serious adverse events. There were 5 total adverse events (AEs). They 
were all determined to be mild in intensity  and not dose -dependent. Reported AEs included: frequent urination 
(N=2) , headache ( N=1), itchy throat ( N=1), rash (N=1 ), sleepiness ( N=1) and abdominal bloating ( N=1). No 
clinically significant changes in ECG recordings, vital signs, or laboratory parameters were  observed.  
 In the multi- dose randomized, double- blind clinical trial, 1 8 healthy volunteers  were given 2 -HOBA or placebo 
for two weeks. Two doses of 2- HOBA were tested, 500 mg or 750 mg. The study assessed the safety, tolerability, 
and pharmacokinetics of dosing over a two week period, and demonstrated a safe and well -tolerated profile with 
three -times daily dosing. 9 subjects were studied at each dose level, with 6 receiving the ADI and 3 receiving 
placebo. These doses were chosen to achieve similar plasma levels at steady state compared with the single dose study. No serious AEs were observed. 14 patients reported at least 1 adverse event ( Table 2). Reported 
AEs included headache (N=6), GI distress (N=3), rash/itching (N=3), urine odor (N=2), dry mouth (N=2), nasal 
congestion (N=2), lethargy/sleepiness (N=2), hypertension (N=1), and eye irritation (N=1). One volunteer 
experienced a rash of moderate intensity, and was withdrawn from the study, though this AE was not determined 
to be study -related or dose- dependent.  
 
 2-Hydroxybenzylamine acetate dose  
Total  
(n=18) Placebo  
(n=6) 500 mg  
(n=6) 750 mg  
(n=6) 
Any event, n (%)  4 (67)  6 (100) 4 (67)  14 (78) 
Headache  2 (33)  2 (33)  2 (33)  6 (33)  
GI distress (nausea, bloating, constipation)  2 (33)  1 (17)  0 (0) 3 (17) 
Rash/itching  1 (17)  1 (17)  1 (17) 3 (17)  
Urine odor  0 (0) 2 (33)  0 (0) 2 (11)  
Dry mouth  1 (17)  1 (17)  0 (0) 2 (11)  
Nasal congestion  0 (0) 2 (33) 0 (0) 2 (11)  
Lethargy/sleepiness  0 (0) 1 (17)  1 (17)  2 (11)  
Hypertension  0 (0) 1 (17)  0 (0) 1 (6) 
Eye irritation  0 (0) 1 (17)  0 (0) 1 (6) 
 
Table 2. Summary of reported adverse events by dose in multi- dose Phase 1 study of 2- HOBA  
 
The pharmacokinetics observed in the multi -dose trial largely resembled those obtained in the single dose study. 
2-HOBA had a T max of 1-2 h and achieved steady -state C max in the range of those observed with the highest dose 
in the single dose study - 3177 ± 1993 ng/mL after 15 days of dosing at 500 mg and 2292 ± 913 ng/mL after 15 
days of dosing at 750 mg. Both groups (500 and 750 mg doses) experienced progressive AUC increases over 
the 15 days, yielding accumulation ratios of 1.25- 1.50. The half -life in this dosing interval was slightly longer than 
that observed in the single dose study, contributing to the increased accumulation of 2- HOBA. Average systemic 
exposure (AUC and C max) was similar for the 500 and 750 mg doses. Response to 2 -HOBA revealed considerable 
variability among subjects, as those dosed at the 500 mg regimen showed greater exposure on average than volunteers dosed at 750 mg. Oral bioavailability is not currently established in humans, and limits the interpretation of these data. Notably, the major metabolite of 2- HOBA, salicylic acid, showed a peak plasma 
  7 
2/2/2021 concentration of 12.8 ± 3.7 mg/L, considerably lower than the accepted therapeutic range of 150- 300 mg/L 
required for anti -inflammatory activity. Consequently, inhibition of cyclooxygenases was not observed, as 
determined by urinary metabolites of 3 major prostaglandins, pGE -M, TxB 2-M, and PGI -M.] 
  
No evaluation of the compound in pediatric settings or in patients with reported history of disease has been 
undertaken. A greater range of age and ethnicity should be explored in additional clinical studies to gain a better understanding of its clinical profile.  
  
3.3. The peak plasma concentration of 2 -HOBA in humans will reach the level demonstrated to reduce 
IsoLG -adduct formation in experimental models  
Prior studies in mice demonstrated that the plasma concentration of 2- HOBA needed for efficacy was ~2.7 µM.
16 
To date, the peak plasma concentration of 2- HOBA in humans has been analyzed from subjects given the 50mg 
and 100mg doses in our Phase I clinical trial. The peak plasma concentration of 2- HOBA from subjects given a 
single 100mg dose was 1.7 µM. The single dose escalation study has administered the 550mg dose without any 
adverse events, which based on estimates using first -order kinetics, is expected to achieve a peak plasma 
concentration (8.5 μM) that significantly exceeds the level found to be efficacious in experimental models. 
Therefore, 2-HOBA is safely tolerated at doses that will produce plasma 
concentrations known to reduce formation of IsoLG -adducts.  
 
3.4. A pilot study demonstrates that AF ablation increases IsoLG  
adduct levels  
In preparation for this trial, a pilot study (IRB #171722) was conducted to 
demonstrate the feasibility of the study protocol, demonstrate that IsoLG -
adduct levels increase following AF ablation, and generate preliminary data for the power/sample size analysis. These measurements are made using 
a cellular system (since IsoLG  adducts are not free in the circulation), and 
has used IsoLG  measurements in monocytes and dendritic cells (DC).
30 
Over an 8 -week period, 11 subjects who met the eligibility criteria for our 
proposed clinical trial were prospectively enrolled and underwent AF 
ablation. The data from our pilot study support the following conclusions:  
 
1. The r ate of participant enrollment was sufficient to meet the enrollment 
target of this proposal . We have proposed to enroll 1 participant per 
week to accrue 162 participants over 36 months.  We enrolled 1.375 
participants per week in the pilot study.  
 
2. A F ablation resulted in a statistically significant increase in circulating 
IsoLG -adduct levels.  IsoLG -adduct levels were measured in blood 
samples collected pre -ablation and on post -procedure day #1. IsoLG -
adduct levels increased in 82% (9/11) of subjects, and the mean 
increase was 23% in DCs (Pre: 41±16% vs. Post: 63±17%; P=0.02; 
Figure 4, top panel ) and 21% (Pre: 38±19% vs. Post: 59±18%; 
P=0.04) in monocytes following ablation.  
 
3. Ther e was an early recurrence of AF in 45% of participants (5/11).  This 
demonstrates that, similar to other published reports, early recurrence 
of AF is common in our study population and is sufficient to power the 
primary endpoint of Aim 1, which is AF recurrence within 28 -days 
following ablation ( Figure 4, bottom panel ). This is comparable to the 
early recurrence rate of AF from numerous other published reports, which is ~50%.
21,23 
   
01234Subjects (N)
0-78-1415-21 22-28>283
1
01
0
Days to AF Recurrence
Figure 4: (Top) There is a 
significant increase in the 
proportion of dendritic cells 
containing IsoLG -adducts from 
pre-ablation to post -operative day 
#1 (POD1; P=0.02). ( Bottom ) 
45% of participants had an early 
recurrence of AF within our 
proposed 28 -day monitoring 
period.  

  8 
2/2/2021 4.0 INCLUSION/EXCLUSION CRITERIA 
 
 
 
5.0 ENROLLMENT AND RANDOMIZATION  
 
Recruitment and informed consent: E ligible subjects will be identified through EPIC.  A member of the study team 
will request an introduction from the clinical staff. If the patient agrees, a member of the study  team will approach 
the patient in person in Arrhythmia Clinic or by phone prior to AF ablation. Information describing the study, why 
the research is being done and what will be learned will be provided. The risks as described in this protocol will 
be delineated. The benefits will be described as general scientific knowledge, along with potential treatment advances. No direct immediate benefit to the subjects is anticipated. Informed consent will be documented with 
the subject’s signature using an IRB -approved consent form for this protocol.  An option will be available for 
phone consent with electronic signature. 
 
Randomization: T
 his will be a double- blind, randomized study. Eligible subjects will be randomized according to 
a stratified  permuted block scheme with a block size of 8.  This ensures that the cumulative number of 
assignments to each treatment ( 2-HOBA or placebo) will be in balance after each block of assignments had 
been made.   Stratification will be made based on: 1) the planned ablation technique, cyroballoon vs. 
radiofrequency, 2) paroxysmal vs. persistent atrial fibrillation, 3) de novo vs. repeat ablation.   A statis tician will 
design the randomization table and enable the randomization tool within REDCap. After a patient enrolls for the 
study, the study nurse will determine the treatment assignment using the randomization tool in REDCap.   
 The s tudy drug will be started 3 days prior to ablation. The dose of 2 -HOBA will be 750mg three times 
per day (TID). At least 24 hours in advance, the study nurse will notify IDS to  randomize the participant and 
prepare the study drug. MTI will provide 2 -HOBA to the IDS as a 250 mg capsule. MTI will also provide matching INCLUSION   
EXCLUSION  
First time AF ablation with radiofrequency or cryo 
ablation  Planned surgical or hybrid (surgical + catheter) 
ablation  
Repeat AF ablation if the patient has persistent AF 
and ablation of non- pulmonary vein substrate is 
planned (e.g. posterior wall ablation, mitral or roof 
line, etc)  Current use of a miodarone or within past 3 months  
Able to provide written, informed consent  Use of oral steroids or colchicine  
22 years of age or older  Pro-inflammatory, rheumatologic disorder (e.g. RA, 
SLE, IBD, psoriasis, ankylosing spondylitis)  
 NYHA Class III/IV Heart Failure  
 Active ischemia  
 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy  
 Cardiac or thoracic surgery within 6 months  
 Expected life span < 1 year  
 Creatinine clearance <30 ml/min  
 Prior or planned heart transplantation  
 Pregnant women  
 Aspirin allergy  
 Current use of MAO -I 
RA=rheumatoid arthritis; SLE=systemic lupus erythematosus; IBD=inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s, 
Ulcerative Colitis); NYHA=New York Heart Association; LVEF=left ventricular ejection fraction  
 
Table 3: Eligibility Criteria . 
  
  9 
2/2/2021 placebo capsules.  The study nurse will arrange for the study drug to be given to the participant in- person or 
mailed.  The total duration of the study drug is 31 days ( 3 days before ablation + 28 days after ablation).  
 
6.0 STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
Encounter 1 : Enrollment  and Informed Consent  
• Performed by a member of the study team either in person in the Vanderbilt Arrhythmia Clinic  or by phone 
with an electronic signature.  
• In person meetings will occur in either : 1) the Vanderbilt Cardiac MRI Suite ( if a pre -ablation cardiac MRI is 
scheduled) , 2) the Vanderbilt Cardiac CT Suite (if a pre -ablation cardiac CT is scheduled) , 3) the VHVI 
Research Room  (5th Floor Medical Center East, South Tower ), or at their cardiology or imaging appointments 
at the One Hundred Oaks location (if applicable).  
• A supply of the study drug will be given to the participant along with dosing instructions  either in- person or 
via the mail . 
 
Encounter 2: Day of ablation 
• The participant will arrive the morning of ablation as instructed by the clinical team 
• Prior to ablation, the participant will be taken to the EP pre -op holding room. A dose of the study drug will be 
taken at this time (~30 minutes prior to the procedure).  
• The study team will provide the participant with the smartwatch  as well as an accompanying smart phone (if 
the patient does not own their own iPhone).  The study team will initialize the smartwatch  and phone with 
configurations to collect data,  and instruct patients on how to record ECGs from the smartwatch . 
• After the patient arrives in the operating room, they will undergo standard of care preparation for surgery including sterile drape and administration of  general anesthesia using endotracheal intubation and 
mechanical ventilation. Central venous catheters are placed in the femoral veins as part of the procedure.  
• A 30 mL blood sample will be collected from one of the central venous catheters prior to ablation. 10 mL of 
blood (divided between purple and blue top tubes ) will be delivered to the Core Laboratory for Cardiovascular 
Translational and Clinical Research, and 20 mL will be put in green top tubes, placed on ice, and delivered 
to the research  laboratory for culturing of monoctyes and dendritic cells for measurement of isolevuglandin-
adduct levels.  
• AF ablation will then  be performed as per standard of care by the primary operator and clinical team .  
• A post ablation blood draw will be collected at the conclusion of the AF ablation prior to the central venous catheter removal.  We will collect an additional 30 mL blood sample for research, with 10 mL of blood 
delivered to the Core Laboratory for Cardiovascular Translational and Clinical Research and 20 mL put in 
green top tubes and delivered to the research laboratory for culturing of monocytes and dendritic cells for measurement of isolevu glandin- adduct levels  
• Following ablation, the patient will be extubated while in the operating room and returned to the EP holding room awake and alert.  
• After removal of central venous catheters and when the patient is ready to begin eating and drinking, another 
dose of the study drug will be given.   
 Encounter 3: Post-ablation day #28  
• The participant will be met in either the: 1)  VHVI Arrhythmia Outpatient Clinic at  the time of their 1 -month 
Post-op Clinical Visit  (Medical Center East or One Hundred Oaks locations), or 2) the VHVI Research Room.  
• A 10 mL blood sample (divided between purple and blue top tubes) will be delivered to the Core Laboratory 
for Cardiovascular Clinical and Translational Research.  
• The study personnel will record any ECG s recorded from the smartwatch from the day of the ablation until 
the end of the 28- day of follow -up period 
• The study personnel will record remaining pills of either placebo or 2- HOBA at the conclusion of the study  
• Participants will be allowed to keep the smartwatch  
• Should the participant have required an iPhone as well as the smartwatch, the phone will be returned to the study personnel  
  10 
2/2/2021  
Encounter 4: 6 and/or 12 month follow up visits  
• Participants undergoing ablation are routinely seen at 6 and 12 months during follow up as part of clinical care 
• During these visits, study team personnel may  review medical records and meet with participants regarding 
clinical outcomes of their ablation procedure  
• If 6 or 12 month follow up visits are not planned, study personnel may call patients during the 12 month time frame to see if any clinical events have occurred  
 
7.0 R ISKS  
 
Patients undergoing AF ablation are at risk for complications by nature of the procedure. These risks are 
inherent to the patient population studied here. The risks of obtaining blood samples from phlebotomy of 
peripheral veins and existing venous lines are minimal.   
 One risk of donating samples for genetic research may be the release of information that could link the 
patient to the stored samples and/or the results of the tests run on those samples. The release of this information 
could cause problems with insurance or future employment. We have mechanisms in place to protect against 
such risks.  
 
8.0 REPORTING OF ADVERSE EVENTS OR UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS INVOLVING RISK TO 
PARTICIPANTS OR OTHERS  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
 
Oversight of the data and safety monitoring plan will be provided by a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB). 
The DSMB will meet at least twice a year and review data on adverse events, adverse drug reactions, data 
quality, and study recruitment. DSMB reports will be sent to the IRB at least yearly.  
 
Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will be formed to review safety data, study progress, and data quality 
every 6 months or after enrollment of every 30 subjects, whichever occurs earlier. The DSMB will be chaired by 
Dr. Julia Wattacheril , MD, MPH  Associate Professor of Medicine, Director, Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease 
Program , Columbia University – NY Presbyterian Hospital; an external member will be Dr. Christine Albert, MD, 
MPH, Professor of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Director of the Center for Arrhythmia Prevention, who has expertise in clinical trials of AF; and a biostatistical member, Gregory Dan Ayers, who has expertise in 
biostatistical review for DSMBs . The DSMB will review all serious adverse events (AEs). Any serious AE will be 
reported to the DSMB, IRB, and FDA as soon as possible, but not more than three days from the investigators’ 
awareness of the event. Any untoward medical event will be classified as an AE, regardless of its causal 
relationship with the study.  
 
Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants or Others :
  
 
Definitions of adverse events: an adverse event (AE) is "any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical 
investigation subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment".  
 Adverse events include:  
o Worsening (change in nature, severity or frequency) of conditions present at the onset of the trial  
o Patient / subject deterioration due to the primary illness  
o Intercurrent illnesses  
o Drug interactions  
o Events related or possibly related to concomitant medications  
o Abnormal laboratory values or changes of vital signs, as well as significant shifts from baseline within the range of normal, which the Investigator considers clinically significant.  
  11 
2/2/2021  
Unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction: an unexpected Adverse Drug Reaction is “an adverse reaction, the nature 
or severity of which is not consistent with the applicable product information (e.g. , Investigator’s Brochure for an 
unapproved investigational medicinal product)”. Definitions of serious adverse events or serious adverse drug reaction: during clinical investigations, adverse events may occur which, if suspected to be drug- related (adverse  
drug reactions), must be significant enough to lead to important changes in the way the medicinal product is 
developed (e.g. , change in dose, population, needed monitoring, consent forms). This is particularly true for 
reactions, which, in their most seve re forms, threaten life or function.  
 
A serious adverse event/experience (SAE) or reaction is any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose:  
 
1. results in death  
2. is life -threatening  
3. requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
4. results in persistent or significant disability/ incapacity (as per reporter’s opinion)  
5. is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
6. is another medically important condition  
7. The term "life- threatening" in the definition of "serious" refers to an event in which the patient is at risk of  
death at the time of the event; it does not refer to an event which hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe.  
 Important medical conditions that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require hospitalization may be 
considered as SAEs when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or may  
require intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the definition above. Examples of such events are  
intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home for allergic bronchospasm; blood dyscrasias or  
convulsions that do not result in hospitalization; or development of drug dependency or drug abuse.   
 
Definition of severity of adverse events : 
 
Mild:   Causing no limitation of usual activities;  the subject / patient may experience slight discomfort.  
 Moderate:  Causing some limitation of usual activities; the subject / patient may experience annoying 
discomfort.  
 Severe:  Causing inability to carry out usual activities;  the subject / patient may experience intolerable 
comfort or pain.  
 
Definition of adverse event causality : 
 
The Investigator will determine causality of each adverse event by using the classification criteria: unlikely,  
likely, or not assessable.  
 
Unlikely:  The AE is considered by the Investigator to be due to a pre- existing condition, a known 
manifestation of the target disease, a recurrent condition, or is likely explained by environmental 
or diagnostic therapeutic factors or  was pre-existing and did not deteriorate.  
 
Likely:  The AE occurred during or after administration of the study treatment or a pre- existing event 
worsened within an appropriate period of time, and at least one of the following criteria is 
applicable:   
o the event could not be explained by the clinical condition or history of the subject, 
environmental or  toxic factors, or other diagnostic or therapeutic measure; 
o was an expected ADR associated with study treatment or a class -labeled drug effect;  
o AE subsided or disappeared after withdrawal or dose reduction of study treatment; or  
o AE recurred after re- exposure to study treatment.  
  12 
2/2/2021  
Not assessable:  There is insufficient or conflicting evidence for classifying the causality of the AE as likely or 
unlikely. Lack of  information may apply for this situation.  
 Note: AEs with causality 'likely' or 'not assessable' are considered to be 'possibly drug- related.'  
 
 
Adverse event reporting  
 Any adverse events (AEs) will be reported  to the PI within 72 hours of notification of the event. The PI will notify 
the DSMB of any major adverse events. Any unanticipated problems involving risk to the participants or others 
will be discussed with the PI and DSMB.  Non-serious AEs and incidences of noncompliance with the protocol 
will be reported to the IRB at the time of annual review.  
 Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) will be reported according to the following procedure:  
 The occurrence of serious adverse events will be reported to the Investigator within 24 hours after notification  of 
their occurrence. The Investigator will report  SAEs to the DSMB and the Vanderbilt University Medical Center 
Institutional Review Board within 7 days of the Investigator’s notification  of the event.  
 
In an unanticipated event of prolonged side effect, requiring prolongation of hospital stay, patients will be  
retained in the hospital until side effects have resolved. For minor side effects, where inpatient care is deemed 
unnecessary, follow- up will be maintained via phone or as outpatient if necessary. Patient and their families  will 
be given the PI’s contact number for reporting any other effects of medication following discharge.  
 Any newly discovered  information which may affect the subject or their caregiver’s decision to continue to 
participate in the study will be passed on to them as soon as possible. This may also result in a change to the 
consent form and review by  the IRB.  
 
9.0 STUDY WITHDRAWAL/DISCONTINUATION 
 Participants may withdraw from the study at any time by informing the study staff verbally or in writing. If an 
individual withdraws their consent, we will withdraw the participant. Contact information for the PI and study staff 
will be made available to the participant upon enrollment in the consent document.  Any remaining biological samples and data will be destroyed. Any data or biological samples that have been used for research prior to 
their withdrawal request will not be withdrawn and destroyed.  
A participant may be withdrawn from the study by the PI if any of the following occurs: 
i. The participant, for any reason, does not undergo AF ablation.  
ii. The participant does not comply with the study protocol, such as failure to attend research encounters, or 
inability to wear the smartwatch .  
iii. The participant experienced an adverse event related to the study drug/protocol  necessitating withdrawal. 
  
10.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Dr. Fei Ye (Associat e Professor of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center) formulated the plan and 
will direct the statistical analysis for this trial.  
Analysis Sets: 1) Full analysis set (FAS) : A
 ll randomized participants . The FAS will be used in the analysis of all 
efficacy endpoints. Participants will be included in FAS according to the treatment to which they are randomized. 
2) Safety analysis set (SAS) : All randomized participants who have received 2- HOBA. The SAS will be used in 
the analyses of all safety endpoints. Participants will be included in the analyses according to the treatment they 
actually received.  
  13 
2/2/2021 General Statistical Strategies: Patient demographics/other baseline characteristics will be listed by patient and/or 
summarized descriptively by treatment group and by stratification factors. Categorical data will be presented as 
frequencies and percentages. Binary and categorical data  will be analyzed with Fisher’s exact test and chi -
squared test. For continuous data, summary statistics will be presented. For single time -point data, between -
group differences will be assessed with t- test (2 groups) or analysis of variance (3 or more groups) based on a 
continuous variable. Nonparametric counterparts, Wilcoxon rank sum test and Kruskal -Wallis test, will be used 
when assumptions for parametric methods are not met. For correlated data (e.g., repeated measurement s) will 
be analyzed with generalized estimating equation (GEE) or linear mixed models (LMM). Multiple comparison 
issues will be corrected using the Bonferroni’s approach. All statistical analysis will be performed using R 3.4.2 
or a newer version.  
 
10.
1. Aim 1 (Clinical Endpoint)  
The primary hypothesis will test whether 2 -HOBA reduces the rate of early recurrence of AF, atrial tachycardia, 
or atrial flutter following AF ablation within 28 days follow -up. For simplicity we will refer to this as “AF recurrence”.  
Measurement of Outcome (Aim 1): P articipants  enrolled in the study will wear a smartwatch  linked to an iPhone 
to continually record heart rate, variability and detection of arrhythmias. For detection of the primary endpoint,  
participants  will record a daily ECG  each morning upon waking via the watch.  In addition, participants  will be 
notified by the smartwatch  of 1) detection of atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter, 2) persistent high HR (> 110 bpm) 
outside of exercise.  Upon prompting or upon patient sel f-report of symptoms, participants  will utilize the ECG  
capture function of the watch and record the ECG  for study personnel .  A continuous tracing of 30 seconds (the 
full duration of a Watch EKG tracing) will be considered as having met the primary endpoint .   
 
Sample size and power (Aim 1): The sample size of this study is based on a logistic regression of the binary  
primary endpoint of early AF recurrence by the end of follow -up. A total sample size of 162 with 81 in each arm 
will provide 8 1% power to detect a reduction in the rate of early recurrence of AF if the event rate is 29 % in the 
treatment arm. This change corresponds to an odds ratio of 0. 4 (treatment vs control), which is nearly equivalent 
to the odds ratio observed in similar trials using colchicine (colchicine OR 0.38)26 at the significance level of 
0.046 using a 1 -sided Farrington and Manning likel ihood score test, and a 48% rate of early recurrence in the 
placebo (control) group.  The estimate 48% rate of early recurrence was extrapolated  from our pilot data, which 
found a 45% rate of recurrence, but did not utilize continuous monitoring as will be performed in our trial.   An 
interim analysis will be performed for superiority after half of the patients (n=40 per group) have completed their 
28-day assessment of the primary endpoint at the significance level of 0.006. The final analysis will be perfor med 
after all patients have completed their 28- day assessment of the primary point at two- sided significance level of 
0.041. Efficacy will be declared early at the interim analysis if the efficacy boundary is crossed (p<0.007). All on-study patients will b e followed for efficacy and safety until the planned end- of-follow- up. If the interim analysis 
indicates that the treatment is not better than the control by 13% (non- binding futility boundary p>0.4), we may 
close the recruitment into study with regard to any recommendations of DSMB.  The O’Brien- Fleming boundaries 
was used for the alpha- and beta -spending functions to preserve the overall Type I and Type II error.    
 
Primary Analysis (Aim 1) :
  All FAS will be included in the primary analysis of AF recurrence, the primary efficacy 
endpoint. Binary recurrence of AF will be compared between treatment and control using a chi-square test. The 
primary analysis will be performed using a multivariable logistic regression model, where the dependent/outcome 
variable is the early AF recurrence (yes/no) by the end of the 28- day follow -up and the primary 
independent/predictor variable is the treatment arm (2 -HOBA or placebo). Adjustment will be made for age, 
gender, AF type (paroxysmal versus persistent), method for pulmonary vein isolation (radiofrequency versus cryoablation), additional ablation lesions (yes/no), BMI (continuous), and hours  of monitoring (0 -672 hours ). To 
avoid over -fitting our multivariable logistic regression model, a 10:1 ratio for degrees of freedom per the less 
frequent outcome event will be used in our modeling. Nonlinear form of the continuous predictors (age, BMI, and 
hours  of monitoring) will be considered when building the model with restricted cubic splines. Models will be 
evaluated for goodness -of-fit, and internally validated for the calibration and discrimination performance using 
the bootstrap method.  
Secondary Analysis (Aim 1):  A
  secondary analysis will analyze a surrogate of AF burden as the endpoint and 
designed to account for the impact of cardioversion on AF burden assessment. AF burden is the percentage of time in AF, atrial tachycardia, or atrial flutter over total time monitored.  The secondary analysis will use the data 
  14 
2/2/2021 provided by the continuous HR monitor provided by the smart watch.   The analysis will be performed using a 
linear mixed models (LMM) in which the AF burden is assessed weekly during the 4 -week (28- day) follow -up 
period. Same covariates mentioned in the primary analysis will be considered. Additionally, AF burden will also 
be analyzed in ordinal scale using generalized estimating equation (GEE), ranked based on severity according 
to increasing AF burden and whether or not a cardioversion was performed. For any missing data in the 
covariates, we will use a multiple imputation method that incorporates predictive mean matching and flexible additive imputation models as implemented in the aregImpute function in the Hmisc R package. The impact of 
missing data on the validity of results will be examined with a pattern- mixture approach using the R package 
SensMice. This will be done for Aims 1 and 2. Additional secondary analyses will include: 1) multivariable 
modeling of participants  who were excluded from the primary analysis due to the use of colchicine or steroids 
during the follow- up period (will examine clinical and biochemical endpoints); 2) multivariable modeling with 
adjustment for 2- HOBA levels for the clinical and biochemical endpoints ; 3) multivariable modeling with 
adjustment for duration of smartwatch use .  
Interim Analyses  (A
 im 1) : An interim analysis will be performed by the study team  and reviewed by the DSMB. 
When 50% of the target enrollment is reached testing for an association between 2 -HOBA or placebo and 
significant adverse events (see Ethical Aspects of the Proposed Research for details) , superiority and futility will 
be performed (see above: Sample Size and Power Aim 1) . The interim analysis will include early stopping rules 
for superiority, futility, and harm .  
 
• I
nterim Analysis for Harm: although none of our Phase I pre -clinical or clinical data have raised safety 
concerns, and no adverse events have been observed, we planned the assessment of safety which will be based mainly on the frequency of adverse events and on the number of laboratory values that fall 
outside of pre -determined ranges. Other safety data such as vital signs will be considered as appropriate. 
All safety data will be listed. Patients will be summarized by treatment and other covariates. All ad verse 
events recorded during the study will be summarized. The incidence of treatment -emergent adverse 
events (new or worsening from baseline) will be summarized by body system, severity, type of adverse 
event, and relation to the investigational regimen. Severe adverse events and non- fatal serious adverse 
events are not expected.  
• Interim Analysis for Efficacy and Futility: early stopping rules for efficacy and futility will be based on the 
primary endpoint in Aim 1, which is arrhythmia recurrence during the 28 -day follow -up period. There will 
be no early stopping rules for the primary endpoints in Aim 2 (biochemical endpoint) or Aim 3 (pharmacogenomic analysis). Both of those aims will be considered exploratory.   
  
10.2. Aim 2 (Biochemical Endpoint)  
Primary hypothesis: The primary endpoint for Aim 2 will be the I
 soLG -adduct content of dendritic cells expressed 
as a percentage ( IsoLG -adducted dendritic cells/total dendritic cells x 100). We will test the hypothesis that 2 -
HOBA reduces the change in IsoLG -adduct levels that occurs with AF ablation (as measured on post -procedure 
day #1 minus pre- ablation blood samples).  
Sample size and power (Aim 2) : Our  pilot data shows that the change in dendritic cell IsoLG -adduct level is 23% 
following ablation in our placebo (control) group and we expect the range of possible observed reduction to be 20-40%. With n=81 participants in each arm, the study provides at least 80% power to detect a minimal 22% 
reduction in lsoLG -adduct level at two- sided significance level of 5%.  
Primary Analysis (Aim 2):  O
 ur primary analysis will use multivariable linear regression to test whether our primary 
determinant (2- HOBA versus placebo), significantly reduces the change in IsoLG -adduct levels (continuous), 
adjusted for baseline pre -ablation IsoLG -adduct level and other potential confounding factors: age, sex, method 
for pulmonary vein isolation (radiofrequency versus cryo), additional ablation lesions (yes/no), and BMI 
(continuous). The IsoLG  content of dendritic cells adjusted for baseline level will be presented for both treatment 
arms, together with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) and p -values will be graphically interpreted 
using boxplots, partial effect plots, residual plots, etc.  
Secondary Analysis (Aim 2):  A  secondary endpoint will be the IsoLG -adduct level in monocytes. Due to the 
prohibitively labor -intensive process required to measure IsoLG  content in dendritic cells and monocytes, only 
the pre -ablation and post -procedure day#1 samples will be analyzed for the analysis. However, blood samples 
from 2 additional time points (baseline and post -procedure day #28) will be available for pharmacoki netic 
  15 
2/2/2021 analysis and secondary analysis of other serological markers. These will include malondialdehyde and other 
biomarkers of oxidative stress.  
 10.3. Aim 3 (Exploratory Genomics): This aim will use the 162 subjects enrolled in Aims 1 and 2. DNA will be 
extracted and genotyping will be performed on a GWAS chip that includes the 3 SNPs located at chromosome 
4q25 that are independently associated with AF risk (rs2200733, rs17570669, and rs3853445).
34 The 4q25 GRS 
will be a weighted score calculated by using the OR for AF multiplied by the number of risk alleles present from 
each of the 3 independent 4q25 SNPs . We hypothesize that a statistically significant interaction will exist between 
the 4q25 GRS and the treatment group (2 -HOBA or placebo) for an association with our clinical and biochemical 
endpoints. In Aim 3 , we will test for an interaction between the 4q25 GRS and the treatment group for an 
association with the primary clinical endpoint (early recurrence of AF). Adjustment will be made for the covariates 
used in Aim 1. We will then  add the 4q25 GRS to the multivariable linear regression model used in Ai m 2 and 
test whether there is a  statistical interaction between the GRS and the treatment group for an association with 
the primary biochemical endpoint (change in dendritic cell IsoLG -adduct level with ablation) by comparing models 
with and without the interaction term using likelihood ratio test. The added predictive value of 4q25 GRS and the interaction of GRS and treatment will be evaluated by comparing nested models with and withou t the predictor 
with regard to c statistics and the integrated discrimination improvement. Models involving 4q25 GRS will be internally validated using the aforementioned bootstrap method for the evaluation and correction of potential optimism in the performance of the model by balancing the bias and variance in the prediction error. All statistical 
tests will be considered significant at two -sided 5% level.  
 
11.0 PRIVACY/CONFIDENTIALITY ISSUES 
 
The conduct of genetic studies raises specific issues with respect to protection of human subjects. We describe 
here mechanisms in place at Vanderbilt University Medical Center  through IRB policy to protect against such 
risks; these apply to all studies described below.  All records are retained on password- protected computers 
accessible only to members of the study team . Computers containing these records are only connected to 
networks if they include appropriate firewalls and security measures. Deidentified r ecords  and DNA samples 
may be shared with other investigators who have IRB -approved protocols and who agree to comply with the 
protections provided at this institution. These research materials are transferred only by secure methods. The identity of any individuals and their families are not to be revealed in any publication without their written informed  
consent.  
 12.0 FOLLOW -UP AND RECORD RETENTION  
 The expected duration of this study is estimated to be 4 years. The study results will be retained for at least six 
years after the study is completed. At that time, the research information, with the exception of genetic information, not already in the medical record will be destroyed. Genetic information will be kept for an 
undetermined period of time for future gene research.     
 
 
13.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management of patients 
with atrial fibrillation: executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on practice guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation  2014;130:2071- 104. 
2. Calkins H, Kuck KH, Cappato R, et al. 2012 HRS/EHRA/ECAS expert consensus statement on catheter 
and surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation: recommendations for patient selection, procedural techniques, patient management and follow- up, definitions, endpoints, and research trial design: a report of the Heart Rhythm 
Society (HRS) Task Force on Catheter and Surgical Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation. Developed in partnership with 
the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA), a registered branch of the European Society of Cardiology 
(ESC) and the European Cardiac Arrhythmia Society (ECAS); and in collaboration with the American College of 
Cardiology (ACC), American Heart Association (AHA), the Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS), and the Society of Thor acic Surgeons (STS). Endorsed by the governing bodies of the American College of Cardiology 
  16 
2/2/2021 Foundation, the American Heart Association, the European Cardiac Arrhythmia Society, the European Heart 
Rhythm Association, the Society of Thoracic Surgeons, the Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society, and the Heart 
Rhythm Society. Heart rhythm : the official journal of the Heart Rhythm Society 2012;9:632-96 e21.  
3. Wang TJ, Parise H, Levy D, et al. Obesity and the risk of new- onset atrial fibrillation. Jama 
2004;292:2471- 7. 
4. Benjamin EJ, Levy D, Vaziri SM, D'Agostino RB, Belanger AJ, Wolf PA. Independent risk factors for atrial 
fibrillation in a population -based cohort. The Framingham Heart Study. Jama 1994;271:840-4.  
5. Darbar D, Roden DM. Genetic mechanisms of atrial fibrillation: impact on response to treatment. Nat Rev 
Cardiol 2013;10:317- 29. 
6. Van Wagoner DR, Piccini JP, Albert CM, et al. Progress toward the prevention and treatment of atrial 
fibrillation: A summary of the Heart Rhythm Society Research Forum on the Treatment and Prevention of Atrial Fibrillation, Washington, DC, December 9- 10, 2013. Heart rhythm : the official journal of the Heart Rhythm 
Society 2015;12:e5 -e29. 
7. Sakabe M, Shiroshita- Takeshita A, Maguy A, et al. Omega -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids prevent atrial 
fibrillation associated with heart failure but not atrial tachycardia remodeling. Circulation 2007;116:2101- 9. 
8. Jahangiri A, Leifert WR, Patten GS, McMurchie EJ. Termination of asynchronous contractile activity in rat 
atrial myocytes by n -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. Mol Cell Biochem 2000;206:33- 41. 
9. Carnes CA, Chung MK, Nakayama T, et al. Ascorbate attenuates atrial pacing -induced peroxynitrite 
formation and electrical remodeling and decreases the incidence of postoperative atrial fibrillation. Circulation research 2001;89:E32- 8. 
10. Roberts LJ, 2nd, Oates JA, Linton MF, et al. The relationship between dose of vitamin E and suppression 
of oxidative stress in humans. Free Radic Biol Med 2007;43:1388 -93. 
11. Darghosian L, Free M, Li J, et al. Effect of omega- three polyunsaturated fatty acids on inflammation, 
oxidative stress, and recurrence of atrial fibrillation. The American journal of cardiology 2015;115:196- 201. 
12. Gutierrez A, Van Wagoner DR. Oxidant and Inflammatory Mechanisms and Targeted Therapy in Atrial 
Fibrillation: An Update. Journal of cardiovascular pharmacology 2015;66:523- 9. 
13. Lennerz C, Barman M, Tantawy M, Sopher M, Whittaker P. Colchicine for primary prevention of atrial 
fibrillation after open -heart surgery: Systematic review and meta- analysis. Int J Cardiol 2017;249:127- 37. 
14. Roberts LJ, 2nd, Salomon RG, Morrow JD, Brame CJ. New developments in the isoprostane pathway: 
identification of novel highly reactive gamma- ketoaldehydes (isolevuglandins) and characterization of their 
protein adducts. FASEB J 1999;13:1157 -68. 
15. Brame CJ, Salomon RG, Morrow JD, Roberts LJ, 2nd. Identification of extremely reactive gamma-
ketoaldehydes (isolevuglandins) as products of the isoprostane pathway and characterization of their lysyl protein adducts. J Biol Chem 1999;274:13139- 46. 
16. Zagol -Ikapitte IA, Matafonova E, Amarnath V, et al. Determination of the Pharmacokinetics and Oral 
Bioavailability of Salicylamine, a Potent gamma- Ketoaldehyde Scavenger, by LC/MS/MS. Pharmaceutics 
2010;2:18- 29. 
17. Marin F, Pascual DA, Roldan V, et al. Statins and postoperative risk of atrial fibrillation following coronary 
artery bypass grafting. The American journal of cardiology 2006;97:55- 60. 
18. Calo L, Bianconi L, Colivicchi F, et al. N -3 Fatty acids for the prevention of atrial fibrillation after coronary 
artery bypass surgery: a randomized, controlled trial. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 2005;45:1723 -8. 
19. Cheruku KK, Ghani A, Ahmad F, et al. Efficacy of nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory medications for 
prevention of atrial fibrillation following coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Prev Cardiol 2004;7:13- 8. 
20. Halonen J, Halonen P, Jarvinen O, et al. Corticosteroids for the prevention of atrial fibrillation after cardiac 
surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Jama 2007;297:1562- 7. 
21. Andrade JG, Khairy P, Macle L, et al. Incidence and significance of early recurrences of atrial fibrillation 
after cryoballoon ablation: insights from the multicenter Sustained Treatment of Paroxysmal Atrial Fibrillation (STOP AF) Trial. Circulation Arrhythmia and electrophysiology 2014;7:69- 75. 
22. Deftereos S, Giannopoulos G, Kossyvakis C, et al. Colchicine for prevention of early atrial fibrillation 
recurrence after pulmonary vein isolation: a randomized controlled study. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 2012;60:1790 -6. 
  17 
2/2/2021 23. Kim YR, Nam GB, Han S, et al. Effect of Short -Term Steroid Therapy on Early Recurrence During the 
Blanking Period After Catheter Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation. Circulation Arrhythmia and electrophysiology 
2015;8:1366- 72. 
24. Kim DR, Won H, Uhm JS, et al. Comparison of two different doses of single bolus steroid injection to 
prevent atrial fibrillation recurrence after radiofrequency catheter ablation. Yonsei Med J 2015;56:324- 31. 
25. Koyama T, Tada H, Sekiguchi Y, et al. Prevention of atrial fibrillation recurrence with corticosteroids after 
radiofrequency catheter ablation: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 
2010;56:1463 -72. 
26. Deftereos S, Giannopoulos G, Efremidis M, et al. Colchicine for prevention of atrial fibrillation recurrence 
after pulmonary vein isolation: mid -term efficacy and effect on quality of life. Heart rhythm : the official journal 
of the Heart Rhythm Societ y 2014;11:620 -8. 
27. Shoemaker MB, Bollmann A, Lubitz SA, et al. Common genetic variants and response to atrial fibrillation 
ablation. Circulation Arrhythmia and electrophysiology 2015;8:296- 302. 
28. Tao G, Kahr PC, Morikawa Y, et al. Pitx2 promotes heart repair by activating the antioxidant response 
after cardiac injury. Nature 2016;534:119 -23. 
29. Davies SS, Bodine C, Matafonova E, et al. Treatment with a gamma- ketoaldehyde scavenger prevents 
working memory deficits in hApoE4 mice. J Alzheimers Dis 2011;27:49 -59. 
30. Kirabo A, Fontana V, de Faria AP, et al. DC isoketal- modified proteins activate T cells and promote 
hypertension. J Clin Invest 2014;124:4642 -56. 
31. Prinsen JK ST, Yermaliskaya LV, Norlander AE, Kirabo, Madhur MS, Barnett JV, Boutaud O, Kannankeril 
PJ, Harrison DG, Murray KT. Reactive gamma- ketoaldehydes promote protein misfolding and atrial arrhythmia 
susceptibility in experimental hypertension. H eart rhythm : the official journal of the Heart Rhythm Society 
2016;13.  
32. Magnussen C, Niiranen TJ, Ojeda FM, et al. Sex Differences and Similarities in Atrial Fibrillation 
Epidemiology, Risk Factors, and Mortality in Community Cohorts: Results From the BiomarCaRE Consortium 
(Biomarker for Cardiovascular Risk Assessment in E urope). Circulation 2017;136:1588 -97. 
33. Fuller JC, Jr., Pitchford LM, Morrison RD, et al. In vitro safety pharmacology evaluation of 2-
hydroxybenzylamine acetate. Food Chem Toxicol 2018;121:541- 8. 
34. Lubitz SA, Sinner MF, Lunetta KL, et al. Independent susceptibility markers for atrial fibrillation on 
chromosome 4q25. Circulation 2010;122:976 -84. 
 