 
1 
 Adapting an Evidenced -based Weight Management Intervention and Testing Strategies to Increase 
Implementation in Community Mental Health Programs  
 
 
January 8, 2025  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
 
2 
  
 
 
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
STRATEGIES TO INCREASE IMPLEMENTATION OF AN ADAPTED, EVIDENCE -BASED WEIGHT 
MANAGEMENT INTERVENTION IN COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMS : THE ACHIEVE 
IMPLEMENTATION AND DISSEMINATION PILOT TRIAL  
 
IRB00247344  January 8, 2025  
 
Version 1. 0 – February 23, 2021  
 
Version 1.4 1.8.2025  
• Change in PI to Gail Daumit, MD, MHS due to original PI leaving JHSOM.  
 
Changes from version 1.3 -10.18.2022  
• Adding interviews six-month  post project completion for staff coaches and admin istration  
• Adding in $25 for both completion of focus group and for a six -month post project interview  for coaches 
and peer leaders  
• Adding in $25 for completion of focus group fo r other staff   
 
Changes from version 1.2 -March 8, 2022  
• Adding Perceived Usefulness (motivational interview ing avatar platform) survey to coach participant 
six-month follow -up data collection  
 
Changes from version 1.1 - December 13, 2021  
• Added Avatar Motivat ional Interviewing (MI) satisfaction survey  to the coach participant six month 
follow -up data collection  
 
Changes from version 1.0  
 
Version 1.1 - September 23, 2021  
 
• Modified consumer participants eligibility criteria for BMI from ≥30 kg/m2 to ≥25 kg/m2 
• Increased flexibility of program delivery by changing the number of groups offered each week from 3 
groups/week to a minimum of one group/week  
• Modified the curriculum to allow for the inclusion of group exercise during in -person groups , if permitted 
by the sites’ COVID -19 safety protocols  
• Modified the curriculum to allow for virtual exercise groups facilitated by a trained  peer leader and study 
team  
 
  
 
3 
                                                               Table of Contents  
 
1.   ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................   
 
2.   SPECIFIC AIMS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................   
 
3.   BACKGROUND  & SIGNIFICANCE  ................................ ................................ .......................    
 
4.   DESIGN SUMMARY…………………………………………………………………………………  
 
5.   S ITE ELIGIBILITY   ................................ ................................ ................................ .................   
 
6.  STUDY POPULATION: COACHES AND PEER LEADERS  ................................ ...................   
         6.1 Eligibility criteria..….…… …………………………………… …………...........................  
6.2 Data collection procedures…………………………………………………… …………..  
6.3 Measurements……………………………………………………………………………..  
 
7.  STUDY POPULATION: CONSUMER PARTICIPANTS  ................................ .........................   
         7.1 Eligibility criteria..….…… …………………………………… …………..........................  
7.2 Data collection procedures ……………………………………………………………….  
7.3 Measureme nts ……………………………………………………………………………..  
 
8.  STUDY POPULATION: OTHER STAFF  ................................ ................................ .................   
         8.1 Eligibility criteria..….…… …………………………………… …………...........................  
8.2 Data collection procedures ……………………………………………………………….  
8.3 Measurements ………………………………………………………………… …………..  
 
9.    QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL ………………………………………..  
    
10.  RANDOMIZATION AND BLINDING ................................ ................................ ......................   
 
11.  INTERVENTION  GROUPS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....  
 
12.  DATA MANAGEMENT  AND SECURITY   ................................ ................................ .............   
 
13.  DATA ANALYSIS ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................   
 
14.  HUMAN SUBJECTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............   
 
15.  POTENTIAL RISKS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............   
  
16.  ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS  ................................ ..............................   
 
17.  BENEFITS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................   
 
18. REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................   
 
  
 
4 
  
 
1. ABSTRACT  
Prevalence of obesity is significantly elevated in people with serious mental illness (SMI)1-3, and obesity is a 
leading cause of preventable death in this population direct ly through its effects on cardiovascular disease 
(CVD) and indirectly by contributing other CVD risk factors4-10. In general populations, behavioral w eight -loss 
interventions have been demonstrated to improve CVD risk by reducing blood pressure and glucose, as well 
as improving lipid  profiles11. However, behavioral interventions targeting changes in diet, exercise and weight 
loss need to be tailored to the particular needs of people with SMI, such as memory impairment and l imited 
executive function12,13.  
The NIMH -funded Achieving Healthy Lifestyles in Psychiatric Rehabilitation (ACHIEVE) trial tested a 
behavioral weight -loss intervention for consumers  with SMI who attended community -based psychiat ric 
rehabilitation programs14. This randomized controlled trial (RCT) demonstrated clinically significant weight los s 
(mean 7 lbs. at 18 months)15. ACHIEVE included group and individual weight -management an d group exercise 
sessions, which was led by trained study interventionists. Given the obesity epidemic in persons with SMI, 
there is an urgent need to “scale -up” or expand ACHIEVE to similar settings and populations as those included 
in the RCT, which we p osited could be accomplished by enabling the psychiatric rehabilitation program s taff to 
deliver the sessions16. Using t he Enhanced Rep licating Effective Programs Framework for translating 
evidence -based inte rventions into community settings17, our scale -up strategy  consider s this model’s three 
stages : pre-implementation, implementation, and dissemination.   
As part of the pre-implementation stage, we adapted the format of the original intervention to increase ease of 
adoption and sustained implementation of ACHIEVE  by program staff in these community -based programs . 
(IRB00194122 ). We retained the core components, but modified the curriculum  schedule (e.g., combined 
exercise and weight management group sessions) and enhanced the delivery format (e.g., video -assisted 
content) to support efficient, staff -led delivery. We pilot tested this adapted curriculum  (ACHIEVE -D) where a 
trained study interventionist implemented 2 months of programming at a community -based psychiatric 
rehabilitation program18, and we then further refined the adapted curriculum  based on feedback from program 
staff and participating individuals with SMI.  
 
In the implementation stage, the objective of this study is to develop and  test innovative  intervention s to give  
community -based psychiatric rehabilitation program  staff the knowledge, self -efficacy, and skills to deliver the 
adapted ACHIEVE curriculum  (ACHI EVE-D) with high fidelity . Training of the ACHIEVE study  interventionists 
required significant in-person initial and ongoing training , as well as performance feedback with particular 
emphasis on motivational interviewing  skills14,15. Time and other logistical constraints prevent  commun ity-
based psychiatric rehabilitation program staff from participating in such intensive training.  By leveraging n ovel 
strategies that incorporate  advances in training and feedback modalities (e.g. , online training, virtual training 
environments) , staff tra ining could  facilitate  adoption and sustained implementation  of the ACHIEVE 
curriculum . To prepare for dissemination, we will also determine the acceptability, appropriateness, and 
feasibility of both the ACHIEVE -D curriculum and the standard and enhanced  strategies among coaches and 
program directors to direct further refinements of these products.  
Strategies to increase implementation of an adapted, evidence -based weight management intervention in 
community mental health programs: The ACHIEVE Imp lementation and Dissemination Pilot Trial is an RCT 
testing the hypothesis that an enhanced intervention will be superior to a standard intervention in increasing 
program staff knowledge, self -efficacy, and skill to deliver the adapted ACHIEVE curriculum w ith high fidelity. 
We will randomly assign  10 community -based psychiatric rehabilitation program s in Maryland to the standard 
or enhanced intervention for ACHIEVE, and we will enroll 2 staff members per program to participate as 
coaches . A peer leader will assist them. The standard intervention will combine  real-time onboarding training  
via Zoom , ongoing online training, and  online avatar -assisted motivational interviewing practice19,20 for 
coaches , as well as organizational strategy meetin gs to garner the leadership support for  ACHIEVE  
implementation21. The enhanced intervention will i nclude all standard strategies and will add performance 
 
5 
 coaching for ACHIEVE  staff coaches.  All enrolled coaches will deliver the adapted ACHIEVE curriculum to 
consumers with SMI at each study site . We propose the following Aims:  
2. SPECIFIC AIMS  
Primary Aim : Conduct a  pilot  randomized clinical trial  testing two  implementation intervention s 
designed to support delivery of ACHIEVE -D at community -based psychiatric rehabilitation program s.  
H1.1. Both the standard and enhanced interventions will i ncrease  knowledge of and self -efficacy to deliver  
ACHIEVE -D, and r esult in high -fidelity delivery of ACHIEVE -D.   
H1.2  Compared to the standard intervention, the en hanced version will l ead to greater knowled ge, self -
efficacy, and ACHIEVE -D fidelity.  
 
Secondary Aims:  
1. Assess the acceptability, appropri ateness, and feasibility of the adapted ACHIEVE curriculum to coaches , 
peer leaders, program directors  and other staff.  
2. Assess  consumer outcomes  of self-reported diet  and physical activity , weight , attendance  and satisfaction .  
This study will lead to a  refined intervention that will contribute to the future development of a certified 
ACHIEVE -D training program for mental health staff  and peers , and thus facilitate  future widespread 
dissemination  of an evidence -base d behavioral weight -loss program for individuals with  SMI.  
 
3. BACKGROUND & SIGNIFICANCE  
Public health burden of CVD, obesity, and other CVD risk factors  in persons with SMI  
CVD  is the leading cause of preventable death among persons with SMI4-10, and this population has high 
prevalence of CVD and CVD risk factors22-26. Notably , obesity is extremely common1-3. For e xample, 60% of 
women with SMI have obesi ty2,27,28 as compared to 41% of women in the general population29.  
 
Factors that  contribute to obesity in individuals with SMI  
Several factors contribute to the high obesity prevalence. First, t he vast majority of individuals with SMI take at 
least one  long-term psychotropic  medication, and these drugs  promote  weight gain  due to increased appetite 
along with  metabolic abnormalities such as elevated glucose and lipids30-36. A shared decision -making process 
that prov ides patients with the expected weight and metabolic effect s of these medications has been the 
recommended strategy to clinicians to make an informed decision about choice37. Unfortunately, initial 
selection of or changes to a weight -neutral alternative medication may not be an option for many indivi duals 
with SMI; therefore, medications are unlikely to be a modifiable risk factor.  
Second, diet and physical activity  are typica lly poor in this population. Studies of individuals with  SMI 
demonstrate high calorie and fat intake, as well as  low intake of  fruit and vegetables38-43. Physical activity 
levels are low in this population44-48. For example, p ersons with SMI report 50% higher leisure time inactivity 
than the general population45, and an accelerometry  study showed only 4% of individuals with SMI met 
recommended moderate to vigorous physical activity in bouts of ≥10 minutes48. These lifestyle habits also 
contribute to obesity and CVD risk among individuals with SMI , and unlike psychotropic medications, re present 
a modifiable CVD risk factor . 
 
Challenge of behavioral weight -loss interventions among persons with SMI  
In general populations, behavioral w eight -loss interventions have been demonstrated to improve CVD risk by 
reducing blood pressure and glucose, as well as improving lipid profiles11. Behavioral interventions p romoting 
healthy diet, exercise, and weight loss are critically needed, but must be adapted to challenges particularly to 
the SMI population . In particular, memory impairment, limited executive function, and residual psychiatric 
symptoms12,13. 
 
A successful  behavioral weight -loss intervention tested in an RCT within the SMI population  
The NIMH -funded ACHIEVE trial was the first to demonstrate that an adapted behavioral intervention leads to 
clinically significant weight loss at 18 months among persons with SMI (mean 7 lbs. weight loss, net 3% loss)15. 
The magnitude of weight loss among individuals with SMI participating in ACHIEVE was similar to the 
 
6 
 magnitude  observed in efficacious weight -loss trials in general populations11. The ACHIEVE intervention 
combined group an d individual weight -management sessions with group exercise sessions delivered in 
community mental health programs14,15. To address some of the noted challenges in this popu lation12,13, the 
intervention  focused on repeated delivery of six key messages: avoid sugary drinks, avoid junk  food, eat 5 
servings of fruits/vegetables per day, portion control, smart snack habits, and  regular physical activity.  The 
ACHIEVE intervention  was predominantly delivered by trained study interventionists, though mental health 
program staff delivered som e video -assisted group exercise sessions14,15. Given the obesity epidemic in 
persons with SMI, there is an urgent need to “scale -up” or expand ACHIEVE to similar settings and populations 
as those included in the RCT, which we posited could be accomplished by enabling the psychiatric 
rehabilitation program staff to deliver the sessions16. Using t he Enhanced Rep licating Effective Programs 
Framework for translating evidence -based interventions into community settings17, our scale -up strategy  
considers this model’s three stages : pre-implementation, implementation, and dissemination.   
 
Scaling up ACHIEVE – pre-implementation stage   
We have already completed the pre -implementation stage, during which we adapted the format of the original 
intervention to increase ease of adoption and sustained implementation of ACHIEVE  by program staff in these 
community -based progra ms. (IRB00194122 ). To realize the full public health potential of ACHIEVE, the 
curriculum needed  to be modified for delivery by community mental health staff16. We retained the core 
components, but modified the curriculum  schedule (e.g., combined exercise and weight management group 
sessions) and enhanced the delivery format (e.g., video -assisted content) to supp ort efficient, staff -led delivery. 
We pilot tested this adapted curriculum  where a trained study interventionist implemented 2 months of 
programming at a community -based psychiatric rehabilitation program18, and we then further refined  the 
adapted curriculum  based on feedback from program staff and participating individuals with SMI. First, we 
defined the role for a peer leader within ACHIEVE, where a consumer would be recruited to serve as the peer 
leader from the group of participating consumers and the duties would include encouraging other enrolled 
consumers to attend ACHIEVE groups, actively participate in the group exercise sessions to act as a role 
model, as well as assist the ACHIEVE coach with set up and management o f curriculum materials.  Second, we 
identified the need for an assessment of readiness to make the necessary lifestyle behavior changes among 
consumers to ensure that we enroll individuals who are at an appropriate stage of change to engage in the 
intensive  ACHIEVE curriculum.  
In addition, we develop ed implementation strategies such as organizational strategy meetings with program 
directors and coaches to support the adoption of ACHIEVE in community -based psychiatric rehabilitation 
program s. We also refined procedures and assessment measures for grading coach fidelity to ACHIEVE, as 
well as adapted measures to assess acceptability, appropri ateness, and feasibility.  
 
Scaling up ACHIEVE – implementation and dissemination stage s 
The ACHIEVE Implementation and Di ssemination Pilot Trial represents the next stage s of the Enhanced 
Replicating Effective Programs Framework  – implementation and dissemination17, which has a particular focus 
on testing innovative interventions to enable psychiatric rehab ilitation program staff to deliver ACHIEVE -D. 
The ACHIEVE trial interventionists , who all had  bachelor’s or master’s degrees in health -related fields , required 
significant in -person initial and ongoing training on intervention content and motivational inte rviewing (MI)  14,15. 
MI is an evidence -based patient -centered communicati on method shown to help people make positive diet  and 
exercise  changes49-51, and considered a key aspect of ACHIEVE. Traditional MI training includes two days of 
in-person training, followed by repeated post -training feedback and  coaching by a master trainer. While the 
community -based psychiatric rehabilitation program staff have valuable experience working with people with 
SMI, they typically  have different education al backgrounds  and less experience with lifesty le content as well as 
MI communication skills. In real -world community mental health settings, time constraints prevent most 
program s taff from participating in the intensive training  used among ACHIEVE trial interventionists. Therefore, 
new strategies nee d to be developed that incorporate advances in training modalities (e.g. online training, 
virtual training environments)  to enable psychiatric rehabilitation program staff to deliver ACHIEVE -D. Given 
that training alone is often insufficient to incre ase wide-spread adoption of new evidence -based interventions52-
55, the ACHIEVE -D curriculum will be supplemented with additional implementation strategies (e.g., 
 
7 
 organizational strategy meetings with program directors an d coaches , peer leader identification and training to 
aid coach ) to support future implementation and dissemination of ACHIEVE -D in comm unity mental health 
settings. Unless effect ive interventions like ACHIEVE are translated into real -world setting s, obesity and CVD 
disparities among the population  with SMI  will likely persist or even worsen.  
 
4. DESIGN SUMMARY  
The core design is a randomized, two -arm, paral lel, pilot clinical trial where 10 psychiatric rehabilitation 
program  sites will be randomized to  a 6-month standard or en hanced intervention.  This trial will recruit and 
enroll participants at each site  – staff, peer leaders , and mental health consumer s, (Figure 1).  The primary 
outcome variables will be coaches’ knowledge, self-efficacy, and fidelity to the ACHIEVE curriculu m. 
 
 
We estimate up to 280 mental health organization staff and peer leaders will participate in data collection 
including program directors, coaches, and other psychiatric rehabilitation program staff. Two coaches and one 
peer leader per study site will be randomized to the standard or enhanced intervention. Up to 120  mental 
health consumers  across all sites will be enrolled , and all will receive group weight -management sessions 
delivered by the trained coaches at their site.   
 
The ACHIEVE -D curriculum is designed to fit into  and will be part of  the regular psychiatric rehabilitation 
programming that is already being conducted.  
 
 
Randomized groups:  
Standard intervention : At those sites assigned to the standard group, two staff and one peer will receive 
training and approximately 8-12 consumers with SMI will participate in the ACHIEVE weight loss program . The 
standard intervention will combine  onboarding training , ongoing o nline training, and  online avatar -assisted 
motivational interviewing practice19,20 for all coaches , as well as organizational strategy meetings  to garner the 
leadership support for  ACHIEVE  implementation21.   
Enhanced intervention : At those sites assigned to the enhanced group, the implementation intervention will 
include all standard strategies and will add performance coaching for the coaches.  
 
Trainings and meetings will be remote during the COVID -19 pandemic.  
 
We outline the eligibility criteria site s in Section 5. Then, w e describe the eligibility criteria  as well as data 
collection and  measurements for each study populati on separately in Sections 6 -8. 

 
8 
  
5. SITE ELIGIBILITY  
We will recruit approximately 10 
community psychiatric rehabili tation 
programs across  Maryland  as study 
sites.  (Table 1 ).  
In general, sites will need 1) to be 
an adult psychiatric rehabilitation 
program . 2) Willing to implement the 
ACHIEVE curriculum;  3) Willing to 
support 2 staff members being 
trained as coaches and 
implementing the curriculum; 4) 
Willing to have a peer leader assist.  
 
 
6. STUDY POPULATION: COACHES  AND PEER LEADERS  
6.1 Eligibility criteria  
To be eligible  to be a coach , the person must be age 18 or older and a staff member  at a psychiatric 
rehabilitation program , as well as be willing to do the following: complete all training activities as part of the 
ACHIEVE intervention, deliver all components of the  ACHIEVE curriculum to consumers at the program, work 
with a peer leader  as part of the ACHIEVE curriculum, and complete data collection procedures  as a study 
participant . We will exclude staff who plan on leaving their position or taking a leave of absence from the 
psychiatr ic rehabilitation program within the next 12 months.  
 
For peer leaders, w e will seek individuals 18 years and older who are or  are in training to become  a Maryland 
Certified Peer Recovery Specialist , or who are mental health consumer s with interest who the psychiatric 
rehabilitation program staff and study team believe would be a good fit  (e.g., in a vocational program) . The 
peer leader  must be willing to do the following: complete training activities as part of the AC HIEVE intervention, 
deliver components of the  ACHIEVE curriculum to consumers at the program, work with the staff coach es as 
part of the ACHIEVE curriculum, and complete data collection procedures . We will exclude peers who plan on 
leaving their position or taki ng a leave of absence within the next 12 months.  
 
6.2 Data collection procedures  
Data collection is outlined in Table 2. Data collection for coaches and peer leaders will occur remotely via 
telephone  or Zoom  and/or online RedCap survey or delivered paper  quest ionnaires . We will col lect follow -up 
measures at 3 months and 6 months at completion of ACHIEVE curriculum .  
 
Participant reimbursement for data collection for staff coach participants is estimated at $16 0 total for 
completing all data collection. Participant reimbursement for data collection for peer leader participants 
includes $75 for completing data collection, up to $320 ($20/hour) for participating in trainings and up to $1500 
($20/hour) per site for  participating in delivery of the curriculum.  
 
  Table 1 . Criteria for study sites  
• Adult psychiatric rehabilitation program with willingness to implement the ACHIEVE 
curriculum at least one time per week for 6 months.  
• Willingness to support 2 staff members  to be trained and serve as ACHIEVE coaches  
o Training: ~16 hours of onboard training ; ~2-4 hours per month of additional 
online training ; ~1.5 hours per month for performance coaching if site is 
randomized to the enhanced training intervention arm  
o Coach duties: Lead at least one (and up to three) 1-hour sessions per week 
of the AC HIEVE curriculum to enrolled consumers  
• Willingness to support  a peer leader to assist with the curriculum.   
o Training: ~16 hours of onboard training; ~2-4 hours per month of additional 
online training  
o Peer leader  duties: Assist staff coaches  
• Organizational leaders and staff to participate in organizational st rategy meetings 
with the study team . ~1 meeting every month   
• Anticipated a bility for study team to recruit consumers to participate in the ACHIEVE 
curriculum  
• Ability for study staff to collect  data from coaches, consumer participants, and other 
staff members   
 
9 
  
Table 2. Data Collection Schedule For Coaches  and Peer Leaders   
 
Baseline  Follow -up  
During  6M 
Post   
6M Post 
project 
completion  
Primary Outcomes      
ACHIEVE curriculum weight management knowledge  x  x  
ACHIEVE curriculum exercise knowledge  x  x  
Self-efficacy to deliver ACHIEVE curriculum  x  x  
ACHIEVE Fidelity Document Assessment Form   x   
ACHIEVE Fidelity Video Assessment Form  
  x   
Other Measures      
Demographics  & prior training  x    
Attitudes towards individuals with obesity  x    
Calculated BMI  x  x  
CARDIA/EARLY Q – sedentary behavior  x  x  
Block Dietary Fat Q  x  x  
Block Dietary Fruit/Vegetable Q  x  x  
EARLY Eating Away from Home Q  x  x  
EARLY SSB Consumption Q  x  x  
Perceived Stress Scale  x  x  
Self-Efficacy recall    x  
Beliefs about Motivational Interviewing  x x x  
Importance and Confidence of Using MI  x x x  
Avatar MI Performance Measurements  
Avatar Motivational Interviewing (MI)  satisfaction survey  
Perceived Usefulness (motivational interviewing avatar platform)  x x x 
x 
x  
Fidelity to Motivational Interviewing  x x x  
Implementation Measures      
Acceptability of training  x  x  
Feasibility of training  x  x  
Appropriateness of training  x  x  
Motivation for implementation  x  x  
Implementation Climate  x    
Qualitative Assessment      
Focus Group  
Interviews    x  
x 
Abbreviations: BMI – body mass index; Q – questionnaire; SSB – sugar -sweetened beverage.     
 
6.3 Measurements  
Measurements for coaches and peer leaders will be conducted using standardized  operating procedures and 
quality control methods.  Specific study forms (RedCap or paper) will be used to collect data.   
 
Primary Outcomes  
Knowledge of the ACHIEVE curriculum . We will assess knowledge about key elements of the ACHIEVE 
curriculum using  two measures : A 22 -item ACHIEVE Curriculum Weight Management Knowledge  measure  
and a 16 -item ACHIEVE Curriculum Exercise Knowledge  measure  The study team created these questions 
 
10 
 using best practices recommended by the National Board of Medical Examiners for item writing56. These  
measure s will be assessed at baseline and 6 months.  
 
Self-efficacy to deliver the ACHIEVE curriculum. We will  assess self -efficacy to deliver key elements of the 
ACHIEVE curriculum, where participants rate their confidence to deliver each element on a 10-point scale. The 
study team used principles from other related self -efficacy measures in creating our measure57,58. This 
measure will be assessed at baseline and 6 months.  Given that this type of self -report measure may be subject 
to response shift bias59,60, we will also have coaches reflect upon their baseline ability to carry out these 
elements at the 6 -month point, which will enable us to determine whether response shift bias may be present.  
 
Fidelity to the ACHIEVE curriculum  (ACHIEVE fidelity video assessment form and ACHIEVE fidelity 
documentation assessment form) . To determine fidelity to the curriculum, we will use two data so urces. First, 
coaches will video -record two AC HIEVE group sessions each month at each site , one per coach.  Two study 
team members will view  each recording  and use a rating tool to assess fidelity to key elements of the 
ACHIEVE curriculum. We will calculate inter -rater reliability between coders.  Second, a study team member 
will examine documentation practices of the coaches on the same day that video tapes are obtained. The 
study team has identified elements from both data sources that will be summed to create a composite score. 
Numerical values from all items will be used. For Y/N items, ‘Yes’ w ill equal a numerical score of 2  and ‘No’ a 
numerical score of 1.  
 
Other Measures  
Demographics and p rior training.  We will collect demographic information such as age, sex, race  and ethnicity. 
We will assess educational level and employment status. We will determine prior training in nutrition, exercise 
and weight loss at baseline, as well as their proficiency in using computers and online education. We will 
assess this at baseline, as prior t raining  in these areas may influence our primary outcomes.  
 
Attitudes towards individuals with obesity . We will determine attitudes towards individuals with obesity using 
elements from a previously validated measu re61.  We will assess this at baseline, as attitudes towards 
individuals with obesity may in fluence our primary outcomes.  
 
 
Physical activity.  We will administer the CARDIA -EARLY Sedentary Behavior questionnaire, which is the 
measure recommended by the NIH for this outcome within weight loss trials62,63. 
 
Dietary change.  We will administer Block Fat, Fruit, Vegetable and Fiber Screener Questionnaires  as the food 
frequency measures64,65.  These screeners provide a reasonably valid assessmen t of intake of these foods and 
have the advantage of being very brief.  We will also administer the EARLY Eating Away from Home and 
Sugar -Sweetened Beverage questionnaires, which are the measures recommended by the NIH for these 
outcomes within weight loss trials62,63.  
 
Stress . We will administer the perceived stress scale66 , which is the measure recommended by the NIH for 
this outcome within weight loss trials62,63. 
 
Self-efficacy recall .  This instrument asks participants to recall their self -efficacy before training.  
 
Beliefs about Motivational Interviewing.  We will administer a 7 -question survey assessing the extent to which 
each person agrees with statements about mot ivational interviewing.  
 
Importance and Confidence of Using Motivational Interviewing.  We will administer a 6 -question survey 
assessing the importance and confidence each person has with motivational interviewing.  
 
Avatar Motivational Interviewing Performance Measurements : Participants  will use the avatar platform and 
conduct 15 -minute practice conversations where they practice use of motivational interviewing  techniques in 
 
11 
 simulated conversations about weight loss with consumer avatars  on the Kognito platform.  An online 
dashboard will give them an individualized report on their performance each time they practice.  
 
Avatar Motivational Interviewing (MI)  satisfaction : Participants will respond to their use and satisfaction of the 
Motivational Interviewing (MI) training and practice simulations  provided during the course of the six month 
project.  
 
Perceived Usefulness (motivational interviewing avatar platform): Participants will respond to their perceived 
usefulness of the motivatio nal interview avatar platform during the course of the six -month project.  
 
Fidelity to Motivation al Interviewing : Standardized Actor Interviews will be conducted to assess fidelity to 
motivational interviewing  for coaches . Coaches will conduct 30 -minute au dio-recorded phone interviews with 
standardized patient actors. These standardized patient actors are trained actors playing consumers with SMI 
who are overweight or obese.  
 
Implementation Measures  
Acceptability, Feasibility and Appropriateness.  We will d etermine perceptions of acceptability, feasibility and 
appropriateness of the ACHIEVE curriculum and the training that they received to deliver this curriculum. 
These measures were adapted from previously validated measures67. 
 
Motivation and Implementation Climate . We will assess these construct s by adapting previously validated 
instrument s68,69 . 
 
Qualitative Assessment  
Focus Groups . Focus groups will be conducted with select staff, staff coaches, and peer leaders at the end of 
the study. The focus group is designed to elicit measures in the following domains: perceptions of the 
acceptability, appropriatene ss, and feasibility of the A CHIEVE  curriculum and the implementation  of the 
intervention; barriers to ACHIEVE  implementation; strategies to overcome barriers; and suggestions for further 
refinement . The focus groups will inquire about perceptions of the acceptability, appropriatene ss, and feasibility 
of the ACHIEVE  curriculum and the implementation  of the intervention; barriers to ACHIEVE  implementation; 
strategies to overcome barriers; and suggestions for further refinement . They will be conducted by Zoom 
video -conference and will be  approximately 90 minutes in length. Participants will receive $25 for participation.  
 
Interviews.  Interviews will be conducted at least six months post project completion with staff coaches and /or 
administration. The interviews are designed to understand if/how the organization has continued implementing 
the ACHIEVE curriculum . We will  assess  which as pects of the curriculum were liked and helpful, which aspects 
were changed and why those changes were made, and what, if any, training was provided to staff to continue 
delivery of the ACHIEVE program. We also aim to understand if changes were made at the organizational level 
to support continued delivery of the ACHIEVE program.  Interviews  will be conducted by Zoom video -
conference and will be approximately 30 minutes in length.  With permission, they will be recorded and 
transcribed.  Participants will recei ve $25 for completing the interview.  
 
7. STUDY PO PULATION: CONSUMER PARTICIPANTS  
7.1 Eligibility criteria  
To be eligible  to be an ACHIEVE participant , the person must be a consumer with SMI enrolled in a psychiatric 
rehabilitation program , age 18 or older, have a body mass index (BMI) ≥  25 kg/m2, and willing  to make 
changes in diet and exercise to lose weight , as well as: willing to participate in all activi ties in the ACHIEVE 
curriculum at least 1 day per week, competent to give informed consent, and complete all data collection 
procedures.  We aim to be generalizable while including individuals  safe to participate in a weight loss program 
that includes moderate intensity exercise. Table 3  provides eligibility criteria for consumer s. 
Table 3 . Eligibility Criteria for Consumers as ACHIEVE Participants  
Inclusion criteria  
 
12 
 • Age 18 and older  
• Enrolled in a psychiatric  rehabilitation program  
• BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2 
• Willing  to make changes in diet and exercise to lose weight  
• Willing to attend the ACHIEVE group sessions  virtually or in -person at least once per week  
• Ability to use a computer or tablet  
• Competent and willing to give informed oral consent  
• Complet ion of baseline data collection  
Exclusion criteria  
• Any underlying medical conditions that could seriously redu ce life expectancy, ability to participate in the study,  or for which 
dietary change/ physical activity /weight loss  may be contraindicated  e.g., 
o Lung disease requiring supplemental oxygen  
o Liver failure  
o History of anorexia nervosa or bulimia  
o Stage V kidney disease on dialysis  
o Cardiovascular event in the last 6 months including unstable angina, myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, 
trans ient ischemic attack, or stroke  
• Insulin dependent diabetes  
• Inability to walk unassisted (e.g., uses a cane, walker, etc)  
• Pregnant, breastfeeding, or planning a pregnancy during study period  
• Prior or planned bariatric surgery  
• Use of a prescription anti -obesity medication or over -the-counter o rlistat within the past 3 months  
• Self-reported weight loss of >20 lbs in the last 3 months  
• Active substance use disorder, alcohol use disorder, or problem drinking (more than 14 drinks per week for women, more than 
21 drinks per week for men)  
• Planning to leave mental health program or move out of geographic area within 12  months  
• Weight greater than 44 0 pounds (so as not to exceed capacity of study scale)  
• Investigator judgment (e.g., for concerns over safety, adherence or follow -up) 
 
7.2 Data collection procedures  
Our study team has worked with several hundred persons with serious mental illness as study participants in 
intervention trials for more than 15 years.  
 
For this study, w hen possible, data collection will occur at psychiatric reh abilitation centers, with all appropriate 
precautions in place to remain safe during the pandemic.  If the participant cannot come to the center  (e.g., kf 
the center is not open) measures will be collect ed over the phone/zoom and with participants self -measuring 
weight on a scale the team provides for them.  
 
Participant reimbursement for data collection for all participants is estimated at $ 60 total for completing all data 
collection  points . 
 
Participant  eligibility is determined by a combination of information provided by psychiatric rehabilitation 
program staff prior to consumer consent (with HIPAA waiver) and from several baseline measures after 
consent.  
 
In response to the pandemic, several safety measures will be in place when meeting  in person:  
• Community mental health programs are regulated by the state of Maryland and currently have 
COVID safety protocols in place.  
• Participants will be required to wea r a mask  at all times . One will be provided  by the study team if 
needed.  
• Research staff will wear PPE during in -person data collection . 
• All equipment will be cleaned and disinfected before and after data collection using appropriate 
cleaning methods . 
• Prior to an in -person visit , we will screen consumers by phone for virus/disease symptoms and 
exposure  with the Ambulatory Screening Algorithm for COVID -19. Screening will occur the day prior 
to the visit. If symptoms or exposure  are reported , we will not conduct the visit, we will alert mental 
 
13 
 health program staff and also advise consumer to contact their primary care provider. In addition, 
mental health programs conduct their own screening prior to in -person attendance.  
• During the in -person v isit, study staff will ins truct the consumer  how to use a t ablet to complete data 
collection and how to use Zoom.  The study tablet will already be set up for the consumer.   
• We plan to then discuss and obtain consent and survey data via videochat /Zoom with the 
participant in the next room . Study staff will  review surveys with the consumer via Zoom . If the 
consumer is not able to follow along, study staff may sit in the same room, more than  6 feet apart, 
and read questions to the participant . 
• We plan to collect  weight, height, and blood pressur e in-person . Research staff will take appropriate 
precautions when coming within 6 feet of participants and will minimize in -person time.  We estimate 
that research staff will need to come within 6 feet of participants for a total of 13 minutes : Taking 
weight and documenting: 3 minutes ; Taking height and documenting: 3 minutes ; Taking 
measurements of the arm and wrapping of blood pressure cuff: 4 minutes ; Documenting blood 
pressure and unwrapping cuff: 3 minutes . 
 
 
We will  assess  eligibility in the following ways.  
1. We will m easure weigh t and height.   
2. We will assess pre-participation health screening in preparation for a moderate intensity exercise program  
that includes  the modified 2018 Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire (2018 PAR -Q), a checklist of 
medical conditions for health screening , and blood pressure measurement .  
• The ACHIEVE curriculum emphasizes the achievement of moderate, not vigorous, intensity 
physical activity. The safety of moderate intensity physical activity in properly screened subjects is 
well established. We will follow the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) recommendations 
for health screening and risk stratif ication in preparation for starting a moderate intensity exercise 
program70. The ACSM exercise pre -participation health screening process focuses on 1) the 
individual’s current level of physical activity, 2) presence of signs or symptoms of known 
cardiovascular, metabolic, or renal disease, and 3) the des ired exercise intensity, as these variables 
have been identified as risk modulators of exercise -related cardiovascular events.  
• If potent ial participants endorse high risk  symptoms on 2018 PAR -Q (e.g., chest pain or dizziness) 
or have a medical condition w here physical activity and/or weight loss m ay be contraindication , we 
will communicate with their primary care provider  to assess appropriateness for the program .  
• For patients with hypertension and non -insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus, w e will send a letter to 
their primary care physician alerting these  physicians to their patients’ interest in participating  in a 
weight loss program  and their need for medical supervision. This letter will request that the 
physician agree to monitor and manage the patie nt’s hypertension and/or diabetes mellitus during 
participation in the program .  
• For other participants, w e will send a letter to primary care physicians alerting these physicians to 
their patients’ participation in a weight loss program .  Due to state reg ulations, almost all consumers 
will have primary care physicians; we will work with rehabilitation program staff to facilitate referral 
to primary care for those who do not.  
3. We will review consumer medical records  and medications  for any exclusion criteri a.   
4. We will a ssess readiness to make changes needed to lose weight.  
5. We will discuss with consumers and staff plans to remain at the rehabilitation center and be available to 
participate  either in -person or remotely . 
 
7.3 Measurements  
Measurements will be conducted using standardized  operating procedures and quality control methods.  
Specific study forms either in RedCap or paper will be used to collect data.   
  
Table 5. Data Collection Schedule  for Consumers    
 Follow -up 
 
14 
 Screening /
Baseline  During  6M 
Post  
General  Assessments     
Evaluation to Give Consent  x   
Demographics   x   
Exercise pre -participation screening ( modified 2018 PAR -Q) x   
Medical history  x   
Medications  x  x 
Readiness rulers  x   
Physical Measurements     
BMI 
Blood pressure  X 
x  x 
Physical Activity     
CARDIA/EARLY Q – sedentary behavior  x  x 
Diet    
Block Dietary Fat Q  x  x 
Block Dietary Fruit/Vegetable Q  x  x 
EARLY Eating Away from Home Q  x  x 
EARLY SSB Consumption Q  x  x 
NHIS Screener  x  x 
Satisfaction     
Consumer Satisfaction & Helpfulness Q    x 
Other Measures     
Palatable Eating Motives Scale (PEMS) – Coping Subscale  x  x 
Reward -based Eating Drive (RED) Scale  x  x 
Important Others  Q x  x 
Medical Events    x 
Perceived Stress Scale (PSS)  x  x 
Ambulatory Screening for COVID -19 x  x 
 
 
General Assessments  
Demographics. We wi ll collect demographic information such as age, sex, race , and  ethnicity. We will also 
assess how often they attend the program.  
 
We will use several measures and data sources to assist in determining eligibility for the study. Exercise pre -
participation screening (modified 2018 PAR -Q): This modified physical activity readiness questionnaire will be 
used to assess if consumer is able to participate in exercise classes. Medical History : We will collect medical 
history information from each consumer to assess ability to participate in the ACHIEVE program  and the staff . 
Medication s: We will list all of the consumer’s current medications.  We will use the Readiness Rulers  survey  to 
assess participant’s readiness to lose weight and willingness to participate in the ACHIEVE program.  
 
Anthropometrics – blood pressure, weight, height and BMI . We will assess blood pressure, height and weight 
at baseline. Weight will be measured to the nearest 0.1 lb. by a high-quality  digital scale with participants 
wearing light indoor clothes without shoes. Weight will b e measures in lbs. for ease of interpretation by 
participants and converted to kg for calculation of BMI, calculated as the Quetelet index (kg/m2). Height will be 
measured to the nearest 0.1 cm using a wall -mounted stadiometer. Blood pressure will be deter mined by the 
OMRON 907 XL, a validated device that records  BP using an oscillometric technique71. One blood pressure 
with 3 measurements (each separated by 30 seconds) will be obtained on the right arm of participants after 
 
15 
 they rest quietly in the seated position for at least 15 minutes72. If measures cannot be in person, participants 
will self -measure weight on a scale the team provides for them.  
 
Physical activity.  We will administer the CARDIA -EARLY Sedentary Behavior questionnaire, which is the 
measure recommended by the NIH for this outcome within weight loss trials62,63. 
 
Dietary change.  We will administer Block Fat, Fruit, Vegetable and Fiber Screener Questio nnaires  as the food 
frequency measures64,65.  These screeners provide a reasonably valid assessment of intake of these foods and 
have the advantage of being very brief.  We will also administer the EARLY Eating Away from Home and 
Sugar -Sweetened Beverage questionnaires, which ar e the measures recommended by the NIH for these 
outcomes within weight loss trials62,63. We will also administer the NHIS Dietary Scree ner Questionnaire with 
26 questions.  
 
 
Satisfaction.  We have adapted a prior measure used to assess helpfulness of various elements  of another 
behavioral weight loss intervention73, as well as adapted a measure previously validated among consumers 
with SMI to assess satisfaction with care74. 
 
Eating habits.  We will administer two measures -- Palatable Eat ing Motives Scale (PEMS) – Coping Subscale  
and Reward -based Eating Drive (RED) Scale , which assess emotional factors that influence eating habits.  We 
will also administer the Important Others Questionnaire that assess social factors that influence eating h abits.  
All of t hese measures recommended by the NIH for these outcomes within weight loss trials62,63. 
 
Stress.  We will administer the perceived stress scale66, which is the measure recommended by the NIH for this 
outcome within weight loss trials62,63. 
 
Medi cal events.  We will also capture any medical events that occur  during the 6 -month intervention.  
 
Important others.  We will capture information about support systems and people in the consumer’s life that can 
assist in healthy weight management behaviors.  
 
Intervention process measures. During the weight management curriculum, attendance, participation and 
weight measurements will be collected.  
 
8. STUDY POPULATION: OTHER STAFF  
8.1 Eligibility criteria  
To be eligible  as other staff , the person must be a staff member at a psychiatric rehabilitation p rogram and  age 
18 or older, as well as willing to  do the following: review waiver of documentation of informed consent  with 
study staff and complete data collection procedures .  
 
8.2 Data collection procedures  
Data collection  timeline is outlined in Table 6 . Data collection will occur with study forms either in RedCap or 
paper.  Focus groups  will be conducted by Zoom . Participant reimbursem ent for data collection for other staff 
participants is estimat ed at $ 45 total for all data collection  points, divided over each time point .  
 
 
Table 6. Data Collection Schedule for Other Staff  
 
Baseline  Follow -up 
During  6M 
Post  
 
16 
  x   
Other Measures     
Demographics  & prior training  x   
Implementation Measures     
Motivation for implementation  x  x 
Implementation Climate  x   
Qualitative Asses sment     
Focus Group    x 
 
 
Demographics and prior training.  We will collect demographic information such as age, sex, race , and  ethnicity. 
We will assess educational level and employment status. We will  determine  prior training in nutrition, exercise 
and weight loss at baseline, as well as their proficiency in usi ng computers and online education.  
 
Motivation and Climate for Implementation . We will assess these constructs by adapting previously validated 
instruments68,69. 
 
Qualitative Assessment  
Focus Groups . Focus groups will be conducted with select staff, staff coaches, and peer leaders at the end of 
the study. The focus group is designed to elicit measures in the following domains: p erceptions of the 
acceptability, appropriatene ss, and feasibility of the ACHIEVE  curriculum and the implementation  of the 
intervention; barriers to ACHIEVE  implementation; strategies to overcome barriers; and suggestions for further 
refinement . Focus group  participants will be represent all study sites. The focus groups will inquire about 
perceptions of the acceptability, appropriatene ss, and feasibility of the ACHIEVE  curriculum and the 
implementation  of the intervention; barriers to ACHIEVE  implementation ; strategies to overcome barriers; and 
suggestions for further refinement .  They will be conducted remotely by Zoom video -conference and will be 
approximately 90 minutes in length.  Participants will receive $25 for completion of focus group.  
 
 
9. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  
Quality Assurance pertains to activities that promote collection of high -quality data, and Quality Control refers 
to activities that detect emerging data issues with sufficient time to implement appropriate corrective actions.  
Our approach to Quality Assurance includes: 1) preparing a manual of operations; 2) implementing a master 
trainer model to train and certify other staff; 3) train and c ertify all data collectors  on in -person and remote 
procedures ; 4) recertify data collectors at least annually; 5) routinely calibrate equipment; 6) maintain logs of 
certified staff and calibrated equipment.  Our approach to Quality Control includes: 1) mon itoring counts of 
completed data collection items; 2) monitoring distribution of trial outcomes, overall, by data collector and site; 
3) record lag time in data entry; 4) issue queries on missing data, out of range values or illogical data relations; 
4) review types and distribution of data entry errors; and 5) prepare reports for staff, investigators , and an 
independent study monitor  on Quality Control.  
 
10. RANDOMIZATION AND BLINDING  
Following baseline data collection, sites will be randomized to the standar d or enhanced arms . Randomized 
blocks of 2 in random order will be used to create the randomization sequence.  The random sequence and 
allocation groupings will be stored in RedCap, only the data analyst will distinguish the treatment assignment to 
sites.  Due to the nature of the intervention, both participants and interventionists w ill be aware of the 
assignment.  Data collectors measure study outcomes. Investigators, staff and participants are masked to 
outcome data, with the exception of trial stat istician, study coordinator, data analyst and independent study 
monitor .  
 
 
11. INTERVENTION GROUPS  
 
17 
 An overarching principle of the adapted ACHIEVE -D curriculum is that it is designed to fit into and will be part 
of the regular programming that psychiatric reh abilitation programs are already providing  for their clients with 
mental illness . The psychiatric rehabilitation program staff trained as ACHIEVE -D coaches will have the 
support of their leadership for ACHIEVE -D program delivery. Based on discussions with and requests from the 
study sites, each site  will decide  how they will deliver the  ACHIEVE -D curriculum during COVID, taking into 
consideration  how they are delivering their other programming , their priorities, and resources . If psychiatric 
rehabilitation programs are delivering in -person programming, then they will likely plan to deliv er ACHIEVE -D 
in-person at least once per week. For persons with serious mental illness, in -person programming is preferred 
due to psychiatric symptoms , cognitive impairment , and potential  challenges using smartphones and 
computers. To support sites that pr efer to offer remote groups, w e will be providing clients with Grandpads 
(tablets) . Our study team will train consumers to use the devices  during baseline data collection and Coaches 
will troubleshoot technology issues that arise during groups . We expect m ost sites will use a hybrid method of 
delivery during COVID with both in -person and remote sessions. Sites follow Maryland Medicaid and other 
regulatory guidelines for safety and operating procedures. Sites will have the flexibility to change their deliver y 
method during the study. ( We have discussed these plans with Megan Singleton ). Peer leaders will assist staff 
coaches as appropriate  including considering COVID restrictions at each site.  
 
In-person group e xercise classes may be held during COVID -19 depending on each site’s COVID safety 
protocol. Exercise classes may be delivered via Zoom video -conferencing  as part of the ACHIEVE group or 
offered as a supplemental session led by a trained  peer leader with support from the study team .  
 
11.1 ACHIEVE Curriculum  
All sites will use the ACHIEVE curriculum, a six-month behavioral weight loss program delivered by  trained 
coaches with the assistance of peer leaders  to enrolled mental health consumers at the  10 PRPs.  ACHIEVE  
classes will be offered at least once per week (up to 3 days per week)  for about 1 h our. Classes may be 
delivered  in person or virtual depending on COVID 
restrictions in place at each PRP.  Obesity is a 
chronic condition which benefits from ongoing 
intervention, and the curriculum is designed to be 
integrated into regular PRP  programming . The 
curriculum includes  six monthly core modules  and 
seasonal modules that can be incorporated into the 
curriculum depending on the time of year the 
program is delivered (Exhibit 1) . Within each monthly 
module, the topic varie s by week. When sites are 
delivering more than one  weight management class 
each week , the content will be repeated ; repetition of 
messages is a key tenet of intervention tailoring for 
persons with SMI. Coaches will use motivational 
interviewing communicat ion techniques in al l 
interactions with consumers. This curriculum was 
adapted from the behavioral intervention previously 
tested by Daumit and colleagues15. We have also 
previously tested two months of this adapted 
curriculum at one PRP in a proof -of-concept study, 
which found that the format was feasible and 
acceptable to consumers and staff.  
 
In-person group exercise classes may be offered  
during COVID -19 with appropriate safety protocols (e.g., social distancing, proper room ventilation) . Exercise 
classes may  also be delivered via Zoom video -conferencing  as part of remote  groups . For remote sessions, 
exercise class will occur during the first 20 minutes of the session via Zoom. The coach may play an exercise 
video over Zoom.  If the site is using a hybrid model of delivery with some weight management sessions Exhibit 1.  6-Month ACHIEVE Curriculum Overview  
Type and Frequency of Contact  
Multipurpose group weight management class : 1-3 times per 
week for 50-min class (30 min weight management and 2 0 min 
exercise  (see above) ) led by  trained ACHIEVE staff and peer 
coaches  
Weigh -ins: occur on the day of each class (10 min)  (or virtually)  
Curriculum Delivery  Modality  
Weight ma nagement: Facilitated session with short videos  
Exercise: Video -assisted group exercise  
Goals and Recommendations  
Weight loss goal 5% in 6 months  
Behavioral r ecommendations: 6 Core Modules Weight loss 
success  
• No sugar drinks  
• No junk food  
• Eat smart portions  
• Eat more vegetables  
• Putting it all together  
Seasonal modules available to tailor experience  
• A New Start in the New Year  
• Heart Healthy Valentine’s Day  
• Maintain Don’t Gain during Celebrations  
• Spring into Walking  
• Halloween Fun without the Sugar  
• Maintain Don’t Gain during the Holidays  
 
18 
 occurring in -person, the coach may offer additional physical activity classes to be delivered via Zoom or 
recommend online exercise videos for participant. The coach will recommend daily physical activity for at least 
20 minutes, whether in an ACHIEVE session or not, s pecifically emphasizing low impact moderate intensity 
aerobic exercises such as going on walks.  
 
Video -based virtual exercise classes may also be offered as a separate group that is facilitated by the peer 
leader and study team staff. The peer leader will  be trained to co -lead these groups using an ACHIEVE -
approved low -impact moderate intensity aerobic video (e.g., Walk Away the Pounds). Groups w ill last 20 
minutes and include a warm -up and cool -down. To ensure participant safety, the study team member w ill 
confirm each participants’ contact information at the beginning of each class (e.g., name, address from which 
they are joining the exercise class, phone number and emergency contact).  The peer leader will facilitate the 
class, and the study team member w ill monitor participants  via video . These groups will be scheduled at times 
that do not conflict with the Coach -led ACHIEVE groups. When sites are delivering in -person groups and are 
not able to incorporate group exercise into the curriculum (due to COVID safety protocols), these virtual 
exercise classes provide an option for clients to engage in exercise from the safety and convenience of their 
home while also benefiting from the support of their peers .  
  
 
11.2 Standard Intervention Group  
The standard intervention compo nents are described in Exhibit 2 . Staff Coaches and Peer Leaders  will 
participate in all trainings.   
12.  
Exhibit 2 . Overview of Standard Intervention  Components  
 Component  Elements  Standard  On-Board  
Training  During training sessions , a mix of didactic content and role play  are used. M aterial s needed to implement 
all components the ACHIEV E weight -loss curriculum is covered. M ore detai l on how to discuss each 
weight -loss subject is introduced in a stepw ise fashion . Training on motivational interviewing (MI) 
techniques is also  provided. Master trainers who have expertise in healt h coaching and MI training conduct 
the initial on-board training.  
Online 
Training 
Modules  Monthly online didactic training modules (15 -20 min) are an efficient method for coaches  to observe and 
learn how to deliver the ACHIEVE  weight -loss to pics. Each training module include s both relevant didactic 
content and examples of experienced ACHIEVE st aff providing real -world examples of delivering the 
content  in groups. Coaches  view the online modules each month before teaching that specific component 
of the program.  
Online Avatar 
MI Practice 
Module  At the end of the on-board  training, coaches  are given access to an online avatar MI practice module, 
which includes a 15-minute didactic component and 15-minute virtual practice conversations with 
consumers with SMI.  These simulated conversations allow coaches to practice (a) providing feedback 
about weight -loss progress and (b) increasing participant engagement in exercise classes. The avatar 
module includes built -in MI performance feedback.  Coaches  are encouraged to use the module weekly for 
the first three months and as needed  (e.g., monthly) , repeating practice until they receive a “good” score.  
Our training approach provides interactive opportunities for coaches to practice the skills  needed to implement 
the ACHIEVE curriculum , a strategy more effective than didactic education.  
At minimum, e ach Coach will be video -recorded delivering an ACHIEVE group  during months 1, 3 and 6; each 
coach may be recorded monthly . These recordings will be for research purposes only and will not b e shared 
with the site supervisors. Recordings will be shared with master trainers on the study team who are 
responsible for assessing fidelity to the ACHIEVE curriculum (master trainer grading will not be used in 
outcome scoring).  
 
To enhance the uptake o f ACHIEVE we will meet with leadership for o rganizational strategy meetings to 
increase leaders’ engagement with evidence -based practice implementation. These meeting will be held 
approximately monthly  and will  include the PRP director and ACHIEVE coache s. These meetings support 
development, adoption, and sustainment of organizational strategies needed for program implementation (e.g., 
changes to class schedules to maximize attendance) as well as implement strategies that demonstrate 
leadership buy -in to AC HIEVE.  
 
19 
  
 
11.3 Enhanced Intervention Group  
The enhanced intervention includes all components of the standard intervention along with the addition of 
performance coaching. Performance c oaching may be particularly beneficial when, as in the present case, the 
evidence -based practice is new to most imp lementers.   Each month a master trainer on the study team will 
meet with the Coach to provide  tailored feedback and performance coaching session . The feedback will be 
used to 1) promote curriculum fidelity; 2) facilitate motivational interviewing skill dev elopment; and 3) help 
coaches plan for improved ACHIEVE curriculum  delivery.  
 
 
12. DATA MANAGEMENT  and SECURITY  
Quantitative Data.  Each participant will be assigned a unique study ID number for data collection , instead of 
name or other identifying information . The link between identifying information and the study ID will be kept in a 
separate database with password access available only to the data analyst, statistician and principal 
investigators. Study team members are trained to protect integrit y and confidentiality of the data.  Data will be 
published only in aggregate, with no identifying character istics of individuals published or presented. We will 
store data in a Johns Hopkins REDCap  database . REDCap data is housed on secure servers at the Jo hns 
Hopkins Biostatistics Center under firewall protection.  Database access is password protected and restricted to 
authorized personnel only and REDCap provides audit trails for tracking data manipulation and user activity. 
Any paper records will be kept in locked file cabinets. Kognito, a health simulation company, developed the 
avatar simulations for this project and hosts the avatar training platform and dashboard. Avatar performance 
measurement data for motivational interviewing practice conversations is accessible only by the individual 
study participant (provider) and the study team, not shared outside Kognito. Kognito stores data securely 
behind two firewalls.  
 
Built-in range and logic checks will prompt data checks and confirmation in real -time during data collection. 
The analyst will routinely conduct thorough checking and cleaning, examining distributions and data patterns 
and evaluation to detect inconsistenc ies. Outliers (e.g., extreme weight changes) will be identified using 
Rosner’s extreme Studentized deviate (ESD). Every effort will be made to determine correctness of outliers in 
a timely manner. Confirmed outliers will be flagged and set aside in the pri ncipal secondary analyses. Those 
removed will be treated as all other missing data; sensitivity analyses will be conducted to assess influence of 
outliers on results. The analyst will create detailed variable documentation and conduct analysis per protocol  
under direction of Dr. Wang, statistician.   
 
 
Qualitative Data . Focus group s will be audio or video -recorded and recordings will be transcribed using 
Production Transcripts, Inc or another approved Johns Hopkins vendor.  Names will be removed from 
transcripts. Recordings will be stored in a Johns Hopkins secure network drive and wi ll be destroyed when 
analyses are complete. Standardized actor interview recordings will be reviewed by experts in motivational 
interviewing for fidelity to motivational interviewing practices and stored in a Johns Hopkins secure network 
drive or OneDrive.  
 
13. DATA ANALYSIS  
We will assess the effects of the implementation intervention on providers’ knowledge self -efficacy, and fidelity 
to the ACHIEVE curriculum, as well as consumer outcomes using generalized linear mixed -effects models 
under the intent -to-treat approach. Mean models will include a binary intervention group indicator, time 
indicators, intervention by time interaction terms, and fixed effects for the 10 study sites. The time indicator 
coefficients estimate time -specific mean outcome changes in th e “standard” group and interaction coefficients 
estimate the between -arm differences of time -specific outcome changes from baseline. The linear combination 
of these time -specific coefficients captures the time -specific mean outcome changes in the “enhanced ” group.  
The model will use an unstructured variance covariance matrix for the repeated outcome measurements over 
time within individuals. To assess whether knowledge and self -efficacy mediate implementation intervention 
 
20 
 effects, we will estimate the magn itude of attenuation on intervention effects in the consumer outcome models 
with vs. without these measures. We will also examine potential moderators, e.g. study sites’ implementation 
intervention fidelity and/or implementation climate, by adding appropri ate interaction terms to the models.  
We will analyze survey data on our implementation measures prior to conducting focus groups in order to 
explore survey findings in depth (e.g., if providers’ rate performance coaching as having mediocre 
acceptability, we will explore reasons why in the focus groups ). We will use descriptive statistics to analyze 
survey measures of perceptions of acceptability, feasibility  and appropriateness of implementation intervention 
and ACHIEVE -D. Point estimates an d corresponding 95% confidence intervals will be obtained.  
 
 
14. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
All study staff will complete the web -based Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) for Basic Human 
Subjects Research, Conflict of Interest Training and training in  the Health Insurance Portability a nd 
Accountability Act (HIPAA). All study participants have a waiver of documentation of  written consent using 
procedures reviewed and approved by Johns Hopkins Institutional Review Boards. The consent scripts  cover 
all pr ocedures done as part of data collection  and the intervention.  
 
Sources of materials  
Data collectors will conduct assessments in -person  and/or remotely . Eligibility will be determined through 
baseline data collection procedures for each study population.  To determine eligibility for the study  for 
consumer participants , we will also obtain permission from potential subjects to talk with mental health program 
staff and clinicians and contact their primary care physician and psychiatrist concernin g any medical or 
psychiatric reasons for study exclusion. We will communicate with these physicians to ensure there are no 
contraindications to parti cipating in the intervention.  We will document assessments in each subject’s study 
chart.  
 
Safety Monitori ng for Consumer Participants  
Consumer p articipant safety will be closely monitored. Protection of these research participants begins with the 
eligibility criteria, which are designed to exclude individuals with a serious medical condition or psychiatric 
instability that would make it unsafe for them to take part in a weight -loss program . During the study, regular 
mental health and primary care will be provided by the participant’s usual mental health and primary care 
providers, not by the study. Participant s will be made aware of this delineation of responsibility.  
 
We will carefully monitor the safety of enrolled participants. If a participant develops a medical or psychiatric 
issue, the safety of continuing or resuming participation in the weight -loss pro gram  will be ascertained by the 
study clinician in collaboration with the participant’s regular providers. Surveillance for serious adverse events 
and other relevant clinical events will occur at the six -month mark.  
 
A study clinician , Dr. Murphy (independ ent study monitor ), with appropriate expertise will be responsible for 
reviewin g medical eligibility criteria and clinical measures, and will be the primary contact for staff, participants 
and physicians for medical issues. This clinician will review and r eport any serious adverse events and will 
have appropriate coverage during absences to provide 24/7 medical safety coverage for the study.  
 
15. POTENTIAL RISKS  
Potential risks differ by study population.  
 
All research studies have some degree of risk or discomfort. Time burden in responding to surveys and 
discomfort during interviews using sensitive questions are common risks and discomforts of minimal risk 
studies that use an oral consent process.  
 
Staff p articipants may become tired or bored during surveys, interviews or focus groups.  
 
 
21 
 There are risks related to physical activity and nutrient intake, including hypoglycemia and symptomatic 
hypotension related to diet and exercise interventions. Protection s against these risks are described below. We 
have also set alert values for baseline blood pressure data collection, w e have procedures  in place for 
surveillance and reporting, and our exclusion criteria is meant to exclude people for safety reasons.  
 
Consu mers will be screened for orthopedic or rheumatologic problems that might limit their ability to participate 
in the physical activity component of the intervention. Exercise will focus on mild to moderate intensity aerobic 
exercise using progression of int ensity and duration appropriate for sedentary individuals. If there is any 
question about the etiology of an injury or the need for treatment, the consumer will be referred to a physician 
for further evaluation.  
 
Surveillance for serious adverse events and other relevant clinical events that may be associated with study 
participation wil l occur at the six month mark. This is done using  a standardized questionnaire. In addition to 
the end of study report participants may report events in other sett ings (e.g., intervention contacts). A study 
clinician will review the completed forms, will classify the event according to several dimensions 
(expectedness, relatedness and type) and will take appropriat e action. Safety -related events will be reported in 
a timely fashion as required by the IRB and NIMH.   
 
Expected events  
Over the duration of the six month project a number of medical events may be expected to occur in overweight 
or obese adults, including routine surgeries and procedures, the development o f cancer and other chronic 
conditions, increased symptoms from a chronic condition, musculoskeletal proble ms and motor vehicle 
accidents.  
 
Importance of knowledge to be gained  
Persons with SMI have high burdens of each major cardiovascular risk behavior, yet persons with SMI have 
been systematically excluded from interventions to decrease cardiovascular risk. If successful, this proposed 
program and curriculum  could be disseminated widely. The minimal health risks to participants are offset by 
the potentia l benefits to participants and to the greater population with chronic mental illness.  
 
16. ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS  
 
 
Organization  staff will be appropriately recruited and informed of the study by study team with waiver of 
documentation of informed consent. They study team will inform them that they do not have to answer any 
questions they do not want to, and that their employment or evaluations will not be affected by their responses. 
This is a minimal risk s tudy.  
 
There will not be a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) for this project. Participant safety will be closely 
monitored. We will have an independent study monitor who is experienced in clinical trial lifestyle interventions 
Dr. Appel , a practicing in ternist, who will work with Drs. Daumit to promote and monitor safety throughout the 
study. The safety officer does not provide direct medical care and is not involved in the intervention.  
 
Protection of research participants begins with the eligibility c riteria, which are designed to exclude individuals 
with a serious medical condition that would preclude their ability to lose weight or to exercise safely.  This will 
be done in collaboration with the partici pant’s primary care physician. During the study,  clinical care will be 
provided by the participants’ usual specialty mental health providers and the primary care physician, not by the 
study. Participants will be made aware of this delineation of responsibility. We will carefully monitor the safety 
of en rolled participants. If a participant develops a medical problem, the safety of continuing or resuming the 
intervention will be ascertained by the participant’s primary care physician in collaboration with a study 
clinician.   
 
 
22 
 Physical activity:  The small risk during  physical activity will be minimized by emphasizing moderate activity, 
and by following American College of Sports Medicine guidelines regarding need for medical examination prior 
to beginning an exercise program. Trained exercise int erventionists will supervise all exercise sessions.   
 
Nutrient intake:  Calorie restriction could theoretically lead to inadequate nutrition or excessive, rapid weight 
loss.  Intervention subjects will be encouraged to eat a variety of foods from all food groups and maintain an 
adequate caloric level. Those who have a sudden, marked weight reduction will be interviewed to determine if 
extreme measures have been taken.  The issue of adequate nutrient intake and the importance of safe weight 
loss will be disc ussed in the group and individual sessions.  If a problem is suspected, the participant will be 
counseled.   
 
Hypoglycemia related to diet and exercise interventions:  For patients who may be susceptible to 
hypoglycemia due to use of anti -diabetic medicatio ns, weight loss interventions have the potential to increase 
the risk of hypoglycemia, especially during the time when diet and/or physical activity interventions are 
implemented.  To minimize the risk of hypoglycemia, we will require primary care physicia n approval prior to 
enrolling individuals with diabetes.  
 
Symptomatic hypotension related to diet and exercise interventions: For patients who may be susceptible 
to hypotension because they are using medications that lower blood pressure, weight loss interventions have 
the potential to increase the risk of hypotension.  Participants are educated about symptoms of hypotension 
and urged to contact their primary physician if they have symptoms suggestive of hypotension.  In addition, 
staff will notify primary physicians for participants who develop symptomatic hypotension while on anti -
hypertensive medications.  
 
Alert Values for bas eline blood pressure data collection  
Blood pressure:   Alert level 1: For any systolic blood pressure (SBP) measure of >= 180 mmHg or diastolic 
blood pressure (DBP) of >=110, the participant is notified during the visit, the study clinician is contacted and  
the subject is referred to their personal physician for further evaluation within one week.  Alert level 2: For any 
systolic blood pressure (SBP) measure of >= 160 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure (DBP) of >=100, the 
participant is notified during the vis it, the study clinician is contacted within 1 week and the subject is referred 
to their personal physician for further ev aluation within one month. Alert level 3: For any systolic blood pressure 
(SBP) measure of >= 140 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure (DBP ) of >=90, the participant is notified during 
the visit, the study clinician is contacted per routine reporting and the subject is referred to their personal 
physician for further evaluation within two months.  For any elevated blood pressure values, if th e participant is 
symptomatic with chest pain, headache or shortness of breath, the study clinician and primary care physician 
are notified immediately.  For any systolic blood pressure (SBP) measure of <90 mmHg or diastolic blood 
pressure (DBP) of <50, the  participant is notified during the visit, the study clinician is contacted per and the 
subject is referred to their personal physician for further evaluation within one week.  If the participant has 
symptoms of lightheadedness or feeling faint, the study clinician and primary care physician are notified 
immediately.  
 
Mental Health  
If a participant is hospitalized for psychiatric reasons during the study, he/she will be reassessed by 
rehabilitation program staff and study personnel after return to the reha bilitation program for the ability to 
continue in  the curriculum . We have enrolled over 800 people from a similar population in clinical trials , and we 
expect these occurrences to be rare.  
 
Pregnancy and other exclusions  
If a participant becomes pregnant during the study, she is then excluded. If a participant develops cancer, 
unstable angina, or another condition for which weight loss or exercise might be contraindicated, further 
participation will be determined by the participant’s primary care physician  in conjunction with a study clinician.  
 
Surveillance and Reporting Procedures  
 
23 
 Serious adverse events include the following: death, life -threatening experience, inpatient medical or surgical 
hospitalization, persistent or significant disability or incapaci ty.  Important medical events that do not result in 
death or require hospitalization may be considered serious adverse events if they jeopardize the participant or 
require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the out comes above.   
 
Breach of confidentiality  
All participant information will be considered confidential. This confidentiality will be assur ed through several 
mechanisms. For the study, each participant will be assigned an anonymous study ID, which wi ll be used on all 
study forms. In addition, all study forms and paper records that contain participant information will be kept in 
secured, locked areas when not in use. During active data collection, any hard copies of data collection forms 
will be stored in locked areas. Only a uthorized personnel will have access to these locked areas.  Finally, 
neither the rehabilitation program nor participants will be identified by name in any publications.   
 
For qualitative  data, no focus group participants will be individually identified; a site identifier will be used.  The 
link to the site ID will be held in a locked file. Focus group transcripts will have names (if mentioned during the 
group) removed, and no participants will be identified by name in any publicatio ns. The tapes will be k ept for 7 
years and then destroyed . Furthermore, data will not be presented in such a way that identity can be inferred. 
Transcripts of focus groups  will have names removed. Employees will be assured that their participation in the 
study and informati on sh ared in the interviews will not affect their employment or their evalu ation.  As described 
in Data Management  and Security , data will be stored in Johns Hopkins secure drives.  
 
17. BENEFITS  
 
There may be no benefit to individual participants. The research will help us understand the effets of the pilot 
implementation intervention  on mental health program  staff delivery of the curriculum in psychiatric 
rehabilitation program settings.  
 
 
18. REFERE NCES  
 
1. Allison DB, Newcomer JW, Dunn AL, et al. Obesity among those with mental disorders: a National 
Institute of Mental Health meeting report. Am J Prev Med 2009;36:341 -50. 
2. Daumit GL, Clark JM, Steinwachs DM, Graham CM, Lehman A, F ord DE. Prevalence and correlates of 
obesity in a community sample of individuals with severe and persistent mental illness. J Nerv Ment Dis 
2003;191:799 -805. 
3. Dickerson FB, Brown CH, Kreyenbuhl JA, et al. Obesity among individuals with serious mental il lness. 
Acta Psychiatr Scand 2006;113:306 -13. 
4. Saha S, Chant D, McGrath J. A systematic review of mortality in schizophrenia: is the differential 
mortality gap worsening over time? . Archives of General Psychiatry 2007;64:1123 -31. 
5. Parks J, Svendsen D, Singer P, Foti ME. Morbidity and mortality in people with serious mental mental 
illness.  Alexandria: National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors (NASMHPD) Medical 
Directors Council. 2006.  
6. Ösby U, Brandt L, Correia N, Ekbom A, Sparén P . Excess mortality in bipolar and unipolar disorder in 
Sweden. Archives of general psychiatry 2001;58:844 -50. 
7. Colton CP, Ronald W, Manderscheid P. Congruencies in Increased Mortality Rates, Years of Life Lost, 
and Causes of Death Among Public Mental hea lth Clients in Eight States.  . Preventing Chronic Disease 
2006;3:1 -14. 
8. Olfson M, Gerhard T, Huang C, Crystal S, Stroup TS. Premature Mortality Among Adults With 
Schizophrenia in the United States. JAMA Psychiatry 2015;72:1172 -81. 
9. Daumit GL, Anthony CB, Ford DE, et al. Pattern of mortality in a sample of Maryland residents with 
severe mental illness. Psychiatry Res 2010;176:242 -5. 
10. Brown S. Excess mortality of schizophrenia. A meta -analysis. Br J Psychiatry 1997;171:502 -8. 
 
24 
 11. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, A povian CM, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the management of 
overweight and obesity in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014 ;63:2985 -3023.  
12. Mueser KT, McGurk SR. Schizophrenia. Lancet 2004;363:2063 -72. 
13. Green MF, Kern RS, Braff DL, Mintz J. Neurocognitive deficits and functional outcome in schizophrenia: 
are we measuring the "right stuff"? Schizophr Bull 2000;26:119 -36. 
14. Casagrande SS, Jerome GJ, Dalcin AT, et al. Randomized trial of achieving healthy lifestyles in 
psychiatric rehabilitation: the ACHIEVE trial. BMC Psychiatry 2010;10:108.  
15. Daumit GL, Dickerson FB, Wang NY, et al. A Behavioral Weight Loss Intervention  in Persons with 
Serious Mental Illness. NEJM 2013;368:1594 -602. 
16. McGinty EE, Gudzune KA, Dalcin A, et al. Bringing an Effective Behavioral Weight Loss Intervention for 
People With Serious Mental Illness to Scale. Frontiers in Psychiatry 2018;9.  
17. Kilbourne AM, Neumann MS, Pincus HA, Bauer MS, Stall R. Implementing evidence -based 
interventions in health care: application of the replicating effective programs framework. Implement Sci 
2007;2:42.  
18. Gudzune KAJGDAMEGSGJDG. the ACHIEVE behavioral weight l oss intervention for individuals with 
serious mental illness for delivery by community mental health programs. Academy Health D&I 2020.  
19. Albright G, Goldman R, Shockley KM, McDevitt F, Akabas S. Using an avatar -based simulation to train 
families to moti vate veterans with post -deployment stress to seek help at the VA. Games for Health: Research, 
Development, and Clinical Applications 2012;1:21 -8. 
20. Albright G, Adam C, Goldman R, Serri D. A Game -Based Simulation Utilizing Virtual Humans to Train 
Physicia ns to Screen and Manage the Care of Patients with Mental Health Disorders. GAMES FOR HEALTH: 
Research, Development, and Clinical Applications 2013;2:269 -73. 
21. Aarons GA, Ehrhart MG, Moullin JC, Torres EM, Green AE. Testing the leadership and organizational 
change for implementation (LOCI) intervention in substance abuse treatment: a cluster randomized trial study 
protocol. Implement Sci 2017;12:29.  
22. Osborn DP, Levy G, Nazareth  I, Petersen I, Islam A, King MB. Relative risk of cardiovascula r and 
cancer mortality in people with severe mental illness from the United Kingdom's General Practice Rsearch 
Database. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2007;64:242 -9. 
23. Sajatovic M, Dawson NV. The emerging problem of diabetes in the seriously mentally ill. Psychiat r 
Danub 2010;22 Suppl 1:S4 -5. 
24. Newcomer JW, Hennekens CH. Severe mental illness and risk of cardiovascular disease. JAMA 
2007;298:1794 -6. 
25. De Hert M, R; VW, D; VE, et al. Prevalence of diabetes, metabolic syndrome and metabolic 
abnormalities in schiz ophrenia over the course of the illness:  a cross -sectional study. Clin Pract Epidemol 
Ment Health 2006;2.  
26. McEvoy JP, Meyer JM, Goff DC, et al. Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in patients with 
schizophrenia: baseline results from the Clinical Anti psychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) 
schizophrenia trial and comparison with national estimates from NHANES III. Schizophr Res 2005;80:19 -32. 
27. McElroy SL. Correlates of Overweight and Obesity in 644 Patients with Bipolar Disorder. J Cl in 
Psychiatry 2002;63:207 -13. 
28. Coodin S. Body mass index in persons with schizophrenia. Can J Psychiatry 2001;46:549 -55. 
29. Hales CM, Carroll MD, Fryar CD, Ogden CL. Prevalence of Obesity Among Adults and Youth: United 
States, 2015 -2016. NCHS Data Brie f 2017:1 -8. 
30. Serretti A, Mandelli L. Antidepressants and body weight: a comprehensive review and meta -analysis. J 
Clin Psychiatry 2010;71:1259 -72. 
31. Allison DB, Mentore JL, Heo M, et al. Antipsychotic -induced weight gain: a comprehensive research 
synthesis. The American Journal of Psychiatry 1999;1999:341 -50. 
32. Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, et al. Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with 
chronic schizophrenia. N Engl J Med 2005;353:1209 -23. 
33. Baptista T, Kin NM, Beaulieu S, de Ba ptista EA. Obesity and related metabolic abnormalities during 
antipsychotic drug administration: mechanisms, management and research perspectives. Pharmacopsychiatry 
2002;35:205 -19. 
 
25 
 34. Macritchie KAN, Geddes JR, Scott J, Haslam DRS, Goodwin GM. Valproic a cid, valproate and 
divalproex in the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder (Cochrane Review).  The Cochrane Library2002.  
35. Depression Guideline Panel: Depression in Primary Care, vol. 2. Rockville, MD: AHCPR; 1993. Report 
No.: 93 -0551.  
36. Sachs GS, Guille C. Weight gain associated with use of psychotropic medications. J Clin Psychiatry 
1999;60 Suppl 21:16 -9. 
37. Apovian CM, Aronne LJ, Bessesen DH, et al. Pharmacological management of obesity: an endocrine 
Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin E ndocrinol Metab 2015;100:342 -62. 
38. Gupta A, Craig TKJ. Diet, smoking and cardiovascular risk in schizophrenia in high and low care 
supported housing. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences 2009;18:200 -7. 
39. Ellingrod VL, Taylor SF, Brook RD, et al. Dieta ry, lifestyle and pharmacogenetic factors associated with 
arteriole endothelial -dependent vasodilatation in schizophrenia patients treated with atypical antipsychotics 
(AAPS). Schizophrenia Research 2011;130:20 -6. 
40. Casagrande SS, Anderson CAM, Dalcin A,  et al. Dietary Intake of Adults with Serious Mental Illness. 
Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal 2011;35:137 -40. 
41. Amani R. Is dietary pattern of schizophrenia patients different from healthy subjects? BMC Psychiatry 
2007;7:15.  
42. McCreadie RG, Scottish  Schizophrenia Lifestyle G. Diet, smoking and cardiovascular risk in people 
with schizophrenia: descriptive study. Br J Psychiatry 2003;183:534 -9. 
43. McCreadie R, Macdonald E, Blacklock C, et al. Dietary intake of schizophrenic patients in Nithsdale, 
Scotland: case -control study. Bmj 1998;317:784 -5. 
44. Vancampfort D, Probst M, Scheewe T, et al. Lack of physical activity during leisure time contributes to 
an impaired health related quality of life in patients with schizophrenia. Schizophrenia research 2011 ;129:122 -
7. 
45. Daumit GL, Goldberg RW, Anthony C, et al. Physical activity patterns in adults with severe mental 
illness. J Nerv Ment Dis 2005;193:641 -6. 
46. Lindamer LA, McKibbin C, Norman GJ, et al. Assessment of physical activity in middle -aged and old er 
adults with schizophrenia. Schizophr Res 2008;104:294 -301. 
47. Johnstone R, Nicol K, Donaghy M, Lawrie S. Barriers to uptake of physical activity in community -based 
patients with schizophrenia. Journal of Mental Health 2009;18:523 –32. 
48. Jerome GJ, You ng DR, Dalcin A, et al. Physical activity levels of persons with mental illness attending 
psychiatric rehabilitation programs. Schizophr Res 2009;108:252 -7. 
49. Rubak S, Sandbæk A, Lauritzen T, Christensen B. Motivational interviewing: a systematic review and 
meta -analysis. Br J Gen Pract 2005;55:305 -12. 
50. Martins RK, McNeil DW. Review of motivational interviewing in promoting health behaviors. Clinical 
psychology review 2009;29:283 -93. 
51. Brug J, Spikmans F, Aartsen C, Breedveld B, Bes R, Fereira I. Training dietitians in basic motivational 
interviewing skills results in changes in their counseling style and in lower saturated fat intakes in their patients. 
Journal of nutrition education and behavior 2007;39:8 -12. 
52. Grol R, Grimshaw J. From best evi dence to best practice: effective implementation of change in 
patients' care. The lancet 2003;362:1225 -30. 
53. Fixsen DL, Blase KA, Naoom SF, Wallace F. Core implementation components. Research on social 
work practice 2009;19:531 -40. 
54. Edmunds JM, Beidas  RS, Kendall PC. Dissemination and implementation of evidence –based practices: 
training and consultation as implementation strategies. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice 
2013;20:152 -65. 
55. Beidas RS, Edmunds JM, Marcus SC, Kendall PC. Training and consultation to promote 
implementation of an empirically supported treatment: A randomized trial. Psychiatric Services 2012;63:660 -5. 
56. Paniagua M, Swygert K, Haist S, et al. Constructing written test questions for the basic and clinical 
sciences. Philad elphia, PA: National Board of Medical Examiners 2016.  
57. Treatment. CfSA. Enhancing Motivation for Change in Substance Abuse Treatment.  Treatment 
Improvement Protocol (TIP). Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 
1999.  
 
26 
 58. Story MT, Neumark -Stzainer DR, Sherwood NE, et al. Management of child and adolescent obesity: 
attitudes, barriers, skills, and training needs among health care professionals. Pediatrics 2002;110:210 -4. 
59. Manthei RJ. The response -shift bias in a couns ellor education programme. British Journal of Guidance 
and Counselling 1997;25:229 -37. 
60. Howard GS. Response -shift bias: A problem in evaluating interventions with pre/post self -reports. 
Evaluation Review 1980;4:93 -106. 
61. Foster GD, Wadden TA, Makris A P, et al. Primary Care Physicians’ Attitudes about Obesity and Its 
Treatment. Obesity Research 2003;11:1168 -77. 
62. Grid-enabled measures database: Accumulating Data to Optimally Predict obesity Treatment (ADOPT) 
Core Measures. NIH, 2017. (Accessed April 8 , 2020, at https://www.gem -
measures.org/public/wsoverview.aspx?cat=8&aid=0&wid=35 .) 
63. S. MP, J. RA, L. NH, et al. The Accumulating Data to Optimally Predict Obesity Tr eatment (ADOPT) 
Core Measures Project: Rationale and Approach. Obesity 2018;26:S6 -S15. 
64. Block G, Clifford C, Naughton MD, Henderson M, McAdams M. A brief dietary screen for high fat 
intake. Journal of Nutrition Education 1989;21:199 -207. 
65. Block G, Gi llespie C, Rosenbaum EH, Jenson C. A rapid food screener to assess fat and fruit and 
vegetable intake. Am J Prev Med 2000;18:284 -8. 
66. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc Behav 
1983;24:385 -96. 
67. Weiner B J, Lewis CC, Stanick C, et al. Psychometric assessment of three newly developed 
implementation outcome measures. Implement Sci 2017;12:108.  
68. Ehrhart MG, Aarons GA, Farahnak LR. Assessing the organizational context for EBP implementation: 
the development  and validity testing of the Implementation Climate Scale (ICS). Implement Sci 2014;9:157.  
69. Lin MK, Marsteller JA, Shortell SM, et al. Motivation to change chronic illness care: results from a 
national evaluation of quality improvement collaboratives. H ealth Care Manage Rev 2005;30:139 -56. 
70. Riebe D, Franklin BA, Thompson PD, et al. Updating ACSM's Recommendations for Exercise 
Preparticipation Health Screening. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2015;47:2473 -9. 
71. White WB, Anwar YA. Evaluation of the overall effic acy of the Omron office digital blood pressure HEM -
907 monitor in adults. Blood Press Monit 2001;6:107 -10. 
72. Vollmer WM, Appel LJ, Svetkey LP, et al. Comparing office -based and ambulatory blood pressure 
monitoring in clinical trials. J Hum Hypertens 2005 ;19:77 -82. 
73. Dalcin AT, Jerome GJ, Fitzpatrick SL, et al. Perceived helpfulness of the individual components of a 
behavioural weight loss program: results from the Hopkins POWER Trial. Obesity Science & Practice 
2015:n/a -n/a. 
74. Nabati L, Shea N, McBrid e L, Gavin C, Bauer MS. Adaptation of a simple patient satisfaction instrument 
to mental health: psychometric properties. Psychiatry research 1998;77:51 -6. 
 