Protocol & Statistical Analysis Plan for:  
Pragmatic Trial of COVID Vaccine Text Outreach Interventions  
University of Pennsylvania  
Dr. Shivan Mehta  
NCT#04834726  
v. 11 -16-2021  
Approved: 11-19-2021  
Covid Vaccine Outreach Protocol v. 11-16-21_clean  Pragmatic Trial of COVID Vaccine Text Outreach Interventions  
 
Brief Description  
This project aims to evaluate different approaches to increase COVID -19 vaccine uptake  among  at-risk 
patients at Penn Medicine in an equitable and systematic manner through a centralized outreach 
program. W e will evaluate different text-based scheduling and messaging approaches informed by 
behavioral science to increase uptake among eligible patients, inc luding the use of clinician  
endorsement, opt -out framing, and scarcity.  
 
Abstract  
COVID -19 is a significant cause of global morbidity and mortality. The COVID -19 vaccine can effectively 
reduce significant morbidity and eliminate mortality in vaccinated pop ulations, but the pandemic has 
exacerbated existing racial and socioeconomic disparities in access to and uptake of the COVID -19 
vaccine. In this project, we will evaluate different ways to  reach out to at-risk patients to encourage 
them to participate in vaccination, comparing different scheduling workflows and messaging approaches 
informed by behavioral science with the goal of increasing COVID -19 vaccine uptake.  
 
Data Management  
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential an d managed according to the requirements 
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). Source documents are 
maintained in PennChart. No source documents will be printed or maintained in paper form at the study 
site. Data from P ennChart will be recorded in Penn Medicine's REDCap system. The investigator and 
study team will have access to PHI within PennChart and REDCap. We will label all PHI within REDCap as 
identifiable information so that de -identified exports are possible. All  reports that include identifiable 
information will be stored on the Innovation Center secure drive, maintained behind the UPHS firewall. 
Direct identifiers will be maintained on RedCap until manuscript publication in case additional chart 
review is needed  for confirmation of results. Once data analysis and manuscripts have been published, 
direct identifiers will be deleted from RedCap and the de -identified database will be stored on the 
Innovation Center secure drive.  
 
Objectives  
We will evaluate a centralized approach to increasing COVID  through  direct outreach to eligible patients 
via text messaging . This pragmatic randomized controlled trial has the following aims:  
 
Aim 1 : To conduct systematic large scale text message outreach for vaccine delivery among a defined 
group of Penn Medicine in a way that advances equity.  
Aim 2 : To offer different scheduling workflows through text messaging that might increase uptake and 
reduce disparities.  
Aim 3 : To compare the equity and efficiency of different messages informed by behavioral science, 
including PCP endorsement, opt -out framing, and scarcity.  
 
 
 
Covid Vaccine Outreach Protocol v. 11-16-21_clean  Primary outcome variable(s)  
The primary outcome will be the percentage of patients who complete the first dose of the COVID 
vaccine within 1 month  of initial outreach.  
 
Secondary outcome variable(s)  
Secondary outcomes will be the completion of the first dose within 2 months, and completion of the 
vaccination process within 2 months of initial outreach . We will also examine  the percentage  of patients 
that are  scheduled, text message responses  (YES, INFO, NOT NOW, DONE) , and number of phone calls  
made by the access center . We will compare response rates by age, race/ethnicity, sex, insurance  type , 
and income (by zip cod e).  
 
Background                                      
The national roll -out of the COVID -19 vaccine has already revealed reduced uptake among Black 
patients due to barriers in the technical and logistical burden of vaccination, and overall hesitancy about 
receiving the vaccine. Those barriers are not distributed uniformly. Penn Medicine has played an integral 
role in delivering the COVID -19 vaccine to our community, but it will be challenging to ensure our 
approach does not exacerbate existing racial and so cioeconomic disparities in the pandemic and, 
instead, helps overcome them.  
The COVID vaccine workgroup at Penn Medicine (including the Office of CMIO, CPUP, PMMG, Access 
Center, Marketing, and CHCI) has identified approximately 19,000  patients with a cell phone number 
who are not enrolled in MyPenn Medicine ( MPM ) and do not have an email address  in the EHR and 
approximately 95,000 patients who have been sent an MPM message or email and have not yet 
scheduled an appointment . The team has  already developed and implemented a protocol to send text 
messages (using the Way to Health platform) to offer the vaccine and help schedule through 
collaboration with the Access Center. Through this program, we propose to prospectively randomize 
scheduli ng workflow and messaging to identify the most effective and equitable approaches to 
increasing vaccine uptake. What we propose will simultaneously [1] identify the interventions with the 
highest response rate that can inform Penn Medicine efforts locally and [2] conduct a pragmatic trial 
with a rigorous analysis plan that we can broadly apply to other contexts and share with other health 
systems.  
 
Study Design  
Design  
This is a pragmatic randomized controlled trial with a factorial design. 20,500  patients will be included 
and randomized to 3 study arms related to scheduling workflow in a 1:20:20  ratio  to include 500 
patients in the usual care arm (phone call only) and 10,000 patients in each text messaging arm as 
follows : 1) Phone Call (usual care), 2) Opt -In (call back), 3) Opt-in (in-bound ).  Among the 20,000 patients 
receiving text messaging (Arms 2 &3), patients will be additionally  randomized in a factorial design to 
four  different  types of  messaging content informed by principles of behavioral science in a 1:1:1:1 ratio 
(5,000 in each arm): A) Standard Messaging, B) Clinician Endorsement, C) Scarcity, and D) Opt -Out 
Framing.  
 
 
Covid Vaccine Outreach Protocol v. 11-16-21_clean  Study duration  
We anticipate 2 weeks to set up the text messaging platform, and to identify and randomize eligible 
patients. Phone calls and text messaging will begin at the same time, and initial outreach and all follow -
up messaging will be completed within 14 days from initial outreach.  
 
Resources necessary  for human research protection  
Dr. Shivan Mehta is the PI of this study. He is a n assistant professor of medicine at  the Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania  and Associate Chief Innovation Officer at Penn Medicine . All 
members of the rese arch team have  completed CITI human subjects research training. Standard 
Operating Procedure documents for the  project will be accessible to all members of the research team, 
which will keep research staff informed  about the protocol and their related duties. There are adequate 
facilities to conduct the research . 
 
Characteristics of the Study Population  
Target population  
This program will take place across patients seen at Penn Medicine practices who reside in the city of 
Philadelphia.  
Subjects enrolle d by Penn Researchers  
20,500  
Subjects enrolled by Collaborating Researchers  
0 
Subject Recruitment  
20,500  patients will be identified through automated data extraction from the electronic health record 
(EHR). All eligible patients will receive vaccine outreach  via phone call or text message . In order to 
minimize the outgoing phone call burden on the access center, we will randomize 500 patients in the 
phone call arm (Arm 1). The remaining 20,000 patients will be randomized to receive text message 
based outreach.  
 
Accrual  
We will conduct the stud y in close partnership and with approval from the COVID vaccine workgroup for 
messaging and outreach methods. As a pragmatic trial, we are randomly selecting 20,500  eligible 
patients followed by  Penn Medicine per  the current city of Philadelphia eligibility guidelines for 
vaccination.  
 
Key inclusion criteria : 
Patients  aged 18+  who reside in Philadelphia who have had  at least 1 visit in the past 5 years , or a future 
scheduled visit within the next 3 months,  with a Penn Medicine primary care provider (PCP)  on file .  
Covid Vaccine Outreach Protocol v. 11-16-21_clean  Key exclusion criteria : 
Patients w ill be excluded if they have completed any dose of the vaccine at Penn Medicine , are currently 
scheduled , have externally documented vaccination records, or have previous ly received text -message 
based vaccine outreach .  
Procedures  
We request  a waiver of informed consent as this is low -risk, supported by and embedded in clinical 
operations, and we could not practicably obtain consent. Through automated data extraction, we w ill 
identify eligible patients, along with  the name of  their primary care provider  or the last clinician that saw 
them in a visit . All patients will receive outreach about scheduling an appointment to receive the COVID -
19 vaccine.  
 
Randomization:  
20,000  patients will be randomized to 3 study arms related to scheduling workflow in a 1:20:20  ratio 
(500 usual care, 10,000 in intervention  arms) to receive: 1) Phone Call (usual care), 2) Opt -In (call back), 
3) Opt-in (in -bound) . 
 
 Arm 1: Phone Call (usual care ): 500 patients will be  randomized to Arm 1, Phone Call  (usual care ) 
and will receive a phone call to schedule their appointment from an Access Center 
representative. Access Center representatives will make up to 3 attempts to schedule an 
appointment with the patient. Patients randomized to this arm will not receive any text 
messaging.  
 
The remaining 20,000 patients will be randomized to study arms that will receive one of 2 scheduling 
workflows in a 1:1 ratio ( 10,000 in each arm):  
 
 Arm 2: Opt-In (call back ):  Messaging will include a prompt to agree to scheduling: “ If you would 
like us to call you to schedule your appointment please reply, YES. ” The access center will call 
these patients back to schedule, calling up to 3 times.  
 Arm 3 : Opt-in (in -bound ): Messaging will include a prompt to agree to scheduling, which will be 
following by a prompt to call the Penn Medicine COVID -19 Vaccine Scheduling Hotline.  
 
Among Arms 2 -3, patients will be additionally randomized to different messaging content informed by 
principles of behavioral science in a 1:1:1:1 ratio ( 2,500  in each arm):  
 
 Arm A: Standard messaging : The message describes that the patient is eligible for the COVID 
vaccine. (“ Our records show you are eligible for your COVID -19 vaccine at Penn Medicine. ”) 
 Arm B: Clinician endorsement : The message will describe an endorsement from the provider to 
get the vaccination. (“Dr. XXXX recommends that you receive the vaccination.”)  
 Arm C: Scarcity : The message will highlight the limited availability and the elevate d priority for 
the patient to receive the vaccine at Penn Medicine. (“You have been selected to receive from 
the limited supply of COVID -19 vaccine at Penn Medicine.”)  
 Arm D: Opt -out framing : This will highlight that a vaccine is reserved for the patient, implying 
that they need to opt -out (“We have reserved a COVID -19 vaccine appointment for you at Penn 
Medicine.”) . 
 
All study arms will be further randomized into 5 smaller batches of 500 patients each  (100 in the phone 
Covid Vaccine Outreach Protocol v. 11-16-21_clean  call only arm) . All patients assigned to batch 1 will receive messages on the same day, per their study 
arm assignment. A total of 4,000 initial outreach text messages and 100 phone calls will be sent each 
day for 5 days  until all 20,500  patients have been contacted . Batched messaging will help evenly spread 
the call volume for the Acce ss Center and help balance  scheduling capacity with vaccine supply.  
Text Messaging:   
All eligible patients randomized to the text message arms will receive text messaging about the COVID 
vaccine from Penn Medicine. The first message will describe that it is from Penn Medicine, ask the 
patient to confirm their name, and allow for patients to opt -out of further outreach. If the patient 
confirms, the 2nd text message will describe that patient s are eligible for the COVID 19 vaccine (“ Our 
records show you are eligible for your COVID -19 vaccine at Penn Medicine. ”). This will be followed by a 
behaviorally -informed messaging prompt  (“YES”) , followed by the mechanism through which the patient 
can ge t scheduled for the vaccine. At the end of the message, there will also be a prompt for more 
information ( “INFO ”), to defer the vaccine for now ( “NOT NOW ”), or to indicate vaccination has already 
been completed (“DONE”).  
If no reply is received and the pa tient has not opted out of messaging or deferred the vaccine (“NOT 
NOW”), they will receive up to 2  reminder text s 2 and 4 days after initial outreach.  
Arms 2 will require  patients to opt -in to receive a call back from Access Center representatives. Arm 3  
will require patients to opt -in to receive the vaccine scheduling hotline number and call to schedule 
themselves. This information will be captured in the Way to Health platform and will be securely 
transmitted in a report to the Access Center daily .  
Que stions that are submitted by patients via text will be  manually reviewed and responded to or routed 
as appropriate.  
 
Analysis Plan  
The primary outcome will be the percentage of patients who complete the first dose of the COVID 
vaccine within 1 month of initial outreach. Secondary outcomes will be the completion of the first dose 
within 2 months, and completion of the vaccination process within 2 months of initial outreach. 
Additional outcomes will include the percentage of patients with invalid  cell phone numbers (either 
wrong or non -textable numbers), non -response to text messaging, the percentage of patients that are 
scheduled, text message responses (YES, INFO, NOT NOW, DONE), and number of phone calls made by 
the access center. Heterogeneity  of subgroup response through interaction analysis will be examined 
controlling for  patient portal /email status,  age, race/ethnicity, sex, insurance, and income (by zip code). 
We will also examine vaccine completion by vaccine type, and code and examine n on-keyword replies 
for themes.  
 
We estimate a 5% response rate to the phone call only. In order to minimize the outgoing phone call 
burden on the access center, we will include 500 patients in the outbound phone call arm (Arm 1). For 
the scheduling flow co mparison, we will allocate 10,000 patients in each text message arm (Arms 2 -3). 
We will compare each text message arm to the phone call arm, resulting in 2 comparisons (arm 2 vs arm 
1, arm 3 vs arm 1). Accounting for 2 pairwise comparisons with a P -value t hreshold of .0 25 (Bonferroni 
correction ; .05/2 ), we estimate over 85 % power to detect a difference of 4 percentage points (response 
Covid Vaccine Outreach Protocol v. 11-16-21_clean  rate of 9%) using the chi -squared test of proportions  [STATA: power twoprop .05 . 09, n1( 500) n2(10000) 
a(.025)] .  
For the me ssaging comparison, we will allocate 2,500  patients in each arm. We will compare arms B -D to 
Arm A with 3 pairwise comparisons. Assuming a P -value threshold of .017  (.05/3)  and a baseline 
response rate of 8% for text messaging, we estimate approximately 87% power to detect a difference of 
2 percentage points (response rate of 1 0% for intervention arms)  using the chi -squared test of 
proportions . [STATA: power twoprop .08 .10, n1(5000) n2 (5000) a(.017)]. We do not anticipate 
interaction between scheduling workflow and messaging arms.  
 
Subject Confidentiality  
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to the requirements  
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). All PHI will be  
maintaine d on UPHS servers. Source documents are maintained in PennChart. No source documents  
will be printed or maintained in paper form at the study site. Data from PennChart will be recorded in  
Penn Medicine's REDCap system. The investigator and study team will have access to PHI within 
PennChart and REDCap . We will  label all PHI within REDCap as identifiable information so that de -
identified exports are possible. All  reports that include identifiable information will be stored on the 
Innovation Center secure dri ve, maintained behind the UPHS firewall.  Direct identifiers will be 
maintained on RedCap until manuscript publication in case additional chart review is needed for 
confirmation of results. Once data analysis and manuscripts have been published, direct ide ntifiers will 
be deleted from RedCap and the de -identified database will be stored on the Innovation Center secure 
drive.   
 
Sensitive Research Information  
This Research does not involve collection of sensitive information about the subjects that should be  
excluded from the electronic medical record.  
 
Subject Privacy  
20,500  patients will be identified through automated data extraction from the electronic health record 
(EHR). The research team will have no direct interaction with study participants. Text messaging will be 
conducted via the Way to Health platform. The initial text message will confirm identity prior to 
proceeding with additional text messaging for the intervention.  
 
 
Data Disclosure  
Patients in Arm 2 who agree to scheduling an appointment for COVID -19 vaccination will receive up to 3 
phone calls from Penn Medic ine Access Center representatives in an attempt to schedule them for their 
appointment. As such, patients will be identified in EPIC via a scheduling queue for Access Center 
representative call queue purposes.  
 
Consent  
1. Consent Process  
Covid Vaccine Outreach Protocol v. 11-16-21_clean  Overview  
Waiver o f consent for this study is  requested. Please see below.       
Children and Adolescents  
Not applicable.  
Adult Subjects Not Competent to Give Consent  
Waiver of consent is being requested.  
2. Waiver of Consent  
Waiver or Alteration of Informed Consent*  
Waiver or alteration of required elements of consent.      
Minimal Risk*  
This study involves no more than minimal risk to subjects. Outreach for COVID -19 vaccination is an 
operational imperative  and this trial is embedded in routine clinical operations at Penn Med icine. All 
participants will receive messaging indicating they are eligible to receive the vaccine as well as a prompt 
for scheduling. The only research related activity is the randomization o f patients to different types of 
scheduling and messaging strategies that will help inform best practices for future outreach to other 
patient populations. Participants must still consent to receive the vaccine at the time of vaccination , as 
is usual care .  
 
Impact on Subject Rights and Welfare*      
Subjects rights and welfare will not be adversely affected by the waiver of authorization and consent.  
All subjects will have the opportunit y to voluntarily receive  or not receive  the COVID -19 vaccination . This 
trial aims to identify outreach approaches that might increase uptake.  
Waiver Essential to Research*  
We believe that we would not be able to practically conduct the research without waiver of consent. If  
we had to obtain either written or verbal consent ah ead of time, it would substantially limit our study  
population and it may alter their participation in the intervention. Thus, we would only learn about the  
response rate for patients who we were able to speak to for consent. This would limit the  
generaliz ability to practice. We believe that subsequent completion of vaccination or deferral of 
participation in vaccination is still completely voluntary , and participants must provide consent at the 
time of vaccination . Obtaining waiver of consent  would allow u s to avoid the potential 
selection/volunteer bias for inclusion of patients particularly  interested in vaccination  that can occur 
when consent is required. Since our main objective is to  understand the potential influence varying 
outreach strategies on participant  behavior, we believe that  obtaining consent would not be practicable . 
Additionally, we have received waiver of  consent for similar studies related to population health 
outreach  in the past .  
     
Additional Information to Subjects  
Participants  who are vaccinated  will be provided with appropriate information about possible side -
Covid Vaccine Outreach Protocol v. 11-16-21_clean  effects and follow -up as per current vaccine guidelines  and Penn Medicine standards of care . 
Participants will be offered their 2nd dose appointment as appropriate per th e type of vaccine given at 
the first appointment.  
 
Written Statement of Research*  
We do not believe it would be reasonable to inform patients of their participation in this behavioral 
outreach study upon completion, as conveying the intent of the research (that it is not a vaccine trial) to 
a lay population would likely lead to unnecess ary confusion. Calling all patients would be infeasible, and 
sending a text message would not be a sufficient platform to explain the nuances of the study. Text 
messaging might also crowd out other more important messaging from Penn Medicine about health 
promotion. As this is a behavior observation study and all participants will receive outreach, we feel the 
risk of harm from informing participants is greater than not informing them.   
 
Risk / Benefit       
Potential Study Risks  
The risks associated with this study are no more than minimal. There is the potential risk of breach of  
confidentiality. We will minimize this risk by using de -identified information whenever possible and by  
maintaining all identifiable information on a secure drive and/or in a HIP AA-compliant system (e.g.  
REDCap)  as is already being done through routine clinical operations . There is also the risk of physical 
discomfort from the vaccine.  We will minimize this risk by communicating the potential discomforts at 
the time of the vaccina tion and by offering routine  monitoring , as is the current standard practice for 
COVID -19 vaccinated patients at Penn Medicine.  
Potential Study Benefits  
If a participant completes their COVID -19 vaccination , they  will potentially benefit by dramatically 
reducing the likelihood of infection by COVID -19 causing severe complications, hospitaliza tion or death . 
Additionally , their vaccination will potentially benefit the population by increasing the overall rate of 
immunity and slowing disease spread among tho se unable to receive the vaccine. Information learned 
from this study may additionally benefit society through a better understanding of how to  effectively 
increase overall uptake of the  COVID -19 vaccination,  which  could inform future vaccination campaigns  
or be applied to other population -wide contexts.  
     
Alternatives to Participation (optional)   
Participants may choose to opt -out of receiving text messaging and/or decline scheduling their 
vaccination.       
Data and Safety Monitoring  
Safety will be over seen by the PI and the study team. In the case of possible events, the PI or designee  
will review the study charts to evaluate events at each subject interaction to ensure the grade,  
relationship to the study procedure, expectedness, and the course of action for each subject is  
documented . 
Risk / Benefit Assessment  
The risks associated with this study are no more than minimal. Better knowledge of how to increase  
Covid Vaccine Outreach Protocol v. 11-16-21_clean  COVID -19 vaccine uptake could potentially address a major source of disparities among our pa tient 
population. Better vaccine uptake could potentially reduce the already increased disease burden on our 
most at -risk patients. For these reasons and those outlined in the above benefits  section, the 
investigator believes that the risks of participatin g in the study are outweighed by the  potential benefits 
of participating in the study.  
 