 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
A Technology -Based Adaptive Intervention to Promote Cardiovascular Health after Completion of 
Cardiac  Rehabilitation  (Mobile4Heart)  
 
Linda G. Park, PhD, MS, FNP -BC, FAAN, FAHA 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Protocol Date: 02/23/2018 
 
 
 
Background   
 
While numerous studies  have examined  barriers to cardiac rehabilitation (CR)  and patient outcomes 
immediately following CR, few have  investigate d long -term adherence to secondary prevention 
behaviors and outcomes of patients who complete CR. Ongoing m aintenance of physical activity after 
CR is an important part of preventing secondary cardiac events in patients  with ischemic heart disease. 
Howeve r, it is well- documented that after discharge from a CR program, many patients re turn to a 
sedentary lifestyle. Applyin g mobile heath strategies  as a method of increasing adherence by providing 
education and support  holds much promise .  
 
Close m onitoring  after CR completion  has been shown to be an effective strategy for improving patient 
adherence to program recommendations. In addition, interventions involving continued communication 
between patient and health care provider post -immediate discharge decreases hospital readmissions . 
Post -CR monitoring through mobile technology may be an effective strategy for improving patient 
adherence.  
 
Our central hypothesis is that monitoring and promotion of health- related behaviors by increasing 
patient -provider communication through a mobile device after discharge  from a CR  program increases 
adherence to a ‘heart healthy’ prescription over an extended period of time.  Through a mixed- methods 
study design, we will  examine the eff icacy  of mobile  technology t o promote  secondary prevention 
behaviors including physical activity as an extension of an outpatient CR program. The intervention 
includes use of  a mobile phone app (MVN) for physical activity and healthy lifestyle behaviors such as 
medication adherence, nutrition, stress management, smoking cessation, etc. We will apply an adaptive 
design that account s for varying  levels of adherence from  baseline to 2 months  (N=60).  
 
The s pecific aims of this randomized clinical trial comparing the intervention group (MVN app and Fitbit) 
to the control group ( pedometer only ) will:  
 
1. Evaluate differences in physical activity .  
Ho: The MVN group will have  more physical activity (measured by an activity tracker) and better 
6 minute walk tests compared to Usual Care.  
2. Determine differences in  depression and self-effica cy to continue exercise .  
Ho: The MVN group wi ll have less depression and higher self -efficacy compared to Usual Care.  
3. Assess usability  and satisfaction with using a smartphone application for participation in a post -
CR cardiac health program .  
Ho: The MVN group will report high usability and satisfaction with  the MVN app.  
 
Study Design  
Mixed methods study with a r andomized controlled trial and usability study with individual interviews.  
 
Selection of Subject s / Setting  
We plan to enroll up to 6 0 participants from  John Muir Medical Center (JMMC). JMMC is a non -profit, 
community hospital system consisting of two large medical campuses and 3 CR locations (Brentwood, 
Concord, Walnut Creek).  Participants will be randomized through a computer program to either the 
interv ention group (Mvn app) or control group (usual care).  
  
 
 
 
Inclusion criteria:  
1. ≥18 years of age  
2. History of cardiovascular disease  that qualified patient for cardiac rehabilitation ( i.e., ischemic 
heart disease, history of unstable angina, systolic heart failure with ejection fraction =/< 35%  
and Class II to IV symptoms , coronary artery bypass graft surgery, valve replacement)  
3. Within  eight  weeks of completing outpatient cardiac rehabilitation 
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Cognitive impairment  
2. Lack of English proficiency/literacy  
3. Clinically conditions including:  
a. Unstable arrhythmias, aortic stenosis, thrombophlebitis, dissecting aneurysm or symptomatic anemia  
b. Active infection  
c. Uncontrolled hypertension: resting  diastolic >100 mmHg, systolic > 180 mmHg  
d. Decompensat ed heart failure NYHA Class 3 -4 
e. Current unstable angina (No chest pain for a month)  
f. 2
nd or 3rd degree heart block  
g. Uncontrolled high grade exercise -induced ventricular ectopy -hemodynamically stable  
 Both Usual Care and MVN Intervention groups  
• Upon completi on of the CR program , participants will be given their standard instructions  and 
educ ational handouts  
• Individuals will meet with their nurse or other health care provider  in an exit interview to review 
their exercise progress, discuss their future exercise goals and plans, and receive referrals to 
additional medical services they might need after discharge from the program.  
• Baseline clinical measurements , including a 6 mi nute walk  
• An activity tracker will be given to each participant . Participants randomized to the intervention 
group will receive a Fitbit and instructions on how to sync  their data. Participants randomized to 
the control group will receive a basic pedometer  with a paper diary to record their step counts 
each day.  
• Questionnaires will ask about health care utilization, physical activit y, quality of life, and self -
efficacy .  
• The clinical measurements and psychosocial questio nnaires will be taken again at 2 -months.  
• Participants will be paid $50 in the form of a  gift card for each  month they complete. 
Participants that participate in the individual interview will receive an extra $25 card. 
Participants in the intervention group will be allowed to choose whet her they would like to keep 
the Fitbit or receive the gift cards. Participants in the control group will be allowed to keep their 
pedometer  and will also receive the gift cards . If a participant withdraws from the study before 
month two, they will be asked to return their devices.  
 
MVN Group Only:  
• During the final week of outpatient cardiac rehabilitation, the MVN  application will be 
downloaded on to the participant’s smartphone  or tablet . If the participant does not have a 
smartphone or tablet, a smartphone will be provided to them for the duration of the study. The 
participant will be required to return the smartphone at the end of their participation in the 
study.  
 
 
 
• Each participant’s indi vidualized instructions for post -cardiac rehabilitation will be integrated 
into the  MVN  application including daily medication reminders, physical activity prompts, 
educational materials, and patient -reported outcome assessment of b ehavior and psychosocial  
status.  
• Text messages  or phone calls  will be used on an ad hoc basis to provide positi ve feedback to the 
participant. Frequency of messages will depend on adherence level (adaptive intervention) .  
• We will apply an adaptive intervention: a sequence of deci sion rules that specify how the 
intensity or type of treatment should change depending on the patient's needs. We are 
developing sequential, multiple assignment, randomized trials (SMART) to enable scientists to 
build adaptive interventions. Interventions that adapt at the right times can improve participant 
outcomes (e.g., intensifying for people who do not respond to the initial treatment) while 
decreasing the cost and burden of the intervention (e.g., stepping down treatment for 
responsive participants).   
• Regular messages will be based on the American Heart Association Simple 7 Principles (3 times a 
week on random days and between 9am -6pm). Examples include prompt ing participants to 
engage in physical activity, track their medicine at certain times of the day, engage in healthy 
eating habits, or provide participants with a homework assignment to reinforce educational 
content regarding risk management.  
• Any patient reports of chest pain or acute shortness of breath will immediately prompt a n 
automated  message on the app to call 911 or their cardiologist/primary care provider. The 
consent will specify the research members including nurse will only monitor app use but not  
play an integral role in provided one -on-one coaching.   
• A registered nurse or nurse practitioner will be available to triage patient entries once a day 
(mid -afternoon). Two -way messaging between the participant and the nurse will be available to 
provide opportunities to answer more specific questions.   
• Technical support will be provided by Moving Analytics who has developed and own the MVN app.  
• We will assign patients to a grou p of 6 individuals to offer social support and a “buddy system”, 
which will be  a feature in the secure MVN app. Ideas for these groups may be sharing exercise 
tips/goals/progress, recipes, etc. The groups will be formed with consecutive enrollment. The function of the social group will be iterative with regular feedback from the gro up members that 
will be sent to the research assistant to improve this feature.  
• Up to six participants from the intervention group will be asked to complete an individual 
interview to assess the feasibility of and their satisfaction with the mobile app ov er the two 
month period.  
 Study Activities:  
Activity  Usual Care  MVN  Intervals  
MVN mobile app   X Intervention period  
Educational materials  X X Baseline  
Activity tracker  X X Intervention period  
Step count diary  X  Intervention period  
Physical activity prompts   X Intervention period  
Nurse feedback (through app 
or by phone)   X Intervention period  
Psychosocial questionnaires  X X Baseline, Month 2  
 
 
 
Blood pressure/heart rate  X X Baseline, Month 2  
Weight  X X Baseline, Month 2  
6 minute walk  X X Baseline, Month 2  
Intervention period: 2 months  
  