PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 1 of 12   1) Protocol Title  Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of incorporation of 
lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 
2) Author (s) of Protocol John W. Newman, Ph.D. - USDA Western Human  Nutrition 
Research Center and Department of Nutrition,  University of California Davis  
 
  UC Davis Researcher 
 Researcher from other institution  
 Private Sponsor 
 Cooperative Group  
 Other:  __________ 
 
3) IRB Review History 
N/A 
 
4) Objectives    
Validate the utility  of sweat as a non -invasive sample for the pharmacological investigation of 
skin biology 
 
Specific Aim  1: Develop and Report Validated Protocols for the Collection and Quantification of 
Lipid Mediator Profiles in Sweat by evaluating:  
1) Comparison of pharmacological and physiological methods of sweat stimulation (i.e. comparing the lipid mediator profile of sweat collected following stimulation by pilocarpine nitrate to sweat collected following stimulation by light exercise)  
2) Site-specificity of sweat lipid mediator composition (i.e. comparing the lipid mediator profile 
of sweat collected from the volar forearm to sweat collected from the anterior distal thigh  
and/or lower back ) 
3) Inter - and intra- individual variability of the sweat mediator lipidome  
 
Specific Aim 2 : Evaluating the impact of systemic cyclooxygenase inhibition  on the plasma and 
sweat mediator lipidome    
 
5) Background  
Blood and urine represent common human biofluids that have been extensively studied in the context of pharmacokinetic and metabolomic analyses. However, the collection of these biofluids is either physically or culturally invasive and therefore subject compliance is sometimes difficult to achieve. The use of non- invasive matrices such as hair, oral fluid, sweat 
and tears has improved subject compliance in pharmacokinetic studies, and recently there has 
been interest in conducting metabolomic analyses usi ng sweat for the same reason. While sweat 
has been previously used to diagnose cystic fibrosis in neonates and infants and to detect illicit drugs in forensic settings, it has rarely been used in metabolomic analyses due to a lack of uniform sweat collection protocols that provide a reproducible and measureable volume of sweat . With advances in technology, the Macroduct® sweat collection system was developed 
and validated by Wescor, Inc. for the reproducible collection of neonatal sweat for the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis. More recently, the Macroduct® system was used in a proof-of- principle study 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 2 of 12   to conduct an untargeted metabolomic analysis of human sweat, and has since been used to 
develop a screening tool for lung cancer based on the sweat metabolite profile . 
 As can be seen from the cited studies above, sweat has predominantly been used to study pulmonary diseases. However, given its proximity to the skin, there is also the potential for sweat 
to be an informative non- invasive matrix in cutaneous research. Current cutaneous research 
methods are dependent on tissue biopsies, which are again invasive methods, and therefore not suitable for repeated temporal sampling. To the best of our knowledge, only a single study exists that examines the composition of sweat in the context of cutaneous disease, and this study 
demonstrated that subjects with atopic dermatitis, psoriasis or hyp erhidrosis exhibited increased 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) levels relative to healthy control.   PGE2 is a member of a class of compounds known as bioactive lipid mediators, which regulate inflammatory and immune responses. These mediators, which include an ar ray of oxygenated 
lipids (“oxylipins”), endocannabinoids and ceramides, are generally produced locally via a 
variety of biosynthetic pathways in response to extracellular stimuli and function similarly to 
local hormones or autacoids. Additionally, ceramide s play an important structural role in the 
epidermal barrier. Lipid mediators have been studied previously in cutaneous research, but have depended  on a limited number of analytical targets and/or focus ed on a single class of analytes, 
preventing the identification of mediator pathway cross-talk. Our laboratory has developed methods to quantify over 125 bioactive lipid targets, most not previously studied in the context of cutaneous biochemistry. Understanding the actions and interactions of these lipid mediators in the skin could improve treatment modalities, thus improving skin care and reducing the burden of skin conditions on subjects with cutaneous diseases.  Recently, we conducted a study which demonstrated differences in the sweat lipid mediator 
profi les of subjects with an d without atopic dermatitis using the Macroduct® sweat collection 
system  on the volar bilateral forearm of human subjects  (IRB #605131). However, little is known 
about the source of lipid mediators in sweat, the effects of different sweat stimulation techniques on lipid mediator composition as well as the site -specificity of the sweat mediator lipidome. 
Collecting such baseline data is critical for the evaluation of routine mediator lipidomic analyses 
of sweat as a non -invasive tool to  support studies investigating cutaneous inflammatory 
responses, dietary manipulation, and skin diseases lacking biomarkers and therapeutic targets.   
6) Inclusion and Exc lusion Criteria  
Inclusion criteria  
• 20-40 y 
• Male 
• Weight > 110 pounds 
 
Exclusion criteria  
• Diagnosed  active chronic diseases  for which the individual is currently taking daily 
medication, including but not limited to : 
o Diabetes mellitus  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 3 of 12   o Cardiovascular disease  
o Cancer  
o Gastrointestinal disorders  
o Kidney disease 
o Liver disease  
o Bleeding disorders 
o Asthma  
o Autoimmune disorders 
o Hypertension  
o Osteoporosis  
• Recent minor surgery  (within 4 wk) or major surgery (within 16 wk) 
• Recent antibiotic therapy (within 4 wk)  
• Recent hosp italization  (within 4 wk) 
• Use of over-the- counter or prescription medications at the time of the study that directly 
affect endpoints of interest (e.g. hyperlipidemia, glycemic control, steroids, statins , anti-
inflammatory agents, and weight loss aids)  
• Adults who are not able to consent 
• Under current medical supervision 
• Ibuprofen intolerance or allergy 
• Those with a bleeding disorder 
• Current enrollee in a clinical research study.  
• Individuals with blood clotting or platelet defect disorders 
• Individuals with orthopedic limitations or cardiovascular risk that preclude participation in 
the p hysiological stimulation of sweat by light exercise  portion of the study 
• Individuals who are trained athletes or that regularly perform physical activity def ined as 
“vigorous” by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
 
 
7) Number of Subjects  
The target sample size is 10 participants  that complete the study visits. In addition, we aim to 
enroll additional participants not to exceed 20% of the calculated sample size to account for 
participants contributing incomplete or invalid data for various reasons including study withdrawal, compromised sample conditions, etc. Thus a total of 12 people will be enrolled. However due to subject withdrawal  and non-compliance, we plan to now enroll 5 additional 
subjects, bringing the total number of enrolled subjects to 17. 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 4 of 12   8) Recruitment Methods  
Participants will be recruited from Davis, Woodland, and the greater Sacramento area using the 
following methods:  
• WHNRC study sub ject referrals  
• Personal contact  
 
WHNRC Human Studies office maintains a list of people who have participated in previous studies, and who wish to be contacted about new studies. In addition, Dr. Sivamani has conducted previous studies from which there is a list of interested persons. The contact will be in the form of an email providing a study description. It will be up to the individual to respond is they wish  to participate.  
 
9) Compensation to the Subjects  
Participants will be compensated a reasonable hourly wage for their time contributions to the 
study.  P articipants will be compe nsated $10 for Visit 1, $10 for Visit 2, $10 for Visit 3, and $45 
for Visit 4 . Total possible compensation will be $75 per participant and will be pro- rated based 
on time involved. The compensation will be provided in the form of a check written to the 
volunteer. 
 
10) Study Timelines  
The study will be conducted over a one- year period. Each subject’s participation will consist of 
four visits. The first three visits will last approximately 1 hour each, the fourth visit will last 
approximately 4 hours. The duration of a single subject’s participation in the study is not expected to exceed six months. 
 Addi tionally, subjects expressing an interest in the study will be screened in-person or by 
telephone and eligibility
 for enrollment in the study will be determined by verbal completion of 
the eligibility screening questionnaire with a trained study staff member . If a subject i s 
determined  to be eligible for participation, they will be given further information about the study 
procedures and consent protocol and emailed a copy of the consent document . Time will be 
allocated at the first study visit to complete the consent docume nt and answer any questions 
related to the study.   
11) Study Endpoints  
 
• Primary endpoints:  
o Changes in sweat oxidized lipid, endocannabinoid and ceramide concentrations 
following exercise -induced sweating relative to sweat collection following pilocarpine 
iontophoresis 
o Changes in sweat oxidized lipid, endocannabinoid and ceramide concentrations  due to 
sweat collection from the anterior distal thigh  and lower back compared to sweat 
collected from the volar forearm  
o Changes in sweat oxidized lipid, endocannabi noid and ceramide concentrations 
following consumption of ibuprofen relative to baseline 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 5 of 12   o Changes in plasma oxidized lipid, endocannabinoid and ceramide concentrations 
following consumption of ibuprofen relative to baseline  
• Secondary endpoints:  
o Changes in  plasma and sweat ibuprofen concentrations following oral administration  
o Relative abundance of s weat metabolites derived from primary metabolism covering 
carbohydrates and sugar phosphates, amino acids, hydroxyl acids, free fatty acids, purines, pyrimidines, aromatics, exposome -derived chemicals  
o Relative abundance of s weat metabolites derived from complex lipids covering  
ceramides, sphingomyelins, cholesteryl esters, oxysterols, lyso- and phospholipids, mono-, di- and triacylglycerols, galactosyl - and glucuronyllipids  
 
12) Procedures Involved  
 
Prior to enrollment in study  
All volunteers will be subjected to either an in -person interview at the WHNRC or to  a telephone 
interview during which their eligibility and willingness to participate in the study will be determined. Twelve subjects eligible and willing to participate will be enrolled in the study and 
scheduled to begin participation at least seven days after  enrollment.  
  
Study Design  and Visits  
Subjects will participate in four study visits, separ ated by at least one week. On each of the study 
days, participants will arrive in the morning after an overnight 12 hour fast  (ad lib water 
consumption will be allowed and encouraged). Collection procedures will be performed at approximately the same time of the day to avoid circadian effects. Subjects will also be asked to 
not apply any cream or medication to their body 24 hours before each  study visit and refrain 
from use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen for at least 48 hours prior to each study visit . 
 
• Study Visit 1:  After obtaining written informed consent, s weat will be collected using the 
Macroduct® sweat collector from the volar forearm following stimulation of sweating by 
pilocarpine iontophoresis as part of the Webster Sweat Induction System . Following sweat 
collection, subjects will be given a 15 -minute break after which they will undergo up to 15-
minutes of light exercise on a stationary bicycle to stimulate sweat by physiological methods 
(see below). Following the light exercise, sweat will be collected from the opposite volar 
forearm using the Macroduct® sweat collector.  The study visit is complete after the second 
sweat collection.  
 
• Study Visit 2:  Sweat will be collected using the Macroduct® sweat collector from the volar 
forearm and anterior distal thigh following stimulation of sweat by pilocarpine iontophoresis 
as part of the Webster Sweat Induction System . Collect ions will occur simultaneously at both 
sites.  The study visit is complete after both sweat collections.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 6 of 12   • Study Visit 3:   Sweat will be collected using the Macroduct® sweat collector from both volar 
forearms  and the lower back  following stimulation of sweat by pilocarpine iontophoresis as 
part of the Webster Sweat Induction System . Collections will begin  at approximately 10 
minute intervals at all three  sites.  The study visit is complete after all three  sweat collections.   
 
• Study Visit 4:  A baseline sweat sample will be collected using the Macroduct® sweat 
collector from the volar forearm following stimulation of sweating by pilocarpine 
iontophoresis as part of the Webster Sweat Induction System . A blood sample (~ 6 mL) will 
be collected in EDTA -treated Vacutainer® tubes following venipuncture of the opposite 
antecubital vein. Following sweat and blood collection, subjects will consume 400 mg of 
ibuprofen orally. Blood and sweat collections will occur  at 30 minutes, 2 hours and 4 hours 
post-ibuprofen consumption. The study visit is complete after the blood and sweat collections  
at 4 hours post-ibuprofen consumption. Total blood drawn per participant over the course of the study will be ~ 24  mL.  Prior to Study Visit 4, participants  will undergo a video interview 
with the study physician (and co- PI of the study) Dr Raja Sivamani, during which time Dr 
Sivamani will obtain a medical history from the subjects and review the risks and side effects of ibuprofen with the subjects.  
 Participants will remain fasted during study visits (ad lib water consumption will be allowed and encouraged). At the end of the study visit, subjects will be allowed access to the WHNRC dining 
room where snacks such as juice, granola bars, oatmeal, dried fruit, coffee, tea and hot cocoa will be made available for their consumption.  All blood and sweat samples collected will be measured  for metabolites derived from normal 
biological processes which  will include inflammatory mediators. Additionally, blood and sweat 
collected during visit 4 will also be used to measure ibuprofen levels at each collection time.  
 
Description of the “ light exercise”  
Sweat stimulation by light exercise, such as riding a stationary bicycle with resistance, has been 
used in several recent studies to collect sweat for ionic analysis. In the proposed study, subjects 
will ride a  cycle ergometer (Monark ergometer)  with resistance for 10-15 minutes in a 
temperature and humidity monitored room. Resistance (in kg*m/min)  will be set so as to  elevate 
heart rate to that evinced during moderate (60-80% VO2max) steady state aerobic exercise and pedal cadence will be set using a metronome at  70 rpm . Heart rate will be continuously 
monitor ed by sensors during the exercise. Additionally, s ubjects will be  fitted with air collection  
masks connected to a metabolic cart  in order to continuously monitor oxygen  consumption, 
respiratory quotient and substrate use in order to ensure achievement of steady state aerobic exercise. All procedures are non -invasive and should cause minimal subject discomfort. 
 
Sweat collection following stimulation of sweating by pilocarpine iontophoresis using the 
Webster Sweat Induction System  
The Macroduct® sweat collection system and the Webster Sweat Inducer  are FDA-approved 
medical devices routinely used for sweat collection in neonates and infants in order to diagnose cystic fibrosis . The protocols for these devices are well established and freely available at 
http://wescor.com/translations/Translations/M2551 -7A-EN.pdf . In brief, the collection site will 
be cleansed with a 70% solution of isopropanol followed by distilled water, and sweating wi ll be 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 7 of 12   stimulated using the Webster Sweat Inducer. This procedure consists of attaching positive and 
negative electrodes, each containing a manufacturer-supplied pilocarpine gel disk, to the 
collection site and applying a 1.5 mA current across the electrodes for five minutes. The area under the positive electrode will be marked using a felt-tip marker and electrodes will then be removed and the collectio n site will be cleansed with distilled water . The Macroduct
® sweat 
collector will then be attached to marked site and secured using a tourniquet or bandage to maximize cutaneous contact. The collection device will remain in place for up to 30 minutes after which it will be removed and the collected sweat will be exuded into a collection vial and 
stored until analysis. 
 
   
13) Data and Specimen Banking  
All banked specimens will be stored in -20 oC or -80 oC freezers.  Participants will be given the 
option to provide consent for future , undetermined use of their specimens by initialing the 
designated section on a signed consent document and a verbal  agree ment of ‘yes’  during the 
discussion of consent for participation at the enrollment visit.  Any archived blood or sweat samples of participants having provided the described consent may be used at a later date for 
purposes not specified by this study.  All identifiable subject information will be removed except for assigned subject ID codes. If the subject does not agree to future use of specimens, all remaining  specimens  will be destroyed.   
 
14) Data Management and Confidentiality  
Identifiable information linked with the participant identification code will be stored separately 
from  any data collected during the study and will only be made accessible to the study Principal 
Investigators and the Coordinator.  Data will be collected on hard copy forms and computer-
based questionnaires using only the participant identification code.  Completed f orms will be 
kept in locked files at the WHNRC in rooms that are also locked.  Electronic files will be kept in 
folders on the WHNRC fileserver, which is password- protected  and will be limited to access for 
key study personnel only.  The WHNRC fileserver is located  behind a hardware firewall and is 
backed up off- site weekly , at a minimum. In the case that data needs to be stored on a laptop 
computer, the laptop will be encrypted.  Data entered manually will be double entered and compared to identify data entry errors.    
15) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
This study is an observational  study and involves an intervention with an FDA-approved over-
the-counter non- steroidal anti -inflammatory drug . The Co -Investigator for the study, Dr. Raja 
Sivamani, will provide oversight for this part of the research and review the study participants’ 
medical history prior to prescribing the ibuprofen to each subject.  Neve rtheless, it does present 
several challenges and various methods of data collection t hat participants will be subject to.  In 
order to ensure the safety of participants during administration of challenges or specimen collection , all aspects of the study will be carried out by trained study personnel.  The other 
collections involve non-invas ive minimal risk activities.   Participants will spend the study visit 
day in private rooms in the Metabolic Research Unit of the WHNRC containing hospital beds for rest and privacy during data and specimen collection.  A unit monitor will remain in the unit (but outside of the participant room) as a contact person for participants should any reactions, 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 8 of 12   concerns, questions, or emergencies arise throughout the visit .  Participants will never be left 
alone in the Metabolic Research Unit.  
 
The exercise- induced  sweat stimulation  (exercise bicycle) will be administered by a qualified 
physiologist and staff  who, prior to the test, will assess the subject’s risk level using the risk 
factors established by the American College of Sports Medicine: a) family history o f premature 
heart disease, cigarette smoking, hypertension, dyslipidemia, impaired fasting glucose, obesity, 
and sedentary lifestyle. Those subjects falling in the low and moderate risk categories will be further evaluated by the physiologist who will verbally administer the Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire prior to the test.  If the subject responds ‘yes’ to any of the questions, they will not
 perform the tes t. For those cleared for testing, heart rate, pulse, and blood pressure 
will be measured prior to administration of the challenge . During the test , participants will be 
asked to rate their level of perceived exertion, and if level reaches a level of ‘extremely hard’  or 
if the participant loses balance, becomes dizzy, or other adverse reaction occurs during the test , it 
will be stopped immediately .    
 Venipuncture blood draws will be conducted by licensed, trained and experienced phlebotomists. If excessive bruising or discomfort occurs, no further venipunctures will be conducted.  Sweat -stimulation by pilocarpine iontophoresis may cause minor discomfort to subjects in the 
form of slight stinging or prickling at the site of administration. Subjects will be asked 
periodically during iontophoresis if the discomfort is unbearable. If the subject responds ‘yes’, the iontophoresis procedure will be stopped immediately.  If at any time a participant refuses to continue participation or refuses to participate in a particular aspect of the study, they will be excluded from all or part of the remaining procedures 
according to their wishes .  
 
16) Withdrawal of Subjects  
During the consent process, participants  will be informed that they can withdraw from the study 
at any time without any risk of repercussion or penalty.  Compensation for participant time in the 
study will be pro -rated to reflect the withdrawal time .  Specimens previously collected during the 
study will be used as specified.    
 
17) Risks to Subjects  
There is a small risk of loss of balance, dizziness, or shortness of breath that could result from 
the 3 0 min light exercise to stimulate sweat production  (exercise bicycle).  The use of an exercise 
bicycle is expected to result in increased heart rate and sweating  but may present additional risks 
to individuals in very poor cardiovascular health or with undiagnosed cardiovascular risk factors such as family history of heart disease, h ypertension, high cholesterol, type 2 d iabetes, harmful 
use of alcohol, tobacco use, stress, physical inactivity, obesity and unhealthy diet.  All of these risk fac tors will be evaluated prior to having participants engage in the test. Potential 
cardiovascular -related serious adverse events include stroke and myocardial infarction, which 
could result in death.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 9 of 12   There is a small risk of bruising as a result of blood s ample collection.  A licensed, trained 
phlebotomist will collect blood samples to minimize bruising.  
 
The measurement of metabolic rate uses an air collection mask that fits snugly over  the nose and 
mouth. This may create a feeling of claustrophobia in some individuals. Participants may request that the mask be readjusted or removed at any time.  
 
Sweat collection procedures pose minimal risks to the subjects as they are all noninvasive. The 
Webster Sweat Inducer  uses electricity for iontophoresis based i nduction of sweating. Physical 
risks of the sweat collection may include: 
• The use of the device will require pressing on the skin. If a subject bruises easily, they may 
develop a bruise at the location of the measurements although this would be unusual. 
• Iontophoretic induction of sweating using the Webster Sweat Inducer  may cause contact 
dermatitis that may be adequately managed with topical steroids. It is also possible, although 
unlikely, that the iontophoretic procedure may cause burns to the subject. The device manufacturer has estimated that the risk of burns to be 1 in 50,000 iontophoretic procedures. It should be noted that both the Macroduct device and Webster Sweat Inducer  have been 
cleared for sweat collection by the FDA and is frequently used on infants and neonates with 
rare adverse effects reported.  
• Iontophoresis may also cause minor discomfort to subjects in the form of slight stinging or 
prickling at the site of administration. However, the procedure has been approved by the 
FDA and any disco mfort should cease immediately after iontophoresis is completed (~ 5 
min).  
 As the amount of ibuprofen provided (400 mg) is within the recommended over-the-counter dosage for this product, we do not anticipate any risks associated with administration of this drug. However, ibuprofen intake has been known to produce an upset stomach including nausea, bloating and gas; diarrhea; constipation; headaches; dizziness; nervousness; itching skin or a rash; blurred vision or ringing ears in certain individuals. Pri or to prescription of the ibuprofen, 
Dr Raja Sivamani will review the participants’ medical history and inform them of of the risks and potential side effects associated with ibuprofen intake.  We will do our best to make sure that the personal information in the subjects’ study record will be kept private. However, no study can guarantee 100% protection of private information despite all of our measures to protect each subject’s privacy. Subjects will be made aware of this during the consent process. 
 
18) Potential Benefits to Subjects  
There are no direct benefits to the participants.  Results f rom this study will benefit the scientific 
and medical  communit ies and provide information that may be used to develop non-invasive 
sampling methods to support future cutaneous research studies.  
 
19) Vulnerable Populations  
UC-Davis Students, Employees  and USDA Employees  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 10 of 12   20) Multi -Site Research  
N/A 
 
21) Community -Based Participatory Research  
N/A 
 
22) Sharing of Results with Subjects  
No results will be shared with participants.  
 
23) Setting 
All in -person contact visits will occur at the USDA  Western Human Nutrition Research Center 
on the UC Davis campus (430 West Health Sciences Dr., Davis, CA  95616).  
 The facilities at the Western Human Nutrition Research Center were designed specifically to support human trials and include a clinical wing with private bedrooms for all -day study visits , a 
physiology lab oratory with instrumentation for anthropometric mea surements, body composition 
testing, and a reception area for screening potential participants.  In addition, the second floor is laboratory space for processing, analyzing and storing bi ological specimens.    
  
24) Resources Available  
Dr. John W. Newman  is a senior scientist at the USDA Western Human Nutrition Research 
Center and holds an  adjunct appointment in the Department of Nutrition at UC Davis. Dr. 
Newman  will serve as PI for this project and is considered a leading expert in the field  of 
metabolomics/lipomic analyses .  
 Dr Raja K. Sivamani is an assistant professor of clinical dermatology at the UC Davis School of Medicine and a board certified dermatologist. His  expertise centers on general dermatology 
including medical, surgical, and cosmetic services . Dr Sivamani will serve as co -PI for this 
project and oversee use of the Macroduct sweat collection and Webster sweat induction devices as well as oversee administration of ibuprofen to study volunteers. 
   The human studies coordinator at the WHNRC, Dr. Ellen Bonnel, will be assisting the investigators with all phases of this study. Dr. Bonnel has held this position since 1999. In addition, to provide additional support for this study the WHNRC has a full complement of personnel with hands- on experience w ith phlebotomy expertise, and laboratory stress training.  
All necessary research equipment for this study is available at the WHNRC .  
 Justin Waller, M.S., is the physiologist and physiology support laboratory supervisor at the 
WHNRC since February 2016. Mr. Waller has  previous clinical and exercise physiology 
research experience with a variety of populations, including endurance athletes, post- bariatric 
surgery patients and breast cancer patients.  His areas of expertise are in cardiovascular, 
endocrine an d metabolic responses to aerobic exercise and he ha s previous experience validating 
commercial heart rate sensors and wearables.    
PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 11 of 12    
25) Prior Approvals 
N/A 
 
26) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Each subject will be assigned a unique numerical identification code which will be linked to all data files. Data is managed through the Western Human Nutrition Research Center’s Laboratory Information Management System, using the identification codes only.  Only the investigators, the sponsors, and the WHNRC analytical laboratory director will have access to this system.  Personal identifiers such as name, date of birth, social security number, driver’s license number, address, phone number, email address etc. will not be linked to the data files.  While the study is active, this personal information will be stored in a locked file cabinet in the Western Human Nutrition Research Center’s Human Studies Office, which is a secure office, along with signed consent forms. Only those individuals who are listed as study personnel responsible for consenting subjects will have access to these files. All records containing personal information will be destroyed upon completion of the study. 
 
27) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
If subjects are injured as a result of participating in this study, USDA and the University of 
California will provide necessary medical treatment. The USDA and the University of California do not normally provide any other form of compensation for injury. 
 
28) Economic Burden to Subjects  
Transportation to the USDA WHNRC  in Davis and related costs will be the responsibility of 
participants.  Complimentary on-site parking will be provided.  Compensation for participation 
sufficient to  outweigh transportation costs. 
 29) Consent Process 
Eligibility for participation in the  study will be determined upon participant completion of a 
telephone interview with study personnel.  Eligible volunteers will be invited to visit the USDA 
WHNRC for an in -person discussion of the consent document with authorized study personnel.  
Volunteers will be allowed time for personal review of the document and given the opportunity 
for a question and answer session, as needed .  If the volunteer wishes to proceed with 
participation in the study , the consent form must be signed and dated by both the volunteer and 
the authorized study personnel. 
 
30) Process to Document Consent in Writing  
SOP: Written Documentation of Consent (HRP-091) procedures will be followed.   The consent 
form must be signed and dated by both the volunteer participant and authorized study personnel. 
A copy of signed consent forms will be provided to the subject upon request and the originals 
will be kept in a locked cabinet at the WHNRC human studie s office.  
 
31) Drugs and Devices  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Investigating the stability, variability and mechanism of 
incorporation of lipid mediators into eccrine sweat  
 Page 12 of 12   Subjects will be administered 400 mg ibuprofen orally at study visit 4. Ibuprofen is an FDA-
approved over-the-counter non- steroidal anti-inflammatory drug. Although the drug is not being 
used for an anti- inflammatory effect, it is being utilized in FDA approved dosing. Ibuprofen will 
be sourced from the UC Davis Health System’s Investigational Drug Pharmacy following prescription to the study subjects by Dr Sivamani and will be stored in a locked medication container at room tem perature at the WHNRC prior to administration to the study subjects.  The 
ibuprofen will be packaged by  the Investigational Drug Pharmacy into individual doses labelled 
with subject ID numbers, and will be transfered  to the subjects by the study coordinator, Mr. 
Karan Agrawal  under instructions from Dr Sivamani.  
 Sweat collections will be conducted using the Macroduct® sweat collector, an FDA-approved medical device routinely used for sweat collection in neonates and infants. The device will be 
used accordin g to manufacturer instructions and for its designated purpose. 
 Sweat stimulation will be achieved by pilocarpine iontophoresis using the Webster Sweat Inducer, FDA -approved medical device routinely used for sweat collection in neonates and 
infants. The device will be used according to manufacturer instructions and for its designated purpose. 