 
  
1 
 COVER PAGE  
 
 
OFFICIAL  TITLE:  SafeTy  and Efficacy  of Periprocedural  Direct  Oral Anticoagulant  
versus  Aspirin  Use for Reduction Of  the RisK  of CErebrovascular  Events  in Patients  Undergoing  
Ventricular  Tachycardia Radiofrequency  Catheter  Ablation  (STROKE -VT) 
 
NCT#02666742  
 
 
Version:  13 / October  1st,2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 
 SafeTy  and Efficacy  of Periprocedural  Direct  Oral  Anticoagulant  versus  Aspirin  Use for 
Reduction  Of the RisK  of CErebrovascular Events  in Patients  Undergoing  Ventricular 
Tachycardia  Radiofrequency  Catheter  Ablation  (STROKE -VT) 
 
 
 
 
Principal  Investigators  
 
Dhanunjaya  Lakkireddy,  MD  
Kansas  City  Heart  Rhythm  Research  Foundation  
6709 W.  119th Street,  Suite  121 
Overland  Park,  KS 66209 
913-575-2157  
dlakkireddy@gmail.com  
 
Andrea  Natale, MD  
Texas  Cardiac Arrhythmia  Institute  
St. David ’s Medical  Center  
Austin, TX  
 
 
Version:  13 / October 2018 
 
 
 
 
  
3 
 INTRODUCTION 
Considerable  research  has sought  to overcome  the limitations  of available anticoagulant  and 
antithrombotic  agents.  This  includes  efforts  to develop agents  that target  specific factors  of the 
coagulation process, which  in turn may  improve  efficacy  and increase the  therapeutic index.  
Warfarin  acts through inhibition  of multiple  areas  on the  coagulation caseade and  the direct  oral 
anticoagulants  (DOACs)  like (Dabigatran/Rivaroxaban/Apixaban/Edoxaban)  .Factor  Xa is a 
primary  target  since  this factor  plays  a pivotal  role in the coagulation cascade at  the junction of  
the intrinsic  and extrinsic  pathways  of the coagulation system.  Inhibition of  FXa  is expected  to 
exert  anticoagulant  and antithrombotic  effects  by decreasing  the conversion  of prothrombin to  
active thrombin, thereby  diminishing  thrombin- mediated  activation  of the coagulation process, 
including  fibrin  formation  and platelet  activation  [1].  DOAC  helps  to anticoagulated  and 
potentially  decrease the  risk of systemic  thromboembolism  .  
Overall  Risk/Benefit  Assessment  
Atrial fibrillation  (AF)  is associated  with  5 times  increased  risk of cerebrovascular  events  
compare to  patients  in Sinus  rhythm  [2]. Even  in patients  undergoing  Radiofrequency  Ablation  
(RFA)  for atrial  fibrillation,  the incidence of  symptomatic  cerebrovascular  events  (CVE) was  
2.3%  and 41%  of those  are from  transient  ischemic attacks  and 25%  are from  ischemic  CVEs,  
despite  being  on anticoagulation. The  incidence of  asymptomatic  CVEs  rises  to 14%  after  the 
ablation  for AF,  detected  by Flair  enhancement  MRI  . Multiple  trials  have  shown that  the 
asymptomatic  CVEs  and/or  micro  infarcts  can increase the  odds  of having  dementia.  The 
incidence of  stroke  immediately  after ablation  for l eft ventricular  arrhythmias  has ranged  from  0 
to 2.7%  to 7.5%  depending  on the  case series  , but  there aren ’t many  studies  to quantify  this 
problem  clearly.  Interestingly,  the amount  of tissue  ablated  in the ventricles  is not any smaller  
than what  is done  in the left atrium.  Even  though the  stunning  phenomenon  that is seen  with  the 
left atrial  appendage  may  not be relevant  to the ventricular  tach ycardia  ablation, the  extensive 
endothelial  denudation and subclinical  thrombus  formation  at the sites  of ablation  is clearly  
under  appreciated.  No active  strategies  to prevent  post  ablation  systemic  thromboembolization  
are available in  patients  undergoing  left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  especially  on the  left 
side.  Similar  to AF, the projected  incidence of  asymptomatic  CVEs  may  be much  higher  than  
the incidence of  symptomatic  CVEs  given  the multiple  reasons  like heat  generated  from  the 
 
  
4 
 ablation, poss ibility  of necrosis  of myocardium  from  ablation  and manipulation  of the left side of 
the heart,  but currently  there are  no studies  that have  focused  on the  incidence of  asymptomatic  
CVEs.  It has been  therefore  recommended  to perform  cardioversion or  ablati on only  at 
therapeutic levels  of anticoagulation to  decrease the  risk of thromboembolism  and stroke. So  far, 
there are  no trials  evaluating  the efficacy  of unfractionated heparin  or newer  direct  thrombin or  
factor  Xa inhibitors  in preventing  or reducing  symptomatic  and also asymptomatic  CVEs  post - 
left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation. Given  the high incidence of  symptomatic  CVEs  and 
possibility  of higher  incidence of  asymptomatic  CVEs  which  has many  prognostic  implications,  
this issue  warrants  further studi es. 
 
Use of oral anticoagulation after  left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  is not standard  of care at  this 
point  and is anecdotally  used in high  risk patients  with  LV aneurysms  and those  with  severe LV 
dysfunction. Even  when  used post  ablation  anticoagulation  with  warfarin  is fraught  with  several  
practical  issues including the  time  to therapeutic range  and the need  for bridging  with  
unfractionated  or low molecular  weight  heparin  with  implications  to prolonged length  of stay 
and increased  bleeding  complications. So, the  novel  non VKA agents  probably  are a  better  fit for 
this specific situation.  Early  experience with  all four currently  available agents  (Dabigatran,  
Rivaroxaban  , Apixiban and Edoxaban)  for periprocedural  anticoagulation  seems  to be safe and  
efficacious.   DOAC  is a direct  oral inhibitor  of Prothrombin/ factor  Xa inhibitor  and thereby  
mediates  its anticoagulation  effect  . In the recently  published double  blind rand omized  clinical  
trial  DOAC  was found to  be superior  to warfarin  in decreasing  the risk of stroke  and also had 
fewer  complications  of bleeding  and death  in patients  with  atrial  fibrillation/flutter  . 
 
We believe that  peri-procedural   DOAC  use for left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  will provide  
effective anticoagulation without  increasing  bleeding  complications  and may decrease the  
incidence of  both symptomatic  and asymptomatic  cerebrovascular  events,  TIAs  and strokes.  
 Magnetic resonance imaging  (MRI)  is the most  commonly  used  imaging  test to detect  acute 
ischemic  stroke  and asymptomatic  CVEs.  There is a natural  appr ehension about  the use of MRI  
scanning  in patient  with  Cardiac Implantable  Electrical  Devices  (CIEDs)  . However,  there are 
protocols  in place showing  MRI  examination  of patients  with  CIEDs  with  minimal or  no side  
 
  
5 
 effects  . There is  increasing  data on the  safety  of the use of MRI  in CIED  patients  which  perhaps  
led to the participating  institutions  routine  use of MRI  in defining  ventricular  scar prior to  RF 
ablation  to optimize  the treatment  strategy  and outcomes. The  potential  for adverse effects  on the  
CIED  during  MRI  of the head  is far lower  than  imaging  the chest  as the device will not  be in the 
direct  MRI  field  as it is with  head  scanning.  When  performed  with appropriate  monitoring  the 
post left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  MRI  scanning  of the brain  can be safe and  help  us 
examine an  important  issue  that has not been  well  defined.  
Research  Hypothesis   
We hypothesize  that periprocedural  anticoagulation  with   DOAC  (an oral anticoagulation agent  
with rapid  onset  of action)  for left  ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  decreases  symptomatic  and 
asymptomatic  cerebrovascular  events  compared  to use of Aspirin  only.   
Study  Rationale  
Ventricular  tachycardia (VT)  is a complex  arrhythmia  with  high  mortality  rate.  ICDs  have shown 
improvement  in survival  when  placed  for primary  or secondary  prevention in  such  patients,  but 
they are not  a cure for VT  and they don’ t prevent  recurrences.  In addition, painful  ICD shocks, 
not only  impair  quality  of life and psychological  health  , but  they  are also associated  with  
increased  all-cause mortality.  Antiarrhythmic  therapy,  even  though moderately  effective,  with  
time and progressive  remodeling  recurrent  VT and subsequent  ICD therapies  are common. 
Radiofrequency  catheter  ablation  has emerged  as an important  therapeutic option to  prevent  VT 
recurrences  and reduce  the frequency  of ICD shocks  . Catheter  ablation  provides  potential  
curative treatment  in 77-95% of post  MI patients  presenting  with  monomorphic  VT and around 
60% in patients  with  VT arising  from  non- ischemic cardiomyopathy  . With  advancement  in 
technology  and newer  saline irrigation  catheters,  the risks  are very  minima l, with  high  success  
rates  . In a nationwide  sample  of 4653 patients  who  underwent  ablation  in the United  States  
between  2002 and 2011 for  post -myocardial  infarction  VT, the overall  in-hospital  complication  
rate was  11 percent  with  in-hospital  mortality  of 1.6 percent  . The  number  of catheter  ablations  
that are being  performed  for left  ventri cular  arrhythmias  continues  to grow  and varies  from  
region  to region  and hard  to quantify  . Both  retrograde  transaortic  approach  and trans -septal  
approach  are possible  routes for endocardial  radiofrequency  ablation  (RFA) with  embolic  risk 
associated  with  thrombus  formation  on the  ablation  catheters  and sheaths,  micro  thrombus  
 
  
6 
 formation  at the ablation  site during  the procedure and after  ablation  as well.  [3].Over  the last 
decade left  ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  techniques  have  evolved  from  being  more  focal  
targeted sites  to the addition of  extensive substrate  modification  targeting  active  channels  as 
represented  by mid diastolic  potentials,  late activation  potentials  etc. in the scar and scar border.  
This will change  the surface area of  the ventricular  endocardium  ablated  significantly.  The 
extensive denudation of  the ventricular  endocardium  can obviously  become  a site of thrombus  
formation  and subsequent  embolization.  Often  times  patients  with  Cardiomyopathy  (CM) 
undergoing  left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  have  poor  LV function and  have  large segments  
of akinesis/dyskinesis/aneurysms  making  them  more  prone  for stasis and  thrombus  formation. 
Treating  them  with  periprocedural  anticoagulation  has a potential  to significantly  decrease the  
risk of systemic  thromboembolization  as measured  by symptomatic  and asymptomatic  
cerebrovascular  events.  
STUDY END POINTS:  
Primary  Objectives  
Primary  end point:  To estimate  the new  symptomatic  (Stroke  and TIA)  and asymptomatic  CVEs  
(brain  MRI  lesions)  and systemic  thromboembolism  in patients  undergoing  left ventricular  
arrhythmia  ablation  with  a novel  oral anticoagulant  ( DOAC ) when  compared  to aspirin  only.  
Secondary  Objectives :  
• To estimate  the impact  of  DOAC  on major  peri-procedural  bleeding  in patients  
undergoing  left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  when  compared  to ASA.  Assessment  
done  up to  30 days  post  procedure.  
• To estimate  the impact  of  DOAC  on m inor peri-procedural  bleeding  in patients  
undergoing  left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  when  compared  to ASA.  Assessments 
completed  at 1week  post  procedure  and up to  30 days  post  procedure .  
Institutional  Review  Board/Independent  Ethics  Committee  
Before  initiation  of the study,  the investigator  must  have  written  and dated  approval/favorable  
opinion from  the IRB/IEC  for the  protocol, consent  form,  subject  recruitment materials/process  
(eg, advertisements),  and any other  written  information  should be  provided to subjects.  The 
 
  
7 
 investigator  or sponsor  should also  provide  the IRB/IEC  with  a copy  of the Investigator  Brochure  
or product  labeling  information  to be provided to  subjects,  and any updates.  
The investigator  should provide  the IRB/IEC  with  reports,  updates, and other  information  (eg, 
expedited  safety  reports,  amendments,  and administrative  lette rs) according  to regulatory  
requirements  or institution  procedures.  
Informed  Consent  
Investigators  must  ensure  that subjects  or, in those  situations  where consent  cannot  be given  by 
subjects,  their  legally  acceptable representative are  clearly  and fully  informed  about  the purpose, 
potential  risks,  and other  critical  issues regarding  clinical studies  in which  they  volunteer  to 
participate.  
Investigators  must: 
a) Provide  a copy  of the consent  form  and written  information  about  the study  in the 
language  in which  the subject  is most  proficient  prior  to clinical  study  participation.  
The language  must  be non- technical  and easily  understood. 
b) Allow  time  necessary  for subject  or subject's  legally  acceptable representative to  
inquire  about  the details  of the study.  
c) Obtai n an informed  consent  signed  and personally  dated  by the subject  or the 
subject's  legally  acceptable representative and  by the person who  conducted  the 
informed  consent  discussion.  
d) Obtain  the IRB/IEC ’s written  approval/favorable  opinion of  the written  informed  
consent  form  and any other  information  to be provided to  the subjects,  prior  to the 
beginning  of the study,  and after  any revisions  are completed  for new  information. 
e) If informed  consent  is initially  given  by a subject ’s legally  acceptable representative  
or legal  guardian, and  the subject  subsequently  becomes  capable of  making  and 
communicating  their  informed  consent  during  the study,  then  consent  must  
additionally  be obtained from  the subject.  
f) Revise the  informed  consent  whenever  important  new inform ation  becomes  available 
that is relevant  to the subject's  consent. The  investigator, or  a person designated  by 
 
  
8 
 the investigator,  should fully  inform  the subject  or the subject's  legally  acceptable 
representative or  legal  guardian,  of all pertinent  aspects  of the study  and of any new  
information  relevant  to the subject's  willingness  to continue  participation  in the study.  
This communication  should be  documented.  
The rights,  safety,  and well-being  of the study  subjects  are the  most  important  considerations  and 
should prevail  over  interests  of science and  society.  
INVESTIGATIONAL  PLAN  
Study  Design  and Duration  
This is a multicenter,  randomized, prospective  study  to determine,  if  DOAC  can be used  
periprocedural  in patients  undergoing  a scar left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation. Patients  will be  
screened  from  both the  clinic  setting  and upcoming  EP lab schedule.  The patient ’s chart  will be  
reviewed  and those  that meet  inclusion/exclusion will be  approached  for the  study.  For this 
study,  we intend to  enroll  52 consecutive  subjects  who  are undergoing  a scar left ventricular  
arrhythmia  ablation  at participating  institutions  if they  meet  all other  inclusion criteria  and do not  
have  any exclusion  criteria.  Patients  will be  randomized  in a 1:1 fashion. 
  
 Figure  1 shows  the use of ASA or   DOAC  for left  ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation.  
 
Patients  undergoing  left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  will be  consented  and randomized to  
either  ASA 81 mg  or 100 mg daily  or  DOAC  twice  daily.  Patients  randomized to  ASA will 
continue  or start  ASA 81  mg or 100 mg  by mouth daily,  and continue  up to  30 days  after the 
procedure. Patients  randomized  to  DOAC  group will stop the  ASA if  they  are currently  taking  
it;  DOAC  5 twice  daily  will be  started  3 hours  after  hemostasis  and continue  for 30 days  post  
procedure.  
 
The drugs  to which  they  are assigned  to will be  continued at  least  for 30 days  post  left ventricular  
arrhythmia  ablation. All  subjects  will be  followed  from  baseline to  30 days  post  procedure. At  
this time  they  will have  completed  the study  and can stop either   DOAC  and/or  Aspirin  at the 
physician ’s discretion. 
 
  
9 
   
 
  
10 
 Figure  1 Therapy  initiation  protocol  for procedures.  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  * In case of any two of the following:  age ≥ 80 yrs, body  weight  ≤ 60 kg, or serum  creatinine  ≥1.5  
mg/dL  a dose  of  DOAC  at a reduced  dose  will be  initiated.  
 
 
 
                 
 
                 
  
Initial Evaluation  for left ventricular  
arrhythmia  Ablation  
Start  DOAC  daily 3 hours  post hemostasis  
and continue  for 30 days post procedure.  • If patient  is already  on ASA  81 mg or 100 
mg, it will be continued  at the same  dose 
before  and after LV arrhythmia  ablation . 
• It patient is on ASA  325 mg it will be 
reduced  to 81 mg or 100 mg PO daily. 
LV Arrhythmia  Ablation  
Continue  ASA  81 mg or 100 mgPO daily  3 
hours  post hemostasis  and continue  for 30 
days post procedure.   DOAC  Arm  
 Aspirin  Arm  
(81 mg or 100 mg PO 
Daily  
• If patient  is on ASA  81 mg or 100 mg or 325 
mg, stop ASA immediately.   
 
 
  
11 
 Baseline  Visit:  
Baseline visit will be  conducted  within  30 days  prior to  procedure  (unless  noted) . This  visit will 
include:  
• A physical  exam  and medical  history  will be  performed  that includes:   height, weight,  
BMI,  NYHC  evaluation, blood pressure,  pulse, review  of systems.  
• Labs:  Chemistry,  CBC,  Coagulation, Pregnancy  test  
• Echo:  EF, LA size,  Mitral Regurgitation,  Aortic  Regurgitation,  Mitral Stenosis, Aortic  
Stenosis  within  3 months  of the procedure  
• ECG,  MRI,  TEE,  CT, Device interrogation  – most  recent  within  6 months  
• Procedural  variables  
 
Oral  Anti -Coagulation/Anti -Platelet  Regimen:  
The initiation  and stopping  of the antiplatelet and   DOAC  regimens  will be  based  on Figure  1. If 
subjects  are on Aspirin  325 mg,  the dose  will be  changed to  81mg  daily.  Once vascular  access  is 
obtained for ablation, the  patient  will be  started  on unfractionat ed heparin intravenously  to 
maintain  the ACT  levels  ≥ 300 msec during  the procedure, as deemed  appropriate  by the 
operator. Subjects  randomized  to the  DOAC  group  will be  started  on oral   DOAC  at the standard 
dose of 5 mg  twice daily  and continued for 30 d ays post  procedure  beginning  3 hours  after 
hemostasis.  In case of  any two of the following:  age ≥ 80 yrs, body  weight  ≤ 60 kg,  or serum  
creatinine ≥ 1.5 mg/dL  a dose of  DOAC  at reduced dose  will be  initiated  for those  randomized to  
the  DOAC  arm.  For drug  interactions  occurring  with  DOAC , the concomitant  use of the 
medications  per the USPI  should be  avoided or  dose  should be  adjusted  accordingly.  
 
Ablation  Protocol  
A standard  left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  protocol  that is approved at  the participat ing 
institution  and which  is in place will be  followed. Endocardial  ablation, access  to the left 
ventricle  is gain via trans -septal  approach  which  is preferred  access  or via retrograde transaortic  
approach. When  deemed  necessary  by the operator  epicardial  access  will be  obtained and  used  
for mapping  and ablation. Left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  is performed  targeting  the clinical  
VT. A voltage  map  is created  to assess the  scar and scar border.  If the VT is hemodynamically  
 
  
12 
 stable  it will be  mapped  and ablated  using  activation  and entrainment  mapping. If the VT is 
unstable, pace making, and substrate  modification  should be  done  in the target  region. The  non-
clinical  VTs  are also  targeted  at the discretion  of the operator.  Substrate  modification  including  
ablation  of potential  sites  of interest  with  mid diastolic  and LAVA  potentials  should also  be 
targeted.  Standard definition for identifying  the scar,  scar border, pace match,  induction protocol  
and substrate  characteristics  apply. Programmed  stimulation  will be repeated  after  the ablation  to 
look for any  inducible  Ventricular  Tachycardia.  Hemodynamic  support  is used  at the discretion  
of the operator.  DOAC  will be  restarted  only  after  the hemodynamic  support  has been  removed  
and hemostasis  has been  achieved .  
Hemostasis  after  procedure is  defined  as complete  absence of  any access  site bleeding  with  ACT  
< 200 seconds  and no further  need  for manual  or artificial compression.  
 
Cerebral  MRI  (as adopted from  ) 
Study  subjects  will be  screened  for new  asymptomatic  CVEs,  within  24 hours  after  the ablation  
procedure  and again  at 1month post  procedure  with  1.5 T  MRI.  A baseline  is not done  to 
minimize  the number  of imaging  studies. The  Flair  sequencing  has the ability  to delineate  a new  
embolic  lesion  from  an old infarct.  This  will help  reduce the  patient  exposure  to repeated  testing.   
The imaging  protocol  includes  a sagittal T1 -weighted  spin echo  sequence to  obtain a  better  
definition  of the anterior  and posterior  cerebral  commissures.  The parameters  of the T1-weighted  
spin echo  sequ ence were as follows:  repetition  time/echo  time  400/13;  slice  thickness  5 mm; 
distant  factor  0%; field  of view  230 mm; matrix  192×256; and acquisition  time  59 seconds. An  
axial  fluid -attenuated  inversion recovery  (FLAIR)  sequence was then  used.  The paramet ers of 
the FLAIR  sequence were  as follows:  repetition  time/echo  time  8500/112;  TI 2500 ms;  slice  
thickness  5 mm; distant  factor  30%;  field  of view  240 mm; matrix  154× 256; and acquisition  time  
3.24 seconds. A  diffusion -weighted  (DW) sequence,  with  the use of a single -shot spin echo  with  
echo -planar  imaging  technique  that combined the  motion -probing  gradient  before  and after  the 
180° pulse  with  echo -planar  imaging  readout, was  obtained;  The parameters  of the DW  sequence  
were as follows:  repetition  time/echo  time 3200/99;  slice  thickness  5 mm; distant  factor  30%;  
field of view  230 mm; matrix  128× 128; bandwidth 1502 Hz;  gradient  strength  22 mT;  duration 
of diffusion gradients  31 ms; gradient  separation  42 ms  in 3 orthogonal  directions;  and 
 
  
13 
 acquisition  time  43 se conds. For  each  DW  sequence,  the apparent  diffusion coefficient  map  will 
be obtained.  
 
On the post  ablation  MRI,  an acute embolic  lesion  was defined  as a focal  hyper  intense  area 
detected  by diffusion weighted  sequence (DWI)  with  or without  addition of  delayed  Fluid -
attenuated  inversion recovery  (FLAIR)  positive  sequence.  The size and localization  of the focal  
lesions  will be  analyzed  certified  by radiologist  blinded to  the clinical  status.  
 
Subjects  who  have  the Cardiac electrical  implantable  devices  who  are undergoing  MRI  
examination  will follow  standard  protocol  which  are in  place in  the institution .  
 
Neurology Evaluations  
Patients  will undergo a  NIHSS  and EQ5D prior  to procedure  (within  24 hours)  and post  (12-48 
hours). If changes  in the NIHSS  score of  greater  than  3 a neurologist  will be  consulted, and  the 
patient  will be  evaluated  and treated  based  on their  recommendation.  Asymptomatic  
Cerebrovascular  emboli  are defined as  cerebral  infarct  present  on MRI  or CT scan  for which  no 
corresponding  symptoms  were documented  [2]. Symptomatic  Cerebrovascular  emboli  were 
defined  as an episode  of neurological  dysfunction associated  with  a focal  cerebral  infarction  in 
the region  correlating  with  the dysfunction. . 
 
Study  Population  
For entry  into the study,  the following  criteria  MUST  be met.  
Inclusion  Criteria  
A. Signed Written  Informed  Consent  
 Before  any study  procedures  are performed, subjects  will have  the details  of the study  
described  to them,  and they  will be  given  a written  informed  consent  document  to read.  Then,  
if subjects  consent  to participate in  the study,  they  will indicate  that consent  by signing and  
dating  the informed  consent  document  in the presence of  study  personnel.  
B. Target  Population  
 
  
14 
 • Patients  undergoing  radiofrequency  catheter  ablation  for left  ventricular  arrhythmias  
secondary  to ischemic  cardiomyopathy  and non-ischemic  cardiomyopathy. Patients  with  
normal  heart  VT, i.e. no clinical  evidence  of cardiomyopathic  process  will be excluded  
from  the study.   
• Patients  undergoing  radiofrequency  catheter  ablation  for left  sided  VT based  on initial 
clinical  suspicion.  
C. Age and Reproductive Status  
• Males  and Females,  ages  18 to  80 years  
• Women  of childbearing  potential  (WOCBP)  must  have  a negative  serum  or urine  
pregnancy  test (minimum sensitivity  25 IU/L  or equivalent  units  of HCG)  within  24 
hours  prior  to the start  of study  drug.  
• Women  must  not be breastfeeding  
• WOCBP  must  agree  to follow  instructions  for method(s)  of contraception  for the duration 
of treatment  with   DOAC  plus  5 half -lives  of  DOAC  (3 days)  plus  30 days  (duration of  
ovulatory  cycle)  for a total of  33 days  post -treatment completion. 
• Males  who  are s exually  active  with  WOCBP  must  agree to  follow  instructions  for 
method(s)  of contraception  for the  duration of  treatment with   DOAC  plus  5 half -lives  3 
days)  plus  90 days  (duration of  sperm  turnover)  for a  total of  93 days  post -treatment  
completion. 
• Azoospermia  males  and WOCBP  who  are continuously  not heterosexually  active  are 
exempt  from  contraceptive requirements.   However,  they  must  still undergo pregnancy  
testing  as described  in this section.  
Investigators  shall  counsel  WOCBP  and male  subjects  who  are s exually  active  with  WOCBP  on 
the importance  of pregnancy  prevention and  the implications  of an unexpected  pregnancy  
Investigators  shall  advise  WOCBP  and male  subjects  who  are sexually  active with  WOCBP  on 
the use of highly  effective methods  of contraceptio n. Highly  effective  methods  of contraception 
have  a failure  rate of  < 1% when  used  consistently  and correctly.  
 
  
15 
 At a minimum,  subjects  must  agree to  the use of one method of  highly  effective contraception  as 
listed  below:  
 
HIGHLY  EFFECTIVE  METHODS  OF CONTRACEPTION  
• Male condoms  with  spermicide  
• Hormonal  methods  of contraception  including  combined  oral contraceptive pills,  vaginal  
ring, injectable,  implants  and intrauterine  devices  (IUDs)  such  as Mirena by  WOCBP  subject  
or male  subject ’s WOCBP  partner.  Female partners  of male  subjects  participating  in the 
study  may  use hormone  based  contraceptives  as one of the acceptable methods  of 
contraception since they  will not  be receiving  study  drug  
• IUDs,  such  as ParaGard  
• Tubal  ligation  
• Vasectomy . 
• Complete  Abstinence*  
 
*Complete  abstinence is  defined  as complete  avoidance  of heterosexual  intercourse  and is an 
acceptable form  of contraception  for all study  drugs.  Female subjects  must  continue  to have  
pregnancy  tests.  Acceptable alternate methods  of highly  effective contraception must  be 
discussed  in the event  that the subject  chooses  to forego  complete  abstinence.  
Exclusion  Criteria  
A. Target  Disease  Exceptions   
• History  or CVA/TIA in  last 3 months  
• Cardiac surgery  or neurosurgery  within  3 months  of the intended procedure  date  
 
  
16 
 B. Medical  History  and Concurrent  Diseases  
• Ongoing  ischemia  or a prior  coronary  intervention  requiring  continued dual  
antiplatelet therapy  
• Any active bleeding 
• Severe hypersensitivity  reaction  to DOACs  (including  drug  hypersensitivity,  such  as 
skin rash  and anaphylactic reactions,  such  as allergic  edema)  
• Prosthetic  heart  valves ; the safety  and efficacy  of DOACs  have  not been  studied in  
patients  with  prosthetic  heart  valves.  
• History  or bleeding  and clotting  disorders  
• Requires  dual  anti-platelet  therapy  
• Contraindications  to Aspirin  therapy  
• Contraindication to  oral anticoagulation  
•  Patients  who  have  a continuing  need  for oral  anticoagulation (i.e.  patients  with AF; 
DVT  or a mechanical  valve)  Evidence  of intracardiac thrombus  
• Patient  with  Creatinine  Clearance of  < 40 cc/min  
C. Sex and Reproductive Status  
See Section  on WOCBP  above   
D. Prohibited  Treatments  and/or  Therapies  
• Participation  in another  investigational study  related  to oral anticoagulation, drug  and/or  
device intervention. 
• Claustrophobic  patients  
• ICD generator  placement  before  the year 2000  
• Has an ICD and is pacing  dependent  without  underlying  rhythm  upon interrogation  at 
baseline  
• Patient  has abandoned leads  
 
  
17 
 E. Other Exclusion  Criteria  
• Prisoners  or subjects  who  are involuntarily  incarcerated.  
• Subjects  who  are compulsorily  detained  for treatment  of either  a psychiatric  or physical  
(eg, infectious  disease)  illness.  
• Patients  with  abnormal  troponins  or any evidence  of a recent  MI 
Eligibility  criteria  for this  study  have  been  carefully  considered t o ensure  the safety  of the study  
subjects  and to ensure  that the results  of the study  can be used. It is imperative  that subjects  fully  
meet  all eligibility  criteria.  
Women  of Childbearing Potential  
Women  of childbearing  potential  (WOCBP)  is defined  as any female who  has experienced  
menarche and  who  has not undergone  surgical  sterilization  (hysterectomy  or bilateral  
oophorectomy)  and is not postmenopausal. Menopause  is defined  as 12 months  of amenorrhea in  
a woman  over  age 45 years  in the absence of  other  biological or  physiological  causes.  In 
addition, females  under  the age of 55 years  must  have  a serum  follicle  stimulating  hormone, 
(FSH)  level  > 40mIU/mL  to confirm  menopause.  
*Females  treated  with hormone  replacement  therapy,  (HRT)  are likely  to have artif icially  
suppressed FSH  levels  and may  require  a washout  period in  order  to obtain a  physiologic  FSH 
level.  The duration of  the washout  period is  a function of  the type  of HRT  used.  The duration of  
the washout  period below  are suggested  guidelines  and the investigators  should use  their  
judgment  in checking  serum  FSH  levels.  If the serum  FSH  level  is >40 mIU/ml at  any time  
during  the washout  period, the  woman  can be considered  postmenopausal:  
• 1 week  minimum for vaginal  hormonal  products  (rings,  creams,  gels)  
• 4 week  minimum for transdermal  products  
• 8 week  minimum for oral  products  
Other  parenteral  products  may  require  washout  periods  as long  as 6 months.  
 
  
18 
 Discontinuation  of Subjects  from  Treatment  
Subjects  MUST  discontinue  investigational product  (and  non- invest igational  product  at the 
discretion  of the investigator)  for any of the following  reasons:  
• Withdrawal  of informed  consent  (subject ’s decision  to withdraw  for any reason).  
• Any clinical  adverse  event,  laboratory  abnormality,  or inter -current  illness  which, i n the  
opinion of  the investigator, indicates  that continued participation  in the study  is not in the 
best interest  of the subject. 
• Pregnancy  
− Instruct  WOCBP  to contact  the investigator  or study  staff  immediately  if they  suspect  
they might  be pregnant  (eg, missed  or late menstrual  period)  at any time  during  study  
participation.  Institutional policy  and local  regulations  should determine  the 
frequency  of on-study  pregnancy  tests  for WOCBP  enrolled  in the study.  
− The investigator  must  immediately  notify  BMS  if a study  subject  becomes  pregnant.  
• Loss  of ability  to freely  provide  consent  through imprisonment  or involuntary  
incarceration  for treatment of  either  a psychiatric or physical  (eg, infectious  disease)  
illness.  
All subjects  who  discontinue  should comply  with  protocol -specified  follow -up procedures  
outlined above. The  only  exception  to this requirement  is when  a subject  withdraws  consent  for 
all study  procedures  or loses  the ability  to consent  freely  (ie, is imprisoned or  involuntarily  
incarcerated  for the  treatment  of either  a psychiatric  or physical  illness).  If a subject  withdraws  
before  completing  the study,  the reason  for withdrawal  must  be documented appropriately.  
TREATMENTS  
Study  Treatment:  DOAC or  Warfarin   
Definition  of Investigational  Product:  A pharmaceutical  form  of an active  substance  or placebo  
being  tested  or used  as a reference  in a clinical study,  including  products  already  with  a 
marketing  authorization but  used  or assembled  (formulated  or packaged)  in a way  different  from  
 
  
19 
 the authorize d form,  or used  for an  unauthorized indication, or  when  used  to gain  further 
information  about  the authorized form.  In this protocol, the  investigational product  is  DOAC . 
 Definition  of Non -Investigational  Product:  Other  medications  used  in the study  as support  or 
escape medication  for preventative,  diagnostic, or  therapeutic reasons  as components  of a given  
standard  of care.  In this protocol, the  non- investigational  products  are none . 
Method  of Assigning  Subjects  to a Treatment  
All subjects  who  have  signe d the  study  ICF and meet  all inclusion and  no exclusion  criteria  will 
be randomized in  a 1:1 into  one of the two study  arms  (1) Aspirin  81 mg  or 100 mg  or (2)  
DOAC  recommended  dose . For  study  purposes, subjects  are considered  enrolled  in the study  
once  they have signed  the consent  form  and are randomized and  stratified  by individual  sites.  
Selection  and Timing  of Dose  for Each  Subject  
 DOAC  should not  be used  if a patient  has an allergy  or has had active pathological  bleeding  
where the  use of the agent  is contraindicated.  Similarly,  patients  who  are allergic and  
contraindicated  to ASA should not  use ASA.  
If a dose  of  DOAC  is not taken  at the scheduled  time,  the dose  should be  taken  as soon as  
possible  on the  same day  and then  continue  with  twice daily  administration  as before.    The  dose  
should not  be doubled to  make up for a missed  dose.  DOAC  can be taken  with or without  food. 
 DOAC  is not recommended  in patients  with  severe hepatic impairment.  These patients  will not  
meet  the inclusion/exclusion criteria.   
Dose  Modifications  
Dose  modification  per investigator  recommendations  and per current  guidelines . 
Concomitant  Treatm ents 
Prohibited  and/or  Restricted  Treatments  
Co-administration  of the maintenance dose  of  DOAC  is not recommended  with drugs  that 
increase the  risk of bleeding  (eg, other  anticoagulants,  heparin, thrombolytic  agents,  NSAIDs,  
SSRIs,  serotonin norepinephrine  reuptake  inhibitors).  
 
  
20 
 Other  Restrictions  and Precautions  
 DOAC  should be  discontinued 48 hours  prior  to elective  surgery  or invasive  procedures.  If 
surgery  or invasive  procedures  cannot  be delayed, exercise appropriate  caution taking  into 
consideration an  increased  risk of bleeding.  This  risk of bleeding  should be  weighed  against  the 
urgency  of intervention.  
Use  DOAC  with  caution  when  co-administered  with  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  
(NSAIDs),  including  ASA.  
Treatment  Compliance  
Patient  compliance will be  reported  by patient  interview  to assure  no medications  were missed.  
The  DOAC  bottle  will be  returned  to the study  coordinator  at their  1 month follow  up visit.  
  
 
  
21 
  STUDY ASSESSMENTS  AND PROCEDURES  
Study  Schematic  
Time  and Events  Schedule  
Procedure  Baseline  
(Within  30 
days  of the 
procedure)  Randomization  
(Within  48 prior  
to procedure ) Prior  to 
Procedure  
(Within  24 
hours  of 
procedure)  Day of 
Procedure  24-48 hours  
Post-
Procedure  Discharge  Day 30 
(+/- 7 
days)  
Follow -
Up 
Eligibility  
Assessments         
Informed  Consent  X       
Medical  History  X       
Inclusion/Exclusion  
Criteria   X       
Study  Assessments :        
Physical  Examination  X   X X X X 
Vital  Signs  X  X X X X X 
Adverse  Events  
Assessment  X X X X X X X 
Evaluation  of 
Bleeding  Events  X  X X X X X 
Laboratory  Tests  X       
Pregnancy  Test X       
Ablation  Procedure     X    
Device  Interrogation    X  X X X 
Cerebral  MRI      X  X 
Neurology  Evaluation  
NIHSS    X  X  X 
EQ5D  Survey    X  X  X 
Randomization   X      
Dispense  Study  Drug     X (3 hours  
post 
hemostasis     
Drug  Compliance    X X X X X 
        
        
        
 
 
  
22 
 Schedule  of Events   
Baseline (to be completed  within  30 days  prior  to the procedure)  
• Informed  Consent  
• Medical  History  including  medication  review  
• Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  reviewed  
• Physical  Exam   
• Vital Signs  
• Adverse  Event  Assessment  
• Evaluation of  Bleedi ng events  – including  TIMI evaluation 
• Laboratory  tests  (including  Chemistry,  CBC,  Pregnancy  Test ) 
• Pregnancy  Test  (if applicable)  
Randomization  
• Adverse  Event  Assessment  
• Randomization  
Prior to  Procedure  (within  24 hours  of procedure)  
• Vital Signs  
• Adverse  Event  Assessment  
• Evaluation of  Bleeding  events  – including  TIMI evaluation 
• Device Interrogation 
• Neurology  Evaluation –  NIHSS  
• EQ5D Survey  
Day of Procedure  
• Physical  Exam   
• Vital Signs  
• Adverse  Event  Assessment  
• Dispense  Study  Drug   
• Evaluation of  Bleeding  events  – including  TIMI evaluation 
• Ablation  Procedure  
 
  
23 
 Post Procedure  (within  24-48 hours)  
• Physical  Exam   
• Vital Signs  
• Adverse  Event  Assessment  
• Evaluation of  Bleeding  events  – including  TIMI evaluation 
• Device Interrogation 
• Cerebral  MRI  
• Neurology  Evaluation –  NIHSS  
• EQ5D Survey  
Discharge  
• Physical  Exam   
• Vital Signs  
• Adverse  Event  Assessment  
• Evaluation of  Bleeding  events  – including  TIMI evaluation Device Interrogation  
Day 30 Follow  up (+/ - 7 days)  
• Physical  Exam   
• Vital Signs  
• Adverse  Event  Assessment  
• Evaluation of  Bleedi ng events  – including  TIMI evaluation 
• Device Interrogation 
• Cerebral  MRI  
• Neurology  Evaluation –  NIHSS  
• EQ5D Survey  
Safety  Assessments 
STROKE  VT 
Non-CABG  Surgery  Related  Bleeding  Events  Criteria  
 
  
24 
 TIMI Major  Bleeding  Events  
Any Symptomatic  Intracranial  Hemorrhage,  or clinically  overt  signs  of hemorrhage  (including  
imaging)  associated  with  a drop in hemoglobin of  >5 g/dL  (or when  the hemoglobin concentration  is 
not available,  an absolute  drop in hematocrit  of >15%  or Fatal  Bleeding  (bleeding  that directly  results  
in death  within  7 days post  procedure)  
TIMI Minor  Bleeding  Events  
Any clinically  overt  sign  of hemorrhage  (including  imaging)  that is associated  with  a fall in 
hemoglobin concentration of 3 to < 5 g/dL  (or, when  hemog lobin concentration  is not available,  an 
absolute  drop  in hematocrit  of 9 to < 15%)  
TIMI Bleeding  Events  Requiring  Medical  Attention  
Any bleeding  event  that requires  medical  treatment,  surgical  treatment,  or laboratory  evaluation  and 
does not meet  criteri a for a major  or minor  bleeding  event,  as defined above  
Insignificant  Bleeding  Events  (ie, TIMI Minimal  Bleeding  Event ) 
A reported  blood loss  or bleeding  event  episode  not meeting  any of the above  criteria  
Clinically  Significant  Bleeding  Events  
The composite  endpoint  of TIMI major  bleeding  event,  TIMI minor  bleeding  event,  or bleeding event  
requiring  medical  attention  is considered  clinically  significant  for the TIMI scale  
Not a TIMI  Bleeding  Event  
 
Primary  End  Point Assessment   
Incidence of  periprocedural  embolic  events  –TIA/CVA/other  systemic  embolic  events  
immediately  after  the left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation  up to  30 days  post  left ventricular  
arrhythmia  ablation.  
The incidence  of new  asymp tomatic  cerebrovascular  events  as documented by MRI  at 24-48 
hours  post  procedure  and at 30 days  after  the left ventricular  arrhythmia  ablation. 
 
Secondary  End  Point  Assessments  
A. Major  bleeding  events  as defined  above  using  TIMI  criteria  
B. Minor  Bleeding  events  as defined  by the TIMI criteria  
 
  
25 
 C. Cardiovascular  mortality  
D.  All-Cause mortality  
E. Any other  adverse events  occurring  during  the study  period 
 
ADVERSE  EVENTS  
An Adverse  Event  [AE]  is defined  as any new  untoward medical  occurrence or  worsening  of a 
pre-existing  medical  condition in  a patient  or clinical  investigation  subject  administered  an 
investigational (medicinal)  product  and that does  not necessarily  have a  causal  relationship  with  
this treatment.  An AE can therefore be  any unfavorable  and unintended sign  (including  an 
abnormal  laboratory  finding, for example),  symptom, or  disease temporally  associated  with  the 
use of investigational  product, whether  or not considered  related  to the investigational product.  
The causal  relationship  to study  drug  is determined  by a physician  and should  be used  to assess 
all adverse events  (AEs).  The causal  relationship  can be one of the followi ng: 
• Related:  There is  a reasonable causal  relationship  between  study  drug  administration  and 
the AE. 
• Not Related:  There is  not a reasonable causal  relationship  between  study  drug  
administration  and the AE. 
The term  “reasonable causal  relationship ” means  there is  evidence to  suggest  a causal  
relationship.  
Adverse  events  can be spontaneously  reported  or elicited  during  open -ended  questioning, 
examination,  or evalu ation  of a subject.  (In order  to prevent  reporting  bias,  subjects  should not  be 
questioned regarding  the specific occurrence  of one or more  adverse events).   
Serious  Adverse Events  
Serious  Adverse Event  (SAE) is  any untoward medical  occurrence at  any dose that:  
• results  in death  
 
  
26 
 • is life-threatening  (defined  as an event  in which  the subject  was at risk of death  at the time  
of the event;  it does  not refer  to an event  which  hypothetically  might  have  caused  death  if 
it were more  severe)  
• requires  inpatient  hospi talization  or causes  prolongation of  existing  hospitalization  (see 
NOTE *: below  for exceptions)  
• results  in persistent  or significant  disability/incapacity  
• is a congenital  anomaly/birth defect  
• is an important  medical  event, defined  as a medical event  that may not be immediately  
life-threatening  or result  in death  or hospitalization  but, based  on appropriate  medical  and 
scientific  judgment, may  jeopardize  the subject  or may require  intervention (e.g.,  medical,  
surgical)  to prevent  one of the other  serious  outcomes  listed  above. Examples  of such  
events  include  but are not  limited  to intensive  treatment in  an emergency  department  or at 
home  for allergic bronchospasm;  blood dyscrasias  or convulsions  that do not  result  in 
hospitalization.   
• Potential drug -induced liver  injury  (DILI)  is also considered  an important  medical  event --
see the  DILI  section  below  for a  definition  of a potential DILI  event.  
• Suspected  transmission  of an infectious  agent  (eg, pathogenic  or non- pathogenic)  via the 
study  drug  is an SAE.   
• Although  pregnancy, overdose, and  cancer  are not always  serious  by regulatory  definition,  
these events  must  be handled  as SAEs.  
*NOTE:  The following  hospitalizations  are not considered  SAEs:   
• A visit to  the emergency  room  or other  hospital  department  lasting  less than  24 hours  that 
does not result  in admission  (unless  considered  an “important  medical  event ” or a life-
threatening  event)  
• Elective  surgery  planned before  signing consent  
• Admissions  as per protocol  for a  planned medical/surgical  procedure  
• Routine  health assessment  requiring  admission  for baseline/trending  of health  status  (eg, 
routine  colonoscopy)  
• Medical/surgical  admission other  than  remedying  ill health  state  that was planned before  
study  entry.  Appropriate  documentation is  required  in these cases  
• Admission  encountered  for another  life circumstance that  carries  no bearing  on health  
status  and requires  no medical/surgical  intervention  (eg, lack  of housing, economic  
inadequacy, caregiver  respite,  family  circumstances,  administrative  reason)  
• In this study, the following  adverse  events  are to be reported  to BMS,  regardless  of whether  
these reports  are classified  as serious  or unexpected:  
 
  
27 
 Potential or  suspected  cases  of liver  injury  including  but not limited  to liver  test 
abnormalities,  jaundice,  hepatitis  or cholestasis.  
 
Serious  Adverse Event  Collecting  and Reporting  
Following  the subject’s  written  consent  to participate in  the study,  all SAEs,  whether  related  or 
not related  to study  drug, must  be collected,  including  those  thought  to be associated  with  
protocol -specified  procedures. All  SAEs  must  be collected  that occur  during  the screening  period  
and within  30 days  of discontinuing  dosing. If applicable,  SAEs  must  be collected  that relate to  
any later  protocol -specific procedure  (such  as follow -up skin biopsy).  
The investigator  should report  any SAE  occurring  after these time  periods  that is believed  to be 
related  to study  drug  or protocol -specified  procedure.  
An SAE  report  should be  completed  for any event  where doubt  exists  regarding  its status  of 
seriousness.  
If the investigator  believes  that an SAE  is not related  to study  drug,  but is potentially  related  to 
the conditions  of the study  (such  as withdrawal  of previous  therapy,  or a complication  of a study  
procedure), the  relationship  should be  specif ied in the narrative section  of the SAE  Report  Form.  
SAEs,  whether  related  or unrelated  to the study  drug, and  pregnancies  must  be reported  to BMS  
within  24 hours. SAEs  must  be recorded  on the  SAE  Report  Form;  Pregnancies  on a  Pregnancy  
Surveillance Form.  
SAE  Email  Address:  dlakkireddy@gmail.com  
SAE  Fax Number:  913-575-2157 
If only  limited  information is  initially  available,  follow -up reports  are required.  (Note:  Follow -up 
SAE  reports  should include  the same investigator  term(s) initially  reported.)   
All SA Es should be  followed to  resolution or  stabilization.  
SAE Reconciliation  
The investigator  will reconcile the  clinical  database SAE  cases  transmitted  to the study  team . The  
DSMB  and study  steering  committee  will adjudicate the adverse events  in the event  of 
disagreement.  
 
  
28 
 Non-Serious  Events  
A non- serious  adverse event  is an AE not classified  as serious.  
Non-Serious  Adverse Events  (NSAEs)  Collecting  and Reporting  
The collection  of non- serious  adverse event  (NSAE) information  should begin  at initiation  of 
study  drug.  Non -serious  adverse event  information should also  be collected  from  the start  of a 
placebo  lead -in period or  other  observational  period  intended to  establish  a baseline status  for the  
subjects.   
Non-serious  AEs  should be followed to  resolution  or stabilization,  or reported  as SAEs  if they  
become serious. Follow -up is  also required  for non- serious  AEs  that cause interruption or  
discontinuation of  study  drug, or those  that are present  at the end of study  treatment  as 
appropriate.  
Laboratory Test  Abnormalities  
The following  laboratory  abnormalities  should be  captured  and reported  as appropriate:  
• Any laboratory  test result  that is clinically  significant  or meets the definition  of an SAE  
• Any laboratory  test result  abnormality  that required  the subject  to have  study  drug 
discontinued or  interrupted 
• Any laboratory  test result  abnormality  that required  the subject  to receive specific 
corrective therapy.   
It is expected  that wherever  possible, the  clinical  rather  than  the laboratory  term  will be  used  by 
the reporting  investigator  (eg, use the term  anemia  rather  than  low hemoglobin  value).   
Laboratory  test abnormalities  are provided to  BMS  via annual  safety  reports  (if applicable),  and 
interim or  final  study  reports.  
 
Pregnancy  
If, following  initiation  of the investigational product, it is  subsequently  discovered that  a study  
subject  is pregnant  or may  have been  pregnant  at the time  of investigational  product  exposur e, 
including  during  at least  5 half -lives  after  product  administration,  the investigational product  will 
 
  
29 
 be permanently  discontinued in  an appropriate  manner  (eg, dose  tapering  if necessary  for subject  
safety).   
The investigator  must  immediately  notify  Wor ldwideSafety@BMS.com  of this event  via the 
Pregnancy  Surveillance Form  within  24 hours  and in accordance with SAE  reporting  procedures.  
Follow -up information  regarding  the course  of the pregnancy, including  perinatal  and neonatal  
outcome  and, where  applicable,  offspring  information  must  be reported  on a Pregnancy  
Surveillance Form.  
Any pregnancy  that occurs  in a female partner  of a male  study  participant  should be  reported  to 
BMS.  Information on this  pregnancy  may  also be collected  on the  Pregnancy  Surveillance Form.  
Protocol -required  procedures  for study  discontinuation and  follow -up must  be performed  on the  
subject  unless  contraindicated  by pregnancy  (eg, x-ray studies). Other  appropriate  pregnancy  
follow -up procedures  should be  considered  if indicated.  
Overdose  
An overdose  is defined as  the accidental  or intentional  administration  of any dose of a product  
that is considered  both excessive and  medically  important.  All occurrences  of overdose  must  be 
reported  as SAEs.  
Potential  Drug -Induced Liver Injury  (DILI)  
Wherever  possible, timely  confirmation  of initial liver -related  laboratory  abnormalities  should 
occur  prior  to the reporting  of a potential  DILI  event.  All occurrences  of potential DILIs,  
meeting  the defined  criteria,  must  be reported  as SAEs.  
Poten tial drug  induced liver  injury  is defined  as  
1. AT (ALT  or AST)  elevation  > 3 times  upper  limit of  normal  (ULN)  
AND  
2. Total  bilirubin  > 2 times  ULN,  without  initial findings  of cholestasis  (elevated  serum  
alkaline  phosphatase),  
AND  
 
  
30 
 3. No other  immediately  apparen t possible  causes  of AT elevation  and hyperbilirubinemia,  
including, but  not limited  to, viral  hepatitis,  pre-existing  chronic  or acute liver  disease,  or 
the administration  of other  drug(s) known to  be hepatotoxic.  
Other Safety  Considerations  
Any significa nt worsening  noted during  interim or  final  physical  examinations,  
electrocardiograms,  x-rays,  and any other  potential  safety  assessments,  whether  or not these 
procedures  are required  by the protocol, should also  be recorded  as a non- serious  or serious  
adve rse event,  as appropriate, and  reported  accordingly.  
DATA MONITORING  COMMITTEE  
To meet  the study ’s ethical  responsibility  to its subjects,  an independent  data  safety  monitoring  
Board  (DSMB)  will monitor  results  during  the study.  The board  consists  of 2 ph ysicians  and 1 
statistician  who  have  no formal  involvement  or conflict  of interest  with  the subjects  or the 
investigators.  Records  will be reviewed  after the first 50 patients  and then  at the completion  of 
the study.   
If the major  bleeding  events  in the  DOAC  group occur  at >15%  but <30%  (absolute  event  rate)  
of those  in the ASA group during  any of the assessments,  a recommendation  will be  made to  
consider  modifying  the study  by the members  of the DSMB.  First  consideration to  modify  is to 
decrease the  dose  of the drug to 2.5mg  PO twice  daily.  If the major  bleeding  events  in the  
DOAC  group occur  at >30%  (absolute  event  rate)  of those  in the ASA group during  any of the 
assessments,  a recommendation will be  made to  stop the  study  by the members  of the DSMB.  
STATI STICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  
Study  Management  and Sample  Size  Justification  
This is a pilot  study  and 52 total patients  will be  enrolled  in the study.   We  expect  to analyze a  
total of  50 patients  and each  arm will consist  of 25 patients.  The additional  2 allows  for attrition.  
Since this  is a pilot  study,  the number  needed  to treat  to achieve a  pre-specified  statistical 
significance cannot  be calculated  accurately.  Exact  sample  size could not  be given  due to lack  of 
pre-existing  data on this  subject.  We hypothesize  a 30%  difference  in outcomes  can be seen  with  
a total sample  size of 50 patients.   
Data  Collection  Center  
 
  
31 
 The Kansas  City  Heart  Rhythm  Research  Foundation will be  the coordinating  site for the  study.  
A project  manager  (PM) with the help  of the PI will create the  study  worksheets  and create the  
CRFs.  The sites  will complete  the paper  CRF  and submit  via secure email  to the project  
manager.  The PM will assist  the Database Manager  (DM) with  updating  the access  database and  
providing  computer  support  for outside  centers.  All data will be  submitted  via secure email  
including  de-identified  patient  data that  is to be used  as source.  
Participant’s  data will be  de-identified  and a code will be  assigned.  The code will consist  of Site 
Number, Patient  Number  and Patien t Initials.   The  coordinator  at that site will have  access  to the 
code;  the linking  list will be  destroyed  at the completion of  the project.   
Statistical  analysis:  Patients  will be  randomized in  a stratified  manner  to control  arm versus  
treatment  arm.  We will analyze  the differences  in secondary  endpoints  between  the two groups  
for major,  minor  bleeding  and cardiovascular  mortality  up to  30 days  post  ablation. Categorical  
variables  will be  reported  as counts  and percentages  and continuous  variables  will be  expressed  
as mean  ± SD. Continuous  variables  will be  compared  using  t-test for normally  distributed  data 
or Mann  Whitney  U test for non- normally  distributed  data as  deemed  appropriate.  Categorical  
events  will be  compared  using  chi-square test  for parametr ic data.  
Univariate  and multi- variate  analysis  will be  performed  to identify  the predictors  of systemic  
thromboembolic  events  and mortality.  This  is a pilot  study  to study  the feasibility  and safety  of 
the study.   A larger  study  will be  done  in the future  if there is  a positive  signal.  
Compliance  with  the Protocol  
The study  shall  be conducted  as described  in this approved protocol. All  revisions  to the protocol  
must  be discussed  with,  and be prepared  by the study  team .  
 
  
32 
 GLOSSARY OF  TERMS  
Term  Definition  
Adverse  Reaction  An adverse event  that is considered  by either  the 
investigator  or the sponsor  to be related  to the 
investigational product. 
Expedited  Safety  Report  Rapid  notification  to investigators  of all SAEs  that are 
suspected  (related  to the investigational  product)  and 
unexpected  (ie, not previously  described  in the 
Investigator  Brochure), or  that could be  associated  with  
the study  procedures.   
Hemostasis  Defined  by no further ooze  from  groin  puncture  sites  after  
pressure  hold is  released.  Typically,  3-4 hours  post  
procedure.  
SUSAR  Suspected,  Unexpected,  Serious  Adverse  Reaction  as 
termed  by the European  Clinical Trial  Directive  
(2001/20/EC).  
Unexpected  Adverse  
Reaction  An adverse reaction,  the nature  or severity  of which  is not 
consistent  with  the applicable product  information (eg,  
Investigator  Brochure  for an unapproved investigational  
product).  
Peri-Procedural  Bleeding  Occurring  prior to  the procedure  within  48 hours  and up 
to 48 hours  post  procedure. 
Recent  MI Recent  is defined  as within  30 days  of the planned  
procedure.   
 
  
33 
 LIST  OF ABBREVIATIONS  
ACE  Asymptomatic  Cerebrovascular  Event  
AE Adverse  Event  
AF Atrial Fibrillation  
ASA  Aspirin  
DOAC  Direct  Oral Anticoagulant  
CIED  Cardiac Implantable  Electrical  Devices  
CTCAE  Common Terminology  Criteria  for Adverse  Events  
CVA  Cerebrovascular  Accident  
CVE  Cerebrovascular  Events  
EP Electrophysiology  
ESR Expedited  Safety  Report  
FDA  Food and  Drug  Administration  
FSH Follicle -Stimulating  Hormone  
GCP  Good  Clinical  Practice  
HCG  Human  Chorionic  Gonadotropin  
HRT  Hormone  Replacement  Therapy  
IB Investigator  Brochure  
ICD Implantable  Cardioverter  Defibrillator  
 
  
34 
 ICH International  Conference  on Harmonisation  
IEC Independent  Ethics  Committee  
IND Investigational  New  Drug  (Application)  
IRB Institutional  Review  Board  
ISR Investigator -Sponsored Research  
MRI  Magnetic Resonance  Imaging  
NCI National  Cancer  Institute  
NIHSS  National  Institute  of Health  Stroke  Score  
NSAE  Non-Serious  Adverse  Event  
RFA  Radiofrequency  Ablation  
SAE  Serious  Adverse  Event  
SUSAR  Suspected  Unexpected  Serious  Adverse  Reaction  
TIA Transient  Ischemic  Attack  
TIMI  Thrombolysis  In Myocardial  Infarction  
VT Ventricular  Tachycardia  
VKA  Vitamin  K Antagonist  
WOCBP  Women  of Child -Bearing  Potential  
 
  
 
  
35 
 Attachment A  
Algorithm  for subjects  who have  Cardiac  implantable  devices  and who  are undergoing  
brain  MRI  examination  (as adopted from  [2]) 
General:  
1. MRI  scans  will be  performed  in a 1.5 T  scanner.  
2. Subjects  will undergo interrogation  of the device  (CIED)  before and  after  the scan  by 
experienced  heart  rhythm  management  personnel, outside  the MRI  room.  
3. Patient  height  and weight  will be  recorded  to determine  the specific  absorption rate (SAR) 
levels  not to exceed  the manufacturer ’s pre-specified  limits,  if in case,  the parameters,  
repetition  times,  number  of slices  and angle  will be  changed  accordingly.  
4. A crash  cart and ACLS  trained  health  care professional  will be  available  during  the entire  
procedure.  
5. Blood pressure,  pulse  oximetry  and cardiac rhythm  will be  monitored. If any signs  of 
hemodynamic  instability  (BP<90/60, HR<40)  or ventricular  fibrillation  the procedur e will be  
stopped and  patient  will be  managed  as per the ACLS  protocol.  
Device (CIED)  interrogation  and monitoring:  
1. Device interrogation  will include  measurements  of battery  voltage, P - and R-wave 
amplitudes  (if present),  and lead  impedance  and pacing  threshold for all leads.  
2. Pacing  threshold measurements  will be  performed  at 10 beats/min  above  the programmed 
pacing  rate (if pacemaker  dependent)  or, 10 beats/min  above  the patient's  intrinsic  rate.  The 
pacing  rate for testing  can be increased  by increm ents of 10 beats/min,  if there is  insufficient  
suppression of  the patient's  underlying  rhythm.  
3. The  pacing  rate will gradually  be decreased  to 40 beats/min,  if the patient  has an intrinsic  
rhythm  of greater  than  40 beats/min,  the device will  be programme d to pacing  and sensing  
functions  disabled  (ODO)  [Chamber  paced -none;  Chamber  sensed --atria  and ventricle;  Mode  
of response  –none]  or OVO [Chamber  paced -none;  Chamber  sensed -ventricle;  Mode  of 
response -none]). The  patient  will then  be observed for 5 minute s before  the scan.  If 
symptoms  are noted, the  pacing  function will be  reprogrammed  to an asynchronous  pacing  
mode  (DOO)  [asynchronous  pacing  mode  using  both atrial  and ventricular  leads]  or (VOO)  
[asynchronous  pacing  mode  using  only  the ventricular  lead].  If the patient  has a device  that 
does not allow  permanent  reprogramming  to an ODO or  OVO mode,  the patient  will be  
 
  
36 
 reprogrammed  to an asynchronous  mode  (DOO  or VOO),  and the pacing  output  for all  active 
leads  and pulse  width  will be set to a minimum value.  If there is  no intrinsic  rhythm  when  the 
device is  reprogrammed  to 40 beats/min,  the patient  will be  considered  pacemaker  
dependent, and  the device  will be  programmed  to an asynchronous  pacing  mode  (DOO or  
VOO).  The patient  will be  observed for 5 minutes  before  the scan  to ensure that the 
asynchronous  pacing  is well  tolerated.  If not, the  original  pacing  parameters  will be  restored  
and the scan  will not  be performed.  
4. Immediately  after the scan,  initial device parameters  will be  restored.  Post  scan  devic e 
parameter  interrogation  will be  performed  using  the pre-scan interrogation  protocol. If there 
is a significant increase  in pacing  threshold ( ≥0.5 V at 0.4 ms  or any increase at  a wider  pulse  
width)  after  the scan  compared  with  before  the scan,  the pacing  output  will be  increased  to 
maintain  a 2- to 2.5-times  amplitude  safety  margin  at the physician's  discretion. If there  is a 
significant decrease in  the P- and R-wave amplitudes,  the sensitivities  will be adjusted  to 
maintain  adequate atrial  and ventricula r electrocardiogram  detection.  
Implantable  cardioverter- defibrillator  interrogation  and programming:  
1. The  pacing  rate will gradually  be decreased  to, 40 beats/min.  If the patient  has an intrinsic  
rhythm  and is asymptomatic,  the device will be  programmed  to no pacing  (ODO or  OVO).  
All tachycardia therapy  and detection  functions  will be disabled. The  patient  will be  observed 
for 5 minutes  before  the scan.  If the patient  does  not have  a stable  intrinsic  heart  rate or  
symptoms  are noted, the  patient  will be  considered pacemaker  dependent. Subjects  with  
ICDs  who  are pacemaker  dependent  are excluded  from  the study.  
2. Immediately  after the scan,  all tachycardia therapy  and detection  functions  will be  
restored.  Post  scan  interrogation  will be  performed  as describ ed earlier  for pacemaker  
Subjects.  
3. Subjects  with  1 or more  parameter  changes  will be asked  to return  for 3 follow -up 
interrogations  over  a six-month period, which  will be  scheduled  less than  7 days after the 
procedure, again  at 3 months  (±30 days)  after  the MRI  procedure,  and at 6 months  (±30 days)  
after the MRI  procedure.  If no parameter  changes  requiring  multiple  follow -up visits  occur,  
the patient  will require  a single -device interrogation  between  3 and 6 months  (±30 days)  after  
the MRI  procedure.  
 
  
37 
 REF ERENCES  
1. Cabral  KP, Ansell  JE. The role of factor  Xa inhibitors  in venous  thromboembolism  
treatment.  Vasc Health  Risk  Manag.  2015 Jan  30;11:117- 23. doi:  
10.2147/VHRM.S39726. eCollection  2015. Review.    PubMed ID: 25673997. 
 
2. Ghanbari  H, Başer  K, Jongnarangsi n K, Chugh  A, Nallamothu  BK,  Gillespie  BW,  Başer  
HD, Suwanagool  A, Crawford  T, Latchamsetty  R, Good E,  Pelosi  F Jr, Bogun F, Morady  
F, Oral  H. Mortality  and cerebrovascular  events  after  radiofrequency  catheter  ablation  of 
atrial  fibrillation.  Heart  Rhythm.  2014 Sep;11(9):1503- 11. doi:  
10.1016/j.hrthm.2014.05.003. Epub 2014 May  6. Erratum  in: Heart  Rhythm.  2015 
Jan;12(1):253. Swangasool,  Arisara  [corrected  to Suwanagool, A risara].    PubMed 
ID: 24813379.  