Statistical Analysis Plan  (IRB20 -0847)  
Can Vitamin D Reduce the Burden of COVID -19? 
8/14/2025 
 
1 
 Primary Outcome Measure 
Title:  Time from randomization to first participant -reported COVID -19 infection. 
Description: Reported in a post -randomization survey. 
Time frame: From da te of randomization to  the earliest of either the first participant- reported 
COVID- 19 infection up to and including 365 days after randomization or right censoring up to 
365 days after randomization. C ensoring events include  (1) the last date of a completed post -
randomization survey if no post -randomization surveys report COVID -19 infection and the 
completion date of the last post -randomization survey was ≤ 365 days after randomization, (2) 
365 days after randomization if no post -randomization surveys report  COVID -19 infection up to 
and including 365 days after randomization and the  completion date of the last post -
randomization survey was >365 days after randomization, or (3) date of study withdrawal.   
 
Primary analysis: W e will use a multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression model to 
estimate  an adjusted hazard ratio of the effect of moderate versus low dose vitamin D on the 
outcome . Covariates will include age, sex, race and ethnicity, baseline sun exposure, baseline 
insomnia severity, baseline COVID -19 exposure outside work, baseline employment, and 
baseline geographic location. The selection and coding of the se covariates mirror a prior NIH -
funded trial of vitamin D and  COVID -19 ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) . Coding of the se covariates includ e 
age (continuous), sex (male versus female), race and ethnicity (non- Hispanic White versus non-
White or Hispanic), sun exposure (average ≤30 minutes per day versus >30 minutes per day), insomnia severity (no or subthreshold insomnia versus moderate or seve re insomnia), COVID -19 
exposure outside work (no versus yes), and employment (no versus yes). Non- Hispanic White 
participants will be defined as those who report White race and non- Hispanic or Latino ethnicity. 
Non-White or Hispanic participants will be defined as those who report either non- White race or 
Hispanic or Latino ethnicity. Whereas recruitment in the NIH trial was limited to Chicagoland 
and stratified by recruitment  site (UChicago Medicine and Rush University Medical Center), this 
study recruited participants across the United States, such that we  will include baseline  
geographic location as a covariate, defined by baseline mailing address latitude  <40.0 or ≥ 40.0 
degrees. Furthermore, whereas the NIH trial recruited participants who concluded their 
participation prior to when Omicron arrived in Chicago about December 1, 2021, every participant in this study could be active in the study after Omicron arrived in the United States  
about December 1, 2021. R ather than control for randomization date with an indicator variable 
for potential participation after Omicron arrived  like the NIH trial, we will control for 
randomization date with  a series of thirteen quarters defined by calendar quarter and year (Q1 
2021 [December 2020 through March 2021], Q2 2021 [April 2021 through June 2021], Q3 2021 [July 2021 through September 2021], Q4 2021 [October 2021 through December 2021], Q1 2022 [January 2022 thro ugh March 2022], etc. up to Q1 2024 [January 2024 through April 
2024]).  
 Secondary  analysis  of non -Hispanic White participants living north of 40.0 degrees : We 
will use a multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression model to estimate  an adjusted 
hazard ratio of the effect of moderate versus low dose vitamin D on the outcome in  participants 
who are non -Hispanic White and whose baseline mailing address latitude is ≥ 40.0 degrees. 
Covariates will mirror those described in the primary analysis, excluding race and ethnicity and baseline geographic location. We prespecify this secondary analysis because the NIH trial cited 
Statistical Analysis Plan  (IRB20 -0847)  
Can Vitamin D Reduce the Burden of COVID -19? 
8/14/2025 
 
2 
 above found stronger evidence of increased time to first COVID -19 infection with vitamin D 
supplementation among non- Hispanic White participants , and participants in that trial were 
recruited in the Chicagoland area which has a latitude north of 40.0 degrees. The NIH trial also 
found stronger evidence of increased time to first COVID -19 infection with vitamin D 
supplementation among participants who reported an average of  ≤30 minutes of sun per day . 
 Additional Analyses  
Time-varying analysis:  We will use a time -varying, multivariable Cox proportional hazards 
regression model to estimate  an adjusted hazard ratio of the effect of moderate versus low dose 
vitamin D in each calendar quarter  (Q1: January through March, Q2: April through June, Q3: 
July through September, Q4: October through December ) on the outcome  in participants whose 
baseline mailing address latitude is ≥40.0 degrees . Covariates will mirror those described in the 
primary analysis, with the addition of four calendar quarter indicator  variables  as time -varying 
covariates . Furthermore, instead of using a single indicator variable for moderate dose vitamin D , 
we will include  four indicator variables for treatment with moderate dose interacted with the 
time-varying calendar quarter. The reference group for the uninteracted and interacted time -
varying calendar quarter indicator  variables  will be Q1  for low dose vitamin D.  
 Treatment heterogeneity analysis: We will use a multivariable Cox proportional hazards 
regression model to estimate  an adjusted hazard ratio of the effect of moderate versus low dose 
vitamin D on the outcome in every subgroup of participants defined by the covariates in the primary analysis , except for the thirteen quarters defined by calendar quarter and year . Age will 
be dichotomized as <45 or ≥45 years . We will also analyze subgroups  of Black s or African -
American s, non -White s or Hispani cs with baseline mailing address latitude ≥40.0 degrees , non-
Whites or Hispanics with baseline mailing address latitude <40 .0 degrees , non- Hispanic Whites 
with baseline mailing address latitude <40 .0 degrees , participants unimmunized for COVID -19 
at baseline, and participants fully immunized for COVID -19 at baseline. Full immunization 
refers to one vaccine dose from Johnson & Johnson or two vaccine doses from other manufacturers.  
 Additional outcomes: We will analyze COVID -19 infection severity for moderate versus low 
dose vitamin D as measured by rates of symptoms  using a modified Beat COVID -19 instrument 
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) , hospital admission, hospitalization with ICU admission, hospital length of stay, 
whether ventilator, high- flow nasal oxygen, or helmet -based ventilation is used, and death.  
 Other Statistical Considerations  
Proportional Hazards Assumption : In the primary analysis , secondary analysis of non-
Hispanic White participants living north of 40.0 degrees , time -varying analysis , and treatment 
heterogeniety analys is, the proportional hazards assumption will be assessed using the estat 
phtest  command in Stata  with rejection of proportion hazards defined by p<0.05 for any variable 
or the global test, or by v isual assessment of Schoenfeld residuals . Continuous variables which 
fail proportional hazards will be categorized. For any c ategorical variable or categorized 
continuous variable which fail proportional hazards , we will perform Cox regression which 
stratifies based on that variable. If the moderate dose vitamin D variable fails the proportional 
hazards  assumption, we will estimate non -proportional hazards models.  
Statistical Analysis Plan  (IRB20 -0847)  
Can Vitamin D Reduce the Burden of COVID -19? 
8/14/2025 
 
3 
 Missing Data: Assuming missingness at random, we will impute missing values of covariates 
with multiple imputation by chained equations with 20 imputations. Covariates in the imputation will include  the covariates in the primary analysis excluding moderate dose  vitamin D . The 
imputation for the s econdary analysis of non -Hispanic White participants living north of 40.0 
degrees  and the treatment heterogeneity analys is will be performed among the denominator of all 
participants in the primary analys is.  
 Statistical Significance and Multiple Testing: Statistical significance will be determined by p<0.05 for the primary analysis and the s econdary analysis of non- Hispanic White participants 
living north of 40.0 degrees  with no adjustment for multiple comparisons .  
 Software: Data analysis will be executed in Stata 18.0.  