   RU021407I  
 
 
 
Academic and Community Cancer Research United  (ACCRU)  
 
Regorafenib Dose Optimization Study (ReDOS): A Phase II Randomized Study of L ower Dose 
Regorafenib Compared to Standard D ose Regorafenib in Patients with Refractory Metastatic Colorectal 
Cancer (mCR C) 
 
For any communications regarding this protocol, please contact 
the protocol resource person on the following page. 
 
 Study Chairs  
ACCRU:  Tanios Bekaii -Saab, M.D.  
 Mayo Clinic Arizona  
507/266-0800 
507/538-0906 (FAX) 
Bekaii -Saab.Tanios@mayo.edu  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
Statistician:    
 
 
 
 
Drug Availability  
Commercial Agents:  Clobetasol Propionate Cream 
Drug Company Supplied:  Regorafenib  – IND Exempt  
 
√ Study contributor(s) not responsible for patient care. 
 
 
Research Coordinating Center 
Academic and Community Cancer Research United  
200 First Street Southwest 
Rochester, MN 55905 
FAX# 507-538-0906 
 
Document History  (effective date)  
Activation ACCRU  March 27, 2015  
Addendum 1  June 2, 2015  
Addendum 2  July 3 , 2015  
Addendum 3  June 24, 2016  
Addendum 4  March 17, 2017  
Addendum 5  December 1, 2017  
            Addendum 6                 February 16, 2018 

RU021407I 2  Addendum 6  
 
 
 
 
Index  
 
Schema  
 1.0 Background
 
 2.0 Goals  
 3.0 Patient Eligibility  
 4.0 Test Schedule  
 5.0  Stratification Factors  
 6.0 Registration/Randomization Procedures 
 7.0 Protocol Treatment  
 8.0 Dosage Modification Based on Adverse Events  
 9.0 Ancillary Treatment/Supportive Care  
10.0 Adverse Event (AE) Reporting and Monitoring  
11.0 Treatment Evaluation Using RECIST Guideline 12.0 Descriptive Factors  
13.0 Treatment/Follow -up Decision at Evaluation of Patient  
14.0 Body Fluid Biospecimens 15.0 Drug Information  
16.0 Statistical Considerations and Methodology 17.0 Pathology Considerations/Tissue Biospecimens 
18.0 Records and Data Collection Procedures  
19.0 Budget 20.0 References  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  

RU021407I 3  Addendum 6  
 
Schema  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Cycle = 28 days  
 
 
* Pre-emptive strategy: Clobetasol 0.05% cream for first 12 wks is  prophylactically applied to hands and soles of 
patients . Reactive strategy: Patients will be treated per inve stigator discretion when they develop Palmar -plantar 
erythrodysesthesia syndrome . 
 
 
Generic name:    Regorafenib  
Brand name(s):  Stivarga®  
Availability: Biologics, Inc. Generic name:    Clobetasol  Propionate Cream  
Brand name(s):  Temovate 
Availability: Commerc ially available   
 Randomization  
1:1:1:1  
(Progression on previous standard 
therapy, including EGFRi if KRAS WT) 
Arm  A 1* 
Regorafenib  Start  low 
dose (See Section 7.0 
for escalation 
schedule)  
+ pre-emptive  
strategy for  Palmar -
plantar  
erythrodysesthesia 
syndrome  (PPES)  Arm  A 2* 
Regorafenib Start low 
dose (See Section 7.0 
for escalation  
schedule)  
+ reactive strategy 
for  
Palmar -plantar  
erythrodyses thesia 
syndrome  (PPES)  Arm B 1* 
Regorafenib 160 mg 
PO daily for 21 days  
+ pre-emptive  
strategy for  
Palmar -plantar  
erythrodysesthesia 
syndrome  (PPES)  Arm  B 2* 
Regorafenib 160 mg 
PO daily for 21 days  
+ reactive strategy 
for  
Palmar -plantar  
erythrodysesthesia 
syndrome  (PPES)  
PD at any time   
Unacceptable adverse    
 events       EM**  
Patient refusal  
Investigator’s decision  
 
** EM= Event Monitoring     
RU021407I 4  Addendum 6  
 
1.0 Background 
 
1.1 Worldwide, nearly 1.3 million patients are diagnosed with and more than 600 000 patients die from colorectal cancer every year  (Ferlay et al , 2013). Regora fenib is a novel 
oral multikinase inhibitor that blocks the a ctivity of several protein kinases, including 
kinases involved in angiogenesis, oncogenesis and tumor microenvironment (Kies et al, 2010) . Regorafenib was recently shown to provide a survival benefit in metastatic 
colorectal cancer patients who have progressed after all standard therapies (Grothey, et al). This led to its approval in September 2012 by the FDA for use in the United States. 
Despite the observed benefits in a patient population with no current standard, toxicities 
such as Palmar -planter erythr odysesthesia syndrome (PPES) (which occurs early in the 
first 1 -2 weeks) and fatigue have widely limited its use in the US. Multiple practices 
across the US have adopted, and despite the absence of supportive data, various dosing or interval scheduling inc luding starting at lower doses and escalate as tolerated, every other 
week dosing intervals and other.  
 
In this study, we propose to design a novel strategy to optimize the dose of regorafenib in patients with refractory mCRC to allow maintenance of the observed benefits while improving the tolerability profile. The proposed strategy, arm A (combining A1 and A2) 
consists of starting regorafenib at 80 mg/day for 1 week (w eek1), then if no significant 
drug- related toxicities escalate to 120 mg/ day for another week (w eek 2), then again if 
no significant related toxicities escalate to a total dose of 160 mg/day (w eek 3) followed 
by a week break ( week 4 of cycle 1). If at the end of w eek 1, w eek 2 or w eek 3 toxicities 
are unacceptable as defined by the study, t he decision will be to deescalate by 40 mg/day 
and there will be no further dose escalations. A comparative arm , arm B (combining B1 
and B2) will include a standard dose/schedule regorafenib of a 160 mg/day starting on day 1 of cycle 1. The primary goal of this study is to compare the proportions of patients 
on each arm who complete 2 cycles of protocol treatment and initiate cycle 3.  We will 
also assess other outcome and quality of life measures and toxicity profile with a focus on 
regorafenib related toxi cities. We will also assess a potential strategy to reduce the 
severity of PPES. Additionally, we will perform limited PK analysis in both arms. 
 
To explore a potential strategy to reduce the severity of PPES,  Clobetasol 0.05% cream 
for first 12 w eeks will  be prophylactically applied to palms and soles of patients in arm 
A1 and (pre -emptive strategy). Patients in arm A2 and B2 will be treated per investigat or 
discretion when they develop PPES (reactive strategy). All patients will be required to fill 
HFS14 quality of life questionnaire on C1D14, C2D1, C2D1 4, and C2D28 intervals.  
 
1.2 QOL Tools  
 
1.21 QOL is an important outcome and covariate in this trial because the treatments 
are expected to differ in terms of their symptom profiles and impact on patient 
well-being. Previous data has indicated that the most prevalent QOL issues with 
these patients are fatigue, pain, weight loss, and other symptoms, as well as more general aspects of QOL such as ability to enjoy life and contentedness in QOL (Odom et. al. 2010).  We hypothesize that patients receiving regorafenib will 
experience greater deficits in QOL as reflected by scores on the HSF14, the BFI and the LASA.  These questionnaires have specific application to this population. 
 
The HSF14 has been specifically designed to capture changes in QOL related to PPES. Cronbach’s alpha for this questionnaire is 0.93. It involves 14 questions 
RU021407I 5  Addendum 6  
 
with three domains:  hand, feet, and social. The final score for this questionnaire 
ranges from 2 -100, where a higher score indicates greater QOL impairment 
(Sibaud et. al., 2011). For comparison to other QOL questionnaires, the HSF14 
will be converted to a 0 -100 scale, where a higher score indicates better QOL.  
 
The Brief Fatigue Inventory (BFI), a 9-item questionnaire, has been valida ted as 
a short and comprehensive instrument to assess severity of fatigue and fatigue-
related impairment in cancer patients.  The reliability estimated with Cronbach’s 
alpha ranges from 0.82 to 0.97. Recently, both the German version and the Japanese versio n of the BFI has been validated with test- reliability (mean scores 
of 0.93) and impairment (mean scores of 0.87) for the German version and 
reliability with Cronbach’s alpha at 0.96 for the Japanese version. Minor 
differences were seen in the validation of the German version compared to the 
original version. 
 
Linear Analogue Self Assessment (LASA) items have been validated as general 
measures of global QOL dimensional constructs in numerous settings (Grunberg 
et al., 1996; Gudex et al, 1996; Hyland et al., 1996; Srivatanakul, 1983; Wewers, 1990). A series of LASA items have been constructed and validated at Mayo 
Clinic  for use in cancer patients (Bretscher et al, 1999). These items have been 
seen to be important prognostic factors for cancer patient survival and should be included as covariates in surv ival analysis (Sloan, JCO, 2012).  
 
1.3 Correlative Research  
 
1.31 Regorafenib clinical pharmacokinetics  
 
Regorafenib and its metabolites M2 and M5 have been assessed 
pharmacokinetically in several phase I studies, both with regorafenib dosed 21 
days on/7 days off (Mross K et al. 2012; Strumberg D et al. 2012; Sunakawa Y et 
al. 2014), and with continuous dosing (Kies MS et al. 2010; Finn RS et al.  2013). 
Based on safety, efficacy and PK analysis (higher exposure o n dosing days), the 
final dose taken into phase III studies was 160 mg 21 days on/7 days off.   
Regorafenib is moderately fast absorbed after oral administration with median 
t
max of 3 to 4 hours, and mean C max of 2.5 mg/L. Steady- state is expected to occur 
within 7 days after first administration. The overall mean terminal half -life at 
steady state is 20 -30 hours, with a t max,ss of 5 hrs. Mean C max,ss and AUC (0-24)ss 
with 160 mg dosing were 3.9 mg/L and 58.3 mg•h/L. In the dose escalation phase 
I studies, r egorafenib PK at doses above 60 mg was less than dose proportional. 
Accumulation of regorafenib from day 1 to day 21 was consistent with linear pharmacokinetics (Mross K, et al . 2012). 
 
Regorafenib has 2 major active metabolites, M2 and M5. While both regorafenib 
and M2 have elimination half- lifes of 20 -30 hrs, the M5 active metabolite has a 
half-life of 60 hrs (range 40-100 hrs). 
 Regorafenib and its active metabolites have substantial variability in their plasma 
exposure – expressed as either the maximum concentration shortly after 
administration (C
max) or the area under the concentration -time curve (AUC) – 
after oral regorafenib administration. The coefficient in variation (standard 
RU021407I 6  Addendum 6  
 
deviation/mean) of C max ranges from 61.9% to 173.5%, showing considerable 
interpatient variability in the absorption.  This is not unexpected since 
regorafenib’s absorption is influenced by the fat content in the diet (Section 
15.15). Similarly, the AUC has substantial variability with the CVs ranging from 
77.8 to 182.4%. This i s also not unexpected since regorafenib undergoes 
enterohepatic recirculation, and is susceptible to a multitude of drug interactions 
since it is a CYP3A4 and UGT1A9 substrate (Section 15.15). Furthermore, 
within -patient variability is present such that an  individual patient can have dose -
to-dose variability in their pharmacokinetics.   
 
No relationship was suggested between AUC or C max of regorafenib, M2 or M5 
and adverse events in phase 1 trials, but it was suggested that an exposure of ≥ 60 
mg daily of re gorafenib was associated with greater efficacy (regorafenib IB).  
 1.32 Rationale for regorafenib pharmacokinetic studies  
 
Regorafenib has clinical activity in CRC, but many patients discontinue 
treatment in the first 2 cycles due to adverse events (Grothey A  et al.  2013). In 
the few phase I studies to date, small patient numbers underwent any PK 
evaluation at steady state beyond cycle 1, to understand a possible connection 
between toxicity and PK parameters.   
 Because this clinical trial seeks to optimize the regorafenib dose and overall 
exposure in patients with refractory mCRC, it is critical that we evaluate the 
pharmacokinetic parameters of regorafenib and its metabolites, and assess 
whether their PK variability is clinically relevant.  To our knowledge, no large 
pharmacokinetic correlative studies – or those studies evaluating if plasma 
regorafenib concentrations are associated with its efficacy or toxicity –have been 
conducted to date.  
 
Therefore, as detailed in Section 14.1, we have developed a clinic- friendly 
sampling schedule to collect the PK trough levels (C
min) for the study drug and its 
metabolites, to maximize patient compliance. In the low dose (dose escalation) cohort, as the regorafenib dose is planned to be escalated weekly in cycle 1 from 
80 to 120 to 160mg, trough levels will be collected on days 7, 14 and 21, when 
each regorafenib dose would be expected to reach steady state. These visi ts 
coincide with regular clinic visits for safety/toxicity evaluation. In cycle 2, PK will be collected o n days 1 and 21. To be able to compare the low dose, 
escalating cohort with the standard dose cohort, similar time -points for PK 
analysis were chosen.  
 
 
2.0 Goals  
 
2.1 Primary  
 
2.11 Evaluate the proportion of patients who complete 2 cycles of protocol treatment 
and initiate cycle 3  in arm A (pooled arm A1 and A2) and arm B (pooled arm B1 
and B2). 
 
 
RU021407I 7  Addendum 6  
 
2.2 Secondary 
 
2.21 Evaluate outcome measures for efficacy in each arm including progression- free 
survival ( PFS), time to progression ( TTP), and overall surviva l (OS). 
 
2.22 Compare between arms the cumulative dose and dose intensity received within 
the first two cycles.  
 
2.23 Evaluate the proportion of patients in each arm that exhibit grade 3 Palmar -
plantar erythrodysesthesia syndrome  (PPES) and/or fatigue, and make 
comparisons between regorafenib dosing strategies and pre- emptive vs. reactive 
strategies to address PPES. 
 
2.24 Compare QOL between treatment arms (regorafenib dosing strategies and pre-
emptive vs. reactive PPES strategies) as measured by the HFS14,  BFI, and 
LASA questionnaires. 
 
2.3 Correlative Research  
 
2.31 Evaluate and compare trough (C min) PK during the first 2 treatment cycles for 
regorafenib and active metabolites M2, M5 between the low dose (dose escalation) and the standard dose cohorts, and correlate with toxicity profile.   
 
2.32 Evaluate the correlation between PK parameters and tumor response/stable 
disease after the first two cycles.   
 
2.33 Evaluate the correlation between PK parameters and PFS and OS.  
 
2.34 Evaluate if trough (C
min) conc entrations are associated with patient -specific 
factors (such as – but not limited to – age and concomitant medications).   
 
3.0 Patient Eligibility  
 
3.1 Inclusion Criteria   
3.11 Age ≥18 years.  
 3.12 Histological or cytological documentation of adenocarcinoma of the colon or 
rectum . 
 
3.13 Advanced or metastatic colorectal cancer with no curative options available and progression on previous standard therapy, including an EGFR inhibitor if KRAS 
wild-type.  
 
3.14 M easurable or non- measurable disease as defined in Section 11.0.  
 3.15 ECOG Performance Status (PS)  0 or 1 . (Form is available on the ACCRU web 
site https://www.accru.org/accru/forms/NonProtocolSpecificForms/index.html
). 
 3.16 Life expectancy of  ≥ 3 months. 
RU021407I 8  Addendum 6  
 
 
3.17 The following laboratory values obtained ≤7 days prior to r andomization. 
 
• Absolute neutrophil count ( ANC ) >1500/mm3 
• Platelet count >100,000/mm3 
• Hemoglobin >9.0 g/dL 
• Total bilirubin ≤1.5 x upper limit of normal ( ULN)  
• Alanine aminotransfer ase (ALT) and aspartate amino -transferease (AST) ≤ 
2.5 x ULN (≤ 5 x ULN for subjects with liver involvement of their cancer) 
• Serum c reatinine ≤1.5 x ULN  
• INR/PTT ≤ 1.5 x ULN 
NOTE:  Patients who are therapeutically treated with an agent such as 
warfarin or he parin will be allowed to participate provided that no prior 
evidence of underlying abnormality in coagulation parameters exists. Close 
monitoring of at least weekly evaluations will be performed until INR/PTT is 
stable based on a measurement that is pre-dose as defined by the local standard of care.  
• Alkaline phosphatase limit ≤2.5 x ULN (≤ 5 x ULN for patients with liver  
involvement of their cancer)  
 
3.18 Negative serum pregnancy test done ≤7 days prior to randomization, for  women 
of childbearing potential only. NOTE : Post -menopausal women (defined as no 
menses for at least 1 year) and surgically sterilized women are not required to 
undergo a pregnancy test. The definition of adequate contraception will be based 
on the judgment of the investigator.  
 3.19a Ability to complete questionnaire(s) by themselves or with assistance. 
 3.19b Provide informed written consent.  
3.19c Willing  to return to enrolling institution for follow -up ( during the Active 
Monitoring Phase of the study ). 
 
3.19d Willing to provide blood samples for correlative research and banking purposes 
(see Sections 6. 0 and 14.0).  
 3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
3.21 Prior treatment with regorafenib.  
3.22 Major surgical procedure, open biopsy, or significant traumatic injury ≤ 28 days  
prior to randomization. 
 
3.23 Congestive heart failure > New York Heart Association (NYHA) class 2.  
 
3.24 Unstable angina (angina symptoms at rest), new -onset angina (begun within the 
last 3 months) or myocardial infarction less than 6 months prior to 
randomization. 
 3.25 Cardiac arrhythmias requiring anti -arrhythmic therapy. Note:  Pace makers, b eta 
RU021407I 9  Addendum 6  
 
blockers or digoxin are permitted.  
 
3.26 Uncontrolled hypertension. (Systolic blood pressure > 140 mmHg or diastolic 
pressure > 90 mmHg despite optimal medical management).  
 
3.27 History of or current pheochromocytoma.  
3.28 Arterial or venous thromboti c or embolic events such as cerebrovascular accident  
(including transient ischemic attacks), deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism ≤6 months prior to randomization. 
 
3.29a Ongoing infection > grade 2 N CI-CTCAE version 4 .0. 
 3.29b Known history of chro nic hepatitis B or C.  
 3.29c Patients with seizure disorder requiring medication.  
 3.29d Symptomatic metastatic brain or meningeal tumors unless the patient is > 6 months from definitive therapy, has a negative imaging study within 4 weeks of 
randomization and is clinically stable with respect to the tumor at the time of 
randomization. Note: Patient must not be undergoing acute steroid therapy or 
taper (chronic steroid therapy is acceptable provided that the dose is stable for 
one month prior to and followi ng screening radiographic studies) . 
 
3.29e History of organ allograft  (including corneal transplant). 
 3.29f Evidence or history of bleeding diathesis  or any hemorrhage or bleeding event 
>CTCAE grade 3 ≤4 weeks prior to randomization. 
 3.29g Non-healing wound, ulcer, or bone fracture. 
 3.29h Renal failure requiring hemo -or peritoneal dialysis.  
 
3.29i Dehydration CTC AE (version 4.0) grade  ≥1. 
 3.29j Substance abuse, medical, psychological or social conditions that may interfere 
with the patient’s participati on in the study or evaluation of the study results. 
 3.29k Known hypersensitivity to any of the study drugs, study drug classes, or 
excipients in the formulation.  
 
3.29l Interstitial lung disease with ongoing signs and symptoms at the time of informed 
consent. 
 
3.29m Persi stent proteinuria of CTC Grade 3  or higher ( ≥ 3.5 g/24 hrs).  
 
3.29n Patients unable to swallow oral medications.  
 3.29o Any malabsorption condition. 
 3.29p Unresolved toxicity  greater  than CTCAE (version  4.0) Grade 1 attributed to any 
RU021407I 10  Addendum 6  
 
prior therapy/procedure excluding alopecia and oxaliplatin induce d neurotoxicity 
≤Grade 2. 
 
3.29q  Albumin levels  <2.5 g/dl . 
 3.29r Any of the following because this study involves an agent that has known 
genotoxic, mutagenic and teratogenic effects: 
 
• Pregnant women 
• Nursing women 
• Men or women of childbearing potential who are unwilling to employ 
adequate contraception  
 
NOTE:  Men and women of childbearing potential must agree to use adequate 
contraception beginning at the signing of the ICF until at least 3 months after 
the last dose of study drug. The definition of adequate contraception will be 
based on the judgment of the principal investigator or a designated associate. 
 
3.29s Co-morbid systemic illnesses or o ther severe concurrent disease which, in the 
judgment of the investigator, would make the patient inappropriate for entry into this study or interfere significantly with the proper assessment of safety and 
toxicity of the prescribed regimens. 
 
3.29t Immunocompromised patients and  patients known to be HIV positive and 
currently receiving antiretroviral therapy . NOTE:  Patients known to be HIV 
positive, but w ithout clinical evidence of an immunocompromised state, are 
eligible for this trial.  
 3.29u Receiving any other investigational agent which would be considered as a 
treatment for the primary neoplasm. 
 
3.29v Previou s or concurrent cancer that is distinct in primary site or histology from  
colorectal cancer within 3 years prior to randomization EXCEPT for curatively 
treated cervical cancer in situ, non- melanoma skin cancer and superficial bladder 
tumors [Ta (Non- invasi ve tumor), Tis (Carcinoma in situ) and T1 (Tumor 
invades lamina propria)].  Note:  All cancer treatments for cancers that were 
distinct in a primary site other than colorectal must be completed at least 3 years 
prior to randomization (i.e., signature date of  the informed consent form).  
 3.29w Pleural effusion or ascites that causes respiratory compromise (≥CTC AE version 
4.0 Grade 2 dyspnea). 
 3.29x Concurrent anti- cancer therapy  ≤4 weeks from registration (chemotherapy, 
radiation therapy, surgery, immunotherapy, biologic therapy, or tumor embolization).  
 
3.29y Current use of clobetasol propionate. 
 
3.29z Use of any herbal remedy (e.g. St. John’s Wort [Hypericum perforatum]). 
 
RU021407I 11  Addendum 6  
 
3.29aa Patients unable to ambulate or who  have amputations or paralysis of any 
extrem ity. 
 
3.29bb History of contact dermatitis to clobetasol propionate or similarly fluorinated 
steroids or other steroids with the propionate ester. 
 
 
 RU021407I  12    Addendum 6  
4.0 Test Schedule  
 
 Active Monitoring Phase  
Tests and procedures  ≤7 days  prior 
to 
randomization  Cycle 113 Cycle 213 After week 8:  Every 
4 weeks until 
progression  (+/- 3 
days)  At PD, 
withdrawal or 
removal  Week1   
(Day 1)  Week 2 
(Day 8)  Week 3 
(Day 15)  Week 4 
(Day 22)  Week 1 
(Day 1)  Week 2 
(Day 8)  Week 3 
(Day 15)  Week 4 
(Day 22)  
History and exam, w eight, 
ECOG PS12, blood pressure  X X12 X X X X X X X X X 
Height  X           
Adverse event assessment8 X  X X X X X X X X X 
Hematology  8, 11: 
CBC/ differential,  ANC,  
INR/PTT  8, 10 X X    X    X  
Chemistry  8, 11: SGOT (AST ), 
alk phos, T. bili, serum 
creatinine, calcium, glucose, 
Na, K, SGPT (ALT)  X X  X7  X7  X7  X  
Albumin  X           
Urine proteinuria or urine 
protein creatinine ratio  X           
Tumor measurement8 (CT 
scan of chest, abdomen and pelvis ) (MRI if CT is not 
feasible)  X1        X1 X1 X1,9 
ECG6 X           
Serum pregnancy test  X2           
Mandatory  blood sample (see 
Section 14.0)  X4,R (Day 7)  
X4,R (Day 14)  
X4,R (Day 21)  
X4,R  (Day 1)  
X4,R  (Day 21)  
X4,R    
Patient Medication Diary 
(Appendix II)3  X X X X X X X X X  
Patient Questionnaire 
Booklets (Appendices IV, V, 
VI) X5  X5, 8   X5, 8 X5, 8  X5, 8   
1. CT scans preferred (MRI if CT is not feasible ) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis . Use same imaging throughout the study. Tumor measurements at 
baseline (≤28 days prior to randomization) and every 8 weeks until progression.  
2. For women of childbearing potential only.  
RU021407I       13   Addendum 6 
 
3. The diary must begin the day the patient starts taking the medication and must be completed per protocol and returned to the treating institution weekly 
during Cycles 1 and 2 and every 4 weeks thereafter. 
4. Kits are required for this collection . Samples will be collected for PK analysis of C min of regorafenib, M2 and M5 at the following time  points: Cycle 1, 
days 7, 14 and 21 prior to treatment; Cycle 2, days 1 and 21 prior to treatment. Samples will be collected for research banking at the following time 
points: Baseline, prior to treatment; Cycle 2, days 1 and 21, prior to treatment. See Section 14.0 for specific instructions.  
5. Patient questionnaires will be completed at baseline (appendices IV and V only), Cycle 1 Day 1 4, Cycle 2  Day 1, Cycle 2 Day 1 4 and Cycle 2 Day 2 8. 
Cycle 2 Day 14 and Cycle 2 Day 28 patient questionnaire can be sent home with the patient to complete and return at their next clinic visit if needed . 
Patient questionnaire  booklets must  be used; copies are not acceptable for this submission . 
6. Performed at screening and then as needed.  
7. AST, ALT and total bilirubin will be checked at baseline and every other week  during Cycles 1 and 2.  
8.  +/ - 1 day. Applies to days 1, 8, 15, and 22 ; includes baseline tests and procedures for Day 1 Cycle 1.  
9. If patient goes off study during Cycle 1 and last CT scan was done >28 days prior, the CT scan must be done. 10. If a subject is on warfarin with stable PT/INR at baseline, the PT/INR should be assessed on Day 5 (+/- 3 days). If value is above the therapeutic range, 
the dose should be modified and the assessment should be repeated weekly until it is stable. 
11. Hematology and chemistry tests to be done prior to each cycle.  
12. If baseline history, exam, weight, ECOG PS, and blood pressure were performed ≤3 days of Cycle 1 Day 1, they do not need to be repeated for Cycle  
1 Day  1. 
13. It is suggested that patients start treatment Tuesday -Friday to avoid PK collection on Sundays. 
R Research funded (see Section 19.0) 
 
RU021407I       14   Addendum 6 
 
  5.0 Stratification Factors : None  
 
6.0 Registration/Randomization Procedures  
 
6.1 Randomization Procedures 
 
6.11 To randomize a patient, access the ACCRU web page at 
 click on “Training Page” and enter the 
registration/randomization application. The registration/randomization application is available 
24 hours a day, 7 days a w eek. Back up and/or system support contact information is available 
on the Web site.  If unable to access the Web site, call the Academic and Community Cancer 
Research United (ACCRU) Registration Office at  between the hours of 8 a.m. 
and 4:30 p.m. Central Time (Monday through Friday). 
 
The 
instructions for the registration/randomization application are available by using the Help 
button. Prior to initiation of protocol study intervention, this process must be completed in its entirety and an A CCRU subject ID number must be available as noted in the instructions.  It is 
the responsibility of the individual and institution registering the patient to confirm the process 
has been successfully completed prior to release of the study agent.  Patient re gistration via the 
registration/randomization application can be confirmed in any of the following ways:  
• Contact the ACCRU Registration Office . If the patient was fully 
registered, the ACCRU Registration Office staff can access the informat ion from the 
centralized database and confirm the registration. 
• Refer to “Instructions for Remote Registration” in section “Finding/Displaying 
Information about A Registered Subject.” 
 
6.12 Correlative Research  
 
• A mandatory  correlative research component i s part of this study. T he patient will be 
automatically registered onto this component (see Sections 3. 0 and 14.0).  
• A mandatory banking component is part of this study. The patient will be automatically registered onto this component (see Sections 3.0 and 14.0). 
 
6.13 Documentation of IRB approval must be on file in the Registration Office before an 
investigator may register any patients.  
 
In addition to submitting initial IRB approval documents, ongoing IRB approval 
documentation must be on file (no less than annually) at the Registration Office (
. If the necessary documentation is not submitted in advance of attempting 
patient registration, the registration will not be accepted and the patient may not be 
enrolled in the protocol until th e situation is resolved.  
 
When the study has been permanently closed to patient enrollment, submission of annual 
IRB approvals to the Registration Office is no longer necessary.  
 
  

RU021407I       15   Addendum 6 
 
  6.14 Prior to accepting the registration/randomization, the registration/ra ndomization application 
will verify the following:  
 
• IRB approval at the registering institution  
• Patient eligibility  
• Existence of a signed consent form 
• Existence of a signed authorization for use and disclosure of protected health 
information   
 
6.15 At the time of randomization , the following will be recorded: 
 
• Patient has given permission for ACCRU to give his/her sample(s) to outside 
researchers.  
 
6.16 Treatment cannot begin prior to randomization and must begin ≤7 days after 
randomization. 
 
6.17 Pretreatment tests/procedures (see Section 4.0) must be completed within the guidelines specified on the test schedule.  
 6.18 All required baseline symptoms (see Section 10.5) must be documented and graded.  
6.19a Treatment on this protocol must commence at an ACCR U institution under the supervision 
of a medical oncologist.  
 
 
6.19b Blood draw kit is available on site.  
 
6.19c Patient questionnaire booklet is available on site; copies are not acceptable for this 
submission. 
 
6.2 Randomization Procedures 
 
6.21 The regi stering membership will be used as the only stratification factor  for this study . 
 
6.22 After the patient has been registered into the study, the patient will be assigned to one of 
the following treatment groups, in 1:1:1:1 fashion, using the Pocock and Simon dynamic 
allocation procedure which balances the marginal distributions of the stratification factors 
between the treatment groups (Pocock -Simon , 1975).   
 
• Arm A 1: Regorafenib Cycle 1: 80 mg daily Week 1 /120 mg daily Week 2 /160 mg 
daily  week 3 then 1 week off followed by Cycle 2+ (160 mg for 21 days /1 week off)  + 
pre-emptive strategy for PPES starting Cycle 1 Day 1   
• Arm A 2: Regorafenib Cycle 1: 80 mg daily week 1 /120 mg daily week 2 /160 mg daily 
week 3 then 1 week off followed by Cycle 2+ (160 mg for 21  days /then 1 week off) + 
reactive strategy for PPES  
• Arm B 1: Regorafenib 160 mg daily for 21 days /then 1 week off  + pre -emptive 
strategy for PPES starting Cycle 1 Day 1   
• Arm B 2: Regorafenib 160 mg daily for 21 days /then 1 week off  + reactive strategy for 
PPES  
 
 
 
 
RU021407I       16   Addendum 6 
 
  7.0 Protocol Treatment 
 
7.1 Treatment Schedule  
 
Arm Agent  Dose  Route  Frequency  ReRx  
A 1  Regorafenib  80 mg daily (Starting 
dose) 
See Section 7.11  PO  Daily for 21 days  
of 28 day cycle  Every 28 days  
Clobetasol  
(pre-emptive ) 0.05% cream thin 
layer to palms and 
soles, avoid washing 
hands or feet for 1 
hour after application  Topical  BID for first 12 
weeks BID for first 12 
weeks starting 
Day 1 of 
regorafenib dose 
A 2 Regorafenib  80 mg daily (Starting 
dose) 
See Section 7.11  PO  Daily for 21 days  
of 28 day cycle  Every 28 days  
Clobetasol  
(reactive ) 0.05% cream thin 
layer to palms and 
soles, avoid washing 
hands or feet for 1 
hour after application  Topical  BID (per 
physician 
discretion; 
recommend no 
longer than 12 
weeks from 
initiation ) BID (per 
phys ician 
discretion  upon 
occurrence of 
PPES Grade ≥1 ; 
recommend no 
longer than 12 
weeks from 
initiation ) 
B 1  Regorafenib  160 mg  
(Starting dose) PO  Daily for 21 days  
of 28 day cycle  Every 28 days  
Clobetasol  
(pre-emptive ) 0.05% cream thin 
layer to palms an d 
soles, avoid washing 
hands or feet for 1 
hour after application  Topical  BID for first 12 
weeks BID for first 12 
weeks starting 
Day 1 of 
regorafenib dose 
B 2 Regorafenib  160 mg  
(Starting dose)  PO  Daily for 21 days  
of 28 day cycle  Every 28 days  
Clobetas ol 
(reactive ) 0.05% cream thin 
layer to palms and 
soles, avoid washing 
hands or feet for 1 
hour after application  Topical  BID (per 
physician 
discretion; 
recommend no 
longer than 12 
weeks from 
initiation ) BID (per 
physician 
discretion  upon 
occurrence of 
PPES Grade ≥1 ; 
recommend no 
longer than 12 
weeks from 
initiation ) 
 
 
Regora fenib tablets should be taken  once a day with approximately 8 fluid ounces (240 mL) of water after 
a low- fat (<30% fat) meal.  Regorafenib  should be taken with a meal  at the same time every day. Some 
examples of low fat meals are:  
 
• Two slices of white toast with 1 tablespoon of low-fat margarine and 1 tablespoon of jelly and 8 
ounces (240 mL) of skim milk (approximately 319 calories and 8.2 g of fat). 
RU021407I       17   Addendum 6 
 
  • One cup of cereal (i.e. Special K), 8 ounces (240 mL) of skim milk, one piece of toast with jam (no 
butter or marmalade), apple juice, and one cup of coffee or tea (2 g fat, 17 g protein, 93 g of 
carbohydrate, 520 calories.  
 
7.11 Arm A Regorafenib  Dose Escalation  
 
Cycle 1:  
 
Week  Dose  
1 
Starting Dose  80 mg*  
2 120 mg  
3 160 mg   
4 Off  
*starting dose level  
 
Cycle  2 and beyond: 
 
Week  Dose  
1 Remain at 
highest 
tolerated dose  
from Cycle 1  
(up to 160 mg) 
 2 
3 
4 Off  
  
7.12 Arm B Regorafenib Dose (all cycles)  
 
Week  Dose  
1 
Starting Dose   
160 mg 
2 
3 
4 Off  
 
7.2 Patients can be instructed in administration techniques and granted treatment independence with 
nursing staff approval.  
 
7.3 For this protocol, the patient must return to the consenting ACCRU institution for evaluation at 
least every 7 days during treatment and every 28 days during active monitoring . 
 
7.4 Treatment by a local medical doctor (LMD) is not allowed.  
 
 
  
RU021407I       18   Addendum 6 
 
  8.0 Dosage Modification Based on Adverse Events  
 
Strictly follow the modifications in the following  table s for the first two cycles, until individual treatment 
tolerance can be ascertained.  Thereafter, these modifications should be regarded as guidelines to produce 
mild-to-moderate, but not debilitating, side effects. If multiple adverse events are seen, administer dose 
based on greatest reduction required for any single adverse event observed.  Reductions or increases apply 
to treatment given in the preceding cycle and are based on adverse events observed since the prior dose.  
 
ALERT : ADR reporting may be required  for some adverse events (See Section 10)  
 
8.1 Arm A  Regorafenib Dose Escalation/Reduction   
 
Dose level  If No SDRT  If + SDRT**  
80 mg*  Proceed to 
next dose 
level  - 
120 mg  Proceed to 
next dose 
level  Decrease to  
80 mg 
160 mg   - Decrease to 
120 mg   
*starting dose level  
**SDRT = Significant Drug Related Toxicities  
 
8.11 After week 8, if toxicities have resolved to ≤ Grade 0-1, re- escalation is allowed 40 mg at a 
time every 4 weeks to a maximum of 160 mg and at the discretion of the treating 
investigator.  
 
8.12 Patients with dose reductions below 80 mg should go off treatment and go to event 
monitoring. 
 
8.13 Any patients with toxicities requiring >4 week delay should go off treatment and then to 
event monitoring. 
 
Regorafenib may be dose reduced per the table in Section 8.2 in case of intolerable toxicity such as weight 
loss, fatigue, rash or anorexia.  
 
8.2 Arm B Regorafenib Dose Levels (Based on Adverse Events in Tables 8.3. ) 
 
Dose 
Level  Drug  Dose  
 0* 
 Regorafenib  160 mg daily, Four 40 -mg tablets  
-1 
 Regorafenib  120 mg daily, Three 40 -mg tablets  
-2 
 Regorafenib  80 mg daily, Two 40 -mg tablets  
* Dose level 0 refers to the starting dose.  
 
8.21 After week 8, if toxicities have resolved to ≤ Grade 0-1, re- escalation is allowed 40 mg at a 
time every 4 week s to a maximum of 160 mg and at the discretion of the treating 
investigator.  
 
RU021407I       19   Addendum 6 
 
  8.22 Patients with dose reductions below 80 mg should go off treatment and go to event 
monitoring. 
 
If a subject experiences more than one toxicity, dose reduction should be acco rding to the 
toxicity with the highest grade .  
 
In the case of two or more toxicities of the same grade, the investigator may dose reduce 
according to that deemed most causally related to study treatment . 
 
8.3 Regorafenib Dose Modifications 
 
Table 8.31  Recommended dose modification for toxicities except hand -foot-skin reaction, 
hypertension and ALT/ AST/bilirubin  
NCI-CTCAE v4.0a Dose Interruption  Dose Modification b Dose for Subsequent 
Cycles  
Grade 0 -2 Treat on time  No change   
Grade 3  Delay until ≤ Grade 2c Reduce by 1 dose level  If toxicity remains < 
Grade 2, dose re -
escalation can be 
considered at the discretion of the treating 
investigator. If dose is 
re-escalated and toxicity 
(≥ Grade 3) recurs, 
institute permanent dose 
reduction.  
Grade 4  Delay until ≤ Grade 2c Reduce by 1 dose level.  
 
Permanent discontinuation can be 
considered at  treating 
investigator’s  discretion.   
a. NCI-CTCAE = National Cancer Institute - Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events,  version 
4.0 
b. Excludes alopecia, non -refractory nausea/vomiting, lymphocyte count decreased , non -refractory 
hypersensitivity and nonclinical and asymptomatic laboratory abnormalities.  
c. If no recovery after a 4 week delay*, treatment should be permanently discontinued unless su bject is 
deriving clinical benefit.  
* Modify according to study specific cycle length  
If greater than 2 dose level reductions are required, regorafenib will be discontinued and the rest of 
the study follow up may be continued. The following tables outline dose adjustments for toxicities 
related to regorafenib except hand- foot skin reaction, hypertension and liver function test 
abnormalities.  
 
The table above outlines dose adjustments for hematologic and non- hematologic toxicities related 
to regorafenib exc ept PPES  and hypertension. In addition to these recommended dose 
modifications, subjects who develop diarrhea, mucositis, anorexia or other events predisposing to 
fluid loss or inadequate fluid intake should be carefully monitored and rehydrated as clinica lly 
necessary.  This is in order to minimize the risk of postural hypotension and renal failure. 
  
RU021407I       20   Addendum 6 
 
   
Table 8.3 2: Grading for Palmar -plantar erythrodysesthesia syndrome  
 Grade 1  Grade 2  Grade 3  
NCI-CTCAE v4.0 
Palmar -plantar 
erythrodysesthesia 
syndrome  Mini mal skin changes or 
dermatitis (e.g.,  erythema, 
edema, or hyperkeratosis) without pain  Skin changes 
(e.g., peeling, blisters  
bleeding, edema, or hyperkeratosis) with 
pain Severe skin changes 
(e.g., peeling, blisters, bleeding, edema, or hyperkeratosis) wit h 
pain 
Further description / 
examples of skin changes  Numbness, dysesthesia / 
paresthesia tingling, painless swelling, or 
erythema of the hands 
and/or feet  Painful erythema and 
swelling of the hands 
and/or feet  Moist desquamation, 
ulceration, blistering, or severe pain of the 
hands and/or feet  
Effect on activities  Does not disrupt normal 
activities  Limiting instrumental 
activities of daily life 
(e.g., preparing meals, 
shopping for groceries 
or clothes, using the 
telephone, managing 
money)  Limiting self -care 
activities of daily life (e.g., bathing, dressing and undressing, feeding 
self, using the toilet, 
taking medications) 
and not bedridden  
a. Palmer -planter erythrodysesthesia syndrome is a disorder characterized by redness, marked  discomfort, 
swelling, a nd tingling in the palms of hands or the soles of the feet.  
 
 
Table 8.33 Recommended dose modification for Palmar -plantar erythrodysesthesia syndrome reactiona 
Grade of event  
(NCI -CTCAE v4.0)  Occurrence  Suggested Dose Modification  
Grade 1  Any Maintain d ose level  and immediately institute supportive 
measures for symptomatic relief  
Grade 2  1st occurrence  Consider decreasing dose by one dose level and immediately 
institute supportive measures.  If no improvement, interrupt 
therapy for a minimum of 7 days, u ntil toxicity resolves to 
Grade 0 -1b,d 
No improvement 
within 7 days or 
2nd occurrence  Interrupt therapy until toxicity resolves to Grade 0 -1. 
When resuming treatment, treat at reduced dose level b 
3rd occurrence  Interrupt therapy until toxicity resolve s to Grade 0 -1. 
When resuming treatment, decrease dose by one dose level.b,d 
4th occurrence  Discontinue therapy  
Grade 3  1st occurrence  Institute supportive measures immediately. I nterrupt therapy 
for a minimum of 7 days until toxicity resolves to Grade 0-1.c 
When resuming treatment, decrease dose by one dose level.b,d 
2nd occurrence  Institute supportive measures immediately. I nterrupt therapy 
for a minimum of 7 days until toxicity resolves to Grade 0 -1.c 
When resuming treatment, decrease dose by one ad ditional 
dose levelb,d  
3rd occurrence  Discontinue treatment permanently.  
a. More conservative management is allowed if judged medically appropriate by the investigator.  
b. If toxicity returns to Grade 0 -1 after dose reduction, dose re -escalation is not  permitted.  
c. If there is no recovery after a 4 -week delay, treatment with regorafenib will be discontinued permanently . 
d. Subjects requiring > 2 dose reductions should go off protocol therapy.  
e. The maximum daily dose is 160 mg.  
f. Refer to Section 9.0  for management strategies for Palmer -plantar erythrodysesthesia syndrome reactions.  
 
  
RU021407I       21   Addendum 6 
 
  8.34 Hypertension 
 
Hypertension is a known AE associated with regorafenib treatment.  Subject will have their 
blood pressure measured at least weekly during the first 5 weeks of treatment.  If additional 
blood pressure measurements are done outside the study site, and the blood pressure is 
>140 mm Hg systolic or >90 mm Hg diastolic (NCI CTCAE v4.0), then the subject must 
contact study personnel. The management of hyperten sion, including the choice of 
antihypertensive medication, will be performed according to local standards and to the 
usual practice of the investigator.  Every effort should be made to control blood pressure by 
medical means other than study drug dose modif ication.  If necessary, Table s Section 8.1 
and 8.2 outline  suggested dose reductions.  
 
Table 8.34: Management of Treatment -Emergent Hypertension  
Grade  
(CTCAE v4.0)  Antihypertensive Therapy  Regorafenib Dosing  
1 
 
Prehypertension  
(systolic BP120 - 139 mmHg 
or 
diastolic BP 80 - 89 mmHg)  None  Continue regorafenib  
Consider increasing blood pressure (BP) 
monitoring  
2 
 
Systolic BP 140 - 159 mmHg 
or 
diastolic BP 90 - 99 mmHg,  
 
OR 
 
Symptomatic increase by >20 
mmHg (diastolic) if 
previously within normal 
limits  Treat with the aim to achieve 
diastolic BP ≤ 90 mm Hg:  
If BP previously within normal limits, start anti-
hypertensive monotherapy 
If patient already on anti -
hypertensive medication, titrate up the dose.  Continue regorafenib  
 If symptomatic, hold regorafenib un til 
symptoms resolve AND diastolic BP ≤90 
mm Hg
a. When regorafenib is restarted, 
continue at the same dose level.  
3 
 
Systolic BP ≥ 160 mmHg or 
diastolic BP ≥ 100 mmHg  
 
OR 
 
More than one drug or more 
intensive therapy than 
previously used indicated  Treat w ith the aim to achieve 
diastolic BP ≤ 90 mm Hg:  
Start anti -hypertensive 
medication  
 AND/OR  
Increase current anti -
hypertensive medication  
 
AND/OR  
Add additional anti -
hypertensive medications.  Hold regorafenib until diastolic BP ≤ 90 
mm Hg, and if symptomatic, until symptoms resolve
a 
 When regorafenib is restarted, continue 
at the same dose level.  
 
If BP is not controlled with the addition of new or more intensive therapy, reduce by 1 dose level.  
 
If Grade 3 hypertension recurs despite dose reduction and anti hypertensive 
therapy, reduce another dose level.  
4 
 
Life-threatening 
consequences  
(e.g., malignant hypertension, 
transient or permanent 
neurologic deficit, 
hypertensive crisis)  Per institutional guidelines  Discontinue therapy  
RU021407I       22   Addendum 6 
 
  a. Patients requiring a dela y of >4 weeks should go off protocol therapy  
If BP remains controlled for at least one cycle. Patients requiring >2 dose reductions should go off 
protocol therapy.  
b. If BP remains controlled for at least one cycle, dose re- escalation permitted per investi gator’s 
discretion.  
c. Patients requiring >2 dose reductions should go off protocol therapy.  
 
8.35 Liver Function Abnormalities 
 
For patients with observed worsening of serum liver tests considered related to regorafenib 
(i.e. where no alternative cause is evident, such as post -hepatic cholestasis or disease 
progression), the dose modification and monitoring advice in Table below should be 
followed. 
 
Regorafenib is a UGT1A1 inhibitor. Mild, indirect (unconjugated) hyperbilirubinemia may 
occur in patients w ith Gilbert’s syndrome.  
 
Table 8.35 : Dose modifications/interruption for ALT and/or AST and/or bilirubin increases 
related to study drug  
Increases in ASL/ALT 
(per NCI -CTCAE v 4.0)  1st Occurrence Restart  Re-occurrence 
AST and/or ALT ≤5 X 
ULN (< Grade 3) Continue dosing, with 
weekly monitoring of 
liver function until transaminases return 
to <3 X ULN (≤ G rade 
1) or baseline.    
ALT and/or AST >5 X 
ULN (≥ Grade 3) Interrupt dosing, with 
weekly monitoring 
until transaminases return to <3 X ULN or baseline.  If the potential benefit 
for reinitiating regorafenib/  placebo is 
considered to outweigh the risk of 
hepatotoxicity: Reduce 
one dose level and measure serum liver tests weekly for at least 4 
weeks.  Discontinue  
ALT and/or AST >20 X 
ULN (≥ G rade 4) Discontinue    
ALT and/or AST >3 X 
ULN (≥ Grade 2) with 
concurrent bilirubin >2 X ULN  Discontinue treatment 
and measure serum liver tests weekly until resolution.  Exception: 
patients with Gilbert’s syndrome who 
develop elevated 
transaminases should be managed as per the 
recommendations outlined above for 
ALT/AST elevations.    
During the first 2 cycles of treatment, ALT, AST and bilirubin must be monitored every 2 weeks . 
 
8.4 No dose modifications expected for clobetasol propionate. 
 
  
RU021407I       23   Addendum 6 
 
  9.0 Ancillary Treatment/Support ive Care 
 
9.1 Antiemetics may be used at the discretion of the attending physician.  
 
9.2 Blood products and growth factors should be utilized as clinically warranted and following 
institutional policies and recommendations. The use of growth factors should follow published 
guidelines of the ASCO 2006 Update of Recommendations for the Use of White Blood Cell 
Growth Factors:  An Evidence Based Clinical Practice Guideline. Journal of Clinical Oncology, Vol 
24, No 19 (July 1), 2006: pp. 3187-3205. 
 
9.3 Patients should receive full supportive care while on this study. This includes blood product 
support, antibiotic treatment, and treatment of other newly diagnosed or concurrent medical 
conditions. All blood products and concomitant medications such as antidiarrheals, analgesics, 
and/or antiemetics received from the first day of study treatment administration until 30 days 
after the final dose will be recorded in the medical records.  
 
9.4 At first occurrence of PPES , independent of grade, prompt institution of suppo rtive measures 
such as topical emollients, low potency steroids, or urea- containing creams should be 
administered.  
9.41 Recommended prevention/management strategies for skin toxicities consistent with PPES 
are summarized below:  
 
Control of calluses  
 
Befor e initiating treatment with regorafenib:  
 
• Check condition of hands and feet. 
• Suggest a manicure/pedicure, when indicated.  
• Recommend pumice stone use for callus or ‘rough spot’ removal. 
 
During regorafenib treatment:  
 
• Avoid pressure points. 
• Avoid items that rub, pinch or create friction. 
 
Use of creams  
 
• Over the counter moisturizing creams or ointments are allowed , but patients cannot 
apply these within 1 hour before and after clobetasol applications.  
• For grades 2 or 3, t opical analgesics (e.g. lidocaine 5% patches, lidocaine/prilocaine 
cream TID, lidocaine 2-5% creams) are to be considered for pain control. 
• Topical corticosteroids like clobetasol 0.05% should be instituted  for subjects with 
Grade 2 or 3 PPES (in reactive arm). Avoid systemic steroids.  
• For gr ade 2/3 Oral NSAIDs (celecoxib, ibuprofen) may be used for pain control  
• Continue clobetasol during dose interruptions or decreased dosing/rechallenge  
• Continue analgesia with topical analgesics or oral NSAIDs during dose interruptions or decreased dosing/re challenge  
 
  
RU021407I       24   Addendum 6 
 
  Tender areas should be protected as follows:  
 
• Use of thick socks/gloves to cover moisturizing creams 
• Wear well -padded footwear 
• Use insole cushions or inserts (e.g. silicon, gel)  
• Foot soaks with tepid or cool water  
• Use soft shoes or slippers (Crocs, TempurPedic slippers), avoid high heels and wood 
soles/heels  
 
Suggested PPES Reaction Treatment  
 
• CTCAE v4 Grade 1 ((Minimal skin changes or dermatitis (e.g., erythema, edema or 
hyperkeratosis) without pain)) - Continue regorafenib at current dose.   
• CTCAE v4 Grade 2 ((Skin changes (e.g., peeling, blisters, bleeding, edema, or hyperkeratosis) with pain, limiting instrumental ADL  (or intolerable grade 2, defined 
as grade 2 AE that does not decrease to grade ≤1 after 2 weeks of therapy OR that is conside red intolerable per patient)) – See Section 8.33.  
 Oral (NSAIDs or narcotics) OR topical analgesia (lidocaine cream or  patches 
PRN.  
• CTCAE v4 Grade ≥3 ((Ulcerative dermatitis or skin changes with pain interfering with function. Severe skin changes (eg, peel ing, blisters, bleeding, edema, or hyperkertosis) 
with pain; limiting self -care ADL)) – Interrupt regorafenib dose and monitor  
 Topical steroid cream BID AND topical anesthetics  
 Oral (NSAIDs or narcotics) OR topical analgesia (lidocaine cream or  patches 
PRN. 
 
9.5 Prevention/management strategies for diarrhea: Diarrhea can be a common side effect of  
regorafenib. The same dose -modification algorithm used for skin toxicities can be used to address 
these toxicities.  However, the preventive/management strategies for diarrhea should be consistent 
with local standards (e.g., anti-diarrheals and optimized hydration status). Anti- diarrhea 
medications may be introduced if symptoms occur. Previous trials have shown that the diarrhea 
could be managed with loperamide. The recommended dose of loperamide is 4 mg at first onset, 
followed by 2 mg every 2 to 4 hours until diarrhea-free for 12 hours. In the event of grade 3 or 4 
diarrhea, the following supportive measures are allowed: hydration, octreotide, and antidiarrheals. 
 
Patients with severe diarrhea or any diarrhea associated with severe nausea or vomiting should be hospitalized for intravenous hydration and correction of electrolyte imbalances. 
  
10.0 Adverse Event (AE) Reporting and Monitoring  
 
10.1 Adverse Event Charac teristics  
 
CTCAE term (AE description) and grade:  The descriptions and grading scales found in the 
revised NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0 will be 
utilized for AE reporting. All appropriate treatment areas should have access to a copy of the CTCAE version 4.0. A copy of the CTCAE version 4.0 can be downloaded from the CTEP web 
site: ( http://ctep.cancer.gov/protocolDevelopment/electronic_applications/ctc.htm
) 
 
10.11 Adverse event monitoring and reporting is a routine part of every clinical trial.  First, 
identify and grade the severity of the event using the CTCAE version 4.0. Next, determine 
whether the event is expected or unexpec ted (see Section 10.2) and if the adverse event is 
related to the medical treatment or procedure (see Section 10.3). With this information, 
determine whether the event must be reported as an expedited report (see Section 10.4). 
RU021407I       25   Addendum 6 
 
  Important : Expedited adverse event reporting requires submission of a MedWatch  3500A 
report(s). Expedited reports are to be completed within the timeframes and via the 
mechanisms specified in Sections 10.2 and 10.3. All AEs reported via expedited 
mechanisms must also be reported via the routine data reporting mechanisms defined by 
the protocol (see Sections 10.5 and 18.0). 
 10.12 Each CTCAE term in the current version is a unique representation of a specific event used 
for medical documentation and scientific analysis and is a single MedDRA Lowest Level Term (LLT).  
 
• NOTE:  A severe AE, as defined by the above grading scale, is NOT  the same as 
serious AE which is defined in the table in Section 10.4. 
 
10.2 Expected vs. Unexpected Events  
 
• The determination of whether an AE is expected is based on agent-specific information 
provided in Section 15.0 of the protocol. 
• Unexpected AEs are those not listed in the agent -specific information provided in Section 15.0 
of the protocol. 
 
NOTE : “Unexpected adverse experiences” means any adverse experie nce that is neither identified 
in nature, severity, or frequency of risk in the information provided for IRB review nor mentioned in the consent form.  
 
10.3 Assessment of Attribution  
 
When assessing whether an adverse event is related to a medical treatment or procedure, the 
following attribution categories are utilized:  
 
Definite - The adverse event is clearly related to the agent(s).  
Probable - The adverse event is likely related to the agent(s).  
Possible - The adverse event may be related to the agent(s ). 
Unlikely - The adverse event is doubtfully related to the agent(s).  
Unrelated - The adverse event is clearly NOT related to the agent(s).  
 
Events determined to be possibly, probably or definitely attributed to a medical 
treatment suggest there is eviden ce to indicate a causal relationship between the drug 
and the adverse event.  
 
10.31  Special Situations for Expedited Reporting   
 
Exceptions to Expedited Reporting: EXPECTED Serious Adverse Events  
 
An expedited report may not be required for specific Grade 1, 2 and 3 Serious Adverse 
Events where the AE is EXPECTED. Any protocol specific reporting procedures MUST 
BE SPECIFIED BELOW and will supersede the standard Expedited Adverse Event 
Reporting Requirements:  
Note:  These exceptions only apply if the adverse event does not result in hospitalization.  
 If the adverse event results in hospitalization, then the standard expedited adverse events 
reporting requirements must be followed. 
  
RU021407I       26   Addendum 6 
 
   
System Organ Class (SOC)  Adverse event/Symptoms  CTCAE Grade at which t he 
event will not be 
expeditiously  reported.  
Gastrointestinal Disorders  Diarrhea  
Any Grade  Dyspepsia  
Nausea  
Vomiting  
Colitis  Grades 1 -3 Pancreatitis  
General disorders and 
administrations site conditions Anorexia  
Any G rade Asthenia  
Dehydra tion 
Fatigue  
Malaise  
Weight loss  
Hepatobiliary disorders  Cholecystitis  Grades 1 -3 
Infections and infestations  Lung Infection  
Grades 1 -3 Sinusitis  
Skin infection  
Urinary tract infection  
Investigations  Alkaline phosphatase increased  
Any Grade  Alanine aminotransferase increased  
Aspartate aminotransferase increased  
Lymphocyte count decreased  
Metabolism and nutrition disorders Hyperkalemia  
Any Grade  Hypocalcemia  
Hypomagnesemia  
Hyponatremia  
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders  Arthralgia  
Any Grade  Back pain  
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue 
disorder – Other (muscle spasms)  
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders Alopecia  
Any Grade  Rash acneiform  
Rash maculo -papular  
Palmar -plantar  erythrodysesth esia syndrome  
 
 
10.311 Persistent or Significant Disabilities/Incapacities  
 
Any AE that results in persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions (formerly referred to as disabilities), congenital abnormities or birth defects, must be reported immediately if they occur at any time 
following treatment with an agent under an IND/IDE since they are considered to be a 
serious AE and must be reported to the sponsor as specified in 21 CFR 312.64(b) . 
 
  
RU021407I       27   Addendum 6 
 
  10.312  Death  
 
• Any death occurring within 30 days of the last dose, regardless of 
attribution to an agent/intervention under an IND/IDE requires 
expedited reporting within 24 -hours.  
• Any death occurring greater than 30 days with an attribution of possible, probable, or definite to an agent/intervention under an NCI 
IND/IDE  requires expedited reporting within 24 -hours. 
 
• Reportable categories of Death  
 
• Death attributable to a CTCAE term.  
• Death Neonatal:  A disorder characterized by cessation of life 
during  the first 28 days of life.  
• Death NOS:  A cessation of life that cannot be attributed to a 
CTCAE term associated with Grade 5.  
• Sudden death NOS:  A sudden (defined as instant or within one 
hour of the onset of symptoms) or an unobserved cessation of life that cannot be attributed to a CTCAE term associated with Grade 
5. 
• Death due to progressive disease should be reported as Grade 5 
“Neoplasms benigh, malignant and unspecified (incl cysts and 
polyps) – Other (Progressive Disease)” under the system organ 
class (SOC) of the same name.  Evidence that the death was a 
manifestation of underlying disease (e.g., radiological changes 
suggesting tumor growth or progression: clinical deterioration 
associated with a disease process) should be submitted.  
  
10.313 Secondary Malignancy 
 
• A secondary malignancy  is a cancer caused by treatment for a previous 
malignancy (e.g., treatment with investigational agent/intervention, 
radiation or chemotherapy). A secondary malignancy is not considered a 
metastasis of the initial neoplasm . 
• All secondary malignancies that occur following treatment with an agent 
under an IND/IDE to be reported. Three options are available to describe the 
event:  
o Leukemia secondary to oncology chemotherapy (e.g., Acute Myeloctyic Leukemia [AML])  
o Myelodysplasti c syndrome (MDS)  
o Treatment -related secondary malignancy  
• Any malignancy possibly related to cancer treatment (including AML/MDS) should also be reported via the routine reporting mechanisms outlined in each 
protocol.  
 
10.314  Second Malignancy  
 
• A second mali gnancy is one unrelated to the treatment of a prior malignancy 
(and is NOT a metastasis from the initial malignancy). Second malignancies 
require ONLY routine reporting. 
 
  
RU021407I       28   Addendum 6 
 
  10.4 Expedited Reporting Requirements for Studies using Commercial Agent(s) ONLY: 
 
Expedited Reporting Requirements for Adverse Events that Occur in a Non -IND/IDE trial 
within 30 Days of the Last Administration of a Commercial Agent 1, 2 
 
FDA REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS (21 CFR Part 312)  
NOTE:  Investigators MUST  immediately report to the sponsor ANY Serious Adverse Events, whether or not they 
are considered related to the investigational agent(s)/intervention (21 CFR 312.64)  
 An adverse event is considered serious if it results in ANY  of the following outcomes:   
1) Deat h 
2) A life -threatening adverse event  
3) An adverse event that results in inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization for ≥ 24 
hours  
4) A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions  
5) A congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
6) Important Medical Events (IME) that may not result in death, be life threatening, or require hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or 
subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this 
definition. (FDA, 21 CFR 312.32; ICH E2A and ICH E6).  
 
ALL SERIOUS  adverse events that meet the above criteria MUST  be immediately reported to the sponsor  within 
the timeframes detailed in the table below.  
Hospitalization Grade 1 
Timeframes  Grade 2 
Timeframes  Grade 3 Timeframes  Grade 4 & 5 
Timeframes  
Resulting in 
Hospitalization  
≥ 24 hrs 7 Calendar Days  
24-Hour 3 
Calendar Days  Not resulting in  
Hospitalization  
≥ 24 hrs Not required  7 Calendar Days  
NOTE: Protocol specific exceptions to expedited reporting of serious adverse events are found in section 
10.31 of the protocol.  
 
Expedited AE reporting timelines are defined as:  
o “24-Hour; 3 Calendar Days” - The AE must initially be reported via MedWatch within 24 hours of 
learning of the AE, followed by a complete expedited report within 3 calendar days of the initial 24-hour report.  
o “7 Calendar Days” - A complete expedited report on the AE must be submitted w ithin 7 calendar days 
of learning of the AE.  
1Serious adverse events that occur more than 30 days after the last administration of investigational 
agent/intervention and have an attribution of possible, probable, or definite require reporting as follows:  
 Expedited 24 -hour notification followed by complete report within 3 calendar days for:  
• All Grade 4, and Grade 5 AEs  
 
Expedited 7 calendar day reports for:  
• Grade 2 adverse events resulting in hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization  
• Grade 3 adv erse events  
2 For studies using PET or SPECT IND agents, the AE reporting period is limited to 10 radioactive half -lives, 
rounded UP to the nearest whole day, after the agent/intervention was last administered.  Footnote “1” above 
applies after this reporting period. 3 
 
Effective Date:  May 5, 2011  
 
  
RU021407I       29   Addendum 6 
 
  Additional Instructions: 
 
1. An increased incidence of an expected adverse event (AE) is based on the patients treated for 
this study at their site.  A list of known/expected AEs is reported in the package insert or the 
literature, including AEs resulting from a drug overdose. 
 
2. Submit form 3500A to the FDA, MedWatch, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20852-9787, 
by fax at 1-800-332-0178 or online at 
http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/HowToReport/default.htm .  
 
3. ACCRU Sites : Follow site -specific reporting guidelines.  Provide copies by fax 
to the ACCRU SAE Coordinator. The ACCRU SAE Coordinator will then 
electronically send the report to Bayer:  
 
Electronic Mailbox: 
Facsimile:    
Address:    
Mail only    
  
Ad
dress:   
FDX or UPS only: 
 
Reports for all Bayer products can also be phoned in via our Medical Communications 
Department   
 
Phone:   
 
The Site Investigator shall report to ACCRU within 24 hours of the investigator’s awareness of other events such as:  
 
• An adverse event related to study specific procedures  
• Any new and important event related to treatment with the study drug(s). 
• Any pregnancy during which a female patient was exposed to the study drug(s) 
• Any pregnancy in the partner of a male patient, where the male patient was exposed to study 
drug at the time of conception or conception occurred within two weeks of the last dose of 
study drug(s). 
• Any other relevant safety information including but not limited to re ports on drug interaction, 
overdose, drug abuse or misuse, drug dependency, withdrawal syndrome, medication error, 
occupational exposure and lack of drug effect (LODE) occurring at any time during the 
treatment phase.  
 
Pregnancy:  If a pregnancy occurs, follow the patient throughout the pregnancy until the outcome of 
the pregnancy is available.  Subsequent follow -up will depend on the outcome of the pregnancy. If 
there is an abnormal outcome or pregnancy complications, additional follow-up may be requested to obtain further information. 
 
Any communication concerning safety related information to regulatory authorities or ethics committees including but not limited to:  
 
• Development Safety Update Reports (DSUR) / relevant parts of IND reports for the STUDY;  
• Any other safety related reports, issues and queries that are either raised by or communicated to 
regulatory authorities or ethics committees;  
  

RU021407I       30   Addendum 6 
 
  10.5 Other Required Reporting 
 
10.51 Adverse events to be graded at each evaluation and pretreatment symptoms/condi tions to 
be evaluated at baseline per the CTCAE v4.0 grading unless otherwise stated in the table 
below: 
 
System Organ  
Class (SOC)  Adverse event/Symptoms  Baseline  Each  
evaluation  
Gastrointestinal 
disorders Diarrhea  # stools per 
day X 
Nausea  X X 
Vomiti ng X X 
General 
Disorders  Fatigue  X X 
Palmar -plantar 
erythrodysesthesia syndrome  X X 
Skin and 
Subcutaneous 
Tissue Disorders  Rash maculo -papular  X X 
Vascular 
disorders Hypertension  X X 
 
 
10.52 Submit via appropriate Academic and Community Cancer Resear ch United (ACCRU) 
Case Report Forms (i.e., paper or electronic, as applicable) the following AEs experienced by a patient and not specified in Section 10.5: 
 
10.521 Grade 2 AEs deemed possibly, probably, or definitely  related to the study 
treatment or proc edure.  
 10.522 Grade 3 and 4 AEs regardless of attribution to the study treatment or procedure.  
 10.523 Grade 5 AEs (Deaths)  
 
10.5231 Any death within 30 days of the patient’s last study treatment or 
procedure regardless of attribution to the study treatment or 
procedure. 
 
10.5232 Any death more than 30 days after the patient’s last study 
treatment or procedure that is felt to be at least possibly treatment 
related must also be submitted as a Grade 5 AE, with a CTCAE 
type and attribution assigned. 
 
 
11.0 Treatment Evaluation Using RECIST Guideline  
 
NOTE:  This study uses protocol RECIST v1.1 template dated 2/16/2011. See the footnote for the table 
regarding measureable disease in Section 11.44, as it pertains to data collection and analysis.  
 
Response and progression will be evaluated in this study using the new international criteria proposed by 
the revised Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (R ECIST) guidelines (version 1.1) (Eisenhauer et 
al., 2009) . Changes in the largest diameter (unidimensional measurement) of the tumor lesions and the 
short axis measurements in the case of lymph nodes are used in the RECIST guideline. 
 
RU021407I       31   Addendum 6 
 
  11.1 Schedule of Evaluations:  For the purposes of this study, patients should be reevaluated every 8 
weeks.  
 
11.2 Definitions of  Measurable and Non -Measurable Disease  
 
11.21 Measurable Disease  
 
11.211 A non- nodal lesion is considered measurable if its longest diameter can be 
accurately measured as ≥2.0 cm with chest x-ray, or as ≥1.0 cm with CT scan, CT 
component of a PET/CT, or MRI. 
 
11.212 A superficial non-nodal lesion is measurable if its longest diameter is ≥ 1.0 cm in 
diameter as assessed using calipers (e.g. skin nodules) or imaging.  In the ca se of 
skin lesions, documentation by color photography, including a ruler to estimate 
the size of the lesion, is recommended. 
 
11.213 A malignant lymph node is considered measurable if its short axis is >1.5 cm 
when assessed by CT scan (CT scan slice thick ness recommended to be no greater 
than 5 mm).  
 
11.22 Non-Measurable Disease  
 
11.221 All other lesions (or sites of disease) are considered non- measurable disease, 
including pathological nodes (those with a short axis ≥1.0 to <1.5 cm). Bone lesions, leptomeningeal disease, ascites, pleural/pericardial effusions, 
lymphangitis cutis/pulmonis , inflammatory breast disease, and abdominal masses 
(not followed by CT or MRI), are considered as non- measurable as well.  
 
Note:  ‘Cystic lesions’ thought to represent cystic metastases can be considered as 
measurable lesions, if they meet the definition o f measurability described above. 
However, if non-cystic lesions are present in the same patient, these are preferred 
for se lection as target lesions.  In addition, lymph nodes that have a short axis <1.0 
cm are considered non pathological (i.e., normal) and should not be recorded or followed. 
 11.3 Guidelines for Evaluation of Measurable Disease  
 
11.31 Measurement Methods:   
• All measurements should be recorded in metric notation (i.e., decimal fractions of 
centimeters) using a ruler or calipers.  
• The same method of assessment and the same technique must be used to characterize each identified and reported lesion at baseline and during follow-up. For patients having 
only lesions measuring at least 1 cm to less than 2 cm must use CT imaging for both 
pre- and post- treatment tumor assessments.   
• Imaging -based evaluation is preferred to evaluation by clinical examination when both 
methods have been used at the same evaluation to assess the antitumor effect of a 
treatment.   
 
11.32 Acceptable Modalities for Measurable Disease:  
• Conventional CT and MRI: This guideline has defined measurability of lesions on CT scan based on the assumption that CT slice thickness is 5 mm or less. If CT scans have slice thickness greater than 5 mm, the minimum size for a measurable lesion sh ould be 
twice the slice thickness.   
RU021407I       32   Addendum 6 
 
  • As with CT, if an MRI is performed, the technical specifications of the scanning 
sequences used should be optimized for the evaluation of the type and site of disease.  
The lesions should be measured on the same pulse sequence.  Ideally, the same type of 
scanner should be used and the image acquisition protocol should be followed as closely 
as possible to prior scans.  Body scans should be performed with breath-hold scanning 
techniques, if possible.  
• PET-CT: If the site can d ocument that the CT performed as part of a PET- CT is of 
identical diagnostic quality to a diagnostic CT (with IV and oral contrast), then the CT portion of the PET- CT can be used for RECIST measurements and can be used 
interchangeably with conventional CT in accurately measuring cancer lesions over time.   
• Physical Examination:  For superficial non-nodal lesions, physical examination is 
acceptable, but imaging is preferable, if both can be done. In the case of skin lesions, 
documentation by color photography, including a ruler to estimate the size of the lesion, is recommended.  
 
11.33 Measurement at Follow -up Evaluation: 
• In the case of stable disease (SD), follow -up measurements must have met the SD 
criteria at least once after study entry at a minimum interva l of 8 weeks (see Section 
11.44). 
• The cytological confirmation of the neoplastic origin of any effusion that appears or worsens during treatment when the measurable tumor has met criteria for response or 
stable disease is mandatory to differentiate between  response or stable disease (an 
effusion may be a side effect of the treatment) and progressive disease.  
• Cytologic and histologic techniques can be used to differentiate between PR and CR in rare cases (e.g., residual lesions in tumor types such as germ cell tumors, where known 
residual benign tumors can remain.) 
 
11.4 Measurement of Effect  
 
11.41 Target Lesions & Target Lymph Nodes 
 
• Measurable lesions (as defined in Section 11.21) up to a maximum of 5 lesions 
representative of all involved organs, should be identified as “Target Lesions” and recorded and measured at baseline.  These lesions can be non -nodal or nodal (as defined 
in 11.21), where no more than 2 lesions are from the same organ and no more than 2 
malignant nodal lesions are selected.  
 
Note:  If fewer than 5 target lesions and target lymph nodes are identified (as there often 
will be), there is no reason to perform additional studies beyond those specified in the protocol to discover new lesions.  
 
• Target lesions and target lymph nodes should be sel ected on the basis of their size, be 
representative of all involved sites of disease, but in addition should be those that lend 
themselves to reproducible repeated measurements.  It may be the case that, on occasion, 
the largest lesion (or malignant lymph node) does not lend itself to reproducible measurements in which circumstance the next largest lesion (or malignant lymph node) 
which can be measured reproducibly should be selected. 
• Baseline Sum of Dimensions (BSD):  A sum of the longest diameter for all ta rget lesions 
plus the sum of the short axis of all the target lymph nodes will be calculated and 
reported as the baseline sum of dimensions (BSD).  The BSD will be used as reference 
to further characterize any objective tumor response in the measurable dimension of the disease.  
  
RU021407I       33   Addendum 6 
 
  • Post-Baseline Sum of the Dimensions (PBSD):  A sum of the longest diameter for all 
target lesions plus the sum of the short axis of all the target lymph nodes will be 
calculated and reported as the post- baseline sum of dimensions (PB SD). If the 
radiologist is able to provide an actual measure for the target lesion (or target lymph node), that should be recorded, even if it is below 0.5 cm. If the target lesion (or target 
lymph node) is believed to be present and is faintly seen but too small to measure, a default value of 0.5 cm should be assigned. If it is the opinion of the radiologist that the target lesion or target lymph node has likely disappeared, the measurement should be 
recorded as 0 cm.  
• The minimum sum of the dimensions (MSD ) is the minimum of the BSD and the 
PBSD.  
 
11.42 Non-Target Lesions & Non -Target Lymph Nodes 
 
Non-measurable sites of disease (Section 11.22) are classified as non - target lesions or non -
target lymph nodes and should also be recorded at baseline.  These les ions and lymph nodes 
should be followed in accord with 11.433.  
 11.43 Response Criteria 
 
11.431 All target lesions and target lymph nodes followed by CT/MRI/PET -CT/Chest 
X-ray/physical examination must be measured on re-evaluation at evaluation 
times speci fied in Section 11.1. Specifically, a change in objective status to 
either a PR or CR cannot be done without re- measuring target lesions and target 
lymph nodes. 
 
Note: Non-target lesions and non -target lymph nodes should be evaluated at 
each assessment, especially in the case of first response or confirmation of 
response.  In selected circumstances, certain non -target organs may be evaluated 
less frequently. For example, bone scans may need to be repeated only when 
complete response is identified in target d isease or when progression in bone is 
suspected. 
 
11.432 Evaluation of Target Lesions 
 
• Complete Response (CR):  All of the following must be true:  
 
a. Disappearance of all target lesions.  
b. Each target lymph node must have reduction in short axis to <1.0 c m. 
 
• Partial Response (PR):  At least a 30% decrease in PBSD (sum of the 
longest diameter for all target lesions plus the sum of the short axis of all the target lymph nodes at current evaluation) taking as reference the BSD ( see 
Section 11.41). 
 
• Progression (PD):  At least one of the following must be true: 
 
a. At least one new malignant lesion, which also includes any lymph node 
that was normal at baseline (< 1.0 cm short axis) and increased to ≥ 1.0 
cm short axis during follow-up. 
  
RU021407I       34   Addendum 6 
 
  b. At least a 20% increase in PBSD (sum of the longest diameter for all 
target lesions plus the sum of the short axis of all the target lymph nodes 
at current evaluation) taking as reference the MSD (Section 11.41).  In 
addition, the PBSD must also demonstrate an absolute increase of at least 0.5 cm from the MSD. 
 
• Stable Disease (SD):  Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR, nor 
sufficient increase to qualify for PD taking as reference the MSD.  
 
11.433 Evaluation of Non- Target Lesions & Non -target Lymph Nodes 
 
• Complete Respo nse (CR):  All of the following must be true:  
a. Disappearance of all non -target lesions.  
b. Each non-target lymph node must have a reduction in short axis to <1.0 
cm. 
 
• Non-CR/Non -PD: Persistence of one or more non-target lesions or non- target 
lymph nodes. 
 
• Progression (PD):  At least one of the following must be true: 
a. At least one new malignan t lesion, which also includes any lymph node 
that was normal at baseline (< 1.0 cm short axis) and increased to ≥1.0 
cm short axis during follow-up. 
b. Unequivocal progression of existing non-target lesions and non- target 
lymph nodes. (NOTE:  Unequivocal progression should not normally 
trump target lesion and target lymph node status. It must be representative of overall disease status change.) 
 
11.44 Overall Objective Status  
 
The overall objective status for an evaluation is determined by combining the patient’s status on target lesions, target lymph nodes, non- target lesions, non-target lymph nodes, and 
new disease as defined in the following tables:  
 
For Patients with Measurable Disease  
 
Target Lesions &  
Target Lymph Nodes  Non-Target Lesions &  
Non-Target Lymph 
Nodes  New  
Sites of Disease  Overall Objective 
Status  
CR CR No CR 
CR Non-CR/Non -PD No PR 
PR CR 
Non-CR/Non -PD No PR 
CR/PR  Not All Evaluated*  No PR**  
SD CR 
Non-CR/Non -PD 
Not All Evaluated*  No SD 
Not all Evaluated  CR 
Non-CR/Non -PD 
Not All Evaluated*  No Not Evaluated 
(NE)  
PD Unequivocal P D 
CR 
Non-CR/No n-PD 
Not All Evaluated*  Yes or No  PD 
RU021407I       35   Addendum 6 
 
  Target Lesions &  
Target Lymph Nodes  Non-Target Lesions &  
Non-Target Lymph 
Nodes  New  
Sites of Disease  Overall Objective 
Status  
CR/PR/SD/PD/Not all 
Evaluated  Unequivocal PD  Yes or No  PD 
CR/PR/SD/PD/Not all 
Evaluated  CR 
Non-CR/Non -PD 
Not All Evaluated*  Yes PD 
*See Section 11.431 
** NOTE:  This study uses the protocol RECIST v1.1 template dated 2/16/2011. For data collection 
and analysis purposes the objective status changed from SD to PR in the ACCRU  protocol RECIST 
v1.1 template as of 2/16/2011 and to match RECIST v1.1 requirements.  
For Patients with Non- Measurable Disease Only:  
 
Non-Target Le sions &  
Non-Target Lymph Nodes  New  
Sites of Disease  Overall  
Objective Status  
CR No CR 
Non-CR/Non -PD No Non-CR/Non -PD  
Not All Evaluated*  No Not Evaluated (NE)  
Unequivocal PD  Yes or No  PD 
Any Yes PD 
*See Section 11.431  
11.45 Symptomatic Deterioration : Patients with global deterioration of health status requiring 
discontinuation of treatment without objective evidence of disease progression at that time, and not either related to study treatment or other medical conditions, should be reported as 
PD due to “symptomatic deterioration.”  Every effort should be made to document the 
objective progression even after discontinuation of treatment due to symptomatic 
deterioration.  A patient is classified as having PD due to “symptomatic deterioration” if 
any of t he following occur that are not either related to study treatment or other medical 
conditions: 
 
• Weight loss >10% of body weight. 
• Worsening of tumor- related symptoms.  
• Decline in performance status of >1 level on ECOG scale.  
 
12.0 Descriptive Factors  
 
12.1 BRAF analysis done:  Yes vs. no . 
 
12.11 If yes, wild -type vs. mutated. 
 
12.2 KRAS analysis done: Yes vs. no. 
 
12.21 If yes, wild -type vs. mutated. 
 12.3 ECOG Performance Status: 0 vs. 1. 
 
12.4 Age:  <70 vs.   ≥70. 
 
  
RU021407I       36   Addendum 6 
 
  13.0 Treatment/Follow –up Decision at Evaluation of Patient  
 
13.1 A patient is deemed ineligible  if after registration, it is determined that at the time of registration, 
the patient did not satisfy each and every eligibility criteria for study ent ry. The patient may 
continue treatment off -protocol at the discretion of the physician as long as there are no safety 
concerns, and the patient was properly registered.  The patient will go directly to the event-
monitoring phase of the study (or off study, if applicable).  
 
• If the patient received treatment, all data up until the point of confirmation of ineligibility must 
be submitted. Event monitoring will be required per Section 18.0 of the protocol. 
• If the patient never received treatment, on -study materi al must be submitted. Event monitoring 
will be required per Section 18.0 of the protocol. 
 
13.2 A patient is deemed a major violation, if protocol requirements regarding treatment in cycle 1 of the initial therapy are so severely violated that evaluability  for the primary endpoint is 
questionable. All data up until the point of confirmation of a major violation must be submitted. The patient will go directly to the event-monitoring phase of the study. The patient may continue 
treatment off -protocol at the d iscretion of the physician as long as there are no safety concerns, and 
the patient was properly registered.  Event monitoring will be required per Section 18.0 of the 
protocol. 
 
13.3 A patient is deemed a cancel if he/she is removed from the study for any reason before any study 
treatment is given.  On-study material and the End of Active Treatment/Cancel Notification Form 
must be submitted. No further data submission is necessary.  
 
13.4 Patients will continue treatment until progression, unacceptable adverse events, or patient refusal. 
Treatment will then be discontinued and the patient will go to event monitoring and be followed per Section 18.0. 
 13.5 Patients who are CR, PR, or SD will continue treatment per protocol.  
13.6 Patients who develop PD while r eceiving therapy will go to the event-monitoring phase. 
 13.7 Patients who go off protocol treatment for reasons other than PD will go to the event-monitoring 
phase per Section 18.0.  
  
14.0 Body Fluid Biospecimens   
 
14.1 Body Fluid Biospecimen Submission  
 
14.11 Summary Table of Body Fluid Specimens for This Protocol  
 
Type of 
biospecimen to 
submit  Mandatory or optional When to submit  Reason for submission 
(background/methodology 
section)  
Where to 
find specific 
details for 
specimen 
submission  
Blood/blood 
products ( EDTA  
whole blood)  Mandatory Multiple draws (see 
Section 14.21for 
schedule)  Defined translational studies (Section 14. 211) Section 14.2 
Blood/blood 
products ( EDTA  
whole blood)  Mandatory Baseline Prior to 
Treatment  and 
Multiple Draws  Banking (Secti on 14.212) Section 14.2 
RU021407I       37   Addendum 6 
 
   
14.12 Kits are required for this study.  
 
14.121 The kit contains supplies and instructions for collecting, processing, and 
shipping specimens. 
 
14.122 Participating institutions may obtain kits by completing and faxing the Supply 
Order Form (found in the Forms Packet) to the number listed on the form. Fill out the site address to where the kits will be shipped on the Fax Supply form. 
Because we are now being charged for all outgoing kits, a small, but sufficient, 
supply of the spec imen collection kits should be ordered prior to patient entry . 
Do not send the unused kits back to Biospecimen Accessioning and 
Processing (BAP) Receiving or the BAP Shared Resource.  
 14.123 Kits will be sent via FedEx® Ground at no additional cost to the participating 
institutions. Allow at least two weeks to receive the kits.  
 
14.124 Kits will not be sent via rush delivery service unless the participating institution 
provides their own FedEx® account number or alternate billing number for 
express service. ACCRU will not cover the cost for rush delivery of kits.  
 
14.13 All samples must be collected Monday –Friday.   
 
14.14 Label specimen tube(s) with protocol number, ACCRU patient ID number, and time and 
date blood is drawn and sample type . 
 
14.15 Collect a nd process all blood/blood products according to the directions below and the kit 
instructions for the table below.  
 
14.151 Baseline and Cycle 2 EDTA Tube:  Centrifuge the EDTA tubes in a refrigerated 
centrifuge within 2 hours or less after collection all t ime points. Centrifuge 
sample 3000 rpm x 10 minutes. Carefully pipette 1.0 mL of plasma into each of 
the 3 cryovials. Next pipette the white blood cells being careful to not disturb the underlying cell layer into the 4
th cryovial. Carefully tighten the cap s. Discard the 
EDTA collection tube.  
 
14.152 Serial Draws: Centrifuge the EDTA tubes in a refrigerated centrifuge within 2 hours or less after collection all time points.  Centrifuge sample 3000 rpm x 10 
minutes. Carefully pipette 1.0 mL of plasma into each of the 3 cryovials.  
Carefully tighten the caps.  Discard the EDTA collection tube.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
RU021407I       38   Addendum 6 
 
  14.153 Freeze all cryovials at -70°C or colder until shipped. 
 
Indicate if 
specimen is 
mandatory 
or optional  Collection 
tube 
description 
and/or 
additive 
(color  of 
tube top)  Volume to 
collect per 
tube 
(number 
of tubes to 
be 
collected)  Blood 
product being 
processed and 
submitted by 
participating 
site Baseline, 
Prior to 
Tx Cycle 1, Day 7 
Prior to Tx, 
Cycle 1 Day 14 
Prior to Tx, 
Cycle 1 Day 21 
prior to Tx  Cycle 2 Da y 1 
Prior to Tx and 
Cycle 2 Day 21 
Prior to Tx  Additional 
processing 
required at 
site after 
blood draw?  Storage  
/shipping 
conditions  
Mandatory  EDTA  10 ml (1)  Plasma  
(PK)   X X Yes Freeze/dry 
ice 
Mandatory  EDTA  10 ml (1)  Plasma, 
White Blood 
Cells  
(banking)  X  X Yes Freeze/dry 
ice 
 
14.16 Shipping 
 
14.161 Verify ALL sections of the Blood Specimen Submission Form (see Forms 
Packet), BAP Requisition Form (provided in kit), and specimen collection labels 
are completed and filled in correctly.  Enter information from the Blood 
Specimen Submission Form. 
 
14.162 Ship all plasma and white blood cells via Priority Overnight service on dry ice. 
 14.163 Ship specimens via Priority Overnight service, Monday – Friday , to BAP 
Freezer according to kit instructions.  Do not s end samples on weekends or just 
prior to federal holidays.  
 
14.164 The BAP kits will include a smart shipper label (3x5 white barcoded label) 
affixed to the shipping boxes. The smart shipper label is a pre- addressed return 
label, which replaces the need for an airbill.  Shipping costs will be covered by 
ACCRU if the shipping box provided with the BAP kit is used for shipping specimens to BAP Freezer.  
 
14.165 BAP Freezer will receive the samples and immediately forward specimens to the 
ACCRU Research Base BAP Shared Resource, Stabile SL -16, Attention: BAP 
Supervisor. 
 
14.2 Study Methodology and Storage Information 
 
14.21 Blood/blood product samples will be collected for pharmacokinetic analysis.  
 
PK analysis for regorafenib and M2 and M5 will be performed as follows:  
 
- Cycle 1 day 7: 0, prior to dosing (C
min, trough levels) 
- Cycle 1 day 14: 0, prior to dosing (C min, trough levels) 
- Cycle 1 day 21: 0, prior to dosing (C min, trough levels) 
- Cycle 2 day 1: 0, prior to dosing (C min, trough levels) 
- Cycle 2 day 21; 0, prior to dosing (C min, trough levels)  
- Window sampling times are predose ≤12 hours. 
 
14.211 A portion of the plasma, 0.5 ml (500 mcl), for each sample will initially be 
analyzed for the amount of  regorafenib  in Dr. Jeannine McCu ne’s laboratory 
using standard laboratory protocols. The samples will be shipped upon request to 
RU021407I       39   Addendum 6 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Accor
ding to patient consent information, remaining white blood cells /plasma 
will be stored frozen at -70/-80ºC by BAP  until specific analyses are identified.  
As protocols are developed, they will be presented for ACCRU and IRB review 
and approval. (This collection is part of a general strategy of investigation for the 
majority of ACCRU studies.) 
 
14.212 Ongoing research is likely to identify putative biomarkers for regorafenib 
efficacy and/or toxicity in the near future. Given the key importance of such 
biomarker identification, our study offers a unique opportunity to validate such 
discoveries given its size and prospective nature. As  such, and as  part of ongoing 
ACCRU research, we will collect plasma and white blood cells for future 
research studies, according to patient consent information, on molecular determinants of efficacy and tolerability.  Samples will be stored frozen at -70ºC 
by BAP until specific analyses are identified.  As protocols are developed, they 
will be presented for ACCRU  (scientific)  and IRB r eview and approval prior to 
any samples being used .  
 
14.3 Return of Genetic Testing Research Results  
 
For this study, DNA (White Blood Cells) is only being banked, and no specific genetic testing is 
being performed. If, at any time, genetic results are obtained that may have clinical relevance, IRB 
review and approval will be sought regarding the most appropriate manner of disclosure and 
whether or not validation in a CLIA- certified setting will be required.  Sharing of research data with 
individual patients should only occur when data have been validated by multiple studies and testing has been done in CLIA-approved laboratories. 
 
 
  

RU021407I       40   Addendum 6 
 
  15.0 Drug Information  
 
IND exempt  
• Investigator brochure  - Available on the ACCRU website.  
 
15.1 Regorafenib (BAY 73 -4506, Sti varga®)   
 
15.11 Background : Regorafenib is a novel oral multi -kinase inhibitor that targets tumor cells 
and the tumor microenvironment. It inhibits tumor growth, progression and metastasis by 
inhibiting the proliferation of tumor cells, the formation of new tumor vasculature and 
stromal signaling in the microenvironment of the tumor. 
 
15.12 Formulation : Regorafenib 40- mg tablets contains regorafenib and the inactive excipients 
microcrystalline cellulose, croscarmellose sodium, magnesium stearate, povidone, colloidal 
anhydrous silica, polyvinyl alcohol-part hydrolyzed, talk, titanium dioxide E171 (color 
index 77891), Macrogol/PEG 33350, lecithin (soy), iron oxide yellow – E172 (color index 
77491), iron oxide red – E172. 
 
Regorafenib will be provided by Bayer as coated, not divisible, gray -orange-red, oval 
tablets (length 16 mm, width 7 mm, thickness 4.9-5.6 mm). Tablets are in an immediate-
release dosage form with rapid dissolution characteristics under the in vitro test conditions. 
 
Regorafenib tablets will b e packaged in high density polyethylene bottles with a white 
child resistant closure and induction seal.  Each bottle includes 28 tablets and a 3 -gram 
desiccant.  The bottles will have a label affixed containing study identification, product 
identification, and quantity of tablets. 
 15.13 Preparation and storage : Once the drug has been received it must be kept in a 
secure, dry location.  Study drug must be stored in its original bottle at a temperature 
not above 25°C (77°F). The study drug must be exclusively used for the investigation specified in this protocol and it will only be accessible to authorized 
staff.  
 15.14 Administration:  Regorafenib tablets should be taken at the same time every day  with 
approximately 8 fluid ounces (240 mL) of water after a low- fat (<30% fat) meal . 
Regorafenib should not be taken with grapefruit juice. 
 
15.15 Pharmacokinetic information : 
a) Absorption – A high -fat meal increased the mean AUC of the parent drug by 
48% compared to the fasted state and decreased the mean AUC of the M-2 (N-
oxide) and M-5 (N-oxide and N-desmethyl) active metabolites by 20% and 51%, 
respectively.  A low- fat meal increased the mean AUC of regorafenib, M-2 and 
M-5 by 36%, 40% and 23%, respectively (as compared to the fasted state). 
b) Distribution – Regora fenib undergoes enterohepatic circulation with multiple 
plasma concentration peaks observed across the 24 -hour dosing interval. 
Regorafenib is highly bound (99.5%) to human plasma proteins. 
c) Metabolism – Regorafenib is metabolized by CYP3A4 and UGT1A9. The main 
circulating metabolites measured at steady state are M-2 (N-oxide) and M-5 (N-
oxide and N -desmethyl), both of them having similar in vitro  pharmacological 
activity and steady -state concentrations as regorafenib.  M-2 and M-5 are highly 
protein bound (99.8% and 99.95%, respectively). 
  
RU021407I       41   Addendum 6 
 
  d) Excretion – Elimination half -lives for regorafenib and the M-2 metabolite in 
plasma are 28 hours (14 to 58 hours) and 25 hours (14 to 32 hours), respectively. 
M-5 has a longer mean (range) elimination half- life of 51 hours (32 to 70 hours). 
Elimination occurs through:  Feces (71%; 47% as parent compound; 24% as 
parent compound; 24% as metabolites); Urine (19%). 
 
15.16 Potential Drug Interactions: Avoid concomitant use of strong CYP3A4 inducers 
(i.e. rifampin, phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital and St. John’s Wort) and 
strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (i.e. clarithromycin, grapefruit juice, itraconazole, 
ketoconazole, posaconazole, telithromycin and voriconazole). 
 
15.17 Known potential toxicities :  
Serious Adverse Effects:  
Hepatotoxicity: [U.S. Boxed Warning]: Severe liver toxicity and hepatic failure 
(sometimes resulting in death) have been observed in clinical trials; hepatocyte 
necrosis with lymphocyte infiltration has been demonstrated with liver biopsy. 
Monitor hepatic function at baseline and during treatment. Interrupt therapy for 
hepatotoxicity; dose reductions or discontinuation are necessary depending on the severity and persistence.  
 
Most Common Adverse Events, >10% 
Cardiovascular:  Hypertension 
Central nervous system:  Fatigue, dysphonia, pain, fever, headache. 
Dermatologic: Palmar- plantar erythrodysesthesia, rash, alopecia  
Endocrine & metabolic: Hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, hyponatremia, 
hypokalemia, hypothyroidism 
Gastrointestinal: Appetite decreased, lipase in creased, diarrhea, mucositis, weight 
loss, amylase increased, nausea, vomiting  
Hematologic:  Anemia, lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, INR increased, 
hemorrhage, neutropenia 
Hepatic:  AST increased, ALT increased, hyperbilirubinemia  
Neuromuscular & skeletal:  Stiffness  
Renal:  Proteinuria  
Miscellaneous:  Infection 
 
Less Common Adverse Events, 1% - 10% 
Cardiovascular:  Myocardial ischemia and infarction  
Gastrointestinal: Taste disturbance, xerostomia, gastroesophageal reflux  
Neuromuscular & skeletal:  Tremor  
Respirato ry: Dyspnea 
 
Rare Adverse Events (Important or life -threatening), <1% 
Bradycardia, erythema multiforme, gastrointestinal fistula, hypertensive crisis, liver 
injury (severe), liver failure, reversible posterior encephalopathy syndrome (RPLS), 
skin cancer (k eratoacanthoma, squamous cell carcinoma), Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis  
 
  
RU021407I       42   Addendum 6 
 
  15.18 Study agent procurement:   
Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals will supply regorafenib tablets to Biologics, Inc.  Each 
participating ACCRU treating location will order the drug from Biologics, Inc. Fax the 
Drug Order Request Form (found in the forms packet) to: 
 
  
 
 
Eac
h participating ACCRU treating location will be responsible for monitoring the supply 
of regorafenib and will use the Drug Order Request Form to order additional supplies as 
needed.  
 Outdated or remaining drug is to be destroyed on- site as per procedures in place at each 
institution.   
15.19 Nursing Guidelines 
 
15.191 Liver toxic ity and liver failure have resulted from this agent. Monitor LFT’s 
closely and instruct patients to report any abdominal pain, jaundice or significant fatigue to the study team. Dose reduce or interrupt treatment as per protocol.  
 
15.192 Hypertension has been seen. Monitor blood pressure as outlined in protocol. 
 
15.193 Instruct patient to report and rash, or signs symptoms of palmar-plantar 
erythrodysesthesia to study team. Rarely SJS and TENS have been seen with this 
agent. Instruct patients to seek immediate medical attention if they experience 
rash with fever, blisters, sloughing of tissue (especially in the mouth and vaginal, anal regions). Treat symptomatically and monitor for effectiveness.  
 
15.194 Warn patients of possibility of alopecia. 
 
15.195 Gastrointestinal side effects can include, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, decreased 
appetite, weight loss, mucositis and less commonly taste changes, dry mouth, 
and reflux. Treat symptomatically and monitor for effectiveness.  
 
15.196 Cytopenias are seen with ag ent. Monitor CBC w/diff and instruct patient to 
report signs, symptoms of infection or any unusual bruising or bleeding to the 
study team.  
 
15.197 Secondary skin cancers have been reported. Instruct patients to report new or 
changing lesions to study team . 
 
15.198 Reversible Posterior Leukoencephalopathy Syndrome (RPLS) is a rare (<1%) 
but serious condition. Presenting symptoms may include changes in mental status, visual disturbance, seizure, or other CNS changes.  Patients with this 
syndrome generally had  HTN as well, therefore BP monitoring is important. 
Instruct patient to report any mental status changes, visual changes, seizures, or 
other CNS changes to the MD immediately.  These may be a sign of RPLS or 
more serious condition, such as hemorrhagic event  in the CNS. 
   

RU021407I       43   Addendum 6 
 
  15.2 Clobetasol Propionate Cream (Temovate®)  
 
15.21 Background: Clobetasol propionate cream has anti-inflammatory, antipruritic and 
vasoconstrictive properties.  Topical corticosteroids may depress the formation, release, and 
activity of end ogenous chemical mediators of inflammation (kinins, histamine, liposomal 
enzymes, prostaglandins) through the induction of phospholipase A2 inhibitor proteins 
(lipocortins) and sequential inhibition of the release of arachidonic acid. Clobetasol has 
very h igh range potency. 
 
15.22 Formulation: Clobetasol propionate 0.05% cream contains clobetasol propionate 0.5 mg/g 
in a cream base of propylene glycol, glyceryl monostearate, cetostearyl alcohol, glyceryl 
stearate, PEG 100 stearate, white wax, chlorocresol, sodium citrate, citric acid 
monohydrate, and purified water.  
 
15.23 Preparation and storage: Once the drug has been received it must be kept in a secure, dry location. Clobetasol propionate must be stored in its original packaging at a temperature 
between  15°C and 30°C (59°F and 77°F). Cream should not be refrigerated. 
 
15.24 Administration: Apply a thin layer of clobetasol propionate cream to the palms of the 
hands and soles of the feet. Avoid washing hands and feet for one hour after application of 
clobe tasol propionate cream.  The use of clobetasol propionate is for external use only. 
Avoid contact with the eyes and mucous membranes. Do not apply to face or intertriginous areas.  Do not use if there is atrophy at the treatment site.  Minimize contact to non affected 
areas of the body. The treated skin should not be bandaged, otherwise covered, or wrapped 
so as to be occlusive unless directed by the physician.   
 
15.25 Pharmacokinetic information:  
Absorption: Percutaneous absorption is variable and dependent upon many factors 
including vehicle used, integrity of epidermis, dose, and use of occlusive dressings (not 
recommended)  
 
Metabolism: Hepatic  
 
Excretion: Urine and feces  
 
15.26 Potential Drug Interactions: Due to the topical use of clobetasol propionate, drug -drug 
interactions are thought to be minimal. 
 
15.27 Known potential toxicities:  
Precautions: 
Systemic absorption of topical corticosteroids can produce reversible HPA axis 
suppression with the potential for glucocorticosteroid insufficiency after with drawal from 
treatment. Manifestations of Cushing syndrome, hyperglycemia, and glucosuria can also be produced in some patients by systemic absorption of topical corticosteroids while on 
therapy. Patients applying a topical steroid to a large surface area o r to areas under 
occlusion should be evaluated periodically for evidence of HPA axis suppression. This 
may be done by using the ACTH stimulation, A.M. plasma cortisol, and urinary free 
cortisol tests. Patients receiving super -potent corticosteroids should not be treated for more 
than 2 weeks at a time, and only small areas should be treated at any one time due to the 
increased risk of HPA suppression.  
 
If HPA axis suppression is noted, an attempt should be made to withdraw the drug, to reduce the frequency of application, or to substitute a less potent corticosteroid. Recovery 
of HPA axis function is generally prompt upon discontinuation of topical corticosteroids. 
RU021407I       44   Addendum 6 
 
  Infrequently, signs and symptoms of glucocorticosteroid insufficiency may occur that 
require s upplemental systemic corticosteroids. For information on systemic 
supplementation, see prescribing information for those products. If irritation develops, clobetasol propionate cream should be discontinued and appropriate therapy instituted. 
Allergic contact dermatitis with corticosteroids is usually diagnosed by observing a failure 
to heal rather than noting a clinical exacerbation as with most topical products not containing corticosteroids. Such an observation should be corroborated with appropriate 
diagnostic patch testing.  If concomitant skin infections are present or develop, an 
appropriate antifungal or antibacterial agent should be used. If a favorable response does not occur promptly, use of clobetasol propionate cream should be discontinued until the 
infection has been adequately controlled. 
 
Adverse reactions, significant  
Frequency not always defined; may depend upon formulation used, length of application, 
surface area covered, and the use of occlusive dressings.  
 
Central nervous system: Localized  burning (5% to 40%), stinging sensation (<2% to 5%), 
numbness of fing ers (<2%), local pain (1%), intracranial hypertension (systemic effect 
reported in children treated with topical corticosteroids)  
Dermatologic: Pruritus (<2% to 3%), eczem a asteatotic (2 %), erythema (<2%), folliculitis 
(<2%), skin atrophy ( <2%), telangiectasia (<2%), xeroderma (<1% to 2%), atrophic 
striae (children) 
Endocrine & metabolic: Adrenal suppression, Cushing's syndrome, glucosuria, growth 
suppression, HPA-axis suppression, hyperg lycemia 
Local: Skin fissure (<2%), local irritation (1%)  
Respiratory: Upper respiratory tract infe ction (8%), nasopharyngitis (5%), streptococcal 
pharyngitis (1%)  
<1% (Limited to important or life -threatening): Al opecia, exfoliation of skin, skin rash, 
urticaria 
 
15.28 Study agent procurement:  
Commercial supplies. Pharmacies or clinics shall obtain supplies from normal commercial 
supply chain or wholesaler. 
 
15.29 Nursing Guidelines  
15.291 As therapy is a topical preparation , side effects are expected to be minimal.  
 
15.292 Instruct patients to apply a thin layer to palms of hands and soles of feet.Patients 
should be instructed not to wash these areas for a minimum of 1 hour after 
application. 
 
15.293 Instruct patients to avoid contact with the eyes and mucous membranes.  
 
15.294 Patients may experience a local burning/stinging sensation depending on the 
strength. 
 
15.295 Rarely after prolonged use and discontinuation, patients may display 
symptomatic signs of glucocorticoid insuf ficiency. Instruct patients to report any 
excessive fatigue, facial puffiness (moon face) to the study team.  
 
15.296 Rarely after prolonged use, patients may experience elevated glucose levels, instruct diabetics to monitor sugar levels and report any fluctuations to the study 
team.  
RU021407I       45   Addendum 6 
 
  16.0 Statistic al Considerations and Methodolog y  
 
16.1 Study Design  
 
This is a randomized phase II study of regoraf enib starting at low dose (Arm A, combining A1 and 
A2) compared to standard dose of regorafenib (Arm B, combining B1 and B2) in patients wit h 
refractory metastatic colo rectal cancer (mCRC). Patients will be randomized 1:1 :1:1 to one of the 
following 4 arms: 
A1: Regorafenib start low dose and pre- emptive Clobetasol for PPES  
A2: Regorafenib start low dose and reactive Clobetasol for PPES  
B1: St andard dose of regorafenib and pre- emptive Clobetasol for PPES  
B2: Standard dose of regorafenib and reactive Clobetasol for PPES  
(see Schema)   
 
16.2 Sample Size, Accrual Time and Study Duration   
Accrual time is anticipated to be 18 months , with  approximately 2 months of follow-up per patient 
until occurrence of  the primary endpoint and approximately 6 months of planned follow-up overall 
per patient . The sample size will be 11 0 patients, with approximately 28 patients randomized per 
regorafenib and strateg y treatment sub -arm (A1, A2, B1, B2). An additional 13 patients overall will 
be enrolled to account for drop-out, cancel s, ineligibles, etc ., to give a total sample size of 12 3 
patients.  The total study durat ion (accrual and follow -up) is expected to be ap proximately 2 years.  
 16.3 Statement for Primary Endpoint  
 
The primary endpoint is the proportion of patients in each arm who complete 2 cycles of protocol treatment and initiate cycle 3 .  The proportion will be calculated among evaluable patients 
separat ely by arm  (Arm A vs. Arm B) .  Evaluable patients are defined as patients who are eligible, 
consented, received any protocol treatment.   In the CORRECT trial, among patients who were 
randomized to regorafenib, 45% continued treatment beyond cycle 2.  Othe r than disease 
progression, majority of patients discontinued regorafenib due to adverse events not associated with progression. It was noted that most adverse events occurred during Cycles 1 -2 of the treatment 
(Grothey A et. al., 2013, Lancet). Assuming 45% of patients would complete 2 cycle s of protocol 
treatment and initiate cycle 3  in the control ( standard  dose ; pooled arms B1 andB2 ) group, and 
desiring an improvement to 63% in the experimental (starting low  dose) group (pooled arms A1 
and A2) , a one -sided test with alpha = 0.20 and power of 80 % will require a sample size of 110 
patients enrolled to both regorafenib arms  (A and B). We will enroll 13 additional patients to 
account for ineligibility, cancellation, major treatment violation, or other reaso ns.  Maximum 
projected accrual is therefore 123  patients.  A Fisher exact test will be used to detect a difference in 
proportion of patients who complete 2 cycles of protocol treatment and initiate cycle 3 between 
arms (starting low dose [pooled arm A1 and  A2] vs. standard dose [poled arm B1 and B2]).  The 
proportion of patients who complete 2 cycles of protocol treatment and initiate cycle 3 will be computed by arm with its 95% confidence interval using exact method. 
 
  
RU021407I       46   Addendum 6 
 
  16.4 Supplementary Analysis Plans (includes all secondary and translational goals) 
 
16.41 Overall survival (OS) is defined as time from randomization to death due to any cause. OS 
will be estimated with Kaplan -Meier survival curves and differences between  regorafenib 
arms  (A vs. B)  tested us ing log- rank tests, though we note these analyses are not powered 
for formal non-inferiority assessments. See Section 2.21. 
 
16.42 Progression-free survival (PFS) is defined as the time from randomization to the earlier of 
disease progression or death due to any cause, where progressed  disease (PD) is as defined 
by RECIST 1.1 (see Section 11.0) . PFS will be estimated with Kaplan -Meier survival 
curves and differences between  regorafenib  arms  (A vs. B)  tested using log -rank tests, 
though we note these analyses are not powered for formal non- inferiority assessments. See 
Section 2.21. 
 
16.43 Time to progression (TTP) is defined as the time from randomization to disease 
progression, where progressed disease (PD) is defined by RECIST 1.1 (see Section 11.0. 
TTP wil l be estimated with Kaplan -Meier survival curves and differences between 
regorafenib arms (A vs. B) tested using log -rank tests, though we note these analyses are 
not pow ered for formal non -inferiority assessments. See Section 2.21.  
 
16.44 The cumulative (total) dose of regorafenib received by patients and dose intensity in the 
first two cycles will be summarized with descriptive statistics and compared between 
regorafenib arms  (A vs. B)  using the t- test (if approximately normally distributed) or the 
Wilcox on rank sum test (if not approximately normally distributed). Dose intensity is 
defined as the cumulative (total) dose of regorafenib divided by the expected total dose.  See Section 2.22. 
 16.45 The proportion of patients overall and within each arm experiencing grade 3 or 4 HFS or 
fatigue will be computed with 95% confidence intervals, and differences between 
regorafenib dosing strategies (pooled across HFS strategies) tested using a Fisher Exact 
test. The incidence of grade 3 or 4 HFS will also be descriptively compared between those 
receiving a pre- specified preemptive vs. reactive approach for hand and foot syndrome 
(pooled across dosing strategies), and tested using a Fisher Exact test. See Section 2.2 4. 
Adverse event reports will be shared with Dr. La couture of Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center 1 -2 times per month for review. 
 
16.46 Furthermore, patients will be descriptively compared between treatment arms and between 
HFS treatment strategies (pre -emptive vs. reactive) according to self -reported outcomes 
given on the HFS14 questionnaire. See Section 2.24. Results from the cycle 1 and 2 HSF14 
questionnaires will also be summarized descriptively as they relate to the pre- emptive 
versus reactive PPES strategies, with comparisons made within and between arms using 
the t-test or Wilcoxon rank sum test as appropriate, as well as taking time -dependence into 
account. Changes in QOL (according to the LASA questionnaire as measured by the overall QOL question) from baseline will also be compared between the treatment arms 
using the t- test or Wilcoxon rank sum test. We hypothesize that patients receiving 
regorafenib will experience greater deficits in QOL as reflected by scores on the HSF14, 
the BFI and the LASA. These questionnaires have specific appl ication to this population. 
See Section 2.24. 
 
16.47 Pharmacokinetic Analysis  
 
The samples will be analyzed for the regorafenib concentrations using liquid 
chromatography mass spectrometry, with the anticipated method being a modified version 
RU021407I       47   Addendum 6 
 
  of that published by Van Erp et al.  The samples will be analyzed for M2 and M5, if cost -
free standards can be obtained from Bayer.   
 
After quantitation, the average regorafenib  concentration will be calculated by arms (Arm 
A vs. B) at each time point.  
 
As exploratory analysis, t his average concentration will be correlated with toxicity and 
efficacy endpoints. Further descriptive characteristics of the pharmacokinetics will also be calculated, An example includes (but is not limited to) within -patient variability in the 
trough concentrations pharmacokinetic parameters will also be calculated, both overall and within cycles, as a ratio of the maximum:minimum value.   
 
16.5 Adverse Event Stopping Rule  
 
Because this study randomizes patients to either a standard of care treatment or a lower dose of the 
same treatment, stopping rules for toxicity will not apply. However, as noted below in Section 
16.7, regular meetings of the DSMB will review all toxicity and adverse event data while patients 
are being treated.  
 
16.6 Accrual Monitoring Stopping Rule  
 
There is no stopping rule related to accrual. 
 
16.7 Study Monitoring  
 
This study will be monitored by the Mayo Clinic Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB). Reports containing patient characteristics, toxicity and administrative information will be provided to the 
DSMB every six months, with the first report due at the first reporting period after study initiation.  
 
16.8 Missing Data  
 
Patients with missing data will be excluded from relev ant analyses; no imputation of missing data 
will b e performed.  
 16.9 Primary Endpoint Completion Time Estimation  
 
Given 18 months of accrual and 2 months of follow-up per patient to observe the primary endpoint, 
a total of 20 months will be required to observe all primary endpoint events, with subsequen t time 
required for data cleaning and analysis (approximately 2 months). 
  
17.0 Pathology Con siderations/Tissue Biospecimens:  
None  
 
 
  
RU021407I       48   Addendum 6 
 
  18.0 Records and Data Collection Procedures  
 
Access the RAVE system through the iMedidata portal at https://login.imedidata.com . All data must be 
entered by Remote Date Entry (RDE) and completed by qualified and authorized personnel. All data on the 
CRF must reflect the corresponding source document.  
 
18.1 Submission Timetable  
 
 
Initial Material(s)  
CRF  Active -Monitoring Phase  
(Compliance with Test Schedule Section 4.0) 
 
Institutional Contacts  
≤2 weeks after registration  On-Study  
On-Study: Prior Radiation2 
On-Study: Prior Systemic Therapy2 
Adverse Events: Baseline  
RECIST Measurements: Baseline  
Measurements (Non -Measur able Disease 
Only): Baseline  
Op and Pathology Reports1 
Supporting Documentation: Baseline  
Patient Status: Baseline  
Specimen Submission: Blood -Baseline  (see 
Section 14.0)  
Off Treatment Submit ≤2 we eks after registration if 
withdrawal/refusal occurs prior to beginning 
protocol therapy  
Patient Questionnaire Booklet : Baseline ≤ 2 weeks after registration - Patient questionnaire 
booklet must be used; copies are not acceptable for 
this submission.  
Book let Compliance  ≤ 2 weeks after registration - This form must  be 
completed only if the Patient Questionnaire 
Booklet contains absolutely NO patient provided 
assessment information.  
1. Submit Op and Path Reports via the Supporting Documentation: Baseline fo rm. 
2. Submit only if applicable. 
 
  
RU021407I       49   Addendum 6 
 
  Test Schedule Material(s)  
CRF  Active -Monitoring Phase  
(Compliance with Test Schedule Section 4.0) 
At each evaluation 
during treatment  At end of treatment  
Treatment (Intervention)  X4 X 
Treatment (Intervention): Dose  
Modifications, Omissions and Delays  X5  
Adverse Events: Solicited  X X 
Adverse Events: Other    
RECIST Measurements X1 X1 
Measurements (Non -Measurable Disease 
Only)  X1 X1 
Supporting Documentation  X1  
Specimen Submission: Blood - Cycle 1  X (see Section  14.0)   
Specimen Submission: Blood – Cycle 2  X (see Section 14.0)   
Patient Questionnaire Booklet : Treatment  X2  
Booklet Compliance  X3  
Patient Status  : Treatment (Intervention)  X  
Off Treatment   X 
Notice of New Primary5 X  
Consent Withdrawal (choose  appropriate 
form)5 
• Consent Withdrawal: QOL Only  
• Consent Withdrawal: Specimen Only 
• Consent Withdrawal: All Follow -Up X  
Lost to Follow -Up5 X  
Deviation Form5 X  
1. Attach a copy of documentation of response or progression in RAVE on the Supporting 
Documentation Form. 
2. Patient questionnaire booklet must  be used; copies are not acceptable for this submission.  
3. This form must be completed only  if the Patient Questionnaire Booklet  contains absolutely NO 
patient provided assessment information.  
4. Complet e at each evaluation during Active Treatment (see Section 4.0).  
5. Submit only if applicable. 
 
  
RU021407I       50   Addendum 6 
 
  Follow -up Material(s)   
CRF  Event Monitoring Phase1 
q. 6 
months 
until PD At PD After 
PD q. 6 
mos. Death  At Each Event 
Occurrence  
Patient Status: Survival and  
Disease Status Follow -Up/Event 
Monitoring  X2 X2 X X At each 
occurrence  
Adverse Events: Late3 
    At each 
occurrence  
Lost to Follow -Up3 
    At each 
occurrence  
Notice of New Primary3 
    At each 
occurrence  
First Non -Protocol Treatment4 
    At each 
occur rence  
Consent Withdrawal (choose 
appropriate form)3 
• Consent Withdrawal: QOL 
Only  
• Consent Withdrawal: Specimen Only 
• Consent Withdrawal: All 
Follow -Up     At each 
occurrence  
1. If a patient is still alive 2 years after registration, no further follow-up is required. 
2. Attach a copy of documentation of response or progression in RAVE on the Supporting 
Documentation Form. 
3. Submit only if applicable. 4. Please use the “Add Event” function to record the first instance of non- protocol treatment 
received.  If the patient has never  had any non- protocol treatment, record as “no” at the end of 
the Event Monitoring Phase. 
 
 
19.0 Budget  
 
19.1 Each site should review the test schedule (Section 4.0), taking into account local and regional 
coverage policies, to determine which items are standard of care and which are research at their 
site. Refer to the payment synopsis for funding provided per accrual for covering study costs, as 
well as any additional invoiceables that may be allowed.  
 
19.2 Tests to be research funded : Mandatory blood samples for correlative research. 
 
19.3 Other budget concerns:   
 
19.31 Regorafenib will be supplied by Bayer Pharm aceuticals.  Clobetasol propionate will not be 
supplied, but is commercially available.  
 
19.32 Remuneration will be provided to patients for the first 2 cycles of treatment.  
  
RU021407I       51   Addendum 6 
 
  20.0 References  
 
Bretscher M, Rummans T, Sloan J, Kaur J, Bartlett A, Borkenhagen L, & Loprinzi C. (1999). Quality of 
Life in Hospice Patients: A Pilot Study, Psychosomatics, 40, 309-313. 
 
Eisenhauer EA, T herasse P, Bogaert J, Schwartz LH, Sargent D, Ford R, Dancey J, Arbuck S, Gwyther S, 
Mooney M, Rubinstein L, Shankar L, Dodd L, Kaplan R, Lacombe D, Verweij J. New response evaluation 
criteria in solid tumors:  revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1). Eur J Cancer 45(2): 228 -247, 2009. 
 
Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I I, Dikshit R, Eser S, Mathers C, Rebelo M, Parkin DM, Forman D D, Bray F. 
Cancer incidence and mortality worldwide: sources, methods and major patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. Int J Cancer. 2014 Sep 13. 
 
Grothey A, Van Cutsem E, Sobrero A, et al. Time course of regorafenib- associated adverse events in the 
phase III CORRECT study, J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: suppl 4; abstr 467.  
Grothey A, Van Cutsem E, Sobrero A, et al. (2013) Regorafenib monotherapy for previous ly treated 
metastatic colorectal cancer (CORRECT): an international, multicenter, randomised, placebo -controlled, 
phase 3 trial, The Lancet, 381;9863: 303-312.  
Grunberg S.M., Groshen S., Steingass S., Zaretsky S., & Meyerowitz B. (1996). Comparison of con ditional 
quality of life terminology and visual analogue scale measurements.  Quality of Life Research; 5: 65 -72. 
 Gudex C., Dolan P., Kind P., & Williams A. (1996). Health state valuations from the general public using 
the Visual Analogue Scale. Quality of Life Research, 5: 521-531. 
 
Jung, S.- H. (2014), Stratified Fisher's exact test and its sample size calculation. Biom. J., 56: 129–
140.  
 
Hyland ME & Sodergren SC. Development of a new type of global quality of life scale and comparison and 
preference for 12 global scales. Quality of Life Research. 5(5): 469-480. 1996. 
 
Kies MS, Blumenschein Jr GR, Christensen O, et al. Phase I study of regorafenib, an inhibitor of onc ogenic 
and angiogenic kinases, administered continuously in patients with advanced refract ory non -small cell lung 
cancer. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28:15s; abstr 7585. 
 Lukas Radbruch, Rainer Sabatowski, Frank Elsner, Jano Everts, Tito Mendoza, Charles Cleeland. (2003).  
 
Validation of the German Version of the Brief Fatigue Inventory. Journal of Pain and Symptom 
Management. 25(5): 449-458. 
 Mendoza TR, Wang XS, Cleeland CS, Morrissey M, Johnson BA. Wendt JK, Huber SL. (1999). The rapid 
assessment of fatigue severity in cancer patients use of the Brief Fatigue Inventory. Cancer. 85(5): 1186-96. 
 
Mross K, Frost A, Steinbild S, et al. Clin Ca Res 2012; 18:2658-67. 
 Odom D, Barber B, Bennett L, Peeters M, Zhao Z, Kaye J, Wolf M, Wiezorek J. (2010) Health- related 
quality of life and colorectal cancer -specific symptoms in patients with chemotherapy- refractory metastatic 
disease treated with panitumumab.  Int J Colorectal Dis. 26: 173-181. 
 
Pocock SJ, Simon R. Sequential Treatment Assignment with Balancing for Prognostic Factors in the 
Controlled Clinical Trial. Biometrics 31(1):103 -115, 1975 Mar. 
 
Sibaud V, Da lenc F, Chevreau C, Roché H, Delord JP, Mourey L, Lacaze JL, Rahhali N, Taïeb C. (2011) 
RU021407I       52   Addendum 6 
 
  HFS-14, a Specific Quality of Life Scale Developed for Patients Suffering from Hand-Foot Syndrome. The 
Oncologist. 16: 1469-1478. 
 
Sloan J, Zhao X, Novotny P, Wampfler J, Garces Y, Clark M, Yang Ping. (2012). Relationship Between 
Deficits in Overall Quality of Life and Non- Small -Cell Lung Cancer Survival, Journal of Clinical 
Oncology, 30, 1-7. 
 
Sriwatanakul, K., Kelvie W., Lasagna L., Calimlim J.F., Weis O.F., & Mehta G. (1983). Studies with 
different types of visual analog scales for measurement of pain; Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics; 
34(2): 234-239. 
 Strumberg D, Scheulen ME, Schultheis B, Richly H, Frost A, Büchert M, Christensen O, Jeffers M, Heinig 
R, Boix O , Mross K.  Regorafenib (BAY 73-4506) in advanced colorectal cancer: a phase I study. Br J 
Cancer. 2012 May 22;106(11):1722-7.  
Sunakawa Y, Furuse J, Okusaka T, et al. Invest New Drugs 2014: 32:104-112. 
 
Toru Okuyama, Xin Shelley Wang, Tatsuo Akechi, Tito R . Mendoza, Takashi Hosaka, Charles S, 
Cleeland, Yosuke Uchitomi. (2003). Validation Study of the Japanese Version of the Brief Fatigue 
Inventory. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management. 25(2): 106-117. 
 
van Erp NP1, de Wit D, Guchelaar HJ, Gelderblom H, He ssing TJ, Hartigh Jd. A validated assay for the 
simultaneous quantification of six tyrosine kinase inhibitors and two active metabolites in human serum 
using liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol 
Biomed Life Sci. 2013 Oct 15;937:33-43. doi: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2013.08.013. Epub 2013 Aug 17. 
 
Wewers ME & Lowe NK. (1990). A Critical Review of Visual Analogue Scales in the Measurement of 
Clinical Phenomena. Research in Nursing & Health, 13: 227-236. 
 
  