1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statistical Plan, Results and Conclusions for :   
 
A Clinical Decision Support Too l for Electronic Health Records  (Official Title ) 
 
NCT number 02697643  
 
Document Date: August 9, 2018  
  
2 
 Analy tic Approach .  
 
Primary Analy tic Approach . We are interested in learning whether participants in the intervention 
condition, BH -CDS, as compared to the control condition, treatment as usual, have (1) greater access to 
wraparound services, (2) more treatment visits, and (3) longer retention in treat ment. As secondary 
hypotheses, we will examine whether the intervention condition, as compared to the control condition, 
will be associated with significantly (1) greater psychosocial outcomes, and (2) reduced drug use. A 
mixed model analytic approach was chosen for its ability to: adjust for individual -level covariates; take 
into account nesting of clients within counselors; and efficiently maximize the correlated nature of the 
repeated measures data in the design. Each mixed model will include fixed effec ts (condition, time and 
condition -by-time); random effects (clients nested within counselors); repeated measures variation 
(time); as well as potential counselor -level demographic covariates (e.g., experience level) and client -
level demographic covariates (i.e., age). Non -significant covariates will be removed systematically. After 
arriving at the final model for each analysis, the condition -by-time effect will be examined for 
significance. In the presence of a significant condition -by-time effect, Bonferro ni corrected post -hoc 
contrasts will be conducted to test for differences between conditions on mean change from baseline to 
one month follow -up and baseline to three month follow up  
 
Analyses by Hypothesis  
Primary Hypothesis 1: Clients in the experimental  condition will have significantly greater matched 
evidenced -based and wraparound services than clients in the control condition.  To address this 
hypothesis, a chart review was conducted to enumerate services received during the study period.  The 
percenta ge of services that clients in the experimental condition received from the list of tailored 
recommendations was calculated.  We then compared this percentage to the percentage of services 
that clients in the control condition would have received had they been in the experimental condition 
and received tailored recommendations.  Because all clients participating in the study completed the 
PDE, we were able to determine which set of recommendations clients in the control condition would 
had received had they  been in the experimental.  
Primary Hypothesis 2: Clients in the experimental condition will have greater engagement in treatment 
than clients in the control condition. Engagement in treatment was calculated by dividing the number of 
treatment sessions att ended during the study period by the total number of scheduled treatment 
sessions (i.e., opportunities for treatment), a sum of treatment sessions attended plus the number of 
scheduled sessions that the client did not show up for (no -show). An independent samples T -test was 
utilized to determine whether there were statistically significant differences between participants in the 
experimental and control groups with respect to treatment engagement.  
Primary Hypothesis 3: Clients in the experimental condition  will have less frequent use of substances than 
clients in the control condition. Use of substances was measured by the number of relapses during the 
study period. An independent samples T-test was conducted to evaluate whether participants number 
of relap ses differed significantly between the experimental and control groups.  
Primary Hypothesis 4: Clients in the experimental condition will have greater biopsychosocial functioning 
than clients in the control condition.  Biopsychosocial functioning was capture d by the seven ASI -MV 
composite scores. The ASI -MV was administered at baseline, 1 -month follow -up and 3 -month follow -up. 
Change in the ASI -MV composite scores was evaluated over time and across participant groups with a 
repeated measures mixed model.  
Prim ary Hypothesis 5: Clients in the experimental condition will have greater cost effectiveness than 
clients in the control condition.   Costs of services provided to the participating clients in the experimental 
and control conditions during the study time pe riod was estimated in the following way.  Services 
received by each client as documented during the chart review process for Hypothesis 1 above.  The 
3 
 cost of each service was estimated using the CPT code for that service (e.g., group psychotherapy = 
90853) .  To establish consistent costs, estimates of cost for each CPT code were derived from Medicare 
reimbursement estimates in Massachusetts using online tools (e.g., https://www.findacode.com).  While 
not precise, use of Medicare reimbursement is often used to get a general and relative sense of service 
costs across states.  This is especially useful for comparing groups (e.g., experimental versus control), 
rather than attempting to generate precise cost estimates.  Costs per individual were summed and 
averag ed for t -test comparison between experimental and control groups.  If patient outcomes are 
superior for one group, this test would determine whether the outcome difference is associated with 
greater or lesser costs.  
Primary Hypothesis 6: Counselors in the experimental condition will report satisfaction with the BH -CDS 
Program.   At the end of the study, participating counselors were asked to complete a satisfaction 
survey, which included both open -ended questions and Likert -type rating scale questions. Due t o the 
small number of counselors in the experimental and control groups, formal statistical significance 
testing was not conducted.  Instead, these data were analyzed descriptively. Open -ended text were 
subject to qualitative thematic analysis.  
 
Results  
 
Counselor Participants . A total of 24 counselors at four outpatient substance abuse treatment facilities 
around the United States participated in the current study.  
 
Client Participants . One hundred and ninety patients completed consent forms and completed  baseline 
surveys. Of these, 140 participants were fully enrolled into the study (completed the PDE, counselors 
obtained recommendations from the BHCDS system, participants completed the baseline survey). Forty -
seven participants were randomized into the c ontrol, TAU, condition and 93 were randomized into the 
experimental condition. Demographics were relatively similar across the experimental and control 
conditions.  
 
Primary Hypothesis 1 : Clients in the experimental condition will have significantly greater  matched 
evidenced -based and wraparound services than clients in the control condition. Results test indicated no 
significant difference for experimental and control groups.  
 
Primary Hypothesis 2 : Clients in the experimental condition will have greater engagement in treatment 
than clients in the control condition. T -tests indicated that the experimental and control groups did not 
differ with respect to treatment engagement.  
 
Primary Hypothesis 3 : Clients in the experimental condition will have less frequ ent use of substances 
than clients in the control condition. The mean number of relapses during the study period for the 
experimental group was not significantly different from the control group.  
 
Primary Hypothesis 4 : Clients in the experimental condition  will have greater biopsychosocial 
functioning than clients in the control condition. Results for psychiatric status, medical status, alcohol 
use, family status, or drug use were not significant. Employment status results suggest that participants 
in the e xperimental, CDS, condition had significantly fewer legal problems than controls.  
 
Primary Hypothesis 5 : Clients in the experimental condition will have greater cost effectiveness than 
clients in the control condition. The CDS program did not yield significantly different costs effectiveness 
than the control group.  
4 
  
Primary Hypothesis 6 : Counselors in the experimental condition will report satisfaction with the BH -CDS 
Program. Overall, counselors found it easy to complete the CDS program and reported  that their clients' 
reaction was "neutral" or "positive" (no counselors reported a negative client reaction).  
 
Counselors exposed to the tailored recommendations, reported that they were easy to understand, easy 
to integrate into the client's treatment pl an, and useful for informing treatment decisions and were 
more likely to incorporate the tailored recommendations into future treatment planning.  
 
Conclusion  
Although the use of clinical decision support is promising, the present effort was unable to empi rically 
demonstrate a direct impact on outcome, retention, amount of service delivered or cost. Further 
research on the impact of clinical decision support for substance use treatment is warranted.  
 
 