Page 1 of 3 
Version Date:  9/27 /2016  Statistical Analysis Plan  
Title of Research:  Aerodentis Clinical Trial: Assessment of the  Efficacy of       
Orthodontic Tooth  Movement Using the Aerodentis System  
UAB IRB Protocol #:  F160418007  
Principal Investigator:   Dr. Chung How Kau, BDS, MScD, PhD. 
Co-investigators:   Dr. Ejvis Lamani, DMD, PhD  
 Dr. Terpsithea  Christou, DDS  
Sponsor :  Dror Orthodesign Ltd.  
  7 Hartom Street  
 Jerusalem, Israel 9777507  
 972 (0) 74 -700-6700  
Statistical Considerations  
Overview and Rationale for Primary Parameter  
The aims of this trial are to assess the safety and efficacy of the Aerodentis system in producing tooth 
movement. Safety is measured by absence of root resorption while efficacy is typically measured by 
various parameters relating to tooth movement. Becau se tooth movement is highly variable between 
individuals, treatment success is not usually contingent on a specific amount of movement over time. To 
this end we specify the primary endpoint, achieving score <1mm in Little’s index  
Design  
Historical contro ls will be utilized as a comparator group.   This historical data will be generated using the 
same inclusion/exclusion criteria as the proposed prospective single arm study.   The historical patient 
population will be derived from the study sites participati ng in this prospective study.   The study 
inclusion/exclusion criteria will be applied to consecutive patients treated with clear correctors that 
have the potential for complete datasets (as defined by the study protocol).  
The use of single arm, open label  trial with historical controls is supported when a device technology is 
well developed and the subject of interest is well understood[1].  Orthodontic treatment of this patient 
population (i.e., use of mechanical force) is well developed and understood.    In addition, the primary 
[1]Draft Guidance for Industry, Clinical Investigators, and Food and Drug Administration Staff Design Considerations for Pivotal  
Clinical Investigations for Medical Devices, published August 15, 2011.  
Page 2 of 3 
Version Date:  9/27 /2016  
 endpoints of success are Objective Performance Criteria (OPC) (use of impressions to objectively 
measure tooth movement and Little’s index scoring and independent radiographic evaluation of tooth 
resorption).   The effectiveness OPC in the treatment of this patient population is a summative Little’s 
index score of <1.5mm. The safety OPC is to allow for no tooth root  resorption.   The use of this study 
design is supported both by proposed FDA Gudiance5 and recent FDA approvals of devices with a high 
risk profile[2] 
 
Safety Analysis Set  
The safety analysis set will consist of all patients from whom dental plaster impres sions were taken for 
the purpose of treatment with Aerodentis.  
 
Full Analysis Set  
Primary efficacy analysis will be assessed using the Full Analysis Set (FAS). The FAS will consist of 
patients from the intent to treat (ITT) cohort who started treatment and  have at least one post -baseline 
assessment, and have no major protocol violation as determined by blind review.  
 
Missing Data:  
Missing data will be handled for imputation the primary endpoint data for FAS subjects. Subjects with no 
post -baseline assessmen t will be imputed as failures and will not be included in the FAS population.   The 
MMRM model (Mixed -effect Model for Repeated Measures), which is based on MAR (missing at 
random) assumption will be applied to all the subjects of the FAS population.   Sensi tivity analyses will be 
applied for testing the effect of the imputation on the treatment effect. This will show the influence of 
the imputation on the study results.  
 
Per Protocol Analysis Set  
Efficacy analyses will also be done on the Per Protocol subset . Per Protocol subset include all FAS 
subjects who completed the study according to the protocol with no protocol deviations.  
 
Missing Values : Only observed data will be used in the Per Protocol Analysis Set; i.e. missing data will 
not be imputed.  
 
Endpoin ts 
 
Safety  
The safety endpoints are adverse events, whether or not treatment related. Included will be amount of 
root repsorption, measured by comparing x -rays before, mid -point and after treatment  
 
 
 
Primary Efficacy  
The primary endpoint will be to evaluate the degree of tooth movement. Treatment success will be 
defined using the Little’s Index and when a score does not summative exceed 1.5mm (<1.5mm)  
                                                      
[2] Campbell, Greg   Some Considerations for Medical Devices: Historical Controls and Performance Goals,  FDA-NIH Science of 
Small Clinical Trials Course, November 27 -28, 2012 
https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=we b&cd=15&cad=rja&ved=0CEIQFjAEOAo&url=https%3A%2F%2
Fevents -support.com%2FDocuments%2FCampbell.pdf&ei=OL4dUvnoLMK9sAT7 -
YGgDw&usg=AFQjCNGQWAFNwDj6XKq5ZVay8hssRm9lzA&bvm=bv.51156542,d.cWc  
Page 3 of 3 
Version Date:  9/27 /2016  
 This is a reasonable endpoint as the results are comparable to other successful aligner studies. In 
addition, studies to long term stability have used 2mm or less as an acceptable outcome of success post 
orthodontic treatment,  
 
Invisalign® treatment in the anterior region: were the predicted tooth movements achieved?   Krieger 
E1, Seiferth J , Mari nello I , Jung BA , Wriedt S , Jacobs C , Wehrbein H . 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22890691  
 
How well does Invisalign work? A prospective clinical study evaluating the efficacy of tooth movement 
with Invisalign. Kravitz   2009    
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19121497  
 
Semin Orthod.  1999 Sep;5(3):191 -204.  
Stability and relapse of mandibular anterior alignment: University of Washington studies.  
Little RM . 
 
Br J Orthod.  1990 Aug;17(3):235 -41. 
Stability and relapse of dental arch alignment.  
Little RM 1. 
 
Sample Size Considerations  
The planned sample size is 40 subjects.   The tested group will include 40 subjects.  
 
Study Hypotheses  
We will have demonstrated success if  the summative Little’s index score will achieve score <1.5mm.  
 
Statistical Analysis  
All measured variables and derived parameters will be tabulated by descriptive statistics.  
 
For categorical variables summary tables will be provided giving sample size, absolute and relative 
frequency and 95% CI (Confidence Interval) for proportions.  
 
For continuous variables summary tables will be provided giving sample size, arithmetic mean, standard 
deviation, median, minimum and maximum and 95% CI (Confidence Interval ) for means of variables.  
 
Complete individual listings of all data represented in the CRF will be provided as an appendix. All 
calculated and derived variables will be listed as well.  
 
All tests will be two -tailed, and a p value of 5% or less will be considered statistically significant.  
All statistical analyses will be performed and data appendices will be created using the SAS® system 
Version 9.1.3 or higher.    
 
The effects of noncomp liance, dropouts, and covariates on treatment will be assessed to determine the 
impact on the general applicability of results from this study.    
 