MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  1 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 The MENDS II Study  
Maximizing the Efficacy of Sedation and Reducing N eurological Dysfunction 
and Mortality in Septic Patients with Acute Respiratory Failure  
 
 
NIH Grant Title: Altering Sedation Paradigms to Improve Brain Injury and  
Survival in Severe Sepsis  
 
FDA -IND #68658  
 
Pratik P. Pandharipande, MD, MSCI  
 
Department of Anesthesiology  
Division of Critical Care  
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact Details  
 
Primary Investigator    Pratik P. Pandharipande, MD, MSCI  
Phone   (615) 300 -2298 
Fax  (615) 936 -1269 
E-mail   
Pratik.pandharipande@vumc.org  
 
Co-Investigator    E. Wesley Ely, MD, MPH  
     Phone   (615) 936 -2795 
     Fax  (615) 936 -1269 
     E-mail  wes.ely@vumc.org  
 
 
 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  2 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 Table of Contents:  
 
1.0 Introduction and Specific Aims  
2.0 Background  
3.0 Preliminary Studies  
4.0 Study Objectives and Endpoints  
5.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
7.0 Study Procedures  
8.0 Risks of Investigational Agents/Devices (side effects)  
9.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants or Others  
10.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
11.0 Statistical Considerations  
12.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
13.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
14.0 References  
  
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  3 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 1.0 Introduction 
 Severe sepsis is a life -threatening syndrome that affects more than 750,000 patients in 
the U.S. and is a leading cause of death worldw ide, with a case fatality rate as high as 30% -50% 
in developed countries.1, 2 Acute respiratory failure  (ARF)  is a dominant determinant of 
outcomes for many with severe sepsis; over 70% of patients with severe sepsis, in fact, require 
mechanical ventilation (MV).3 One -third of these patients are formally diagnosed with a cute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS ) or  acute lung injury (ALI), whereas all of them have 
severe hypoxemic/gas exchange abnormalities.4 Patients with acute respiratory failure due to 
sepsis are at high risk not only for death but for significant functional and cognitive decline, 
which can persist for years after recovery of lung function.1, 2, 5-9 These adverse long-term 
outcomes, which levy significant costs to patients and society,5-9  are usually preceded by acute 
brain injury (ABI), manifested as delirium and coma, which occurs in 50% -70% of MV septic 
patients.10-13  Despite advances in the management of acute respiratory failure and sepsis, there 
have been only marginal improvements in survival; the dearth of promising new therapeutics for 
the near future is marked by an absence of attention to the effects that supportive therapies may have on both short - and long- term outcomes.
14-23  Sedatives, for example, are nearly universally 
given to sept ic mechanically ventilated  patients. We now know that sedatives contribute to 
iatrogenic injury, prolonging ventilator time and inciting acute brain injury.12, 24-27  Compelling 
data now indicate that minimizing28-30 or altering patients’ exposure to specific sedative agents 
may be a new avenue for improving outcome s in severe sepsis with respiratory failure and acute 
brain injury.31-36  The GABAergic benzodiazepines, in particular, have been repeatedly shown to 
increase brain dysfunction, promote infection, and prolong MV, predisposing patients to higher 
mortality.12, 26, 27, 34-39  As a result of these data, the newer, shorter -acting GABAergic sedative 
agent, propofol, and the alpha 2 agonist, dexmedetomidine, are becoming widely prescribed for 
the sedation of septic mechanically ventilated  patients.13, 35, 36, 40-43 To date, there remain only a 
few randomized trials to guide clinicians regarding the beneficial effects and risks associated 
with these newer sedatives in patients with severe sepsis and respiratory failure, and yet there 
are data to indicate that GABAergi c and alpha 2 agonist sedative agents possess distinctly 
different effects on innate immunity, risk of infection,44-49 arousability,50, 51 duration of action,52, 
53 and suppression of respiratory drive.54  In small clinical studies55, 56 and preclinical work,45 
dexmedetomidine appears to offer superior anti -inflammatory effects compared with 
GABAergic agents, including propofol.  Dexmedetomidine improves bacterial clearance, 
whereas propofol reduces it ;49 effects that may alter outcomes for septic ventilated patients, 
leading to preclinical work on GABA A anta gonists as anti -infective agents.57, 58 Alpha 2 agonists 
may also inhibit neuronal apoptosis, a deleterious effect of sepsis that is likely critical to the 
development of brain dysfunction in these vulnerable patients.34, 59, 60  Sedation with 
dexmedetomidine instead of benzodiazepines reduces delirium by 2 0%-30%35, 36 and improves 
arousability,50 facilitating “wake -up” strategies.29 Endogenous sleep pathways mediate the 
hypnotic response of both classes of drugs,61, 62 but G ABAergic agents induce unconsciousness 
at the level of the hypothalamus, whereas the alpha 2 agonists do so in the brainstem,61-63 an 
effect—more akin to natural sleep —which may improve autonomic function, immunity, and 
insulin resistance. These factors converge to suggest that sedation with an alpha 2 agonist, rather 
than a GABAergic agent, may improve outcomes for septic mechanically ven tilated  patients, 
including brain function and survival.  We , therefore, propose to study the effects of 
sedatives —the alpha 2 agonist dexmedetomidine and the GABAergic propofol —in severely 
septic patients with acute respiratory failure via a multicenter randomized, double -blind, 
trial.   In this study, we plan to consent approximately 5 80 adult me dical or surgical intensive 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  4 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 care unit ( ICU) patients  with severe sepsis and on  MV.  Although, the study participants will 
span the adult age spectrum, we anticipate the majority of them will be elderly based on our 
ongoing BRAIN -ICU cohort demographics and those of the participating sites as well as  the 
fact that nearly two thirds  of all ICU admissions are >65 years old.64, 65   
Specific Aims  
Aim 1 : To determine whether sedation of mechanically ventilated severely septic patients with an alpha
2 agonist ( dexmedetomidine) rather than a GABAergic agent (propofol)  will 
(Aim 1A)  increase days alive without delirium or coma (delirium/coma -free days) and 
(Aim 1B) increase ventilator -free days.  
Aim 2 : To determine whether sedation of mechanically ventilated severely septic patients with 
an alpha 2 agonist (dexmedetomidine) rather than a GABAergic agent (propofol)  will 
(Aim 2A)  improve 90 -day survival  and (Aim 2B)  decrease incidence and severity of 
long-term cognitive impairment.  
Aim 3 : To determine whether  sedation of mechanically  ventilated severely septic patients with 
an alpha 2 agonist (dexmedetomidine) rather than a GABAergic agent (propofol)  will 
reduce pro- and anti -inflammatory cytokines (CRP, interleukin -1 [IL -1], IL -6, IL -10, 
sTNFR1, HMGB1) . 
 To test the hypothesis , we plan to randomize mechanically  ventilated , severely septic 
patients requiring sedation to targeted sedation with dexmedetomidine or propofol.  To reach 
this goal, w e plan to enroll and randomize 440 patients in order to have at least  420 patients 
randomized who received study drug.  This will account for some disqualification after randomization. The study will be powered to detect a difference of 1.5 delirium/coma -free days 
between the two groups and an absolute difference in mortali ty of 10%. Patients will be assessed 
daily for delirium using the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM -ICU);
10, 11 other 
important clinical outcomes and safety parameters will be tracked daily in the ICU.  Survivors will be assessed 6-months post -randomization  for cognitive impairment via a validated and 
reliable phone battery.  
 2.0 Background  
 “Septic shock is the rude unhinging of the machinery of life.” (Samuel Gross, 1862)  
 “For many aging people in good physical condition who succumb to an acute illness [e.g., sepsis, ARDS] cognitive decline [e.g., delirium followed by an acquired post -ICU long -
term cognitive impairment] is the main threat to their ability to recover and en joy their 
favorite activities; for those whose physical activities were already limited, cognitive 
decline is a major additional threat to quality of life.”  National Research Council
66 
 
2.1 Severe sepsis, acute respiratory failure and acute brain dysfunction often occur 
concomitantly in mechanically ventilated patients .  There are an estimated 2 to 3 million 
patients on MV each year in high -income countries  and the majority of these patients have 
sepsis with  ALI, ARDS  or ARF due to gas exchange abnormalities, and up to 50 -80% of these 
MV pa tients have acute brain dysfunction, manifesting as delirium and /or coma) .10-13, 60, 67, 68  
Although separate entities, sepsis and delirium  are closely linked in terms of pathophysiology 
and share many of the same inflammatory pathways and cellular interactions  resulting in  
widespread effects on other organs and tissues.60, 68-73 In the United States , severe sepsis  alone 
accounts for an estimated 250,000 deaths,2 and exceeds the number of annual deaths from 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  5 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 myocardial infarctions, HIV/AIDS, breast cancer and asthma. Indeed, while mortality from 
severe sepsis is upwards of 30 -40% in developed countries,2, 74, 75 with only slight temporal 
improvement s,74, 75 that of ST -elevation myocardial infarction is much less at 7% and on the 
decline.67 Furthermore, w ith the aging population, the number of cases  of severe sepsis is 
expected to increase by 50% by 2030 unless new therapeutic options are discovered.2 While the 
incidence and mortality associated w ith severe sepsis is staggering,  and sepsis results in 
longer times on MV and in ICUs, a major but often missed cause of increased morbidity in 
ventilated septic patients is delirium , and its complications .69-71, 76  
2.2 Delirium in ventilated sep tic patients is associated with mortality and poor 
cognitive function and functional status.  Delirium occurs in 50- 80% of MV  patients10-13 and 
carries enormous financi al77 and societal burdens due to its association with increased 
mortality ,37, 38, 78 prolonged hospital stay s,79 and its relationship to long -term 
neuropsychological deficits.80-82  Each additional day of delirium independently increas es risk 
of death by 10% ,37, 38 strongly supporting  Aim  1 of this MENDS II  study , aimed at reducing 
duration of delirium in patients with ARF and sepsis. It is estimated that ICU delirium is 
associated with $4-$16 billion annually in  the U.S.,77 not including cost of lost workdays, 
caregiver burden, or cognitive rehabilitation for the 50-66% of patients with dementia -like 
deficits years later8, 9, 80, 82-84 (supporting Aim 2 of MENDS II  aimed at reducing incidence 
of lon g-term brain dysfunction). Sepsis , too, has been shown to independently and 
significantly alter the trajectory of cognitive impairment with almost a 3 -fold increase in the risk 
of developing cognitive impairment in survivors of sepsis.7 While it is unclear as to whether it is 
sepsis that contributes to worse cognitive impairment, or if this is a consequence of the closely 
associated brain dysfu nction,  it is extremely concerning that the two episodes of ICU care, on 
average, that each American will experience in their lifetime will result in millions of survivors 
suffering mild to severe ICU -acquired cognitive impairment tha t impairs quality of  life.  
2.3 Sedation used to keep ventilated septic patients comfortable can lead to delirium 
and iatrogenic harm . The mainstay of therapy in severe sepsis is  aggressive source control, 
appropriate choice of antibiotics and the consideration of activated protein- C in select cases.14, 15   
Apart from these, key elements in the management  of severe sepsis remain  supportive  (e.g., 
goal-directed resuscitation , ventilation management , glucose  control , etc.).85-92  Sedative and 
analgesic medications are part of these supportive treatments, and are almost universally used to provide patient comfort, treat pain and anxiety , and prevent agitation .
93  Yet, they have shown 
to prolong time on  MV and in ICU.24 Deep sedation has also been shown to be associated with 
burst suppression, or an obliteration of brain wave activity on an encephalogra m, associated 
with a higher mortality in a important minority of critically ill patients.94  While psychoactive 
medications have traditionally been compared using surrogate markers such as time on the 
ventilator and ICU and hospital length of stay, our team has found that commonl y prescribed 
benzodiazepine GABAergic  agents,  such as lorazepam  and midazolam,  are independent (and 
iatrogenic) risk factor s for daily development  of delirium ( see section 3.0)  in three  separate 
cohorts .27 12, 95 These  data show ed, for the first time , that benzodiazepines are associated with 
more  acute brain dysfunction prompting clinicians and researchers to study alternative sedation 
paradigms to either decrease the exposure to sedatives or to move away from the practice of 
using benzodiazepines in order to improve patient outcomes .13, 28, 29, 35, 36, 40-42  With the  
pathogenesis of delirium still unclear,96 a leading hypothesis is perturbations in 
inflammation69-71 that may have common elements  with pathways involved in sepsis.60, 68  
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  6 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 2.4 Sedative  medications  can dysregulate the body’s natural control of inflammation .  
To understand how sedation may play a role in dysregulating the body’s natural response to 
inflammation, w e need to first succinctly review the inflammatory response to infection. Sepsis 
is the systemic inflammatory response to infection and is characterized by dysregulated production of cytokines, a pathological state that causes tissue injury and consequentl y organ 
dysfunction and death.
60, 68 It is characterized by an early unrestrained product ion of pro -
inflammatory cytokines  such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukins (IL) such as IL -1, 
IL-6 etc., and late mediators such as high -mobility group protein B1 ( HMGB1), which 
perpetuate inflammatory response and lead to organ dysfunctions.  60   Anti -inflammatory  
cytokines such as soluble TNF receptor -1 (sTNFR -1), IL -1ra, IL-10 are released in an attempt 
to attenuate the pro -inflammatory response and reduce organ damage; f ailure or dysregulation 
of this compensatory anti -inflammatory response syndrome  (CARS)  further w orsens 
outcomes.60  The b rain, too, responds to systemic infections and injury with an inflammatory 
response of its own that includes the production of cytokines, cell infiltration, and tissue 
damage.97, 98  This local inflammatory response is thought to alter patterns of neuronal activity 
resulting in delirium. In addition to the inflammatory responses described above, the 
parasympathetic (cholinergic) anti -inflammatory pathway plays an important role in attenuation 
of pro -inflammatory cytokines from macrophages, without any effects on anti- inflammatory 
cytokines such as IL -10.99, 100   The body generally regulates  this balance between the pro 
and anti -inflammatory cytokin es; unfortunately , comm only prescribed GABAergic 
sedative agents have immunomodulatory properties that may alter this balance and 
contribu te to worse outcomes .  
2.5 GABAergic  sedatives, like benzodiazepines, impact the immune response.  
GABAergic  agents, such as midazolam, impair nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB) and mitogen 
activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling, leading to reduced responsiveness to inflammatory stimuli, including pathogens.
46 This effect typically manifests itself as reduced cytokine 
production that may have utility in septic shock, however this mechanism also blunts bacterial killing.
46  In vivo  animal studies have demonstrated that the GABAergic  agents increase 
mortality in live bacterial infection with intranasal Streptococcus pneumonia ,  intraperiton eal 
Klebsiella pneumonia,101  Mycobacterium bovis ,102 and Salmonella typhimurium infection that 
may be caused by impairment of neutro phil48 and macrophage46 function. Review of the 
available evidence suggests that this impaired immune response to pathogens is common to the 
whole class of GABA agonists studied so far.34 In contrast, GABA A antagonists improve 
outcomes in infective models.57, 58 Bicuculline57 improves acute mortality in severely septic rats 
and securinine,58 a GABA A antagonist, enhances killing of Coxiella burnetii  in vitro  and in vivo  
by alveolar macrophages. Consistent with the hypothesis that GABAergic  agents may impair 
immune responses to infection, critically ill patients sedated with midazolam appear more susceptible to secondary bacterial infections than those sedated with dexmedetomidine,
35 and 
septic patients on lorazepam have a greater likelihood of death than patients se dated with 
dexmedetomidine.36 
2.6 Propofol  and dexmedetomidine may differentially affect inflammation and improve 
clinical outcomes in sepsis and delirium.  Compelling data now indicate that a new avenue for 
improv ing outcomes in severe sepsis and delirium may be via newer sedative agents that lack 
the deleterious effects of benzodiazepine GABA A mediated immunomodulation.31-36 These 
agents include the shorter acting GABAergic  agent propofol and the alpha 2 agonist 
dexmedetom idine, which are rapidly becoming the pillars of sedation in critically ill patients, 13, 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  7 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 35, 36, 40, 42, 43  and yet are different from each other in terms of receptor s pecificity, 
immunomodulation including bacterial clearance, apoptosis, maintenance of sleep architecture, 
delirium risk, mortality and side effect profile. A comparison of these specific p roperties is 
provided below . 
[1] Propofol  is a 2-6 di-iso-propyl phenol  intravenous GABAergic sedative agent that 
has been studied and found superior to benzodiazepines for sedation in the ICU with respect to time on MV, faster rousability ,  greater times at target sedation and faster 
extubations.
40, 41, 103 Dexmedetomidine  is a highly selective alpha 2 receptor agonist 
that inhibits the release of norepinephrine (NE),50 resulting in sedation and analgesia  
and blunting of the  stress response , without respiratory depression.54, 55, 104, 105 
Dexmedetomidine has been studied against lorazepam in the MENDS13 double -blind 
randomized  controlled  trial and was f ound to be superior in reducing the duration 
and prevalence of brain dysfunction,13 and further time on MV  and mortality in the 
septic subgroup, without any differences in hemodynamic profiles or adverse events.
36 The SEDCOM study,35 compared  dexmedetomidine with midazolam,  and 
found that dexmedetomidine patients spent fewer days on MV,  experienced less 
delirium, and developed less tachycardia and hypertension.  
[2] As mentioned earlier, the dysregulated production of pro- inflammatory cytokines60, 
68 is associated with worse outcomes in sepsis. The body itself attempts to reign this 
pro-inflammatory cytokine cascade by two  mechanisms —(2.a)  the production of 
anti-inflammatory cytokin es,60 and (2.b)  the paras ympathetic (cholinergic) reflex 
that attenuates inflammation.99, 100  Propofol shows favorable properties of reducing 
the pro- inflammatory cytokines in animal mod els;106, 107 however , human studies55, 
108 have been contradictory with an increase in the pro -inflammatory cytokine 
production. Additionally propofol has not been shown to influence the parasympathetic reflex. Dexmedetomidine, on the other ha nd, has consistently 
attenuated pro -inflammatory cytokines in animal and human studies, with 
corresponding improvements in outcomes including survival . Its vagomimetic action 
may also play a role in potentiating the parasympathetic reflex.  
50 
[3] Propofol , similar to the data on the other GABAergics  (benzodiazepines) presented 
in section 2.5, impairs bacterial clearance from the lung and spleen in rabbits 
injected with Escherichia (E.) coli in vivo , and E. coli  and Staphylococcus aureus  in 
vitro ,49, 109 through inhibition both of myeloid (in particular neutrophil) and 
lymphoid cell function.49, 110, 111 Dexmedetomidine , on the other hand, does not 
suppress neutrophil function and helps bacterial clearance (see s ection 3.5)112 
[4] Propofol has not been associated with beneficial effects on apoptosis, while 
dexmedetomidine  inhibits neuronal apoptosis and apoptosis in other vital organs.34, 
59, 60 
[5] Both propofol and dexmedetomidine  have been associated with improving 
restorative sleep .  Endogenous sleep pathways mediate the hypnotic response of both 
classes of drugs,61, 62 but GABAergic agents induce unconsciousness at the level of 
the hypothalamus, whereas the alpha 2 agonists do so in the brainstem,61-63 an effect —
more akin to natural sleep—which may improve  autonomic funct ion and immunity . 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  8 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 
This image cannot currently be displayed.
Lorazepam Dose (mg)  
 
 
p=0.02  
Lorazepam Dose (mg)  
p=0.003  
Probability of delirium  
Figure 1. GABA -ergic agents and delirium  [6] As eluded in point [ 1], benzodiazepines ha ve been associated with delirium, but data 
on propofol are inconclusive. Dexmedetomidine, however, has been shown to reduce 
duration and prevalence of brain dysfunction in two  randomized controlled trial s 
compared to benzodiazepines.13;35, 36 A comparative trial (the PRODEX study, Orion 
Pharma press release) in low severity illness patients,  with approximately  25% septic 
patients, has shown equipoise between the two agents  in delirium outcomes . 
Dexmedetomidine , however, has been shown to be superior to propofol with regards 
to its effect on maintenance of cognition,51 and improve ment of  attention as 
compared to benzodiazepines.33 
[7] GABAergic  agents may promote infect ion,49, 110 and the intralipid formulation of 
propofol may play a role in this. Dexmedetomidine , on the other hand, has been 
associated with lower secondary infections and mortality in septic patients when 
compared with a benzo diazepine.35, 36   
[8] Side effects associated with propofol incl ude hypert riglyceridemia , pancreatitis, 
acidemia and propofol infusion syndrome .113 Propofol infusion syndrome is rare .  
About 20 adult cases have been described , mostly in patients with acute neurological 
illness , acute inflammatory disease complicated  by severe infections or even sepsis, 
and receiving catecholamines and/or steroids in addition to propofol.113 Common 
side effects s een with dexmedetomidine include bradycardia (including a reported 
cardiac arrest in which dexmedetomidine was part of the multifactorial causes for the 
event) and hypotension, though in studies in critically ill patients, including septic 
patients, there has not been a reported increase in vasopressor use.35, 36   
Additionally , one trial reported hyperglycemia with dexmedetomidine.35, 36   
 Thus there are data supporting beneficial effects of both propofol and dexmedetomidine.  
While propofol offers significant benefits over benzodiazepines, data indicate that 
dexmedetomidine  is superior to propofol with regard to its effects on innate immunity  and 
inflammation,44-49 cognition,51 apoptosis,34, 59  and delirium.35, 36 All these factors  converge to 
suggest that sedation with an alpha 2 agonist  rather than a GABAergic  agent  may improve 
outcomes , including  brain function and survival , for septic MV patients . Physicians are now 
challenged, due to the absence of head to  head comparisons of these two agents in high 
severity of illness, severely septic patients, to understand the benefit to risk profile. This 
presents an unmet scientific gap in knowledge, which has to be addressed to ensure that our most vulnerable patient s are treated in the most effective and safe manner.  T he 
MENDS II trial will address this need.  
 
3.0 Preliminary Studies  
 
3.1 Benzodiazepines and delirium.  Of the three 
components of patient comfort (pain, anxiety, and 
delirium) included in current guidelines for use of sedatives and analgesics in ICU patients,
93 only 
delirium has been found to be an independent predictor of death. P harmacological data was 
analyzed from 198 medica l ICU patients,
37 using  
time-dependent multivariable analysis, to test the 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  9 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  
Fig 3.  Probability of transitioning to delirium  hypothesis  that sedative and analgesic medications are independent risk factors for the 
development of delirium aft er adjusting for releva nt covariates. Every unit dose  of lorazepam in 
the previous  24 hours was associated with increased probability of development of delirium 
[O.R. 1.2 (95% C.I. 1.1 to 1.4), p =0.003] (Fig 1) , whereas propofol were associated with higher 
but not statistically  significant odds ratios.27 Using a simila r methodology midazolam was also 
shown as a  risk factor for delirium in surgical, trauma and burn ICU patients.12, 95 These data 
support Aim1A of MENDS II (reducing delirium by use of alpha 2 agonists instead of 
GABAergic agents).  Data on opiates is inconsistent, with opiates being risk factors for delirium 
in surgical patients, but not in trauma and burn patients where pain is significant and adequate 
treatment may offer benefit.27  
3.2 Delirium and Long -term Cognitive Impairment. This cohort study82 enrolled 126 
adult ventilated medical ICU survivors and followed them for 12 months. Mu ltiple linear 
regression was used to analyze the association between deli rium duration and 12- month 
cognitive performance, ad justing for covariates. Follow -up 
data were obtained for 80% of survivors. Duration of delirium (Fig 2)  independently predicted worse cognition at 
3 months  (P=0.02) and 12 months (P=0.03).
82 These data 
demonstrate our coordinating center’s success in achieving high long- term follow -up rates and add 
support for the idea that  an intervention to reduce 
delirium duration might produce improvements in long -
term cognitive function, justifying Aim 2B (cognitive function) in MENDS II.  
 
3.3 Changing sedation paradigms reduces duration and prevalence of brain 
dysfunction. The  MENDS study,
13 which enrolled both medical and surgi cal ICU patients, was 
the first to evaluate the benefit of sedation targeting alpha 2 receptors compared to the standard 
of care GABAergic agents to reduce brain dysfunction.  This 
trial showed that compared to 
lorazepam, patients sedated with 
dexmedetomidine achieved 
sedation targets more often and 
had more days alive without 
delirium or coma, with important trends toward a reduction in death at 28 -days (27% in lorazepam 
versus 17% dexmedetomidine). Patients on dexmedetomidine had a 60% lower risk of devel oping 
delirium ( Fig 3 ) versus 
lorazepam , further supporting 
Aim 1A of MENDS II.   
 
3.4 Alpha
2 agonists improve survival in patients with sepsis compared to GABAergic 
agents. In this a priori -determined subgroup analysis36 of septic vs non- septic patients from the 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  10 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 
Fig 4.   Dexmedetomidine improves 28 -day survival  in 
septic patients  
 - 
0 
 7 
 14 
 21 
 28 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Days 
Patients a live (%)  
Dexmedetomidine  
Lorazepam  
HR 0.3 (0.1  
- 
0.9). P=0.04  
Effect of Diazepam or Clonidine treatment on
Survival from Co-infection
0 50 100 150050100150
Diazepam 2 mg kg-1
Clonidine 5 mcg kg-1
Time (h)Percent survival
Effect of Propofol or Dexmedetomidine treatment on
Survival from Streptococcus pneumoniae  Pneumonia
0 50 100 150050100150
Dexmedetomidine 5 mcg kg-1
Propofol 10 mg kg-1
Time (h)Percent survivalMENDS double -blind randomized controlled trial, 63 (31 dexmedetomidine; 32 lorazepam) 
were admitted with sepsis and 40 (21 dexmedetomidine; 19 lorazepam) without sepsis. 
Compared with septic patients who received lorazepam, the septic patients receiving 
dexmedetomidine had 3.2 more delirium/coma -free days (DCFD) on average (95% CI for 
difference, 1.1 to 4.9), and 6 (0.3, 11.1) more ventilator -free days (VFD). Th e 
beneficial effects of dexmedetomidine were more pronounced in septic patients than in non-septic patients for both DCFDs and 
VFDs ( supporting Aim 1B ) (P-value for 
interaction = 0.09 and 0.02 respectively). Additionally, sedation with dexmedetomidine, com pared with 
lorazepam, reduced the daily risk of delirium [OR, CI 0.3 (0.1, 0.7)] in both septic and non- septic patients. Risk of 
dying at 28 days was reduced by 70% [hazard ratio 0.3 (0.1, 0.9)] in dexmedetomidine patients with sepsis (Fig 4) as compared t o the lorazepam patients; this reduction in death was not seen in non- septic 
patients ( supporting Aim 2A of MENDS II ). 
 
3.5 Alpha 2 agonists improve survival in animal models with infections compared to 
GABAergic agents.  In order to confirm a survival benefit conferred by alpha 2 adrenoceptor 
agonists over GABAergic agents , diazepam 
versus  clonidine and propofol versus  
dexmedetomidine (drugs with similar half -lives)  
were compared in two infection paradigms. In the  
prolonged infection model, adult C57BL/6 mice infected with 50HA of  X31 influenza (intranasal) 
were administered diazepam, clonidine or placebo, 4 hours after influenza infection. Seven days later, both groups of animals were super infected with D39 (serotype 2) Streptococcus pneumoniae infection (1 x 10
6 colony forming 
units ml-1 intranasal). Median survival time in the 
placebo group was 72 hours from the time of bacterial superinfection.  Clonidine increased median survival time compared to diazepam (84 versus 42 hours) and reduced the hazard ratio of death (HR 0.06 [0.01 – 0.32]; p = 0.0008) (Fig 5) .  
In the  acute infection model, adult C57BL/6 mice 
infected with 5 x 10
4 colony forming units ml-1 Streptococcus pneumoniae intranasal had a 19% 
survival (3 out of 16 mice). In this model comparison of dexmedetomidine (n = 15) with propofol (n = 16) treatment started four hours after infection revealed that dexmedetomidine increased survival compared to propofol (33% versus 0%; p = 0.02). Thus our clinical ( 3.4) Fig. 5  
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  11 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 and preclinical work (3.5) are supportive of Aim 2B of MENDS II where we hypothesize 
that survival may be better with alpha2 agonists over GABAergic agents. 
 
4.0 Study Objectives and Endpoints  
 4.1 Study Objectives . The primary objective of the MENDS II  study is to determine the 
efficacy and safety of dexmedetomidine vs. propofol in mechanically ventilated medical and surgical patients with severe sepsis.  
 
4.2 Efficacy Endpoints  
 
4.2.1 Primary Endpoint.   The trial’s primary endpoint (Aim 1A) will be delirium/coma -
free days (DCFDs) , defined as number of days alive and free of delirium and coma during the 
14-day Treatment  Period (from randomization, which will be Study Day 1,  until Study Day 14 ). 
Patients will be evaluated for delirium by trained resear ch nurses with the CAM -ICU,10, 11a 
validated instrument for diagnosing delirium , even in non- verbal ventilated patients , that takes 
on an average 2 minutes and can be administered by non- psychiatrist personnel  (Fig 6). 
Delirium assessments will be performed twice daily while in the ICU and then once daily until 
conclusion of the combi ned Treatment/ Post Study Drug Period  (see section  7.2), hospital 
discharge or death (whichever is first) . Patients who are unresponsive to voice are categorized 
as comatose; those responsive to voice and CAM -ICU positive are categorized as delirious; 
those who are CAM -ICU negative are called normal. The DCFD continuous  variable represents 
duration of time a patient is alive an d free of brain dysfunction (delirium and coma) and has 
been used in other  high -impact studies.13, 28 For example, if during a 14 day  period a patient is 
comatose the first 3 days, then has delirium ( or CAM -ICU positive) the next 4 days , and then 
normal or CAM -ICU negative the remaining 7 days, he will have 7 =[14- (3+4)] delirium/coma -
free days. On the other hand, suppose a patient is comatose the first 3 days, then has delirium (or CAM -ICU po sitive) the next 4 days and then dies, he will have 0 delirium/coma -free days, 
since there were no days that the patient was alive and free of delirium or coma.  
The MENDS II study will have tremendous implications for practice, based on the 
outcome of DCFD  results, even if the secondary outcome of mortality is neutral, given ours and 
others’ recent data that every additional day of brain dysfunction is independently associated 
with higher mortality and cognitive impairment in survivors.37-39, 82  We will also assess 
delirium days in survivors and daily prevalence of delirium after randomization as additional 
brain injury outcomes. Delirium days was not chosen as a primary end point because delirium 
Feature 1:  Acute change or fluctuating course 
of mental status  
And 
       Feature 2:  Inattention  
And 
Feature 3:  Altered level of consciousness  
 Feature 4:  Disorganized Thinking  
 Or Fig. 6  CAM -ICU 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  12 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 days can be curtailed by death; similarly delirium- free days was not used because delirium -free 
days fails to account for coma; thus patients could artificially be considered to have more 
delirium- free days (thus a good outcome) when in fact the reason they were delirium -free was 
because of coma (an untoward outcome). The analysis of DCFDs and other s econdary outcomes 
will be conducted using Intention -to-Treat (ITT) population , defined as all patients who were 
randomized to study drug. We chose a 14 day evaluation period for delirium, because it represents the best balance of gaining valuable clinical information, while maximizing resource utilization, given the average study drug infusion to be 7 days and maximum duration to be 14 days. Thus our follow -up period will cover 7 additional days of delirium monitoring after the 
study drug is stopped in the majority of our patients. 
 
4.2.2 Secondary Endpoints  
[1] Ventilator -free days  (VFDs) (Aim 1B),  i.e., days alive and free of MV  at 28 days. 
This endpoint has been used by the NHLBI’s ARDSNet in numerous critical care 
trials examining ICU populations.
88, 89, 114, 115 
[2] 90-day survival  (Aim 2A ) 
[3] Neuropsychological funct ion, Activities of Daily Living (ADL)116 and 
Instrumen tal ADLs117 will be assessed 6 months after randomization ( Aim 2B ) 
using a validated and reliable telephone battery118 for post -ICU patients, to measure 
incidence, dura tion, and severity of dysfunction in memory, attention, reasoning, and 
executive function domains as well as assess independence and quality of life (see 
section 8.1) .    
[4] Markers of inflammation (Aim 3) will be assessed on Days 1, 3, 5, 7 and 14 (see 
details in 7.2.3)   
[5] Organ dysfunctions  will be tracked until conclusion of the combined 
Treatment/ Post Study Drug Period, hospital discharge or death (whichever happens  
first) using daily SOFA scores and continuous as well as established predefined cut 
offs for each organ failure: Kidney, Cr > 2 mg/dL or urine < 400 cc/day; Lung, PaO
2/FiO 2 <300 or SaO 2/FiO 2 <315;119  Liver, total bilirubin > 2 mg/dL; 
Coagulation, Platelet count  < 100,000/mm3; and Hemodynamic, need for 
vasopressor,120, 121 consistent with definitions utili zed in published studies of organ 
dysfunction in critically ill patients.122 
[6] Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. We will monitor a patient’s oxygenation status by tracking daily SaO
2/FiO 2 ratios.119 A SaO 2/FiO 2 ratio <235 correlates to a 
PaO 2/FiO 2 ratio of < 200, which is the oxygenation threshold for ARDS.119 Chest X -
rays that are ordered as part of routine clinical care will be followed daily in patients who meet ARDS oxygenation threshold and patients with bilateral infiltrates confirmed by the medical team, will be considered to have ARDS. Time to onset of 
ARDS and duration of ARDS will be tracked until conclusion of the combined 
Treatment/ Post Study Drug Period, hospital discharge , or death (whichever happens 
first). 
 
4.3 Safety Endpoints .  Safety endpoints tracked until conclusion of the combined 
Treatment/Post Study Drug Period, hospital discharge or death (whichever happens first)  
include daily  monitoring for hypotension (defined as systolic blood pressure <80 mmHg, 
duration and dose of vasopressors/i notropes  using SOFA scores ), arrhythmias (tachy and/or 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  13 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 brady), acidosis, and weekly  for triglyceridemia and adrenal insufficiency. Patients will be 
monitored for withdrawal for 48 -hours after study drug termination, assessing for hypertension, 
tachycardia and diaphores is. Vital signs will be monitored per established standards in the ICUs 
and wards. Select laboratory values from s tandard laboratory measures of blood counts and 
chemistries will be collected daily, when ordered as part of usual clinical care.   
 
5.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
5.1 Inclusion Criteria . Consecutive patients will be eligible for inclusion in the MENDS II 
study  if they are : [1] adult patients (≥18 years old) [2] in a medical or surgical ICU and [3] on 
MV, requiring sedation and [4] have a suspected or known infection.  
 
5.2 Exclusion Criteria . Patients will be excluded (i.e., not consented) for any of the 
following reasons:  
[1] Rapidly resolving organ failure, indicated by planned immediate discontinuation of 
MV, at time of screening  for s tudy enrollment  
[2] Pregnant or breastfeeding  
[3] Severe dementia or neurodegenerative disease, defined as either cognitive 
impairment that makes the patient incapable of living independently at baseline or IQCODE > 4.5,
123 measured using a patient’s qualified surrogate. This exclusion also 
pertains to mental illnesses  requiring long -term institutionaliz ation, acquired or 
congenital mental retardation, severe neuromuscular disorders, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease , Alzheimer’s and debilitating cerebrovascular disease . It also 
excludes patients in coma or with severe cognitive deficits due to st ructural brain 
diseases such as stroke, intracranial hemorrhage, cranial trauma, malignancy, anoxic brain injury, or cerebral edema . 
[4] Present h istory of 2nd or 3rd degree heart block , or persistent bradycardia < 50 
beats/minute  that requires interventio n (e.g., atropine, glycopyrrolate). If patient has 
a pacemaker for bradyarrythmias, then patient does not  meet this exclusion criterion 
and may be enrolled.  
[5] Benzodiazepine dependency or history of alcohol  dependency based on the medical 
team’s decision to institute a specific treatment plan involving benzodiazepines  
(either as continuous infusions or intermittent intravenous boluses ) for this 
dependency.  
[6] Active seizures  during this ICU admission  being treated with intrave nous 
benzodiazepines . 
[7] Expected death within 24 hours of enrollment or lack of commitment to aggressive treatment by family  or the medical team (e.g., likely to withdraw life support 
measures within 24 hrs of screening) . 
[8] Inability to understand Engl ish or deafness that will preclude delirium evaluation. 
The inability to understand English (for example in Spanish -only or Mandarin- only 
speaking patients) will not result in exclusion at center s where the research staff is 
proficient and/or translation s ervices are actively available in that particular 
language ; these patients will not be followed in the long -term follow -up phase of the 
trial since the testing materials are primarily available only in English. Patients with laryngectomies and those with hearing deficits are  eligible for enrollment if their 
medical condition permits them to communicate with research staff .    
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  14 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 [9] Inability to obtain informed consent from the patient or an authorized representative 
within 48 hours of meeting all inclusion cr iteria for the following reasons:  
(a)  Patient and/or surrogate refusal  
(b)  Patient unable to consent and no surrogate available  in the 48 hour window  
(c)  48-hour period of eligibility was exceeded prior to screen   
[10] Prisoners.  
[11] Medical team following patient unwilling to use the sedation regimens.  
[12] Documented allergy to propofol or dexmedetomidine . 
[13] Current enrollment in a study that does not allow co- enrollment or that uses delirium 
as a primary outcome.  
[14]  Patients who are on mus cle relaxant infusions at time of screening with plans to 
maintain paralysis > 48 hours  
[15] Greater than 96 hours on mechanical ventilation prior to meeting all inclusion criteria .  
 
6.0 Enrollment/Randomization    
 6.1. Screening and Obtaining Informed Consent .  Study personnel at each site will screen  
the ICU census .  When an eligible patient is identified  (i.e., inclusion criteria are met and no 
exclusion criteria  are present) , informed consent will be pursued. Surrogate consent will be 
required for mo st patients because during the initial phase of their illness they will often be 
comatose, sedated, on MV , or delirious. A consent/re- consent process will be used (surrogate 
consent at enrollment and re -consenting patients when competent), in keeping with recent 
literature on consenting delirious and/or ICU patients.
124, 125  All patients consented via 
surrogate will be re -consented for participation in the trial once competent.  
Once informed consent is obtained, if not already confirmed , patients will b e assessed for 
advanced heart block, pregnancy (female patients of childbearing potential  only) , and dementia  
via the IQCODE . When a patient’s telemetry strip is negative for advanced heart block , 
IQCODE <4.5  and female patients of childbearing potential  have a negative pregnancy test, 
they will be randomized and advanced to the Interventional  Trial Phase of the study (see section 
7.2 & 7.3).  At this time the patient is assigned via randomization to one of the two treatment groups: dexmedetomidine or propofol.   
Randomization will be conducted using computer -generated, randomly chosen permuted 
block sizes of 6 and 8, stratified by study center  and age (<65 vs >  65 years) .  We will 
randomize patients in a 1:1 ratio  to sedation with dexmedetomidine or propofol . The 
randomization scheme will be created by the study’s primary biostatistician and distributed directly to each site’s investigational pharmacy as a set of randomization lists stratified by study center and age (<65 vs >  65 years).  Once a conse nted patient has entered the Interventional  
Trial Phase, an order for blinded study drug is placed, and the investigational pharmacist will refer to the appropriate randomization list (determined by patient’s age)  to establish that 
patient’s treatment assi gnment.  The lists will only be accessible to investigational pharmacists 
so that t reatment assignment will be known only by the investigational pharmacists .  
 6.2 Blinding .  The challenge of blinding propofol, a milky fat emulsion, and 
dexmedetomidine, a clear aqueous solution, is evident.  Nevertheless, a part from investigational 
pharmacists, all study per sonnel, patients, and physicians  will attempt to remain blinded to each 
patient’s treatment assignment throughout enrollment, follow -up, and data analys is. Study drug 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  15 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 will, therefore , be administered via intravenous infusion covered by an opaque bag  along with 
sleeves to cover the intravenous tubing . Study personnel are prohibited from entering a patient’s 
room during infusion bag or tubing changes to fur ther reduce risk of unblinding of study 
personnel by visualization of study drug.  E nd-points such as ventilator -free days , mortality , and 
long-term cognitive impairment are unlikely to be influenced , should unbl inding be suspected. 
Instances of unblinding  are anticipat ed and when known will be recorded in the study database. 
If an adverse event is considered study -drug related, unexpected and serious, the study drug will 
be immediately discontinued and the event will be reviewed via the usual process, whic h may 
involve unbli nded evaluation by the D ata S afety Monitoring B oard (DSMB)  Chair , as outlined 
in the Data Safety Monitoring Plan (see sections 9.2 &9.3).  
 
7.0 Study Procedures  
 7.1 Enrollment .  After informed consent is obtained, on the day of enrollment baseline data 
will be collected and the following procedures conducted:  
 [1] As part of a P re-Hospital Function A ssessment a  dementia assessment  via surrogate 
interview  will ascertain  the patient’s physical and cognitive abilitie s prior to the 
current hospitalization.  Rather than relying on a “label” of dementia in the medical record, we will use the surrogate- completed IQCODE.
126-128  Any patient with  severe 
dementia , based on an IQCODE > 4.5,123 will be excluded from further participation 
in the study, as described in the exclusion criteria (see section 5.2).  The P re-
Hospital F unction A ssessment  form will ascertain additional import ant information 
about the patient’s  pre-hospital functional status, including history of depression and 
chronic pain as well as provide information regarding tobacco, alcohol and illicit substance use  
[2] A pregnancy tes t (beta- hCG) will be done in all females of childbearing potential 
unless a pregnancy test (urine or serum hCG) has been performed during the current hospitalization that ruled out pregnancy.  
[3] All patients will be assessed for advanced heart block  using  a bedside telemetry  
strip.  Advanced heart block will be defined as second or third degree block on telemetry  per the MENDS II study.  
 
7.2 In-Hospital Phase .  The In-Hospital  Phase will comprise of the Treatment Period 
(Study Days 1 -14), during which time study drug will be infused per the study drug 
administration rules (see section 7.2.1)  and the Post -Study Drug period (2 calendar days after 
discontinuation of study drug). I n most instances ( when study drug is administered for < 12 
days), the Post -Study Drug Period will fall within the treatment period. When study  drug  is 
required for >12 days, the Post -Study Drug period will extend beyond the treatment period such 
that for e.g., patients who receive study drug for the entire 14 -day treatment period will have the 
Post-Study D rug Period last until  Study Day 16.  
 Once it has been confirmed that the patient qualifies for randomization [ e.g. patient’s 
telemetry strip is negative  for advanced heart block, female patients of childbearing potential  
have a negative pregnancy test  (either serum or urine) , and IQ CODE  is less than 4.5]  they will 
advance to the Interventional  Trial  and enter the In -Hospital Phase of the trial.   Upon entering 
the Interventional  Trial  Phase,  each patient will be assigned, via randomization, to one of the 
two treatment groups, and study drug will be delivered in a double -blind manner per titration 
rules as outlined in section 7.2.1 when in the ICU on mec hanical ventilation, and needing 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  16 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 sedation per the managing clinical team,  until study drug withdrawal, death, or for a maximum 
of 14 days —the Treatment Period — (whichever occurs first).   
  
 The following data will be collected during the In -Hospital Phase:  
[1] On enrollment t he patient’s medical records  will be used to collect demographics, 
preexisting conditions, admission severity of illness and organ failure.  If obtained as 
part of routine medical care, results of additional test results will also be collected and may include hematologic laboratory values and blood chemistries, [e.g. WBC, HCT, potass ium, sodium, BUN, creatinine, albumin, bilirubin, SGOT (AST), SGPT 
(ALT), lactate, ammonia, troponin, and glucose ]. 
 [2] Throughout the study , data reflecting current severity of illness, recent and ongoing  
treatments (including medications and mechanical ventilator status), vital signs  
(including daily worst SaO
2/FiO 2 ratios) , routine lab results, tracking of sepsis and 
ventilator management, and complications  (e.g., infections and device removals ), 
will be collected from the  patient’s  medical records . These data will be generated 
as part of routine clinical care and will not require study -related tests.   
[3] A direct patient assessment  will occur twice daily while in the ICU and once a day 
when on the wards to determine level of sedation using the RASS129, 130, assess for 
pain using the Critical- Care Pain Observation Tool (CPOT), assess for delirium 
using the CAM -ICU, and assess for diaphoresis.10, 11, 131 
[4] A bedside checklist  will be used to collect data regarding adherence to the 
nonpharmacologic ABCDE protocol ( see section 7.2.2), which includes standardized 
components of ventilator weaning, sedation, and delirium management. Components 
of the ABCDE protocol will be document ed as complete or incomplete on a daily 
basis by ICU staff and/or study personnel  after they are implemented . 
[5] Co-administered psychoactive medications , including sedatives, analgesics, and 
antipsychotics, will be tracked daily in the study.  
[6] Blood s pecimens will be collected as outlined in section 7.2.3 on all consented 
patients.  
[7] Assessment for Catatonia: At select participating sites and in a convenience sample, patients will be screened up to twice daily while in the ICU and up to once 
daily when on the wards with the Bush Francis C atatonia Rating Scale (BFCRS), a 
bedside clinical tool used widely in psychiatric consultations to diagnose catatonia, 
and for motor symptoms with the Delirium Motor Subtype Scale (DMSS).  Together these assessments will take 5 minutes on average to perform.  These evaluations will for the first time evaluate the prevalence of catatonia in critically ill patients, and prospectively explore the extent to which an overlap syndrome exists between delirium and  catatonia.  For those patients who receive  a catatonia assessment  - a 
telephone assessment identical to the 6 month neuropsychological battery will also be conducted 12 months after randomization.  These patients will also receive a 
depression inventory (B DI-II) and  a PTSD screening tool ( PCL-5) at both 6 and 12 
months. 
[8] At select participating sites, and in a convenience sample of patients, we will connect patients to the noninvasive Root
® patient monitoring and connectivity 
platform by Massimo for up to 7 days. This enables the monitoring of several physiologic parameters, including electroencephalography (EEG), cerebral oximetry, 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  17 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 and capnography with one portable monitoring platform. W e will monitor the raw  
(EEG ) and spectral analysis patterns of patients randomized to dexmedetomidine and 
propofol, using  the portable SedLine Sedation Monitor through the Root® platform .  
The SedLine Sedation Monitor is a patient -connected, 4- channel process ed EEG 
monitor. It displays electrode status, EEG waveforms, Density Spectral Array 
(DSA), and Patient State Index (PSI).  It is intended to monitor the state of the brain 
by real -time data acquisition and processing of EEG.  We will use the Masimo 
Rainbow SET® through the Root® platform to continuously measure additional 
blood constituents and physiologic parameter like the Oxygen Saturation (SpO 2) and 
the non invasive hemoglobin (Sphb). We will use the O3regional oximetry that uses near-infrared spect roscopy (NIRS) to continuously  measure cerebral tissue oxygen 
saturation(rSO2) on the Root
® platform. Finally, the Root® platform will allow the 
ISATM   CO2 module for capnography monitoring, end- tidal carbon dioxide (EtCO2) 
waveform   and measurements and trend of EtCO2, fractional concentration of 
inspiration of CO2 (FiCO2), and respiratory rate (RR). The research team and 
medical team will be blinded to the raw EEG and spectral analysis  cerebral 
oximetry, and all other monitoring parameters  which will be downloaded directly 
from the monitor to a US B port and then stored in the database. These evaluations 
will for the first time evaluate the EEG patterns and spectral analysis of critically ill 
septic patients on dexmedetomidine and propofol and provide insi ghts into its 
relationship with sleep , delirium, coma, and long -term cognitive outcomes .  
 
7.2.1 Study Drug Administration.  Upon entry into the Interventional  Trial , randomization 
will be carried out by the investigational pharmacist at each study center according to the 
randomization scheme provided by the study biostatistician. The pharmacist at each site will prepare and deliver study drug to the bedside nurse according to orders placed by study personnel at each site.  Study drug will be titrated by th e bedside nurse in accordance with the 
weight -based titration table (Table 2) . 
[1]       Route and Concentration.  All study drug will be administered intravenously 
(IV) by continuous infusion at concentrations of 10 mg/mL propofol  or 5 mcg/mL 
dexmedetomidine.  Patients will only receive study drug while in the ICU  and on mechanical 
ventilation, and thus will be monitored with continuous telemetry as per usual ICU practice.  
[2] Dosing Range .  Study drug dose will be titrated in a double -blind manner 
according to clinical effect to achieve a “goal” or “target” Richmond Agitation -Sedation Score 
(Table 3) set by the managing clinical team (see Titration  section below).  For sites that do not 
utilize the RASS scale, the VCC will provide titration instructions using their local sedation -
agitation scale.  For patients in the propofol group, dose will range from 5- 50 mcg/kg/min.  For 
patients in the dexmedetomidine group, dose will range from 0.15- 1.5 mcg/kg/hr .  For example, 
a 70 kg patient  would receive 10.5 mL of study drug per hour, which would provide either 25 
mcg/kg/min of propofol or 0.75 mcg/kg/hr of dexmedetomidine. These dose ranges have been selected after literature review and discussions with critical care practitioners, investigational 
pharmacists, and the MENDS II study steering committee.  
13, 35, 40, 132 Patient doses will be 
calculated based on each patient's enrollment weight, with no cap to the maximum 
weight.   Table 2 includes the infusion rates for patients weighing 40- 140kg; an additional 
titration table for patients >140 kg is available to sites from the VCC.  
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  18 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 Table 2. Study dr ug concentration and weight -based titration table  for 40- 140kgs  
 
 
 
  
[3] Initiation .  No  bolus dose of study medication will be allowed.   Since most patients are 
already receiving sedation prior to enrollment this is often not required. The bedside nurse will 
initiate  this infusion based on patient weight in kg  starting at 5 -15 mcg/kg/min propofol and 
0.15- 0.45 mcg/kg/hr dexmedetomidine .  (see Table 2) starting at 5- 15 mcg/kg/min propofol and 
0.15- 0.45 mcg/kg/hr dexmedetomidine . 
[4] Titration .  Study drug dose will be titrated every 10 minutes by the bedside nurse in 
mL/hr according the weight -based titration table (see Table 2 ) to achieve th e RASS target  
(Table 3)  set by the managing clinical team.  
 
Table  3. Richmond Agitation -Sedation Scale (RASS)129, 130 
 
+4 Combative  Combative, violent, immediate danger to staff  
+3 Very agitated  Pulls or removes tube(s) or catheter(s); aggressive  
+2 Agitated  Frequent nonpurposeful movement, fights ventilator  
+1 Restless    Anxious, apprehensive but movements are not aggressive or vigorous  
0 Alert and calm   
-1 Drowsy  Not fully alert, but sustained awakening to voice (eye opening &  contact > 10 sec)  
-2 Light sedation   Briefly awakens to voice (eye opening & contact < 10 sec)  
-3 Moderate sedation  Movement or eye opening  to voice (but no eye contact)  
-4 Deep sedation  No response to voice, but movement or eye opening to physical stimulation  
-5 Unarousable  No response to voice or physical stimulation  
 

MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  19 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 (a) Titrating Up ( undersedation: Patient RASS > Target RASS ). If a patient ’s 
RASS is 1 or more level s higher than the Target RASS (e.g. patient RASS +1 
& target RASS 0 or - 1), study drug volume will be increased according to 
weight -based titration table (see Table 2) every 10 minutes in increments of 5 
mcg/kg/min for propofol or 0.15 mcg/kg/hr for dexmede tomidine, until  the 
maximum dose is reached (1.5 m cg/kg/hr  dexmedetomidine or 50 
mcg/kg/min propofol) or the patient reaches the target RASS . 
(b) Titrating Down (oversedation: Patient RASS < Target RASS ).  If 
oversedated (i.e ., more than 1 RASS level deepe r than ICU team’s sedation 
target), study  drug  volume will be decreased every 30 minutes  per the 
weight -based titration table (see Table 2) in decrements of 5 mcg/kg/min for 
propofol or 0.15 mcg/kg/hr for dexmedetomidine until the patient is within 1 
RASS level of the target RASS . Study drug  will be held if other sedatives 
have been held, study drug has been titrated to lowest volume  (5 mcg/kg/min 
for propofol or 0.15 mcg/kg/) , and the patient remains oversedated  (i.e., more 
than 1 RASS level deeper than IC U team’s sedation target)  for >30 minutes . 
(c) Titrating  Study Drug during a Spontaneous Awakening Trial  (SAT) (see 
section 7.2.2) . Patients will be evaluated daily for readiness for a SAT  by 
first evaluating patients with a SAT  safety screen.  In patients  passing the 
safety screen, s tudy drug will be held  until  patients show signs of failing the 
SAT  indicating a need for sedation . Study drug that is held for the 
spontaneous awakening trial will be restarted, if need ed, to the lowest 
possible infusion rate that is needed to achieve target RASS (see section 7.2.2).  
(d) Restarting Study Drug  (with exception of restarting after SAT  as outlined in 
section 7.2.1[4] c above) .  Study drug will be discontinued if a patient is 
liberated from mechanical ventilation, o r if the managing clinical team 
determines the patient does not need ongoing sedation. If, however, at any 
time during the 14- day Treatment  Period  (startin g from enrollment day , 
which is Trial Day 1, through Trial D ay 14) a patient again requires sedative 
therapy  and is still on mechanical ventilation , the study drug will be restarted 
according to initiation rules (see Initiation section 7.2.1[ 3] above), as long as 
study drug was  not discontinued permanently for safety reasons (see 
Permanent Discontinuation section 7.2.1[6 ] below).  No study drug will be 
continued beyond Trial Day 14, irrespective of the duration of therapy within 
the 14-day Treatment Period .  
[5] Holding .  Throughout the treatment period , study drug may be temporarily held for 
the following reasons:  
(a)  Hypotension. If a patient’s systolic blood pressure is <80 mmHg and  if 
deemed necessary by the managing clinical team, study drug will be held until fluid and/or vasopressor/inotrope therapy can be initiated and systolic blood pressure has in creased to >80 mmHg.  Since this is a study in severely 
septic patients, hypotension may occur frequently and will be monitored as a safety outcome.   
(b)     New onset symptomatic bradycardia (< 50 beats/minute and systolic blood 
pressure <80 mm Hg) . Study drug  may be held if deemed necessary by the 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  20 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 managing clinical team until atropine is administered and patients heart rate 
is >50 beats/min.  
(c).    Oversedation  despite titration  to lowest study drug rate . Study drug may be 
held if patient continues to be  oversedated  (i.e., more than 1 RASS level 
deeper than ICU team’s sedation target) , all other sedatives have been held 
and study has been titrated to lowest volume (5 mcg/kg/min for propofol or 0.15 mcg/kg/)  for >30 minutes , until patients RASS level is at target .  
(d) General anesthesia.  Study drug may be held if patient is receiving general 
anesthesia for a surgical operation.  Study drug may be held until the patient returns to the ICU setting and resumes sedation per ICU target sedation scale orders.   
[6] Permanent Discontinuation.  Study drug will be permanently discontinued at any time during the trial for any of the following safety reasons.  Management of these conditions is left to the discretion of the medical team.  
(a) Second episode of symptomatic bradycardia (< 50 beats/minute  and systolic 
blood pressure <80 mm Hg) while on study drug.  As described above in 7.2.1[ 5]b, s tudy drug may be continued, titrated down or hel d during the first 
episode of symptomatic bradycardia, at the discretio n of the medical team. 
Medical team would manage the bradycardia and once it resolves, study drug should be restarted, if it had been stopped. Symptomatic bradycardia that reoccurs while back on study drug will result in permanent discontinuation.  
(b) New  onset  2nd or 3rd degree heart block . Degree of heart block should be 
confirmed with medical team or PI before discontinuation.  
(c) Serious a llergic reactions  to study drug as determined by the managing 
clinical team and principal investigator .  
(d) New onset coma due to a known structural brain disease  such as stroke, 
intracranial hemorrhage, cranial trauma, malignancy, anoxic brain injury, or cerebral edema.  
(e) Suspected Propofol Infusion Syndrome  (commonly presents as cardiac 
failure, rhabdomyoly sis, severe metabolic acidosis and renal failure) or 
acidosis that cannot be explained by the medical condition of the patient . 
These are considered severe clin ical outcomes and tracked.  
(e) Any other study drug -related, life- threatening, serious adverse reaction s. 
(f) Withdrawal from study drug treatment  at the discretion of the principal 
investigator , the patient /family,  or the attending physician . 
In the event that study drug is permanently discontinued, the managing clinical team will be notified by study personnel, and may then order sedative/analgesia management per standard ICU sedation protocol.  
7.2.2 Management Components .   
[1] Management of p ain, rescue sedation , and the chemically paralyzed patient .  
Patients will be monitored for pain using the Critical- Care Pain Observation Tool 
(CPOT), and intermittent boluses of 0.5- 1 mc g/kg of fentanyl  (or other standard of 
care opiates such as morphine or hydromorphone)  or continuous fentanyl infusions 
will be pe rmitted for analgesia as determined necessary by the managing clinical 
team. In circumstances where sedation target is not met with maximum study drug 
infusion, additional intermittent opiates (IV opiates such as fentanyl, morphine or 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  21 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 hydromorphone or po opiates) or continuous fentanyl may be used to help attain 
sedation target. Occasionally , despite maximum study drug and use of significant (4-
5 mcg/kg/hr) continuous fentanyl, patients may still be undersedated; in these rare circumstances intermittent dos e midazolam will be permitted and tracked. In the rare 
instance, when sedation is required beyond the 14 day  Treatment  Period , sedation 
will be administered per existing ICU protocol and tracked until hospital discharge, 
death or the end of the Post -Study Drug Period (whichever is earlier) . Chemical 
paralysis is used in < 5% of patients in ICUs, and when needed, intermittent midazolam or continuous midazolam will be permitted and tracked, since dexmedetomidine  may not provide adequate amnesia. Study drug will be reduced to 
the lowest infusion rate for the patient’s weight according to the weight based titration table being used for the patient and maintained at this level during the time chemical paralysis is ongoing . Midazolam infusions that are started to provide 
amnesia during sustained chemical paralysis will be discontinued approximately one hour after discontinuation of chemical paralysis , while study drug will continue and 
management will be per titration rules . We expect our rescue protocol to minimize, 
and the randomization to balance the effects of  these medications.  Similarly 
intermittent midazolam or propofol will be permitted to provide amnesia when short -
term muscle relaxation is employed during procedures e.g. bronchosc opies, 
tracheostomies , etc.  
[2] Delirium  Protocol  (ABCDE Protocol) .
28, 133-136  During the Treatment Period , we 
will standardize  and/or track  components of ICU care that may influence delirium  
risk via an  evidence- based non- pharmacologic protocol  referred to as the ABCDE 
protocol . Study personnel will be well -trained with this protocol  during the MENDS 
II startup meeting and compliance will be emphasized  and tracked  throughout the 
study . Local ICU nursing staff at each study center will receive a standar dized 
educational packet  that focuses on delirium recognition, risk factors, and prevention. 
When knowledge gaps are identified or compliance drops below 80% , as measured 
by daily compliance checks, additional education will be provided. The ABCDE 
protocol has 3 components:  
(a)  ABCDE  (Awakening and B reathing C oordination) . Based on our  “Wake 
Up and Breathe”  protocol  proven to improve outcome s, including one -year 
survival ,28, 136 the ABC  component includes standardized SATs  (i.e., daily 
interruption of sedation) paired with spontaneous breathing trials  (SBTs) ,137 
both administered only when specif ic safety criteria are met . Study drug that is 
held for the spontaneous awakening trial will be restarted, if needed, at the 
lowest possible infusion rate that is needed to achieve target RASS. All study 
centers use validated sedation scales to facilitate goal -directed sedation, a 
practice that will continue throughout the MENDS II study . Ventilator 
management will be standardized according to each institution’s approved protocols, including the use of low tidal volume ventilation for acute lung 
injury.
88 
(b)  AB CDE (Delirium monitoring and management) . The Delirium component 
of ABCDE will inclu de nonpharmacologic strategies, given that the majority of 
delirium in ICUs is the hypoactive subtype.138, 139  The protocol includes 
nonpharmacologic strategies that have been shown to reduce delirium in non-
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  22 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 ICU settings140-150  Study personnel will encourage members of the ICU team 
to perform the following tasks:  
• Reorient and cognitively stimulate  patients by conveying the day, date, 
place, and reason for hospitalization, updating whiteboards with caregiver 
names, requesting placement of a clock and calendar in the room, and 
discussing current events.140-143, 145, 146, 148, 151-153 
• Determine need for hearing aids and/or eye glasses  from the surrogate 
and request that the surrogate provi de these to the patient when 
appropriate.141-143, 145, 146, 148, 151, 152 
• Monitor and manage pain level  in all patients daily with the CPOT  or 
other assessments , in accordance with practice guidelines  and local I CU 
policies.93, 152, 154-157 
• Maintain sleep preservation using techniques  including noise reduction 
strategies (e.g., minimize noise outside the room, offer white noise or 
earplugs), normal izing  day-night variation in illumination, minimizing 
interruptions during normal sleeping hours via “time out” strategy, maintaining ventilator synchrony, and promoting comfort and relaxation (e.g., back care, massa ge, oral care, washing face/hands, and daytime 
bath).
141, 143, 145, 146, 151, 158-163 
• Patients  with h yperactive (agitated) delirium (i.e. RASS +1 to +4 and 
CAM -ICU positive) will be permitted either per tube or intravenously  
haloperidol  starting between  0.5-5 mg . Patients with either an allergy to 
haloperidol or in patients where the treating clin ical team desires to use 
an oral atypical antipsychotic, quetiapine will be permitted as needed 
(prn) or scheduled with recommended starting doses of 25- 50 mg and 
titration per primary team.  All antipsychotic medication will be tracked in the database unt il the end of the combined Treatment/ Post Study Drug 
Period, hospital discharge or death  (whichever is earlier) . 
(c)  ABCD E (Early mobility and E xercise) . The Exercise component of the 
ABCDE protocol will include strategies to promote mobility and exercise  in 
the earliest phases of critical illness.  Early physical/occupational therapy significantly reduced delirium duration for mechanically ventilated ICU patients in a recent randomized controlled trial.
133  Study personnel will 
encourage members of the ICU team, including the bedside nurses and  physical/occup ational therapists, to evaluate each patient’s readiness for 
mobility and exercise and coordinate the following activities: removal of restraints , active range of motion , sitting on the side of the bed, sitting in a 
chair, standing  in place,  and ambulation. 
133, 141, 145, 151-153, 164, 165 
(d) Barriers and Facilitators to the ABCDE bundle .  At sites  that would like to 
participate , critical care providers (i.e., nurses, respiratory therapists, 
pharmacists, physicians, occupational therapists  [OT] , and/or physical 
therapists  [PT] ) will be asked to complete a voluntary electronic survey (i.e., 
the ABCDE Bundle Provider Survey) designed to identify barriers and facilitators to the use of the ABCDE bundle.  In addition, managers (e.g., nurse manager, respiratory therapy manager, and/or PT/OT manager) will be asked to provide details about key organizational structures and processe s that 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  23 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 may influence a provider’s ability to use the ABCDE bundle.  Lastly, units 
will be observed for accessibility of equipment useful for applying the ABCDE bundle and unit layout.  Both the manager evaluation and the unit 
observation will be accomplish ed utilizing the ABCDE Unit Observation and 
Manager Questionnaire . When barriers and facilitators are identified, this 
information will be provided to study personnel and/or managers at each site. 
 
[3] Sepsis and Mechanical Ventilation . Management of sepsi s and MV  will be 
directed by standard ICU protocols based on the surviving sepsis guidelines.
15  The 
managing clinical team will dictate use of these guidelines according to patient need.  Study personnel will track important determinants of care including: choice of  
antibiotic, vasopressor and inotrope use, and blood glucose levels .
15 Patients will be 
evaluated daily by  the medical team as part of standard ICU protocols for readiness 
for SATs, SBTs , and subsequently extubation.  
 
7.2.3 Monitoring .  The risks of propofol and dexmedetomidine include  oversedation, 
bradycardia, hypotension, acidosis, hypertriglyceridemia, hy perglycemia, adrenal insufficiency, 
and propofol infusion syndrome. Throughout the Interventional Trial Period, study personnel 
will carefully monitor all patients daily for evidence of these potential adverse effects, 
determine study drug efficacy and saf ety, and monitor other factors that may influence outcome.  
Should adverse effects occur, the above section (7.2.1) describes how study drug will be titrated, held , or permanently discontinued.  Additionally , patients will be monitored for two  full 
days fo llowing discontinuation of the study drug . This will be the Post -Study Drug Period and 
will be contained within the treatment period if study drug is discontinued prior to or on study day 1 2. For those patients that receive study drug for more than 12 days  during the treatment  
period of 14 days, the Post -Study Drug Period will extend beyond the Treatment  period.  
[1] Efficacy .  In addition to delirium, coma , and ventilator -free days, t ime-to-event 
outcomes including ICU length of stay  and survival , will be assessed until the 
outcome in question or a censoring event occurs.  Twice daily , while in ICU and once 
thereafter until end of Post -Study Drug Period , hospital discharge or death 
(whichever is first), study personnel will determine level of sedatio n using the 
RASS
129, 130 and assess for delirium using the CAM -ICU.10, 11, 131  
[2] Safety .  Patients will be monitored as part of routine ICU care  for adverse clinical 
outcomes  including but not limited to oversedation, bradycardia, hypotension, 
acidosis, hypertriglyceridemia, hyperglycemia, adrenal insufficiency, and propofol 
infusion syndrome .  Additionally, study personnel will specifically assess pa tients 
for the following safety outcomes : 
(a) Triglyceride s according to plasma level drawn on Trial Day s 7 (or earlier if 
planned hospital discharge is before Day 7)  and 14  (or earlier if planned 
hospital discharge is before Day 14) . 
(b) Cortisol  according to plasma level drawn on Trial Days 7(or earlier if 
planned hospital discharge is before Day 7) and 14  (or earlier if planned 
hospital discharge is before Day 14) .  
(c) Arrhythmia and/or Heart Block  according to telemetry or a12- Lead 
electrocard iogram while in the ICU until the end of the combined 
Treatment/ Post-Study Drug Period.  
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  24 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 (d) Hyperactivity or agitation  according to daily RASS139 until the end of the 
combined Treatment/ Post-Study Drug Period  (see section 7.2.2 for rescue 
protocol) . 
(e) Development of new cases of ARDS based on criteria described in 4.2.2 until 
the end of the combined Treatment/ Post-Study Drug Period. All aspects of 
management of patient’s ARDS will be determined by the  medical  team, 
including if deemed necessary, stopping of the study drug. 
(f) Organ dysfunctions  will be tracked until conclusion of the combined 
Treatment/ Post-Study Drug Period using daily SOFA scores and continuous 
as well as established predefined cut offs for each organ failure : Kidney, Cr > 
2 mg/dL or urine < 400 cc/day; Lung, PaO 2/FiO 2 <300 or SaO 2/FiO 2 <315;119  
Liver, total bilirubin > 2 mg/dL; Coagulation, Platelet count < 100,000/mm3; 
and Hemodynamic, need for vasopressor,120, 121 consistent with definitions 
utilized in published studies of organ dysfunction in critically ill patients.122 
[3] Biological specimens .  Pla sma will be obtained on approximately Trial Days  1, 3, 5, 
7 and 14.  A  maximum of  30 mL of blood will be collected at each time point (150 
mL max during the study), processed , and stored at - 80º C prior to being shipped to 
the V anderbilt C oordinating C enter  biorepository  for storage and batched analyses of 
the following:  
(a) Genetic predictors of delirium duration , including , but not limited to , the 
apolipoprotein E4 polymorphism .166-168 
(b) Inflammatory/coagulopathic biomarkers , (e.g., IL -1, IL -6, IL -10, CRP, 
sTNFR1, and HMGB1) based on  their importance in sepsis and kinetic 
responses.169-171, 171, 172, 172, 173, 173, 174, 174-177  Furthermore , combination of 
pro- and anti -inflammatory  cytokine markers improves the  predictive quality 
of these biomarkers for mortality.178 
(c) Other biomarkers  to be determined by ongoing and future studies.  
(d)  At select participating sites,  the Cholinesterase Activity and DeliriUm during 
Critical illness Study  (CADUCe uS) – a substudy within the MENDS II study 
will examine whole blood acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and 
butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE) activities  as biomarkers for delirium during 
critical illness and for long -term cognitive impairment in survivors of critical 
illness. During the blood collection on study days 1, 3, 5, 7, & 14 AChE and 
BuChE activities in the collected blood will additionally be measured using ChE Check (LISA -CHE, Dr. F. Köhler Chemie [DFKC] Bensheim, 
Germany), a point -of-care device that reliably measures AChE and BuChE 
activities in whole blood within 4 minutes of specimen collection
194,195,196. 
  
[4] Delirium Experience and Baseline Chronic Pain Evaluation.
 After resolution of 
delirium and prior to hospital discharge, patients will be asked to recall their memory 
and delirium experience using a modified Delirium Experience Questionnaire (DEQ) 
193. Additionally, patients will be asked about the presence of chronic pain prior to 
this hospital admission and any medications that were taken to manage that pain. 
 
[5] Other data .  The patient’s medical records  will be used during the In-Hospital Phase   
to collect vital signs and other data reflect ing current  severi ty of illness, recent and 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  25 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 ongoing treatments (including medications  and mechanical ventilator status), routine 
lab results, and complications  (e.g., infections and device removals) .  These data will 
be generated as part of routine care and will not require study -related tests.  
 
7.3 Long- term F ollow -up Phase .  We will evaluate long -term outcomes  among survivors 
(Aim 2B ), including  neuropsychological function and ADL/IADL s 6 months  after 
randomization.  Under the direction of the Vanderbilt Coordinating Center’s lead neuropsychologist, trained study personnel will assess patients using the following validated telephone assessments:  
[1] Delirium  will be evaluated  via the “phone” Confusion Assessment Method
179 
algorithm.  Patients diagnosed with delirium will not be assessed further at that time, but contacted at weekly intervals and tested if/when delirium resolves.  
[2] A neuropsychological phone battery
118 derive d from standard cognitive tests and 
proven feasible  and valid  for phone use  in a study of  ICU survivors ( with similar 
characteristics to those targeted for enrollment in the MENDS II study ) will be used 
to assess memory, attention, re asoning, and executive functioning .  
[3] Activities of Daily Living (ADL)116 and Instrumental ADLs  (IADLs)117 
[4] Quality of Life  will be assessed using the EQ -5D, a short, easy to administer, well -
validated, and widely used instrument.180-182 
[5] Brief Pain Inventory Short Form ( BPI) 183 will be used to assess patients for the 
presence of chronic pain . The BPI is one of the most widely used measurement tools 
for assessing clinical pain  and consists of 9 questions, taking only a few minutes to 
complete . In addition to examining prevalence of chronic pain and chronic pain 
interference in ICU survivors, we will utilize the BPI to identify potential risk factors (e.g., sedative and analgesic exposure in the hospital) for chronic pain after critical illness.  
 
In addition to the battery described, data will be collected regarding intervening event s that 
happened since hospital discharge including, but not limited to, death and re -hospitalizations. 
Vital status at 6 months after randomization and date of death (if applicable) will be determined 
via medical records or the Social Security Death Index  if not already known at hospital 
discharge.  
7.3.1 Long- term F ollow -Up Patient Retention  Plan .  In order to maximize full 6-month 
participation of the randomized patients, the  Long -Term Follow -Up Committee will rely on 
strategies refined  over the past 10 years to produce a Follow -Up assessment rate of >85%. 
Study personnel  will be instructed to obtain as much contact information as possible at time of 
enrollment (e.g. multiple phone numbers, mailing addresses, discharge destination , etc.) . The 
Neuropsychology Coordinator will perform the following interventions to maintain >85% Follow -Up assessment rates:  
[1] Following hospital discharge a letter will be sent to patients reminding them about the Follow -Up Period and introducing them to the  Follow -Up staff.  
[2] A periodic  phone call , letter , postcard, or email  will serve as an additional  reminder 
of study participation . 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  26 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 [3] Weekly  meetings will be conducted with study staff to evaluate the status of follow -
up evaluations, with a particular f ocus on devising and implementing effective 
strategies to reach patients who may be difficult to contact.   
7.4 Data Collection/Case Report Form Details .  During all study phases, a ll data will be 
directly entered into electronic case report form s (eCRF s) in a secured password -protected 
database with the exception of the Pre -Hospital Function Assessment and the assessments in the 
Long -Term Follow -Up Assessment , which will be collected on paper CRFs (due to copyright 
restrictions) and later entered into the e CRFs  for storage in the secured password- protected 
database.  Additionally, all signed Informed Consent Documents will be uploaded to the study 
database.  This will allow the VCC ready access to review the consent forms for appropriate version use and completeness.  This study will utilize Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap ) for data collection, transmission and storage.  REDCap is a secure, web -based 
application for building and managing online databases.  Vanderbilt University, with collaboration fr om a consortium of institutional partners, including the Vanderbilt Institute for 
Clinical and Translation Research (VICTR) Informatics Core, developed and manages a software toolset and workflow methodology for electronic collection and management of research and clinical trial data.  All study data will be entered via a password protected, study unique REDCap database website.  REDCap servers are housed in a local data center at 
Vanderbilt and all web -based information transmission is encrypted.  REDCap w as developed 
specifically around HIPAA -Security guidelines and is recommended by both the Vanderbilt 
University Privacy Office and Institutional Review Board. REDCap has been disseminated for 
use locally at other institutions and currently supports > 140 a cademic/non -profit consortium 
partners and 11,000 research end- users ( www.project -redcap.org
). 
7.5 Schedule of Events   
*Variable   Enrollment  
 Treatment Period & 
Post-Study Drug 
Period  6 Month  
Follow -up 12 Month  
Follow -up 
Pre-Hospital Function  Assessment  (ADL,116 IADL/FAQ,117 IQCODE,123, 
126-128, AUDIT)  X    
Demographics, Comorbidities184,APACHE II185 X    
SOFA120, 186 X Daily    
Rhythm strip assessment for advanced heart block  X Daily    
Pregnancy test (either urine or serum Beta hCG)  X    
Blood draw: IL -1, IL -6, IL -10, CRP, sTNFR1, HMGB1   Approximately  
Days  1,3,5,7,14    
Blood draw:  whole blood AChE and BuChE  at participating sites194,195,196 
(Blood draw above will be used when possible)   Approximately  
Days 1,3,5,7,14    
Hematology/Chemistry, Neuroimaging  X Daily    
Co-administered sedative/analgesic/antipsychotic medications   Daily    
RASS (target/actual),129, 130 CAM -ICU10, 11  1-2x daily   
Bush Francis Catatonia Rating Scale (BFCRS), and Delirium Motor 
Subtype Scale (DMSS) at participating site s    1-2x daily    
Hospital -acquired infections (blood, urine, sputum)   Daily    
ABCDE Protocol Compliance & Sepsis/Ventilator tracking     Daily    
Safety assessments . As part of routine ICU care   Daily    
Plasma triglycerides & cortisol   Approximately 
Days 7,14    
SaO2/FiO2, PaO2/FiO2 ratio, Chest X -ray to evaluate ARDS   Daily    
EEG via portable SedLine Sedation Monitor at participating sites    Up to 7 days    
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  27 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 Delirium Experience Questionnaire193 and Chronic Pain Questions   X   
Long -term telephone follow -up: CAM ,179 neuropsychological  battery,118 
ADL,116 IADL/FAQ,117  EuroQOL quality of life (EQ -5D)180-182, BPI183   X  
Catatonia Patients  ONLY: At both the 6 and 12 month follow -up dates, 
patients will be assessed with the long -term telephone battery along with 
the BDI -II and PCL -5.   X X 
*Abbreviations (alphabetical) :  AChE - acetylcholinesterase  ADL - activities of daily living, APACHE II - Acute Physiologic 
Chronic Health Evaluation II, AUDIT - Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test , BDI-II – Beck Depression Inventory II, 
BPI- Brief Pain Inventory, BuChE - butyrylcholinesterase , CAM - Confusion Assessment Method, CAM -ICU- Confusion 
Assessment Method for ICU, CRP - C-reactive protein, EEG - Electroencephalograph , FAQ - Functional Activities 
Questionnaire for IADLs, HMGB1 - High -mobility group protein 1, IADL - instrumental activities of daily living, IL - 
interleukin, IQCODE - Informant Questionnaire of Cognitive Decline in Elderly,  MV-mechanical ventilation , PCL -5 - PTSD 
Checklist , RASS - Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale, SOFA - Sequential Organ Failure Assessment, sTNFr1 - soluble TNF 
receptor 1   
 
7.6 The Vanderbilt Coordinating Center (VCC) .  The VCC has extensive experience in 
the conduct of large, phase III clinical trials over the past decade .  The VCC will perform 
(among other functions) the following: communicate with the FDA using a schedule of 
reporting in accordance with IND policies, design the database and data collection tool , conduct 
startup meetings and site -training regarding protocol implementation  and delirium monitoring to 
standardize all research activities  during  the trial, monitor enrollment pace and quality to ensure 
patients meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria, maintain blinding, track adverse events and 
ensure safety reporting, ensure protocol compliance, store plasma, serum, and genetic samples for planned and future analyses, conduct follow -up phone testi ng of neuropsychological 
function and quality of life via neuropsychology technicians, and work with the study centers  
and local study personnel  using multiple proven patient retention techniques that have 
consistently achieved over 80%  follow -up during pr evious studies. 
 
 
8.0  Risks of Investigational Agents/Devices (side effects)  
 
8.1 Side Effects of Study Drug (Propofol and Dexmedetomidine).  The risks of the 
sedative medications include oversedation, hypotension, bradycardia, acidosis, triglyceridemia, 
propofol infusion syndrome , and adrenal insufficiency. S tudy personnel will carefully monitor 
all patients for evidence of potential adverse effects from the study drugs  until conclusion of the 
combined Treatment/ Post-Study Drug Period . These assessments a re described in section 7.2.3. 
Should any of these occur, adverse events will be reported to the coordinating center, with 
Adverse Events  reported within 24 hours (see section 9.0) . From an immediate clinical 
management perspective, section 7.2.2 describes  how study drug will be titrated, held, or 
permanently discontinued, depending on the adverse effect.  
 
8.2 Risks from Blood Draws. All patients will have blood drawn for research purposes. 
The risks of drawing blood are uncommon and may include bleeding and bruising. Commonly, having blood drawn is painful and rarely can lead to infection at the site of the blood draw. For this reason , it will be our standard approach whenever possible to obtain the majority of blood 
for research purposes through existing intravenous peripheral, central or arterial catheters since these patients routinely have such catheters while in the ICU. Rarely th e AChE and BuChe 
testing
194,195,196  will require a finger stick  to be performed. The amount of blood drawn for 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  28 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 biological specimens is minimal, represents a small percentage of the amount of blood taken 
during the course of a standard ICU stay, and will not represent a significant risk to the patient.   
 
8.3 Risks from ECG and SedLine Sedation Monitoring . As mentioned above an ECG 
may be done to evaluate heart rhythms and heart block.  The ECG electrode pads may cause 
skin irritation.  While it is rare, ther e may also be l ocal allergic reactions and/or skin tears from 
the SedLine Sedation Monitor sensors. This study staff will monitor the skin condition daily 
when using the sensors.   
 
8.4 Steps Taken to Reduce Risks and Increase Impact of Study . The following are a 
highlighted “top ten” list of actions we have explicitly taken to minimize risk for the study 
population and to maximize the ultimate impact of this investigation on the field of medicine.187  
[1] Interventions included in the MENDS II study are supported by a well -grounded and 
clearly described rationale suggesting potential, though unproven, benefit for eligible 
patients.  
[2] All interventions are common and with established equipoise within the context of usual care and considered good or competent care in light of an absence of  clear 
proof in favor of one over the other.  
[3] Experts in the fields of critical care, neuropsychology, nursing, pharmacology, and clinical trial design have developed the interventions being studied.  
[4] The management of patients in both treatment groups will be guided by explicit MENDS II protocols so that the results of the trial can be clearly interpreted and 
imitated, where appropriate, in clinical practice. This will also allow for the use of 
the “superior group” as a control in future trials.  
[5] The MENDS II protocol will adjust study drug dose to meet individual patient needs 
in the attempt to deliver safe and effective care to critically ill old and young er 
patients. This protocol is explicitly designed and drafted from landmark trials to meet p atients’ needs over time and provide individualized care.  
[6] The titration protocol for study drug and the management components for pain, 
rescue sedation, and  hyperactive delirium are designed to minimize risks in 
comparison to anticipated benefits.  
[7] Because most previous comparator trials of either dexmedetomidine or propofol 
versus benzodiazepines have shown superior outcomes with dexmedetomidine and 
propofol, no benzodiazepine control arm was included, to safeguard patients from 
receiving sedative a gents whose use is on the decline.  
[8] An independent and qualified Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will be established (see s ection 9.5.1, 9.5.2 and 9.5.3.)  to review the research protocol prior 
to the start of the study and conduct interim analyses f or safety and review data on 
serious adverse events as close to real -time as possible.  
[9] We will work very closely with the regulatory authorities including our IRB and the FDA to make certain that this proposal is safe and that they agree with our pla nned 
oversight and approach to due diligence in monitoring and reviewing all adverse events during the conduct of the trial. The FDA- IND f or this study  is #68658. 
[10] Rigorous monitoring and reporting of prospectively defined Adverse Events (AEs)  including Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSARs) and unexpected problems (UPs) will be conducted as outlined in s ection 9.2 and 9.3, to 
comprehensively monitor safety during the trial.  
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  29 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  
9.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or Others  
 
A system has been established to report and track clinical outcomes, (AEs)  including SUSARs  
and UPs that increased risk .  Study personnel will monitor the safety of subjects and follow 
them until the event resolves or is explained.  9.1 Clinical Outcomes (not considered Adverse Events) .  In this study of critically ill 
patients who are at high risk for death or other adverse outcomes due to their underlying critical illness, clinical outcome s including death and organ dysfunction, will be systematically tracked 
(collected in the CRF) and will be included as part of the safety and efficacy analyses for this study. For the purposes of reporting, death and organ dysfunction will not be recorded a s 
adverse events unless the investigator believes the event may have been caused by study drug  
and is more severe or prolonged than expected given the underlying critical illness  
(investigator’s discretion). This approach (considering death and organ dysfunction as outcomes 
rather than adverse events) is common in ICU trials because these outcomes occur commonly in 
the ICU and because it mandates that data regarding death , organ dysfunction, and expected 
safety outcomes  be tracked systematically for all pat ients and analyzed appropriately.  
All 
clinical outcomes (with the exception of death and duration of MV - see 9.1.1 and 9.1.2 below ) will 
be systemically tracked until conclusion of the combined Treatment/ Post-Study Drug Period , i.e., 
they will be tracked f rom randomization until Study Day 1 6 at a maximum , hospital discharge, or 
death, whichever comes earlier . Listed below are events that will be tracked as clinical outcomes 
and will not therefore be required to be reported as adverse events during this study (unless believed 
to be study -drug related and more severe or prolonged than expected given the underlying critical 
illness):   
[1] Death. All deaths occurring within the  Interventional Trial will be reported on the 
CRF in the death summary section. For de aths thought to be caused by study drug, 
an AE/SUSAR  will be reported along with the death summary  
[2] Respiratory failure, including need for MV  (invasive or noninvasive) or episodes of 
hypoxemia . Duration of MV will be tracked for up to 28 days to evaluate VFDs  
[3] Circulatory  failure, including shock (whether requiring vasopressors or not) and 
cardiac arrhythmias, and hypo/ hypertension 
[4] Hepatic failure or injury leading to increased bilirubin, AST, or ALT  
[5] Renal failure or injury leading to a n increased creatinine or acute hemodialysis  
[6] Coagulation derangements (e.g., thrombocytopenia ) 
[7] Neuropsychological dysfunction that is believed to be newly acquired  
[8] Alterations in vital signs (e.g., temperature, heart rate, blood pressure , oxyge n 
saturation)  
[9] ICU readmissions  
[10] Infections  
[11] Alterations in routine safety labs  (e.g.,  liver function tests , creatine kinase, 
creatinine, cortisol, triglyceride, and lactate).  
[12]  The following known adverse reactions to propofol and/or  dexmedetomidine:  
 (a) bradycardia  
 (b) tachycardia  
 (c) hypotension  
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  30 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (d) hypertension  
 (e) triglyceridemia  
 (f) sedation  
 (g) respiratory depression  
 (h) lactic acidosis  
 (i) cardiac rhythm disturbances  
 (j) propofol infusion syndrome  
 
9.2 Adverse Events (AEs), Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions 
(SUSARs) , and Unanticipated Problems (UPs)   
[1] Adverse Event (AE) is  defined as any untoward medical occurrence for a patient 
enrolled in the trial that is not tracked as a clinical outc ome (see s ection 9.1),  
regardless of whether the event is considered study drug- related or not. If a subject 
experiences an AE after informed consent is signed but before receiv ing study drug, 
the event will be reported as an “AE not study drug related.” Prior to enrollment, 
study site personnel will note the occurrence and nature of each subject’s medical condition(s). During the study, site personnel will note changes in these condition(s) and/or the occurrence and nature of any AEs. All AEs occurring after consent and until the end of combined Treatment/ Post-Study Drug Period, hospi tal discharge, or 
death  (whichever comes first)  will be recorded in the database. This period is the 
window of time during which study drug- related advers e reactions are expected 
based on the duration of the Treatment Period and the  Post -Study Drug Period.  An 
AE that later meets criteria for an UP or SUSAR between the start of study drug and hospital  discharge will be reported as an UP or SUSAR. If study drug is 
discontinued as a result of an AE, study personnel will document the circumstances leading to discontinuation of study drug. In cases where the investigator notes an unanticipated benefit to t he subject, study site personnel will enter “unanticipated 
benefit” with the actual event description (e.g., “unanticipated benefit -  sleeping 
longer”).   
  All AEs will be evaluated for the following three criteria: relatedness to study 
drug, expectedness, and seriousness.  An AE will be considered serious if it results in any of the criteria below (regardless of whether it is deemed study drug related) : 
(a) Life-threatening condition with immediate risk of death within the context of 
a patient’s event (i.e., a well -tolerated bradyarrhythmia is not an SAE, 
whereas the same rhythm resulting in cardiac arrest and CPR is an SAE)  
(b) Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
(c) Persistent or significant incapacitation or substantial dis ruption of the ability 
to conduct normal life func tions  
(d) Significant hazard, contraindication, or side effect according to the PI  
(e) Any breech in the confidentiality of patient’s data  
(f) Investigators will determine whether an AE is related to stu dy drug based on 
a temporal relationship to administration, as well as whether the event is unanticipated and unexplained given clinical course, previous conditions, and concomitant medications.  
[2] All AEs that are (1) suspected to be study drug related, (2) unexpected, and  (3) meet 
any of the following seriousness criteria must be reported as Suspected Unexpected 
Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) : 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  31 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 (a) Death  
(b) A life -threatening episode requiring i mmediate intervention  
(c) An event resulting in hospitalization or that prolongs existing hospitalization  
(d) Events resulting in persistent or significant incapacitation or disability  
(e) An episode that requires intervention to prevent the above and/or permanent 
impairment or damage  
[3] Unanticipated problems (UPs)  are defined as any incident, experience, or outcome 
that meets all of the following criteria:  unexpected , related or possibly related to 
participation in the research; and suggest that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of harm than was previously known or recognized. UPs may result in adverse events and they may not. Protocol noncompliance that results in harm to a patient would be both a UP and AE whereas protocol noncompliance that increased risk to a patient but did not result in harm would only be classified as a UP that increased risk.   
 
9.3 Communication and Reporting of Adverse Events  and Unexpected Problems with 
Coordinating Center and Regulatory Bodies. In order to ensure proper and timely reporting 
of all AEs and UPs , there will be a clear communication plan for all sites to follow. Sites will be 
responsible for reporting all AEs and UP s that increased risk to patients  to the VCC ; they will 
also follow their local IRB policies to determine when AEs and UPs  should be reported to the 
local IRB . The VCC will be responsible for reporting the events to the proper regulatory bodies 
(i.e., FDA, NIH, DSMB, and Coordinating Center IRB) in a timely manner and in 
communicating any responses from those bodies back to the sites. The  procedures for reporting 
the various events will be as follows:  
[1] SUSARs . In the event that a SUSAR occurs the study drug should be permanently 
discontinued immediately .  The event will be recorded in the patient’s study chart in 
the electronic database. All SUSARs will be reported to the VCC within 24 hours of 
occurrence by telephone call. As required , VCC will report the event within 48 hours 
to the DSMB Chair . The DSMB report will be due and sent to the Vanderbilt IRB 
and NIH within 7 days . When the DSMB Chair/DSMB  suspects an event is study -
drug related, they will have the opportunity to access unblinded data in order to conduct appropriate safety monitoring. There should be no need for the site investigators to be unblinded since the study drug should have been stopped at the time of event occurrence per titrating rules of the study protocol. The DSMB Cha ir 
will work in concert with the rest of the DSMB to determine if any necessary actions need to occur as result of the event in order to increase the safety of the protocol. If 
the Data Safety Monitor or the DSMB suspect an imbalance between the SUSARs in the study groups, they will have the right to convene a full DSMB meeting and have access to other supporting data to determine safety and ongoing conduct of the study, without having to wait for the set meetings annually  and N= 236 as discussed in 
9.5.3. 
[2] UPs. All suspected UPs that possibly increase the risk to patients will be recorded in 
the patient’s study chart in the electronic database, reported to the site IRB within 5 days of occurrence,  and reported to the VCC within 5 days of occurrence.  Any of 
these reports that the site IRB determines to meet the OHRP definition of UP and thus the requirement for reporting to the OHRP, will subsequently be reported by  
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  32 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 the VCC to the DSMB within 15 days of receipt of the site IRB notification and to 
the NIH  within 30 days of receipt  of the site IRB notification .  
[3] All remaining  AEs  (i.e., AEs that are not SUSARS or UPs) will be recorded in the 
patient’s study chart in the electronic database and reported to the VCC within 5 
days of occurrence. As required , the VCC will provide a batched report of all study 
wide AEs annually to each regulatory body as part of the annual review process.  
9.4 Data Monitoring Plan . To ensure data is accurately and completely collected during 
the MENDS II study, the VCC will follow a specific Data Monitoring Plan modeled after the FDA’s guidelines for the monitoring of clinical investigations. Once each year, a VCC member will visit ea ch study site to assure that the facilities continue to be acceptable for the purpose of 
the study, the study protocol is being followed, changes to the protocol have been approved by the local IRB, and the site investigator is carrying out the agreed -upon activities and has not 
delegated them to other unspecified staff. Also, the monitor will review subject records to determine whether data collected is accurate, complete, and current. Per the FDA guidelines, the monitor will compare a representative numbe r of subject records and other supporting 
documents with the investigator’s reports. Specifically, site visits will include the following:  
[1] A Technical Review  will occur annually and will consist of a VCC research nurse 
examining the quality and accurac y of data, regulatory documents and drug 
accountability. Data quality and accuracy  will be reviewed through a CRF data and 
source document review. The monitor will randomly select three subjects (or 10% of the subjects enrolled since the last site visit, if more than 30 were enrolled in that time) to serve as a representative sample. Regulatory Document Review  will consist 
of a review of IRB approvals, informed consents, critical documents, and protocols/amendments.  
[2] A Scientific Review  will occur at th e discretion of the VCC as needed  and could 
consist of presentations by the site staff on their organizational structure, patient recruitment, and staff training, and quality control procedures. The site monitoring team will include a VCC research nurse as  well as the MENDS II Principal or Co -
Investigator (alternating).   
The s ite monitoring reports from these reviews will be submitted to the DSMB and other 
regulatory bodies (IRB, FDA and NIH) as requested and/or required. Data accuracy reports (including si te comparisons) as well as site monitoring updates will be presented to the VCC. 
This Monitoring Plan will serve as a method for identifying systematic problems and provide a means in which to institute resolution and follow -up and therefore increase data quality.  
 
9.5 Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
 
9.5.1 Membership . The DSMB will include 5 independent members (3 members will 
constitute a quorum) who are not study investigators and have no financial, scientific, or other 
conflict of interest with the trial; written documentation attesting to absence of conflict of interest will be required. P otential members will be chosen by the MENDS II steering 
committee and study PI in discussion with the NHLBI Program Official. The PI will recommend experts/representatives from the following fields as potential members of the DSMB: critical care medicine,  ethics , clinical trial methodology, and biostatistics . A 
chairperson will be selected  and will be responsible for overseeing meetings, developing 
agendas in consultation with the PI, and being the contact person for the DSMB. 
 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  33 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 9.5.2 Initial Meeting . Prior to the initiation of the trial, the DSMB will meet and review the 
entire IRB -approved study protocol with regard to subject safety, recruitment, randomization, 
intervention, data management, quality control and analysis. If the protocol is  deemed 
satisfactory by the DSMB, they will recommend to the VCC that subject recruitment begin. If, 
alternatively, modifications to the protocol or other study documents are needed, the DSMB will recommend such modifications and postpone its recommendation to begin recruitment. This initial meeting may occur via conference call or in person and will begin with an introduction by the PI and VCC Co- Investigator, then continue as a closed session, including 
only DSMB members and (if available) NHLBI program staff.  
 
9.5.3 Additional Meetings . The DSMB is responsible for identifying problems related to 
safety (including all AEs/SUSARs), requesting additional data relevant to safety (including all 
AEs/SUSARs), proposing analyses of safety endpoints as needed, and considering the rationale 
for continuation of the study in light of safety data, progress of randomization, retention, 
protocol adherence, and data management. After the initial meeting, the DSMB will meet at the 
end of each calendar year for annual safety reviews and  also at the specified interim analyses (at 
N=236, see section 11.4, for detailed description) . Reports of AEs and SUSARs for the interim 
look at the data will initially be provided to the DSMB in a blinded fashion (i.e., treatment 
group assignment will not be revealed), but the DSMB will retain the right to request an 
unblinded report. Only DSMB members will have access to unblinded data in order to preserve 
the integrity of data and minimize potential for bias while maintaining appropriate safety 
monitori ng. After each DSMB meeting, the chairperson will provide a written report to the 
VCC and the NHLBI program official. In addition, the VCC, in turn, will provide the reports to 
the Vanderbilt University IRB and to all sites for submission to their local IR Bs. 
 10.0 Study Withdrawal / Discontinuation.  Subjects may be withdrawn from study 
participation at the discretion of the investigator or if the patient/family or attending physician requests that the subject be withdrawn.  The reason and date of every wi thdrawal will be 
recorded.  
The Informed Consent Document will notify participants that their participation is 
voluntary, and they can tell the study staff at any time if they decide to stop participating. In 
addition, if they choose to withdraw their auth orization for study staff to access protected health 
information (PHI) in the medical record, they may do so by notifying study staff in writing (the 
address is provided). If a participant chooses to no longer participate but does not notify study staff 
that they withdraw authorization for access to PHI, their medical record may be accessed to obtain 
outcomes and safety data. Follow -up will be performed for all discontinuations due to an SAE or 
other safety concern until resolution, until deemed chronic and stable, or as long as clinically 
appropriate. Data and specimen destruction will be over seen by the Vanderbilt Coordinating Center for patients that withdraw from the study and want to have their data and specimens destroyed.   
 
11.0 Statistical Considerations  
 
11.1 Power analyses and sample size calculations for Aim 1A (DCFDs) . Based on the 
demographic data from our NIH -sponsored BRAIN -ICU cohort, we anticipate patients in the 
MENDS  II control group will have a mean±SD of 6.8±5.2 DCF Ds during the 14- day study 
period. The study has been repowered/resized due to concerns about the feasibility of 
completing study enrollment. With  approval from the DSMB, we will randomize at least 210 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  34 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 patients in each group to receive study drug , and with a 2 -sided alpha of 0.05, we will have 85% 
power to demonstrate a difference of 1.5 DCFDs between dexmedetomidine and propofol 
(primary outcome), which we believe has face validity as a clinically meaningful difference in 
the duration of acute br ain injury . Importantly, this sample size will also provide 80%  power 
to detect a 12% absolute improvement in 90 -day survival with dexmedetomidine , assuming 
the 90- day mortality  in patients receiving propofol to be 30% (which is conservative given the 
25% mortality at 28 days in the both the recent PROWESS -Shock control group and MENDS 
lorazepam group). The ability to detect a 12% improvement in 90- days mortality is also realistic 
given the  25% absolute reduction in mortality at 28 days in the MENDS septic subgroup with 
dexmedetomidine. In order to achieve this sample size of at least 420 patients enrolled, 
randomized and receiving study drug , we will randomize approximately 440 in order to account 
for disqualifications post randomization. 
  
11.2 Power Analyses for Long- Term Cognitive Impairment (Aim 2B) . We expect to 
follow > 80% of survivors for evaluation of LTCI. Based on the expected mortality rates (see 
above), we expect an overall 25% m ortality across the two  groups and plan to test 252 
(=420x0 .75x0.80) patients for LTCI at 6 months. With 252 patients, we will have up to 17 
degrees of freedom in our multivariable linear regression to account for potential confounders. The proposed study will have adequate—indeed abundant —ability to assess the independent 
effect of the intervention on cognitive impairment while controlling for confounders.  
 11.3 Data Analysis Plan . To determine the effect of the two  sedative regimens on DCFDs 
and other continuous outcomes, we will use the Mann- Whitney test (Wilcoxon rank -sum tests). 
For ICU LOS, and 90- day mortality, Kaplan -Meier curves and log -rank test will be used, while 
censoring patients at time of death. We will perform sensitivity analyses using multivariable regression to adjust for imbalances in baseline factors; linear regression will be used for DCFDs and Cox regression for time -to-event outcomes (ICU LOS, mortality). Proportionality 
assumptions for Cox regression will be assessed using partial re sidual plots. No adjustments 
will be made for multiple comparisons when examining secondary outcomes in keeping with authoritative recommendations
188-190 and standard practice in analyzing multiple, prospectively 
defined outcomes i n a trial.  
 11.4 Interim Examination of Results by DSMB . In addition to the final analysis of 420 
randomized patients  who received study drug , we plan yearly safety reviews and t hen one 
interim analysis at 300 patients by the DSMB. The yearly safety reviews will only review protocol compliance, collated adverse event reporting, selected outcomes (excluding the primary outcome) and quality control. At N= 236 patients (~ 118 patients per group), we will 
conduct data analysis for early stopping due to safety and efficacy based on DCFDs and 
mortality outcomes. U sing the O’Brien -Fleming method
191, 192 (adjusting for two  planned 
analyses at N=236 and 420) with a 2 -sided significance level at 5 %, t he study will be stopped 
early if test statistics reach a critical value (standardized Z score) of ± 2.76 (corresponding to p-
value of 0.006) at the interim analysis of 236 patients. Statistical significance at the final 
analysis will be referred by a critical level of 1.976 or 2- sided significance level of 0.044.  
 
11.5 Intention -to-Treat (ITT) Principle and Missing Data . For all primary analyses, we 
will employ intention -to-treat (ITT) ( see section 4. 2.1).  When data cannot be collected, we will 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  35 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 impute  missing variables via  multiple imputation methods. For Aim 2B, missing data are 
common due to deaths and loss to follow -up.  While our team has a proven track record of 
achieving high follow -up we will carefully analyze whether particular baseline demographics 
are associated with missing evaluations of long -term testing among ICU survivors.   Loss due to 
deaths is not random and may be associated with more severe cognitive or functional deficits 
among those not tested, which will likely bias towards the null.  
 11.6 Statistical Meetings.  The VCC will work regularly with our statisticians at the ongoing 
weekly biostat istics  meetings. Final analyses will occur during the last 6 months of the study 
period, when monitoring, quality checks, data lock, archivin g and manuscript preparation will 
take place.  
 12.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
 
 At no time will we reveal subject identities in any manner, whether in presentation, 
description or publication of the research for scientific purposes.  All data obtained with subject 
or provider identifiers will be kept in locked file cabinets to ensure confidentiality, and all paper file contents will be shredded before disposal.  All subjects will be assigned a unique study number for use in the computer database, and all electronic data will be kept in password-protected computer files to ensure confid entiality.  All biological specimens (serum, plasma, 
and DNA samples), maintain for batched assay after trial completion, will be stored in a locked 
–80 °C freezer and labeled with date and study ID# only, without any patient identifiers.  These 
samples wi ll be accessible only to designated co -investigators.  Results of the specified 
laboratory tests will be maintained in a password -protected database to be accessed only by 
designated co -investigators.  
 Most data will be collected from medical records or di rect assessments and entered 
directly into the study database via electronic case report forms (eCRFs). Paper CRFs will be 
used for baseline dementia, quality of life, and follow -up neuropsychological battery (some 
require copyrighted forms). Once collected on paper, data will be directly entered into the database. The study will utilize a centralized database located on Vanderbilt’s secure R EDCap 
database system.  
 Access to the database will be secured by two layers of passwords:  First  the staff must 
acces s the trial based website and only then will they be able to access the link to the database 
via another password. Each study site will only have access to their local study patients’ data. 
Only the Coordinating Center will have access to all the patient d ata.   
 13.0 Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
13.1 Duration of Record Retention.   Information stored in the database will be stored for an 
indefinite period of time for future reference, including for use in subsequent data analyses.  
Throughout the study, all collected data will be entered directly in to the secure password -
protected web -based database.  
 13.2 Method for Indefinite Archival of Information .  Biological specimens will be stored 
for an indefinite period of time for use in future studies (as des cribed in the informed consent 
document).  Because genetic markers of risk for delirium and other study outcomes are not currently known, storage of specimens for later research use is required to advance this 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  36 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 knowledge of ICU delirium.  It is our hope tha t polymorphisms will eventually be identified that 
will help us better understand the pathogenesis of delirium and patients’ response (or lack 
thereof) to therapy.  When such information is available, it would be invaluable to have a bank of genetic samples available for testing that can be coupled with a comprehensive set of clinical data such as the database being co llected in this investigation.  
 
13.3     Timeline and Duration of Study.  As shown in Figure 7 , the study is planned to last 7 
years and recruit and randomize approximately 440 patients into the Interventional  Trial (i.e., 
clinical trial). We will begin with a 6 -month start -up, during which the VCC will continue to 
work diligently with each site through weekly calls, start -up meetings, and the ongoing 
processes with regulatory authorities (e.g., NIH, FDA, DSMB, and IRBs) to solidify infrastructure and begin enrollment. Recruitment will be completed over 60 -66 months with an 
additional 6 months of follow -up; each site is expected to consent and randomize approximately 
25 patients per year.  During recruitment and testing, VCC will diligently monitor data 
collection (see section 9.4),  conduct data cleaning, conference calls, in -person meetings with 
study personnel at all sites to ensure compliance , and overall efficiency of study 
implementation. We will also work regularly with our statisticians to execute the planned analyses. 
The final analyses will occur during the last 6 months of the study period, when monitoring, quality 
checks, archiving and manuscript preparation will take place.   
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  37 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 14.0 References  
 
Reference List  
 
 (1)  Angus D, Musthafa AA, Clermonte G et al. Quality -adjusted survival in the first year 
after the acute respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med  
2001;163:1389- 94. 
 (2)  Angus DC, Linde -Zwirble WT, Clermonte G, Carcillo J, Pinsky MR. Epidemiology of 
severe sepsis in the United States: analysis of incidence, outcome, and associated costs 
of care. Crit Care Med  2001;29:1303- 10. 
 (3)  Bernard GR, Ely EW, Wright TJ et al. Safety and dose relationship of recombinant human activated protein C for coagulopathy in severe sepsis. Crit Care Med  
2001;29:2051- 9. 
 (4)  Esteban A, Anzueto A, Frutos F et al. Characteristics and outcomes in adult patients receiving mechanical ventilation: a 28 -day international study. JAMA  2002;287:345- 55. 
 (5)  Herridge MS, Cheung AM, Tansey CM et al. One -year outcomes in survivors of the 
acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med  2003;34:683- 93. 
 (6)  Herridge MS, Tansey CM, Matte AL, Al -Saidi F, Cheung AM, McAndrews MP. Five 
year neuropsychological outcomes in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) survivors. Proceedings of the American Thoracic Society  2006;A571.  
 (7)  Iwashyna TJ, Ely EW, Smith D S, Langa KM. Long -term Cognitive Impairment and 
Functional Disability Among Survivors of Severe Sepsis. JAMA  2010;304(16):1787- 94. 
 (8)  Hopkins RO, Weaver LK, Pope D, Orme JF, Bigler ED, Larson -Lohr V. 
Neuropsychological sequelae and impaired health statu s in survivors of severe acute 
respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med  1999;160:50- 6. 
 (9)  Hopkins RO, Weaver LK, Collingridge D, Parkinson RB, Chan KJ, Orme JF, Jr. Two-Year Cognitive, Emotional, and Quality -of-Life Outcomes in Acute Res piratory Distress 
Syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med  2005 February 15;171(4):340- 7. 
 (10)  Ely EW, Margolin R, Francis J et al. Evaluation of delirium in critically ill patients: validation of the Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (C AM-
ICU). Crit Care Med  2001 July;29(7):1370- 9. 
 (11)  Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR et al. Delirium in mechanically ventilated patients: validity and reliability of the confusion assessment method for the intensive care unit (CAM -ICU). JAMA  2001;286:2703- 10. 
 (12)  Pandharipande P, Cotton BA, Shintani A et al. Prevalence and risk factors for development of delirium in surgical and trauma intensive care unit patients. J Trauma 
2008 July;65(1):34- 41. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  38 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (13)  Pandharipande PP, Pun BT, Herr DL et al. Effect of s edation with dexmedetomidine vs 
lorazepam on acute brain dysfunction in mechanically ventilated patients: the MENDS 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA  2007 December 12;298(22):2644- 53. 
 (14)  Dellinger RP, Carlet JM, Masur H et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign  guidelines for 
management of severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med  2004 March;32(3):858-
73. 
 (15)  Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Carlet JM et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2008. Crit Care Med  2008 
January;36(1):296 -327. 
 (16)  Angstwurm MW, Engelmann L, Zimmermann T et al. Selenium in Intensive Care (SIC): results of a prospective randomized, placebo- controlled, multiple -center study in 
patients with severe systemic inflammatory response syndrome, sepsis, and septic shock. Crit Care Med  2007 January;35(1):118- 26. 
 (17)  Angus DC, Birmingham MC, Balk RA et al. E5 Murine monoclonal antiendotoxin antibody in gram -negative sepsis. JAMA  2000;283:1723- 30. 
 (18)  Bernard GR, Vincent JL, Laterre PF et al. Efficacy and safety of recombinant human activated protein C for severe sepsis. N Engl J Med 2001 March 8;344(10):699- 709. 
 (19)  Eisele B, Lamy M, Thijs LG et al. Antithrombin III in patients with severe sepsis:  a randomized, placebo- controlled, double -blind multicenter trial plus a meta -analysis on 
all randomized, placebo- controlled, double -blind trials with antithrombin III in severe 
sepsis. Intensive Care Med  1998;24:663- 72. 
 (20)  Reinhart K, Menges T, Gardlund B et al. Randomized, placebo- controlled trial of the 
anti-tumor necrosis factor antibody fragment afelimomab in hyperinflammatory 
response during severe sepsis: The RAMSES study. Crit Care Med  2001;29:765- 9. 
 (21)  Rice TW, Wheeler AP, Morris PE et al. S afety and efficacy of affinity -purified, anti -
tumor necrosis factor -alpha, ovine fab for injection (CytoFab) in severe sepsis*. Crit 
Care Med  2006 June 27. 
 (22)  Sprung CL, Annane D, Keh D et al. Hydrocortisone therapy for patients with septic shock. N En gl J Med  2008 January 10;358(2):111 -24. 
 (23)  Abraham E, Reinhart K, Opal S et al. Efficacy and safety of tigacogin (recombinant tissue factor pathway inhibitor) in severe sepsis : a randomized controlled trial. JAMA  
2003;290:238- 47. 
 (24)  Kollef MH, Lev y NT, Ahrens TS, Schaiff R, Prentice D, Sherman G. The use of 
continuous i.v. sedation is associated with prolongation of mechanical ventilation. Chest  
1998 August;114(2):541- 8. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  39 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (25)  Lat I, McMillian W, Taylor S et al. The impact of delirium on clinical outcomes in 
mechanically ventilated surgical and trauma patients. Crit Care Med  2009 
June;37(6):1898- 905. 
 (26)  Ouimet S, Kavanagh BP, Gottfried SB, Skrobik Y. Incidence, risk factors and consequences of ICU delirium. Intensive Care Med  2007 January;33(1) :66-73. 
 (27)  Pandharipande P, Shintani A, Peterson J et al. Lorazepam is an independent risk factor for transitioning to delirium in intensive care unit patients. Anesthesiology  2006 
January;104(1):21 -6. 
 (28)  Girard TD, Kress JP, Fuchs BD et al. Effica cy and safety of a paired sedation and 
ventilator weaning protocol for mechanically ventilated patients in intensive care (Awakening and Breathing Controlled trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet  2008 
January 12;371(9607):126- 34. 
 (29)  Kress JP, P ohlman AS, O'Connor MF, Hall JB. Daily interruption of sedative infusions 
in critically ill patients undergoing mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med  
2000;342:1471- 7. 
 (30)  Strom T, Martinussen T, Toft P. A protocol of no sedation for critically ill patients receiving mechanical ventilation: a randomised trial. Lancet  2010 February 
6;375(9713):475- 80. 
 (31)  Taniguchi T, Kanakura H, Yamamoto K. Effects of posttreatment with propofol on mortality and cytokine responses to endotoxin- induced shock in rats. Cri t Care Med  
2002 April;30(4):904- 7. 
 (32)  Taniguchi T, Kidani Y, Kanakura H, Takemoto Y, Yamamoto K. Effects of dexmedetomidine on mortality rate and inflammatory responses to endotoxin- induced 
shock in rats. Crit Care Med  2004 June;32(6):1322- 6. 
 (33)  Taniguchi T, Kurita A, Kobayashi K, Yamamoto K, Inaba H. Dose - and time -related 
effects of dexmedetomidine on mortality and inflammatory responses to endotoxin-induced shock in rats. J Anesth  2008;22(3):221- 8. 
 (34)  Sanders RD, Hussell T, Maze M. Sedation &  immunomodulation. Crit Care Clin  2009 
July;25(3):551- 70, ix. 
 (35)  Riker RR, Shehabi Y, Bokesch PM et al. Dexmedetomidine vs midazolam for sedation of critically ill patients: a randomized trial. JAMA  2009 February 4;301(5):489- 99. 
 (36)  Pandharipande P P, Sanders RD, Girard TD et al. Effect of dexmedetomidine versus 
lorazepam on outcome in patients with sepsis: an a priori -designed analysis of the 
MENDS randomized controlled trial. Crit Care  2010 March 16;14(2):R38.  
 (37)  Ely EW, Shintani A, Truman B et  al. Delirium as a predictor of mortality in 
mechanically ventilated patients in the intensive care unit. JAMA  2004;291:1753- 62. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  40 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (38)  Pisani MA, Kong SY, Kasl SV, Murphy TE, Araujo KL, Van Ness PH. Days of 
delirium are associated with 1 -year mortality in  an older intensive care unit population. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med  2009 December 1;180(11):1092- 7. 
 (39)  Shehabi Y, Riker RR, Bokesch PM, Wisemandle W, Shintani A, Ely EW. Delirium duration and mortality in lightly sedated, mechanically ventilated intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med  2010 September 9.  
 (40)  Carson SS, Kress JP, Rodgers JE et al. A randomized trial of intermittent lorazepam versus propofol with daily interruption in mechanically ventilated patients. Crit Care 
Med 2006 May;34(5):1326- 32. 
 (41)  Kress JP, O'Connor MF, Pohlman AS et al. Sedation of critically ill patients during mechanical  ventilation. A comparison of propofol and midazolam. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med  1996 March;153(3):1012- 8. 
 (42)  Shehabi Y, Grant P, Wolfenden H et al. Prevalence of Delirium with Dexmedetomidine Compared with Morphine Based Therapy after Cardiac Surgery: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial (DEXmedetomidine COmpared to Morphine -DEXCOM Study). 
Anesthesiology  2009 September 25.  
 (43)  Wunsch H, Kahn JM, Kramer AA, Rubenfeld GD. Use of intravenous infusion sedation among mechanically ventilated patients in the Unite d States. Crit Care Med  2009 
December;37(12):3031- 9. 
 (44)  Bhat R, Axtell R, Mitra A et al. Inhibitory role for GABA in autoimmune inflammation. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  2010 February 9;107(6):2580- 5. 
 (45)  Qiao H, Sanders RD, Ma D, Wu X, Maze M. Sedation improves early outcome in severely septic Sprague Dawley rats. Crit Care  2009;13(4):R136. 
 (46)  Kim SN, Son SC, Lee SM et al. Midazolam inhibits proinflammatory mediators in the lipopolysaccharide -activated  macrophage. Anesthesiology  2006 July;105(1):105- 10. 
 (47)  Wu GJ, Chen TL, Chang CC, Chen RM. Propofol suppresses tumor necrosis factor -
alpha biosynthesis in lipopolysaccharide -stimulated macrophages possibly through 
downregulation of nuclear factor -kappa  B-mediated toll- like receptor 4 gene expression. 
Chem Biol Interact  2009 August 14;180(3):465- 71. 
 (48)  Finnerty M, Marczynski TJ, Amirault HJ, Urbancic M, Andersen BR. Benzodiazepines inhibit neutrophil chemotaxis and superoxide production in a stimulus  dependent 
manner; PK -11195 antagonizes these effects. Immunopharmacology  1991 
November;22(3):185- 93. 
 (49)  Kelbel I, Koch T, Weber A, Schiefer HG, van AK, Neuhof H. Alterations of bacterial clearance induced by propofol. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1999 January;43(1):71 -6. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  41 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (50)  Maze M, Scarfini C, Cavaliere F. New agents for sedation in the intensive care unit. 
Critical Care Clinics  2001;17:881- 97. 
 (51)  Mirski MA, Lewin JJ, III, Ledroux S et al. Cognitive improvement during continuous sedation in critically ill, awake and responsive patients: the Acute Neurological ICU Sedation Trial (ANIST). Intensive Care Med  2010 September;36(9):1505- 13. 
 (52)  Venn RM, Karol MD, Grounds RM. Pharmacokinetics of dexmedetomidine infusions for sedation of postoperative pat ients requiring intensive caret. Br J Anaesth  2002 
May;88(5):669- 75. 
 (53)  Barr J, Egan TD, Sandoval NF et al. Propofol dosing regimens for ICU sedation based upon an integrated pharmacokinetic -pharmacodynamic model. Anesthesiology  2001 
August;95(2):324- 33. 
 (54)  Venn RM, Hell J, Grounds RM. Respiratory effects of dexmedetomidine in the surgical patient requiring intensive care. Crit Care  2000;4(5):302- 8. 
 (55)  Venn RM, Bryant A, Hall GM, Grounds RM. Effects of dexmedetomidine on adrenocortical function,  and the cardiovascular, endocrine and inflammatory responses 
in post -operative patients needing sedation in the intensive care unit. Br J Anaesth  2001 
May;86(5):650- 6. 
 (56)  Memis D, Hekimoglu S, Vatan I, Yandim T, Yuksel M, Sut N. Effects of midazolam and dexmedetomidine on inflammatory responses and gastric intramucosal pH to sepsis, 
in critically ill patients. Br J Anaesth  2007 April;98(4):550- 2. 
 (57)  Hsu DZ, Liu MY. Bicuculline methiodide attenuates hepatic injury and decreases mortality in septic r ats: role of cytokines. Shock  2004 October;22(4):347- 50. 
 (58)  Lubick K, Radke M, Jutila M. Securinine, a GABAA receptor antagonist, enhances macrophage clearance of phase II C. burnetii: comparison with TLR agonists. J Leukoc Biol 2007 November;82(5):1062- 9. 
 (59)  Sanders RD, Ma D, Hossain M, Maze M. Dexmedetomodine is Neuroprotective Against Wortmannin and Staurosporine -Induced Apoptosis In Vitro. ASA Abstract 2004 
2004;A778. 
 (60)  Hotchkiss RS, Karl IE. The pathopysiology and treatment of sepsis. N En gl J Med  
2003;348:138- 50. 
 (61)  Nelson LE, Guo TZ, Lu J, Saper CB, Franks NP, Maze M. The sedative component of anesthesia is mediated by GABA(A) receptors in an endogenous sleep pathway. Nat Neurosci  2002 October;5(10):979- 84. 
 (62)  Nelson LE, Lu J, Guo T, Saper CB, Franks NP, Maze M. The α
2-adrenoceptor agonist 
dexmedetomidine converges on an endogenous sleep- promoting pathway to exert its 
sedative effects. Anesthesiology  2003 February;98(2):428- 36. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  42 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (63)  Tung A, Lynch JP, Mendelson WB. Prolonged sedation with propofol in the rat does not 
result in sleep deprivation. Anesth Analg 2001 May;92(5):1232 -6. 
 (64)  Angus DC, Barnato AE, Linde -Zwirble WT et al. Use of intensive care at the end of life 
in the United States: an epidemiologic study. Crit Care Med  2004 March;32(3):638- 43. 
 (65)  Angus DC, Kelley MA, Schmitz RJ, White A, Popovich J, Jr. Caring for the critically ill patient. Current and projected workforce requirements for care of the critically ill and patients with pulmonary di sease: can we meet the requirements of an aging population? 
JAMA  2000 December 6;284(21):2762- 70. 
 (66)  National Research Council Committee on Future Directions for Cognitive Research on Aging. The Aging Mind: Opportunities in Cognitive Research. Washingt on, D.C.: 
National Academy Press; 2000.  
 (67)  Adhikari NK, Fowler RA, Bhagwanjee S, Rubenfeld GD. Critical care and the global burden of critical illness in adults. Lancet  2010 October 16;376(9749):1339 -46. 
 (68)  Ware LB, Matthay M. The acute respiratory  distress syndrome. N Engl J Med  
2000;342:1334- 49. 
 (69)  Sharshar T, Hopkinson NS, Orlikowski D, Annane D. Science review:  the brain in sepsis -  culprit and victim. Critical Care Forum  2004;8:Published online.  
 (70)  Sharshar T, Polito A, Checinski A, St evens RD. Septic -associated encephalopathy --
everything starts at a microlevel. Crit Care  2010;14(5):199. 
 (71)  Annane D. Sepsis -associated delirium: the pro and con of C5a blockade. Crit Care  2009 
April 22;13(2):135. 
 (72)  Woiciechowsky C, Asudullah K, Nestler D et al. Sympathetic activation triggers systemic interleukin -10 release in immunodepression induced brain injury. Nat Med  
1998;4:808- 13. 
 (73)  Woiciechowsky C, Schoening B, Daberkow N et al. Brain IL -1 beta induces l ocal 
inflammation but systemic anti- inflammatory response through stimulation of both 
hypothalamic -pituitary -adrenal axis and sympathetic nervous system. Brain Research  
1999;816:563- 71. 
 (74)  Annane D, Aegerter P, Jars -Guincestre MC, Guidet B. Current epi demiology of septic 
shock: the CUB -Rea Network. Am J Respir Crit Care Med  2003 July 15;168(2):165- 72. 
 (75)  Phua J, Baldia JR, Adhikari NKJ et al. Has Mortality from Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Decreased over Time? A Systemic Review. Am J Respir C rit Care Med  
2009;179:220- 7. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  43 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (76)  Morandi A, Pandharipande P, Trabucchi M et al. Understanding international 
differences in terminology for delirium and other types of acute brain dysfunction in critically ill patients. Intensive Care Med  2008 June 18;34:1907- 15. 
 (77)  Milbrandt E, Deppen S, Harrison P et al. Costs associated with delirium in mechanically ventilated patients. Crit Care Med  2004;32:955- 62. 
 (78)  Lin SM, Liu CY, Wang CH et al. The impact of delirium on the survival of mechanically ventila ted patients. Crit Care Med  2004;32:2254- 9. 
 (79)  Ely EW, Gautam S, Margolin R et al. The impact of delirium in the intensive care unit on hospital length of stay. Intensive Care Med  2001;27:1892- 900. 
 (80)  Jackson JC, Hart RP, Gordon SM et al. Six -month  neuropsychological outcome of 
medical intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med  2003;31:1226- 34. 
 (81)  Hopkins RO, Jackson JC. Assessing neurocognitive outcomes after critical illness: are delirium and long -term cognitive impairments related? Curr Opin Crit Care  
2006;12:388- 94. 
 (82)  Girard TD, Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP et al. Delirium as a predictor of long -term 
cognitive impairment in survivors of critical illness. Crit Care Med  2010 
July;38(7):1513- 20. 
 (83)  Jackson JC, Gordon SM, Hart RP, Hopkins RO, Ely EW. The association between delirium and cognitive decline: a review of the empirical literature. Neuropsychol Rev 
2004 June;14(2):87- 98. 
 (84)  Ehlenbach WJ, Hough CL, Crane PK et al. Association Between Acute Care and Critical Illness Hospitalization and Cognitive Function in Older Adults. JAMA  2010;303(8):763-
70. 
 (85)  Van den BG, Wilmer A, Hermans G et al. Intensive insulin therapy in the medical ICU. N Engl J Med  2006 February 2;354(5):449- 61. 
 (86)  Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S et al. Early goal -directed therapy in the treatment of 
severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med  2001;345:1368- 77. 
 (87)  Brower RG, Lanken PN, MacIntyre N et al. Higher versus lower positive end- expiratory 
pressures in patien ts with the acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med  2004 
July 22;351(4):327- 36. 
 (88)  The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network. Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med  2000 May 4;342(18):1301- 8. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  44 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (89)  The National Heart Lung and Blood Institute ARDS Clinical Trials Network. Higher 
versus lower positive end -expiratory pressures in patients with the acute respiratory 
distress syndrome. N Engl J Med  2004 July 22;351(4):327- 36. 
 (90)  Annane D, Sebille V, Charpentier C et al. Effect of treatment with low doses of hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone on mortality in patients with septic shock. JAMA  
2002;288:862- 71. 
 (91)  Annane  D, Vignon P, Renault A et al. Norepinephrine plus dobutamine versus 
epinephrine alone for management of septic shock: a randomised trial. Lancet  2007 
August 25;370(9588):676- 84. 
 (92)  Hebert PC, Wells G, Blajchman MA et al. A multicenter, randomized, controlled clinical trial of transfusion requirements in critical care. N Engl J Med  1999 February 
11;340(6):409- 17. 
 (93)  Jacobi J, Fraser GL, Coursin DB et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the sustained use of sedatives and analgesics in the critically  ill adult. Crit Care Med  2002;30:119- 41. 
 (94)  Watson PL, Shintani A, Tyson R, Pandharipande P, Pun B, Ely EW. Presence of EEG Burst Suppression in Critically Ill Patients is Associated with Increased Mortality. Criti Care Med  2008;IN PRESS.  
 (95)  Agarw al V, O'neill PJ, Cotton BA et al. Prevalence and Risk Factors for Development of 
Delirium in Burn Intensive Care Unit Patients. J Burn Care Res  2010 July 19; Jul 19. 
[Epub ahead of print]. 
 (96)  Girard TD, Pandharipande PP, Ely EW. Delirium in the intens ive care unit. Crit Care  
2008;12 Suppl 3:S3.  
 (97)  Perry VH, Andersson B, Gordon S. Macrophages and inflammation in the central nervous system. Trends Neurosci  1993;16:268- 73. 
 (98)  Rothwell NJ, Luheshi G, Toulmond S. Cytokines and their receptors in the central nervous system: physiology, pharmacology and pathology. Pharmacol Ther  1996;69:85-
95. 
 (99)  Rosas -Ballina M, Tracey KJ. Cholinergic control of inflammation. J Intern Med  2009 
June;265(6):663- 79. 
 (100)  Tracey KJ. The inflammatory reflex. Nature  2002 December 19;420(6917):853- 9. 
 (101)  Laschi A, Descotes J, Tachon P, Evreux JC. Adverse influence of diazepam upon resistance to Klebsiella pneumoniae infection in mice. Toxicol L ett 1983 May;16(3 -
4):281- 4. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  45 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (102)  Domingues -Junior M, Pinheiro SR, Guerra JL, Palermo- Neto J. Effects of treatment 
with amphetamine and diazepam on Mycobacterium bovis -induced infection in 
hamsters. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol  2000 August;22(3):555- 74. 
 (103)  Hall RI, Sandham D, Cardinal P et al. Propofol vs midazolam for ICU sedation : a 
Canadian multicenter randomized trial. Chest  2001 April;119(4):1151- 9. 
 (104)  Talke P, Li J, Jain U et al. Effects of perioperative dexmedetomidine infusion in patie nts 
undergoing vascular surgery. The Study of Perioperative Ischemia Research Group. Anesthesiology  1995 March;82(3):620- 33. 
 (105)  Talke P, Chen R, Thomas B et al. The hemodynamic and adrenergic effects of perioperative dexmedetomidine infusion after vascular surgery. Anesth Analg 2000 April;90(4):834- 9. 
 (106)  Tang J, Sun Y, Wu WK et al. Propofol lowers serum PF4 level and partially  corrects 
hypercoagulopathy in endotoxemic rats. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010 September;1804(9):1895 -901. 
 (107)  Chu CH, David LD, Hsu YH, Lee KC, Chen HI. Propofol exerts protective effects on the acute lung injury induced by endotoxin in rats. Pulm Pharmac ol Ther  
2007;20(5):503- 12. 
 (108)  Helmy SA, Al -Attiyah RJ. The immunomodulatory effects of prolonged intravenous 
infusion of propofol versus midazolam in critically ill surgical patients. Anaesthesia  
2001 January;56(1):4 -8. 
 (109)  Krumholz W, Endrass J, Hempelmann G. Propofol inhibits phagocytosis and killing of 
Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli by polymorphonuclear leukocytes in vitro. Can J Anaesth 1994 May;41(5 Pt 1):446- 9. 
 (110)  Mikawa K, Akamatsu H, Nishina K et al. Propofol inhibits human neutrophil functions. Anesth Analg 1998 September;87(3):695- 700. 
 (111)  Heller A, Heller S, Blecken S, Urbaschek R, Koch T. Effects of intravenous anesthetics on bacterial elimination in human blood in vitro. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1998 
May;42(5):518- 26. 
 (112)  Nishina K, Akamatsu H, Mikawa K et al. The effects of clonidine and dexmedetomidine on human neutrophil functions. Anesth Analg 1999 February;88(2):452 -8. 
 (113)  Vasile B, Rasulo F, Candiani A, Latronico N. The pathophysiology of propofol infusi on 
syndrome: a simple name for a complex syndrome. Intensive Care Med  2003 
October;29(9):1417 -25. 
 (114)  Schoenfeld DA, Bernard GR. Statistical evaluation of ventilator -free days as an efficacy 
measure in clinical trials of treatments for acute respirator y distress syndrome. Crit Care 
Med 2002 August;30(8):1772- 7. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  46 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (115)  Wheeler AP, Bernard GR, Thompson BT et al. Pulmonary -artery versus central venous 
catheter to guide treatment of acute lung injury. N Engl J Med  2006 May 
25;354(21):2213- 24. 
 (116)  Katz S, Ford AB, Moskowitz RW, Jackson BA, Jaffe MW. Studies of illness in the 
aged. The index of ADL: a standardized measure of biological and psychological function. JAMA  1963 September 21;185:914- 9. 
 (117)  Pfeffer RI, Kurosaki TT, Harrah CH, Jr., Chance JM, Filos S. Measurement of functional activities in older adults in the community. J Gerontol  1982 May;37(3):323-
9. 
 (118)  Christie JD, Biester RC, Taichman DB et al. Formation and validation of a telephone battery to assess cognitive function in acute resp iratory distress syndrome survivors. J 
Crit Care  2006 June;21(2):125- 32. 
 (119)  Pandharipande PP, Shintani AK, Hagerman HE et al. Derivation and validation of Spo2/Fio2 ratio to impute for Pao2/Fio2 ratio in the respiratory component of the Sequential Org an Failure Assessment score. Crit Care Med  2009 April;37(4):1317- 21. 
 (120)  Vincent JL, Mendonca Ad, Cantraine F et al. Use of the SOFA score to assess the incidence of organ dysfunction/failure in intensive care units: Results of a multicenter, prospecti ve study. Crit Care Med  1998;26:1793- 800. 
 (121)  Ferreira FL, Peres Bota D, Bross A, Melot C, Vincent JL. Serial evaluation of the SOFA score to predict outcome in critically ill patients. JAMA  2001;286:1754- 8. 
 (122)  Palevsky PM, Zhang JH, O'Connor TZ e t al. Intensity of renal support in critically ill 
patients with acute kidney injury. N Engl J Med  2008 July 3;359(1):7- 20. 
 (123)  Perroco TR, Damin AE, Frota NA et al. Short IQCODE as a screening tool for MCI and dementia: Preliminary Results. Dementia a nd Neuropsychologica 2008 
December;2(4):300 -4. 
 (124)  Holt R, Siddiqi N, Young J. The ethics of consent in delirium studies. J Psychosom Res  
2008 September;65(3):283- 7. 
 (125)  Davis N, Pohlman A, Gehlbach B et al. Improving the process of informed consent in the critically ill. JAMA  2003;289:1963- 8. 
 (126)  Jorm AF, Jacomb PA. The Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE): socio -demographic correlates,  reliability, validity and some norms. Psychol 
Med 1989 November;19(4):1015- 22. 
 (127)  Jorm AF, Scott R, Cullen JS, MacKinnon AJ. Performance of the Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE) as a screening test for dementia. Psy chological Medicine  1991;21:785- 90. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  47 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (128)  Jorm AF. A short form of the Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the 
Elderly (IQCODE): development and cross -validation. Psychol Med  1994 
February;24(1):145 -53. 
 (129)  Sessler CN, Gosnell MS, Grap MJ et al. The Richmond Agitation- Sedation Scale: 
validity and reliability in adult intensive care unit patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med  
2002 November 15;166(10):1338- 44. 
 (130)  Ely EW, Truman B, Shintani A et al. Monitoring  sedation status over time in ICU 
patients: reliability and validity of the Richmond Agitation -Sedation Scale (RASS). 
JAMA  2003;289:2983- 91. 
 (131)  Ely EW, Pun BT. The Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM -ICU) training 
manual. ICU Delirium and Cognitive Impairment Study Group Website  2005 April 
22;Available at: URL: http://www.icudelirium.org/docs/CAM_ICU_training.pdf . 
AccessedSeptember 20, 2006. 
 (132)  Venn RM, Newman PJ, Grounds RM. A phase II study to evaluate the efficacy of dexmedetomidine for sedation in the medical intensive care unit. Intensive Care Med  
2002. 
 (133)  Schweickert WD, Pohlman MC, Pohlman AS et al. Early physical and occupational therapy in mechanically venti lated, critically ill patients: a randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet  2009 May 30;373(9678):1874- 82. 
 (134)  King MS, Render ML, Ely EW, Watson PL. Liberation and Animation: Strategies to Minimize Brain Dysfunction in Critically Ill Patients. Semin Respir Crit Care Med  2010 
February;31(1):87 -96. 
 (135)  Girard TD, Kress JP, Fuchs BD, Bernard GR, Ely EW. "Wake up and breathe" for patients with respiratory failure -  Authors' reply. Lancet  2008 April 26;371(9622):1414-
5. 
 (136)  Girard TD. Wake up and breathe flowchart. ICU Delirium and Cognitive Impairment 
Study Group Website  2008;Available at: URL: 
http://www.icudelirium.org/docs/WakeUpAndBreathe.pdf
. AccessedJune 10, 2008. 
 (137)  Ely EW, B aker AM, Dunagan DP et al. Effect on the duration of mechanical ventilation 
of identifying patients capable of breathing spontaneously. N Engl J Med  
1996;335:1864- 9. 
 (138)  Pandharipande P, Cotton BA, Shintani A et al. Motoric subtypes of delirium in mech anically ventilated surgical and trauma intensive care unit patients. Intensive Care 
Med 2007 June 5;33(10):1726- 31. 
 (139)  Peterson JF, Pun BT, Dittus RS et al. Delirium and its motoric subtypes: a study of 614 critically ill patients. J Am Geriatr Soc  2006 March;54(3):479- 84. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  48 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (140)  Lundstrom M, Edlund A, Karlsson S, Brannstrom B, Bucht G, Gustafson Y. A 
multifactorial intervention program reduces the duration of delirium, length of hospitalization, and mortality in delirious patients. J Am Geriatr Soc  2005 
April;53(4):622- 8. 
 (141)  Vidan MT, Sanchez E, Alonso M, Montero B, Ortiz J, Serra JA. An Intervention Integrated into Daily Clinical Practice Reduces the Incidence of Delirium During Hospitalization in Elderly Patients. J Am Geriatr Soc  2009 September 15;57:2029- 36. 
 (142)  Milisen K, Lemiengre J, Braes T, Foreman MD. Multicomponent intervention strategies for managing delirium in hospitalized older people: systematic review. J Adv Nurs  2005 
October;52(1):79 -90. 
 (143)  Anderson D. Preventing delirium in older people. Br Med Bull  2005;73- 74:25- 34. 
 (144)  Rockwood K. Educational interventions in delirium. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 1999 September;10(5):426- 9. 
 (145)  Inouye SK, Bogardus ST, Jr., Baker DI, Leo- Summers L, Cooney LM, Jr. The Hospital 
Elder Life Program: a model of care to prevent cognitive and functional decline in older 
hospitalized patients. Hospital Elder Life Program. J Am Geriatr Soc  2000 
December;48(12):1697- 706. 
 (146)  Young J, Leentjens AF, George J, Olofsson B, Gustafson Y. Syst ematic approaches to 
the prevention and management of patients with delirium. J Psychosom Res  2008 
September;65(3):267- 72. 
 (147)  Pierre JS. Delirium: a process improvement approach to changing prescribing practices in a community teaching hospital. J Nurs Care Qual  2005 July;20(3):244- 50. 
 (148)  Tabet N, Howard R. Non -pharmacological interventions in the prevention of delirium. 
Age Ageing 2009 May 21. 
 (149)  Tabet N, Hudson S, Sweeney V et al. An educational intervention can prevent delirium on acute  medical wards. Age Ageing 2005 March;34(2):152- 6. 
 (150)  Inouye SK, Bogardus ST, Jr., Williams CS, Leo- Summers L, Agostini JV. The role of 
adherence on the effectiveness of nonpharmacologic interventions: evidence from the delirium prevention trial. Arch  Intern Med  2003 April 28;163(8):958- 64. 
 (151)  Inouye SK, Bogardus ST, Charpentier PA et al. A multicomponent intervention to prevent delirium in hospitalized older patients. N Engl J Med  1999;340:669- 76. 
 (152)  Marcantonio ER, Flacker JM, Wright RJ, Resnick NM. Reducing delirium after hip fracture: a randomized trial. JAGS  2001;(49):516- 22. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  49 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (153)  Pitkala KH, Laurila JV, Strandberg TE, Tilvis RS. Multicomponent geriatric 
intervention for elderly inpatients with delirium: a randomized, controlled trial. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  2006 February;61(2):176- 81. 
 (154)  Lynch EP, Lazor MA, Gellis JE, Orav J, Goldman L, Marcantonio ER. The impact of postoperative pain on the development of postoperative delirium. Ane sth Analg 1998 
April;86(4):781- 5. 
 (155)  Young J, Siffleet J, Nikoletti S, Shaw T. Use of a Behavioural Pain Scale to assess pain in ventilated, unconscious and/or sedated patients. Intensive Crit Care Nurs  2006 
February;22(1):32 -9. 
 (156)  Payen JF, Bru O, Bosson JL et al. Assessing pain in critically ill sedated patients by using a behavioral pain scale. Crit Care Med  2001 December;29(12):2258 -63. 
 (157)  Flinn DR, Diehl KM, Seyfried LS, Malani PN. Prevention, diagnosis, and management of postoperative delirium in older adults. J Am Coll Surg 2009 August;209(2):261- 8. 
 (158)  Riutta A, Ylitalo P, Kaukinen S. Diurnal variation of melatonin and cortisol is maintained in non- septic intensive care patients. Intensive Care Med  2009 
October;35(10):1720- 7. 
 (159)  Tembo AC, Parker V. Factors that impact on sleep in intensive care patients. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2009 December;25(6):314- 22. 
 (160)  Salas RE, Gamaldo CE. Adverse effects of sleep deprivation in the ICU. Crit Care Clin  
2008 July;24(3):461- vi. 
 (161)  Weinhouse GL, Schwab RJ. Sleep in the critically ill patient. Sleep  2006 May 
1;29(5):707- 16. 
 (162)  Bosma KJ, Ranieri VM. Filtering out the noise: evaluating the impact of noise and sound reduction strategies on sleep quality for ICU patients. Crit Car e 2009;13(3):151. 
 (163)  Xie H, Kang J, Mills GH. Clinical review: The impact of noise on patients' sleep and the effectiveness of noise reduction strategies in intensive care units. Crit Care  
2009;13(2):208. 
 (164)  Hopkins RO, Spuhler VJ. Strategies for  promoting early activity in critically ill 
mechanically ventilated patients. AACN Adv Crit Care  2009 July;20(3):277- 89. 
 (165)  Skrobik Y. Delirium prevention and treatment. Crit Care Clin  2009 July;25(3):585- 91, 
x. 
 (166)  Ely EW, Girard TD, Shintani AK et al. Apolipoprotein E4 polymorphism as a genetic predisposition to delirium in critically ill patients. Crit Care Med  2007 
January;35(1):112 -7. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  50 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (167)  van Munster BC, Korevaar JC, Zwinderman AH, Leeflang MM, de Rooij SE. The 
association between delirium  and the apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele: new study results 
and a meta- analysis. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2009 October;17(10):856- 62. 
 (168)  van Munster BC, Korevaar JC, de Rooij SE, Levi M, Zwinderman AH. The association between delirium and the apolipoprotein E &epsiv;4 allele in the elderly. Psychiatr Genet  2007 October;17(5):261- 6. 
 (169)  Beloosesky Y, Grinblat J, Pirotsky A, Weiss A, Hendel D. Different C -reactive protein 
kinetics in post -operative hip- fractured geriatric patients with and without 
complications. Gerontology  2004 July;50(4):216- 22. 
 (170)  Pfister D, Siegemund M, ll -Kuster S et al. Cerebral perfusion in sepsis -associated 
delirium. Crit Care  2008 May 5;12(3):R63. 
 (171)  Marshall JC. Such stuff as dreams are made on: mediator -directed therapy in sepsis. Nat 
Rev Drug Discov 2003 May;2(5):391- 405. 
 (172)  Annane D, Bellissant E, Cavaillon JM. Septic shock. Lancet  2005 January 
1;365(9453):63- 78. 
 (173)  Rivers EP, Kruse JA, J acobsen G et al. The influence of early hemodynamic 
optimization on biomarker patterns of severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med  
2007 September;35(9):2016- 24. 
 (174)  dib-Conquy M, Cavaillon JM. Compensatory anti -inflammatory response syndrome. 
Thromb Haemost  2009 January;101(1):36 -47. 
 (175)  Sunden- Cullberg J, Norrby -Teglund A, Treutiger CJ. The role of high mobility group 
box-1 protein in severe sepsis. Curr Opin Infect Dis  2006 June;19(3):231- 6. 
 (176)  Gibot S, Massin F, Cravoisy A et al. High -mobility group box 1 protein plasma 
concentrations during septic shock. Intensive Care Med  2007 August;33(8):1347- 53. 
 (177)  Hotchkiss RS, Swanson PE, Freeman BD et al. Apoptotic cell death in patients with sepsis, shock, and multiple organ dysfunction. Cr it Care Med  1999 July;27(7):1230- 51. 
 (178)  Kellum JA, Kong L, Fink MP et al. Understanding the inflammatory cytokine response in pneumonia and sepsis: results of the Genetic and Inflammatory Markers of Sepsis (GenIMS) Study. Arch Intern Med  2007 August 1 3;167(15):1655- 63. 
 (179)  Marcantonio ER, Michaels M, Resnick NM. Diagnosing delirium by telephone. J Gen Intern Med  1998;(13):621- 3. 
 (180)  Badia X, Diaz -Prieto A, Gorriz MT et al. Using the EuroQol -5D to measure changes in 
quality of life 12 months after discharge from an intensive care unit. Intensive Care Med  
2001;27:1901- 7. 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  51 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01  (181)  EuroQol Group. The EuroQoL - a new facility for the measur ement of health related 
quality of life. Health Policy  1990;16:199- 208. 
 (182)  Rabin R, de Charro F. EQ -5D: a measure of health status from the EuroQol Group. 
Annals of Medicine  2001;33(337):343. 
(183)  Keller S , Bann CM , Dodd SL , Schein J , Mendoza TR , Cleeland CS .Validity of the brief 
pain inventory for use in documenting the outcome s of patients with noncancer pain. 
Clin J Pain.  2004; 20(5):309- 18. 
 (184)  Charlson ME, Pompei P, Ales KL, MacKenzie CR. A new method of classifying 
prognostic comorbidity in longitudinal studies: development and validation. J Chron Dis  
1987;40(5):373- 83. 
 (185)  Knaus WA, Draper EA, Wagner DP, Zimmerman JE. APACHE II: a severity  of disease 
classification system. Crit Care Med  1985 October;13(10):818- 29. 
 (186)  Vincent JL, Moreno R, Takala J et al. The SOFA (Sepsis -related Organ Failure 
Assessment) score to describe organ dysfunction/failure. Intensive Care Med  1996 
July;22(7):707- 10. 
 (187)  Slutsky AS, Lavery JV. Data Safety and Monitoring Board. N Engl J Med  
2004;350:1143- 7. 
 (188)  Rothman KJ. No adjustments are needed for multiple comparisons. Epidemiology  1990 
January;1(1):43 -6. 
 (189)  Perneger TV. What's wrong with Bonferr oni adjustments. BMJ  1998 April 
18;316(7139):1236- 8. 
 (190)  Cook RJ, Farewell V. Multiplicity considerations in the design and analysis of clinical trials. J Roy Statist Soc A  1996;159:93- 110. 
 (191)  O'Brien PC, Fleming TR. A multiple testing procedure f or clinical trials. Biometrics  
1979 September;35(3):549- 56. 
 (192)  GroupSeq: Performing computations related to group sequential designs. [computer program]. Version R package version 1.3.1. 2009.  
 (193)   Breitbart W, Gibson C, Tremblay A. The delirium ex perience: delirium recall and 
delirium- related distress in hospitalized patients with cancer, their spouses/caregivers, 
and their nurses. Psychosomatics  2002; 43:183- 194. 
 (194)   Worek F, Schilha M, Neumaier K, Aurbek N, Wille T, Thiermann H, Kehe K. On- site 
analysis of acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase activity with the ChE check mobile test kit- Determination of reference values and their relevance for diagnosis of 
exposure to organophosphorus compounds. Toxicol Lett. 2016 May 13;249:22- 8. 
 
MENDS II Protocol Version: 1.12  Confidential  52 of 52 
Protocol Date:  2018- 10-01 (195)  Zivkovic AR , Schmidt K , Sigl A , Decker SO , Brenner T , Hofer S . Reduced serum 
butyrylcholinesterase activity indicates severe systemic inflammation in critically ill 
patients. Mediators Inflamm . 2015;2015:274607. 
 
(196)  Zivkovic AR , Bender J , Brenner T , Hofer S , Schmidt K . Reduced butyrylcholinesterase 
activity is an early indicator of trauma -induced acute systemic inflammatory response. J 
Inflamm Res . 2016 Nov 18;9:221- 230. 
 
  