 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 1 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  CMCVAMC SPECIFIC PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
Corporal Michael J. Crescenz Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center (CMCVAMC)  
Institutional Review Board (IRB)  
 
Instructions:  Click in box and start typing or click ‘choose an item’ and choose the applicable entry .  
NOTE:  If you are using a MAC, you may have difficulty with checkboxes and “choose an item” 
boxes.  
 
Section 1. General Information  
 
Protocol Title:   Incorporating  Veterans'  Preferences  into Lung  Cancer  Screening  Decisions - Phase  3  
 
CMC VAMC Pro tocol Version Number and Date:  Version  #8  03/03/2021    
 
Principal Investigator (PI) Name:  Marilyn  M. Schapira  
 
PI’s Academic Degree(s):    MD, MPH  
 
Is the study funded?    YES    If “yes”, specify f unding agency:  VA Health  Services  Research  & 
Development  Service  (HSR&D)  
 
Is a grant application requesting funds for  the study currently being reviewed ?    NO 
 
CMC VAMC is the only institution involved : NO 
 
CMC VAMC is the coordinating center in which the PI is the lead investigator : YES       If this 
answer is yes, complete the next two sections:  
➢ List the name(s) of the other site(s) involved .  West  Haven  VA Medical  Center  (WHVAMC)  
Milwaukee  VA Medical  Center  
➢ Provide the F ederal Wide Assurance (FWA)  numbers for each site .  WHVAMC  00001286 , 
Milwaukee  VAMC  00000289  
 
State name of coordinating center if this is not CMC VAMC.     n/a 
 
Describe PI’s qualifications to conduct this project and  attach a copy of PI’s VA or NIH 
biosketch.  Be specific in regard to PI’s research experience.  NOTE :  If PI does not have any prior 
research experience, indicate what provisions are being made to pro vide oversight or mentoring.   Dr. 
Schapira  is a Professor  at the University  of Pennsylvania  and the Center  for Health  Equity  Research  
Program  (CHERP)  at the Corporal  Michael  J. Crescenz  VA Medical  Center  (CMVAMC)  and co-Director  
of the Cancer  Control  Research  Program  the Abramson  Cancer  Center  at the University  of 
Pennsylvania  (Penn) . Her research  has focused  on risk communication  and medical  decision -making . 
Her work  has advanced  methods  of shared  decision -making  including  the measurement  of health  
numeracy,  communication  of risk and uncertainty,  and preference  assessment.  The clinical  context  of 
her research  has been  oncology,  encompassing  both screening  and treatment  decisions.  Her work  has 
been  trans -disciplinary,  reflecting  the discipline  of decision  science.  She collaborates  with experts  in 
clinical  medicine,  cognitive  and social  psychology,  economics,  education,  and biostatistics.  In work  
supported  by the NCI and the American  Cancer  Society,  she has developed  a theoretically  based  and 
cross-culturally  equivalent  measure  of health  numeracy  called  the Numeracy  Understanding  in Medicine  
Instrument  (NUMi).  The NUMi  is being  translated  into Spanish  and a Computer  Adaptive  Version  (CAT)  
version  has been  developed.  She is now conducting  a cohort  study to evaluate  the NUMi  as a screening  
test for health  numeracy  that can be used  in the clinical  setting  and communication  strategies  in the 
cancer  treatment  consultation.  Her work  has also focused  on evaluating  cancer  screening  paradigms  
from a populati on perspective.  Her focus  in the decision  sciences  is reflected  in my professional  
leadership  positions  including  past President  of the Society  for Medical  Decision -making  (SMDM)  and 
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 2 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  Associate  Editor  of Medical  Decision -making . She assembled  a trans -discip linary  team  (clinical  
medicine,  economics,  biostatistics,  human  factors  engineering,  and implementation  science)  to develop  
an innovative  decision  support  tool for Veterans  who are eligible  for and considering  lung cancer  
screening.  This project  builds  on her prior work  in preference  assessment  and shared  decision -making  
in the context  of cancer  care.  
 
Does any research staff member have an actual and/or perceived conflict of interest with this 
study?    NO         If yes, explain.         
 
Is this study a clinical trial?  YES         If yes, specify the type . Phase  3 
NOTE:  Only ‘applicable clinical trials’ must be registered on ClinicalTrials.gov.  The term ‘applicable 
clinical trial’ means an applicable drug clinical trial or an applicable device clinical trial.  Investigators 
might consider registering a ll other clinical t rials on ClinicalTrials.gov, if journals in which they publish 
studies require such registration prior to starting a trial . 
 
State the estimated length of time to complete enrollment of subjects.  24 Months  
 
State the expected duration of participation by individual subjects (including any follow -up, e.g., 
need to re -contact subject for fol low-up questions prior to closure of the study ). One Study  Visit;  
One 1-Month  Phone  Follow -Up and One 3-Month  Phone  Follow -Up     
 
Specify the projected date of completion of the study .   Phase  3 – March  2021 
 
Section 2:  Participating Site Specifications  
2.1. Where will the research project be cond ucted?  (Check all that apply)  
  VA Inpatient Setting  
   VA Outpatient Clinic /Office  
  
   VA Laboratories  
   Subject  Homes   
 
   University of Pennsylvania  
   Community Bas ed Outpatient Clinics  
                                                                                          (CBOCs)   
  (Gloucester, NJ, Saracini (Horsham, PA),  
   Cam den, NJ, Burlington, NJ , Fourth Street VA 
Clinic, Chestnut Street VA Clinic, West Philadelphia 
VA Clinic ) 
 
   Other (Specify) : WHVAMC  
 
2.2. If research is conducted at a non -VA site, please specify where and how much of the 
project will be conducted at that location .     
    Dr. Schapira  has an office  at Penn  and some  of the work  with coded  data may occur  at that 
office  through  a VPN connection  to VA Secure  Computers.  The office  number  1316  Blockley  and 
the location  is 423 Guardian  Drive,  Philadelphia,  PA, 19104.  The office  is located  in close  
proximity  to the CMCVAMC.  All interactions  with VA subjects  occur  at the VA. 
 
Section 3:  Introduction  
3.1. Provide scientific background and rationale for study.  Includ ing summary of gaps in 
current knowledge, relevant data, and how the study will add to existing knowledge.    
                Lung  cancer  is a significant  health  issue,  and especially  so within  the Veteran  population.  
Lung  cancer  is the top cause  of cancer -related  deaths,  and this risk is higher  for Veterans  because  of 
age and smoking  history  [1]. The majority  of lung cancer  prevention  has focused  on ending  smoking,  but 
a recent  study  that compared  low dose  computerized  tomography  scans  (LDCT)  to simple  chest -x-ray 
scans  saw a 20% decrease  in cancer  specific  mortality  rates  [2]. Following  additional  evidence  [3], the 
US Preventive  Services  Task  Force  and American  Cancer  Society,  along  with a number  of other  cancer  
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 3 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  preventative  organizations,  issued  guidelines  in favor  of annual  lung cancer  screenings  for older  people  
with a history  of smoking  [4-6]. However,  there  are concerns  that with more  screenings  an increase  in 
false  positives  and over diagnosis  will occur.  The effectiveness  of lung cancer  screening  may also vary 
by gender,  and initial  data suggests  some  Veterans  are reluctant  to enter  an intensive  screening  
process  [7]. As the Department  of Veteran  Affairs  expands  the paradigm  of lung cancer  control  to 
include  lung cancer  screening,  it is critical  to develop  and test decision  support  tools  that 1) educate  
Veterans  regarding  expected  outcomes,  2) incorporate  Veteran  preferences  and values  into the 
decision -making  process,  and 3) encourage  shared  decision -making  between  Veterans  and providers  
 
The VA method  of lung cancer  screening  is unique  in that it is designed  to increase  assessment  rates  
and support  among  Veterans.  Lung  canc er screening  criteria  includes  age and the modifiable  behavior  
of smoking.  As stated  before,  the high rate of false  positives  negatively  impacts  screening  participation,  
so the assessment  of patient  preferences  will inform  participants  of strategies  to encourage  adherence  
to the program  [8]. Comorbidity  must  also be taken  into account,  as the target  screening  population  is 
older  [9], and at a higher  risk for vascular  diseases  than younger  people.  A successful  paradigm  will 
include  these  concerns.  The unique  aspects  of the lung cancer  screening  paradigm  increase  the 
importance  of preference  assessment  as part of an informed  decision -making  process.  
 
A recent  Cochrane  meta -analysis  found  that decision  aids such  as conjoint  analysis  and best-worse  
scaling  (comm only called  discrete  choice  experiments)  can improve  receptiveness  to lung cancer  
screening  methods  [10]. However,  these  tools  have  not been  widely  used  in clinical  practice,  and these  
assessment  methods  would  have  to be geared  towards  Veteran  population  and require  systems  to 
integrate  decision  support  with clinical  practice.  This proposal  will address  these  gaps  by evaluating  the 
usability  and acceptability  of an explicit  preference  assessment  method  as part of a lung cancer  
screening  decision  support  tool (LCSDecTool)  designed  for Veterans.  
 
Significance  
Veterans  are at higher  risk of lung cancer  due to their increased  smoking  rate when  compared  to the 
general  population,  both when  active  and following  service  time [1]. Eight  VA Medical  Centers  have  
recentl y completed  studies  that demonstrate  the need  for effective  screening  tactics.  The PI of this 
proposal  (Schapira)  has completed  pilot work  with HSR&D  Research  in this area.  and the demonstration  
projects  across  8 sites in the VA health  care system  found  that 56% of the Veterans  offered  screening  
agreed  to the tests.  Before  expanding  further,  it is imperative  that decision -support  tools  are present  to 
encourage  participation  in lung cancer  screening  programs.  By developing  these  strategies  now,  patient  
prefe rences  can be accounted  for in the study  guidelines.  (Figure  1). 
 
 
 
This research  is based  on the theoretical  frameworks  of shared  decision -making  (SDM),  implementation  
science,  and technology  adoption.  SDM  incorporates  normative  and dual process  reasonin g theories.  
Dual process  theory  recognizes  the role of systematic  reasoning,  which  is thought  to lead to decisions  
that people  are more  likely  to follow  through  with [11]. Implementing  a decision  support  tool that 

 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 4 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  provides  evidence -based  information  clearl y reduces  the barriers  to dual process  reasoning  leading  to 
higher  decision  quality  and more  accurate  risk perception  [12-15]. 
This study  simultaneously  collects  data to gauge  effectiveness  of intervention  and implementation.  Data  
collection  pertaining  to process  evaluation  will be guided  by the Promoting  Action  on Research  
Implementation  in Health  Services  (PARIHS)  implementation  framework  [16-18] and the Technology  
Acceptance  Model  (TAM)  [19]. This team  is qualified  to conduct  this work,  as the core and 
coinvestigators  have  a number  of relevant  experiences  to draw  from regarding  this study.  
 
Pilot data to support  this program  was conducted  at Penn  in two parts:  1) an HSR&D  pilot (PI Schapira)  
of preference  assessment  and risk communication  among  Veterans  considering  lung cancer  screening,  
and 2) a Center  for the Evaluation  of Patient  Aligned  Care  Teams  (CE-PACT)  pilot grant  to develop  a 
web-based  health  numeracy  tutorial  for patients  enrolled  in a Patient  Aligned  Care  Team  (PACT)  at the 
CMCVAMC.  Qualitative  interviews  with Veterans  were  conducted  in the HSR&D  pilot to define  the most  
critical  attributes  of lung cancer  screening.  In the pilot,  it was seen  that Veterans  found  pictographs  to be 
useful  for conveying  expected  outcomes,  along  with gradations  indicating  risk estimates,  and a “margin  
of error”  interval  analogy.  Veteran  concerns  included  the financial  and emotional  strain  of follow -up tests  
resulting  from false  positives.  Fifty-one percent  (51%)  of study  participants  were  African  American,  86% 
were  current  smokers,  and 47% had at least  30 pack  years  of smoking  (this means  1 pack  per day for 
30 years  or 2 packs  a day for 15 years).  Participants  were  asked  to choose  the attributes  most  and least  
important  to them  regarding  lung cancer  screening  from groups  of three.  Linear  regression  was used  to 
determine  the association  between  race and other  factors  via importance  weights  [20, 21]. (Figure  3). 
 
 
 
Dr. Schapira  also worked  with web developers  to improve  patient  understanding  of numeric  information  
used  in medical  diagnosis.  Forty -two participants  diagnosed  with heart  failure  had the option  to learn  in 
a classroom  setting,  or in a web-based  program.  The pilot study  found  that 95% of participants  preferred  
a computer -based  tutorial,  with the most  viewed modules  being  Understanding  Risk and Taking  
Medications.  Knowledge  quizzes  embedded  in the program  noted  participant  knowledge  increased  after 
module  completion.  The pilot studies  demonstrate  the research  team’s  experience  in the field of risk 
communic ation,  preference  assessment,  and the development  of web-based  interventions.  The 
proposed  study  is a natural  extension  of this pilot work.  
 
The methods  proposed  are put forth to help design  a Lung  Cancer  Screening  Decision  Tool 
(LCSDecTool)  for Veterans.  LCSDecTool  is intended  to improve  outcomes  and number  of high-quality  
decisions  for Veterans  eligible  for lung cancer  screening.  High quality  decisions  are broadly  defined  as 

 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 5 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  informed  decisions  in which  the patient’s  choice  is aligned  with their values  and preferences.  The 
linkages  to outcomes  are described  in the table  below  (Table  2). 
 
 
The decision  regret  scale  was adapted  to lung cancer  screening  Data  Collection  Instrument ). Anxiety,  as 
measured  by the STAI,  and cancer  worry  have  been  used  as patient -centered  outcomes  among  lung 
cancer  screening  recipients  [12, 85, 86]. A systematic  review  reports  short -term psychological  
discomfort  among  many  lung cancer  screening  recipien ts and short -term increases  in distress  among  
those  with false -positive  results  [87]. The lung cancer  worry  scale  is adapted  from a measure  of breast  
cancer  worry  after mammography  screening  [88]. A post-visit provider  survey  will assess  whether  lung 
cance r screening  was discussed  at the visit, if a recommendation  was made,  and if a test ordered . 
 
The following  objectives  were  completed  in Phase  1 and 2. 
Phase  1: To elicit stakeholder  input  to inform  the development  of a lung cancer  screening  
decisio n tool (LCSDecTool).  In this Phase  we use structured  interview  and focus  groups  among  
patients,  providers,  and clinical  leaders.  Findings  from Phase  1 were  used  to develop  the 
LCSDecTool  in Phase  2. 
Phase  2: To develop  a web based  LCSDecTool  that will expand existing  materials  available  for 
Veterans  through  a Web application  that can be used  on a desktop,  laptop,  tablet,  or mobile  
phone.  Outcomes  will include  measures  of feasibility,  perceived  utility,  patient  engagement,  and 
satisfaction.   

 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 6 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021   
  
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 7 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  Section 4:  Objectives S ection  
4.1. Describe the study’s purpose, specific aims, or objectives.      
Phase  3: To test the efficacy  of the LCSDecTool  compared  to usual  care on improving  decision  
process,  clinical,  and behavioral  outcomes.  Primary  outcomes  include  decisional  regret,  
decisional  conflict,  state  trait anxiety,  lung cancer  worry,  and lung cancer  screening  uptake.  We 
hypothesize  that Veterans  randomized  to the LCSDecTool  compared  to the control  intervention  
will demonstrate  the following:  
• H1: Decreased  decisional  regret  and decisional  conflict  at 1 month  following  the 
intervention  
• H2: Decreased  state  anxiety  and lung cancer  worry  at 1 month  following  the 
intervention  
• H3: Decreased  rates  of lung cancer  screening  at 3 months  following  the interve ntion  
 
This work  builds  directly  upon  a recently  completed  HSR&D  supported  pilot study  in the area of 
lung cancer  and shared  decision -making . We will accomplish  these  Aims  through  a mixed  
methods  study  at the CMCVAMC ,the WHVAMC , and the Milwaukee  VAMC . The study  utilizes  
the expertise  of a transdisciplinary  research  team  culminating  in a randomized  trial to evaluate  
the efficacy  of the LCSDecTool  as well as feasibility  and process  outcomes  to support  future  
wide spread  implementation.  As a new paradigm  of lung cancer  control  is emerging  that 
incorporates  both lung cancer  screening  and smoking  cessation,  it is imperative  to develop  a 
patient  centered  strategy  that incorporates  Veterans’  values  into lung cancer  screening  decisions  
that can be integrated  into the clinical  setting.  The proposal  provides  a mechanism  to accomplish  
these  goals  and fills a gap in currently  available  decision  support  tools  for Veterans.  The 
proposed  research  will augment  ongoing  efforts  by the VHA National  Center  for Health  
Promoti on and Disease  Prevention  to promote  a patient  centered  approach  to lung cancer  
screening.  
 
4.2. State the hypotheses to be tested.      
We hypothesize  that Veterans  randomized  to the LCSDecTool  compared  to the control  
intervention  will demonstrate  the following:  
• H1: Decreased  decisional  regret  and decisional  conflict  at T2 (1 month  after the 
intervention)  
• H2: [Decreased  overall  anxiety  and lung cancer  worry  at T2 (1 month  after the 
intervention)]  
• H3: Lower  rates  of lung cancer  screening  at T3 (3 months  after the intervention)  
 
Section 5: Study Procedures  
5.1. Study Design  
5.1.1.  Describe in detail the experimental design, i.e. from recruitment procedures to 
study closure .            
A pilot randomized  clinical  trial (RCT) will be conducted  to compare  the efficacy  of the 
LCSDecTool  to a control  intervention  among  with respect  to decision  process  outcomes,  clinical  
outcomes,  and health  related  quality  of life. 
 
Eligible  patients  will be identified  through  VA Corporate  Data  Warehouse  (CDW ), flyers  in 
primary  care/pulmona ry clinics  and the use of a study  team  consult  that will allow  providers  to 
refer eligible  patients  to the study  team.  When  a potential  participant  is identified,  the study  team  
will send  the patient  an invitation  letter to join the study.  Use of the CDW  database  will support  
this approach,  as the dates  of scheduled  visits  are included  in the CDW  database  and updated  
daily.  Efforts  will be made  to recruit  at least  40% African  American,  5% Hispanic,  and 10% 
female  patients.  Eligibility  will be determined  by in-person  or telephone  interviews.  
 
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 8 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  Since  MyHealtheVet  will be used  after consent,  the research  team  will ask patients  if they are 
registered  on MyHealtheVet  with a premium  account  that allows  them  to access  Secure  
Messaging.  If they are not registered,  the study  team  will offer that they go to the MyHealtheVet  
office  to sign up. The study  team  may use MyHealtheVet  Secure  Messagin g to confirm  and 
schedule  research  appointments  and follow -ups.  The use of MyHealtheVet  is optional.   Patients  
will be enrolled  prior to upcoming  appointments  in primary  care/pulmonary  clinics  to ensure  an 
opportunity  for shared  decision-making  following  the intervention   
 
All primary  care providers  in the PACT  at the respective  VA centers  will be sent a description  of 
the overall  study  through  email  and/or office  mail.  Providers  will be able to opt out of the study,  in 
which  case  their patients  will not be approached  regarding  study  enrollment . For providers  who 
agree  to participate,  their patients  will be approached  regarding  study  enrollment  if they meet  
inclusion  and exclusion  criteria . A provider  information  page  will be sent to all participating  
providers  which  will include  information  about  the LCSDecTool  and example  of the LCSDecTool  
summary  sheet . This may include  the same  providers  that participated  in Phase  1 and Phase  2. 
 
The LCSDecTool  will be programmed  to randomly  assign  the participant  to 1 of 2 viewing  
experiences  (Experimental  vs. Control).  The study  visit will occur  either  in-person  or by 
telephone.   The in-person  study  visit will be in a quiet,  private  room.  Telephone  visits  will be 
arranged  so that coordinators  and participants  will both be in a quiet,  private  setting.  After  
completing  informed  consent  and HIPAA  Authorization  (for baseline  in-person  visit), the patient  
will sign on to the study  site, complete  baseline  assessments,  and be randomly  assigned  to the 
Experimental  or Control  intervention.  Randomization  will occur  at the patient  level.  A research  
assistant  will be available  to answer  questions  for participants  during  the study  visit. The visit 
may be observed  by a member  of the web development  team  to better  understand  how the tool 
functions.  
 
Experimental  Intervention : Participants  randomized  to the experimental  intervention  will 
receive  a message  on the screen  that they are now going  to view the LCSDecTool.  At the end of 
the tool experience,  they will be given  the option  to print out a summary  sheet.  Participants  will 
complete  the immediate  post-intervention  assessments  (T1) on a computer  interface.   
 
Control  Intervention : Participants  will view screen  content  that that provides  general  information  
on health  promotion  and disease  prevention  unrelated  to lung cancer  screening.  No printout  is 
given  to subjects  in this arm. The control  intervention  will have  the same  number  of screens  to 
review  as the LCSDecTool.  Participants  will complete  the immediate  post-intervention  
assessment  (T1) using  a computer  interface.  The Control  group  will complete  all of the surveys,  
with modified  versions  of Practical  Utility  of LCSDecTool,  Pt Engagement,  and End User  
Satisfaction  that cover  general  cancer  screening  rather  than Lung  Cancer  specifically.  
 
The basel ine visit (T0) research  visit will last ~2 hours  
The immediate  post-intervention  visit (T1) done  in person  or by phone  will last ~1 hour.  
 
The summary  sheet  that is presented  at the end of the LCSDecTool  will have  the option  to be 
downloaded,  emailed ,  or printed  and a copy  given  to the subject  to have  available  to refer to 
during  an in-person  clinic  visit or telehealth  visit and serve  as a prompt  for shared  decision -
making . The subject  or study  team  will also send  the summary  sheet  to the provider  through  
MyHealtheVet  Secure  Messaging.  Studies  suggest  that printed  action  plans  can be effective  in 
supporting  shared  decision -making  for collaborative  goal setting  in primary  care. [83] Note , that if 
the subject  chooses  use email,  the subject  will type in their own email  address.   The study  will 
not be storing  that email  information  in the application  back  end. 
 
Participants  in the control  group  will NOT  be given  any materials  to bring  to their clinical  
appointment   
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 9 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  Outcome  assessment  will be blinded  to group  assignmen t (Table  4). Primary  outcomes  include  
decisional  conflict,  decisional  conflict,  general  anxiety,  lung cancer  worry,  and lung cancer  
screening  uptake  at T1 (1 month  post-interv ention) . Health  related  quality  of life and feasibility  
measures  will also be assessed  (Table  4)]. Patient  measures  will be obtained  at baseline  (T0),  
immediately  post-intervention  (T1),  1 month  post-intervention  (T2),  and 3 months  post-
intervention  (T3).  The T2 and T3 survey  assessments  will be assessed  by a telephone  interview .  
At the conclusion  of the study , we will mail summary  findings  of the study  to participants .     
 
Provider  participation  in this study  
Healthcare  providers  participating  in this study  will undergo  oral consent  prior to recruiting  
patients .  
 
For those  patient -provider  dyads  in which  the patient  was randomized  into the intervention,  their 
patient  may bring  the LCSDecTool  to the appointment  so that they can review  it with the 
provider.  Their  patient  may also bring  their summary  page  to be reviewed  with the provider.  The 
subject  or study  team  will also send  the summary  sheet  to the provider  through  MyHealtheVet  
Secure  Messaging,  for those  randomi zed to the experimental  arm. They  will have  the opportunity  
to engage  in shared  decision -making  regarding  Lung  Cancer  Screening.  For those  patient -
provider  dyads  in which  the patient  was randomized  into the control,  they will have  the 
opportunity  to engage  in shared  decision  making  regarding  general  cancer  screening  and 
prevention.  For either  randomized  group,  the provider  will comp lete a one page  “Post -Visit 
Provider  Survey”  after each  appointment  with participating  patients.  Each  participating  provider  
will have  between  0 and 20 patients  enrolled  in the study.  At the conclusion  of the study,  every  
provider  will complete  a 3-page  survey,  which  includes  System  Usability  Survey , Technology  
Acceptance  Model, and End User Computing  Satisfaction . Total  involvement  in the study  will 
take approximately  1 hour.  
 
Power  and Sample  Size -  We will enroll  200 Veterans   in addition  to up to 240 Providers  in this 
pilot RCT,  a sample  size that is feasible  to enroll  and that will provide  adequate  power  to permit  
testing  of key study  outcomes . We conducted  our power  analysis  comparing  the LCSDecTool  to 
usual  care with respect  to the two primary  outcomes,  Decisional  Regret  and Decisional  Conflict,  
assessed  at T2 (1 month  post-intervention ). We will conclude  that the intervention  was superior  if 
we reject  the null hypothesis  of no difference  for either  or both of these  outcomes.  Tests  will be 
two-sided  and will be conducted  using  α=0.025  to control  the family -wise type I error  rate at 0.05.  
Assuming  10% loss to follow -up at one month  post-interven tion, 180 patients  will be available  for 
analysis.  For Decisional  Regret  at T2, we will have  96% power  to detect  a medium  effect  size of 
0.60 corresponding  to a 10 point  difference  between  intervention  and control  groups .  Assuming  
SD = 16.6 [95]. For the Decisional  Conflict  outcome,  we will have  96% power  to detect  a 
medium -sized  standardized  effect  size of 0.5, corresponding  to a difference  of 2.0 points  
between  groups  assuming  SD = 3.9. In exploratory  analyses  of Africa . We will conclude  that the 
intervention  was superi or if we reject  the null hypoth esis of no difference  for either  or both of 
these  outcomes.  Tests  will be two-sided  and will be conducted  using  α=0.025  to control  the 
family -wise type I error  rate at 0.05.  Assuming  10% loss to follow -up at one month  post-
intervention,  180 patients  will be available  for analysis.  For Decisional  Regret  at T2, we will have  
96% power  to detect  a medium  effect  size of 0.60 corresponding  to a 10 point  difference  
between  intervention  and control  groups,  an Ameri can participants,  we will have  80% power  to 
detect  a standardized  effect  size of 0.74 or larger  in either  outcome.  
 
 
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 10 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021   
Amendment  February  2019 
The purpose  of this amendment  is to speak  to interactions  with MyHealtheVet  as written  in the 
grant.  MHV  letter  of support  attached.   In addition,  we wanted  to add a comment  regarding  
sharing  a summary  of findings  with the patients.   There  is a small  edit to the Post visit provider  
survey  regarding  the web based  LCS Tool.  Last,  we changed  the scaling  on the EUCS  survey  to 
mirror  the original  widely  used  survey.   We removed  (6 not applicable  from the survey)  
 
Amendment  March  2019  
The purpose  of this amendment  is to make  minor  changes  to the post-visit provider  survey,  
future  screen ing intentions  and replace  the former  table  4 with the above.  
 
Amendment  April  2020  – addition  of the Milwaukee  VA site  
Veteran  recruitment  at the West Haven  site was low and recruitment  at that site will. We are 
adding  the Milwaukee  site to try to reach  our original  goals  for patient  recruitment.  However,  
each  site involves  essentially  all the primary  care providers  at the site - hence  there  will be 

 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 11 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  another  80 providers  recruited  from Milwaukee  
 
Amendment  September  2020  
Due to COVID -19 and the increasing  amounts  of primary  care telehealth  appointments  we are 
modifying  our protocol  to include  telephone  baseline  visits  to meet  our recruitment  goals . 
In addition,  we are modifying  our protocol  to increase  compensation  for follow -up telephone  visits  
for participants  at the Philadelphia  site. The reasons  for increased  compensation  are to increase  
follow -up participation  and to properly  compensate  Veterans  for their time spent  answering  
survey  questions  for the study  as follow -up calls are taking  up to sixty minutes  to complete.  
Currently,  we provide  Veterans  with a $25 stipend  after completion  of both 1- and 3-month  
follow -ups. In this modification , we will provide  Veterans  with $25 stipends  for each  of the 
telephone  visits.  With the modification,  the total amount  participants  receive  will incre ase from 
$75 to $100.   
  
5.1.2.  What research methods will be used in the project ? Check all that apply.  
 Surveys/Questionnaires  
  Interviews               
  Audio Taping  
 Behavioral Observations         
  Chart Reviews        
  Video Taping  
 Focus Groups         
  Randomization       
  Double -Blind  
 Control Group         
  Placebo            
  Withhold/Delay Treatment  
 Specimen Collection         
  Deception            
  Telephone Survey  
 Other (Describe)         
 
5.1.3.  Provide description of the study population (delineate all categories of subjects – 
male, female, in patients, outpatients, providers,  family members, employees, 
etc.).   Include anticipated initial enrollment numbers  (and number of subjects 
anticipated to complete all aspects of the protocol) .    
This project  involves  the recruitment  of 200 Veterans  and up to 240 Providers . Patient  
recruitment  efforts  at the three  sites (CMCVAMC , WHVAMC , and Milwaukee  VAMC ) will 
target  male  and female  patients  enrolled  in a Patient  Aligned  Care  Teams  (PACT)  who 
are eligible  for lung cancer  screening.  Our recruitment  goals  for patients  are 40% African  
American,  5% Hispanic  patients,  and 10% wome n. 
 
5.1.4.  As applicable, provide rationale and information on any added protections  and 
safeguards  for vulnerable populations  (children, prisoners, pregnant women, 
physically or mentally -disabled persons, and economically or educationally  
disadvantaged persons ).      
N/A 
 
5.1.5.  Does this project target a specific race or ethnic group as subject s? Yes.         If yes, 
check all that apply .  
Race                                                          Ethnicity  
American Indian or Alaska Native   
 Hispanic or Latino   
Asian   
 Not Hispanic or Latino   
Black or African American     
Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander      
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 12 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  
White      
Other        
 
5.1.6.  Will this study bank /store  specimens  for future research ?  NO        
NOTE:  Banking  is for future specified research.  Storage is for the life of this protocol.  
5.1.6.1.   If yes,  include information on specimen s to be banked/stored .   
             
5.1.6.2.  If specimens will be banked /stored , specify location .   
             
5.1.6.2.1.  IF BANKING SPECIMENS, IT MUST BE AT A VA APPROVED 
FACILITY . (For additional information, go to the following 
website 
http://www.research.va.gov/programs/tissue_banking/ , or 
contact the IRB office.)  
5.1.6.3.  If applicable, explain how destruction of banked samples will be 
substantiated.    
                
5.1.6.4.  Do you anticipate using the banked specimens for other studies 
beyond the defined study period and defined study parameters?    
Choose  an item.  
5.1.6.4.1.  If yes, will you need to re -contact subjects?  How will this 
be done?       
 
5.1.7.  Will this study create a data repository  for future studies ?    NO 
5.1.7.1.  If yes, describe and /or provide the following:  
5.1.7.1.1.  The type of data (identified or de -identified) including what 
protected health elements are to be collected . 
       
5.1.7.1.2.  The source from which data will be collected  (e.g., 
subjects, non -research data repositories, research data 
repositories, publicly available, VA source, non -VA source.  
       
5.1.7.1.3.  How and where the data will be stored (e.g., electronic, 
paper records, approved VA -owned or VA -leased space) . 
       
5.1.7.1.4.  How the data will be transmitted , if applicable . 
       
5.1.7.1.5.  How the data will be secured during storage, use, and 
transmission both during the conduct of the research 
protocol and after the protocol is completed.  
      
5.1.7.1.6.  Plans to store data for future research. If the data is stored 
for future research, there must be a description of a 
research data repository, its location, and its security 
measures.  
      
5.1.7.1.7.  Plans to share with others including other researchers (VA 
and non -VA). If the data were collected through a research 
project, discussion of whether or not the original informed 
consent allowed for such reuse of the data and if the reuse 
is consistent with the HIPAA authorization that was 
obtained . 
       
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 13 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  5.1.7.1.8.  Justification for the use of any identifiers . 
      
5.1.7.1.9.  Justification that the data requested represent the 
minimum necessary to conduct the research.  
      
5.1.7.1.10.  A discussion of plans for obtaining informed consent and 
HIPAA Authorization, or for requesting the IRB to waive 
these requirements. If the investigator requests that the 
requirement for a HIPAA Authorization be waived, 
justification for this request must be  included in 
information submitted to the IRB.  
      
5.1.7.1.11.  In addition to the above, provide a Standard Operating 
Procedures Manual for the data repository .  Contact IRB 
office for additional details.  
(NOTE: The investigator is encouraged to consult the facility’s ISO during the development of the 
protocol to ensure compliance with all information security requirements and physical security 
requirements. ) 
 
5.2. Subject  Recruitment Met hods  
NOTE:  Details of recruitment should be included in the ‘procedures’ section.  Only ‘short’ 
responses should be included in the below sections.  
5.2.1.  State how many subjects will be needed .    
This project  involves  the recruitment  of up to 100 Veterans  and 80 providers  from the 
CMCVAMC/CBOCS.  
 
 This project  involves  the recruitment  of up to 200 Veterans  between  
CMCVAMC/CBOCS,  WHVAMC,  and Milwaukee  VAMC.  This project  also involves  the 
recruitment  of up to 240 Providers  (80 from each  site). 
 
5.2.2.  Who will be responsible for recruiting potential subject s?   Provide titles of 
individuals.   
     Principal  Investigator,  Sr. Coordinator,  and the Research  Assistant  
 
5.2.3.  How will initial contact with potential subject s be made? ( e.g., local clinics,  
physician referrals, letter s to prospective subject s)  
NOTE : VA policy prohibits “cold calls” to potential VA research subject s. Provide an introductory 
letter and telephone script .    
     Eligible  Veterans  will be mailed  a recruitment  letter  with study  information  and an 
invitation  to participate.  A study  staff member  will make  a follow -up phone  call to the 
Veteran  if there  is no reply  after one week.  During  screening  phone  call, 
inclusion/exclusion  criteria  will be confirme d. A second  recruitment  strategy  will be to 
post study  flyers  and brochures  in the primary  care and pulmonary  clinic  setting  and 
have  a recruitment  table  in the waiting  room  to provide  study  information.  Study  visits  
will be scheduled  the same  day as clinic appointments  when  possible.  If necessary,  
due to the timing,  participants  can be scheduled  up to 2 weeks  prior to their 
appointment  time .    
 
5.2.4.  Will you be using any of the following methods to recruit subject s? (Check all 
that apply.)  
  N/A 
  Local database for which subject s have NOT  given prior  permission to be 
contacted for Research .   
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 14 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  NOTE :  If this option is checked, please submit a Waiver of Individual Authorization for 
Disclosure of Protected Health Information.       
  Personal contact with patients over whom you have direct/indirect oversight  
  Provider (Clinician) Referrals of potential subject s 
 
5.2.5.  Indicate  the types of recruitment/advertisement materials that will be used:   
Check all that apply.  Submit  copies of recruitment materials, for IRB review . 
     
 Not applicable; none to be used  
     
 Fliers       
 Newspapers      
 Letters      
 Websites      
 Television  
     
 Radio      
 Audio      
 Video      
 Surveys  
     
 Other (Specify, e.g. employee newsletters )  Study  Brochure , Emails  to Providers  
5.2.6.  Non-Veteran S ubjects  will be given a copy of  the Notice of Privacy Practice s.   
YES 
NOTE:  
➢ Every non -Veteran should sign VA form 10 -0483, Acknowledgement of the Notice of Privacy 
Practices (ANOP)  
➢ Once the ANOP is signed, the research study staff must send the non-Veteran's name to the 
CMCVAMC Privacy Officer via encrypted e -mail.  The signed ANOP must be kept in the 
research study binder.  
➢ If an oral informed consent is used, the NOP should be sent to the non -Veteran via postal 
mail.  In addition, the research s tudy staff must write a Note -to-File that the NOP was sent to 
the non -Veteran.  
 
5.3. Compensation for Participation  -   YES.        If yes, complete the following . 
5.3.1.  Summarize any financial compensation that will be offered to subjects .     
    Veterans  will be compensated  $100 total incentive  ($50 for completing  the baseline  
and immediate  post-intervention  surveys;  and $25 each  for completing  the 1 and 3-month  
telephone  follow -ups). 
 
5.3.2.  Provide the schedule for compensation .  
5.3.2.1.  Per study visit or session.       
       $50 for completing  the baseline  and immediate  post-intervention  surveys , 
$25 for completing  the 1-month  telephone  follow -up, and $25 for completing  the 
3-month  telephone  follow -up. 
5.3.2.2.  Total amount for entire participation.    
       $100  total incentive  
5.3.3.  State how compensation will be provided:   In-person  visits – voucher  given  in 
person Telephon e visits  – voucher s given  to research  budget  office  who mails  
participant  the check s.   
 
5.4. Informed Consent Procedures  
5.4.1.  Indicate if informed consent will be obtained and/or if you are requesting a 
waiver of informed consent or waiver of documentation of informed consent.  
Consent  to be obtained  at baseline ; written  consent  for Veteran  with in-person  baseline  
visits;  oral consent  for Veteran  telephone  visits .  Oral consent  for providers . 
 
5.4.2.  If the research involves multiple phases, specify for which phases of the 
research the waiver(s) is/are  being requested.   
HIPAA  waiver  will be obtained  to screen  computer  databases  for potential  Veteran  
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 15 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  subjects  who will be contacted  to see if they are interested  in participating  in research .  
HIPAA  waiver  is not needed  for Provider  subject  because  study  team  is NOT  
collecting  patient  PHI from the provider . 
 
5.4.3.  Describe circumstances , if any, that may need to be addressed in seeking 
informed consent (e.g., subjects with impaired decision -making  ability and the 
use of a legally authorized representative, etc. )      
     NA 
 
5.4.4.  If applicable, indicate how study personnel will be trained regarding human 
subjects protections requirements and how to obtain and document informed 
consent.    
     All study  personnel  will be trained/overseen  by PI. They  will have  completed  relevant  
training  regarding  human  subjects  protection  and how to obtain  informed  consent.  All 
personnel  are required  to have  CITI (Good  Clinical  Practices  and Ethical  Principles),  VA 
Privacy  and Information  Security  Awareness  and Rules  of Behavior,  and Privacy  and 
HIPAA  trainings .  In addition, all study  personnel  obtaining  informed  consent  will have  
taken  the VA Research  Compliance  Officer  training.  
 
5.4.5.  Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria :  Describe the criteria that determine who will be 
included in or excluded from the study.  
5.4.5.1.  Inclusion Criteria  
           All Veterans  must  be enrolled  in a Patient  Aligned  Care  Teams  (PACT)  
who are eligible  for lung cancer  screening.  Veterans  will be age 55 to 80 years,  
smoking  history  of 30 or more  pack  years,  and current  smoker  or smoker  who 
quit within  15 years whose  providers  have  agreed  to also participate  in the study  
 
Inclusion  criteria  for providers  will include  practicing  or providing  leadership  in a 
PACT  or involvement  in the lung cancer  screening  through  the clinical  services  
of Radiology,  Oncology,  or Pulmonary  Medicine,  services  that are most  involved  
with the lung cancer  screening.   
 
5.4.5.2.  Exclusion Criteria  
           Exclusion  criteria  for Veterans  will be cognitive  impairment  as determined  
by clinical  history,  previous  diagnosis  of cancer  with the exception  of non-
melanoma  skin cancer  and localized  prostate  cancer  that is 1-year post-
diagnosis  or more  and with no indication  of progression , active  surveillance  of 
Lung  Nodule,  Enrolled  in CMCVAMC  Lung  Cancer  Screening  Program ,  life 
expectancy  of less than 2 years  as indicated  by chart  review  and confirmation  
with PCP,  and inability  to speak  English  during  the phone  screen. 
 
5.5. Withdrawal of Subjects  
5.5.1.  Describe how a subject can withdraw from the study .   
     Veteran  subjects  who want  to withdrawal  from the study  should  do so using  the HIPAA  
Revocation  form. Providers  who want  to withdrawal  from the study  may do so verbally .  
 
5.5.2.  Describe any anticipated circumstances under which subjects will be withdrawn 
from the research without their consent . 
                NA 
 
5.5.3.  Describe the consequences of a subject's decision to withdraw from the 
research and the procedures for orderly termination of participation by the 
subject (e.g., the subject contacting the investigator for an end -of-study visit) .   
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 16 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  No consequences  for withdrawal.  Once  we are notified  of a participant’s  decision  to 
withdraw,  we can continue  to use information  about  them  that has been  collected  up 
to that point.  No information  will be collected  after a participant  formally  withdraws  
 
5.6. Potential Risk/Benefit Analysis  
5.6.1.  Potential Study Risks  
5.6.1.1.  Describe and assess all of the following risks that may be associated 
with the research : 
5.6.1.2.  Physical  (Physical risks include physical discomfort, pain, injury, illness or 
disease brought about by the methods and procedures of the research. A 
physical risk may result from the involvement of  physical stimuli such as 
noise, electric shock, heat, cold, electric magnetic or gravitational fields, etc. 
Engaging a subject in a social situation which could involve violence may 
also create a physical risk .) 
                 NA 
 
5.6.1.3.  Psychologica l (Psychological risks include the production of negative 
affective states such as anxiety, depression, guilt, shock and loss of self -
esteem and altered behavior. Sensory deprivation, sleep deprivation, use of 
hypnosi s, deception or mental stress are  examples  of psychological risks.)  
The Veteran  subjects  may risk distress  from considering  the topic  of lung 
cancer.  Veterans  in the study  will be at increased  risk for lung cancer  due to 
the smoking  exposure  eligibility  requirements.  Therefore,  it is possible  that a 
discussion  of lung cancer  screening  may lead to anxiety  or distress.  
Subjects  with anxiety  or concerns  will be referred  to their primary  care 
physician  as all subjects  are enrolled  in a primary  care clinic  as it is an 
inclusion  criterion  for the study.  The primary  care physician  will be able to 
evaluate  Veteran’s  level of anxiety/distress  and refer them  to mental  
counseling  if needed . 
 
Provider  and clinical  leader  participants  may risk anxiety  regarding  the 
potential  implementation  of a new clinical  procedure  (Lung  cancer  screening  
shared  decision -making ) in a busy  clinical  practice . 
 
5.6.1.4.  Social /Economic  (Social/Economic risks include alterations in relationships 
with others that are to the disadvantage of the subject, including 
embarrassment, loss of respect of others, labeling a subject in a way that will 
have negative consequences, or in some way diminishing those 
opportunities and powers a person has by virtue of relationships with others. 
Economic risks include payment by subjects for procedures no t otherwise 
required, loss of wages or other income and any other financial costs, such 
as damage to a subject's employability, as a consequence of participation in 
the research. ) 
                 NA                
 
5.6.1.5.  Legal  (Legal risks exist when the research methods are such that the 
subject or others will be liable for a violation of the law, either by revealing 
that the subject or others have engaged, or will engage , in conduct for which 
the subject or others may be crimin ally or civilly liable, or by requiring 
activities for which the subject or others may be criminally or civilly liable.)  
                 NA 
 
5.6.1.6.  Loss of Confidentiality  (In all research involving human subjects, 
confidentiality of identifiable information is presumed and must be 
maintained unless the investigator obtains the express permission of the 
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 17 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  subject to do oth erwise. Subjects have the right  to be protected against injury 
or illegal invasions of their privacy and to preservation of their personal 
dignity. The more sensitive the research material, the greater the care that 
must be exercised in obtaining, handling, and storing data. In order to  
minimize the risk for loss of confidentiality, investigators should only collect 
personal information that is absolutely essential to the research activity. If 
personal data must be collected, it should be coded as early in the activity as 
poss ible and se curely stored so that only the investigator and authorized 
staff may access it. Identities of individual subjects must never be released 
without the express consent of the subject. In addition, if an investigator 
wishes to use data for a purpose other than  the one for which it was 
originally collected,  and the data are still identifiable (e.g. , a code list for the 
data still exists), the investigator may need to obtain consent from the 
subjects for the new use of the data.)  
There  is some  risk of confidentia lity. Efforts  will be made  to minimize  this 
risk by collecting  only information  that is absolutely  essential  to research.  
Veteran's  protected  health  and personally  identifiable  information  will be 
coded  and securely  stored  in a file cabinet  behind  locked  doors in CHERP  
Annex  Room  232. Identified  and coded  data will be kept in two separate  file 
locations , both located  in Room  232. The data collected  will only be used  for 
the purposes  of the study  protocol  
 
5.6.1.7.  Other, e.g. radiation, placebo, washout of medications  
                  NA 
 
5.6.1.8.  Assess the likelihood and seriousness of such risks . 
The risk of Veterans  feeling  distress  about  discussing  cancer  screening  is 
not likely  to be serious  since  this targeted  group  would  have  most  likely  
discussed  lung cancer  screening  with their providers.  The risk of 
clinicians/leaders’  facing  negative  social  opinions  is highly  unlikely  since  
participants  will be working  together  and inputting  ideas.  Theft,  loss and 
unauthorized  access  will be reported  immediately  to the Privacy  Officer , 
Information  Security  Officer  and IRB 
 
5.6.2.  Include a description of how anticipated risk will be minimized and include an 
analysis of risk vs. potential benefit.   
Veterans  with anxiety  or concerns  will be referred  to their primary  care physician.  Each  
Veteran  will be assigned  an ID number  that is not related  to any PHI. The 
providers/leaders  will be assigned  an ID number  so that their baseline  assessment  can 
be linked  to an ID number.   The key containing  the link between  the study  identification  
number  and participant  will be maintained  on the CMCVAMC’s  secure  server  
(\\vhaphifpccherp.v04.med.va.gov \shares2 \Schapira_Marilyn  ) on a separate  fold from 
the collected  data.   Only Dr. Schapira  (PI), Research  Coordinator,  and Resea rch 
Assistant  will have  access  to this key.   
 
5.6.3.  Potential Study Benefits  
5.6.3.1.  Indicate potential benefits to be gained by the individual subjects, as 
well as benefit(s) that may accrue to society in general as a result of 
the planned work. If the subject will not receive any direct benefit, this 
fact must be stated here and in the consent form.   
The study  may not benefit  participants.  It could  benefit  future  Veterans  if a 
patient  centered  approach  to decision -making  regarding  lung cancer  
screening  works.  This may benefit  Veterans  and others  who are considering  
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 18 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  lung cancer  screening  and would  like a structured  way to assess  whether  
lung cancer  screening  is good  option  for them  
 
5.6.4.  Alternative Treatments  Outside the Study  
5.6.4.1.  Describe alternatives available to the subject outside the research 
context. If there are no such alternatives, state that the alternative is 
not to participate in the research study .  
                 This is not a treatment  study.  The alternative  is not to participate.  
 
5.7. Data Monitoring  (Monitoring plans describe how study records are inspected to ensure the study 
is adhering to the study protocol and applicable research regulations and CMCVAMC  requirements.  
Monitoring plans do not necessarily require the use of an independent Data and Safety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB).  Such independent boards are usually reserved for high -risk phase I studies, or 
large, multi -center phase III trials.  Federally funded studies may require the use of an independent 
DSMB .) 
5.7.1.  Will a D ata and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  or Data Monitoring Committee 
(DMC ) oversee the project?   YES 
5.7.1.1.  If yes, provide contact information for the DSMB or DMC 
representative . 
       A data and safety  monitoring  committee  will be formed   and include  Dr. 
Chhatre  (Co-I) and Dr. Hubbard  (biostatistics).  The committee  will report  to the 
investigative  team  on a monthly  basis.  The committee  will review  the accuracy  
and integrity  of the data and monitor  adequate  subject  recruitment  and 
enrollment.  Dr. Hubbard  (biostatistics)  is experienced  in data management  
methods.  This committee  will review  all reports  of adverse  events  within  24 
hours  of their occurrence  and on a monthly  basis  and determine  if a change  in 
protocol  is indicated  due to the occurrence  of adverse  events  
5.7.1.2.  If no, describe the data and safety monitoring plan to be followed.  
      
 
5.8. Reporting  of Protocol D eviations, Adverse Events (AEs), Serious Adverse Events (SAEs), 
Breaches of Confidentiality, Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect s (UADE s), and 
Unanticipated /Unexpected Problems  
5.8.1.  Include procedures for reporting these events to the CMCVAMC  IRB and 
sponsor .  NOTE : Except for AEs, all other events must be reported to the CMCVAMC  
IRB within 5 business days of discover y. Use the CMCVAMC  Serious -Adverse Event 
form for reporting SAEs, UADEs , and unanticipated/unexpected problems .  Use the 
CMCVAMC  Protocol  Deviation form for reporting protocol deviations.  On-site AEs 
should be reported at the time of continuing review.)  
Protocol  deviations,  unanticipated/unexpected  problems  will be reported  to the IRB 
within  5 business  days  of discovery.  Since  this study  involves  interviews,  survey  
assessments,  and obtaining  feedback  for the LCSDecTool,  we do not anticipate  any 
adverse  events  or serious  adverse  events.  However,  any serious  adverse  event  
relate d to this study  would  be reported  to the IRB within  5 business  days  of 
discovery.  Any adverse  event  would  be reported  to the IRB at continuing  review  
 
5.9. Privacy and Confidentiality  
5.9.1.  Describe whether the study will use or disclose subjects’ Protected Health 
Information (PHI).  
For Veterans,  we will need  to obtain  name,  date of birth,  complete  mailing  address,  
social  security  numbers,  race,  gender,  and medical  history  such  as smoking  history,  
lung cancer  history,  and life expectancy  
 
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 19 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  No medical  history  will be collected  from clinical  providers.  We will collect  information  
such  as name,  gender,  job title, years  in current  job, email,  phone  number  for clinical  
leaders/providers . 
 
5.9.2.  Check the PHI to be collected on all subjects for this research protocol.  
 Name  
 All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, including street address, city, 
county, precinct, ZIP code, and their equivalent geographical codes, except for 
the initial three digits of a ZIP code if, according to the current publicl y 
available data from the Bureau of the Census:  
a. The geographic unit formed by combining all ZIP Codes with the same three 
initial  digits contains more than 20,000 people; and  
b. The initial three digits of a ZIP Code for all such geographic units containing 
20,000 or fewer people are changed to 000.  
 All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual, 
including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of death; and all ages 
over 89 and all elements of dates (in cluding year) indicative of such age, except 
that such ages and elements may be aggregated into a single category of age 
90 or older .   
 Telephone numbers  
  Fax numbers  
 Electronic mail addresses  
  Social Security/Medical Record Number  
 Health plan beneficiary numbers  
 Account Numbers   
 Certificate/license numbers  
 Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers  
 Device identifiers and serial numbers   
 Web universal resource locators (URLS)  
 Internet protocol (IP) addre ss numbers  
 Biometric identifiers, inclu ding fingerprints and voiceprints  
 Full-face photographic images and any comparable images  
 Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code, unless otherwise 
permitted by the Privacy Rule for re -ident ification.  
 HIV (testing or infectious disease) records  
  Sickle cell anemia  
 Drug Abuse Information    
  Alcoholism or Alcohol Use  
 
5.10.  Information Security  (Contact the Information Security Officer for additional assistance 
regarding confidentiality (storage/security) of research data.)  
5.10.1.  List the data /information  that will be stored (including signed, original informed 
consent and HIPAA authorization forms, if applicable, case report forms, etc. )  
                Subject  log, signed  Consent  documents,  signed   HIPAA  authorizations,  paper  
surveys  and electronic  database  of survey  data 
 
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 20 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  5.10.2.  Describe the steps that will be taken to secure the data (e.g., training, 
authorization of access, password protection, encryption, physical contr ols, 
Certificates of Confidentiality and separation of identifiers and data) . 
All paper/hard  copy  data - signed  consent  and HIPAA  authorization  forms,  subject  logs,  surveys  
will be maintained  in study  binders.  The study  binders  in CMCVAMC  will be kept in CHERP,  
4100  Chester  Ave, Ste 202 in a locked  file cabinet.  Any electronic  data—the subject  logs and the 
key linking  participants  to their study  ID at CMCVAMC  will be kept on the secured  CMCVAMC  
server  vhaphicherpnas.  (\\vhaphifpccherp.v04.med.va.gov \shares2 \Schapira_Marilyn  ) The log 
and the key will be kept in separate  folders  on the server  and will not be printed  out. 
 
Study  personnel  with access  to study  data who are no longer  involved  with the study  data will 
have  access  revoked  and will be removed  from the research  staff form 
 
5.10.3.  Indicate how and where data/information will be stored and  specify pertinent 
security systems .  
All paper/hard  copy  data-consent  forms,  subject  logs,  HIPAA  authorization,  surveys  
will be maintained  in study  binders.  The study  binders  in CMCVAMC  will be kept in 
CHERP,  4100  Chester  Ave, Ste 202 in a locked  file cabinet.  Study  staff will walk the 
hard copy  documents  to CHERP  from the CMCVAMC  after interviews  sessions.  Any 
electronic  data-- the subject  logs and the key linking  participants  to their study  ID-- 
at CMCVAMC  will be kept on the secured  VA server  vhaphicherpnas.  The log and 
the key will be kept in separate  folders.  
 
Electronic  Survey  data will be entered  into the VA REDCap  database.  No 
Identifiable  information  will be included  with this data.  The VA REDCap  database  is 
kept on a VA secured  server  that is only accessible  through  an application  process  
 
5.10.4.  Will PHI be trans mitted or transported outside of CMCVAMC ?      NOT  
APPLICABLE                             If yes, complete sections 5. 10.4.1 through 5. 10.4.3, 
and an  Off-site Storage/Transfer of Research Data form.  If no, go directly to 
section 5.11.  
5.10.4.1.  Does the i nformed consent document and Authorization for Use & 
Release of Individually Identifiable Health Information for Veterans 
Health Administration (VHA) Research form disclose 
entities/individuals to which/whom PHI will be transported or 
transmitted?     Choos e an item.  
5.10.4.2.  Specify entities/individuals outside CMCVAMC  to which/whom data will 
be disclosed, the justification for such disclosure and the authority , 
and how they will access it .   
            
5.10.4.3.  List the data /information  that will be transmitted  or transported,  and  
specify how data will be transported or transmitted from one location to 
another and how it will be protected during transmission  or 
transportation  outside of CMCVAMC . 
                        
 
5.11.  Data Management Access Plan - NOTE:  Effective January 1, 2016, all new proposals for VA 
research (regardless of how the research is to be supported) must  include a Data Management 
and Access Plan (DMAP) that describes how PUBLICATIONS resulting from the r esearch and 
the FINAL DATA SETS underlying such publications will be made available to the public.  
5.11.1.  DMAP form must  be included with all initial submissions.  The DMAP form can be 
found on the Research and Development SharePoint site 
https://vaww.visn4.portal.va.gov/philadelphia/home/Research/default.aspx  or obtained 
from one of the IRB Administrators.  
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 21 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  5.12.  Communication Plan   
5.12.1.  Include plan for  ensuring that the study is conducted according to the IRB -
approved protocol.  
Monthly  team  meetings  will be held with the PI and study  staff to discuss  the study  
progress.  The PI will ensure  that all study  activities  are being  conducted  according  to 
the IRB approved  protocol  
5.12.2.  If a multi -site study, include information on  
• ensuring that all required local site approvals are obtained and notifying the 
Director of an y facility where the research is  being conducted but the facility 
is not engaged , and 
• keeping all engaged sites informed o f changes to the protocol, informed 
consent, and HIPAA authorization , and 
• informing local sites of any Serious Adverse Events, Unanticipated Problems, 
or interim results that may impact conduct of the study , and 
• notifying all local facility directors and local site investigators ( LSI) when a 
multi -site study reaches the point that it no longer requires engagement of the 
local facility (e.g., all subsequent follow -up of subjects will be performed by 
the PI from another facility).  
Dr. Schapira  (PI) will have  overall  responsibility  for the coordination  of the study  
sites,  study  team  members,  and the achievement  of scientific  goals  and 
objectives.   
 
Dr. Bastian , site PI for WHVA MC, will have  direct  oversight  for activities  at the 
WHVA MC. Dr. Schapira  and Dr. Bastian  will have  bi-weekly  conference  calls to 
coordinate  study  protocol  and recruitment  efforts.  
 
Dr. Whittle , site PI for Milwaukee  VAMC, will have  direct  oversight  for activities  at 
the Milwaukee  VAMC. Dr. Schapira  and Dr. Whittle  will have  bi-weekly  conference  
calls to coordinate  study  protocol  and recruitment  efforts   
 
Dr. Schapira  will also have  bi-weekly  meetings  with the analysis  team,  led by Dr. 
Hubbard  (biostatistics)  and including  Christopher  Roberts  (Data  Analyst)  and Dr. 
Chhatre  to review  data collection  and recruitment  procedures.   
 
Drs. Schapira , Bastian , and Whittle  will have  quarterly  calls with the advisory  
committee  members.   
 
The advisory  committee  members  are Tanner  Caverly,  MD of Ann Arbor  VAMC  
and Sarah  Lillie,  PhD of Minneapolis  VAMC.   
 
A Data  Review  and Monitoring  Board  (DRMB)  will be established  led by Dr. 
Hubbard  (along  with Dr. Chhatre ). The DRMB  will meet  on a monthly  basis  to 
monitor  all data collection  procedures  and ongoing  data analysis  regarding  
recruitment  rates  and outcomes  at appropriately  pre-determined  intervals  
 
5.13.  Is this S tudy Investigating the Use of a Drug or Biological Agent?   NO       If yes, complete 
the rest of this section.  If no, go directly to section 6, unless 5.13 applies.  NOTE:  If this 
study involves an investigational drug, investigator must  contact the Pharmacy and Therapeutic s 
(P&T) Committee  and provide its approval  to IRB.  
5.13.1.  Specify if the drug or biological agent is:   
5.13.1.1.  FDA approved :   Choose  an item.  
5.13.1.2.  Used for off -label purposes :   Choose  an item.  
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 22 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  5.13.2.  Include the FDA Investigational New Drug (IND) number for all non -FDA 
approved and off -label drugs, biological agents or nutritional supplements.  If not 
applicable state, “Not Applicable.”  
             
5.13.3.  Provide all relevant information about the drug, including pre -clinical data.  
             
5.13.4.  Explain any wash -out periods, rescue medications permitted,  and any type of 
medications not permitted while enrolled in the study.   
             
5.13.5.  Describe blinding and un -blinding procedures.  
             
5.13.6.  Include the dosage, route of administration, previous u se, and the safety and 
efficacy information on any drug used for research purposes.  
            
5.13.7.  Describe rationale for the dosage in this study.  
            
5.13.8.  Justify why the risks are reasonable in relation to anticipated benefits and/or 
knowledge.  
           
5.13.9.  Describe where drug preparation will be done.  
           
5.13.10.  All drugs for CMCVAMC  subjects must be dispensed through the VA 
investigational pharmacy.  
           
5.13.11.  Describe where the study treatment will be administered.  
           
5.13.12.  Describe plan for tracking a non -compliant treatment  study subject.  
          
5.13.13.  Describe the process for the storage, security, dispensing and return of an 
investigational drug.  
           
5.13.14.  Has t his protocol has been submitted to the Medical Center’s Pharmacy and 
Therapeutics Committee?     Choose  an item.  
 
5.14.  Is this Study Investigating  the Use of a Device  – NOT  APPLICABLE         If yes, complete 
the rest of this section.   If no, go directly to sect ion 6 . 
5.14.1.  The Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) number must be submitted for all 
significant risk devices and if an IDE exists for a non -significant risk device.  
            
5.14.2.  Significant Risk or Non -significant Risk - If a device is not approved by the FDA, 
specify whether or not the sponsor has determined this device to be a 
“significant risk” or “non -significant ri sk” as defined by the FDA.  
             
5.14.3.  Provide all relevant information about the device.  
             
5.14.4.  Describe blinding and un -blinding procedures.  
              
5.14.5.  Specify if device is:   
5.14.5.1.  FDA approved :  Choose  an item.  
5.14.5.2.  Used for off -label purposes :  Choose  an item.  
5.14.6.  Explain if the investigational device will be delivered and/or stored by the 
Principal Investigator or Pharmacy Service.  
            
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 23 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  5.14.7.  Describe the process for the storage, security, dispensing and return of an 
investigational device.  
           
5.14.8.  For research involving an investigational device, describe the SOP or plan for 
device control.  
           
5.14.9.  Address how the device will  be stored in such a way that only research staff 
associated with the protocol will have access to the device.  
           
5.14.10.  Describe measures that will be put into place to ensure that the device will only 
be used in subjects of this research protocol.  
                        
 
Section 6:  Resources and Personnel  
6.1. Include where and by whom the research will be conducted .  
                The study  will be conducted  by the PI, Co-Investigators,  and other  trained  research  staff at the 
CMCVAMC  
 
6.2. Provide a brief description of each individual’s role in the study.   Indicate who will have 
access to protected health information and who will be involved in recruiting subjects; 
obtaining informed consent; administering survey/interview procedures; and performing 
data analysis .  
➢ The Principal  Investigator  will have  access  to all study  data,  be involved  with 
recruitment,  obtaining  informed  consent  and HIPAA  authorization , administering  
interviews,  and performing  data analysis.  
➢ The Co-Investigators  meet  monthly  to discuss  study  design  and oversee  study  
progress.   
➢ The Research  Coordinator  and research  assistants  will be involved  with recruitment,  
obtaining  informed  consent  and HIPAA  authorization , and administering  interview  
➢ Collaborator  will be involved  in qualitative  analysis  and development  of value  
clarification  tool. This person  will not have  access  to PHI. 
➢ Biostatistician  will be involved  in quantitative  data analysis . This person  will not have  
access  to PHI   
➢ Dissemination  Manager  will be involved  in communication  of study  findings . This 
person  will not have  access  to PHI   
➢ Dataset  Administrator  will be involved  in data pulls from CDW  for recruitment  lists. This 
person  will have  access  to PHI but not involved  in recruiting  subjects,  obtaining  
informed  consent  and administering  survey/interview  procedures.  
➢ The Qualitative  Researcher  will be involved  with assisting  in qualitative  analysis  and 
development  of value  clarification  tool. This person  will not have  access  to PHI. 
 
6.3. If applicable , provide information on any services that will be performed by contractors , 
including what is being contracted out and with whom .  
Pun’k  Ave is a web site developer  that has an extensive  experience  in the development  of 
interactive  patient  oriented  interventions  that are integrated  into clinical  trials  of behavioral  
interventions.  The activities  conducted  by Pun’k  Ave as outlined  in their letter  of support  
include  server  set up with coordi nation  with VA IT and HIPAA  compliant  infrastructure,  visual  
design,  development  of the basic  application  framework,  incorporation  of a randomized  
questionnaire  module,  user management  and authentication  capability,  design  of a basic  
administrative  module  for data reporting,  and consideration  of user experience  and strategy.  
This contract  will include  server  and technical  support  during  the full course  of the study  
 
6.4. If applicable , provide information on any Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) or Data 
Use Agreements (DUAs) that are being entered into , including with whom and for what 
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 24 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  reason .  
    NA 
 
Section 7: Genetic Testing  
7.1. Does the project involve genetic testing?   Not Applicable,  SKIP  TO SECTION  8  
7.2. Will specimens be kept for future, unspecified use?  Choose  an item.  
7.3. Will samples be made anonymous to maintain confidentiality? Choose  an item.   (If there is a 
link, it is not anonymous.  Coding is not anonymous. ) 
7.4. Will specimens be destroyed after the project -specific use is completed?  Choose  an item.  
7.5. Will specimens be sold in the future?  Choose  an item.  
7.6. Will subjects be paid for their specimens now or in the future?  Choose  an item.  
7.7. Will subjects be informed of the resul ts of the specimen testing?  Choose  an item.  
7.8. Are there any implications for family members based on specimen testing results?  Choose  
an item.  
7.8.1.  If answer to section 7.8 is yes, they may be subject s. 
7.9. Will subjects be informed of results obtained from their DNA?  Choose  an item.  
7.10.  Explain if the study is looking for an association between a genetic marker and a specific 
disease or condition, but at this point it is not clear if the genetic marker has predictive 
value .  
                 
7.11.  Describe if the study is based on the premise that a link between a genetic marker and a 
specific disease or condition is such that the marker is clinically useful in predicting the 
development of that specific disease or condition.  
                 
7.12.  Will the subject be notified of the results and the provision for genetic counseling?   Choose  
an item.  
 
Section 8:  International Research  
8.1. Does this study involve international research?   NOT  APPLICABLE      If no, go directly to 
section 9 . 
NOTE:  Refer to VHA Handbook 1200.05 and contact the IRB office  for additional guidance .  
 
Section 9:  Statistical Analysis  
9.1. Include statistical power calculations and the assumptions made in making these 
calculations.  
Specific  Aim 3 To test the efficacy  of the LCSDecTool  compared  to usual  care on decision  
process,  psychosocial,  and behavioral  outcomes.  We hypothesize  that Veterans  randomized  to 
the LCSDecTool  compared  to the control  intervention  will demonstrate  the following:  
• H1: Decreased  decisional  regret  and decisional  conflict  at T2 (1 month  after the 
intervention)  
• H2: [Decreased  overall  anxiety  and lung cancer  worry  at T2 (1 month  after the 
intervention)]  
• H3: Lower  rates  of lung cancer  screening  at T3 (3 months  after the interve ntion)  
 
Descriptive  Analysis  - Descriptive  statistics  will include  frequencies  and percentages  for 
categorical  variables,  and either  mean  and standard  deviation  or median  and interquartile  range  
for continuous  variables,  as appropriate  based  on distributional  characteristics.  We will compare  
baseline  characteristics  between  groups  to assess  the adequacy  of randomization,  using  t-tests  
to compare  continuous  variables  and chi-square  tests  for categorical  variables.  Characteristics  
found  to differ  significantly  between  intervention  groups  (defined  as p<0.15)  will be included  as 
covariates  in adjusted  analyses.  We will examine  the distribut ions of decisional  regret,  decisional  
conflict,  STAI,  and lung cancer  worry  at T2 (1-month  post-intervention)  graphically  and will 
calculate  summary  statistics  to assess  symmetry  and substantial  departures  from normality . 
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 25 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  9.2. Define plans for data and statisti cal analysis, including key elements of the statistical 
plan, stopping rules and endpoints.  
Statistical  Analysis  for H1 - Our primary  analysis  for H1 outcomes  will be intention  to treat,  
including  all patients  as randomized  in the analysis,  using  linear  regression  to test whether  
decisional  regret  and decisional  conflict  scores  differ  by intervention  group  at T2 after adjustment  
for baseline  characteristics  and study  site. If the outcome  distribution  exhibits  substantial  skew  or 
deviates  in other  ways  from approximate  normality,  generalized  linear  mixed  models  or 
alternative  methods  will be used.  The dependent  variable  will be either  Decisional  Regret  or 
Decisional  Conflict,  and the primary  independent  variable  will be intervention  group.  We will 
include  in all models  fixed  effects  for study  site to account  for potential  variation  in outcomes  
associated  with care environment.  Adjusted  analyses  will include  variables  not balanced  by 
randomization.  Standard  regression  diagnostics  will be performed  and robustnes s of results  to 
analysis  assumptions  will be assessed  in sensitivity  analyses.  Tests  will be conducted  at the two-
sided  α=0.025  level so that the overall  type 1 error  rate is controlled  at the 0.05 level (Bonferroni  
adjustment).  
 
Statistical  Analysis  for H2 - Our analysis  for H2 outcomes  will be intention  to treat,  including  all 
patients  as randomized  in the analysis,  using  linear  regression  to test whether  STAI  and lung 
cancer  worry  differ  between  interventions  at T2 after adjustment  for base line characteristics  and 
study  site. The approach  de-scribed  above  for H1 will be used,  with outcomes  defined  as STAI  
and lung cancer  worry  at T2. Standard  regression  diagnostics  will be performed  and robustness  
of results  to analy sis assump tions  will be assessed  in sensitivity  analyses.  Tests  will be 
conducted  at the two-sided  α=0.025  level so that the overall  type 1 error  rate is controlled  at the 
0.05 level (Bonferroni  adjustment).  
 
Statistical  Analysis  for H3 - For H3, we hypothesize  that the LCSDecTool  intervention,  
compared  to usual  care,  will result  in lower  rates  of lung cancer  screening  assessed  at 3 months.  
In this aim, the effect  of the LCSDecTool  intervention  compared  to usual  care on completion  of 
lung cancer  screening  will be assessed.  Our analysis for H3 will be intention  to treat,  including  all 
patients  as randomized  in the analysis  using  logistic  regression  adjusted  for study  site. The 
dependent  variable  will be receipt  of lung cancer  screening  within  3 months  of the index  visit; the 
primary  independent  variable  will be intervention  group,  and study  site will also be included  as a 
covariate  in all analyses.  Analyses  will also be adjusted  for characteristics  not balanced  by 
rando mization  as described  above.  Because  H3 tests  only one outcome,  tests will be conducted  
at the two-sided  α=0.05  level 
 
9.3. Provide sample size determination and analysis (include anticipated rate of screen 
failures, study discontinuations, lost to follow -up, etc.) 
The sample  size includes  up to 200 Veterans  across  the 3 sites.In addition,  up to 240 
providers  across  the 3 sites with80 Providersat  the CMCVAMC  site,80 Providers  at the West  
Haven  CT Site, and 80 providers  at the Milwaukee  WI Site.   
 
9.4. Describe how, where and by whom the data will be analyzed .   
    Power  and Sample  Size -  We will enroll  200 persons  in this pilot RCT,  a sample  size that is feasible  to 
enroll  and that will provide  adequate  power  to permit  testing  of key study  outcomes.   
 
• H1: We conducted  our power  analysis  comparing  the LCSDecTool  to usual  care with respect  to 
the two primary  outcomes,  Decisional  Regret  and Decisional  Conflict,  assessed  at T2 (1-month  
post-intervention).  Assuming  SD = 16.6 [95]. For the Decisional  Conflict  outcome,  we will have  
96% power  to detect  a medium -sized  standardized  effect  size of 0.5, corresponding  to a 
difference  of 2.0 points  between  groups  assuming  SD = 3.9. In exploratory  analyses  of Africa.  We 
will conclude  that the intervention  was superior  if we reject  the null hypothesis  of no difference  for 
either  or both of these  outcomes.  Tests  will be two-sided  and will be conducted  using  α=0.025  to 
control  the family -wise type I error  rate at 0.05.  Assuming  10% loss to follow -up at one-month  
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 26 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  post-intervention,  180 patients  will be available  for analysis.  For Decisional  Regret  at T2, we will 
have  96% power  to detect  a medium  effect  size of 0.60 corresponding  to a 10-point  difference  
between  intervention  and control  groups,  an American  participant,  we will have  80% power  to 
detect  a standardized  effect  size of 0.74 or larger  in either  outcome.   
• H2: Using  the same  approach  as H1, tests  will be two-sided  comparisons  between  the 
intervention  and control  group  at T2 conducted  at the α=0.025  level to control  the family -wise 
type I error  rate at 0.05.  With180  patients  available  for analysis  at T2, we will have  80% power  to 
detect  a medium  standardized  effect  size of 0.46 SD. This corresponds  to absolute  differences  
between  intervention  and control  arms  of approxi mately  5.5 in STAI  assuming  SD = 12.0 and 1.6 
in lung cancer  worry  assuming  SD = 3.5. In the African  American  subgroup,  we will have  80% 
power  to detect  a standardized  effect  size of 0.74 (medium).    
 
Section 10:  Reference s - Bibliography of cited literat ure 
1. Brown, D.W., Smoking prevalence among US veterans. J Gen Intern Med, 2010. 25(2): p. 147 -9. 
2. Aberle, D.R., et al., Reduced lung -cancer mortality with low -dose computed tomographic screening. N 
Engl J Med, 2011. 365(5): p. 395 -409. 
3. Bach, P.B., e t al., Benefits and harms of CT screening for lung cancer: a systematic review. JAMA,  
2012. 307(22): p. 2418 -29. 
4. Force, U.S.P.S.T., Lung cancer screening: recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med, 2004. 140(9):  
p. 738 -9. 
5. Wender, R., et al., American Cancer Society lung cancer screening guidelines. CA Cancer J Clin, 
2013.  63(2): p. 107 -17. 
6. Mazzone, P., et al., Components Necessary for High Quality Lung Cancer Screening: American  
College of Chest Physicians and American Thoracic Society Policy Statem ent. Chest, 2014.  
7. Pinsky, P.F., et al., The National Lung Screening Trial: results stratified by demographics, smoking  
history, and lung cancer histology. Cancer, 2013. 119(22): p. 3976 -83. 
8. Kovalchik, S.A., et al., Targeting of low -dose CT screening according to the risk of lung -cancer death. 
N Engl J Med, 2013. 369(3): p. 245 -54. 
9. Black, W.C., et al., Cost-effectiveness of CT screening in the National Lung Screening Trial. N Engl J  
Med, 2014. 371(19): p. 1793 -802. 
10. Proposed Decision Memo for Screening for Lung Cancer with Low Dose Computed Tomography  
(LDCT) (CAG -00439N) . 
11. Tammemagi, M.C., et al., Impact of lung cancer screening results on smoking cessation. J Natl 
Cancer  Inst, 2014. 106(6): p. dju084.  
12. Gar een, I.F., et al., Impact of lung cancer screening results on participant health -related quality of life  
and state anxiety in the National Lung Screening Trial. Cancer, 2014. 120(21): p. 3401 -9. 
13. Moyer, V.A. and U.S.P.S.T. Force, Screening for lung canc er: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force  
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med, 2014. 160(5): p. 330 -8. 
14. Stacey, D., et al., Decision aids for people facing health treatment or screening decisions. Cochrane  
Database Syst Rev, 2011(10): p. CD001431.  
15. Frosch, D.L., F. Legare, and C.M. Mangione, Using decision aids in community -based primary care: 
a theory -driven evaluation with ethnically diverse patients. Patient Educ Couns, 2008. 73(3): p. 490 -6. 
16. Frosch, D.L., et al., Shared decision -making  in the United States: policy and implementation activity 
on multiple fronts. Z Evid Fortbild Qual Gesundhwes, 2011. 105(4): p. 305 -12. 
17. Frosch, D.L., K.J. Singer, and S. Timmermans, Conducting implementation research in community  
based  primary care: a quali tative study on integrating patient decision support interventions for cancer  
screening into routine practice. Health Expect, 2011. 14 Suppl 1: p. 73 -84. 
18. Marshall, D., et al., Conjoint Analysis Applications in Health - How are Studies being Designed an d 
Reported?: An Update on Current Practice in the Published Literature between 2005 and 2008. Patient,  
2010. 3(4): p. 249 -56. 
19. Bridges, J.F., et al., Conjoint analysis applications in health --a checklist: a report of the ISPOR Good  
Research Practices fo r Conjoint Analysis Task Force. Value Health, 2011. 14(4): p. 403 -13. 
20. Reed Johnson, F., et al., Constructing experimental designs for discrete -choice experiments: report 
of the ISPOR Conjoint Analysis Experimental Design Good Research Practices Task Fo rce. Value in  
Health, 2013. 16(1): p. 3 -13. 
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 27 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  21. Fraenkel, L., et al., Patients' Preferences for Treatment of Hepatitis C. Medical Decision -making , 
2010.  30(1): p. 45 -57. 
22. Wortley, S., et al., Assessing stated preferences for colorectal cancer screening: a critical systematic  
review of discrete choice experiments. Patient, 2014. 7(3): p. 271 -82. 
23. Pignone, M.P., et al., Conjoint analysis versus rating and ranking for values elicitation and 
clarification  in colorectal cancer screening. J Gen In tern Med, 2012. 27(1): p. 45 -50. 
24. O'Connor, A.M., et al., The effects of an 'explicit' values clarification exercise in a woman's decision 
aid regarding postmenopausal hormone therapy. Health Expect, 1999. 2(1): p. 21 -32. 
25. Griffith, J.M., et al., Randomized trial of presenting absolute v. relative risk reduction in the elicitation 
of patient values for heart disease prevention with conjoint analysis. Med Decis Making, 2009. 29(2): p.  
167-74. 
26. Imaeda, A., D. Bender, an d L. Fraenkel, What is most important to patients when deciding about  
colorectal screening? J Gen Intern Med, 2010. 25(7): p. 688 -93. 
27. Benning, T.M., et al., The effect of presenting information about invasive follow -up testing on  
individuals' noninvasive colorectal cancer screening participation decision: results from a discrete  
choice experiment. Value Health, 2014. 17(5): p. 578 -87. 
28. Prevention, C.f.D.C.a. Cigarette Smoking in the United States: Current Cigarette Smoning Among  
U.S. Adults Aged 18 Years and Older . [cited November 22, 2014; Available from:  
http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/resources/data/cigarette -smoking -in-united -states.html.  
29. Stiggelbout, A.M., et al., Shared decision -making : really putting patients at the centre of healthcare.  
BMJ, 2012. 344: p. e256.  
30. Elwyn, G., et al., Shared decision -making  and motivational interviewing: achieving patient -centered  
care across the spectrum of health care problems. Ann Fam Med, 2014. 12(3): p. 270 -5. 
31. Baron, J ., Why expected utility theory is normative, but not prescriptive. Med Decis Making, 1996.  
16(1): p. 7 -9; discussion 14.  
32. Hellinger, F.J., Expected utility theory and risky choices with health outcomes. Med Care, 1989. 
27(3):p. 273 -9. 
33. Nease, R.F., J r., Do violations of the axioms of expected utility theory threaten decision analysis? 
Med Decis Making, 1996. 16(4): p. 399 -403. 
34. Wu, G., The strengths and limitations of expected utility theory. Med Decis Making, 1996. 16(1): p. 9 - 
10; discussion 14.  
35. Ferreira, M.B., et al., Automatic and controlled components of judgment and decision -making . J Pers  
Soc Psychol, 2006. 91(5): p. 797 -813. 
36. Trumbo, C.W., Heuristic -systematic information processing and risk judgment. Risk Anal, 1999. 
19(3):  p. 391 -400. 
37. Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman, Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science, 1974.  
185(4157): p. 1124 -31. 
38. Inbar, Y., J. Cone, and T. Gilovich, People's intuitions about intuitive insight and intuitive choice. J 
Pers Soc Psychol, 2010 . 99(2): p. 232 -47. 
39. Dohmen T, F.A., Huffman D, Sunde W, Interpreting Time Horizon Effects in Inter -Temporal Choic . 
2012, The Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Bonn, Germany.  
40. Bandyopadhyay, D., V.S. Pammi, and N. Srinivasan, Role of affect in decision -making . Progress in  
Brain Research, 2013. 202: p. 37 -53. 
41. Fraenkel, L., et al., A pilot randomized controlled trial of a decision support tool to improve the quality 
of communication and decision -making in individuals with atrial fibrillation. J Am Geriatr Soc, 2012. 
60(8):  p. 1434 -41. 
42. Chien, C.H., et al., Changes in decisional conflict and decisional regret in patients with localised  
prostate cancer. J Clin Nurs, 201 4. 23(13 -14): p. 1959 -69. 
43. Center, E. -b.S.P.E., The Effects of Shared Decision -making  on Cancer Screening -A Systematic  
REview . 2014, Department of Veterans Affairs Health Services Research & Development Series.  
44. Stacey, D., et al., Decision aids for people facing health treatment or screening decisions. The 
Cochrane database of systematic reviews, 2014. 1: p. CD001431.  
45. Kitson, A.L., et al., Evaluating the successful implementation of evidence into practice using the  
PARiHS framework: theoretical a nd practical challenges. Implement Sci, 2008. 3: p. 1.  
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 28 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  46. Rycroft -Malone, J., The PARIHS framework --a framework for guiding the implementation of 
evidence  based  practice. J Nurs Care Qual, 2004. 19(4): p. 297 -304. 
47. Rycroft -Malone, J., Evidence -informed  practice: from individual to context. J Nurs Manag, 2008. 
16(4):p. 404 -8. 
48. Holden, R.J. and B.T. Karsh, The technology acceptance model: its past and its future in health 
care. J Biomed Inform, 2010. 43(1): p. 159 -72. 
49. Schapira, M.M. and J. VanRuisw yk, The effect of an illustrated pamphlet decision -aid on the use of  
prostate cancer screening tests. J Fam Pract, 2000. 49(5): p. 418 -24. 
50. Schapira, M.M., et al., Decision -making at menopause: a randomized controlled trial of a computer  
based  hormone therapy decision -aid. Patient Educ Couns, 2007. 67(1 -2): p. 100 -7. 
51. Schapira, M.M., et al., The Numeracy Understanding in Medicine Instrument: : A Measure of Health  
Numeracy Developed Using Item Response Theory. Med Decis Making, 2012.  
52. Neune r, J.M. and M.M. Schapira, The importance of physicians' risk perception in osteoporosis  
treatment decision -making . Journal of Clinical Densitometry, 2012. 15(1): p. 49 -54. 
53. Schapira, M.M., et al., Public engagement with scientific evidence in health: A  qualitative study 
among  primary -care patients in an urban popula tion. Public Underst Sci, 2014.  
54. Fraenkel, L., Incorporating patients' preferences into medical decision -making . Med Care Res Rev,  
2013. 70(1 Suppl): p. 80S -93S. 
55. Owsley, C., et al., Eye Care Quality and Accessibility Improvement in the Community (EQUALITY) 
for adults at risk for glaucoma: study rationale and design. Int J Equity Health, 2015. 14(1): p. 135.  
56. Chhatre, S., et al., Understanding the Racial and Ethnic Differences in Cost and Mortality Among  
Advanced Stage Prostate Cancer Patients (STROBE). Medicine (Baltimore), 2015. 94(32): p. e1353.  
57. Epstein, A.J. and J.D. Ketcham, Information technology and agency in physicians' prescribing  
decis ions. Rand Journal of Economics, 2014. 45(2): p. 422 -448. 
58. Jubelt, L.E., et al., A Qualitative Evaluation of Patient -Perceived Benefits and Barriers to 
Participation in  a Telephone Care Management Program. Am J Health Promot, 2015. 30(2): p. 117 -9. 
59. Asan, O., E. Chiou, and E. Montague, Quantitative ethnographic study of physician workflow and  
interactions with electronic health record systems. Int J Ind Ergon, 2015. 49: p. 124 -130. 
60. Asan, O., J. Xu, and E. Montague, Dynamic Comparison of Physicians ' Interaction Style with 
Electronic  Health Records in Primary Care Settings. J Gen Pract (Los Angel), 2013. 2.  
61. Asan, O., et al., How physician electronic health record screen sharing affects patient and doctor 
nonverbal  communication in primary care. Patient Educ Couns, 2015. 98(3): p. 310 -6. 
62. Hubbard, R.A., et al., Cumulative probability of false -positive recall or biopsy recommendation after 
10 years of screening mammography: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med, 2011. 155(8): p. 481 -92. 
63. Hubbard, R.A ., et al., The cumulative risk of false -positive fecal occult blood test after 10 years of  
colorectal cancer screening. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev, 2013. 22(9): p. 1612 -9. 
64. Hubbard, R., J. Chubak, and C. Rutter, Estimating screening test utilizati on using electronic health  
records data. EGEMS (Wash DC), 2014. 2(1): p. 14.  
65. Orem, U., The CBC System for Choice -Based Conjoint Analysis. Version 8. Sawtooth Software  
Technical Paper. 2013.  
66. Series., S.S.T.P., The CBC/HB System for Hierarchical Baye s Estimation Version 5.0 Sawtooth  
Software Technical Paper . Copyright 2000 -2009: Sequim, WA.  
67. Affairs, U.S.D.o.V. National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics . 2014; Available from:  
http://www.va.gov/vetdata/.  
68. Lerz KA, A.K., Taylor C, ROse M G, Federman D, Kravetz JD, Ruser C, Schwartz AR, Beck J, Rosa 
M, Cain HC., Low dose -screening CT in a Veteran cohort detects more nodules and more cancers than 
in other studied populations , in American Thoracic Society . 2014: San Diego, CA.  
69. McGinnis, K .A., et al., Validating smoking data from the Veteran's Affairs Health Factors dataset, an  
electronic data source. Nicotine Tob Res, 2011. 13(12): p. 1233 -9. 
70. Corbin J, S.A., Basics of Qualitative Research . Third ed. 2008, Thousand Oaks, California: Sag e 
Publications.  
71. Fowler JF, M.T., Standardized Survey Interviewing . Applied Social Research Methods. Vol. 18. 
1990,  Newbery Park, California: Sage.  
72. Nvivo qualitative data analysis software . 2012, QSR International Pty Ltd.  
73. Holmes -Rovner, M., International Patient Decision Aid Standards (IPDAS): beyond decision aids to  
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 29 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  usual design of patient education materials. Health Expect, 2007. 10(2): p. 103 -7. 
74. Miller, K.M., et al., Promoting decision aid use in primary care usi ng a staff member for delivery. 
Patient  Educ Couns, 2012. 86(2): p. 189 -94. 
75. Schroy, P.C., 3rd, S. Mylvaganam, and P. Davidson, Provider perspectives on the utility of a 
colorectal  cancer screening decision aid for facilitating shared decision -making . Health Expect, 2014. 
17(1): p. 27 -35. 
76. Stacey, D., et al., Decision aids for people facing health treatment or screening decisions. Cochrane  
Database Syst Rev, 2014. 1: p. CD001431.  
77. Lipkus, I.M., Numeric, verbal, and visual formats of conveying healt h risks: suggested best practices  
and future recommendations. Med Decis Making, 2007. 27(5): p. 696 -713. 
78. Zipkin, D.A., et al., Evidence -based risk communication: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med, 2014.  
161(4): p. 270 -80. 
79. Cohen SG, S.A., Sawtooth  Software Research Paper Series: Maximum Difference Scaling: 
Improved  Measures of Importance and Preference for Segmentation . 2003: Sequim, WA.  
80. The MaxDiff System Technical Paper . 2013, Sawtooth Software, Inc: Orem, Utah.  
81. Doll, W.E. and C.S. Clay, Seismic Imaging of the Puritan Batholith, Wisconsin, Using Split Array 
Cross -Correlator Processing. Journal of Geophysical Research -Solid Earth and Planets, 1988. 93(B7): 
p.8023 -&. 
82. Doll, W.J., et al., The meaning and measurement of user satisfaction: A multigroup invariance 
analysis  of the end -user computing satisfaction instrument. Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 2004.  21(1): p. 227 -262. 
83. MacGregor, K., et al., Behavior -change action plans in primary care: a feasibility stu dy of clinicians. J 
Am Board Fam Med, 2006. 19(3): p. 215 -23. 
84. Brandes, K., et al., The characteristics and effectiveness of Question Prompt List interventions in  
oncology: a systematic review of the literature. Psychooncology, 2015. 24(3): p. 245 -52. 
85. Byrne, M.M., J. Weissfeld, and M.S. Roberts, Anxiety, fear of cancer, and perceived risk of cancer  
following lung cancer screening. Med Decis Making, 2008. 28(6): p. 917 -25. 
86. van den Bergh, K.A., et al., Informed decision -making  does not affect healt h-related quality of life in  
lung cancer screening (NELSON trial). Eur J Cancer, 2010. 46(18): p. 3300 -6. 
87. Slatore, C.G., et al., Patient -centered outcomes among lung cancer screening recipients with 
computed  tomography: a systematic review. J Thorac On col, 2014. 9(7): p. 927 -34. 
88. Spiegel, T.N., et al., Psychological impact of recall on women with BRCA mutations undergoing MRI  
surveillance. Breast, 2011. 20(5): p. 424 -30. 
89. Davis, T.C., et al., Rapid estimate of adult literacy in medicine: a shortened screening instrument. 
Fam Med, 1993. 25(6): p. 391 -5. 
90. Schapira, M.M., et al., Development and validation of the numeracy understanding in medicine  
instrument short form. J Health Commun, 2014. 1 9 Suppl 2: p. 240 -53. 
91. Watson, D., L.A. Clark, and A. Tellegen, Development and validation of brief measures of positive 
and negative affect: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol, 1988. 54(6): p. 1063 -70. 
92. Dolan, J.G. and S. Frisina, Randomized controlled trial of a patient decision aid for colorectal cancer  
screening. Med Decis Making, 2002. 22(2): p. 125 -39. 
93. O'Connor, A.M., Validation of a decisional conflict scale. Med Decis Making, 1995. 15(1): p . 25-30. 
94. Watts, K.J., et al., Online prostate cancer screening decision aid for at -risk men: a randomized trial.  
Health Psychol, 2014. 33(9): p. 986 -97. 
95. Brehaut, J.C., et al., Validation of a decision regret scale. Med Decis Making, 2003. 23(4): p.  281-92. 
96. Champion, V., C.S. Skinner, and U. Menon, Development of a self -efficacy scale for mammography.  
Res Nurs Health, 2005. 28(4): p. 329 -36. 
97. Biener, L. and D.B. Abrams, The Contemplation Ladder: validation of a measure of readiness to  
consider  smoking cessation. Health Psychol, 1991. 10(5): p. 360 -5. 
98. Perzynski, A., Health risk assessment software for everyone: Testing the association of numeracy 
with engagement, perceived usefulness, and satisfaction , in Socity for Medical Decision -making . 2014:  
Miami, FL.  
99. Doll, W.J. and G. Torkzadeh, The Measurement of End -User Computing Satisfaction. Mis Quarterly,  
1988. 12(2): p. 259 -274. 
 
HRPP Accepted:  09/21/2016                                                                                Page 30 of 30 
Philadelphia (642); Research & Development (151)  
APPROVED by CMCVAMC IRB on 03/28/2021  100. Perzynski, A., Health risk assessment software for everyone: Testing the association of numeracy 
with engagem ent, perceived usefulness, and satisfaction , in Society for Medical Decision -making . 2014:  
Miami, FL.  
101. Elwyn, G., et al., Developing CollaboRATE: a fast and frugal patient -reported measure of shared  
decision -making  in clinical encounters. Patient Educ Couns, 2013. 93(1): p. 102 -7. 
102. Miller Jr, D.P., et al., Effectiveness of a web -based colorectal cancer screening patient decision aid: 
A randomized controlled trial in a mixed -literacy population. American Journal of Preventive Medicine,  
2011. 40(6): p. 608 -615. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  