1(65) Drug Substance: Avelumab 
Study Number: U
W17106 
Version Number:  Version 7 
Version Date: 05 July 2021 
IND #: Exempt 
PHASE I/II TRIAL OF PER IOPERATIVE AVELUMAB IN 
COMBINATION WITH CHEMORADIATION IN THE TREATMENT OF 
STAGE II/III RESECTABLE ESOPHAGEAL AND 
GASTROESOPHAGEAL JUNCTION CANCER 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 6, 11/11/2018  
2(65) Principal Investigator 
Nataliya Uboha, MD, PhD 
Assistant Professor 
University of Wisconsin 
600 Highland Avenue Madison, WI 53792 
nvuboha@medicine.wisc.edu  
 
Co-Principal Investigator 
Michael Bassetti, MD, PhD 
Assistant Professor 
University of Wisconsin 600 Highland Avenue 
Madison, WI 53792 
bassetti@humonc.wisc.edu 
 
Sub-Investigators 
Dustin Deming, MD 600 Highland Avenue Madison, WI 53792 
ddeming@medicine.wisc.edu 
 Noelle LoConte, MD 
600 Highland Avenue  
Madison, WI 53792 Ns3@medicine.wisc.edu  
 
Sam J. Lubner, MD 600 Highland Avenue 
Madison, WI 53792 
sjlubner@medicine.wisc.edu  
Daniel Mulkerin, MD 
600 Highland Avenue Madison, WI 53792 
Dm2@medicine.wisc.edu  
 Pathology  
Kristina A. Matkowskyj, MD, PhD 600 Highland Ave, L5/183 CSC  Madison, WI 53792 
matkowskyj@wisc.edu 
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 6, 11/11/2018  
3(65) Statistician  
Jens Eickhoff, PhD 
600 Highland Avenue  
Madison, WI 53792 
eickhoff@biostat.wisc.edu  
  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
4(65) PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS 
Title of study:   Phase I/II Trial of Avelumab In C ombination With Chemoradiation  In The Treatment Of Stage 
II/III Resectable Esophageal and Gastroesophageal Junction Canc er.  
Study Phase: I/II 
Background: 
Neoadjuvant chemoradiation is pa rt of the standard of care for patients with stage II and III 
resectable esophageal and gastro esophageal junction (E/GEJ) cancer. This approach is based on 
the results of a large randomi zed clinical trial (CROSS) that d emonstrated superior survival in 
patients receiving neoadjuvant che moradiotherapy followed by su rgical resection compared to 
patients treated with surgery alo ne.  Pathological complete res ponse at the time of resection is 
strongly linked to better surviva l.  However, with current stra tegies pathological complete 
response is achieved only in a m inority (29%) of patients.  Rem aining patients, especially those 
with positive lymph nodes at the time of the resection, are at significant risk for recurrences.  
Five-year survival rate for th ese patients is only 37%, and ove rall survival is as low as 9 months 
for those with persistent l ymph node disease.  Among patients w ho develop recurrent disease, 
most present with distant metastas es outside of th e radiation field.  This is not surprising since 
the accepted treatment paradigm for this diseas e does not targe t possible disseminated 
microscopic systemic disease.  H ence, novel strategies are need ed to improve outcomes of these 
patients.  We propose conducting a p hase I/II clinical trial ev aluating a role of immune 
checkpoint inhibitor in combinati on with chemoradiotherapy and post-operatively in the 
management of resectable esophageal cancer. 
Study Rationale:    
1. A number of preclinical and clin ical studies demonstrated synergism between radiation 
and immunotherapy, suggesting th at combining these approaches c an enhance anti-tumor 
activity and increase treatment efficacy. 
2. Immune checkpoint inhibitors have demonstrat ed promising act ivity in a subset of 
patients with metastatic esophage al and gastric cancers. Moving these agents into 
neoadjuvant setting may increase the cure rate of this disease compared to the standard 
approach. 
3. Current neoadjuvant therapy does  not target any potential mi croscopic disease outside of 
the radiation field since chemo therapy serves primarily as a ra diation sensitizer. 
Immunotherapy treatment will ta rget both local and systemic dis ease. 
Hypothesis: 
We hypothesize that co-administra tion of avelumab with chemorad iation will be well tolerated 
and will increase pathological complete response rate in resect ed tumor specimens. We 
hypothesize that avelumab treatment will also decrease the rate s of disease recurrence. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
5(65) Study Design:    
This is a 2 part Phase I/II clinical trial evaluating the safet y, tolerability and efficacy of 
avelumab in combination with che moradiation in patients with re sectable esophageal and GEJ 
(E/GEJ) cancer. 
Part 1: This is the run-in phase  of the trial. This portion wil l determine the safety and 
tolerability of avelumab in com bination with chemoradiotherapy in 6 patients. The proposed 
combination will be considered as safe if dose limiting toxicit ies are observed in at most 1 
patient.  
Part 2:  This is a Phase 2 portion of the trial, which will eva luate the efficacy of the 
proposed treatment regimen in patie nts with stage II/III resect able E/GEJ cancer. 
Objectives: 
Primary:  Evaluate the safet y of avelumab in combination with c hemoradiation in patients with 
resectable esophageal cancer receiving perioperative therapy.   
Secondary:  Obtain efficacy data  and further safety data of the  proposed drug combination in this 
patient population.  
Exploratory objectives: 
The translational focus of the study will evaluate changes in t umor microenvironment that occur 
in response to radiation and immunotherapy.  
Endpoints:    
Part 1: 
Primary endpoint:  
1. Establish safety and tolerabil ity of the proposed treatment. 
Part 2: 
Primary Endpoint:  
1. Pathological complete response rate. 
Secondary Endpoint: 
1. Safety and tolerability. 
2. Disease free survival. 
3. Incidence of surgi cal complications. 
4. Rate of R0 resection. 
Number of centers & patients:    
One center. Part 1: total of 6 eligible pa tients will be accrued to evaluat e the safety and tolerability of the 
proposed combination.  
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
6(65) Part 2: 18 patients will be enro lled in the phase 2 portion of the trial. 
Population:    
Patients with histologically con firmed, potentially curable squ amous-cell carcinoma, 
adenocarcinoma, or large-cell undi fferentiated carcinoma of E/G EJ who are candidates for 
neoadjuvant therapy and surgical resection. 
Investigational drugs:   
Avelumab (Provided by EMD Serono).  
IND information to be added as needed. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
7(65) TABLE OF CONTENTS  PAGE 
TITLE PAGE 1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 7 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AN D DEFINITION OF TERMS 11  
EVALUATION SCHEDULE 13 
1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 15 
1.1 Esophageal Cancer 15 
1.2 Current Treatment Paradigm of Resectable Esophageal Cancer. 15 
1.3 Immunotherapy in the Treatment of Gastroesophageal Cancers 16 
1.4 Avelumab 16 
 Pharmacology and Pre-Clinical Data 16 
 Clinical Experience with Avelumab 17 
1.5 Rationale for Adding Avelumab to Neoadjuvant Chemoradiation. 17  
1.6 Benefit/Risk and Ethical Assessment 18 
2. STUDY OBJECTIVES/ENDPOINTS 18 
2.1 Part 1 18 
2.2 Part 2 18 
3. STUDY PLAN AND PROCEDURES 19 
3.1 Overall Study Design 19 
3.2 Part 1: Run-In Phase 19 
 Definitions of Dose-Limiting Toxicities 19 
3.3 Part 2: Expansion Cohort 20 
3.4 Post-Treatment Surveillance 20 
3.5 Rationale for Study Design and Doses 20 
4. PATIENT SELECTION CRITERIA 21 
4.1 Study Population 21 
4.2 Inclusion Criteria 21 
4.3 Exclusion Criteria 22 
4.4 Replacement Criteria 23 
5. TREATMENTS 23 
5.1 Chemotherapy Administration 23 
5.2 Avelumab Administration 24 
 Dosing and Administration of Avelumab 24 
 Packaging, Labeling, Storing and Preparation 24 
 Avelumab Product Accountability 25 
5.3 Radiation Therapy 25 
 Dose Specification 25 
 Volume Definitions 25 
 Treatment Planning 26 
 Quality Control 26 
 Treatment Verification 27 
 External Beam Equipment 27 
5.4 Surgical Resection 27 
5.5 Concomitant and post-study treatment(s) 27 
5.6 Restrictions During the Study 27 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
8(65) 
 Administration of Other Anti-Cancer Agents 27 
 Immunosuppressive Agents 27 
 Pregnancy and Contraception 28 
6. STUDY PROCEDURES. 28 
6.1 Visit Schedule and Assessments 28 
6.2 Radiological Evaluations 32 
6.3 Procedures for Handling Subjects Incorrectly Enrolled or Initia ted On 
Investigational Product. 32 
7. TOXICITY MANAGEMENT 33 
7.1 General Toxicity Management Guidelines 33 
7.2 Hematologic Toxicity 33 
7.3 Non-Hematologic Toxicity During Chemoradiation 33 
7.4 Immune-Mediated Toxicities of Avelumab 34 
7.5 Treatment Modification for Sympt oms of Infusion-Related Reactions Caused 
by Avelumab 44 
7.6 Indications for Treatment Discontinuation 44 
7.7 Procedures for Discontinuation of a Subject From Investigationa l Product 45  
7.8 Withdrawal From Study 45 
8. STUDY EFFICACY ASSESSMENTS 45 
8.1 Pathology Evaluation 45 
 Pathologic Complete Response 45 
 Assessment of Treatment Effect 45 
 R0 Assessment 46 
8.2 Disease Surveillance 46 
8.3 Surgical Outcomes 46 
9. CORRELATIVE STUDIES 46 
9.1 Correlative Objectives 46 
9.2 Correlative Studies 47 
 PD-L1 Immunohistochemistry (IHC) 47 
 Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocytes and Examination of the Immune Co ntext 47  
 Versican Proteolysis 47 
9.3 Sample Collection and Banking 48 
 Pretreatment Specimen Collection 48 
 Resection Specimen Collection 48 
 Peripheral Blood Collection 48 
10. STUDY SAFETY ASSESSMENTS 48 
10.1 Definitions 48 
 Adverse Events 48 
 Serious Adverse Event 49 
10.2 Recording of Adverse Events 49 
 Adverse Events Based on Signs and Symptoms 50 
 Adverse Events Based on Examinations and Tests 50 
 Disease Progression 50 
 New Cancers 51 
 Lack of Efficacy 51 
 Deaths 51 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
9(65) 11. DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN 52 
11.1 Oversight and Monitoring Plan 52 
11.2 Monitoring and Reporting Guidelines 52 
 Intermediate Monitoring 52 
11.3 Serious Adverse Event – Reporting within 24 Hours 53 
11.4 Serious Adverse Event – Reporting within 10 Days 53 
11.5 Sponsor-Investigator Responsibilities for SAE Review 53 
11.6 Study Progress Review 54 
12. EXPEDITED REPORTING OF SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS 54 
12.1 SAE Requiring [24] Hour Reporting Occurs at UWCCC 56 
 Report to the UWCCC: 56 
 Reporting to EMD Serono 56 
 Report to the IRB 57 
12.2 SAE Requiring [10] Day Reporting Occurs at UWCCC 57 
 Report to the UWCCC: 57 
 Report to the Sponsor: 57 
 Report to the IRB: 57 
12.3 Other Reporting Requirements 57 
 Reporting to the FDA 57 
13. ETHICAL AND REGULATO RY REQUIREMENTS 58 
13.1 Ethical conduct of the study 58 
13.2 Subject data protection 58 
13.3 Ethics and regulatory review 58 
 Informed consent 58 
 Changes to the protocol and informed consent form 58 
 Audits and inspections 58 
14. STATISTICAL METHODS AND SAMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION 59  
14.1 Sample Size and Power Calculation 59 
 Part 1- Run-in Phase 59 
 Part 2 – Expansion Phase 60 
14.2 Analysis Plan 60 
 General 60 
 Demographics 61 
 Primary Endpoints 61 
 Secondary Endpoints 61 
15. IMPORTANT MEDICAL PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE 
INVESTIGATOR 61  
15.1 Pregnancy 61 
 Maternal Exposure 61 
 Paternal Exposure 62 
16. LIST OF REFERENCES 63 
APPENDIX A. ECOG PERFORMANCE STATUS. 65 
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
10(65) LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1: Management of Immune-med iated Avelumab Toxicities. 
Table 2: FDA Reporting Requirements. 
LIST OF APPENDICES 
Appendix A: ECOG Performance Status. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
11(65) LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITION OF TERMS 
Abbreviation or special term Explanation 
3D-CRT 
ADCC ADR AE ALT ANC AST BUN CBC cc CR CT CTCAE CTV DFS DLT DSMC E/GEJ EC ECOG EOT FDA FFPE GC 
GEJ 
GERD GI GTV Gy HPF HSR ICF IFN-ᵞ 3-D conformal radiotherapy Antibody-dependent cell-me diated cytotoxicity 
Adverse drug reaction Adverse event Alanine aminotransferase Absolute neutrophil count Aspartate aminotransferase Blood urea nitrogen Complete blood count Cubic centimeter Complete response Computed tomography Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events Clinical tumor volume Disease free survival Dose Limiting Toxicity Data and Safety Monitoring Committee Esophageal and gastroesophageal junction Esophageal cancer Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group End of treatment Food and Drug Administration Formalin fixed paraffin embedded Gastric cancer 
Gastroesophageal junction 
Gastroesophageal reflux disease Gastrointestinal Gross tumor volume Gray High power field Hypersensitivity reaction Informed consent form Interferon gamma 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
12(65) IGRT 
IHC IL IMRT irAE ITV IV Kg LFT MoAb NCI OAE pCR PET PD-1 PD-L1 PI PLT PRMC PS PTV SAE SCC 
TIL 
TSH ULN UWCCC VCAN VMAT Image-guided radiotherapy Immunohistochemistry Intensity modulated radiotherapy Interleukin Immune mediated adverse event Internal target volume Intravenous Kilogram Liver function tests Monoclonal antibody National Cancer Institute Other significant adverse events Pathological complete response Positron emission tomography Programmed death 1 Programmed death ligand 1 Principal investigator Platelets Protocol Review Monitoring Committee Performance status Planning target volume Serious adverse event Squamous cell carcinoma 
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes 
Thyroid stimulating hormone Upper limit of normal University of Wisconsi n Carbone Cancer Center 
Versican Volumetric Modulated Arc Therapy 
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
13(65) EVALUATION SCHEDULE 
Pre-Operative Phase: 
Treatment Days Screeninga 1 
(+/- 2 
days)  8 
(+/- 2 
days)  15 
(+/- 2 
days)  22 
(+/- 2 
days)  29 
(+/- 2 
days)  43 
(+/- 3 
days)  57 
(+/- 3 
days)  71 
(+/- 7 
days)  ~80-
100 
(+/- 5 
days)  
Carboplatin (AUC2), 
Paclitaxel (50 mg/m2), IV; 
weekly  x x x x x     
Radiation Therapy  23 fractions, given M-F; estimated 
completion day 35      
Avelumab (10 mg/kg IV), 
Q14 days      x x x   
Surgical Resection          x 
Informed Consent x          
Demographics x          
Medical History x          
Medications x x  x  x x x x  
Physical exam x x  x  x x x x  
Vital Signsb x x  x  x x x x  
Lab Testsc  x x x x x x x x x  
Pregnancy Testd x          
AE’s Evaluation  x  x  x x x x  
Radiologic Evaluatione x        x  
Plasma for Correlates      x  x   
Serum for Correlates      x  x   
Tissue for Correlatesf  x        x 
a. Screening period of 21 days. 
b. Vital signs should include blood pressure, heart rate, respirat ions, temperature, height and weight.  Height will be 
measured at screen ing visit only. 
c. During the screening period, la b tests will include complete b lood count (CBC), absolute neutrophil count (ANC), 
platelets (PLT), albumin, alka line phosphatase, total bilirubin , bicarbonate, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), calcium, 
chloride, creatinine, glucose, pot assium, total protein, aspart ate aminotransferase (AST) , alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT), sodium, and Hepatitis B/C testing Labs done during the screening period will be used for eligibility determination.  On d ays 1, 8, 15, and 22 lab collection will in clude CBC, ANC, PLT, bicar bonate, BUN, chloride, 
creatinine, glucose, potassium, and sodium. On day 29, 43, 57 a nd 71 lab tests will include the same labs as 
performed during the screening p eriod.  Thyroid stimulating hor mone (TSH) and free T4 w ill be tested on days 29 
and 71 only.  
d. Urine or serum pregnancy test (women of childbearing potential ) will be obtained at the time of study enrollment.  
Urine pregnancy test will also b e performed at least once a mon th while on treatment. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
14(65) e. Baseline PET/CT must be perform ed within 3 weeks  of trial enro llment to ensure subject s have no evidence of 
metastatic disease and are eligible for participation.  While o n study, subjects will undergo a restaging PET/CT ~ 1-2 
weeks after the last dose of ave lumab to evaluate treatment res ponse.   
f. Archival tissue at baseline. Som e of the tissue from surgical resection will be used for correlative studies. See 
section 9.3 
Post-Operative Phase:  
Treatment 
Days 0a 1b 
(+/- 3 
days)  15 
(+/- 3 
days)  29 
(+/- 3 
days)  43 
(+/- 3 
days)  57 
(+/- 3 
days)  71 
(+/- 3 
days)  30-day 
Follow-
upf 
(+/- 7 days)  Surveillanceg Long-
Term 
Follow-
up 
Avelumab IV 
(10 mg/kg IV), 
every 14 days  x x x x x x  
  
Medications x x x x x x x x x  
Physical Exam x x x x x x x x x  
Vital Signsc x x x x x x x x x  
Lab Testsd   x x x x x x x   
Pregnancy Testi  x         
AE’s Evaluation x x x x x x x x x  
Radiologic 
Evaluatione  x       x x  
Plasma for 
Correlates   x     x  xh  
Serum for 
Correlates  x     x  xh  
Survivalg          x 
a. This first post-operative visit should occur 2-4 weeks after su rgical resection, unless th ere are complications that 
delay this follow-up appointment. 
b. Avelumab treatment should begin within 12 weeks after the surgi cal resection. It can begin as early as it is deemed 
to be safe from the standpoint of surgical recovery in the opin ion of the treating physician. Avelumab will be 
continued for a total of ~ 3 months (i.e. for three 28 day cycl es or 6 doses every 14 d ays) post-operatively.  
c. Vital signs should include blood pressure, heart rate, respirat ions, temperature, and weight. Height required at day 
0.    
d. Prior to each post-operative av elumab treatment, labs will incl ude CBC, ANC, PLT, albumin, alkaline 
phosphatase, total bilirubin, bi carbonate, BUN, calcium, chlori de, creatinine, glucose, pota ssium, total protein, AST, 
ALT, sodium.  TSH and free T4 w ill be checked on day 1 and day 57.  Labs during follow-up visit (~ 30 days after 
adjuvant therapy completion) will include the same labs as on d ay 1 of adjuvant avelumab treatment initiation.  
e. A new baseline CT of chest without contrast, and CT abdomen an d pelvis with contrast w ill be obtained within 2 
weeks prior to the first dose of adjuvant avelumab administration.  The first surveillance scan (CT of chest, abdomen and pelvis) will be obtained with in 7 days prior to the visit a t 30 days post last dose of adjuvant treatment.  
f. Follow-up visit will occur ~30 da ys after last dose of adjuvant  treatment. At ~90 days after last dose of avelumab 
treatment, patients will be contacted via telephone to assess for any delayed immune-related toxicities. If there are any signals of such toxicities , a clinic visit will be schedule d for a more detailed assessment by the study physician. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
15(65) g. Subjects will be followed with active surveillance while on tri al for 12 months after the completion of all planned 
treatments (calculated from 14 days after last dose of adjuvant  treatment).  Subjects will have clinic visits 
approximately every 16 weeks (+/- 14 days) after the first post -treatment radiological evalu ation.  Surveillance scans 
(CT of chest, abdomen, and pel vis) will be obtained approximate ly every 16 weeks, starti ng after the completion of 
all adjuvant therapy, during the 12 months of surveillance whil e on the study.  After final surveillance visit at 12 
months post adjuvant therapy com pletion, patients will be follo wed per discretion of their treating provider.  
Survival and disease status dat a will be collected over a time period of up to 3 years from medical records and phone 
interviews.  Labs are not mandato ry during surveillance visits,  but labs may be obtained as clinically indicated in the 
opinion of the trea ting physician.  
h. Final correlative blood samples  will be drawn at last planned s urveillance visit ~ 12 month s after adjuvant therapy 
completion (completion = 14  days after last dose).  
i. Urine pregnancy test will be performed prior to start of adj uvant treatment and at least once a month while on 
treatment. 
1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
1.1 Esophageal Cancer 
Esophageal cancer is a major h ealth problem in the world.  In Western countries, lower 
esophagus is the most common site for esophageal cancers, and these tumors frequently involve 
gastroesophageal junction (GEJ).  There are two major histologi cal subtypes of esophageal 
cancer: squamous carcinoma and a denocarcinoma.  Although the in cidence of squamous cell 
esophageal cancer has been declining, esophageal adenocarcinoma  has one of the fastest growing 
incidence among solid tumors in t he Western world.  Esophageal adenocarcinoma is more 
common in males, but over the last few decades its rates among women have been increasing as 
well 1.  Tobacco and alcohol abuse are ma jor risk factors for esophageal SCC, while obesity and 
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) predispose to the develo pment of esophageal 
adenocarcinoma.  The majority of p atients are diagnosed with at  least stage II disease, which 
requires multimodality therapy.  Despite aggressive treatments of potentially curative esophageal 
cancer, about 50% of patients ult imately developed recurrent di sease 2.  Further treatment 
strategies are needed to improve  recurrence free survival in th is patient population since 
metastatic esophageal cancer is universally fatal with current treatment options.   
1.2 Current Treatment Paradigm of Resectable Esophageal Cancer. 
Trimodality therapy is the standa rd approach in the treatment o f resectable stage II or higher 
esophageal cancer.  This method is  based on the results of a la rge randomized clinical trial 
(CROSS) that demonstrated superior  survival in patients receivi ng neoadjuvant 
chemoradiotherapy followed by surgical resection compared to patients treated with surgery alone 2,3.  In this trial, subjects with trimodality arm were treated concurrent chemoradiation that 
consisted of weekly radiosensit izing carboplatin (AUC 2) and pa clitaxel (50 mg/m2) for 5 weeks 
along with daily radiation for a total dose of 41 Gray (Gy) in 23 fractions 3. This treatment was 
well tolerated.  Over 90% of patien ts received all scheduled treatments, and there was no 
increase in postoperative compli cations.  Neoadju vant therapy r esulted in higher rates of R0 
resection and lower rates of l ymph node involvement in resected specimen compared to the 
control arm.  Pathologi cal complete response was see in 29% of patients (23% for 
adenocarcinomas and 49% for S CC) 3.  Pathological complete response at the time of resection 
is strongly linked to better survival.  CROSS trial demonstrated superior survival in patients 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
16(65) treated with trimodality thera py.  However, with current strate gies pathological complete 
response is achieved in a minority of patients.  The remaining patients, especially those with 
positive lymph nodes at the time of the resection, are at signi ficant risk for recurrences.  Five-
year survival rate for these patients is only 37%, and overall survival is as low as 9 months for 
those with persistent lymph node  disease at the time of resecti on 4,5.  Among patients who 
develop recurrent disease, most present with distant metastases  outside of the radiation field 6.  
This is not surprising since the accepted treatment paradigm fo r this disease does not target 
possible disseminated microscopic disease present at the time of diagnosis.  Utilized 
chemotherapy regimen serves primarily as a radiation sensitizer  and has limited activity outside 
of the radiation field.  Prolonge d recovery after extensive sur gery makes it challenging for many 
patients to receive additional therapies in post-operative sett ings.  In a similar patient population 
with resectable gastric cancer treated with peri-operative chem otherapy, less than 50% of 
patients were able to receive a ll planned post-operative treatm ents 7.  In May 2021, adjuvant 
nivolumab was approved in adjuvant setting, This approval was b ased on the results from 
randomized phase 3 trial that enro lled patients with resectable  esophageal and GEJ cancers 
treated with preoperative chemor adiation per CROSS and who had residual disease at the time of 
resection. The benefits were mo st pronounced in patients with S CC.  \These results suggest that 
novel strategies that involve immunotherapy are warranted to im prove outcomes in patients with 
upper gastrointestinal (UGI) malignancies.   
1.3 Immunotherapy in the Treatment of Gastroesophageal Cancers 
Programmed death ligand 1(PD-L1) is a transmembrane protein that is expressed in about 40% of UGI tumors.  PDL1 is one of th e ligands for programmed death 1 (PD-1), which is an 
inhibitory receptor that belongs  to the CD28-B7 family. Binding  to PD1 results in down 
regulation of the T cell immune response allowing PDL1 positive  tumors to evade immune 
mediated cell death.  PDL1 expression has been shown to be asso ciated with greater depth of 
muscle invasion, the presence of  lymph node metastasis, and overall worse prognosis
8,9.  A 
number of immunotherapy agents have demonstrated  activity again st metastatic 
gastroesophageal cancers.  Nivolum ab, an antibody that blocks PD1 receptor, is not approved in 
combination with chemotherapy for patients with untreated advan ced gastric, esophageal and 
GEJ adenocarcinoma based on the results of phase 3 trial Checkm ate 649 11.  Pembrolizumab 
(another anti PD1 antibody) is approved in combination with che motherapy in the 1st line 
treatment of advanced esophageal  cancer based on the results of phase 4 Keynote 590 trial.  Both 
of these agents have also demonstrated activity in more advance d setting in biomarker defined 
patient population 12,13. Avelumab has been found to have encouraging results in this d isease 
when looking at biomarker defined patient population 14. Most recently, nivolumab was 
approved in the adjuvant setting after resection of esophageal and GEJ cancers treated with 
preoperative chemoradiation and who had residual disease at the  time of resection 16. 
1.4 Avelumab 
 Pharmacology and Pre-Clinical Data 
Avelumab is a full human antibody of the immunoglobulin G 1 iso type that specifically targets 
and blocks programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1), the ligand for pr ogram death 1 (PD-1) receptor. 
The nonclinical pharmac ology studies have shown that avelumab functionally enhances T cell 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
17(65) activation in vitro and significan tly inhibits the growth of PD -L1 expressing tumors in vivo 
resulting in the restoration of  cytotoxic T cell response. Avelumab binds to human PD-L1 with a 
high affinity of 0.7 nM and not to any other B7 family proteins , and competitively blocks the 
interaction of PD-L1 with PD-1. T he in vitro study results have shown that by binding to PD-L1, 
avelumab effectively enhances T cell activation as measured by interleukin (IL)-2 or interferon-
gamma (IFN-ᵞ production.  In addition, as a fully human IgG1 antibody, avelumab has the 
potential to trigger the antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytot oxicity (ADCC) against target 
cells expressing PD-L1.  In pre-cl inical studies, avelumab has demonstrated anti-tumor activity 
against murine MC38 colon carcinoma tumors that are characteriz ed by a high level of PD-L1 
expression. The combination of ave lumab with commonly used canc er treatments, such as 
cytotoxic agents and radiation th erapy, resulted in an improved anti-tumor activity.  Radiation 
therapy in particular was found to be a highly synergistic with  avelumab; this treated resulted in 
complete regression of establish ed tumors probably through generating anti-tumor immune 
memory. 
 Clinical Experience with Avelumab  
There are a number of ongoing Phase 1, 2, and 3 clinical trials  evaluating avelumab in the 
treatment of different malignancies. Avelumab has been studied for its activity in gastric and 
esophageal cancer.  In a Phase 1B trial presented at ASCO 2016 meeting, avelumab was 
explored for its activity again st gastroesophageal cancer. In t his early trial avelumab treatment 
resulted in 15% RR in patients who have progressed on standard chemotherapy 15. Avelumab is 
currently being investigated in a randomized trial in similar setting, as well as for its role as 
maintenance therapy in metasta tic disease.  The safety for avel umab is based on 1300 subjects 
treated across different trials .  Most of the observed adverse events (AEs) were either in line with 
those expected in subjects with a dvanced solid tumors or with c lass effects of monoclonal 
antibodies (MoAbs) blocking the PD-1/PD-L1 axis.  In addition, infusion-related reactions 
including drug hypersensitivity reactions and immune-mediated a dverse reactions have been 
identified as important risks for  avelumab.  Respective risk mi tigation measures have been 
implemented in all ongoing clinical studies with avelumab. 
1.5 Rationale for Adding Avelumab to Neoadjuvant Chemoradiation. 
A number of preclinical and clinical studies demonstrated syner gism between radiation and 
immunotherapy, suggesting that combining these approaches can e nhance anti-tumor activity 
and increase treatment efficacy 17-19. Local radiotherapy is thought to induce an 
immunostimulatory form of cell death via activation of multiple pro-inflammatory pathways 
and induction of changes in tumor microenvironment 19.  Although radiation induces 
chemokines that promote recruitment of effector CD8 cell and T-helper CD4 cells, it has also 
been shown to induce local upregulation of the PD-L1, which blo cks antitumor immunity 18,20,21 .  
In esophageal cancers, neoadjuvant chemoradiation has been shown to upregulate PDL1 expression by over 50% compared to pre-treatment baseline 
22. In preclinical models, 
combination of radiation with immune checkpoint inhibitors demo nstrated impressive 
synergism 17,21.  In clinical practice, treatment  with ipilimumab or granulocy te–macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor has b een shown to increase the incide nce of abscopal events in 
patients with melanoma 23.  There a number of ongoing clini cal trials evaluating synergi sm 
between in radiation and immunotherapy in other disease types, including lung cancer, 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
18(65) melanoma, and other solid tumors (clinicatrials.gov).  Hence, g iven the fact that a number of 
immune checkpoint inhibitors have demonstrated promising activi ty in a subset of patients with 
metastatic esophageal and gastric cancers, moving these agents into neoadjuvant setting and 
combining with chemoradiation ma y increase the cure rate of thi s disease 24.  This approach 
takes advantage of the discussed synergism between immunotherap y and radiati on.  In addition, 
immunotherapy treatment will targ et both local and systemic dis ease, which is not addressed 
with the current t reatment paradigm.  
 
1.6 Benefit/Risk and Ethical Assessment 
Based on current clinical experien ce with immunotherapy in meta static setting, we hypothesize 
that adding avelumab to the neoa djuvant therapy can increase cu re rate in some patients with this 
disease.  Although increased toxic ities may be seen when avelum ab is combined with 
chemoradiation, we anticipate tha t overall the proposed regimen  will be tolerable and will 
provide additional efficacy f or a patient population with signi ficant recurrence ra tes using current 
treatment strategies. This clin ical trial is designed to avoid compromises to standard neoadjuvant 
therapy in the studied patient population.  In addition, a run- in phase is built in to ensure there is 
appropriate safety evaluation o f the proposed treatment. No new  safety signal were seen during 
evaluation of toxicities after the first 6 patients enrolled in  this trial.  If this study has promising 
results, future trials may also explore the use of this approach in larger randomized trials . 
2. STUDY OBJECTIVES/ENDPOINTS 
2.1 Part 1 
The primary objective of part 1 of t he trial is to evaluate the  safety of avelumab when combined 
with chemoradiation in the trea tment of resectable E/GEJ cancer . 
 
2.2 Part 2 
Part 2 will further evaluate t he safety and tolerability of the studied drug combination.  It will 
also study activity of avelumab in combination with neoadjuvant chemoradiation in  the treatment 
of resectable E/GEJ cancer. 
Primary Endpoint: 
 Pathologic complete response (pCR) rate. 
 
Secondary Endpoints: 
 Safety and tolerability. 
 Disease free survival. 
 Incidence of surgi cal complications. 
 Rate of R0 resection. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
19(65) 3. STUDY PLAN AND PROCEDURES 
3.1 Overall Study Design 
The study is a two-part phase 1/2 clinical trial conducted in o ne center.  Part 1 is a run-in phase 
with the objective to assess the safety and tolerability of ave lumab in combination with 
chemoradiation.  Adjuvant aveluma b treatment will not be includ ed in DLT evaluation.  Part 1 
will enroll 6 patients, after which further accrual will be sto pped temporarily whi le safety data is 
being obtained.  The second part of the trial will be an open-l abel phase 2 study.  Part 2 will 
obtain further safety data of the proposed drug combination and will evaluate the anti-tumor efficacy of perioperative avelumab and chemoradiation in this p atient population.  Part 2 of the 
trial will enroll 18 additional patients.   
The study will consist of 3 parts: a 21 day screening period, t reatment procedures (neoadjuvant 
therapy, resection and adjuvant therapy), active surveillance for a year after the completion of 
adjuvant therapy.  After the final planned active surveillance visit at 12 months post treatment 
completion, survival data and disease status will be collected via phone calls or medical record 
review every 6 months during the following 3 years.   
3.2 Part 1: Run-In Phase 
Six patients will be enrolled in the run-in phase. The goal of this part is to establish safety and 
tolerability of avelumab when used  in combination with chemorad iation.    Safety evaluation will 
last until the first post-operative clinic visit at about 2-4 w eeks after resection.  Trial enrollment 
will resume after at least 5 patients do not have a DLT during the DLT evaluation period or until 
all 6 patients are seen for post-operative evaluation.  Subject s during the run-in phase will be 
allowed to proceed with adjuvant avelumab therapy while DLT evaluations on other subjects are 
ongoing.  If 2 or more patients e xperience dose-limiting toxici ties (DLT) associated with the 
proposed treatments, further acc rual of the subjects will be halted and trial will be suspended.  
Trial may be reopened in the fut ure with appropriate schedule a nd dose modifications of the 
proposed treatment.  
 Definitions of Dose-Limiting Toxicities  
For the purposes of this trial DLT will be defined as an adverse event (AE) that occurs after 
avelumab administration during preoperative period that is clin ically significant and/or 
unacceptable, and is judged to be a related to the avelumab tre atment by the investigator.  DLT 
evaluations will occur only during the first part of the trial.   Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events (CTCAE) v 5.0 will be used in DLT definition. 
Definition of DLTs: 
 Any complication directly relat ed to neoadjuvant therapy with avelumab that results in 
the delay in surgical resection, such that resection occurs mor e than 10 weeks post 
chemoradiation completion. 
 Any complications from neoadjuvant therapy that precludes surgi cal resection. Disease 
progression that prevents surgical resection is not considered a DLT. Medical 
comorbidities that are not related to neoadjuvant therapy in the opinion of the 
investigator, but which preclude safe surgical resection, are not considered a DLT.  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
20(65)  Any grade 3 immune mediated event (with the exception of esopha gitis) that fails to 
resolve with treatment interrup tion and systemic steroid admini stration (if needed) prior 
to surgical resection. 
 Any grade 4 treatment related non-hematologic to xicities excluding alopecia. 
 Any avelumab related toxicity tha t prevents completion of at least 2 of the 3 planned 
doses in neoadjuvant setting.  
3.3 Part 2: Expansion Cohort 
The second part of the trial w ill enroll 18 additional patients to evaluate activity of the proposed 
treatment and to obtain furth er safety information.  
3.4 Post-Treatment Surveillance 
All patients treated on this st udy will be followed with active  surveillance for 1 year after all 
planned treatment completion whi le on protocol. Active surveill ance will include clinic visit 
every 16 weeks and surveillance CT of chest, abdomen and pelvis  every 16 weeks during the 
first year after the treatment  completion.  Clinic visits and scans can be performed more 
frequently if clinically indicated.  During surveillance visits , labs will be performed only if 
clinically indicated.  Additional procedures, such as endoscopy  should be performed as clinically 
indicated.  After the study is completed at 1 y ear post the com pletion of adjuvant therapy, active 
surveillance will be continued per discre tion of the treating physician.  Surveillance tests after 1 
year will not be mandated by the pr otocol.  Survival data and d isease status will be collected 
from either patients or treati ng physicians every 6 months for up to 3 years after the study 
completion.   
3.5 Rationale for Study Design and Doses 
The study will use previously established doses of carboplatin and paclitaxel when used in 
combination with radiation in neoadjuvant setting for the treat ment of E/GEJ cancer. This 
treatment paradigm was estab lished based on the on randomized p hase III trial evaluating this 
approach 3.  Avelumab will be administere d at its standard dose of 10 mg/ kg IV every 2 weeks. 
During pre-operative period, three doses of avelumab will be ad ministered starting on day 29 of 
treatment.  It will be started on the same day as the last (fif th) chemotherapy infusion. The 
schedule of avelumab administration was chosen to optimize the synergism between 
chemoradiation and immunotherapy, but also to avoid any comprom ise to the standard of care 
chemoradiation administered to this patient population.  A total of 3 months (6 treatments every 
2 weeks) of adjuvant avelumab wi ll be administered post-operatively.  Additional avelumab 
treatments were built into the pro tocol to maximize potential b enefits of avelumab on systemic 
recurrences.  Three months durat ion was chosen to mimic perioperative gastric cancer treatment 
standards, where 9 weeks of preoperative and 9 weeks post-opera tive chemotherapy is typically 
recommended based on MAGIC trial 7. Similar to this approach, w ith the proposed treatment 
schema patients will receive a total of 18 weeks of avelumab.  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
21(65) 4. PATIENT SELECTION CRITERIA 
4.1 Study Population 
This study will enroll patients w ith stage II/III E/GEJ cancer who are candidates for neoadjuvant 
therapy and surgical resec tion with curative intent. 
4.2 Inclusion Criteria 
1. Patients with histologically con firmed, potentially curable squ amous-cell carcinoma, 
adenocarcinoma, or large-cell undi fferentiated carcinoma of the esophagus and GEJ 
(Siewert type 1-3). 
2. Locoregional disease with clini cal stage of T1N1 or T2-3N0-2. 
3. No clinical evidence of metas tatic spread. Staging should inclu de endoscopic ultrasound 
and PET/CT as recommended by NCC N guidelines. PET/CT should be performed within 
3 weeks of signing informed consent. 
4. Age 18 years or older. 
5. ECOG performance status 0-2. 
6. Subjects must be deemed to be poten tial surgical candidates by an evaluating surgeon. 
7. Adequate organ function: 
a. Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥ 1.5 x 109/L 
b. Hemoglobin ≥ 9 g/dL (transfusions allowed) 
c. Platelets ≥ 100 x 109/L 
d. AST/ALT ≤  2.5 x ULN  
e. Total serum bilir ubin of ≤1.5 x institutional upper limit of no rmal (ULN)  
f. Estimated creatinine clearance ≥ 30 mL/min according to the Coc kcroft-Gault 
formula  
8. Female patients of childbearing po tential must have a negative pregnancy test (urine or 
serum) within 21 days prior to the start of the s tudy drug treatment and must agree to use 
adequate birth control if con ception is possible during the stu dy and up to 30 days after 
the completion of a djuvant therapy.  
9. Male patients must agree to use adequate birth control during the study and up to 30 days 
after the last avelumab dose.  
10. Women who are nursing must discon tinue breast-fe eding prior to the enrollment in the 
trial. 
11. Patient must be able and willing to comply with study procedure s as per protocol. 
12. Patient able to understand and w illing to sign and date the wri tten voluntary informed 
consent form (ICF) at screening visit prior to a ny protocol-specific procedures. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
22(65) 4.3 Exclusion Criteria 
1. Prior history of radiati on to the mediastinum. 
2. Diagnosis of cervical e sophageal carcinoma. 
3. Other active malignancy within t he last 3 years (except for non -melanoma skin cancer, a 
non-invasive/in situ cancer, or indolent non metastatic Gleason  6 prostate cancer). 
4. Subjects with an active or known autoimmune disease. Subjects w ith type I diabetes 
mellitus, hypo- or hyperthyroidism only requiring hormone repla cement/suppression, 
skin disorders (such as vitiligo, psoriasis, or alopecia) not r equiring systemic 
immunosuppressive trea tment are eligible. 
5. Current use of immunosuppressive m edication, excep t for the fol lowing:  
a. intranasal, inhaled, topical stero ids, or local steroid injecti on (e.g., intra-articular 
injection) 
b. systemic corticostero ids at physiologic doses ≤ 10 mg/day of pr ednisone or 
equivalent  
c.  Steroids as premedication for hypersensitivity reactions (e.g. , CT scan 
premedication) 
6. Active infection requiring syste mic therapy at th e time of study treatment initiation. 
7. Prior organ transplantation inclu ding allogenic st em-cell trans plantation. 
8. Known history of testing positive for HIV or known immunodefici ency syndrome 
9. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) or hepati tis C virus (HCV) infection at  screening (positive HBV 
surface antigen or HCV RNA if a nti-HCV antibody screening test positive) 
10. Vaccination within 4 weeks of the  first dose of avelumab and while on trials is prohibited 
except for administration of inactivated vaccines.. 
11. Major surgery within prior 4 weeks of treatment initiation (the  surgical incision should be 
fully healed prior to all neoadj uvant treatment  initiation). 
12. Any prior anticancer therapy for esophageal cancer. 
13. History of allergic reactions a ttributed to compounds of similar chemical or biologic 
composition to carboplatin, pacl itaxel or avelumab, including k nown severe 
hypersensitivity reactions to monoclonal antibod
ies (NCI CTCAE v5.0 Grade ≥ 3). 
14. Clinically significan t (i.e., active) cardiovascular disease: c erebral vascular 
accident/stroke (< 6 months prior to enrollment), myocardial in farction (< 6 months prior 
to enrollment), unstable angina, congestive heart failure (≥ Ne w York Heart Association 
Classification Class II), or seri ous cardiac arrhythmia requiring medication. Patients with 
stable rate-controlled atrial fibrillation will  be allowed to p articipate. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
23(65) 15. Other severe acute or chronic medical conditions including  imm une colitis, 
inflammatory bowel disease,  immu ne pneumonitis, pulmonary fibr osis or psychiatric 
conditions including recent (with in the past year) or active su icidal ideation or behavior; 
or laboratory abnormalities that may increase the risk associat ed with study participation 
or study treatment adm inistration or may interfere with the int erpretation of study results 
and, in the judgment of the investigator, would make the patien t inappropriate for entry 
into this study 
16. Psychological, familial, or sociological condition potentially hampering compliance with the study protocol and follow-up schedule.  
4.4 Replacement Criteria 
 In Part 1 of the study, patients  who discontinue the study due to a DLT will not be 
replaced. 
 Patients who discontinue the s tudy prior to receiving any avelu mab doses will be 
replaced in parts  1 and 2 of the study.   
 Patients who are not taken to surgery because of issues unrelat ed to neoadjuvant 
therapy (such as undiagnosed prio r comorbidities, patient prefe rence) will be replaced 
in parts 1 and 2.  
 Patients who develop progressive di sease after avelumab has bee n started will not be 
replaced.   
5. TREATMENTS 
All patients will receive weekly carboplatin and paclitaxel whi le undergoing radiation therapy.  
Chemotherapy will be started on day 1 of radiation and will be given every 7 days. A total of 5 
planned weekly chemotherapy tre atments will be administered dur ing the course of the study.  
Radiation will be administered Monday – Friday until the planne d course is completed.  
Avelumab will be given every two weeks starting on the same day  as the last chemotherapy 
infusion (day 29).  If the last dos e of chemotherapy is omitted  due to cytopenias, avelumab will 
still be administered as origin ally planned.  Avelumab will be continued after radiation is 
completed. A total of 3 doses of avelumab will be administered during the preoperative period.  
Additional 6 doses of avelumab w ill be administered post-operat ively.  
5.1 Chemotherapy Administration 
Paclitaxel 50 mg/m2 and Carboplatin (AUC 2) will be given via intravenous infusion  on days 1, 
8, 15, 22 and 29.  Standard of care proce dures and institutiona l guidelines will be followed 
during the administration of these  agents. Detailed information  about carboplatin and paclitaxel 
can be obtained from drug package inserts. 
Patients who start treatment wit h paclitaxel are at risk for hy persensitivity reaction (HSR).  All 
patients should be premedicated pr ior to paclitaxel administrat ion in order to prevent severe 
HSRs.  Premedication regimen will consist of dexamethasone 12 a nd 6 hours before treatment, 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
24(65) diphenhydramine (or its equivalent) 50 mg IV 30 minutes prior t o chemotherapy, and ranitidine 
50 mg IV 30 minutes prior to chemotherapy. Oral dexamethasone d oses will be 20 mg before 
day 1 treatment, 12 mg before day 8 treatment, and 8 mg before day 15 treatment.  Patients who 
do not take dexamethasone at home will receive IV dexamethasone  before paclitaxel infusion: 20 
mg IV prior to day 1 treatment and 8 mg IV before day 8 and day 15 of treatment.  Patients who 
do not experience hypersensitivity r eaction during the first 3 paclitaxel infusions with the above 
premedication regimen will be asked to stop further premedication with dexamethasone during subsequent treatments since thei r risk for subsequent significa nt HSR is very low 
25. This change 
in premedication is done to prev ent any potential counteractivi ty of the steroids with 
immunotherapy. These patients will continue to receive diphenhydramine and ranitidine.  Dexamethasone can be reinstituted as needed if HSR were to deve lop.  Subjects can continue 
with the study protocol even if d examethasone is required for premedication prior to 
chemotherapy infusion.  
5.2 Avelumab Administration 
 Dosing and Administration of Avelumab 
Avelumab 10mg/kg will be administered intravenously every 2 wee ks for 3 doses prior to 
surgery and for 6 doses as adjuvant treatment postoperatively.  Avelumab dose will be adjusted 
accordingly if subject’s weight changes more than 10% compared to prior treatment or baseline.  
A new baseline weight will be obtained prior to the first post-operative avelumab dose administration.  In order to mi tigate infusion related reaction s, a premedication with an 
antihistamine and with paracetamo l (acetaminophen) 30 to 60 min utes prior to the first 4 
infusions of avelumab is mandato ry (for example, 25-50 mg diphe nhydramine (IV or oral) and 
500-650 mg acetaminophen.  Premedication should be administered  for subsequent avelumab 
infusions based upon clinical judgment and presence/severity of prior infusion reactions. This 
may be modified based on local treatment standards and guidelin es, as appropriate.   
Avelumab will be diluted in Sodium Chloride 0.9% 250mL and infu sed IV over 60 minutes (-
10/+20 minutes) via a 0.2 micron in line filter. Immediately fo llowing the infusion of avelumab, 
it is recommended (but not ma ndatory) to conduct a normal salin e flush using the same tubing 
and 25-100 mL normal saline infused at the same rate to clear the infusion set of residual drug. 
Avelumab should be administered in a setting that allows for im mediate access to an intensive 
care unit or equivalent environment and administration of thera py for anaphylaxis, such as the 
ability to implement immediate resuscitation measures.  Steroid s (dexamethasone 10 mg), 
epinephrine (1:1,000 dilution), antihistamines, bronchodilators , or equivalents, and oxygen 
should be available for immediate access along with equipment f or assisted ventilation.  
Following the avelumab infusion, p atients must be observed for 30 minutes post infusion for 
potential infusion related reactions. 
 Packaging, Labeling, Storing and Preparation 
Avelumab is provided by EMD Ser ono in a form of a sterile, clea r, colorless and non-pyrogenic 
solution for intravenous infusion.  It will be presented in Type I glass vials filled with 10 mL of 
liquid (200 mg/vial), closed with  a rubber septum and sealed wi th an aluminum flip off seal. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
25(65) Each single-use vial contains 200 mg of avelumab, formulated as  a 20 mg/mL preservative-free 
acetate buffered solution at pH 5.2 in presence of Polysorbate 20 and Mannitol.  This product 
will require further dilution prior to IV infusion.  Vials must be stored under refrigeration at 
(2ºC-8ºC) in an environment with temperature control devices.  Temperatures must be recorded 
on a daily basis.  Vials must not b e stored at room temperature , frozen or shaken vigorously. 
Vials must be warmed up to room t emperature by removal from the refrigerator for 30 (+20) 
minutes before preparing each dose.  Avelumab infusion solution  should be prepared by dilution 
in 0.9% Sodium Chloride (Norma l Saline) (or in 0.45% Sodium Chloride, only if the first option 
is not applicable). The verifie d avelumab concentration range i n the infusion solution is 0.016 
mg/mL to 8 mg/mL.  Any unused portion of the solution should be discarded in biohazard waste disposal with final disposal by accepted local and institutional procedures. 
 Avelumab Product Accountability 
Avelumab must not be used for any purpose other than this clini cal trial.  The administration of 
trial drug to subjects who have not been enrolled is considered  a protocol deviation.  
Rigorous drug accountability will be  maintained at all times an d will include (at minimum) the 
following information: record of product receipt, perpetual inv entory (including batch/lot 
number and quantity), subject dos ing and utilization, and disposal.  All clinical study drug 
provided by EMD Serono will be fully reconciled and any unused vials will be either returned to 
the EMD Serono or destroyed afte r trial completion with require d documentation.   
5.3 Radiation Therapy 
The radiation will be administered concurrently with the chemot herapy.  Both 3-D conformal 
radiotherapy (3D-CRT) and intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) will be allowed.  The 
IMRT may be delivered with either conventional IMRT, Volumetric Modulated Arc Therapy (VMAT) or helical IMRT (tomotherapy).  
 Dose Specification 
The planned total dose will be 41.4 Gray (Gy) in 23 fractions at 1.80 Gy/day.  Patients will be 
treated 5 days/week; patients wi ll receive the 41.4 Gy over an approximately 4-1/2-week period.  
The daily prescription dose will be to the selected isodose cur ve, 95% of which must encompass 
the entire planning target volume (PTV).   
 Volume Definitions 
Gross tumor volume (GTV) will include all FDG avid regions by P ET/CT or areas of 
involvement identified by EUS or CT (whichever is larger).  Cli nical tumor volume (CTV) 
consists of a minimum of 4 cm proximal and distal and 1 cm lateral beyond the GTV of the primary tumor. In addition, i nvolved regional lymph nodes will have a ≥ 1 cm CTV in all 
dimensions, and the involved nodal region can be included at th e physician’s discretion. CTVs 
may be edited off of uninvolved normal tissues. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
26(65) PTV will provide a margin around the CTV to compensate for vari ability in treatment setup, 
breathing, or motion during treatment.  A margin around the CTV will define the PTV.  The PTV 
volume must include a minimum of 0.3 cm and a maximum of 2 cm a round the CTV. Margins 
can be adjusted as necessary to avoid excessive normal organ ex posure, as defined in section 
5.2.5.  Use of cross-sectional imaging based image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT) may further limit PTV volume. 
 Treatment Planning 
A PET and CT scan (preferably a PET/CT) for diagnosis and volum etric treatment planning is 
required.  Planning and treatment w ill be performed with the patient in supine position with body 
immobilization.  Treatment will be given free breathing or at b reath hold with gating per the 
treating physician’s discretion. Three mm or smaller CT slices will be obtained from the thoracic 
inlet to the mid-abdomen as part of the PET/CT.  A 4D CT simulation may be obtained to evaluate internal target motion and create an internal target volume (ITV) for better definition of 
PTV margins.  All plans will be limited to the dose constraints  as described below.  
The spinal cord, liver, lung, and heart will be contoured in th eir entirety.  The lungs, heart, spinal 
cord, and liver will be the considered the primary dose-limitin g structures.  When planning the 
beam arrangement to the PTV, the lungs, heart, spinal cord, and  liver should be out of the field to 
the greatest extent possible.  T he dose per fraction to the lun gs, heart, and spinal cord should be 
maintained at 2 Gy or less per fraction to the greatest extent possible.  If tolerance dose to any of 
the normal organs is exceeded i n a treatment plan, alternate be am arrangements should be used. 
Maximum dose to the PTV should not exceed the prescription dose  by >10 %. The maximum 
point dose to critical normal stru ctures outside the PTV including the unspecified tissue should 
not exceed the prescription dose. The treating physician must c arefully consider the tolerance 
dose/volume to each critical normal structure and unspecified t issue. 
5.3.3.1 Critical structures 
 Spinal cord dose will be limited to < 0.1 cc of the cord receiv ing ≥ 40.0 Gy.   
 Heart:  Heart mean dose of < 25 Gy.  
 Liver:  mean liver dose not to exceed 25 Gy. 
 Lung:  the volume(V) of lung outsi de of the PTV that receives 20 Gy will be limited to < 
30% (V 20 < 30%). Mean lung dose < 18 Gy. 
 Kidney:  combined kidneys V 20<33%, each individual kidney V 20 <50%. 
 Quality Control 
Dose heterogeneity:  Maximum dose to PTV should not exceed the prescription dose by > 10%. 
The maximum point dose to critical normal structures outside th e PTV including the unspecified 
tissue should not exceed the prescription dose.  The treating p hysician must carefully consider 
the tolerance dose/volume to each  critical normal structure and  unspecified tissue. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
27(65) 
 Treatment Verification 
First day portal, CT or MRI images of each field must be obtain ed for position verification.  At 
least once weekly verification films or images will be obtained  per institutional guidelines.  For 
IMRT or PTV margins of less than  5mm, daily 3D imaging is requi red. 
 External Beam Equipment 
Mega-voltage radiation therapy will be used.  IMRT treatment planning and delivery, including 
with tomotherapy, can be used in lieu of 3D conformal planning as described above. 
5.4 Surgical Resection 
Surgical resection will be performed ~8 weeks after the complet ion of chemoradiation.  The most 
appropriate surgical interventi on will be chosen by the operating surgeon.  Resected specimen 
will be evaluated in our pathology department for any residual disease and treatm ent effect.  Part 
of the resected specimen will also be evaluated in Dr. Deming’s research laboratory for 
correlative biomarkers.   
5.5 Concomitant and post -study treatment(s) 
Concomitant therapy includes any prescription medications or ov er-the-counter preparations 
used by a patient from ≤ 7 days prior to the first day of neoad juvant treatment initiation to the 
end of treatment visit.  All concomitant therapy, including ane sthetic agents, vitamins, 
homeopathic/herbal remedies, nut ritional supplements, will be r ecorded during the screening and 
treatment period, starting from the date of signature of inform ed consent, and ending at follow up 
visit.  Vaccination with live vaccines within 4 weeks of the fi rst dose of avelumab and while on 
trial is prohibited. 
5.6 Restrictions During the Study 
 Administration of Other Anti-Cancer Agents 
Administration of anti-cancer age nts other than those specified in the protocol is not allowed 
during study enrolment.  
 Immunosuppressive Agents 
The use of immunosuppressive agent s is prohibited during the treatment with avelumab and until 
surgical resection, including immunosuppressive doses of systemic corticosteroids.  Subjects will 
be allowed to use topical, ocular, intra-articular, intranasal and inhalational corticosteroids (with 
minimal systemic absorption).  Physiologic replacement doses of  systemic corticosteroids are 
permitted at doses of ≤ 10 mg of daily prednisone (or equivalent). A brief course of corticosteroids for prophylaxis (e.g., for contrast dye allergy  or to prevent taxane related 
hypersensitivity reaction) or for treatment of non-autoimmune c onditions (e.g., delayed-type 
hypersensitivity reaction caused by a contact allergen) is permitted.  However, it is preferable 
that steroid premedication is re duced or omitted by week 22 of treatment if no hypersensitivity 
reaction with taxanes has been observed during prior weeks.  
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
28(65) 
 Pregnancy and Contraception 
All patients must be made fully aware of the information relating to the potential for reproductive toxicity as detailed in the Informed Consent Form.   Patients of child bearing 
potential and their partners, who are sexually active, must agr ee to the use of two highly effective 
forms of contraception throughout t heir participation in the st udy and for 30 days after the 
completion of the adjuvant therapy. 
Women of childbearing potential 
Females of childbearing potential should use reliable methods o f contraception from the time of 
screening until 30 days post the completion of adjuvant therapy .  Acceptable methods of 
contraception include tubal ligat ion, oral, transdermal or intr a-vaginal hormonal contraceptives, 
medroxyprogesterone injections (e.g,. Depo-Provera), copper-ban ded intra-uterine devices, 
hormone impregnated intra-uterine systems and vasectomised part ners.  All methods of 
contraception should be used in combination with the use of a c ondom by their male sexual 
partner for intercourse. 
Males 
Male patients must use a condom during sexual intercourse with female sexual partners 
including a pregnant partner during the study and for 30 days a fter the completion of adjuvant 
therapy.  Male patients should a void procreation during the tri al and for 30 days after the 
completion of adjuvant therapy. 
6. STUDY PROCEDURES. 
Patients who are eligible for the study will be enrolled in the  clinical trial after they provide 
informed consent for study participation.  There will be no ran domization in this trial.  This is an 
open label trial.   
6.1 Visit Schedule and Assessments  
Screening Visit (within 21 days of treatment initiation): 
 Review eligibility criteria 
 Demographic data  
 Review cancer history 
 Review past medical history and surgical history  
 Vital Signs (weight, height, blood pressure, heart rate, temper ature) 
 ECOG performance status de termination (Appendix B) 
 Complete physical examination; com plete neurological exam is no t required unless 
clinically indicated 
 Medication reconciliation 
 Lab work: CBC, ANC, PLT, albumin, alkaline phosphatase, total b ilirubin, 
bicarbonate, BUN, calcium, chloride, creatinine, glucose, potas sium, total protein, 
AST, ALT, sodium, Hepatitis B/C testing  
 Obtain informed consent for trial enrollment  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
29(65) Days 1, 8, 15, 22 (+/- 2 days): 
 Vital Signs (weight, blood pressu re, heart rate, temperature) 
 Medication reconcili ation (day 1 and 15 only) 
 ECOG performance status de termination (day 1 and 15 only) 
 Complete physical examinati on (on days 1 and 15 onl y); complete  neurological exam 
is not required unless clinically indicated 
 Review occurrence or change of  existing conditions (day 1 and 15 only) 
 Review adverse events 
 Document details of any new AE s and obtain any new information about AEs 
ongoing at the last visit 
 Lab work: CBC, ANC, PLT, bicarbona te, BUN, chloride, creatinine, glucose, 
potassium, and sodium 
 Carboplatin and paclitaxel administration 
 Radiation will be continued daily, Monday – Friday (excluding weekends and holidays) to comple te a planned course 
 Urine pregnancy test in females  of childbearing potential shoul d be performed prior 
to all treatment initiation a nd at least monthly during the duration of active 
perioperative treatment while on the study. Urine pregnancy tes t will not be 
performed on monthly basis after a ll the adjuvant treatment is completed. Urine 
pregnancy test will not be repe ated during hospitalization for surgical resection. 
 
Day 29 (+/- 2 days): 
 Vital Signs (weight, blood pressu re, heart rate, temperature) 
 Medication r econciliation 
 ECOG performance sta tus determination 
 Complete physical examination; c omplete neurological exam is not required unless 
clinically indicated 
 Review occurrence or change  of existing conditions 
 Review adverse events that have occurred since the previous vis it (starting with cycle 
2) 
 Document details of any new AE s and obtain any new information about AEs 
ongoing at the last visit 
 Lab work: CBC, ANC, PLT, albumin, alkaline phosphatase, total b ilirubin, 
bicarbonate, BUN, calcium, chlorid e, creatinine, glucose, potas sium, total protein, 
AST, ALT, sodium, TSH, free T4 

 Carboplatin and paclitaxel administration 
 Avelumab administration, after c hemotherapy administration is complete. 
Premedication will be repeated prior to the avelumab administra tion.  
 Radiation will be continued daily, Monday – Friday (excluding weekends and 
holidays) to comple te a planned course 
 Blood draw for correlative studies 
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
30(65) Day 43, 57 (+/- 3 days):  
 Vital Signs (weight, blood pressu re, heart rate, temperature) 
 Medication r econciliation 
 ECOG performance sta tus determination 
 Complete physical examination; c omplete neurological exam is not required unless 
clinically indicated 
 Review occurrence or change  of existing conditions 
 Review adverse events  
 Document details of any new AE s and obtain any new information about AEs 
ongoing at the last visit 
 Lab work: CBC, ANC, PLT, albumin, alkaline phosphatase, total b ilirubin, 
bicarbonate, BUN, calcium, chlorid e, creatinine, glucose, potas sium, total protein, 
AST, ALT, sodium.  
 Avelumab administration 
 Blood draw for correlative studies (Day 57 only) 
 Day 71 (+/- 7 days): 
 Vital Signs (weight, blood pressu re, heart rate, temperature) 
 Medication r econciliation 
 ECOG performance sta tus determination 
 Complete physical examination; c omplete neurological exam is not required unless 
clinically indicated 
 Review occurrence or change  of existing conditions 
 Review adverse events  
 Document details of any new AE s and obtain any new information about AEs 
ongoing at the last visit 
 Lab work: CBC, ANC, PLT, albumin, alkaline phosphatase, total b ilirubin, 
bicarbonate, BUN, calcium, chlorid e, creatinine, glucose, potas sium, total protein, 
AST, ALT, sodium,TSH and free T4. 
 Restaging PET/CT should be perf ormed prior to this visit 
 Day 80-100 (+/- 5 days): 
 Surgical resection 
 Tumor sample collected f or correlative studies 
 Post-Operative Follow-up (2-4 w eeks after the surgical 
resectio n): 
 Vital Signs (weight, blood pressu re, heart rate, temperature) 
 Medication r econciliation 
 ECOG performance sta tus determination 
 Complete physical examination; c omplete neurological exam is not required unless 
clinically indicated 
 Review occurrence or change  of existing conditions 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
31(65)  Review adverse events  
 Document details of any new AE s and obtain any new information about AEs 
ongoing at the last visit  
Adjuvant Avelumab every 2 weeks fo r a total of 6 doses (i.e. three 28 day cycles), starting 
within 12 weeks after su rgical resection:  
 Vital Signs (weight, blood pressu re, heart rate, temperature)  
 Medication r econciliation 
 ECOG performance sta tus determination 
 Complete physical examination; c omplete neurological exam is not required unless 
clinically indicated 
 Review occurrence or change  of existing conditions 
 Review adverse events  
 Document details of any new AE s and obtain any new information about AEs 
ongoing at the last visit 
 Lab work: CBC, ANC, PLT, albumin, alkaline phosphatase, total b ilirubin, 
bicarbonate, BUN, calcium, chlorid e, creatinine, glucose, potas sium, total protein, 
AST, ALT, sodium.  TSH and free T4 will be obtained on day 1 and day 57 of treatment.  
 New baseline CT of chest, abdom en and pelvis must be obtained w ithin two weeks 
prior to the first dose of adjuvant avelumab administration.  
 Blood draws for correlative studi es on first and last days of a velumab administration, 
pre infusion.  
 Follow-up Visit, 30 days (+/- 7 days) after adjuvant treatment completion: 
 Vital Signs (weight, blood pressu re, heart rate, temperature)  
 Medication r econciliation 
 ECOG performance sta tus determination 
 Complete physical examination; c omplete neurological exam is not required unless 
clinically indicated 
 Review occurrence or change  of existing conditions 
 Review adverse events  
 Document details of any new AE s and obtain any new information about AEs 
ongoing at the last visit 
 Lab work: CBC, ANC, PLT, albumin, alkaline phosphatase, total b ilirubin, 
bicarbonate, BUN, calcium, chlorid e, creatinine, glucose, potas sium, total protein, 
AST, ALT, sodium, TSH and free T
4. 
 CT of chest, abdomen and pelvis w ill be obtained prior to this visit. 
 ~90 days after avelumab treatment  completion, patients will be contacted via 
telephone to assess fo r any delayed immune -related toxicities. If there are any signals 
of such toxicities, a clinic visi t will be scheduled for a more  detailed assessment.  
  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
32(65) Surveillance Follow Up (every 16 weeks +/- 14 days) after adjuvant therapy completion for a duration of 12 months:  
 Vital Signs (weight, blood pressu re, heart rate, temperature) 
 Medication r econciliation 
 ECOG performance sta tus determination 
 Complete physical examination; c omplete neurological exam is not required unless 
clinically indicated 
 Review occurrence or change  of existing conditions 
 Review adverse events  
 Document details of any new AE s and obtain any new information about AEs 
ongoing at the last visit. 
 Surveillance CT chest, abdome n and pelvis should be obtained pr ior to follow-up 
visits, approximately every 4 mon ths during the f irst year adjuvant therapy 
completion. 
 Labs are not required, but can be ob tained as clinically indica ted in the opinion of the 
treating physician. 
 Survival Follow-Up: 
 Subjects will be followed for sur vival and disease progression after completing the 
final surveillance visit.  Sur vival follow up should continue a t least every 6 months 
for 3 years after final surveill ance visit or death, whichever is sooner.  When possible, 
the following informa tion will be obtained f rom subjects (via telephone is acceptable) 
or medical record (if available): 
o Disease status and date of dise ase progression or recurrence (if known and 
applicable)  
o Anti-cancer therapy received s ince end of treatment visit  
o Date of death (if applicable)  
6.2 Radiological Evaluations 
Subjects will be required to ha ve a restaging PET/CT about 2 we eks after the last avelumab dose 
to evaluate treatment response a nd to rule out progressive meta static disease. After surgical 
resection, subjects will undergo surveillance CT of chest, abdo men and pelvis every 16 weeks 
during the first 12 months. There i s no requirement for disease assessment after the end of 
treatment visit.  Subjects who stop study treatment before comp letion for any reason will not be 
required to follow study imaging requirements . 
6.3 Procedures for Handling Subjects Incorrectly Enrolled or Initia ted On 
Investigational Product. 
Subjects who are incorrectly enr olled in the study will be with drawn from study participation and 
replaced.  If study treatments have been initiated, patients wi ll be monitored for development of 
any toxicities. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
33(65) 7. TOXICITY MANAGEMENT 
7.1 General Toxicity Management Guidelines  
These guidelines are applicable for toxicity management during the study duration with the 
exception of the DLT evaluati on period in part 1. Any toxicity observed during the course of the 
study should be managed by interr uption and/ or dose reduction of the drug if deemed 
appropriate by the Investigator . In general, any Grade 4 AE wil l require treatment 
discontinuation with avelumab ex cept for single laboratory valu es out of normal range that are 
unlikely related to study treatment as assessed by the Investig ator, do not have any clinical 
correlate, and resolve within 7 da ys with adequate medical management. 
7.2 Hematologic Toxicity 
During the pre-operative phase, if on days 8, 15, 22, 29 ANC is  < 1000 and PLT < 50, 
chemotherapy should not be admin istered and delayed by one week . On day 29, which is the last 
treatment, chemotherapy can be  administered if ANC is ≥ 750.  S ince bone marrow toxicity is 
not specifically associated with avelumab, avelumab can be admi nistered even with the above 
labs.  However, avelumab should be  held for grade 4 thrombocyto penia, grade 3 
thrombocytopenia with bleedi ng, grade 4 neutropenia or any febrile neutropenia.  The first dose 
of avelumab can be delayed up to 10  days if needed. If the last  dose of chemotherapy is not given 
because of hematologic toxicit y and avelumab needs to be delaye d, avelumab can be started as 
soon as there is adequate bone marrow recovery.  
7.3 Non-Hematologic Toxicity During Chemoradiation 
Any Grade ≥ 3 non-hematological treatment related toxicity (exc ept for alopecia or esophagitis) 
during chemoradiation should resu lt in dose delays of chemother apy and appropriate supportive 
measures should be instituted until toxicity resolves to Grade ≤ 2.  Radiation should continue as 
planned unless toxicities are t hought to be speci fically radiat ion related and would not resolve 
without radiation interruption i n the opinion of the investigat or.   
Intravenous therapy and radiation can continue with ongoing gra de 3 esophagitis, which can be 
seen in the setting of esophageal  chemoradiation. Appropriate supportive measures should be 
initiated per institutional pract ice standards.  In some instan ces, medical support with intravenous 
hydration and parenteral nutri tion may be necessary for support in order to complete the planned 
neoadjuvant treatment.  In the eve nt of grade 4 treatment induced esophagitis all of the treatment 
should be held until esophagit is resolves to grade ≤ 3.  
If radiation has to be interrupted for toxicity, additional rad iation days may be added at the end 
of the treatment.  Chemotherapy w ill be added as needed to match weekly radiation schedule. 
Avelumab may potentially be sta rted after day 29, but its start  date must coincide with the last 
chemotherapy infusion or be give n on the day chemotherapy was p lanned (if chemotherapy was 
held for hematologic toxic ities as deta iled above).  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
34(65) 7.4 Immune-Mediated Toxicities of Avelumab 
Avelumab treatment may result in  toxicities related to the acti vation of immune system and its 
off-target effects.  These immune -related AEs (irAEs) may be se en after the first dose or as late 
as weeks after the last  dose of avelumab.   
Dose reduction of avelumab is not allowed.  Dose delays or trea tment discontinuation may be 
necessary depending on the grade and timing of the AE.  If AEs require more than 2 week delay 
for the scheduled dose, then avelu mab treatment must be discont inued. This does not apply to the 
first dose of avelumab in neoadj uvant setting, which may be delayed to match the last dose of 
chemotherapy.  
Any Grade 3 avelumab attributed A Es require treatment discontin uation with avelumab 
except for any of the following :  
 Transient (≤ 6 hours) Grade 3 flu-l ike symptoms or fever, which is controlled with 
medical management. 
 Transient (≤ 24 hours) Grade 3 fa tigue, local reactions, headac he, nausea, emesis that 
resolves to Grade ≤ 1.  
 Single laboratory values out of nor mal range (excluding Grade ≥ 3 liver function test 
increase) that are unlikely related to study treatment accordin g to the Investigator, do not 
have any clinical correlate, and resolve to Grade ≤ 1 within 7 days with adequate medical 
management. Asymptomatic eleva tion of amylase or lipase do not require drug 
interruption or discontinuation, even if these lab abnormalitie s are thought to be related to 
avelumab. 
 Tumor flare phenomenon defined as local pain, irritation, or ra sh localized at sites of 
known or suspected tumor. 
 Change in ECOG PS to ≥ 3 that does not resolve to ≤ 2 within 14  days (infusions should 
not be given if the ECOG PS is ≥ 3 on the day of study drug adm inistration). 
 Grade 3 esophagitis during neoadjuvant therapy does not necessitate treatment 
discontinuation. 
Any Grade 2 avelumab attributed AEs  should be managed as follow s: 
 If a Grade 2 AE resolves to Gra de ≤ 1 by the next scheduled ave lumab administration, 
treatment may continue. 
 If a Grade 2 AE does not resolve to Grade ≤ 1 by the next sched uled avelumab 
administration, infusions should not be given. If treatment is delayed by more than 2 
weeks, the subject should permanen tly discontinue treatment wit h avelumab (except for 
hormone insufficiencies that ca n be managed by replacement ther apy; for these hormone 
insufficiencies, up to 2 subsequent doses may be omitted). This is not applicable to 
esophagitis during neoadjuvant phase of the treatment.  
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
35(65)  Upon the second occurrence of the s ame Grade 2 AE (except for h ormone insufficiencies 
that can be managed by replacemen t therapy) in the same subject , treatment with 
avelumab has to be permanently discontinued. This is not applicable to esophagitis during neoadjuvant phase of  the treatment.  
 No treatment interruptions/disco ntinuation is needed for asymptomatic elevation of 
amylase or lipase. 
For any additional immune mediate d toxicities tha t are not list ed in Table 1 below, treatment 
should be held for any AE of Grade 2 or higher until resolution  down to grade 1 or 0. Treatment 
should be discontinued permanently  if toxicities remain at grad e 2 or above for over 2 weeks 
despite supportive me asures (including ste roids if needed). 
Table 1: Management of Immune-R elated Adverse Events
. 
GASTROINTESTINAL irAEs 
Severity of Diarrhea / Colitis 
(NCI-CTCAE v5.0) Initial Management Follow-up Management 
Grade 1 
Diarrhea: increase of < 4 
stools/day over baseline 
Colitis: asymptomatic  Continue avelumab therapy 
Symptomatic treatment (for 
example, loperamide) Close monitoring for worsening symptoms 
Educate subject to report worsening 
immediately 
If worsens: Treat as Grade 2, 3 or 4  
Grade 2 Diarrhea:  increase of 4 to 6 
stools per day over baseline; IV fluids indicated < 24 hours; not interfering with ADL 
Colitis:  abdominal pain; blood 
in stool  Delay avelumab therapy 
Symptomatic treatment If improves to Grade < 1: Resume avelumab 
therapy 
If persists > 5 to 7 days or recurs: Treat as 
Grade 3 to 4 
Grade 3 to 4 
Diarrhea (Grade 3): increase of 
≥ 7 stools per day over baseline; hospitalization indicated; limiting self care ADL   
Colitis (Grade 3):  severe 
abdominal pain, peritoneal 
signs. 
Grade 4:  life-threatening, 
urgent intervention indicated Withhold avelumab for Grade 3. 
Permanently discontinue 
avelumab therapy for Grade 4 or recurrent Grade 3. 
1 to 2 mg/kg/day prednisolone 
IV or equivalent 
Add prophylactic antibiotics 
for opportunistic infections  
Consider lower endoscopy  If improves:  
Continue steroids until  Grade < 1, then taper 
over at least 1 month; resume avelumab therapy 
following steroids taper (for initial Grade 3). 
 If worsens, persists > 3 to 5 days, or recurs after 
improvement: 
Add infliximab 5 mg/kg (if no contraindication), 
Note: Infliximab should not be used in cases of perforation or sepsis  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
36(65) DERMATOLOGICAL irAEs 
Grade of Rash 
(NCI-CTCAE v5.0) Initial Management Follow-up Management 
Grade 1 to 2  
Covering ≤ 30% body surface 
area  Continue avelumab therapy  
Symptomatic therapy (for 
example, antihistamines, topical steroids)  If persists > 1 to 2 weeks or recurs:  
Withhold avelumab therapy 
Consider skin biopsy   Consider 0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day prednisolone or 
oral equivalent. Once improving, taper steroids 
over at least 1 month, consider prophylactic 
antibiotics for opportunistic infections, and resume avelumab therapy following steroids taper. 
If worsens: Treat as Grade 3 to 4  
Grade 3 to 4 
Covering > 30% body surface 
area; life threatening 
consequences  Withhold avelumab for Grade 3. 
Permanently  discontinue for 
Grade 4 or recurrent Grade 3. 
Consider skin biopsy  
Dermatology consult  
1 to 2 mg/kg/day prednisolone 
or equivalent  
Add prophylactic antibiotics 
for opportunistic infections If improves to < Grade 1:  
Taper steroids over at least 1 month , resume avelumab therapy following steroids taper (for 
initial Grade 3)  
  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
37(65) PULMONARY irAEs 
Grade of Pneumonitis 
(NCI-CTCAE v5) Initial Management Follow-up Management 
Grade 1 
Asymptomatic; clinical or 
diagnostic observations only, intervention not indicated  Consider withholding avelumab therapy  
Monitor for symptoms every 
2 to 3 days  
Consider Pulmonary and 
Infectious Disease consults  Re-assess at least every 3 weeks 
If worsens: Treat as Grade 2 or Grade 3 to 4  
Grade 2 
Symptomatic; medical 
intervention indicated; limiting instrumental ADL Withhold avelumab therapy 
Pulmonary and Infectious 
Disease consults 
Monitor symptoms daily, 
consider hospitalization  
1 mg/kg/day prednisolone or 
equivalent  
Add prophylactic antibiotics 
for opportunistic infections 
Consider bronchoscopy, lung 
biopsy  Re-assess every 1 to 3 days  If improves:  
When symptoms return to Grade < 1, taper 
steroids over at least 1 month  
If not improving after 2 weeks or worsening: 
 or worsening:  Treat as Grade 3 to 4  
Grade 3 to 4 
Severe symptoms; limiting self 
care ADL; oxygen indicated ; 
life-threatening respiratory compromise– urgent intervention indicated(e.g., tracheotomy or intubation) Permanently discontinue avelumab therapy 
Hospitalize  Pulmonary and Infectious 
Disease consults 
1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg/day 
prednisolone or equivalent  
Add prophylactic antibiotics 
for opportunistic infections  
Consider bronchoscopy, lung 
biopsy  If improves to Grade < 1:  
Taper steroids over at least 6 weeks  
If not improving after 48 hours or worsening:  Add additional immunosuppression (for 
example, infliximab, cyclophosphamide, IV immunoglobulin, or mycophenolate mofetil)  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
38(65) HEPATIC irAEs 
Grade of Liver Test 
Elevation 
(NCI-CTCAE v5) Initial Management Follow-up 
Grade 1 
AST or ALT > ULN to 3 x 
ULN; >1.5 to 3.0x baseline if 
baseline was abnormal and / or total bilirubin > ULN to 1.5 x ULN; >1.0 to 1.5x baseline if baseline was abnormal  Continue avelumab therapy Continue liver function monitoring  
If worsens: Treat as Grade 2 or 3 to 4  
Grade 2 
AST or ALT > 3.0 to ≤ 5 x 
ULN; >3.0 to 5.0x baseline if 
baseline was abnormal and / or 
total bilirubin > 1.5 to ≤ 3 x ULN ; >1.5 to 3.0x baseline if baseline was abnormal Delay avelumab therapy 
Increase frequency of 
monitoring to every 3 days  If returns to baseline: resume routine monitoring, resume avelumab therapy 
If elevations persist > 5 to 7 days or worsen:  
0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day methylprednisolone or oral 
equivalent and when LFT returns to Grade 1 or 
baseline, taper steroids over at least 1 month, consider prophylactic antibiotics for opportunistic infections , and resume avelumab 
therapy 
Grade 3 to 4 
AST or ALT > 5 x ULN; >5.0x 
baseline if baseline was abnormal and / or total bilirubin > 3 x ULN; >3.0x baseline if baseline was abnormal  Permanently discontinue avelumab therapy  
Increase frequency of 
monitoring to every 1 to 2 days  
1 to 2 mg/kg/day prednisolone 
or equivalent 
Add prophylactic antibiotics 
for opportunistic infections  
Consult 
gastroenterologist/hepatologist 
Consider obtaining MRI/CT 
scan of liver and liver biopsy if clinically warranted  If returns to Grade < 1:  
Taper steroids over at least 1 month  
If does not improve in > 3 to 5 days, worsens or 
rebounds:  
Add mycophenolate mofetil 1 gram (g) twice 
daily  
If no response within an additional 3 to 5 days, 
consider other immunosuppressants per local guidelines  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
39(65) Renal irAEs 
Grade of Creatinine 
Increased 
(NCI-CTCAE v5) Initial Management Follow-up Management 
Grade 1 
Creatinine increased > ULN to 
1.5 x ULN Continue avelumab therapy Continue renal function monitoring  
If worsens: Treat as Grade 2 to 3 or 4 
Grade 2 to 3 
Creatinine increased > 1.5 and 
< 6 x ULN Withhold avelumab therapy 
Increase frequency of 
monitoring to every 3 days 
1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg/day 
prednisone or equivalent. 
Add prophylactic antibiotics 
for opportunistic infections 
Consider renal biopsy Nephrology consul
t If returns to Grade < 1: 
Taper steroids over at least 1 month, and resume 
avelumab therapy following steroids taper. 
If worsens: 
Treat as Grade 4 
Grade 4 Creatinine increased > 6 x 
ULN Permanently discontinue avelumab therapy 
Monitor creatinine daily 1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg/day 
prednisone or equivalent. 
Add prophylactic antibiotics 
for opportunistic infections 
Consider renal biopsy If returns to Grade < 1: 
Taper steroids over at least 1 month 
  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
40(65) CARDIAC irAEs 
Myocarditis Initial Management Follow-up Management 
New onset of cardiac signs or 
symptoms and / or new laboratory cardiac biomarker elevations (e.g. troponin, CK-
MB, BNP) or cardiac imaging 
abnormalities suggestive of myocarditis.  Withhold avelumab therapy 
Hospitalize. In the presence of life 
threatening cardiac 
decompensation, consider 
transfer to a facility  
experienced in advanced heart 
failure and arrhythmia 
management 
Cardiology consult to establish 
etiology and rule-out immune-
mediated myocarditis.  
Guideline based supportive 
treatment as per cardiology 
consult.* 
Consider myocardial biopsy if 
recommended per cardiology 
consult. If symptoms improve and immune-mediated 
etiology is ruled out, re-start avelumab therapy. 
 
If symptoms do not improve/worsen, viral 
myocarditis is excluded, and immune-mediated etiology is suspected or confirmed following cardiology consult, manage as immune-mediated myocarditis. 
Immune-mediated myocarditis Permanently discontinue 
avelumab. 
Guideline based supportive 
treatment as appropriate as per 
cardiology consult.* 
Prednisolone 1 to 2 mg/kg/day 
or equivalent. 
Add prophylactic antibiotics 
for opportunistic infections. Once improving, taper steroids over at least 1 
month. 
 If no improvement or worsening, consider 
additional immunosuppressants (e.g. 
azathioprine, cyclosporine A) 
 
*Local guidelines, or e.g. ESC or AHA guidelines  
ESC guidelines website:  https://www.escardio.org/Guidelin es/Clinical-Practice-Guideline s 
AHA guidelines website: 
http://professional.heart.org/professional/GuidelinesStatements /searchresults.jsp?q=&y=&t=1001  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
41(65) ENDOCRINE irAEs 
Endocrine Disorder Initial Management Follow-up Management 
Grade 1 or Grade 2 
endocrinopathies (hypothyroidism, 
hyperthyroidism, adrenal 
insufficiency, type I diabetes mellitus) Continue avelumab therapy Endocrinology consult if 
needed 
Start thyroid hormone replacement therapy (for hypothyroidism), anti-thyroid treatment (for 
hyperthyroidism), 
corticosteroids (for adrenal insufficiency) or insulin (for Type I diabetes mellitus) as appropriate. 
Rule-out secondary 
endocrinopathies (i.e. hypopituitarism / hypophysitis) Continue hormone replacement/suppression and monitoring of endocrine function as appropriate. 
Grade 3 or Grade 4 endocrinopathies (hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, adrenal 
insufficiency, type I diabetes 
mellitus)  Withhold avelumab therapy 
Consider hospitalization Endocrinology consult  
Start thyroid hormone 
replacement therapy (for hypothyroidism), anti-thyroid treatment (for hyperthyroidism), 
corticosteroids (for adrenal 
insufficiency) or insulin (for type I diabetes mellitus) as appropriate.  Rule-out secondary 
endocrinopathies  (i.e. 
hypopituitarism / hypophysitis) Resume avelumab once symptoms and/or laboratory tests improve to Grade ≤ 1 (with or without hormone replacement/suppression).  
Continue hormone replacement/suppression and 
monitoring of endocrine function as appropriate. 
Hypopituitarism/Hypophysitis 
(secondary endocrinopathies)  If secondary thyroid and/or 
adrenal insufficiency is confirmed (i.e.  subnormal serum FT4 with 
inappropriately low TSH 
and/or low serum cortisol with inappropriately low ACTH) :  Resume avelumab once symptoms and hormone tests improve to Grade ≤ 1 (with or without hormone replacement).  
In addition, for hypoph ysitis with abnormal 
MRI, resume avelumab only once shrinkage of 
the pituitary gland on MRI/CT scan is documented.  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
42(65)  Refer to endocrinologist 
for dynamic testing as 
indicated and measurement of other hormones (FSH, LH, GH/IGF-1, PRL, 
testosterone in men, 
estrogens in women) 
 Hormone replacement/suppressive therapy as appropriate 
 Perform pituitary MRI and visual field 
examination as indicated 
 
If hypophysitis confirmed: 
 Continue avelumab if 
mild symptoms with normal MRI. Repeat the MRI in 1 month 
 Withhold avelumab if 
moderate, severe or life-
threatening symptoms of hypophysitis and/or abnormal MRI. Consider hospitalization. Initiate 
corticosteroids (1 to 2 
mg/kg/day prednisone or equivalent) followed by corticosteroids taper during at least 1 month. 
 Add prophylactic 
antibiotics for 
opportunistic infections. Continue hormone replacement/suppression therapy as appropriate. 
  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
43(65) Other irAEs (not described above) 
Grade of other irAEs 
(NCI-CTCAE v5) Initial Management Follow-up Management 
Grade 2 or Grade 3 clinical 
signs or symptoms suggestive 
of a potential irAE Withhold avelumab therapy 
pending clinical investigation If irAE is ruled out, manage as appropriate according to the diagnosis and consider re-
starting avelumab therapy 
If irAE is confirmed, treat as Grade 2 or 3 irAE. 
Grade 2 irAE or first occurrence of Grade 3 irAE Withhold avelumab therapy 1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg/day prednisone or equivalent Add prophylactic antibiotics for opportunistic infections 
Specialty consult as 
appropriate If improves to Grade ≤ 1: Taper steroids over at least 1 month and resume avelumab therapy following steroids taper. 
Recurrence of same Grade 3 irAEs Permanently discontinue avelumab therapy 1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg/day prednisone or equivalent Add prophylactic antibiotics 
for opportunistic infections 
Specialty consult as appropriate If improves to Grade ≤ 1: Taper steroids over at least 1 month. 
Grade 4 Permanently discontinue avelumab therapy 1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg/day prednisone or equivalent 
and/or other 
immunosuppressant as needed Add prophylactic antibiotics for opportunistic infections Specialty consult. If improves to Grade ≤ 1: Taper steroids over at least 1 month 
Requirement for 10 mg per day or greater prednisone or 
equivalent for more than 12 
weeks for reasons other than hormonal replacement for adrenal insufficiency  Persistent Grade 2 or 3 irAE 
lasting 12 weeks or longer Permanently discontinue 
avelumab therapy 
Specialty consult  
Abbreviations: ACTH=adrenocortic otropic hormone; ADL=activities  of daily living; ALT=alanine 
aminotransferase; AST=aspartate aminotransferase; BNP=B-type na triuretic peptide; CK-MB=creatine kinase MB; 
CT= computed tomography; FSH=fo llicle-stimulating hormone; GH=g rowth hormone; IGF-1=insulin-like growth 
factor 1; irAE=immune-related adverse event; IV=intravenous; LH=luteinizing hormone; MRI=magnetic resonance 
imaging; NCI-CTCAE=National Canc er Institute-Common Terminology  Criteria for Adverse Events; 
PRL=prolactin;T4=thyroxine; TSH=thyroid-stimulating hormone; UL N=upper limit of normal. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
44(65) 7.5 Treatment Modification for Symptoms of Infusion-Related Reactio ns 
Caused by Avelumab 
IV = intravenous; NCI-CTCAE = N ational Cancer Institute-Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Event; 
NSAIDs=nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
7.6 Indications for Treatment Discontinuation 
Patient must be remov ed from the study prot ocol for one of the following reasons: 
 Development of met astatic disease. 
 Development of locoregional re currence after the resection. 
 Development of locally advance d disease while on neoadjuvant tr eatment that precludes 
adequate and safe su rgical resection.  
 Intercurrent illness that prevents further administration of tr eatment or surgical resection. 
 Unacceptable adverse event(s). 
 Severe non-compliance to study protocol as judged by the invest igator. 
 Patient becomes pregnant. NCI-CTCAE Grade  Treatment Modification for Avelumab 
Grade 1 – mild 
Mild transient reaction; infusion interruption not indicated; intervention not indicated.  Decrease the study drug infusion rate by 50% and monitor closely for any worsening. 
 
Grade 2 – moderate Therapy or infusion interruption indicated but responds promptly to symp tomatic treatment (for 
example, antihistamines, NSAIDs, narcotics, IV 
fluids); prophylactic medications indicated for  
24 h.   Temporarily discontinue drug infusion. 
 Resume infusion at 50% of previous rate once infusion-
related reaction has resolv ed or decreased to at least 
Grade 1 in severity, and monitor closely for any worsening.
  
Grade 3 or Grade 4 – severe or life-threatening 
Grade 3: Prolonged (for example, not rapidly 
responsive to symptomatic medication and/or 
brief interruption of infusion); recurrence of symptoms following initial improvement; hospitalization indicated for clinical sequelae. 
Grade 4: Life-threatening consequences; urgent 
intervention indicated.  Stop the avelumab infusion immediately and disconnect 
infusion tubing from the subject. 
 Subjects have to be withdrawn immediately from avelumab treatment and must not receive any further avelumab treatment. 
- If avelumab infusion rate h as been decreased by 50% or interru pted due to an infusion reaction, it must remain 
decreased for the next scheduled infusion.  If no infusion reac tion is observed in the next scheduled infusion, the 
infusion rate may be returned t o baseline at the subsequent inf usions based on investigat or’s medical judgment.- If 
hypersensitivity reaction occurs, the subject must be treated a ccording to the best available medical practice. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
45(65)  Patient is determined to be incorrectly enrolled (i.e., the pat ient does not meet the 
required inclusion/exclusi on criteria for the study). 
 Patient decides to withdraw from the study (the subject is at a ny time free to discontinue 
treatment, without prejudice to furth er treatment). 
7.7 Procedures for Discontinuation o f a Subject From Investigationa l 
Product  
All reasons for discontinuation of treatment must be documented  clearly.  Any patient 
discontinuing investigational therapy should be seen at 30 days post treatment discontinuation for the evaluations, as outlined in the study schedule, or befo re new treatment initiation 
(whichever comes first).  The pa tient’s tumor status should be assessed clinically and, if 
appropriate, disease recurrence or progression should be confirmed by radiological assessment.  
After discontinuation of the study medications, all ongoing or new AEs or SAEs must be 
followed until resolution unless , in the investigator’s opinion , the condition is unlikely to resolve 
due to the patients underlying disease, or the patient is lost to follow up, or a new treatment has 
been started. 
7.8 Withdrawal From Study 
Subjects who withdraw from the st udy before treatment initiatio n will be replaced by other 
eligible patients.  In part 1 of the study, patients who withdr aw from the study before any 
avelumab administration will be replaced. 
8. STUDY EFFICACY ASSESSMENTS 
8.1 Pathology Evaluation 
Assessment of the histopatholog ic response to the treatment wil l be performed by the 
pathologist.  Esophagogastrectomy specimens will be processed according to standard operating 
procedures within the UWHC Department of Pathology.   
 Pathologic Complete Response 
The pathologist will review the slides from the tissue sections  submitted in order to assess 
pathologic compete response (p CR).  pCR is defined as an absence of any viable tumor at 
microscopic examination of the primary tumor and any lymph node s sampled after surgery 
following neoadjuvant therapy.  Par ticipants with invalid/missi ng pCR assessments will be 
defined as non-responders.  In patients not achieving pCR, measurement of residual disease will 
be performed. 
 Assessment of Treatment Effect 
Response of tumor to previous che motherapy and/or radiation therapy will be reported.  Several 
systems for tumor response have been advocated, and a modified Ryan scheme is suggested by the CAP/AJCC, which has been shown to provide good interobserver reproducibility and provide prognostic significance in rectal cancer 
26.  Sizable pools of acellular mucin may be present after 
chemoradiation but should not be interpreted as representing re sidual tumor. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
46(65)  No viable cancer cells (co mplete response, score 0) 
 Single cells or rare small groups  of cancer cells (near complet e response, score 1) 
 Residual cancer with evident tumor  regression, but more than si ngle cells or rare small 
groups of cancer cells (pa rtial response, score 2) 
 Extensive residual cancer with no evident tumor regression (poor or no response, score 3) 
 R0 Assessment 
Margins include the proximal, distal, and radial margins.  The radial margin represents the 
adventitial soft tissue margin c losest to the deepest penetration of residual tumor.  The distance 
from the tumor edge to the closest resection margin(s) will be measured and reported. 
Microscopic involvement of tumor directly at the resection marg in (‘‘tumor transected’’) will be 
reported and is defined as (R1). 
8.2 Disease Surveillance 
After completion of planned treat ments, all subjects will be fo llowed with active surveillance to 
monitor for recurrence.  Patients will undergo surveillance scans every 16 weeks during the first 
12 months after adjuvant therapy completion.  Patients may also  undergo endoscopic procedures 
as clinically indicated.  Recurren ce is defined as the appearance of one or more new lesions, 
which can be local, regional, or distant.  Disease recurrence m ay be documented with either 
radiological findings of recurren t disease or pathological assessment, whichever is available first.  
Biopsies are recommended, but not required, to confirm recurren t disease.  Locoregional 
recurrences can be detected with endoscopic procedures and biop sies.  Disease free survival is 
defined as the time period fro m completion of adjuvant therapy till the finding of recurrent 
disease or death, whichever comes first. 
8.3 Surgical Outcomes 
All patients will be followed post-operatively. Any delays of p lanned surgery or surgical 
complications will be recorded.  Rates of surgical complication s will be compared to the 
historical controls from our institution. 
9. CORRELATIVE STUDIES 
9.1 Correlative Objectives 
1) To correlate PD-L1 staining with clinical and biomarkers of res ponse. 
2) To evaluate changes in tumor inf iltrating lymphocytes following  treatment with 
avelumab and chemoradiation.  
3) To characterize the immune inf iltrate following treatment with avelumab and 
chemoradiation. 
4) To determine the pretreatment ve rsican proteolysis phenotype an d correlate with clinical 
outcomes and changes in the immune contexture. 
5) To collect and bank tissues for future investigations.  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
47(65) 9.2 Correlative Studies 
All of the correlative studies w ill be performed in Dr. Deming’s laboratory. Twenty FFPE slides 
will be needed for the proposed correlates. 
 PD-L1 Immunohistochemistry (IHC) 
PD-L1 staining has been the best studied of all immune biomarke rs in the setting of checkpoint 
blockade.  The presence of PD-L1 has been associated with an en hanced treatment benefit rate to 
checkpoint blockade in many settings.  Standardized protocols h ave now been developed for 
anti-PD-L1 immunohistochemistry ( IHC).  Pre-treatment PD-L1 sta ining will be performed on 
the pre-treatment biopsy tissue . This staining will be scored a s the percent of positive staining 
cells per high power field (hpf).  
 Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocytes a nd Examination of the Immune Co ntext 
Multiple investigations have now demonstrated a correlation bet ween the presence of tumor-
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in cancer tissue and a favorable prognosis.  An increase in TILs 
is commonly being used as a surr ogate marker for the developmen t of an immune response in the 
setting of immune-based anti-can cer therapies.  As part of this  clinical trial, the presence of TILs 
and other immune cell populations will be determined, comparing  pretreatment biopsy tissue and 
the resection specimen following avelumab in combination with c hemoradiation.  
IHC studies will be performed on formalin-fixed/paraffin-embedd ed tumor tissue. IHC will be 
performed per standardized proto cols for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20 and CD45RO and potentially 
other biomarkers of response.  O mission of the primary antibody will be used as a negative 
control along with positive cont rol tissue.  Semi-automated quantitative brightfield assessment of 
expression will be performed using the Vectra imaging system (P erkinElmer) and inForm 
analysis software system.  A scanning protocol will be generated based on the tissue size and 
location of the cancer within the  sample.  Biomarker quantifica tion will be calculated as a 
continuous variable (mean optical density) and also as quartiles (ex. 0, 1+, 2+, or 3+).   
 Versican Proteolysis 
Versican (VCAN) is a tumor matrix  proteoglycan with known immun oregulatory properties that 
when cleaved by ADAM-TS proteases releases an immunostimulatory  fragment, versikine. 
Tumors displaying a VCAN proteolysis predominant phenotype (low  staining for VCAN and 
intense staining for versikine) have been shown to have a great er CD8+ T cell infiltration.  In 
these investigations VCAN proteolysis will be examined as an im mune biomarker. IHC will be 
performed for the total (intact) VCAN and versikine. Biomarker quantification will be performed 
in quartiles (0, 1+, 2+, or 3+). The VCAN proteolysis predomina nt phenotype will be classified 
as VCAN <2+ and versikine > 2+. 
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
48(65) 9.3 Sample Collection and Banking 
If the subject agrees, leftover samples will be banked for futu re research. The link connecting 
subject information and coded samples will be held by the GI re search staff and will be 
accessible to the UWCCC biobank. T he Deming Laboratory staff wi ll not have access to this 
information. Subjects may withdraw any unused samples from the optional banking by 
contacting the principal investigator. 
 Pretreatment Specimen Collection 
A total of 10 formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) slides fr om the diagnostic biopsy will be 
collected and transferred to the Deming Laboratory in the McArd le Laboratory for Cancer 
Research. These samples will be coded prior to transfer and lab eled with the study number, 
subject ID and date.   
 Resection Specimen Collection 
The University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center Biobank will be notified of all subjects 
undergoing resection as part of this protocol.  At the time of the operation, the tissue will be 
transferred to surgical pathology and residual tissue will be c ollected by the Biobank staff.  
Tissue will be then be coded and transferred to Deming Laborato ry staff for storage and future 
studies including but not limited to tissue culture, RNA, DNA a nd protein analyses.  Samples 
will be coded and labeled with the study number, subject ID and  date. In patients with complete 
pathologic response, tissue sect ions that include tumor bed/sca r (determined by a pathologist) 
will be submitted for correlative studies. 
 Peripheral Blood Collection 
Plasma and serum samples will be collected (50 ml per draw in a heparinized tube green top for 
plasma and 10 ml per draw in red top tube for serum) as per the  study calendar, These samples 
will then be coded and transferred to the Deming Laboratory for  storage and analysis. Samples 
will be labeled with the study number, subject ID and date.. Co llected samples will be used for 
exploratory studies evaluating potential circulating markers of  response.  These studies may 
include, but are not limited to, CD4/CD8 ratio determination, T CR subtyping, cell free tumor 
DNA evaluation, and measuring serum circulating chemokines and cytokines.  The samples will also be banked for future studies. 
10. STUDY SAFETY ASSESSMENTS 
The Principal Investigator (PI) is responsible for ensuring that all staff involved in the study is 
familiar with the cont ent of this section. 
10.1 Definitions  
 Adverse Events 
An adverse event is the development of an undesirable medical c ondition or the deterioration of 
a pre-existing medical condition following or during exposure to a pharmaceutical product, 
whether or not considered causa lly related to the product.  An undesirable medical condition can 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
49(65) be symptoms (e.g. nausea, chest pain), signs (e.g. tachycardia, enlarged liver) or the abnormal 
results of an investigation (e.g. laboratory findings, electroc ardiogram).  In clinical studies, an 
AE can include an undesirable medical condition occurring at an y time during treatment and 
during the 30 day follow-up period. The term AE is used to incl ude both serious and non-serious 
AEs. 
 Serious Adverse Event 
A serious adverse event is an AE occurring during any study pha se (i.e., screening, run-in, 
treatment, wash-out, follow-up), a t any dose of the study drugs that fulfills one or more of the 
following criteria: 
 Results in death 
 Is immediately life-threatening 
 Requires in-patient hospitaliza tion or prolongation of existing  hospitalization (>24 
hours). Hospitalization for a plan ned procedure, such as feeding tube placement, 
esophageal stent placement or es ophagectomy, is not considered an SAE. 
 Results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
 Important medical events that may not result in death, be life threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered an SAE when, based upon medic al judgement, 
they may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surg ical intervention to 
prevent one of the outcomes listed above. 
 The causality of SAEs (their relationship to all study treatmen t/procedures) will be 
assessed by the investigator(s) and communicated to EMD Serono or designee. 
10.2 Recording of Adverse Events 
Non-serious adverse events and SAEs will be collected from the time the study drug is given, 
throughout the treatment period and up to and including the 30 day follow-up period.  After 
withdrawal from treatment, subjec ts must be followed-up for all  existing and new AEs for 30 
calendar days after the last dose of trial drug and/or until ev ent resolution. All new AEs 
occurring during that period must  be recorded (if SAEs, they mu st be reported to the FDA and 
EMD Serono See section 11). In addition, all grades of adverse drug reactions (ADRs, AEs 
related to study medication) and any AE that results in treatme nt discontinuation will be recorded 
as study data on CRFs.  All study-related toxicities/SAE s must be followed until resolution, unless in the Investigator’s 
opinion, the condition is unlikely to resolve.  
 The following variables will be collected for each AE: 
 AE (verbatim) 
 The date when the AE started and stopped 
 Changes in NCI CTCAE (version 5. 0) grade and the maximum CTC gr ade attained 
 Whether the AE is serious or not 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
50(65)  Investigator causality rating against the investigational combi nation (yes or no)  
 Action taken with regard to investigational combination agent 
 Outcome. 
In addition, the following variables will be collected for SAEs : 
 Date AE met criteria for serious AE 
 Date Investigator became aware of serious AE 
 AE is serious due to criteria listed in Section 9.1.2 
 Date of hospitalization 
 Date of discharge 
 Probable cause of death (if applicable) 
 Date of death (if applicable) 
 Autopsy performed (if applicable) 
 Description of AE 
 Causality assessment in rela tion to Study procedure(s) 
 Causality assessment in rela tion to study drug combination 
 Adverse Events Based on Signs and Symptoms 
When collecting AEs, the record ing of diagnoses is preferred (when possible) to recording a list 
of signs and symptoms.  However, if a diagnosis is known and th ere are other signs or symptoms 
that are not generally part of the diagnosis, the diagnosis and  each sign or symptom will be 
recorded separately. 
 Adverse Events Based on Examinations and Tests 
Deterioration as compared to baseline in protocol-mandated labo ratory values and vital signs 
should only be reported as AEs if they fulfill any of the SAE criteria or are the reason for 
discontinuation of treatment with the investigational product. 
If deterioration in a laborator y value/vital sign is associated  with clinical signs and symptoms, 
the sign or symptom will be report ed as an AE and the associate d laboratory result/vital sign will 
be considered as additional info rmation.  Wherever possible the  reporting investigator will use 
the clinical, rather than the la boratory term (e.g. anemia versus low hemoglobin value).  In the 
absence of clinical signs or symptoms, clinically relevant dete riorations in non-mandated 
parameters should be reported as AE(s). Any new or aggravated clinically  relevant abnormal medical find ing at a physical examination as 
compared with the baseline assessment will be reported as an AE . 
 Disease Progression 
Disease progression can be considered as a worsening of a subje ct’s condition attributable to the 
disease for which the investig ational product is being studied.   It may be an increase in the 
severity of the disease under st udy and/or increases in the symptoms of the disease.  The 
development of new or progression of existing metastasis during the study should be considered 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
51(65) as disease progression and not a n AE.  Events, which are unequi vocally due to disease 
progression, should not be reported as an AE during the study. 
 New Cancers 
The development of a new primary cancer should be regarded as an AE and will generally meet at least one of the serious criteria (see Section 10.1.2).  New  primary cancers are those that are 
not the primary reason for the administration of the study trea tment and have developed after the 
inclusion of the patient into the study.  They do not include m etastases of the original cancer.  
Symptoms of metastasis or the me tastasis itself should not be r eported as an AE/SAE, as they are 
considered to be disease progression. 
 Lack of Efficacy 
When there is deterioration in the condition for which the stud y treatment(s) is being used, there 
may be uncertainty as to whether  this is lack of efficacy or an AE.  In such cases, unless the PI or 
the reporting physician consider s that the study treatment cont ributed to the deterioration of the 
condition, or local regulations s tate to the contrary, the dete rioration should be considered to be a 
lack of efficacy and not an AE. 
 Deaths 
All deaths that occur during the study, or within the protocol- defined 30-day post-study 
follow-up period after the admini stration of the last dose of s tudy treatment, must be reported to 
EMD Serono or designee within 24 hours from the time site perso nnel become aware of the 
death. See section 11.  
When reporting a death in the CRF, it will be required to ident ify which of the following best 
describes the category of death: 
 Toxicity for study medication. 
 Radiological disease progression. 
 Clinical disease progression. 
 Other causes. 
Death should be reported in the following manner: 
 Death clearly the result of dis ease progression should be repor ted and should be 
documented in the eCRF, but it should not be reported as an SAE . 
 Where death is not due (or not clearly due) to progression of t he disease under study, the 
AE causing the death must be repo rted to the study monitor as a SAE within 24 hours  
(see Section 11 for fu rther details).  The report should contai n a comment regarding the 
co-involvement of progression of  disease, if appropriate, and s hould assign main and 
contributory causes of death. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
52(65)  Deaths with an unknown cause should always be reported as a SAE .  A post mortem 
maybe helpful in the assessment of the cause of death, and if performed a copy of the 
post-mortem results should be fo rwarded to EMD Serono within th e usual timeframes. 
11. DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN 
11.1 Oversight and Monitoring Plan 
The UWCCC Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) is respon sible for the regular 
review and monitoring of all ongoi ng clinical research in the U WCCC. A summary of DSMC 
activities are as follows: 
 Reviews all clinical trials conducted at the UWCCC for subject safety, protocol 
compliance, and data integrity.  
 Reviews all Serious Adverse Events (SAE) requiring expedited re porting, as defined in the 
protocol, for all clinical trial s conducted at the UWCCC, and studies conducted at external 
sites for which the UWCCC acts as an oversight body.  
 Reviews all reports generated through the UWCCC DSMS elements ( Internal Audits, 
Quality Assurance Reviews, Response Reviews, Compliance Reviews , and Protocol 
Summary Reports) described in Section II of this document.  
 Notifies the protocol PI of DSM C decisions and, if applicable, any requirements for 
corrective action related to data or safety issues.  
 Notifies the CRC of DSMC decisions and any correspondence from the DSMC to the 
protocol Principal Investigator.  
 Works in conjunction with the UW Health Sciences IRB in the rev iew of relevant safety 
information as well as protoco l deviations, non-compliance, and unanticipated problems 
reported by the UWCCC research staff.  
 Ensures that notification of S AEs requiring expedited reporting  is provided to external 
sites participating in multi-institutional clinical trials coor dinated by the UWCCC.  
11.2 Monitoring and Reporting Guidelines 
UWCCC quality assurance and moni toring activities are determined by study sponsorship and 
risk level of the protocol as determined by the PRMC. All proto cols (including Intervention 
Trials, Non-Intervention Trials, Behavioral and Nutritional Stu dies, and trials conducted under a 
Training Grant) are evaluated by the PRMC at the time of committee review. UWCCC 
monitoring requirements for tria ls without an acceptable extern al DSMB are as follows: 
 Intermediate Monitoring 
Protocols subject to intermedia te monitoring generally include UW Institutional Phase I/II and 
Phase II Trials. These protocols  undergo review of subject safe ty at regularly scheduled DOT 
meetings where the results of ea ch subject’s treatment are disc ussed and the discussion is 
documented in the DOT meeting mi nutes. The discussion includes the number of subjects 
enrolled, significant toxicities , dose adjustments, and responses observed. Protocol Summary 
Reports are submitted on a quart erly basis by the study team fo r review by the DSMC.  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
53(65) 11.3 Serious Adverse Event – Re porting within 24 Hours 
Serious Adverse Events requi ring reporting within 24 hours (as described in the protocol) must 
also be reported to the Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (D SMC) Chair via an email to 
saenotify@uwcarbone.wisc.edu w ithin one business day. The OnCor e SAE Details Report must 
be submitted along with other repor t materials as appropriate ( NCI AdEERS form or FDA 
Medwatch Form #3500 and/or any oth er documentation available at  that time of initial 
reporting). The DSMC Chair will review the information and dete rmine if immediate action is 
required. Within 10 working days, all available subsequent SAE documentation must be 
submitted electronically al ong with a 24 hour follow-up SAE Det ails Report and a completed 
UWCCC SAE Routing Form to saenotify@uwcarbone.wisc.edu. All inf ormation is entered and 
tracked in the UWCCC database. 
The PI notifies all investigators involved with the study at th e UWCCC, the IRB, and the funding 
agency and provides documentatio n of these notifi cations to the  DSMC. For this trial, since the 
UW PI serves as the sponsor-investigator, the PI will review the event to determine whether the 
SAE requires reporting to the FDA and other participating inves tigators.  
See Section 12 for detailed ins tructions on SAE reporting. 
11.4 Serious Adverse Event – Reporting within 10 Days  
Serious Adverse Events requi ring reporting within 10 days (as described in the protocol) must 
also be reported to the Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (D SMC) Chair via an email to 
saenotify@uwcarbone.wisc.edu. The O nCore SAE Details Report mus t be submitted along with 
other report materials as appropr iate (NCI AdEERS form or FDA M edwatch Form #3500 and/or 
any other documentation available at the time of initial report ing). The DSMC Chair will review 
the information and dete rmine if further action is required. Al l information is en tered and tracked 
in the UWCCC database.  
The PI notifies all investigators involved with the study at th e UWCCC, the IRB, and the funding 
agency and provides documentatio n of these notifi cations to the  DSMC.  
The PI will also review the event to determine whether the SAE requires reporting to the FDA 
and other participa ting investigators.  
See Section 12 for detailed ins tructions on SAE reporting. 
11.5 Sponsor-Investigator Responsibilities for SAE Review  
For this clinical trial, the UW CCC PI is acting as the Sponsor- Investigator (i.e., the PI holds the 
IND).  As such, the PI assumes responsibilities of the study sp onsor in accordance with FDA 21 
CFR 312.32. In this capacity, the UW CCC PI reviews all reports of serious adverse events 
occurring on the study at the U WCCC and participating external sites and makes a determination 
of 1) suspectedness  (i.e., whether there is a reas onable possibility that the drug caused the AE); 
and 2) unexpectedness (the event is not lis ted in the Investigator’s Brochure or is not listed at 
the specificity or severity tha t has been observed) in the cont ext of this study. SAE with 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
54(65) suspected causality to study dr ug and deemed unexpected are rep orted as IND Safety Reports by 
the UWCCC PI to the FDA and all pa rticipating investigators on the study within 15 calendar 
days.  All fatal or life-threaten ing SAE that are unexpected an d have suspected causality to the 
study drug will be reported by the  UWCCC PI to the FDA and all participating investigators on 
the study within 7 calendar days. 
Refer to Section 12.3.1 for UWCCC PI  instructions for reporting  to the FDA. 
11.6 Study Progress Review  
Protocol Summary Reports (PSR) are required to be submitted to the DSMC in the timeframe 
determined by the risk level of the study (quarterly; semi-annu ally; or annua lly). The PSR 
provides a cumulative report of S AEs, as well as instances of n oncompliance, protocol 
deviations, and unanticipated pr oblems, toxicitie s and responses that have occurred on the 
protocol in the timeframe specifi ed. PSRs for those protocols s cheduled for review are reviewed 
at each DSMC meeting. Protocol Summary Reports enable DSMC committee members to asses s whether significant 
benefits or risks are occurring that would warrant study suspen sion or closure. This information 
is evaluated by the DSMC in conj unction with other reports of q uality assurance activities (e.g., 
reports from Internal Audits, Qua lity Assurance Reviews) occurr ing since the prio r review of the 
protocol by the DSMC. Additionally, the DSMC requires the study  team to submit external 
DSMB or DSMC reports if available and any other pertinent study -related information 
In the event that there is si gnificant risk warranting study su spension or closure, the DSMC will 
notify the PI of the DSMC findi ngs and ensure the appropriate a ction is taken for  the protocol 
(e.g., suspension or closure). The D SMC ensures that the PI rep orts any temporar y or permanent 
suspension of a clinical trial to EMD Serono and other appropri ate agencies. DSMC findings and 
requirements for follow-up acti on are submitted to the CRC. 
12. EXPEDITED REPORTING OF SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS 
Depending on the nature, severit y, and attribution of the serio us adverse event an SAE report 
will be phoned in, submitted i n writing, or both according to T able 2 below. All serious adverse 
events must also be reported t o the UWCCC Data and Safety Monitoring Committee Chair. All 
serious adverse events must als o be reported to the UW IRB (if applicable), and any funding 
agency not already included in the list. Determine the reporting time lin e for the SAE in question by using the following table. Then 
refer to section 12.1. Phase 1 and Early Phase 2 Studies: Expedited Reporting Requirements for Adverse Events 
that Occur on Studies under an  IND/IDE within 30 Days of the La st Administration of the 
Investigational Agent/Intervention 
1,2. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
55(65) Table 2. FDA Reporting Requirements.  
FDA Reporting Requirements for S erious Adverse Events (21 CRF P art 312) 
NOTE:  Investigators MUST  immediately report to the University of Wisconsin Carbone Canc er 
Center  and any other parties outlined in the protocol ANY Serious Adve rse Events, whether or not 
they are considered related to the investigational agent(s)/int ervention (21 CFR 312.64). 
An adverse event is considered serious if it results in ANY of the following outcomes: 
1) Death. 
2) A life-threatening adverse event (the patient was at risk of death at the time of the event; it 
does not refer to an event that hypothetically might have caused death if it were more 
severe). 
3) An adverse event that results in inpatient hospitalization or p rolongation of existing 
hospitalization for ≥ 24 hours. 
4) A persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruptio n of the ability to conduct 
normal life functions. 
5) A congenital anomaly/birth defect. 
6) Important Medical Events (IME) that may not result in death, be  life threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered serious when, based upon medi cal judgment, they may 
jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or su rgical intervention to 
prevent one of the outcomes lis ted in this definition (FDA, 21 CFR 312.32; ICH E2A and 
ICH E6). 
ALL SERIOUS  adverse events that meet the above criteria MUST  be immediately reported to the 
UWCCC within the timeframes detailed in the table below: 
Hospitalization Grade 1 and Grade 2 Timeframes Grade 3-5 
Timeframes 
Resulting in 
hospitalization  ≥ 
24 hrs 10 Calendar Days 
24 Hour; 5 Calendar Days 
Not resulting in 
Hospitalization ≥ 
24 hrs Not required 
Expedited AE reporting timelines are defined as:  
 24-Hour; 5 Calendar Days – The AE must initially be  reported within 24 hours of 
learning of the AE, followed by a c omplete expedited report wit hin 5 calendar days of 
the initial 24-hour report.  
 10 Calendar Days  – A complete expedited report  on the AE must be submitted with in 
10 calendar da ys of learnin g of the AE  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
56(65) 1 Serious adverse events that occur more than 30 days after the last administration of 
investigational agent/intervention and have an attribution of p ossible, probable, or definite 
require reporting as follows: 
Expedited 24-hour notification fo llowed by complete report with in 5 calendar days for: 
 All Grade 3, 4, and 5 AEs 
Expedited 10 calendar day reports for: 
 Grade 2 AEs resulting in hospitalization or pro longation of hos pitalization 
2 For studies using PET or SPECT IND agents, the AE reporting pe riod is limited to 10 
radioactive half-lives , rounded UP to the nearest whole day, af ter the agent/intervention was 
last administered.  Footnote “1”  above applies after this repor ting period.  
12.1 SAE Requiring [24] Hour Reporting Occurs at UWCCC 
 Report to the UWCCC: 
Reference the SAE SOP (Standard Operating Procedure) and the SAE Reporting Workflow for 
DOTs  on the UWCCC website (http://kb. wisc.edu/uwccc) for specific i nstructions on how and 
what to report to the UWCCC for [24] hour initial and follow-up  reports . A follow-up report is 
required to be submitted within 10 days of the initial [24] hou r report.  
For this protocol, the following UWCCC entities are required to  be notified: 
a. saenotify@uwcarbone.wisc.edu 
b. UWCCC PI: Nataliya Uboha, MD, PhD 
c. UWCCC PM: Renae Quale 
d. Any other appropriate parties lis ted on the SAE Routing Form (f or follow-up reports 
only) 
 Reporting to EMD Serono 
The following reportable events must be submitted to EMD Serono  within 2 business days or 3 
calendar days (whichever comes fi rst) using the applicable safe ty report form provided.  Dr. Uboha 
will assume responsibility for submitting the reportable event( s) to EMD Serono as well as 
ensuring that any local reporting requirements are completed in  parallel. 
 Serious Adverse Events 
 Exposure during Pregnancy or Breastfeeding (even if not associa ted with an adverse 
event) 
 Occupational exposure (even if not associated with an adverse e vent) 
 Potential drug-induced liver injury (Hy’s Law cases): These eve nts are considered 
important medical events and should be reported as SAEs. 
 
 
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
57(65) Contact information for submission of reportable events to EMD Serono: 
Fax: +49 6151 72 6914 
OR 
E-mail: GlobalDrugSafety@merckgroup.com 
 Specifying: 
 PROTOCOL Number and/or Title 
 EMD Serono assigned Study Number 
 SUBJECT Number 
 SITE Number/PI Name 
 SAE/ONSET DATE 
 Report to the IRB 
Consult the UW-IRB website f or reporting guidelines.  
12.2 SAE Requiring [10] Day Reporting Occurs at UWCCC 
 Report to the UWCCC: 
Reference the SAE SOP and the SAE Reporting Workflow for DOTs on the UWCCC website 
(http://kb.wisc.edu/uwccc) for s pecific instructions on how and  what to report to the UWCCC for 
[10] day reports.  
For this protocol, the following entities are required to be no tified: 
a. saenotify@uwcarbone.wisc.edu 
b. Any appropriate parties listed on SAE Routing form 
 Report to the Sponsor: 
See section 12.1.2 - SAEs must be reported to EMD Serono or des ignee within 24 hours.  
 Report to the IRB: 
Consult the UW-IRB website f or reporting guidelines. 
12.3 Other Reporting Requirements 
 Reporting to the FDA 
Serious Adverse Events occurring on studies on which a UW PI is acting as sponsor-investigator 
must be reported to the FDA within the appropriate time frame.  Mandatory and voluntary 
reporting guidelines and instructions are outlined on the FDA w ebsite: 
http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWa tch/HowToReport/default.htm  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
58(65) 13. ETHICAL AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 
13.1 Ethical conduct of the study 
The study will be performed in accordance with ethical principl es that have their origin in the 
Declaration of Helsinki and ar e consistent with ICH/Good Clinical Practice, applicable 
regulatory requirements. 
13.2 Subject data protection 
The Informed Consent Form will incorporate (or, in some cases, be accompanied by a separate 
document incorporating) wording th at complies with relevant data protection and privacy 
legislation.  In accordance with the Health Information Portabi lity and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA), the written Informed C onsent Form must include a subject authorization to release 
medical information to EMD Serono Inc. and/or allow EMD Serono Inc., a regulatory authority, 
or Institutional Review Board (IRB) access to subject’s medical  information that includes all 
hospital records relevant to the study, including subjects’ med ical history. 
13.3 Ethics and regulatory review 
 Informed consent 
Provision of written Informed Consent will be obtained prior to  any study-related procedures. 
The principal investigator will ensure that the subject is give n full and adequate oral and written 
information about the nature, purpose, possible risk and benefi t of the study. Subjects will also 
be notified that they are free to discontinue from the study at  any time.  The subject will be given 
the opportunity to ask questions a nd allowed time to consider t he information provided.  The 
original, signed written Informed Consent Form will be stored f or the duration of the study. A 
copy of the signed written Inform ed Consent Form will be given to the subject. 
 Changes to the protocol and informed consent form 
In the event that there are any changes to the protocol, these changes will have to be first 
reviewed by the sponsor-investigator, and then the amendment an d updated consent will be 
submitted for approval by the ins titutional IRB. Once approved,  an amendment to the protocol 
and consent form will be generated.  Subjects will be notified of the protocol changes and will be 
provided with the updated ICF for their signature. They will al so be provided with a copy of the 
updated ICF for their records .  The funding agency (EMD Serono) will also be updated about 
any changes to the protocol or consent form.   
 Audits and inspections 
The PI will monitor the clinical trial for safety. The PI will assess all expedited adverse events 
and will periodically review all adverse events observed on the  trial. UW Carbone Cancer Center 
standard operating procedures ( SOPs) for assessment and reporti ng of adverse events will be 
followed, which are in compliance with 21 CFR 312.32 and 312.22 . The clinical trial data 
consisting of all required obser vations, AEs, and laboratory da ta will be entered into a 
computerized database in a tim ely manner. The accuracy and comp leteness of the database, 
timely submission of SAEs and compliance with the protocol, is assured by periodic auditing 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
59(65) conducted by the UW Carbone Cance r Center Office of Protocol Re view and Monitoring, which 
reports to the UW Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) C ommittee. Safety data will 
be submitted to the DSMC at least once yearly or more often as required by the DSMP. On a 
regular interval basis, status re ports of all laboratory parame ters, AEs and SAEs are reviewed by 
the PI to view composite data across subjects. Regular meetings  will be held to discuss ongoing 
patient treatment a nd adverse events. 
Expedited SAE reports submitted by the Investigator to FDA will also be copied to relevant institutional safety committees within the timeframes required by UW. These will also be copied 
to EMD Serono or designee.  The T oxicity List, in addition to t he Investigator’s  Brochure, will 
be used as a reference for reporting any new SAE. Possible actions taken by the PIs or the UW DSMC if a new unexpected toxicity is identified from the above safety review, or if the periodic 
review of all adverse events and laboratory data indicates a pattern of incidence or severity of toxicity that raises a safety concern, can be to: 
1. Revise consent form 
2. Amend the protocol 
3. Suspend the protocol 
All AEs found to be expected or non -serious will be included in the Annual Report to EMD 
Serono. 
14. STATISTICAL METHODS AND SAMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION 
14.1 Sample Size and Power Calculation 
 Part 1- Run-in Phase  
A total number of 6 subjects will be enrolled during the run-in  phase of the trial. A sample size 
of 6 is sufficient to estimate th e true dose limiting toxicity rate of the proposed 
avelumab/chemoradiation thera py with adequate accuracy. Specifi cally, the true dose limiting 
toxicity rate will be estimated with a standard error of 20%.Th e proposed treatment combination 
will be considered as safe if dose limiting toxicities are obse rved in at most 1 patient. The 
following table shows the probabi lities that dose limiting toxicities are observed in at most one 
patient for various toxicity rates. 
 
Table 7: Operating Characteristics of run-in phase – probabilities tha t the proposed 
avelumab/chemoradiation therapy will be considered as safe for various true dose 
limiting toxicity rates ranging between 0.05 and 0.30. 
 True DLT rate 
 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 
Probability that DLTs are observed in 
at most one  patient (treatment combination will be declared as safe) 0.97 0.89 0.78 0.66 0.53 0.42 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
60(65) For example, if the true DLT ra te is 10%, then the probability that the proposed t reatment will be 
declared as safe is 89 %. 
 Part 2 – Expansion Phase 
This is a Phase 2 portion of the trial, which will evaluate the  efficacy of the proposed 
avelumab/chemoradiation therapy in patients with stage II/III r esectable esophageal cancer. The 
primary endpoint for the phase II component is the pathological  complete response rate. A 
pathological complete response rate of 29% (95% CI: 23-37%) has  been reported for standard 
preoperative chemoradiotherapy 3.  A pathological complete res ponse rate of 20% or less, i.e., 
less than the lower 95% confid ence bound of the reported respon se rate for standard care, will be 
considered as unacceptably low fo r this patient population.  It is hypothesized that the co-
administration of avelumab with c hemoradiation will substantial ly increase pathological 
complete response rate to 40% or above. A single-stage design w ill be used to evaluate the 
pathological response rate.  The  null hypothesis that the patho logical complete response rate is at 
most 20% versus will be tested  against the alternative hypothes is that the rate it greater than 
20%.  With a sample size of 24 pa tients, an anticipated patholo gical response rate of 40% will be 
detected with 80% power at the one-sided 0.1 significance level . The following table shows the 
operating characteristics of t he two-state study design. 
 
Table 8: Operating characteristics of single-stage study design for expansion cohort.  
 True Patholo gical Complete Response Rate 
 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 
Probability that the proposed avelumab/chemoradiation therapy will be declared as effective (rejecting the null hypothesis that the pathological complete response rate is at most 20%) 0.23 0.44 0.64 0.81 0.91 0.97 
 
For example, if the true patholog ical complete response rate is  45%, then the probability of 
declaring the proposed avelumab/ chemoradiation therapy was effe ctive is 91%. 
14.2 Analysis Plan 
 General 
Descriptive statistics will prima rily be generated to summarize the data.  For continuous 
variable, descriptive statistics may include the number of subj ects reflected in the calculation 
(n), mean, standard deviation, m edian, minimum, and maximum; fr equencies and percentages 
may be displayed for categoric al data (e.g., toxicities, respon ses).  Data analysis will be 
performed using SAS® (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, North Carolina) version 9.4.  
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
61(65) 
 Demographics 
All demographic variables (e.g ., gender, age, weight, etc.) wil l be summarized by standard 
descriptive statistics, i.e., in terms of means, standard devia tions, medians, and ranges for 
variables on a continuous scale, and in terms of frequency tables for variables on a categorical scale. 
 
 Primary Endpoints 
Part 1:  All patients who receiv e at least one dose of avelumab  will be evaluated for toxicity and 
tolerability. Toxicities observed will be summarized in terms of types and severities by Common Terminology Criteria for A dverse Events (CTCAE) v 45.0. The number and severity 
of toxicity incidents will be ana lyzed descriptively in tabular  format. The 90% confidence 
interval for the dose limiting toxicity rate (DLT) will be cons tructed using the Wilson score 
method.  
 
Part 2: Pathologic compete response (pCR) is defined as an abse nce of any viable tumor at 
microscopic examination of the primary tumor and any lymph node s sampled after surgery 
following neoadjuvant therapy.  Par ticipants with invalid/missi ng pCR assessments will be 
defined as non-responders.  The number and frequency of patient s with a pCR will be 
summarized in tabular format.  T he pCR rate will be reported al ong with the corresponding 90% 
confidence interval which will be constructed using the Wilson score method.  
 
 Secondary Endpoints 
Disease free survival (DFS) will be defined as the number of da ys from the day of resection to 
the day a subject experiences an event of disease recurrence or  death, whichever comes first. If a 
subject has not experienced an ev ent of disease recurrence prog ression or death at the time of 
analysis, then the subject’s data will be censored at the date of the last available evaluation. DFS 
will be summarized using point estimates of the median time to progression and the associated 
95% confidence interval. The data  will be presented graphically  using Kaplan-Meier plots. 
Incidence of survival complications and the rate of R0 resection will be calculated and report along with the corresponding 95% c onfidence intervals which wil l be constructed using the 
Wilson score method.  
15. IMPORTANT MEDICAL PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED BY 
THE INVESTIGATOR 
15.1 Pregnancy 
After investigator first becomes  aware of its occurrence, he/sh e should follow the same process 
for reporting as described for the SAEs . 
 Maternal Exposure 
If a patient becomes pregnant dur ing the course of the study, a ll treatments should be 
discontinued immediately. The out come of any conception occurri ng from the date of the first 
dose until 3 months after the last dose should be followed up and documented. 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
62(65) Pregnancy itself is not regarded as an adverse event unless the re is a suspicion that the 
investigational product under study may have interfered with the effectiveness of a contraceptive 
medication. Congenital abnormalitie s/birth defects and spontane ous miscarriages should be 
reported and handled as SAEs.  Elective abortions without complications should not be handled as AEs.  The outcome of all pregnancies (spontaneous miscarriag e, elective termination, ectopic 
pregnancy, normal birth or congenital abnormality) should be fo llowed up and documented even 
if the patient was withdrawn from the study.   
 Paternal Exposure 
Male patients should refrain fro m fathering a child or donating  sperm during the study and for 30 
days after the completion of adjuvant therapy. Pregnancy of the patient’s partners is not 
considered to be an adverse even t.  However, the outcome of all  pregnancies (spontaneous 
miscarriage, elective terminati on, ectopic pregnancy, normal bi rth or congenital abnormality) 
should if possible be followed up and documented.  The outcome of any conception occurring 
from the date of the first dose until 3 months after the last dose should be followed up and 
documented. 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
63(65) 16. LIST OF REFERENCES 
 1. Raman R, Deorah S, McDowell BD, et al: Changing incidence o f esophageal 
cancer among white women: anal ysis of SEER data (1992-2010). Co ntemp Oncol (Pozn) 
19:338-40, 2015  2. Shapiro J, van Lanschot JJ, H ulshof MC, et al: Effectiveness of neoadjuvant 
chemoradiotherapy for early-sta ge esophageal cancer. J Clin Onc ol 33:288-9, 2015 
 3. van Hagen P, Hulshof MC, van Lanschot JJ, et al: Preoperati ve 
chemoradiotherapy for esophageal or junctional cancer. N Engl J Med 366:2074-84, 2012  4. Scheer RV, Fakiris AJ, Johnstone PA: Quantifying the benefi t of a pathologic 
complete response after neoadjuva nt chemoradiotherapy in the tr eatment of esophageal cancer. 
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 80:996-1001, 2011  5. Reynolds JV, Muldoon C, Holly wood D, et al: Long-term outco mes following 
neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for esophageal cancer. Ann Surg 245:707-16, 2007 
 6. Meguid RA, Hooker CM, Taylor JT, et al: Recurrence after ne oadjuvant 
chemoradiation and surgery for e sophageal cancer: does the patt ern of recurrence differ for 
patients with complete response and those with partial or no response? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 
138:1309-17, 2009  7. Cunningham D, Allum WH, Stenni ng SP, et al: Perioperative chemotherapy 
versus surgery alone for resec table gastroesophageal cancer. N Engl J Med 355:11-20, 2006 
 8. Tanaka K, Miyata H, Sugimura K, et al: Negative influence o f programmed 
death-1-ligands on the survival  of esophageal cancer patients t reated with chemotherapy. Cancer 
Sci 107:726-33, 2016  9. Ohigashi Y, Sho M, Yamada Y, e t al: Clinical significance o f programmed death-
1 ligand-1 and programmed death-1 ligand-2 expression in human esophageal cancer. Clin 
Cancer Res 11:2947-53, 2005  10. Kang Y-K: Nivolumab (ONO-4538/BMS-936558) as salvage treatment after second or later-line chemotherapy for advanced gastric or gastr o-esophageal junction cancer 
(AGC): A double-blinded, randomiz ed, phase III trial. J Clin On col 35, 2017 
 11. Janjigian YY, Shitara K, Moe hler M, et al: First-line nivo lumab plus 
chemotherapy versus chemothera py alone for advanced gastric, gastro-oesophageal junction, and 
oesophageal adenocarcinoma ( CheckMate 649): a randomised, open- label, phase 3 trial. Lancet, 
2021  12. Kato K, Cho BC, Takahashi M , et al: Nivolumab versus chemo therapy in patients 
with advanced oesophageal squamo us cell carcinoma refractory or intolerant to previous 
chemotherapy (ATTRACTION-3): a multicentre, randomised, open-la bel, phase 3 trial. Lancet 
Oncol 20:1506-1517, 2019  13. Shitara K, Ozguroglu M, Bang YJ, et al: Pembrolizumab vers us paclitaxel for 
previously treated, advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction cancer (KEYNOTE-061): a randomised, open-label, contro lled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 392:1 23-133, 2018 
 14. Moehler M, Dvorkin M, Boku N, et al: Phase III Trial of Avelumab Maintenance After First-Line Induction Chemo therapy Versus Continuation of Chemotherapy in Patients With 
Gastric Cancers: Results From JAVELIN Gastric 100. J Clin Oncol  39:966-977, 2021 
 15. Chung HC: Safety, PD-L1 expr ession, and clinical activity of avelumab 
(MSB0010718C), an anti-PD-L1 antibody, in patients with advanced gastric or gastroesophageal junction cancer. journal of Clinical Oncology 34:Abstr 167, 201 6 
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
64(65)  16. Kelly RJ, Ajani JA, Kuzdzal  J, et al: Adjuvant Nivolumab i n Resected 
Esophageal or Gastroesophageal J unction Cancer. N Engl J Med 38 4:1191-1203, 2021 
 17. Twyman-Saint Victor C, Rec h AJ, Maity A, et al: Radiation and dual checkpoint 
blockade activate non-redundant immune mechanisms in cancer. Na ture 520:373-7, 2015 
 18. Deng L, Liang H, Burnette B, et al: Irradiation and anti-P D-L1 treatment 
synergistically promote antitumor immunity in mice. J Clin Inve st 124:687-95, 2014 
 19. Formenti SC, Demaria S: Co mbining radiotherapy and cancer immunotherapy: a 
paradigm shift. J Natl Cancer Inst 105:256-65, 2013 
 20. Matsumura S, Demaria S: Up-regulation of the pro-inflammat ory chemokine 
CXCL16 is a common response of tumor cells to ionizing radiatio n. Radiat Res 173:418-25, 
2010  21. Matsumura S, Wang B, Kawash ima N, et al: Radiation-induced  CXCL16 release 
by breast cancer cells attracts effector T cells. J Immunol 181 :3099-107, 2008 
 22. Kelly R: Checkpoint expression pre and post chemoradiation in operable esophageal cancer. Journal  of Clinical Oncology 35, 2017 
 23. Chandra RA, Wilhite TJ, Balboni TA, et al: A systematic ev aluation of abscopal 
responses following radiotherapy in patients with metastatic melanoma treated with ipilimumab. 
Oncoimmunology 4:e1046028, 2015  24. Muro K, Chung HC, Shankaran V, et al: Pembrolizumab for pa tients with PD-L1-
positive advanced gastric cancer (KEYNOTE-012): a multicentre, open-label, phase 1b trial. 
Lancet Oncol 17:717-26, 2016  25. Berger MJ, Dunlea LJ, Retti g AE, et al: Feasibility of sto pping paclitaxel 
premedication after two doses i n patients not experiencing a previous infusion hypersensitivity 
reaction. Support Care Cancer 20:1991-7, 2012  26. Ryan R, Gibbons D, Hyland JM, et al: Pathological response  following long-
course neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for locally advanced recta l cancer. Histopathology 
47:141-6, 2005 
 
 
 
  
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol  
Drug Substance Avelumab   
Study Code UW17106 
Version 7, 07/05/2021  
65(65) APPENDIX A. ECOG PE RFORMANCE STATUS. 
ECOG 
Performance Status Activity 
0 Fully active, able to carry on all pre-disease performance with out 
restrictions. 
1 Restricted in physically stre nuous activity, but ambulatory and  able 
to carry out work of a light or sedentary nature, e.g. light ho use 
work, office work. 
2 Ambulatory and capable of all se lf-care but unable to carry out  any 
work activities.  Up and about more than 50% of waking hours. 
3 Capable of only limited self-car e, confined to bed or chair mor e than 
50% of waking hours. 
4 Completely disabled.  Cannot carry on any self-care.  100% 
confined to bed or chair. 
 
 
 
 
 