APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 1 of 23
                   
                                   
HRP-503B –  BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL 
(2017-1)
Protocol Title: Perioperative  blood pressure screening to improve long-term cardiovascular health
Principal Investigator:  Robert Schonberger, MD
Version Date:  01/31/2019
Clinicaltrials.gov Registration #:  Pending
INSTRUCTIONS
This template  is intended to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes all of the necessary information needed 
by the IRB to determine whether a study meets approval criteria. Read the following instructions before proceeding:
1. Use  this protocol template for a PI initiated study that includes direct interactions with research subjects. 
Additional templates for other types of research protocols are available in the system Library.
2. If  a section or question does not apply to your research study, type “Not Applicable” underneath.
3. Once  completed, upload your protocol in the “Basic Information” screen in IRES IRB system. 
SECTION  I:  RESEARCH PLAN
1.Statement of Purpose: State  the scientific aim(s) of the study, or the hypotheses to be tested. 
To explore in a pilot randomized clinical trial, the impact of Home Blood Pressure Monitoring with patient directed 
information as compared to usual care on the postoperative management of blood pressure.  
The intervention and control groups will be defined by, 1) preoperative home blood pressure monitoring with a 
detailed report sent to the patient, and 2) usual standard of care including a suggestion during the pre-operative 
clinic appointment to follow up with Primary Care. Both groups will receive a brief questionnaire about their blood 
pressure treatment and medication adherence.  We will examine the rate of primary care follow-up and changes in 
hypertension treatment at 60 days post-operative, through a telephone call.  This information, along with 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 2 of 23information regarding patient acceptance of the intervention will be used to inform the design of a future clinical 
trial powered to outcomes, including follow-up visits and blood pressure management.
2.Probable  Duration of Project: State the expected duration of the project, including all follow-up and data analysis 
activities.  
Data collection will  take approximately 12 months, with a 60-day post-surgical date follow up for all subjects. We 
estimate a 5-year time frame total, allowing for data collection and interpretation and publication after peer-reviews.
3.Background:  Describe the background information that led to the plan for this project. Provide references to support 
the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.
Elevated blood pressure remains an important, and modifiable, cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk factor. Per the 
American Heart Association 2017 Hypertension Guidelines, “it was the leading cause of death and disability-
adjusted life years worldwide” and, in the United States, it occupies first place for CDV deaths secondary to 
modifiable risk factors, and second place, after smoking, as a preventable cause of death for any reason.1 Because 
of its preventable nature, we believe that as preoperative physicians, we have the opportunity to address and 
counsel patients that have elevated blood pressure, and potentially impact surgical and life-time outcomes. 
Randomized trials are the gold standard for the comparison of treatment effects but are resource intensive.  Pilot 
studies can provide guidance for the formulation of such studies to ensure feasibility and the validity of the research 
plan.2 We propose the following research plan.
4.Research  Plan: Summarize the study design and research procedures using non-technical language that can be readily 
understood by someone outside the discipline. Be sure to distinguish between standard of care vs. research procedures 
when applicable and include any flowcharts of visits specifying their individual times and lengths. Describe the setting 
in which the research will take place.
In the  proposed pilot study, we will recruit 100 preoperative patients in the preadmission testing center with blood 
pressure elevation for home blood pressure monitoring (HBPM) and questionnaires regarding life style and blood 
pressure treatment and adherence vs. usual care. Approximately 40% of our pre-operative population presents with a 
pre-surgical blood pressure > 140/90 mmHg. On the day of surgery, we will randomly assign patients with elevated 
home blood pressure into two groups comparing usual care with home blood pressure monitoring and feedback. We 
will then follow these patients to estimate the prevalence among the two groups of primary-care follow-up and new or 
adjusted hypertension treatment at 60-days post-surgery. To assess patient satisfaction with the interventions and 
medication adherence, a short questionnaire will be administered.
Setting and population: We propose a pilot randomized trial that will take place at the preadmission testing center 
of YNHH, a Level 1 surgery center located within a large, diverse urban hospital that performs over 60,000 surgery 
cases per year. We expect to enroll 30 subjects each month and thus meet our recruitment goals within 3 months.
Screening and Enrollment: Inclusion and screening: We propose to recruit patients who present for ambulatory 
surgery, aged >18 years, with a preoperative blood pressure > 140/90 mmHg taken as the mean of two readings 
during the pre-admission testing visit. Subjects must be able to speak on the phone and be able to provide their 
own consent. There will not be surrogate consent or surrogate participation in follow up phone visits. Patients who 
are unable or unwilling to be contacted by telephone, are non-English speaking, or are unable to operate an 
automated home blood pressure monitor will also be excluded.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 3 of 23Randomization: Individuals who meet the inclusion criteria and have provided consent to participate in the study 
will be randomized to one of two groups in a 1:1 ratio using permuted blocks of 4 and stratified by gender. 
Interventions: While at the Preadmission Testing Center for their standard of care visit, all enrollees will complete 
a short questionnaire battery (please see Appendix I below for proposed survey) and be randomized to one of the 
two groups:
1)HBPM and Counseling group:  Enrolled patients will be fitted with a HBPM device (Omron MX3 model BP742, 
Omron, Shaumberg, IL) and instructed in its use.  The accuracy of this monitor has been validated previously.3 
For confirmation of device function and patient understanding, the patient will be asked to take two successive 
test readings.  These will be compared to two successive readings taken by research personnel using a manual 
sphygmomanometer.  If the average SBP or DBP readings differ by more than 10 mmHg, a new cuff/HBPM 
combination will be assessed.  After validation, patients will be given the device to take home with instructions 
to record a series of two successive morning blood pressures and 2 successive evening blood pressures each 
day until their surgery date.  Patients will be asked to return the HBPM device on the morning of surgery.  At 
the same time they receive the HBPM device, they will also be provided with the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) booklet called “Your guide on lowering blood pressure”, which has several guidelines regarding diet, 
exercise and lifestyle changes that can be implemented to improve blood pressure control.  After presentation 
for surgery and HBPM data processing, these patients will receive a summary report of the findings from their 
questionnaire and HBPM device feedback identifying whether they are likely to be able to control their 
hypertension (please see Appendix II below for proposed letters).  If so, they will be instructed to follow-up in 
primary care within 30 days. 
2) Usual Care Group: The usual care group will receive brief counseling after the PAT visit which will review their 
blood pressure readings taken at the clinic and how they compare with the American Heart Association (AHA) 
blood pressure guidelines. They will be offered the suggestion that they should follow up with their primary 
care doctor 2-4 weeks after their surgical episode is completed, or at their earliest convenience.
Assessments: All subjects will be contacted by telephone at 60 days postoperatively to ascertain (please see 
Appendix III below for proposed survey): 
1. Subject’s attendance at a primary care appointment within 60 days postoperatively.
2. New/adjusted treatment for hypertension within 60 days postoperatively.
3.Patient acceptance/satisfaction with blood pressure care.
5. Genetic  Testing   N/A ☒
6.Subject  Population: Provide a detailed description of the types of human subjects who will be recruited into this study.
Patients will be recruited from the Pre-Admission Testing Clinic, both male and female, >18 years of age, English 
speaking and with a mean preoperative blood pressure > 140 and/or 90 mmHg taken as the mean of two readings. 
They will be asked if they would like to participate in a pilot study that evaluates the impact on lifestyle modifications 
and blood pressure control after counseling provided in the pre-admission testing clinic. Patients who are agreeable 
will be referred to the PI or research personnel who will speak directly with them about the study and give a copy 
of informed consent. They will be recruited over a 3-month period and followed at 60-days after surgery. 
Patients who are interested in counseling, but not in being randomized will receive the same counseling as the 
control group and will not be included in the study.
7.Subject classification:  Check off all classifications of subjects that will be specifically recruited for enrollment in the 
research project.  Will  subjects who may require additional safeguards or other considerations be enrolled in the study? 
If so, identify the population of subjects requiring special safeguards and provide a justification for their involvement.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 4 of 23☐Children ☐  Healthy ☐Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus
☐Non-English Speaking ☐  Prisoners ☐Economically disadvantaged persons
☐Decisionally Impaired ☐  Employees ☐Pregnant women and/or fetuses
☐Yale Students  ☐ Females of childbearing potential
NOTE: Is  this research proposal designed to enroll children who are wards of the state as potential subjects?
Yes ☐   No ☒ 
8.Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria : What are the criteria used to determine subject inclusion or exclusion?
Inclusion and screening: We propose to recruit patients who present for ambulatory surgery, both male and female, 
>18 years of age, and with a preoperative blood pressure > 140 and/or 90 mmHg taken as the mean of two readings. 
Exclusion criteria: Non-English speaking patients,  minors,  patients unable to consent for themselves or refuse 
participation in the study, inability or unwillingness to be contacted by telephone, or an inability to operate an 
automated home blood pressure monitor. 
9. How  will eligibility be determined, and by whom? 
Dr. Diaz  or designated research personnel, will be present in the preoperative clinic and will select patients who meet 
inclusion criteria and do not meet exclusion criteria. If the patient is alert, oriented and able to give self-consent, they 
will be asked to provide consent for participation. No surrogate consent will be accepted.
10.Risks:  Describe the reasonably foreseeable risks, including risks to subject privacy, discomforts, or inconveniences 
associated with subjects participating in the research. 
Bruising or  discomfort from blood pressure cuff if fitted incorrectly or long measurement times due to elevated blood 
pressure values; possible subject anxiety or inconvenience over having to measure blood pressure twice daily.
There may  be a risk to privacy related to participation in research.   
11.Minimizing  Risks: Describe the manner in which the above-mentioned risks will be minimized.
a. Patients  will be advised to rest and relax before the reading, and avoid activities known to influence BP such as 
caffeine, exercise, eating, talking or cold exposure 30 minutes before the measurement. 
b. We  will ensure properly selected blood pressure cuffs based on patient physical characteristics, with a bladder 
length 80 percent of the patient’s arm circumference, an ideal width of 40 percent, and a size selection as follows:
22  to 26 cm 12 × 22 cm (small adult).
27  to 34 cm 16 × 30 cm (adult).
35  to 44 cm 16 × 36 cm (large adult).
c. To  reduce anxiety caused by blood pressure readings, we will reassure that these results will not affect their access 
to medical care or postpone their surgical treatment. We will also give more information about how accurate their 
elevated blood pressure in preadmission testing clinic really was and how this may be influenced by the clinical 
environment. We will also counsel patients on lifestyle modifications and follow up with their primary care 
physician.
d. Regarding  PHI, it will be stored for the shortest possible period of time and destroyed upon completion of data 
analysis. The minimal amount of PHI will be collected to conduct the study. Only de-identified information will 
remain on a server. For full discussion of storage and destruction of PHI, please see below.
e. Every  effort to minimize the risk to privacy will be taken by the research staff and clinicians including patient privacy 
protections that are standard of care, discussions in private exam rooms, and maintaining confidentiality about 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 5 of 23research participation. All  data collected as part of the study will be de-identified as soon as possible to protect 
privacy. 
12.Data  and Safety Monitoring Plan:  Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) based on the 
investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HIC will make the final determination of the risk to subjects.)
a. What  is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for subjects participating in this study? 
Minimal
b. If  children are involved, what is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for the children 
participating in this study? N/A
c. Include  an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:
The principal  investigator is responsible for monitoring the data, assuring protocol compliance, and conducting the 
safety reviews at the specified frequency bi-weekly.  During the review process the principal investigator will 
evaluate whether the study should continue unchanged, require modification/amendment, or close to enrollment.
The principal  investigator or the Institutional Review Board (IRB) have the authority  to stop or suspend the study or 
require modifications.
This protocol  presents minimal risks to the subjects and Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or 
Others (UPIRSOs), including adverse events, are not anticipated. In the unlikely event that such events occur, 
Reportable Events (which are events that are serious or life-threatening and unanticipated (or anticipated but 
occurring with a greater frequency than expected) and possibly, probably, or definitely related) or Unanticipated 
Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others that may require a temporary or permanent interruption of study 
activities will be reported immediately (if possible), followed by a written report within 5 calendar days of the 
Principal Investigator becoming aware of the event to the IRB (using the appropriate forms from the website) and 
any appropriate funding and regulatory agencies. The investigator will apprise fellow investigators and study 
personnel of all UPIRSOs and adverse events that occur during the conduct of this research project via email or in 
person. The protocol’s IRB will be informed of any unexpected adverse events that carry implications for future 
subjects’ decision to participate within 5 days of the event becoming known to the principal investigator.
d. For multi-site  studies for which the Yale PI serves as the lead investigator: N/A
13.Statistical  Considerations: Describe the statistical analyses that support the study design. 
For the primary analysis, we will estimate the proportion of subjects with 90% confidence interval that had a primary 
care follow-up visit within 60 days and the proportion reporting new/adjusted hypertension treatment.  For the 
primary analysis, we will consider those lost to follow-up as not receiving a primary care visit or new/adjusted 
hypertension treatment.  We will also estimate the mean and standard deviation of the patient satisfaction score 
in each group. 
In secondary analyses, we will compare the proportion of patients in each group who received primary care follow-
up and the proportion reporting new/adjusted hypertension treatment using the Fisher’s Exact Test. The 
distribution in patient satisfaction scores will be compared among the two groups using a Kruskal–Wallis one-way 
analysis of variance by ranks test.  In a further analysis, we will examine the proportion of patients demonstrating 
HBPM elevation.   Specific cut-offs for the interpretation of home blood pressure are controversial.4 For our own 
analysis, we will use the mean home blood pressure threshold > 135/85 mmHg as indicating hypertension, in-line 
with recommendations from the American Heart Association.2 A similar HBPM cutoff of 137/84 mmHg has 
previously been associated with a 10% increase in the adjusted relative hazard of mortality relative to ideal blood 
pressure.5
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 6 of 23Sample Size:  As the purpose of this pilot is to estimate the prevalence and distribution of outcomes and to assess 
feasibility, 100subjects will allow us to estimate for a continuous variable a 90% confidence interval around the 
mean of +/- 0.3 standard deviations. For the measurement of proportional outcomes, proportions of 0.10, 0.20, 
0.30, and 0.40 will have 90% confidence interval widths of 0.21, 0.27, 0.30, and 0.32, respectively. These estimations 
will allow for a rigorous power analysis and sample-size estimation in future clinical trials.   
Interpretation:  The data from this pilot clinical trial will provide important information in constructing future 
interventions.  Regarding feasibility, if significant non-adherence to the study protocol occurs, we may have to 
reconsider the nature of the intervention – perhaps moving toward a primary care provider-centered intervention 
that might result in improved adherence.  In the event that adherence is high, implementing the proposed 
intervention in a larger cohort may gain acceptance from care providers and institutions more broadly. If the pilot 
demonstrates poor patient acceptance/satisfaction, the interventions will similarly be reexamined as above.
SECTION  II: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS , BIOLOGICS , RADIOTRACERS,  PLACEBOS AND DEVICES
If this  section (or one of its parts, A or B) is not applicable, check off N/A and delete the rest of the section.
A.  RADIOTRACERS ☒N/A
B.  DRUGS/BIOLOGICS    ☒N/A
 B.  DEVICES  ☒N/A
SECTION III:  RECRUITMENT/CONSENT AND ASSENT PROCEDURES 
1. Targeted  Enrollment: Give the number of subjects: 
a. Targeted  for enrollment at Yale for this protocol: 100
b. If  this is a multi-site study, give the total number of subjects targeted across all sites: Not applicable.
2. Indicate  recruitment methods below.  Attach copies of any recruitment materials that will be used.
☐Flyers ☐ Internet/web  postings ☐ Radio
☐ Posters ☐ Mass email  solicitation ☐ Telephone
☐ Letter ☐ Departmental/Center  website ☐ Television
☒ Medical  record review* ☐ Departmental/Center  research boards ☐ Newspaper
☐ Departmental/Center  newsletters ☐ Web-based clinical  trial registries ☐ Clinicaltrails.gov  
☐ YCCI  Recruitment database ☐ Social  Media (Twitter/Facebook): 
☒ Other:  Referrals from Pre-
admission testing center and chart 
review
* Requests  for medical records should be made through JDAT as described at  
http://medicine.yale.edu/ycci/oncore/availableservices/datarequests/datarequests.aspx
3. Recruitment  Procedures: 
a. Describe  how potential subjects will be identified. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 7 of 23Patients older  than 18 years of age being seen at the preadmission testing clinic, will have two sets of blood pressure 
measurements, and, if at or above 140 and/or 90, they will be asked by the provider performing the PAT assessment if 
they are interested in learning more about the study. If they agree, they will be referred to Dr. Sofia Diaz or designated 
research personnel, who will discuss potential study participation with the patient.
b. Describe  how potential subjects are contacted. 
Potential participants will be  seen in the PAT area after their appointment. If the patient expresses interest in learning 
more about the study, Dr. Diaz or designated research personnel will meet with the patient before they leave the PAT 
area to review the consent and establish eligibility.
c. Who  is recruiting potential subjects? 
Dr. Sofia Diaz  or designated research personnel will be recruiting the patients who have a mean out of two blood 
pressures at or above 140 and/or 90, and express that they are interested in hearing more about this program.
4. Assessment  of Current Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:
Does the  Investigator or any member of the research team have a direct existing clinical relationship with any potential 
subject? 
☐Yes, all  subjects
☒Yes, some  of the subjects
☐No
If yes, describe  the nature of this relationship. 
The study  investigators may provide anesthesia care to some of the subjects as part of their normal clinical responsibilities 
at YNHH.
5. Request for  waiver of HIPAA authorization: (When requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for either the entire study, 
or for recruitment purposes only.  Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of a phone or email screen, you must request a 
HIPAA waiver for recruitment purposes.)
Choose one:  N/A
☐ For  entire study 
☒ For  recruitment/screening purposes only
☐ For  inclusion of non-English speaking subject if short form is being used and there is no translated HIPAA research 
authorization form available on the University’s HIPAA website at hipaa.yale.edu.
i. Describe  why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s authorization for use/disclosure of this data:
 The  investigators will look at participants' history of their hypertension treatment for the two years prior to 
their surgery, including any medications or other treatments for blood pressure that they may have been on 
previously or that they may be on now. We will approach only subjects who meet the appropriate inclusion 
criteria and therefore, will require a waiver of consent to review their blood measurement and name to 
approach them about the study. Written consent will be obtained if they are interested in study participation.
ii. If  requesting a waiver of signed authorization, describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the subject’s 
signed authorization for use/disclosure of this data: Write here
The investigator  assures that the protected health information for which a Waiver of Authorization has been requested 
will not be reused or disclosed to any person or entity other than those listed in this application, except as required by 
law, for authorized oversight of this research study, or as specifically approved for use in another study by an IRB.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 8 of 23Researchers are  reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale HIPAA-Covered entity 
must be accounted for in the “accounting for disclosures log”, by subject name, purpose, date, recipients, and a description 
of information provided.  Logs are to be forwarded to the Deputy HIPAA Privacy Officer.
6. Process  of Consent/Assent:  Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will be obtained, including 
parental permission or surrogate permission and the steps taken to ensure subjects’ independent decision-making. 
Consent will be  provided to the interested patient in the Pre-Admission Testing Clinic. They will have the opportunity 
to read the consent form and ask questions in a quiet and private exam room. Dr. Diaz or designated research personnel 
will review the full Compound Authorization and Consent document with the subject discussing the purpose and scope 
of the study, explaining any risks and/or potential benefits, procedures associated with participation, economic 
considerations, confidentiality of the subject’s information, and their ability to voluntarily participate and withdraw at 
any time during the study will be explained in person. It will be explained that participation is completely voluntary and 
that they may withdraw at any time without penalty. Full disclosure regarding their blood pressure measurement will 
be provided. Only after the patient has a thorough understanding of the study and what is being asked of them and 
after all their questions have been answered by the investigator or designated research personnel, will they be asked 
to indicate a decision to participate by signing the consent form. A copy of the signed consent form will be given to each 
subject.
7. Evaluation  of Subject(s) Capacity to Provide Informed Consent/Assent: Indicate how the personnel obtaining consent 
will assess the potential subject’s ability and capacity to consent to the research being proposed. 
Patients participating should  be alert and oriented, capable of clearly indicating their decision regarding participation 
or not, capable of paraphrasing the information provided, and show understanding of the risks, benefits and overall 
outcomes that can be expected from the pilot study.
8. Non-English Speaking  Subjects: Explain provisions in place to ensure comprehension for research involving non-English 
speaking subjects. If enrollment of these subjects is anticipated, translated copies of all consent materials must be 
submitted for approval prior to use.  We do not plan to enroll any non-English speaking subjects at this time.
As a  limited alternative to the above requirement, will you use the short form* for consenting process if you unexpectedly 
encounter a non-English speaking individual interested in study participation and the translation of the long form is not 
possible prior to intended enrollment?  YES ☐  NO ☐
Note* If more than  2 study participants are enrolled using a short form translated into the same language, then the full 
consent form  should be translated into that language for use the next time a subject speaking that language is to be 
enrolled.
Several translated  short form templates are available on the HRPP website (yale.edu/hrpp) and translated HIPAA Research 
Authorization Forms are available on the HIPAA website (hipaa.yale.edu). If the translation of the short form is not 
available on our website, then the translated short form needs to be submitted to the IRB office for approval via 
modification prior to enrolling the subject.   Please review the guidance and presentation on use of the short form 
available on the HRPP website.
If using  a short form without a translated HIPAA Research Authorization Form, please request a HIPAA waiver in the 
section above. 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 9 of 239. Consent Waiver:  In certain circumstances, the HIC may grant a waiver of signed consent, or a full waiver of consent, 
depending on the study. If you will request either a waiver of consent, or a waiver of signed consent for this study, complete 
the appropriate section below.  
☐Not Requesting  any consent waivers 
☐Requesting a  waiver of signed consent:
☐ Recruitment/Screening  only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will apply to recruitment 
activities only)
☐ Entire Study ( Note that an information sheet may be required.)
 For  a waiver of signed consent, address the following:
Would the signed consent form be the only record linking the subject and the research?  YES ☐  NO ☐ 
Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal risk to subjects? YES ☐  NO ☐
 
OR
Does the research pose greater than minimal risk? YES ☐    NO☒ 
Does the research include any activities that would require signed consent in a non-research context? YES ☐   
NO ☒
 ☒ Requesting a waiver of consent:
☒ Recruitment/Screening  only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will apply to recruitment 
activities only)
☐ Entire Study 
 
For a  full waiver of consent, please address all of the following:
Does the research pose greater than minimal risk to subjects?  
☐ Yes  If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot be granted.  
☒ No
Will the waiver adversely affect subjects’ rights and welfare? YES ☐    NO☒
Why would the research be impracticable to conduct without the waiver? A waiver is necessary to pre-
screen subjects by reviewing their medical record for blood pressure levels in order to avoid approaching 
those patients who do not meet inclusion criteria.
Where appropriate, how will pertinent information be returned to, or shared with subjects at a later date? 
Write here
SECTION  IV: P ROTECTION OF RESEARCH SUBJECTS
    Confidentiality &  Security of Data:
1. What  protected health information (medical information along with the HIPAA identifiers) about subjects will be 
collected and used for the research?  
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 10 of 23Health information  collected at the initial visit includes full name, date of birth, gender, MRN, ASA status, type of 
surgery, date of surgery, current medication list and telephone number. Follow up for both groups at 60 days after date 
of surgery will be by phone. Data collected includes the initial and post-operative surveys (see attached appendix I and 
III). On the day of surgery, data from the HBPM group will be collected. Additionally, we will do a chart review post-
operatively to look for blood pressure ranges following surgery.
2. How  will the research data be collected, recorded and stored? 
Each patient  will be assigned a number at time of initial visit. All patient information will be stored in a locked-box in 
the PAT clinic and uploaded on an encrypted, password protected computer. Patient data in the server will contain the 
assigned number, but will NOT contain MRN, patient’s first name or any identified data.  All paper sheets will be 
destroyed after being uploaded. A separate file with the key containing patient’s first name, MRN, telephone number, 
day-of-surgery and assigned number will be used for day-of-surgery and telephone follow up’s. This sheet will be stored 
on a separate iron-key encrypted flash-drive and will be password protected. This flash drive will be maintained by Dr. 
Diaz. Once all follow-up data is collected and de-identified information is uploaded, this file will be deleted per IT policy. 
All information gathered from follow-up will be uploaded onto the server, in a de-identified manner.
3. How  will the digital data be stored? ☐CD  ☐DVD  ☒Flash Drive  ☐Portable Hard Drive   ☒Secured Server  ☒Laptop 
Computer  ☐Desktop Computer  ☐Other
4. What  methods and procedures will be used to safeguard the confidentiality and security of the identifiable study data 
and the storage media indicated above during and after the subject’s participation in the study?
The use  of locked boxes for paper information, de-identified information on a server for long-term data after final 
communication with the patient, use of minimal patient identifiers and software encryption (for sheets containing 
information for follow up and chart review) all help protect patient security.
All portable  devices must contain encryption software, per University Policy 5100.  If there is a technical reason a device 
cannot be encrypted please submit an exception request to the Information Security, Policy and Compliance Office by 
clicking on url http://its.yale.edu/egrc or email it.compliance@yale.edu
5. What  will be done with the data when the research is completed? Are there plans to destroy the identifiable data? If 
yes, describe how, by whom and when identifiers will be destroyed. If no, describe how the data and/or identifiers will 
be secured. 
Paper information  in the locked box will be destroyed (shredded) once uploaded to the server. It will be destroyed by 
the study member uploading data to the server. The files containing patient name, MRN and telephone number will be 
destroyed (deleted digitally per IT policy) once the follow-up is complete by the study member performing follow-up 
interviews.
6. If  appropriate, has a Certificate of Confidentiality been obtained? N/A
SECTION V: P OTENTIAL BENEFITS
Potential Benefits:  Identify any benefits that may be reasonably expected to result from the research, either to the subject(s) 
or to society at large. (Payment of subjects is not considered a benefit in this context of the risk benefit assessment.) 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 11 of 23Subjects would  benefit from lifestyle modifications that would ensure a healthier diet and increased physical activity. 
Diagnosis of high blood pressure with subsequent treatment can be obtained, as well as improved treatment or adherence 
to current treatment.
If these  goals are accomplished by education and follow up by anesthesiologist at the perioperative clinic and by home 
blood pressure monitoring before surgery, an education protocol could be administered from perioperative clinics to 
decrease cardiovascular risk in patients with elevated blood pressure seen before surgery.
         S ECTION  VI: R ESEARCH ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
1.Alternatives:  What other alternatives are available to the study subjects outside of the research? 
Not taking  part in the study.
2.Payments  for Participation (Economic Considerations): Describe any payments that will be made to subjects, the 
amount and schedule of payments, and the conditions for receiving this compensation.
There is  no patient compensation for participation.
3.Costs for  Participation (Economic Considerations): Clearly describe the subject’s costs associated with participation in 
the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that will be provided at no cost to subjects. 
None.
4.In  Case of Injury: This section is required for any research involving more than minimal risk, and for minimal risk research 
that presents the potential for physical harm (e.g., research involving blood draws).
The Primary intervention  is not expected to cause any harm. It consists of discussion, information and questionnaires.
a. Will  medical treatment be available if research-related injury occurs? No, no injuries related to participation 
are expected.
b. Where  and from whom may treatment be obtained? If the participant experiences any NRT related side-
effects he/she should contact their primary care physician for assessment and instructions
c. Are  there any limits to the treatment being provided? N/A
d. Who  will pay for this treatment? Any medical treatment related to the use of NRT will be the patient’s or 
his/her insurance.
e. How  will the medical treatment be accessed by subjects? Via their PCP
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 12 of 23
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 13 of 23IMPORTANT REMINDERS
Will this  study have a billable service?  Yes ☐  No☒
A billable  service is defined as any service rendered to a study subject that, if he/she was not on a study, would normally 
generate a bill from either Yale-New Haven Hospital or Yale Medical Group to the patient or the patient’s insurer. The 
service may or may not be performed by the research staff on your study, but may be provided by professionals within 
either Yale-New Haven Hospital or Yale Medical Group (examples include x-rays, MRIs, CT scans, specimens sent to central 
labs, or specimens sent to pathology). Notes: 1. There is no distinction made whether the service is paid for by the subject 
or their insurance (Standard of Care) or by the study’s funding mechanism (Research Sponsored). 2. This generally includes 
new services or orders placed in EPIC for research subjects. 
If answered,  “yes”, this study will need to be set up in OnCore, Yale’s clinical research management system, for Epic to 
appropriately route research related charges. Please contact oncore.support@yale.edu
Are there  any procedures involved in this protocol that will be performed at YNHH or one of its affiliated entities?  Yes ☐  
No ☒ 
If Yes, please  answer questions a through c and note instructions below.  
a. Does  your YNHH privilege delineation currently include the specific procedure that you will perform? Yes ☐  No ☐
b. Will  you be using any new equipment or equipment that you have not used in the past for this procedure? Yes ☐  No ☐
c. Will a  novel approach using existing equipment be applied? Yes ☐  No ☐
 
If you answered  “no” to question 4a, or "yes" to question 4b or c, please contact the YNHH Department of Physician 
Services (688-2615) for prior approval before commencing with your research protocol.
IMPORTANT REMINDER  ABOUT RESEARCH AT YNHH 
Please note  that if this protocol includes Yale-New Haven Hospital patients, including patients at the HRU, the Principal 
Investigator and any co-investigators who are physicians or mid-level practitioners (includes PAs, APRNs, psychologists 
and speech pathologists) who may have direct patient contact with patients on YNHH premises must have medical staff 
appointment and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH. If you are uncertain whether the study personnel meet the 
criteria, please telephone the Physician Services Department at 203-688-2615. By submitting this protocol as a PI, you 
attest that you and any co-investigator who may have patient contact has a medical staff appointment and appropriate 
clinical privileges at YNHH.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 14 of 23APPENDIX I
Elevated blood  pressure in the pre-admission testing clinic can be caused by several reasons including (but not limited to) 
anxiety, newly diagnosed hypertension, or diagnosed hypertension but issues with treatment. Because two of your blood 
pressure values were elevated today, we would like to ask you a few questions to better understand the possible cause 
behind this.
1. What  is your gender?
[ ] Female [  ] Male
2. What  is your race?
[ ] White/Caucasian [  ] Black/African American
[ ] Asian [  ] American Indian/Pacific Islander
[ ] Other
And ethnicity?
[ ] Hispanic/latino [  ] Non-hispanic/latino
3. Do  you have a primary care physician (PCP)?
[ ] Yes [  ] No
4. If  yes, when did you last see your PCP?
[ ] Less  than a month ago [ ] 1-3 months ago [ ] 3-6 months ago
[ ] 6-12  months ago [ ] More than one year [ ] I don’t have a PCP
5. On a  scale from 1 to 5, 1 being very difficult and 5 being very easy, how easy is it for you to get an appointment 
with your PCP when you need one?
6. Has  a doctor ever told you that you have high blood pressure?
[ ] Yes [  ] No
7. If  yes, how long ago were you told that you have high blood pressure?
[ ] 0-6 months  ago [ ] 6-12 months ago [ ] More than 12 months ago
8. Have  you ever been in the emergency room or hospitalized for high blood pressure?
[ ] Yes [  ] No
9. Has  a doctor ever recommended or prescribed a treatment to lower your blood pressure?
[ ] Yes [  ] No
10. If  yes, what type of treatment? Select all that apply
[ ] Diet  changes [ ] Exercise
[ ] Smoking  cessation [ ] Medications          Very difficult                                       Very easy
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 15 of 23[ ] Stress  management [ ] Home blood pressure monitoring
11. If  you have a home blood pressure monitor, how often do you measure your blood pressure?
[ ] Every day [  ] 1-3 times per week
[ ] Every week [  ] 1-2 times per month
[ ] A few times  a year [ ]  I don't have a home blood pressure cuff
12. If  you take medications for your blood pressure, how many do you take?
[ ] 1 [  ] 2 [ ] >=3
Extent of  Adherence9
In order  for blood pressure medication to work, people have to take it according to their doctor’s instructions. For one 
reason or another, people can’t or don’t always take all of their pills as prescribed. We want to know how often you have 
missed your blood pressure medication. Please rate your agreement with the following statements. 
Over the  past 7 days…
1. I  took all doses of my blood pressure 
medication.      Strongly disagree                            Strongly agree
2. I  missed or skipped at least one dose of my 
blood pressure medication.      Strongly disagree                            Strongly agree
3. I  was not able to take all of my blood 
pressure medication.      Strongly disagree                            Strongly agree
Reasons for  Nonadherence9
Situations come  up that make it difficult for people to take their blood pressure medications as prescribed by their doctors. 
Below is a list of those situations. We want to know how much these situations contributed to you missing a dose of your 
medication. Only one of these situations may apply to you, or many may apply to you.
In the  past 7 days, how much did each situation contribute to you missing a dose of your blood pressure medication?
1. I  was busy              Not at  all                                         Very much
2. There was  no one to remind me              Not at  all                                         Very much
3. They  caused some side effects              Not at  all                                         Very much
4. I  worried about taking them for the rest of 
my life            Not at  all                                         Very much
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 16 of 235. They  cost a lot of money             Not at  all                                         Very much
6. I  came home late              Not at  all                                        Very much
7. I  did not have any symptoms of high blood 
pressure            Not at  all                                          Very much
8. I  was with friends or family members             Not at  all                                         Very much
9. I  was in a public place             Not at  all                                         Very much
10. I  was afraid of becoming dependent on 
them            Not at  all                                          Very much
11.  I was afraid  they may affect my sexual 
performance           Not at  all                                           Very much
12.  The  time to take them was between my 
meals            Not at  all                                          Very much
13. I  felt I did not need them            Not at  all                                           Very much
14. I  was travelling            Not at  all                                           Very much
15.  I was supposed  to take them more than 
once a day           Not at  all                                           Very much
16. I  had other medications to take            Not at  all                                          Very much
17.  They make  me want to urinate while 
away from home            Not at  all                                          Very much
18.   I ran  out of medication            Not at  all                                          Very much
19.  I was afraid  the medication would interact 
with other medication I take           Not at  all                                           Very much
20.  My  blood pressure was too low            Not at  all                                          Very much
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 17 of 23 21.  I was feeling  too ill to take them            Not at  all                                          Very much
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 18 of 23APENDIX II
Healthy patient
Dear Mr./Ms.  [patient name]
Congratulations! The following  are your average home blood pressure measurements [BP mmHg], which are considered 
normal. We  encourage you to continue with a healthy lifestyle to maintain these numbers, and to share these with your 
doctor.  
As people  age, their systolic blood pressures tend to rise so it is important to continue to monitor your blood pressures with 
your primary care  physician from time to time in the future.
We wish  you well, and a speedy recovery from your surgery.
Non-adherence (no  HBPM letter)
Dear Mr./Ms.  [patient name]
Based on  your answers to our questionnaire, you are currently diagnosed with elevated blood pressure and receiving 
treatment. However,  we noticed that when you were seen in our clinic, you had a blood pressure value that is considered 
elevated. We  do not know whether your blood pressure is frequently elevated, but many patients with elevated blood 
pressure in our  clinic have been shown to also have elevated blood pressures at home. Many patients sometimes find that 
it is difficult to  take medications as prescribed, and when high blood pressure is untreated for a long period of time, it can 
increase your risk  of bad health outcomes such as strokes, heart attacks, eye, and kidney problems.  
We encourage  you to follow up with your doctor to discuss your blood pressure medications and ways of helping to get 
your blood pressure  under better control. We also encourage you to look at the enclosed brochure by the National Institutes 
of Health  (NIH), which talks about ways you can help decrease your blood pressure through a healthy lifestyle. You can also 
obtain an  electronic version at https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/docs/public/heart/hbp_low.pdf
We wish  you well, and a speedy recovery from your surgery.
Non-adherence (HBPM  letter)
Dear Mr./Ms.  [patient name]
The following  are your average home blood pressure measurements [BP mmHg], which are considered elevated. Based on 
your previous  answers to our questionnaire, you are currently treated for high blood pressure, but your blood pressures 
remain elevated.   One common reason for this is that sometimes it is difficult to take your medications as prescribed. When 
high blood  pressure is untreated for a long period of time, it can increase your risk of bad health outcomes such as strokes, 
heart attacks,  eye, and kidney problems.  
We encourage  you to follow up with your doctor to discuss your blood pressure medications and ways of helping to get 
your blood pressure  under better control. We also encourage you to look at the enclosed brochure by the National Institutes 
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 19 of 23of Health  (NIH), which talks about ways you can help decrease your blood pressure through a healthy lifestyle. You can also 
obtain an  electronic version at https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/docs/public/heart/hbp_low.pdf
We wish  you well, and a speedy recovery from your surgery.
Non-diagnosis (no  HBPM letter)
Dear Mr./Ms.  [patient name]
Based on  your answers to our questionnaire, you have never been diagnosed with high blood pressure. However, we 
noticed that when  you were seen in our clinic, you had a blood pressure value that is considered elevated. We do not know 
whether your  blood pressure is frequently elevated, but many patients with elevated blood pressure in our clinic have been 
shown to  also have elevated blood pressures at home.
 
We encourage  you to speak with your primary care doctor about your blood pressures. Some people measure their blood 
pressures at  home to help determine whether they need treatment or not. 
We have  also included a brochure by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), which talks about ways you can help decrease 
your blood  pressure through a healthy lifestyle. You can also obtain an electronic version at 
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/docs/public/heart/hbp_low.pdf
We wish  you well, and a speedy recovery from your surgery.
Non-diagnosis (HBPM  letter)
Dear Mr./Ms.  [patient name]
The following  are your average home blood pressure measurements [BP mmHg], which are considered elevated. Based on 
your previous  answers, you have never been diagnosed with elevated blood pressure. However, we noticed that when you 
were seen  in our clinic, you had a blood pressure value that is considered elevated.  After you went home, your average 
blood pressures  remained elevated at home.  When high blood pressure is untreated for a long period of time, it can 
increase your risk  of bad health outcomes such as strokes, heart attacks, eye, and kidney problems.  
We encourage  you to follow up with your doctor to discuss your blood pressure results from this letter and to discuss ways 
of helping  to get your blood pressure under better control. We also encourage you to look at the enclosed brochure by the 
National Institute of Health  (NIH), which talks about ways you can help decrease your blood pressure through a healthy 
lifestyle. You can  also obtain an electronic version at https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/docs/public/heart/hbp_low.pdf
We wish  you well, and a speedy recovery from your surgery.
Treatment Inertia  (no HBPM letter)
Dear Mr./Ms.  [patient name]
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 20 of 23Based on  your answers to our questionnaire, you are currently being treated for high blood pressure. We do not know 
whether your  blood pressure is frequently elevated, but many patients with elevated blood pressure in our clinic have been 
shown to  also have elevated blood pressures at home.
 
We encourage  you to speak with your primary care doctor about your blood pressures. Some people with high blood 
pressures may  need to intensify their treatment, and many patients measure blood pressures at home to help figure out 
what treatments  work best. 
We have  also included a brochure by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), which talks about ways you can help decrease 
your blood  pressure through a healthy lifestyle. You can also obtain an electronic version at 
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/docs/public/heart/hbp_low.pdf
We wish  you well, and a speedy recovery from your surgery.
Treatment Inertia  (HBPM letter)
Dear Mr./Ms.  [patient name]
The following  are your average home blood pressure measurements [BP mmHg], which are considered elevated. Based on 
your previous  answers to our questionnaires, you are currently treated for high blood pressure. However, we noticed that 
when you  were seen in our clinic, you had a blood pressure value that is considered elevated.  After you went home, your 
average blood pressures remained  elevated at home.  When high blood pressure is untreated for a long period of time, it 
can increase  your risk of bad health outcomes such as strokes, heart attacks, eye, and kidney problems.  
We encourage  you to speak with your primary care doctor about your blood pressures. Some people with high blood 
pressures may  need to intensify their treatment, and many patients measure blood pressures at home to help figure out 
what treatments  work best. 
We have  also included a brochure by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), which talks about ways you can help decrease 
your blood  pressure through a healthy lifestyle. You can also obtain an electronic version at 
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/docs/public/heart/hbp_low.pdf
We wish  you well, and a speedy recovery from your surgery.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 21 of 23APENDIX III
60-day post-operative  questionnaire
When we  saw you in our preadmission testing clinic, you were found to have two elevated blood pressure readings. Because 
of this you agreed to be enrolled in a pilot trial regarding lifestyle, habits and blood pressure management modifications. 
We would now like to ask you some questions regarding these subjects and your satisfaction with the whole process.
1. Have  you seen your primary care physician since your surgery?  
[ ] Yes [  ] No
If yes, and  A) On medications, continue to question 3; or B) On no medications, continue to question 5. 
If no  to this or any of the following questions, continue to question 6.
2. Did  you and your doctor discuss blood pressure treatment during that appointment?
 [  ] Yes [ ] No
3. Have  you had any changes in your blood pressure treatment since your surgery?
[ ] Yes [  ] No
4. If  yes, what changes?
[ ] Increase  in dose [ ] Change in medication [ ] Addition of medication
5. Have  you received any new medicines to treat your blood pressure since your surgery?
[ ] Yes [  ] No
6. You  may remember that we gave you a brochure about blood pressured a healthy lifestyle before you came for 
surgery. Have you taken any steps to control your blood pressure?
[ ] Yes [  ] No
7. If  yes, which of the following (select all that apply):
[ ] Diet  changes [ ] Exercise
[ ] Smoking  cessation [ ] Medications
[ ] Stress  management [ ] Home blood pressure monitoring
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 22 of 23The following  are questions regarding your satisfaction with this project. On a scale from 1 to 5:
1. How  satisfied are you with your 
participation in our blood pressure study?            Not at  all                                         Very much
2. How  easy was it for you to take your 
home blood pressures for the study?            Not at  all                                          Very much
3. How  helpful was the brochure that you 
received in helping you understand the 
importance of blood pressure control?            Not at  all                                           Very much
4. How  helpful was the follow-up visit on the 
day of surgery to discuss you home blood 
pressure monitoring readings?             Not at  all                                          Very much
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020        HIC#2000023093
Page 23 of 23References: 
1. Whelton  PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 
ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults. Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology. 2017.
2. Lancaster  GA, Dodd S, Williamson PR: Design and analysis of pilot studies: recommendations for good 
practice. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice. 10:307-312, 2004.
3. Coleman  A, Freeman P, Steel S, et al. Validation of the Omron MX3 Plus oscillometric blood pressure 
monitoring device according to the European Society of Hypertension international protocol. Blood 
Pressure Monitoring. 10:165-168, 2005.
4. Myers  MG, Godwin M, Dawes M, et al. Conventional versus automated measurement of blood pressure in 
primary care patients with systolic hypertension: randomised parallel design controlled trial. BMJ . 
342:d286, 2011.
5. Tsuji  I, Imai Y, Nagai K, et al. Proposal of reference values for home blood pressure measurement: 
prognostic criteria based on a prospective observation of the general population in Ohasama, Japan. 
American Journal of Hypertension.  10:409-418, 1997.
6. Schonberger  RB: Ideal Blood Pressure Management and our Specialty: RE: Drummond, et al. "An 
Observational Study of the Influence of "White-coat Hypertension" on Day-of-Surgery Blood Pressure 
Determinations. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. In Press, 2014.
7. Schonberger  RB, Burg MM, Holt NF, et al.: The relationship between day-of-surgery and primary care blood 
pressure among Veterans presenting from home for surgery.  Is there evidence for anesthesiologist-
initiated blood pressure referral? Anesthesia & Analgesia. 114:205-214, 2012.
8. Schonberger  RB, Feinleib J, Lukens CL, et al.: Beta-blocker withdrawal among patients presenting for 
surgery from home. Journal of Cardiothoracic & Vascular Anesthesia. 2012.
9. Voils  CI, Maciejewski ML, Hoyle RH, et al. Initial validation of a self-report measure of the extent of and 
reasons for medication nonadherence. Medical care. 50(12):1013-1019, 2012.
APPROVED BY THE YALE UNIVERSITY IRB 3/16/2020