An Investigation of Early Life Stress and Depression (ID: 2012P002593)  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version date: 3/20/2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 2 
 Early Life Stress and Depression: Molecular and Functional Imaging Approache s 
2012 -P-002593 
 
I. BACKGROUND and SIGNIFICANCE  
a. Historical background  
 
The recent National Comorbidity Survey showed that severe childhood adversity explains nearly 32% 
of psychiatric disorders, and an even higher percentage (44%) of disorders with childhood onset (Green 
et al 2010). Strikingly, early adversities account for about 67% of suicide risk (Dube et al 2001). In a 
birth cohort of 1,000 children, early maltreatment was linked to an increased odds ratio of 4.6 for MDD 
(Fergu sson et al 1996a,b; see also Kendler et al 2000; Wise et al 2001). In addition, CSA has been 
linked to higher rates of maladaptive coping behaviors, including 2.7 -fold risk for alcohol abuse and 
dependence and 6.6 -fold risk for abuse of other substances (K endler et al 2000). Although maladaptive 
behaviors may serve an initial coping function to relieve CSA -related distress, these behaviors form a 
primary mediator between CSA and future sexual victimization (Messman -Moore et al 2009), which 
is consistently h igh (~30%; Messman -Moore et al 2010). Early adversity does not only increase the 
risk for psychopathology, but also medical illnesses (e.g., cardiovascular disease) and health -damaging 
behavior (e.g., smoking) (e.g., Anda et al 2006; Chapman et al 2004; Do ng et al 2004b). In spite of 
these epidemiological data, the neurobiological underpinnings associated with adaptive (resilience) 
and maladaptive sequelae of CSA remain largely unknown. Furthermore,  despite high prevalence rates 
and severe sequelae of CSA, little is known about underlying neurobiological mechanisms, particularly 
with respect to stress -mediated disturbances of mesocorticolimbic DA pathways. Progress in this area 
is currently hampered b y a failure to consider the (1) specificity of the type of early adversity, (2) role 
of developmental trajectory of the brain at the timing of abuse, and (3) interplay of mesocortical vs. 
mesolimbic DA system.  
 
b. Previous research  
A large body of work has hi ghlighted reduced affective, behavioral, and physiological responses to 
positive and reward -related cu es in depression. Depressed and/or anhedonic participants: 1) fail to 
distinguish between options yielding large versus small rewards (Forbes  et al, 2007) ; 2) experience 
diminished affective (Berenbaum & Oltmanns, 1992) , behavioral (Sloan  et al, 2001), and physiological 
(Pierson et al, 1987) responses to pleasant stimuli; 3) underestimate the frequency of correct feedback 
and positive reinforcement received in experimental tasks (Nelson & Craighead, 1977) ; and 4) require 
greater emotional intensity to correctly identify happy facial expressions (Joormann & Gotlib, 2006) . 
In our work using a probabilistic reward task, we found that subjects with elevated depre ssive 
symptoms (Pizzagalli  et al, 2005), unmedicated Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) patients (Pizzagalli  
et al, 2009), and euthymic bipolar patients (Pizzagalli  et al, 2008) are characterized by reduced reward 
learning. Interestingly, in both clinical and  non-clinical samples, reward responsiveness negatively 
correlated with anhedonic symptoms (Bogdan & Pizzagalli, 2006; Pizzagalli, et al., 2008; Pizzagalli et 
al., 2009; Pizzagalli et al., 2005), and predicted these symptoms one month later (Pizzagalli et al., 
2005).  
 
These behavioral findings have been complemented by neuroimaging data. Forbes and colleagues 
(Forbes et al., 2006) reported that, relative to controls, depressed children displayed reduced activation 
in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), cau date, and right orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) during the 
decision/anticipation and outcome phases of a reward -based decision making task (particularly for 
small rewards). Similarly, replicating and extending their finding of increased affective response to a 
dopamine (DA) agonist in MDD, Tremblay and colleagues (Tremblay et al., 2005) reported that, 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 3 
 relative to controls, MDD subjects showed increased affective responses to a DA agonist along with 
decreased BOLD signals in the OFC, caudate, and putamen. The dec reased BOLD signal in these 
regions was interpreted as resulting from disinhibition of DA neurons. Thus, both the self -reported 
hyper -response to the drug and the fMRI results were interpreted as suggesting hypofunction in the 
brain’s reward system in MDD.  Further evidence of dysfunctional reward pathways in MDD arises 
from studies highlighting reduced responsiveness to positive stimuli in reward -related regions, 
including the ventral striatum (Epstein et al., 2006; Lawrence et al., 2004) and medial PFC/OFC  (Elliott  
et al, 2002). Notably, a recent study using a gambling task reported that MDD subjects failed to show 
the behavioral (RT reduction) and neural (ventral striatum activation) patterns displayed by controls 
upon receiving positive feedback (Steele  et al, 2007). Finally, anhedonic symptoms correlated 
negatively with activation in the ventral striatum and dorsolateral PFC in response to visual stimuli 
(Epstein et al., 2006; Harvey  et al, 2007; Keedwell  et al, 2005).  
 
Preclinical data suggest that chron ic stressors, including early adversity, exert long -lasting effects on 
mesocorticolimbic DA pathways (e.g., Anisman & Matheson 2005; Matthews & Robbins 2003). For 
example, chronic unavoidable stressors led to a 64% reduction in the number of spontaneously active 
DA neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) (Moore et al 2001) and reduced DA output in the 
nucleus accumbens (NAc) up to 14 days post -stressor (Gambarana et al 1999). Reduction in 
mesolimbic DA was closely related to coping failures and maintena nce of depression -like behaviors 
(Mangiavacchi et al 2001), and was normalized by antidepressants (Gambarana et al 1999). In adult 
monkeys (age 19 -24), social deprivation in the first 9 months was linked to altered distribution and 
density of neurotransmit ters in basal ganglia regions (globus pallidus, caudate, and putamen; Martin et 
al 1991). Similarly, early life stress reduced dopamine transporter (DAT) density and enhanced stress -
induced DA release in the NAc and PFC (Brake et al 2004; Di Chiara et al 1 999).  
 
Notably, in Matthews and Robbins’s (2003) maternal separation model, impaired reward anticipation 
emerged in spite of  normal consummatory behavior, suggesting that specific phases of reward 
processing might be particularly affected by early adversity. Pryce et al (2004) extended these findings 
to non -human primates: adult monkeys subjected to early maternal separation di splayed diminished 
motivation to obtain reward despite normative consummatory behavior. Similarly, maternal 
deprivation in rats led to an adult phenotype with decreased motivation to work to obtain a sucrose 
reinforcer (Ruedi -Bettschen et al 2005). While p reclinical data point to reward system abnormalities 
following early adversity, little attention has been devoted to clarify the role of DA in CSA . 
The role of stress in the development, expression, and exacerbation of depression, and 
particularly, anhedon ia, is well established (Brown and Harris 1978 ; Kendler, Kessler et al. 
1995 ; Hammen 2005 ; Monroe and Harkness 2005 ). Decades of anim al research have shown that 
exposure to uncontrollable stressors down -regulates mesolimbic DA pathways and induces 
anhedonia -like behavior. Because phasic DA responses play a key role in the acquisition and 
expression of motivated behavior and reinforcemen t learning (Schultz 2007 ), these preclinical 
findings suggest that dysfunctions in DA mechanisms might underlie anhedonia in MDD. Of 
primary relevance to the proposed research, this preclinical work has also shown that  these 
behavioral and physiological effects are dependent on the nature of the stressor (e.g., 
uncontrollable vs. controllable), prior encounters with chronic stressors, and genetics (Cabib and 
Puglisi -Allegra 1996 ). The ability of an organism to exert control over a stressful situation, in 
particular, has been found to hav e important effects (Anisman and Matheson 2005 ). Critically, 
elegant work by Maier and colleagues has shown that detection of control during  a stressful 
situation activates the medial prefrontal cortex ( mPFC ), which in turn inhibits stress -induced 
activation of b rainstem and limbic regions (Amat, Baratta et al. 2005 ; Amat, Paul et al. 2008 ). 
Intriguingly, experience of stress controllability modifies mPFC responses to future 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 4 
 uncontrollable stressors, boosting resilience.  Evidence of increased stress sensitivity in MDD is 
complemented by reports of (1) Hypothalamic -Pituitary -Axis (HPA) hyperactivity, including 
chronically elevated cortisol and increased stress -related corticotrophin -releasing hormone 
(CRH) levels in MDD, which is seen in up to 70% of patients (Holsboer 2000 ); (2) HPA 
hyperactivity in both remi tted MDD subjects (Vreeburg, Hoogendijk et al. 2009 ) as well as 
healthy first -degree relatives of MDD patients (Modell, Lauer et al. 1998 ); and (3) normalization 
of HPA axis function ante ceding remission (Holsboer 2000 ).   
 
 In addition to stress -induced alterations in stress -hormone pathways, acute stressors have 
also been found to engage the inflammatory response system (IRS). IRS reactivity has been 
previously associated with anhedonic symptoms, directly impacts multiple as pects of reward -
processing pathways such as DA turnover and basal ganglia function, and is dysfunctional in a 
substantial sub -group of patients meeting criteria for MDD  (Capuron, Su et al. 2008 ; Raison and 
Miller 2011 ). Despite this robust evidence, the spe cific role of IRS function in relation to 
neurophysiological, neuroendocrine and anhedonic responses to stress is not well -characterized. 
Therefore, the current study will measure  pro-inflammatory cytokines levels , specifically tumor -
necrosis factor alpha (TNF -) and interleukin -6 (IL -6). These markers were chosen as they have 
shown the most robust associations with both laboratory stress -paradigms as well as depressive 
symptoms in clinical populations  (Steptoe, Hamer et al. 2007 ; Dowlati, Herrmann et al. 2010 ). 
  
c. Study rationale  
In summary, these data indicate that MDD is characterized by reduced hedonic responses and abil ity 
to modulate behavior as a function of positive reinforcers. Functional MRI studies suggest that these 
deficits may reflect ventral striatal, ACC, and OFC abnormalities. Because positive reinforcers 
increase the likelihood of behavior (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972) , blunted reward responsiveness may 
lead to reduced motiv ational drive to pursue pleasurable activities, which may in turn contribute to 
depressive symptoms. Indeed, reduced hedonic capacity (1) characterizes both currently depressed and 
remitted depressed individuals (Kasch  et al, 2002; Pinto -Meza, 2006); and ( 2) predicts depressive 
symptoms (Hundt  et al, 2007), time to recovery (McFarland  et al, 2006), and poor treatment outcome 
(Kasch et al., 2002; Spijker  et al, 2001). The overarching goal of the proposed research is to investigate 
mesocorticolimbic dopaminer gic pathways within young adult females with a history of CSA between 
the ages of 5 -14 years with (“CSA/MDD group”) and without (“CSA/RES group”) a current diagnosis 
of major depressive disorder (MDD). To disentangle CSA - vs. MDD -related effects, these gro ups will 
be compared to not only healthy controls but also MDD females without a history of CSA. We 
hypothesize that, relative to healthy control and CSA/RES groups, the CSA/MDD participants will be 
characterized by (1) reduced reward responsiveness and ve ntromedial prefrontal cortex activation but 
cortisol hypersecretion when exposed to an acute psychosocial stress manipulation, (2) reduced 
dopaminergic transmission, and (3) reduced dopamine transporter binding. These hypotheses will be 
tested using a nove l integration of behavioral, endocrinological, and functional/molecular imaging 
approaches. Improving our understanding of neurobiological mechanisms associated with different 
CSA outcomes (specifically MDD and resilience) is of paramount importance in ord er to (1) identify 
individuals at risk for psychopathology and maladaptive behavior, (2) prevent revictimization, and (3) 
develop more targeted therapeutic interventions.  
 
 
II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
a. Objectives and hypotheses  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 5 
 The findings outlined above demonstrate that MDD subjects display blunted reinforcement learning 
and reduced striatal activation (assessed by fMRI) in response to rewards. Based on the US Department 
of Health and Human Services (2011), over 63,000 children  experienced childhood sexual abuse 
(CSA) in the US in 2010 alone. Early adversity accounts for 25 -32% of adult psychiatric illnesses 
(Green et al 2010), with over 60% of adults meeting criteria for major depressive disorder (MDD) 
following CSA (Teicher et  al 2009).  An even larger risk of depression has been found in those who 
experienced CSA between the ages of 5 -14 years. Preclinical research has shown that early adversities 
lead to a downregulation of mesolimbic dopaminergic (DA) pathways – including re duced DA 
transporter (DAT) levels – and a sensitization of the mesocorticolimbic system in response to later 
acute stressors. These data suggest that increased risk for psychopathology following CSA might be 
mediated by dysfunctions in mesocorticolimbic DA  pathways leading to anhedonia and stress 
sensitization.  Conversely, a well -functioning reward system and increased prefrontal cortex activity 
might be markers of resilience following adversity . The goals of the proposed research are to (1) test 
precise hy potheses about the role of DA mechanisms in the sequelae of CSA, and (2) identify 
biomarkers of resilience. Moreover, to gather a better understanding of the cellular mechanisms linked 
to these important outcomes , we will use in a small sub -set of the part icipants (n =20) directed 
conversion of participants’ skin fibroblasts into functional DA neurons  to investigat e (1) DAT 
functions in human -induced neuronal cells, and (2) relationships between DAT function and fMRI, 
PET, and behavioral markers of anhedonia .   
Specific Aim 1 : To investigate that increased DA transmission normalizes reward responsiveness  and 
optimism  in females with histories of CSA.   We will use reward paradigms from our pilot work in 
conjunction with a pharmacological challenge to test that decreased phasic DA transmission within 
mesolimbic regions plays a key role in CSA sequelae. We hypothesize that increased phasic DA release 
– achieved through presynaptic DA autoreceptor blocking by means of single low dose of the D 2/D3 
antagonist amisulpride – will improve positive reinforcement learning and boost activation in reward -
related brain regions, particularly the ventral and dorsal st riatum ( Hypothesis 1a ). Due to hypothesized 
downregulation of mesolimbic DA pathways, we expect that individuals with CSA and current MDD 
(“CSA/MDD”) will show the largest improvements. Confirming that a well -functioning reward system 
is a marker of resili ence, adults with CSA without lifetime psychopathology (“CSA/RES”) will show 
normative activation and performance under placebo (Hypothesis 1b) .  We also hypothesize that 
increased phasic DA release – achieved through amisulpride – will re -orient MDD indiv iduals from a 
pessimistic outlook to an optimistic outlook as measured by the Optimism Bias Task ( Hypothesis 1c ). 
In addition, under placebo, MDD participants will show a pessimistic outlook as compared with 
healthy controls ( Hypothesis 1d ). 
Specific Aim 2 : To investigate dopamine transporter and its relation to reward processing in females 
with CSA history.  We will utilize positron emission tomography (PET) and a highly selective 
radioactive ligand (11C-altropane) to assess DAT binding in CSA adults. Anima l studies have shown 
that early adversity leads to DAT downregulation within mesolimbic regions. In humans, we have 
observed links between altropane binding and depressive symptoms, the most common CSA sequelae). 
Based on our data, we expect that, relative  to control and CSA/RES subjects, CSA/MDD adults will 
show reduced altropane binding ( Hypothesis 2a ). We further hypothesize that, among the CSA/MDD 
group, reduced DAT will correlate with blunted reinforcement learning and striatal activation 
(Hypothesis 2 b).  
Specific Aim 3: To investigate stress sensitization of the mesocortical system following CSA.  We will 
use high -density, source localized electrophysiology (EEG), and cortisol assessments to probe cortical 
activation and stress reactivity during a reward learning paradigm performed under acute stress. 
Relative to control and CSA/RES subjects, the CSA/M DD group will show decreased ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) activation and increased cortisol reactivity following acute stress 
accompanied by impaired reward learning (Hypothesis 3a) . Relative to healthy controls, the CSA/RES 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 6 
 group will show incre ased vmPFC activation but similar reward sensitivity and cortisol reactivity 
(Hypothesis 3b) . 
Specific Aim 4 a: To investigate DAT function from DA neurons derived from directed conversion of 
skin fibroblasts.  We will collect  a skin biopsy from a subset of  the study sample ( 20 participants) to 
analyze human -induced neuronal DA cells. We hypothesize that relative to the healthy group (n = 8), 
individuals with MDD and a history of CSA (n= 8) will show altered/downregulated DA -related 
phenotyp e (e.g., DAT downr egulation; Hypothesis 4 a). Similarly, we hypothesize that the 
CSA/RES subjects (n=4) will show similar DA -related phenotype as the healthy group.  
Specific Aim 4b : To Investigate relations between DAT function and fMRI, PET, ERP, 
endocrinological and behavioral markers of anhedonic behavior and stress responsiveness.  Across all 
groups, downregulated DAT function will be associated with decreased 11C altropane binding in striatal 
regions (PET), lower reward -related striatal responsiveness (fMRI), potent iated stress -induced cortisol 
responses, and stress -induced anhedonia  (Hypoyhesis 4b ). 
 
Specific Aim 4c: To provide more conclusive tests of the potential role of DAT and NOC dysfunction 
in the pathophysiology of depression .  Post-mortem tissue will be obtained from the Douglas Bell 
Canada Brain Bank in Montreal, QC, Canada through our collaborator Gustavo Turecki, Professor and 
Chair, Department of Psychiatry, McGill University.   Please see Appendix 2 for more details.  
     
 
III. SUBJECT SELECTION  
Inclusion Criteria:  
• Females of all ethnic origins, age between 20 and 45; right -handed (Chapman & Chapman 
1987);  
• Absence of any psychotropic medications for at least 2 weeks (6 weeks for fluoxetine; 6 
months for neuroleptics; 2 weeks for b enzodiazepines; 2 weeks for any other 
antidepressants);  
Childhood Sexual Abuse/MDD (CSA/MDD):  
- At least one incident of contact sexual abuse between the ages 5 -14 years;  
- Current DSM -IV diagnostic criteria for MDD (as diagnosed with the use of the SCID);  
Childhood Sexual Abuse/Resilient (CSA/RES):  
- At least one incident of contact sexual abuse between the ages 5 -14 years;  
- Absence of past or current  DSM diagnosis, including MDD or alcohol/substance abuse;  
Non-traumatized, MDD (MDD):         
- No incidents of childhood sexual, verbal, or physical abuse (ascertained using the Traumatic 
Antecedents Questionnaire);  
- Current DSM -IV diagnostic criteria for MDD (as diagnosed with the use of SCID);  
Non-traumatized, healthy controls (controls):  
- No inc idents of childhood sexual, verbal, or physical abuse (ascertained using the Traumatic 
Antecedents Questionnaire);  
- Absence of any medical, neurological, and psychiatric illness (including alcohol/substance 
abuse)  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Participants with suicidal ideation where study participation is deemed unsafe by the study 
clinician;  
• Women who are not fully fluent (reading, speaking, & writing) in English;  
• Pregnant women or women of childbearing potential who are not compliant with t he 
requirements of a urine and blood pregnancy test. Pregnancy is determined by serum 
pregnancy tests conducted during sessions 1 and 4 and by a urine pregnancy test conducted 
during session 3.  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 7 
 • Women of childbearing potential not using adequate form of con traception. Adequate 
contraception includes  birth control pills,  birth control patch, birth control sponge, birth control 
vaginal ring,  birth control shots, a non -metallic, MRI -compatible intrauterine device  (IUD) , 
condom, diaphragm, female condom, spermic ide, partner with vasectomy, and abstinence.  
Those not of childbearing potential include post -menopausal for more than 6 months or 
surgically sterilized  
• Failure to meet MRI or PET safety requirements.  
• Serious or unstable medical illness, including cardiovascular, hepatic, renal, respiratory, 
endocrine ( hypothyroidism) , neurologic or hematologic disease;  
• Past/current DSM diagnosis of: OCD, ADHD, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, 
delusional disorder, bipolar disorder, mood congruent/incongruent psychotic features, 
substance dependence, substance abuse within the last 12 months (with the exception of 
cocaine or stimulant abuse, which will lead to automatic exclusion);  Bulimia and Binge 
Eating Disorder within the last 2 years;  Anorexia  
• PTSD*, s imple phobia, social anxiety disorder and generalized anxiety disorder will be 
allowed only if secondary to MDD and only in the CSA/MDD and MDD groups (which will 
be matched for comorbidities);  
* Eligibility has been revised to include pa rticipants with PTSD secondary to MDD in either 
the CSA/MDD or MDD groups. History of seizure disorder ; 
• Renal insufficiency , defined as eGFR of 60 or less, as determined by blood test conducted at 
session 1   
• Abnormal result on differential, comprehensive m etabolic panel (CMP) as determined by 
blood test conducted at session 1. This includes Urea Nitrogen (BUN) outside of 7 -25 
mg/dL; Creatinine outside of 0.6 -1.35 mg/dL, BUN/Creatinine Ratio outside of 6 -22; 
Sodium outside of 135 -146 mmol/L; Potassium outsid e of 3.5 -5.3 mmol/L; Chloride outside 
of 98 -110 mmol/L; Carbon Dioxide outside of 21 -33 mmol/L; Calcium outside of 8.6 -10.3 
mg/dL; Total Protein outside of 6.2 -8.3 g/dL , Albumin outside of 3.6 -5.1 g/dL, Globulin 
outside of 2.1 -3.7 g/dL, Albumin/Globulin Ra tio outside of 1.0 -2.1, Total Bilirubin outside 
of 0.2 -1.2 mg/dL, Alkaline Phosphatase outside of 40/115 U/L, AST/SGOT outside of 10 -
40 U/L, ALT outside of 9 -60 U/L, and Total Creatine Kinase outside of 44 -196 U/L . If a lab 
result is outside the reference range, but is determined by a M.D. to be of minimal clinical 
significance and have no impact on their safety in participating in our research, a subject 
may not be excluded.  
• Abornmal levels of Thyroid -Stimulating Hormone (TSH), defined as outside the rage of 0.4 -
4.50 mIU/L, as determined by blood test conduted at session 1.  
• Abnormal result on complete blood count (CBC) as determined by blood test conducted at 
session 1. This includes  White Blood Cell Count outside of 3.8 -10.8 Thousand/uL; Red 
Blood Cell Cou nt outside of 4.2 -5.8 Million/uL; Hemoglobin outside of 13.2 -17.1 g/dL; 
Hematrocrit outside of 38.5 -50.0%; Mean Corpuscular Volume (MCV) outside of 80 -100 
fL; Mean Corpuscular Hemoglobin (MCH) outside of 27 -33 pg; Mean Corpuscular 
Hemoglobin Concentration (MCHC) outside of 32 -36 g/dL; Red Blood Cell Distribution 
Width (RDW) outside of 11 -15%; Platelet Count outside of 140 -400 Thousand/uL; Mean 
Platelet Volume (MPV) outside of 7.5 -11.5 fL; Absolute Neutrophils outside of 1500 -7800 
cells/uL; Absolute Lymphocy tes outside of 850 -3900 cells/uL; Absolute Monocytes outside 
of 200 -950 cells/uL; Absolute Eosinophils outside of 15 -500 cells/uL; and Absolute 
Basophils outside of 0 -200 cells/uL.  If a lab result is outside the reference range, but is 
determined by a M.D.  to be of minimal clinical significance and have no impact on their 
safety in participating in our research, a subject may not be excluded.  
• History of adverse reactions to amisulpride;  
• History of cocaine, stimulant, and ot her DA drug use [e.g., (meth)amphe tamine), 
methylphenidate].  
• Current use of cocaine, amphetamines, methamphetamines, opiates, PCP, barbiturates, 
benzodiazepines, methadone, oxycodone, MDMA, or tricyclic antidepressants, as 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 8 
 determined by a urine drug test which is conducted at each session .  Current m arijuana use 
exceeding two occasions in two weeks prior to each session will be exclusionary.  
• Abnormal electrocardiogram (EKG) as determined by M.D. Family history* of sudden early 
death  due to sudden cardiac arrest  
• QT abnormalities  
• Family history* of QT abnormalities  
*Family history is operationalized to include first degree relatives, including parents, siblings, and 
children.  
• Exclusionary for the skin biopsy session: History of keloids , bleeding disorder , lidocaine 
allergy, or skin adhesi ve (such as Dermabond) allergy.   
• Reynaud’s Disease (exclusionary for EEG session due to ice water task)  
 
b. Source of subjects and recruitment methods  
The subjects for this research will be 184 females (20 -45 years) recruited from the greater Boston area 
by McLean Hospital ’s Center for Depression, Anxiety and Stress Research. Only females will be 
recruited due to expected sex -specific differences in (i) abuse -related (e.g., child -perpetrator gen der) 
and unrelated variables (e.g., brain development; Pechtel & Pizzagalli 2010), and (ii) HPA axis 
reactivity (e.g., Young & Korszun 2010). No employees of McLean Hospital, or students or employees 
of Harvard Medical School will be enrolled.  
 
IV. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
a. Methods of enrollment  
Recruitment for participants will be conducted through the Center of Depression, Anxiety, and Stress 
Research at McLean Hospital (Director: Diego Pizzagalli, Ph.D.). Participants will be recruited through 
flyer postings , advertisements in Craigslist , postings on student job sites at local universities and 
colleges , postcards , outreach letters sent to local education and mental health center s, advertisements 
on the Partners Clinical Trials website ( http://www.clinicaltrials.partners.org ), and online 
advertisement campaign via TrialSpark, a Partners -approved recruiting system that helps 
investigators recruit patients/participants for clinical trials more efficiently using social media, 
software, and machine learning . Participants will also be recruited using google adwords (brief 
advertisements that appear in google search results and direct potential participants to the study’s 
recruitment website which features informatio n on eligibility criteria, information on study procedures and 
reimbursement).  Participants responding to ads may either complete an online screening tool on REDCap, 
a Partners secure website, be screened over the phone by study coordinators, or both,  Additionally 
participants will be recruited in collaboration with McLean’s Developmental Biopsychiatry Program 
(DBP, Director: Martin Teicher, MD, Ph.D.). Individuals who are potentially eligible for the present 
study who participated in studies conducted by DBP may be contacted and invited to complete phone 
screening conducted by members of the Center for Depression, Anxiety and Stress Research.  To 
facilitate this collaboration and ensure confidentiality of data, DBP  staff members will use secure file 
transf er to convey participant information to the Center for Depression, Anxiety and Stress Research.  
Note that personal identifying information and eligibility information will be stored in distinct files  
linked only by an ID number . All information received f rom DBP will be destroyed at the time of study 
completion as it is used solely for purposes of identifying potential participants for initial contact.   
Prospective candidates will be screened over the phone by study coordinators  or via the onli ne screenin g 
survey on RedCap ( a Partners secure website) .  They will be informed that only subjects currently on no 
medications are eligible for the study.  Those meeting criteria based on the phone interview  or 
screening survey  will be scheduled for a screening visit with one of the study physicians , At the 
screening visit, all subjects will undergo a number of laboratory tests to ensure safe participation, 
including complete blood count with differential, comprehensive metaboli c panel (CMP), serum 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 9 
 concentrations of electrolytes, BUN, SGOT, SGPT, CPK, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, 
albumin, total protein, blood pregnancy test, TSH , eGFR,  and electrocardiogram (EKG), and a urine 
drug test. These tests must be performed wit hin four weeks prior to amisulpride administration.  
 
Preliminary screening for sex, handedness, neurological disorders, exclusionary physical conditions, 
medication status, weight, history of childhood trauma and history of depression, and MRI and PET 
safety will take place at the time of the initial telephone contact or interview  or via the online screening 
survey on RedCap ( a Partners secure website) . Subjects will be re -screened for MRI safety at the 
beginning of the fMRI session.  
 
To avoid the confound ing effects of medication, only subjects off medication will be considered . 
Importantly, no subject will be requested to discontinue treatment for the purpose of participating in 
the studies proposed here. Further, if any subject  becomes emergently ill or suicidal, access to 
emergency clinical care will be provided according to established procedures at McLean Hospital. If  
at any point between signing of consent and the conclusion of the second session, a subject becomes 
suicidal, homicidal, manic, or psych otic, (s)he will be withdrawn from the study and appropriate care 
and resources will be provided. Depending on the outcome of the first session, eligible participants 
will be assigned to one of four groups: (1) CSA between the ages of 5 -14 with current diagnosis of 
MDD ( CSA/MDD) , (2) CSA between the ages of 5 -14 without current or past diagnosis of Axis I or II 
disorders (CSA/RES), (3) current diagnosis of MDD without a history of CSA ( MDD ), and (4) healthy 
controls.   Each group will contai n 23 subjects who complete at least two imaging sessions 
(n=23/group).   
 
A subset of subjects ( 20 participants) will be invited to participate in an additional study component  
involving a skin biopsy (see details below) after they have completed the ERP session . A subset of 
participants from the healthy group (n=8 ), CSA/MDD group (n=8), and  the CSA/RES group (n=4) will 
participate.  Invitations to participate will be extended to all subjects in the healthy group, CSA/MDD 
group, and CSA/RES group until recr uitment for this additional component is complete .  Participation 
in the additional session will require signing of a separate consen t form prior to participation. In order 
to minimize phenotypic heterogeneity and maximize our ability to detect group diffe rences, we will 
prioritize the cell conversion for participants based on their performance in a laboratory -based measure 
of anhedonia, the Probabilistic Reward Task (PRT) , administered during the ERP session. Specifically, 
we will prioritize the subjects in the CSA/MDD group showing the greatest  impairments in reward 
learning (as assessed by the PRT) when  tested under stress and the  healthy control subjects showing 
the greatest resistance  against stress -induced reduction in reward learning (as assessed by  the PRT).  
For all other subjects that do not meet this criteria (including all subjects in the CSA/RES group), skin 
samples will be frozen until additional funding is acquired.  If any of these subjects refuse to participate, 
investigators will continue  prioritizing  subjects showing the next greatest level of impairment or resistance 
(as assessed by the PRT) until they find 3 subjects in each group.  A normative database collected by Dr. 
Pizzagalli’s laboratory will be used to identify participants meeting pre-specified cutoffs with respect 
to their performance in the PRT during stress.  
 
 
b. Procedures for obtaining informed consent  
After screening and approval for participation, subjects will read and sign an IRB -approved informed 
consent detailing the general purposes and procedures of the experiment, and any questions they may 
`have will be answered. The subjects of this study must be judged capable of understanding the nature 
of this study as well as the discomforts and potential benefits.  This deter mination will be made by a 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 10 
 clinician or masters -level clinical interviewer (e.g., Nancy Hall Brooks, M.Ed., LMHC) after a 
comprehensive psychiatric evaluation. The informed consent will clearly state that the subjects may 
quit participation at any time wit hout penalty. Potential risks and benefits will be explained in full by 
the project staff, and the subjects will be asked to sign a consent form. The informed consent will be 
signed by the subjects and a licensed study clinician.  
 
A subset of subjects ( n=20) will be invited to participate in an additional component  involving a skin 
biopsy immediately after they have completed the ERP session  and will sign a separate informed 
consent form that will detail the risks of a small skin punch biopsy of their butto cks. The consent form 
will clearly state that participation is entirely voluntary and subjects may stop participation at any time, 
without a penalty or loss of benefits to which they are otherwise entitled. The procedure will be 
described in detail includi ng a description of possible risks and benefits as well as  steps taken to 
minimize the pain. Additionally, participants will be screened for ineligibility due to lidocaine allergy, 
skin adhesive (Dermabond) allergy, or history of or bleeding disorder.  Consent will be acquired by 
Dr. Arthur Siegel, a physician board -certified  in Internal Medicine, and the informed consent form will 
be signed by both Dr. Siegel and the subjects.  
 
 
Confidentiality of all subjects will be honored. Individual records will be made anonymous 
immediately after recording using numeric codes only accessible to the experimenters. Only the 
experimenters will have access to identifiable subject information, wh ich will be stored in locked 
cabinets.  
 
V. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Study visits and parameters to be measured  
This study will include four sessions  (for a subset of participants (n= 20; see details below) , the ERP 
session will include a skin biopsy.)    
 
Session 1 (S CID Session)  
The first session will take place at the Center for Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Research or McLean 
Imaging Center at McLean Hospital (Director: Diego Pizzagalli, Ph.D). The session will involve 
consenting, a clinical evaluation, and a medi cal assessment.  The first session may be absolved in two 
separate visits if preferred by the participant (e.g. due to scheduling constraints). This will not affect 
data collection or reimbursement (participants will still be reimbursed at $15/hour).  
 
Consenting  
Subjects  will read and sign an IRB -approved informed consent detailing the general purposes and 
procedures of the experiment, and any questions they may have will be answered. The subjects of this 
study must be judged capable of understanding the nature of this st udy as well as the discomforts and 
potential benefits.  This determination will be made by a clinician (e.g., Dr. David Olson, MD, Ph.D.)  
or masters -level clinical interviewer (e.g., Nancy Hall Brooks, M.Ed., LMHC) after a comprehensive 
psychiatric evaluat ion. The informed consent will clearly state that the subjects may quit participation 
at any time without penalty. Potential risks and benefits will be explained in full by the project staff, 
and the subjects will be asked to sign a consent form. The infor med consent will be signed by the 
subjects and a study doctor . 
 
Clinical Evaluation  
The Clinical evaluation involves the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV (First et al 2002; the 
SCID is a diagnostic tool that assesses the presence of Axis I disorder s); the Traumatic Antecedents 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 11 
 Questionnaire (Herman et al 1990; the TAQ evaluates the duration and severity of sexual abuse in 
childhood and confirms the absence of exposure to other types of childhood trauma ) and the Columbia 
Suicide Severity Rating Scale  (C-SSRS; to assess the emergence of suicidality).  
 
Once eligibility is confirmed, participants move on to the medical assessment.  
 
Medical Assessment  
All subjects who meet criteria based upon the clinical evaluation will undergo a number of  laboratory 
tests to ensure safe participation, including a blood draw with the following analyses: complete blood 
count with differential, urinalysis, comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), serum concentrations of 
electrolytes, BUN, SGOT, SGPT, CPK, alkalin e phosphatase, total bilirubin, albumin, total protein, 
serum pregnancy test, and TSH. An electrocardiogram (EKG) will be performed as a measure of heart 
health. Any subjects with signs of possible heart disease will be excluded from the study. A urine dru g 
test will be performed to measure any current drug use. Participants who test positive for a substance 
or test positive for pregnancy will  be excluded from the remainder of the study.  
We will also collect a plasma sample (will be used for analysis of inf lammatory signaling molecules). 
An additional 6ml of blood will be drawn for the plasma sample.  
 
The Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (Guy, 1976) is a 12 -item scale designed to record the 
occurrence of dyskinetic, involuntary movements. Participants wil l complete the AIMS task during the 
screening visit, prior to dismissal from the study and, in the case of a dystonic reaction during the 
scanning visit, during a final exit interview one to two weeks after the scanning visit.  
Patients presenting with acu te dystonic reaction, who are not in extreme distress, would be first treated 
with 50mg to 100mg of diphenhydramine orally.  This is a safe and effective treatment, and widely 
available as an over -the-counter preparation.  This is routinely used, (in oral or IV form), for example, 
for dystonic occulogyric crises in patients taking regular antipsychotic medication.   
 
Patients with an acute dystonic reaction, who are in extreme distress would be directed to go to the 
nearest emergency room for treatment unle ss they were at McLean in which case IM cogentin or 
diphenhydramine would be given - after a brief assessment.  
 
Benztropine (1mg - 4mg orally or 1mg - 2mg IM/IV) (available only by prescription, or in a physician’s 
office or the ER) is also safe and effect ive for resolving acute dystonic reactions.  IM/IV cogentin or 
diphenhydramine tends to work faster than oral treatment - but both strategies are effective.  
 
The AIMS task will be administered and scored by one of the study staff physicians ( e.g., David Ol son, 
M.D., Ph.D.). During the AIMS task, participants are observed in stationary positions as well as during 
activated movements and any involuntary movements are recorded. This scale provides a quantitative 
measure of symptoms of dyskin esia and will help identify possible adverse reactions to the study drug, 
which are deemed unlikely due to the low and single dose administration.  
 
Sessions 2 -4 will include procedures for assessment of brain and cognitive functioning, specifically: a 
functional magnetic res onance imaging (fMRI) session, a positron emission tomography (PET) 
session, and an event related potential (ERP) session.  The order in which these sessions are scheduled 
will depend on facility availability and convenience for participants.  
 
ERP Session  
This session will take place at the Center for Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Research at McLean 
Hospital (Director: Diego Pizzagalli, Ph.D) and will be scheduled between 1 and 5pm to control for 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 12 
 diurnal cortisol fluctuations. This session will involve an  EEG recording while participants perform a 
probabilistic reward task. This session also involves  a stress manipulation , the Maastricht Acute Stress 
Test (MAST; Smeets et al. 2012),  and saliva samples for cortisol analysis.  
 
EEG Recording  
The probabilistic  reward task used in our prior work (see below) will be administered in conjunction 
with 128 -channel ERP recording; subjects will perform the task  twice, once before exposure to an 
acute stressor and once immediately following the stressor . The 128 -channel  EEG will be recoded 
using the Geodesic EGI system in an electrically shielded room.  
 
Probabilistic Reward Task  
The probabilistic reward task  (PRT)  has been successfully used by the PI to assess reward 
responsiveness (e.g., Pizzagalli et al 2005, 2007, 200 9b). In each trial, subjects choose which of two 
difficult -to-differentiate stimuli was presented. Stimuli consist of simple cartoon faces (diameter: 25 
mm; eyes: 7 mm) presented in the center of the monitor. At the beginning of the trial, the face has no 
mouth. After a given delay, either a straight mouth of 11.5 mm (“short mouth”) or 13 mm (“long 
mouth”) is presented for 100 ms. Subjects are instructed to press an appropriate button to decide 
whether a long or small mouth had been presented.  Unbeknownst to subjects, correct identification of 
one stimulus (“rich stimulus”) is rewarded three times more frequently ( “Correct! You won 20 cents” ) 
than the other (“lean”) stimulus. In healthy controls, this reinforcement schedule leads to a response 
bias (i.e., a  preference for the more frequently rewarded stimulus). The degree of response bias toward 
the more frequently reinforced alternative will be used for operationalizing sensitivity to reward.   
 
To avoid carry -over effects, p articipants complete the PRT twice in which only the stimuli type will 
vary. In the second version, instead of determining the length of the mouth, participants will need to 
decide whether a long or short ‘nose’ had been presented on the cartoon face by pressing the 
appropriate button. Al l other task parameters remain identical.  
 
One version of the PRT is completed prior to the ‘stress manipulation’ (see below) and the other is 
completed after the ‘stress manipulation’. The order of the two versions  (mouth vs. nose)  will be 
counterbalanced  across subjects.  
 
Maastricht Acute Stress Test (MAST)  
The MAST is a physically and psychologically challenging laboratory stress test. It combines the 
most stressful feature of the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST; i.e., psychosocial evaluative threat, 
unco ntrollability, and unpredictability; Foley and Kirschbaum, 2010) and the Cold Pressure Test 
(CPT; i.e., the painful aspect; e.g., Mitchell, 2004). The test starts with a short instruction and 
preparation phase (5 min). After that, over a 10 min time span, participants will be instructed to 
perform 5 socially evaluated cold pressor  trials that vary in duration (ranging from 60 s to 90 s), with 
the water temperature held between 0 ° and 2 °C. In between the  cold pressure trials (intertri al 
intervals also vary in duration), participants will be asked to do a mental arithmetic  task as fast and 
accurate as possible and receive negative feedback on their pe rformance . Specifically, starting at 
2043, participants will be asked to count backwards in intervals of 17. If participants make a mistake, 
they will need to start again at 2043. During the procedure, participants are told that they are being 
videotaped and thus will need to look  into the camera  and are monitored by the experimenter . In 
reality, the camera is not saving data . Following the final immersion , participants will be told that 
their performance was poor and that they will need to repeat the task at a later stage of the s ession. 
Immediately a fter this announcement, participants  will complete the post -stress set of tasks , 
including the PRT. Following the task s, participants will be informed that they will not need to 
complete  the water immersion and calculation task  again.  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 13 
  
Saliva samples for cortisol analysis  
Saliva samples will be acquired for cortisol assessment 20 min after arrival (baseline  saliva sample ), 
immediately following the stress manipulation (acute saliva sample), following block 1  of the second 
PRT (post -stressor saliva sample #1), following block 2 of the second PRT (post -stressor saliva sample 
#2), and 68 minutes following the stress manipulation (recovery saliva sample). Saliva samples will be 
collected using passive -drooling cr yovials (Salimetrics, State College, PA, USA). Subjects will be 
instructed to not eat, drink, smoke, brush their teeth or engage in physical activity for at least 30 min 
before the session.  To avoid contamination from food particles, water will be handed t o rinse oral 
cavities prior to data collection. In our prior work, intra - and inter -assay coefficients of variance were 
<10% (Koslov et al 2011). The protocol is in line with large cortisol studies (e.g., Lederbogen et al 
2010) and adheres to the policies on tissue storage and transfer of McLean Hospital.  
 
fMRI Session  
This session will take place at the McLean Hospital Imaging Center. Participants will complete the 
Monetary Incentive Delay (MID) task during fMRI (collected using the 3T MR scanner). Becaus e the 
pharmacokinetics of amisulpride are linear and a first peak plasma concentration is seen 1 -1.5 hr after 
oral administration (Curran & Perry 2001), fMRI scanning will start 1 hr after administration of 
amisulpride (or placebo). The dose (50 mg) was se lected based on prior studies (e.g., Hamon -Vilcot et 
al 1998; Samuels et al 2006), and the observation that all prior studies in depressive disorders have 
used 50 mg/day doses. Using a double -blind design, half of the participants in each group will be 
administered amisulpride (or placebo).  
 
Amisulpride is a substituted benzamide neuroleptic with high affinity for D 2/D3 DA receptors and low 
affinity for other receptors, and higher binding to DA receptors in limbic (e.g., NAc) than nigrostriatal 
regions. Ani mal studies have shown that at low doses, amisulpride preferentially blocks presynaptic 
DA autoreceptors, leading to increased DA synthesis and release and prohedonic effects (Coukell et al 
1996; Schoemaker et al 1997).  
  
The Monetary Incentive Trial (MID)  task used in our published work with maltreated samples will be 
used with fMRI ( Dillon et al, 2009 ). The Probabilistic Stimulus Selection Task (PSST)  we have  used 
in our pilot data in women with CSA will be administered after fMRI scanning (Pechtel  & Pizzagalli, 
2013 ). The subject will also complete the Implicit Learning Serial Reaction Time Task (SRTT) before 
the administration of amisulpride.  
 
Implicit Learning Serial Reaction Time Task (SRTT)  
To exclude the possibility of global learning deficit s in MDD, an implicit learning serial reaction 
time task (Nissen & Bullemer, 1987) will be administered before fMRI scanning.  The SRTT will be 
used to probe procedural learning, a form of implicit memory used to acquire, for example, simple 
stimulus -respo nse associations. The task involves five blocks of 100 stimuli (an asterisk appearing in 
one of four boxes aligned horizontally). Each box, designated 1 –4, corresponds to a button on a 
keyboard. When a cue appears, at the start of each trial, a participant selects the appropriate response 
button, which ends the trial. At the end of each trial, there is a short fixed delay before another cue is 
presented. In blocks 1 -4, the visual cues play out a repeating sequence of positions (i.e., each location 
can be pr edicted by the preceding sequence of two locations), and subjects show systematic RT 
reduction in spite of no declarative knowledge of the sequence rule. In block 5, the sequence is fully 
random, and the visual cue no longer plays out a repeating pattern o f positions. Performance on the 
SRTT is interpreted by measuring the gradual reduction in response time that takes place across the 
sequential trials.  This provides a measure of participants’ growing expertise in performing the 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 14 
 sequence and learning the v isuomotor association, or mapping, between the position of the visual 
cute and the required response.  
 
Self-Concept Attention (SCATT) Task.   In this task, participants view a series of words, each 
superimposed on an image of either themself , a gender -matched other individual, or a scrambled 
image of another person.  For attention -interference trials, participants must judge each word 
based on how self -descriptive is the word or based on the valence of the word, while ignoring the 
image.  For  memory trials, participants must manipulate word -image pairs in working memory 
(e.g. replace old word -image pairs with new word -image pairs).  This task will take 
approximately 30 minutes. If there is not sufficient time for this task at the fMRI study vi sit, the 
task may instead be administered at the beginning of the EEG session. This will not affect data 
collection or change the reimbursement to participants.  
 
 
Monetary Incentive Delay (MID) Task  
During fMRI data collection, participants will complete  an MID task featuring balanced incentive 
delivery and analytic strategies designed to identify activity specific to anticipation or consumption of 
incentives. The structure of the MID paradigm will be identical to our prior studies (Dillon et al 2008, 
2009). Briefly, individual trials begin with presentation of one of three visual cues (1.5 s) signaling 
potential trial outcomes (reward: +$; loss: -$; no -incentive: 0$). Following a jittered ISI (3 - 7.5 s), a 
red square target stimulus will be presented; par ticipants are instructed to respond to the target with a 
button press. Following a second ISI (4.4 -8.9 s), visual feedback (1.5 s) will be provided. In the reward 
condition, successful trials are associated with monetary gains ($1.96 to $2.34) whereas unsu ccessful 
trials lead to no change. In the loss condition, successful trials are associated with no change whereas 
unsuccessful trials are associated with monetary penalties ( -$1.81 to -$2.19). No feedback about 
cumulative earnings will be provided. Intertr ial intervals (ITIs) will range from 3 to 12 s. The task will 
include five blocks of 24 trials (8 reward, 8 loss, 8 no -incentive). Thus, 40 trials/condition will be 
available for the analyses of anticipatory activation, whereas 20 trials/condition will be used for post -
feedback responses. Participants will be told that faster reaction times (RT) will increase the likelihood 
of obtaining rewards and avoiding losses. RT data in three independent control samples confirmed that 
the task induces motivated respon ding: mean RT was fastest on reward trials, intermediate on loss 
trials, and slowest on no -incentive trials (all ps<.001; (Dillon et al., 2008, 2009).  
 
Probabilistic Stimulus Selection Task (PSST)  
The PSST task (Frank  et al, 2004) will allow us to examine  whether participants exhibit a bias for 
choosing frequently reinforced stimuli or avoiding frequently punished stimuli, and thus to assess 
positive and negative reinforcement learning. Of note, this task has been found to be sensitive to DA 
modulations, s uggesting that hypodopaminergic states affect phasic DA signals required for learning 
from positive outcomes. Thus, MDD subjects are expected to be better at learning from punishment 
than reward in the PSST. The task has two phases: a learning and testing phase. In the learning phase, 
subjects are randomly presented with three different stimuli pairs (AB, CD, EF), and are instructed to 
choose one of the two stimuli by pressing a key.  After the response, feedback is given to indicate 
whether the choice was correct or incorrect. Importantly, the feedback is probabilistic: for AB trials, a 
choice of stimulus A leads to positive feedback in 80% of the trials, while a choice of stimulus B leads 
to negative feedback in 80% of the trials. The stimulus pair CD is l ess reliable, with stimulus C being 
correct in 70% of the trials, and the stimulus pair EF is the least reliable, with stimulus E being correct 
in 60% of the trials. Subjects learn to choose stimuli A, C, and E more frequently than B, D, or F, 
during the l earning phase. Of note, learning to choose A over B can be achieved either by learning that 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 15 
 A usually leads to positive feedback or that B usually leads to negative feedback, or both.  The learning 
phase ends after participants reach performance criteria ( 65% accuracy for A, 60% for C, and 50% for 
E) or after 6 blocks. The performance criteria are set so that all subjects are at the same level before 
starting the testing phase. In the testing phase, the same three pairs as well as all novel combinations 
of stimuli pairs are presented, and no feedback is provided. To examine whether subjects learned more 
about positive or negative outcomes of their decisions, the stimuli pairs of interest are those involving 
an A or B stimulus paired with a novel stimulus (e. g., AC, AD, BC, BD), referred to as transfer pairs. 
These transfer pairs will allow us to assess whether subjects learn from prior positive feedback to 
choose the most reinforced stimulus (“Choose A”) or learn from prior negative feedback to avoid the 
most  punished stimulus (“Avoid B”).  
 
MRI data will be acquired on a 3T Siemens Tim Trio system using a 32 -channel brain array coil. As 
in our prior work (Dillon et al 2009), data will be acquired using tilted slice acquisition (300 to the AC -
PC line). To minim ize susceptibility dephasing of spins and loss of magnetization, we will use a short 
echo time (30 ms), a GRAPPA acceleration factor of 2 to reduce the length of the EPI readout, and 
thin slices. During functional scans, gradient echo T2* -weighted echoplan ar images will be acquired 
with: TR/TE: 3000/30ms; FOV: 224 mm; matrix: 64x64; 42 slices; in -plane resolution: 3.5 mm (2.5 
mm slices, 1.0 -mm gap); voxels 3.5 x 3.5 x 3.5 mm). The EPI acquisition will use prospective motion 
correction to minimize the effect s of subject motion.  
 
Self-report questionnaires will also be administered during the course of this session as well as the 
Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C - SSRS) to assess the emergence of suicidality. The 
appropriate procedures in the event of emergence of suicidality are outlined in ‘Psychosocial (non -
medical) risks’ in section VII (Risks and Discomforts). In addition, urine drug and pregnancy tests will 
also be administered prior to the MRI scan.  
 
In case that a subject is observed or determin ed to be in an altered state, (s)he will be evaluated by one  
of the study physicians (e.g., David Olson, M.D., Ph.D.) and will be given appropriate care. Subjects 
deemed not to be at risk by one of the study physicians will be offered transportation by cab and 
reimbursed through a voucher. In the rare case that a  subject exhibits dystonic symptoms, as assessed 
by AIMS, the subject will be invited back for a final exit interview one to two weeks after the scan at 
which time AIMS will be repeated.  
 
Asymptomatic subjects will be dismissed 3 hours after administration of amisulpride, following a final 
evaluation by one of the study physicians (e.g., David Olson, M.D., Ph.D.).  
 
PET Session  
This session will take place at the Massachusetts General Hospital PET facility. After re -screening for 
compatibility with the PET en vironment, any remaining questions will be answered.  Subjects will then 
be positioned in the gantry of a PET camera.  Head alignment will be made, relative to the canthomeatal 
line, using projected laser lines. A Civco vac -lok cushion with velcro head str ap will be used to prevent 
movement. A peripheral venous catheter will be inserted for radiopharmaceutical injection. 9 mCi of 
[11C] altropane will be injected either by a physician or a trained nuclear medicine technicians and PET 
scanning will begin. The  minimum specific activity that we use for C -11 altropane is 300 mCi / 
micromole at time of administration. PET data will be acquired using an ECAT EXACT HR + PET 
camera.  
 
Subjects will be instructed that they are being continuously monitored and can be he ard by the 
investigators if there is a problem. They will also be reminded that it is best for them to remain still 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 16 
 and refrain from any head, face or jaw movements.  After conclusion of the PET scan, participants will 
be removed from the scanner.  
 
Compare d to other DAT tracers, altropane offers the following advantages (Fischman et al 2001; 
Madras et al 1998a,b,c): (1) rapid (max. accumulation 15 -30 min post -injection) and specific striatal 
binding; (2) high selectivity for DA sites; (3) reversible binding  kinetics; and (4) a relatively low level 
of nonspecific binding.  
 
Prior to the PET scan, a blood serum pregnancy test and a urine drug will be administered , and 
participants will complete two tasks on cognitive functioning: the Optimism Bias Task, and the  Self-
Concept Attention Task.  
 
Optimism Bias Task  
This task is a belief updating task. On each trial participants are presented with a description of 
40 different adverse life events (e.g. Alzheimer’s disease, robbery). They are asked to provide 
estimates of their likelihood of experiencing these events in their lifetime. After each trial, 
participants are presented with the average probability of that event occurring to a person from 
the same sociocultural environment. We then ask participants to estimate their likelihoods for the 
same 40 events again in a second session to examine how they incorporate the information into 
their estimates. To control for potential confounds participants complete a memory test for the 
information presented and rate all stimu li on emotional arousal, negativity and past experience . 
The task takes approximately  30 minutes to complete.  
 
 
Skin Fibroblast  Component  
 
A subset of subjects ( 20 participants) will be invited to participate in an additional component 
involving a skin biopsy immediately after they have completed the ERP session. As aforementioned 
(see section  IV a. “Methods of Enrollment” for details), this subset will  not be selected based on a 
specific criteria, but rather based on willingness to participate .  Cell conversion, however, will be 
prioritized  based on performance on the Probabilistic Reward Task (PRT) administered during the 
ERP session. For this component, participants will be accompanied by a staff to the Internal 
Medicine unit in t he Admission Building (located 2 min walking distance from CDASR) .  Next Dr. 
Arthur Siegel, a physician board -certified  in Internal Medicine, will acquire informed consent using a 
separate consent form for this component of the study; see section IV b. “Pr ocedures for obtaining 
informed consent ”. Dr. Siegel will then ask the participant some questions to determine eligibility 
(exclusion criteria include history of keloids or bleeding disorder). If eligible, Dr. Siegel will take a 
4mm ( 0.157  inch) skin sampl e from the subject’s buttocks via a new, sterile disposable punch biopsy 
for each subject. The area will first be cleaned, and then a very small injection of l ocal anesthesia 
will be used, 0.6 to 1.0 ml of 1% xylocaine with 1/200,000 epinephrine intracutan eously, so that the 
pain associated with the procedure will be minimal; the  subject should not feel any pain from the 
procedure other than the needle stick. Finally, 25% aluminum chloride will be applied for 
hemostasis, if needed, after which a skin adhesi ve (DERMABOND by  ETHICON, REF DNX6, 
Advanced topical skin adhesive, which comes in a single -dose vial [0.7 ml] and requires no dressing) 
will be applied . This procedure is identical to that used by the IRB approved study “Sensitive 
Periods, Brain Development and Depression ”, P 2010P001100, led by Dr. Martin Teicher. This study 
session will take approximately 30  minutes.  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 17 
  
A series of self -report questionnaires will also be administered during the course of the experiment.  
 
Postmortem Analysis  
To pr ovide more conclusive tests of the potential role of DAT and NOC dysfunction in 
the pathophysiology of depression, we  are collaborating with Dr. Berretta and her group, at 
McLean Hospital. Together  we would like to perform analyses on post -mortem tissues f rom 
individuals with MDD and demographically matched healthy controls. Post -mortem tissue will 
be obtained from the Douglas Bell Canada Brain Bank in Montreal, QC, Canada through our 
collaborator Gustavo Turecki, Professor and Chair, Department of Psychiat ry, McGill 
University. The Douglas Bell Canada Brain Bank collected these samples under their IRB 
protocol, which covers informed consent process for postmortem tissue donation, 
communication with donor families, tissue processing and information de -identi fication and 
secure storage.  
 
Information provided by the Douglas Bell Canada Brain Bank to group at McLean 
Hospital will be strictly anonymized, so that no personal identifiable information will be 
included. Information provided will include demographic a nd clinical data strictly needed for 
meaningful interpretations of potential findings, such distributive diagnosis, available clinical 
assessment, cause of death, post -mortem interval and tissue characteristics, exposure to 
pharmacological and non -pharmaco logical treatment, and neuropathology report. This 
information will be kept at McLean in hard copy form in locked cabinets within locked offices 
and, electronically, using access -restricted encrypted computers, backed up using Syncplicity 
(FIPS 140 -2 compl iant).  Tissue samples will be coded and stored in locked freezers within the 
Mailman Research Center at McLean Hospital. Under no circumstances, they will be shared with 
investigators outside this collaboration without prior permission from the Douglas Be ll Canada 
Brain Bank.  Please see Appendix 2 for more details.  
Self-report measures  
During the course of the study, participants will complete a number of standardized instruments on 
paper , on the computer and  through the secure, online survey collection system, REDCap Survey. The 
instruments will include the following:  
 
1) Positive and Negative Affect Schedule – State (PANAS) (Watson  et al, 1988)  
o Measures positive and negative affect  
2) State -Trait Anxiety Invento ry (STAI) (Spielberger  et al, 1970)  
o Measures and differentiates between temporary or emotional state anxiety versus long 
standing personality trait anxiety in adults.  
3) Visual Analogue Mood Scales (VAMS) (Aitken, 1969)  
o Measures current affective state  
4) Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI -11) (Beck et al., 1996)  
o Measures the presence and severity of depressive symptoms  
5) Mood and Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire (MASQ) (Watson et al., 1995)  
o Measures anxiety and depressive symptoms, including Anhedonic Depression, General 
Distress (Depression), General Distress (Anxiety), and Anxious Arousal subscales.  
6) Snaith Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHPS) (Snaith et al., 1995)  
o Assesses hedonic tone  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 18 
 7) Apathy Evaluation Scale (Marin  et al, 1991)  
o Assesses apathy, defined as a state char acterized by simultaneous reduction in the overt 
behavioral, cognitive, and emotional concomitants of goal -directed behavior.  
8) Menstrual Cycle Questionnaire  
o Record information on last menstruation and use of hormonal contraceptives (oral, 
implant, hormone -secreting IUD).  
9) Race & Ethnicity Demographics  
o Background Information Questionnaire  
10) General Habit Questionnaire s 
o Record information on alcohol, nicotine use  
o Two versions: one assesses typical alcohol and nicotine consumption and one probes 
alcohol and nicotine consumption in the past 24 hours  
11) Caffeine Assessment Questionnaire s 
o Record information on caffeine and stimulant/depressant use  
o Two versions: one assesses typical caffeine consumption and one probes caffeine 
consumption in the past 24 hours  
12) Trauma tic Antecedents Questionnaire (Herman et al 1990)  
o Evaluates the duration and severity of sexual abuse in childhood and confirms the 
absence of exposure to other types of childhood trauma  
13) Modified Adverse Childhood Experience Scale  
o Measures the severity of life stress in the first 18 years of life  
14) Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology – Clinican Rated (Rush et al 2003)  
o Measures depressive symptoms experienced in the past seven days  
15) Coping in Stressful Situations (Endler & Parker 1990)  
o Assesses three co ping styles (emotion -oriented, task -oriented, avoidant) to deal with 
difficult and stressful situations)  
16) Perceived Stress Scale (Cohen et al 1983)  
o Probes the extent of stress experienced during the past months)  
17) Limbic System Function Questionnaire (Teicher  et al 1993)  
o Records symptoms related to limbic system dysfunction  
18) Post MID Questionnaire  
o Probes participants’ thoughts regarding their performance in the MID task  
19) Post-PRT Questionnaire  
o Probes participants’ thoughts regarding their performance in the PRT task 
20) Post-EEG Questionnaire  
o Probes whether participants were uncomfortable, anxious, sleepy, or inattentive during 
the EEG recording  
21) Youth Risk Behavior Survey -Adult Version  
o Probes participants’ level of engagement in behaviors related to safety, violence -
related behaviors, self -harm behavior and ideation, tobacco use, alcohol use, marijuana 
use, other drug use, sexual behavior, body weight  
22) Trait Ratings Survey  
o Assesses participants’ self -concept by asking participants to rate a list of personality 
trait words on how self -descriptive, positive or negative, or important, those traits are.  
23) Ruminative Responses Scale  
o Assesses participant’s use of ruminative response patterns when they feel down or sad.  
24) Experiences Questionnaire  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 19 
 o Assesses levels of decentering  and rumination by asking how frequently 
participant’s engage in various thoughts and experiences.  
25) Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression  
o 17-item scale assessing depressive symptoms  (Hamilton, 1960)  
26) ADHD module from the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview  
o Short assessment of lifetime and current ADHD symptoms.  
27) Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ; Bernstein et al., 2003)  
28) Threat -Challenge Questionnaire  (Mendes, Gray et al. 2007)  
 
Debriefing  
At the conclusion of each session , subjects will be fully  debriefed by a member of the study staff. (S)he 
will outline the purpose of the study and explain the purposes of each procedure (e.g. the scans, tasks, 
and the stressor ).  The experimenter will also explain how results of the project might inform our 
unde rstanding of the interactions between dopamine, mood, reward responsiveness, and early life 
stress.  
 
Material Inducements   
Subjects will be paid $15/hour  for the SCID session (session 1), up to $ 70 for the ERP session including 
$38 for completing the EEG and up to $ 32 on the probabilistic reward task, up to $150 for the fMRI 
session including $100 for completing the session and up to $50 on the MID task, and $200 for the 
PET session. In addition, participants who complete all four sessions of the study wil l earn an 
additional $75. Lastly, if participants complete only part of a study session, they will be compensated 
in a prorated manner, such that if they complete half of a study session, they will be compensated half 
of the total amount (e.g., participant  completes half of the PET scan session, he/she will be 
compensated $100). If the participant completes all of the sessions, they can earn up to $555. The 
subset of subjects who participate in the additional skin fibroblast study (n =20) will be compensated  
$100 . 
 
Randomization  
 For protocol 2010 -P-002593, all subjects in study are administered a single low dose of amisulpride 
(50 mg) in order to test the role of dopaminergic mechanisms in the pathophysiology of MDD. This proof -
of mechanism study uses a doub le-blind, placebo -controlled between -subject design (for each group in 
study, 50% of the subjects in each group will receive placebo, with the remaining 50% receiving a single 
dose of amisulpride), involves a single MRI session, and does not include a trea tment component.  Though 
data collection has not yet been completed, the blind was broken as of May 2016 to conduct preliminary 
analyses. Accordingly, the medication blind will be broken as of November, 2016 in order to allow further 
analyses. In order to preserve the scientific integrity of the study, we propose the following precaution:  
 The Research Assistant responsible for running participants (Ms. Clegg), the study doctors (Dr. 
Olson, Dr. Vitaliano), and any other member of the Pizzagalli Lab who dire ctly interacts with participants 
will remain blind to drug group assignment. Accordingly, if we discover during statistical analyses that a 
few participants yielded unusable data (e.g., due to excessive motion artifacts), we will be able to enroll 
and test  a few final participants in a fully unbiased way.  
 
 
b. Drugs to be used  
Amisulpride  
Rationale : Many studies have shown that low doses of amisulpride (50 mg/day) are effective in 
relieving depressive and negative symptoms across a variety of disorders. Numerous studies in MDD, 
dysthymia, and double depression have shown that administration of low do ses of amisulpride (50 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 20 
 mg/day) has antidepressant effects comparable to other antidepressants (e.g., Amore & Jori, 2001; 
Boyer  et al, 1999; Cassano & Jori, 2002). Antidepressant efficacy has been attributed to increased DA 
release due to presynaptic D 2/D3 autoreceptor blocking. Similarly, in an outpatient sample with 
dysthymia and/or MDD, amisulpride was superior to imipramine in ameliorating anhedonic symptoms 
(Lecrubier  et al , 1997). Adverse events and drop -off rates in amisulpride -treated patients with 
depressive disorders or schizophrenia were similar or lower than those of other antidepressant 
treatments (Amore & Jori, 2001; Boyer et al., 1999) or conventional antipsychotics (Leucht  et al, 
2002), respectively.  These findings fit animal data showing tha t low doses of amisulpride potentiate 
DA release in the nucleus accumbens and other limbic regions, have strong prohedonic effects, and 
increase the incentive value of environmental cues. Because increased DA transmission and 
potentiation of D 2/D3 receptor  function in the nucleus accumbens might represent a final common 
pathway of antidepressant effects (D'Aquila  et al, 2000; Gershon  et al, 2007), the strong affinity of 
amisulpride for D 2/D3 receptors in limbic regions makes it an ideal drug for testing mec hanisms 
underlying reduced hedonic capacity in MDD. An Investigational New Drug (IND) application to use 
amisulpride in the proposed research has been approved by the FDA on 01/19/2010 (see attached IND 
approval letter).  
 
Procedure:  Because the pharmacoki netics of amisulpride are linear and similar across gender, and a 
first peak plasma concentration is seen 1 -1.5 hr after oral administration (Ascalone  et al, 1996), fMRI 
scanning will start 1 hr after administration of amisulpride (or placebo).  During the  one-hour wait 
between the administration of amisulpride (or placebo), participants may read or view a neutral film.  
During this time, experimenters will carefully monitor participants to assess the presence/absence of 
side effects. A designated study phy sician will be present at the neuroimaging facility throughout the 
session with a response time of 2 -3 minutes in case study participants experience adverse side effects 
during the fMRI scanning. After one hour, participants will be asked to enter the scan ner, and data 
collection will begin. The dose (50 mg) was selected based on prior studies (Hamon -Vilcot et al., 1998; 
Samuels  et al, 2006), and the observation that all prior studies using amisulpride in depressive disorders 
have used 50 mg/day doses (see above). Using a double -blind design, half of the participants in each 
group will be administered amisulpride, whereas the other half will receive placebo.  
 
c. Devices to be used  
Not applicable  
 
d. Surgical interventions  
Not applicable  
 
e. Data to be collected  
Please see below for details on data collected and analyses performed.  
 
VI. BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
a. Specific data variables being collected  
 
Probabilistic Reward Task (PRT)  
The main variable is response bias, which assesses participants’ preference for the sti mulus paired with 
more frequent reward, and will be calculated using a published formula (Pizzagalli et al 2005). To test 
the specificity of findings, control analyses will be run on discriminability, which provides a measure 
of the ability to discriminate  the two stimuli. To test Hypothesis 3a  and 3b, Group  (CSA/MDD, 
CSA/RES, MDD, controls) x Block  (1,2,3) ANOVAs will be run for response bias and discriminability.   
 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 21 
 Implicit Learning Serial Reaction Time Task (SRTT)  
SRTT data will be analyzed using established procedures (median reaction times for blocks 
presenting random vs. the predetermined sequence will be calculated; (Kathmann  et al, 2005). If 
group differences emerge in procedural learning, SRTT data will be used as covariates/regressors in 
all analyses.  
 
Optimism Bias Task  
For each trial we compare the extent to which participants altered their estimates in response to 
the information presented (update score = second estimate - first estimate). We then compare 
these scores for trials in which pa rticipants receive good news (trials where the actuarial 
probability of a negative event is less than participants’ estimate of their likelihood) with trials in 
which they receive bad news trials (where the actuarial probability of a negative event is grea ter 
than participants estimate of their likelihood).  
 
Self-Concept Attention Task  
Reaction time (RT) and responses to trait words are compared between the accompanying image 
types  (self, other person, or scrambled).  
 
Scalp ERP and Source Analyses  
ERP analyses will follow prior work (Pizzagalli et al 2002, 2003). ERPs will be collected during the 
Probabilistic Reward Task. Briefly, ERPs will be computed covering 1024 ms and time -locked to the 
onset of the stimulus (Rich, Lean) and feedback  using a 1 00-ms pre -stimulus baseline. Analyses will 
focus on the feedback -related negativity (FRN). The FRN (measured as the most negative deflection 
200-400ms after reward feedback over fronto -central electrodes) is hypothesized to reflect phasic DA 
reward predict ion signals projecting from the basal ganglia to the ACC and used to guide behavior 
according to reinforcements (Holroyd & Coles 2002). Studies in the PI’s lab have shown that reduced 
reinforcement learning is linked to a larger (i.e., more negative) FRN, likely due to a reliance on 
external feedback to guide behavior (Bogdan et al 2011; Santesso et al 2008, 2009). Thus, relative to 
controls, the CSA/MDD – but not CSA/RES group – will show larger FRN and reduced OFC and 
vmPFC activation to reward feedback. Group  x Electrode (AFz, Fz, FCz, Cz) ANOVAs will be 
conducted on FRN amplitude and latency.  As in prior work (Bogdan et al 2011; Santesso et al 2008), 
intracortical current density will be computed at the time of the FRN using LORETA (Pascual -Marqui 
et al 1999). Whole -brain voxelwise tests will test differences between groups or conditions. To control 
for Type I error, permutation procedures will be used to calculate the false -positive rate under the Null 
Hypothesis (Nichols & Holmes 2002).  
 
Amisulpride B ehavioral Analyses for PSST and MID  
A Group (CSA/MDD, CSA/RES, MDD, controls) x Drug  (amisulpride, placebo) x Trial Type  (PSST:  
Choose A, Avoid B or MID : Reward, loss, no -incentive) ANOVA will be run. Based on prior findings, 
we expect a significant Drug  x Trial Type  interaction, due to larger positive reinforcement learning but 
lower negative reinforcement learning in the amisulpride relative to the placebo group. Moreover, 
although amisulpride is expected to affect reinforcement learning in all groups, we  hypothesize that 
CSA/MDD subjects will show the largest gains, leading to a significant Group x Drug  x Trial Type  
interaction. Planned contrast will show no difference in positive reinforcement learning between 
controls receiving placebo and CSA/MDD subjects receiving amisulpride. To test Hypothesis 1b, a 
Group x Drug x Trial  ANOVA is expected to yield no group diffe rences between CSA/RES and 
controls and significant differences to the CSA/MDD in the placebo condition and CSA/MDD subjects 
receiving amisulpride.  
 
fMRI Analyses  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 22 
 Analyses will be conducted using  FreeSurfer (Fischl et al 2002, 2004). Volumetric analysis w ill be 
conducted and, if applicable, fMRI data will be adjusted for volumetric group differences. Pre -
processing will include motion/slice -time correction, removal of slow linear trends, intensity 
normalization, and spatial smoothing (6 -mm). The hemodynami c response will be modeled as a 
gamma function (2.5 s delay to rise, 1.25 s dispersion time) and convolved with stimulus onsets. Data 
will be analyzed using two approaches: an ROI approach to evaluate a priori  hypotheses and a whole -
brain approach to test finding specificity. In the first, regression coefficients (“beta weights”) will be 
extracted from ROIs obtained from FreeSurfer’s parcellation and selected based on prior studies 
(Knutson & Cooper 2005). ROIs will include basal ganglia regions (globus pal lidus, NAc, caudate, 
putamen), dorsal/ rostral anterior cingulate, vmPFC, and OFC. For each subject and ROI, beta weights 
will be entered into Group  x Condition  (amisulpride, placebo) x Hemisphere  x Trial  (reward, loss, no -
incentive) ANOVAs. We expect that  the main effects of Group  (controls ≈ CSA/RES > MDD > 
CSA/MDD) and Condition  (amisulpride > placebo) will be significant. Moreover, although 
amisulpride will increase basal ganglia responses to reward – but not punishment or no -incentive – 
cues in all gro ups, we expect that the CSA/MDD group will show the greatest improvements 
(significant Group x Condition x Cue interaction). Planned contrast will show no difference between 
controls and CSA/RES receiving placebo, and CSA/MDD subjects receiving amisulpride  will show 
similar activation as controls under placebo. In the second approach, whole -brain analyses will be run. 
Each subject’s data will first be re -sampled into Talairach space and random effects analyses will be 
run.  Significance levels in the fMRI d ata will be set to yield a corrected mapwise significance level of 
p<.05.  
 
PET Analyses  
Images will be acquired in 3 -D mode and reconstructed using a filtered back projection method while 
modeling the point spread function of the HR+ in the projector to ensure recovery of in -plane spatial 
resolution of ~4.5 mm without increasing noise levels. All projection data will be corrected for 
nonuniformity of detector response, dead time, random coincidences, and scattered radiation. After 
realignment, motion -corrected PET frames will be summed, registered to the respective MRI (Woods 
et al 1993), and transformed into stereotaxic space (Talairach & Tournoux 1988) based on an 
automated feature -matching algorithm (Collins et al 1994). ROIs will be manually drawn on h igh-
resolution MRI images for dorsal (caudate, putamen) and ventral (NAc) striatal regions. The 
cerebellum will be used as reference tissue. A simplified reference tissue method (Gunn et al 2001; 
Lammertsma & Hume 1996) will be used to calculate binding po tential. To increase statistical power, 
a Bayesian method recently developed by the MGH team will be used (Alpert et al 2009; Fang et al 
2010). Briefly, this method utilizes prior normative data in a cohort of 51 healthy subjects who 
underwent 60 -min 11C-altropane scan. Bayesian estimates yielded a substantial variance reduction in 
SRTM parameters, making it possible to reduce the sample size needed to achieve a given power level 
by √2. ANOVAs contrasting age -adjusted altropane binding (covariates: smoking & phase of 
menstrual cycle) across the groups will be performed. Correlational analyses between binding and (1) 
response bias in the probabilistic reward task, and (2) beta weights in striatal regions during the reward 
task, will be run.  
Skin Fibroblast An alyses  
Procedures to Obtain Skin Fibroblasts : After the skin biopsy has been collected, it will be  frozen 
at -80oC in the laboratory of Dr. Kwang -Soo Kim , Ph.D . The biopsy will be transferred to a petri dish 
and washed in balanced salt solution with antibiotics. Large chunks of tissue will be diced smaller with 
a scalpel. The epidermis will be separated from the dermal layer using dispase incubation. The growth 
surface of tissue culture flasks will be coated with fetal bovine serum ( FBS) to lay down a matrix of 
fibronectin to allow for more rapid fibroblast growth. Dispase will be washed with fresh 1x phosphate 
buffered saline and the tissue minced to smaller chun ks < 4mm using a sterile blade. The minced tissue 
will be placed evenly around the growth surface of flasks with minimal Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 23 
 Medium ( DMEM ) containing 20% FBS, so the tissue can adhere easily. The medium will be changed 
every 4 -5 days,  increasing the volume gradually without disturbing the adhered tissue. Large patches 
of fibroblasts will appear to grow from the chunks in 2 weeks. Dermal fibroblasts will be passaged by 
trypsinization, redistributed evenly expanded for 2 -3 weeks , and cryopreserved  for further use .  
Direct Conversion of Skin Fibroblasts into DA Neurons : To efficiently convert human fibroblasts 
into mDA neurons, Dr. Kim will combine lentiviral vectors expressing (i) neurogenesis -promoting TFs 
(e.g., BAM), (ii) mDA -promoting  TFs (e.g., Nurr1, Pitx3, FoxA2) and/or (iii) miRNAs (e.g., miR-9* 
and miR -124). Biopsied adult fibroblasts will be maintained in DMEM fibroblast media with 10% FBS 
as previously described41. Lentiviral vectors expressing the above factors or miRNAs will be prepared 
in Lenti -X 293T cells and used for transducing fibroblasts overnight. The transduced fibroblasts will 
be maintained in fibroblast media for 2 -3 days, followed by a change to Neuro nal Media (ScienceCell) 
supplemented with bFGF and BDNF and other survival -promoting factors. Media will be changed 
every 3 -4 days until differentiated cells are used for functional and phenotype analyses. The optimal 
conditions will be determined by testi ng combinations of the above factors, as well as small molecules 
that may promote mDA differentiation and/or inhibit alternative differentiation.  
Comparison of Molecular and Cellular Properties of Converted DA Neurons from Fibroblasts of 
MDD/CSA  (n=8), CSA/RES (n=4 ), and Psychiatrically Healthy Subjects (n= 8): Once we optimize 
conversion of fibroblasts to mDA neurons, we will use these biopsied fibroblasts to convert them to 
mDA neurons using our optimized protocol. To evaluate whether  converted  DA neurons from each 
group have distinct  properties, we will test their ability to synthesize and release DA in response to 
membrane depolarization.  We will treat in vitro  differentiated cells with 50 mM KCl for 30 minutes 
and assess DA release by HPLC. Media will be collected after 30 min then concentrated perchloric 
acid (PCA) will be added to a final concentration of 0.1 M PCA/0.1mM EDTA. The DA content of the 
supernatants will be measured by reverse -phase HPLC . We will also compare mRNA expression  
patterns for dopamine -related genes such as synthesizing (TH and AADC), uptake (DAT), degrading 
(MAO and COMT), and storage function (VMAT2) at mRNA and protein levels  in converted mDA 
neurons of each group.  
 
Plasma Samples  
 
Concentrations of pro - an anti -inflammatory cytokines and related receptors will be assessed 
using enzyme -linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA, R&D systems, Minneapolis, MN). All 
assays will be performed at the CLIA -certified Harvard Catalyst Central Laboratory (HCCL) in 
accordan ce with manufacturer specifications, and will be run in duplicate.  
 
 
b. Study endpoints  
Not applicable  
 
c. Statistical methods  
Please see above.  
 
d. Power analysis  
Sample size and power calculations  
Sample size was estimated after considering effect sizes obtained in preliminary studies. Effect sizes 
were calculated using p = 0.05 for detecting differences between (1) controls vs. CSA/MDD, and (2) 
CSA/MDD receiving a DA challenge vs. placebo. Based on  these estimates and allowing for 5% data 
loss, the sample size is 92 (23 subjects/group). In our study using the PSST task pro posed, relative to 
controls, women with histories of CSA and MDD showed lower accuracy in trials in which they needed 
to rely on reward (Cohen’s d = -0.85). In a study using the probabilistic reward task, we found that 
unmedicated MDD subjects had significantly reduced response bias compared to controls (d = -0.70; 
Pizzagalli et al 2009b). In another study using the same task, we fo und that healthy subjects receiving 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 24 
 a single dose of pramipexole – hypothesized to reduce phasic DA transmission due to inhibition of 
presynaptic autoreceptors – had significantly lower reward learning than those receiving placebo (d = 
-1.45; Pizzagalli et  al 2008b). In an fMRI study using the MID task, relative to controls, a maltreated 
sample showed weaker activation to reward -predicting cues in the left putamen (d = -0.54) and left 
pallidus (d = -1.02), yielding a mean effect size of -0.78.  In a separat e study using the MID task, 
unmedicated MDD subjects showed weaker activation than controls in response to gains in the caudate 
(d = -0.98), left NAc (d = -0.73) and left putamen (d = -0.78) during reward anticipation (Pizzagalli et 
al 2009a), yielding a m ean effect size of -0.87. In a pharmacological fMRI study in unmedicated MDD 
subjects we found that a single 150 mg dose of Bupropion – assumed to partially block DAT – 
increased reward -related responses in components of the brain’s reward circuit, includi ng the midbrain 
(d = -1.88), subcallosal gyrus (d = -1.64), and SLEA (d = -1.89), leading to an mean effect size of -
1.80 (Pizzagalli et al 2008a). In sum, based on the effect sizes we have observed for the behavioral 
(mean d = -1.00) and fMRI (mean d = -1.15) components, a total of 92 subjects leads to a power >0.95 
of detecting group differences.   
 For the PET study, secondary analyses of altropane data collected in ADHD and control 
samples (Spencer et al 2007) indicated that a history of depression and/ or current subthreshold 
depressive symptoms were linked to decreased DAT binding (d = -0.58). Because this sample was 
carefully screened to exclude current, clinically significant depressive symptoms and because analyses 
did not involve the recently develo ped Bayesian method, we expect that effect size between control 
and CSA/MDD groups will be larger (expected d > 0.80). Thus, 92 subjects leads to a power >0.85 of 
detecting group differences.  
 
 
 
VII. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
a. Complications of surgical and non-surgical procedures  
 
Maastricht Acute Stress Test (MAST)  
The risks associated with the stress manipulation are minimal. This manipulation has been 
implemented in numerous labs due to its efficiency and safety. First of all, it is a non -intrusive 
manipulation that causes only very minor  pain, if any. Secondly, at all times participants are allowed 
to remove their hand from the cold water and thus immediately stop the manipulation . 
 
EEG  
We foresee only minimal risks from the EEG recording, a commonl y and widespread procedure used 
to non -invasively measure electrical brain activity. The EEG will be recorded with the Geodesics 
Sensors Net, which requires no scalp abrasion. On rare occasions, individuals with very sensitive skin 
may experience a slight irritation at the site of sensor application due to the use of mildly salinated 
water.  
 
fMRI  
Implants/Prostheses :  The magnetic field of the scanner exerts a force on ferromagnetic objects within 
the field.  This force can cause a ferromagnetic implant, such as some brands of aneurysm clips, 
surgical clips, or prostheses, to move or be displaced and cause injury or death.  If the implant is both 
large and ferromagnetic, sufficient currents can be induced in the metal by the magnetic field to cause 
heating of the implant. Individuals with any such devices will be excluded from enrolling in the study.  
 
Pregnancy : The s afety of the 3.0T MRI scanner for imaging embryos/fetuses has not been clearly 
established. Therefore, women who are pregnant or who are of unknown pregnancy status will be 
excluded.  
 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 25 
 Collision Hazard : The magnetic field near the scanner is strong enough t o attract ferromagnetic objects 
with great force.  Near the magnet this force can be strong enough to pull objects in and cause them to 
fly down the axis of the magnet.  Such objects become projectiles that can cause injury or death.  A 
security zone has b een established to prevent ferromagnetic objects from coming into proximity of the 
magnet. The likelihood of a collision in the context of the present experiment is thought to be low, 
much lower than the likelihood in clinical practice.  
 
RF and Magnetic Fi eld Interference : Implants electronic devices, such as cardiac pacemakers and 
cochlear implants, may be susceptible to interference from the magnetic and RF fields produced by the 
scanner.  This interference may destroy or adversely affect operation of the se devices.  Since 
interference to cardiac pacemakers is observed in magnetic fields as low as 13 gauss, means have been 
provided to prevent persons with cardiac pacemakers or other implanted electronic devices from 
entering a zone where the magnetic field  exceeds 5 gauss. Individuals with such devices will be 
excluded from the study.  
 
Biomagnetic Hazards : It is possible that subtle genetic or molecular changes could be caused by the 
magnetic fields produced by the MR system.  To date, however, no harmful b iological effects have 
been demonstrated at the magnetic field strengths and exposure times utilized by the scanner.  At the 
present time, the likelihood of any significant adverse biomagnetic effect is considered to be very low.  
 
Neurostimulation :  Some s ubjects undergoing functional MRI have experienced minor 
neurostimulation effects, such as muscle twitches and “tingling” sensations, due to the rapidly 
oscillating magnetic field gradients used in these examinations.  There are no known risks associated 
with these effects.  Specifically, the potential for cardiac stimulation has been examined and judged 
not to be a problem. The devices used in our research create field gradients that are within the limits 
specified by the FDA.  Likewise, the head resonator  for the McLean 3.0T scanner operates within FDA 
guidelines.  
 
Clinical Hazards : The confining conditions of the MR system can precipitate claustrophobia in a 
subject.  Subjects will be screened for possible claustrophobia before they are enrolled in the st udy. 
 
Access to MR Area : Access to all areas exceeding the 5 gauss  level will be controlled by warning 
signs, barriers, staffed entry locations, and adequate interrogation to assure avoidance of incidents. 
Access to the magnet room by any personnel will be closely controlled for safety of persons, in 
particular to preven t accidental introduction of ferromagnetic objects that could be attracted by the 
magnetic field generated by the MR system.  
 
PET  
The primary risk associated with the study is exposure to ionizing radiation. However, the exposure 
will be small, and there i s no evidence that it causes major health risks. Subjects will be exposed to 
approximately 2 milliSieverts (2 mSv).  This amount of radiation is equal to about 55% of the annual 
background radiation everyone is exposed to each year from the earth and the s ky. Careful screening 
for contraindications will be conducted via written questionnaire both at the time of recruitment and 
just prior to the experiment.  No side effects from the radiopharmaceutical [11C] altropane are expected. 
[11C] Altropane is similar to cocaine, which is known to cause physical dependence and addiction 
after repeated use at high doses.  The dose of [11C] Altropane being administered in this study is below 
that at which we would expect any effect, including physical dependence and addic tion.  However, 
since this drug is investigational, unexpected adverse effects could occur.  
 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 26 
 An IV injection is made either by a physician or trained nuclear medicine technician. The risks 
associated with injections include: bruising, local discomfort, or infection at the site of the needle 
puncture.  The placement of an intravenous line will be necessary and local infection swelling, and 
redness could occur at this site and temporary loss of pulse at the wrist could occur.  The area may 
have a bruise or fe el uncomfortable for 2 - 3 days after the tube is removed.   
 
In addition, subjects will be required to lie still on the imaging table with their heads in the scanner, 
which may be uncomfortable.  
 
The safety of the PET scanner for imaging embryos/fetuses h as not been clearly established. Therefore, 
women who are pregnant or who are of unknown pregnancy status will be excluded. In addition, the 
safety of the PET scanner for participants with a history of cancer or exposure to radiation has not been 
establish ed.  Participants with a history of cancer will be excluded. In cases where participants have a 
history of radiation exposure, the MGH Radiation Safety Office will be consulted to determine if 
participation in the study is safe.  
 
The proposed PET procedure s are identical  to those previously approved by both the McLean (2010 -
P-001447) and Partners (2009 -P-001360) IRB board (“ Depression and Dopamine Transporter 
Function: A Positron Emission Tomography Study Using C -11 Altropane ”). 
 
Fibroblast Biopsy  
 
Risks to  study subjects are modest. Skin punch biopsies are simple medical procedures performed by 
an experienced physician. As stated in the informed consent form, the biopsy procedure may cause a 
small scar (generally smaller than the size of the biopsy itself 4mm or 0.157  inch in diameter). The 
site (buttocks) is chosen to minimize discomfort and so that the minimal scarring that may occur will 
have no adverse cosmetic effects. The biopsy site will be cleaned. Local anesthesia will be used, 0.6 
to 1.0 ml of 1% x ylocaine with 1/200,000 epinephrine intracutaneously, so that the pain associated 
with the procedure will be minimal. There is a slight risk that the biopsy site might become infected. 
However, new, disposable, sterile punch biopsy kits will be used for ea ch subject, and antibiotic 
ointment and a band -aid will be applied to minimize this risk. Dr. Siegel will assess eligibility before 
the proced ure to ensure that no participants undergoing the skin biopsy procedure have a previous 
history of keloids (a typ e of scar which results in an overgrowth of tissue at the site of a healed skin 
injury) or bleeding disorders.  
 
No subject will have more than one biopsy.  The subject will be told that the biopsy site should be 
kept clean. The site should not be submerged  in water (i.e. no swimming, hot tubs, baths, etc) for a 
few days. This information is also specified in the informed consent form, a copy of which will be 
given to the subject.  
 
We believe that these risks are minimized by having an experienced physician  perform these 
procedures.  
 
b. Drug side effects and toxicities  
Amisulpride  
The risks posed to the subjects due to a single 50 mg dose of amisulpride, are minimal. At the low dose 
proposed for the current study (50 mg), amisulpride caused an incidence of extr apyramidal symptoms 
similar to placebo and lower than that of haloperidol. At low doses, neuroendocrinological adverse 
events, gastrointestinal intolerance, anxiety, and excitation were reported rarely. Moreover, in healthy 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 27 
 controls, single administrations  of 50 -mg doses of amisulpride had no observable effects on mood or 
a variety of cognitive functions, including memory, attention, vigilance, sensory -motor coordination, 
and information processing. No potentiation of the effects of alcohol was seen after c o-administration 
of 50 -mg amisulpride. However, because amisulpride undergoes substantial renal elimination, subjects  
with moderate or severe renal insufficiency will be excluded. In sum, the likelihood of discomforts 
arising from a single, low dose administration of amisulpride is deemed to be very low; based on 
available studies, we expect that if discomfort were to occur, it would be transient and benign, and 
resolve quickly.  
 
The proposed pharmacological challenge and fMRI procedures are identical  to those previously  
approved by the McLean IRB board (2010 -P-001568) (“ The Effects of Dopamine on Reward 
Processing ”) 
 
c. Device complications/malfunctions  
Not applicable.  
 
d. Psychosocial (non -medical) risks  
Actively Suicidal Participants  
SCID Session: If a di agnosis of current severe major depressive disorder is made when the SCID is 
administered at the first session, the interviewer will make a further assessment of current suicidal 
intent and planning. If the interviewer, in consultation with the PI and McLe an Study Physicians, 
determines that that subject is at imminent risk, our protocol will be to call hospital security to arrange 
a walk -over to the McLean Clinical Evaluation Center or Massachusetts General Hospital Acute 
Psychiatric Services (depending up on subject location at the time). If risk is judged to be serious but 
not imminent, the project protocol calls for the interviewer, in consultation with the PI and the study 
physicians, to provide crisis phone numbers as well as relevant referrals for ther apy, and to verify that 
the subject understands how best to access these resources.  
 
EEG, fMRI, PET , and f ibroblast biopsy  sessions:   
If an individual appears to be at imminent risk at the EEG, fMRI , PET or biopsy  sessions, we will 
consult a physician, who will be available for these sessions. If the physician determines that the subject 
is at imminent risk, our protocol will be to call the McLean Clinical Evaluation Center or the Boston 
Emergency Services Team.  
 
SCID  and Questionnaires  
Possible discomfort may occur while answering personal questions during the psychiatric (SCID) 
interview, and while completing the questionnaires.  
 
MID, PSST, PRTT , PRT , and Optimism Bias Tasks  
Minimal discomfort may occur due to the time and effort related to completing these tasks.  
Maastricht Acute Stress Test (MAST)  
This paradigm is designed to induce physiological and psychological stress and thus most 
participants will find this task discomforting. However,  participants are to ld that they can take their 
hand out of the ice water at any time if it is too uncomfortable. A ll subjects will be de -briefed at the 
end of the experiment regarding the stress manipulation.  
 
e. Radiation risks  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 28 
 Exposure from the PET scan is considered small, a nd there is no evidence that it causes major health 
risks. Subjects will be exposed to approximately 2 milliSieverts (2 mSv).  This amount of radiation is 
equal to about 55% of the annual background radiation everyone is exposed to each year from the earth  
and the sky. Subjects who have a history of cancer or a history of exposure to mutagens or radiation 
will be excluded from the study.  
 
VIII.  POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
a. Potential benefits to participants  
There will be no direct benefits to the subjects themselves for participating in this research.  
 
b. Potential benefits to society  
From a scientific perspective, the study may benefit people with depression and early life stress by 
furthering our understandin g of the role of dopamine in the risk for and manifestation of depression 
and also the effects of early life stress on the dopaminergic system.  
IX. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
a. Independent monitoring of source data  
Not applicable.  
 
b. Safety monitoring (e.g. , Data Safety Monitoring Board, etc.)  
As there is no clinical intervention, an external Data and Safety Monitoring Board will not be required. 
However, formal procedures for managing potential safety concerns will be implemented prior to study 
initiation.  
 
Subjects are required to have a structural MRI scan of clinical quality at least once per year at 
McLean Hospital that is reviewed by a board certified radiologist or neurologist and a clinical report 
is generated usually within 2 -4 days.  If the subject has not received a structural clinical scan in the 
past year, one will be obtained for the present study  during session 3 (fMRI session) . Subjects will 
not receive more than one structural clinical MRI within a given 12 -month period unless a follow -up 
scan is recommended by the radiologist who reads the scan.  
 
Abnormal reports are reviewed by the Clinical Director of the McLean Imaging Center (MIC), Dr. 
David Olson and forwarded to the Principal Investigator, in this case, Dr. Pizzagalli, and the  
designated  study physician. If an abnormality is present, the study physician and PI will coordinate 
the process of contacting the subject so that an appointment can be made to discuss the findings. The 
MIC Clinical Director may also assist with this process when re quested and appropriate.  
 
c. Outcomes monitoring  
The principal investigator and co -investigators will hold regular meetings to review data integrity and 
safety concerns. Confidentiality will be maintained throughout the project period. Names will not be 
kept on data records, and a standardized code will be used for each subject’s data. Subjects will be 
identified only by a code number. Any records with subject -specific information will be kept in a 
locked file.  
 
For the skin biopsy samples, confidentiality will be protected by labeling information and samples with 
a study subject number, not the subject’s name. The coded skin sample will be processed in Dr. Kim's 
McLean Hospital laboratory on grounds at McLean Hos pital. Dr. Pizzagalli will maintain any 
information that identifies you in a locked file, accessible only to clinical research staff directly 
involved in the study. As stated in the informed consent form for the addendum, individual genetic 
results will no t be given to anyone (including the subject and the subject’s family, doctor, insurance 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 29 
 company and employer) unless required by law. The consent form will emphasize that results will not 
be shared with the subject and that even given these protective meas ures we cannot guarantee that the 
subject’s individual genetic results could never be linked to them. Furthermore, it is stated  in the 
informed consent that subjects have the right to have their skin sample destroyed if they request so 
before testing has b een done and the sample has been anonymized.  
 
 
d. Adverse event reporting guidelines  
In the unlikely event of serious adverse events, these events will be documented and reported 
immediately to the McLean IRB, as well as to the safety board and to the FDA (a s appropriate). An 
event that is serious must be recorded on the case record and requires expeditious handling to comply 
with regulatory requirements. In the event that a subject  becomes ill or injured as a direct result of 
participation in the research study, necessary medical care will be made available. The NIMH Project 
Officer will be informed of any actions taken by the IRBs as a result of such adverse events.  
 
All adverse eff ects will be immediately reported upon their discovery. Potentially serious adverse 
events (SAEs) should be followed to resolution or stabilization and reported as SAEs if they become 
serious.   
 
In the case that a subject is observed or determined to be i n an altered state at any point during the 
study, (s)he will be evaluated by one of the study physicians (e.g., David Olson, M.D., Ph.D.) and will 
be given appropriate care.  
 
In addition, in order to assess any dystonic symptoms caused by amisulpride admi nistration, a study 
physician will now utilize the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) to rate subject 
involuntary movements during the screening visit and prior to dismissal on the scanning visit.  
 
Asymptomatic subjects will be dismissed 3 hours a fter administration of amisulpride, following a final 
evaluation by a study physician. If a participant does report an adverse event or symptom following 
the administration of the Amisulpride, they will remain with the researcher until they are feeling wel l, 
and will be assessed by the study physician before dismissal. Participants who report an adverse 
response to the Amisulpride dose will be contacted 24 hours following dismissal from the study, and 
will also be contacted for an exit interview one to two weeks after the drug administration session 
where the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) will be repeated.   
 
All subjects will be provided with taxi transportation to and from McLean Hospital for the fMRI 
session.  Participants will be given the co ntact information of the study staff contact and the principal 
investigator, as well as the McLean Clinical Evaluation Center and/or the Boston Emergency Services 
Team and relevant referrals for therapy as needed.  
 
For a detailed description of the publish ed literature supporting the Amisulpride specific 
precautions summarized above, please refer to “Appendix 1”  
 
 
X. REFERENCES  
Aitken, R. C. (1969). Measurement of feelings using visual analogue scales. Proc R Soc Med, 62 (10), 
989-993. 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 30 
 al'Absi, M., K. L. Petersen and L. E. Wittmers (2002). "Adrenocortical and hemodynamic 
predictors of pain perception in men and women." Pain 96(1-2): 197 -204. 
Amat, J., M. V. Baratta, et al. (2005). "Medial prefrontal cortex determines how stressor 
controllability affects behavior and dorsal raphe nucleus." Nat Neurosci  8(3): 365 -371. 
Amat, J., E. Paul, et al. (2008). "Activation of the ventral medial prefrontal  cortex during an 
uncontrollable stressor reproduces both the immediate and long -term protective effects of 
behavioral control." Neuroscience  154(4): 1178 -1186.  
Amore, M., & Jori, M. C. (2001). Faster response on amisulpride 50 mg versus sertraline 50 -100 mg 
in patients with dysthymia or double depression: a randomized, double -blind, parallel group 
study. Int Clin Psychopharmacol, 16 (6), 317 -324. 
Ascalone, V., Ripamonti, M., & Malavasi, B. (1996). Stereospecific determination of amisulpride, a 
new benzamide  derivative, in human plasma and urine by automated solid -phase extraction 
and liquid chromatography on a chiral column. application to pharmacokinetics. J Chromatogr 
B Biomed Appl, 676 (1), 95 -105. 
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., Ball, R., & Ranieri, W. (1996).  Comparison of Beck Depression Inventories 
-IA and -II in psychiatric outpatients. J Pers Assess, 67 (3), 588 -597. 
Berenbaum, H., & Oltmanns, T. F. (1992). Emotional experience and expression in schizophrenia and 
depression. J. Abnorm. Psychol., 101 (1), 37 -44. 
Bernstein DP, Stein JA, Newcomb MD,Walker E, Pogge D, Ahluvalia T, et al. (2003). Development and 
validation of a brief screening version of the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire. Child Abuse & 
Neglect 27(2), 169 -190. 
Bogdan, R., & Pizzagalli, D. A. (2006 ). Acute stress reduces reward responsiveness: implications for 
depression. Biol. Psychiatry, 60 (10), 1147 -1154.  
Boyer, P., Lecrubier, Y., Stalla -Bourdillon, A., & Fleurot, O. (1999). Amisulpride versus amineptine 
and placebo for the treatment of dysthymia . Neuropsychobiology, 39 (1), 25 -32. 
Brown, G.W. and Harris, T,  (1978). "Social origins of depression: A study of psychiatric disorder in women. " 
 London: Tavistock.  
Buchanan, T. W., D. Tranel and R. Adolphs (2006). "Impaired memory retrieval correlates with 
individual differences in cortisol response but not autonomic response." Learn Mem  
13(3): 382 -387. 
Cabib, S. and S. Puglisi -Allegra (1996). "Stress, depression and  the mesolimbic dopamine 
system." Psychopharmacology (Berl)  128(4): 331 -342. 
Capuron, L., S. Su, et al. (2008). "Depressive symptoms and metabolic syndrome: is 
inflammation the underlying link?" Biol Psychiatry  64(10): 896 -900. 
Cassano, G. B., & Jori, M. C . (2002). Efficacy and safety of amisulpride 50 mg versus paroxetine 20 
mg in major depression: a randomized, double -blind, parallel group study. Int Clin 
Psychopharmacol, 17 (1), 27 -32. 
Chapman, L. J., & Chapman, J. P. (1987). The measurement of handedness. Brain Cogn, 6 (2), 175 -
183. 
Chapman L.J., Chapman J.P., Kwapil T.R., Eckblad M., Zinser M.C. (1994). Putatively psychosis -
prone subjects 10 years later. J. Abnorm. Psychol.  103(2) , 171 -183. 
Cloninger, C. R. (1994). Temperament and personality. Curr Opin Neurobiol, 4 (2), 266 -273. 
Cox, R. W. (1996). AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance 
neuroimages. Comput Biomed Res, 29 (3), 162 -173. 
D'Aquila, P. S. , Collu, M., Gessa, G. L., & Serra, G. (2000). The role of dopamine in the mechanism 
of action of antidepressant drugs. Eur J Pharmacol, 405 (1-3), 365 -373. 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 31 
 Dillon, D.G., Bogdan, R., Fagerness, J., Holmes, A.J., Perlis, R.H., Pizzagalli, D.A. (in press). 
Variation in TREK1 gene linked to depression -resistant phenotype is associated with potentiated 
neural responses to rewards in humans. Human Brain Mapping  
Dillon, D. G., Holmes, A. J., Jahn , A. L., Bogdan, R., Wald, L. L., & Pizzagalli, D. A. (2008). 
Dissociation of neural regions associated with anticipatory versus consummatory phases of 
incentive processing. Psychophysiology, 45 (1), 36 -49. 
Dillon, D.G., Holmes, A.J., Birk, J.L., Brooks, N. , Lyons -Ruth, K., Pizzagalli, D.A. (2009). Childhood 
adversity is associated with left basal ganglia dysfunction during reward anticipation in 
adulthood.  Biological  Psychiatry , 66, 206 -213. 
Elliott, R., Rubinsztein, J. S., Sahakian , B. J., & Dolan, R. J. (2002). The neural basis of mood -
congruent processing biases in depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 59 (7), 597 -604. 
Epstein, J., Pan, H., Kocsis, J. H., Yang, Y., Butler, T., Chusid, J., et al. (2006). Lack of ventral striatal 
response  to positive stimuli in depressed versus normal subjects. Am. J. Psychiatry, 163 (10), 
1784 -1790.  
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W. (1994). Structured Clinical Interview for 
axis 1 DSM -IV disorders.  New York: Biometric Research Department, New York State 
Psychiatric Institute.  
Folstein, M. F., Folstein, S. E., & McHugh, P. R. (1975). "Mini -mental state". A practical method for 
grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res, 12 (3), 189 -198. 
Forbes, E. E ., Christopher May, J., Siegle, G. J., Ladouceur, C. D., Ryan, N. D., Carter, C. S., et al. 
(2006). Reward -related decision -making in pediatric major depressive disorder: an fMRI 
study. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry, 47 (10), 1031 -1040.  
Forbes, E. E., Shaw, D. S., & Dahl, R. E. (2007). Alterations in reward -related decision making in boys 
with recent and future depression. Biol. Psychiatry, 61 (5), 633 -639. 
Frank, M. J., Seeberger, L. C., & O'Reilly R, C. (2004). By carrot or by stick: cognitive reinforcement 
learning in parkinsonism. Science, 306 (5703), 1940 -1943.  
Friston, K. J., Tononi, G., Reeke, G. N., Jr., Sporns, O., & Edelman, G. M. (1994). Value -dependent 
selection in the brain: simulation in a synthetic neural model. Neuroscience, 59 (2), 229 -243. 
Gershon, A. A., Vishne, T., & Grunhaus, L. (2007). Dopamine D2 -like receptors and the antidepressant 
response. Biol Psychiatry, 61 (2), 145 -153. 
Gluck, M. E., A. Geliebter, J. Hung and E. Yahav (2004). "Cortisol, hunger, and desire to binge 
eat following a cold stress test in obese women with binge eating disorder." Psychosom 
Med 66(6): 876 -881. 
Greden, J.F. (2001). The burden of disease for treatment -resistant depression. J Clin Psychiatry  62 
Suppl 16 , 26-31. 
Guy, W. (1976). ECDEU assessment manual for psyc hopharmacology, revised ed. Washington, D.C., 
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.  
Hammen, C. (2005). "Stress and depression." Annu Rev Clin Psychol  1: 293 -319. 
Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 
23, 56-62. 
Hamon -Vilcot, B., Chaufour, S., Deschamps, C., Canal, M., Zieleniuk, I., Ahtoy, P., et al. (1998). 
Safety and pharmacokinetics of a single oral dose of amisulpride in healthy elderly volunteers. 
Eur J Clin Pharmacol, 5 4(5), 405 -409. 
Harvey, P. O., Pruessner, J., Czechowska, Y., & Lepage, M. (2007). Individual differences in trait 
anhedonia: a structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging study in non -clinical 
subjects. Mol Psychiatry, 12 (8), 703, 767 -775. 
Hasler,  G., Drevets, W.C., Manji, H.K., Charney, D.S. (2004). Discovering endophenotypes for 
major depression. Neuropsychopharmacology,  29(10) , 1765 -1781.  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 32 
 Holsboer, F. (2000). "The corticosteroid receptor hypothesis of depression." 
Neuropsychopharmacology  23(5): 477-501. 
Hundt, N. E., Nelson -Gray, R. O., Kimbrela, N. A., Mitchella, J. T., & Kwapila, T. R. (2007). The 
interaction of reinforcement sensitivity and life events in the prediction of anhedonic 
depression and mixed anxiety -depression symptoms Personality and Individual Differences, 
43(5), 1001 -1012.  
Joormann, J., & Gotlib, I. H. (2006). Is this happiness I see? Biases in the identification of emotional 
facial expressions in depression and social phobia. J. Abnorm. Psychol., 115 (4), 705 -714. 
Kasch, K. L., R ottenberg, J., Arnow, B. A., & Gotlib, I. H. (2002). Behavioral activation and inhibition 
systems and the severity and course of depression. J. Abnorm. Psychol., 111 (4), 589 -597. 
Kathmann, N., Rupertseder, C., Hauke, W., & Zaudig , M. (2005). Implicit sequence learning in 
obsessive -compulsive disorder: further support for the fronto -striatal dysfunction model. Biol 
Psychiatry, 58 (3), 239 -244. 
Keedwell, P. A., Andrew, C., Williams, S. C., Brammer, M. J., & Phillips, M. L. (2005). Th e neural 
correlates of anhedonia in major depressive disorder. Biol. Psychiatry, 58 (11), 843 -853. 
Kendler, K. S., R. C. Kessler, et al. (1995). "Stressful life events, genetic liability, and onset of 
an episode of major depression in women." Am J Psychiatr y 152(6): 833 -842. 
Lawrence, N. S., Williams, A. M., Surguladze, S., Giampietro, V., Brammer, M. J., Andrew, C., et al. 
(2004). Subcortical and ventral prefrontal cortical neural responses to facial expressions 
distinguish patients with bipolar disorder an d major depression. Biol Psychiatry, 55 (6), 578 -
587. 
Lecrubier, Y., Boyer, P., Turjanski, S., & Rein, W. (1997). Amisulpride versus imipramine and placebo 
in dysthymia and major depression. Amisulpride Study Group. J Affect Disord, 43 (2), 95 -103. 
Leucht, S ., Pitschel -Walz, G., Engel, R. R., & Kissling, W. (2002). Amisulpride, an unusual "atypical" 
antipsychotic: a meta -analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Psychiatry, 159 (2), 180 -
190. 
Marin, R. S., Biedrzycki, R. C., & Firinciogullari, S. (1991). R eliability and validity of the Apathy 
Evaluation Scale. Psychiatry Res, 38 (2), 143 -162. 
McFarland, B. R., Shankman, S. A., Tenke, C. E., Bruder, G. E., & Klein, D. N. (2006). Behavioral 
activation system deficits predict the six -month course of depression.  J. Affect. Disord., 91 (2-
3), 229 -234. 
Meehl, P.E. (1975). Hedonic capacity: some conjectures. Bull. Menninger Clin.,  39(4) , 295 -307. 
Mendes, W. B., Gray, H., Mendoza -Denton, R., Major, B. & Epel, E. (2007). Why 
egalitarianism might be good for your health: Physiological thriving during stressful 
intergroup encounters. Psychological Science, 18, 991 -998. 
Modell, S., C. J. Lauer, et al. (1998). "Hormonal response pattern in the combined DEX -CRH 
test is stable over time in subjects at high familial risk  for affective disorders." 
Neuropsychopharmacology  18(4): 253 -262. 
Monroe, S. M. and K. L. Harkness (2005). "Life stress, the "kindling" hypothesis, and the 
recurrence of depression: considerations from a life stress perspective." Psychol Rev  
112(2): 417 -445. 
Nelson, R. E., & Craighead, W. E. (1977). Selective recall of positive and negative feedback, self -
control behaviors, and depression. J. Abnorm. Psychol., 86 (4), 379 -388. 
Nissen, M. J., & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional requirements of learning: evide nce from performance 
measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19 , 1-32. 
Patton, J. H., Stanford, M. S., & Barratt, E. S. (1995). Factor structure of the Barratt impulsiveness 
scale. J Clin Psychol, 51 (6), 768 -774. 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 33 
 Pechtel, P., Pizzagalli, D.A. (2013). Disrupted reinforcement learning and maladaptive behavior 
in women with a history of childhood sexual abuse: A high -density event -related potential 
study. JAMA Psychiatry, 70, 499 -507. 
Pierson, A., Ragot, R., Ripoche, A., & Lesevre, N. (1987). Electrophysiological c hanges elicited by 
auditory stimuli given a positive or negative value: a study comparing anhedonic with hedonic 
subjects. Int J Psychophysiol, 5 (2), 107 -123. 
Pinto -Meza, A., Caseras X, Soler, J., Puigdemont, D., Perez, V., Torrubia, R. (2006). Behavioural  
inhibition and behavioural activation systems in current and recovered major depression 
participants. Personality and Individual Differences, 40 , 215 -226. 
Pizzagalli, D. A., Evins, A. E., Schetter, E. C., Frank, M. J., Pajtas, P. E., Santesso, D. L., et a l. (2008). 
Single dose of a dopamine agonist impairs reinforcement learning in humans: behavioral 
evidence from a laboratory -based measure of reward responsiveness. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl), 196 (2), 221 -232. 
Pizzagalli, D. A., Goetz, E., Ostacher, M., Ios ifescu, D. V., & Perlis, R. H. (2008). Euthymic patients 
with bipolar disorder show decreased reward learning in a probabilistic reward task. Biol. 
Psychiatry, 64 (2), 162 -168. 
Pizzagalli, D. A., Holmes, A. J., Dillon, D. G., Goetz, E. L., Birk, J. L., Bogd an, R., et al. (2009). 
Reduced caudate and nucleus accumbens response to rewards in unmedicated individuals with 
major depressive disorder. Am J Psychiatry, 166 (6), 702 -710. 
Pizzagalli, D. A., Iosifescu, D., Hallett, L. A., Ratner, K. G., & Fava, M. (2009) . Reduced hedonic 
capacity in major depressive disorder: evidence from a probabilistic reward task. J Psychiatr 
Res, 43 (1), 76 -87. 
Pizzagalli, D. A., Jahn , A. L., & O'Shea, J. P. (2005). Toward an objective characterization of an 
anhedonic phenotype: a signal -detection approach. Biol. Psychiatry, 57 (4), 319 -327. 
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian conditioning and the  
effectivenes s of reinforcement and non -reinforcement. . In A. H. Black & W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), 
Classical Conditioning. 2. Current Research and Theory.  (pp. 64 –69). New York: Appleton -
Century -Crofts.  
Raison, C. L. and A. H. Miller (2011). "Is depression an inflammatory  disorder?" Curr 
Psychiatry Rep  13(6): 467 -475. 
Samuels, E. R., Hou, R. H., Langley, R. W., Szabadi, E., & Bradshaw, C. M. (2006). Comparison of 
pramipexole and amisulpride on alertness, autonomic and endocrine functions in healthy 
volunteers. Psychopharmacology (Berl), 187 (4), 498 -510. 
Sartorius, N. (2001). The economic and social burden of depression. J. Clin. Psychiatry,  62 (Suppl 
15), 8-11. 
Schultz, W. (2007). "Behavioral dopamine signals." Trends Neurosci  30(5): 203 -210. 
Schwabe, L., L. Had dad, et al. (2008). "HPA axis activation by a socially evaluated cold -pressor 
test." Psychoneuroendocrinology  33(6): 890 -895. 
Schwabe, L., L. Haddad and H. Schachinger (2008). "HPA axis activation by a socially 
evaluated cold -pressor test." Psychoneuroendocrinology  33(6): 890 -895. 
Sloan, D. M., Strauss, M. E., & Wisner, K. L. (2001). Diminished response to pleasant stimuli by 
depressed women. J. Abnorm. Psychol., 110 (3), 488 -493. 
Smeets, T., Cornelisse, S., Quaedflieg, C. W. E. M., Meyer, T.,  Jelicic, M., & Merckelbach, H. (2012). 
Introducing the Maastricht Acute Stress Test (MAST): a quick and non -invasive approach to 
elicit robust autonomic and glucocorticoid stress responses. Psychoneuroendocrinology , 
37(12), 1998 –2008. doi:10.1016/j.psyneu en.2012.04.012  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 34 
 Snaith, R. P., Hamilton, M., Morley, S., Humayan, A., Hargreaves, D., & Trigwell, P. (1995). A scale 
for the assessment of hedonic tone the Snaith -Hamilton Pleasure Scale. Br J Psychiatry, 
167(1), 99 -103. 
Spielberger, C. D., Goruch, R. L., &  Lushene, R. E. (1970). Manual for the State -Trait Anxiety 
Inventory . Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.  
Spijker, J., Bijl, R. V., de Graaf, R., & Nolen, W. A. (2001). Determinants of poor 1 -year outcome of 
DSM -III-R major depression in the gen eral population: results of the Netherlands Mental 
Health Survey and Incidence Study (NEMESIS). Acta Psychiatr Scand, 103 (2), 122 -130. 
Steele, J. D., Kumar, P., & Ebmeier, K. P. (2007). Blunted response to feedback information in 
depressive illness. Brain,  130(Pt 9), 2367 -2374.  
Steptoe, A., M. Hamer, et al. (2007). "The effects of acute psychological stress on circulating 
inflammatory factors in humans: a review and meta -analysis." Brain Behav Immun  21(7): 
901-912. 
Tremblay, L. K., Naranjo, C. A., Graham, S. J., Herrmann, N., Mayberg, H. S., Hevenor, S., et al. 
(2005). Functional neuroanatomical substrates of altered reward processing in major 
depressive disorder revealed by a dopaminergic probe. Arch. Gen. Psychiatr y, 62 (11), 1228 -
1236.  
Vreeburg, S. A., W. J. Hoogendijk, et al. (2009). "Major depressive disorder and hypothalamic -
pituitary -adrenal axis activity: results from a large cohort study." Arch Gen Psychiatry  
66(6): 617 -626. 
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellege n, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of 
positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol, 54 (6), 1063 -1070.  
Watson, D., Weber, K., Assenheimer, J. S., Clark, L. A., Strauss, M. E., & McCormick, R. A. (1995). 
Testing a tripartite model: I. Evaluating the convergent and discriminant validity of anxiety 
and depression symptom scales. J. Abnorm. Psychol., 104 (1), 3 -14. 
 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 35 
  Appendix 1 - Amisulpride Research  
 
For the study 2012 -P-002119  “Early Life Stress and Depression: Molecular and Functional 
Imaging Approache s”, we are using a 50 mg oral dose of Amisulpride to study the role of dopamine 
in reward processing. In this study, female subjects with and without a history of childhood sexual 
abuse and with and without current  MDD will receive either 50 mg of Amisulpride or placebo and 
will participate in an fMRI scan. Asymptomatic subjects will be dismissed from the study session 
after an assessment by the study physician (using the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale 
(AIMS)) 3 hours following the drug administration In a study by Jocham and colleagues (2011) 
entitled “Dopamine -Mediated Reinforcement Learning Signals in the Striatum and Ventromedial 
Prefrontal Cortex Underlie Value -Based Choices”,  investigators administered a 200 mg dose of 
Amisulpride to healthy participants. Subjects’ heart rate and blood pressure were measured before 
dismissal and if they felt well, they were dismissed. In consulting with Dr. Jocham, he clarified 
that subjects were dismissed immediately afte r the study if they did not feel anything unusual 
(roughly 4 hours after the 200 mg drug administration). Dr. Jocham reports that none of the 
participants reported any unusual symptoms, and therefore all were dismissed following the final 
heart rate and bl ood pressure assessment. Furthermore, in another recent study by Dr. Jocham, a 
400 mg dose of Amisulpride was administered to study participants, and no adverse reactions were 
observed or reported. Participants in this study were often unable to distinguis h between placebo 
and drug administration, despite the dose being eight times higher than the 50 mg we will be using 
in our study (Jocham et al., unpublished observation).  
In a study by Ersche and colleagues (2010) entitled “Influence of Compulsivity of D rug 
Abuse on Dopaminergic Modulation of Attentional Bias in Stimulant Dependence”, investigators 
administered a single oral 400 mg dose of Amisulpride to stimulant dependant and healthy 
controls. Participants were released following the completion of the s ession, which was 
approximately six hours after the Amisulpride administration. The participants were also contacted 
by telephone the following day by researchers to ensure no adverse events occurred following 
dismissal. They reported that the 400 mg dose was well tolerated, and no serious adverse events 
were reported in either of the populations.  
In a separate study in patients with OCD, the same group (Ersche et al., 2011) recently 
reported that a 400 -mg Amisulpride dose evoked unpleasant side effects in a subgroup of patients 
with OCD. Specifically, the study investigated the effect of the single 400 mg dose of Amisulpride 
on 22 OCD patients, 20 were being successfully treated with SSRIs, and the remaining 2 were not 
being treated with medication. The fol lowing side effects were reported:  
o   8 of the 20 SSRI -treated OCD patients experienced the subjective effects of akathisia 
(inner restlessness, agitation, feelings of anxiety, irritability, panic attacks or 
aggression)  (36.3% of total OCD patients)  
o   2 of the 8 patients who reported akathisia also reported aggravation of their OCD 
symptoms  (9% of total OCD patients)  
Critically, a diagnosis of OCD is an exclusionary criterion in our IRB protocol. 
Furthermore, use of SSRI’s within the previous two weeks is also an exclusionary criterion in our 
IRB protocol. Based on these recent findings by Ersche et al., both past and current OCD diagnosis 
will lead to exclusion to minimize the likelihood of drug -related side effects. In addition, all of the 
akathisia re ports and increased OCD symptoms reported by Ersche et al. were from participants 
who were currently being treated by SSRI’s. Our exclusion of participants who have taken SSRI’s 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 36 
 in the past two weeks will minimize the likelihood of the drug -related side ef fects reported by 
Ersche et al (2011) occurring in our study.  
After a systematic review of studies investigating Amisulpride use in healthy participants, 
Rosenzweig and colleagues (2002) concluded that “[Amisulpride] exhibits no significant 
detrimental ef fects in psychometric or memory tests up to the dose of 400 mg a day, inducing only 
mild impairment at high doses, whereas EEG data suggest an alertness enhancing effect at low 
doses (< 50 mg)” (p. 1). Fifty mg doses have been shown to be without clinicall y significant 
detrimental effects in a wide range of psychometric tests intended to explore attention, vigilance, 
sensory motor coordination and information processing. Single, 100 mg and 200mg doses were 
also free of deleterious effects on psychomotor per formance and body sway. Finally, a single 
administration of a high dose (400mg) did not cause any alteration in selective and divided 
attention, motor activity, sensory -motor coordination or vigilance in healthy volunteers. Based on 
their review, the autho rs concluded that “In most studies, Amisulpride did not show any sedative 
effects at dosages up to 400 mg/day in young subjects, or after a single 200 mg dose in elderly 
subjects” (p. 9).  
Hamon -Vilcot and colleagues (1998) administered a single dose of 50 mg Amisulpride to 
healthy volunteers aged 65 -79. Despite the fact that older people are especially sensitive to 
antipsychotics and many will experience extrapyramidal and anticholinergic effects, “no serious 
adverse events were recorded” (p. 407).  One sub ject vomited 9 h after dosing. A further subject 
complained of mild somnolence lasting 12 h, which occurred 4 hrs after dosing. No extrapyramidal 
symptoms were observed. Neither clinically significant hemodynamic variations nor ECG 
abnormalities were obser ved during the study. Overall, these findings indicate that a single dose 
of 50 mg Amisulpride was not associated with any clinically significant side effects. Importantly, 
to minimize age -related fluctuations in dopamine levels, our protocol proposes to i nclude only 
participants between the age of 20 and 45. Accordingly, the likelihood that sedation or nausea will 
occur will be further diminished.   
Samuels and colleagues (2006) administered to 16 healthy males a 50 -mg Amisulpride 
dose, and its functional effects were assessed at peak plasma levels. The following side effects 
were recorded.  
o   Sleepiness ( 3 mild, 1 moderate, 2 severe= 6 total)  37.50%  
o   Nausea (2 mild)       12.50%  
o   Vomiting 0        0% 
o   Headache (5 mild, 1 moderate= 6 total)    37.50% 
o   Dizziness (5 mild)       31.25%  
o   Irritated throat (1)       6.25%  
o   General tiredness (1)      6.25%  
 
References:  
Ersche KD, Bullmore ET, Craig KJ, Shabbir SS, Abbott S, Müller U, Ooi C, Suckling J, Barnes 
A, Sahakian BJ, Merlo -Pich EV, Robbins TW. Influence of compulsivity of drug abuse on 
dopaminergic modulation of attentional bias in stimulant depe ndence. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2010 
Jun;67(6):632 -44. 
 
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 37 
 Hamon -Vilcot B, Chaufour S, Deschamps C, Canal M, Zieleniuk I, Ahtoy  P, Chretien P, 
Rosenzweig P, Nasr A, Piette F. Safety and pharmacokinetics of a single oral dose of Amisulpride 
in healthy elderly volunteers. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1998 Jul;54(5):405 -9.  
 
Jocham G, Klein TA, Ullsperger M. Dopamine -mediated reinforcement learning signals in the 
striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex underlie value -based choices. J Neurosci. 2011 Feb 
2;31(5):1606 -13. 
 
Rosenzweig P, Canal M, Patat A, Bergougnan L, Zieleniuk I, Bianchetti G. A review of the 
pharmacokinetics, tolerability  and pharmacodynamics of Amisulpride in healthy volunteers. Hum 
Psychopharmacol. 2002 Jan;17(1):1 -13. 
 
Samuels ER, Hou RH, Langley RW, Szabadi E, Bradshaw CM. Comparison of pramipexole and 
Amisulpride on alertness, autonomic and endocrine functions in heal thy volunteers. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2006 Sep;187(4):498 -510.  
 
  
Version Date: 3/20/2017   Page 38 
 Appendix 2 – Postmortem Analysis  
For protocol 2012 -P-002593, interim analyses indicate that, relative to healthy controls, 
individuals with major depressive disorder (MDD) show reduced  dopamine transporter (DAT) 
binding in both the striatum and ventral tegmental area, as assessed by Positron Emission 
Tomography (PET). Prior studies assessing DAT density in MDD have yielded inconsistent 
findings, with some studies describing down -regulat ion of DAT densities (e.g., Sarchiapone et 
al. 2006), and others describing opposite results (e.g., Brunswick et al. 2003). In contrast, post -
mortem studies have provided more consistent evidence of reduced DAT levels in striatal 
regions (e.g., caudate, pu tamen) of depressed subjects (Bowden et al. 1997; Klimek et al. 2002).  
 
In addition, growing evidence highlights the potential role of the Nociceptin (NOC)/ Orphanin 
FQ Receptor in stress -related, depression -like phenotypes. For example, blockade of NOC 
receptors has been found to reverse depression -like phenotypes induced by chronic mild stress 
(Gavioli and Calo, 2013). In addition, NOC antagonists have been found to block the behavioral 
and neurobiological effects of acute and chronic stressors (Gavioli a nd Calo, 2013; Witkin et al., 
2014). In parallel, human PET (Lohith et al., 2014) and post -mortem autoradiography (Berthele 
et al., 2003) studies have described the highest distribution of NOC in the prefrontal cortex, 
anterior cingulate cortex and striatu m.  
 
To provide more conclusive tests of the potential role of DAT and NOC dysfunction in the 
pathophysiology of depression, we are collaborating with Dr. Berretta and her group, at McLean 
Hospital. Together we would like to perform analyses on post -mortem  tissues from individuals 
with MDD and demographically matched healthy controls. Post -mortem tissue will be obtained 
from the Douglas Bell Canada Brain Bank in Montreal, QC, Canada through our collaborator 
Gustavo Turecki, Professor and Chair, Department o f Psychiatry, McGill University. The 
Douglas Bell Canada Brain Bank collected these samples under their IRB protocol, which covers 
informed consent process for postmortem tissue donation, communication with donor families, 
tissue processing and information  de-identification and secure storage.  
Information provided by the Douglas Bell Canada Brain Bank to group at McLean Hospital will 
be strictly anonymized, so that no personal identifiable information will be included. Information 
provided will include dem ographic and clinical data strictly needed for meaningful 
interpretations of potential findings, such distributive diagnosis, available clinical assessment, 
cause of death, post -mortem interval and tissue characteristics, exposure to pharmacological and 
non-pharmacological treatment, and neuropathology report. This information will be kept at 
McLean in hard copy form in locked cabinets within locked offices and, electronically, using 
access -restricted encrypted computers, backed up using Syncplicity (FIPS 1 40-2 compliant).  
Tissue samples will be coded and stored in locked freezers within the Mailman Research Center 
at McLean Hospital. Under no circumstances, they will be shared with investigators outside this 
collaboration withou t prior permission from the Douglas Bell Canada Brain Bank.  
 