[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 SYNOPSIS 5
2I N T R O D U C T I O N 8
2.1 B ACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 8
2.2 B ENEFITS AND RISKS TO SUBJECTS 8
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS 9
3.1 O BJECTIVES 9
3.2 P RIMARY ENDPOINT 10
3.3 S ECONDARY AND ADDITIONAL ENDPOINTS 10
3.4 S AFETY ENDPOINTS 10
3.5 P HARMACOKINETIC AND IMMUNOGENICITY ENDPOINTS 11
3.6 B IOMARKER ENDPOINTS 11
4 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 11
4.1 O VERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN 11
4.2 D ISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN 13
5 STUDY ACTIVITIES 14
5.1 E LIGIBILITY CRITERIA 14
5.2 C ONTRACEPTION RECOMMENDATIONS 17
5.3 P ROHIBITED MEDICATIONS AND THERAPY 18
5.4 P RIOR AND CONCOMITANT THERAPY 18
5.5 W ITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS AND DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY 19
5.6 F OLLOW -UP FOR SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL FROM STUDY 20
5.7 S TUDY DRUG 21
5.8 R ANDOMIZATION /DRUG ASSIGNMENT 22
5.9 P ROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 23
6 SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS 23
6.1 C OMPLAINTS AND ADVERSE EVENTS 23
6.2 T OXICITY MANAGEMENT 27
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE 30
7.1 S TATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 30
7.2 D EFINITION FOR ANALYSIS POPULATIONS 30
7.3 S TATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR EFFICACY 31
7.4 S TATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR SAFETY 33
7.5 S TATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF PHARMACOKINETIC AND IMMUNOGENITICY DATA 33
7.6 S TATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF BIOMARKER DATA 33
7.7 I NTERIM ANALYSIS 33
8E T H I C S 34
8.1 I NDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE /INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD (IEC/IRB) 34
8.2 E THICAL CONDUCT OF THE STUDY 34
8.3 S UBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 34
9 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM COMPLETION 34
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE 34
11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY 35
12 REFERENCES 35
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. IDENTITY OF INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT 22
TABLE 2. SPECIFIC TOXICITY MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES FOR ABNORMAL LABORATORY VALUES 28
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. STUDY SCHEMATIC 12
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS 36
APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 39
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIGNATORIES 40
APPENDIX D. ADDITIONAL ENDPOINT/ASSESSMENT DEFINITIONS 41
APPENDIX E. JOINT EVALUATION WORKSHEET EXAMPLE 43
APPENDIX F. REPORTED OUTCOMES VAS 44
APPENDIX G. HEALTH ASSESSMENT QUESTIONNAIRE DISABILITY INDEX 45
APPENDIX H. 36-ITEM SHORT FORM HEALTH SURVEY SAMPLE 46
APPENDIX I. RHEUMATOLOGY COMMON TOXICITY CRITERIA V.2.0 47
APPENDIX J. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE 61
APPENDIX K. SUMMARY OF CHANGES 65
APPENDIX L. OPERATIONS MANUAL 68
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2 INTRODUCTION
2.1 Background and Rationale
Why Is This Study Being Conducted
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α antagonists reduce the signs and symptoms of disease by reducing 
inflammation and limiting the progression of tissue destruction and are considered effective therapies 
with established safety profiles in patients with immune-mediated inflammatory diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA).  Nevertheless, TNF α antagonists as well as other biologics and targeted 
synthetic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) provide 50% improvement in arthritis scores (American College of Rheumatology 50% improvement criteria [ACR50]) for fewer than half of RA subjects, even in combination with methotrexate (MTX), indicating that there remains an unmet clinical need for improved therapies.
Glucocorticoid receptor modulators (GRMs) are potent drugs for treating many inflammatory diseases.  
In RA, GRMs such as prednisone are highly effective at reducing inflammation and fatigue as well as relieving pain.  However, the administration of GRMs is limited due to their side effect profile including (but not limited to) hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis suppression, increased rates of bone 
fracture due to osteoporosis, hyperglycemia, glaucoma, skin thinning and weight gain.
1  Thus, the full 
efficacy of GRM therapy is not achieved with existing agents due to systemic side effects.
ABBV-3373 is an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) composed of adalimumab (the active component of 
Humira®) conjugated to A-1677770, a proprietary, highly potent GRM (also referred to as the payload) 
being developed for the treatment of immune-mediated inflammatory diseases including RA.  This 
adalimumab/GRM ADC has the potential to deliver a highly potent anti-inflammatory payload selectively to the activated immune cells that express transmembrane TNF, and meanwhile to minimize systemic exposure to the free payload GRM.  Therefore, the adalimumab/GRM ADC is promising as a novel therapeutic agent which can achieve transformational efficacy relative to adalimumab while reducing side effects caused by free GRM systemic exposure.
Clinical Hypothesis
ABBV-3373 is safe and well-tolerated and provides superior efficacy in subjects with moderately to severely active RA on background MTX compared to adalimumab.
2.2 Benefits and Risks to Subjects
The clinical efficacy of TNF inhibitors and GRMs in the treatment of RA is well established.  Based on the preclinical data discussed in the ABBV-3373 Investigator's Brochure,
2ABBV-3373 is expected to 
demonstrate therapeutic benefit in treatment of RA and other immune-mediated inflammatory diseases with a favorable safety profile.  Preclinical toxicology of ABBV-3373 suggests that the potential risks to human subjects receiving ABBV-3373 treatment are consistent with known effects of adalimumab and glucocorticoids (GCs).  ABBV-3373 was tested in a Phase 1 single ascending dose (SAD) study in healthy volunteers in which 6 cohorts of subcutaneous (SC) (30, 100, 300 mg) and intravenous (IV) (30, 300, 900 mg) successfully completed dosing.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Medical review of the available safety data from the Phase 1 study did not identify any unexpected risk 
or trend to the healthy volunteer population.  All single doses tested to date have been well tolerated.  For further details, please see the ABBV-3373 Investigator's Brochure.
2
In clinical settings, TNF antagonists and GCs have been associated with an increased risk of serious infections due to bacterial, mycobacterial, invasive fungal, viral, parasitic, or other opportunistic 
pathogens.  Opportunistic infections have included tuberculosis (TB) and histoplasmosis.  Patients will 
be closely monitored during the clinical study for any signs of infection.
Tumor necrosis factor antagonists have also been associated with an increased risk for malignancy 
(including lymphoma), hepatitis B virus (HBV) reactivation, worsening or new onset heart failure, and 
rarely central nervous system demyelinating disease, pancytopenia including aplastic anemia, and lupus-like syndrome.
The risk of hypersensitivity reaction or other post-dose systemic reaction for humans who receive 
multiple doses of ABBV-3373 is considered a potential risk.  During Study M16-560, 1 case of anaphylactic shock was observed following repeated eow IV (over 3 minute bolus injection) administration of ABBV-3373.  The event was assessed by the investigator and AbbVie to be reasonably related to study drug.  The administration of biologics may lead to such reactions; therefore, patients will be closely monitored during and post drug administrations.
Hypertension is one of the most commonly reported events for GCs in patients, especially with high 
doses of GCs.  Therefore, blood pressure and other vital signs will be monitored during the trial.
Based on the above considerations, the risk to RA patients receiving multiple doses of ABBV-3373 is 
considered manageable and acceptable.  In addition, based on the population and disease being studied and the anticipation that COVID-19 related risks are not expected to differ substantially between study subjects and the broader population of subjects receiving treatment for RA, no change to the benefit/risk balance for subjects in this study is expected.
3 STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
3.1 Objectives
Primary
1. To assess the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of ABBV-3373 administered every other week 
(eow) intravenously (IV) in subjects with moderately to severely active RA on background MTX.
2. To compare clinical efficacy of ABBV-3373 with adalimumab and to test the concept that an 
anti-TNF antibody-drug-conjugate has the potential to provide superior efficacy than the traditional anti-TNF antibody in RA.
Secondary
3. To compare adalimumab with synthetic placebo control to establish assay sensitivity.
4. To assess the pharmacokinetics (PK), pharmacodynamics, and immunogenicity of ABBV-3373.5. To assess the duration of the treatment effect of ABBV-3373 after discontinuation.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.2 Primary Endpoint
The primary endpoint is the change in disease activity score (DAS)28 (C-reactive protein [CRP]) from 
Baseline (BL) at Week 12.
3.3 Secondary and Additional Endpoints
Secondary Endpoints
1. Change in clinical disease activity index (CDAI) from BL at Week 12 
2. Change in simplified disease activity index (SDAI) from BL at Week 12 3. Change in disease activity score (28 joints) (DAS28) erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) from 
BL at Week 12 
4. Achievement of low disease activity (LDA) (DAS28 [CRP] ≤3.2) at Week 12 
5. Achievement of American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 50 at Week 12 
Additional Endpoints
1. Change from BL in DAS28 (CRP) and DAS28 (ESR) at all visits2. Change from BL in CDAI at all visits3. Change from BL in SDAI at all visits4. ACR20/50/70 response rates at all visits
5. Change from BL in individual components of ACR response at all visits
6. Achievement of LDA at all visits.  Low disease activity is defined as DAS28 (CRP) ≤3.2, 
DAS28(ESR) ≤ 3.2, CDAI ≤  10, SDAI ≤  11
7. Achievement of clinical remission at all visits.  Clinical remission is defined as DAS28 (CRP) < 2.6, 
DAS28(ESR) < 2.6, CDAI ≤ 2.8, SDAI ≤ 3.3
8. Change in Short Form-36 (SF-36) from BL at Week 129. Achievement of minimal clinically important difference (MCID) in change from BL in Health 
Assessment Questionnaire Disability Index (HAQ-DI) (defined as change from BL in Health 
Assessment Questionnaire ≤ –0.22) at all visits among subjects who have HAQ ≥ 0.22 at BL
10. Achievement of response (such as LDA) based on DAS28 (CRP), CDAI, or SDAI over time from 
Week 12 to Week 24 among subjects who have achieved DAS28 (CRP), CDAI, or SDAI response at Week 12
Additional endpoint definitions are provided in Appendix D .
3.4 Safety Endpoints
The following safety evaluations will be performed during the study:
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1. Treatment-emergent adverse events, serious adverse events (SAEs), adverse events (AEs) 
leading to discontinuation, AEs of special interest
2. Percent of subjects meeting potentially clinically significant criteria for vital signs, laboratory 
variables, physical examination findings and electrocardiogram (ECG) interval variables
3.5 Pharmacokinetic and Immunogenicity Endpoints
Serum or plasma concentrations of the conjugated ADC (ABBV-3373), total antibody, free payload 
A-1677770, and adalimumab (in the comparator arm) will be determined during the treatment period and drug washout period.  If sufficient data are available from the optional intensive PK sampling group, terminal elimination half-life may be calculated and reported.
Anti-drug antibody (ADA) to either ABBV-3373 or adalimumab will be evaluated and if confirmed 
positive, titers will be measured.  If required, samples will be analyzed for neutralizing antibodies (nAb).
3.6 Biomarker Endpoints
Biospecimens (e.g., blood, serum, and plasma) will be collected at specified time points ( Appendix J) 
throughout the study to evaluate known and/or novel disease-related or drug-related biomarkers.
The analyses of biomarker samples will include but are not limited to proteins and genetic markers that 
will help to understand the subject's disease and response to study treatments.  Changes in cortisol level 
under ABBV-3373 treatment and adalimumab will be assessed.  Genes of interest will include those 
associated with PK, genes within the target pathway, or other genes believed to be related to RA and other inflammatory diseases.  Samples for ribonucleic acid (RNA) and proteomics will be used to research if any genetic variants result in changes to gene expression or protein concentrations.  Biomarker samples will be collected and analyzed from all subjects, unless precluded by local regulations or restrictions.  For any samples collected in Germany, the research will be restricted to study drug and RA.
4 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan
This is a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, adalimumab active-controlled (12-week) Phase 2astudy to assess the safety, tolerability, PK, pharmacodynamics, immunogenicity and efficacy following multiple IV administrations of ABBV-3373 or multiple SC injections of adalimumab in subjects with RA on background MTX.  In the actively controlled period of the first 12 weeks of treatment, 45 subjects will receive either ABBV-3373 100 mg IV and the matching placebo for adalimumab SC eow or in the control arm the matching placebo for ABBV-3373 IV and adalimumab 80 mg SC eow (double-dummy) according to a 2:1 ratio.  Thereafter all subjects enter a 12-week double-blind extension period.  At Week 12, the administration of ABBV-3373 will stop (i.e., the last dose of ABBV-3373 will be given at Week 10) to assess the durability of the observed clinical effects up to 24 weeks.  To keep blinding of the study beyond Week 12, the subjects randomized to ABBV-3373 will receive placebo injections, whereas 
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.subjects randomized into the adalimumab arm will continue their 80 mg dosing until Week 22.  At 
Week 12 and within the blinded extension period subjects who have not achieved at least a 20% 
improvement in both their swollen joint count (SJC) and tender joint count (TJC) based on 28 joint 
assessment compared with BL may be discontinued from the study at the discretion of the Investigator.  Subsequently, standard of care may be administered at the discretion of the investigator.
After all endpoints are assessed at Week 24, a telephone contact is planned to follow up on safety 
70 days after the last dose.
After all ongoing subjects complete the Week 12 study visit, the primary analysis for the ABBV-3373 
cohort will be conducted to assess the primary/secondary endpoints and safety of this actively 
controlled period.  A final analysis will be conducted after all subjects have completed Week 24 plus their safety follow-up.  To maintain integrity of the trial, the study sites and subjects will remain blinded until the final analysis is completed.
The schematic of the study is shown in Figure 1 .  Further details regarding study procedures are located 
in Appendix K .
Figure 1. Study Schematic
∆DAS28(CRP) = change in disease activity score (DAS)28(C-reactive protein [CRP]); EOW = every other week; IV = intravenous; 
SC = subcutaneous

STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.See Section 5.1for information regarding eligibility criteria.  See Section 5.8for stratification factors for 
each cohort.
Pharmacokinetic Sampling
For ABBV-3373, blood samples for PK assessments will be collected according to the assessment 
schedule in Appendix J.  Data from the first 12 subjects treated for at least 4 doses will be used in the PK 
interim analyses.
In addition, optional PK samples will be collected from subjects who consent to participate in the more 
intensive sampling group to provide data for PK characterization following repeated administrations.  For these subjects, in addition to the standard sampling schedule, blood samples at the following time points will also be collected:  Day 72, Day 73, Week 11, and Week 14.
4.2 Discussion of Study Design
Choice of Control Group
ABBV-3373 is an ADC, composed of adalimumab (the active component of Humira®) conjugated toA-1677770, a proprietary, highly potent GRM.  In order to assess how the conjugation of adalimumab with the GRM impacts safety, tolerability and in particular whether it will provide additional efficacy versus (vs.) adalimumab, a direct comparison between the ADC and adalimumab is needed.  The chosen study design with adalimumab as the positive control group allows such direct comparison.  In addition, to compare clinical efficacy of the ADC with placebo control, and to address assay sensitivity, a synthetic 
placebo arm will be created with the propensity score matching approach using historical placebo 
subjects from similar trials with subject-level data.
Appropriateness of Measurements
Standard statistical, clinical, and laboratory procedures will be utilized in this study.  All efficacy measurements in this study are standard for assessing disease activity in subjects with RA.  All clinical and laboratory procedures in this study are standard and generally accepted.
Suitability of Subject Population
The specific population chosen was based on the unmet medical need of subjects as defined in Section 5.1.
Selection of Doses in the Study
Based on the clinical hypothesis, the ADC ABBV-3373 targets the activated immune cells that express transmembrane TNF to deliver the highly potent GRM selectively, therefore it has the potential to provide superior efficacy compared to a traditional anti-TNF antibody such as adalimumab.  The dose of 100 mg IV eow for ABBV-3373 is selected to provide a similar systemic exposure to 80 mg adalimumab SC eow, which is a dose previously tested in RA subjects and twice as high as the recommended clinical 
regimen of 40 mg adalimumab SC eow.  The rationale for selecting this higher dose is to increase tissue 
penetration of ABBV-3373 to successfully engage its intended target of transmembrane TNF on activated immune cells.  Furthermore, the doses selected for ABBV-3373 and adalimumab are expected to generate similar systemic exposure to ensure a fair comparison between the two.  Finally, 100 mg IV 
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.ABBV-3373 is well within the range of doses that have been safely tested and well tolerated in the 
first-in-human SAD study.  Historical data with adalimumab 80 mg eow or even higher in Phase 1 and 2 
studies with adalimumab in the presence of MTX3,4or 40 mg weekly as monotherapy in Phase 2 and 3 
studies5,6have not shown any safety concerns.
Study Duration
For the patient population selected and the type of study drug tested, a 12-week primary endpoint to 
analyze the improvement of signs and symptoms and to assess the safety and tolerability of ABBV-3373 
is appropriate.  Preclinical data from a mouse collagen induced arthritis model2have shown a long 
lasting effect of the ADC in comparison to adequate control groups.  Therefore, to assess the durability 
of the achieved clinical response at Week 12 in ABBV-3373-treated RA subjects, the subjects will be followed closely up to Week 24. While the maintenance of responses of ABBV-3373 will be monitored (under continuous placebo injections), subjects in the comparator arm will continue their adalimumab dosing to keep the blinding of the study.
5 STUDY ACTIVITIES
5.1 Eligibility Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria in order to be included in the study.  Anything other than a positive response to the questions below will result in exclusion from study participation.
Consent
1. Subjects or their legally authorized representative must voluntarily sign and date an informed consent, approved by an independent ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB), prior to the initiation of any screening or study-specific procedures.
Demographic and Laboratory Assessments
2. Adult male or female , between 18 and 75 years of age inclusive at Screening.
3. Body mass index (BMI) is ≥  18.0 to ≤  39.9 kg/m2after rounding to the nearest tenth.  Body 
mass index is calculated as weight in kg divided by the square of height measured in meters.
4.Laboratory values meeting the following criteria within the screening period prior to the first 
dose of study drug:
!Serum values of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 
< 2.5 × upper limit of normal (ULN);
!Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) > 1,500/ μL;
!Creatinine < 1.5 × ULN.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
5. Subject must have a negative test result for hepatitis A virus immunoglobulin M (HAV-IgM), 
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), HBc Ab (subjects who have been vaccinated against 
hepatitis B [HB] and are HBs Ab positive may be enrolled), hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody (if 
Hepatitis C RNA level is undetectable at Screening, the subject can participate in this trial), and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Ab at Screening.
6. Subject is willing and able to comply with procedures required in this protocol.
Diagnosis and Disease Activity
7. Subject has the clinical diagnosis of RA for > 3 months based on the 1987 ACR classification criteria or 2010 ACR/European League against Rheumatism (EULAR) criteria.
8. Subject meets the following disease activity criteria:  ≥ 4 swollen joints (based on 28 joint 
count) and ≥ 4 tender joints (based on 28 joint count) at Screening and BL Visits; and 
DAS28(CRP) ≥ 3.2 at Screening.
9. Incomplete response to MTX.  Subjects must have been on oral or parenteral MTX therapy ≥3 months and on a stable prescription of 15 to 25 mg/week (or ≥ 10 mg/week in subjects 
intolerant of MTX at doses ≥ 15 mg/week) for ≥ 4 weeks prior to the first dose of study drug.  
Subject must be expected to be able to continue on stable dose of MTX for the duration of study participation.
Subject History
10. Subject must not have been previously exposed to adalimumab or other anti-TNF biologics.
11. Subject must not have been previously exposed to non-anti-TNF biologics or targeted 
synthetic DMARDs for RA, with exception of subjects exposed for less than 3 months and terminated not due to lack of efficacy or intolerability.
12. No history of persistent chronic or active infection(s) requiring hospitalization or treatment 
with parenteral anti-infectives within 30 days, or oral anti-infectives within 14 days prior to the first dose of study drug administration.
13. No history of demyelinating disease (including myelitis) or neurologic symptoms suggestive 
of demyelinating disease.
14. No history of moderate to severe congestive heart failure (CHF) (New York Heart Association 
Class III or IV).
15. No history or evidence of active TB disease or evidence of risk factors for latent TB infection 
OR a history of positive TB skin test or QuantiFERON-TB Gold In-Tube (GIT assay) within 90 days prior to study drug administration.
16. No history of pre-existing hyperglycemia (HbA1c > 6.5%), no history of osteoporotic 
fractures, and no high fracture risk (severe osteoporosis).
17. No history of pre-existing glaucoma, severe acne, osteonecrosis, uncontrolled hypertension, 
or peripheral edema.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
18. No history of any malignancy except for successfully treated non-melanoma skin cancer 
(NMSC) or localized carcinoma in situ of the cervix.
19. No history of clinically significant (per investigator's judgment) drug or alcohol abuse within 
the last 6 months.
20. No history of clinically significant medical conditions or any other reason that the 
investigator determines would interfere with the subject's participation in this study or would 
make the subject an unsuitable candidate to receive study drug.
21. No history of an allergic reaction or significant sensitivity to any constituents of the study 
drug, or an anaphylactic reaction to any agent (e.g., food products and bee sting), or a major 
reaction to any immunoglobulin G-containing product.
22. Is not currently enrolled in another clinical study, and has not been previously enrolled in this study.
Contraception
23. For all females of child-bearing potential; a negative serum pregnancy test at the Screening 
Visit and a negative urine pregnancy test at BL prior to the first dose of study drug.
24. Female subjects of childbearing potential must practice at least 1 protocol-specified method 
of birth control , that is effective from Study Day 1 through at least 70 days after the last dose of 
study drug.  Female subjects of non-childbearing potential do not need to use birth control.
25. Female who is not pregnant, breastfeeding, or considering becoming pregnant during the 
study or for approximately 70 days after the last dose of study drug.
Concomitant Medications
26. Subject must have discontinued all conventional synthetic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (csDMARDs), except for MTX.  The washout periods for csDMARDs prior to the first dose of study are specified in Section 5.4.
27. Subject must not be on systemic GCs except for stable doses of GC ( ≤ 7.5 mg/d prednisone 
equivalent) in preceding 3 weeks prior to BL.
28. Subject must not have been treated with any investigational drug within 30 days or 5 half-
lives of the drug (whichever is longer) prior to the first dose of study drug.
29. Subject must not have been treated with any intra-articular, intramuscular, IV, trigger point 
or tender point, intra-bursa, or intra-tendon sheet corticosteroids in the preceding 8 weeks prior to the first dose of the study drug.
30. Subject must not have received any live vaccine within 4 weeks prior to the first dose of 
study drug, or expected need of live vaccination during study participation including at least 12 weeks after the last dose of study drug.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.2 Contraception Recommendations
Contraception Requirements for Females
Subjects must follow the following contraceptive guidelines as specified:
!Females, Non-Childbearing Potential
Females do not need to use birth control during or following study drug treatment if considered 
of non-childbearing potential due to meeting any of the following criteria:
!Postmenopausal, age > 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an 
alternative medical cause.
!Postmenopausal, age ≤ 55 years with no menses for 12 or more months without an 
alternative medical cause AND an FSH level > 40 IU/L.
!Permanently surgically sterile (bilateral oophorectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, or hysterectomy).
!Females, of Childbearing Potential
!Females of childbearing potential must avoid pregnancy while taking study drug(s) and for at least 70 days after the last dose of study drug.
!Females must commit to one of the following methods of birth control:
!Combined (estrogen and progestogen containing) hormonal birth control (oral, 
intravaginal, transdermal, injectable) associated with inhibition of ovulation initiated at least 30 days prior to study BL Day 1.
!Progestogen-only hormonal birth control (oral, injectable, implantable) associated with inhibition of ovulation initiated at least 30 days prior to study BL Day 1.
!Bilateral tubal occlusion/ligation (can be via hysteroscopy, provided a hysterosalpingogram confirms success of the procedure).
!Intrauterine device (IUD).
!Intrauterine hormone-releasing system (IUS).
!Vasectomized partner (provided the partner has received medical confirmation of the surgical success of the vasectomy and is the sole sexual partner of the trial subject).
!Practice true abstinence, defined as:  Refraining from heterosexual intercourse when this is in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject (periodic abstinence [e.g., calendar, ovulation, symptothermal, post-ovulation methods] and withdrawal are not acceptable).
If required per local practices, male or female condom with or without spermicide OR cap, diaphragm or sponge with spermicide should be used in addition to one of the highly effective birth control methods listed above (excluding true abstinence).
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Male subjects who are sexually active with a female partner of childbearing potential, must agree to use 
condoms, even if the male subject has undergone a successful vasectomy, from Study Day 1 through at least 70 days after the last dose of study drug.
Contraception recommendations related to use of concomitant therapies prescribed (e.g., MTX) should 
be based on the local label.
5.3 Prohibited Medications and Therapy
The following medications are prohibited throughout the duration of the study:
!Systemic GCs except stable doses of GC ( ≤ 7.5 mg/d prednisone equivalent) at BL, which have to 
be tapered off completely by end of Week 4.
!All csDMARDs, except MTX
!All targeted synthetic DMARDs:  Examples include but are not limited to the following:  Xeljanz® (tofacitinib), Olumiant® (baricitinib), Rinvoq® (upadacitinib)
!All biologic therapies.  Examples include but are not limited to the following:  Humira® (adalimumab), Enbrel® (etanercept), Remicade® (infliximab), Kineret® (anakinra), Rituxan® (rituximab), Cimzia® (certolizumab pegol), Simponi® (golimumab), Actemra® (tocilizumab), Raptiva® (efalizumab), Tysabri® (natalizumab), Stelara® (ustekinumab), Benlysta® (belimumab), Orencia® (abatacept), Prolia® (denosumab)
!Any intra-articular, intramuscular, parenteral, trigger point or tender point, intra-bursa, or intra-tendon sheet corticosteroids
!Any investigational drugs
!Any live vaccination
5.4 Prior and Concomitant Therapy
Any medication or vaccine (including over-the-counter or prescription medicines, vitamins, and/or herbal supplements) that the subject is receiving at the time of enrollment or receives during the study 
must be recorded along with reasons for use; dates of administration, including start and end dates; and 
dosage information including dose, route, and frequency on the appropriate electronic case report form (eCRF) through the post-treatment contact (70 day follow-up call).
Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAID) and low potency analgesics (i.e., tramadol, codeine, 
hydrocodeine, or propoxyphene) should continue to be used for the same reason and same dose each time but should not be taken within 24 hours prior to any study visit to avoid bias in outcome measurements.
Any questions regarding concomitant or prior therapy should be raised to the AbbVie emergency 
contact.  Information regarding potential drug interactions with ABBV-3373 can be located in the ABBV-3373 Investigator's Brochure.
2
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.progression, lack of response to treatment, an AE, safety concerns, or failure to comply with the 
protocol.  See Section 6.2for toxicity management criteria.
Subjects will have study drug discontinued immediately if any of the following occur:
!Clinically significant abnormal laboratory results or AEs, which rule out continuation of the study drug, as determined by the Investigator or the AbbVie Therapeutic Area Medical Director (TA MD).
!Serious infections (e.g., sepsis) that cannot be adequately controlled within 2 weeks by anti-infective treatment or would put the subject at risk for continued participation in the trial as determined by the Investigator.
!The Investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject.
!The subject requests withdrawal from the study.
!Eligibility criteria violation was noted after the subject started study drug, when continuation of the study drug would place the subject at risk as determined by the AbbVie TA MD.
!Introduction of prohibited medications or dosages when continuation of the study drug would place the subject at risk, as determined by the AbbVie TA MD.
!Subject is non-compliant with TB prophylaxis (if applicable) or develops active TB at any time during the study.
!The subject becomes pregnant while on study drug.
!Malignancy, except for localized NMSC or carcinoma in-situ of the cervix.
!Subject is significantly non-compliant with study procedures which would put the subject at risk for continued participation in the trial as determined by the Investigator or the AbbVie TA MD.
!The subject develops anaphylactic reactions or anaphylactic shock.
In order to minimize missing data for efficacy and safety assessments, subjects who prematurely discontinue study participation should complete a Premature Discontinuation (PD) visit.
For subjects to be considered lost to follow-up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain 
information on the subject's final status.  At a minimum, 2 telephone calls must be made and 1 certified letter must be sent and documented in the subject's source documentation.
AbbVie may terminate this study prematurely, either in its entirety or at any site.  The investigator may 
also stop the study at his/her site if he/she has safety concerns.  If AbbVie terminates the study for safety reasons, AbbVie will promptly notify the investigator.
5.6 Follow-Up for Subject Withdrawal from Study
To minimize missing data for efficacy and safety assessments, subjects who prematurely discontinue study drug treatment should continue to be followed for all regularly scheduled visits, unless subjects have decided to discontinue the study participation entirely (withdrawal of informed consent).  Subjects 
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.should be advised on the continued scientific importance of their data even if they discontinue 
treatment with study drug early.
If a subject prematurely discontinues study participation (withdrawal of informed consent), the 
procedures outlined for the PD visit should be completed as soon as possible, preferably within 2 weeks.  In addition, if subject is willing, a 70-day follow-up phone call after the last dose of study drug will becompleted to ensure all treatment-emergent AEs/SAEs have been resolved.
All attempts must be made to determine the date of the last study drug dose and the primary reason for 
discontinuation of study drug or study participation.  The information will be recorded on the 
appropriate eCRF page.  However, these procedures should not interfere with the initiation of any new 
treatments or therapeutic modalities that the Investigator feels are necessary to treat the subject's condition.  Following discontinuation of study drug, the subject should be treated in accordance with the Investigator's best clinical judgment irrespective of whether the subject decides to continue participation in the study.
Biomarker Research
In the event a subject withdraws consent from the clinical study, biomarker research will continue unless the subject explicitly requests analysis to be stopped.  When AbbVie is informed that samples are withdrawn from research, samples will not be analyzed, no new biomarker analysis data will be collected for the withdrawn subject or added to the existing data or database(s).  Data generated from clinical study and/or biomarker research, before subject withdrawal of consent, will remain part of the study results.
5.7 Study Drug
ABBV-3373 or matching placebo manufactured by AbbVie will be administered intravenously beginning on Day 1 (BL).  Adalimumab or matching placebo manufactured by AbbVie will be administered subcutaneously beginning on Day 1 (BL).  The administration of ABBV-3373 and matching placebo by venipuncture has to be given slowly over 15 – 30 minutes (via infusion line or infusion pump; the study drug can be diluted in 50 – 100 mL isotonic saline solution for this administration).  Subjects have to be observed for at least 30 minutes thereafter.
AbbVie will provide study drug for ABBV-3373 or matching placebo and adalimumab or matching 
placebo.  AbbVie-provided study drug should not be substituted or alternately sourced unless otherwise directed by AbbVie.
ABBV-3373 and matching placebo and adalimumab or matching placebo will be packaged in cartons 
with quantities sufficient to accommodate study design.  Each kit will be labeled per local requirements and this label must remain affixed to the kit.  Upon receipt, study drug should be stored as specified on the label and kept in a secure location.  Each kit will contain a unique kit number.  This kit number is assigned to a subject via interactive response technology (IRT) and encodes the appropriate study drug to be dispensed at the subject's corresponding study visit.  Site staff will complete all blank spaces on the label before dispensing to subjects.  Study drug will only be used for the conduct of this study.
AbbVie will provide instructions for drug preparation ( Table 1 ).
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 1. Identity of Investigational Product
Study Drug Dosage Form StrengthRoute of 
Administration Manufacturer
ABBV-3373 Lyophilized powder 
for solution for 
infusion in vials50 mg/mL when 
reconstituted with 
1.2 mL of sterile water 
for injection; 
1 mL extractable 
volume per vial; further 
dilution into saline for 
IV infusionIV AbbVie
Placebo for ABBV-3373 Lyophilized powder 
for solution for 
infusion in vialsN/A IV AbbVie
Adalimumab Pre-filled syringe 80 mg/0.8 mL SC AbbVie
Placebo for 
AdalimumabPre-filled syringe N/A SC AbbVie
IV = intravenous; N/A = not applicable; SC = subcutaneous
5.8 Randomization/Drug Assignment
All subjects will be assigned a unique identification number by the IRT at the screening visit.  For 
subjects who rescreen, the screening number assigned by the IRT at the initial screening visit should be used.  The IRT will assign a randomization number that will encode the subject's treatment group assignment according to the randomization schedule generated by the statistics department at AbbVie.
Randomization will be stratified by factors listed in Section 4.1.
Forty-five subjects will be randomized to either the ABBV-3373 or adalimumab control arm according to 
a 2:1 ratio.  Randomization will be stratified by the following factors:
!Stratification by current use of systemic GC ( ≤7.5 mg/d prednisone equivalent) for treatment of 
RA at BL (yes/no).
!Stratification by prior exposure to non-anti-TNF biologics or targeted synthetic DMARDs (< 3 months and terminated not due to lack of efficacy or intolerance) (yes/no).
All AbbVie personnel with direct oversight of the conduct and management of the trial (with the exception of AbbVie Drug Supply Management Team), the investigator, study site personnel, and the subject will remain blinded to each subject's treatment throughout the study.  To maintain the blind, the ABBV-3373 vials and matching placebo vials, as well as adalimumab PFS and matching placebo PFS, will be provided for the study.  The IRT will provide access to unblinded subject treatment information in the case of a medical emergency.  The procedure for breaking the blind is referenced in the IRT Training Slides provided to each study site.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.AbbVie must be notified before the blind is broken unless identification of the study drug is required for 
medical emergency, i.e., situation in which the knowledge of the specific blinded treatment will affect 
the immediate management of the subject/patient's conditions (e.g., antidote is available).  AbbVie 
must then be notified within 24 hours of the blind being broken.  See Appendix K for contact 
information, including 24/7 AbbVie emergency contact coverage.
5.9 Protocol Deviations
The investigator is responsible for complying with all protocol requirements, written instructions, and applicable laws regarding protocol deviations.  Protocol deviations are prohibited except when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects.  If a protocol deviation occurs (or is 
identified), the investigator is responsible for notifying IEC/independent review board (IRB), regulatory 
authorities (as applicable), and AbbVie.
6 SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Complaints and Adverse Events
Complaints
A complaint is any written, electronic, or oral communication that alleges deficiencies related to the physical characteristics, identity, quality, purity, potency, durability, reliability, safety, effectiveness, or performance of a product/device.  Complaints associated with any component of this investigational product must be reported to AbbVie.
Product Complaint
A product complaint is any complaint related to the biologic or drug component of the product or to the medical device component(s).
For a product this may include, but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, labeling discrepancies/inadequacies in the labeling/instructions (e.g., printing illegible), missing components/product, device not working properly, or packaging issues.
Product complaints concerning the investigational product and/or device must be reported to AbbVie 
within 1 business day of the study site's knowledge of the event.  Product complaints occurring during the study will be followed up to a satisfactory conclusion.
Medical Complaints/Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
An AE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment.  An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not the event is considered causally related to the use of the product.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Persistent or Significant 
Disability/IncapacityAn event that results in a condition that substantially interferes with the activities of daily living of a study subject.  Disability is not intended to 
include experiences of relatively minor medical significance such as 
headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, and accidental trauma (e.g., sprained ankle).
Important Medical Event Requiring Medical or Surgical Intervention to Prevent Serious OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately life-threatening or result in death or hospitalization, but based on medical judgment may jeopardize the subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent any of the outcomes listed above (i.e., death of subject, life threatening, hospitalization, prolongation of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or significant disability/incapacity).  Additionally, any elective or spontaneous abortion or stillbirth is considered an important medical event.  Examples of such events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse.
All adverse events reported from the time of study drug administration until 70 days after discontinuation of study drug administration will be collected, whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the subject.  In addition, serious adverse events and protocol-related nonserious adverse events will be collected from the time the subject signs the study-specific informed consent.
AbbVie will be responsible for Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) reporting for 
the Investigational Medicinal Product (IMP) in accordance with global and local requirements.
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special interest that may 
indicate a trend or risk to subjects.
Serious Adverse Event Reporting
AbbVie is committed to continue to collect safety information including those events that may occur in this trial in order to confirm this established safety profile and to identify any unknown potential 
adverse reactions, rare events, and those events with a long latency.  AbbVie is participating in a Food 
and Drug Administration-requested, TNF inhibitor class wide exploration of the rare appearance of malignancy in subjects/patients who are 30 years of age or younger at the time of diagnosis.  The risk of malignancy in this age group has not been established and is difficult to study due to its rarity.  AbbVie appreciates your attention to the additional reporting requirements needed in this unlikely event.  In the event of an SAE, and additionally, any nonserious event of malignancy in subjects 30 years of age and younger, whether related to SC study drug or not, the physician will notify Clinical Pharmacovigilance within 24 hours of the physician becoming aware of the event by entering the SAE or nonserious event of malignancy in subjects 30 years of age and younger data into the electronic data capture (EDC) system.  Serious adverse events and nonserious events of malignancy in subjects 30 years of age and 
younger, that occur prior to the site having access to the RAVE® EDC system or if RAVE® is not operable, 
should be documented on the SAE non-case report form forms and emailed (preferred route) or faxed to the Clinical Pharmacovigilance within 24 hours of being made aware of the SAE.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Adverse Events of Special Interest
The following adverse events of special interest will be monitored during the study:
!Serious infections, opportunistic infections, herpes zoster, and TB;
!Malignancy (all types);
!Cardiovascular events (e.g., major adverse cardiovascular event [MACE]);
!Hematologic disorders (i.e., anemia, neutropenia, lymphopenia);
!Hepatic disorders;
!Hypersensitivity reactions, including all serious allergic reactions;
!Demyelinating disease;
!Systemic GC side effects (i.e., infections, skin atrophy, weight gain, cataract, hypertension, 
indigestion, hyperglycemia).
Adverse Event Severity and Relationship to Study Drug
The investigator will classify AEs according to the Rheumatology Common Toxicity Criteria v.2.0 (Appendix I ).
The investigator will use the following definitions to assess the relationship of the AE to the use of study drug:
Reasonable Possibility After consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is sufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
No Reasonable Possibility After consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is insufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
Pregnancy
While not an AE, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 1 working day after the site becomes aware of the pregnancy.  Subjects who become pregnant during the study must be discontinued (Section 5.5).  If a pregnancy occurs in a study subject or in the partner of a study subject, 
information regarding the pregnancy and the outcome will be collected.
In the event of pregnancy occurring in a subject's partner during the study, written informed consent 
from the partner must be obtained prior to collection of any such information.  AbbVie will provide a separate consent form for this purpose.  Pregnancy in a subject's partners will be collected from the date of the first dose through 70 days following the last dose of study drug.
The pregnancy outcome of an elective or spontaneous abortion, stillbirth or congenital anomaly is 
considered a SAE and must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site becomes aware of the event.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.2 Toxicity Management
The management of specific AEs and laboratory parameters is described in Table 2 and in the 
Operations Manual ( Appendix K ).
The toxicity management of the AEs including AEs of special interest consists of safety monitoring 
(review of AEs on an ongoing basis, and periodical/ad hoc review of safety issues by a safety data monitoring committee), interruption of study drug dosing with appropriate clinical management if applicable, and discontinuation of the subjects from the study drug. The management of specific AEs and laboratory parameters is described below.
For subjects who discontinued study drug but continued study participation and are on standard of care 
therapies, these toxicity management requirements do not apply (including alerts from the central lab) and any intolerability to standard of care therapies should be managed by the prescribing physician.
Management of Hypersensitivity and Serious Allergic Reactions
Subjects should be closely monitored and assessed for the development of signs and symptoms of hypersensitivity reactions, including anaphylaxis.  Drug administration (ABBV-3373) should be done slowly over 15 – 30 minutes (via infusion line or infusion pump; the study drug can be diluted in 50 – 100 mL isotonic saline solution for this administration), and subjects should be observed for at least 30 minutes thereafter.  Study drug should be discontinued and appropriate therapy be instituted if a subject develops clinically significant hypersensitivity reactions.
Hypersensitivity TestingIn the event of a suspected systemic post-dose hypersensitivity reaction, if the clinical situation allows, 
every effort should be made to obtain a serum sample within 2 hours but no later than 6 hours from symptom onset for additional blood tests (e.g, tryptase, ADA, nAb, total IgE, total hemolytic complement, etc.).  Additional details regarding hypersensitivity testing can be found in the Operations Manual, Section 3.12 ( Appendix K ).
Management of Serious Infections
Subjects should be closely monitored for the development of signs and symptoms of infection during and after treatment with study drug.  Study drug should be interrupted if a subject develops a serious infection or a serious opportunistic infection.  A subject who develops a new infection during treatment 
with study drug should undergo prompt diagnostic testing appropriate for an immunocompromised 
subject.  As appropriate, antimicrobial therapy should be initiated, and the subject should be closely monitored.  Study drug may be restarted once the infection has been successfully treated.  Subjects who develop active TB must be permanently discontinued from study drug.
Management of Malignancy
Subjects who develop malignancy other than NMSC or carcinoma in-situ of the cervix must be discontinued from the study drug.  Information including histopathological results should be queried for the confirmation of the diagnosis.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Management of Demyelinating Disease
Subjects must be discontinued from study drug with new onset or exacerbation of clinical symptoms 
and/or radiographic evidence of central nervous system demyelinating disease (including multiple sclerosis), optic neuritis, and peripheral demyelinating disease (including Guillain Barré syndrome).
Management of Hypertension
Subjects should be closely monitored for the development of hypertension before and 30 minutes after treatment with study drug.  Study drug should be interrupted if a subject develops serious hypertension in which case they should be monitored under standard of care.
Management of Hyperglycemia
Subjects should be closely monitored for the development of hyperglycemia during and after treatment with study drug.  Study drug should be interrupted if a subject develops a serious hyperglycemia in which case they should be monitored under standard of care.
Management of GC-Induced Adrenal Insufficiency
High dose or long term use of corticosteroids can produce reversible HPA axis suppression with the potential for GC insufficiency after withdrawal of treatment.  Drug-induced secondary adrenocortical insufficiency may be minimized by gradual reduction of dosage.  This type of relative insufficiency may persist for months after discontinuation of therapy; therefore, hormone therapy should be reinstituted in any situation of stress occurring during that period.
Management of Select Laboratory Abnormalities
For any given laboratory abnormality, the investigator should assess the subject, apply the standard of care for medical evaluation and treatment following any local guidelines.  Specific toxicity management guidelines for selected abnormal laboratory values are described in Table 2 , and may require a 
supplemental eCRF to be completed (Section 6.1 [Complaints and AEs]).  All abnormal laboratory tests 
that are considered clinically significant by the investigator will be followed to a satisfactory resolution.  If a repeat test is required per Table 2 , the repeat testing must occur as soon as possible.
Table 2. Specific Toxicity Management Guidelines for Abnormal Laboratory Values
Laboratory 
Parameter Toxicity Management Guideline
Hemoglobin ! If hemoglobin < 8 g/dL interrupt study drug dosing and confirm by repeat testing with new sample
! If hemoglobin decreases ≥ 3.0 g/dL from BL, without an alternative etiology, 
interrupt study drug dosing and confirm by repeat testing with new sample.
! If hemoglobin decreases ≥ 3.0 g/dL from BL and an alternative etiology is known, the 
subject may remain on study drug at the investigator's discretion.
! If confirmed, continue to withhold study drug until hemoglobin value returns to normal reference range or its BL value.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Laboratory 
Parameter Toxicity Management Guideline
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC)! If confirmed < 1000/ μL by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug 
dosing until ANC value returns to normal reference range or its BL value.
! Discontinue study drug if confirmed < 500/ μL by repeat testing with new sample.
Absolute 
lymphocyte counts 
(ALC)! If confirmed < 500/μ L by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug 
dosing until ALC returns to normal reference range or its BL value.
Total white blood cell count! If confirmed < 2000/ μL by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug 
dosing until white blood cell count returns to normal reference range or its BL value.
Platelet count ! If confirmed < 50,000/ μL by repeat testing with new sample, interrupt study drug 
dosing until platelet count returns to normal reference range or its BL value.
AST or ALT ! Interrupt study drug if confirmed ALT or AST > 3 × ULN by repeat testing with new sample and either a total bilirubin > 2 × ULN or an international normalized ratio (INR) > 1.5.
! A separate blood sample for INR testing will be needed to measure INR at the 
time of repeat testing for ALT or AST.  A repeat test of INR is not needed for determination if above toxicity management criteria are met.
! Interrupt study drug if confirmed ALT or AST > 3 × ULN by repeat testing with new sample along with appearance of fatigue, nausea, vomiting, right upper quadrant pain or tenderness, fever, rash, and/or eosinophilia (> 5%).
! Interrupt study drug if confirmed ALT or AST > 5 × ULN by repeat testing with new sample for more than 2 weeks.
! Interrupt study drug if confirmed ALT or AST > 8 × ULN by repeat testing with new sample.
Subjects who meet any of the above criteria should be evaluated for an alternative etiology of the ALT or AST elevation and managed as medically appropriate.  The 
investigator should contact the AbbVie TA MD to discuss the management of a subject 
when an alternative etiology has been determined.  The alternative etiology should be documented appropriately in the eCRF; study drug should be discontinued if no alternative etiology can be found and ALT or AST elevations persist.
For any confirmed ALT or AST elevations > 3 ULN, complete the appropriate 
supplemental hepatic eCRF(s).
! Subjects with HBc Ab+ (irrespective of HBs Ab status) and negative HBV DNA PCR testing at Screening who develop the following should have HBV DNA PCR testing performed within one week:
! ALT > 5 × ULN OR
! ALT or AST > 3 × ULN and either a total bilirubin > 2 × ULN or INR > 1.5 OR
! ALT or AST > 3 × ULN along with clinical signs of possible hepatitis.
A positive result for HBV DNA PCR testing will require immediate interruption of study 
drug (unless not acceptable by local practices) and a hepatologist consultation should 
occur within 1 week for recommendation regarding subsequent treatment.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Laboratory 
Parameter Toxicity Management Guideline
Serum Creatinine ! If serum creatinine is > 1.5 × the BL value and > ULN, repeat the test for serum 
creatinine (with subject in an euvolemic state) to confirm the results.  If the results 
of the repeat testing still meet this criterion, then interrupt study drug and re-start study drug once serum creatinine returns to ≤ 1.5 × BL value and ≤ ULN.
For the above serum creatinine elevation scenario, complete the appropriate supplemental renal eCRF(s).
Creatine Phosphokinase (CPK)! If confirmed CPK value ≥ 4 × ULN and there are no symptoms suggestive of myositis 
or rhabdomyolysis, the subjects may continue study drug at the investigator's discretion.
! If CPK ≥ 4 × ULN accompanied by symptoms suggestive of myositis or 
rhabdomyolysis, interrupt study drug and contact AbbVie TA MD.
For the above CPK elevation scenarios, complete supplemental increased CPK eCRF.
Ab = antibody; ALC = Absolute lymphocyte counts; ALT = alanine aminotransferase; ANC = absolute neutrophil count; 
AST = aspartate aminotransferase; BL = baseline; CPK = creatine phosphokinase; DNA = deoxyribonucleic acid; eCRF = electronic case report form; HB = hepatitis B; HBV = hepatitis B virus; INR = international normalized ratio; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; TA MD = Therapeutic Area Medical Director; ULN = upper limit of normal
Management of ECG Abnormality
Subjects should be discontinued for an ECG change considered clinically significant OR a confirmed 
absolute QT interval corrected for heart rate using Fridericia's correction formula (QTcF) value > 500 msec.
7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE
7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
The statistical methods provided in this protocol will be focused on primary and secondary analyses.  Complete and specific details of the statistical analysis will be described in the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).  All statistical analyses will be performed using SAS (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, North Carolina, USA).
7.2 Definition for Analysis Populations
The Full Analysis Set (FAS) includes all randomized subjects who received at least 1 dose of the study drugs.  The FAS will be used for all efficacy analyses. Subjects will be grouped according to treatment as randomized.  The Per-Protocol Analysis Set represents a subset of the FAS and consists of all FAS subjects without any major violations.  Additional analysis may be conducted on the Per-Protocol 
Analysis Set as deemed appropriate, in order to evaluate the impact of major protocol violations on the 
primary endpoint.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The Safety Analysis Set consists of all subjects who received at least 1 dose of the study drugs.  For the 
Safety Analysis Set, subjects are grouped based on the treatment actually received, regardless of the treatment randomized.
7.3 Statistical Analyses for Efficacy
Primary Endpoint Analysis
Analysis of the primary endpoint will be conducted on the FAS based on treatment as randomized.
The primary endpoint is the change from BL in DAS28(CRP) at Week 12.  The historical mean and 
standard deviation of the change from BL in DAS28(CRP) at Week 12 in adalimumab 80 mg eow are estimated to be –2.13 and 1.35 respectively based on a meta-analysis of 3 historical adalimumab studies (Studies DE007, DE009, and DE011).
The first comparison in order to achieve the first primary objective of assessing the efficacy of 
ABBV-3373 is to compare change from BL in DAS28(CRP) at Week 12 in the ABBV-3373 group with –2.13, the adalimumab 80 mg eow historical mean change from BL at Week 12 based on the meta-analysis.  The treatment mean change from BL and 90% confidence interval of ABBV-3373 will be estimated from Mixed Effect Model Repeated Measurements (MMRM) method including up to Week 12 data with treatment group, visits, treatment-by-visit interaction, BL values of the primary endpoint, and stratification factors with observed case (OC) data.  The study will be declared positive if the comparison is significant and favoring ABBV-3373.
In order to achieve the second primary objective of comparing clinical efficacy of ABBV-3373 with 
adalimumab and to test the concept that an anti-TNF ADC has the potential to provide superior efficacy 
than the traditional anti-TNF antibody in RA, the second comparison is to compare ABBV-3373 with 
adalimumab for the primary efficacy endpoint with a Bayesian historical data borrowing approach.  The same MMRM model as described in the first comparison will be used to estimate in-study mean and standard deviation.  Informative normal prior for adalimumab will be determined based on historical adalimumab data and a non-informative prior will be used for ABBV-3373.  The prior distributions and estimates from MMRM model will be combined to construct the posterior distributions which will be used for comparison between ABBV-3373 and adalimumab.
If the adalimumab group mean is not comparable with historical adalimumab data, for example, the 
confidence intervals of the mean based on historical and in-trial data don't overlap, the Bayesian approach based on historical data will not be performed, and the mean difference in change from BL in DAS28(CRP) at Week 12 between the ABBV-3373 group and adalimumab will be estimated only based on in-study data with the MMRM model described above.
Historical data borrowing will only apply to the primary endpoint.To address the secondary objectives of assay sensitivity, a synthetic placebo arm will be created with the 
propensity score matching approach using historical placebo subjects from similar trials with subject-level data. Details will be provided in the SAP.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Secondary Endpoints and Additional Endpoints Analyses for BL to Week 12
For the first 12 weeks of treatment period, continuous efficacy variables will be analyzed using an 
MMRM method.  Categorical efficacy variables will be analyzed using the Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel 
(CMH) test controlling for stratification variables.  Non-responder imputation (NRI) will be used for 
primary inference purpose.  Observed Case data will be summarized descriptively as a sensitivity analysis.
Additional Endpoints Analyses up to Week 24
Statistical inference of additional continuous endpoints at each visit up to Week 24 will be conducted 
using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with treatment and stratification factors as the fixed factors and 
the corresponding BL value as the covariate. Additional categorical efficacy variables up to Week 24 will be analyzed using the same CMH test as for the binary secondary endpoint analysis.
Details on the analyses of the primary and other efficacy endpoints will be provided in the SAP.
Sample Size Estimation
The primary endpoint is the mean change of DAS28(CRP) from BL at Week 12.  Two comparisons are 
considered.  The first one is to compare mean change in DAS28(CRP) of the ABBV-3373 group to that of historical adalimumab 80 mg eow, which is –2.13.  Assuming a mean DAS28(CRP) change from BL of–2.769 to –2.982 for ABBV-3373 (corresponding to 30% to 40% more reduction than historical 
adalimumab) and a standard deviation of 1.35, 30 subjects on ABBV-3373 will provide an approximate 
81% to 96% power with a one-sample t-test and one-sided alpha = 0.05 significance level.
The second comparison is between ABBV-3373 arm and adalimumab arm with borrowed historical 
adalimumab data using a Bayesian approach.  When considering borrowing historical data, the planned 
sample size is 45 subjects (30 in ABBV-3373 and 15 in adalimumab).  The study will be considered successful if the posterior probability of mean difference < 0 is larger than 95%, i.e.,:
 (μ
          −μ           <0|     )>0 . 9 5 .
Based on the historical mean and standard deviation from adalimumab meta-analysis, a prior distribution for adalimumab is N (–2.13, 0.246
2) corresponding to the 30 historical subjects borrowed.  A 
noninformative prior for ABBV-3373 treatment group will be set.  Given the mean change from BL in DAS28 (CRP) is –2.13 for adalimumab, the probability to claim the study success is approximately 66% to 88% if the mean change from BL in DAS28 (CRP) is –2.769 to –2.982 for ABBV-3373 (i.e., 30% to 40% 
more reduction than historical adalimumab), with at least 45 subjects for adalimumab (15 in-trial and at least 30 borrowed) and 30 subjects for ABBV-3373.  If both ABBV-3373 and adalimumab groups have the same mean change from BL of –2.13, the probability to claim study success (equivalent to type I error 
rate) is approximately 0.03 with the same sample sizes.  In the event that adalimumab variability 
precludes historic data borrowing, using only the in-study 15 adalimumab subjects and 30 ABBV-3373 subjects will provide 43% to 63% power when ABBV-3373 in 30% to 40% more reduction than adalimumab respectively.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.4 Statistical Analyses for Safety
Safety analyses will be carried out using the Safety Analysis Set.  There will be 2 sets of planned safety 
analyses:  safety analysis by Week 12 and long-term safety analysis.  Safety will be assessed by AEs, laboratory assessments, and vital signs.  Frequency tables of subjects with treatment emergent AEs by preferred term (PT), by system organ class (SOC) and PT as in the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory 
Activities, by severity, and by relationship to the study drug as assessed by the Investigator will be 
provided.
Summaries of SAEs, deaths, AEs leading to discontinuation, and Areas of Safety Interest will be provided 
as well.  The changes from BL in clinical laboratory and vital sign values by visit will be analyzed in a 
descriptive manner.  Shift of selected laboratory values from BL to defined time points will be tabulated.  
The number and percentage of subjects meeting the criteria for potentially clinically significant laboratory/vital sign/ physical examination/ECG values will be summarized.
No external data borrowing will be applied for safety analyses.
7.5 Statistical Analysis of Pharmacokinetic and Immunogeniticy Data
Concentrations of conjugated ADC (ABBV-3373), total antibody, free payload A-1677770, and 
adalimumab (in the comparator arm), along with all applicable PK parameters will be summarized at each time point for each group using descriptive statistics.
Population PK analyses combining the data from this study and other studies may be performed and 
reported outside of the clinical study report.
Anti-drug antibody and nAb incidence and ADA titer values will be summarized for each group using 
descriptive statistics.
7.6 Statistical Analysis of Biomarker Data
Analysis will be conducted on biomarker data for the purpose of identification of prognostic, predictive, surrogate, and pharmacodynamic biomarkers associated with efficacy or safety.  The association of biomarkers to the efficacy or safety endpoints will be explored for each biomarker one at a time, and also for combinations of biomarkers via some multivariate predictive modeling approaches.
7.7 Interim Analysis
An interim PK analysis after 12 subjects are treated for at least 4 doses will be performed to assess whether the observed total antibody systemic exposure following ABBV-3373 administration is in the 
approximate range of 80 mg adalimumab exposure based on trough concentration (C
trough ) levels and if 
there is a need for dose adjustment for ABBV-3373 and replacement of already-treated subjects.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.8 ETHICS
8.1 Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board 
(IEC/IRB)
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all subject materials will be 
submitted to the IEC/IRB for review and approval.  Approval of both the protocol and the informed consent form(s) must be obtained before any subject is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will require review and approval by the IEC/IRB before the changes are implemented to the study.  In addition, all changes to the consent form(s) will be IEC/IRB approved.
8.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, Operations Manual, International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines, applicable regulations, and guidelines governing clinical study conduct and the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  Responsibilities of the investigator are specified in Appendix B .
8.3 Subject Confidentiality
To protect subjects' confidentiality, all subjects and their associated samples will be assigned numerical study identifiers or "codes."  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie.
9 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM 
COMPLETION
The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the data reported.  All source documents should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, 
accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data.  Clinical site monitoring is conducted 
to ensure that the rights and well-being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the currently approved protocol, ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable local regulatory requirement(s).
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE
AbbVie will ensure that the clinical trial is conducted with a quality management system that will define quality tolerance limits in order to ensure human subject protection and reliability of study results.  Data will be generated, documented, and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP, and applicable regulatory requirements.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end-of-study is defined as last subject last visit (70 day follow-up call).
12 REFERENCES
1. Schäcke H, Döcke WD, Asadullah K.  Mechanisms involved in the side effects of glucocorticoids.  
Pharmacol Ther.  2002;96(1):23-43.
2. AbbVie.  ABBV-3373 Investigator's Brochure Edition 3.  September 2019.  Addendum 1, 
Edition 3.  November 2019.
3. Keystone E, Weinblatt M, Furst D, et al.  Adalimumab, a fully human anti-TNF monoclonal 
antibody α monoclonal antibody, for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in patients taking 
concomitant methotrexate:  The ARMADA trial.  Arthritis Rheum.  2003;48(1):35-45.
4. Weisman M, Keystone E, Paulus H, et al.  A dose escalation study designed to demonstrate the 
safety, tolerability and efficacy of the fully human anti-TNF antibody, D2E7, given in combination 
with methotrexate (MTX) in patients with active RA (abstract 1948).  Arthritis Rheum.  
2000;43(9):S391.
5. van de Putte LBA, Rau R, Breedveld F, et al.  Efficacy and safety of the fully human anti-tumour 
necrosis factor α monoclonal antibody adalimumab (D2E7) in DMARD refractory patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis:  a 12 week, phase II study.  Ann Rheum Dis.  2003;62(12):1168-77.
6. van de Putte LB, Atkins C, Malaise M, et al.  Efficacy and safety of adalimumab as monotherapy 
in patients with rheumatoid arthritis for whom previous disease modifying anti-rheumatic drug treatment has failed.  Ann Rheum Dis.  2004;63(5):508-16.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
ACR American College of Rheumatology
ACR20 American College of Rheumatology 20% improvement criteria
ACR50 American College of Rheumatology 50% improvement criteria
ADA anti-drug antibody
ADC antibody-drug conjugate
ADL activities of daily living
AE adverse event
ALT alanine aminotransferase
ANC absolute neutrophil count
ANCOVA analysis of covariance
AST aspartate aminotransferase
BL baseline
BMI body mass index
CDAI clinical disease activity index
CHF congestive heart failure
CMH Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel
CR clinical remission
CRF case report form
CRP C-reactive protein
csDMARD conventional synthetic disease-modifying antirheumatic drug
Ctrough trough concentration measured at the end of a dosing interval at steady state
DAS disease activity score
DAS28 disease activity score (28 joints)
DMARD disease-modifying antirheumatic drug
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
ECG electrocardiogram
eCRF electronic case report form
EDC electronic data capture
eow every other week
ESR erythrocyte sedimentation rate
EULAR European League Against Rheumatism
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.FAS full analysis set
FSH follicle-stimulating hormone
GC glucocorticoid
GCP good clinical practice
GRMs glucocorticoid receptor modulators
HAQ-DI Health Assessment Questionnaire Disability Index
HAV hepatitis A virus
HAV-IgM hepatitis A virus immunoglobulin M
HB hepatitis B
HBsAg hepatitis B surface antigen
HBV hepatitis B virus
HCV hepatitis C virus
HIV human immunodeficiency virus
HPA hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
hs-CRP high-sensitivity C-reactive protein
ICH International Council for Harmonisation
IEC Independent ethics committee
IL interleukin
IMP Investigational Medicinal Product
IRB institutional review board
IRT interactive response technology
IUD intrauterine device
IUS intrauterine hormone-releasing system
IV intravenous
LDA low disease activity
MACE major adverse cardiac event
MCID minimal clinically important difference
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MMRM Mixed Effect Model Repeated Measurements
MTX Methotrexate
nAb neutralizing antibody
NMSC non-melanoma skin cancer
NRI non-responder imputation
NSAID nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.OC observed case
QTcF QT interval corrected for heart rate using Fridericia's correction formula
PD premature discontinuation
PK pharmacokinetic(s)
PT preferred term
RA rheumatoid arthritis
RNA ribonucleic acid
SAD single ascending dose
SAE serious adverse event
SAP statistical analysis plan
SC subcutaneous
SDAI simplified disease activity index
SF-36 36-Item Short Form Health Survey
SJC swollen joint count
SOC system organ class
SUSAR suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions
TA MD Therapeutic Area Medical Director
TB tuberculosis
TJC tender joint count
TNF tumor necrosis factor
ULN upper limit of normal
VAS visual analogue scale
vs. versus
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M16-560:  A Randomized, Double-Blind, Double-Dummy, Active Controlled Study to Evaluate 
the Safety, Tolerability, Pharmacokinetics, and Efficacy of ABBV-3373 in Subjects with Moderate to Severe Rheumatoid Arthritis
Protocol Date:  04 September 2020
Clinical research studies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the International Council for Harmonisation 
(ICH) Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and local regulations and guidelines governing the study at the site location.  In signing the Investigator Agreement, the investigator is agreeing to the following:
1. Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GCP, the applicable regulatory requirements, 
current protocol and operations manual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying AbbVie and the appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee (IEC), except when necessary to protect the subject from immediate harm.
2. Personally conducting or supervising the described investigation(s).
3. Informing all subjects, or persons used as controls, that the drugs are being used for 
investigational purposes and complying with the requirements relating to informed consent and 
ethics committees (e.g., IEC or IRB) review and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
4. Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investigation(s) to AbbVie.
5. Reading the information in the Investigator's Brochure/safety material provided, including the 
instructions for use and the potential risks and side effects of the investigational product(s).
6. Informing all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the study about 
their obligations in meeting the above commitments.
7. Maintaining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records 
available for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, 
and retaining all study-related documents until notification from AbbVie.
8. Maintaining records demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial 
clinical protocol and all of its amendments.
9. Reporting promptly, all changes in the research activity and all unanticipated problems involving 
risks to human subjects or others, to the appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, institution director) and/or directly to the ethics committees and AbbVie.
10. Providing direct access to source data documents for study-related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB 
review, and regulatory inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed)
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIGNATORIES
Name Title Functional Area
Clinical Program Development
Clinical Program Development
Medical Writing
Immunology Development
Data and Statistical Sciences
Data and Statistical Sciences
Clinical Pharmacology
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX D. ADDITIONAL ENDPOINT/ASSESSMENT 
DEFINITIONS
Physician's Global Assessment of Disease Activity
Physician's Global Assessment of Disease Activity (visual analogue scale [VAS]) allows physicians to score 
on a 100 mm horizontal scale (0 being very low and 100 being very high) to assess the patient's current disease activity.
DAS28
The DAS is a combined index used to measure the disease activity in patients with RA.  The DAS provides a score (between 0 and 10) indicating how active the disease is at the time of measurement.  The calculation of the DAS28 score used either ESR or CRP.
The calculation of the DAS28 score will use ESR based on the following formula:
DAS28 (ESR) = 0.56 × √TJC28 + 0.28 × √SJC28 + 0.70 × ln(ESR) + 0.014 × PtGA
The calculation of the DAS28 score will use CRP based on the following formula:
DAS28 (CRP) = 0.56 × √TJC28 + 0.28 × √ SJC28 + 0.36 × ln(CRP + 1) + 0.014 × PtGA + 0.96
PtGA represents patient's global assessment of disease activity; ESR is measured in mm/h, CRP is 
measured in mg/L, TJC28 and SJC28 represent total TJC and total SJC, respectively, based on the 28 joints (including the left and right side of the body).
American College of Rheumatology 20/50/70 Response (ACR20/50/70)
ACR20/50/70 is defined as
!At least 20%/50%/70% improvement in SJC compared to BL AND
!At least 20%/50%/70% improvement in TJC compared to BL AND
!At least 20%/50%/70% improvement in at least 3 out of the following 5 variables
1. Patient's Assessment of RA Pain Intensity VAS2. Patient's Global Assessment of Disease VAS3. Physician's Global Assessment of Disease Activity VAS4. Patient's Assessment of Disability on HAQ-DI5. Serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP).
Clinical Disease Activity Index (CDAI)
The CDAI is a composite index for assessing disease activity based on the summation of the count of 
swollen/tender joint count of 28 joints along with patient and physician global assessment on visual 
analogue scale (VAS) (0 – 10 cm) for estimating disease activity.  It has range from 0 to 76.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Simplified Disease Activity Index (SDAI)
The SDAI is the numerical sum of five outcome parameters:  tender and swollen joint count (based on a 
28-joint assessment), patient and physician global assessment of disease activity (VAS 0 - 10 cm) and level of CRP (mg/dl, normal < 1 mg/dl).  It has a range from 0 to 86.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX E. JOINT EVALUATION WORKSHEET EXAMPLE
JOINT
(Tick Correct Answer)Subject Right Subject Left
0 = Absent
1 = Present9 = Replaced 
NA = No 
Assessment0 = Absent
1 = Present9 = Replaced 
NA = No 
Assessment
Pain/ 
Tenderness Swelling JointPain/ 
Tenderness Swelling Joint
1.  Shoulder 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
2.  Elbow 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
3.  Wrist 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
4.  Metacarpophalangeal I 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
5.  Metacarpophalangeal II 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
6.  Metacarpophalangeal III 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
7.  Metacarpophalangeal IV 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
8.  Metacarpophalangeal V 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
9.  Thumb Interphalangeal 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
10.  Prox. Interphalangeal II 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
11.  Prox. Interphalangeal III 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
12.  Prox. Interphalangeal IV 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
13.  Prox. Interphalangeal V 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
14.  Knee 0 1 0 1 9 NA 0 1 0 1 9 NA
TOTAL Joint Count
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX F. REPORTED OUTCOMES VAS
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX G. HEALTH ASSESSMENT QUESTIONNAIRE 
DISABILITY INDEX
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX H. 36-ITEM SHORT FORM HEALTH SURVEY SAMPLE
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX I. RHEUMATOLOGY COMMON TOXICITY CRITERIA 
V.2.0
For designation of AE terms not shown in the Rheumatology Common Toxicity Criteria v.2.0 table, the 
approach described in the header row should be used.
Rheumatology Common Toxicity Criteria v.2.0
Based on Woodworth TG, et al.  Standardizing assessment of adverse effects in rheumatology clinical trials II.  Status of OMERACT Drug Safety Working Group May 2006:  OMERACT 8.  Standardizing Assessment and Reporting of Adverse Effects in Rheumatology Clinical Trials:  Enabling Description of Comparative Safety Profiles for Anti-Rheumatic Therapies.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
A.  Allergic/Immunologic
A1.  Allergic reaction/ 
hypersensitivity 
(includes drug fever)Transient rash:  drug fever < 38°C:  
transient, asymptomatic 
bronchospasmGeneralised urticaria responsive to 
meds; or drug fever > 38°C, or 
reversible bronchospasmSymptomatic bronchospasm 
requiring meds; symptomatic 
urticaria persisting with meds, allergy related oedema/angioedemaAnaphylaxis, laryngeal/pharyngeal oedema, requiring resuscitation
A2.  Autoimmune reactionSeriologic or other evidence of autoimmune reaction, but patient 
asymptomatic:  all organ function 
normal and no treatment is required (e.g., vitiligo)Evidence of autoimmune reaction involving a non-essential organ or 
functions, requiring treatment 
other than immunosuppressive drugs (e.g., hypothyroidism)Reversible autoimmune reaction involving function of a major organ 
or toxicity requiring short term 
immunosuppressive treatment (e.g., transient colitis or anaemia)Causes major organ dysfunction, or progressive, not reversible, or 
requires long term administration 
of high dose immunosuppressive therapy
A3.  Rhinitis (includes sneezing, nasal 
stuffiness, post nasal 
discharge)Transient, non-prescription meds relievePrescription meds required, slow Corticosteroids or other prescription med with persistent disabling 
symptoms such as impaired exercise 
toleranceNA
A4.  Serum sickness Transient, non-prescription meds relieveSymptomatic, slow response to meds (e.g., oral corticosteroids)Prolonged; symptoms only partially relieved by meds; parenteral corticosteroids requiredMajor organ dysfunction, requires long-term high-dose immunosuppressive therapy 
A5.  Vasculitis Localised, not requiring treatment; or rapid response to meds; cutaneousSymptomatic, slow response to meds (e.g., oral corticosteroids)Generalised, parenteral corticosteroids required or/and short duration hospitalisationProlonged, hospitalisation, ischemic changes, amputation
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
B.  Cardiac
B1.  Arrhythmia Transient, asymptomatic Transient, but symptomatic or 
recurrent, responds to medsRecurrent/persistent; maintenance 
prescriptionUnstable, hospitalisation required, parenteral meds
B2.  Cardiac function decreasedAsymptomatic decline in resting ejection fraction by > 10%, but < 20% of baseline valueAsymptomatic decline of resting ejection fraction ≥ 20% of baseline 
valueCHF responsive to treatment Severe or refractory CHF
B3.  Edema Asymptomatic (e.g., 1 + 
feet/calves), self-limited, no therapy requiredSymptomatic (e.g., 2 + feet/calves), requires therapySymptoms limiting function (e.g., 3 + 
feet/calves, 2 + thighs), partial relief 
with treatment prolongedAnasarca; no response to treatment
B4.  Hypertension 
(new onset or 
worsening)Asymptomatic, transient increase 
by > 20 mmHg (diastolic) or to 
> 150/100 if previously normal, no therapy requiredRecurrent or persistent increase 
> 150/100 or by > 10 mmHg 
(diastolic), requiring and responding readily to treatmentSymptomatic increase > 150/100, 
> 20 mmHg, persistent, requiring 
multi agency therapy, difficult to controlHypertensive crisis
B5.  Hypotension (without underlying diagnosis)Transient, intermittent, asymptomatic, orthostatic 
decrease in blood pressure 
> 20 mmHgSymptomatic, without interference with function, 
recurrent or persistent > 20 mmHg 
decrease, responds to treatmentSyncope or symptomatic, interferes with function, requiring therapy and 
sustained medical attention, dose 
adjustment or drug discontinuationShock
B6.  Myocardial ischaemiaTransient chest pain/ECG changes; rapid relief with nitroRecurring chest pain, transient ECG ST-T changes; treatment relievesAngina with infarction, no or minimal functional compromise, reduce dose or discontinue study drugAcute myocardial infarction, arrhythmia or/and CHF
B7.  Pericarditis/ pericardial effusionRub heard, asymptomatic Detectable effusion by 
echocardiogram, symptomatic NSAID requiredDetectable on chest x-ray, dyspnoea; 
or pericardiocentesis; requires 
corticosteroidsPulsus alternates with low cardiac output; requires surgery
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
B.  Cardiac (continued)
B8.  
Phlebitis/thrombosis/ 
Embolism (excludes injection sites)Asymptomatic, superficial, 
transient, local, or no treatment 
requiredSymptomatic, recurrent, deep vein 
thrombosis, no anticoagulant 
therapy requiredDeep vein thrombosis requiring anticoagulant therapyPulmonary embolism
C.  General (Constitutional)
C1.  Fatigue/malaise (asthenia)Increase over baseline; most usual 
daily functions maintained, short 
termLimits daily function intermittently over timeInterferes with basic ADL, persistent Unable to care for self, bed or 
wheelchair bound > 50% of day debilitating, hospitalisation
C2.  Fever (pyrexia) 
(note:  fever due to 
drug allergy should be coded as allergy)Transient, few symptoms37.7 – 38.5°CSymptomatic, recurrent38.6 – 39.9°C.  Relieved by meds≥ 40°C; ≤ 24 h, persistent symptoms; partial response to meds.≥ 40°C, debilitating, > 24 h, hospitalisation; no relief with meds
C3.  Headache Transient or intermittent, no meds 
or relieved with OTCPersistent, recurring, non-narcotic analgesics relieveProlonged with limited response to narcotic medicineIntractable, debilitating, requires parenteral meds.
C4.  Insomnia Difficulty sleeping, short term, no interfering with functionDifficulty sleeping interfering with function, use of prescription med.Prolonged symptoms, with limited response to narcotic medsDebilitating, hospitalisation; no relief with meds
C5.  Rigors, chills Asymptomatic, transient, no meds, 
or non-narcotic meds relieveSymptomatic, narcotic meds relieve.Prolonged symptoms, with limited response to narcotic medsDebilitating, hospitalisation; no relief with meds
C6.  Sweating (diaphoresis)Episodic, transient Frequent, short term Frequent, drenching, disabling Dehydration, requiring IV 
fluids/hospitalization > 24 hrs
C7.  Weight gain 5% – 9.9% 10% – 19.9% 20% – 30% NA
C8.  Weight loss 5% – 9.9% 10% – 19.9% 20% – 30% NA
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
D.  Dermatologic
D1.  Alopecia Subjective, transient Objective, fully reversible Patchy, wig used, partly reversible Complete, or irreversible even if 
patchy
D2.  Bullous eruption Localised, asymptomatic Localised, symptomatic, requiring 
treatmentGeneralised, responsive to 
treatment; reversibleProlonged, generalised, or requiring hospitalisation for treatment
D3.  Dry skin Asymptomatic, controlled with emollientsSymptoms eventually (1 – 2 wks) controlled with emollientsGeneralised, interfering with ADL > 2 wks, persistent pruritis, partially responsive to treatmentDisabling for extended period, unresponsive to ancillary therapy 
and requiring study drug 
discontinuation for relief
D4.  Injection site reactionLocal erythema, pain, pruritis, < few daysErythema, pain, oedema, may 
include superficial phlebitis,
1 – 2 wksProlonged induration, superficial ulceration; includes thrombosisMajor ulceration necrosis requiring surgery
D5.  Petechiae (without vasculitis)Few, transient asymptomatic Dependent areas, persistent up to 2w k sGeneralised, responsive to treatment; reversibleProlonged, irreversible, disabling
D6.  Photosensitivity Transient erythema Painful erythema and oedema 
requiring topical treatmentBlistering or desquamation, requires systematic corticosteroidsGeneralised exfoliation or hospitalisation
D7.  Pruritis Localised, asymptomatic, transient, 
local treatmentIntense, or generalised, relieved by systematic medicationIntense or generalised; poorly controlled despite treatmentDisabling, irreversible
D8.  Rash (not bullous)Erythema, scattered macular/popular eruption; pruritis transient; TOC or no medsDiffuse macular/popular eruption or erythema with pruritus; dry 
desquamation; treatment 
requiredGeneralised, moist desquamation, requires systemic corticosteroids; responsive to treatment; reversibleExfoliative or ulcerating; or requires hospitalisation; or parenteral corticosteroids
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
D.  Dermatologic (continued)
D9.  Induration/ 
fibrosis/Thickening 
(not sclerodermal)Localized, high density on 
palpation, reversible, no effect on 
ADL and not disfiguringLocal areas < 50% body surface, 
not disfiguring, transient 
interference with ADL, reversibleGeneralized, disfiguring, interferes with ADL, reversibleDisabling, irreversible, systemic symptoms
E.  Ear/Nose/Throat
E1.  Hearing loss Transient, intermittent, no interference with functionSymptomatic, treatment required, reversibleInterferes with function; incomplete response to treatmentIrreversible deafness
E2.  Sense of smell Slightly altered Markedly altered Complete loss, reversible Complete loss, without recovery
E3.  Stomatitis Asymptomatic Painful, multiple, can eat Interferes with nutrition, slowly reversibleRequires enteral support; residual dysfunction
E4.  Taste disturbance (dysgeusia)Transiently altered; metallic Persistently altered; limited effect 
on eatingDisabling, effect on nutrition NA
E5.  Tinnitus Intermittent, transient, no 
interference with functionRequires treatment, reversible Disabling, or associated with hearing 
lossIrreversible deafness
E6.  Voice changes (includes hoarseness, loss of voice, laryngitis)Intermittent hoarseness, able to vocalisePersistent hoarseness, able to vocaliseWhispered speech, slow return of ability to vocaliseUnable to vocalize for extended
E7.  Xerostomia (dry mouth)Transient dryness Relief with meds Interferes with nutrition, slowly 
reversibleExtended duration interference 
with nutrition, requires parenteral 
nutrition
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
F.  Eye/Ophthalmologic
F1.  Cataract Asymptomatic, no change in vision, 
non-progressiveSymptomatic, partial visual loss, 
progressiveSymptoms impairing function, vision 
loss requiring treatment, including 
surgeryNA
F2.  Conjunctivitis Asymptomatic, transient, rapid 
response to treatmentSymptomatic, responds to 
treatment, changes not interfering 
with functionSymptoms prolonged, partial 
response to treatment, interferes 
with functionNA
F3.  Lacrimation increased (tearing, watery eyes)Symptoms not requiring treatment, transientSymptomatic, treatment required, reversibleUnresponsive to treatment with major effect on functionNA
F4.  Retinopathy Asymptomatic, non-progressive, no treatmentReversible change in vision; readily responsive to treatmentDisabling change in vision ophthalmological findings reversible, sight improves over timeLoss of sight
F5.  Vision changes (e.g., blurred, 
photophobia, night 
blindness, vitreous floaters)Asymptomatic, transient, no treatment requiredSymptomatic, vision changes not interfering with function, reversibleSymptomatic, vision changes interfering with functionLoss of sight
F6.  Xerophtalmia (dry eyes)Mild scratchiness Symptomatic without interfering 
with function, requires artificial tearsInterferes with vision/function, corneal ulcerationLoss of sight
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
G.  Gastrointestinal
G1.  Anorexia Adequate food intake, minimal 
weight lossSymptoms requiring oral 
nutritional supplementationProlonged, requiring iv support Requires hospitalization for 
nutritional support
G2.  Constipation Asymptomatic, transient, responds 
to stool softener, OTC laxativesSymptomatic, requiring prescription laxatives, reversibleObstipation requiring medical interventionBowel obstruction.  Surgery required.
G3.  Diarrhea Transient, increase of2 – 3 stools/day over pre-
treatment (no blood or mucus), 
OTC agents relieveSymptomatic, increase4 – 6 stools/day, nocturnal stools, 
cramping, requires treatment with 
prescription meds.Increase > 6 stools/day, associated with disabling symptoms, 
e.g., incontinence, severe cramping, 
partial response to treatment.Prolonged, dehydration, unresponsive to treatment, requires hospitalization.
G4.  Dyspepsia (heartburn)Transient, intermittent, responds to OTC antacids, H-2 blockersProlonged, recurrent, requires 
prescription meds, relieved by 
medsPersistent despite treatment, 
interferes with function, associated 
with GI bleedingNA
G5.  GI bleed (gastritis, gastric or duodenal ulcer 
diagnosed-define 
aetiology)Asymptomatic, endoscopic finding, haemocult + stools, no transfusion, responds rapidly to treatmentSymptomatic, transfusion ≤ 2 units 
needed; responds to treatmentHaematemesis, transfusion3 – 4 units, prolonged interference with functionRecurrent, transfusion > 4 units, perforation, requiring surgery, hospitalisation
G6.  Haematochezia (rectal bleeding)Haemorrhodial, asymptomatic, no transfusionSymptomatic, transfusion≤ 2 units, reversibleRecurrent, transfusion > 3 – 4 units > 4 units, hypotension, requiring hospitalization
G7.  Hepatitis Laboratory abnormalities, 
asymptomatic, reversibleSymptomatic laboratory 
abnormalities, not interfering with 
function, slowly reversibleLaboratory abnormalities persistent 
> 2 wks, symptoms interfere with 
functionProgressive, hepato-renal, anasarca, pre-coma or coma
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
G.  Gastrointestinal (continued)
G8.  Nausea, or 
nausea/vomiting (use 
diagnostic term)Transient, intermittent, minimal 
interference with intake, rapid 
response to meds.Persistent, recurrent, requires 
prescription meds, intake 
maintainedProlonged, interferes with daily 
function and nutritional intake, 
periodic iv fluidsHypotensive, hospitalization, 
parenteral nutrition, unresponsive 
to out-patient management
G9.  Pancreatitis Anylase elevation, intermittent 
nausea/vomiting, transient, responds rapidly to treatmentAmylase elevation with abdominal 
pain, nausea, occasional vomiting, 
responsive to treatmentSevere, persistent abdominal pain 
with pancreatitic enzyme elevation, 
incomplete or slow response to treatmentComplicated by shock, 
haemorrhage (acute circulatory 
failure)
G10.  Proctitis Perianal pruritus, haemorrhoids 
(new onset), transient, or intermittent, relieved by OTC medsTenesmus or ulcerations, anal fissure, responsive to treatment, 
minimal interference with 
functionUnresponsive to treatment, marked interference with functionMucosal necrosis with haemorrhage, infection, surgery required.
H.  Musculoskeletal
H1.  Avascular necrosisAsymptomatic MRI changes, non-progressiveMRI changes and symptoms responsive to rest and analgesiaMRI changes, symptoms requiring surgical interventionWheelchair bound; surgical repair not possible
H2.  Arthralgia Intermittent transient symptoms, no meds or relieved by OTC medsPersistent or recurrent symptoms, resolve with meds, little effect on functionSevere symptoms despite meds impairs functionDebilitating, hospitalisation required for treatment
H3.  Leg cramps Transient, intermittent, does not interfere with functionRecurrent symptoms, minimally interferes with function or sleep, responds to medsPersistent, prolonged interference with function or sleep, partial or no response to medsNA
H4.  Myalgia Occasional; does not interfere with 
functionFrequent, requires meds (non-narcotic); minor effects on functionMajor change in function/lifestyle, narcotic pain medsDebilitating, profound weakness, requires wheelchair, unresponsive to meds
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
I.  Neuropsychiatric
I1.  Anxiety or 
Depression (mood 
alteration)Symptomatic, does not interfere with function; no medsFrequent symptoms, responds to meds; interferes with ADL at timesPersistent, prolonged symptoms, 
partial or no response to meds, 
limits daily functionSuicidal ideation or danger to self
I2.  Cerebrovascular ischaemiaNA Single transient ischaemic event, 
responsive to treatmentRecurrent transient ischaemic eventsCerebrovascular vascular accident with permanent disability
I3.  Cognitive disturbanceSubjective symptoms, transient, 
intermittent, not interfering with 
functionObjective symptoms, persisting, 
interferes with daily function 
occasionallyPersistent, or worsening objective 
symptoms; interferes with routine 
daily routineDebilitating/disabling and permanent; toxic psychosis
I4.  Depressed 
consciousness 
(somnolence)Observed, transient, intermittent, not interfering with functionSomnolence or sedation, interfering with functionPersistent, progressive, obundation, stuporComa
I5.  Inability to concentrateSubjective symptoms, does not interfere with functionObjective findings, interferes with functionPersistent, prolonged objective findings or organic causeNA
I6.  Insomnia (in absence of pain)Occasional difficulty sleeping, 
transient intermittent, not 
interfering with functionRecurrent difficulty sleeping; 
requires meds for relief; 
occasional interference with functionPersistent or worsening difficulty 
sleeping; severely interferes with 
routine daily functionNA
I7.  Libido decreased Decrease in interest Loss of interest; influences relationshipPersistent, prolonged interfering with relationshipNA
I8.  Peripheral motor neuropathySubjective or transient loss of deep tendon reflexes; function maintainedObjective weakness, persistent, no significant impairment of daily functionObjective weakness with substantial impairment of functionParalysis
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
I.  Neuropsychiatric (continued)
I9.  Peripheral sensory 
neuropathy (sensory 
disturbance)Subjective symptoms without 
objective findings, transient, not 
interfering with functionObjective sensory loss, persistent, not interfering with functionProlonged sensory loss or 
paraethesias interfering with 
functionNA
I10.  Seizure NA Recurrence of old seizures, 
controlled with adjustment of medsRecurrence/exacerbation with partial response to medicationRecurrence not controlled, 
requiring hospitalization; new 
seizures
I11.  Vertigo (dizziness)Subjective symptoms, transient, intermittent, no treatmentObjective findings, recurrent, meds relieve, occasionally interfering with functionPersistent, prolonged, interfering with daily function; partial response to medicationDebilitating without response to medication, hospitalization
J.  Pulmonary
J1.  Asthma Occasional wheeze, no interference 
with activitiesWheezing, requires oral meds, 
occasional interference with 
functionDebilitating, requires nasal O 2 Requires ventilator assistance
J2.  Cough Transient, intermittent, occasional 
OTC meds relievePersistent, requires narcotic or other prescription meds for reliefRecurrent, persistent coughing 
spasms without consistent relief by 
meds, interferes with functionInterferes with oxygenation; debilitating
J3.  Dyspnea Subjective, transient, no 
interference with functionSymptomatic, intermittent or 
recurring, interferes with 
exertional activitiesSymptomatic during daily routine 
activities, interferes with function, 
treatment with intermittent nasal O 2
relievesSymptomatic at rest, debilitating, requires constant nasal O
2
J4.  Pleuritic pain 
(pleurisy)Transient, intermittent symptoms, no treatment or OTC meds relievePersistent symptoms, requires prescription meds for reliefProlonged symptoms, interferes with function, requires frequent narcotic pain reliefDebilitation, requiring hospitalisation
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
J.  Pulmonary (continued)
J5.  Pneumonitis 
(pulmonary 
infiltrates)Asymptomatic radiographic 
changes, transient, no treatment 
requiredSymptomatic, persistent, requiring corticosteroidsSymptomatic, requiring treatment 
including O
2Debilitating, not reversible; or 
requiring assisted ventilation
J6.  Pulmonary 
function decreased 
(FVC or carbon 
monoxide diffusion 
capacity – DLCO)76% – 90% of pre-treatment value 51% – 75% of pre-treatment value 26% – 50% of pre-treatment value ≤ 25% of pre-treatment value
Laboratory Data
K.  Haematology
K1.  Hgb (g/dl) 
decrease from pre-
treatment1.0 – 1.4 1.5 – 2.0 2.1 – 2.9, or Hgb < 8.0, > 7.0 ≥ 3.0; or Hgb < 7.0
K2.  Leukopenia (total WBC) × 10003.0 – 3.9 2.0 – 2.9 1.0 – 1.9 < 1.0
K3.  Neutropenia (× 1000)1.5 – 1.9 1.0 – 1.4 0.5 – 0.9 < 0.5
K4.  Lymphopenia (× 1000)1.5 – 1.9 1.0 –1.4 0.5 – 0.9 < 0.5
K5.  Platelets (× 1000) 75 – LLN 50 – 74.9 20 – 49.9; platelet transfusion required < 20; recurrent platelet transfusions
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
L.  Chemistry
L1.  Hypercalcaemia 
(mg/dl)1.1 × ULN – 11.5 11.6 – 12.5 12.6 – 13.5; or symptoms present > 13.5; or associated coma
L2.  Hyperglycemia (mg/dl) Fasting140 – 160 161 – 250 251 – 500 > 500, or associated with 
ketoacidosis
L3.  Hyperkalaemia (mg/dl)5.5 – 5.9 6.0 – 6.4 6.5 – 7.0 or any ECG change > 7.0 or any arrhythmia
L5.  Hypocalcaemia (mg/dl)0.9 × LLN – 7.8 7.7 – 7.0 6.9 – 6.5; or associated with 
symptoms< 6.5 or occurrence of tetany
L6.  Hypoglycemia (mg/dl)55 – 64 (no symptoms) 40 – 54 (or symptoms present) 30 – 39 (symptoms impair function) < 30 or coma
L7.  Hyponatraemia (mg/dl)-- 125 – 129 120 – 124 < 120
L8.  Hypokalaemia (mg/dl)-- 3.0 – 3.4 2.5 – 2.9 < 2.5
L9.  CPK (also if polymyositis-disease)1.2 – 1.9 × ULN 2.0 – 4.0 × ULN 4.0 × ULN with weakness but 
without life-threatening signs or symptoms> 4.0 × ULN with signs or symptoms 
of rhabdomyolysis or life-
threatening
L10.  Serum uric acid 1.2 – 1.6 × ULN 1.7 – 2.9 × ULN 3.0 – 5.0 × ULN or gout NA
L11.  Creatinine (mg/dL)1.1 – 1.3 × ULN 1.3 – 1.8 × ULN 1.9 – 3.0 × ULN > 3.0 × ULN
L12.  SGOT (AST) 1.2 – 1.5 × ULN 1.6 – 3.0 × ULN 3.1 – 8.0 × ULN > 8.0 × ULN
L13.  SGPT (ALT) 1.2 – 1.5 × ULN 1.6 – 3.0 × ULN 3.0 – 8.0 × ULN > 8.0 × ULN
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1 – Mild
No medication or OTC
Asymptomatic, or transient
Short duration (< 1 week)
No change in life style2 – ModerateSymptomaticDuration (1 – 2 weeks)
Alter lifestyle occasionallyMeds relieve (may be 
prescription)
Study drug continued3 – Severe
Prolonged symptoms, reversible, 
major functional impairment
Prescription meds/partial relief
May be hospitalized < 24 hrTemporary study drug 
discontinuation or/and dose reduced4 – Includes Life Threatening
At risk of death
Substantial disability, especially if 
permanent
Multiple meds
Hospitalized > 24 hr
Study drug discontinued
L.  Chemistry (continued)
L14.  Alkaline 
phosphatase1.1 – 2.0 × ULN 1.6 – 3.0 × ULN 3.0 – 5.0 × ULN > 5.0 × ULN
L15.  T. bilirubin 1.1 – 1.4 × ULN 1.5 – 1.9 × ULN 2.0 – 3.0 × ULN > 3.0 × ULN
L16.  LDH 1.3 – 2.4 × ULN 2.5 – 5.0 × ULN 5.1 – 10 × ULN > 10 × ULN
M.  Urinalysis
M1.  Haematuria Micro only Gross, no clots Clots, transfusion < 2 units Transfusion required
M2.  Proteinuria (per 24 h)300 – 500 mg (tr/1+) 501 – 1999 mg (2+) 2 – 5.0 g (3+) nephrotic syndrome 5.0 g (4+) anasarca
M3.  WBC in urine NA NA Indicating acute interstitial nephritis Associated with acute renal failure
M4.  Uric acid crystals Present without symptoms NA With stones or symptoms of stones 
(e.g., renal colic)Causing renal outflow obstruction and hospitalization
ADL = activities of daily living; ANA = antinuclear antibodies; CHF = congestive heart failure; ECG = electrocardiogram; FVC = forced vital capacity; H-2 blockers = histamine-2 blockers 
IV = intravenous; LLN = lower limit of normal; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; OTC = over-the-counter medication; SLE = syste mic lupus erythematosus; ULN = upper limit of 
normal; WBC = white blood cells
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX J. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE
The following table shows the required activities the subject encounters.  The individual activities are 
described in detail in Appendix K , the Operations Manual .
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX K. SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Previous Protocol Versions
Protocol Date
Version 1.0 18 October 2018
Version 1.1 (Germany Only) 07 November 2019
Version 1.1.1 (Germany Only) 20 November 2019
Version 2.0 20 November 2019
Version 3.0 20 November 2019
Version 4.0 11 March 2020
Version 4.1 (Germany Only) 12 March 2020
The purpose of this version is to remove the  cohort.  Minor clerical edits have been made as 
needed for consistency and clarity throughout the protocol.
Summary of Protocol Changes:
!Title Page, removed  from the Title Page.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Synopsis, removed  language from the Synopsis.Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 2.1, removed  language from this section and the clinical hypothesis.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 2.2, removed  language, and added language regarding COVID-19 related risks.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.  COVID-19 language added to indicate 
that no change to the benefit/risk balance for subjects in this study is expected.
!Section 3.1, removed the primary and secondary objectives for the  cohort.
Rationale:   To clarify that the  cohort is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 3.5, revised PK and immunogenicity endpoints to remove 
Rationale:   is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 3.6, removed  with regard to assessment of changes in cortisol level.
Rationale:   is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 4.1, revised overall study design, including study schematic, and plan to exclude the 
 cohort.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 4.2, removed details of study conduct related to
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 5.1, removed prior and concomitant medication criteria and expectations for the 
 cohort.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 5.1, removed washout times for prior biologics/tsDMARDs for the  cohort, and 
shortened duration of treatment with any investigational drug prior to first dose of study drug 
to 30 days.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.  Thirty days is the correct duration; 
the change to 70 days in the last amendment was made in error.
!Section 5.4, removed reference to  Investigator Brochure and  wash out 
times before baseline.Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 5.7, removed details for  cohort dosing.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 5.8, removed information about randomization for the  cohort.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 6.2, removed drug administration information for 
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 7.3, removed statistical analyses for efficacy for 
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 7.4, removed "of each cohort" regarding the Safety Analysis Set.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 7.5, removed  from statistical analysis of PK and immunogenicity data.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 7.7, removed interim analysis for 
Rationale:  is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 12, reference list updated.
Rationale:   References that are no longer applicable have been removed.
!Appendix J:  revised to remove assessment/procedures related to  cohort.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
Summary of Operations Manual Changes:
!Title Page, removed  from Title Page.Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.!Section 1, added section description for clarity, and removed  from Pharmacokinetic 
Lab section.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 2.1, removed study activities for .
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 3.5, removed sections for PK and immunogenicity sampling for .
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 3.6, removed biomarker sampling for .
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 3.12, removed clinical laboratory testing for the  cohort.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 5.1, removed  for SUSAR reporting.Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 6.1, removed section for  treatment administration.Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 6.2, removed information on for  drug supply, storage, and disposition.Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 6.3, removed the section for method of assigning subjects to treatment groups for the 
 cohort.
Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
!Section 6.4, removed the section for timing of study drug in the  cohort.Rationale:    is not being studied in this protocol.
STUDY M16-560  |  Version 5.0 | EudraCT 2018-003053-21
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX L. OPERATIONS MANUAL