Quadratus Lumborum block (QL 3) versus C lassic   Sharad Khetarpal, MD  
Lumbar Plexus block  in Total Primary, Unilateral Hip  
Replacement Surgery: A Prospective, Randomized, Double -Blind,  
Active Comparator Trial  
Page 1 of 7 
  
Official Title:  A Prospective, Randomized, Double -Blind , Active -Comparator, Non -Inferiority 
study to observe relative efficacy of Ultrasound -Guided Supra -iliac Transmuscular  Quadratus 
Lumborum block (QL 3) vs. classic Lumbar Plexus block in managing post -operative pain 
following total hip replacement surgery.  
ClinicalTrials.gov ID (NCT  number ): [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: June 5th, 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quadratus Lumborum block (QL 3) versus C lassic   Sharad Khetarpal, MD  
Lumbar Plexus block  in Total Primary, Unilateral Hip  
Replacement Surgery: A Prospective, Randomized, Double -Blind,  
Active Comparator Trial  
Page 2 of 7 
  
Background  
The Lumbar Plexus (LP) block is a well -established and widely studied regional analgesia procedure 
proven to provide postoperative pain management after primary hip replacement surgery (1).  However, 
the technique of LP block is considered by those with li mited experience as complex and associated with 
potentially serious side effects, including nerve injury, major bleeding, retroperitoneal hematoma, and 
intrathecal injection of local anesthetic (2). Also, the LP block, when preformed with a concentrated 
local anesthetic solution, may lead to motor blockade, interfering with early ambulation and delaying 
initiation of physical therapy before transferring the patient to floor from PACU (3).  Despite this, the 
very skilled Acute and Interventional Perioperativ e Pain Service (AIPPS) has safely administered over 
10,000 LP blocks in this institution, and therefore the LP block is considered the standard of care for hip 
replacement surgery at Shadyside Hospital. The LP block is currently a part of an approved Enhan ced 
Recovery After Surgery protocol (ERAS) which uses multimodal analgesia, restricted goal directed fluids 
in intraoperative period, and minimal invasive surgical technique, which are all directed towards getting 
patient ready for successful outcome and e arly discharge.  
In the past few years, consideration has been given to inter -facial administration of local anesthetic to 
avoid theoretical nerve injury, bleeding and intrathecal anesthetic administration associated with the 
direct interaction between the  nerve and the nerve block needle.  Thus, the use of inter -fascial blocks 
represents an attractive alternative to traditional peripheral nerve blocks to provide regional analgesia 
utilizing local anesthetics as part of multimodal analgesic protocol. There are several case reports of 
Quadratus Lumborum inter -fascial block giving adequate pain relief after total hip replacement surgery 
and this QL3 block is preformed routinely in this institution 4 -6. Several of early case reports were 
published in many peer review journals from our own institution, although randomized control studies 
Quadratus Lumborum block (QL 3) versus C lassic   Sharad Khetarpal, MD  
Lumbar Plexus block  in Total Primary, Unilateral Hip  
Replacement Surgery: A Prospective, Randomized, Double -Blind,  
Active Comparator Trial  
Page 3 of 7 
 are yet to be conducted. The inter -facial block is theoretically easier to preform and presents less risk to 
the patient, as the local anesthetic is deposited further away from t he nerve plexus. The purpose of this 
study is to show that inter -facial block is non -inferior to the standard -of-care lumbar plexus block, and 
should be used more regularly in hip replacement surgery.  
Specific Aims  
1. This study will prospectively investigate the efficacy of Quadratus Lumborum block (QL 3) versus  
Classic Lumbar Plexus block for post -operative pain management in subjects undergoing primary, 
unilateral hip replacement surgery . Primary outcome measures include pain with m ovement and total 
narcotic consumption in 24 or until discharge.  
2. To prospectively compare Quadratus Lumborum block (QL 3) versus Classic Lumbar Plexus block  
in time to mobilization and physical therapy response  
Hypothesis  
There will be no difference in  efficacy between 2 groups .  
Study Design  
The study will be conducted as a prospective, randomized, double -blind, non-inferiority, active -
comparator trial at the University of Pittsburgh Medical C enter (UPMC) Shadyside Hospital. Institutional 
review board approval will be obtained before eligible patients are recruited and consented. Trial will be 
registered at www.clinicaltrial.gov before beginning recruitment.  
Recruitment  
Potential subjects will be recruited in the pre -operative area of Shadyside hospital on the day of their 
scheduled hip replacement surgery . Patients who agree to participate in the trial will sign an IRB 
Quadratus Lumborum block (QL 3) versus C lassic   Sharad Khetarpal, MD  
Lumbar Plexus block  in Total Primary, Unilateral Hip  
Replacement Surgery: A Prospective, Randomized, Double -Blind,  
Active Comparator Trial  
Page 4 of 7 
 approved Informed Consent Form. Forty patients are expected be enrolled in t his trial, with twenty in 
each group.  
Randomization Process  
Participating patients will be randomized by computer generat ed random numbers to either the 
Quadratus Lumborum block (QL 3) or the Classic Lumbar Plexus  group , which is the standard of car in 
this institution for hip replacement surgery.  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Patients 18-90 years old  
2. Primary unilateral total hip arthroplasty  
3. BMI 20 – 36 
4. Male and Female  
5. All races  
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Patient refusal  
2. ASA class < or = 4  
3. Pregnancy  
4. Any condi tion precluding patient going home with in 24 hours of surgery  
5. Non -English speaking or inability to participate in the study  
6. Patients with coagulopathy or on therapeutic anticoagulation  
7. Chronic Steroid Use  
8. Narcotic Addiction  
Treatment Groups  
Group 1:  20 Subjects randomized to Group 1 will have a classic lumbar plexus block  with 20mg 0.5% 
ropivacaine, which is standard of care.   
Quadratus Lumborum block (QL 3) versus C lassic   Sharad Khetarpal, MD  
Lumbar Plexus block  in Total Primary, Unilateral Hip  
Replacement Surgery: A Prospective, Randomized, Double -Blind,  
Active Comparator Trial  
Page 5 of 7 
 LP Block Approach:  Patient  will be  positioned in lateral decubitus position with side to be blocked facing 
upwards. Midline will be  identified by palpating the spinous process. Intercristal line will be drawn 
connecting iliac crests. The point of needle insertion w ill be 4 cm lateral to th e intersection of both lines. 
The transverse process will first contact  with a finder needle. Subsequently an 18 gauge 10 cm insulated 
needle w ill be used and advanced until it contacted the transverse process. Needle will then be 
redirected cephalad or ca usdad and advanced 1 cm, until  the quadriceps femoris twitch is obtained as 
desc ribed by Winnie et al. 8 Local anesthetic will then be injected after confirming a motor response 
between 0.3 -0.5 milli amperes.  
Group 2: 20 subjects randomized to Group 2 will  have a Quadratus Lumborum block (QL 3) using 20mg 
of 0.5% ropivacaine   
QL3 Approach: Patient will be  placed in a lateral position with the side to be blocked facing u p. A low 
frequency transducer will be  used to identify three layers of abdominal musculat ure, probe will be then 
moved posteriorly till the transverse abdominus aponeurosis is visualized, the QL muscle is then 
identified by tracing the aponeurosis posteriorly. The transducer is then moved more posteriorly to 
visualize the shadow of transverse process and the origin of QL muscle. Psoas muscle is then identified 
lying anterior to the QL muscle. A 22 gauge 8 cm is inserted in plane posterior to the probe and 
advanced intramuscularly through the QL to interfacial plane between QL and psoas major as  described 
by Børglum, Jens, et al 7 and local anesthetic is deposited.  
Anesthetic Management  
Participants in both treatment groups will receive standard ERAS multi -modal analgesics pre -operatively 
(Celebrex 200 mg PO and Acetaminophen 1000 mg PO) and will receive the standard ERAS anesthetic 
technique intraoperatively (Spinal neuraxial block with hyperbaric bupivacaine in standard doses (1.4 – 
Quadratus Lumborum block (QL 3) versus C lassic   Sharad Khetarpal, MD  
Lumbar Plexus block  in Total Primary, Unilateral Hip  
Replacement Surgery: A Prospective, Randomized, Double -Blind,  
Active Comparator Trial  
Page 6 of 7 
 1.6 mg), intraoperative propofol infusion (50 -100 mcg/kg/min), intravenous dexmetetomidine (12 -20 
mcg) infusion, and intravenous Ketamine (20 mg)). Participants will also follow ERAS protocol for fluid 
manage ment intraoperatively. Post -operative pain management will also follow standard ERAS protocol, 
using  IV hydromorphone (0.2 mg) and P O oxycodone ( 5 -10 mg) on request by patient for moderate to 
severe pain (VAS >5) .  
 
Data Collection and Outcome Measures  
Once the patient has signed the informed consent document they will be randomized to receive with 
the LP block or the QL3 block. Only the person administering the block will be unblinded, both the 
patient and the outcome assessors will be blinded to the trea tment group allocation . Primary outcome 
measures include pain with move ment at 6 hours after surgery,  time for 1st  request for pain medication, 
total pain medications  (narcotics and non -narcotic analgesics)  given in 24 ho urs or till time to discharge.  
If patient is discharged within 24 hours, the time of participant’s ability to walk 100 feet as recorded  by 
physical therapist  will be collected.  
References  
1.Ilfeld, Brian M., et al. "Ambulatory Continuous Posterior Lumbar Plexus Nerve Blocks after Hip 
ArthroplastyA Dual -center, Randomized, Triple -masked, Placebo -controlled Trial."  Anesthesiology: The 
Journal of the American Society of Anesthesiologists  109.3 (2008): 491 -501. 
 
2. Weller, Robert S., et al. "Extensive retroperitoneal hematoma without neurologic deficit in two patients 
who underwent lumbar plexus block and were later anticoagulated."  Anesthesiology: The Journal of the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists  98.2 (2003): 581 -585.  
 
3. Ilfeld, Brian M., Kimberly B. Duke, and Michael C. Dono hue. "The association between lower extremity 
continuous peripheral nerve blocks and patient falls after knee and hip arthroplasty."  Anesthesia and 
analgesia  111.6 (2010): 1552.  
 
4. Hockett, Margaret M., Sheena Hembrador, and Alex Lee. "Continuous quadratu s lumborum block for 
postoperative pain in total hip arthroplasty: a case report."  A&A Practice  7.6 (2016): 129 -131.  
 
Quadratus Lumborum block (QL 3) versus C lassic   Sharad Khetarpal, MD  
Lumbar Plexus block  in Total Primary, Unilateral Hip  
Replacement Surgery: A Prospective, Randomized, Double -Blind,  
Active Comparator Trial  
Page 7 of 7 
 5. La Colla, Luca, Bruce Ben -David, and Rita Merman. "Quadratus lumborum block as an alternative to 
lumbar plexus block for hip surgery: a report of 2 cases."  A&A Practice  8.1 (2017): 4 -6.  
 
6. Adhikary, Sanjib D., et al. "Transmuscular quadratus lumborum versus lumbar plexus block for total hip 
arthroplasty: A retrospective propensity score matched cohort study."  Journal of anaest hesiology, clinical 
pharmacology  34.3 (2018): 372.  
 
7. Børglum, Jens, et al. "Ultrasound -guided transmuscular quadratus lumborum blockade."  BJA: British 
Journal of Anaesthesia  111.eLetters Supplement (2013).  
 
8. Winnie AP, Ramamurthy S, Durrani Z, Radonjic  R: Plexus blocks for lower extremity surgery: New 
answers to old problems. Anesth Review 1974; 1:11  
 