  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 1 of 75 Protocol Title :  Phase I/II Study of Lenalidomide Maintenance Following BEAM (+/ - 
Rituximab) for Chemo -Resistant  or High Risk  Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma  
 
Principal Investigator:    Julie M. Vose, M.D. , M.B.A.     
     Neumann M. and Mildred E. Harris Professor  
Chief, Section of Hematology/Oncology  
Professor of Medicine  
987680 Nebraska Medical Center  
     Omaha, NE 68198- 7680  
     Phone (402) 559- 3848  FAX (402) 559- 6520  
     e-mail: jmvose@unmc.edu 
 
Secondary Investigator s:  James O. Armitage, M.D.  
Philip J. Bierman, M.D.  
     R. Greg ory Bociek , M.D.  
     Matthew Lunning, MD  
 
Multi -site Participation:   IRB Approved Sites  
 Collaborating Sites:    Paolo F. Caimi , MD  
University Hospital Seidman Cancer Center  
     Case Western Reserve University  
     Cleveland, OH  
 
     Siddhartha Ganguly, MD  
University of Kansas Cancer Center  
Westwood, KS  
        
Participating Personnel:    UNMC Physicians  - Pathology:
   
     Dennis Weisenburger, MD  
     Kai Fu, MD , PhD  
     Rakesh Singh, Ph.D . 
 
Biostatistician:    Jane L. Meza, PhD  
 
 
Research Study Coordinator:  Mary Mailliard, R.N., B.S.N., OCN 
     Clinical Research Support  
UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett  Cancer Center , CPDMU  
Early Phase Therapeutic Clinical Trial Unit  
986805 Nebraska Medical Center  
     Omaha, NE 68198- 6805  
     Phone (402) 559- 5582         FAX (402) 559 -8895  
     e-mail: mjmailli@unmc.edu  
   
Lenalidomide:    Celgene Corporation   
                                                       Protocol Number  RV-LYM-PI-0328 
     IND 103,802 EXEMPT 10- 17-08 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 2 of 75 Index:  
          Page 
Abstract/Schema        3 
 
1.0 – Objectives         4  
 
2.0 - Background, Significance, an d Preliminary Studies    4 
 
3.0 - Eligibility Criteria         15  
 4.0 - Registration Procedures        18 
 
5.0 – Treatment Plan         21 
 
6.0 - Measurement of Effect        27 
 7.0 - Study Parameters                   28 
 
8.0 - Drug Formulation and Procurement      31 
 9.0 - Toxicity Reporting Guidelines       36 
 
10.0 - Statistical Considerations       46 
 11.0 - Records to be Kept        48 
 
12.0 - Subject  Consent form Statement      48 
 
13.0 – References         50 
 14.0 - Data Forms         53 
 
Appendix A –  Karnofsky Performance Scale     54 
Appendix B –   Risks of Fetal Exposure,  
 Pregnancy Testing Guidelines  
 and Acceptable Birth Control Methods    55 
Appendix C –      New Y ork Heart Association Heart  
 Disease Classification      59 
Appendix D –   Response Criteria, International Harmonization  
 Project’s update to the International Working  
 Group guidelines       60 
Appendix E –     NCI Common Toxicity Criteria Version 4.0    64 
Appendix F –     Medwatch SAE Reporting Form     64 
Appendix G –   BSA and Creatinine Clearance Calculations               64 
Appendix H-    Eligibility Checklist                                                65 
Appendix  I-  “Oral, Sublingual, and/or Bucc al Route Medication  
          Adherence Standard Procedure   
          Example:  Medication Diary       (Form A)                                   70 
Appendix J -     Blood and Tissue Sample Processing and Shipping  
                          for Cytokine Level Studies                 72  
Appendix K -     International Prognastic Index (IPI)                                          74  
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 3 of 75 Abstract:   This is a multi -center Phase I/II trial in which up to 16 evaluable subject s with 
persistent  or relapsed non- Hodgki n’s lymphoma (NHL) (any histology) that is chem o-
resistant (< a PR) , has received 3 or more prior chemotherapy regimens , or for subject s with 
lymphomas that have a high relapse rate following autologous or syngeneic stem cell 
transplantation (transformed N HL, peripheral T -cell lymphoma (PTCL), mantle cell 
lymphoma, ALK- negative  anaplastic large cell lymphoma ( ALCL, alk neg ), intermediate IPI 
or high risk IPI or subject s with a positive PET scan prior to transplant . Subject s that relapse 
within one year of diagnosis are also eligible. Subjects will receive the suggested transplant 
regimen of BEAM +/ -Rituximab (Rituximab added for CD20+ NHL’s) treatment and 
Autologous Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation (AHSCT) (Standard of Care) followed by lenalidomide maintenance. Lenalidomide Phase  II maintenance therapy will be started 
day 100, or as close as possible by treating physician’s discretion and dependent on the 
subject ’s travel conditions, etc.,  when the ANC is >  1000 and the plts are >  60K. 
Lenalidomide was administered to four subject  dose cohorts, ( 10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg and 25 
mg). Lenalidomide will be administered orally on days 1- 21 followed by 7 days of rest (28 
day cycle) for 12 cycles maintenance. Three (3) subject s will be accrued in each  
Lenalidomide  dose cohort with enrollment starting at dose cohort 1, (10 mg ). These subjects 
will be evaluated to establish the maximum tolerated dose of Lenalidomide that can be 
tolerated in following  Rituximab/BEAM autologous peripheral blood stem cell 
transplantati on.  T he Lenalidomide of 10 mg will be utilized for the Phase II cohort. Due to 
the high dropout rate of subjects and the counting of consented never treated subjects, up to 
114 subjects will be enrolled to achieve the 16 evaluable at the Phase II 10 mg dose level to 
estimate the 1 year event -free and overall survival.  Data collected will be utilized to obtain a 
preliminary estimate of the response rate, event -free and overall survival using this regimen.   
 
 Summary Schema:  
Stem cell collection per standar d protocol  
Rituximab per standard care.  
 
    Day – 6 
  Day - 5   Day - 4   Day - 3   Day - 2      Day - 1  
 
   Day 0  
 
 Transplantation     BCNU  
300mg/
m2 
 Etoposide 
100mg/m2 
BID 
Cytarabine 
100mg/m2 
BID Etoposide 
100mg/m2 
BID 
Cytarabine 100mg/m
2 
BID Etoposide 
100mg/m2 
BID 
Cytarabine 100mg/m
2 
BID Etoposide 
100mg/m2 
BID 
Cytarabine 100mg/m
2 
BID Melphalan  
140mg/m2 Stem 
Cell 
Infusion 
 
   
Day 100 , or as close as possible by treating physician’s discretion and dependent on the subject ’s travel conditions, etc. , post-transplant*  
Phase  I Cohort  # Pts  Days 1 -21 of a 28 day cycle  for 12 cycles after initiation of the therapy post - 
transplant.  
#-1  Maintenance Lenalidomide  5 mg PO  
#1 3 Maintenance Lenalidomide  10 mg PO  
#2 3 Maintenance Lenalidomide  15mg PO  
#3 3 Maintenance Lenalidomide  20 mg PO  
#4 3 Maintenance Lenalidomide  25 mg PO  
Phase  II Cohort    Days 1 -21 of a 28 day cycle for 12 cycles after initiation of the therapy post -
transplant  
 Up to 24  Maintenance Lenalidomide 10mg PO 
* the first cycle of Lenalidomide should be started day 100, or as close as possible by treating physician’s discretion and 
dependent on the subject ’s travel conditions, insurance approval, primary/referral oncologist approval, consolidation radiation, 
which may delay day 100, etc., post-transplant when the ANC is >  1000 and the plts are >  60K. 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 4 of 75  
1.0    Objective  
 
1.1   Primary Objective  
 To establish the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of Lenalidomide given in the 
post- transplant setting for a 12 month maintenance period  
. 
1.2 Secondary Ob jective 
 To obtain preliminary estimates of the 1- year response rate, event -free and 
overall survival using this regimen.  
 
2.0     Background, Significance, and Preliminary Studies  
  Subject s with persistent or relapsed non- Hodgkin’s lymphoma that is 
 chem otherapy resistant or have received 3 or more prior chemotherapy 
 regimens have only a 15 -30% long term disease- free survival following 
 standard high- dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation. 
 The major cause for failure is progressive l ymphoma.   However, the addition 
 of other standard chemotherapy agents have not been found to improve the 
 results in this difficult to treat subject  population.  With this in mind, we have 
 been adding agents to the transplant protocol that have a novel m echanism of 
 action and have demonstrated some individual activity in NHL subject s. 
 Lenalidomide has shown single agent activity in NHL.   The  purpose of this 
 proposed trial is to add on to this  backbone of the BEAM (+/ - Rituximab) with 
 Lenalidomide main tenance therapy to decrease the post-transplant relapse of 
 NHL.  
  2.1 High -Dose Therapy in non -Hodgkin’s Lymphoma  
 
Subject s with relapsed non- Hodgkin’s lymphoma have a high complete 
response rate with Rituxan/BEAM and autologous stem cell transplantation.   
However, there are still a number of subject s who relapse following this 
procedure.  It is hoped the addition of maintenance therapies would improve 
the outcomes for subject s receiving high- dose chemotherapy and stem cell 
transplantation for treatment of  relapsed non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma without 
excessive toxicity.  A Phase I study of the addition of Lenalidomide need to be 
carried out due to the lack of pri or studies with this treatment used as 
maintenance  in the post -transplant setting .   
 
 Subject s who have transformed from a follicular to a diffuse large cell non-
 Hodgkin’s are felt to have a poor prognosis with standard therapies.   
 (Lerner and Burns, 2003; Martinez -Climent, Alizadeh, Segraves, 2003)     
However, if subject s have at least a partial res ponse to salvage 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 5 of 75 chemotherapy with respect to the large cell component and then go on to 
receive high- dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation, 
they have been found to have a similar prognosis to subject s receiving a 
similar transplant for follicular NHL.  (Cao, Horning, Negrin, 2001 ; Andreadis, 
Schuster, Chong, 2005 ; Laudi, Arora, Burns, 2005)   In one study by Cao et al , 
17 subject s with transformed NHL who underwent autologous stem cell 
transplant had a 4 year estimate of overall  surviva l of 50% (95% CI, 24% -
76%) and disease-  free survival year survival of 49% (95% CI, 20% - 78%).  
This compares to a 4 year overall  survival of 60% and a disease- free survival 
of 44% in subject s who were transplanted still having a follicular histology.   
Rituximab (IDEC- C2B8) is a chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against 
the CD20 antigen.  It contains human IgG1 antibody and kappa constant 
regions, complexed to murine variable regions.  This combination seems to 
maximize antitumor activity while minim izing autoimmunogenicity. In vitro  
rituximab mediates antibody -dependent cell -mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) 
and complement -dependent cy totoxicity (CDC).  It appears to directly inhibit 
cellular proliferation and induces apoptosis.  Rituximab has also demons trated an ability to sensitize drug -resistant lymphoma cell lines to the 
cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy.  In vivo , it is not clear which of these 
mechanisms of action predominate.  In subject s with large circulating tumor 
burdens, rapid tumor lysis has been observed, most likely as a result of activation of the complement system.  Toxicity is generally infusional, and related to acute host responses to a foreign protein (e.g., fever, chills, asthenia).  Other toxicities such as acute bronchospasm/hypotension have been observed rarely, and generally respond to the agents used to treat acute 
hypersensitivity reactions.  Such reactions tend to be minimized or detectable early by administering the drug at a controlled gradually escalating infusion rate.  Responses to rituximab are seen over 1- 3 months, with duration of 
response varying by tumor type, bulk of disease, and amount and type of prior therapy.  Median durations of response in these trials were often in the range of 7- 13 months.  Very rarely, life threatening al lergic reactions has 
occurred with the use or rituximab.  
 2.2 Early Trials of Rituximab  
 Maloney et al. initially evaluated Rituximab for use in subject s with relapsed 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma in usual Phase  I fashion, administering it as a 
single agent in doses ranging from 10 to 500 mg/m
2.  Among 15 treated 
subject s, 7 responses (2 partial, 5 minimal) were seen.  Therapy was in 
general well tolerated and no dose- limiting toxicity was observed, although 
the higher dose levels required that subject s undergo prolonged infusion 
times because of infusion- related side effects.  Toxicity consisted generally of 
allergic/infusional symptoms, including fevers, asthenia, chills, rash and urticaria with bronchospasm, hypotension and angioedema seen less commonly.  Some subject s experienced brief, clinically insignificant 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 6 of 75 hematologic nadirs. Infusion- related symptoms tended to be most severe 
during the first infusion and generally diminished with subsequent treatments. 
No increased rates of infection were observed.  This is presumably because serum immunoglobulin and T -cell levels did not change significantly post 
therapy.  The higher dose in the multi -dose study was selected as the test 
dose for subsequent Phase II trials.  As responses appeared to be more 
common in subje cts with relapsed indolent lymphomas, subsequent Phase II 
trials focused primarily on this subject  population.  (Maloney et al.)  
 McLaughlin et al.  published the results of a pivotal large multicenter Phase  III 
trial in which 166 subject s with previously t reated low -grade lymphoma were 
enrolled.  Subject s received rituximab 375 mg/m
2 weekly for 4 weeks.  In the 
intent -to-treat analysis the response rate was 48% and the complete 
response rate was 6%.  Response rates of 60% were seen in those with follicular lymphoma, and subject s considered chemotherapy -resistant still 
demonstrated a response rate of 36%.  The median time to progression for responders was 13.2 months and median duration of response was 11.6 months.  Again, the majority of adverse events occur red during the first 
infusion and was allergic/infusional in nature.  Only 1 grade 4 neutropenia 
was observed. On the basis of these studies, rituximab was approved by the Food and Drug Administration for use in subject s with relapsed low -
grade/follicular non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma.   Several further studies have been 
conducted with rituximab to evaluate other aspects of its therapeutic potential.  A study by Piro and colleagues  evaluated safety and efficacy of extending 
therapy to 8 weekly infusions.  Thirty seven subject s with relapsed/refractory 
low-grade or follicular B -cell NHL who had relapsed or had failed primary 
therapy were treated.  The majority of toxicity as expected was infusional, with events decreasing with subsequent infusions.  No host antibody (human 
anti-chimeric antibody) responses were seen.  Mean serum immunoglobulin 
levels remained within normal.  On an intent -to-treat basis, 5 subject s (14%) 
had a complete response and 16 subject s (43%) had a partial response for an 
overall response rate o f 57%.  Among 35 evaluable subject s, the response 
rate was 60% (14% CR and 46% PR), and the median time to progression (TTP) and the median response duration have not been reached after 19.4+ 
months and 13.4+ months, respectively.  The authors concluded th at the 
safety profile appeared to compare favorably with 4 weekly injections.  It is 
possible that the median time to progression, and median response duration 
with 8 weekly injections is superior to that seen with 4 weeks of treatment, but 
no such direct comparison has yet been carried out.  
 
Finally, a Phase  II study of 31 subject s with low grade/follicular lymphoma 
described response rates and duration in subject s with low grade/follicular 
lymphoma and bulky disease (defined as the presence of at least on e tumor 
mass ≥ 10 cm).  This study demonstrated an overall response rate of 40% in 
28 evaluable subject s.  The median time to progression and duration of 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 7 of 75 response were 8.1 months and 5.9 months, respectively.  The shorter time to 
progression compared with studies of subject s with non- bulky disease 
suggests perhaps decreased penetrance of antibody in bulky disease sites.   
(Davis et al.)  
 
2.3 Rituximab in Conjunction with CHOP in Subject s with Indolent non-
Hodgkin’s Lymphomas  
 
A Phase  II study by Czuczman et al.  published in 1999 looked at the 
combination of CHOP chemotherapy in conjunction with rituximab in 40 subject s with low -grade/follicular non- Hodgkin’s lymphoma.  Subject s had to 
be anthracycline naïve, and had to have a WHO performance status of 0- 2.  
Most subject s had follicular small cleaved or follicular mixed histology, and 
nearly 80% of subject s had received no prior therapy.  CHOP was given in 
standard doses, at 21 day intervals for six cycles.  Rituximab was given at the usual dose for six infusions.  Two infusions were given prior to the initiation of CHOP;  one infusion was given at weeks 5 and 11 respectively, then finally as 
two infusions after the completion of CHOP.  The overall response rate in this group of subject s was 95%, and with a media n follow -up duration of nearly 
two years, 75% of subject s have not experienced disease recurrence or 
progression.  Toxicity did not appear to be different than that associated with CHOP alone, with the exception of the expected first dose effect seen with rituximab.  
 2.4 Rituximab in Aggressive Non -Hodgkin’s Lymphoma  
 
A prospective Phase II study by Coiffier et al.  looked at the use of rituximab in 
54 subject s with aggressive subtypes of non- Hodgkin’s lymphoma and 
mantle -cell lymphoma.  Subject s received 8 weekly infusions of rituximab at a 
dose of either 375 mg/m
2 or a dose of 375 mg/m2 once followed by 7 weekly 
infusions at a dose of 500 mg/m2.  Subject s were evaluated for response 2 
months after completion of therapy.  In an intent -to-treat analysis, the 
complete response rate was 9% and the partial response rate was 22% for an overall response rate of 31%.  The projected median time to progression was greater than 105 days for all subject s and greater than 246 days for 
responding subject s.  Taking into ac count the observation that many of these 
subject s had chemorefractory disease, these data were considered 
encouraging for a single agent.  
 The potential for synergy with rituximab in conjunction with chemotherapy led to a Phase II study of CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, 
prednisone) in combination with rituximab in subject s with advanced stage 
aggressive B -cell lymphomas.  Subject s received rituximab 375 mg/m2 on 
day one and CHOP on day 3 of each 21 day chemotherapy cycle.  Thirty -one 
subjects were treated.  The median age of subject s was 49 years.  All 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 8 of 75 subject s received six cycles of therapy. The overall response rate was 94%.  
The complete response rate was 61%.  The median time to progression had 
not been reached after a median follow -up of 26 months.  Toxicity was 
predominantly hematologic, but did not appear to be different than that expected from CHOP alone. Expected side- effects associated with rituximab 
were seen.  
 The conclusion of this pilot trial was that this regimen was tolerabl e with 
serious adverse events occurring at a rate and severity similar to that seen with conventional CHOP chemotherapy.  Response rates may have been higher than that with CHOP alone, but since this was a pilot Phase II trial, no 
control group was available for comparison.   (Vose et al.)   
 Most recently, a randomized trial comparing CHOP to rituximab/CHOP (r -
CHOP) in elderly subject s (60 -80 years of age) with aggressive B -cell  
lymphomas was conducted by the GELA (Groupe d’Etude de Lymphomes Adultes)  and the first peer reviewed results on this study were recently 
published.  In this study 399 subject s were randomized to CHOP versus r -
CHOP.  For subject s receiving r -CHOP both therapies were given on day 1.  
Response rates were higher for r -CHOP compared wit h CHOP alone (86% vs 
71%, P=0.007).  Eighteen- month event -free survival (62% vs 43%; 
P=0.00012) and overall survival (73% vs 61%; P=0.0065) were superior in the r-CHOP group.  This is the first published randomized trial comparing CHOP 
to r-CHOP.  Although  preliminary results of a second randomized trial are 
likely to be available within the next one to two years, many centers are now 
considering r -CHOP as standard therapy for newly diagnosed aggressive B -
cell non- Hodgkin’s lymphoma.   (Coffier et al.)   
 2.5 Rituximab in Conjunction with High- Dose Therapy/Autologous 
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 Since relapse is the most common cause of treatment failure in subject s with 
chemotherapy refractory or relapsed lymphoma, the evaluation of this combinat ion was clearly warranted.  The potential additive or synergistic 
benefit of rituximab in conjunction with chemotherapy led to the design and execution of three clinical trials at UNMC.  Rituximab was given in conjunction with BEAM (carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine, melphalan) followed by AHSCT.  The first study included subject s with chemotherapy sensitive 
indolent NHL receiving high- dose BEAM/PSCT.  In this study rituximab was 
given as a pre and post -transplant agent as a possible chemosensitized and 
for the treatment of post -transplant minimal residual disease.  This study 
produced a complete response rate of 88% and a 24- month failure- free 
survival of 84% and a 24- month overall survival of 94%.  Toxicity did not 
appear to be greater than that expected f rom the BEAM regimen alone.   
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 9 of 75  
A second trial was conducted which enrolled subject s with chemorefractory 
disease prior to transplantation.  This trial of BEAM in conjunction with rituximab was completed in subject s with refractory disease, multiple prior 
chemotherapy regimens, or mantle- cell lymphoma.  In this trial, rituximab was 
administered twice prior to peripheral blood stem cell mobilization (preliminary 
information had demonstrated that at least two doses of rituximab given two 
weeks prior to hemato poietic stem cell collection was necessary for adequate 
clearing of PCR positive cells in the product to provide further cytoreductive therapy pre- transplant, as well as to act as a potential in- vivo purge prior to 
peripheral blood progenitor cell collecti on.  One further dose of rituximab was 
administered prior to beginning conditioning  with BEAM, and a fourth dose 
was administered post recovery from transplantation.   Preliminary results of 
this trial have demonstrated a complete response rate of 65%, a 24- month 
overall survival of 88% and a 24- month event -free survival of 76%.    
 Investigators from Stanford presented results from a Phase  II trial of rituximab 
as an adjuvant to high-dose therapy/ AHSCT at the recent meeting of the 
American Society of Hematology. Subject s with relapsed/refractory B -cell 
lymphomas were eligible.  Thirty -two subject s received CBV 
(cyclophosphamide carmustine, etoposide) as their conditioning regimen and three received a total body irradiation- based regimen.  All subject s receiv ed a 
purged stem cell product.  Subject s received four weekly infusions of 
rituximab starting at day + 40 post -transplant. Toxicity appeared to be similar 
to that expected with high- dose ch emotherapy/ AHSCT alone.   At a median 
follow -up of 18 months, projected two year freedom from progression is 86%, 
and overall survival is 85%.  This result was felt by the investigators to be an improvement over that seen with conventional conditioning/transplantation 
only (comparison made with historical controls), and as a result a randomized intergroup trial is under development to evaluate rituximab as an adjuvant therapy further in this setting.   However, for subject s with chemotherapy 
refractory NHL results with high- dose chemotherapy and peripheral stem cells 
(PSC) continue to need improvement with additional modalities to the 
regimen (Horowitz et al.) . 
  
2.6 Lenalidomide  
Lenalidomide is a proprietary IMiD ® compound of Celgene Corporation.    
IMiD® compounds have both immunomodulatory and anti -angiogenic 
properties w hich could confer antitumor and antimetastatic effects.  
Lenalidomide has been demonstrated to possess anti -angiogenic activity 
through inhibition of bFGF, VEGF and TNF -alpha induced endothelial cell 
migration, due at least in part to inhibition of Akt phosphorylation response to bFGF. (Dredge et al., 2005)   In addition, lenalidomide has a variety of 
immunomodulatory effects.  Lenalidomide stimulates T cell proliferation, and the production of IL- 2, IL-10 and IFN -gamma, inhibits IL- 1 beta and IL- 6 and 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 10 of 75 modul ates IL- 12 production. (Corral et al.,1993)  Upregulation of T cell derived 
IL-2 production is achieved at least in part through increased AP -1 activity. 
(Schafer et al., 2003)  
 
Although the exact antitumor mechanism of action of lenalidomide is 
unknown, a number of mechanisms are postulated to be responsible for 
lenalidomide’s activity against multiple myeloma.  Lenalidomide has been 
shown to increase T cell proliferation, which leads to an increase in IL- 2 and 
IFN-gamma secretion.  The increased level of these circulating cytokines 
augment natural killer cell number and function, and enhance natural killer cell activity to yield an increase in multiple myeloma cell lysis . (Davies et al., 
2001)   In addition, lenalidomide has direct activity against multiple  myeloma 
and induces apoptosis or G1growth arrest in multiple myeloma cell lines and in multiple myeloma cells of subject s resistant to melphalan, doxorubicin and 
dexamethasone.  (Hideshima et al., 2000)    
 Clinical Experience in S olid Tumors with L enalidom ide 
Twenty subject s with varying types of solid tumors (13 with malignant 
melanoma, 2 each with carcinoma of the pancreas and non- small -cell lung 
cancer [NSCLC], 1 each with renal carcinoma, breast carcinoma, and carcinoid- unknown primary) were enrolled in a Phase  1 study of lenalidomide 
conducted at the St. George Hospital, London, UK.  This was a non -
randomized, open- label with -in subject  dose- escalation design, where 
subject s started on 5 mg/day for 7 days and then increased their dose every 7 
days to 10 mg/day, 25  mg/day, and 50 mg/day for a total of 4 weeks on 
therapy . (Bartlett et al., 2004)  
 Clinical Experience in Multiple M yeloma with Lenalidomide  
In two (2) Phase I studies in multiple myeloma, a total of 41 subject s have 
been treated with lenalidomi de.  In one study at the University of Arkansas, 
15 subject s who relapsed or were refractory to high dose melphalan therapy 
with stem cell transplant were treated for 4 weeks in an open- label safety 
study and were permitted to continue therapy in an extens ion Phase  of the 
trial.  Subject  cohorts were treated at the following daily doses: 5mg, 10mg, 
25mg, and 50mg . (Zangari et al. 2001) .  In a similar study at the Dana Farber 
Cancer Institute, 27 subject s with rapidly advancing refractory multiple 
myeloma were enrolled. (Richardson et al., 2002)  
   Anti-myeloma activity was observed in each of these 2 Phase  I studies.  
Decreases in neutrophil and platelet counts were the dose- limiting toxicities 
associated with lenalidomide.  The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was not reached within 28 days.  Due to dose modifications associated with myelosuppression observed beyond Day 28 at the 25mg and 50mg daily dose levels, the dose schedule most widely used in future studies has been lenalidomide 25 mg on Days 1- 21, repeat ed every 28 days.   
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 11 of 75  
Pharmacokinetic analyses were performed on 15 multiple myeloma subject s 
treated in the Phase I studies.  Absorption was found to be rapid on both Day 
1 and Day 28 with time to maximum blood levels ranging from 0.7 to 2.0 hours at all d ose levels (5mg, 10mg, 25mg, and 50mg).  Plasma lenalidomide 
declined in a monophasic manner with elimination half -life ranging from 2.8 to 
6.1 hours on both Day 1 and 28 at all 4 doses.  No plasma accumulation was observed with multiple daily dosing.  Peak and overall plasma concentrations were dose proportional over the dosing range of 5mg to 50mg.  (Wu, 
Scheffler, 2004)  
 A recent Phase  II trial utilizing lenalidomide plus dexamethasone for newly 
diagnosed multiple myeloma subject s were  reported by the May o Clinic. 
Lenalidomide was given orally 25 mg daily on days 1- 21 of a 28- day cycle. 
Dexamethasone was given orally 40 mg daily on days 1- 4, 9-12, 17 -20 of 
each cycle.  Objective response was defined as a decrease in serum 
monoclonal protein by 50% or great er and a decrease in urine M protein by at 
least 90% or to a level less than 200 mg/24 hours, confirmed by two consecutive determinations at least 4 weeks apart.  Thirty -one of 34 subject s 
achieved an objective response, including 2 (6%) achieving complete response (CR), and 11 (32%) meeting criteria for both very good partial response and near complete response, resulting in an overall objective response rate of 91%.  Of the 3 remaining subject s not achieving an objective 
response, two had minor response ( MR) and one stable disease.  Forty -
seven percent of subject s experienced grade 3 or higher non- hematologic 
toxicity, most commonly fatigue (15%), muscle weakness (6%), anxiety (6%), pneumonitis (6%) and rash (6%). Revlimid®/dexamethasone is a highly active regimen with manageable side- effects in the treatment of newly diagnosed 
myeloma.  (Rajkumar et al., 2005)  
 A Phase  I/II trial of liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil®), vincristine, 
dexamethasone (DVd) and lenalidomide in heavily pretreated relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma subject s is ongoing.  The MTD of 
lenalidomide was 10mg on Days 1- 21 in combination with Doxil® 40mg/m2 
IVPB on Day 1, vincristine 2mg IVP on Day 1 and dexamethasone 40mg PO on Days 1- 4 cycled every 28 days.  All subject s received amoxicillin , acyclovir 
and aspirin 81mg prophylactically.  The dose limiting toxicity with lenalidomide 15mg on Days 1- 21 in combination with DVd was sepsis/septic shock.  
(Hussin etg al., 2004)   Additional Phase  I trials of lenalidomide with 
chemotherapy in advanced malignancies are in progress.  
 Celgene Corporation sponsored 2 multicenter, randomized, double- blinded, 
placebo- controlled Phase  III trials [1 U.S. (MM -009) and 1 international (MM -
010)] in subject s with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma.  (Data file 
Celgene Corporation)   More than 350 subject s were enrolled into each of 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 12 of 75 these studies.  All subject s had to be considered sensitive to dexamethasone 
and were treated with dexamethasone 40mg daily on Days 1- 4, 9-12 and 17 -
20.  In addition to receiving dexam ethasone, subject s were randomized to 
lenalidomide 25mg or placebo each given daily on Days 1- 21.  Cycles were 
repeated every 28 days.  After 4 cycles, there was a predetermined reduction 
of the dexamethasone dose to 40mg daily on Days 1- 4 repeated every 28 
days.  In both studies, a pre- specified interim analysis conducted by an 
Independent Data Monitoring Committee demonstrated that subjects 
receiving the combination of lenalidomide (Len) plus dexamethasone (Dex) had significantly longer times to progressi on and higher response rates than 
those treated with single- agent dexamethasone.  These studies led to the 
FDA approval of lenalidomide in combination with dexamethasone for the treatment of multiple myeloma in subject s that have received at least one 
prior therapy.  
 Clinical experience in Myelodysplastic S yndromes (MDS) with 
Lenalidomide  
An exploratory trial in 43 MDS subject s with transfusion dependent or 
symptomatic anemia was conducted at the University of Arizona.  (List et al., 
2005)   Subject s receive d lenalidomide at doses of 25mg or 10mg per day, or 
of 10mg on Days 1 -21, repeated every 28 days.  All subject s had had no 
response to erythropoietin or had a high endogenous erythropoietin level.  Response rates were similar across the 3 dose schedules us ed.  Responses 
were observed in 24 subject s overall (56%) including 21 subject s with a major 
response and 20 subject s with sustained transfusion independence.  Subject s 
with a major response reached a median hemoglobin level of 13.2 grams per deciliter, with a corresponding 5.3 grams per deciliter median increase from baseline.  After a median follow -up of 81 weeks, the median duration of major 
response had not been reached and was more than 48 weeks.  Of 20 subject s with karyotypic abnormalities, 10 (50%) subject s had a complete 
cytogenetic remission.  The response rate was highest in subject s with a 
clonal interstitial deletion involving chromosome 5q31.1 (10 out of 12, 83%).  Neutropenia and thrombocytopenia were the most common adverse events, and result ed in dose delays or reductions in 25 subject s (58%).  
 Celgene Corporation sponsored a multicenter trial (MDS -003) of 148 MDS 
subject s with a clonal interstitial deletion involving chromosome 5q31.1.  
Lenalidomide was given at a dose of 10mg on Days 1- 21, repeated every 28 
days, to 44 subject s, and at a dose of 10mg daily to the other 104 subject s.  
Transfusion independence was achieved in 93 subject s (64%), with a median 
hemoglobin increase of 3.9g/dl.  Cytogenetic response was achieved in 76% 
of transfusi on independent subject s with 55% achieving a cytogenetic 
complete response.  Pathologic complete response was documented in 32 
out of 110 (29%) evaluable subject s.  With a median follow -up of 9.3 months, 
the median response duration had not been reached.  Neutropenia (39%) and 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 13 of 75 thrombocytopenia (35%) were the most common adverse events requiring 
dose delays or reductions.  (List et al., 2005  
 Another Celgene  Corporation sponsored trial (MDS -002) in subject s with low 
to intermediate- 1 risk MDS enrolled 215 sub jects, of whom, 166 were 
documented to have low to intermediate- 1 risk MDS.  Among the subject s 
with documented low to intermediate- 1 risk MDS, 84 subject s (51%) 
responded to treatment.  Transfusion independence was achieved in 54 subject s (33%) and 30 subjects (18%) achieved a minor response, defined as 
a 50% or greater decrease in blood transfusion requirement.  The median duration of transfusion- independence was 41 weeks.  The median baseline 
hemoglobin level was 8.0g/dl, which increased by 3.2g/dl in responding subject s.  Among 20 subject s evaluable for cytogenetic response, 9 subject s 
(45%) experienced a cytogenetic remission.  
 Clinical Experience with Lenalidomide and Non- Hodgkin’s Lymphoma.  
Two Phase II studies have been performed for subject s with re lapsed non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma.  One was for subject s with indolent NHL and the other 
for subject s with aggressive NHL.  In the protocol treating indolent NHL, the 
overall response rate was 26% in subject s with multiply relapsed follicular 
lymphoma, small l ymphocytic, and marginal zone lymphoma ( Witzig et al ., 
2007).  In the Phase  II study for subject s with relapsed aggressive NHL, the 
overall response rate was 41% with a 50% response rate in mantle cell lymphoma and a 50% response rate in transformed lympho ma. (Wiernik  et 
al., 2007 ).  
 Updated Information for Phase I. (Protocol V.3.8, dated 09- 06-2012)  
Results from Phase  I with 3 subject s treated at dose level I  (10mg), 1 subject  
with dose level toxicity which resulted in expanding to 6 subject s and all 6 
subject s completed 12 cycles. At dose level II (15mg), 3 subject s were 
treated; 1 subject  completed 12 cycles and 2 subject s withdrew from study, 
and no dose level toxicity  occurred at this level. Moving onto dose level IIl  
(20mg) , 3 subject s were treated; 1 subject  completed 12 cycles and 2 
subject s withdrew from study , and  no dose level toxicity occurred at this level.  
During dose level IV  (25mg), 4 subject s were treated; 2 subject s completed 
12 cycles, 1 subject  was removed from the study after repeated delays and 1 
subject  was put on hold post elective surgery.  Two dose level toxicit ies 
occurred at this level and level was expanded to dose level 3 with 3 addi tional 
subject s with 1 subject  receiving treatment and 2 subject s withdr awn from 
study.  All 3 ad ditional subject s had dose level toxicity which is an indicator 
that all subject s will be treated with dose level II  (15mg) in Phase  II of the 
study.     
  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 14 of 75 Indications and Usage 
Revlimid® (lenalidomide) is indicated for the treatment of  subject s with 
trans fusion -dependent anemia due to Low - or Intermediate- 1-risk 
myelodysplastic syndromes associated with a deletion 5q cytogenetic 
abnormality with or without additional cytogenetic abnormalities.  Revlimid® is also approved in combination with dexamethasone f or the treatment of 
subject s with multiple myeloma that have received at least one prior therapy.  
 Adverse Events Most frequently reported adverse events reported during clinical studies with lenalidomide in oncologic and non- oncologic indications, regardless of 
presumed relationship to study medication include: anemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia and pancytopenia, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea, dehydration, rash, itching, infections, sepsis, pneumonia, UTI, Upper respiratory infection, c ellulites, atrial fibrillation, congestive heart 
failure, myocardial infarction, chest pain, weakness, hypotension, hypercalcemia, hyperglycemia, back pain, bone pain, generalized pain, dizziness, mental status changes, syncope, renal failure, dyspnea, pleural effusion, pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis, CVA, convulsions, dizziness, spinal cord compression, syncope, disease progression, death not specified and fractures.  
 Complete and updated adverse events are available in the Investigational Drug B rochure and the IND Safety Letters.  
 
2.7  Study Rationale  
 
The rationale for this trial is to build upon the preliminary results with the combination of BEAM (+/ - Rituxan) for subject s with relapsed NHL.  The 
current trial will add maintenance therapy starting day 100 (+/ - 7 days)  when 
the ANC is > 1000 and the plts are >  60K with Lenalidomide  (in four dose 
cohorts, 10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg and 25 mg) administered orally on days 1- 21 
followed by 7 days of rest (28 day cycle) for 12 cycles after initiation of the therapy post -transplant .  This trial will be in chemoresistant (< PR), subject s 
who have received multiple prior treatments ( > 3 regimens), or have 
histologies that have a known higher post -transplant relapse such as 
transformed lymphoma, PTCL, MCL or ALCL, alk neg , intermediate IPI or 
high risk IPI or subject s with a positi ve PET scan prior to transplant . 
 Phase  II dose will be 10mg  1 day x 21 days of 28- day cycle.  
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 15 of 75 3.0       Eligibility Criteria  
 
3.1 Inclusion Criteria  
3.1.1  Persistent, or relapsed non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma  (NHL) (any 
histology) that is chem o-resistant (< a PR) , subject s who have 
received >3 prior chemotherapy regimens, or  subject s with  
lymphomas that have a high relapse rate following autologous or 
syngeneic stem cell transplantation (transformed N HL, peripheral T -
cell lymphoma (PTCL), mantle cell lymphoma, ALK-negative  
anaplastic large cell lymphoma ( ALCL, alk neg),  intermediate IPI or 
high risk IPI or subject s with a positive PET scan prior to transplant,  
and otherwise eligible for transplantation with adequate end-organ 
function.  
 
3.1.2  Subject s that relapse within one year of diagnosis.    
 
3.1.3  Able to collect >  1.5 X 106 CD34+/kg cell for transplantation.   
 
3.1.4  ANC > 1000 cells/mm3 and Platelet Count >  60K when maintenance 
Lenalidomide is started [ as close t o as feasible to day  100 post-
transplant ].  
3.1.5   Subject s must have calculated creatinine clearance ≥ 30ml/min 
(Appendix H).  
 
3.1.6 Total bilirubin <  1.5 x ULN  
 
3.1.7 AST (SGOT) and ALT (SGPT) <  3 x ULN.  
 
3.1.8 Age >19 years.   
 
3.1.9   Subject s who are seropositive because of  hepatitis B virus  vaccine  
 
3.1.10 Subject s must be willing to give written informed consent, and sign  
an institutionally approved consent form before performance of any 
study -related procedure not part of normal medical care, with the 
understanding that consent  may be withdrawn by the subject at any 
time without prejudice to future medical care.  
 
3.1.11 Able to adhere to the study visit schedule and other protocol 
requirements . 
 
3.1.12 Expected survival duration of >  six months.  
 
3.1.13 Karnofsky Performance Status >  70.  (Appendix A)  
 
3.1.14 Subject s > age 60 or with clinical signs of heart disease must have 
ejection fraction ≥ 45% LVEF  pre-transplant . 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 16 of 75  
3.1.15 Subject s with clinical signs of pulmonary insufficiency must have 
DLCO to be measured at > 50% of predicted value prior to 
transplant . 
 
3.1.16 No serious disease or condition that, in the opinion of the 
investigator,   would compromise the subject ’s ability to participate in 
the study.  
 
3.1.17 Disease free of prior malignancies for ≥  2 years with exception of 
currently treated basal cell, squamous cell c arcinoma of the skin, or 
carcinoma “insitu” of the cervix or breast  or low risk prostate cancer 
after curative therapy . 
 
3.1.18 All study participants must be registered into the mandatory Revlimid 
REMS TM program, and be willing and able to comply with the 
requi rements of  Revlimid REMS TM program.  
 
3.1.19 Females of childbearing potential (FCBP)† must have a negative 
serum or urine pregnancy test with a sensitivity of at least 50 
mIU/mL within 10 – 14 days prior to and again within 24 hours of 
prescribing lenalidomide ( prescriptions must be filled within 7 days) 
and must either commit to continued abstinence from heterosexual 
intercourse or begin TWO acceptable methods of birth control, one 
highly effective method and one additional effective method AT THE SAME TIME, at least 28 days before she starts taking lenalidomide.  FCBP must also agree to ongoing pregnancy testing.  Men must 
agree to use a latex condom during sexual contact with a FCBP 
even if they have had a successful vasectomy.  See Appendix B  
Risks of Fetal Ex posure, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines and 
Acceptable Birth Control Methods . 
 
3.1.20 Females of reproductive potential must adhere to the scheduled pregnancy testing as required in the Revlimid REMS
 TM program.  
 
3.1.21 Able to take aspirin (81 or 325 mg) daily as prophylactic 
anticoagulation ( subject s intolerant to ASA may use warfarin or low 
molecular weight heparin).  
 
3.1.22 Male subject agrees to use an acceptable method for contraception 
for the duration of the study.  
 
 
† A female of childbearing potential is a sexually matur e woman who: 1) has not undergone a 
hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy; or 2) has not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 
consecutive months (i.e., has had menses at any time in the preceding 24 consecutive months).  
                     
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 17 of 75 3.2  Exclusion Criteria  
3.2.1 Chemosensitive NHL, except subject s receiving >  3 prior 
chemotherapy regimens,  or subject s having transformed NHL , 
PTCL,  MCL , or ALCL, alk neg.  
 
3.2.2 End-organ function not appropriate for transplant ation. 
 
3.2.3 Inability to collect adequate stem cells.  
 
3.2.4 Known positiv e for HIV or infec tious hepatitis, type B (HBV) or C 
(HCV) or active Hepatitis .  
 
3.2.5 Any serious medical condition, laboratory abnormality, or psychiatric 
illness that would prevent the subject from signing the informed 
consent form.  
 
3.2.6 Pregnant or breast feedi ng females. (Lactating females must agree 
not to breast feed while taking lenalidomide).  
 
3.2.7 Known hypersensitivity to thalidomide or lenalidomide (if applicable) . 
 
3.2.8 The development of erythema nodosum if characterized by a 
desquamating rash while taking thali domide or similar drugs.  
 
3.2.9 Any prior use of lenalidomide.  
 
3.2.10 Concurrent use of other anti -cancer agents or treatments . 
 
3.2.11 Serum creatinine >2. 0mg/dL or calculated creatinine clearance <  
30ml/min (Appendix H). 
 
3.2.12 Active infection at the start of Lenalidomide.  
 
3.2.13 Myocardial infarction within 6 months prior to enrollment or has New 
York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III or IV heart failure 
uncontrolled angina, severe uncontrolled ventricular arrhythmias, or 
electrocardiographic evidence of acute ischemia or active 
conduction system abnormalities.  (Appendix C)   Prior to study entry, 
any ECG abnormality at Screening has to be documented by the 
investigator as not medically relevant.  
 
3.2.14 History of life threatening or recurrent thrombosis/embolism.  
Subject s may participate if they are adequately ant icoagulated 
during the treatment.  
 
3.2.15  Subject  has >Grade 2 peripheral neuropathy within 14 days before 
enrollment  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 18 of 75 4.0       Registration Procedures  
 
Subject s who are referred to the Nebraska Medical Center (NMC) / UNMC;  
University o f Kansas Cancer Center -Westwood, KS ; University Hospitals  Seidman 
Cancer  Center -Case Western Reserve University - Cleveland, OH ; or other IRB 
approved sites , for autologous stem cell transplant with p ersistent, or relapsed non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) (any histology) that is chem oresistant (< a PR ), has 
received 3 or more prior chemotherapy regimens, or for subject s with lymphomas 
that have a high relapse rate following autologous  or syngeneic  stem cell 
transplantation (transformed NHL, peripheral T -cell lymphoma  (PTCL), mantle cell 
lymphoma,  ALK-negative  anaplastic large cell lymphoma ( ALCL , alk neg) , 
intermediate IPI or high risk IPI  or subject s with a positi ve PET scan prior to transplant  
may be eligible for this trial.   The pre- conditioning regimen will  be at the discretion of 
the treating physician.  Screening eligibility will be performed by the treating 
physician at the time of encounter.  On initial presentation, a history and physical 
examination are performed, laboratory data obtained, and performa nce status is 
assessed. Imaging studies will be obtained as clinically indicated.  The subject ’s 
primary oncologist will make the decision as to eligibility of the candidate based on the eligibility criteria listed above.  
 
If the subject  is found eligible,  he/she will then be offered the option to participate.  
An informed consent will be signed by the subject  after thorough review of the study 
is completed with the physician and his/her designee.  All study participants must be 
registered into the mandatory  Revlimid REMS TM program.  
 
Some insurance carrier’s may decline to cover the costs of usual medical care if the 
subject  is participating in a clinical trial.  The subject  will be provided assistance by 
the research nurse coordinator in determining if the insurance carrier will decline coverage.  Insurance carriers may or may not  pay for study related expenses.  The 
subject  can then decide if they wish to participate.   
 
4.1 Eligibility Verification/Registration:  
Before subject s are enrolled into the study,  an eligibility checklist  (Appendix H) must 
be completed to verify the subject meets the eligibility criteria.  Date of enrollment is 
defined as the date of the start of study treatment / first protocol related intervention.  
 
Subject s will be registered through the UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett  Cancer Center 
Research Project Coordinator  and the UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center 
Protocol Review and Monitoring System Office (PRMS).   
 Study personnel from non- UNMC IRB approved sites will contact the UNMC Fred & 
Pamela Buffett Cancer Center Research Project Coordinator if a non- UNMC subject  
appears to meet the eligibility criteria.  They will fax the c ompleted eligibility checklist  
(Appendix H) and accompanying applicable de-identified source documents (i.e . 
laboratory, pathology, and radiology records) to the UNMC research study 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 19 of 75 coordinator, at FAX: 402- 559-8895 (ph:402- 559-5582 or 402- 559-5286) to verify the 
subject meets the eligibility criteria.  The eligibility check list and source documents 
will be ma intained in the study file.  If the UNMC research study coordinator confirms 
that the non- UNMC subject  meets criteria, and target accrual has not been met, 
approval for the non- UNMC subject  will be given.  A confirmation of registration will 
be forwarded by  the UNMC research study coordinator.  
 
UNMC:  
Study personnel will provide the UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center PRMS 
office (ZIP 6805) a copy of the signed and dated consent form for each UNMC 
subject registered to the protocol within one (1) week  that includes the following 
information:  
• Protocol Number  
• Subject  Identification: Subject ’s name UNMC/NMC medical record number  
• Subject  demographics: gender, birth date (mm/dd/yyyy), race, ethnicity  
• New CTRP reporting requirements: Subject  zip code/country  (if not USA) 
and primary method of payment information  
 
Collaborating Sites:  
Collaborating  sites must have both local and  UNMC IRB approval, and have met all 
other UNMC criteria to enroll. Study personnel from non- UNMC IRB approved sites 
will p rovide the UNMC Research Project Coordinator  with: 
• Study Manual demographics fax/scan cover  
• Copy of the signed (subject  signature obliterated with signature line and 
subject initials visible)  and dated consent form  
• Signed eligibility checklist  
• De-identified source documents (with study assigned subject I.D. if known 
on each page) to support eligibility (i.e., H&P, Medical/Surgical Hx, lab, pathology, scans, etc.).  
 UNMC Research Project Coordinator  will register collaborating  site subjects to 
the National Cancer Insti tute (NCI) Clinical Trials Reporting Program (CTRP) 
Accrual Registry.  Collaborating sites will utilize the Fax/Scan Cover provided in 
the Study Manual which includes demographics required for CTRP accrual reporting compliance.  
 
The information listed bel ow for subjects enrolled at collaborating  sites will be 
provided to the PRMS office by the UNMC Research Project Coordinator within one (1) week  of enrollment as applicable:  
 
• UNMC and Collaborating Site Protocol Number s 
• Investigator /Collaborating  Site Identifier (ID)  
• Subject ID:  Assigned by UNMC [Site ID  followed by subject number (##-
###)]  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 20 of 75 • Consent Date: Date subject signed consent  
• Re-consent Date:  (If applicable)  
• Ineligibility Status: (If known)  
• Off Study Date: (If applicable)  
• CTRP Status (Entered/Not entered)  
 
University of Nebraska Medical Center  
Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center PRMS Office  
Attn: Anna Grant, RRT , PRMS Administrator  
986805 Nebraska Medical Center  
Omaha, NE 68198- 6805  
Ph: (402) -559-4232  
FAX: (402) -559-4970 
 
4.2 Requirements for Non- UNMC Sites/ Collaborating Institutions: 
 
Submitting Regulatory Documents  
Before a collaborating  institution may enter subject s, protocol specific 
regulatory documents must be submitted to the UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett 
Cancer Center  study Project  Coordinator . 
 
4.3  Required Protocol Specific Regulatory Documents  
1. Confirmation that UNMC PI and Research Study Coordinator conducted an 
initial Site  Visit/Teleconference prior to opening a protocol to accrual at 
collaborating  sites. 
2. Copy of IRB Informed Consent Document.  
    NOTE: Any deletion or substantive modification of information concerning  
    risks or alternative procedures contained in the sample informed consent  
   document must be justified in writing by the inv estigator and approved by  
   the IRB.  
3. IRB Approval Letter  
    NOTE: The above submissions must include the following details:  
• Indicate all sites approved for the protocol under an assurance  
  number.  
• OHRP assurance number of reviewing IRB  
• Full pro tocol title and number  
• Version Date  
• Type of review (full board vs. expedited)  
• Date of review.  
• Signature of IRB official  
 
5.0     Treatment Plan  
 
Subject s will receive the suggested transplant regimen of R/BEAM treatment and 
AHSCT (Standard of Care) followed by lenalidomide maintenance.  For the 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 21 of 75 lenalidomide maintenance portion of the study, a Phase  I study design was  needed 
to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of lenalidomide in this setting.  The 
dose of lenalidomide  used for the Phase  II maintenance portion will be 10 mg.  
 
 
              5.1   Administration of Lenalidomide Maintenance Regimen  
Visits in between day of dismissal from transplant,  as close as feasible 
to day 100 and 1 year can be done at the subject s referring or home 
physi cian.   Disease re -evaluation at day 100 (+/- 7 days) , and 1 year is 
preferred to be done at UNMC but if not possible can be done referring 
or home physician office.   
 
Phase  II maintenance therapy ( the first cycle should be started day 
100, or as close as p ossible by treating physician’s discretion and 
dependent on the subject ’s travel conditions, etc., post-transplant , 
when the ANC is >  1000 and the plts are >  60K) with Lenalidomide 
(see Lenalidomide dosing cohorts section 5.8.1)  administered orally on 
days  1-21 followed by 7 days of rest ( 28 day cycle)  for 12 cycles. 
Prescriptions must be filled within 7 days.   
 Females of childbearing potential should not handle or administer lenalidomide unless they are wearing gloves.  
 Lenalidomide will be supplied as capsules for oral administration.  
 
If a dose of lenalidomide is missed, it should be taken as soon as possible on the same day.  If it is missed for the entire day, it should not be made up.  
 Subject s who take more than the prescribed dose of lenalidomide 
should be instructed to seek emergency medical care if needed and 
contact study staff immediately.  
 Subject s are required to take a daily dosing of  aspirin ( 81 or 325 mg)  
beginning Day 1 of Lenalidamide .  Low molecular weight heparin may 
be utilized in subject s that are intolerant to ASA.   Coumadin should be 
used with caution and close monitoring of INR.  
 Subjects experiencing adverse events may need study treatment modifications (See section 5. 8.4). 
 5.1.1 Lena lidomide  dosing 
Based in Phase I data, the MTD w as determined to be 15 
mg but, t he MTD for the study was based on cycle 1 of 
the Lenalidomide maintenance.  However, there is 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 22 of 75 cumulative toxicity of Lenalidomide, especially in the 
post-transplant setting which led to a need to lower the 
dose to 10 mg for the Phase II study.  At the 10 mg dose, 
a much higher percentage of subject s were able to 
complete >  6 months of maintenance therapy.  Therefore 
the dose for continued Phase  II will be 10 mg. 
Lenalidomide capsules will be taken orally daily days 1-21 of a 28 day cycle for 12 cycles post -transplant.  
 
5.1.2 Instructions for Initiation of a New Cycle  of Lenalidomide  
A new course of treatment may begin on the scheduled Day 1 of a new cycle if  lab work is obtained prior to Day 1:  
• The ANC is ≥ 1000 mm³;   
• The platel et count is ≥  60K;  
• Any drug -related rash or neuropathy that may have occurred 
 has resolved to ≤ grade 1 severity;  
• Any other drug -related adverse events that may have occurred 
 have resolved to ≤ grade 2 severity.  
If these conditions are not met on Day 1 of a new cycle, the subject will be 
evaluated weekly and a new cycle of treatment will not be initiated until the toxicity has resolved as described above.  If lenalidomide dosing was halted during the previous cycle and was restarted with a one- level dos e 
reduction without requiring an interruption for the remainder of the cycle, 
then that reduced dose level will be initiated on Day 1 of the new cycle. If lenalidomide dosing was omitted for the remainder of the previous cycle or if the new cycle is delayed due to toxicity newly encountered on the scheduled Day 1 , then the new cycle will be started with a one-
level dose reduction of lenalidomide.  
 5.1.3  I nstructions for Dose Modifications or I nterruption During a 
Cycle of Lenalidomide    
 (See the following  Table. ) 
NCI CTC Toxicity Grade  Dose Modification Instructions   
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 23 of 75 NCI CTC Toxicity Grade  Dose Modification Instructions   
Grade 3 neutropenia 
associated with fever 
(temperature ≥ 38.5º  C) 
or Grade 4 neutropenia   
• Hold (interrupt) lenalidomide dose.  
• Follow CBC weekly.  
• If neutropenia has resolved to ≤ grade 2 prior to Day 21of the 
current cycle , restart lenalidomide at next lower dose level and 
continue through the scheduled Day 21 of the current cycle. 
Otherwise, omit for remainder of cycle and reduce the dose of lenalidomide by 1 dose level at the start of the next cycle. Omitted doses are not made up .  If neutropenia is the only toxicity for which 
a dose reduction is required,  G-CSF may be used and the 
lenalidomide dose maintained.  If G -CSF is needed in more than 
one consecutive cycle then that should be a DLT  
  
 
Thrombocytopenia 
≥Grade 3 (platelet count 
< 50,000/mm³)   
• Hold (interrupt) lenalidomide dose.  
• Follow CBC weekly.  
• If thrombocytopenia resolves to ≤  grade 2 prior to Day 21 of the current 
cycle , restart lenalidomide at next lower dose level and continue through 
the scheduled Day 21 of the current cycle. Otherwise, omit for remainder of 
cycle and reduce the dose of lenalidomide by 1 dose level at the start of the 
next cycle. Omitted doses are not made up .  
 
Platelet count < 50K • Hold prophylactic anti -coagulation/ASA for platel et <50K  
• Restart prophylactic anti -coagulation when platelet count is ≥ 60K  
Non-blistering rash  
1 
Grade 3  
2 
3 
4 
5 
             Grade 4   
• If Grade 3, hold (interrupt) lenalidomide dose.  Follow weekly.  
• If the toxicity resolves to ≤ grade 1 prior to Day 21 of the cur rent cycle , 
restart lenalidomide at next lower dose level and continue through the 
scheduled Day 21 of the current cycle. Otherwise, omit for remainder of 
cycle and reduce dose of lenalidomide by 1 dose level at the start of the 
next cycle. Omitted doses are not made up.  
 
• If Grade 4, d iscontinue lenalidomide.  Remove subject  from study.   
 
Desquamating 
(blistering) rash - any 
Grade   
• Discontinue lenalidomide.  Remove subject  from study.  
 
Neuropathy  
when Lenalidomide is 
<3% 
Grade 3  
 
 
  
 
 
Grade 4   
• If Grade 3 , hold (interrupt) lenalidomide dose.  Follow at least weekly.  
• If the toxicity resolves to ≤ grade 1 prior to Day 21 of the current cycle, 
restart lenalidomide at next lower dose level and continue through the 
scheduled Day 21 of the current cycle. Otherwi se, omit for remainder of 
cycle and reduce the dose of lenalidomide by 1 dose level at the start of the next cycle. Omitted doses are not made up.  
 
 
 
• If Grade 4, d iscontinue lenalidomide.  Remove subject  from study.   
 
 
Venous 
thrombosis/embolism  
≥ Grade 3  • Hold (interrupt) lenalidomide and start therapeutic anticoagulation , if 
appropriate  
•  Restart lenalidomide at investigator’s discretion (maintain dose level).  
• See Anticoagulation Section    
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 24 of 75 NCI CTC Toxicity Grade  Dose Modification Instructions   
Hyperthyroidism or 
hypothyroidism   
• Omit lenalidomide for remainder  of cycle, evaluate etiology, and initiate 
appropriate therapy.  
• See Instructions for Initiation of a New Cycle and reduce the dose of 
lenalidomide by 1 dose level.   
other non -hematologic 
toxicity ≥ Grade 3  
• Hold (interrupt) lenalidomide dose.  Follow at least weekly.  
• If the toxicity resolves to ≤ grade 2 prior to Day 21 of the current cycle, 
restart lenalidomide and continue through the scheduled Day 21 of the 
current cycle . Otherwise, omit for rem ainder of cycle. Omitted doses are not 
made up. For toxicity attributed to lenalidomide, reduce the lenalidomide 
dose by 1 dose level when restarting lenalidomide . •  
 
 
5.1.4 Treatment compliance  for Lenalidomide Dosing  
Research center personnel will review  the dosing instructions with subjects.  
Subjects will not receive study medication until they speak with the  Revlimid 
REMS TM certified pharmacist.  To provide a means of ensuring oral route of 
medication adherence to subject  while participating in this c linical trial, 
standard procedure for “Oral, Sublingual, and/or Buccal Route Medication Adherence Standard Procedure (V 1.0 11- 25-2013)” will be followed. See 
Appendix I.  All unused Revlimid® (lenalidomide) capsules should be returned 
as instructed through 
Revlimid REMS TM program.   If any study drug is lost or 
damaged, its disposition should be documented in the  source documents.  
 5.2 Duration of Therapy  
Subject s may be withdrawn from the study by the investigator or supporter for 
the following reasons: any adverse event or toxicity which compromises the subject ’s ability to participate, disease progression, and discontinuation of 
lenalidomide for any reason, major violation of the study protocol, suspected pregnancy, any intercurrent illness or condition w hich in the opinion of the 
investigator would necessitate withdrawal from the study.  Additionally, the 
subject  may decide to withdraw from the study and will be offered 
consultation with the investigator to discuss consequences and benefits of 
such withdr awal.  
 Subject s, who discontinue treatment for any reason, will be followed for 
toxicity, relapse, and death as per any standard transplant subject .  
 Subject s with stable disease will remain on study until disease progression. 
Lenalidomide will be discont inued a fter 12 cycles after initiation of the 
therapy.  All subject s will continue to be followed for survival following 
treatment on the study.  
 
 
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 25 of 75  
5.3 Supportive Care/Additional Therapy  
The subject s will be cared for as standard bone marrow transplant su bject s. 
Subject s should receive full supportive care, including transfusions of blood 
and blood products, antibiotics, and antiemetics when appropriate.  
 
Subject s will be discharged from the hospital and followed on an outpatient 
basis as clinically indic ated.  
 Females of childbearing potential (FCBP)
† must either commit to continued 
abstinence from heterosexual intercourse or begin TWO acceptable methods of birth control, one highly effective method and one additional effective method AT THE SAME TIME, pre or day 1 of  transplant  and at least 28 days 
before she starts taking lenalidomide.  FCBP must also agree to ongoing pregnancy testing.  Men must agree to use a latex condom during sexual contact with a FCBP even if they have had a successful vasectomy.  See 
Appendix B Risks of Fetal Exposure, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines and Acceptable Birth Control Methods . 
 
† A female of childbearing potential is a sexually mature woman who: 1) has not undergone a 
hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy; or 2) has not been naturally postmenopausal for at 
least 24 consecutive months (i.e., has had menses at any time in the preceding 24 
consecutive months).  
 
External beam radiation therapy will not be administered during the transplant course.  External beam radiation may,  however be given following the 
transplant as felt to be clinically indicated for areas of bulky tumor prior to transplant.  External beam radiation given post – transplant should be given 
prior to start of lenalidomide.  
 The use of hematopoietic growth fact ors (GCSF or GMCSF) to stimulate 
blood cell production will be initiated post stem cell transplant as per existing institutional policy  (ANC < 500 associated with neutropenic fever ).   
   
 Treatment with corticosteroids, other than transient administration to control 
or prevent nausea or vomiting , asthma, or allergic reactions , will not be 
permitted and may result in withdrawal of a subject  from the study.  Non-
steroidal hormones administered for non- lymphoma- related conditions, e.g., 
insulin for diabetes, are acceptable.  
 Anticoagulation   Lenalidomide increases the risk of thrombotic events in subject s who are at 
high risk of thrombosis or with a history of  thrombosis, in particular when 
combined with other drugs known to cause thrombosis.  When lenalidomi de is 
                     
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 26 of 75 combined with other agents such as steroids (e.g. dexamethasone, 
prednisone), anthracyclines (Doxil, Adriamycin) and erythropoietin the risk of thrombosis is increased.  
  The use of  daily dosing of  aspirin ( 81 or 325 mg)  will be required to start wi th 
Day 1 of Lenalidamide.  Low molecular weight heparin may be utilized in 
subject s that are intolerant to ASA. Coumadin should be used with caution 
and close monitoring of INR.  
 
 5.4 Staging Re -Evaluations  
Subject s will be restaged and evaluated by radiographic tests that are 
disease appropriate, such as: CT scans, PET scans, MRI. A bone marrow biopsy (only if previously positive) and evaluated with labs (CBC, diff, plt, CMET, LDH, TSH) at Day 100 as close as feasible and one year post -
transplant evaluati on.  If <CR  at Day 100 (+/- 7 days)  repeat staging 
evaluations at the treating physicians discretion.  
 At yearly intervals  for 5 year s minimum  after the first annual visit post -
transplant, the subject s will be clinically evaluated.  Yearly l abs, chest x -ray, 
scans and other tests  will be perfo rmed as clinically appropriate  and more 
frequently  for symptoms or problems .    
 5.5  Biospecimens for Research Purposes  
1. Diagnostic Tissue Block:  
For DLBCL    -- immunostaining to distinguish between GBC and non- GBC, 
        Ki67 
For FL            -- CD20, 3, 68, 10, BCL2, Fox P3, PD -1 
For MCL        -- CD20, 3, 5, Ki67, cyclin D1  
For all tumors –  CD34 for vascular density  
 
Shipping:  Send frozen tissue overnight on dry ice Monday through Thursday 
only.  Do not send the day before a holiday.  Tissue should be frozen in an 
OCT block, or a sample of tissue frozen (not embedded) and wrapped in foil 
and sent overnight on dry ice.  It is critical that the frozen tissue remains frozen, is well -packed and surrounded by dry ice.  
 
Please contact  Chengfeng Bi or Xuan Zhang, Dept. of Pathology/ 
Microbiology at (402) 559- 7753 AND the UNMC Research Project 
Coordinator to advise of planned shipments and to discuss appropriate 
procedures in the event a tissue sample must be sent  on a Fri day or before a 
holiday.  
 
If alternative methods require consideration, please contact Kai Fu M.D. , 
Ph.D.  for guidance on acceptable specifications.  
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 27 of 75  
2.  Post PSCT:  
2- 10ml Na Heparin tubes, baseline before Lenalidomide, 6 months  and 1 
year post -transplant on Lenalidomide (or end of study drug if off 
Lenalidomide before this time point)  if the subject  returns to site .   
 1- 10ml Serum tubes, baseline before Lenalidomide, 6 months and 1 year 
post-transplant on Lenalidomide (or end of study drug if off Lenalido mide 
before this time point) if the subject returns to site.   
 
Serum to assay for VEGF, sIL2R, IL12, TNFa  
Flow analysis for total T -cells (Th1, Th2, Th17), B -cells, NK -cells, 
monocytes (subsets)  
 
Shipping:  Send blood sample overnight at room temp Monday t hrough 
Thursday only; do not send the day before a holiday.   
 
Please contact  Michelle Varney, Dept. of Pathology/ Microbiology at (402) 
559-5580  AND the UNMC Research Project Coordinator to advise of planned 
shipments and to discuss appropriate procedures in the event a sample 
collection must be drawn  on a Friday or before a holiday.  
 
If alternative methods require consideration, please contact Rakesh Singh, 
PhD for guidance on acceptable specifications.  
 
6.0 Measurement of Effect  
Response to therapy will be classified as complete response (CR), complete response, partial response (PR), no response (NR), progressive disease (PD), early death, or not evaluable.  Response to therapy will be determined at Day 100.  For specific definitions of the International Harmonization Project’s update to the 
International Working Group guidelines , see Appendix D . 
 Subject s will be analyzed with respect to overall survival and event -free survival.  
Overall survival is defined as time from the first chemotherapy administered on the 
transplant trial  until death from any cause.  Event -free survival is defined as time 
from therapy until relapse, progression, or death from any cause.  Response will be determined by the principal investigator or the co- principal investigators.  
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 28 of 75 7.0 Study Parameters  
Schedule of Study Assessments for Lenalidomide  
 
 
Procedure   
Transplant 
Related 
Procedures 
(Standard of 
Care)   Cycle 1 of Revlimid®  (lenalidomide)  
Day 100  Subsequent  
Cycles   
28 days after 
therapy 
completed 12 
cycles Follow -
Up 
Phase3 
Day  
1 
 Day  
8 Day  
15 Day   
22 Day   
1  
Record prior medications, treatments   X       
Record prior anti -cancer therapies   X       
Physical exam, vital signs, weight , 
height9, as medically indicated9a  X9    X9a X x 
KS performance status   X9     X x 
CT , or PET or MRI  Pre-transplant      X7 11 X 11  
Chest x -ray 1         
Bone Marrow Bx 2, 11 Pre-transplant if 
positive previously     X2, 11 X2, 11  
ECG , PFTs, Echocardiogram  Pre-transplant          
HIV testing pre -transplant  Pre-transplant         
Hematology  CBC diff, PLT   X9, 12 X X X X X  
C MET  LDH  X9,12  X  X X  
TSH4  X4, 12    X4,   
Pregnancy testing5  X6 X X X X6 X6  
Research blood specimen Dr. Singh’s 
lab VEGF and cytokines ( 2-10ml NA 
Heparin green top tubes  and 1- ml no 
additive red top at baseline, 6 months 
and 1 year post -transplant)   X    X 1yr post -
transplant    
Request Research tissue block for 
immunostaining  Dr. Fu’s  lab (see 
Appendix J)   X       
Register subject  into Revlimid REMS TM 
program   X       
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 29 of 75 Prescribe lenalidomide via  Revlimid 
REMS TM  10  X10    X10   
Response assessment       X7 X  
Record adverse events8   X X X X X8  
Record concomitant 
therapies/procedures    X  X X X  
Obtain Follow -Up anti -cancer 
treatments         X 
Obtain Follow -Up survival information         X 
* Variations of ± 3 days of the scheduled visit are permitted.   
If Physical examination, vital signs, weight , height  and KS performance status were done within 7 days of Day 1, they do not need to be 
repeated at Study Day 1.  
An unscheduled visit can occ ur at any time during the study.  Source must be maintained for these unscheduled visits.  The date for the visit 
and any data generated must be recorded on the appropriate CRF.  Source documents for these unscheduled visits must also be m aintained.  
1 Not needed if Chest CT scan has been obtained.  
2 If subject had previously positive bone marrow bx. scan or if symptoms suggest metastases.  
3 Follow -up day 100, and yearly at UNMC  or Collaborating Site preferably. Otherwise for the first year every 3 months by local MD ’s per SOC 
with CBC, B -met, exams.   Then once every 6 months  for the second year then yearly . 
4 To include Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) at Screening and at treatment discontinuation.  T3 and T4 levels may be assessed as 
clinically indicated.  
5 Pregnancy tests for females of childbearing potential.  A female of childbearing potential (FCBP) is a sexually mature female who: 1) has not 
undergone a hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy; or 2) has not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 c onsecutive months (i.e., 
has had menses at any time in the preceding 24 consecutive months).  
6 Pregnancy tests must occur within 10 – 14 days and again within 24 hours prior to prescribing lenalidomide (prescriptions must be filled 
within 7 days).  FCBP wi th regular or no menstruation must have a pregnancy test weekly for the first 28 days and then every 28 days while on 
therapy (including breaks in therapy); at discontinuation of lenalidomide and at Day 28 post the last dose of lenalidomide.  Females with 
irregular menstruation must have a pregnancy test weekly for the first 28 days and then every 14 days while on therapy (including breaks in 
therapy), at discontinuation of lenalidomide and at Day 14 and Day 28 post the last dose of lenalidomide (see Append ix: Risks of Fetal 
Exposure, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines and Acceptable Birth Control Methods ).  See Revlimid REMS TM program requirements for FCBP 
and birth control  
7 As clinically indicated.  
8 An additional safety assessment will be done 30 days (+/ - 2 days) following the last dose of study drug.  
9 If screening assessments were done within 7 days of Day 1, they do not need to be repeated at Study Day 1.  
9a Physical exam, vital signs, weight, height only as medically indicated.  
10 Lenalidomide must be prescribed through and in compliance with Celgene  Corporation ’s Revlimid REMS TM program.  Prescriptions must be 
filled within 7 days.  Any unused Revlimid® (lenalidomide) should be returned to the research center for disposition , in accordance with the 
Revlimid REMS TM program.   If any study drug is lost or damaged, its disposition should be documented in the source documents.  
11 Subject s will be restaged and evaluated by radiographic tests that are disease appropriate, such as: CT scans, PET scans, MRI.   A bone 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 30 of 75 marrow biopsy (only if previously positive) and evaluated with labs (CBC, diff, plt, CMET, LDH, TSH) at Day 100 and yearly  unless clinical 
suspicion of progression. If <CR at Day 100 repeat staging evaluations at the treating physicians discretion.  
12 Day 1 reference Day 1 of treatment.  Lab work to be obtained as close to Day 1 or within Day 1.  
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 31 of 75 8.0 Drug Formulation and Procurement:  
 
8.1 Lenalidomide  
REVLIMID ® (lenalidomide),  a thalidomide analogue, is an immunomodulatory agent  
with anti -angiogenic pr operties .  The Chemical Abstract  Service (CAS) registry 
number and name for lenalidomide are 191732- 72-6 and 3- (4-amino -1-oxo 1,  3-
dihydro- 2H-isoindol -2-yl) piperidine- 2, 6-dione, respectively. Lenalidomide is also  
known by the earlier clinical code names,  CC-5013 and CDC -501. 
  
The chemical structure of lenalidomide is as follows:  
NNHOO
O
NH2 
Lenalidomide has an empirical formula of C 13H13N3O3 and a molecular weight of 
259.3.  It is an off -white to pale- yellow solid  powder , with a melting point between 
265ºC to 270º C. 
Lenalidomide has 1 chiral center and is prepared as a 50:50 racemic mixture of the 
R (+) and S  (-) isomers.  
Mechanism of Action:  The mechanism of action of lenalidomide remains to be 
fully characterized. Lenalidomide  possesses immunomodulatory  and antiangiogenic 
properties.  Experiments  have demonstrated that lenalidomide inhibits the growth of 
cells derived from  subject s with multiple myeloma and del (5q) myelodysplastic 
syndromes in vitro.   Lenalidomide causes a delay in tumor growth in some in vivo 
nonclinical hematopoietic  tumor models, including multiple myeloma.  Lenalidomide 
inhibits the secretion of  pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNF -α), from  peripheral blood mononuclear cells.   Lenalidomide also inhibited 
the expression of  cyclooxygenase- 2 (COX -2) but not COX -1 in vitro.  
Absorption:   Lenalidomide, in healthy volunteers, is  rapidly absorbed following oral 
administration with maximum plasma concentrations occurring between 0.625 and 
1.5 hours post -dose.  Co-administration with food does not alter the extent of 
absorption (AUC) but does reduce the maximal plasma concentration (Cmax) by 
36%.  The pharmacokinetic disposition of lenalidomide is linear.  Cmax and AUC 
increase proportionately with increases in dose.  Multiple dosing at the 
recommended dose- regimen does not result in drug accumulation.  
Pharmacokinetic sampling in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) subject s was not 
performed.  In multiple myeloma subject s treated in the Phase  I studies, maximum 
plasma concentrations occurred between 0.5 and 4.0 hours  post-dose both on Days 
1 and 28.  AUC and Cmax values increase proportion ally with dose following single 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 32 of 75 and multiple doses. Exposure (AUC) in multiple myeloma subject s is 57% higher 
than in healthy male volunteers.  
Pharmacokinetic Parameters  Distribution:  In vitro (14C)-lenalidomide binding to 
plasma proteins is approximatel y 30%.  
Metabolism and Excretion:  The metabolic profile of lenalidomide in humans has 
not been studied.  In healthy volunteers, approximately two- thirds of lenalidomide is 
eliminated unchanged through urinary excretion.  The process exceeds the 
glomerular filtration rate and therefore is partially or entirely active.  Half -life of 
elimination is approximately 3 hours.  
Supplier(s)  
Celgene Corporation will supply Revlimid® (lenalidomide) to study participants at no 
charge through the Revlimid Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy TM (REMS) 
program  (formerly known as RevAssist® Program) .  All physicians who prescribe 
lenalidomide for research subjects enrolled into this trial and all research subjects 
enrolled into this trial must be registered in and must comply with all requirements of 
Celgene  Corporation’s Revlimid REMS TM program . 
Dosage Form:  
For clinical study, lenalidomide is provided as 1.25- , 2.5-, 5-, 10-, 15-, 20-, and 25-
mg capsules  for oral administration.   Each capsule of lenalidomide contains  1.25, 
2.5, 5, 10, 15, 20 or 25 mg  of lenalidomide and the following inactive ingredients: 
anhydrous lactose, microcrystalline cellulose, croscarmellose sodium, and 
magnesium stearate.  The 1.25- , and 2.5- mg dose of  lenalidomide is contained in a 
size 4 hard gelatin capsule.  The 5 -mg dose of lenalidomide is  contained in a size 2 
hard gelatin capsule.   The 10 -, 15-, 20-, and 25- mg doses of lenalidomide 
are contained in a size 0 hard gelatin capsules.   The lenalidomide capsules are 
supplied in push- through blister foil or tamperevident,  child-resistant, opaque, high-
density polyethylene (HDPE) containers with HDPE caps.  
Packaging : Lenalidomide will be shipped directly to subject s.  Bottles will contain a 
sufficient number of capsules for one cycle of dosing.    
Labeling  
Lenalidomide supplies are dispensed in individual bottles of capsules.  Each bottle will identify the contents as study medication.  In addition, the label will bear Celgene’s name, quantity contained and the standard caution statement as follow s:  
“Caution: New drug -  Limited by Federal law to investigational use.” Lenalidomide 
should not be handled by FCBP unless wearing gloves.  
The study drug label must be clearly visible.  Additional labels must not cover the 
Celgene label.  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 33 of 75 Storage :  
Subject s should store Lenalidomide in a locked,  safe area,  and out of the reach of 
children to prevent unauthorized access.  
Lenalidomide should be stored at room temperature away from direct sunlight and 
protected from excessive heat and cold.      
 
Care should be exercised in the handling of REVLIMID  ® (lenalidomide) . REVLIMID 
capsules should not be opened or crushed.  If a powder from REVLIMID contacts 
the skin, wash the  skin immediately and thoroughly with soap and water.   If 
REVLIMID contacts the  mucous membran es, flush thoroughly with water.  
 Procedures for the proper handling and disposal of anticancer drugs should be 
considered.   Several guidelines on the subject have been published.  
 
White opaque capsules imprinted “REV” on one half and “5 mg” on the other half in  
black ink:  
• 5 mg bottles of 28 (NDC 59572- 405-28) 
• 5 mg bottles of 100 (NDC 59572- 405-00) 
• Blue/green and pale yellow opaque capsules imprinted “REV” on one half and “10 mg”  on the other half in black ink:  
• 10 mg bottles of 28 (NDC 59572- 410-28) 
• 10 mg bottles of 100 (NDC 59572- 410-00) 
 Powder blue and white opaque capsules imprinted “REV” on one half and “15 mg”on 
the other half in black ink:  
• 15 mg bottles of 21 (NDC 59572- 415-21) 
• 15 mg bottles of 100 (NDC 59572- 415-00) 
 White opaque capsules imprinted “ REV” on one half and “25 mg” on the other half in 
black ink:  
• 25 mg bottles of 21 (NDC 59572- 425-21) 
• 25 mg bottles of 100 (NDC 59572- 425-00) 
• Store at 25°C (77°F); excursions permitted to 15- 30°C (59- 86°F) [See USP  
Controlled Room Temperature].  
• Dispense no m ore than a 28- day supply.  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 34 of 75 Prescribing Information:  Lenalidomide (Revlimid®) will be provided to research 
subjects for the duration of their participation in this trial  (12 cycles)  at no charge to 
them or their insurance providers.  Lenalidomide will be pr ovided in accordance with 
the Celgene Corporation Revlimid REMS TM program.  Per standard Revlimid REMS TM 
program r equirements all physicians who prescribe lenalidomide for research 
subjects enrolled into this trial, and all research subjects enrolled int o this trial, must 
be registered in and must comply with all requirements of  the Revlimid REMS TM 
program.  Prescriptions must be filled within 7 days  for females of childbearing 
potential and 14 days for all other risk categories.   Only enough lenalidomide for 
one cycle of therapy will be supplied to the subject  each cycle.  
Adverse Events of Medical or Regulatory Interest : 
 
Blood and Lymphatic System Disorders  
Hematologic Toxicity  
Lenalidomide is associated with anemia, neutropenia, febrile neutropenia, 
thrombocytopenia,  and pancytopenia.   Grade 3/4 neutropenia and thrombocytopenia 
are the most common, doselimiting  AEs associated with the administration of 
lenalidomide.  
 
Vascular Disorders  
Thromboembolic Events  
Lenalidomide, in combination with dexamethasone, has been associated with an 
increased  incidence in thrombotic or thromboembolic events, including deep vein 
thrombosis (DVT),  pulmonary embolism, thrombosis, and thromboembolism, 
particularly among MM subject s receiving concomitant therapy with an erythropoietic 
agent. DVT has been reported with both indications but is more frequent in MM than 
in MDS.  
 
Gastrointestinal Disorders  
Constipation, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting were the most commonly reported 
gastrointestinal  AEs during treatment with lenali domide.  
 
Hepatic Disorders  
Cases of transient liver laboratory abnormalities (predominantly in transaminases) 
were reported in subjects treated with lenalomide. Successful rechallenge without 
recurrence of liver  laboratory elevation was reported in some s ubjects.  
 
Cardiac Disorders  
Occasional TEAEs such as atrial fibrillation, myocardial infarction, and congestive 
heart failure have been reported with the use of lenalidomide from clinical studies 
and post -marketing.  
 
  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 35 of 75 Infections and Infestations  
Treatment -emergent adverse events of infections specifically pneumonia (including 
MedDRA  preferred terms of pneumonia NOS, bronchopneumonia NOS, lobar 
pneumonia, pneumocystis  carinii pneumonia, pneumonia bacterial NOS, pneumonia 
cytomegaloviral, pneumonia legionell a, pneumococcal pneumonia, pneumonia 
primary atypical, and pneumonia staphylococcal) are commonly seen with 
lenalidomide.  
 
Neoplasms Benign, Malignant and Unspecified (Including Cysts and Polyps)  
Cases of AML have been reported in some MDS and MM studies.  In addition, cases 
of MDS  have been reported in some MM trials.   It is thought that AML and MDS may 
be part of the  natural course of MM.   Furthermore, certain treatments for MM, such 
as alkylating agents (eg,  melphalan) are known to be associated with the increased 
incidence of AML.  It is unknown at  this time if the use of lenalidomide increases the 
risk of AML or MDS; any potential causal  relationship is under investigation.  
 
Tumor Lysis Syndrome and Tumor Flare Reaction  
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) and tu mor flare reaction (TFR) have commonly been 
observed in subject s with CLL, and uncommonly in subject s with other lymphomas, 
who were treated with lenalidomide.  Subject s at risk for TLS and TFR are those with 
high tumor burden prior to treatment.  Fatal in stances of TLS have been reported 
during treatment with lenalidomide.   Caution should be practiced when introducing 
these subject s to lenalidomide.  There have been rare reports of TLS in subject s 
with MM treated with lenalidomide, and no reports in subjec ts with MDS treated with 
lenalidomide.  
 
Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue Disorders  
The rare TEAE of rhabdomyolysis has been observed with lenalidomide.  
 
Allergic Reactions   
Rare TEAEs of angioedema, pneumonitis, and serious dermatologic reactions 
including Stevens -Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) 
have been reported with lenalidomide during commercial use. These events have 
the potential to be fatal.  
 
Mortality and Morbidity  
The results from Study E4A03 provide supportive dat a that the combination of 
lenalidomide and dexamethasone is safe and effective for the treatment of newly 
diagnosed MM. Study E4A03 further demonstrates that reducing the dose of 
dexamethasone in this combination results in an overall early survival advant age 
and has less toxicity with an improved safety profile than the  standard 
examethasone regimen in subjects with newly diagnosed MM. A greater clinical  
benefit was observed in the older subject  population (> 65 years). In addition, the 
treatment differenc e in improved mortality was maintained with continued 
observation (> 30 days after the last dose of protocol therapy). In this trial the  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 36 of 75 combination of lenalidomide plus low dose  dexamethasone demonstrated an 
improved safety profile and reduced mortality r esulting in a clinically significant 
survival advantage.   Both the reduced mortality and morbidity are  
considered meaningful improvements in subject  benefit as well as a significant 
reduction in risk  when compared with the standard dose dexamethasone 
combi nation for subjects with newly  diagnosed MM.  
Review of current post marketing  data, which consists of thousands of subject  
exposure, did not  identify any additional significant safety signal.  Cross -sensitivity 
with thalidomide has been reported in the lit erature.   
 
The safety of Lenolidomide will be assessed through collection and analyses of 
adverse events (AEs), baseline medical conditions, laboratory tests, and vital sign data.  
 
9.0 Toxicity Reporting Guidelines  
This protocol will comply with monitoring  and adverse event reporting requirements 
of the UNMC/ Fred & Pamela Buffett  Cancer Center Data Monitoring plan Celgene 
Corporation  guidelines will also be adhered to for toxicity reporting . The protocol will 
adhere to the institutional, FDA, and Celgene Co rporation guidelines for the toxicity 
reporting.    
All adverse events will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion.  Serious adverse events should be followed until resolution, death, or until no further improvement is reasonably expected.  Deaths occurr ing within 100 days of study treatment 
regardless of relationship will be reported to the UNMC IRB and UNMC DSMC.   
In addition to complying with all applicable regulatory reporting laws and regulations, all serious adverse events and toxicities f or all su bjects at  all collaborating  sites 
will be reported to the University of Nebraska Medical Center, Institutional Review Board (IRB) and Fred & Pamela Buffett  Cancer Center Data and Safety Monitoring 
Committee (DSMC), FDA, and Celgene  Corporation Drug Safety .  
  
9.1 Adverse Experiences Definitions  
Adverse Event  
An adverse event (AE) is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal rel ationship with this treatment.  An adverse 
event can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not the event is considered causally related to the use of the product.  
 
An elective surgery or procedure that is scheduled to occur during a study will not be considered an adverse event if the surgery or procedure is being performed for a pre-existing condition and the surgery or procedure has been planned before study 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 37 of 75 entry.  However, if the pre- existing condition deteriorates unexpectedly during the 
study ( e.g., the surgery is performed earlier than planned), then the deterioration of 
the condition for w hich the elective surgery or procedure is being done will be 
considered an adverse event.  
 
An adverse event can result from use of the drug as stipulated in the protocol or 
labeling, as well as from accidental or intentional overdose, drug abuse, or drug 
withdrawal.  Any worsening of a pre- existing condition or illness is considered an 
adverse event.  Laboratory abnormalities and changes in vital signs are considered to be adverse events if they result in discontinuation from the study, necessitate therapeutic medical intervention, meet protocol specific criteria (see Section 5.0, Treatment Plan) and/or if the investigator considers them to be adverse events. In general, if a laboratory abnormality or change in vital sign is associated with a specific diagnosis that is being reported concurrently as an adverse event (e.g. elevated creatinine with renal failure or sinus tachycardia in febrile neutropenia) the findings that support the diagnosis do not need to be reported as separate adverse events unless the investigator feels it is appropriate.  
 
Treatment -emergent Adverse Event  
Treatment -emergent adverse event is defined as any adverse event with 
onset or worsening from the time that the first dose of study drug is administered until 30 days after the final dose of study drug is administered.  
 
Unexpected Adverse Event  
An unexpected adverse event is any adverse drug event that is not listed in 
the current labeling (e.g. Lenalidomide  Investigator’s Brochure).  This 
includes events that may be symptomatically and pathophysiologically related to an event listed in the labeling, but differ from the labeled event because of greater severity or specificity.   For example, under this definition, hepatic 
necrosis would be unexpected (by virtue of greater severity) if t he labeling 
only referred to elevated hepatic enzymes or hepatitis.  Similarly, cerebral 
thromboembolism and cerebral vasculitis would be unexpected (by virtue of greater specificity) if the labeling only listed cerebral vascular accidents. “Unexpected,” as used in this definition, refers to an adverse drug experience that has not been previously observed (i.e., included in the labeling) rather than from the perspective of such experience not being anticipated from the pharmacological properties of the phar maceutical product.  
 
Serious Adverse Event  
A serious adverse event is one that at any dose (including overdose)  and 
regardless of causality that : 
 Results in death  
 Is life -threatening 1 
 Requires in patient  hospitalization or prolongation of existing 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 38 of 75 hospitalization 
 Results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity 2 
 Is a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
 Is an important medical event 3 
 Pregnancy  
 1“Life-threatening” means that the subject was at immediate risk of death at the time of the 
serious adverse event; it does not refer to a serious adverse event that hypothetically might 
have caused death if it were more severe.  
2“Persi stent or significant disability or incapacity” means that there is a substantial disruption 
of a person’s ability to carry out normal life functions.  
3Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether expedited reporting 
is appropriat e in situations where none of the outcomes listed above occurred.  Important 
medical events that may not be immediately life- threatening or result in death or 
hospitalization but may jeopardize the subject  or may require intervention to prevent one of 
the other outcomes listed in the definition above should also usually be considered serious.  
Examples of such events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an 
emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not resul t in subject  
hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse.  A new diagnosis of 
cancer during the course of a treatment should be considered as medically important.  
 
9.2 Adverse Event  Reporting  
 
Toxicity will be scored using CTCAE v ersion 4.0 for toxicity and adverse 
event reporting.  (Appendix E)   A copy of the CTCAE version 4.0  can be 
downloaded from the CTEP homepage (http://ctep.info.nih.gov ).  All 
appropriate treatment areas should have a ccess to a copy of the CTCAE 
version 4.0.  All adverse clinical experiences, whether observed by the 
investigator or reported by the subject , must be recorded, with details about 
the duration and intensity of each episode, the action taken with respect to the test drug, and the subject ’s outcome.  The investigator must evaluate 
each adverse experience for its relationship to the test drug and for its seriousness.  
The investigator must appraise all abnormal laboratory results for their clinical significance.   If any abnormal laboratory result is considered clinically 
significant, the investigator must provide details about the action taken with respect to the test drug and about the subject ’s outcome  
Pregnancies and Male Subjects  
If a female partner of a male  subject taking investigational product becomes 
pregnant, the male subject taking lenalidomide should notify the Investigator, and the pregnant female partner should be advised to call their healthcare provider immediately.  
 Pregnanc ies and suspected pregnancies (including a positive pregnancy test 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 39 of 75 regardless of age or disease state)  of a female subject or the female partner of a 
male subject  occurring while the subject is on lenalidomide or within 4 weeks  (28 
days)  after the subject’s last dose of lenalido mide are considered immediately 
reportable events.  If the subject is on lenalidomide, it is to be discontinued 
immediately and the subject is to be instructed to return any unused portion of 
lenalidomide to the Investigator  or designee.  The pregnancy , suspected pregnancy, 
or positive pregnancy test  must be reported to Celgene Corporation Drug Safety 
immediately  following the Investigator’s knowledge of the pregnancy ,by  facsimile or 
email using the Pregnancy Initial Report Form . The female subject should be 
referred to an obstetrician- gynecologist, preferably one experienced in reproductive 
toxicity for further evaluation and counseling.  
 
The Investigator will follow the pregnant female until completion of the 
pregnancy, and must notify Celgene  Corporation  Drug Safety immediately of 
the outcome of the pregnancy (either normal or abnormal outcome) .  The 
Investigator will provide this information using the Pregnancy F ollow -up 
Report Form . 
If the outcome of the pregnancy was abnormal (e.g., spontaneous or ther apeutic 
abortion), the Investigator should report the abnormal outcome as an AE. If the 
abnormal outcome meets any of the serious criteria, it must be reported as an SAE to Celgene Drug Safety immediately by facsimile, or other appropriate method, within 2 4 hours of the Investigator’s knowledge of the event using the SAE Report 
Form.  
 All neonatal deaths that occur within 28 days of birth should be reported, without 
regard to causality, as SAEs. In addition, any infant death after 28 days that the Investiga tor suspects is related to the in utero exposure to the IP should also be 
reported to Celgene Drug Safety immediately by facsimile, or other appropriate method, within 24 hours of the Investigator’s knowledge of the event using the SAE Report Form.  
 Male Subjects  
If a female partner of a male subject taking investigational product becomes pregnant, the male subject taking lenalidomide should notify the Investigator, and the pregnant female partner should be advised to call their healthcare provider immediately. . 
  Celgene  Corporation Drug Safety Contact Information:  
Celgene Corporation  
Global Drug Safety and Risk Management  
Connell Corporate Park  
300 Connell Dr. Suite 6000  
Berkel ey Heights, NJ 07922  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 40 of 75 Toll Free:   (800) -640-7854 
Phone:  (908) 673- 9667  
Fax:  (908) 673- 9115  
e-mail:  drugsafety@celgene.com  
 
Adverse Event Causality  
The investigator will use the following definitions to assess the relationship of 
the adverse event to the use of study drug:  
 Related  An adverse event  has a strong temporal relationship to study drug, 
recurs on re -challenge  or is known to be an effect of the study drug.  Another 
reasonable etiology either doesn’t exist or is unlikely.             
 Possibly Related  An adverse event has a strong temporal relationship to 
the study drug and an alternative etiology is either equally or less likely when compared to the potential relationship to study drug.  
 Not Related    An adverse event is due to an underlying or concurrent illness 
or effect of another drug and is not related to the study  drug ( e.g., has little or 
no temporal relationship to study drug or has a much more likely alternative 
etiology).  
  
If an investigator’s opinion of not related to study drug is given, an alternate etiology (underlying disease, co morbid condition, other drug) must be 
provided for the adverse event.  
 
All subject s will be followed for adverse experiences (AEs) (serious and 
nonserious), regardless of relationship to study drug starting first day of study treatment (day 100 (+/ - 7 days)  post-transplant when the ANC is > 1000 and 
the plts are > 60K) and  will be followed for determination of DLTs.   See 
Section 5.8. 2 for determination of DLT and MTD for this trial . 
 All grade 3 or greater toxicities (expected and unexpected, regardless of 
attribution) will be reported to the UNMC/ Fred & Pamela Buffett  Cancer 
Center Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC).    Transplant related Adverse Experiences  (AE’s)  or Serious Adverse 
Experiences  (SAE’s)  will NOT be collected.
 However, all AE’s and SAE’s 
irrespective of attribution, when occurring after the start of  Lenalidomide  
maintenance therapy.   Will need to be reported to the UNMC/ Fred & Pamela 
Buffett  Cancer Center Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC).   
 Any subject  withdrawn prior to completion of the planned therapy on this 
protocol will be followed at a minimum for 30 days following the last dose of the conditioning chemotherapy  or Lenalidomide maintenance regardless of 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 41 of 75 disease progression or discontinuation of planned therapy.  Adverse 
experiences will no longer be followed for this protocol if other disease related 
treatment is initiated within this 30 day timeframe.  
   Investigator Reporting Responsibilities  
The conduct of the study will comply with all FDA safety reporting 
requirements.   
IND Annual Re ports  
If the FDA has granted an IND number, it is a requirement of 21 CFR 312.33, 
that an annual report is provided to the FDA within 60- days of the IND 
anniversary date.   21 CRF 312.33 provides the data elements  that are to be 
submitted in the report.    The Annual Report should be filed in the study's 
Regulatory Binder, and a copy provided to Celgene Corporation as a supporter of this study as follows.  
 
 Celgene Corporation  
 Attn: Medical Affairs Operations  
 Connell Corporate Park  
 400 Connell Drive Suite 700 
 Berkeley Heights, NJ  07922  
Tel: (908) 673- 9000 
 
All adverse experience reports must include the subject  number, age, sex, 
weight, severity of reaction (mild, moderate, severe), relationship to study 
drug (probably related, unknown relationship, defi nitely not related), date and 
time of administration of test medications and all concomitant medications, and medical treatment provided.  The investigator is responsible for evaluating all adverse events to determine whether criteria for “serious” and as defined above are present.  The investigator is responsible for reporting 
adverse events to Celgene Corporation as described below.  
  Expedited Reporting by Investigator to Celgene  Corporation  
For the purpose of regulatory reporting, Celgene Drug Safety wi ll determine the 
expectedness of events of being related to lenalidomide based on the Investigator Brochure.  In the United States, all suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions (SUSARs) will be reported in an expedited manner in accordance with 21 CF R 
312.32. 
 
Serious adverse events (SAE) are defined above.  The investigator and 
collaborating site investigator must  inform Celgene Corporation in writing  
using a Celgene SAE Form or MEDWATCH 3500A F orm (Appendix F) of any 
SAE within 24 hours of being aware of the event .  The written report  must be 
completed and supplied to Celgene Corporation by facsmile within 24 hours/1 
business day .  The initial report must be as complete as possible, including 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 42 of 75 details of the current illness and (serious) adverse event , and an assessment 
of the causal relationship between the event and the investigational 
product(s)  if available.  Information not available at the time of the initial report 
(e.g., an end date for the adverse event or laboratory values received after the report) must be documented on a follow -up report .  A final report to 
document resolution of the SAE is required.  The Celgene Corporation 
tracking number (RV-LYM-PI-0328) and the institutional protocol number 
should be included on SAE reports (or on the fax cover letter) sent to Celgene 
Corporation .  A copy of the fax transmission confirmation of the SAE report 
sent to Celgene  Corporation should be attached to the SAE and retained with 
the subject  records.  
 
It is the responsibility of the collaborating  site investigator to submit the Celgene 
SAE Form or MEDWATCH 3500A Form to UNMC within 24 hours of his/her knowledge of the SAE: Attn – Research Project/Data Coordinator: FAX 402-559-
5669, or email  the UNMC Research Project/Data coordinator .  The SAE informati on 
will be routed to the UNMC P rincipal Investigator  who will further evaluate the SAE.
 
  Report of Adverse Events to the Institutional Review Board 
The principal Investigator is required to notify his/her Institutional Review 
Board (IRB) of a serious adverse event according to institutional policy.   
  Protocol amendments  
Any amendment to this protocol must be agreed to by the Principal Investigator and reviewed by Celgene Corporation.  Amendments should only 
be submitted to IRB/EC after consideration of C elgene Corporation review.  
Written verification of IRB/EC approval will be obtained before any 
amendment is implemented.   
  Protocol deviations  
When an emergency occurs that requires a deviation from the protocol for a 
subject, a deviation will be made o nly for that subject.  A decision will be 
made as soon as possible to determine whether or not the subject (for whom 
the deviation from protocol was effected) is to continue in the study.  The 
subject’s medical records will completely describe the deviatio n from the 
protocol and state the reasons for such deviation.  In addition, the Investigator 
will notify the IRB/EC in writing of such deviation from protocol.  
Non-emergency minor deviations from the protocol will be permitted with 
approval of the Principal Investigator.  
  Study Record Requirements  
The Investigator must ensure that the records and documents pertaining to 
the conduct of the study and the distribution of the study drug, that is copies 
of CRFs and source documents (original documents, data, and records [e.g., 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 43 of 75 hospital records; clinical and office charts; laboratory notes; memoranda; 
subject’s diaries or evaluation checklists; SAE reports, pharmacy dispensing records; recorded data from automated instruments; copies or transcriptions certified after verification as being accurate copies; microfiches; photographic 
negatives, microfilm, or magnetic media; x -rays; subject files; and records 
kept at the pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at medico -technical 
departments involved in the clinical study ; documents regarding subject 
treatment and study drug accountability; original signed informed consents, etc.]) be retained by the Investigator for as long as needed to comply with national and international regulations (generally 2 years after discontinuing clinical development or after the last marketing approval).  The Investigator agrees to adhere to the document/records retention procedures by signing the protocol.  
  Investigator Reporting to the FDA  
Serious adverse events (SAEs) that are unlisted/une xpected, and at least 
possibly associated to the drug, and that have not previously been reported in the Investigators brochure, or reference safety information document should be reported promptly to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) by telephone or by fax.  Fatal or life threatening SAEs that meet the criteria for reporting to 
the FDA must be reported to the FDA within 7 calendar days after awareness of the event.  All other SAEs that meet the criteria for reporting to the FDA must be reported to the  FDA within 15 calendar days after awareness of the event.  
A clear description of the suspected reaction should be provided along with an assessment as to whether the event is drug or disease related.  
 
Collaborating  study sites should NOT report SAEs to t he FDA.   The SAEs will be 
submitted to FDA if the UNMC sponsor -investigator, Julie Vose, M.D., determines 
21CRF312.32 criteria are met.  
 
   Adverse event updates/IND safety reports  
Celgene Corporation shall notify the Investigator via an IND Safety Report  of 
the following information:  
• Any AE associated with the use of study drug in this study or in other studies 
that is both serious and unexpected.  
• Any finding from tests in laboratory animals that suggests a significant risk for human subjects including reports of mutagenicity, teratogenicity, or carcinogenicity.  
The Investigator shall notify his/her IRB/EC promptly of these new serious and unexpected AE(s) or significant risks to subjects.  
The Investigator must keep copies of all AE information, including correspondence with Celgene Corporation  and the IRB/EC, on file.  
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 44 of 75 9.3 Adverse Event Reporting and Definitions Per University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, IRB and Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center Data and Safety 
Monitoring Committee (DSMC) 
 All internal s erious adverse events (AE) must be reported to the IRB promptly 
through the electronic RSS system and in no case later than two (2) business days 
following PI notification that the event occurred if  the principal investigator 
determines that conditions A, B, and C are met:  
 
a. The AE is unexpected,   AND 
b. The AE is  related to, or possibly related to , the drug, biologic, device, or other 
 research  intervention,     AND 
c. The AE is more than minor in nature which is defined as requiring treatment 
 from a health pro fessional.   
All unexpected, internal, fatal AEs must be reported promptly to the IRB, no later 
than 24 hours through the electronic RSS system following PI notification that the 
event occurred.   If documentation is still pending, the IRB office must be not ified by a 
telephone call or e- mail.  
 
All expected, internal, fatal AEs (i.e., due to progressive disease or which reflect a 
risk currently found in the consent form) must be reported through the electronic 
RSS system no later than ten (10) business days f ollowing PI notification that the 
event occurred.   
The RSS system is accessed through a link on the UNMC IRB website (http://unmc.edu/irb
).  
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
All grade 3 or greater toxicities (expected a nd unexpected, regardless of attribution) 
will be reported to the UNMC/ Fred & Pamela Buffett  Cancer Center Data and Safety 
Monitoring Committee (DSMC)  in accordance with DSMC guidelines . Transplant 
related Adverse Experiences  (AE’s)  or Serious Adverse Experiences  (SAE’s)  will 
NOT be collected.   However, all AE’s and SAE’s irrespective of attribution, when 
occurring after the start of  Lenalidomide maintenance therapy , will need to be 
reported to the UNMC/ Fred & Pamela Buffett  Cancer Center Data and Safety 
Monitoring Committee (DSMC).   
 The investigator will assign a causal relationship for all reportable AE’s, using the terminology of probably related (AE has strong temporal relationship to study drug or recurs on re -challenge, another etiology is unlikely or significantly less likely), 
possibly related (AE has strong temporal relationship to study drug, alternative etiology is equally or less likely), probably not related (AE has little or no temporal relationship to study drug and/or a more likely etiology  exists), or not related (AE 
related to underlying or concurrent illness).  
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 45 of 75 AEs will be collected from the time the subject starts Lenalidomide maintenance 
therapy  and ending 4 weeks following the final Lenalidomide  maintenance therapy . 
All AEs will be fo llowed until resolution or a cause is identified. Prescription 
medication taken to relieve symptoms of the AE will be recorded in addition to the 
outcome. AEs judged by the investigator as not related or probably not related to the 
treatment will not be fo llowed beyond the 4 weeks after the final chemotherapy.  
 
Severity of  AE 
The severity of events reported on the AE case report form will be determined 
by the principal investigator according the NCI Common Toxicity Criteria.   The likelihood of relationshi p of the AE to the study drugs will be determined 
by the investigator based on the following definitions:  
Unrelated :  The subject was not exposed to the study treatment or 
another cause is obvious.  
Unlikely related :  The AE is most likely explained by anot her cause, 
and the time of occurrence of the AE is not reasonably related to the study treatment.  
Possibly related:   Study treatment administration and AE occurrence 
reasonably related in time, and the AE is explained equally well by causes other than stud y treatment, or treatment administration and AE 
occurrence are not reasonably related in time, but the AE is not obviously a result of other causes.  
Probably related:   Study treatment administration and AE occurrence 
are reasonably related in time, and the AE is more likely explained by 
study treatment than by other mechanisms.  
Definitely related:  There occurrence and timing of the AE are clearly 
attributable to the study treatment.  
 
Copies of the AE report will be submitted to the IRB (when required), the Fred 
& Pamela Buffett Cancer Center’s Data Safety and Monitoring Committee and 
the Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center Clinical Trials Office.  
 It is the responsibility of the sponsor -investigator to submit to the FDA IND 
Safety Reports in accordance wit h 21 CFR 312.32.  In addition the sponsor -
investigator must notify the Ethics Review Committee/Institutional Review Board (EC/IRB) of a serious adverse event in writing in accordance with international and local laws and regulations. SAEs not meeting expedited criteria will be made available to FDA by the sponsor -investigator via the 
annual report.  
 
Monitoring :  The UNMC Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center Scientific 
Review Committee  (SRC)  will review this protocol on at least an annual basis.   
This study w ill undergo audit on at least a quarterly basis by the UNMC Fred 
& Pamela Buffett Cancer Center Audit Committee for all collaborating  sites.  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 46 of 75 All adverse events and toxicity reporting for all subjects at  all collaborating  
sites  will be reported to the UNMC  Fred & Pamela Buffett  Cancer Center 
Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC).  The DSMC will also monitor 
the protocol according to their evaluation of level of risk to subjects during  
regularly scheduled DSMC review process ing and by request ; the DSMC  will 
be notified whenever a change in protocol dose is made (e.g., no DLT’s 
experienced at level 1 ; dose increased to dose level 2). Approved/applicable 
UNMC multi- site policies will be adhered to.  
 The Principal Investigator will inform the DSMC when a d ose escalation takes 
place or when the maximum tolerated dose level has been reached  using the 
DSMC approved form . Celgene  Corporation  will simultaneously be provided a 
copy of the DSMC notification.   
 
10.0     Statistical Considerations  
  10.1    Primary Objective  
  
To establish the MTD of lenalidomide given in the post -transplant setting for a 
12 month maintenance  period.  
 10.2    Secondary Objectives  
 To obtain preliminary estimates of the 1 -year response rate,  
event-free and overall survival using this regimen . 
 10.3     Sample Size   
 Phase  I 3 +3 Sample Size Design   
The number of subject s enrolled in this study will vary depending on the dose 
escalation results .  The Maximum Tolerated Dose (MTD) is defined to be the 
dose cohort below which 3 out of 6 su bject s experience dose limiting toxicities 
or the highest dose cohort of 25 mg, if 2 dose limiting toxicities are not observed at any dose cohort.  The maximum number of subject s for the 
Phase  I portion is 24.   Three subject s will be enrolled at the initial dose level.  
If two of three subject s in Dose Cohort #1 have a dose- limiting toxicity, three 
additional subject s will be added to that dose level.  If 3 of these 6 subject s 
experience a dose limiting toxicity as defined as grade >  4 Hematologic or  > 
grade 3 non- hematologic toxicity  on the NCI Common Toxicity Criteria 
(version 4.0, see http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/About.html  or APPENDIX 
E)  no further dose escalation wiIl take place.  If two of three subject s in Dose 
Cohort #2- #4 have a dose- limiting toxicity, three additional subject s will be 
added to that dose cohort.  If 2 of these 6 subject s experience a dose limiting 
toxicity as defined as grade > 4 Hematologic or  > grade 3 non- hematologic 
toxicity  on the NCI Common Toxicity Criteria (version 4.0 , see 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 47 of 75 http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/About.html  or APPENDIX E) no further 
dose escalation will occur.   
 
Phase  II Sample Size Design  
Due to the high dropout rate of subjects and the counting of consented never 
treated subjects, up to 114 subjects will be  enrolled to achieve the 16 
evaluable at the 10 mg  dose level  to estimate the 1 year event -free and 
overall survival.  We will also estimate the response rate at one year.  Time 
point of 1 year is chosen since the regimen to be evaluated is one that is 
designed for maintenance treatment.   A sample of n= 16 will provide a 
maximum width estimate of the 95% confidence interval at ± 0.225.  The 1 -y 
event -free survival estimate will be used to calculate sample requirements in 
future studies   
 10.4 Stopping Rules  
During  the Phase  I portion of the protocol, the safety stopping rules are 
defined by the dose escalation plan.  An interim report for excessive toxicity 
after 3 subjects have completed 1  month of maintenance therapy at the dose 
level that is determined to be the  MTD  during the Phase I part of the trial  will 
be performed.   Enrollment will continue during that time as Lenalido mide has 
been used extensively in subject s with multiple myeloma as maintenance in 
the post -transplant setting and has been found to be safe.    
   Analysis of treatment -related mortality (TRM) at 90 days post initiation of 
treatment after accrual of 10 additional subjects will be performed.  If 1 of the 
first 10 (e.g. 5%) subject s experiences mortality due to the addition of the 
lenalidomide , the protocol will close.  If the death is related to other transplant 
related causes  or progressive disease, accrual to the study will continue.   
 
10.5   Evaluable Subject   
Subject s are considered evaluable for DLT  after they receive the first dose of 
chem otherapy.  Subject s evaluable for the secondary endpoints ( Phase  II) 
are those who complete 12 cycles of treatment or have developed disease progression during time of study.  
 10.6   Analysis of Secondary Endpoints  
The complete response rate at 1 year wil l be estimated as the proportion of 
subject s who achieve a CR divided by the number of evaluable subject s.  The 
overall response rate will be estimated as the proportions of subject s who 
achieve a CR or PR divided by the number of evaluable subject s.  Each  will 
be reported with their associated 95% confidence interval.  
 The Kaplan- Meier method will be used to estimate the event -free and overall 
survival distributions.  Disease progression or death will be considered events 
of interest for event -free survival .  We will also describe the gene expression 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 48 of 75 profile of the different tissues, as well as studies on the microenvironment and 
immunomodulatory effects or changes over time post -lenalid omide using 
descriptive statistics.  When sample distribution allows, w e will explore the 
correlation between biomarkers tested and response to Lena lidomide in able 
to assess if there are biomarkers that can predict subject s with better 
outcome of likely to stay in remission using Chi -square test.  
 
11.0 Records to be Kept  
 
The research data will be stored in the data managers work area and files.  The data 
will be secured behind locked doors during non- business hours.  The subject s' data 
information will be kept confidential and only number identifiers will be used.  Only 
the principal investigator, the subject s' primary physician, the research study 
coordinator, Celgene  Corporation  or their  designee, UNMC/ Fred & Pamela Buffett  
Cancer Center Scientific Review Committee, the UNMC/NHS IRB, and the Food and Drug Administration wil l have access to this information.  
 Information regarding the actual treatments, adverse effects, radiographic and laboratory information, and pathology are to be recorded on appropriate forms. See attached Data forms.  Serious adverse events, when noted, will be recorded on site via the standard serious adverse effects form.  
 
11.1 Quality assurance:  
Complete records must be maintained in a research chart on each subject  treated 
on the protocol.  These records should include primary documentation (e.g., la b, 
report slips, X -ray reports, scan reports, pathology reports, physician notes, etc.) 
which confirm that:  
 - The subject  met the eligibility criteria.  
- Signed informed consent was obtained prior to treatment.  
- Treatment was given according to protocol (dated notes about doses given 
& reasons for any dose modifications).  
- Toxicity was assessed according to protocol (laboratory report slips, etc.).  
- Response was assessed according to protocol (x -ray, scan, lab reports, 
dated notes on measurements & clinical assessment, as appropriate).  
 
12.0 Subject  Consent  
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 49 of 75 The subject  and their family will be placed in a consult room in the outpatient cancer 
center for their discussion of the protocol.  The study, risk/benefit ratio, side effects 
and possible outcomes are discussed with the subject  by the primary investigator or 
the subject ’s primary oncologist.  The consent form is reviewed in detail by the 
physician with the subject .  The subject  and family are given the opportunity to ask 
questions at this time.  In addition, the subject  is given the informed consent form to 
take with them and read in detail at their leisure.  They are seen back in a day or so to once again ask questions and to sign the informed consent form.  
 When the process of informed consent has been completed, the subject  will be 
asked to state in his/her own words all elements of the consent and protocol including, but not limited to, the purpose of the study, the procedures which will be carried out, the potential risks, the potential benefits to him/her, the alternatives and the right to withdraw from the study.  If there is any indication that a given subject s' 
comprehension of the study is anything less than accurate, the points of confusion will be discussed and clarified.  The subject  will then be asked to explain these same 
points in his/her own words.  
No information will be purposely withheld from the subject s.  The consent form used 
in this study will include the adult consent form.   
  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 50 of 75 13.0  References  
 
Vose JM,  Tuscano JM ,  Justice G, Lossos IS,  Ervin- Haynes A, Takeshita K, 
Pietronigro D, Zeldis JB, Habermann TM: High Response Rate to Lenalidomide in 
Relapsed/Refractory Aggressive Non- Hodgkin’s Lymphoma with Prior Stem Cell 
Transplant  , Abstract 2570 2007 ASH  Clinical Advances in He matology & Oncology 6: 2 
Supp 4:  pg 8, 2008  
 
Lerner RE, Burns LJ:  Transformed lymphoma: an Achilles heel of non- Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma.  Bone Marrow Transplant 31: 531- 537, 2003.   
 Martinez -Climent, JA, Alizadeh AA, Segraves R. et al: Transformation of foll icular 
lymphoma to diffuse large cell lymphoma is associated with a heterogeneous set of DNA copy number and gene expression alternations.  Blood 101: 3109 -3117, 2003.  
  
Cao TM, Horning S, Negrin RS, et al: High- dose therapy and autologous hematopoietic -
cell transplantation for follicular lymphoma beyond first remission:  the Stanford 
University experience.  Biol Blood Marrow Transplantation.  7:294- 301, 2001.   
 Andreadis C, Schuster SH, Chong EA, et al: Long- term event -free survivors after high -
dose ther apy and autologous stem -cell transplantation for low -grade follicular lymphoma.  
Bone Marrow Transplant 36:955 -961, 2005.   
 
Laudi N, Arora M, Burns LJ, et al: Long- term follow -up after autologous hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation for low -grade non- Hodgkin’s lymphoma.  Biol Blood Marrow 
Transplant 11:129- 135, 2005.  
  
Maloney DG, Liles TM, Czerwinski DK, et al.  Phase I clinical trial using escalating 
single -dose infusion of chimeric anti CD20 monoclonal antibody (IDEC -C2B8) in 
subject s with recurrent  B-cell lymphoma.  Blood 1994;84:2457 -2466.  
 
Maloney DG, Grillo -Lopez AJ, Bodkin DJ, White CA, Liles T -M, Royston I, et al.   IDEC -
C2B8:  Results of a Phase  I multiple -dose trial in subject s with relapsed non- Hodgkin's 
lymphoma.  Journal of Clinical Oncology 1997;15:3266- 3274.  
 
Maloney DG, Grillo -Lopez AJ, White CA, Bodkin D, Schilder RJ, Neidhart JA, et al.   
IDEC- C2B8 (Rituximab) Anti -CD20 monoclonal antibody therapy in subject s with 
relapsed low -grade non- Hodgkin's lymphoma.  Blood 1997;90:2188- 2195.  
 
McLaughlin P, Grillo -Lopez AJ, Link BK, Levy R, Czuczman MS, Wiliams ME, et al.   
Rituximab chimeric anti -CD20 monoclonal antibody therapy for relapsed indolent 
lymphoma:  Half of subject s respond to a four -dose treatment program.  Journal of 
Clinical Oncolo gy 1998;16:2825- 2833.  
 Piro LD, White CA, Grillo -Lopez AJ, Janakiraman N, Saven A, Beck TM, et al.   
Extended Rituximab (anti -CD20 monoclonal antibody) therapy for relapsed or refractory 
low-grade or follicular non- Hodgkin's lymphoma.  Ann Oncol 1999;10:655 -661. 
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 51 of 75 Davis T, Levy R, White CA, Czuczman M, McLaughlin P, Link B, et al.   Rituximab:  
Phase II retreatment study in subject s with low -grade or follicular NHL.  Blood 
1998;92:414a.  
 
Davis TA, White CA, Grillo -Lopez AJ, Velasquez WS, Link B, Maloney DG, et al.   
Single -agent monoclonal antibody efficacy in bulky Non- Hodgkin's lymphoma:Results of 
a Phase II trial of rituximab.  J Clin Oncol 1999;17:1851- 1857.  
 
Czuczman MS, Grillo -Lopez AJ, White CA, Saleh M, Gordin L, LoBuglio AF, et al.   
Treatment of sub jects with low -grade B -cell lymphoma with the combination of chimeric 
anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody and CHOP chemotherapy.  J Clin Oncol 1999;17:268 -
276. 
 Coiffier B, Haioun C, Ketterer N, Engert A, Tilly H, Ma D, et al.   Rituximab (anti -CD 20 
monoclonal antibody) for the treatment of subject s with relapsing or refractory 
aggressive lymphoma: A multicenter Phase II study.  Blood 1999;92:1927 -1932.  
 
Vose JM, Link BK, Grossbard ML, Czuczman M, Grillo- Lopez A, Gilman P, et al.   Phase 
II study of rituximab in combination with CHOP chemotherapy in subject s with previously 
untreated, aggressive non- Hodgkin's lymphoma.  J Clin Oncol 2001;19:389- 397. 
 
Coiffier B, Lepage E, Briere J, et al.  CHOP chemotherapy plus rituximab compared with 
CHOP alone in elderly subject s with diffuse large B -cell lymphoma. N Engl J Med 
2002;346:235 -242. 
 
Horowitz SM, Negrin R, Stockerl -Goldstein KE, et al.  Phase  II trial of rituximab as 
adjuvant therapy to high- dose chemotherapy and peripheral blood stem cell 
transplantation for relapsed and refractory aggressive non- Hodgkin's lymphomas.  Blood 
2001;98:862a.  
 
Dredge K, Horsfall R, Robinson S, Zhang L- H, Lu L, et al.  Orally administered 
lenalidomide (lenalidomide) is anti -angiogenic in vivo and inhibits endothelial cell 
migration and Akt phosphorylation in vitro.  Microvascular Research 69 (2005) 56 -63. 
 
Corral LF, Haslett PAJ, Muller FW, Chen R, Wong LM, Ocampo CJ, Patterson RT, 
Stirling DI, Kaplan G.  Differential cytokine modulation and T cell activation by two 
distinct classes of t halidomide analogues that are potent inhibitors of TNF- alpha.  J 
Immunol. 1993;163:380- 386. 
 
Schafer PH, Gandhi AK, Loveland MA, Chen RS, Man H -W, et al.  Enhancement of 
cytokine production and AP -1 transcriptional activity in T cells by thalidomide- relate d 
immunomodulatory drugs.  J of Pharmacology and Exp Therapeutics, 305:1222- 1232, 
2003.  
 
Davies FE, Raje N, Hideshima T, Lentzsch S, Young G, Tai YT, Lin B, Podar K, Gupta 
D, Chauhan D, Treon SP, Richarson PG, Schlossman RL, Morgan GJ, Muller GW, 
Stirling DI, Anderson KC.  Thalidomide and immunomodulatory derivatives augment 
natural killer cell cytotoxicity in multiple myeloma.  Blood. 2001;98:210- 216. 
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 52 of 75 Hideshima T, Chauhan D, Shima Y, Raje N, Davies F, Tai YT, Treon SP, Lin B, 
Schlossman RL, Richarson P, M uller G, Stirling DI, Anderson KC.  Thalidomide and its 
analogs overcome drug resistance of human multiple myeloma cells to conventional therapy.  Blood. 2000;96:2943- 2950.  
 
Bartlett JB, Michael A, Clarke IA, Dredge K, Nicholson S, et al.  Phase  I study to  
determine the safety, tolerability and immunostimulatory activity of thalidomide analog 
lenalidomide in subject s with metastatic malignant melanoma and other advanced 
cancers.  British J of Cancer (2004) 90, 955- 961 
 
Zangari M, Tricot G, Zeldis J, Eddlemon P, Saghafifar F, Barlogie B.  Results of Phase I 
study of lenalidomide for the treatment of multiple myeloma (MM) subject s who relapse 
after high dose chemotherapy (HDCT). Blood 2001; 98:775a (Abstract #3226).  
 
Richardson PG, Schlossman RL, Weller E, Hideshima T, Mitsiades C, et al.  Immunomodulatory drug (lenalidomide) overcomes drug resistance and is well tolerated 
in subject s with relapsed multiple myeloma.  Blood 2002; 100:3063 -3067.  
 
Wu A, Scheffler MR.  Multiple -dose pharmacokinetics and safety of l enalidomide in 15 
multiple myeloma subject s.  Proc ASCO 2004, Abstract #2056.  
 
 Rajkumar SV, Hayman SR, Lacy MQ et al. Combination therapy with lenalidomide plus 
dexamethasone (REV/DEX) for newly diagnosed myeloma. Blood 2005; 2005- 2007.  
 Hussein MA, Karam  MA, Brand C, Pearce G, Reed J, et al.  Doxil (D), vincristine (V), 
reduced frequency dexamethasone (d) and Revlimid (R) (DVd- R) a Phase  I/II trial in 
advanced relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma (Rmm) subject s.  Blood 2004, Abstract 
#208.  
 Data on file.  Celgene Corporation 
 
List A, Kurtin S, Roe DJ, Buresh A, Mahadevan D, et al.  Efficacy of lenalidomide in myelodysplastic syndromes.  N Engl J Med 2005; 352:549- 57. 
 
List AF, Dewald G, Bennett J, Giagounadis A, Raza A, et al.  Hematologic and 
cytogenetic (CTG) response to lenalidomide (lenalidomide) in subject s with transfusion -
independent (TD) myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and chromosome 5q31.1 deletion: Results of the multicenter MDS -003 study.  Proc ASCO 2005, abstract #5.  
 
Witzig TE, Vose J, Pietronig ro D, Takeshita K, Ervin -Haynes A, Zeldis J, Wiernik PH. 
Preliminary results from a Phase II study of lenalidomide oral monotherapy in 
relapsed/refractory indolent non -Hodgkin lymphoma. Proc ASCO 2007, abstract #8066  
 
Wiernik PH, Lossos IS, Tuscano JM, Jus tice G, Vose JM, Cole CE, McBride K, Wride K, 
Pietronigro D, Takeshita K, Ervin- Haynes A, Zeldis JB, Habermann TM. Lenalidomide 
Response in Relapsed/Refractory Aggressive Non- Hodgkin
s Lymphoma Is Related to 
Tumor Burden and Time from Rituximab Treatment. Proc ASH 2007, abstract #2565.  
 
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 53 of 75 A predictive model for aggressive non- Hodgkin’s lymphoma.  The International Non-
Hodgkin’s Lymphoma Prognostic Factors Pro ject.  N Engl J Med 1993;329(14):987- 94 
Solal -Celigny, et al.  Follicular lymphoma international prognostic index.  Blood 
2004;104(5):12588 -1265.  
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 54 of 75 Data Forms  
See attached  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 55 of 75 Appendix A :  
 
Karnofsky Scale for Performance Status  
 
Scale (%)  Description  
100  Normal; no complaints  
 90  Able to carry on normal activities; minor signs or symptoms of  
  disease  
 80  Normal activity with effort  
 70  Cares for self.  Unable to carry on normal activity or to do active  
  work  
 60  Requires occasional assistance but able to care for most of needs  
 50  Requires considerable assistance and frequent medical care  
 40  Disabled; requires special care and assistance 
 30  Severely disabled; hospitalization indicated though death not  
  imminent  
 20  Very sick.  Hospitaliz ation necessary.   Active supportive treatment  
  necessary    
 10  Moribund  
  0  Dead  
 Reference: Karnofsky DA, et al. Cancer 1:634- 656, 1948.  
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 56 of 75 Appendix B: 
Risks of Fetal Exposure, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines and Acceptable Birth 
Control Methods  
Risks Associated with Pregnancy  
The use of lenalidomide in pregnant females and nursing mothers has not been studied nor has the effect of the lenalidomide on human eggs and sperm.   Lenalidomide is structurally related to thalidomide.  Thalidomide is a known human 
teratogenic active substance that causes severe life- threatening birth defects.  An 
embryofetal development study in animals indicates that lenalidomide produced malformations in the offsprings of female monkeys who received the drug during pregnancy.  The teratogenic effect of lenalidomide in humans cannot be ruled out. 
Therefore, a risk minimization plan to prevent pregnancy must be observed.  
All study participants must be registered into the mandatory 
Revlimid REMS TM 
program, and be willing and able to comply with the requirements of Revlimid REMS 
TM program.  
Criteria for females of childbearing potential (FCBP)  
This protocol defines a female of childbearing potential as a sexually mature female 
who: 1) has not undergone a hysterectomy or bilateral oo phorectomy or 2) has not 
been naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 consecutive months  (i.e., has had 
menses at any time in the preceding 24 consecutive months).  
The investigator must ensure that:  
• Females of childbearing potential comply with the condi tions for pregnancy 
risk minimization, including confirmation that she has an adequate level of 
understanding.  
• Females NOT of childbearing  potential acknowledge that she understands the 
hazards and necessary precautions associated with the use of lenalidomide.  
• Male subject s taking lenalidomide acknowledge that he understands that 
traces of lenalidomide have been found in semen, that he understands the 
potential or pregnant female, if engaged in sexual activity with a female of 
childbearing potential or pr egnant female, and that he understands the need 
for the use of a condom even if he has had a vasectomy, if engaged in sexual 
activity with a female of childbearing  potential or pregnant female.  
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 57 of 75 Contraception  
Females of childbearing potential (FCBP)† must  agree to use two reliable forms of 
contraception simultaneously or to practice complete abstinence from heterosexual 
intercourse during the following time periods related to this study: 1) for at least 28 
days before starting lenalidomide ; 2)throughout th e entire duration of lenalidomide; 
and 3) for at least 28 days after  lenalidomide discontinuation.  
The two methods of reliable contraception must include one highly effective method 
and one additional effective (barrier) method. FCBP must be referred to a qualified 
provider of contraceptive methods if needed.  The following are examples of highly 
effective and additional effective methods of contraception:  
• Highly effective methods:  
o Intrauterine device (IUD)  
o Hormonal (birth control pills, injections, implan ts) 
o Tubal ligation  
o Partner’s vasectomy  
• Additional  effective methods:  
o Male condom  
o Diaphragm  
o Cervical Cap  
 Because of the increased risk of venous thromboembolism in subject s with multiple 
myeloma taking lenalidomide and dexamethasone, combined oral contrace ptive pills 
are not recommended.  If a subject  is currently using combined oral contraception 
the subject  should switch to one of the effective method listed above.  The risk of 
venous thromboembolism continues for 4- 6 weeks after discontinuing combined or al 
contraception.  The efficacy of contraceptive steroids may be reduced during co-
treatment with dexamethasone.  
Implants and levonorgestrel -releasing intrauterine systems are associated with an 
increased risk of infection at the time of insertion and irr egular vaginal bleeding. 
                     
 † A female of childbearing potential is a  sexually mature woman who: 1) has not undergone a 
hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy; or 2) has n ot been naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 consecutive 
months (i.e., has had menses at any time in the preceding 24 consecutive months).  
  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 58 of 75 Prophylactic antibiotics should be considered particularly in subject s with 
neutropenia.  
Pregnancy testing   
Medically supervised pregnancy tests with a minimum sensitivity of 50mIU/mL must be 
performed for females of childbearing potential, including females of childbearing 
potential who commit to complete abstinence, as outlined below.                                          
 
Before starting study drug:   
Female Subject s   
• FCBP must have two (2) negative pregnancy tests (sensitiv ity of at least 50 
mIU/mL) prior to prescribing lenalidomide.  The first pregnancy test must be 
performed within 10- 14 days prior to prescribing lenalidomide and the second 
pregnancy test must be performed within 24 hours prior to prescribing 
lenalidomide .  The subject  may not receive lenalidomide until the Investigator 
has verified that the results of these pregnancy tests are negative.  
 
Male  Subject s   
• Must agree to use a latex condom during sexual contact with females of childbearing potential while parti cipating in the study and for at least 28 days 
following discontinuation from the study even if he has undergone a successful vasectomy.  
During study participation and for 28 days following discontinuation from the study:  
Female Subject s   
• FCBP with regul ar or no menstrual cycles must agree to have pregnancy 
tests weekly for the first 28 days of lenalidomide treatment, including dose 
interruptions and then every 28 days  throughout the remaining duration of 
lenalidomi de treatment,including dose interruptions,  at lenalidomide 
discontinuation,  and at day 28 following  lenalidomide discontinuation.   If 
menstrual cycles are irregular, the pregnancy testing must occur weekly for 
the first 28 days  of lenalidomid e treatment, including dose  interruptions,  and 
then every 14 days throughout the remaining duration of lenalidomide 
treatment, including dose interruptions, at lenalidomide discontinuation, and 
at Day 14 and Day 28 following lenalidomide discontinuation.  
• At each visit, the Investigator  must confirm with the FCBP that she is 
continuing to use two reliable methods of birth control at each visit during the time that birth control is required.  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 59 of 75 • If pregnancy or a positive pregnancy test does occur in a study subject , 
lenalidomide must be immediately discontinued.  Pregnancy testing and 
counseling must be performed if a subject  misses her period or if her 
pregnancy test or her menstrual bleeding is abnormal.  Lenalidomide 
treatment must be discontinued during this evaluation.  
• Female must agree to abstain from breast feeding during study participation 
and for at least 28 days after lenalidomide discontinuation.  
Male  Subject s 
• Must practice complete abstinence or use a condom during sexual contact 
with pregnant female or females of childbearing potential throughout the entire duration of lenalidomide treatment, during dose interruptions and for at 
least 28 days following lenalidomide discontinuation, even if he has 
undergone a successful vasectomy.   If pregnancy or a positive pregnancy test 
does occur in the partner of a  male study subject  during study participation, 
the investigator must be notified immediately.  
• Male subject s should not donate semen or sperm during therapy or for at 
least 28 days following discontinuation of lenalidomide.  
Additional precautions  
• Subject s should be instructed never to give lenalidomide to another person.  
• Subject s should not donate blood during therapy and for at least 28 days 
following discontinuation of lenalidomide.  
• Only enough lenalidomide for one cycle of therapy may be prescribed wit h 
each cycle of therapy.  
• Any unused lenalidomide must be returned as instructed through Revlimid 
REMS TM program.  
 
 
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 60 of 75 Appendix C : 
 
NEW YORK HEART ASSOCIATION HEART DISEASE CLASSIFICATION  
 
Class   Definition  
 
 
I.  No limitation of physical activity.  Ordina ry physical activity does 
not cause undue fatigue, or dyspnea.  
 
II.  Slight limitation of physical activity.  Comfortable at rest, but ordinary physical activity results in fatigue, or dyspnea.  
  III.  Marked limitation of physical activity.  Comfortable at rest, but 
less than ordinary activity causes fatigue, or dyspnea.  
 
 IV.  Unable to carry on any physical activity without symptoms.  
Symptoms are present even at rest.  If any physical activity is 
undertaken, symptoms are increased.  
 
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 61 of 75 Appendix D:    RESPONSE CRITERIA   
Response criteria (listed below) are the recommendations of the International Harmonization 
Project’s update to the International Work ing Group  guidelines.  
 PET using [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), has emerged as a  powerful functional imagi ng 
tool for staging,  restaging, and response  assessment of lymphomas.  The advantage of PET 
over conventional  imaging  techniques such as computed tomography (CT) or  magnetic 
resonance imaging is its ability to distinguish between viable tumor and necrosis or fibrosis 
in residual mass  (es) often present after  treatmen t. 
Complete Response ( CR) The designation of CR requires the following (Table 1 ): 
1.  Complete disappearance of all detectable clinical evidence of  disease and disease-
related symptoms if present before therapy.  
2a.  Typically FDG -avid lymphoma: in subject s with no pretreatment  PET scan or when the 
PET scan was positive before therapy, a  post-treatment residual mass of any size is 
permitted as  long as it is  PET negative.  
2b.  Variably FDG -avid ly mphomas/FDG avidity unknown: in subject s without a pretreatment  
PET scan, or if a pretreatment PET  scan was negative, all lymph nodes and nodal masses 
must have regressed on CT to normal size ( <1.5 cm in their greatest transverse diameter for 
nodes > 1.5 c m before therapy). Previously involved nodes that were 1.1 to 1.5 cm in their 
long axis and more than 1.0 cm  in their short axis before treatment must have decreased 
to<1.0cm  in their short axis after treatment.  
3.  The spleen and/or liver, if considered enlarged before therapy  on the basis of a physical  
examination or CT scan, should not be  palpable on physical examination and should be 
considered normal  size by imaging studies, and nodules related to lymphoma should  
disappear.  However, determination of s plenic involvement is not always  reliable because a 
spleen considered normal in size may still  contain lymphoma, whereas an enlarged spleen 
may reflec t variations  in anatomy, blood volume, the use of hematopoietic growth factors,  or 
causes other  than lymphoma.  
4.  If the bone marrow was involved by lymphoma before treatment,  the infiltrate must have  
cleared on repeat bone marrow biopsy.   The biopsy sample on which this determination is 
made must be  adequate (with a goal of > 20 mm unilateral core).  If the sample is  
indeterminate by  morphology, it should be negative by immunohistochemistry.  A sample that 
is negative by i mmunohistochemistry but  that demonstrates a small population of clonal 
lymphocytes by flow  cytometry will be considered a CR until data become available 
demonstrating a clear difference in subject  outcome.  
Partial Response (PR)  The designation of PR requires all of the following:  
1.  At least a 50% decrease in sum of the product of the diameters  (SPD) of up to six of the  
largest dominant nodes  or nodal masses.   These nodes or masses should be selected 
according to all of the following: they should be clearly measurable in at least 2 
perpendicular  dimensions; if possible they should be from disparate regions of the body; and 
they should include mediastinal and retroperitoneal areas  of disease whenever these sites 
are involved.  
2.  No increase should be observed in the size of other nodes, liver,  or spleen.  
3.  Splenic and hepatic nodules must regress by >50% in their  SPD or, for single nodules, i n 
the greatest transverse diameter.  
4.  With the exception of splenic and hepatic nodules, involvement  of other organs is usually 
assessable and no measurable disease should be present.  
5.  Bone marrow assessment is irrelevant for determination of a  PR if the sample was 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 62 of 75 positive  before treatment.  However, if positive,  the cell type should be specified (e .g., large -
cell lymphoma or small  neoplastic  B cells).   Subject s who achieve a CR by the above 
criteria, but  who have persistent morphologic bone marrow involvement will be  considered 
partial responders.   When the bone marrow was involved before therapy and a clinical  CR 
was achieved, but with no bone marrow assessment after  treatment, subject s should be 
considered partial responders.  
6.  No new sites of dis ease should be observed.  
7.  Typically FDG -avid lymphoma: for subject s with no pretreatment  PET scan or if the PET 
scan was positive before therapy, the post-treatment PET should be positive in at least one  
previously involved site. 
8.  Variably FDG -avid l ymphomas/FDG -avidity unknown: for  subject s without a pretreatment 
PET scan, or if a pretreatment PET scan was negative, CT criteria should be used.  In 
subject s with  follicular  lymphoma  or mantle- cell lymphoma, a PET scan is only indicated with 
one or at most  two residual masses that  have regressed by more than 50% on CT; those 
with more than two residual lesions are unlikely to be PET negative and should be 
considered partial responders.  
Stable Disease (SD)  Stable disease is defined as the following:   
1.  A subject  is considered to have SD when he or she fails to attain the criteria needed for a 
CR or PR, but does not fulfill those for  progressive disease (see Relapsed Disease [after  
CR]/Progressive Disease  [after PR, SD]).  
2.  Typically FGD- avid lymphomas: the PET should be positive at  prior sites of disease with 
no new areas of involvement on the post  treatment  CT or PET.  
3. Variably FDG -avid lymphomas/FDG -avidity unknown: for  subject s without a pretreatment 
PET scan or if the pretreatment PET  was negative,  there must be no change in the size of 
the previous  lesions on the post -treatment CT scan.  
Relapsed Disease (RD)  (after CR)/Progressive Disease (after PR, SD)  
1.  Lymph nodes should be considered abnormal if the long axis is  more than 1.5 cm 
regardless of  the short axis.   If a lymph node has a long axis of 1.1 to 1.5 cm, it should only 
be considered abnormal if its  short axis is more than 1.0.Lymph nodes  <1.0 x< 1.0 cm will 
not be  considered as  abnormal for relapse or progressive disease.  
2.  Appearance of  any new lesion more than 1.5 cm in any axis  during or at the end of 
therapy,  even if other lesions are decreasing in size. Increased FDG  uptake in a previously 
unaffected site should only  be considered relapsed or progressive disease after confirmation 
with other  modalities. In subject s with no prior history of pulmonary  lymphoma, new lung 
nodules identified by CT are mostly benign.  Thus, a therapeutic decision should not be 
made solely on the basis  of the PET without histologic confirmation.  
3.. At least a  50% increase from nadir in the  SPD of any previously  involved nodes, or in a 
single  involved node, or the size of other lesions  (e.g., splenic or hepatic nodules). To be 
considered progressive disease,  a lymph node with a diameter of the short axis of less than 
1.0cm  must  increase by  > 50% and to a size of 1.5 x 1.5 cm or more than 1.5 cm  in the long 
axis. 
4.  At least a 50% increase in the longest diameter of any single  previously identified node 
more  than 1 cm in its short axis.  
5.  Lesions should be PE T positive if observed in a typical FDG  avid lymphoma or the lesion 
was PET positive before therapy unless  the lesion is too small to be detected with current 
PET systems (< 1.5  cm in its long axis by CT).   Measurable extranodal disease should be 
assessed in a manner  similar to that for nodal disease. For these recommendations, the 
spleen is  considered nodal disease.   Disease that is only assessable (e .g., pleural effusions, 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 63 of 75 bone lesions)  will be recorded as present or absent  only, unless, while an abnormal ity is still 
noted by imaging studies or  physical examination, it is found to be histologically negative.  In 
clinical trials where  PET is unavailable to the vast majority  of participants, or where PET is 
not deemed necessary  or appropriate  for use (eg, a t rial in subject s with MALT lymphoma),  
response should be assessed as above, but only using CT scans.   However, residual 
masses should not be  assigned CRu status, but  should be considered partial responses.   
 
Table 1. Response Definitions for Clinical Trial s 
Response  Definition  Nodal Masses  Spleen, Liver  Bone Marrow  
 
 
CR  
Disappearance of all 
evidence 
of disease  
  
(a) FDG -avid or PET 
positive prior to therapy; mass  of any 
size permitted if PET 
negative 
 
(b) Variably FDG -avid 
or PET negative; 
regression to  
normal size on CT  
  
Not palpable, nodules  
disappeared 
  
Infiltrate cleared on 
repeat  biopsy; if 
indeterminate  
by morphology,  
immunohistochemistry  
should be negative 
 
 PR  
Regression of 
measurable  
disease and no new 
sites 
  
> 50% decrease in 
SPD of up to 6 largest 
dominant  
masses; no increase 
in size of other nodes  
 
(a) FDG -avid or PET 
positive prior to 
therapy; one or  
more PET positive at 
previously involved 
site 
 (b) Variably FDG -avid 
or PET negative; 
regression on  
CT 
  
> 50% decrease in 
SPD of nodules (f or 
single nodule in greatest transverse  
diameter); no  
increase in size of  
liver or spleen   
Irrelevant if positive 
prior to therapy; cell 
type should be 
specified  
 
 
SD  Failure to attain 
CR/PR or PD   
(a) FDG -avid or PET 
positive prior to 
therapy; PET  
posit ive at prior sites 
of disease and no new sites on CT or PET  
 (b) Variably FDG -avid 
or PET negative; no 
change in  
size of previous 
lesions on CT    
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 64 of 75  
Relapsed disease  
or PD  
  
Any new lesion or 
increase by _ 50% of 
previously  involved 
sites from nadir  
  
Appearance of a new lesion(s) > 1.5 cm in 
any axis, >  50% 
increase in SPD of more than one node, 
or >50% increase in 
longest diameter of a 
previously identified 
node > 1 cm in short 
axis 
 
Lesions PET positive 
if FDG -avid lymphoma 
or PET positive prior 
to therapy  
  
> 50% increase from 
nadir in the SPD of 
any previous lesions  
  
New or recurrent  
involvement  
 
Abbreviations: CR, complete remission; FDG, [18F]  fluorodeoxyglucose; PET, positron emission tomography; CT, computed 
tomography; PR, partial remission; SPD, sum of the product of the diameters; SD, stable disease; PD, progressive disease.  
Cheson BD, Pfistner B, Juweid ME, Gascoyne RD,Specht L, Horning SJ, et al. 
Revised Resonse Criteria for Malignant Lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2007; 25: 579 -586. 
 
       
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 65 of 75 Appendix  E:  NCI Common Toxicity Criteria Version 4.0  (CTCAE)  
Active Date: October 1, 2009  
 
Toxicity will be scored using NCI CTC Version 4.0  for toxicity and adverse event 
reporting.  A copy of the NCI CTC Version 4.0 can be downloaded from the CTEP 
homepage: (http://ctep.info.nih.gov ).  All appropriate treatment areas have access 
to a copy of the CTC Version 4.0 . 
   
Appendix F:  FDA 3500A MEDWATCH Form  
 Available on- line at http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/SAFETY/3500.pdf  
   
Appendix G :   Body Surface Area and Creatinine Clearance Calculations  
 
Body surface area (BSA) should be calculated using a standard nomogram that yields the following results in meters squared (m
2): 
BSA = 3131)( ) ( lbsWt inchesHt × 
or 
BSA = 3600)( )( kgWt cmHt× 
 
Cockcroft -Gault estimation of creatinine clearance (CrCl):  (Cockcroft, 1976; Luke 
1990)  
 
 CrCl (ml/min) =   (140- age) x (actual wt in kg)               
 (Males)      72 x ( serum creatinine,  mg/d L) 
 CrCl (ml/min) =   (140- age) x (actual wt in kg)       x 0.85         
 (Females)      72 x ( serum creatinine, mg/d L) 
Note:  In markedly obese subject s, the Cockroft -Gault formula will tend to 
overestimate the creatinine clearance. (Adipose tissue tends to contribute little 
creatinine requiring renal clearanc e.) 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 66 of 75 Appendix H –   ELIGIBILITY CHECKLIST  
NCI/DCTC/CTMS CASE REPORT FORM  
 
Phase I/II Study of Lenalidomide Maintenance Following BEAM (+/- Rituximab ) 
for Chemo -Resistant or High R isk Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma  
 
Date Completed:  
(dy/mth/yr)  
 Protocol #:  446 -08 Institution:  Subject  ID: 
 
Checklist #: v4.7 
  
Effective Date   
   
Waiver #:  
Eligibility Checklist    
                             
1. Persistent, or relapsed non -Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) (any histology) that is chemo -resistant 
(< a PR), subjects  who have received >3 prior chemotherapy regimens, or subjects  with  
lymphomas that have a high relapse rate following autologous or syngeneic stem cell 
transplantation (transformed NHL, peripheral T -cell lymphoma (PTCL), mantle cell lymphoma, 
ALK -negative  anaplastic large cell lymphoma ( ALCL, alk neg),  intermediate IPI or high risk 
IPI or subjects  with a positive PET scan prior to transplant, and otherwise eligible for 
transplantation with adequate end -organ function.   
2. Subjects that relapse within one year of diagnosi s.   
 
3. Able to collect >  1.5 X 106 CD34+/kg cell for transplantation.   
 
4. ANC > 1000 cells/mm3 and Platelet Count >  60K when maintenance Lenalidomide is started; as 
close as feasible to day 100 post-transplant.  
 
5. Age >19 years.  
 
6. Subjects  must be willing to give written informed consent, and sign an institutionally approved 
consent form before performance of any study -related procedure not part of normal medical 
care, with the understanding that consent may be withdrawn by the subject at any time without 
prejudice to future medical care.  
 
7. Able to adhere to the study visit schedule and other protocol requirements.  
 
8. Expected survival duration of > six months.  
 
9. Karnofsky Performance Status >  70.  (Appendix A)  
 
10. Subjects  > age 60 or with clinical signs of heart di sease mu st have ejection fraction ≥ 45% 
LVEF  pre-transplant . 
 
11. Subjects with clinical signs of pulmonary insufficiency must have DLCO to be measured at >  
50% of predicted value  prior to transplant . Yes   No  N/A  
 
[   ]    [   ]1.  
 
  
 
 
 
[   ]    [   ]2.  
 
 
[   ]    [   ]3. 
 
[   ]    [   ]4.  
 
 
[   ]    [   ]5.  
 [   ]    [   ]6.  
  
 
 [   ]    [   ]7.  
 
[   ]    [   ]8.  
 [   ]    [   ]9.  
 [   ]    [   ]10.  
 
 
[   ]    [   ]11.  
 
 
. 
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 67 of 75 Appendix H ELIGIBILITY CHECKLIST 
NCI/DCTC/CTMS CASE REPORT FORM  
 
Phase I/II Study of Lenali domide Maintenance Following BEAM (+/- Rituximab ) 
for Chemo -Resistant or High R isk Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma  
 
Date Completed:  
(dy/mth/yr)  
 Protocol #:  446 -08 Institution:  Subject  ID: 
 
Checklist #: v4.7 
  
Effective Date   
 Waiver #:  
12 No serious disease or co ndition that, in the opinion of the investigator, would 
compromise the subject’s  ability to participate in the study.  
 
13 Disease free of prior malignancies for ≥ 2 years with exception of currently treated 
basal cell, squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, or carcinoma “insitu” of the cervix 
or breast or low risk prostate cancer after curative therapy.  
 14 All study participants must be registered into the mandatory Revlimid REMS
 TM 
Program, and be willing and able to comply with the requirements of Revlimid 
REMS TM Program.  
 15 Females of childbearing potential (FCBP)
† must have a negative serum or urine 
pregnancy test with a sensitivity of at least 50 mIU/mL within 10 –  14 days prior to 
and again within 24 hours of prescribing lenalidomide  (prescriptions must be fil led 
within 7 days) and must either commit to continued abstinence from heterosexual 
intercourse or begin TWO acceptable methods of birth control, one highly effective 
method and one additional effective method AT THE SAME TIME, at least 28 days 
before she starts taking lenalidomide.  FCBP must also agree to ongoing pregnancy 
testing.  Men must agree to use a latex condom during sexual contact with a FCBP 
even if they have had a successful vasectomy.  See Appendix B Risks of Fetal 
Exposure, Pregnancy Testing Guidelines and Acceptable Birth Control Methods . 
 
16 Able to take aspirin (81 or 325 mg) daily as prophylactic anticoagulation ( subject s 
intolerant to ASA may use warfarin or low molecular weight heparin).  
 17 Male subject agrees to use an acceptable method for  contraception for the duration 
of the study.  
 
† A female of childbearing potential is a  sexually mature woman who: 1) has not 
undergone a hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy; or 2) has not been naturally postmenopausal for at least 24 consecutive month s (i.e., has had menses at any time in 
the preceding 24 consecutive months).  [   ]    [   ]1 2.  
  
[   ]    [   ]1 3. 
 
  
[   ]    [   ]1 4. 
  
 [   ]    [   ]1 5. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[   ]    [   ]1 6. 
 
 
[   ]    [   ]1 7. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                     
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 68 of 75 Appendix H- ELIGIBILITY CHECKLIST 
NCI/DCTC /CTMS CASE REPORT FORM  
Phase  I/II Study of Lenalidomide Maintenance Following BEAM (+/- Rituximab ) 
for Chemo -Resistant or High R isk Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma  
Date Completed:  
(dy/mth/yr)  
 Protocol #:  446 -08 Institution:  Subject  ID: 
 
Checklist #: v4.7 
  
Effec tive Date   
 Waiver #:  
All of the above must be yes to be eligible.  
 
1. Chemosensitive NHL, except subjects receiving > 3 prior chemotherapy regimens, or 
subject s having transformed NHL, PTCL, MCL, or  ALCL, alk neg.  
2. End-organ function not appropriate for tr ansplantation.  
3. Inability to collect adequate stem cells.  
4. Known positive for HIV or infectious hepatitis, type A, B or C or active Hepatitis.  
5. Any serious medical condition, laboratory abnormality, or psychiatric illness that would 
prevent the subject from s igning the informed consent form.  
6. Pregnant or breast feeding females. (Lactating females must agree not to breast feed while 
taking lenalidomide).  
7. Known hypersensitivity to thalidomide.  
8. The development of erythema nodosum if characterized by a desquamating  rash while 
taking thalidomide or similar drugs.  
9. Any prior use of lenalidomide.  
10. Concurrent use of other anti -cancer agents or treatments.  
11. Serum creatinine >2.0mg/dL or calculated creatinine clearance < 30ml/min . 
12. Active infection at the start of Lenalidomid e. 
13. Myocardial infarction within 6 months prior to enrollment or has New York Heart 
Association (NYHA) Class III or IV heart failure uncontrolled angina, severe uncontrolled ventricular arrhythmias, or electrocardiographic evidence of acute ischemia or acti ve 
conduction system abnormalities. (Appendix C)  Prior to study entry, any ECG 
abnormality at Screening has to be documented by the investigator as not medically 
relevant.  
14. History of life threatening or recurrent thrombosis/embolism.  Subject s may participate if 
they are adequately anticoagulated during the treatment.  
15. Subject  has >Grade 2 peripheral neuropathy within 14 days before enrollment.  
All of the above must be no to be eligible.   
 
[   ]    [   ]1.  
 
 
[   ]    [   ]2.  
 
[   ]    [   ]3.  
 
[   ]    [   ]4. 
 
[   ]    [   ]5.  
  
[   ]    [   ]6.  
 
 
[   ]    [   ]7.  
[   ]    [   ]8.  
 
 
[   ]    [   ]9  
 [   ]    [   ]10.  
 
[   ]    [   ]11.  
[   ]    [   ]12.  
 [   ]    [   ]13.  
 
 
 
  
 
 [   ]    [   ]14.  
  [   ]    [   ]15.
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 69 of 75 Appendix H- ELIGIBILITY CHECKLIST 
NCI/DC TC/CTMS CASE REPORT FORM  
 
Phase  I/II Study of Lenalidomide Maintenance Following BEAM (+/- Rituximab ) 
for Chemo -Resistant or High R isk Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma  
 
Date Completed:  
(dy/mth/yr)  
 Protocol #:  446 -08 Institution:  Subject  ID: 
 
Checklist #: v4.7 
  
Effective Date   
 Waiver #:  
 
Eligibility:      [   ]   Subject  satisfies all criteria.  
                     [    ]  Subject  not formally eligible, but admitted to study because (state reason);  
 
 
   Subject  Initials:  __________MR or Study ID#______________DOB 
______________  
   
ELIGIBILITY reviewed and confirmed  
Site Investigator Signature _______________________Date_____________    
             
__________________________________________________________________________________________  
 
Date Completed:  
(dy/mth/yr)  
 Protocol #: VOSE  446 -08 Institution:       Subject  ID: 
                 
__________________________________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 70 of 75 Appendix I: 
Oral, Sublingual, and/or Buccal Route  
Medication Adherence  Standard Procedure  
 
PURPOSE  
To provide a means of ensuring oral, sublingual and/or buccal routes of medication 
adherence to subject s while participating in a clinical trial.  
1. A physician’s order will be completed by study subjects  or representative for 
oral, sublingual and/or buccal administration per IRB approved protocol.  
2. To ensure the consistent and safe administration of medications not given 
under the direct supervision of study staff (at home), there will be a 
“Medication Information Sheet” and a diar y to document times of drug 
administration.  
3. To record medication adherence Study staff will document results of 
medication reconciliation and or medication return in the subject ’s chart.  
4. Maintain documentation of medications returned or sent to for destruc tion (if 
applicable).  
PROCEDURE  
1. Subjects s will be given a monthly “Medication Diary ”.  The diary  will have a 
place for the subject  to record the time that the medication(s) were taken. 
(See Form A  for example)  
 
2. The research nurse will review the subject ’s “Medication Diary ” for adherence 
to the study regimen for oral medication administration. Adherence will be 
noted in the subject ’s chart.  All unused Revlimid® (lenalidomide) capsules 
should be returned to the research center for disposition in accordance with 
the Revlimid REMS TM program.  If any study drug is lost or damaged, its 
disposition should be documented in the source documents .   
 
       
 
    
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 71 of 75 Medication Diary (Form A)  EXAMPLE Month  
 
~ September 20 13 ~ 
Sun Mon Tue Wed  Thu Fri Sat 
1  
 
 2  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 3  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 4  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 5  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 6  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 7  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 
8  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 9  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 10  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 
 11  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 12  
Revlimid®  at:  
 _______AM / PM  
 13  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 14  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 
15  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 16  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 17  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 18  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 19  
Revlimid®  at:  
 _______AM / PM  
 20  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 21  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
 
22  
Revlimid®  at:  
 
_______AM / PM  
       
  Notes:  
 
  
 
  
 
      
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 72 of 75 Appendix J:   
 
Blood and Tissue Sample Processing and Shipping for Cytokine Level  Studies   
(For research purposes only , to study factors that  influences a subject’s  response to a particular 
drug. ) 
Description of Sample Collection: The proposed Cytok ine Levels will be tested in the 
subject ’s existing lymphoma specimen. Tissue samples for immunostaining  from either a 
baseline diagnostic or relapsed biopsy in either frozen or paraffin embedded tissue will be 
retrieved from all subjects and sent to the laboratory of Kai Fu, MD , PhD  (a.k.a. Dr. Chan’s 
lab) at UNMC.  
Research blood specimens VEGF and cytokines will be obtained at baseline, 6 months  and 
1 year post transplant (or at the end of taking lenalidomide if before these time points) and 
sent to the laboratory of Rakesh Singh, PhD  at UNMC.  
No therapeutic intervention will be undertaken and the results of these studies will not have 
any influence on the medical management of the subjects.  
 
Facility  Sample  Contact 
Person(s)  Date and Time 
Points  
Labor atory of Kai Fu, MD , 
PhD, Professor, 
Pathology/Microbiology, 
Director, Hematology 
Fellowship Program ,  
Co-Director, Center for 
Lymphoma and Leukemia 
Research  
University of Nebraska Medical Center  
 
 Tissue samples from 
either a baseline diagnostic or 
relaps ed biopsy in 
either frozen or 
paraffin embedded tissue  Xuan Zhan and 
Chengfeng Bi  
 
Dr. Kai Fu’s L ab   
Lied Bldg 11th Floor, 
Rm 11711  
Phone# 402- 559-7753  
 
Shipping Address:  
Department of Pathology  
UMA Bldg, Rm 3528, Zip 3135  
University of Nebraska Medical Center  
668 S. 41
st Street  
Omaha, NE 68105  
Phone# 402- 559-7689  
Fax# 402- 559-6018  
 Baseline Tissue date: 
___/___/____  
 
Check one:  
 
  Diagnostic   
         or  
  Relapsed biopsy  
          
Check one:   
  Frozen  
          or  
 Paraffin embedded  
 
Laboratory of Rakesh 
Singh, PhD , Professor, 
Department of  Pathology/  
Microbiology  
University of Nebraska Medical Center  
 Research blood specimen for VEGF and cytokines.  
Two (2) -10ml NA 
Heparin green top tubes and one (1) 10 
ml no additive red top at baseline, 6 months  
and 1 year post 
transplant( or at the Michel le Varney  
 
Dr. Rakesh Singh ’s 
Lab   
DRC2 Bldg, Rm 7072  
phone 402-559-5580  
  
Shipping Address:  
Michelle Varney  
DRC2 Bldg, Rm 70, 
Zip 5900  Samples will need 
immediate handling in 
a research laboratory 
to evaluate the 
changes in the levels 
of various cytokines . 
 Ship all specimens the 
day of collection.  
Please contact 
Michelle Varney  to 
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 73 of 75 end of taking 
lenalidomide if before 
these time points).  
 University of Nebraska 
Medical Center  
668 S. 41st Street  
Omaha, NE 68105  
ATTENTION:  
Dr. Rakesh Singh ’s 
Phone#  402-559-5580 
 advise of planned 
shipments .   
 
Whole blood tubes 
should be shipped with 
cold packs that are cold, but not frozen.  
 
Check one:  
 
 Baseline Sample:  
 
  Date:  _________  
 
  Time:  _________  
 
 
  Other Time Point:  
 
  Date:  _________  
   Time:  _________  
 
  
   
Research Nurse:  Mary Mailliard, RN, BSN, OCN  Office (402) 559-5582  pager (402) 888-
2123 Fax (402) 559-8895 
 
   
 
             
 
  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 74 of 75 Appendix K: 
International Prognostic Index  
 
PURPOSE  
The International Prognostic Index (IPI)  is a clinical tool developed by oncologists 
to aid in predicting the prognosis  of subject s with aggressive non-Hodgkin's 
lymphoma . 
 CATEG ORIES  
International Prognostic Index  
One point is assigned for each of the following risk factors:  
• Age greater than 60 years  
• Stage  III or IV disease  
• Elevated serum LDH  (Lactic Acid D ehydrogenase)  
• ECOG/Zubrod  performance status of 2, 3, or 4 
• More than 1 extranodal site 
The sum of the points allotted correlates with the following risk groups:  
• Low risk (0 -1 points) -  5-year survival of 73%  
• Low-intermediate risk (2 points) -  5-year survival of 51%  
• High-intermediate risk (3 points) -  5-year survival of 43%  
• High risk (4 -5 points) -  5-year survival of 26%  
Age-Adjusted IPI  
A simplified index can be us ed when comparing subject s within an age group (i.e. 60 
or younger, or over 60) and includes only 3 of the above factors:  
• Stage 
• LDH (Lactic Acid D ehydrogenase)  
• Performance status  
The sum of the points allotted correlates with the following risk groups:  
• Low risk (0 points) -  5-year survival of 83%  
• Low-intermediate risk (1 point) -  5-year survival of 69%  
• High-intermediate risk (2 points) -  5-year survival of 46%  
• High risk (3 points) -  5-year survival of 32%  
  
IRB # 446- 08 Protocol Version 4.9, 01/24/17                                 Page 75 of 75  
Although the IPI has shown itself to be a useful cl inical tool, widely used by 
oncologists and a mainstay of risk stratification in clinical trials for lymphoma, it should be kept in mind that it was developed prior to the use of rituxima b
, which is 
now included with anthracycline- based combination chemotherapy as of the 
standard of care in B-cell lymphomas (the majority of non- Hodgkin's lymphomas). 
Rituximab has dramatically  improved the outcomes of lymphoma subjec ts, and its 
effect on the prognostic value of the IPI is uncertain.  
 