Randomized Double -­­Blinded, Controlled 
Trial to Compare the Effectiveness of 
Sugammadex vs. Placebo to Prevent 
Residu al Neuromuscular Block in the Post -­­
Anesthesia Care Unit as Evaluated with a 
Non -­­Invasive Respiratory Volume Monitor  
  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
6/29/2017  
MISP Template : Protoco l 5 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
  
B.   Respiratory  Volume  Monitoring  (RVM)  Background:  
 
An  non-­­inva sive   RVM  (ExSpiron,  Respira tory  Motion,  Inc., Waltham  
MA)  based  on thoracic electrical impedance  been  shown to  accurately  
monitor  respiratory  status  in  non-­­intubat ed patients,  providing  a 
real -­­time respiratory curve  and measurements of  minute  ventilation  
(MV),  tidal  volu me (TV)  and respiratory  rate.4,5,6,7,8 The ExSpiron  
system  consists  of two  main components,  a monitor  and an electrode 
PadSet,  which  utilizes  3 adhesive electrode patches  placed  on the 
thorax,  similar  to ECG monitoring  electrodes.  
 
Simultaneous  measurement s of MV, TV, and RR with  the RVM  and a  
Wright  monitoring  spirometer  demonstrated  a precision  error of  
7.2%  and 7.1%  for MV and TV, and an accuracy error  of 9.3% and  
9.0%,  respectively. Throughout  the range  of 4 breaths  per minute  
(bpm)  to 40 bpm  and during  erratic breathing,  RVM measurements  
were  highly  correlated  with  measurements  made with  a Morgan  
diagnostic  spirometer  (r = 0.96,  95%  CI: 0.93  to 0.99).9 
 
In a recent  study  at the Massachusetts General  Hospital  in Boston 
published  in  the  Journal  of  Trauma,10   the  RVM  evaluated  132  
PACU  patients  following  elective  joint  replacement surgery  under 
general  or regional anesthesia.  This  work  demonstrated  the effects  
of  opioids  on  RVM  measurements,  and  a  stratification based  on 
opioid sensitiv ity was  proposed.  This  finding  is relevant to  the study  
proposed  here,  because  the following  categories  were defined:  “At -­­
Risk”  was  defined  as patients  with  a MV <80%  of a given  patient’s  
predicted  MV  based  on  a  body  surface  area formula.  “Un-­­Safe”  
MV was  considered  to be <40%  of Predicted MV  sustained  for at 
least  2 minutes.  
MISP Template : Protoco l 6 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
  
 
 
Figure  1:  A)  MV  measurements  at  various  time  points  in  the  PACU . 
Across  the  entire  patient  popu lation  a distinct  depression  in MV  within  15 
minutes of the first opioid dose in the PAC U was seen. The average MV across 
the whole popu lation did not noticeably decreas e and recovers to baseline prior 
to discharge. B) MV across the cohort calculated  as percent predicted  by 
BSA . The plot demonstrate s MV as Percent Predicted (MV PRED), and allows 
normalizati on of the opioid response to account for patient size. C) Patients 
designated “At-Risk” The red bars show the course of the 18 of 50 (36%) of 
patients who recei ved an opioid dose when their MV was below 80% MVPRED 
became “Un-Safe”.  D) Patients designated  “Not-at-Risk”  Green bars show 
the course  of the remaining  32/ 50 (64%)  of patients  who  recei ved  opioids 
when   their  MV  was  above   80%   MV PRED    and  had  minimal   respiratory 
depressi on. 
 
 
 
C.   Train -­­of-­­Four  Monitoring  Background:  
 
Train -­­of-­­Four  (TOF)  is used  as an indicator of  the depth  of 
neuromuscular  block  and adequacy  of reversal.  A normal  TOF  = 
1.0, meaning that  there  is no fade  (no decrease  in the amplitude  of the  
fourth  response,  T4, compared  to the first  response,  T1).11 
With  increasing  levels  of neuromuscular block,  the TOF  decreases 
from  1.0 to 0, at which  point  the degree  of block  correlates  with  
80 -­­85%  neuromuscular  receptor  occupancy.  This  degree  of block  
is sufficient  for non -­­intracavita ry surgeries. For  abdominal, thoracic,  
intracranial  surgeries, and  for robotic,  laparoscopic  and bariatric  
surgery,  all 4 of the TOF  responses  need  to be blocked, 
corresponding to  95 -­­100%  receptor  blockade.  While  facilitating 
surgery,  this extreme degree  of block  is very  difficult to  reverse with  
traditional  anticholinesterase drugs  like neostigmine.  In the vast  
majority  of  patients,  reversal  with  neostigmine  from  this deep  
block  may  require 90 -­­120 minutes,  markedly  increasing  the su rgical  
duration.  Additionally, up  to 40%  or ALL  patients  who receive  
intraoperative NMBAs  have  been  shown  to exhibit significant  residual  
neuromuscular  block  (TOF<0.9),  and 0.8%  of 

MISP Template : Protoco l 9 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
  
 
D. Risk/Benefit  Assessment:  
 
Sugammadex . Sugammadex has been FDA approved for clinical 
use in the US and it  has been  used  worldwide since  2008. We  
plan  to administer the  smallest  dose  of sugammadex 
recommended  for shallow  neuromuscular  block  (2 mg/kg  of 
actual body weight ), a dose that  has not been  reported to  cause  
allergic  or any other  side effects.  The use of sugammadex  may  
lead  to complete  reversal of residual  neuromuscular block,  and 
avoidance of  the respiratory complications  (CREs)  associated 
with  incomplete  reversal  after neostigmine.  
 
TOF Mea surement.  This  involves  delivery of  small  electrical 
impulses  from  a nerve  stimulator  via surface  ECG  electrodes to  a 
peripheral nerve  (usually  the ulnar  nerve  at the wrist)  and 
measuring  the muscle  contraction in  the innervated muscle 
(usually  the adducto r pollicis  muscle  or the thumb.  This  testing  is 
used  routinely  in many centers  in awakening  patients  in the  
PACU, and  it is not associated  with  any adverse effects  or patient 
discomfort. In  fact,  routine  monitoring  has been  advocated 
routinely  for decades,  as it both  decreases  the incidence  of 
CREs and other  postoperative complications  and increases  
patient satisfaction.11,12 
 
ExSpiron  Respiratory  Volume  Monitoring  (RVM).   The RVM  
device has  been  FDA  cleared and  is currently in  clinical  use.  It is 
considere d a “non -­­significa nt risk device”.  The device requires  
the application  of monitoring PadSets  to the patient’s  skin  
similar  to EKG  electrodes  and,  as such,  poses  minimal  risk.  It is 
possible  that the  electrodes  may  irritate  the  skin.     The  
presenc e  of  skin irritation  will be monitored  and treated  
appropriately,  and further subject  participation  with  cease  if it 
is significant.  Collected  data up  to that  point  will be used for  the 
stud y, unless  the subject requests  otherwise.  Direct  physical  
harm  is extremely  unlikely. Any  adverse  events  will be 
documented and  forwarded  to the IRB as  per adverse  event  (AE)  
reporting  requirements.  
 
There  is always  a risk for breach  of confidentiality de spite  best 
efforts.  
 
Categories  of Risk : 
 
1) Physical  Risk:  Sugammad ex administration may  result  in 
temporary  changes  in taste  sensation  (disgeusia);  allergic 
reactions  have  been  reported  exceedingly  rarely  at  the dose  we 
plan  to administer (2  mg/kg).   Rare  allergic reactions  have  been  
reported in  patients  receivin g the highest  dose  indicated,  16 
mg/kg , which is 8 times higher than the dose we plan to  
MISP Template : Protoco l 12 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
 which may decrease the incidence of residual neuromuscular block.)  
1)  The ExSpiron  will be placed  on the patients’  chest  prior 
to extubation.  ExSpiron  data  will be collected starting 
prior to tracheal extubation,  during  transport  from  OR  
to  PACU,  and  in PACU.  
2)  Patient  care  staff  will be blinded  to the ExSpiron 
numerical and  trending  data  for MV, TV and RR, but the 
respiratory trace will  be displayed  to demonstrate  that  the 
ExSpiron  is functioning. Of note, the gain on the trace is 
variable so the size of the breath visualized on the screen 
is not correlated to the volume of the breath. This will 
maintain blin ding of the patient care staff.  
3)  TOF  Monitoring  with  an objective  monitor  (TOF-­Watc h or 
StimPod)  will be used  in all patients  once  the decision  
to extubate  the patients’  trachea  is made.  The monitoring  
will continue  in the PACU  until  full recovery (TOF= 1.0)  is 
documented. Monitoring  will be performed as  per usual 
clinical  routine  via surface  ECG  electrodes.  In the PACU,  
the current  amplitude  will be decreased to  30 -­­40 mA,  
current intensities that  are used  routinely  for patient  care  
in other centers  and that  do not result  in patient  
discomfort.  
4) Patient  care  staff  will be blinded to  TOF  data.  Only the 
investigator assigned  to the PACU  data  retrieval  will know 
the results  of TOF  Monitoring.  
5)  Patient care  should  follow  standard  hospital  protocol.  
6)  Physiologic  monitoring  and clinical assessment  data  will be 
recorded  as per standard  protocol  in the PACU.  
7)  All  other  therapies  and  medications  including  oxygen, 
CPAP,  opioids  and  sedatives  will  be  delivered  in 
accordance  with standard  of care.  
8)  Doses  and  times  of  all  medications  (such  as  opioids,  
sedatives,  etc.)  or respiratory interventions (such  as 
albuterol,  respiratory treatment,  suctio ning,  high  flow 
oxygen,  CPAP,  BiPAP,  etc.)  will be recorded throughout  the 
entire  perioperative  period  (pre -­­op, OR, PACU).  
9)  Pain  scores based  on a standard analog  scale  (1-­­10) will be 
recorded. These  will be obtained  per standard  clinical 
practice.  
10)Arterial  or venous  blood  gas values  and Chest  x-­­rays  taken  
in the OR or PACU  will be recorded  when  obtained  as part 
of standard  care.  
B. Study Procedures  
1)  Screening  and Recruitment:  
Study   personnel  will   review  the   surgery  schedule  
to iden tify appropriate and  eligible  patients.  Eligible   
MISP Template : Protoco l 13 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
 patients will  be informed about  the study  and the study  
will be explained to  them .  They will  be able  to ask 
questions.  If they would  like to participate,  written  
informed consent  will be obtained.  Recru itment at Mayo 
Clinic site will be conducted by Investigators on the day of 
surgery. Patients will be identified and approached before 
they are taken to the preoperative area. A private room 
located near the surgical area will be used for consenting 
of pro spective participants. Family and/or friends will be 
allowed to remain with a patient during the consenting 
process. Patients usually arrive approximately 2 hours 
prior to their scheduled surgery time, which will be 
adequate time to discuss the study  and a llow patients to 
make an informed decision whether or not to participate 
in this research study.  
2)  Randomization:  
Patients   will   be   randomized   to   one   of   two   groups:  
administration   of    sugammadex    (n=150)   vs.    placebo  
(n=150)  prio r to tracheal  extubation  in the OR. 
3)  Prior  to Procedure  (in the OR or  preoperative  area):  
i. For RVM monitoring,  ExSpiron  PadSet  will be placed  
on   the   patient’s   thorax   (see   Appendix   A   for 
placement  instructions). Deviations from  standard 
placement  will be documented.  Once  in the OR the 
ExSpiron  will be connected  and the ExSpiron  will be 
synchronized  to the ventilator.  
 
ii. For  TOF  monitoring,  skin  ECG  electrodes  will  be 
placed  along  the ulnar  nerve  on the volar  forearm, 
as per routi ne clinical  protocol. Visual  or tactile 
intraoperative monitoring  of neuromuscular  block 
level  will be performed  according  to the clinicians’ 
usual  routine.  At the end of surgery, once  the 
clinician  has determined that  recovery  of 
neuromuscular  block  is adequate  (after 
administration of standard of care reversal agents)  
for maintenance of  spontaneous   ventilation,    the    
TOF    will    be determined  objectively  (it  will  be  
measured  with the  currently  available  monitor, 
TOF-­­Watc h or StimPod), and  then  the patient’s  
trachea  will be extubated,  as per  usual clinical  
routine.  In 150 of the  
300 patients,  a dose of  sugammadex  (2 mg/kg)  will 
be administered, and  then  routine  TOF 
measurements  will be made  in the PACU.  
4)   Operati ng Room  (OR):  
a.   Record  all medications  (dose,  route,  time)  
MISP Template : Protoco l 14 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
 b.   Record  surgery  start  and end times  
c. Record  position  changes  
d.   Record  intubation  and extubation  times  
5)  Recovery  Room  (PACU):  
a.   Record  PACU  arrival  and check  device  function.  
b.   Record  all medications  (dose,  route,  time)  
c. Record  form  and dose  of administered  oxygen  & all 
changes  in administered oxygen  or respiratory 
treatments  of any kind  
d.   Record  PACU  discharge  time  
e.   MV, TV & RR numerical  data  will be hidden  and not  
 
MISP Template : Protoco l 15 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
 available  for patient  care  decisions, but  the 
continuous  respiratory trace  will be displayed. 
Patient  care  providers should  not use this trace  for 
clinical  decision -­­mak ing. If the trace is  absent  or 
grossly  abnormal,  this should  be recorded  and study 
staff notified  to ensure  proper  device  function.  
f. TOF  data  will  be  hidden  and  not  available  for 
patient care  decisions  
6) Final  Discharge  Parameters:  Record  the patients’  final 
discharge  date  and time  (LOS)  from  the PACU.  
7)  De -­­identification:   All study  data  will be de -­­identified   and 
identifying information  will be linked  to a code  only 
accessible to  the study  staff.  The code  will be destroyed 
following  final  data  analysis.  
8) Assessment of  Subject  Safety  and Data  Safety  Monitoring 
Plan:  All patients  will be followed by  one of the study 
investigators to  ensure  there  are no complications 
associated  with  sugammadex  administration (flushing, 
tachycardia,  hypotension, etc).  There  are no expected 
complications of  RVM  monitoring. There  are no expect ed 
complications  associated with  TOF  monitoring,  and in fact, 
such  monitoring has  been  shown  to improve  patient  safety 
by decreasing      postoperative      CREs      and      other 
complications .11,12 External monitoring will not be 
provided; however, Pri ncipal Investigator will review all 
data for accuracy to ensure adherence to the approved 
protocol. Data will be recorded by the study coordinator 
and all electronic study -related files will be stored on a 
secured Mayo Clinic server. Drug accountability an d 
dispension will be handled by pharmacy. Any potential 
adverse events will be assessed by the principal 
investigator for severity and relevance to the study drug.  
9)   Subject Participation:  
 
a.   Recruitment: Subjects  will be recruited in  the pre-­­ 
procedure  holding  areas  by  the  study  team 
members  prior  to their  surgery.  
 
b.   Screening   Interview:   Subject   screening   will   be 
based  on study  personnel examining  the surgery 
schedule of  the next  or same  day to identify 
appropriate  proce dures scheduled  and patient’s 
eligibility.  
 
c. Informed  consent  process  and timing  of obtaining  of 
consent:  Informed consent  will be obtained  by the 
study  staff  prior  to surgery in  the preoperative 
holding  area,  in patients  requiring surgery  and 
MISP Template : Protoco l 16 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
 general  anesthesia  and  planned  extubation  in  the 
OR.  After  a thorough  review  of the study.  Sufficient 
time  will be given  to the  patients,  parents,  guardians 
or legal  representative to  ask questions  and decide 
on participation.  
 
d.   Location  where  study  will be performed: University  
 
MISP Template : Protoco l 17 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
  of Texas,  UTHealth at  Houston and  Mayo Clinic, 
Jacksonville,  Florida  operating holding  areas, 
operating  and recovery rooms,  and intensive  care 
units as  applicable.  
e.   Personnel  who  will conduct  the study  include  PI and 
researc h team  members.  
 
10) Subject fees:  There  are no fees  for this study.  
11) Procedures  to  protect  subject  confidentiality:   A  unique 
study  ID  number  will  be  assigned  to  each  subject  as  a 
means  to de -­­identify the study  data.  A code will  be kept 
separately with  the PI. Study  files  will be kept  in a locked 
office  in  a  locked  cabinet  or  a  passwor d-­­protected 
computer  with  encrypted  study  files.  The location  will be 
the PI office  with  restricted  access.  The code  will be locked 
separately  from  study  files  in the PI office.  
 
a. Certificate  of Confidentiality:  N/A  
 
b.  How  data  will be coded,  recor ded, and stored  to 
protect  confidentiality: All  data  will be de -­­ 
identified.  All data  will be linked  to the subject 
study  ID by a code.  
 
c.  Data     will     be     analyzed     by     institutional 
biostatisticians  at UTHealth  at Houston.  
 
d.  Parties   who   will   have   access   to   the   data, 
including  the key to the identity code:  only  Jaideep 
Mehta,  MD  and  J. Ross Renew ,  MD  and  primary 
study  staff  will have  access to  the master  study 
log/key.  Other  investigators and  the clinical  and 
engineering staff  at Respiratory  Moti on, Inc. will 
only  have  access  to de -­­identified  data.  
 
e.  Parties   who   will   have   access   to   research 
records:  Investigators on  the study,  Respiratory 
Motion,  Inc. will have  access only  to de-­­identified 
records.  
 
f.  Collaboration:   This   study   is   performed   in 
collabora tion  with  Respiratory  Motion,  Inc. 
 
g.  Alternatives:  The alternative  to participating  in 
this study  is not participating.  
 
h.  How  new  information  will be conveyed  to the 
study  subject  and how  it will be documented:  Other 
than  the initial  explanat ion of the purpose  and plan 
for the study,  we don’t  expect  new  information  to  
MISP Template : Protoco l 20 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
  
B. Statistical  Analysis:  
 
a.   Using  Fishe r exact  test,  we will compare  across  the two 
groups  the incidence  of: 
 
i.   Sustained MV<80%MV PRED for at least 1 minute  in the 
first 15 -30 minutes after arrival  in PACU  
ii.   Sustained  MV<40% MV PRED for more than 10 
contiguous minutes  of the last 30 minut es prior to  PACU  
discharge  
iii.. Sustained MV<40%MV PRED for at least 2 
minutes  after  opioid  administration  (amongst 
patients  receiving  opioids  in the PACU)  
iv.   Sustained MV<40%MV PRED for at least 2 minutes  in 
the absence  of opioids (amongst  patients  w/o  opioids  in 
the PACU  
v. Sustained MV<40%MV PRED for at least 2 
minutes  after  opioid  administration  (amongst 
patients  receiving  opioids  in the PACU) when 
corrected for PACU LOS  
vi.   Sustained MV<40%MV PRED for at least 2 minutes  in 
the absence  of opioids (amo ngst  patients  w/o  opioids  in 
the PACU when corrected for PACU LOS  
vii.   Adverse  events,  including:  
 
1.   Respiratory  complications  (O2 desaturation, 
atelectasis,  respiratory  status  requiring 
advanced  monitoring,  etc.)  
2.   Respiratory  interventions  (O2 
administration,  CPAP,  BiPAP,  medications, 
etc.)  
3.   ICU or step -­­dow n unit transfer  
 
viii.   Normal  TOF  ratio  (>0.90)  at equivalent time  points 
in the PACU  (e.g. on arrival, at discharge, etc…)  
 
b.   Using  2-sample  t-­­tests we will compare:  
 
i.   Average  MV during the 15 -30 minutes after arrival  at 
the PACU  
ii.   Average  MV during the 30 minutes prior to the 
time  cleared  for PACU  discharge  
iii.   Average  LOS  in the PACU  
iv.   Average  pain  scores  
v.   Average  total  opioid  dose  (morphine  equivalents)  in 
the PACU  
 
 
MISP Template : Protoco l 21 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
 c. Using  paired  t-­­tests we will compare:  
i.   MV, TV, and RR measurements  before  and after 
sugammadex  administration  
d.   We will perform  sensitivity  and specificity  analysis  to 
evaluate  the ability  of sugammadex  to: 
i.   Decrease  respiratory  complications  (O2 
desaturat ion, atelectasis,  respiratory  status 
requiring  advanced  monitoring,  etc.)  
ii.   Decrease  the need  for respiratory  interventions  (O2 
administration,  CPAP,  BiPAP,  medications,  etc.) 
iii.   Decrease  transfers  to step -­­dow n or  ICU 
iv.   Decrease  LOS  in PACU  
v.   Increase  MV in the PACU  at the  following  time  
points:  
1.   On arrival 
2.   After  opioids  
3.   At disch arge 
e.   We will perform  mult i-­­factor Analysis  of Variance 
(MFANOVA)  with dependent variable s: “sustained 
MV<40% MV PRED  for at least 2 minutes ”, “A dverse event”, 
PACU LOS, etc… as defined in each hypothesis, based  on 
demographics  to demonstrate  group uniformity.  
f. We will use  Pearson  correlations  and linear  regressions , 
without regard to treatment group  to compare:  
i.   MV measurements  and TOF  ratio s 
ii.   MV measurements  and total  opioid  dose  
iii.   Pain scores  and total opioid  dose  
iv.   MV measurements  and pain  scores  
 
C. Multiplicity:  
For the purposes  of this work,  we will treat  Hypothesis A1  as a 
primary objective and A2 as a key secondary.   We will consider  
p<0.05  to be statistically  significant  for the primary objective and 
this result  will be the  main outcome  of our study.  We will test the 
key secondary objective (at p<0.05 significance level) only if we 
have achieved significance with the pri mary.  
 
We will continue with testing  the remaining  secondary  
hypotheses  only if we have significant results from the primary 
and the  key secondary . For each additional secondary  
hypothesis , we  will calculate  statistical significance both  with  
and without  Hochberg correction .14 If we discover marginally  
significant  effects  in any of the  remaining  hypotheses, we  will 
propose  additional  studies powered and  geared  towards  
specifically  addressing  said hypotheses.  
 
 
MISP Template : Protoco l 22 Final Version : 4/6/2015  Protocol Version date 6/29/17  
 
 
 
D. Power/Sample  Size: 
Considering the  study  in general,  the incidence  of residual 
neuromuscular block  in the PACU  is estimated to be 35%.11 
Based  upon  a sample size  of n=92  patients  per group,  this 
study  has 80%  power  to detect  a 5% difference between  groups  
in incidence  of residual block;  this calculation  is based  on a 
standard  deviation  of 12%. We  would need 100  patients  per 
group  in order to  be conservative to observe this effect. However, 
more specific  calculations  related  to our primary and key 
secondary  hypotheses described  below  suggest we wou ld need 
150 patients per group to ensure we can adequately power these 
hypotheses.  
 
(1) Low  MV on arrival  at the  PACU . We will be comparing 
absolute measurements of MV as well as incidences of MV <80%  
across the two groups. Since comparisons of incidences u sually 
requires  more data, we are basing our sample size calculations on 
the incidence comparison.  
 
Previous  data  suggest  that  as many  as 33%  of patients  arrive  in 
the PACU  with  MV<80%  MV PRED. We anticipate  that  in a group  of 
similar  patients  receiving  sugammadex  at the  end of surgery,  the 
prevalence  of MV<80%MV PRED will decrease  significantly,  by 
approximately  18%  ( ). To demonstrate  this reduction  
with  80%  power  ( ) at a  level  ( ), the 
required  sample  size  (assuming  a large  patient population)  for 
each  of the two groups  (with  and w/o sugammadex)  can be 
calculated  as follows:  
 
 
 
 
where  is the average  incidence  in the two groups  and 
is the difference  in the inciden ce of low MV  across 
the two groups.   
 
(2) Low  MV at discharge  from  the PACU . Similarly with  the PACU 
arrival, at PACU discharge we will compare both MV 
measurements as well as the incidence of Low MV and will 
calculate our sample size  based on the incidence comparison  
 
Previous  data  suggest  that  around 22% of patients  leave  the PACU   
