1 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol  
 
1. Project Title:  Utilizing the RESCUE Stroke Caregiver Website to Enhance Discharge Planning  
 
2. Investigators:  Constance Uphold, PhD, PI; Magaly Freytes, PhD ; Karen Besterman -Dahan , PhD ; 
Stuti Dang, MD , MS; Ronald Shorr, MD, MS ; Rebecca Beyt h, MD, MS HS; Bruce Vogel, PhD ; Samuel 
Wu, PhD; Timothy Hogan, PhD ; Charles Levy, MD ; Xinping Wang , PhD ; Sergio Romero, PhD; Tatiana 
Schember, PhD  
 
3. Abstract: Caregiver depression is common following a family member’s stroke and is a major 
contributor of survivor s’ hospital readmission and institutionalization. O ur long-term goal is to implement stroke 
caregiver programs that involve low -cost interventions that are sustainable in routine clinical practice. Our 
immediate objective  is to test, usi ng a random ized controlled trial, a problem -solving intervention for stroke 
caregivers that can be delivered over the phone followed by online, in -home sessions. We will modify the 
traditional problem -solving intervention by adding web -based training using  interactiv e modules, factsheets, 
and tools on our previously developed and nationally available RESCUE Caregiver website 
(http://www.cidrr8.research.va.gov/rescue/ ). We will also provide online  skills training and application of the 
problem -solving approa ch via the RESCUE messaging center, a secure site behind the VA firewall. This work 
builds on the team’s extensive experience in stroke caregiver education . 
Our immediate, primary aim (#1)  is to test  the effect  of the intervention on stroke caregivers’ 
depressive s ymptoms at approximately 11 and 19 weeks  after baseline data collection . Primary 
Hypothesis:  Stroke caregivers who receive the intervention will have less depressive symptoms compared to 
stroke ca regivers in usual care . We propose  four secondary a ims.  Aim #2 is to test the effect  of the 
intervention on stroke caregivers’ knowledge, perceived stress, burden, perceptions of positive aspects of 
caregiving , self -efficacy, health -related quality of life (HRQOL), and satisfaction with care at approximat ely 11 
and 19 weeks  after baseline data collection . Aim # 3 is to test the effect  of the intervention on Vetera ns’ 
outcomes:  functional abilities  and healthcare utilization (i.e., unintended hospital bed days of care, number of 
emergency room visits, numbe r of unsche duled clinic visits) at approximately 11 and 19 weeks  after baseline 
data collection . Aim # 4 is to determine the budgetary impact for implementing the intervention. Aim # 5 is to 
determine the facilitators, barriers , and best practices for implem enting the intervention.   
Methods:   We will conduct a two -group randomized controlled trial with repeated measures and use mixed 
methods to determine caregivers’ perceptions of the intervention. We will enroll 240 stroke caregivers from 8 
VA sites (North F lorida/Sout h Georgia Veterans Healthcare System, Miami VA Healthcare System, James A. 
Haley Veterans Hospital in Tampa , Michael E. Debakey VAMC in Houston, Hunter Holmes McGuire VAMC in 
Richmond , Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, VA Tennessee Va lley Health care System, and the 
VA Boston Healthcare System ).  Eligible caregivers will be interviewed, complete baseline measures, and then 
be randomized to two groups:   1) intervention group or 2) usual care group .  A study team member will 
telephone car egivers at approximately 11 and 19 weeks  after baseline  to answer questions on instruments with 
established reliability and validity. The staff member will review the Veterans’ VA Computerized Patient Record 
System health record to obtain information on th e Veterans’  healthcare utilization.  We will determine the 
budgetary impact of the intervention by examining the cost data in the VA Managerial Cost Accounting System 
(MCAS) (formerly DSS)  National Data Extracts (NDE) and Non-VA Medical Care  files. Q ualita tive interv iews 
will be conducted with selected caregivers to obtain in -depth perceptions of the value, facilitators, and barriers 
of the intervention.  Throughout all phases of the project, we will collaborate with our VA partners (Office of 
Nursing Servi ces, Office  of Geriatrics and Extended Care) . 
Impact:  This is the first known study to test a transition to home  intervention combined with technology to 
improve the quality of caregiving and the recovery of Veterans. Other outcomes will be a state -of-the-art 
website  and an evidence -based model ( telephone , transition to home  and online, training and caregiver -
provider messaging) that can be transportable to other disease models.  
 
2 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 4. Background:  The overarching theoretical model guiding our study is the health communi cation 
process model . This  model has the following  stages: planning and strategy development; development and 
pretesting concepts, messages, and materials; implementation; assessment of effectiveness; and feedback to 
the first stage. Within each  stage ther e is an ongoing, synergist feedback loop between planning, 
implementation, an d improvement (see graphic ). A key component of this model is improving the health of 
communities (e.g., caregivers & Veterans in the VA) with programs that are “consum er-driven” and that use 
traditional coalition building strategies  and partic ipatory action methods  to collaboratively engage  stakeholders 
and partners . 
     The relational/problem -solving model of stress guides the intervention and the outcome variables se lected 
in our project.  Stress is  viewed as a function of the reciprocal relations among stressful life events, emotional 
stress respons es, and problem -solving coping.  Successful problem -solving coping entails developing a 
creative and optimistic attitude a nd using a structured approach to manage challenges. The model can be 
summarized by the acronym COPE (Creativity, Optimism, Planning, and Expert Information).  Effective problem 
solving entails developing a Creative way of thinking and using one’s imaginati on to devel op ideas for solving 
problems.  In this model, caregivers are encouraged to have an Optimistic attitude.  Optimism involves viewing 
problems as a normal part o f life and recognizing that  effective problem solving can b e learned and 
successfully us ed. Effecti ve Problem solving involves several steps: 1) identifying and defining the problem; 2) 
prioritizing problems; 3) selecting the highest priority problem; 4) gathering Expert information; 5) setting 
realistic goals; 6) listing all possible solutio ns; 7) choo sing the best solution; and 8) evaluating the plan.            
Underlying this model is the premise that  successful family caregiving  involves open, collaborative 
relationships with healthcare professionals.  Healthcare professionals are viewed as  partners w ho are available 
to motivate, support and provide expert information (i.e., causes/consequences of problems, when and how 
caregivers should obtain help) when needed.  Consistent with the proble m-solving model, in our  project, we will 
use the them e of RESCUE  (Resources and Education for Stroke Caregivers’ Understanding and 
Empowerment) to illustrate how caregivers in collaboration with providers act as “lifeguards” and are 
responsible for the safety of the stroke survivors who are under their watch ful care. Regardless of what goals 
are set, the expected outcome of problem -solving is to minimize  negative effects of stress on caregivers 
(depressive symptoms, perceived stress, burden ) and patients (functional disabilities, healthcare utilization and 
costs); and o ptimize caregivers’ knowledge, skills/behaviors  (i.e., self -efficacy , perceptions of positive aspects 
of caregiving , satisfaction with care)  and health -related quality of life.  
 
5. Specific Aims and Hypotheses:  
 Our immediate, primary aim (#1) : to test the  effect  of the intervention on stroke caregivers’ depressive 
symptoms at approximately 11 and 19 weeks  after baseline data collection . Hypothesis #1 (primary):  
Stroke caregivers who receive the intervention will have less depressive symptoms at approximate ly 11 and 19  
weeks after baseline data collection compared to stroke caregivers in the usual care group.  
We propose four secondary aims (#2 -5): 
Aim #2 : to test the effect of the intervention on stroke caregivers’ knowledge, perceived stress,  burden, 
perce ptions of positive aspects of caregiving , self -efficacy, health -related quality of life (HRQOL), and 
satisfaction with care at approximately  11 and 19 weeks after baseline data collection .   
Hypotheses #2:  (2a) Stroke caregivers who receive the interventio n will have superior outcomes (i.e., greater  
knowledge, less stress, less burden, perceive more positive aspects  of caregiving , greater self -efficacy, better 
health -related quality of life (HRQOL), and greater satisfaction with care) at approxim ately  11 and 19 weeks  
after baseline data collection than caregivers in the usual care group.  
Aim #3 : to test the effect of the intervention on Veterans’ outcomes:  Functional abilities and 
healthcare utilization (i.e., unintended hospital bed days of ca re, number of emergency room visits, 
number of unscheduled clinic visits) at approximately  11 and 19  weeks  after baseline data collection .  
Hypotheses #3 : Veterans whose caregivers receive the intervention will have better functional abilities at 
approxima tely 11 and  19 weeks after baseline data collection and less healthcare utilization at 11 and 19  
weeks after baseline data collection compared to Veterans whose caregivers are in the usual care group.  
Aim #4 : to determine the budgetary impact for implement ing the int ervention.   
Research question:  What are the costs associated with the intervention and how do they compare to usual 
care?  
3 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 Aim #5 : to determine the facilitators, barriers , and best practices for implementing the intervention.  
Research questions : What are th e recommendations of VA leaders, policy makers, and clinicians for planning, 
developing, promoting, and evaluating and implementing the intervention in other sites? What are the 
caregivers’ perceptions of the value, strengths , and weaknesses of the interve ntion , and what 
facilitators/barriers did they identify with the intervention?  
Our rationale is that findings from the primary and secondary aims will provide information about the impact of 
the intervention and will inform dissemination and tra nslation of  the intervention into VA practice.  
 
6. Research Plan: The project will use mixed methods.  Aims 1, 2, and 3 will test the effect of the stroke 
caregiver intervention on improving outcomes using quantitative methods.  Aim 4 will determine the bu dgetary  
impact of the intervention using  micro -costing techniques (viz., direct measurement and pseudo -billing) 
combined with average costing to determine the average staff time, wage, space, and equipment costs 
associated with the intervention.   Aim 5 wil l use quali tative methods to determine the facilitators, barriers and 
best practices for implementing the intervention.  
 
Research Design &  Methods  (Aim #1 , 2, 3 ) 
Design : A two -group , randomi zed controlled trial with three assessment points  (baseline, appro ximately 11 
weeks,  and approximately 19 weeks ) will be conducted. The randomization will be stratified across study sites.   
Stud y Location s: We will recruit participants from a total of eight  sites. We will have staff at three study sites  
in VISN8 : NF/SG V HS in Gaine sville, FL; James A. Haley Veterans Hospital in Tampa, FL; Bruce W. Carter 
Medical Center, in  Miami , FL.  Staff at these sites will also recruit  from Michael E. Debakey VAMC in Houston, 
TX, Hunter Holmes McGuire VAMC in Richmond, VA ,  Central Ar kansas Vete rans Healthcare System , VA 
Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, and VA Boston Healthcare System via telephone and mail . All of the 
sites hav e large, in -patient hospitals, community living c enters, and in -patient rehabilitation units ; however , the 
Tampa sit e has a standardized, discharge planning process that involves Veteran education while the other 
sites have no discharge planning  process.  Thus, the usual/standard discharge planning care that Veterans 
receive at Tampa may be different than the care receiv ed by Veterans at the other sites . The research nurses 
will document the discharge planning care that the caregivers receive at all sites . In addition, research staff will 
review the Veterans’ CPRS health records and describe the discharge plann ing care th at is documented in the 
records. To address the issue of potential differences in usual care between study sites,  and to aid in recruiting 
the necessary sample size, we will use a stratified, randomization procedure to achieve balanced group 
mem bership across the study sites.  In our data analytic plan we will stratify by study sites in addition to 
controlling for baseline measurements.   
 
Sample : We will recruit a total of 240 caregivers who will be randomized to an intervention or a usual care 
group (see randomization & power analysis in the data analy sis section ). 
Eligibility Criteria:  Inclusion criteria:  All caregivers of Veterans with a primary diagnosis of stroke  are eligible 
for participation if they meet the following criteria: 1)  are the p rimary care giver and provide the majority of care 
for a Veteran who has a primary diagnosis of stroke (ICD 10 codes for stroke: 160.0 -169.998 ) and who has at 
least one activity of daily living (ADL) deficit  or a new or worsening cognitive or physical functi oning probl em, 2) 
have internet and email access and ability , 3) are reachable by cell or home phone, 4) read English at the sixth 
grade reading level or bet ter, 5) score 1 or greater on the Perceived Stress Scale and 6) plan to be ultimately 
discharged to  home  or ha ve been discharged home within the preceding 4 months 7) agree to random 
assignment to the intervention o r usual care group .  
    The researc h staff will use a checklist for caregiver enrollment to determine the caregivers’ eligibility . The 
research staff will determine whether the Veteran has a primary diagnosis of stroke by reviewing the Veterans’ 
CPRS health record and by conferring with the clinical staff. Caregiver status and responsibilities will be 
determined by caregiver self-report. We w ill determi ne the Veterans’ ADL deficits by asking caregivers which 
ADL deficits their Veteran has on the Barthel Index . Reading level will be indicated by the Brief Health Literacy 
Level screening tool .  Internet  and email  access and ability will be deter mined by  caregiver  self-report . 
    Exclusion criteria:   We will exclude caregivers of Veterans who are terminally ill , who are prisoners , who fail 
to meet one or more of the inclusion criteria , and whose Veterans have a life expectancy of less than 6 
mont hs. We will  also exclude professional caregivers who had no preexisting relationship to the Veteran.  
Caregivers who are enrolled in or have completed similar caregiver support programs will be excluded at PI 
discretion. Service use will be determined by re viewing the  CPRS records . We will confer  with the in -patient 
4 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 staff and with our clinical team members (MDs, RNs)  to approximate life expectancy . The study personnel will 
terminate the caregiver participation if the Veteran dies during the study .  
 
Rational e for Study  Sample Size:  The sample will consist of 240 caregivers. Assuming a standard dev iation 
of 8.2, 84  subjects per group would achieve 80% power to detect a mean intervention effect size of 3.5 on 
depression at a 5% significance level.  The sample si ze of 120 per group  (i.e., intervention group, usual  care 
group)  was selected to account for the occurrence of a (30%) dropout rate . The 30% drop -out rate is a 
conservative estimate of attrition and is based on previous caregiver problem -solving interventi on studies in the 
literature and on the attrition rates found in the internet intervention studies of our consultants, Dr s. Nahm and 
Rupper. The expected effect size and variability was deemed reasonable based on a number of sources.  In a 
study of caregive rs of Alzhe imer’s patients, the investigative team  described large changes pre - and post -
treatment in a clinical setting, with depression from time of admission to 4 weeks post decreasing 20 points for 
“recovered” patients and 12 poi nts for “still ill” pat ients. I n a study of a telephone intervention to family 
caregivers of stroke caregivers, found an estimated 1 month treatment effect of 3.1.   
 
Recruitment  and enrollment:     
The study will be open to all eligible caregivers.  The caregivers will be recruit ed from 8 settings  (North 
Florida/South Georgia Veterans Healthcare System, Miami VA Healthcare System, James A. Haley Veterans 
Hospital in Tampa , Michael E. DeBakey  VAMC  in Houston, Hunter Holmes McGuire  VAMC  in Richmond , 
Central Arkansas Veterans Healthc are System,  VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, and VA B oston 
Healthcare System ). We will also recruit from each facility’s associated community -based outpatient clinics . 
Although we will recruit from the Houston , Richmond , Central Arkansas, Tennessee V alley and B oston VA 
Systems , all study procedures will be performed by staff at the North Florida/South Georgia, Tampa and Miami 
locations (i.e., no personnel at the Houston , Richmond , Arkansas, Tennessee or Boston  facilities will be 
engaged in research).  Staff at th e main study site s (North Florida/South Georgia , Miami and Tampa ) will be 
responsible for maintaining study records for participants recruited from Houston , Richmond , Arkansas, 
Tennessee and Boston . 
  
 Face -to-face recruitment (Gainesville, Miam i, Tampa)  
We will perform face -to-face recruit ment for  in-patient Veterans and Veterans returning for outpatient 
appointments at the Gainesville, Miami and Tampa sites. To recruit in -patient Veterans  and Veterans returning 
to VA clinics for outpatient appo intments , we will meet with the clinical staff in the VA settings that care for 
Veterans with strokes and describe our study. We will also notify VA clinicians of the study via email.  Clinicians 
in the VA will ask Veterans with stroke who are receiving car e on their units or facilities and/or their caregivers 
if they are interested in talking to a research staff member  about the study.  The VA clinicians who care for 
Veterans with a stroke are busy and often rotate shifts , so study Nurses will additionally review the V A’s 
computerized record system (CPRS) to identify in -patient Veterans in order to assist the clinicians in locating 
potential participants . The study Nurses will review the minimum amount of i nformation necessary to determine  
if the Veteran is a dmitted for  new onset stroke. Once a Veteran is identified  as having  a new onset stroke , the 
study Nurse will notify a VA clinician involved in that Veteran’s care either in person, by phone, or through 
encrypted e -mail. The clinician will then ask the Vet eran and/ o r caregiver if they are interested in talking to a 
research staff  member about the study. If either the Veteran or caregiver is interested in the study, the study 
staff members will contact the caregiver and/or Veteran (using contact information  found in C PRS or provided 
by the clinician) to arrange times to meet or talk with the caregiver and Veteran.   
 Next, we will make two recruitment contacts (i.e. in person or by phone)  with the Veterans and 
caregivers. First recruitment contact : the resear ch staff will explain the study to the  Veteran and caregiver and 
ask if they are interested . If the Veteran and caregiver are still interested, the research staff will screen the 
caregiver for study eligibility. The research staff will use a checklist for caregiver e nrollment to determine the 
caregivers’ eligibility. (See inclusion/exclusion criteria section for procedures to determine caregivers’ study 
eligibility). If Veterans and caregivers are interested and eligible, we will provide them  with a folder containing 
copies  of the informed consent document s so that they can review it and/or discuss with their family and 
friends.  Study staff will give caregivers and Veterans a recruitment card with brief study information and staff 
contact information  for re ference . Second recruitment contact : for eligible caregivers  and Veterans , the 
research staff will meet in person or call the caregiver and Veteran on the telephone to  implement the standard 
consenting process that will be in compliance with VA Central IRB  and Resear ch & Development Committees 
5 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 at the study sites.  We will also implement the following consenting process with the caregivers’ Veterans . We 
will explain that the Veterans will not be involved in the study intervention, but that the research team n eeds to 
review the Veterans’ medical record to obtain information on the Veterans’ demographic characteristics, clinical 
characteristics, and healthcare utilization. We will determine the Veterans’ decision -making capacity by asking 
the Veteran three quest ions to det ermine their orientation (what is the month ?, what is the year?, what state 
are we in?). If the Veteran is unable to answer these questions correctly, they will be considered to have 
potential diminished decision -making capacity. We will also as sess their comprehension. After the research 
team member has discussed the study with the Veteran, the research team member will ask the Veteran to 
reiterate back their understanding of study , the potential risks/be nefits of the study, that his/her partici pation is 
voluntary, and that he/she can terminate participation, and so on . Veterans who are unable to reiterate their 
understanding will be considered to have potential diminished decision making capacity.  Since stroke  can 
affect different parts of the brain, the Veteran may have full decision making capability, but be aphasic or 
unable to speak clearly and unable to answer the questions related to orientation or be able to describe the 
study.  In these cases, we will confer with the clinic al staff regar ding the Ve teran’s  aphasia and decision 
making capacity. We were advised by a neuropsychologist regarding how to assess stoke patients’  decision -
making capacity.  We will obtain assent of the Veterans and we will respec t any dissent of the Veteran s. The 
legally autho rized representation (LAR) will be asked to give consent for Veterans with diminished decision 
making capacity.  The research team member will inform the LAR of the roles and responsibilities of the LAR 
and will provide the LAR with all the info rmation tha t would have been provided to the participant.   If the 
Veterans have physical disabilities and unable to sign the informed consent forms  and HIPAA authorization 
forms , the Veterans  will be asked to make marks  on the forms with witnesses present.   
 
 Outpati ent Recruitment via Telephone ( All Sites) 
We will recruit Veterans that have been discharged home within the previous 4 months from all five 
settings . To recruit Veterans that have been discharged home within the last 4 months, w e will develop a  list of 
potential participants (including SSN and date of birth) by reviewing the VA Patient Care Encounter Package 
Dataset and the VA's Computerized Records System (CPRS) to identify Veterans at the 8 recruitment  
locations  with a diagnosis of stroke base d on ICD 10 codes. We will mail letters of invitation and self -
addressed, stamped, recruitment postcards with an opt -in/opt -out option to the Veteran or their next of kin.   
A research staff member will then telephone the Veteran  or their next of kin (i.e., those who r eturned 
the postcards with positive responses, those who did not return the postcards). The staff member will identify 
the Veteran’s caregiver or confirm the next of kin is the Veteran’s caregiver, explain the study and ask if there 
are question s. If the Veteran and caregiver  are willing to participate, the staff member will confirm that the 
individual s meet all the other study eligibility criteria.  The research staff will use a checklist for caregiver 
enrollment to determine the caregivers’ elig ibility  (see inclusion/exclusion criteria section for procedures to 
determine caregivers’ study eligibility).  Once eligibility is confirmed, study personnel will mail Informed Consent 
Forms  and HIPAA Authorization Forms, with a self -addressed stamped envel ope so that  the caregiver can mail 
it back to us. After caregivers  and Veterans have had a chance to review the consent and HIP AA forms , the 
research staff will  call the caregiver on the telephone to  implement the standard consenting process that will be 
in complianc e with VA Central IRB and Research & Development Committees at the study sites.  We will also 
implement the consenting process , as described above,  with the caregivers’ Veterans. Once study personnel 
receive the signed forms, the original consent s will be r etained by PI in participant’s subject file  and a copy will 
be mailed to participants . Study documents for subjects from the Houston , Richmond , Central Arkansas, 
Tennessee Valley and Boston  locations will be maintained by staff at the main study  sites (Gainesville , Miami 
and Tampa ).  
A brief description of the study and staff contact information will also be posted on the RESCUE 
website (http://www.cidrr8.research.va.gov/rescue ). Caregivers  or Veteran s who contact study staff will be 
screened and consented following the same procedures described previously.  
 
 
Recruitment at Affiliate Facilities :   
 Recruitment may also occur at affiliate facilities  (hospitals or rehabilitation facilities) . Clinicians a t these 
facilities will hand recruitment cards to inpatient Veterans with stroke on their units and the Veterans’ 
caregivers. The cards will contain information  about the study and a contact number.  We will also post 
recruitment flyers with the research nu rse’s contact information at these facilities. If interested , the caregiver  or 
Veteran  will contact study staff who will arrange a time to explain the study, screen for eligibility  and consent 
6 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 either in -person at the facility or over the phone. All other r ecruitment and enrollment procedures will  be 
followed as outlined above. Affiliate facility  staff members will not be directly engaged  in research and no 
patient information will be shared from the affiliate facility .  
 
Recruitment tracking:  We will track the number of caregivers who decline to participat e and the reasons for 
their non -participation.  
 
Randomization:   
The proposed study will use a two -group randomized design with 3 assessment points (baseline, 
approximately 11 weeks, and approxima tely 1 9 weeks). Following baseline assessments, the participant will be 
random ly assign ed to one of the two study groups (Intervention or Usual Care). The Pocock -Simon covariate 
adaptive randomization procedure will be used so that there will be approximat ely equal n umber of subjects 
assigned to the two groups within each covariate level  (depressed or not and high or low ADL ) and within each 
study site. The statistician will develop the randomization scheme and share it with the project coordinator a nd 
a research staf f member  at each site . When a caregiver is enrolled in the study , this staff member at site will 
obtain the group assignment for that caregiver  from the randomization system . 
 
Data Collection:   
Research personnel will follow a step -by-step study  procedure manual to collect the data. Research staff will 
meet or telephone caregivers who are interested in learning more about the study. We will arrange times to 
meet or talk with the caregivers that are convenient with the caregivers. The research staff will dis cuss the 
study and provide the caregivers a copy of the informed consent document, so that they can review it and/or 
discuss with their family and friends.  For caregivers who are willing to participate, the research staff will 
arrange an in -person or tele phone meeting  to determine the caregivers’ study eligibility  (also see 
inclusion/exclusion criteria & recruitment and enrollment sections) . For eligible caregivers, the research staff 
will meet in person with the caregivers and Veterans or call them to implement the standard consenting 
process that will be in compliance with VA Central IRB and Research & Development Committees at the 3 
study sites.  If a discharge date is not known at this time, study staff will call the caregiver on a weekly basi s to 
check on the status of the veteran’s discharge.  
    Once the Veteran and caregiver are enrolled in the study , baseline data will be collected  over the phone . If 
the Veteran is an inpatient at the time of enrollment, baseline data will be collected af ter the Vet eran is 
discharged. The research staff will ask the caregivers questions on the demographic data forms and survey 
questionnaires  (stroke caregivers’ depression, knowledge, perceived stress, burden, perception of positive 
aspects of caregiving , self-efficac y, health -related quality of life (HRQOL), and satisfaction with care ).  
    The research staff member  will also review the caregivers' Veterans CPRS record to document the 
Veterans' age, gender, race/ethnicity, category of facility (hospital, c ommunity li ving center, rehabilitation 
facility) from which the Veteran was discharged to home, length of hospital and/or post -stroke rehabilitation 
stay, date/location/type of the stroke, number of previous strokes, and healthcare use. The research staff 
member will document any information in the record related to the Veterans' discharge plan s (i.e., treatments, 
medicines, patient and family education, case management, services).  
    The p ost-test assessments  (stroke caregivers’ depression, perceived str ess, knowle dge, burden, perception 
of positive aspects of caregiving , self -efficacy, health -related quality of life (HRQOL), and satisfaction with 
care) will be collected at approximately 11 weeks and approximately 19 weeks after  the Veterans’ discharge.   
A study tea m member  at the main study site (Gainesville), who will be blinded to the group assignment of the 
caregivers , will telephone the caregivers to obtain the post -test assessments . The research staff  will also 
review the Veterans' CPRS record and do cument the Veterans' healthcare utilization  since their discharge to 
home.  To minimize loss to follow -up, we will contact participants 24 hours before each post -test assessment to 
remind them of their scheduled appointment time. We will also mail postcards  to enrolle d caregivers who we 
cannot contact after 3 attempts  to reduce attrition.  
     In the event that the RN conducting the intervention or the research personnel conducting the pre -and post -
test assessments uncovers that the caregivers are experienci ng unmanage able stress,  but not severe stress, 
the research personnel  will advise the caregivers to call their assigned VA primary care social workers and 
primary care clinicians (MD, ARNP, PA) of their Veterans’ care team .  The research personnel will als o give 
the caregivers the phone number of the VA Caregiver Support Line and other referral sources as needed .  If 
the research personnel  assesses that the caregivers are in severe stress or crisis or if the  research personnel 
7 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 uncovers that the Veteran has serious cha nges in his/her health, the research personnel will call the primary 
care provider/social worker of the Veteran’s care team  or the local emergency response system (9 -1-1).  In the 
event that any abuse or neglect is suspected, study personnel wi ll follow e stablished procedures by oversight 
agencies, including VHA as directed in the VA Handbook 1050.01, to contact the Office of Inspector General, 
Office of Investigation, as well as the IRB and the state of Florida Abuse Hotline.   
 
Efforts to impr ove retenti on of participants : To improve the chances that participants will complete the 
project, we will conduct the 11-week and 19-week post-test assess ments  at times  that are convenient to the 
caregivers.  
Overview of the Intervention  
We will use a nur se-guided , multi -component transition -to-home  planning intervention . The intervention  is 
designed to enhance , rather than substitute for the usual post-discharge efforts that are already in place at VA 
medical facilities. The transition -to-home  component o f the intervention (i.e., caregiver training using the 
RESCUE website) will be conducted in one  or two sessions with stroke caregivers over the phone after 
baseline  data collection . The in -home component  will include 8 sessions of skills training on the RE SCUE 
websit e followed by application of the problem -solving approach via the RESCUE  messaging c enter . The 
intervention is designed to enhance stroke caregiver problem -solving skills and improve both caregiver and 
Veteran outcomes.  The intervention is based  on the relational/problem -solving model of stress . The  
intervention is tailored to address the self -identified needs of the caregivers.      
    The uniqueness of this proposed intervention is that it adds technology -based components (Internet training 
and messaging ) to the traditional, in -person, problem -solving intervention. We designed our intervention to be 
minimally disruptive to caregivers’ schedules. This entailed developing an intervention that could be delivered 
in a one -time session over the phone  followed b y online training and messaging that caregivers could do at 
convenient times. Below, we separately discuss each component of the intervention: a) RES CUE website, b) 
transition -to-home telephone  session, and c) In -home, online training and proble m-solving s essions.  
a) The RESCUE Stroke Caregiver Website serves as the foundation for the entire intervention ( transition -to-
home  session and the in -home sessions). The goal of the website, which is named Resources and Education 
for Stroke Caregivers’ Un derstanding  and Empowerment (RESCUE), is to help family members become skilled 
caregivers by providing comprehensive information to manage their own problems and those of their survivors. 
The website is evidence -based a nd consumer driven and houses informa tion/tools,  a problem -solving module, 
and a problem -solving diary form that are integral components of the intervention (see following sections and 
appendix for examples; visit the website at  http://www.cidrr8.research.va.gov/rescue/ ).     
      The websit e includes the following sections: 1) an extensive list of resources; 2) a library of the 
monthly/bimonthly patient education newsletters; 3) self -help tools; 4) a glossary of medical terms with 
phonetic pronunciations; 5) testimonials or stories from stro ke caregive rs; 6) links to other stroke and caregiver 
websites; 7)  a factsheet library; 8) a problem -solving training module, and 9) a problem -solving diary form. A 
major component of our proposed intervention is the comprehensive library of factsheets for  stroke car egivers 
(see following table for categories and topics).  
 
b) Intervention Component  (#1): Transition -to-Home Telephone Session : (includes the RESCUE 
problem -solving module  and diary accessible on http://www.cidrr8.research.va.gov/rescue/  and in 
appendix ). The research  nurses at each site  will conduct telephone  sessions with t he caregivers  shortly after  
baseline data is collected . The nurses will follow a structured protocol (see following  table) and  script . The 
problem -solving module on the RESCUE website serves as the primary teaching tool for this session.  Similar 
to how teachers use power -point presentations for classroom instruction, the nurses will use the module to 
teach the problem solving met hod. 
   
Protocol: Telephone , Transition -to-Home  Session (s) using the Problem -Solving Module and RESCUE website  
#1 Objective:  
Rapport building 
and caregiver 
assessment   The nurses will begin with an “icebreaker” to build rapport by asking the caregivers to talk about their 
families. Next, the nurses will ask the caregivers to talk about their stroke survivors before and after 
the stroke. Last, the nurses will ask the caregivers to talk about themselves and what they know or 
have learned while i n the hospi tal about taking care of someone who has suffered a stroke.  
8 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 #2 Objective:  
Tour of the 
RESCUE 
caregiver website  The nurse s will mail the caregivers the RESCUE workbook that prominently dis plays the RESCUE 
website access procedures on the cover.   The nurse s will then give the caregivers a guided tour of  
the RESCUE website  over the phone .  The nurses will navigate through the website with the 
caregiver and show the caregivers the various website features.  
 #3 Objective:  
 
Review of the 
Problem -Solving 
Modu le on the 
RESCUE website  
 a) The nurses will ask the caregivers to click and open the problem -solving module. The module 
discusses the basic concepts of the problem -solving approach.  Problems are viewed as challenges 
and successfully handled by developing a Creative  way of thinking. Problems are resolved by 
developing an Optimistic  attitude. Using a Planning -solving  approach involves  8 steps: 1) 
identifyin g  and defining problem s; 2) prioritizing problems; 3) selecting the highest priority proble m; 
4) gathe ring Expert information; 5) setting realistic goals; 6) listing all possible solutions; 7) choosing 
the best solution; and 8) evaluating the plan. b) Prior to moving to the next part of the module, the 
research nurse s will ask scripted questions  to determi ne the caregivers’ understanding and will 
clarify information as needed.   
#4 Objective:  
 
Application of the 
problem -solving 
approach and the 
RESCUE website 
to address a 
common 
caregiver problem 
– STRESS & 
DEPRESSION  a) The nurses and caregive rs will nex t read the illustrative example or scenario in the problem -
solving module that discusses a fictional  caregiver named Alice who has depression and stress. The 
nurses will show the caregiver how to apply the problem -solving approach using the info rmation and  
tools on the RESCUE website to help resolve Alice’s stress and depression. b) The research nurse s 
will then illustrate how to apply the problem -solving approach . c) Throughou t the instruction, the 
nurse s will emphasize the importance of having a positive attitude, remembering that most 
caregivers experience depressive symptoms (i.e., normalizing their experiences) and reinforcing that 
there are strategies to alleviate stress.  
#5 Objective  
 
Development of a 
personalized 
problem -solving 
plan a) The caregive rs will identify all potential problems.  
b) Caregivers will use a printed copy of the “problem -solving diary” that is on the RESCUE website . 
This diary will be mailed to the caregivers.  The caregivers will use the diary to  write down  their 
problems, prior itize their problems, and identify  the most troublesome problem.  The caregivers will 
read and discuss the factsheet(s) on the RESCUE caregiver website related to the ir most 
troublesome problem.  The caregivers will list realistic goal(s), possi ble solutio ns, and evaluation 
plans.  
#6 Objective  
Summary  of the 
problem -solving 
approach , in-
home sessions, 
and RESCUE 
workbook  a) The nurses will summarize the session and answer questions .  
b) The nurses will review the purpose and procedures of the f ollow -up se ssions that the caregivers 
will participate in at home on their computers (referred to as "in -home sessions"). The nurses will 
review the RESCUE website and verify that  the caregivers know how to use the RESCUE 
messaging center (see in -home sect ion). 
  
 
RESCUE Problem -Solving Diary Form : The caregivers will write their personalized problem -solving plans on a 
diary form. A blank diary form can be printed from the RESCUE website. The form provides spaces to list and 
prioritize problems, goals, sol utions, and  evalua tion plans. During the telephone session , the caregivers will 
use a printed diary form to develop their pe rsonalized plan that they will update  as needed  (e.g., in -home 
sessions and after the study is completed). Caregivers will be remind ed that the y can go to the RESCUE 
website and print th e blank diary forms as needed . 
RESCUE Information :  Caregivers will be given  the URL of the  VA-secured  RESCUE Messaging Center  and 
information (telephone  number ) about how to call the VA National Caregi ver Support  Line.   
 
c) Intervention Component  (#2): In-Home Skills Training and Problem -Solving Sessions.  The sessions 
will reinforce, sustain, and add to what was learned during the transition -to-home  telephone  session. The goals 
of the in -home component  are to ref resh the caregiver's knowledge of the problem -solving method, motivate 
and empower the caregivers’ abilities to access information on the RESCUE website to resolve their personal 
problems, and provide additional skills training to facilitate car egivers’ su ccessful adjustment after Veterans’ 
return to home. We will begin  the in -home sessions within the first four months after the Veterans’ discharge 
because this is the time caregivers recognize that the changes in their loved one may be permanent and 
9 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 become most stressed.  This is also the time that caregivers are most in need of information and support as 
they adjust to new roles.  We will conduct 8 sessions . 
    The in -home sessions involve two parts:  1) skills training on the RESCUE website, and  2) problem -solving 
planning via the RESCUE messaging center. For part one, caregivers will learn a new caregiving skill each 
session by reading a different factsheet on the RESCUE website.  
    In the second part of each in -home session, the caregivers wi ll apply th eir skills training to develop 
personalized problem -solving plans using the RESCUE messaging center. The messaging center is a secure 
site that is located behind the VA firewall. The messaging center uses a free -text format that will enable  the 
caregivers at home a nd the research nurses  to asynchronously communicate and collaborate online over an 
encrypted channel . Participants will receive reminder emails 48 hours before each messaging center session . 
The messaging center is designed to assist p articipants  in improving their abilities to problem -solve and 
thereby decrease their depressive symptoms. The caregiver -nurse interaction on the messaging center will 
reinforce information that the caregiver received during the transition -to-home  session a nd the skil ls training on 
the RESCUE website. The role of the research nurse s is to empower participants  via the messaging center  to 
act on their own behalf by providing acceptance and integration of new knowledge and suggesting alternatives.  
    The RESC UE messagin g center is an adaptation of the currently available Low-ADL Monitoring Program  
(LAMP) platform that has been successfully used at our facility (North Florida/South Georgia VHS) by 1774 
Veterans since 2003. With the  guidance of our Co -I, Dr. Lev y, and cons ultant, Steven Moore, we modified the 
existing code base on the LAMP platform and began the initial steps to create the RESCUE messag ing center. 
We also pretested the current message center .   
    During the  transition -to-home  session, the resea rch nurses will discuss the procedures of the in -home 
sessions and explain  how to access and use the RESCUE messaging center. In the transition -to-home  
session, the nurses will stress that the messaging center should not be relied on by the caregivers to h ave 
their p roblems solved by the research nurses.  Rather, the caregivers will be told that the messaging center is 
to help them learn how to solve their own problems. The nurses will emphasize that the caregiver should NOT  
use the messaging center as a su bstitute fo r their primary care provider or to address problems that are urgent 
and requi re immediate support and help. I n the in -home sessions, i f the caregiver s have  any problems with the 
RESCUE messaging center, they can call the project coordinator . 
    We will m aintain records of “exact correspondence” of the caregiver and nurse communications on the 
messaging center. We will also collect data on the time spent or minutes that the caregivers and study nurse 
interact via the messaging center. This data will allow us to monitor participant adherence . To minimize loss to 
follow -up, if necessary, we will c ontact  participants 24 hours before scheduled data collections/sessions to  
remind them of their session . We will also mail reminder postcards to enrolled caregivers that we are unable  to 
contact after 3 attempts to reduce attrition.  
 If after starting, a caregiver is unable or unwilling to continue with the intervention they will be offered 
the opportunity to discontinue the intervention but remain in the s tudy for da ta collection phone call s. The se 
phone call s will occur approximately 11 and 19 weeks after baseline  data collection . To be eligible to complete 
these optional data collection phone call s, the caregiver must have completed at least one phone or 
messaging c enter intervention session.  
    
Usual Care Group:  The caregivers’ Veterans will receive usual or standard care.  The caregivers will receive 
the standard information and discharge planning that is provided to all stroke caregivers.  There will b e no 
change s in the care the Veterans normally receive or in the information and discharge planning that the 
caregivers normally receive.  
 
Fidelity Considerations:    We will develop st andardized manuals and protocols. This manual will provide 
step-by-step guidelines  on recruiting/enrolling participants, implementing the informed consent proc ess, in 
conducting the transition -to-home  and in -home  session s and implementing the data collection procedures.  We 
will provide extensive training to all of our team me mbers . The PI and one staff member  will periodically visit 
(minimally once a year) the Tampa and Miami study sites and observe the research  nurses conducting the 
transition -to-home  session.  Feedback will be provided as needed.  
    Similar to our previous p rojects, we  will have regular conference calls with our team members at the three 
study site s (Gainesville, Miami and Tampa) .  In these meetings, team members will describe how they are 
10 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 implementing the intervention and discuss protocol issues.  To monitor the deliver y of the intervention,  we will 
listen to each research nurse’s first one or two  transition -to-home  sessions to identify any fidelity issues at the 
beginning of the project.  Following this initial monitoring, we will periodically listen to the re maining ses sions, 
making sure that we have fidelity checks during the beginning, middle, a nd end of the first component of the 
intervention . We will also ask the research nurses to track the number of minutes they spend with each 
participant and to  keep de tailed note s of any deviations from our study protocol  that occur during the transition -
to-home  sessions.  The PI and project coordinator will discuss the deliveries of the intervention  and evaluate 
adherence to study protocols, n oting all deviations on a form. Feedba ck will be provided to the research 
nurses.   
    In a similar fashion, we will monitor the in -home sessions  (in the intervention ) that are conducted via the 
RESCUE messaging c enter. We will review the first  two “exact correspondences” of the ca regiver and nurse  to 
identify initial, fide lity issues. After this assessment , we will periodically review the exact correspondences 
between the caregiver and nursing on the messaging center to ensure that we have fidelity checks throughout 
the project.  The research nurse s conducting the in -home sessions  will also keep detailed notes of any 
deviations in protocol that occur during the in -home sessions.  The PI and project coordinator will review the 
fidelity check data and provide feedback, as needed, to th e main stud y, research nurse.  
     
    We will evaluate “enactment” using the Treatment Fidelity Tool.  After completion of the study, w e will ask  
caregivers (in intervention group) to rate the amount of information  and contact  they received duri ng the 
transition -to-home  and in -home sessions  (too little, just right, too much),  how much they used the skill -building 
strategies (not used, used a little, used often, used all the time) and the RESCUE website (never, infrequently, 
monthly, every 2 -3 weeks, every  week, ever y day ,) how helpful the intervention was (not helpful, little, 
moderate, extremely ,) and whether their problems were resolved (not resolved, making progress, fully 
resolved, resolved now). We will ask caregivers in the standard care group how mu ch they use d the RESCUE 
website (never, infrequently, monthly, every 2 -3 weeks, every week, every day)  and whether their problems 
were resolved (not resolved, making progress, fully resolved, resolved now) . 
 
Training of investigative team members : Prior to interactin g with participants, team members at all study 
sites will have a training meeting in Gainesville. This meeting will include the PI, project coordinator  (PC), site 
PIs, and all research nurses . Other research team members will participate at desi gnated time s. We w ill 
carefully review the study  manual and protocols and the project timeline.  Although all of the research nurses 
will be experienced clinicians with expertise in motivational interviewing, we will review the principles and 
techniques of this approa ch. We will give feedback to research staff members after they have completed 
“mock” sessions performing the screening, the informed consent, and baseline assessment procedures . We 
will also give feedback to the nurses after they have completed “mock sessi ons” for the transition -to-home  
intervention. These staff members will be required to "pass” a role -playing session in front of the PI, site PIs, 
and PC.   
    We will extensively train the study staff  who will co nduct the post -test assessments , including the qualitative 
interviews.  We have hired study staff  that have experience in motivational and qualitative interviewing.  
Nonetheless, we will extensive ly train the study staff on these techniques . The study staff will practice 
interviewing techn iques with feedback from the PI and project coordinator.  The study staff will be required to 
“pass” a role -playing session.  
    Similarly, we will train the research nurse s who will communicate with the caregivers via the RESCUE 
messaging center in  the in tervent ion group  (second intervention component). We will conduct “mock se ssions” 
in which the PI and project coordinator will monitor the nurse as she/he conduct s these sessions. The nurse 
will be re quired to successfully “pass” two messaging session s with a “proxy”  caregiver i n front of the PI and 
PC who will provide feedback for improving the nurse’s online messaging skills.  
 
Measures:  We carefully chose measures that had good psychometric properties, were easy to administer, and 
were relatively short in  length to reduce participant burde n. An important consideration in  our selection was 
including measures that had been used  in our previous studies and in other care giver  studies  so that we could 
compare our results with others.  In addition, to address the  “common ca regiver dataset requirement” in this 
targeted solicitation we selected caregiver measures that have been evaluated historically in the literature. 
Most of the measures selected were tools that our team members had used previously in other studie s. In the 
11 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 table below, we describe the measures we will use for screening caregivers to determine their study eligibility 
as well as the measures related to testing hypotheses 1 -3. Our other measures are described in later sections.  
 
Instruments/Measures  
Concept – 
Instrument /Measure  Description of Instrument /Measure  Mean  
Time  
Screening Instruments  
Caregiver Literacy Level – 
BRIEF health literacy 
screening tool  
Haun , et al., 2009  This is a four -item health literacy screening tool that has been shown to  accurately  identify 
individuals with inadequate health literacy or persons who have below 7th grade reading level. 
The tool has adequate sensitivity and specificity .  <2 
minutes  
Veterans’ Activity of Daily 
Living - Barthel Index   
Mahoney FI & Barthel D, 
1965  This t ool consists of 10 items that measure patients’ abilities to perform self -care tasks ( e.g., 
feeding, bathing, personal toileting, dressing, chair/bed trans fers, ambulation ). The tool has 
been used extensively in  studies of outcomes of care in re habilitatio n setting s. We will screen 
caregivers by asking them if their stroke survivor  needs assistance  performing the tasks.   <2 
minutes  
Perceived Stress Scale -
Screening  
Cohen S & Williamson G, 
1988  The PSS -4 was designed for use with community sample s with at l east a junior high school 
education, the items are easy to understand and the response alternatives are simple to grasp.  
Moreover, the questions are quite general in nature and hence relatively free of content specific 
to any sub population gro up.  Caregi vers should score a 1 or greater on this tool to be eligible 
for enrollment.  
 <2 
minutes  
Caregiver Measures  (Pre- and Post -Test Assessments)  
Demographic and Health 
Characteristics  Age, sex, marital status, educational level, race/ethnicity, re lationship to stroke survivor  will be 
collected by self -report.  <5 
minutes  
Stroke Knowledge   
National Institutes of Health  Stroke Knowledge is an instrument developed by the National Institutes of Health to measure 
individuals ’ knowledge of stroke.  <5 
minutes  
Perc eived Stress Scale  
Cohen S & Williamson G, 
1988  The PSS -4 was designed for use with community samples with at least a junior high school 
education, the items are easy to understand and the response alternatives are simple to grasp.  
Moreover, t he question s are quite general in nature and hence relatively free of content specific 
to any sub population group.   <2 
minutes  
Depressive Symptoms - 
Center for Epidemiologic 
Studies Depression (CES -D 
20)  
Eaton W, et al., 1994  CES-D is a 20 -item, 4 -point Likert sc ale ranging from never (0) to most  of the time (3). It 
assess es depressive symptoms and is not a clinical measure of depression.  Scores range 
from 0 -60 with higher scores indicating g reater depressive symptoms . It has been used in 
numerous stud ies with ca regivers , and has good reliability and validity.  <8 
minutes  
Positive Aspects of 
Caregiving Scale —11-Item 
Boerner, et al., 2004  The Positive Aspects of Caregiving Scale is an 11 -item 5 -point Likert scale ranging from 
disagree a lot (1) to agree  a lot (5). Higher scores indicate greater benefits from caregiving.  <5 
minutes  
 
Revised Scale for 
Caregiver Self -Efficacy  
Steffen et al. 2002  This is a 15-item measure of caregivers’ judgments regarding their ability to perform effectively 
in specific, c aregiving s ettings. We will administer  two sub -scales  of the instrument : Caregiver 
Self-Efficacy for Obtaining Respite and Caregiver Self Efficacy  for Controlling Upsetting 
Thoughts about Caregiving . Respondents rate their level of confidence for each item  on a scale  
from 0 to 100. The tool has established reliability and validity. We selected this self -efficacy tool 
because it was developed spe cifically for caregivers  <5 
minutes  
12 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 Caregiver Burden – Short 
Version of the Zarit 
Burden Interview (S -ZBI)  
Zarit, 1980  This is a 12-item instrument that has been reduced from the original, full 29 -item instrument .125 
The short version was correlated with the full version with correlation coefficients ranging from 
0.92 to 0.97. The S -ZBI measures the degree of burden felt by caregiv ers. Items fall into five 
categories (health, well -being, finances, social life, relationship with impaired person). The 
instrument was originally developed to measure burden of caregivers of patients with dementia. 
However, the S -ZBI has been used in stro ke caregive r studies . We selected this tool above 
other burden instruments because it is brief, easy -to-answer, measures both subjective and 
objective burden, and is widely -used.  <5 
minutes  
RAND 12 -Item  Health 
Survey (VR-12)  
Kazis et al., 1998  The VR-12 consists of 12 items  that measure health -related quality of life.  As recommended by 
Ware,126 we will  transform raw data scores so that comparisons can be made with norms. 
Thus, scores will range from 0 -100, with higher scores indicating better general health 
perceptions. The tool has been widely used in stroke caregiver studies and has establi shed 
psycho metric properties.  We have used this tool in prior  studies.  <2 
minutes  
Patient Satisfaction – 
General Satisfaction 
Subscale of the Long -
Form Patient Satisfaction 
Question. (PSQ -III)  
Ware JE, et al., 1976  The General Satisfaction Subscale consi sts of 6 it ems. Responses to items range from 
1=strongly agree to 5=strongly disagree. Lower scores indicate greater satisfaction. The 
subscale has adequate internal consistency and test -retest reliabilities. Val idity of the tool has 
been supported in  nume rous studie s. We selected  this tool because it is brief, has good 
psychometric properties131 and is easy -to-read as we found in our previous studies.  <5 
minutes  
Oberst Caregiving 
Burden Scale  
Oberst et al, 1991  This instrument uses a 5 -point response scale t o measure t he perceived amount of time spent 
and perceived level of difficulty for 15 caregiving tasks. Higher scores indicate more perceived 
time spent or difficulty with caregiving tasks.  <8 
minutes  
Problem Checklist  This instrument was created for the study. The instrument asks caregivers to indicate what 
problems they or their Veterans are dealing with.  <5 
minutes  
Veteran Measures  
Demographic and 
Health -related variables  Age, gender, race/ethnicity, facility from which Veteran was discharge to home ( i.e., hospi tal, 
community living center, rehabilitation), length of post -stroke rehabilitation, location/type of the 
stroke, and numb er of previous strokes will be obtain ed from CPRS review.  N/A 
Functional Abilit ies – 
Barthel Index  
(Caregivers answer this  
form)  
Maho ney FI & Barthel D, 
1965  The Barthel Index is a frequently used tool to measure functional ability in both clinical and 
research settings. It has established validity, reliability, and sensitivity . We decided not to use 
the Functional Independen ce Measure (FIM), because FIM scores in the Veterans’ CPRS 
records will not coincide when the study assessments will be conducted.  Because the FIM 
items are based on the Barthel Index, we believe this index is a good proxy for the FIM.   <2 
minutes  
Healt hcare Utili zation – 
Unintended hospital bed 
days of care, number of 
emergency room visits, 
number of unscheduled 
clinic visits  Data on healthcare utilization will be obtained  from the CPRS  records.  N/A 
Cost Data – See Aim #3  We will obtain the standard c ost data fr om the VA Managerial Cost Accounting System (MCAS) 
(formerly DSS) National Data Extracts (NDE) (total,  nursing, pharmacy, laboratory, etc.) b y fixed 
and variable categories  and the Non-VA Medical Care  files. N/A 
 Measures to check fidelity (see  section on  Fidelity)   
Enactment   We will use  the Treatment Fidelity Tool and ask caregivers in the intervention  to rate the amount 
and value of the information they received (see section on fidelity).  <5 
minutes  
   
13 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 RESCUE messaging 
center  We will moni tor the con tent of the Messaging Center sessions via “exact correspondence” 
between caregivers and the nurse . N/A 
 
Data Analysis:  
Hypothesis #1 (primary):  Stroke caregivers who receive the intervention will have less depressive 
symptoms at approximately  11 and 19 we eks compared to stroke caregivers in the usual care group.  
Our primary endpoint is the caregiver depressive score. The focus of the primary analysis will be to examine 
the effect of the intervention based on “intention to treat.” Data from all the partici pants will be part of the 
primary analyses regardless of actual number of completed in -home sessions. Thus, we are examining the 
effectiveness of the intervention taking into account real world compliance factors. As an exploratory study 
element , we will a ssess compliance and attempt to determine its effect on study results.  
     For the primary analysis, the general linear mixed model for repeated measures will be used to model the 
follow -up depression times (approximately 11 and 19 weeks after baseline da ta collection), adjusted for site 
and baseline scores as fixed effects. Since the Tampa site has a standardized, discharge planning process 
that involves Veteran education while the other sites have no discharge planning process, there may be 
different res ponses due to usual care between the Tampa versus other  sites. Thus, we will first explore 
whether or not there is a differential treatment effect at the Tampa site by fitting a full model that allows for 
Tampa to have a differential time and gr oup effect for each time point. Let yij be the depression score for 
person i at time j, then Full fixed effects model will be:  
E(y ij) = β 0 + β 1Baseline i + β 2Tampa i + Σ sβ3s I(Site  i =s)+ β 4Time ij+ β 5Group i + β 6Group i*Time ij + β7Tampa i*Time ij 
+ β 8Tampa i*Group i + β 9 Tampa i*Group i*Time ij 
with covariates for baseline depression and time since discharge ( Baseline ), site (e.g., Tampa =1 if Tamp a, 0 
otherwise; and β3s represent effects of sites compared to reference site Gainesville), time ( Time =0 for 11 
weeks, 1 for 19 weeks), and group (0 if active control, 1 if intervention). Of primary interest is the estimated 
within -site intervention effect  at approximately  11 weeks after baseline data collection, controlling for baseline 
and stratifying by site. The initial test will be the test of β8+ β9=0, which tests whether the Tampa site has a 
differential group effect compared to the other sites at ap proximately  11 weeks after baseline data collection.  If 
a site difference in treatment effect is found, then results will be conditional on Tampa or Miami/Gainesville.  In 
this case, the primary tests of interest will be the estimated within -site interven tion effect at approximately  11 
weeks after baseline data collection, controlling for baseline and stratifying by site.  In the model above, this 
corresponds to the test of β5 =0 for other sites and β5 +β8=0 for Tampa . If no difference is found in our initial 
interaction test, we will assume that the Tampa site does not have a differential treatment effect and the 
interaction will be removed from the model.  The new fixed eff ect portion of the model will simplify to the 
Reduced model:  
E(y ij) = β 0 + β 1Baseline i + β 2Tampa i + Σ sβ3s I(Site  i =s)+ β 4Time ij+ β 5Group i + β 6Group i*Time ij  
 
Of primary interest is the estimated within -site intervention effect at approximately  11 weeks a fter baseline data 
collection, controlling for baseline covariates and stratifying by site. In the model above, this is the test of β5 =0.  
In order to control for possible chance sample imbalances resulting from randomization, the model will include 
covar iates for baseline prognostic factors (e.g., discharge from hospital, community living center, or 
rehabilitation facility; caregivers’ relationship to Veteran; number of previous strokes among Veterans, etc.), 
deemed to have significant relationships with response and groupwise imbalances. Thus, analyses will be able 
to compare the groups on the measure of interest while controlling for these factors. As a supplemental 
analysis we will assess long term intervention effects at the approximately 19 week after  baseline data 
collection time point.  In the Full model above, this is the test of β6 =0 for other sites, and β6+ β 9=0 for Tampa. 
In the reduced model, this is simply the test of β6 =0. All tests will be performed at the α=0.05 significance 
level.  The co rrelation among observations from the same person will be accounted for through the inclusion of 
a random person effect into the mixed model analysis.  
  
Hypotheses #2 (secondary):  (2a) Stroke caregivers who receive the intervention will have superior 
outco mes (i.e., less burden, less stress, greater self -efficacy, perceive greater positive aspects of 
14 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 caregiving , better HRQOL, and greater satisfaction with care) at approximately  11 and 19 weeks  after 
baseline data collection  than  caregivers in the usual care  group.  
The analysis plan for Hypothesis 2 will closely follow the plan outlined above for Hypothesis 1 for each 
secondary outcome of interest.  
 
Hypotheses #3 (secondary) : Veterans whose caregivers receive the intervention will have better 
functional abilities at approximately  11 and 19 weeks after baseline data collection and less healthcare 
utilization at approximately  11 and 19 weeks after baseline data collection compared to Veterans 
whose caregivers are in the usual care group.  
Since the Barthel Index score can be treated as continuous, the analysis plan follows exactly as above in 
Hypothesis 1. Since the Veteran healthcare utilization measures are count data, the models will be somewhat 
different. There will be no baseline covariate s added to the model , as they are not applicable to the count 
measures. Analyses will be conducted for the period following baseline data collection  to approximately  11 
weeks  and 19 weeks  after baseline data collec tion. Generalized linear models for count data (such as Poisso n 
or negative binomial regression models , depending on the presence or absence of over -dispersion) will be 
employed to determine the group effects on healthcare utilization. As before, the site type will be included in 
the full model and possible site diff erences will be accounted for. Log link functions will be employed on the 
count data to create the correct distributional data forms. As before, i n order to control for possible sample 
imbalances resulting from randomization , all models will include covari ates for prognostic factors deemed to 
have significant relationships with response and significant groupwise imbalances. Thus, analyses will be able 
to compare the groups on the measures of interest while controlling for these factors.  
Handling of Missing Data:  We should not have a problem with missing data as our data will be collected in -
person or over the telephone. Our data collectors will receive extensive training on interviewing and how to 
politely encourage participants to answer all questions on re search instruments. In the event of drop -outs, the 
missingness mechanism will be explored. If the assumption of Missing Completely at Random (MCAR) or the 
common assumption of Missing at Random (MAR) are plausible, then little change to the analysis plan i s 
necessary. The mixed models analysis using direct -likelihood approaches will be unbiased and appropriate. 
Study efficiency (power) will of course be affected by the smaller amount of available information, thus we have 
inflated the planned recruitment sa mple size. If the missingness assumptions are not plausible, then Missing 
Not at Random (MNAR) techniques will be employed  and analysis results will be interpreted  with caution.  
 
Research Design and Methods  (Aim #4 )  
Research  Question : Wha t are the budgeta ry impacts associated with the intervention and how do these 
costs compare to usual care?  
Data collection & measures : We will obtain c ost data in the VA Managerial Cost Accounting System (MCAS) 
(formerly DSS) National Data Extracts (NDE) (total, nursing, p harmacy, laboratory, etc.) by fixed and variable 
categories  and the Non-VA Medical Care  files, supplemented by the direct measures (i.e., microcosting) of the 
intervention as necessary.   
Research Question: What are the budgetary impacts  associated with the  intervention and how do these 
costs compa re to the costs of usual care?  
 The budgetary impact of this intervention will consist of two parts:  (1) the incremental cost of the intervention 
itself over and above usual care, and (2) the impact of the interve ntion o n healthcare utilization. To determine 
the incremental costs of the intervention, we will use micro -costing techniques (viz., direct measurement and 
pseudo -billing)  combined with average costing  to determine the average staff time, wage, space, and 
equipment costs ass ociated with the intervention. The micro -cost estimate for the transition -to-home  and in -
home session s will use the average elapsed time of such sessions along with an estimate of the average 
national wage of the type of nurse most likel y to deliver the intervention in the field.   
    To determine the intervention’s impact on the costs o f healthcare utilization, we will rely on ISPOR’s 2014 
budgetary impact analysis guidelines. Data on VA -funded  utilization costs will be obtained from MC AS) 138 and 
the Non -VA Medical Care files . We will tabulate all costs from these sources for  study enrollees over the period 
of the study, calculate the difference  between intervention and usual care average costs and test for the 
statistical significance of this difference using the Z -score method proposed by Zhou.  
    The final step in determining the budgetary imp act of the intervention will combine parts 1 and 2 to 
determine the complete impact of the intervention on the VA budget.  While the incrementa l cost of the 
15 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 intervention (part 1) will be positive, the impact of the intervention on the costs of VA utilization will likely vary 
directly with the impact of the intervention on VA utilization .  
 
Research Design and Methods  (Aim #5 )  
Research question  #1: What are the recommendations of non -VA and VA leaders, policy makers, and 
clinicians for implementing the  intervention in other sites?  
An impo rtant component of our project is assuring that our research is “consumer -driven” and uses the 
feedbacks from multiple individuals, including caregiver s, Veteran s, and stakeholders/ partners within the non -
VA and VA agencies and programs. To accomplish this we will us e traditional strategies and participatory 
action methods . Participatory action rese arch involves e ngaging parties in a collaborative effort to exa mine 
current practices , problem solve, plan, and monitor processes to affect change.  Throughout the project, we will 
communicate face -to-face with our local stakeholders (staff members at the sites) and via r egular telephone 
conference calls with members in our partner VA Offices and Programs (VA Offices of Nursing Service, VA 
Office of Geriatrics and Extended Care, VA My Health eVet).  These stakeholders and partners will function as 
advisors and will not be m embers of the team.  We will discuss problems and successes that we are 
encountering with our stakeholders and partners. We will not share any identifiable information. We will 
maintain and periodically review notes of our communications and meetings, whic h will provide valuable 
feedback concerning refinement, development, and evaluation of our methods for future initiatives . 
Research Question #2:  What are the caregivers’ perceptions of the value, strengths/weaknesses of the 
intervention and what facilitato rs/barriers did they identify with the intervention?  
To obtain feedback from care givers and to answer this research question, w e will conduct in-depth, qualitative 
interviews with 15  stroke caregivers (5 from each study site).   
 
Sample (size, recruitment, enrollment):   We will select a purposive subsample of 15 caregivers who 
participated in the intervention arm  of the study .  Sample size considerations in qualitative studies include the 
purpose/goal of the study and the depth of data needed to reach theore tical saturation and adequately answer 
the study question. Typically, 8 -12 participants are needed to reach theoretical sample. We will select 
caregivers from each recruitment site  following their completion of the intervention. We will telephone the 
selec ted caregivers and ask if they are willing to participate in the qualitative interviews. If the caregivers are 
willing, we will arrange a telephone meeting in which the research assistant will conduct the interview s.  We will 
enroll caregivers from each si te until we  have the desired sample size .  
 
Data collection:  A trained study team member  will conduct the in-depth, qualitative interviews over the 
telephone . The study team member will use an interview guide and  will ask caregivers their perceptions of th e 
value, strengths/weaknesse s of the intervention, and about the barriers and facilitators in participating in the 
intervention. The interviews will be digitally recorded, transcribed verbatim  by a research team member , and 
validated by another member of t he research team.  We will follow traditional qualitative research methods, 
which recommend that interviews are recorded, transcribed, and then analyzed, rather than using note taking.  
The recordings will allow the team to conduct more accurate data analys is. 
 
Data analysis:  We will use the constant comparative method to analyze the qualitative interviews.  Two team 
members, who are experienced qualitative researchers, will begin by reading the first two caregiver transcripts 
to identify initial concepts an d codes. Then, they will enter data labels and codes into NVivo, a software 
program that our team has purchased and used in previous projects. NVivo compiles data related to a code, 
groups related data, and provides a print out of all data for each code to  assist further analysis. The two 
qualitative researchers will regularly interact with the PI to discuss and ultimately arrive at consensus about 
coding schemes. A final coding framework and codebook will be created.  As the interviews are completed, the 
two qualitative team members will continue their coding and use an iterative, inductive process to generate 
categories and themes based on i dentified regularities and repetitive patterns in the data. The qualitative team 
members will interact regularly with  the PI and the entire team to discuss the findings and to search for 
alternative explanations in the data. Throughout the analysis, the two qualitative team members will write 
memos in NVivo about data analysis decisions. Common themes with selected, supp ortive quotations will be 
presented.  
 
16 
Updated 06/19/2017  
 Data  Security.  To ensure privacy, efforts will be taken to protect the identity of participants and ensure that 
data are kept confidential.  Following data collections procedures, we will de -identify data. Participan ts will be 
identified by unique, identifying codes  rather than direct identifie rs on all written and electronic documents and 
computer files.  While the data may contain some protected health information only a study team member 
possessing the code can link  the data to a particular participant.   In the event that the study team needs to 
contact the participants, they will look up their coded information in his/her local files to track participants' real 
name and contact information.   Electronic files will b e stored in folders with restricted access on a protected 
computer shared drive behind the VA firewall in a secured server.  Any hard copies of data forms and coded 
data will be double -locked in a VHS restricted access location.  The data will be only acce ssible to personnel 
involved in the study. All staff will be trained to avoid breach of confidentiality issues . We will obtain a data 
transfer agreement to transport paper data collection the other study sites to the NF/SG VHS via UPS or by 
having members of the research team personally transport the data using a government -issued or personal 
vehicle.  Data will be secured by using sealed envelopes in a locked container.  
 
In the intervention arm, qualitative interviews between the study team members  and th e caregivers will be 
audio -recorded.  These interviews  will be audio -recorded using PHILLIPSLFH 9600 digital pocket memo 
w/speech pro recorder. These recorders are VA encrypted (encryption is FIPS 140 -2 validated) voice recorders 
and were recently purchase d by the PI for another study. The audio sessions will be downloaded and stored 
on a protected, secure VA research server, and then deleted from the portable device. Digi tal recordings will 
use first names only and any identifying information will be removed once transcribed. All electronic records 
will be stored on a secure VA serve r that has limited access  to only study personnel and is accessible via 
desktop workstation s that are password protected.  
 
In the intervention arm, the caregivers will participate in the in -home component of the intervention (online 
skills training and application of problem -solving skills via the RESCUE messaging center). The RESCUE 
messaging c enter is an adaptation of the low -ADL Monitoring Program (LAMP) platform that has been used at 
the North/Florida South Georgia Veterans Healthcare System since 2003. The messaging center is a secure 
site that is located behind the VA firewall.  
 
7. Possible  Discomforts and Risks:   Participants may feel tired and uncomfortable or become stressed 
while discussing stroke -related issues and problems.  Caregivers may become tired or have stress during the 
baseline and pos t-test data collection sessions.  There als o is a slight risk that there could be a privacy breach 
and information about the caregivers in both arms of the study could be revealed inappropriately or 
accidentally.  
 
8. Possible Benefits : There are no direct benefits from this study.  Participants may  benefit from learning 
problem -solving techniques that may help them transition into their role as caregivers more efficiently.  Also, 
participants may benefit from obtaining information and resources on the RESCUE website.  Possible future 
benefits are id entification of best practices for improving discharge planning and transitional care for caregivers 
of Veterans with stroke.  
 
9.  Conflict of Interest:  There is no conflict of interest for the investigators and/or the participants.  