Resources for Resiliency (R4R) Advance Care Planning: A Pilot 
Study to Test a Trauma-Informed Care-adapted Advance Care 
Planning Intervention Among Affordable Housing Residents in 
Nashville 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
09/3/2024 
A. Specific Aims and Hypoth esis 
Long-t erm obje ctives and goals. Vanderbilt University School of Nursing (VUSN) and Urban Housing Solutions 
(UHS ) -the second largest provider of affordab le housing in Nashville -are pa1tners with the long-tenn goal of 
reduc ing health dispaiities among medica lly-tmder served UHS resident s in Nashv ille. This pa1tner ship is develop ing 
resiliency hubs that will provide essential services and suppo 1 t wi thin a communa l setting at the housing facility. 
Within the context of this pa1tnershi p, we are collecting prelimina 1 y data showing that UHS residen ts lack 
information about and access to advance care planning (ACP) , which specifies their healthcare wishes drning 
cogni tive incapacitation or end-of-life, and nationw ide, reseai·ch shows significant dispai·ities regarding ACP 
paitic ipation filllong low-income populations . The sho1t-tem1 goal of the propo sed work is to pilot test a Hyb1id type 
1, single-aim, pre-po st inte1vention to assess the initial efficacy and implementation outcomes of a trauma-info1med 
care (TIC)-adap ted ACP intervention to improve learning and communication for times of decisiona l incapac ity 
among UHS resident s, within the contex t of a resiliency hub mode l. This is a nece ssa1y first step for developing a 
long-tenn research po1tfolio dedicated to addressing ACP dispaiities and promot ing equitable end-of-life planning 
filllong low-income , medica lly-under served populations . The PI is an early -stage, postdoctora l-level researc her and 
this work would be the first opp01tunity to pilot this work as PI, in preparation for future stu dies of the efficacy and 
implementation of this novel intervention with staff, resident peers, residents, and cai·egivers. 
Specific aims: 
Aim 1. Pilot test a TIC-adap ted ACP intervention with UBS residents in an afford able housing-l ocated 
resiliency hub for initial efficacy, based on outcome s of ACP values/beliefs, processes (e.g., lookin g up ACP 
information ), and actions (e.g., advance directive compl etion, famil y conversation s about life-susta ining 
measures). We will emoll a coho1t ofUHS residents (n=30) to assess baseline ACP status , Adverse Childhood 
Expe1iences , and prev ious death -related experiences and deliver an intervent ion that is sensitive to past trauma 
following a novel stand ai· dized ACP checklist deve loped from a nanative synthes is of ACP conversa tion guide s [l]. 
HI. We hypothesize the intervention will decrease misconceptions about ACP (ACP values/beliefs), incre ase ACP 
processes, and increase ACP actions (e.g., advance directive completion,family conversations about life-sustaining 
measures ). 
Aim 2. Assess intervention acceptabili ty, appropri ateness, and feasibility among residents and prelimina1 ·y 
barriers and facili tators to implementation. Antic ipated baiTiers and facilitators may include identifying peers and 
staff to facilitate ACP discuss ions; document management and retention ; dedicating time and space to inte1ven tion 
delive1y vs. addressing c1i tical social dete1minant s of health (e.g., transp01tation , food , healthcare ), and long-te1m 
decisional supp01t as ACP preference s change with life and health event s. In addit ion to the residents comp leting a 
brief impleme ntation outco mes srnvey , we will hold audio-recorded 15-minute debriefs with residents following the 
inte1vention to assess process concerns and bani ers and facilitators. H2: We hypothesize that UHS residents (n=30) 
will find the inten 1ention to be acceptable, appropriate, and feasible . 
B. Background and Signifi cance 
Urban Hou sing Solution s (UBS) a non-profit organization , is the second-larg est afford able housing provid er in 
Nashville and provides housing for over 1,000 residents on a slidin g scale (30% of income) [2]. VUSN has 
pa1tnered with UHS since 2012 and this experience has 
shown that UHS residents have little access to preventa tive, 
community -based healthcare and continue to experience 
other resource deficits ( e.g., transportat ion, food, and 
commun ication techno logy) . To address this need for more 
sustainable solutions to multiple and overlapping 
insecur ities, Dr. Chlistian Ketel and Dr. Kate Clouse from 
VUSN , along with UHS , have created the Reso urces for 
Resiliency (R4R) study to deve lop resiliency hubs within 
communa l settings at UHS prope1t ies. These hubs (Figur e 
1) will feature critical resources and refe1rnl s that residents 
need in eve1yday life. ACP is a c1itical component of 
comprehen sive resiliency -hub model to facilitate timely, 
patient -centered discuss ions on what matters most durin g 
times of decisional incapacity for this disenfranchised 
popu lation. Within this context, through the suppo1t of the 
two-yeai· PROgRESS T32 progrfilll , Dr. Kimpel (PI of the 
proposed work) crnrnntly is collecting c1itical preliminaiy 
1 
data about the prevalence of ACP completion and knowled ge among UHS residents (n=200 ), as well as important 
potential factor s that may influence ACP completion (Adve rse Childhood Expe1ience s). While this prelimina 1 y work 
will inform the initial development of the propo sed ACP intervention , it does not include testing the intervention for 
initial efficacy and implementation outcomes of a pilot interv ention in this setting , which is why this funding 
opportunity is a critical next step of this researc h. Through this Hyb1id-Type 1 implementa tion pilot study, in 
collaboration with UHS , we will conduct essentia l preliminary research to develop this ACP intervention . This work 
is significant becau se we are directl y targeting an important healtl1care dispa rity that is often overlooked: the right to 
plan for times of cognitive incapacity . Research nationwide shows that adults with limited income are less likely to 
complete any ACP (26-33%) compared witl1 those with high income [3, 4]. Optin1al ACP is a life-long, iterati ve 
process of learning and communicat ion about healthcare preferences for times of decisio nal incapacity for patien ts 
and caregivers. When equitab ly implemented , patient s and families learn about life-sustaining care options (e.g., 
CPR), clarify values and preferences (e.g., Do Note Resuscitate ), prepare for in-the-moment decision-makin g durin g 
health crises, and participate in forma l and informal documentation and discuss ion [5]. Despite this aim, typica l ACP, 
if it happens at all, consists of superficial discussions , incomplete documentation , and little awareness or attention to 
the possibility of triggering trauma from previou s death-related experience s, leading to poorer patient , caregiver , and 
provider outcomes. ACP ba1riers for this population include the competing priorities of unmet basic n eeds, lack of 
ACP knowledge , limited social suppo11. medica l mistrnst , and insufficien tly trained clinica l staff, which is why 
community-ba sed ACP is so essential to facilitate early and continued learnin g and education [6, 7]. Early 
intervention is even more crucia l for this population given the profound , negative health and healthcare consequence s 
from chronic stress (e.g., early mortality) [3, 4, 7- 17]. While URS bas made impo1tan t strides to facilitate service 
connections , the se1vices available are insuffic ient to support ACP in the propo sed popu lation, which makes this a 
novel setting for ACP inter vention [6, 18]. Based on the PI's previous qualitative work and litera ture [6, 18-20], 
ACP is a s tressful proce ss and successful implementatio n with this population may depend on previou s trauma 
(childhood experie nces and previous death-re lated experience s). This work repre sents an innovative adaptat ion 
using principles of trauma-informed care [21]. Addi tional ly, to our knowledge , such adaptations have yet to be 
explored in this novel affordable housing context. This work is significant because it will inform a larger future smdy 
that has the potential to positively impact equitable, patient -centered, and timely healthcare . Durin g and after a 
crisis, when ACP does not happen , caregive rs and other social suppo1ts may experience additio nal decisiona l conflict , 
emotio nal distress, and prolonged grief [5]. Patient s from disadvantaged background are likely to experie nce lower-
quality end-of-life care, including unneces sary hospitalizat ions, little to no palliative care, and hospital deaths when 
home death s are often prefeITed [22]. The overarching goal of this research is to positivel y impact patients with the 
dignity of choice and will supp01t future studies that aim to reduce the harmfu l outcomes resulting from this disparity. 
C. Preliminarv Studies 
Dming the SUll1Iller of 2020 , Dr. Kimpel 
conducted five qualitative inte1view s 
with Nashville affordable housing 
speciali sts to hone the approach for her 
disse1tation study protocol and learn 
more about the popu lation of interest. 
Following her dissertation , she identified 
that stmcn1ral , life-stage , and social 
stressors and resources strong ly 
influence individual stress responses and 
ACP motivation , which in turn affects 
ACP preference s and practices (Figure 
2). The finding s also emphasized the 
importance of trust and a general hist01y 
of disenfran chisement. This finding 
reinforced the plan to use trusted Figure 2. Conceptual framewo1·k of cumulative resource s and sh·essors, individual 
stl·ess respons es, and advance ca1• e planning outcome s. 
Structural resource s and sourcN of Insecurity 
Healthcare cost, to11erage , and quality 
Prv,,,ider-pa tient inlUfllClions & llust 
• Healthcare manage ment 
• Housing and transponatlon lnseruri ty 
• Pub~ c benefit denia l & approval 
Ufe-stage experi ences and stressof5 
• Chi<flood poverty and death e,cperiences 
• Adulthood gaps in hea11hcar e coverage and de.!lth 
e)(l)erienoes 
• Older adulthood etigibility for public assistance 
acxeplance of morta lity 
Soclal dynamics and stressora 
• Ava~abitity of• healthcaro decbion •maker and 
trust 
• Reletionship quaity and social coping lndlvld~a l llnH 
rnponses and ACP 
motivation 
• Genetal resilience 
• Independent 
problem solving 
• 5'1eking social 
suppofl 
• Religious ooping 
• Avoidance ACP 
preferer1ces and 
practices 
Informa l 
dOcwnentation 
and di$CU$$lon 
Life inSurance 
anddealtl & 
burial 
Long-term 
care 
preferences 
community partnership s, face-to -face study interactions to promote rapport , and emphasized the investigator 's 
relian ce on participant expe1tise to fuel the proposed study. Resident illiteracy was also major finding from these 
interv iews and influenced the choice of investigator-administered study instrument s. This work informed variable 
selection for the ongoing R4R sn1dy (September 2023-June 2025): healthcare access and quality , resilience, coping , 
and adverse /positive childh ood experience s. Dr. Kimpel is serving as a Co-Investigator on the R4R s~ 
overseeing all study ACP measure s. After pilotin g the R4R questionnaire with 15 residents ofUHS 's--
2 
prope1ty in September 2023 , 8/15 ( 53%) stated they would be "ve1 y interested " in a center that provide s "end-of -life 
planning " and 73.3%(11/15) were "very intere sted" in a center that prov ides medical or legal plann ing. Although 
eight (53.3%) stated they had heard of ACP before , most respondent s (13/15, 86.7%) had not completed an advance 
directive, only 7/15 (46.7) had info1mally identified a healthcare decision-maker , 6/15 ( 40%) had discussed life-
sustaining measures and quality of life with famil y, and only 3/15 (20%) had discussed ACP with their doctor. These 
number s underscore the significant need for adaptive and early inter vention to explore patient plannin g need s, 
carefully screen for trauma and adapt approach to trauma need s, and foster appropriate follo w-up for patient s. The 
R4R Study preliminar y data and procedure s will info1m ongoing inte1vention development for this propo sed study . 
D. Research Design and Method s 
Dl. Design. We will implement a Hyb1id type 1, single-arm , pre-po st inte1ven tion to test initial efficacy of the 
inte1vention (ACP values/beliefs , proces ses, and actions) 
with the population of interest (Aim 1) and assess 
implementation outcomes (barriers and facilitator s, 
resident acceptability, appropr iateness, and feasibility) 
in the affordab le housing resiliency hub setting (Aim 2). 
D2. Inter vention. The inte1vention will consist of a single 
one- to two-hour visit wherein the PI (Kimpel ) will facilitate 
a flexible conversational approach with the resident (and, 
optionally, a healthcar · e decision-maker) in a quiet , p1ivate 
location in the resiliency hub. The conver sation will follow 
a standar ·dized proce ss of ACP to assess each participant' s 
uniqu e background with ACP , knowledge need s, explore 
values , preference s, and goals, and to identify readine ss for 
ACP action s ( e.g., AD completion ) to evaluate initial 
knowledge . Over 34 ACP conversat ion guide s have been 
deve loped as inte1vent ions, but all guide s take different 
approaches that may not comprehensive ly address patient 
need s. To facilitate a comprehensi ve and flexible approach , 
the PI will create an ACP checkl ist that is delived from a 
na1rntive synthe sis of the strncture and content of the most 
pr01ninent ACP conversation guides [ 1] The overa ll 
stmcture of the ACP chec klist for this inte1vention is 
portra yed in Table 1. The innovative approach will 
include initial and ongo ing adaptat ions of the check list with Table 1. Standal'dized ACP Checklist 
ACP Main Topics Sub-Topics 
Checklist 
Sections 
Initiation 
Exploration 
Action -Patien t readiness 
•R ap port- building 
•Introducti on to AC P 
conc epts 
-Percep tions of illness 
-PerceptioM of living 
-8elief'S about death 
and dying 
-Psychosocial well• 
being 
-Decision-mak ing 
prefer ences 
•Involvemen t of othe rs 
-Summar ize 
•Agreements 
-Follow-up -Address health status 
•Assess attitudes and beliefa abou t future care planning 
-Obtaining perml55lo n to dlscuH Aai 
•Establ ish relationship and tr ust 
-Introduce ACP concepts and potential positii,,e effect s of ACP 
-Set up future scenarios 
·Set expecta tions for discussi on 
-ReRect on who patient would want to join future conversations 
-Com prehension of health status and illness 
-Explore daily life wit h illness 
-E,cplore quality of life meaning 
-E>Cplore prior experi ences of death-rel ated experiences (TJC-
adaptati on) 
-Explore hopes for end-of- life e,cperiences 
-E>cplore topiC$ of coping, fear, hope, and religion and spirituality around 
plannina: for cognitive incap acity or end-of-life 
-Elcplore prior experiences with decision-making (TIC-adapt1tt on} 
•Identify patient's prefe rences for who will make the decision s (doctors, 
family, etc.} 
-Set goals for different health scena rios 
•Discuss level of willingness to trade off for a longer time 
·Explore treatment preferences and oth er preferences (e.g.1 dytng at 
home ) 
-Discu.ss plans for involving family, friends, providers, or other 
profe ssionals 
·E>Camine patie nt under5tanding of conversation anQ facilitator's 
underst anding of preferences 
•Review major themes from conversa tion and any points that need 
clarified 
·Milke recommendatio ns bitsed on conversil tion, which may inc:lude 
completin, paperwork or discussing matters furth er with family or :a 
provider 
-Identify surrogate-ded sion•ma ker i.e., Healthcare decision•maker) 
-Write questions down for patient tO tilke to famity, friends, or provider 
to clarify plans 
•Provide .a pl.an of next ~eps for patient 
TIC principle s: safety , trnstw01thine ss and transparency , peer suppmt , collaboration and mutuality , empowe1ment , 
and choice , and cultural, histo1ical , and gender issues [23-25]. Adver se Childhood Exper iences and previou s death-
related expe1ience s assessed dmin g base line data collection will be used to tailor the discussion to car·efully explore 
relevant hist01y to as sess resident ACP values, preference s, and goals. Participants will be offered the oppo 1ttmity to 
comp lete an advance directive, but some pa1ticipants may not be ready for this step as follow -up questions may ar· ise 
for additiona l family , fiiend s, or provider discu ssion. Following each inte1vention session , the PI will hold a fifteen-
to twenty -minute, audio -recorded discussion to review the inte1vention for possible adaptations to align it with TIC 
principles and banier s and facilitators (Aim 2). While peer supp01t will not be used in this inte1vention , par·ticipant s 
will be asked for sugge stions of how to involve peers to facilitate the ACP proce ss. 
D3. Eligibility. Inclusion crite1ia for emollment in the inte1vention will inclu de an adult (18+) residing in a UHS unit 
that does not have a completed advance directive and exclusion c1ite1ia include inability to provide info1med consent 
or participate in the inte1vention due to cogn itive, audit01y , visual impaitment or non-En lish Ian uage bar1ier. 
D4. Recruitment and enrnllment. We will purpo sively sample from , the UHS prope1ty 
where the first resiliency hub is located. Pa1ticipant selection will start with R4R study partic ipants that 
commun icated interest in future study pa1ticipation and non-pa1ticipants that were interested , but lmable to paiticipate 
in the study due to randomized selection . Resident s will be contacted by phone , text, or door knocking depending on 
theit· communication preference and availability of contact infmmation from the R4R study. If the individual does not 
answer the door , a letter and flyer will be left at the door with the contact infmmation of the study team . We also will 
post study flyer s in common space s to adve1ti se the study . To promote a diverse sample , we will stratif y by age (1 
is 18 to 39, 14 are 40 to 59, and 15 are 60+), 16-20 identif y as Black or African American, and 16-20 identify as 
male. If eligible (inclusion crite1ia are met, and no exclusion c1ite1ia are present), the PI or Key Study personnel 
3 
(KSP) will set a time to meet in person or rem otely to complete info1med consen t and other study procedures . 
Recrnitment flyers and word-of-mouth will be used to raise study awareness . 
D5. Data collection prncedures . 
Figure 3. Study Activitie s across Three Visits DS.1 Pre-data collection proc edure s. During the study team 
member will info1m the cand idate that incent ives will be 
Enrollment _ [oata Collecti on given in person and the pa1ticipant will receive a total of $75 
_ in phys ical gift cards for study partic ipation ($25 for baseline 
-Consent 
-Basel ine data 
collection 
•Bacqround 
character1stlcs, ACE 
scores , and death-
related experiences 
metrics , and Alm 1 
ACPmetrtcs 
-Schedule ACP visit 
-0.75 to 1.25 hours 
•$251iftcard -30 days following 
the ACP visit 
-Follow-up Data 
Collection 
-Aim 1 ACP metrics 
and Alm 2 
Implementation 
metrics 
-30 to 45 minutes 
-S25 gift card outco me meas ure complet ion (Visit 1 ), $25 for completio n of 
the 15-20 minute debrief interview (Visit 2), and $25 for the 
follow-up data comp letion at 30-days post-interve ntion (Visit 
3)). If eligible , the study team member will sched ule a 
conv enient time to meet with the candidate to complete 
infonned consent prior to data collection , within 
approximate ly 14 days of initial contact. Dming Visit 1: w ith 
the pa1ticipant, electronic consent and any identifier data will 
be entered directly into REDCa p [7]. A signed consent copy 
will be given to the p a1ticipant. A unique study ID will be 
created for the qu estionnaire proced ures and kept separate 
from any participa nt identifiers . Consent proced ures will take 
IO to 30 minutes . Prior to audio-recording the qualitative interview, the PI ask pe1mission to record. 
D5.2 Data collection procedure s. During Visit 1 and Visit 3, the questionnaire will be adtninis tered to each 
partic ipant in-person by the study team member. For in-person quest ionnaire adtninistration, a copy of the questions 
and responses will be available to the paitic ipant to reference . The KSP will enter paiticipant responses directly into 
RED Cap using a tablet computer. If internet is inaccess ible, responses will be recorde d on paper using the 
pa1tic ipant' s study ID. If in- person procedures are not poss ible, but the paitic ipant has access to a computer and 
internet (i.e., to complete e- consent) , and a telephone , inte1 v iews will be completed remote ly by telephone . The Visit 
I questionn aire proced ures will take approximately 45 minutes and t he Visit 3 qu estionn aire of fewer items will take 
approximate ly 30 minutes . Qualitative Debrief Inte1view: The PI will complete the inte1ventio n and then commence 
the 15-20-minute audio- recorded inte1v iew using a semi-strnctured inte1view guide. This inte1view will focus on tile 
pai·ticipant's perceptions of the intervention, any mom ents of discolnfo1t, stress, or discolnfo rt, and suggestions for 
how to align the intervention with TIC principles ( e.g., h ow can we make you feel safer during this discussio n). 
Inte1vention Fidelity : Members of the P I's mentor teain or a peer at the Vanderbilt University Schoo l of N ursing will 
attend a rando m visit for approximate ly 20% (6) of the visits to observe the interact ion, record conversational content 
using the ACP checklist, and, after the intervention and debrief visit ai·e complete, will discuss obse1vatio ns wi th the 
PI and discuss ongoing adaptations to the checkl ist to align it with TIC p1inc iples. 
D5.3 Post-data collection procedures. After each time of data collection is complete, t he KSP will facilitate the $25 
gift cai· d incentive as a token of gratitude for each pai·tic ipant's time . This amount is in line with other studies 
opera ting at the study site. The study team will audit quantita tive data within 1-2 days following data collection to 
ensure complete ness and accuracy . IfRED Cap data collection was not poss ible dming the interview, quantita tive data 
will be entered into REDCap immediate ly. A copy of the paper smvey will be scaimed into the REDCap record, to 
promo te data integrity, and then shredded . We will facilitate data trans pai·ency by sha1ing results with paiticipants per 
their preference . Audio-r ecorded data will be professiona lly transc 1 ibed by Rev.com and securely stor ed. 
D6. Limitation s. This innovative Hybrid type 1, single-aim , pre-post interventio n study will include both qualitative 
and quantitat ive methods, gather p relimina 1 y data on initia l efficacy and implementation outcomes, and will be a vital 
step for filture work adapting our inte1vention and cond ucting lai·ger studies assess ing the effectiveness within 
mai·ginalized communi ties. This study is lilnited by collecting data from a single aim, which does not allow for 
between group comparison, however, this approach is approp1iate for introd uct01y studies to explore within-group 
diffe rences in efficacy outcomes and initia l acceptability, feasib ility, and adaptab ility of an ACP intervention. Face -
to-face data collection methodo logy is subject to biased responses from social desirability and racia l discorda nce, 
whic h will be hand led by using trnst-building techniques from instrnment expe1ts and commu nity-engaged 
reseai·c hers (e.g., using communi ty paitne rships for recrnitment, fralning the pa1ticipant as the expe1t inf01mant, and 
asking for their help) [26, 27]. The mode of in-person , questionna ire delive1 y w ill assist pa1ticipants with health or 
reading literacy challenges and prevent exclusion of paiticipants with insufficient techno logy or transpo rt [26]. The 
intervention delive1y within the novel resiliency hub model will enable a safe, p 1ivate , and suppo1tive setting to 
explore plaiming needs and goals. Additional ly, the strong commun ity paitne rship, robust expe1ience of the reseai·ch 
4 
team , and previous research success with this community enable a rigorous approach that will enable compl etion 
of all study activities within the 12-month fundin g period. 
D7. Instrum ents and variables. 
Table 2. Outcome inst ruments Validated measures will be used for Aim 1 and the 
Var1ablo (Monauro) llmo Alm 
Period 
ACP PrOCHHS: ACP Processes Scale Baseline, Aim 
(15-items, 5--poi nt Likett scale (1 ""almosl 30-day 1 
nove,, 5 = almost always, participants rate 
how often they partldpate In different AC? follow--up 
processes. Higher summed scores 
Indicate higher partidpation In ACP 
processes, e.g., I review my advance care 
documen ts so that I know what they say) 
1--ACP Values/Beliefs: ACP Values and Basellne, Aim 
Sellers SQ11e (7-item, 5-poi nt Ukert 30-day 1 
(1=strongty ag,ee, S=sttongly disag ree. 
lower score$=fewer ACP misconcep tions) follow-up 
ACP AC11ons : ACP Slagos of Chango Basellne, Aim 
Scale (6-items, 5--point likert (O=no , not al 30-day 1 
all, 4-yes, rve done that months or years fol:low-up 
ago, higher soores: on individua l items 8nd 
ovora ll=highor ACP participation) 
Implementation outcome s: Acce ptabi lity 30-day Aim 
(4-item, AIM), App,opriateness (4~1tem. follow-up 2 
1AM}, .and Feasibility (4-item, F1M) 
I I Purpos.o 
This scale assesses the rrequency of 
participatio n in ACP processes. We 
hypothesize thal al 30-day follOW. •UP 
?:80% of lhe partJclpanls will endorse 
ACP process scores as anticipated 
compared with <80% at base line. 
Possible 1cont s: 15·75 
Antic ipated 1eorH at baHllne: <37; at 
30--dal follow-up: ~37 
Thls scale assesses ACP 
misconceptions . We hypothesize trnlt .al 
30-day follow-up at leas.I. 80% of 
participanls will hold ACP 
misconceptions as antici pated compared 
with <80% ti baseline. 
PoHiblo scores: 7-35 
AnUc lp,ated scores at baulln•: <28: at 
30-day follow-t.1p: ?::2! 
This scale lndlcalos the stage of change 
{preoon temp lation to mainten.ance) th.al 
each participant is in for the six core ACP 
actionslbeh8viors . We hypothesize th8t 
at 3().day folow-4..lp ii!:80% of participan ts 
will report ACP actions as anticipated 
compared witn <80% at baseline-. 
Possible overall scores: 0.2, 
Antic lp,at~ overal l scorff at baHlin t : 
<14, at 30-day follow-op: ~14 
PoH iblo scores for Individual ACP 
actions: 0-4 
Antic ipated lndlvidual acorea at 
bntllnt: 0·2, al 30-<l•t!ollow-4.lp: 3-4 
Each of lhese scares indic8tes 
participant perceptions of accep tability 
(agreeab leness , appropri,ateness (good 
flt), and feasibility (Implementability) of 
the intervention . We hypothesize that 
80% of participants will find the 
intervention to be acceptable. 
appropriate, and feasib le as reflected in 
the antldpated scores. 
PoHible Scor H for each subscale: S-
20 
Antic ipated scores at JO~ay follow-
up: 80% of the participants wlll rat• 
the intervention :!:1 S for each of the 
subscalH characte1istics will include demographics , soc ial 
detenninants of health (PRAPARE-18 ) [28], Health Literacy 
(BHLS-3) [29], and anxiety /depression (PHQ -4) [30]. 
Intervention vaiiab les that will be used to shape the TIC 
adaptat ion include adverse childhood experiences (ACE -10) 
[31] and death -related expe1iences (6 items ) [23, 32-34]. 
Table 3. Study Timeline Ove1 · Two Years 
Activity 
Protocol develo pment 
IRB a proval/renewa l 
Prepa re study database 
Team train in 
Purchase gift cards and 
distrib ute 
Interve ntion and data 
collection 
Data analysis 
Manuscript preparation and 
disseminati on 
Grant developmen t and 
submissi on 
E. Statistical Analysis Plan and Sam ple Size: 
Aim 1: Randomly missing item responses within measures 
will be handled via each measure's specific sc01i ng protoco l. 
Although minimal missing data are anticipated based on 
preliminaiy desciipt ive reseai·ch using in-person data 
collect ion, missing responses for entire measures will not be assumed random and imputations will not be conducted 
Quant itative data analysis will be conducted using SAS or IBM SPSS statistics softwai·e and perfonned by Dr. 
Kimpel, with additional guidance from Dr. Maiy Dietiich , as needed. Desc1ipt ive summaiie s of pa1ticipant 
characteiist ics will be generated to info1m generalizability of our population estimates. Boot strapped bias-co1rncted 
95% confidence inter vals will be generated ai·ound the observed samp le propo 1tions ( catego1ical data), means 
(non nally distiib uted continuous) , and medians (skewed continuous). We have specified clinically imp01tant 
standai·ds for demonstrating efficacy in Table 2. Frequency dist:1ibutions summa1izing the proportion ofpait icipants 
meeting the standai ·ds for demonst:1·ating efficacy at 30-days follow-up will info1m whether at least 80% met the 
standai·d. Fmthe1more , we will genera te effec t statistics with 90% confidence inter val to infonn powe1ing of 
subsequent work. Aim 2: We will statistically and visually desc1iptively characterize scores on each implement ation 
measure and compai·e scores to the benchmai·ks decided on with our stakeholder s as indicating adequate acceptabi lity, 
appropria teness, and feasibi lity. Impleme ntation Barriers and Facilitators: Analys is will be conducted with the 
assistance of the VU Qualitat ive Core . Their approach to thema tic analysis typically invol ves an inductive coding 
approach of open coding and deductive applicat ion of the interv iew guide stlucture and applicable theoretical 
framework result ing in a hierai·chical coding system. Initial and final themes will be developed from iterative , in-
depth review of the deb1ief intervie w t:1·ansc1ipts to chai·acte1ize p1imaiy baniers and facilitato rs and guide 
inte1vention adaptations . Themes will be compared across age groups, racial identities, and gender identi ties to 
promote thick descr iption of final themes . Sam ple Size Justi[ication and Power: The primaiy outcomes of the study 
ai·e initial efficacy and acceptabil ity, appropr iateness , and feasibility of the ACP intervention. To optimize the 
inf01mation gleaned about the intervention , we have by design did not include any "cont:1 ·01" condition and have not 
used a power analys is to motivate sample size. We ai·e justifying our samp le size based on the numbe r ofpaitic ipants 
that we antic ipate can reasonably emoll and complete all study measures dming the funded period . Fmthennore , 30 
patticipants will suffice for generating relative stable pai·amete r estimates of efficacy for informing future work. For 
the qualitative analysis, thilty inte1views will more than suffice to reach data saturation , when no new themes emerge. 
5 
F. Literatur e cited 
Reference s 
1. Fahner , J.C., et al., Interventions Guiding Advance Care Planning Conversations: A Systematic Review. 
Journal of the Ame 1ican Medical Directors Assoc iation, 2019. 20 (3): p. 227-248 . 
2. About Urban Housing Solutions . 2-14-21]; Available from: https://www.ur banhou singsolution s.org/about-
us/. 
3. Inoue, M. , The influence of sociodemographic and psychosocial factors on advance care planning . Journal of 
geronto logical social work, 2016. 59 (5): p. 401-422. 
4. Nour i, S., et al., Evaluation of Neighborhood Socioeconomic Characteristics and Advance Care Planning 
Among Older Adults . JAMA network open, 2020. 3(1 2): p. e2029063 -e2029063 . 
5. Malhotra , C., M. Shafiq, and A.P.M. Batcaga n-Abueg , What is the evidence for efficacy of advance care 
planning in improving patient outcomes ? A systematic review of randomised controlled trials. BMJ open, 
2022 . 12(7). 
6. Coogan, A., et al., Perspectives on Aging and End of Life Among Lower Socioecon omic Status (SES) Older 
Adults . Journal of Appli ed Gerontology, 2022 . 41(6): p. 1595-1603. 
7. Ka plan, L.M., et al., Barriers and Solutions to Advance Care Planning among Homeless -Experienced Older 
Adults. Journal of palliative medicine , 2020 . 23(1 0): p. 13-1306. 
8. Ba1 w i se, A., et al., An Individual Housing -Based Socioecon omic Status Measure Predicts Advance Care 
Planning and Nursing Home Utih.zation. Am J Hosp Palliat Care , 2019. 36(5): p. 362-369. 
9. Hong , M., et a l., Facilitators and Barriers for Advance Care Planning Among Ethnic and Racial Minorities 
in the U.S.: A Systematic Review of the Current Literature. Journal ofhmni grant and Min01i ty Health, 2018. 
20(5): p. 1277-1287. 
10. L asser , K.E ., D.U. Himme lstein, and S. Woolhand ler, Access to care, health status, and health disparities in 
the United States and Canada: results of a cross -national population -based survey . American journa l of 
public health , 2006 . 96(7): p. 1300-1307. 
11. Baciu, A., et al., The state of health disparities in the United States , in Communities in action: Pathways to 
health equity. 2017, Nationa l Academi es Press (US) . 
12. Hanison, K.L. , et al., Low Completion and Disparities in Advance Care Planning Activities Among Older 
Medicare Beneficiaries. JAMA Intern Med , 2016. 176(12): p. 1872-1875. 
13. Ko, E. and J. Lee, Completion of advance directive s among low-income older adults: does race/ethnici ty 
matter ? Am J Hosp Palliat Care, 2014. 31(3): p. 247-53. 
14. Su dore, R.L. , et al., Advance Care Planning/or Older Homeless -Experienced Adults: Results from the Health 
Outcomes of People Experiencing Homelessness in Older Middle Age Study. J Am Ge1iatr Soc, 201 8. 66( 6): 
p. 1068-1074. 
15. Lee, A.A. , A.S. James , and J.M. Hunle th, Waiting for care: Chronic illness and health system uncertainties in 
the United States . Social Science & Medic ine, 2020. 264: p. 113296. 
16. Myers , H., Ethnicity -and socio -economic status -related stresses in context : an integrative revie, v and 
conceptual model . Jomnal of Beh aviora l Med icine, 2009 . 32(1 ): p. 9-19. 
17. Testa, A., et al., Adverse Childhood Experiences , health insurance status , and health care utilization in 
middle adulthood. Social Science & Med icine, 2022 : p. 115194 . 
18. Kimpel , C.C. , et al., Affordable Housing Specialists' Perceptions of Advance Care Planning Among Low-
Income Older Adult Residents: A Qualitati ve Study. J Hosp Palliat Nurs, 2022 . 24(4): p. 232-239. 
19. Lipn ick, D., et al., Surrogate decision maker stress in advance care planning conversations: a mixed -methods 
analysis from a randomized controlled trial. Jomnal of pain and symptom management, 2020. 60(6): p. 1117-
1126. 
20. Hong, M., et al., Facilitators and Barriers for Advance Care Planning Among Ethnic and Racial Minorities 
in the U.S.: A Systematic Revie w of the Current Literature. J Itmni gr Minor Health , 2018. 20(5): p. 1277-
1287. 
21. MacKenzie, M. A., et al., Respecting Choices and Related Model s of Advance Care Planning: A Systematic 
Revie, v of Published Evidence. Am J Hosp Palliat Care, 2018. 35(6): p. 897-907. 
22. D avies, J.M., et al., Socioeconomic position and use of healthcare in the last year of life: A systematic re,,iew 
and meta -analysis .(ResearchArticle )(Repor t). PLoS Medicine , 2019. 16(4): p. el 002782 . 
23. Tebes , J.K., et al., Population Health and Trauma -Informed Practice: Impli cations for Program s, Systems, 
and Policies. Am J Collllllunity Psychol, 2019 . 64(3-4): p. 494-508. 
6 
24. Y atchmenoff , D.K., S.A. Slllldborg, and M. A. Davis, Implementing trauma -informed care: Recommendations 
on the process . Advances in Social Work, 2 017. 18(1): p. 167-185. 
25. Raja, S., et al., Trauma informed care in medicine . Family & community health, 2015. 38(3): p. 216-226. 
26. Dillm an, D.A. , Internet, phone , mail, and mixed -mode surveys : the tailored design method I Don A. Dillman , 
Jolene D. Smyth, Leah Melani Christian. 2014. 
27. W allerstein, N. and B. Duran, Community -based participatory research contributions to intervention 
research : the intersection of science and practice to improve health equity . Am J Publi c He alth, 2010. 100 
Suppl 1: p. S40-6. 
28. W eir, R.C., et al , Collecting Social Determinants of Health Data in the Clinical Setting: Findings from 
National PRAPARE Implementation . Journal of he alth care for the poor and llllderserved, 2020 . 31(2): p. 
1018-1035. 
29. W allston, K.A. , et al., Psychometric properties of the brief health literacy screen in clinical practice . J Gen 
Intern Med, 2014. 29(1): p. 119- 26. 
30. Kroenke, K., et a l., An ultra -brief screening scale for anxiety and depression : the PHQ-4. Psychosomatics , 
2009. 50(6): p. 6 13-621. 
31. Felitti , V.J., et al., Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to many of the leading causes 
of death in adults: The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE ) Study. Ameticanjournal of preventive 
medicine , 1998. 14(4): p. 245- 258. 
32. Amjad, H., V. T owle, and T. F1ied, Associati on of Experience with Illness and End-of-life Care with Advance 
Care Planning in Older Adults . Journal of the American Geriatlics Society (JAGS), 2014. 62(7): p. 1304-
1309. 
33. Sudore, R.L., et a l., Outcomes That Define Successful Advance Care Planning: A Delphi Panel Consensus . 
Journal of P ain and Symptom Management, 2018. 55 (2): p. 245- 255.e8. 
34. Weiner, B .J., et al., Psychometric assessment of three ne,,v/ y developed implementation outcome measures . 
Impl ementation science: IS, 201 7. 12(1): p. 108- 108. 
7 