Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  w	COMIRB	Protocol	COLORADO	MULTIPLE	INSTITUTIONAL	REVIEW	BOARD	CAMPUS	BOX	F-490				TELEPHONE:		303-724-1055		Fax:		303-724-0990				Protocol	#:	18-2513	Project	Title:	Bedside	Resources	to	Gauge	Intravascular	Volume	Status	in	Hypovolemic	Infants	in	the	Operating	Room	Principal	Investigator:	Sarkis	C	Derderian		Version	Date:	07/01/2019		1.	Lay	Language:		Predicting	fluid	responsiveness	in	the	operating	room	is	essential	to	guide	balanced	resuscitation.		Aggressive	resuscitation	may	lead	to	significant	morbidities,	such	as	intra-abdominal	hypertension,	pulmonary	edema,	difficulty	with	ventilator	liberalization,	and	consequently	increased	mortality	[1].		Alternatively,	under	resuscitation	may	lead	to	mal-perfusion	and	end-organ	dysfunction.		A	plethora	of	indices	and	tools	have	been	studied	and	marketed	to	assess	intravascular	volume	status	with	only	a	few	proven	reliable	with	reproducible	results.		Based	on	pre-fluid	challenge	values,	several	of	these	tools	have	been	used	to	predict	who	may	benefit	from	additional	fluid	(fluid	responders).		Alternatively,	some	of	these	tools	have	been	used	to	distinguish	fluid	responders	from	non-responders	based	on	changes	in	pre-	and	post-fluid	challenge	values.		Among	these	tools,	the	pulmonary	artery	catheter	provides	measurements	of	both	left	and	right	heart	pressures	which	can	be	applied	to	calculate	the	cardiac	output	(CO)	and	stroke	volume	(SV).		Changes	in	these	values	(e.g.	an	increase	in	the	stroke	volume	by	10%)	between	pre-	and	post-fluid	challenge	have	been	used	to	define	fluid	responders.		This	devise,	however,	is	invasive	with	several	significant	risks,	and	therefore	is	rarely	used	in	children.		Echocardiography,	on	the	other	hand,	is	a	non-invasive	bedside	study	also	used	to	assess	CO	and	SV	but	is	expensive	and	requires	trained	echosonagraphers	for	application.		Further,	because	a	transthoracic	probe	is	required	to	obtain	the	images,	application	in	the	operating	room	is	difficult	as	the	chest	is	often	in	the	operating	field	limiting	access	to	the	echosonagrapher.	Lastly,	the	esophageal	aortic	blood	flow	device	(CardioQ-EDM,	Deltex	Medical,	Chichester,	UK)	has	been	found	in	multiple	adult	and	pediatric	studies	to	reliably	distinguish	fluid	responders	from	non-responders	intensive	care	unit	(ICU)	and	operating	room	[2-6].		Much	like	an	orogastric	tube,	this	device	is	simply	placed	by	a	provider	in	the	patient’s	esophagus	and	uses	Doppler	waveforms	to	measure	aortic	blood	flow	velocities	(Figure	1).		Variations	in	the	amplitude	of	peak	velocities	has	been	shown	to	corelate	with	intravascular	volume	status[2-6].		Specifically,	a	change	in	the	peak	velocity	by	greater	than	10%	between	pre-	and	post-fluid	challenge	values	has	
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  been	shown	to	accurately	distinguishes	those	who	are	fluid	responsive	from	those	who	are	not	with	similar	accuracy	to	echocardiography	and	pulmonary	artery	catheter	readings[7].				Figure	1		A						B															
                	Legend:		A)	Illustration	of	CardioQ-EDM	position.	In	children	age	15	years	and	younger,	the	device	is	introduced	through	the	oral	cavity.		B)	Correct	placement	confirmed	by	descending	aortic	waveform.				In	recent	years	with	continued	technological	advancements,	there	has	been	enthusiasm	about	less	invasive,	and	in	some	cases,	non-invasive,	tools	to	gauge	volume	status.		Among	these,	bedside	ultrasonography	(performed	by	providers	rather	than	sonographers)	is	a	common	tool	used	to	evaluate	the	inferior	vena	cava	(IVC)	collapsibility	index	(CI)	has	been	shown	to	be	a	reliable	tool	in	adults	[8].		Another	non-invasive	device	uses	a	photoplethysmoraphic	probe	(CipherOx-CRI)	placed	on	a	digit	to	calculate	the	compensatory	reserve	index	(CRI),	a	marker	of	proximity	to	hemodynamic	collapse	[9].	Both	IVC	CI	and	CRI	have	been	shown	in	multiple	adult	studies	to	predictive	the	need	for	volume	expansion,	but	their	utility	in	the	pediatric	population	is	unknown.				The	goal	if	this	proposed	study	is	to	employ	the	CardioQ-EDM	probe	to	define	fluid	responders	from	non-responders	among	infants	undergoing	cranial	vault	reconstruction	for	craniosynostosis.		After	defining	these	two	groups	in	this	single	arm	prospective	trial,	we	will	compare	the	predictive	utility	of	non-invasive	devices	such	as	the	CipherOx-CRI	and	IVC	CI	to	currently	employed	indices	(heart	rate,	systolic	blood	pressure,	urine	output	and	pulse	pressure	variability)	to	gauge	the	need	for	additional	fluid	and	ongoing	resuscitation.		If	the	CipherOx-CRI	or	IVC	CI	proved	to	be	as	predictive	or	better	at	predicting	fluid	responders,	we	hope	to	replace	invasive	arterial	lines	with	non-invasive	tools	to	guide	resuscitation.				We	chose	this	population	for	several	reasons.		First,	CHCO	performs	approximately	50-70	of	these	cases	a	year	making	them	a	relatively	accessible	group.	Second,	these	children	are	generally	healthy	

Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  which	will	minimize	physiologic	confounders.		Additionally,	they	are	paralyzed,	have	normal	respiratory	compliance,	and	providers	maintain	normothermia	all	of	which	will	minimizing	confounders.		Another	unique	benefit	to	this	population	is	that	these	infants	have	been	nil	per	os	for	several	hours	prior	to	surgery,	putting	them	at	risk	for	hypovolemia,	and	after	induction,	independent	of	the	provider’s	assessment	of	intravascular	volume	status,	they	all	receive	a	bolus	of	crystalloid	(10mL/kg).		This	baseline	data	should	provide	sufficient	data	for	analysis;	but	because	these	procedures	are	associated	with	significant	blood	loss	and	hypovolemia	requiring	aggressive	resuscitation	in	the	form	of	fluid	or	blood	boluses[10],	we	plan	to	continue	to	collect	pre-	and	post-	bolus	data	with	the	hope	to	further	validate	the	benefit	of	non-invasive	tools	such	as	the	CipherOx-CRI	and	IVC	CI	in	the	setting	of	ongoing	blood	loss.				Aggregated	data	collected	from	the	past	five	cases	suggests	that	these	infants	lose	approximately	100	mL	of	blood	(17.2	mL/kg),	receive	200	mL	(37	mL/kg)	of	crystalloid	and	75	mL	(12.9	mL/kg)	of	blood	(Table	1).				Table	1:	Previous	Five	Cranial	Vault	Reconstruction	Procedures	Case	Number	Age	(months)	Weight	(kg)	Blood	Loss	Infusion		(ml)	(ml/kg)	Crystalloid	Colloid	(mL)	Blood	(mL)	(ml/kg)	(mL)	(ml/kg)	1	5	5.8	100	17.2	200	34.5	0	75	12.9	2	4	5.4	75	13.9	200	37.0	0	55	10.2	3	8	7.0	80	11.4	180	25.7	0	0	0	4	7	7.1	125	17.6	500	70.4	0	119	16.8	5	3	6.6	200	30.3	300	45.5	0	255	38.6	Mean	5.4	6.38	116	18.1	276	42.6	0	100.8	15.7	Median	5	6.6	100	17.2	200	37.0	0	75	12.9		As	intravascular	volume	status	is	often	difficult	to	assess	clinically,	we	aim	to	determine	the	predictability	of	non-invasive	devices	to	guide	resuscitation.		In	this	prospective	observational	study,	we	hope	to	identify:	1. The	proportion	of	children	within	the	cohort	who	are	fluid	responsive	based	on	CardioQ-EDM	aortic	blood	flow	velocity	changes	pre-	and	post-bolus,			2. The	PPV,	NPV,	sensitivity,	specificity,	and	optimal	threshold	for	CRI,	IVC	CI,	pulse	pressure	variability,	stroke	volume	variability,	heart	rate,	systolic	blood	pressure,	and	mean	arterial	pressures	in	predicting	fluid	responders	as	determined	by	CardioQ-EDM,	and		3. Assess	confounding	variables	that	may	influence	the	predictive	utility	of	such	devices			
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  2.	Background		Objective	measures	to	guide	resuscitation	became	mainstream	with	the	introduction	of	the	pulmonary	artery	catheter	in	1970	[11].		Over	the	ensuing	decades,	several	randomized	control	trials	demonstrated	that	the	use	of	pulmonary	artery	catheters	did	not	incur	a	survival	advantage.		In	fact,	the	complexity	inherent	in	placing,	operating,	and	interpreting	data	from	this	tool	is	not	without	risk.	Thus,	in	large	part,	these	invasive	devises	have	fallen	out	of	favor	[12-14].	There	has	since	been	a	focus	on	developing	minimally	invasive	and	non-invasive	tools	to	gauge	intravascular	volume	status	in	order	to	accurately	direct	resuscitation.				Several	of	these	techniques	rely	on	cardiopulmonary	interactions	with	the	cyclic	variations	of	intra-thoracic	pressure	produced	by	ventilation.		In	a	mechanically	ventilated	patient,	changes	in	intra-thoracic	pressures	are	transmitted	to	the	right	ventricle	with	increased	pressure	during	inspiration	and	decreased	pressure	during	exhalation.		In	patients	who	are	intravascularly	deplete,	these	pressure	shifts	lead	to	larger	variations	in	measured	parameters	such	as	pulse	pressure,	IVC	collapsibility,	and	plethysmography	throughout	the	respiratory	cycle.		Figure	2	describes	the	variation	in	pulse	pressure	which	is	represented	by	ΔPs.		Plethysmography	variation	and	CI	are	derived	in	a	similar	fashion	using	corresponding	waveforms	with	the	notion	that	more	variation	correlates	with	less	intravascular	volume.					Figure	2		Ppmin,	minimal	arterial	pulse	pressure;	Ppmax,	maximal	arterial	pulse	pressure;	Psmin,	minimal	arterial	systolic	pressure;	Psmax,	maximal	arterial	systolic	pressure;	ΔPs,	pulse	pressure	variability.		From	Vasodilation	increases	pulse	pressure	variation,	mimicking	hypovolemic	status	in	rabbits.	Westphal	GA,	Goncalves	AR,	Bedin	A	et	al.,	2018,	Clinics[15].				Tools	and	indices	available	to	measure	intravascular	volume	status	are	numerous	with	the	most	frequent	utilized	ones	described	in	Table	2.	These	indices	range	from	simply	measuring	the	systolic	blood	pressure	to	using	computer	generated	algorithms	in	order	to	calculate	a	CRI.		This	armamentarium	has	vast	applicability,	but	the	predictive	utility	is	variable,	influenced	by	several	confounders,	and	must	be	applied	in	the	appropriate	clinical	setting.			

Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  Table	2:		Intravascular	Volume	Status	Measurements		INVASIVE	DEVICES		SWAN-GANZ	CATHETER							CO,	SVR,	SV,	LVEDAI,	GEDVI,	CVP,	PCWP	CENTRAL	VENOUS	CATHETERS	CVP,	SvO2,	DpCO2	ARTERIAL	LINES	PPV,	SVV,	SPV	ESOPHAGEAL	DOPPLER	DVpeak,	SV,	CO,	ABF	CAPNOMETER	DETCO2				NON-INVASIVE		VITAL	SIGNS	HR,	SBP	PLETHYSMOGRAPHY	Plethysmography	variation	index	ULTRASONOGRAPHY	IVC	CI	ECHOCARDIOGRAM	CO,	SV	COMPENSATORY	RESERVE	INDEX	CRI	CO	–	cardiac	output,	SVR	–	systemic	vascular	resistance,	SV	–	stroke	volume,	LV	–	left	ventricular	end-diastolic	area	index,	GEDVI	–	global	end-diastolic	volume	increase,	CVP	–	central	venous	pressure,	PCWP	–	pulmonary	capillary	wedge	pressure,	SvO2	–	mixed	venous	oxygen	saturation,	DpCO2	–	delta	partial	pressure	of	carbon	dioxide,	PPV	–	pulse	pressure	variation,	SVV	–	stroke	volume	variation,	SPV	–	systolic	pressure	variation,	DVpeak	–	delta	aortic	blood	flow	peak	velocity,	ABF	-		aortic	blood	flow,	DETCO2	–	delta	end-tidal	carbon	dioxide	level,	HR	–	heart	rate,	SBP	–	systolic	blood	pressure,	IVC	–	inferior	vena	cava,	CI	–	collapsibility	index,	CO	–	cardiac,	CRI	–	compensatory	reserve	index						While	large	series	have	evaluated	the	predictive	utility	of	various	devices	in	adults,	reports	appraising	tools	used	to	assess	fluid	responsiveness	in	children	are	limited	with	heterogeneous	findings	[16].		A	systematic	review	by	Gan	et	al.	published	in	2013	reviewed	12	pediatric	studies	that,	in	total,	evaluated	24	markers	of	fluid	responsiveness	in	439	children.		The	only	variable	that	was	repeatedly	found	predictive	of	fluid	responsiveness	and	distinguish	fluid	responders	from	non-responders	was	variation	in	aortic	blood	flow	peak	velocity	(ΔVPeak)	obtained	from	the	CardioQ-EDM.	Not	only	has	this	tool	been	shown	to	predict	those	who	will	benefit	from	additional	fluid,	but,	based	on	changes	in	pre-	and	post-	fluid	ΔVPeak,	in	it	has	been	shown	to	accurately	distinguish	fluid	responders	from	non-responders	[7].		In	adults,	the	esophageal	CardioQ-EDM	has	been	used	both	in	the	operating	room	and	ICU.		Among	adult	trauma	patients	admitted	to	the	ICU,	CardioQ-EDM	has	been	used	to	guide	resuscitation	and	shown	to	decrease	infection	complications	as	well	as	reduce	ICU	and	hospital	length	of	stay [17].		In	children,	increased	enthusiasm	in	recent	years	has	led	to	a	number	of	small	clinical	trials	most	of	which	have	been	performed	in	Europe.		In	a	metanalysis	published	in	2016	included	six	studies	and	163	ventilated	children,	comparing	CardioQ-EDM	to	echocardiography	the	authors	concluded	that	the	area	under	the	summary	receiver	operating	characteristic	curve	to	distinguish	responders	from	
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  non-responders	for	ΔVPeak	was	0.94 [18].		While	the	optimal	ΔVPeak	varied	from	7-20%	among	studies,	one	of	the	larger	series	using	a	ΔVPeak	of	10%	as	a	threshold	found	the	sensitivity	and	specificity	to	be	100%	in	distinguishing	fluid	responders	based	on	aortic	velocity–time	integrals	identified	by	transthoracic	echocardiogram [7].		Based	on	these	results,	we	plan	to	define	fluid	responders	as	those	who	have	>10%	ΔVPeak	between	pre-	and	post-fluid	challenge.		Bedside	evaluation	of	the	IVC	to	calculate	the	CI	is	a	commonly	used	tool	in	adults [19,	20].		It	serves	as	a	surrogate	to	measure	preload	variation	induced	by	mechanical	ventilation.		The	technique	requires	limited	ultrasonographic	experience	often	at	the	critical	care	or	anesthesia	fellow	level.		In	pediatrics,	the	predictive	utility	of	IVC	CI	has	only	been	evaluated	in	small	series	with	conflicting	results [21].				The	CRI	is	another	non-invasive	devise	using	a	photoplethysmoraphic	probe	(CipherOx-CRI)	placed	on	the	index	finger.	Based	on	data	gathered	from	the	probe,	a	computer-generated	algorithm	is	then	used	to	calculate	a	number	between	zero	and	one,	referred	to	the	CRI	(Figure	3)		[22].		The	CRI	correlates	to	one’s	intravascular	volume	status	and	proximity	to	hemodynamic	collapse	[23].				Figure	3	
	Legend:	CRI,	compensatory	reserve	index.	CRI=1	is	normovolemia	and	CRI=0	is	the	point	at	which	the	patient	is	at	highest	risk	for	hemodynamic	decompensation.					Confounders	that	can	influence	dynamic	measurements	must	also	be	considered.		For	instance,	cardiac	arrhythmias,	small	tidal	volumes,	spontaneous	respiration,	and	high	positive	end-expiratory	pressure	have	been	found	to	decrease	the	predictive	utility	of	pulse	pressure	variability	and	IVC	CI [24-26].		Thus,	it	is	paramount	to	use	and	apply	these	measurements	in	the	appropriate	clinical	setting.		Presumably,	the	influence	confounding	variables	have	on	the	predictive	utility	of	these	indices	in	children	is	similar	to	that	of	adults,	however,	comparative	analyses	have	not	been	performed.		Thus,	when	interpreted	in	the	appropriate	clinical	context,	these	minimally	and	non-invasive	devices	are	tools	available	to	guide	a	balanced	fluid	resuscitation;	however,	while	small	series	exist	in	various	pediatric	populations,	validation	is	necessary	in	order	to	apply	these	tools	in	hypovolemic	children	with	significant	blood	loss.	

Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  	While	numerous	tools	are	available	to	guide	resuscitation,	one	potential	benefit	of	this	project	is	to	validate	the	use	of	CipherOx-CRI	in	this	cohort.		If	CRI	proves	to	be	a	valuable	predictor	of	intravascular	volume	status	and	the	need	for	volume	expansion,	this	could	negate	the	need	for	arterial	line	placement	which	is	time	consuming,	invasive,	and	associated	with	complications	such	as	arterial	thrombosis.		Furthermore,	after	validation	in	this	cohort,	additional	studies	could	be	performed	in	other	groups	of	children	at	risk	for	hemorrhagic	shock	in	the	hopes	to	guide	ongoing	resuscitation	accurately	without	the	need	for	invasive	devices.					3.	Specific	Aims	and	Hypotheses:		Aim	I:	Among	infants	undergoing	cranial	vault	reconstruction	for	craniosynostosis,	we	aim	to	determine	the	proportion	who	respond	to	clinically	administered	fluid	or	blood	products	defined	by	pre-	and	post-fluid	challenge	EDM	ΔVPeak	>10%.		Hypothesis	Ia:		We	hypothesize	that	approximately	half	of	the	cohort	will	be	fluid	responsive	defined	by	ΔVPeak	by	>	10%	after	a	10	mL/kg	fluid	bolus	is	administered	immediately	following	induction.		Although	this	is	a	prediction,	it	is	based	on	previous	published	reports	suggesting	a	relatively	even	distribution	among	patients	who	clinicians	believe	need	volume	expansion.			Additionally,	because	these	children	have	a	mean	weight	of	6.4	kg	and	will	have	been	nil	per	os	for	several	hours	prior	to	surgery,	they	are	at	risk	for	intravascular	volume	depletion	even	prior	to	blood	loss.				Hypothesis	Ib:		Because	clinicians	use	pulse	pressure	variability,	heart	rate,	systolic	blood	pressure,	urine	output,	and	blood	loss	to	gauge	need	for	ongoing	resuscitation	(either	crystalloid,	colloid,	or	blood),	we	suspect	that	more	than	half	of	subsequent	fluid	challenges	will	be	given	to	infants	who	are	fluid	responsive	(defined	by	a	pre-	and	post-bolus	ΔVPeak	of	>	10%).			Aim	II:	To	determine	the	PPV,	NPV,	sensitivity,	specificity,	and	optimal	threshold	for	CRI,	collapsibility	index,	pulse	pressure	variability,	stroke	volume	variability,	heart	rate,	systolic	blood	pressure,	and	mean	arterial	pressure	as	tools	to	predict	fluid	responsiveness	using	pre-	and	post-fluid	challenge	EDM	ΔVPeak	>10%	to	define	fluid	responders.		
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  Hypothesis	II:		CRI	and	collapsibility	index	will	reliably	predict	fluid	responsive	patients	with	an	approximate	area	under	the	receiver	operating	characteristic	curve	(AUROC)	of	0.9	while	other	indices	will	have	a	lower	predictive	accuracy.					Aim	III:	Evaluate	confounding	variables	that	may	influence	predictive	measures	outlined	in	Aim	II.		Hypothesis	III:		Confounding	variables	that	may	decrease	the	predictive	accuracy	of	indices	described	in	Aim	II	include	spontaneous	breathing	over	the	ventilator,	minimal	blood	loss,	and	hypothermia			4.	Materials	and	Methods:		4.1	Pre-trial	Training		1) Prior	to	patient	enrollment,	the	principle	investigator	(PI)	and	two	co-investigators	will	be	trained	by	a	certified	ultrasonographer	regarding	how	to	measure	the	IVC	CI.		After	participating	in	a	one-hour	skills	lab,	the	PI	and	co-investigators	will	be	evaluated	for	competency	and	reproducibility.		If	deemed	incompetent,	remediation	will	be	required	prior	to	the	start	of	the	trial.		Additionally,	we	will	confirm	inter-observer	reliability	between	co-investigators	to	assure	measurement	reliability.				2) The	PI	and	Co-investigators	(Drs.	Shahi	or	Phillips)	will	be	trained	in	the	appropriate	placement	and	operation	of	the	CardioQ-EDM	probe	and	monitor	by	a	manufacturer	representative.		Given	the	PI’s	extensive	experience	with	both	nasal	and	oroesophogeal	device	placement	(see	below),	after	the	manufacturer	representative	confirms	competency	with	appropriate	probe	positioning,	he	will	be	responsible	for	all	probes	placed.		Prior	to	enrolling	patients	in	the	study,	a	manufacturer	representative	will	provide	a	live	demonstration	in	a	child	undergoing	cranial	vault	reconstruction	after	informed	consent.						4.2	Materials	Necessary		1. Esophageal	aortic	Doppler	(CardioQ-EDM)	probe	=	30	provided	by	Deltex	Medical		
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  2. CardioQ-EDM	monitor	=	2	provided	by	Deltex	Medical	3. Bedside	Ultrasound	=	2	machines	are	available	in	the	operating	room	at	all	times	4. CipherOx	CRI	–	Provided	by	Division	of	Pediatric	Surgery			4.3	Patient	recruitment		Patients	will	be	identified	by	the	PI	based	on	communication	with	the	craniosynostosis	clinic	team.		Parents/guardians	of	eligible	candidates	will	be	approached	by	a	study	team	member	at	their	pre-operative	appointment	or	on	the	day	of	surgery	for	voluntary	participation.		If	recruitment	is	insufficient	(<70%),	a	$20	gift	card	will	be	used	as	incentive	for	study	participation.		Funding	will	be	provided	by	the	division	of	pediatric	surgery	if	this	is	necessary.				4.3.1	Population:	Children	older	than	3	months	and	younger	than	2	years	of	age	who	undergo	cranial	vault	reconstruction	in	the	supine	position	will	be	included.			Children	with	associated	syndromes	will	be	included	as	long	as	they	do	not	have	known	underlying	cardiac	abnormalities.		Consent	will	be	translated	into	Spanish	as	well	for	those	in	whom	it	is	indicated.				4.3.2	Exclusion	Criteria:	Children	with	known	underlying	cardiac	anomalies	or	cardiac	arrhythmias,	infants	younger	3	months	of	age	or	greater	than	2	years	of	age.		In	addition,	children	weighing	less	than	3	kg	will	be	excluded	at	the	recommendation	of	the	manufacturer.		While	vasopressor	(epinephrine,	norepinephrine,	and/or	vasopressin)	support	is	not	a	contraindication,	fluid	boluses	administered	during	dosage	adjustments	will	be	excluded	from	analysis.		Patients	who	are	placed	in	the	prone	position	for	surgery	will	also	be	excluded	given	the	difficulty	with	obtaining	a	window	to	measure	the	IVC	CI	and	possible	effect	on	reported	measurements.		Additionally,	if	abnormal	anatomy	is	discovered	while	assessing	the	IVC,	these	children	will	also	be	excluded	from	analysis.				4.4	Definitions		• Bolus	–	10	-	20	ml/kg	fluid	(isotonic	crystalloid,	colloid,	or	blood	product)	up	to	1	L	and	given	within	a	10	minutes	period	• Fluid	responders	–	Children	who	have	a	pre-	and	post-fluid	challenge	ΔVPeak	>	10%	calculated	using	the	equation	(ΔVPeakpre	=	(VPeakmaxpre	–	VPeakminpre)/	
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  [(Vpeakmeanpre])	-		(ΔVPeakpost	=	(VPeakmaxpost	–	VPeakminpost)/	[(Vpeakmeanpost])	x	100	• Multiple	fluid	challenges	–	If	more	than	one	fluid	bolus	is	administered	at	least	30	minutes	apart,	they	will	be	reported	as	individual	events		• Pre-bolus	measurements	–	Hemodynamic	measurements	will	be	calculated	or	recorded	three	times	thirty	seconds	apart	and	averaged	just	before	a	bolus	is	administered.		Cine	loops	from	IVC	measurements	will	be	recorded	three	times,	thirty	seconds	apart	for	post-hoc	CI	calculation.	Peak	aortic	velocity	and	CRI	will	be	recorded	on	the	EDM	monitor	and	averaged	over	90	seconds.			• Post-bolus	measurements	-	Hemodynamic	measurements	will	be	calculated	or	recorded	three	times	and	averaged	five	minutes	after	a	bolus	is	completed.	These	measurements	will	be	time	and	repeated	in	an	identical	fashion	to	pre-bolus	measurements.							4.5	Decision	for	volume	expansion		All	children	receive	a	10	ml/kg	crystalloid	bolus	immediately	after	induction.		The	need/decision	for	a	fluid	bolus	will	be	determined	by	the	anesthesiologist	based	on	clinical	judgement.	Currently,	the	anesthesiologist	places	an	arterial	line	at	the	beginning	of	the	case	and	using	pulse	pressure	variability,	HR,	SBP,	MAP,	urine	output,	and	blood	loss	determines	whether	or	not	a	fluid	or	blood	bolus	is	appropriate.		Data	collected	from	the	CardioQ-EDM,	CipherOx-CRI,	and	bedside	ultrasound	will	not	be	provided	to	the	care	team.					4.6	Data	Acquisition			If	consent	is	obtained,	a	CardioQ-EDM	probe	will	be	placed	on	the	day	of	surgery	after	induction	of	general	anesthesia.		One	of	the	investigators	will	be	present	in	the	operating	room	for	the	duration	of	surgery	to	perform	study	procedures	(PI	or	Co-investigators	(Drs.	Shahi	or	Phillips)	to	place	all	CardioQ-EDM	probes)	and	gather	study	data.	The	anesthesiologist	will	inform	the	investigator	of	plans	to	provide	a	fluid	or	blood	bolus	per	clinical	judgement	in	addition	to	the	protocolized	10	ml/kg	bolus	provided	after	induction.		While	the	anesthesiologist	is	preparing	to	administer	volume	expansion,	a	co-investigator	will	collect	pre-fluid	bolus	data.		Administration	of	fluid	will	not	be	delayed	for	any	reason,	including	performance	of	study	measurements.		Measurements	will	be	recorded	for	data	analysis	at	the	completion	of	the	trial	(see	below).		Additionally,	a	CipherOx-CRI	probe	will	be	placed	on	the	patient’s	index	finger	(again,	recorded	data	will	be	interpreted	post	hoc)	and	a	bedside	ultrasound	will	be	performed	by	either	the	PI	or	one	of	two	co-investigators	to	measure	the	IVC	CI.		The	IVC	CI	will	be	visualized	through	a	sub-xyphoid	window.		The	ultrasound	
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  indicator	will	be	aimed	at	the	child’s	left	flank.	Once	the	right	atrium	is	identified,	the	ultrasound	probe	will	be	turned	90	degrees	counterclockwise	so	the	indicator	is	directed	at	the	head.	The	best	way	to	evaluate	the	IVC	diameter	through	the	respiratory	cycle	is	to	use	M	mode.	After	positioning	the	probe	appropriately	in	order	to	visualize	the	IVC	2	cm	inferior	to	the	cavo-atrial	junction,	the	M	mode	will	be	activated	to	measure	variation	in	the	IVC	diameter	with	respiration.		Ultrasound	cine-loops	will	be	recorded,	and	CI	will	be	calculated	post-hoc.		Data	will	be	recorded	on	the	Data	Collection	Form	for	each	fluid	bolus	administered.	The	PI	and	co-investigators	will	manage	all	aspects	of	investigational	devices.			Day	of	Surgery	Step-by-step	Description:	1. While	the	anesthesiologist	intubates	and	places	an	arterial-line,	the	CardioQ-EDM	monitor,	CipherOx-CRI	device,	and	U/S	will	be	set	up	2. After	positioning	the	patient	for	surgery,	the	CardioQ-EDM	device	will	be	placed	through	the	mouth	into	the	esophagus	by	the	PI	or	Co-investigators	(Drs.	Shahi	or	Phillips)	and	the	aortic	Doppler	waveform	will	be	confirmed.		Additionally,	the	CipherOx-CRI	finger	probe	will	be	placed,	and	a	baseline	IVC	CI	will	be	measured	and	recorded.	3. Baseline	values	and	measurements	(included	in	Table	3)	will	be	recorded.		Additionally,	the	baseline	ΔVPeak	and	CRI	will	be	recorded.		4. A	protocolized	10	mg/kg	crystalloid	fluid	bolus	will	be	administered		5. Two	minutes	after	the	bolus	has	completed,	repeat	EDM	and	CRI	values	will	be	recordings	and	a	repeat	abdominal	ultrasound	to	measure	the	IVC	CI	will	be	obtained.			6. If	an	additional	fluid	bolus	or	blood	transfusion	is	administered	during	the	remainder	of	the	procedure,	steps	3	and	5	will	be	repeated.						4.6.1	Demographic	Data:	Age,	weight,	height,	body	mass	index	(BMI),	gender,	and	ethnicity	will	be	collected	from	medical	records.		4.6.2	Ventilator	Data:		pressure	or	volume	control,	tidal	volume	(ml/kg)	and	peak	end-expiratory	pressure	(PEEP),	peak	inspiratory	pressure	(PIP),	and	spontaneously	breathing.			4.6.3	CardioQ-EDM	Data:	Based	on	a	validated	internal	nomogram	derived	from	the	child’s	age,	height,	and	weight[27],	peak	velocities	will	be	obtained	from	the	Cardio-EDM	monitor.		4.6.4	Fluid	Data/Vasopressor	Administration:	Number,	time,	type,	and	volume	of	fluid/blood	administered	will	be	recorded	in	real	time.	Vasopressor	agent,	dose,	and	time	administered	will	also	be	reported.	
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  	4.6.5	Waveform/Vital	Data:	As	it	is	currently	not	possible	to	extract	waveform	data	from	the	operating	room	monitors,	we	will	record	data	in	real	time.		Values	listed	below	will	be	reported	on	an	excel	spreadsheet.					Parameters	to	measure:	All	parameters	will	be	measured	x	3	with	30	seconds	between	each	measurement	and	averaged		• Systolic	blood	pressure	(measured	by	arterial	line)	• Mean	arterial	pressure	(calculated	from	arterial	line)	• Heart	rate	• Pulse	pressure	variability	(measured	by	arterial	line)	=	acquired	from	arterial	line	• Stroke	volume	variability	–	acquired	from	arterial	line	• DVpeak	=	(VPeakmax	–	VPeakmin)/	[(Vpeakmean]	x	100	• Compensatory	reserve	index	–	algorithmically	generated		• Inferior	vena	cava	collapsibility	index	=	Maximum	diameter	(expiration)	–	minimum	diameter	(inspiration)/maximum	diameter	(expiration)	in	M	mode		4.7	Data	Blinding:				Reporting	bias	will	be	minimized	by	limiting	interactions	between	the	study	team	and	OR	team.		Furthermore,	as	all	children	receive	a	bolus	prior	to	incision,	independent	of	available	indices	used	to	assess	intravascular	volume	status,	bias	should	be	minimized	for	this	fluid	bolus.		As	these	devices	are	experimental	in	this	patient	population,	anesthesiologists	will	be	blinded	to	hemodynamic	data	generated	by	the	CardioQ-EDM,	bedside	ultrasound,	and	CipherOx	CRI.	If	data	is	needed	in	an	emergent	setting,	the	subject	will	be	excluded	from	analysis.	Although	recorded	measurements	from	the	Cardio-Q	EDM	monitor	will	be	visible	to	the	study	team,	IVC	measurements	will	be	stored	and	calculated	post-hoc	by	a	co-investigator	blinded	to	whether	or	not	the	subject	is	or	is	not	fluid	responsive.		Additionally,	a	trained	statistician	not	involved	in	data	collection	will	be	paid	for	analysis.		It	should	also	be	noted	at	Dr.	Steven	Moulton	is	a	paid	officer	of	CipherOx	but	will	not	be	involved	in	the	data	collection	and	analysis.			4.8	Data	Analysis		
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  Univariate	comparisons	between	various	measures	will	be	compared	between	the	fluid	responder	and	non-responder	groups	using	t-tests	or	Fisher’s	exact	test	for	continuous	and	categorical	measures,	respectively.	Area	under	the	curve	will	be	calculated	for	CI	and	CRI	using	both	simple	logistic	regression	models	including	no	confounders	and	multiple	logistic	regression	models	including	confounders.	Confounders	will	be	identified	for	inclusion	in	the	multiple	logistic	regression	models	by	calculating	the	univariate	association	with	the	gold	standard	(using	a	p<0.10	threshold).	These	adjusted	models	will	be	used	to	verify	thresholds	for	classification	using	CI	and	CRI	which	will	then	be	applied	to	calculate	classification	summary	measures	(e.g.,	PPV,	NPV,	sensitivity,	and	specificity).	Data	analysis	will	be	performed	by	a	biostatistician	funded	by	the	Division	of	Pediatric	Surgery	using	R	and	SAS	statistical	software	programs.			4.9	Risk,	Safety,	and	Indications/Contraindications		Both	the	Deltex	Medical	CardioQ-EDM	(Deltex	Medical	Limited;	K172457;	June	28,	2018),	and	the	CipherOx	CRI,	(Flashback	Technologies,	Inc.;	K173929;	July	24,	2018),	have	been	cleared	through	Class	II/Traditional	510(k)s.				The	CardioQ-EDM	has	been	used	in	over	400,000	patients	worldwide.	To	date,	there	have	been	no	serious	adverse	events	associated	with	EDM.	Extrapolating	data	from	nasogastric	tube	and	transesophageal	echocardiography	probe	placement,	the	incidence	of	esophageal	perforation	is	exceedingly	low	and	only	described	in	case	reports	and	small	case	series.		Nonetheless,	the	risk	of	esophageal	perforation	will	be	discussed	during	the	informed	consent	process.			The	co-investigator	in	the	operating	room	will	be	responsible	for	reporting	any	adverse	events	to	the	PI.		In	the	event	of	an	adverse	event,	the	PI	will	fully	disclose	details	to	the	participants	family,	COMIRB,	Children’s	Hospital	Research	Institute,	and	Deltex	Medical.					To	minimize	risk	associated	with	CardioQ-EDM	placement,	the	PI	or	Co-investigators	(Drs.	Shahi	or	Phillips)	who	all	have	experience	placing	similar	objects	will	place	the	device	by	applying	jaw	thrust	in	the	standard	fashion.		Proper	positioning	of	the	device	will	be	confirmed	by	Doppler	waveform,	negating	the	need	for	radiographic	confirmation.		Specific	pediatric	CardioQ-EDM	probes	(KDP72)	which	are	indicated	in	children	age	15	and	younger	will	be	placed	through	the	oral	cavity.	Although	the	device	has	not	been	used	at	CHCO	previously,	the	insertion	is	identical	to	an	orogastric	tube	placement	and	thus	the	investigators	do	not	believe	that	a	bioengineering	review	is	necessary.			One	additional	risk	is	the	potential	for	extubation	with	probe	manipulation.		To	minimize	this	risk,	probes	will	be	placed	while	the	anesthesiologist	maintains	the	airway.		If	at	any	point	during	the	case,	the	probe	becomes	mal-positioned,	no	repositioning	will	be	performed,	and	the	study	is	terminated	for	this	individual	in	an	effort	to	avoid	inadvertent	extubation.		Furthermore,	the	probe	
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  will	remain	in	place	until	the	time	of	extubation	to	again	minimize	the	risk	of	inadvertent	extubation.						The	CipherOx-CRI	probe	was	cleared	by	the	FDA	for	patients	with	a	finger	thickness	of	0.3	to	1	inch.		There	were	no	warnings,	precautions	or	contraindications	in	the	product	brochure.			4.9.1	CardioQ-EDM	Details	• The	Deltex	Medical	Doppler	KDP72	probe	is	for	use	in	patients	aged	15	years	or	younger	for	up	to	72	hours.	• The	KDP	probe	is	28	in	(72	cm)	long	and	has	maximum	usage	time	which	is	defined	on	the	probe	packaging.	• It	is	only	approved	for	ORAL	placement	into	the	esophagus	of	a	single	patient	over	5.5	lb.	(2.5	kg)	in	weight.	• The	patient	should	be	under	full	sedation	or	general	anesthesia.	• The	probe	shaft	has	six	depth	markers	visible	through	the	transparent	cover	starting	at	6	in	(15	cm)	through	to	16	in	(40	cm)	incrementing	in	steps	of	2	in	(5	cm).	These	markers	act	as	a	guide	to	facilitate	correct	probe	placement.		• Nasal	placement	of	any	probes	in	patients	aged	15	years	or	younger	is	not	approved	nor	is	usage	of	the	CardioQ-EDM	for	patients	below	5.5	lb.	(2.5	kg)	in	weight.		4.9.2	CardioQ-EDM	Contraindications	• Doppler	probes	(DP240	and	I2n)	should	not	be	placed	in	patients	under	16	years	of	age.	We	will	be	using	the	KDP72	probe	• Do	not	use	where	nasal	injuries	are	apparent	or	may	have	occurred.	• Do	not	use	where	nasal	polyps	exist.	• Do	not	use	where	there	are	circumstances	of	facial	trauma.	• Do	not	use	where	there	is	a	risk	of	brain	injury.	• Do	not	use	in	patients	undergoing	intra-aortic	balloon	pumping.	• Do	not	use	with	carcinoma	of	the	pharynx,	larynx	or	esophagus.	• Do	not	use	with	aneurysms	of	the	thoracic	aorta.	• Do	not	use	with	tissue	necrosis	of	the	esophagus	or	nasal	passage.	• Do	not	use	in	close	proximity	to	laser	surgery.	• Do	not	use	in	patients	with	pharyngo-oesophago-gastric	pathology	and/or	severe	bleeding	diatheses.			
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  5.	Specific	Aims:		Aim	I:	Define	fluid	responders	based	on	aortic	DVpeak:	Among	infants	undergoing	cranial	vault	reconstruction	for	craniosynostosis,	we	aim	to	determine	the	proportion	who	respond	to	clinically	administered	fluid	or	blood	products	defined	by	pre-	and	post-fluid	challenge	EDM	ΔVPeak	>10%.		Mock-up	Table	1:		Demographics	of	Responders	and	Non-Responders	to	Initial	10	mL/kg	bolus	prior	to	surgical	incision			Variable	Responders	Non-Responders	P-value	Demographics						Age							Weight						Height							BMI						Gender						Ethnicity	Duration	of	NPO	status	Associated	syndrome				
Legend:		BMI,	body	mass	index;	npo,	nil	per	os		Aim	II:		Calculate	the	PPV,	NPV,	sensitivity,	specificity,	and	optimal	threshold	for	CRI	and	collapsibility	index	as	tools	to	prediction	fluid	responder			
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  
									Performance	will	also	be	calculated	for	heart	rate,	systolic	blood	pressure,	mean	arterial	pressure,	pulse	pressure	variability	and	stroke	volume	variability.	Two	separate	analyses	will	be	performed	–	one	for	the	10	ml/kg	protocolized	bolus	provided	immediately	after	induction	and	one	accounting	for	all	boluses	provided.																

Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  		Mock-up	Figure		
			Mock-up	Table	2	–	Performance	at	predicting	fluid	responsiveness		Variable	Correlation	(r)	AUC	IVC	CI			CRI			SBP			PPV			SVV			MAP			HR							

Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  Aim	III:	Evaluate	confounding	variables	that	may	influence	CRI	or	collapsibility	index		Variable	Scale	of	Measurement	Data	Point	Location	Analysis	Method	Outcome	Variable						IVC	CI,	CRI,	PPV,	SVV,	HR,										SBP,	MAP	AUROC											Interval					Pre-bolus	measurements	
Multivariable	Linear	Regression	Confounding	Variables				Age				Weight				BMI				Gender				Ethnicity				Associated	syndrome				Preoperative	Hemoglobin				Duration	of	NPO	status				Core	temperature	at	time	of										bolus				Paralysis	provided	(Y/N)				Blood	transfusion	(Y/N)				Total	blood	volume				Total	Crystalloid				Total	Colloid				Vasopressor	requirement				Total	amount	of	vasopressor						Ventilation										Tidal	volume									PEEP									PIP									Spontaneous	breaths		Interval	Interval	Interval	Dichotomous	Ordinal	Dichotomous	Interval	Interval		Interval			Dichotomous	Dichotomous	Interval	Interval	Interval	Dichotomous	Interval		Interval	Interval	Interval	Dichotomous		Demographics	Demographics	Demographics	Demographics	Demographics	Demographics	Preop	results		Anesthesia	Rec	Anesthesia	Rec		Anesthesia	Rec	Anesthesia	Rec	Anesthesia	Rec	Anesthesia	Rec	Anesthesia	Rec	Anesthesia	Rec	Anesthesia	Rec		Ventilator	Ventilator	Ventilator	Ventilator			Figure	or	Table	will	depend	on	results	found.		If	neither	of	the	outcome	variables	are	affected	by	the	confounding	variables	may	only	report	this	finding	in	the	text.	Two	separate	analyses	will	be	performed	–	one	for	the	10	ml/kg	protocolized	bolus	provided	immediately	after	induction	and	one	accounting	for	all	boluses	provided.	 	
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  Reference: [1] Malbrain ML, Marik PE, Witters I, Cordemans C, Kirkpatrick AW, Roberts DJ, et al. Fluid overload, de-resuscitation, and outcomes in critically ill or injured patients: a systematic review with suggestions for clinical practice. Anaesthesiology intensive therapy 2014;46(5):361-80. [2] Feissel M, Michard F, Mangin I, Ruyer O, Faller JP, Teboul JL. Respiratory changes in aortic blood velocity as an indicator of fluid responsiveness in ventilated patients with septic shock. Chest 2001;119(3):867-73. [3] Monnet X, Rienzo M, Osman D, Anguel N, Richard C, Pinsky MR, et al. Esophageal Doppler monitoring predicts fluid responsiveness in critically ill ventilated patients. Intensive care medicine 2005;31(9):1195-201. [4] Durand P, Chevret L, Essouri S, Haas V, Devictor D. Respiratory variations in aortic blood flow predict fluid responsiveness in ventilated children. Intensive care medicine 2008;34(5):888-94. [5] Absi MA, Lutterman J, Wetzel GT. Noninvasive cardiac output monitoring in the pediatric cardiac Intensive Care Unit. Curr Opin Cardiol 2010;25(2):77-9. [6] Weber T, Wagner T, Neumann K, Deusch E. Low predictability of three different noninvasive methods to determine fluid responsiveness in critically ill children. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2015;16(3):e89-94. [7] Pereira de Souza Neto E, Grousson S, Duflo F, Ducreux C, Joly H, Convert J, et al. Predicting fluid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated children under general anaesthesia using dynamic parameters and transthoracic echocardiography. Br J Anaesth 2011;106(6):856-64. [8] Lanspa MJ, Grissom CK, Hirshberg EL, Jones JP, Brown SM. Applying dynamic parameters to predict hemodynamic response to volume expansion in spontaneously breathing patients with septic shock. Shock 2013;39(2):155-60. [9] Janak JC, Howard JT, Goei KA, Weber R, Muniz GW, Hinojosa-Laborde C, et al. Predictors of the Onset of Hemodynamic Decompensation During Progressive Central Hypovolemia: Comparison of the Peripheral Perfusion Index, Pulse Pressure Variability, and Compensatory Reserve Index. Shock 2015;44(6):548-53. [10] Czerwinski M, Hopper RA, Gruss J, Fearon JA. Major morbidity and mortality rates in craniofacial surgery: an analysis of 8101 major procedures. Plast Reconstr Surg 2010;126(1):181-6. [11] Swan HJ, Ganz W, Forrester J, Marcus H, Diamond G, Chonette D. Catheterization of the heart in man with use of a flow-directed balloon-tipped catheter. The New England journal of medicine 1970;283(9):447-51. [12] National Heart L, Blood Institute Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Clinical Trials N, Wheeler AP, Bernard GR, Thompson BT, Schoenfeld D, et al. Pulmonary-artery versus central venous catheter to guide treatment of acute lung injury. The New England journal of medicine 2006;354(21):2213-24. 
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  [13] Shah MR, Hasselblad V, Stevenson LW, Binanay C, O'Connor CM, Sopko G, et al. Impact of the pulmonary artery catheter in critically ill patients: meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Jama 2005;294(13):1664-70. [14] Sandham JD, Hull RD, Brant RF, Knox L, Pineo GF, Doig CJ, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of the use of pulmonary-artery catheters in high-risk surgical patients. The New England journal of medicine 2003;348(1):5-14. [15] Westphal GA, Goncalves AR, Bedin A, Steglich RB, Silva E, Poli-de-Figueiredo LF. Vasodilation increases pulse pressure variation, mimicking hypovolemic status in rabbits. Clinics (Sao Paulo) 2010;65(2):189-94. [16] Monnet X, Marik PE, Teboul JL. Prediction of fluid responsiveness: an update. Ann Intensive Care 2016;6(1):111. [17] Chytra I, Pradl R, Bosman R, Pelnar P, Kasal E, Zidkova A. Esophageal Doppler-guided fluid management decreases blood lactate levels in multiple-trauma patients: a randomized controlled trial. Critical care 2007;11(1):R24. [18] Desgranges FP, Desebbe O, Pereira de Souza Neto E, Raphael D, Chassard D. Respiratory variation in aortic blood flow peak velocity to predict fluid responsiveness in mechanically ventilated children: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Paediatr Anaesth 2016;26(1):37-47. [19] Zhao J, Wang G. Inferior Vena Cava Collapsibility Index is a Valuable and Non-Invasive Index for Elevated General Heart End-Diastolic Volume Index Estimation in Septic Shock Patients. Med Sci Monit 2016;22:3843-8. [20] Preau S, Bortolotti P, Colling D, Dewavrin F, Colas V, Voisin B, et al. Diagnostic Accuracy of the Inferior Vena Cava Collapsibility to Predict Fluid Responsiveness in Spontaneously Breathing Patients With Sepsis and Acute Circulatory Failure. Critical care medicine 2017;45(3):e290-e7. [21] Gan H, Cannesson M, Chandler JR, Ansermino JM. Predicting fluid responsiveness in children: a systematic review. Anesth Analg 2013;117(6):1380-92. [22] Muniz GW, Wampler DA, Manifold CA, Grudic GZ, Mulligan J, Moulton S, et al. Promoting early diagnosis of hemodynamic instability during simulated hemorrhage with the use of a real-time decision-assist algorithm. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2013;75(2 Suppl 2):S184-9. [23] Stewart CL, Mulligan J, Grudic GZ, Convertino VA, Moulton SL. Detection of low-volume blood loss: compensatory reserve versus traditional vital signs. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2014;77(6):892-7; discussion 7-8. [24] Monnet X, Bleibtreu A, Ferre A, Dres M, Gharbi R, Richard C, et al. Passive leg-raising and end-expiratory occlusion tests perform better than pulse pressure variation in patients with low respiratory system compliance. Critical care medicine 2012;40(1):152-7. [25] Teboul JL, Monnet X, Chemla D, Michard F. Arterial Pulse Pressure Variation with Mechanical Ventilation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2018. [26] Airapetian N, Maizel J, Alyamani O, Mahjoub Y, Lorne E, Levrard M, et al. Does inferior vena cava respiratory variability predict fluid responsiveness in spontaneously breathing patients? Critical care 2015;19:400. 
Protocol #: 18-2513 PI: Sarkis C Derderian Version date: 07/01/2019  [27] Tibby SM, Hatherill M, Murdoch IA. Use of transesophageal Doppler ultrasonography in ventilated pediatric patients: derivation of cardiac output. Critical care medicine 2000;28(6):2045-50. 		