Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 1  
 
Study Title: Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the 
Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
 
 
Principal Investigator :  Johnathan H. Goree M.D.  
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
4301 W. Markham Street, Slot # 515 
Little Rock, AR 72205  
Telephone:  501.686.8818  
Email:  JHGoree @uams.edu  
  
Sub-Investigator  (s): Lauren A. Byers, APRN  
 University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
  4301 W. Markham Street, Slot # 515  
Little Rock, AR 72205  
Telephone:   501.686.8818  
Email:   LAByers @uams.edu  
 
 Michael Cucciare, Ph.D.  
 University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
  4301 W. Markham Street  
Little Rock, AR 72205  
Telephone:  501.526.8179  
Email: MCucciare@uams.edu  
 
 Corey Hayes, Pharm. D.  
 Unive rsity of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
  4301 W. Markham Street  
Little Rock, AR 72205  
Telephone:  501.526.8179  
Email: CJHayes @uams.edu  
 
 Nickolas Zaller, Ph. D.  
 University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
  4301 W. Markham Street, Slot # 820  
Little Rock, AR 72205  
Telephone:  501.526.6700  
Email: NDZaller@uams.edu  
 
Study location : University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 4301 W. Markham Street  
 Little Rock, AR  72205   
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 2 Table of Contents           Page  
 
Study Summary           4 
Background and Rationale          5 
Study Objectives           6 
Hypothesis            7 
Study Population            
 Inclusion Criteria          7 
 Exclusion Criteria          8 
Study Design and Procedures         8 
Risks and Benefits           9 
Data Management           10 
Ethical Considerations          10 
Dissemination of Data          11 
Reference            12 
Appendices            14 
  
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 3 Study Summary  
Title  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the 
Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
Short Title  Perioperative patient opioid education video study  
Methodology  A pilot study designed to assess the  feasibility of using a 
novel, video -based opioid education tool for opioid naïve 
ambulatory surgery patients in the perioperative period . 
Study Center  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
Objectives  To evaluate the affect that video -based opioid education 
has on  narcotic intake after outpatient surgery . 
Number of Subjects  Total N = 11 0 
Diagnosis and Main Inclusion 
Criteria  Opioid naïve adult men and women undergoing outpatient 
surgical procedure  
Study Procedures  Patients will be randomized to a video or no video prior to 
surgery then administered a phone questionnaire at post -op 
day 7, 30, and 90. The Arkansas Prescriptions Drug 
Monitoring Database will also be accessed for information 
on opioid prescription refills.  
Duration of Administration  The duration of the study will be approximately 3 months, 
plus a single  1-hour long focus group if desired  by the 
patient.  
Primary Objective  Primary outcomes are patient satisfaction, knowledge 
acquisition, and the effect of the video intervention on post -
operative pain control.   
Secondary Objective  Feasibility of collecting data including the percentage of 
patients who develop chro nic opioid use, percentage of 
patients who develop a chronic post -surgical pain disorder, 
and number of total days to opioid cessation . 
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 4 Background and Rationale  
It has been well publicized  that the United States  is facing a n opioid  crisis, with m ost 
states  experiencing an  alarming increase in rates  of prescription opioid related deaths , 
now spanning  almost  three decades  (Deyo, 2016 ). As this public health crisis continues 
to plague Americans , much attention has been  directed to opioid prescribing trends.  It 
has been shown that the rate of long -term opioid use increases to 13.5% when opiate 
naïve patients extend its use to eight days or longer  and 29.9% when its use extends to 
31 days or longer ( Shah, 2017 ). Even o ne additional refill after initiation can increa se 
odds  of long-term use by 2.25 ( Deyo, 2016 ). Coupling these  tendencies  with the fact 
that over prescribing of narcotic analgesics has been shown to occur  even when these  
opiate naïve patients encounter s even their first prescription, at ambulatory surgeries  for 
example , increased awareness through education is paramount in working to effectively 
battle  the opioid epidemic ( Thiels, 2018 ). 
Other than overdose deaths, complications of long -term opiate use have been wel l 
studied showing tolerance to the medication, hyperalgesia, and limited efficacy over 
time, just to name a few  (Deyo, 2016 ). Therefore , opiate alternatives and  non-opiate 
analgesic regimens  that can be paired with opiates to decrease total intake should b e 
emphasized.  Acetaminophen and non-steroidal anti -inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are 
popular substitutes to opioids that should be considered fo r post -operative pain control 
(Valentine, 2015 ). They can be administered on a scheduled basis so that consistent 
therapeutic concentrations can be maintained to avoid opiate analgesics as a rescue .  
Ibuprofen and Acetaminophen  have been shown to provide superior acute pain with 
combined with opioids (Memtsoudis, 2018) and to be more effective than opioids in 
certain chronic p ain conditions (Krebs, 2018).  
We now know that long term opioid use often begins with the treatment of a cute pain.  
More specifically, many patients use opioids chronically and develop opioid use 
disorders after they experience their first exposure to opioids during a hospital surgical 
encounter (Cicero, 2014). Patients are often provided with a prescription  for excessive 
amounts of opioids without clear instructions on usage, full disclosure of the risk and 
benefits, or a discussion of alternative treatment strategies for pain control (Sabatino, 
2018; Theisen, 2018).  Approximately 6% of patients who undergo  an operative 
procedure have continued opioid usage at 90 days (Brummett, 2017).  While many of 
these patients have developed chronic post -surgical pain disorders, rates of chronic 
post-surgical pain are increased by poorly controlled acute post -surgical p ain (Gjeilo, 
2014; Meissner, 2015).   
Disseminating information  into easily understood patient education programs that will 
allow patients to navigate post -operative pain management options  and improve acute 
pain treatment could be a  technique to decrease narcotic intake after outpatient surgery.   
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 5 According to Shah, Hayes, and Martin (2017), starting this conversation early, prior to 
surgery thus prior to opioid intake is suggested. Cancer -related pain control has been 
shown by researchers to respond  well t o brief 20 minute coaching interventions on self –
management (Oliver, 2001 ).  Booklets regarding  pain-relief methods  have been used 
with proven adequate analgesia ( Watt-Watson, 2017 ).  While this work is promising, 
there are some limitations to the use of handouts as the primary means of patient 
education .   While most hospital education materials are produced at a 10th grade 
reading level, the reading level of the average patient in the United States is 
approximately 8th -9th grade (Saffer, 2005). Also, app roximately 22 percent of patients 
read at a 5th grade reading level or lo wer (Saffer, 2005).  
In studies that have randomized patients to handouts versus  video -based education, 
patients obtained and retained more knowledge from video -based  education initiatives 
(Hill, 2009; Shah 2017).  This conclusion holds true for instructional -based initiatives 
pertaining to prescription medications, preventing home falls, and adherence to pre -
surgical instructions (Hill, 2009; Shah 2017). Pre -procedural  video based education has 
also been shown to decrease anxiety among patients due to increased knowledge 
about the unknown (Ayasrah, 2016). Ambulatory surgery, pre -procedural patient -
centered interview interventions have also been shown to decrease post pr ocedural 
pain, improve surgical recovery, and increase daily activity after surgery (Pereira, 2015).  
In the emergency room, fifty -two patients who were being discharged with an opioid 
prescription were randomized to either a 6 minute animation -based video  on opioid 
education discussing safe usage of opioids and their potential dangers or an information 
sheet co ntaining the same information.  In this study, the animation -based video tool 
was found to increase knowledge acquisition of the covered material me asured by a 
written test by a statistically significant margin of 17 percent (Chakravarthy, 2018).  This 
trial further illustrates the benefits of standardized video -based education over non 
standardized verbal education by providers and handouts.  We feel  that this video 
based style of opioid education could be better implemented throughout other phases of 
hospital care.  
Therefore, we propose to examine the feasibility of using a novel, video -based opioid 
education tool for opioid naïve (patients who have not taken opioids in the 30 days pre -
operatively), ambulatory surgery patients in the perioperative period. During our pilot 
study, our primary outcomes are patient satisfaction, knowledge acquisition, and the 
effect of the video intervention on post -opera tive pain control.  This pilot study will also 
examine the feasibility of collecting data including the percentage of patients who 
develop chronic opioid use (use of opioids past 90 days), percentage of patients who 
develop a chronic post -surgical pain dis order, and number of total days to opioid 
cessation.  We plan to collect this data both by patient report and from the Arkansas 
Prescriptions Drug Monitoring Database.  This study will also allow us to assess 
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 6 whether video opioid education tools are an eff ective means of providing information 
about opioid use to ambulatory surgery patients and whether the perioperative holding 
area is the ideal location for this education.  
Study Objectives  
Primary Objective s 
Assess the feasibility of collection of data from both cohorts including the following 
metrics vi a phone survey:  
 Days to post-operative  opioid cessation  
 Methods for post -operative pain control  
 Patient rated knowledge of post-operative  pain control  
 Patient rated knowledge of post-operative  opioid safety  
 Development  of chronic post-surgical  pain syndromes  
 Development of chronic post-surgical  opioid use  
Assess the feasibility of collection of data from both cohorts from the Arkansas  
Prescription Drug Monitoring Database including the following:  
 Number of post-operative  prescriptions obtained  
Assess the feasibility of the proposed intervention on patient satisfaction, retention of 
information, perceived usefulness of information, effect on pre -operative anxiety, and 
effect on acute usage of opioid m edication via focus group.  
Hypothesis  
The use of patient -focused, video based opioid education about the risks and 
benefits, alternatives to opioid therapy, and safe use, storage, and disposal of opioids is 
feasible in the perioperative period.  The collec tion of data about opioid use, patient 
perception of their knowledge on pain control options, patient perception of their 
knowledge on opioid safety, rates of post -operative chronic opioid use, and rates of 
chron ic post -surgical pain disorders is feasible via phone interview, focus group, and 
access to the Arkansas Prescription Drug Monitoring Database.   
 Potential Impact: Understanding the feasibility of this research protocol will inform 
the creation of a  fully powered comparative effectiveness trial to test whether applying 
this video intervention for opioid naïve, ambulatory surgery patients in the pre -operative 
holding area will decrease chronic opioid use (90 days), days to opioid cessation, and 
development of chronic post -surgi cal pain conditions.  
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 7 Study Population  
Eligibility waivers are not permitted.  Subjects must meet all of the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria to be enrolled in the study.  Study events may not begin until a subject 
has signed the informed consent for and is  enrolled.  The study population will be opiate 
naïve preoperative patients arrived and consented for ambulatory surgery.  
Inclusion Criteria  
• 110 men and women 18 years or older  
• not chronically receiving opioid analgesics  
• patients who have not taken opioids 30 days pre -operatively  
• undergoing surgical procedure not requiring overnight hospital stay  
Exclusion Criteria  
• non-English speaking  
• legally deaf or blind  
• on opiate contract  
• has taken oral narcotic in the past 30 days  
• unable to operat e a telephone   
Study Design and Procedures  
Study Procedure    
Prior to subject enrollment, we  will create a 5 -10 minute opioid education video.  
This video will explain the risks and benefits of opioid medications and provide 
examples of evidence -based alternative acute pain therapies.  It will also discuss safe 
use, storage, and disposal of opioi ds.  This video will be based on a Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention publication titled “Opioids for Acute Pain: What You 
Need to Know.”  This video will be peer -reviewed for accuracy by a panel of medical 
doctors, pharmacists specializing in addi ction medicine, psychologist, researchers with 
experience in substance using populations, and nurses , all of which are experts with 
advanced knowledge of opioid pharmaco logy and opioid use disorders.  
After video creation, we will begin enrolling patients.  Patients admitted for 
ambulatory surgery will be consented for the study in the preoperative holding area.  All 
patients will be read the risk and benefits of the study prior to signing informed consent.  
After signing informed consent and discussing the risks and benefits of the study 
protocol, interested patients will be randomized to either receive the video intervention 
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 8 or to standard of care.  100-opaque -envelopes will be filled with a piece of paper with 
either “video intervention” or “standard inter vention” typed on them.  They will be 
shuffled 10 times then split in half then sequentially numbered, and stored  in a plastic 
tub.  Envelopes containing the treatment allocation will be opened by the recruiting 
clinician on participant enrolment. To be ro bust, the envelopes will be truly opaque, 
sequentially numbered, and opened in the correct order. The clinician will not open the 
envelope in advance and will ensure that the envelope seal has not been broken.  
Patients randomized to the intervention will be shown the video in the pre -operative 
holding area on an iPad.  
Post -Operative Data Collection  and Analysis . 
Patients will be contacted on Post -operative day 7, 30, and 90  and asked a 
series of questions (Appendix B) .  After completing their post -operative day 90 phone 
call, patients will be compensated for their time with a $20 gift card.  Arkansas 
Prescription Monitoring Database Data will be accessed for every patient (D r. Hayes) 
and will be protected and de -identified.  This will provide objective data to determine 
whether patients have gotten additional prescriptions post operatively and whether 
patients are continuing opioids past 90 days.  
As this a prospective prelimi nary collection with plans for a more detailed 
longitudinal study in the future, no net sample size or statistical power has been 
planned, however the goal is to enroll 1 10 subjects.  Data collection will continue in an 
ongoing, prospective, open -ended man ner, which depends on participant willingness to 
continue in the study over several months.  
Analysis of data will be undertaken with the help of SPSS version 22 software 
(IBM) using parametric and non -parametric tests of significance dependent on the 
varia bles being tested.  Univariate and multivariate regression models will be applied 
using the same software to determine variables that correlate best with differences in 
studied variables.  
Focus Group Structure and Content.  
Patients who are randomized to th e video group will also be notified that they are 
eligible to participate in one of two focus groups.  These will be scheduled after all 
patients have been enrolled in the study and all 7 day follow up calls are completed.  
Patients will receive a $50 gift  card in compensation for completing the interactive  focus 
group.  The two focus groups of patients from the treatment arm will be held on the 10th 
floor of the Winthrop P. Rockefeller Cancer Institute and will last approximately 1 hour 
each (Basch, 1987).   We will use the information from this focus group to ensure that 
this information is correctly delivered to and consumed and retained by patients.  We 
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 9 will also use this information to assess timing for the intervention in the pre -operative 
holding area and assess whether patients feel that there is a better time for this 
information to be delivered.   
Analysis of Qualitative Data Gathered from Focus Groups.   
All focus group discussions will be audio recorded.  We will compile and review 
notes and transc ripts collected from the phone interviews to generate written summaries 
of the factors that impact acceptability and feasibility of the video intervention.  We will 
pursue a rapid analysis (e.g., Sobo et al., 2006) of focus group data to ensure quick 
trans lation of patient feedback to actionable suggestions for developing the study 
protocol and finalizing the video intervention .  We will listen to all focus group audio 
recordings and will compile all interview and observation notes.  This data will be used 
to generate a summary of patient recommendations for adaptations to video content 
and final study video delivery methods. This gen erated summary will be presented to 
study team and stakeholders.  
Removal of Subjects from the Study  
 Patients can be taken off the study at any time at their own request, or they may 
be withdrawn at the discretion of the investigator for safety, behavioral , or administrative 
reasons.  The reason(s) for discontinuation will be documented and may include:  
• Subject withdraws consent  
• Subject is lost to follow up.  If the investigator is unable to contact the subject for 
follow up phone calls the subject will be considered “lost to follow up”  
Risks  
The only potential risk to study participants is the potential for loss of confidentiality.  
Measures to protect the confidentiality of study participants will be implemented as 
described in the Data Handling and Record keeping section below.  
Potential Benefits  
Patients provided with education video could be at lower risk for opioid addiction.  As 
well as the  knowledge gained from the study could potentially benefit patients in the 
future.  
 
 
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 10 Data Management  
The Principal Investigator will carefully monitor study procedures to protect the safety of 
research subjects, the quality of the data and the integrity of the study.  All study subject 
material will be assigned a unique identifying code or number  (Appendix A) .  The key to 
the code will be kept in a locked file in the principal investigator’s office.  Only princip al 
and sub -investigators  will hav e access to the code and information that identifies the 
subject in this study.  At the conclusion of the study, the data will be permanently 
deidentified, then destroyed  after seven years.  
Ethical Considerations  
This study will be conducted in accordance with all applicable government regulations 
and University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences research policies and 
procedures.   This protocol and any amendments will be submitted and approved by the 
UAMS Institution al Review Board (IRB) to conduct the study.    
The formal consent of each subject, using the IRB -approved consent form, will be 
obtained before that subject is submitted to any study procedure.   All subjects for this 
study will be provided a consent form de scribing this study and providing sufficient 
information in language suitable for subjects to make an informed decision about their 
participation in this study.   The person obtaining consent will thoroughly explain each 
element of the document and outline the risks and benefits, alternate treatment(s), and 
requirements of the study.  
The consent process will take p lace in a  private preoperative bay , and subjects may 
take as much time as needed to make a decision about their participation.   Participation 
privacy will be maintained and questions regarding participation will be answered.   No 
coercion or undue influence will be used in the consent process.   This consent form 
must be signed by the subject or legally authorized representative (only if applicable ), 
and the individual obtaining the consent.   A copy of  the signed consent will be given to 
the participant, and the informed consent process will be documented in each subject’s 
research record . 
Amendments  to the Protocol  
Should amendments to the protocol be required, the amendments will be originated and 
documented by the Principal Investigator.  It should also be noted that when an 
amendment to the protocol substantially alters the study deign or potential risk to the 
patient, a revised consent f orm might be required.  
The amendment protocol, and if required the amended consent form, must be approved 
by the IRB prior to implementation.  
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 11 Record Retention  
All study records will be retained in accordance with applicable institutional and 
applicable re gulatory requirements.   
Obligation of Investigators  
The principal investigator is responsible for the conduct of the clinical trial at the site in 
accordance with applicable regulatory requirements.  The principal investigator is 
responsible for personall y overseeing the treatment of all study subjects.  The principal 
investigator must assure that all study site personnel, including sub -investigators and 
the other study staff members, adhere to the study protocol and all applicable 
regulations and guidelin es regarding clinical trials both during and after study 
completion.   
Dissemination of Data  
Results of this study may be used for presentations, posters, or publications. The 
publications will not contain any identifiable information that could be linked to a 
participant.    
  
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 12 References  
1. Ayasrah , S., Ahmad, M. Educational video intervention effects on periprocedural 
anxiety levels among cardiac catheterization patietns; a randomized clinical trial. 
Research and Theory for Nursing Practice. 2016; 30, 70 -84 
2. Basch, C. E. Focus group interview: an un derutilized research technique for 
improving theory and practice in health education. Health Education & Behavior. 
1987; 14: 411 -448 
3. Brummett, C., Waljee, J., Goesling, J., Moser, S., Lin, P., Englsbe, M., et. al. 
New persistent opioid  use after minor and major surgical procedures in US 
adults. JAMA Surgery. 2017; 152: e170504  
4. Chakravarthy, B., Somasundaram, S., Mogi, J., Burns, r., Hoonpongsimanont, 
W., Wiechmann, W., et al. Randomized pilot trial measuring knowledge 
acquisition of opioid education in emer gency department patients using a novel 
media platform. Substance Abuse. 2018; 2, 27 -31. 
5. Deyo et al. Association Between Initial Opioid Prescribing Patterns and 
Subsequent Long -Term Use Among Opioid -Naïve Patients: A Statewide 
Retrospective Cohort Study. J ournal of General Internal Medicine. 2016; 32(1): 
21-27. 
6. Gjeilo, K., Stenseth, R., Klepstad, P. Risk factors and early pharmacologic 
interventions to prevent chronic postsurgical pain following cardiac surgery. 
American Journal of Cardiovascular Drugs. 201 4; 14:335 -342 
7. Hill, A., McPhail, S., BAppScPhty, Hoffmann, T., Hill, K., Oliver, D. Beer, C., et al. 
A randomized trial comparing digital video disc with written delivery of falls 
prevention education for older patients in hospital, Journal of American Ger iatrics 
Society. 2009; 57, 1458 -1463.  
8. Krebs, E., Gravely, A., N ugent, S., Jensen, A., DeRonne, B., Goldsmith, E., et al. 
Effect of opioid vs nonopioid medication on pain related function in patients with 
chronic back pain or knee osteoarthritis  pain; the s pace  randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA. 2018; 319:872 -882. 
9. Meissner, W., Coluzzi, F., Fletcher, D., Huygen, F., Morlion B., Neugebauer, E 
et. al. Improving the management of post -operative acute pain; priorities for 
change. Current Medical Research and Opini on. 2015; 31: 2131 -2141  
10. Memtsoudis, S., Poeran, J., Zubizarreta, N., Cozowicz, C., Morwalk, E., Mariano, 
E.R., et.al. Association of multimodal pain management strategies with 
perioperative outcomes and resource utilization; a population -based study. 
Anest hesiology. 2018; 128: 891 -902  
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 13 11. Oliver, J., Kravitz, R., Kaplan, S., & Meyers, F.  Individualized Patient Education 
and Coaching to Improve Pain Control Among Cancer Outpatients.  Journal of 
Clinical Oncology.  2001; 19(7): 2206 -2212.  
12. Pereira, L., Figueired o-Braga, M., Carvalho, I. Preoperative anxiety in ambulatory 
surgery: The Impact of an empathic patient -centered approach on psychological 
and clinical outcomes. Patient Education and Counseling. 2015; 99, 733 -738. 
13. Prabhu et al.  Implementation of a Qualit y Improvement Initiative to Decrease 
Opioid Prescribing After Cesarean Delivery.  Obstetrics and Gynecology.  2018; 
132(3): 631 -636. 
14. Sabatino, M., Kunkel, S., Ramkumar, D., Keeney, B., Jevsevar , D. Excess opioid 
medications and variation in prescribing patterns following common orthopeadic 
procedures. Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery. 2018; 100: 180 -188 
15. Saffer , R.S., Keenan, J.  Health literacy: the gap between physicians and 
patients. American Family Physician . 2005;  72, 463 -468.  
16. Shah, A., Hayes, C., & Martin, B.  Characteristic of Initial Prescription Episodes 
and Likelihood of Long -Term Opioid Use – United States, 2006 -2015.  CDC 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.  2017; 66(10): 265 -269. 
17. Sobo, e.J., Seid, M., Reyes Gelhard, L. Parent -identified barriers to pediatric 
health care; a process -oriented model. Health Services Research. 2006; 41, 148 -
172. 
18. Theisen, K., Myrga, J., Hale, N., Cochran, G., Sewall, C., Mcleaud, L., et. al. 
Excessive op ioid prescribing after major urologic procedures. Urology. 2018; 18: 
30890 -30892  
19. Thiels, C., Hanson, K., Cima, R., & Habermann, E.  From Data to Practice: 
Increasing Awareness of Opioid Prescribing Data Changes Practice.  Annals of 
Surgery.  2018.  267(3):  46-47. 
20. Valentine, A., Carvalho, B., Lazo, T., & Riley, E.  Scheduled Acetaminophen with 
As-needed Opioids Compared to As -needed acetaminophen Plus Opioids for 
Post-cesarean Pain Management.  International Journal of Obstetric Anesthesia.  
2015; 24: 210 -216. 
21. Watt-Watson, J., Stevens, B., Costello, J., Katz, J., & Reid, G.  Impact of 
Preoperative Education on Pain Management Outcomes After Coronary Artery 
Bypass Graft Surgery: A Pilot.  Canadian Journal of Nursing Research.  2000; 
31(4): 41 -56. 
  
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 14 Appendices  
Appendix  A: Coded Identifier List  
Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A 
Feasibility Study  
Code Identifier        Patient Name           DOB     Phone number        Date of Surgery  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 15 Appendix  B: Follow up Phone Interview Questions  
Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A 
Feasibility Study  
 
Day 7 post -op phone call:  
1. Are you still taking opioids?  
2. With your surgery day being day 0 and today being day 7,  what day was your 
last opioid taken?  
3. What methods other than opioids did you use to control your post-operative  
pain?  
4. On a scale of 1 -10 with 1 being not at all informed and 10 being very 
informed, rate your knowledge of post -operati ve pain control prior to surgery.  
5. On a scale of 1 -10 with 1 being not at all informed  and 10 being very 
informed, rate your knowledge of post -operative pain control after surgery.  
6. On a scale of 1 -10 with 1 being not at all informed and 10 being very 
inform ed, rate your knowledge of opioid safety including safe use, storage, 
and disposal of opioids prior to surgery  
7. On a scale of 1 -10 with 1 being not at all informed and 10 being very 
informed, rate your knowledge of opioid safety including safe use, storage,  
and disposal of after surgery  
8. On a scale of 1 -10 with 1 being not at  all improved  and 10 being very 
improved, how you feel your hospital experience improved your knowledge o f 
post-operative pain control.  
   
Day 30 post -op phone call  
1. Are you currently taking opioids?  
2. When was your last opioid taken ? 
3. Are you experiencing any pain from your surgery?  
4. On a scale of 0 -10 with 0 being pain free and 10 being the worst pain 
imaginable, how would you rate your current post -surgical pain?  
 
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 16 Day 90 post -op phone call:  
1. Are you currently taking opioids?  
2. When was your last opioid taken?  
3. Are you still experiencing any pain from your surgery?  
4. On a scale of 0 -10 with 0 being pain free and 10 being the worst pain 
imaginable, how would you rate your current post -surgical pain?  
  
Title:  Video -based, Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A Feasibility Study  
PI: Johnathan Goree, M.D.  
Site:  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
Version #: 4  IRB #  228789  
Date:  1/4/2019 Page 17 Appendix C: Focus Group Interview Discussion  Outline  
Video -based,  Patient -Focused Opioid Education in the Perioperative Period: A 
Feasibility Study  
 
 
1. How do you feel about the timing of the educational video?  Is there a better time 
this information could be provided prior to surgery (e.g.: in clinic)?  
2. Did you like the way the information was conveyed in the video?  
3. What information should  be added to the video?  
 