STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Application with the Competent Authority. Additional study contact information can be found in the 
Operations Manual ( Appendix F).
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1SYNOPSIS 5
2INTRODUCTION 6
2.1 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 6
2.2 BENEFITS AND RISKS TO SUBJECTS 7
3OBJECTIVES AND ENDPO INTS 7
3.1 OBJECTIVES , HYPOTHESES ,AND ESTIMANDS 7
3.2 PRIMARY ENDPOINT 8
3.3 SECONDARY ENDPOINT 8
3.4 ADDITIONAL ENDPOINTS 8
3.5 SAFETY ENDPOINTS 9
4INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 9
4.1 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN 9
4.2 DISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN 10
5STUDY ACTIVITIES 11
5.1 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 11
5.2 CONTRACEPTION RECOMMENDATIONS 14
5.3 PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS AND PROCEDURES 15
5.4 PRIOR AND CONCOMI TANT PROCEDURES 16
5.5 WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS AND DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY 18
5.6 FOLLOW-U P AFTER SUBJECT DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY DRUG OR FROM STUDY 18
5.7 STUDY DRUG 19
5.8 RANDOMIZATION /DRUG ASSIGNMENT 19
5.9 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 19
5.10 DATA MONITORING COMMITTEE 20
6SAFETY CONSIDERATION S 20
Page 2 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.6.1 COMPLAINTS AND ADVERSE EVENTS 20
7STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF S AMPLE SIZE 23
7.1 STATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 23
7.2 DEFINITION FOR ANALYSIS POPUL ATIONS 24
7.3 HANDLING POTENTIAL INTERCURRENT EVENTS FOR THE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EFFICACY ENDPOINTS 24
7.4 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR EFFICACY 24
7.5 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR SAFETY 24
7.6 INTERIM ANALYSIS 25
7.7 OVERALL TYPE I ERROR CONTROL 26
7.8 SAMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION 26
8ETHICS 26
8.1 INDEPENDENT ETHICS COMMITTEE /INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD (IEC/IRB) 26
8.2 ETHICAL CONDUCT OF THE STUDY 26
8.3 SUBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 27
9SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM CO MPLETION 27
10DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE 27
11COMPLETION OF THE ST UDY 27
12REFERENCES 27
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. STUDY DRUG INFORMATI ON 19
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. STUDY SCHEMA 10
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY -SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS 29
Page 3 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 31
APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES 32
APPENDIX D. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE 33
APPENDIX E. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANG ES 36
APPENDIX F. OPERATIONS MANUAL 37
Page 4 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2INTRODUCTION
2.1 Background and Rationale
Why Is This Study Being Conducted?
BOTOX Cosmetic (onabotulinumtoxinA/Botulinum Toxin Type A) is an acetylcholine release inhibitor and 
a neuromuscular blocking agent indicated in adults for the temporary improvement in the appearance 
of moderate to severe glabellar lines (GL) as sociated with corrugator and/or procerus muscle activity, 
moderate to severe lateral canthal lines (LCL) associated with orbicularis oculi activity, and moderate to 
severe forehead lines (FHL) associated with frontalis muscle activity .1,2
The contraction of these facial muscles serves a role in communicating an emotional state, which 
influences both how an individual presents themselves as well as how they are perceive d by others.3  
Over time, the repetitive contraction of facial muscles, along with degenerative changes due to a ging , 
can negatively aff ect social interactions, social perceptions and, ultimately, self -esteem.4
Facial rejuvenation has been rapidly gaining ground to improve subject satisfaction with facial 
appearances , which is often described as achieving a "natural and relaxed "look . It is typical for some 
clinicians to start with less than labeled doses of botulinum toxin to avoid a "frozen " look. Asmore 
experience has been gained, botu linum toxin dosing, precise placement, and injection techniques have 
become more fine-tuned. As a result of these advances, healthc are professionals have learned that 
proper botulinum toxin procedures can yield a natural look that drives subject satisfaction.5
Although limited, several studies have focused on patient outcomes associated with theimprovement in 
signs of aging . The HARMONY study investigated the impact o f fillers and onabotulinumtoxinA in a 
pan-facial approach and demonstrated that minimally invasive, multimodal treatment resulted in 
improvements in FACE -Q scores and perceived age, indicating a high degree of patient satisfaction and a 
younger facial appe arance .6  In addition, when independent observers were provided with enrolled 
subjects 'paired before and after treatment images , the independent observers reported that subjects 
appeared to have a higher social status, look nearly 5 years younger, more healthy, a pproachable, more 
attractive, and more successful at attracting others after treatment.7
Significant improvements in patient -reported outcomes (PROs) have also been reported in a P hase 3 
study assessing the effectivene ss of onabotulinumtoxinA treatment of GL, LCL, and FHL .8  Subjects were 
highly satisfied with onabotuli numtoxinA treatment and reported significant improvement in emotional 
and psychological well-being compared toplacebo . Subject satisfaction remained high throughout the 
6 -month double -blind period, and improvements were maintained with repeated onabotulinumtoxinA 
treatment during the following 6 -month open -label period .
The purpose of this study is to evaluate subject satisfaction and natural outcome sfollowing BOTOX 
Cosmetic treatment of upper facial areas ( GL, LCL, and FHL ).
Page 6 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2.2 Benefits and Risks to Subjects
The clinical efficacy and safety profile of BOTOX Cosmetic has been demonstrated in multiple clinical 
trials across several indications, with favorable benefit risk prof iles. In general, adverse reactions occur 
within the first few days to weeks following injection of BOTOX Cosmetic and, while generally transient, 
may have a duration of several months or, in rare cases, longer.
While Allergan (an AbbVie company) does not consider Coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID -19)to be a 
safety concern for BOTOX Cosmetic due to its mechanism of action and route of administration, the 
sponsor is monitoring COVID -19 events during the pandemic closely . A review of COVID -19 events for 
the pe riod of 01 January 2019 through 31 December 2021 did not identify any new or significant safety 
findings for the subjects receiving BOTOX Cosmetic treatment . Overall, the clinical course and 
presentation of patients with COVID -19 infection coincident with BOTOX Cosmetic is consistent with 
what has been described for the general population . Considering the COVID -19 pandemic and based on 
the limited information to date, no additional risk to study participants is anticipated with the use of 
BOTOX Cosmetic.
For further details, please see findings from completed studies, including safety data in the current
BOTOX Cosmetic investigator's brochure.
3OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
3.1 Objectives, Hypotheses, and Estimands
Objective
The objective of this study is t o evaluate subject satisfaction and natural outcome s following the 
administration of 64 U of BOTOX Cosmetic in subjects with upper facial lines (GL, LCL, and FHL).
Clinical Hypothesis
Single t reatment of upper facial lines with BOTOX Cosmetic at 64 Ucan lead to subjec t satisfaction and 
natural outcome s.
Estimands
The estimand corresponding to the primary endpoint is as follows: 
The proportion of subjects receiving treatment of BOTOX Cosmetic 64U who achieve the 
respon derstatus ofMostly satisfied or Very satisf iedon the Facial Line Satisfaction 
Questionnaire (FLSQ) Item 4 at the Day 30 assessment in the modified intention- to-treat (mITT) 
population. Subjects who have any intercurrent event resulting in not having a Day 30 
assessment will not be included. 
Page 7 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The estimand corresponding to the secondary endpoint is as follows: 
The mean change from baseline in subject assessment based on Rasch -transformed score of 
FACE -Q Psychological Function at the Day 30 assessment for subjects who receive BOTOX 
Cosmetic 64 U in the mITT population. Subjects who have any intercurrent event resulting in not 
having a Day 30 assessment will not be included.
3.2 Primary Endpoint
The primary endpoint is the responder status of Mostly satisfied orVery satisfied on the Facial Line 
Satisfaction Questionnaire (FLSQ) Follow -up Item 4 at Day 30. 
3.3 Secondary Endpoint
Secondary endpoint is
Change from baseline in subject's assessment based on Rasch -transformed score of FACE -Q 
Psychological Function scale at Day 30
3.4 Additional Endpoints
Page 8 of 59 

STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.5 Safety Endpoints
The safety endpoint is the incidence of adverse events (AEs) .
4INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan
This is a6-month, prospective, multicente r, open -label study to evaluate subject satisfaction and natural 
outcomes following the administration of BOTOX Cosmetic 64 U for the treatment of upper facial lines.
The study will enroll approximately 100 subjects with moderate to severe GL, LCL, and FHL as asse ssed 
by the investigator. Out of the approximately 100 enrolled subjects:
approximately 20% of the study population willbe treatment naïve to any botulinum toxin of 
any serotype for any indication, 
approximately 20% of the study population will be self-identified as male,
Page 9 of 59 

STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.approximately 20% of the study population will be self- identified as Asian, and 
approximately 20% of the study population will have Fitzpatrick skin phototypes of IV, V, or VI.
A review of individual site data will be conducted once a sufficient number of subjects has been
enrolled. The site will be permitted to enroll additional subjects upon sponsor approval. This process 
may be repeated as needed.
On Day 1, after subject sare verified to meet all eligibility criteria and have completed all baseline study 
procedures , they will receive 64 U of BOTOX Cosmetic . Each subject will receive a total of 16injections 
(0.1 mL or 4 U of BOTOX Cosmetic per injection), with 5 injections in the glabellar complex, 3 injections 
in each of the lateral canthal area (6 total injections), and 5 injections in the frontalis muscle.
There are seven in-clinic visits: screening/b aseline /treatment (Day 1), post -treatment follow -up visits 
(Day s30, 60, 90, 120 , 150) ,and study exit (Day 180 or Early Exit ). The study schema of the study is 
shown in Figure 1.
Further details on study procedures are located in the Operations Manual ( Appendix E).
Figure 1. Study Schema
4.2 Discussion of Study Design
Choice of Control Group
This is an open -label study. There is no separate control gr oup. 
Appropriateness of Measurements
The primary efficacy measure used in this study (FLSQ) is a validated measure . Allergan has also 
developed and validated upper facial line severity scales (AGLSS, LCLSS, and FHLSS) in accordance with 
the United States Food and Drug Administration requirement. All efficacy -related measurements in this 
study are standard for assessin gfacial aesthetics correction (for GL, LCL, and FHL). All clinical procedures 
in this study are standard and generally accepted.
Suitability of Subject Population
The study population will include male and female adults with moderate to severe GL, LCL, an d FHL at 
maximum contraction as assessed by investigators using the AGLSS, LCLSS, and FHLSS, respectively. To 
avoid confounding the study results, washout from prior facial aesthetic treatments is required as 
described in the eligibility criteria. 
Page 10 of 59 
    
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Selecti on of Doses in the Study
BOTOX Cosmetic is currently approved for aesthetic treatment of GL, LCL and FHL . The total dose , 
dilution, injection pattern, and route of administration will follow the approved label, and each eligible 
subject will receive a fixe d dose of 64 U of BOTOX Cosmetic on Day 1 (20 U to the glabellar complex, 
24U to the lateral canthal areas, and 20 U to the frontalis muscles). 
5STUDY ACTIVITIES
5.1 Eligibility Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria in order to be included in the study. Anything other than 
a positive response to the questions below will result in exclusion from study participation. 
Rescreening is not allowed for individuals who do not meet Eligibility Criterion #8 (listed below). Any 
attempt to rescreen a subject must only occur after agreement with the sponsor. Rescreening can only 
occur once for any given potential subject .
Consent
1.Subjects must voluntarily sign and date an informed consent, approved by an independent 
ethics committee (IEC)/institutional review board (IRB), prior to the initiation of any screening or 
study -specific procedures. 
2.Subjects are willing and able to comply with procedures required in this protocol.
3.Subjects must agree to have photos and videos taken during study visits . Subjects must 
consent to having photographs and videos taken for research/educational purposes but may still 
participate if he/she declines use of the photographs and videos for other purposes.
Demographic and Subject Characteristics
4.Adult m ale or female, at least 18 years old, at the time of signing the informed consent.
5.Subjects must have sufficient visual acuity without the use of eyeglasses (contact lens use 
acceptable) to accurately assess their facial wrinkles.
6.Subject must be able to follow study instructions and complete study assessment tools 
without any assistance or alterations to the assessment tools and complete all required study 
procedures.
7.Subject must be in good health as deter mined by medical history, vital signs, and 
investigator's judgement, including no known active pandemic infection .
Condition
8.Subject meets all of t he following criteria prior to dosing on Day 1, as determined by the 
investigator :
GL of Moderate (Grade 2) to Severe (Grade 3) on AGLSS at maximum contraction . 
Page 11 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.LCL of Moderate (Grade 2) to Severe (Grade 3) bilaterally (severity identical on both sides)
on LCLSS at maximum contraction .
FHL of Moderate (Grade 2) to Severe (Grade 3) on FHLSS at maximum contraction.
Subject History
9.No history of known immunization or hyper sensitivity to any botulinum toxin serotype.
10.No history of an allergic reaction or significant sensitivity to constituents of the study drug 
(and its excipients) and/or other products in the same class.
11.No history of clinically significant (per investigator's judgment) drug or alcohol abuse within 
the las t 6 months.
12.No presence of tattoos, jewelry, or clothing which obscures or interferes with the tar get area 
of interest and cannot be removed.
14.Nohistory of clinically significant medical condition sor presence of current uncontrolle d 
systemic disease or any other reasons, in the i nvestigator 's opinion, that may put the subject at 
significant risk, may confound the study results, or may interfere significantly with participation 
in the study.
15.Subjects cannot be directly or indirectly involved in the conduct and administration of this 
study as a principal investigator, sub- investigator, study coordinator, or other study staff 
member; or employee of the sponsor, or a first -degree family member, significant other, or 
relative residing with one of the above persons involved directly or indirectly in the study. 
16.No known active severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV-2) infection. If 
a subject has signs/symptoms suggestive of SARS- CoV-2 infection, th e subject must have a 
negative molecular (e.g., polymerase chain reaction [PCR ]test result ). Note: SARS -CoV-2 
diagnostic tests should be applied following local requirements /recommendations .
Page 12 of 59 

STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
17.Subjects who do not meet SARS -CoV-2 infection eligib ility criteria must be screen failed and 
may only rescreen after they meet the following SARS -CoV-2 infection viral clearance criteria: 
At least 10days since first positive test result have passed in asymptomatic subject s or at 
least 10days since recove ry, defined as resolution of fever without use of antipyretics and 
improvement in symptoms
20.No history of any botulinum neurotoxin of any serotype for any indication within 6months
prior to Day 1 .
21.No clinically significant abnormal vital signs at Day 1.
Contraception
22.Female subjects of childbearing potential must have a negative urine pregnancy test at Day 1
prior to study treatment . 
23.Female subjects of childbearing potential must practice at least 1 protocol -specified method 
of birth control that is effective from study drug administration (Day 1 )through a minimum of
60 days or until last study follow -up visit, whichever is longer . Female subjects of 
nonchildbearing potential do not need to use birth control.
24.Female subject who is not pregnant or breastfeeding and is not considering becoming 
pregnant or donating eggs from study drug administration (Day 1) through a minimum of
60days after study drug administration or until last study follow -up visit, whichever is longer.
Concomitant Medications or Procedures
25.No anticipated need for treatment with botulinum toxin of any serotype for any indication 
during the study (other than study drug).
26.No anticipated need for surgery or overnight hospitalization d uring the study.
Page 13 of 59 

STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
27.No plans for an extended absence away from the immediate area of the study site that 
would preclude them from returning for all protocol -specified study visits.
28.In the investigator' s opinion, subject is able and wil ling to maintain his or her standardized 
skin care regimen throughout the study period.
29.Subject must not have been treated with any investigational drug within 30 days or 5 half -
lives of the drug (whichever is longer) prior to the first dose of study drug or is currently enrolled 
in another clinical study or was previously enrolled in this study.
5.2 Contraception Recommendations
Contraception Requirements for Females
Subjects must follow the following contraceptive guidelines as specified:
Females , Non- Childbearing Potential
Females do not need to use birth control during or following study drug treatment if considered 
of non -childbearing potential due to meeting any of the following criteria:
1.Premenopausal female with permanent sterility or per manent infertility due to one of the 
following:
Permanent sterility due to a hysterectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, bilateral 
oophorectomy .
Non -surgical permanent infertility due to Mullerian agenesis, androgen insensitivity, or 
gonadal dysgenesis; investi gator discretion should be applied to determining study entry 
for these individuals.
2.Postmenopausal female
A postmenopausal state is defined as no menses for 12 months without an alternative 
medical cause.
Ahigh follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) level in the postmenopausal range may be 
used to confirm a postmenopausal state in women not using hormonal 
contraception or hormone replacement therapy. However, in the absence of 
12months of amenorrhea, confirmation with more than 1 FSH measurement is 
requir ed.
Females on hormone replacement therapy and whose menopausal status is in 
doubt, as determined by the investigator, will be required to use one of the 
non-hormonal (highly) effective contraception methods if they wish to continue 
their hormone replaceme nt therapy during the study. Otherwise, they must 
discontinue hormone replacement therapy to allow confirmation of 
postmenopausal status before study enrollment.
Page 14 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Females, of Childbearing Potential
Females of childbearing potential must avoid pregnancy from study drug administration 
(Day 1) through a minimum of 60 days after the last dose or until last study follow -up visit , 
whichever is longer.
Females must commit to one of the following methods of birth control:
Combined (estrogen and progestogen conta ining) hormonal birth control (oral, 
intravaginal, transdermal, injectable) associated with inhibition of ovulation- initiated at 
least 30 days prior to Day 1.
Progestogen -only hormonal birth control (oral, injectable, implantable) associated with 
inhibitio n of ovulation initiated at least 30 days prior to Day 1.
Bilateral tubal occlusion/ligation (can be via hysteroscopy, provided a 
hysterosalpingogram confirms success of the procedure).
Intrauterine device (IUD).
Intrauterine hormone -releasing system.
Vase ctomized partner (provided the partner has received medical confirmation of the 
surgical success of the vasectomy and is the sole sexual partner of the trial subject).
Practice true abstinence, defined as:  Refraining from heterosexual intercourse when 
this is in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject (periodic abstinence 
[e.g., calendar, ovulation, symptothermal, post -ovulation methods] and withdrawal are 
not acceptable).
Progestogen -only oral hormonal contraception, where inhibition of ovulation is not the 
primary mode of action, initiated at least 30 days prior to Day 1.
Male or female condom with or without spermicide.
Cap, diaphragm, or sponge with spermicide.
A combination of male condom with cap, diaphragm, or sponge with spermicid e (double 
barrier method).
Contraception recommendations related to use of concomitant therapies prescribed should be based on 
the local label.
5.3 Prohibited Medications and Procedures
The decision to administer a prohibited medication/treatment during the s tudy period is done with the 
safety of the subject as the primary consideration. When possible, the sponsor is to be notified before 
the prohibited medication/treatment is administered.
In addition to the medications listed in the eligibility criteria, no other facial cosmetic procedures or 
treatments are to be performed throughout the duration of the study. Prohibited treatments and 
procedures include, but are not limited to:
Page 15 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.All other investigational drugs are prohibited. 
5.4 Prior and Concomitant Procedures
Any medication or vacci ne (including over -the-counter or prescription medicines, vitamins, and/or 
herbal supplements) that the subject is receiving at the time of enrollment or receives d uring the study 
must be recorded from 30 days prior to the study drug administration through the study exit . See below 
for details on special handling for the COVID -19 vaccine.
The use of any medication during the study (including prescription or over -the-counter medication, 
vitamins, and/or herbal supplements) is to be recorded on the subject's electronic case report form 
(eCRF) at each visit along with the reason the medication is taken, dates of use, and dosing regimen. 
Concomitant medications and concurrent procedures will also be collected at each visit. 
Study site personnel should notify th e sponsor immediately if a subject uses a concomitant medication 
or has a concurrent procedure that is prohibited per protocol (see Section 5.3). Subjects who use 
prohibited concomitant medications or have a prohibited concurrent procedure may be discontinued at 
the discretion of the investigator or sponsor. Concomitant medications and concurrent procedures will 
be tabulated and listed. 
Non -live vaccines may be used during the study, if not contraindicated or medically inappropriate. When 
possible, study drug should be given at least ± 7 days from vaccine administration.
Co-administration of aminoglycosides or agents that could interfere with neuromuscular transmiss ion 
(e.g., curare -like agents) or muscle relaxants are to be used with caution as the effects of the toxin, 
theoretically, could be potentiated.
Page 16 of 59 

STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Systemic and topical hormones and their derivatives ( e.g., sex steroids -androgens, estrogens, 
progesterone) s hould be maintained throughout the study period to avoid changes in skin, including but 
not limited to:
Oral birth control
IUDs/implants/injections
Oral supplements including testosterone & estrogens and their derivatives, 
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), etc.
Topicals (anywhere on the body) including testosterone & estrogens and their derivatives, 
DHEA, etc.
Androgel, Axiron, Testim, Fortesta, Vogelxo
Emepelle (methyl estradiolpropanoate), Rejuvenate, All Natural Bioidentical Estradiol, Emerita 
Phytoestrog en
Subjects should maintain their skin care regimen throughout the study period.
Any questions regarding concomitant or prior procedures should be raised to the AbbVie non -
emergency contact . Information regarding potential drug interactions with BOTOX Cosmetic can be 
located in the BOTOX Cosmetic Investigator 's Brochure.
Subjects must be able to safely discontinue any prohibited medications as described in the eligibility 
criteria. Subjects must consent to the study prior to discontinuing any prohibited medications for the 
purpose of meeting study eligibility.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Vaccination Guidance
Select non -live vaccines (e.g., messenger ribonucleic acid , non -replicating viral vector, protein subunit , 
etc.) to prevent SARS- CoV-2 infection may be administered during the study , as long as components of 
the vaccine are not contraindicated.
The decision to receive a locally available vaccine should be based on local guidance and an individual 
discussio n between the treating physician and the subject.
The potential impact of BOTOX Cosmetic on SARS- CoV-2 vaccination is unknown . Therefore, study drug 
should be administered as follows :
Study drug is preferred to be administered, when possible, at least ± 14days from the 
SARS -CoV-2 vaccine administration.
Note: The above guidance applies to all SARS -CoV-2 vaccine doses given as part of the complete 
vaccination course.
These recommendations may be subject to change based on the evolving knowledge around the use of 
SARS -CoV-2 vaccines and as more data are collected in real -world scenarios and clinical trials.
Page 17 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Any SARS -CoV-2 vaccine information must be documented on the COVID -19 vaccine eCRF. Refer to the 
Operations Manual for instructions on reporting any AEs associated with the COVID -19 vaccine.
5.5 Withdrawal of Subjects and Discontinuation of Study
A subject may voluntarily withdraw or be withdrawn from the study at any time for reasons including, 
but not limited to, the following:  
The investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject.
The subject requests withdrawal from the study.
Subject is significantly noncompliant with study procedures.
This is a single treatment study. Treatment will be administered on Day 1 only. In case of pregnancy or 
AE during the study after study treatment is provided, the subject should continue in the study for 
safety follow -up.
In case the subject has a desire to end his/her participation, or is discontinued for any reason, the Early 
Exit Visit procedures should b e completed.
For subjects to be considered lost to follow -up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain 
information on the subject's final status . At a minimum, 2 telephone calls must be made and 1 certified 
letter must be sent and documented in the subject's source documentation.
AbbVie may terminate this study prematurely, either in its entirety or at any site . The investigator may 
also stop the study at his/her site if he/she has safety concerns . If AbbVie terminates the study for safety 
reasons, A bbVie will promptly notify the investigator.
COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Acceptable Protocol Modification
During the COVID -19 pandemic, it has been necessary to employ mitigation strategies to enable the 
investigator to ensure subject safety and continuity of care . Acceptable mitigation strategies are 
identified and included in the Operations Manual (Appendix E).
The investigator should contact the sponsor 's non -emerg ency medical contact before discontinuing a 
subject from the study for a reason other than described in the protocol to ensure all acceptable 
mitigation steps have been explored.
5.6 Follow -Up After Subject Discontinuation of Study Drug or from 
Study
To minimi ze missing data for efficacy and safety assessments, subjects should continue to be followed 
for all regularly scheduled visits, unless subjects have decided to discontinue the study participation 
entirely (withdrawal of informed consent). Subjects should be advised on the continued scientific 
importance of their data.
Page 18 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.If a subject prematurely discontinues study participation (withdrawal of informed consent), the 
procedures outlined for the Early Exit visit should be completed as soon as possible, preferabl y within 
2weeks. In addition, if subject is willing, a 30 -day follow -up phone call after the last dose of study drug 
may be completed to ensure all treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs)/serious adverse events 
(SAEs) have been resolved.
5.7 Study Drug
Stud y drugs refer to drugs that are used (or can be used) in this study to assess the safety and the 
efficacy of the Investigational Product . Investigators will assess the relationship of adverse events to the 
use of study drugs. 
Study drug will be provided by AbbVie and administered on Day 1, and subjects will not be retreated 
(Table 1).
Table 1. Study Drug Information
ProductMode of 
Administration Formulation Total Treatment Dose Manufacturer
BOTOX Cosmetic
(100 U/vial)Intramuscular 
InjectionPowder for 
solution64 U Allergan
Study drug provided by AbbVie should not be substituted or alternately sourced unless otherwise 
directed by AbbVie. Upon receipt, study drug should be stored as specified on the package insert and 
kept in a secure location. Study drug will only be used for the conduct of this study.
Additional information regarding the study drug and administration is available in the Operations 
Manual ( Appendix E).
5.8 Randomization/Dru g Assignment
All subjects who provide informed consent will be assigned a unique subject identification number at 
the Day 1 visit. For subjects who rescreen, the subject identification number assigned at the initial Day 1 
visit should be used.
Randomizatio n is not applicable since this is an open -label study.
5.9 Protocol Deviations
AbbVie does not allow intentional/prospective deviations from the protocol except when necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects . The investigator is responsible for complying with all 
protocol requirements, written instructions, and applicable laws regarding protocol deviations. If a 
protocol deviation occurs (or is identified, including those that may be due to the COVID -19 pandemic ), 
the investigator is respons ible for notifying IEC/IRB, regulatory authorities (as applicable), and AbbVie.
Page 19 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.10 Data Monitoring Committee
A data monitoring committee is not planned for this study . 
6SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Complaints and Adverse Events
Complaints
A complaint is any written, electronic, or oral communication that alleges deficiencies related to the 
physical characteristics, identity, quality, purity, potency, durability, reliability, safety, effectiveness, or 
performance of a product/device . Complaints associated with any component of this investigational 
product must be reported to AbbVie.
Product Complaint
A product complaint is any complaint related to the biologic or drug component of the product or to the 
medical device component(s).
For a product this may include , but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, labeling discrepancies/inadequacies in the 
labeling/instructions (e.g., printing illegible), missing components/product, device damage or not 
working properly, or packaging issues.
Product complaints concerning the investigational product and/or device must be reported to AbbVie 
within 24 hours of the study site's knowledge of the event.
Reporting will be done via electronic data capture (EDC) . The date the product complaint details are 
entered into EDC and the form is saved represents the date reported to AbbVie . A back -up paper form 
will be provided for reporting complaints related to unassigned product or in the event of an EDC system 
issue . If a back -up paper form is used, the date the form is emailed to RD_PQC_QA@abbvie.com 
represents the date reported to AbbVie.
All follow -up information is to be reported to the sponsor (or an authorized representative) and 
documented in sourc e as required by the sponsor. Product complaints associated with AEswill be 
reported in the study summary . All other complaints will be monitored on an ongoing basis . Product 
complaints occurring during the study will be followed up to a satisfactory conc lusion.
Medical Complaints/Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
An AE is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation subject 
administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal relat ionship with 
this treatment. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal 
(investigational) product, regardless of whether the e vent is considered causally related to the use of 
the product.
Page 20 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Such an event can result from use of the drug as stipulated in the protocol or labeling, as well as from 
"special situations "such as accidental or intentional overdose, medication error, occup ational or 
accidental exposure, off -label use, drug abuse, drug misuse, or drug withdrawal, all which must be 
reported whether associated with an AEor not . Any worsening of a pre -existing condition or illness is 
considered an AE. Worsening in severity of a reported AEshould be reported as a new AE. Laboratory 
abnormalities and changes in vital signs are considered to be AEs only if they result in discontinuation 
from the study, necessitate therapeutic medical intervention, and/or if the investigator considers them 
to be AEs.
The investigators will monitor each subject for clinical and laboratory evidence of AEs on a routine basis 
throughout the study. All AEs will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion.
An elective surgery/proced ure scheduled to occur during a study will not be considered an AE if the 
surgery/procedure is being performed for a pre -existing condition and/or the surgery/procedure has 
been pre -planned prior to study entry. However, if the pre -existing condition deter iorates unexpectedly 
during the study (e.g., surgery performed earlier than planned), then the deterioration of the condition 
for which the elective surgery/procedure is being done will be considered an AE.
If an AE, whether associated with study drug or n ot, meets any of the following criteria, it is to be 
reported to AbbVie clinical pharmacovigilance as a SAE within 24 hours of the site being made aware of 
the SAE (refer to Section 4.2 of the Operations Manual for reporting details and contact information ):
Death of Subject An event that results in the death of a subject.
Life-Threatening An event that, in the opinion of the investigator, would have 
resulted in immediate fatality if medical intervention had not been 
taken . This does not include an event t hat would have been fatal if it 
had occurred in a more severe form.
Hospitalization or 
Prolongation of 
HospitalizationAn event that results in an admission to the hospital for any length 
of time or prolongs the subject's hospital stay . This does not include 
an emergency room visit or admission to an outpatient facility.
Congenital Anomaly An anomaly detected at or after birth, or any anomaly that results in 
fetal loss.
Persistent or Significant 
Disability/IncapacityAn event that results in a condit ion that substantially interferes with 
the activities of daily living of a study subject . Disability is not 
intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
significance such as headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, 
and accidental tra uma (e.g., sprained ankle).
Page 21 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Important Medical Event 
Requiring Medical or Surgical 
Intervention to Prevent 
Serious OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately life -
threatening or result in death or hospitalization but based on 
medical ju dgment may jeopardize the subject and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent any of the outcomes 
listed above ( e.g., death of subject, life threatening, hospitalization, 
prolongation of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or
significant disability/incapacity) . Additionally, any elective or 
spontaneous abortion or stillbirth is considered an important 
medical event along with any suspected transmission of an 
infectious agent via a medicinal product if no other serious criterio n
is applicable . Examples of such events include allergic bronchospasm 
requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, 
blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient 
hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug 
abuse.
All adverse events from the time of study drug administration will be collected for at least 30 days or 
until the last follow -up visit, whichever is longer, whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the 
subject . After 30 days following t he last dose of study drug or last follow -up visit, whichever is longer, 
only spontaneously reported SAEs will be collected (nonserious AEs will not be collected) . In addition, 
study procedure -related serious and nonserious adverse events will be collected from the time the 
subject signs the study -specific informed consent.
The following definitions will be used for Serious Adverse Reactions (SAR) and Suspected Unexpected 
Serious Adverse Reaction (SUSAR):
SAR Defined as all noxious and unintended responses to an Investigational medicinal 
product (IMP) related to any dose administered that result in an SAE as defined 
above.
SUSAR Refers to individual SAE case reports from clinical trials where a causal 
relation ship between the SAE and the IMP was suspected by either the sponsor 
or the investigator, is unexpected (not listed in the applicable Reference Safety 
Information) and meets one of the above serious criteria .
AbbVie will be responsible for SUSAR reportin g for the IMP in accordance with global and local 
requirements.
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special interest that may 
indicate a trend or risk to subjects.
Adverse Event Severity and Relationship to Study Drug
The investigators will rate the severity of each AEas mild, moderate, or severe.
The investigator will use the following definitions to rate the severity of each AE:
Page 22 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Mild The adverse event is transient and easily tolerated by the subject.
Moderate The adverse event causes the subject discomfort and interrupts the subject's 
usual activities.
Severe The adverse event causes considerable interference with the subject's usual 
activities and may be incapacitating or life threatening.
The investigator will use the following definitions to assess the relationship of the AE to the use of study 
drug:
Reasonable 
PossibilityAfter consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, t here is 
sufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
No Reasonable 
PossibilityAfter consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes, there is 
insufficient evidence (information) to suggest a causal relationship.
Pregnancy
While not an AE, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site 
becomes aware of the pregnancy . Subjects who become pregnant during the study will be encouraged 
to remain in the study for follow -up through study exit but will receive no further treatment with the 
study drug. If a pregnancy occurs in a study subject, information regarding the pregnancy and the 
outcome will be collected. Partner pregnancy information will not be collected.
The pregnancy outcome of an elective or spontaneous abortion, stillbirth or congenital anomaly is 
considered a SAE and must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site becomes aware of the 
event.
Possible Distant Spread of Toxin
Possible distant spread of toxin (PDSOT) is defined as a possible pharmacologic effect of botulinum toxin 
at sites noncontiguous and distant from the site of injection . Utilizing a standardized methodology to 
assess for PD SOT, MedDRA preferred terms (PTs) that may be associated with botulinum toxin effects 
have been prospectively identified (see the statistical analysis plan [SAP] for a complete list of these 
PTs). Adverse events reporting any of these terms will be medical ly reviewed on a regular basis 
throughout the study and will be summarized in the clinical study report.
7STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE
7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
The statistical methods provided in this protocol will be focused on primary and secondary efficacy
endpoints. Complete and specific details of the statistical analysis will be described in the SAP. 
Page 23 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.2 Definition for Analysis Populations
The mITT population includes all enrolled subjects who receive the total dose of 64 U of BOTOX 
Cosmetic, as described in this study protocol . 
The Safety Analysis Set consists of all subjects who receive at least 1 injection of study drug. 
7.3 Handling Potential Intercurrent Events for the Primary and 
Secondary Efficacy Endpoints
Observed data will be used without imputation, so subjects who have an intercurrent event resulting in 
not having a Day 30 assessment for any reason will not be included. Intercurrent events include :
Subjects who are enrolled but do not receive the total do se of 64 U of BOTOX Cosmetic, as 
described in this study protocol
Subjects who are enrolled but prematurely discontinue the study before the Day 30 assessment 
Subjects who die before the Day 30 assessment
Subjects who are lost to follow -up and are missing Day 30 data for the endpoint
Subjects who continue in the study beyond Day 30, but are missing the Day 30 assessment for 
any reason 
7.4 Statistical Analyses for Efficacy
Summary and Analysis of the Primary Endpoint
Analysis of the primary endpoint will be c onducted based on mITT population. No formal statistical 
testing will be performed, and descriptive statistics will be tabulated. Observed data will be used 
without imputation.
Summary and Analysis of Secondary and Additional Endpoint s
Analysis of the secondary and additional endpoint swill be conducted based on mITT population . 
Descriptive statistics will be tabulated and o bserved data will be used without imputation.
Additional details will be provided in the SAP.
7.5 Statistical Analyses for Safety
The s afety analyses will be performed using the safety population. For each safety endpoint evaluating 
change from baseline, the last non- missing safety assessment before study drug administration will be 
used as the baseline for all analyses of that endpoint.
Page 24 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Treatment -emergent AEs (TEAEs) are defined as any AE with the onset that is after the first dose of 
study drug . Events in which the onset date is the same as the study drug start date are assumed to be 
treatment -emergent, unless known to have started prior to study drug administration.
An overview of AEs will be presented consisting of the number and percentage of subjects experiencing 
at least one event for each of the following AE categories:
Any TEAE
Any TEAE related to study treatment according to the i nvestigator
Any TEAE related to study drug according to the investigator
Any TEAE related to study procedure according to the investigator
Any mild TEAE
Any mild TEAE related to study treatment according to the investigator
Any moderate TEAE
Any moderate TEAE related to study treatment according to the investigator
Any severe TEAE
Any severe TEAE related to study treatment according to the investigator
Any serious TEAE
Any serious TEAE related to study treatment according to the investigator
Any TEAE leadi ng to death
Any PDSOT TEAE
All deaths
Treatment -emergent adverse events will be summarized by system organ class (SOC) and PT; for TEAEs 
related with reasonable possibility to study treatment (including study drug related and study procedure 
related) as assessed by the investigator bySOC and PT; formaximum severity bySOC and PT; and for
subject number sbySOC and PT . Specific TEAEs will be counted once for each subject for calculating 
percentages, unless stated otherwise . In addition, if the same AEoccurs multiple times within a subject, 
the highest severity and level of relationship to study treatment will be reported.
Treatment -emergent SAEs (including deaths) will be summarized by SOC and PT. All SAEs will be 
provided in listing format.
Possible dist ant spread of toxin TEAEs will be identified in the SAP and summarized by PT.
7.6 Interim Analysis
Not applicable for this study.
Page 25 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.7 Overall Type I Error Control
Not applicable for this study.
7.8 Sample Size Determination
No formal sample size calculation was performed.
For a conservative expected proportion of 75% for the primary endpoint (proportion of subjects 
reporting Mostly satisfied orVery satisfied on the FLSQ Follow -up Item 4 at Day 30), a sample size of 100 
subjects in the study is required for an adjusted logit -based 95% binomial confidence interval to have a 
width of 16.8% (interval is 75 % –9.1% to 75 % +7.7% with recommended correction of –1/2).9
8ETHICS
8.1 Independent Ethics Committee/Institutional Review Board 
(IEC/IRB)
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all subje ct materials will be 
submitted to the IEC/IRB for review and approval . Approval of both the protocol and the informed 
consent form(s) must be obtained before any subject is enrolled . Any amendment to the protocol will 
require review and approval by the IEC /IRB before the changes are implemented to the study . In 
addition, all changes to the consent form(s) will be IEC/IRB approved.
8.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, Operations Manual, International Counc il 
for Harmonisation (ICH) guidelines, applicable regulations, and guidelines governing clinical study 
conduct and the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki. The 
responsibilities of the investigator are specified in Appendix B.
In the event a significant disaster/crisis (e.g., epidemic/pandemic, natural disaster, conflict/combat) 
occurs leading to difficulties in performing protoco l-specified procedures, AbbVie may engage with 
study site personnel in efforts to ensure the safety of subjects, maintain protocol compliance, and 
minimize risks to the integrity of the study while trying to best manage subject continuity of care. This 
may include alternative methods for assessments (e.g., phone contacts or virtual site visits), and 
alternative locations for data collection (e.g., use of a local lab instead of a central lab). In all cases, these 
alternative measures must be allowed by local regulations and permitted by IRB/IEC. Investigators 
should notify AbbVie if any urgent safety measures are taken to protect the subjects against any 
immediate hazard.
Page 26 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.8.3 Subject Confidentiality
To protect subjects' confidentiality, all subjects and their ass ociated samples will be assigned numerical 
study identifiers or "codes."  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie.
9SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM 
COMPLETION
The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legi bility, and timeliness of the 
data reported. All source documents should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, 
accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data. Clinical site monitoring is conducted 
to ensure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data 
are accurate, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the 
currently approved protocol, ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable l ocal regulatory 
requirement(s). During the COVID -19 pandemic, remote data review/verification may be employed if 
allowed by the local regulatory authority, IRB/IEC, and the study site.
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE
AbbVie will ensure that the clinical trial is c onducted with a quality management system that will define 
quality tolerance limits in order to ensure human subject protection and reliability of study results. Data 
will be generated, documented, and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP, and applicable 
regulatory requirements.
11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end- of-study is defined as the date of last visit of the last subject in the study.
12 REFERENCES
1.BOTOX® (onabotulinumtoxinA) Prescribing Information. (Revised May, 2018): Allergan, Inc;  
[Available from: http://www.allergan.com/assets/pdf/botox_pi.pdf.
2.BOTOX COSMETIC® Product Monograph. (Revised June, 2020): Allergan, Inc;  [Available from: 
https://allergan -web -cdn-
prod.azureedge.net/allergancanadaspecialty/allerg ancanadaspecialty/media/actavis -canada -
specialty/en/products/pms/2020 -06-29-botox -cosmetic -product -monograph.pdf.
3.Martinez L, Falvello VB, Aviezer H, et al. Contributions of facial expressions and body language to the 
rapid perception of dynamic emotions. Cogn Emot. 2016;30(5):939 -52.
4.Bale C, Archer J. Self -perceived attractiveness, romantic desirability and self- esteem: a mating 
sociometer perspective. Evol Psychol. 2013;11(1):68 -84.
Page 27 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.Molina B, David M, Jain R, et al. Patient Satisfaction and Effic acy of Full -Facial Rejuvenation Using a 
Combination of Botulinum Toxin Type A and Hyaluronic Acid Filler. Dermatol Surg. 2015;41 Suppl 
1:S325 -32.
6.Weinkle SH, Werschler WP, Teller CF, et al. Impact of Comprehensive, Minimally Invasive, 
Multimodal Aesthet ic Treatment on Satisfaction With Facial Appearance: The HARMONY Study. 
Aesthet Surg J. 2018;38(5):540 -56.
7.Dayan S, Rivkin A, Sykes JM, et al. Aesthetic Treatment Positively Impacts Social Perception: Analysis 
of Subjects From the HARMONY Study. Aesthet Surg J. 2019;39(12):1380 -9.
8.De Boulle K, Werschler WP, Gold MH, et al. Phase 3 Study of OnabotulinumtoxinA Distributed 
Between Frontalis, Glabellar Complex, and Lateral Canthal Areas for Treatment of Upper Facial 
Lines. Dermatol Surg. 2018;44(11):1437 -48.
9.Edwardes M. The evaluation of confidence sets with application to binomial intervals. Stat Sin. 
1998;8(2):393 -409.
Page 28 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A.STUDY -SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
AE adverse event
AGLSS Allergan Glabellar Line Severity Scale
COVID -19 coronavirus disease 2019
DHEA dehydroepiandrosterone
eCRF electronic case report form
EDC electronic data capture
FDA Food and Drug Administration
FHL forehead lines
FHLSS Forehead Line Severity Scale
FLSQ Facial Line Satisfaction Questionnaire
FSH follicle -stimulating hormone
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GL glabellar lines
ICH International Council for Harmonisation
IEC independent ethics committee
IMP investigational medicinal product
IRB institutional review board
IUD intrauterine device
LCL lateral canthal lines
LCLSS Lateral Canthal Line Severity Scale
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
mITT modified intention -to-treat
N/A not applicable
NTEA Neurotoxin Treatment Experience Assessment
PCR polymerase chain reaction
PDSOT possible distant spread of toxin
PRO patient -reported outcome
PT preferred term
RSI reference safety information
SAE serious adverse event
SAP statistical analysis plan
Page 29 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.SAR serious adverse reaction
SARS -CoV-2 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
SOC system organ class
SUSAR suspected unexpected serious adverse reaction
TEAEs treatment -emergent adverse events
U units
UFL upper facial lines
VDS verbal descriptor scale
WOCBP women of childbearing potential
Page 30 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B.RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M22 -974:  A Prospective, Multi -center, Open -label Study to Evaluate Subject Satisfaction and Natural 
Outcomes Following Administration of BOTOX® Cosmetic (Botulinum Toxin Type A) Purified Neurotoxin Complex in 
Subjects with Upper Facial Lines (Glabellar Lines, Lateral Canthal Lines, and Forehead Lines)
Protocol Date:  14 December 2023
Clinical research studies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the International Council for Harmonisation of 
Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and local laws and 
regulations and guidelines governing the study at the site location . In signing the Investigator Agreement, the 
investigator is agreeing to the following :
1. Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GCP, the applicable regulatory requirements, current 
protocol and operations manual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying AbbVie and the 
appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee (IEC), except when necessary 
to protect the subject from immediate harm.
2. Personally conducting or supervising the described investigation(s).
3. Informing all subjects, or persons used as controls, that the drugs are being used for investiga tional 
purposes and complying with the requirements relating to informed consent and ethics committees (e.g., 
IEC or IRB) review and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
4. Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investigation(s) to AbbVi e.
5. Reading the information in the Investigator's Brochure/safety material provided, including the 
instructions for use and the potential risks and side effects of the investigational product(s).
6. Informing all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the study about their 
obligations in meeting the above commitments.
7. Maintaining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records available 
for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, and retaining all 
study -related documents until notification from AbbVie.
8. Maintaining records demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial clinical 
protocol and all of its amendments.
9. Reporting promptly to Abb Vie, the ethics committee/institutional review boards (as required) and other 
appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, institution director):
 All changes in the research activity and all unanticipated problems involving risks to human subjects 
or others
 Any departure from relevant clinical trial law or regulation, GCP, or the trial protocol that has the 
potential to affect the following:
 Rights, safety, physical or mental integrity of the subjects in the clinical trial
 Scientific value of the clinical trial, reliability or robustness of data generated
10. Providing direct access to source data documents for study -related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB review, 
and regulatory inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed)
Page 31 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C.LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES
Name Title Functional Area
Clinical Development
Medical Affairs
Statistic s
Page 32 of 59 

STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX D.ACTIVITY SCHEDULE
The following tables show the required activities across the study. The individual activities are described in detail in 
the Operations Manual (Appendix E). Allowed modifications due to COVID -19 are detailed in the Operations 
Manual.
Page 33 of 59 
STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Page 34 of 59 

STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.
Page 35 of 59 

STUDY M 22-974  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX E.PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Previous Protocol Versions
Protocol Date
Version 1.0 03 June 2022
Version 2.0 26June 2023
The purpose of this version is to correct minor clerical errors for consistency throughout the protocol in 
addition to the following:
1.Protocol (Title Page) and Operations Manual ( Appendix F, Section 1 and Section 4.2) were 
updated to reflect the current Sponsor/emergency medical and non -emergency contact s.
2.Protocol (Section 3.4) and Operations Manual ( Appendix F, Section 3.6) were updated to correct 
measurement of efficacy onset from "Day 1 up to Day 14"to "Day 2 to Day 15."
3.Protocol (Section 4.1) was updated to allow more flexibility in enrollment and to reflect review 
of site data .
4.Protocol (Section 5.1, eligibilit ycriterion #3) was updated for consistency with the Operations 
Manual ( Appendix F, Section 3.1). Eligibility criterion # 8was updated for clarity .
5.Protocol (Section 5.2) was updated to provide additional language for females on hormone 
replacement therapy whose menopausal status is in doubt.
6.Protocol (Section 5.7) and Operations Manual ( Appendix F, Section 6.2, Section 6.3, and 
Section 6.6) were updated, as the study drug will be sourced commercially .
7.Protocol (Section 6.1) was updated to clarify that partner pregnancy information will not be 
collected.
8.Operations Manual ( Appendix F, Section 3. 11) was updated to remove a sentence regarding 
images captured on Day 1. A sentence was added to allow for image collection to be repeated 
within 7 days asneeded.
Page 36 of 59 