 
 
Enhancing Adaptations to Exercise  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
2/25/2021  
Title of the study:  Enhancing Adaptations to Exercise   
Principal Investigator:  Ian R. Lanza, Ph.D.  
Co-investigator(s):  Adrian Vella, M.D., Michael Jensen, M.D., K. Sreekumaran Nair, 
M.D., Ph.D., Eric Polley, Ph.D., Surendra Dasari, Ph.D., Corey Hart, Ph.D. , Hawley 
Kunz, Ph.D.  
IRB approved:  2/25/2021  
 
ABSTRACT  
Many older adults suffer from derangements in skeletal muscle, including mitochondrial 
impairments, oxidative stress, insulin resistance, weakness, and fatigue.   Despite 
evidence implicating inflammation in muscle dysfunction,  a mechanistic link in the 
context of human aging is in early stages of investigation.   The objective here is to 
determine how chronic inflammation influences exercise responsiveness, mitochondrial 
physiology, and metabolic function in skeletal muscle of o lder adults. Our central 
hypothesis is that chronic inflammation originating from inflamed adipose tissue triggers 
local inflammatory responses within skeletal muscle, leading to oxidative stress, 
reduced mitochondrial capacity, compromised muscle quality,  functional and metabolic 
impairments, and attenuated ad aptive responses to exercise . We will test this 
hypothesis through cross -sectional comparisons of older humans grouped by 
inflammation status.  We will also perform a blinded, placebo -controlled study  to 
determine if suppressing chronic inflammation using omega -3 fatty acids  (n3-PUFA)  
restores skeletal muscle function and exercise responsiveness  in older adults . 
 
RESEARCH PLAN  
 
A.  Specific Aims  
Aim 1.   To determine the impact of chronic inflammation o n skeletal muscle 
physiology . 
Hypothesis 1:   chronic inflammation triggers local inflammation within skeletal muscle, 
which provokes mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, protein damage, and 
functional impairments.  
Approach:  Skeletal muscle biochem ical and functional parameters will be compared in 
older adults grouped into quartiles based on a composite systemic inflammatory score 
(CRP, IL -6, TNF -α). Outcomes will be measured again following 2 6 weeks of placebo or 
n3-PUFAs to reduce adipose tissue inflammation.  
 
Aim 2.  To determine the impact of chronic inflammation on responsiveness to 
acute  exercise.  
Hypothesis 2:   Acute exerc ise responsiveness is blunted in older adults with  chronic 
inflammation, but restored when inflammation is reduced.  
Approach:   We will combine conventional molecular techniques with tracer -based 
approaches to evaluate anabolic and metabolic responses to a single bout of exe rcise 
in older adults grouped by inflammation status before and after inflammation is reduced 
by n3 -PUFAs.  Muscle and blood samples collected before and after a single bout of 
exercise will be used to measure anabolic and metabolic responsiveness to exerc ise 
from mRNA of exercise -responsive genes, activation of signaling proteins in muscle, 
and whole -body amino acid kinetics .  Exercise -stimulated anabolic and metabolic 
responsiveness will be evaluated again after reducing inflammation in older adults 
(plac ebo vs. n3 -PUFAs) . 
 
B.  Background  
 2 Many older adults suffer from derangements in skeletal muscle, including mitochondrial 
impairments, oxidative stress, insulin resistance, weakness, and fatigue.  Exercise 
forestalls disease and disability in older adults,  but many (15 -20%) fail to demonstrate 
favorable adaptations even when interventions are painstakingly controlled (1-4). This 
so-called exercise resistance is particularly evident in older adults, who exhibit blunt ed 
anabolic responses to exercise and nutrition (5-7), which likely contributes to sarcopenia 
and attenuates adaptive responses to exercise. Early evidence  shows that clearance of 
inflammatory cells in adipose tiss ue restores mitochondrial function and muscle mass in 
mice.  In humans, we show that responsiveness to acute  exercise is enhanced by 
omega -3 fatty acids (n3 -PUFAs), putative suppressors of chronic inflammation, 
particularly in adipose tissue (8, 9) . Knowledge gap:  Despite evidence implicating 
inflammation in muscle dysfunction, a mechanistic link in the context of human aging is 
in early stages of investigation.  
 
C.  Significance of Proposed Research  
A goal of Healt hy People 2020 is to improve the quality of life of older adults. The 
initiative underscores the importance of physical activity for metabolic health and 
preventing frailty.  In this regard skeletal muscle health is critical, but muscle mass and 
strength a re clearly compromised in older adults (10, 11) .  Sarcopenia is a major factor 
contributing to physical impairment with aging and predictive of disability (12).  Exercise 
is a proven strategy to prevent and r everse sarcopenia, insulin resistance, and related 
complications (13, 14) , but the recommended 150 minutes per week as a lifestyle goal 
is often met with poor adherence or is impractical for people with physical di sability or 
other contraindications to exercise. There is also emerging evidence that the 
adaptations to exercise training are blunted in some people.  For example, there is 
considerably variability in the improvement in cardiorespiratory fitness in respon se to a 
standardized aerobic training program (1, 2) . These findings are in line with the concept 
of “anabolic resistance” whereby some individuals, particularly older adults, exhibit 
blunted increases in muscle pr otein synthesis in response to exercise or nutritional 
stimuli (3, 5, 6, 15, 16)  and attenuated transcriptional responses to acute endurance 
exercise (4). Through a better understanding of the factors that attenuate exercise 
responsiveness, it may be possible to enhance adaptations to exercise in people who 
are “exercise resistant” or are unable to engage in exercise at sufficient intensities or 
volumes required to induce th erapeutic benefit.  Chronic inflammation appears to be a 
factor in exercise resistance based on observations that anabolic responses are 
restored when inflammation is reduced  (17, 18) . Altogether, precedent literat ure and our 
own preliminary data suggest that chronic systemic inflammation is detrimental to 
skeletal muscle and may limit adaptative responses to exercise.  Inasmuch, targeting 
inflammation holds promise for enhancing responses to exercise, particularly under 
conditions of chronic inflammation such as sarcopenia, insulin resistance, type 2 
diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and cancer cachexia.  The following contributions will 
emerge from the proposed work:  
1) Identify mechanistic links between systemic infla mmation, adipose tissue 
inflammation, and local inflammatory responses within aging muscle.  
2) Determine the influence of inflammation on biochemical and functional parameters 
in aging muscle.  
3) Determine if reducing inflammation can enhance the adaptations to acute exercise 
in older humans.  
This contribution is significant because it will provide new fundamental knowledge to 
help understand the origins of metabolic and functional impairments in skeletal muscle 
 3 of older people and how chronic inflammation may be  an effective target to enhance 
therapeutic benefits of exercise.  Such knowledge would be expected to have a positive 
impact on health and quality of life of older adults.  
 
D. Research Design and Methods:  
 
Study Design : Men and women between the ages of 20-35 years (N=30)and 65-85 
years (N=120) will be recruited for this study. Participants in the older age group will be 
randomly assigned to receive n3-PUFA or placebo  (corn oil)  in a double -blind manner.  
Before and after the intervention, all p articipants will complete an outpatient study day 
(body composition, blood draw, treadmill test, strength test) and an inpatient study day 
(muscle biopsies, fat biopsies, indirect calorimetry, exercise test, mixed meal test) as 
described below  in more deta il.  The D HA/EPA and placebo softgels will be supplied by 
Sancilio and Company, Inc. ,Riviera Beach, FL) and stored in the Mayo Clinic Research 
Pharmacy at room temperature. During the intervention phase of the study, participant s 
will be instructed to swal low 2 softgels twice per day with meals (morning and evening) 
for a total of 4 softgels per day.  The DHA/EPA softgels will each contain 675mg of  EPA 
and 300mg of  DHA  for a total daily dosage of 3. 9g/day. The total omega -3 content of 
each capsule is 1050mg , which includes an additional 75mg of “non EPA/DHA” omega -
3 fatty acids.  The total fat content of the capsule will be 1200mg.  This dose of 
EPA?DHA was choosen because it has been shown to augment the anabolic response 
of skeletal muscle [24] Every 4 week s, participants will report to the Clinical Research 
and Trials Unit ( CRTU) to pick up a new prescription and return any remaining capsules 
from the previous prescription.  Remaining pills will be counted to determine 
compliance. The pharmacy will maintain  records of receipt, dispensation, and ret urn pill 
counts for compliance. Unused drug will be incinerated at the end of the study.  On the 
day they pick up prescription refills , participants will report to the CRTU for a fasting 
blood sample to measure liv er function (ALT, AST), coagulation (INR), blood lipid 
profile , glucose, and insulin .  Participants will be withdrawn from the study if INR values 
exceed 2.0, indicating a high chance of bleeding.  Participants will also be withdrawn 
from the study if ALT levels exceed 165IU/L or AST levels exceed 144IU/L .  The 
durati on of the intervention will be 6  months.  
 
Participants:  Our plan is to complete the study on 120 men and women age 65 -85yrs  
and 30 young adults who will only be studied at baseline   We are  anticipating a target 
accrual of 179 subjects to account for an anticipated dropout rate of 20%  in the 
intervention group . 
 
Description of recruitment  methods:  
We will use lists of prior research participants in our lab who have given permission to 
be co ntacted. We w ill use brochures, flyers, radio ads, television ads,  and 
advertisements on the Research Studies section of the Mayo Classifieds . A member of 
the study team  will contact participants by telephone or email with a brief description of 
the st udy and to de termine if they are interested in participating. Brochures, flyers and 
radio ads will include the telephone number  of a study team member .  Participants will 
be asked to call the contact person .  When the call is received, the member of the st udy 
team  will perform a brief screening questionnaire to determine eligibility to proceed with 
enrollment.   The screening questionnaire may also be sent by email in accordance with 
the Research Policy Manual Policy on Electronic Communications with Researc h 
 4 Subjects.  The information gathered from the screening questionnaire will not be stored 
or used for data analysis if participants do not qualify for the study.  
 
 Exclusion criteria:  
1) Regular  use of omega -3 nutritional supplements  
2) Diabetes  or fasting plasm a glucose 126 mg /dL 
3) Anemia (female subjects hemoglobin of <11 g/dl and male subjects hemoglobin 
<12 g/dl ) 
4) Active coronary artery disease  or history of unstable macrovascular disease 
(unstable angina, myocardial infarction, stroke, and revascularization of  coronary, 
peripheral or carotid artery within 3 months of recruitment)  
5) Renal failure (serum creatinine > 1.5mg/dl)  
6) Chronic active liver disease (AST>144IU/L or ALT>165IU/L)  
7) Oral warfarin  group medications  or history of blood clotting disorders.  
8) INR > 2.0 
9) Smoki ng 
10) Pregna ncy or breastfeeding  
11) Alcohol consumption greater than 2 glasses/day  or other substance abuse  
12) Untreated or uncontrolled hypothyroidism  
13) Debilitating chronic disease (at the discretion of the investigators)  
14) Fish or shellfish allergy  
 
Consent and screening: Potential participants will report to the Clinical Research and 
Trials Unit at Mayo Clinic Hospital St. Mary s Campus  the morning after an overnight 
fast.  A member of the study team will meet the potential participant and the consent 
form will b e read and di scussed in private area.  After receiving cons ent, the CRTU staff 
will measure vital signs including blood pressure, heart rate, temperature.  Height and 
weight will be measured.  The participant will undergo  urine pregnancy test (if 
applicabl e) and screen ing blood work that will include CBC, lipid profile, creatinine, liver 
enzymes, TSH, glucose, insulin, blood clotting time (INR) , c-reactive protein, and 
interleukin -6. Participants will be instructed on the use of a physical activity monitor 
(Actigraph), which they will wear for waking hours for a period of two weeks to quantify 
habitual physical activity levels.  Participants will return for two additional blood draws  
and weight  approximately 2 and 4 weeks later to repeat measurements of infl amma tory 
mark ers (CBC, c -reactive protein, interleukin -6). RReconsenting may take place  if study 
is stopp ed due to COVID closure.  The subje ct will be withdrawn from the study a t the 
point where the study stopped . The subject  will be reconsented and start over  from the 
begin ning of the study .   
 
Withdrawn  and Reenrollment  
Two participants were withdrawn from the study due to COVID -19 related closure of the 
clinical research unit.   One participant completed a consent and screening visit 
(baseline blood testing).   Another parti cipant completed consent, screening, and an 
outpatient visit involving DEXA and exercise testing.   Neither participant completed 
baseline inpatient study visits or were randomi zed to study arms.   These participants 
will be re -enrolled, start ing from the be ginning given the amount of time that passed 
since the initial testing and potential drift in measured outcomes.  
 
 
 5 Outpatient testing: At least 4 weeks following the screening visit, participants will 
return for a n outpatient testing session  when they will  provide a third blood sample to 
confirm inflammatory s tatus. Partic ipants wi ll meet with a dietic ian to discuss food 
preferences.  Participants will  undergo measurements of body composition by dual -
energy X -ray a bsorptiometry (DEX A), restin g energy expend iture (REE) by indirect 
calorimetry,  and a graded exerc ise test on a  treadmil l.  Participants will  also be 
habituated to the single -leg exercise that will be used to evaluate acute exercise 
responsiveness. Blood t ests,  REE, DEXA , and treadm ill tests will be repeated after 2 6 
weeks of the n3 -PUFA/placebo inter vention. 
 
Inpatient st udy day:  Participants  will be admitted to the CRTU on the evening of the 
3rd day of a weight -maintaining diet provided by the CRTU metab olic kitchen. The 
weight mai ntenance meals (diet composition: 20% protein, 30% fat, 50% carbohydra te) 
will be m onitored daily to assure corre ct calorie level and that the participants are 
weight -stable. After a standardized meal (10kcal/kg with 50% carbohy drate, 20% 
protein, and 30% fat) at 1800 ho urs on the evening of admission to the CRTU, 
participan ts will remai n fasting  except for water unt il the noon on the following day.  
 
At 0500h infusions of 13C6 phenylalanine at 1.0 mg/kg FFM/h and [15N] tyrosine at 0.5 
mg/kg FFM/h will be s tarted after bo lus of 1.0 mg/kg FFM [13C6] phenylalanine , 0.5 
mg/kg FF M [15N] tyros ine, and 0.5 mg/kg FFM [13C6] tyrosine.   These are stable (non -
radioactive) isotopes. Muscle biopsies from  one v. lateralis  will be obtained at 0830hrs 
for measuring baselin e gene expressi on, protein expression, and mitochondrial function .  
Muscle biopsy s ampl es wi ll be collected under  local anesthesia (2% lidocaine  buffered 
with sodium bicarbonate ) using a modified Bergstrom needle. A single abdom inal 
subcutaneous fat biopsy  will be perfor med at 0830 hrs  under local anesthesia using 
sterile te chnique.  Following th e muscle and fat biop sies (~0900hrs) , participants will 
perform a bout of unaccustomed unilateral knee extension exercise using only the  leg 
without prior biopsies .  Following a w arm-up set, subjects will complete 8 sets of 10 
repetit ions at 70% o f their 1-repetition maximum, determined at least 7 days prior.   A 
second muscle biopsy will be obtained from the exercised leg 3 hours following  exercise 
(~1230hrs) .   
 
Following the seco nd biopsy  (~1300hr) , participants will consume a mixed liquid meal 
containing  15% protein, 55% car bohydrate, and 30% fat, approximately equal to 35% of 
resting energy expenditure  determined from the REE on the out patient study day . 
Arteriali zed blood sampl es will be taken from a heated hand vein for glucose, i nsulin, 
and c -peptide measurements at inter vals over 5 h after the test meal, which will be 
consumed over 10 min. Blood samples will be collected at  30, 20, a nd 10 minutes 
before the mea l and at 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 75, 90, 120, 150, 180, 210,  240, 
260, 28 0, and 30 0 minutes following t he meal. We are collecting and washing red blood 
cells for storage for future testing.   Resting energy expenditure  and respiratory quotient 
will be measured by indirect calorimetry for 30 minutes under postabsorp tive conditio ns 
(0700hrs) and postprandial (1430hrs) . Participants will be given a meal 
from the hospital kitchen at approximately 1800hr before discharge.  
 
The inpatient and 48 hour study day will be  repeated following the 6 
month intervention.   
 6 
Muscle
Bx	
0500	
Blood	 sampling	
Muscle
Bx	0600	 0700	 0800	 0900	 1000	 1100	 1200	 1300	 1400	Isotope	 infusion	
1500	 1600	Resistance
exercise	
Mixed	 meal	 tolerance	 test	
Fat	 Bx	
1700	REE	REE	
1800	 
  
48 hours post -exercise  biopsy : 
Participants will return to the CRTU for an outpati ent study visit involving an  additional 
muscle biopsy from the exercised leg 48 hours following th e single bout  of exerc ise. 
 
Additional Dexa scan  
One subje ct will have an additional D exa scan  due to unforeseen  Covid circumstance s. 
Participant  was withdrawn from the study due to COVID -19 related cl osure of the 
clinical research unit.   Patient completed consent, screening, and an outpatient visit 
involving DEXA and exercise testing.   The participant  will be re -enrolled, start ing from 
the be ginning given the amount of time that passed since the initia l testing and potential 
drift in measured outcomes.   
 
 
Statistical ana lyses and Power:  
For all variables  in aim 1 , the interest is in assessing if the change from baseline to post 
treatment differs by treatment ar m. We will dete rmine the influence of chron ic 
inflammation on these ou tcom es in old er adults  grouped according to  quartiles of a 
composite score inc luding serum CRP and IL -6.  The initial analysis will be stratified by 
inflammat ion composite score quartile s. Within a sub group, the Wilcoxon rank sum  test 
will be applied to te st for differ ence  in the change of outcome value pre and post 
treatment between the two treatment arms, placebo and n3 -PUFAs.  Additionally, 
generalized linea r models will be used to ass ess the effect inflammation has on 
modifyin g the treatment effect by i ncluding inte raction t erms of a smoothing s pline 
functional fit of the composite score with the treatment and time variables. The residuals 
from the regressio n will be used to assess dis tribution assum ptions and variables will be  
transformed if required fo r appropriate  statistical inference. All pa rticipants with at least 
a pre -treatment measurement will be included in the primary analysis utilizing the as -
randomized study arm assignment for comparison.  Efforts will be made to min imize 
missing data, but in the event of missing v alues, characteristic s between those with 
observed values and with missing values will be compared. If no observed differences 
are ident ified, multiple imputation w ill be used wit h the primary analysis.  Pow er 
calculations were perfor med for hypot hese s related to mitochondrial  physiology.  We 
used the preliminary data where we measured effects of EPA on mitochondrial capacity.  
With mean J O2 = 28.9 pmol/s/tissue and σ = 4.891, a sa mple size of 15 per treatmen t 
group within an inflammation quartile gives 80%  power ( α=0.05) to detect a treatment 
difference in the difference from baseline to post treatment of 5.18 pmol/s/tissue (15% 
change).  With 4 inflammation quartile  groups, the to tal sample size will be 120,  with 
 7 balanced randomization that gives 60 for ea ch treatment arm in total. We believe that 
this expected difference is meaningful and realistic because our target population of 
older a dults is known to exhibit re ductions in mit ochondrial capacity, and thi s degree of 
improvement would be physiologically important.  
 
The main outcome variables for specific aim 2 are: 1) mRNA expression of anabolic and 
metabolic signaling genes, 2) expressi on and activation (phosphory lation) of sign aling 
proteins, and 3) whole -body protein turnover .  Hypothesis 2a will be ad dressed using 
the pre -treatment measurements, including a baseline and 3 post -exercise time points 
for all individuals. For each outcome , linear random effects mode ls with time po int and 
the inflammation sco re interaction terms plus a random intercept for each individual will 
be estimated.  The statistical analysis for hypothesis 2b will be similar to specific aim 1, 
wherein regression mod els will be estimated for ea ch outcome vari able and include an 
interact ion term between assigned treatment arm and the i nflammation score.  Missing 
data and loss to follow -up will be handled as described above in aim 1. Power 
calculations were performed us ing the  preliminary data in  which protein s ynthesis was 
measured using the same exercise protocol proposed in this aim. We utilized a linear 
random intercept model with a baseline and 3 post intervention time point and assuming 
an exchangeable correlation matrix with pairwise correla tion of 0.7 wit hin an individual 
between ti me points. With σ = 0.025 %/hr, a sample size of 30 per inflammation group 
gives 80% power ( α=0.05) to detect a 0.028 %/hr slope change between inflammation 
groups in muscle protein syn thesis in response to exerci se.  We believe  that this 
minimal detectabl e difference is meaningf ul, realistic, and conservative.  
 8 Human Subjects  
  
1. Risks to the subjects  
 
Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics :  All protocols and all techniques 
to be used will be approved b y the Mayo Clin ic Institutional Review Boar d prior to 
initiation of any studies. Subject characteristics and exclusion criteria have been clearly 
specified above. All women of child bearing potential will have a negative pregnan cy 
test within 24 hours of t he study and wi ll be advised to refrain fro m conception for  at 
least two months after the study.  No children will be studied. All subjects will be weight 
stable before enrolling in the study. Our plan i s to complete the study o n 135 
particip ants.  
    
Sources of Materia ls: Samples of blood, skelet al muscle , and a dipose tissue  obtained 
during the study will be used exclusively for research purposes. Data on body 
composition will be used only for research. No use will be made of p re-existing 
specimens.  
 
Musc le tissue:  Two or three  muscle biops ies (~300mg each) will be obtained during 
each  inpatient study visit.  
Blood: 1 blood draw will occur during the screening visit  (approximately 15ml).  Each 
inpatient study will require 48 blo od draws (approx 407mL blood ). All specimen s will be 
processed internal ly and stored in  the study team laboratory.  
Adipose tissue :  One subcutaneous abdominal fat biopsy (2 -3g) will be obtained during 
each  inpatient visit.  
 
Potential Risks:  The following  are the potential risks for  this study:  
 
a) Blood will be withdrawn. T he total blood w ithdrawn will not exceed 550m L in a 12 -
week period . Hemoglobin measured before starting the study will be within safe limits as 
decided by the investigators. All subject s will refrain from giving b lood twelve  weeks 
prior to the study and un til twelve  weeks  after the completion of the study.  
 
b) DEXA will be completed on all subjects for all specific aims. The radiation exposure 
from this technique is within the safe limit s as determined by the Radia tion Safety 
Com mittee of our institution.  Scans are done on  the Lunar iDXA, software version 11.4  
(General Electric Company, GE Healthcare Technologies, Madison, WI). This can be 
done with sufficiently low radiation exposure tha t pregnancy testing is not r equired.  
 
c)  V ascular catheters will be pl aced.  Catheter insertion, intravenous infusion and blood 
withdrawal are associated with a small risk of phlebitis.  This will be minimized by 
careful attention to sterile technique.  I f phlebitis occurs, it will be treated cons ervatively 
with heat and whe n appropriate, w ith antibiotics. In all experiments, “arterialized – 
venous” blood will be obtained by placing a hand in which a catheter has been inserted 
in a heated box during the st udy.  The temperature inside  the box is mai ntained at 
~55C.  With prol onged exposure t o continuous heat, there is a potential risk of local 
skin irritation or a minor burn.  If this occurs, it will be treated appropriately. However we 
have used this techn ique for the past 18 years a nd have had no instances of hot box -
related  burns or injuri es. The potential risks of catheters and hot box use will be 
discussed with the volunteers prior to obtaining consent for the study.  
 9  
d) Muscle biopsies will be performe d with a percutaneous biopsy  needle  by the PI or an 
appropriately -trained member of his  study team in accordance with approval from the 
Research Resources Executive Committee .  Local subcutaneous injection of 2% 
lidocaine buffered with 8.4% sodium bicarbon ate will be used for analges ia.  A small 
incision will be made through the skin and fas cia.  After the biopsy, pressure will be held 
over the incision until hemostasis is achieved.  The incision is closed with steri le strips, 
gauze and Ace wrap.  Risks of this procedure include hemat oma, infection,  and pain.  
Hematoma likelih ood is minimized  by holding pressure after the biopsy to ensure 
hemostasis, followed by a pressure dressing.  Risk of infection is minimized by using 
sterile surgical techniques.  Pain is managed by local analgesi a during the pr ocedure 
and Tylenol followin g the procedure.  
 
e)  Whole -body cardiorespiratory fitness will be evaluated by a graded exercise test on 
a treadmill .  Risks include chest pain, arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, and  
hyperventilation syndrome.  We will monito r these risks by having only  trained 
personn el with CPR training performing the testing.  Continuous ECG and blood 
pressure monitoring will be performed a minimum of every 2 minutes during the test and 
5 minutes f ollowing the test.  Pretest history and phy sical examination will be pe rformed 
with emp hasis on signs and symptoms of cardiac , vascular or pulmonary disease .  
Levels of perceived exertion with be asked every 2 minutes.  Emergency resuscitation 
equipment an d drugs and telephone to act ivate code team  are in testing room.  Attent ion 
to exercise test end points will be made.    
 
f)  Fat biopsies will be taken from the abdomen.  The risks of these procedures include 
pain, hematomas, bruising, infection, and scarin g of the biopsy site.  The r isk of pain 
and bruising from adipose tissu e biopsies is hi gh, and the volunteers are given this 
information. We reduce the risk of infection by performing all biopsies under sterile 
conditions. Nonetheless, each volunteer is to ld of the signs symptoms of infection and i s 
told to call the study coo rdinator immedia tely should any of they occur. A record is kept 
of all adverse reactions to biopsies. If an increase in the number of adverse reactions 
relative to historical controls i s observed during the course  of a particula r study a careful 
assessment  of technique an d approaches is made. The protocol might then be modified 
or additional instruction or supervision of the individual performing the biopsies could be 
undertaken. The sub sequent results are then aud ited to determi ne how effective the 
interve ntion has been.  
 
2.  Adequacy of Protection against Risks  
Feasibility, Recruitment  and Informed Consent:  Volunteers will be initially recruited  
from individuals who have previously indi cated a desire to participat e in research. 
Volunteers will be recruited  from advertisem ents placed on the Mayo Clinic and 
appropriate Mayo Health System (MHS) bulletin boards, electronic bulletin boards, in 
local newspapers and the Mayo Health System Newsl etter.   Each willing partic ipant will 
meet  one of the investigators wh o will explain t he scientific rationale of the study, the 
procedures and potential risks involved in the study.  The consent form will be approved 
by Mayo IRB prior to use.  Informed wr itten consent from the parti cipant will be obtained 
by one of the inves tigators prior t o participation.  An electronic note will be entered in 
each participant’s medical record regarding the consent and a copy of the consent will 
be electronically kept wit h the participant’s medical record.  A copy  of the consent will 
be give n to the subject  and the original kept with the investigators records.  
 10  
Protection against Risk:  All protocols and all techniques to be used will be approved 
by the Mayo Clinic Institut ional Review Board prior to initiation of a ny studies.  All 
participant s will have the Mayo Clinic paging operator available to them 24 hours a day 
to contact the investigators for any problems.  The Clinical Research Unit also has an 
on-call physician ava ilable 24 hours a day to con tact for proble ms or concerns.  The 
followi ng protection wi ll be taken for the risks identified above:  
 
1. Intravenous risks will be minimized by having experienced CRTU  staff place the 
lines and infusing 0.9% normal saline through out the study to decrease th e risk of 
phleb itis or occlusion.   
2. All inf usions will be p repared in the pharmacy or by a trained nurse or doctor to 
ensure accuracy of all infusion concentrations and rates.  
3. The amount of blood drawn is within the amounts acce ptable by the institution.  
There is an ins titutional electronic tracki ng system to ens ure that a patient is not in 
more than one study at a time.   
4. The Radiation Safety Committee will approve the study for radiation safety of the 
Lunar iDXA scan.  
5. A DSMP w ill be utilized for patient safety.  A DSMB  is not necessary for the st udy. 
Investigato rs and the CRTU  have had extensive experience in all procedures and 
aspects of the study.  The investigative team will review any participant safety issues 
as delineated  in the DSMP.   
6. Subject prot ection is as li sted in the above section.  Confidentiality of all medical 
records is strictly maintained by established procedures.  The original study data are 
kept in the principal investigators’ laboratory/office and are ente red into a secure 
computer d atabase passwor d protected under a secure s erver space behi nd the 
Mayo firewall allocated for use by only the study team.  All data are reviewed by the 
principal investigator.  All investigators carry pagers.  Volunteers have ac cess to the 
Mayo Clinic pagi ng operator 24 hours a day.  
7. Risk for infec tion from muscle  and fat biopsies is minimized by using sterile surgical 
technique.  Participants will be educated on proper post biopsy care to further 
minimize infection risk.  
8. The ris ks to the subjects are small  being primaril y those of blood withdrawal,  
catheter insert ions and muscle biopsies.  
  
3.  Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others  
Muscle healt h has a tremendous impact on  physical funct ion and metabolic health.  
Although exercise  is an effective strategy to enhance muscle and metabolic health, 
there is emerging evidence that some people exhibit blunted responsiveness to 
exercise.  Chronic system ic inflammation may be a fac tor that contri butes to this so -
called exer cise resistance.   The proposed studies will determine the relationship 
between systemic inflammation  and salient parameters of skeletal muscle function . 
Such information will help ident ify effective strategies to manage sarcopen ia, diabetes, 
and other chro nic diseases tha t influence muscle physiology .  The risks to the patients 
are minimal compared to the knowledge gained from the study.   
 
5. Protection of Human Research Participants   
The personnel identified in t his application  have completed the required  education on 
the protection of human research participants. The institution has established a formal 
program entitled the Mayo Investigator Training Program or MITP. The MITP is  a web 
 11 based educational course designed to provide all personnel involved in human subject 
research with training about human subject protection. All Mayo personnel engaged in 
human subject research are required to complete the course and recertify themsel ves 
every two years.  The primary objectives of the course are to provide the historical 
framework for current human subject protection regulations and to explore the evolving 
issues related to human subject research.   The course is divided into four sect ions:  
1. Course introduction and general overview  
2. History section which explores examples of unethical behavior in human subject 
research  
3. Review of major human subject protection issues  
4. Discussion of the various roles and responsibilities of individuals i nvolve d in 
human subject research.  
At the conclusion of the instruction, individuals are required to complete a thirty -question 
assessment.  
 