   
 
Page 1 of 6  6/21/2017  RESEARCH PRO TOCOL   
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Title  
 Non-invasive tidal volume monitoring using the Linshom 
Respiratory Monitoring Device  
 
 
Faculty Sponsor  
 Madhankumar Sathyamoorthy, MD  
 
Principle 
Investigator/Co -
investigators  Madhankumar Sathyamoorthy, MD  
George E. Abraham III, MD  
Abstract  Many post -operative complications  arise from patients who breathe  
inadequate ly. Inadequate respiration, w hether the result  of surgery or the 
anesthesia, causes  a decrease  in blood oxygen  satur ation and an increase 
in carbon dioxide partial pressure. Both of these surrogate 
measurements of respiration may pose a challenge to measure. Some 
administer exogenous  oxygen to all patients as they leave the operating 
room in order to maintain  the blood oxygen saturation . This renders the  
oximeter a less sensitive metric of depressed respiration . In the face of 
decreased respiration,  the carbon dioxide levels continue to incre ase 
slowly and often go undetected  unless blood gases are measured . Indeed 
carbon dioxide blood levels are the only metric to detect inadequate 
ventilation  using this surrogate index .  
 
Monitoring ventilation is a serious challenge  outside of critical care  
settings. In fact, there are no monitors available that can  measure tidal 
volume or relative tidal volume outside of these settings.  
 
Linshom is a novel instrument that tracks relative respiration by 
measuring the excursions of the temperature swing s between inspiration 
and expiration  and normalizing them to the patient’s breathing. This 
monitor may be the first non -invasive monitor to measure relative tidal 
volume in non -critical care settings.  
 
   
 
Page 2 of 6  6/21/2017   
 
 
Background  
 
 
 Oxygenation – the process of delivering oxygen to the lungs – is often 
much simpler to achieve than ventilation, since only a small volume of 
oxygen must be delivered  to oxygenate the patient and  provide a 
reserve. Carbon dioxide, however, constantly accum ulates  and depends  
on ongoing ventilation to eliminate it from the lungs.  
 
Direct automatic ventilation monitors tend to be cumbersome. They 
typically require chest straps or EKG -type stickers to be placed on the 
patient’s chest. EKG signals themselves can be used to detect inhalation 
and exhalation, but the noise of EKG monitors tends to make this 
method unreliable. In most cases, the patient needs to be lying quite still 
in order for accurate ventilation monitoring  and even then they measure 
respirator y rate and not tidal volume .  
 
The gold standard method to measure  the adequacy of ventilation is to 
measure the  exhaled carbon dioxide concentration. Exhaled gas  almost 
always contains carbon dioxide  that may be measured using either 
sidestream or mainstr eam capnography. However, the carbon dioxide 
tension is only a surrogate measure of ventilation since it is the changes 
in tidal volume per breath or minute ventilation that determines the 
adequacy of respiration and therefore the carbon dioxide tension.  
Capnography accurate ly measures  the respiratory rate and the net effect 
of ventilation without reporting  the tidal volume. Knowing the tidal 
volume before the carbon dioxide tension begins to increase provides an 
opportunity to intervene before the clinical  situation has deteriorated too 
much. Linshom is  a reliable, effective patient ventilation monitor that is 
minimally invasive, simple, inexpensive, fast responding and tracks 
relative  tidal volume  outside of critical care settings .  
Purpose  
 
 To determine  whether a non -invasive, temperature -based respiratory 
instrument could track tidal volume (V t) in patients.  
Specific Aim(s)  The primary purpose of this investigation is to evaluate whether a non -
invasive, thermodynamic temperature -based instrument, Linshom, can 
accurately and consistently track tidal volume  as measured by closed 
loop mechanical ventilator .  
Study Period 
(inclusive years)  The study will be completed over a period of one week . 
   
 
Page 3 of 6  6/21/2017  Study Design  Flyers advertising the study will be placed around campus on designated 
bulletin boards.  Individuals interested in the study will be able to call 
the number  (PI Office Number: 601 815 7066) .  If the individual meets 
the study criteria, then he or she will be scheduled for a study session, 
which will take place in room N200 -13 of the respiratory therapy 
department.   After completing the visit, the volunteer will receive a 
$10.00 gift card.  
 
The Linshom detector, which is comprised of two  rapid responding 
medical -grade thermistors in close proximity t o the mouth/nose (sensor) 
and a thermistor remote to the airway, will be mounted in the CPAP 
facemask to measure the temperature during breathing . The CPAP will 
be connected to  a Servo -I ventilator (Maquet) with a circuit and 
disposable filter.  The volunte ers will be instructed to breathe  normal  
through the CPAP mask on room air.  The excursions of the thermistor 
tracings (from valley to peak)  will be  recorded  by the Linshom device 
and displayed continuously on a laptop monitor in a waveform .  The 
tidal volu me will also be measured by the ventilator  and the data 
downloaded in a C ompact Flash card. The temperature profiles from the 
sensors and the relative tidal volume will be correlated with the tidal 
volume s measured by the ventilator.   
Inclusion Criteria   
Healthy  volunteers  18 years of age or older  will be recruited from the 
Medical School at the University of Mississippi.   
 
 
Exclusion Criteria  
 
 Individuals who are pregnant, suffer from claustrophobia, or who have 
had a recent respiratory or gastrointestinal illness will be excluded.  
Volunteers deemed not to have the capacity to provide informed consent 
will not be enrolled.    
Number of Subjects 
(anticipated)  40.  
 
Outcome Measures  
 
 Every volunteer recruited in this study will be monitored by the study 
investigators during data collection. Linsho m readings showing the 
temperature cha nges and tidal volume measured by ventilator  will be 
collected . 
 
Study Endpoints  
 
 The subjects will breathe through the mask for about 5  minutes, and 
will be observed during this time by the study investigators. Continuous 
data for tidal volume and temperature will be collected during this time 
and the data will be analyzed post -hoc. 
   
 
Page 4 of 6  6/21/2017  Private Health 
Information  
 
 No medical record information will be collected – no other volunteer 
information will be recorded. Volunteer numbers will be paired with 
study numbers in a single Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. All study 
information will thereafter refer to study numbers.  
Statistical 
Methodology  
 
 
 We shall correlate the tidal volumes measured with the Linshom 
detector with the respective tidal volumes from the mechanical 
ventilator . A least squares regression analysis (with the coeffici ent of 
determination r -squared) and a Bland Altman plot will be prepared. 
P<0.05 will be accepted.  
   
 
Page 5 of 6  6/21/2017  References  
 
 
 REFERENCES:  
1. Manifold CA, Davids N, Villers LC, Wampler DA.  
Capnography for the nonintubated patient in the emergency setting. J 
Emerg  Med 2013; 45(4): 626 -32. 
2. Brouillette RT, Morrow AS, Weese -Mayer DE, Hunt CE.  
Comparison of respiratory inductive plethysmography and thoracic 
impedance for apnea monitoring. J Pediatrics  1987; 111(3): 377 -83.  
3. Ramsay MA, Usman M, Lagow E, Mendoza M , Untalan E, De 
Vol E. The accuracy, precision and reliability of measuring ventilatory 
rate and detecting ventilatory pause by rainbow acoustic monitoring and 
capnometry. Anesth Analg  2013; 117(1): 69 -75. 
4.  Keidan I, Gravenstein D, Berkenstadt H, et al.  Supplemental 
oxygen compromises the use of pulse oximetry for detection of apnea 
and hypoventilation during sedation in simulated pediatric patients. 
Pediatrics  2008; 122: 293 -8. 
5. Williamson JA, Webb RK, Cockings J, Morgan C. The 
Australian Incident Mon itoring Study. The capnograph:  applications 
and limitations -an analysis of 2000 incident reports.  Anaesth Intensive 
Care  1993; 21(5): 551 -7. 
6. Nassi N, Piumelli R, Lombardi E, Landini L, Donzelli G, de 
Martino M. Comparison between pulse oximetry and tra nsthoracic 
impedance alarm traces during home monitoring. Arch Dis Child  2008: 
93(2); 126 -32. 
7. Kasuya Y, Akca O, Sessler DI, Ozaki M, Komatsu R. Accuracy 
of postoperative end -tidal Pco 2 measurements with mainstream and 
sidestream capnography in non -obese  patients and in obese patients with 
and without obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology 2009; 111(3): 609 -
15. 
8. Lerman J, Feldman D, Feldman R, et al. Linshom respiratory 
monitoring device: a novel temperature -based respiratory monitor. Can 
J Anesth 2016 :63;1154 -60 
9. Preiss D, Drew B, Gosnell J, Kodali BS, Philip JH. A 
thermodynamic breathing sensor – a new non -invasive monitor of 
respiration. American Society of Anesthesiologists, San Diego, October 
2015, BOC09  
10. Sathyamoorthy M, Lerman J Feldman D, e t al. ALINSHOM: “A 
new respiratory monitor” American Society of Anesthesiologists, San 
Francisco, 2013:A5032  
 
 
  
   
 
Page 6 of 6  6/21/2017   
Funding Source  
 
 Departmental Funds  (Department of Anesthesia)  
 
 
 
 