 Official Study Title: 
 Towards   the  development  of  a  mobile-health  technology  designed  to  encourage  the  use 
 of  serious  game-based  interventions  in  patients  with  mild  cognitive  impairment  outside 
 the clinic 
 Study ID: [REMOVED] 
 Document Type:  
 Study Protocol 
 Document Date  : 
 February 05, 2025 
 STUDY PROTOCOL 
 Study Procedures  : 
 1.  Recruitment 
 2.  Screening 
 3.  Informed consent obtainment 
 4.  Random assignment into two groups 
 5.  Assessment at baseline 
 6.  Shipping  tablet  PC  5.  Assessment  at  baseline  (Only  Rutgers  RA  can  perform  assessment;  UMass 
 RAs will organize the overall meeting) 
 7.  Tutorial for the intervention group 
 8.  Checking compliance every week (twice per week) 
 9.  Assessment after 12 weeks 
 10.  Returning tablet PC 
 11.  Focus group (Online workshop) 
 12.  Assessment after 24 weeks 
 Role Assignment 
 UMass RA  Rutgers RA 
 Recruitment  O  O 
 Screening  O  O 
 Informed consent obtainment  O  O 
 Random assignment into two groups  O  X 
 Assessment at baseline  O (general instructions 
 before assessment)  O (actual assessment) 
 Shipping tablet PC  O  X 
 Tutorial for the intervention group  O  X 
 Checking compliance every week  O  X 
 Assessment after 12 weeks  O (general instructions 
 before assessment)  O (actual assessment) 
 Returning table PC  O  X 
 Focus group (Online workshop)  O  X 
 Assessment after 24 weeks  O (general instructions 
 before assessment)  O (actual assessment) 
 1. Recruitment  : 
 - 50  participants with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)  will be recruited as follows. 
 ●  Currently planned means: 
 o  Emailing  recruitment  flyers  to  residents  in  local  senior  centers  in  Amherst,  MA  and 
 Union, NJ 
 o  Emailing recruitment flyers to support groups and conferences 
 o  Posting  recruitment  flyers  on  the  Internet  (e.g.,  ClinicalTrials.gov  ,  National  Alliance  on 
 Mental Illness; nami.org, Alzheimer’s Association; alz.org, UMass newsletter) 
 o  Posting  an  abbreviated  recruiting  message  +  screen  shots  of  flyers  on  the  social  media 
 (e.g., Facebook, Twitter) 
 ▪  Recruiting  message:  “  If  you  believe  you  have  mild  cognitive  impairment,  and  are 
 interested  in  cognitive  training  using  mobile  games,  please  contact  AHHA  Lab 
 (413-545-8875,  umass.ahha.lab@gmail.com  ).” 
 o  Visit senior villages 
 ●  Optional means: 
 o  Using paid third-party services that perform the recruiting process 
 o  Advertising on local newspapers 
 - The flyer can be found in  Appendix 1  . (unified phone  number / email address) 
 - Available recruitment methods (website, social media group) are listed in the spreadsheet 
 (  Patient Recruitment/Contact Information.xlsx  ) 
 2. Screening  (Both UMass & Rutgers RA can perform) 
 - When a volunteer contacts us through AHHA lab’s email or phone number, their  name,  phone number, 
 and  email  will be collected using email reply (email)  or pre-recorded voicemail instruction (phone). 
 ●  UMass and Rutgers RAs will check the email and the voicemail box regularly (1 time a week by 
 each RA). The following is an example. 
 ○  Rutgers RA: Mon 
 ○  UMass RA1: Wed 
 ○  UMass RA2: Fri 
 ●  RAs will  add a new record  in the RedCap and enter  the volunteer’s  name  in the  Name Data 
 instrument,  and  phone number  and  email  in the  MCI  Participant Demographics instrument 
 of the RedCap and remove processed voicemail messages. 
 ○  The convention for naming the study ID for a person with MCI will be, for example, 
 MCI21 (password for Neuro-World administration is woorisoft!@) 
 ●  The  prefix  MCI  followed  by  an  incrementing  number  with  0  padding  for  a 
 single-digit  number  (e.g.,  MCI02  will  be  assigned  after  MCI01  ;  MCI22  will  be 
 assigned after  MCI21  ). 
 ●  The  study  ID  will  be  used  for  a  MCI  participant.  In  other  words,  an  active 
 caregiver will not be given a separate study ID. 
 ●  If a caregiver participates in the study, RAs will enter the caregiver’s  name  in the  Name Data 
 instrument,  and  phone number  and  email  in the  Caregiver  Demographics instrument  of the 
 RedCap and remove processed voicemail messages. 
 ○  The caregiver for the person with MCI will be given a separate study ID, for example 
 CARE21  . 
 ■  The prefix CARE followed by an incrementing number that matches that of the 
 person with MCI. (record in the  Caregiver Demographics  instrument  ) 
 - Any of the 3 RAs will call the volunteer, if the corresponding  Screening Data instrument  is not 
 completed (i.e., not green), using the phone number in the  MCI Participant Demographics instrument   . 
 ●  If the  volunteer  have approximately 30 minutes at  the time of zoom call, 
 ○  Each volunteer is asked for their demographic information, including gender, age, etc., 
 which will be entered in  the MCI Participant Demographics  instrument  . 
 ○  If a caregiver participates in the study, each caregiver is asked for their demographic 
 information, including gender, age, etc., which will be entered in  the Caregiver 
 Demographics instrument  . 

 ○  Each volunteer is asked  inclusion and exclusion questions  (See  Appendix 2  for the 
 inclusion & exclusion questions), answers of which will be entered in  the Screening 
 Data instrument  . 
 ○  The volunteer’s caregiver will be asked  inclusion  and exclusion questions, the answers 
 of which will be entered in the Screening Data instrument  .  The fields are popped up 
 when selecting ‘Yes’ to the questions ‘Is a caregiver available to participate in this 
 study’? 
 ○  The volunteer, meeting the inclusion and exclusion questions, will be assessed for his/her 
 cognitive function using the  MoCA test via Zoom  . The  answers will be entered in  the 
 Screening Data instrument  . 
 ■  The volunteer, scoring MoCA  17 <= (score) < 26  , will  be included in our study. 
 ○  If both the volunteer and the active caregiver are eligible to join the study, 
 ■  The RA will ask the  volunteer  and his/her active  caregiver  for their contact 
 information, including their name, email address, and phone number if not 
 collected yet, which will be entered in  the MCI Participant/Caregiver 
 Demographics instrument  . 
 ■  The RA will inform the volunteer and the active caregiver that the informed 
 consent documents will be sent to them via email, and ask them to read, sign, and 
 return the signed informed consent form. 
 ■  The RA will change  the Form Status (Complete) field  of  the Screening Data 
 to Complete (i.e., green color). Green color indicates that the volunteer and the 
 active caregiver are eligible for our study. 
 ○  If either the volunteer or the active caregiver or none of them is/are eligible to join the 
 study, 
 ■  All the contact information (name, email, phone number) will be removed from 
 the MCI Participant/Caregiver Demographics instrument  . 
 ■  The demographic information and the answers to the inclusion/exclusion 
 question will be stored. 
 ■  The RA will change  the Form Status (Complete) field  of  the Screening Data 
 to Incomplete (i.e., red color). Red color indicates that the volunteer and the 
 active caregiver are not eligible for our study. 
 ●  If the  volunteer  or his/her have active  caregiver  do not have time at the moment, 
 ○  The RA will schedule an appointment for a phone screening and enter the date and notes 
 in  the Contact Attempt field  of  the Screening Data  instrument  . 
 ○  The RA leaves  the Form Status field  of  the Screening  Data instrument  to Incomplete. 
 ●  If the volunteer cannot be reached, 
 ○  The RA will leave a message. 
 ■  Message:  “Hello. This is – from the UMass Amherst  research team. I am 
 contacting you about your interest in participating in our research about mild 
 cognitive impairment. I’d like to discuss your eligibility to participate in our 
 research. I would be grateful if you could call back us when you are available. 
 My number is -----. Thank you.” 
 ○  The RA will enter the attempted date, time, and responses in  the Contact Attempt 1/2/3 
 for MCI Participant  or  Caregiver  in the  Screening   Data instrument  . 
 ○  If the RA completes the screening, enter the completed date, time, and their name in the 
 Screening Data instrument  . 
 ○  If all the Contact Attempt 1/2/3 are entered, the RA will change  the Form Status 
 (Complete) field  of  the Screened Result instrument  to Incomplete (i.e., red color). 
 - For those who are eligible to participate in the study (called  participants  hereafter), see the  3.  Informed 
 consent obtainment  and  5. Assessment at baseline  within  the phone call  . 
 3. Informed consent obtainment  (Both UMass can perform) 
 - (When the RA, volunteer, and the active caregiver remain on the phone after the screening process) An 
 RA will email informed consent forms either to 1) the volunteer and the active caregiver to their email 
 addresses separately or 2) the active caregiver depending on the participants’ preference. 
 ●  UMass and Rutgers RAs will email at the end of the  2. Screening  when both the volunteer and 
 the active caregiver are determined eligible for our study. 
 ●  Use DocuSign @  DocuSign Login - Enter email to start  sign in  . 
 ●  If both the volunteer and the active caregiver have time, 
 ○  The RA will give the volunteer and the active caregiver to read the informed consent 
 form. 
 ○  The RA will answer questions should the volunteer and the active caregiver have any. 
 ○  When the volunteer and the active caregiver sign (using  DocuSign  ) and return the signed 
 informed consent form, 
 ■  The RA will enter the date the forms are received. 
 ■  The RA will change  the Form Status field  of  the Informed  Consent 
 instrument  to Complete. 
 ■  The signed informed consent will be stored in the UMass-supported cloud (i.e., 
 OneDrive). 
 ■  The  RA  will  schedule  an  assessment  with  the  volunteer  and  the  active  caregiver 
 for  the  baseline  assessment  when  one  UMass  RA,  the  Rutgers  RA,  the  volunteer, 
 and the active caregiver are available for 2 hours in a row 
 (AHHA lab account,  umass.ahha.lab@gmail.com  )  . 
 ■  The RA will mark the scheduled assessment on the Google calendar. 
 ●  If the volunteer or the active caregiver do not have time, 
 ○  The RA will schedule an appointment when any of the RAs are available based on the 
 Google calendar (AHHA lab account,  umass.ahha.lab@gmail.com  )  . 
 ○  The RA will inform other RAs of the scheduled appointment in the Slack channel. 
 - (When an RA is making a separate call) An RA, who is available at the scheduled appointment time, 
 will call the volunteer, assuming that the active caregiver accompanies the volunteer. 
 ●  The RA will give the volunteer and the active caregiver time to read the informed consent form. 

 ●  The RA will answer questions should the volunteer or the active caregiver have any. 
 ●  When the volunteer and the active caregiver sign and return the signed informed consent form, 
 ○  The RA will enter the date the forms are received. 
 ○  The RA will change  the Form Status field  of  the Informed  Consent instrument  to 
 Complete. 
 ○  The signed informed consent will be stored in the UMass-supported cloud (i.e., 
 OneDrive). 
 ○  The  RA  will  schedule  an  assessment  with  the  volunteer  (optionally,  and  the  active 
 caregiver)  for  the  baseline  assessment  when  one  UMass  RA,  the  Rutgers  RA,  the 
 volunteer, and the active caregiver are available for 2 hours in a row 
 (AHHA lab account,  umass.ahha.lab@gmail.com  )  . 
 ○  The RA will mark the scheduled assessment on the Google calendar. 
 4. Random assignment into two groups  (Only UMass RA  can perform) 
 -  When  the  UMass  RA  finds  a  study  ID  with  the  completed  Informed  Consent  instrument  (i.e.,  green 
 color),  the  RA  refers  to  random_group_assign.xlsx  (in  the  Google  folder  Pre-determined 
 randomization,  which  is  only  available  to  the  UMass  RAs  )  and  assigns  the  study  ID  to  either  Group  A 
 or B. 
 ●  Group A 
 ○  First period: Neuro-World game intervention (12 weeks) 
 ○  Second period: phone interaction + usual care (12 weeks) 
 ●  Group B 
 ○  First period: phone interaction + usual care (12 weeks) 
 ○  Second period: Neuro-World game intervention (12 weeks) 
 -  The Randomization instrument  will be hidden from  the Rutgers personnel throughout the study. 

 5.  Assessment  at  baseline  (Only  Rutgers  RA  can  perform  assessment; 
 UMass RAs will organize the overall meeting) 
 - A UMass RA will remind the participant of the scheduled assessment. 
 ●  Give  a  call  to  the  participant,  remind  them  1  day  before  the  scheduled  assessment  in  the  following 
 order. 
 ○  Phone call 
 ○  If not answering, text and email. 
 ●  Give a call to the participant, remind them 2 hours before the scheduled assessment. 
 ○  Phone call 
 ○  If not answering, text and email. 
 - A UMass RA will organize the zoom meeting. 
 ●  The UMass RA will initiate a zoom meeting. 
 ●  A  UMass  RA  will  email  a  zoom  link  to  the  participant’s  email  and  the  Rutgers  RA  approximately 
 10 minutes before the scheduled time. 
 ●  The Rutgers RA will join the meeting. 
 ●  Introduce RAs 
 ○  Message:  “  Hello,  [Participant  name].  I  am  [Umass  RA  name],  and  a  researcher  from 
 UMass  Amherst.  Today,  we  will  administer  cognitive  assessments  and  some  surveys  to 
 you  and  your  helper.  They  will  take  about  2  hours  to  complete.  All  the  assessments  will  be 
 administered  by  [Rutgers  RA].  Can  you  introduce  yourself  briefly,  [Rutgers  RA]?  Before 
 starting  assessments,  I  will  break  a  room  for  [Rutgers  RA]  to  give  some  important 
 instructions for today's session. 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  will  break  out  a  meeting  room  for  the  Rutgers  RA,  and  the  Rutgers  RA  will  wait 
 in the room. 
 ●  The volunteer will join the meeting at the scheduled time. 
 ●  The UMass RA will explain about the assessment. 
 ○  Message: 
 ○  Group  A:  “OK.  I  will  give  the  overall  process  of  our  study  first.  Our  study  participants 
 are  divided  randomly  into  Group  A/B.  You  are  selected  as  Group  A.  It  means  that  for  the 
 first  12  weeks,  you  play  a  cognitive  game  with  the  provided  tablet  PC.  We  will  also  follow 
 up  on  your  game  playing  experience  and  your  cognitive  and  physical  activity  by  call  and 
 email  survey.  They  will  be  very  brief  and  take  about  1  min.  After  12  weeks,  you  need  to 
 return  a  table  PC,  and  do  the  second  assessment,  and  don’t  need  to  do  anything  particular 
 for  the  next  12  weeks.  We  will  just  check  your  cognitive  and  physical  activity.  For  this 
 assessment,  an  important  note  is  that  [  Rutgers  RA]  ]  should  not  know  about  which  group 
 you  are  in.  Please  know  that  [Rutgers  RA]]  is  only  here  for  the  assessment  purpose.  To 
 assess  your  cognitive  function  without  any  bias,  [Rutgers  RA]  should  not  know  which 
 group  you  are  in,  you  already  received  a  table  PC,  and  start  to  play  a  game  soon.  So,  if 
 you  have  any  concerns  or  questions  related  to  our  overall  study  procedure,  game  play  or 
 tablet  PC,  please  feel  free  to  talk  to  me  or  ask  me.  {(optional)  For  today's  assessment, 
 [Helper  Name]  will  be  asked  survey  questions  related  to  [participant  name]’ s  daily 
 activity  first  before  starting  cognitive  assessment.  I  will  break  a  zoom  room  for 
 [participant  name]  during  the  survey,  and  let  [participant  name]  join  again  after 
 completing  the  survey.  [participant  name],  do  you  feel  comfortable  with  using  zoom? 
 After  completing  the  survey,  [helper  name]  please  stay  in  the  house  but  not  in  the  room 
 during  the  assessments.}  The  entire  assessment  will  be  video-recorded  for  future 
 reference.  Now  the  [Rutgers  RA]  will  join  and  start  the  assessment.  I  will  stay  muted  until 
 the assessment is over, but if you have a question, please feel free to ask me.  ” 
 ○  Group  B:  “OK.  I  will  give  the  overall  process  of  our  study  first.  Our  study  participants 
 are  divided  randomly  into  Group  A/B.  You  are  selected  as  Group  B.  It  means  that  For  the 
 first  12  weeks,  you  don’t  need  to  do  anything  for  this  study  but  we  will  just  check  you 
 about  your  cognitive  and  physical  activity  such  as  puzzles,  board  games  or  hiking  like 
 that.  After  12  weeks,  you  will  receive  a  table  PC  and  play  a  cognitive  training  game.  For 
 this  assessment,  an  important  note  is  that  Aurora  should  not  know  about  which  group  you 
 are  in.  Please  know  that  [name3]  is  only  here  for  the  assessment  purpose.  To  assess  your 
 cognitive   function  without  any  bias,  [Rutgers  RA]  should  not  know  that  you  are  starting 
 12  weeks  with  no  game  play  and  you  will  receive  a  table  PC  12  weeks  later.  So,  if  you 
 have  any  concerns  or  questions  related  to  our  overall  study  procedure,  game  play  or 
 tablet  PC,  please  feel  free  to  talk  to  me  or  ask  me.  {(optional)  For  today's  assessment, 
 [Helper  Name]  will  be  asked  survey  questions  related  to  [participant  name]’ s  daily 
 activity  first  before  starting  cognitive  assessment.  I  will  break  a  zoom  room  for 
 [participant  name]  during  the  survey,  and  let  [participant  name]  join  again  after 
 completing  the  survey.  [participant  name],  do  you  feel  comfortable  with  using  zoom? 
 After  completing  the  survey,  [helper  name]  please  stay  in  the  house  but  not  in  the  room 
 during  the  assessments.}  The  entire  assessment  will  be  video-recorded  for  future 
 reference.  Now  the  [Rutgers  RA]  will  join  and  start  the  assessment.  I  will  stay  muted  until 
 the assessment is over, but if you have a question, please feel free ask to me.  ” 
 ○ 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  will  bring  the  Rutgers  RA  back  to  the  main  meeting  room   and  start  recording  the 
 assessment  . 
 ●  Five  different  Assessment  Form  (1-5)  instruments  have  a  different  randomized  order  of  tests. 
 RAs  select  an  assessment  form  using  Assessment/Assessment  Form  Assignment.xlsx  in  Google 
 drive. Then, the questions and fields of the selected  Assessment Form instrument  will appear. 
 ●  The  Rutgers  RA  will  administer  all  the  assessments  and  enter  all  answers  to  the  corresponding 
 Assessment  Form  instrument  .  The  Rutgers  RA  will  score  the  participant  as  he/she  administers 
 the assessments. 
 ○  (  Videoconference  version  )  Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment  (  MoCA  ):  Chapman,  J.  E., 
 Cadilhac,  D.  A.,  Gardner,  B.,  Ponsford,  J.,  Bhalla,  R.,  &  Stolwyk,  R.  J.  (2019). 
 Comparing  face-to-face  and  videoconference  completion  of  the  Montreal  Cognitive 
 Assessment  (MoCA)  in  community-based  survivors  of  stroke.  Journal  of  telemedicine 
 and telecare  , 1357633X19890788. 
 ○  (  Videoconference  version  )  Mini-Mental  State  Examination  (  MMSE  ):  Timpano,  F., 
 Pirrotta,  F.,  Bonanno,  L.,  Marino,  S.,  Marra,  A.,  Bramanti,  P.,  &  Lanzafame,  P.  (2013). 
 Videoconference-based  mini  mental  state  examination:  a  validation  study.  Telemedicine 
 and e-Health  ,  19  (12), 931-937. 
 ○  (  Original  )  Digit  Forward  Span  (  DFS  from  WAIS-IV):  Powell,  D.  H.,  &  Hiatt,  M.  D. 
 (1996).  Auditory  and  visual  recall  of  forward  and  backward  digit  spans.  Perceptual  and 
 Motor Skills  ,  82  (3_suppl), 1099-1103. 
 ○  (  Original  )  Digit  Backward  Span  (  DBS  from  WAIS-IV):  Powell,  D.  H.,  &  Hiatt,  M.  D. 
 (1996).  Auditory  and  visual  recall  of  forward  and  backward  digit  spans.  Perceptual  and 
 Motor Skills  ,  82  (3_suppl), 1099-1103. 
 ○  (  Original  ) Geriatric Depression Scale (  GDS  ) 
 ○  (  Original  ) Short Form 36 (  SF-36  ) 
 ○  (  Original  )  Alzheimer’s  Disease  Cooperative  Study/ADL  scale  adapted  for  MCI 
 participants (  ADCS/MCI/ADL24  ) 
 ●  When  the  Rutgers  RA  completes  the  assessments,  he/she  will  message  the  UMass  RA  in  the 
 smart phone texting group. 
 ●  The UMass RA will unmute. 
 ●  The Rutgers RA will leave. 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  enters  the  address  in  the  Address  to  ship  the  tablet  computer  field  of  the  MCI 
 Participant Demographics instrument  . 
 ●  The UMass RA will inform the participant about the assignment result and explain the schedule. 
 ○  Group A 
 ■  Message:  “  Do  you  have  any  questions  so  far?  If  not,  I  would  like  to  explain  what 
 will  happen  next.  We  will  ask  you  to  play  Neuro-World  for  30  minutes  a  day,  2 
 days  a  week  for  12  weeks.  (accurate  exactly  two  days,  separate  day)  We  already 
 installed  the  cognitive  training  program,  Neuro-World,  in  the  table  computer  we 
 sent.  Also,  we  will  call  you  twice  a  week  to  follow  up  your  training.  The  call  will 
 take  1-2  minutes  to  briefly  follow  up  on  your  training  and  thoughts   related  to  the 
 training.  Before  you  start  the  training  with  the  Neuro-World  game,  We  will  need 
 to  schedule  a  training  session  where  we  will  go  over  all  the  games  together  and 
 help  you  learn  how  to  play  all  those  games.  It  will  take  about  one  hour  to  go  over 
 all the games. When would be available to you this week or next week?  ” 
 ○  Group  B:  “  Do  you  have  any  questions  so  far?  If  not,  I  will  start  to  check  your  physical 
 and  cognitive  activity  about  next  week.  I  will  send  surveys  to  you  very  simple  questions 
 three  times  a  week  and  call  you  twice  a  weak.  The  phone  call  will  take  about  2  minutes. 
 12  weeks  from  now,  we  will  ask  you  to  play  the  cognitive  training  game,  Neuro-World. 
 Until then, we will follow up with you twice a week.  ” 
 - All participants will be assessed using the following tests. 
 ●  We will use the original assessment if it is a questionnaire that can easily be done online. 
 ●  We  will  use  the  modified  version  for  the  videoconference-based  administration  (as  opposed  to 
 telephone-based),  if  the  original  assessment  is  difficult  to  be  done  online.  (According  to  Becky 
 Ready)  Some  assessment  tools,  such  as  MoCA  and  MMSE,  also  test  the  visuospatial  function  of 
 participants.  The  participants’  performance  on  visuospatial-related  questions  is  important 
 information  as  well,  which  makes  the  videoconference-based  version  superior  to  the 
 telephone-based version. 
 -  The  convention  for  naming  the  video-recorded  interactions.  P1_A1_20210623.mp4  (participant  number, 
 event type and number, date) 
 ●  Assessments (before, after, follow-up) [A1, A2, A3] 
 ●  Weekly check-ups [C1, C2, ...] 
 ●  participants’ initiated questions [Q1, Q2, ...] 
 ●  Online workshops [W] 
 -  The  computer  that  the  researchers  initially  record  audios/videos  need  to  be  encrypted  (e.g.,  Windows  10 
 BitLocker Drive Encryption) and password-protected. 
 6. Shipping tablet PC  (UMass RA will perform) 
 -  A  UMass  RA  will  ship  a  tablet  computer,  a  return  label,  and  a  hardcopy  instruction  for  returning  the 
 tablet computer to the participant’s address. 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  will  generate  the  shipping  label  using  the  UMass  paying  account  (  F2E075  )  and 
 the  participant’s  address  stored  in  the  Address  to  ship  the  tablet  computer  field  of  the  MCI 
 Participant Demographics instrument  . 
 ○  https://www.easyship.com/blog/prepaid-return-labels 
 ○  https://www.ups.com/us/en/campusship-support/return-services.page 
 ●  The UMass RA will generate the returning label. 
 ●  The UMass RA will perform a factory reset on a tablet computer to be shipped. 
 ●  The UMass RA will perform all the updates. 
 ●  The UMass RA will install Neuro-World. 
 ●  The UMass RA will enter the study ID in Neuro-World. 
 ●  The UMass RA will double-check to make sure Neuro-World works as expected. 
 ●  The UMass RA will print out the instructions. 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  will  wrap  the  tablet  +  plastic  case  in  a  bubble  wrap,  put  it  in  the  air-inflated 
 laptop package, and put it in the box. 
 ●  The UMass RA will put the printed instructions and the returning label in the box. 
 ●  The UMass RA will seal the box using scotch tape. 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  will  put  a  shipping  label  on  the  box  and  place   it  in  the  on-campus  UPS  pick-up 
 location. 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  will  text  and  email  both  the  participant  and  the  caregiver  about  the  estimated 
 delivery date. 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  will  enter  the  shipped  date,  and  the  tracking  number  in  the  Shipped  Date  field 
 (  both  Shipping  to  the  subject  from  the  UMass  ,  Returning  to  the  UMass  from  the  subject)  of 
 the Tablet Ship & Return instrument  . 
 - A UMass RA will track the delivery of the tablet computer. 
 ●  The  UMass  RA,  on  his/her  assigned  date,  will  check  if  any  of  the  tablet  computers  are  estimated 
 to have arrived. 
 ●  The UMass RA tracks the delivery using the tracking number. 
 ●  If the package is reported to be delivered, 
 ○  The  UMass  RA  will  call  the  participant  (the  caregiver  if  the  participant  cannot  be 
 reached) and confirm the delivery. 
 ○  If the participant (or the caregiver) confirms the receipt of the tablet computer, 
 ■  The  UMass  RA  will  schedule  a  tutorial  session  when  the  participant,  the 
 caregiver, and one UMass RA are available based on the Google calendar. 
 (AHHA lab account,  umass.ahha.lab@gmail.com  ) 
 ■  The  UMass  RA  will  notify  the  responsible  UMass  RA  for  the  tutorial  (the  UMass 
 RA,  who  schedules  the  tutorial  session,  may  not  be  the  one  who  is  available  for 
 the tutorial session). 
 ○  If the participant (or the caregiver) did not receive the package, 
 ■  The UMass RA will contact UPS and file a claim for the missing tablet computer. 
 ■  The UMass RA will ship another tablet computer to the participant. 
 - Purchase items through Deb (  bergeron@cs.umass.edu  ). 
 7. Tutorial for the intervention group  (UMass RA will  perform) 
 - A UMass RA will remind the participant and the caregiver of the scheduled tutorial. 
 ●  Give  a  call  to  the  participant  and  the  caregiver,  remind  them  1  day  before  the  scheduled  tutorial  in 
 the following order. 
 ○  Phone call 
 ○  If not answering, text and email. 
 ●  Give a call to the participant and the caregiver, remind them 2 hours before the scheduled tutorial. 
 ○  Phone call 
 ○  If not answering, text and email. 
 - The UMass RA will organize the zoom meeting. 
 ●  The UMass RA will initiate a zoom meeting. 
 ●  A  UMass  RA  will  email  a  zoom  link  to  the  participant’s  email  approximately  10  minutes  before 
 the scheduled time. 
 ●  When the participant join, the UMass RA will start  video-recording  and start the tutorial session. 
 ○  Important points: 
 ■  How  to  use  the  tablet  computer.  (Prepare  a  video  presentation  with  Share  sound 
 &  Optimize for video clip  toggled) 
 ●  Open a cover 
 ●  How to turn on 
 ●  How to unlock 
 ●  How to lock 
 ●  How to wake (from the sleeping mode) 
 ●  How to charge 
 ●  How to change the volume 
 ●  How to set up a wifi connection 
 ■  How to use Neuro-World. 
 ●  How to run 
 ○  It takes a few seconds 
 ●  Layout of the buttons (menus) on the initial screen 
 ○  Tutorial on game mechanics 
 ■  Encourage  participants  to  go  through  the  tutorial  at  the 
 presence of connecting researchers  
 ■  Answer any questions that the participants ask. 
 ○  Daily training 
 ■  Six  games  will  be  presented  to  the  participant  in  a 
 random order every time 
 ■  A  timer  will  keep  track  of  the  time  that  the  participant 
 plays each game 
 ■  When  5  minutes  are  up,  the  participant  will  be  moved  to 
 the next game 
 ■  When  the  participant  plays  all  6  games,  the  daily  training 
 will be done 
 ●  How to exit 
 -  The  UMass  RA  will  inform  the  participant  and  the  caregiver  about  the  self-administration  and  the 
 weekly follow-up. 
 ●  The UMass RA informs that 
 ○  The participant can start self-administration of Neuro-World on the subsequent Monday. 
 ○  (Optional)  The  caregiver  can  help  the  participant  to  operate  the  tablet  computer  or  start 
 the daily training. 
 ○  (Optional)  The caregiver cannot help the participant play the games. 
 ○  The  researcher  (i.e.,  a  UMass  RA)  will  contact  the  participant  or  the  caregiver  separately 
 to ask about any potential issues. 
 ○  Should  they  have  any  questions,  the  participant  or  the  caregiver  can  contact  the  UMass 
 RA  anytime  through  a  phone  call  or  an  email  to  schedule  a  meeting.  →  Zoom  link 
 will be sent at a scheduled time. Video-record interactions. 
 - The UMass RA will store the video-recording in the MS OneDrive 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  will  initially  store  the  Zoom  video-recording  in  the  encrypted  & 
 password-protected local computer. 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  will  upload  the  file  to  the  HIPAA-compliant  cloud  storage  supported  by  UMass 
 Amherst (MS OneDrive) 
 ●  The UMass RA will remove the file from the local computer. 
 8. Checking compliance every week  (UMass RA will  perform) 
 - UMass RAs will follow up with the participant twice a week for 24 weeks by phone call. 
 -  If  the  caregiver  participates  in  the  study,  UMass  RAs  will  follow  up  with  the  caregiver  once  a  week  for 
 24 weeks by phone call. 
 ●  The phone follow-up will be audio-recorded. 
 ●  For the participant, 
 ○  During the experiment period 
 ■  When the participant successfully adheres to Neuro-World training, a casual 
 follow-up. 
 ●  Message: “  How is Neuro-World training going?  Are there  any significant 
 changes in your daily activities? Could you explain in more detail? 
 Thank you.” 
 ■  When the participant missed Neuro-World training this week, try to understand 
 what hinders the participant’s low adherence. 
 ●  Message: “I noticed that you have not played Neuro-World this week. Is 
 everything ok? Do you need any help?” 
 ■  At the last follow-up call, ask the participant to return the tablet computer & 
 arrange the 1:1 interview. 
 ●  Message: “So, this week is your last Neuro-World training. Would you 
 be able to return the tablet computer? Please wrap the tablet computer 
 using bubble wrap. Put the wrapped tablet computer and the charger in 
 the air-inflated package. Put the package in the paper box. Put the 
 returning label on the box.” 
 ●  The RA will schedule the earliest available time for the participant and 
 both UMass RAs. 
 (AHHA lab account,  umass.ahha.lab@gmail.com  ) 
 ●  For more details about the interview, refer to  11.  Interview. 
 ○  During the control period 
 ■  Message: (for MCI participant) “Are there any significant changes in your daily 
 activities? Could you explain in more detail? Thank you.” 
 ■  Message: (for helper, optional) “Are there any significant changes in [NAME]’s 
 daily activities? Could you explain in more detail? Thank you.” 
 ○  The RA enters the date that he/she made a call to the participant and whether he/she was 
 successful connecting with the participant  in the  Follow-up field  of  the Weekly 
 Follow-up instrument  . 
 ●  For the caregiver (optional), 
 ○  During the experiment period 
 ■  When the participant successfully adheres to Neuro-World training, try to 
 understand the third-person perspective of the participant’s adherence to 
 Neuro-World training. 
 ●  Message:  “Can you tell me about how the participant  plays Neuro-World 
 training? Does he enjoy playing it? Does he focus when plays 
 Neuro-World?” 
 ■  When the participant missed Neuro-World training this week, try to ask if the 
 caregiver can encourage the participant to play Neuro-World. 
 ●  Message: “Can you tell me about how the participant plays Neuro-World 
 training? Does he enjoy playing it? Does he focus when plays 
 Neuro-World? I noticed that the participant has not played Neuro-World 
 this week. Would you be able to encourage the participant to play 
 Neuro-World x times this week?” 
 ■  At the last follow-up call, ask the participant to return the tablet computer. 
 ●  Message: “So, this week is the participant’s last Neuro-World training. 
 Would you be able to help him/her to return the tablet computer? Please 
 wrap the tablet computer using bubble wrap. Put the wrapped tablet 
 computer and the charger in the air-inflated package. Put the package in 
 the paper box. Put the returning label on the box.” 
 ●  The RA will schedule the earliest available time for the caregiver and 
 both UMass RAs. 
 (AHHA lab account,  umass.ahha.lab@gmail.com  ) 
 ●  For more details about the interview, refer to  11.  Interview. 
 ○  The RA enters the date that he/she made a call to the participant and whether he/she was 
 successful connecting with the participant  in the  Follow-up field  of  the Weekly 
 Follow-up instrument  . 
 - UMass RAs will follow up with the participant three times a week for 24 weeks by REDCap survey. 
 -  If  the  caregiver  participates  in  the  study,  UMass  RAs  will  follow  up  with  the  caregiver  once  a  week  for 
 24 weeks by REDCap survey. 
 ●  For the participant, 
 ○  In  the  past  two  days,  did  you  do  any  COGNITIVE  activities  such  as  Sudoku, 
 board  games,  word  games,  or  any  other  activities  you  do  to  help  your  memory 
 and mental capacity? 
 ○  If yes, how long? 
 ○  In  the  past  two  days,  did  you  do  any  PHYSICAL  activities  or  exercise  such  as 
 going  for  a  walk,  biking,  swimming,  exercise  videos/classes  or  anything  else  you 
 can think of? 
 ○  If yes, how long? 
 ●  For the caregiver (optional), 
 ○  During this week, did you meet the participant? 
 ○  In  the  past  two  days,  did  you  see  the  participant  do  any  COGNITIVE  activities 
 such  as  Sudoku,  board  games,  word  games,  or  any  other  activities  you  do  to  help 
 your memory and mental capacity? 
 ○  If yes, how long? 
 ○  In  the  past  two  days,  did  you  see  the  participant  do  any  PHYSICAL  activities  or 
 exercise  such  as  going  for  a  walk,  biking,  swimming,  exercise  videos/classes  or 
 anything else you can think of? 
 ○  If yes, how long? 
 9.  Assessment  after  12  weeks  (Only  Rutgers  RA  can  perform  assessment; 
 UMass RAs will organize the overall meeting) 
 - After  12  weeks, all participants will be assessed  with the following tests  online (via zoom)  . 
 Detailed steps will be the same as the baseline assessment. 
 RAs  will  generate  a  new  form  for  recording  12  weeks  follow-up  assessment  from  the  corresponding 
 Assessment Form instrument. 
 10. Returning tablet PC  (UMass RAs will perform) 
 - A UMass RA will track the returning delivery of the tablet computer. 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  should  have  instructed  the  participant  or  the  caregiver  to  return  the  tablet 
 computer. If not, 
 ○  Call  the  participant  or  the  caregiver  to  provide  the  instructions.  (Refer  to  8.  Checking 
 compliance every week  ) 
 ●  The  UMass  RA,  who  is  on  the  designed  days,  will  check  the  tracking  number  based  on  the 
 Tracking  number  field  (  Returning  to  the  UMass  from  the  subject  )  of  the  Tablet  Ship  & 
 Return instrument  . The following is an example. 
 ○  UMass RA1: Wed 
 ○  UMass RA2: Fri 
 ○  If the returning package has been picked up by the UPS, 
 ■  Enter  the  date  in  the  Shipped  date  field  of  the  Tablet  Ship  &  Return 
 instrument  . 
 ○  If the returning package is shown delivered, 
 ■  The RA will retrieve the tablet computer. 
 ■  The  RA  will  check  if  both  the  tablet  computer  and  the  charger  are  included  in  the 
 box. 
 ○  If the returning package is shown delivered but the package is not delivered, 
 ■  The RA will contact the UPS and file a claim. 
 11. Interview  (UMass RAs will perform) 
 - A UMass RA will remind the participant and the caregiver of the scheduled interview. 
 ●  Give  a  call  to  the  participant  and  the  caregiver,  remind  them  1  day  before  the  scheduled  interview 
 in the following order. 
 ○  Phone call 
 ○  If not answering, text and email. 
 ●  Give  a  call  to  the  participant  and  the  caregiver,  remind  them  2  hours  before  the  scheduled 
 interview. 
 ○  Phone call 
 ○  If not answering, text and email. 
 - Both UMass RAs and PIs (if applicable) will attend the interview. 
 ●  One UMass RA will initiate a zoom meeting. 
 ●  The  UMass  RA  will  email  a  zoom  link  to  the  participant  (or  the  caregiver),  another  UMass  RA, 
 and PIs approximately 10 minutes before the scheduled time. 
 - List of potential questions for the participant. 
 ●  What  information  and  how  do  participants  want  to  receive  to  better  comprehend  their  cognitive 
 performance and their compliance behaviors (frequency and duration)? 
 ○  Can you tell us which Neuro-World games you did well? 
 ○  How well did you do those games? 
 ○  Can you tell us which Neuro-World games you did poorly? 
 ○  How poorly did you do those games? 
 ○  Is  there  anything  else  you  want  to  know  about  your  performance  while  you  were  playing 
 those games? 
 ○  Did you enjoy playing Neuro-World games? 
 ○  What did you enjoy about playing Neuro-World games? 
 ○  What did you not enjoy about playing Neuro-World games? 
 ○  Can  you  tell  us  if  knowing  your  performance  in  Neuro-World  games  helped  you  play 
 Neuro-World routinely? 
 ○  What other information would help you adhere to playing Neuro-World routinely? 
 ●  What  is  the  optimal  design  of  the  feedback  mechanism  (content,  medium,  and  timing)  to  remind 
 participants to self-administer the training? 
 ○  What  made  it  easy  to  access  the  information  about  your  performance  in  playing 
 Neuro-World games? 
 ○  What  made  it  difficult  to  access  the  information  about  your  performance  in  playing 
 Neuro-World games? 
 ○  How can we present the information so that you can access it more easily? 
 ○  What made it easy to understand the information about your performance? 
 ○  What made it difficult to understand the information about your performance? 
 ○  How can we present the information so that you can understand more easily? 
 ○  How many times or often did you access the information about your performance? 
 ○  How  often  would  you  be  willing  to  access  the  information  if  it  were  presented  in  a  way 
 you preferred? 
 ●  Are  there  any  interaction  barriers,  such  as  video/audio  instructions  that  may  not  be  sufficiently 
 informative,  for  participants  to  use  the  system,  which  have  not  been  observed  in  our  preliminary 
 studies? 
 ○  What made it easy to play Neuro-World? 
 ○  What made it difficult to play Neuro-World? 
 ○  Did you find the Tutorial easy to understand? 
 ○  Did you find the instructions in the games easy to understand? 
 ○  Was it easy to navigate the menu? 
 ○  How do you think we can improve the menu? 
 ●  Any comments? 
 ○  Is there anything else you want to share with us? 
 - List of potential questions for the caregiver. 
 ●  How often did you have to remind the participant?  Was this a burden for you? 
 ●  How much assistance did you have to provide help to participants? 
 ●  Did the participant avoid, complain, or otherwise protest when it was time to play Neuro-World? 
 ●  What advice do you have for us as we move forward with this research on Neuro-World training 
 for persons diagnosed with MCI? 
 12.  Assessment  after  24  weeks  (Only  Rutgers  RA  can  perform 
 assessment; UMass RAs will organize the overall meeting) 
 - After  24  weeks, all participants will be assessed  with the following tests  online (via zoom)  . 
 Detailed steps will be the same as the baseline assessment. 
 RAs  will  generate  a  new  form  for  recording  24  weeks  follow-up  assessment  from  the  corresponding 
 Assessment Form instrument. 
 Towards the Development of a Mobile-Health Technology Based on Serious Game-based 
 Interventions in Adults with MCI outside the clinic 
 Purpose 
 The purpose of this study is to learn: 1) if Neuro-World (mobile cognitive training games) can 
 improve the cognitive function of adults with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 2) if we can 
 understand the cognitive function of adults with MCI based on their performance in 
 Neuro-World, and 3) if we can learn practical challenges that adults with MCI face while playing 
 Neuro-World. 
 Neuro-World 
 A tablet computer with pre-installed Neuro-world cognitive training games will be provided 
 during the study. 
 Eligibility 
 Adults with MCI  are eligible for the study if you  1) have mild cognitive impairment (we will 
 assess your impairment level for you), 2) are 55 years old or older, 3) can use a tablet 
 independently, and 4) have access to a computer for online video communication (e.g., Zoom). 
 Adults with MCI CANNOT participate in this study if you have 1) another neurologic or 
 psychiatric disorder, 2) history of traumatic brain injury, 3) uncorrected hearing or vision 

 impairment, 4) any significant impairment in your arms that could affect tablet use, 5) diagnosis 
 of dementia with Lewy bodies, progressive supranuclear palsy, multiple system atrophy, or 
 vascular parkinsonism, 6) diagnosis of dementia, and 7) participation of any other 
 therapist-supervised cognitive training. 
 If you need help navigating technology (such as using Zoom or mobile apps), you can choose to 
 have a friend or family member help you throughout this study. If you choose this option, they 
 will be enrolled in the study with you. In that case, helpers need to 1) be 18 years or older, 2) 
 understand your condition, and 3) can be contacted by the study team regularly. The person is 
 not eligible if he/she 1) has been specifically hired to provide care for you and 2) has any 
 impairments that prevent them from helping you. 
 Task 
 1.  We will ask  adults with MCI  to do one of the following  for the study (not both). 
 Group A: 1)  We will ask you to play Neuro-World cognitive  training games 30 minutes per day, 
 twice a week for 12 weeks in your home setting. During this period, we will give you phone calls 
 and ask if you adhere to the cognitive training and ask you to report the time of any additional 
 cognitive and physical activities three times a week.  2)  Upon completing 24 sessions, we will 
 ask you to join online sessions (e.g., Zoom) to share your experience of using Neuro-World  3) 
 Then, we will give you phone calls and ask if you have any significant changes in the level of 
 daily activities for another 12 weeks and ask you to report the time of any additional cognitive 
 and physical activities three times a week. This study lasts about six months, and you will spend 
 about 27.2 hours in total. 
 Group B: 1)  We will give you phone calls and ask if  you have any significant changes in the 
 level of daily activities for 12 weeks and ask you to report the time of any additional cognitive 
 and physical activities three times a week.  2)  After  the 12 weeks, we will ask you to play 
 Neuro-World cognitive training games 30 minutes per day, twice a week for 12 weeks in your 
 home setting. During this period, they will give you phone calls and ask if you adhere to the 
 cognitive training and ask you to report the time of any additional cognitive and physical 
 activities three times a week.  3)  Upon completing  24 sessions, we will ask you to join online 
 sessions (e.g., Zoom) to share your experience of using Neuro-World. This study lasts about six 
 months, and you will spend about 27.2 hours in total. 
 2.  If helpers participate in the study, we will ask  helpers  to do the following for the study. 
 1)  We will ask you to check on adults with MCI you  are helping if they do not adhere to cognitive 
 training.  2)  We will ask you to assist adults with  MCI in using a tablet computer and online 
 communication technology as necessary.  3)  During the  entire study, we will ask you to report the 
 time of any cognitive and physical activities adults with MCI engage in once per week.  4)  During 
 the 12-week period that adults with MCI use Neuro-World, we will contact you and ask for your 
 perspective on their adherence to Neuro-World cognitive training.  5)  During the 12-week control 
 period, we will contact you and ask if there are any significant changes in the activities of adults 
 with MCI.  6)  Upon the completion of 12-week Neuro-World  play, we will ask you to participate in 
 a 1:1 interview to hear your experience and opinions as a helper. This study lasts about six 
 months, and you will spend 4.4 hours in total for an interview and follow-up calls. You may need 
 to spend an additional 27.2 hours in total. However, you will be asked for help only when it is 
 necessary. 
 Compensation: 
 Adults with MCI will receive $2 after each Neuro-World play and $34 for each suite of cognitive 
 assessments, which amount to a total of $150. If helpers participate in the study, helpers will 
 receive $1 for each week of support and $13 for each 1:1 interview, which amounts to a total of 
 $50. 
 If you are interested in participating or want to know more, please contact the AHHA Lab 
 (413-545-8875, umass.ahha.lab@gmail.com). 
 For Adults with MCI 
 Thank you for speaking with us today. Before you officially enroll in this research study, I will be 
 asking you to complete a screening questionnaire. It should take you no more than 30 minutes 
 to complete. If you are determined ineligible to participate, your completed questionnaire will be 
 destroyed. If you are determined eligible to participate, the completed questionnaire will become 
 part of the study materials, and we will protect your information as confidential and safeguard it 
 from unauthorized disclosure. Only research personnel will have access to the information 
 contained in your screening questionnaire. If the screening questionnaire indicates that you are 
 eligible to participate, we will proceed to obtaining your written informed consent for participation 
 in the study. Do you have any questions? 
 The contacted researcher will ask the following questions regarding the inclusion criteria (2 
 minutes). 
 1. Are you 55 years old or older? 
 2. Can you turn on/off a smartphone or a tablet computer? Can you start an application and use 
 it on your smartphone or a tablet computer? It is ok to receive help from your caregiver on 
 operating your smartphone or tablet computer. 
 3. Do you have access to a computer for online video communication (e.g., Zoom, Microsoft 
 Team, Google Hangouts)? 
 The contacted researcher will ask the following questions regarding the exclusion criteria (5 
 minutes). 
 1. Do you have diagnosed neurologic or psychiatric disorders other than mild cognitive 
 impairment? 
 2. Do you have a history of diagnosed traumatic brain injury? 
 3. Do you have hearing or vision impairment that can hinder you from playing games? 
 4. Do you have any significant impairment in your arm that could affect the use of a tablet 
 computer? 
 5. Do you have diagnosed dementia with Lewy bodies, progressive supranuclear palsy, multiple 
 system atrophy, or vascular parkinsonism? 
 6. Do you have diagnosed dementia? 
 7. Are you receiving any therapist-supervised cognitive training? 
 For Caregivers (optional) 
 The contacted researcher will ask the following questions regarding the inclusion/exclusion 
 criteria (2 minutes). 
 Inclusion criteria 
 1. Are you 18 years old or older? 
 2. Do you know about your care receiver’s health conditions? 
 3. Will you be willing to be contacted by the researchers on a regular basis in case your care 
 receiver needs external help? 
 Exclusion criteria 
 4. Are you hired to provide care for your care receiver? 
 5. Do you have any cognitive, behavioral, or motor impairments that can affect assisting your 
 care receiver in the study? 
 ATTENTION 
 When you open the box, CHECK if the following items are in the box. 
 1.  One air-filled container 
 2.  One tablet (in the air-filled container) 
 3.  One tablet cover (a tablet is in the cover) 
 4.  One charger (in the air-filled container) 
 5.  One UPS return label 
 Please KEEP EVERYTHING you received that includes the following.  
 1.  One outer box 
 2.  One air-filled container 
 3.  One tablet 
 4.  One tablet cover 
 5.  One charger 
 6.  One UPS return label 
 Please DO NOT START cognitive training games until the researchers  
 contact you. 
 When the study is complete, the researchers will contact and ask you 
 to return all the items. At the time, you will need to do the following. 
 1.  Place the tablet (with its cover) in the air-filled container.  
 2.  Place the charger in the air-filled container.  
 3.  Place the air-filled container (with the tablet, the charger inside) 
 in the outer box. 
 4.  Seal the outer box. 
 5.  Put the UPS return label on the outer box. 
 6.  Place the box outside your front door.  
 References 
 ●  Chapman, J. E., Cadilhac, D. A., Gardner, B., Ponsford, J., Bhalla, R., & Stolwyk, R. J. (2019). 
 Comparing face-to-face and videoconference completion of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment 
 (MoCA) in community-based survivors of stroke.  Journal  of telemedicine and telecare  , 
 1357633X19890788. 
 ●  Wong, A., Nyenhuis, D., Black, S. E., Law, L. S., Lo, E. S., Kwan, P. W., ... & Mok, V. (2015). 
 Montreal Cognitive Assessment 5-minute protocol is a brief, valid, reliable, and feasible cognitive 
 screen for telephone administration.  Stroke  ,  46  (4),  1059-1064. 
 ●  Zietemann, V., Kopczak, A., Müller, C., Wollenweber, F. A., & Dichgans, M. (2017). Validation of 
 the telephone interview of cognitive status and telephone Montreal cognitive assessment against 
 detailed cognitive testing and clinical diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment after stroke.  Stroke  , 
 48  (11), 2952-2957. 
 ●  Zietemann, V., Kopczak, A., Müller, C., Wollenweber, F. A., & Dichgans, M. (2017). Validation of 
 the telephone interview of cognitive status and telephone Montreal cognitive assessment against 
 detailed cognitive testing and clinical diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment after stroke.  Stroke  , 
 48  (11), 2952-2957. 
 ●  Katz, M. J., Wang, C., Nester, C. O., Derby, C. A., Zimmerman, M. E., Lipton, R. B., ... & Rabin, L. 
 A. (2021). T -MoCA: A valid phone screen for cognitive impairment in diverse community samples. 
 Alzheimer's & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring  ,  13  (1), e12144. 
 ●  Timpano, F., Pirrotta, F., Bonanno, L., Marino, S., Marra, A., Bramanti, P., & Lanzafame, P. 
 (2013). Videoconference-based mini mental state examination: a validation study.  Telemedicine 
 and e-Health  ,  19  (12), 931-937. 
 ●  Roccaforte, W. H., Burke, W. J., Bayer, B. L., & Wengel, S. P. (1992). Validation of a telephone 
 version of the Mini-Mental State Examination.  Journal  of the American Geriatrics Society  ,  40  (7), 
 697-702. 
 ●  Newkirk, L. A., Kim, J. M., Thompson, J. M., Tinklenberg, J. R., Yesavage, J. A., & Taylor, J. L. 
 (2004). Validation of a 26-point telephone version of the Mini-Mental State Examination.  Journal 
 of geriatric psychiatry and neurology  ,  17  (2), 81-87. 
 ●  Kennedy, R. E., Williams, C. P., Sawyer, P., Allman, R. M., & Crowe, M. (2014). Comparison of 
 in-person and telephone administration of the Mini-Mental State Examination in the University of 
 Alabama at Birmingham Study of Aging.  Journal of the  American Geriatrics Society  ,  62  (10), 
 1928-1932. 
 ●  Miller, D. I., Talbot, V., Gagnon, M., & Messier, C. (2013). Administration of neuropsychological 
 tests using interactive voice response technology in the elderly: validation and limitations. 
 Frontiers in Neurology  ,  4  , 107. 
 ●  Powell, D. H., & Hiatt, M. D. (1996). Auditory and visual recall of forward and backward digit 
 spans.  Perceptual and Motor Skills  ,  82  (3_suppl), 1099-1103. 
 ●  Burke, W. J., Roccaforte, W. H., Wengel, S. P., Conley, D. M., & Potter, J. F. (1995). The reliability 
 and validity of the Geriatric Depression Rating Scale administered by telephone.  Journal of the 
 American Geriatrics Society  ,  43  (6), 674-679. 
 ●  García, M., Rohlfs, I., Vila, J., Sala, J., Pena, A., Masiá, R., & Marrugat, J. (2005). Comparison 
 between telephone and self-administration of Short Form Health Survey Questionnaire (SF-36). 
 Gaceta Sanitaria  ,  19  , 433-439. 