CONFIDENCE -AI Financial Education for 
Caregivers (CONFIDENCE- AI) 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Pla n 
NCT0613418
May 19, 2025  
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided in section 29, or  added as a comment. Page 1 of 27[USE THIS TEMPLATE IF YOUR PROJECT INCLUDES SURVEY, INTERVIEWS, FOCUS 
GROUPS OR EDUCATIONAL
 RESEARCH ACTIVITIES WITH NO BIOMEDICAL/CLINICAL 
COMPONENTS]
INSTRUCTIONS:
Use this template to prepare your IRB Protocol.
Depending on the nature of what you are doing, some sections may not  be applicable to
your research. If so, please mark as N/A.
When you write a protocol, keep an electronic copy. You will need to modify this copy
when making
 changes.
Consider using  a different color font for your answers.
PROTOCOL TITLE:
Include the full protocol title.
CONFIDENCE 2 Financial Education Program Evaluation.
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
Name: Kylie Meyer
DATE:
5/19/2025
Indicate the origin of this protocol  (who conceived  of and leads the development of the 
protocol regardless of funding):
☒ Investigator initiated (Investigator(s) developed  protocol, regardless of funding)
☐ Industry (Pharmaceutical, Device, etc.) (Industry developed protocol)
☐ Federal (NIH, DOD, etc.)
☐ Cooperative Group
 (SWOG, GOG, etc.)
☐ Other - Please specify:
  Click here to enter text.
Has this study been disapproved by or withdrawn from any
 other  IRB?
☐  Yes ☒  No
If so, please explain: .
Does this study involve cancer research
 or cancer-related issues?
☐
  Yes ☒  No
If yes, indicate the
 PRMC number: Click here to enter text.
Is this 
a student led study?
☐Yes☒  No
If yes,
 is the student: ☐ Undergrad ☐  Graduate Student  ☐Other Click here to enter text.
If yes, is the project:  ☐ Capstone ☐  Master’s thesis ☐ PhD dissertation
☐Other Click here to enter text.
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 2 of 27Is this work part of a larger collaborative  research  project where more than one institution is 
participating in  the research?  ( In collaborative  projects, data/specimens/results are often shared  
between researchers at the participating institutions, and they will publish  together.)
☐ No  ☒ Yes
If yes, please explain.
We are collaborating with the University of Southern California, where the intervention is being administered as a part  of a social service  program for caregivers (USC Family 
Caregiver Support Program).  USC  may participate in the publication of findings but is 
not involved in data collection procedures, other than registration data used as a part of regular programming.  We are also working with Amicus Brain Innovations as a study 
partner. Amicus  Brain  Innovations is responsible for building  out technology components 
of the CONFIDENCE program. They will store data  such as utilization data (e.g.,  receipt 
of text messages) from caregivers in the NeuViCare app that  we are integrating into the 
intervention.
1.0 Funding
If this study is grant  funded,  is the money coming directly to  CWRU from the study sponsor?
☒  Yes ☐  No ☐  N/A, not grant funded
2.0 Objectives
Directions: Describe the purpose, specific  aims or objectives. Be sure to also include the 
hypothesis being tested. The overall objective of this project  is to test the feasibility, acceptability,  and preliminary 
efficacy on an AI-enhanced psychoeducational intervention to reduce financial strain among Latino/Hispanic family 
caregivers to people living with dementia (PLWD)   by supporting resource access called  CONFIDENCE  2. The central  
hypothesis is that caregivers who participate in the CONFIDENCE intervention will report higher levels  of 
resourcefulness and self-efficacy following participation in the CONFIDENCE intervention that will reduce financial strain 
among caregivers of PLWD.   
3.0 Background
Directions: Describe the relevant prior experience and gaps  in current  knowledge 
describing how this  study will add  to existing knowledge.  Include any relevant preliminary 
data. Family  caregivers to people living with dementia encounter financial  strain,  including material, 
psychological, and behavioral components. Caregivers to PLWD also spend an average of $8,978 per year out-of-pocket on caregiving expenses,  which is around  $1000 more  than caregivers  to persons 
without dementia. Research findings support that caregiving places individuals at increased  risk of 
poverty, due to factors such  as reduced ability to engage in employment  and spending down one's own 
savings to cover costs. Financial  strain  is also a risk factor for caregiver  depression  and burden  which  
affects 1 in 5 family caregivers to PLWD.  Financial strain disproportionately affects Latino/Hispanic 
family caregivers  to PLWD. They spend 47%of their  annual household income  on out-of-pocket  costs of 
caregiving, compared to 18% among non-Hispanic white,  34% among African American, and  22% 
among Asian  American caregivers. These differences  in out-of-pocket  expenses are partially due to 
cultural preferences to provide care at home,  such  that Latino/Hispanic families  provide  more intensive 
care that is more  likely  to disrupt employment and increases out-of-pocket costs. Further, U.S. 
Latino/Hispanic households have a median net worth of  $52,190 (four  times lower than U.S non-
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 3 of 27Latino/Hispanic households), which makes  it more difficult  to absorb  out-of-pocket costs when they  
occur. The impact of financial strain on Latino/Hispanic  families is likely to grow substantially,  given an 
anticipated 832% increase in the number of Latinos/Hispanics LWD in 2060. However  in 2022 only two 
studies were found to examine intervention  effects on financial strain  of Latino/Hispanic caregivers.   
To address the  need for programs to reduce financial strain among Latino  caregivers, we developed the  
Confidently Navigating  Financial Decisions and Enhancing Financial  Wellbeing in Dementia Caregiving  
(CONFIDENCE) program with  support from AARP Foundation  from 2020 to 2023. The original  version 
of CONFIDENCE includes a 5-week,  group-based  psychoeducational intervention  delivered by Zoom.  
Most data for the evaluation  of the CONFIDENCE original program have been  collected. Initial  findings 
indicate high satisfaction  with  the program among participants (100% “Agree”  or “Strongly Agree” they  
would recommend the program to other caregivers), but also lower-than-anticipated uptake  and 
adherence. For example,  only  51% of caregivers registering for CONFIDENCE at  the USC Family 
Caregiver Support Center attended at  least one session.  Of those  who attended at least one  session,  
average attendance was  3.1 out of  5 sessions. These findings suggest high acceptability  but limited 
feasibility. The second version of CONFIDENCE aims to build on lessons  learned from the original  CONFIDENCE 
program with the goal  of improving program feasibility prior to testing the program’s efficacy. To  
improve uptake  and adherence, we  have shortened  the number of group-based Zoom discussion sessions  
from 5 to 4 to reduce the  time required to participate. Content covered in the  sessions  removed from the  
core program will be delivered by asynchronous,  technology-driven means.  Participating  caregivers will 
have a chance to decide which topics to focus on based on  their current needs  and will receive 
informational text  messages  covering these topics. Caregivers  will also have access to a  conversational AI 
assistant (“Keiko”) that  will draw  from hand-picked and trusted resources to devise  answers  to questions 
caregivers may  have about  topics such as  how to find reduced-cost home modifications,  how to prepare 
for retirement,  and how to prevent financial scams. To support learning between discussion  sessions, 
NeuViCare also will host  a moderated community forum where caregivers  can connect with other 
participating caregivers  .  
Please add relevant references at the end of the  protocol, not  at the end of  this section.
4.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Directions: Describe how individuals will be screened for eligibility. 
Participants will be asked to either complete an online self-administered survey 
to determine  their eligibility, or to complete  eligibility questions by telephone. 
Using the  tables below, describe the inclusion  and exclusion criteria that will define who 
will be included and excluded in your final  study  sample.
 
Inclusion
1.Age range: from 18 to not upper  limit
2.Has been  at least 6 months since  the care recipient began  to experience dementia 
symptoms
3.Person living with dementia meets stage 4 to 6 criteria on Global Deterioration Scale according to family  caregiver
4.Latino/Hispanic ethnicity
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 4 of 27Exclusion
1.Individuals who plan  to place their  family member  in a nursing home  in the next 3 
months
2.Unreliable access to internet, tablet or smart phone, and email 
3. Does not  agree to participate in at least  3 of the 4 group sessions and/or register for 
the NeuViCare app 
4.Unable to read and  speak in English or Spanish
5.0 Number of  Research Participants
Directions: Indicate  the target number of research participants to be accrued locally, and, 
if this is a multi-site study,  indicate the total number  of research participants to be accrued 
across all sites. 
Example language that  can be used: We will enroll 25 subjects  at CWRU and plan to enroll  
150 subjects study wide. We  will recruit 42 family  caregivers to  account for the anticipated 20% 
attrition before and after participation in CONFIDENCE 2. Moreover, at least 12 participants will complete  qualitative  interviews.
6.0 Special/Vulnerable  Populations
Indicate specifically if you will include each  of the following special populations by  checking 
the appropriate box: 
☐  Adults unable to consent
☐  Minors (infants, children, teenagers) 
☐  Wards of the state (e.g.  Foster Children)
☐  Pregnant  Women  (only  if targeted)
☐  Neonates
☐  Neonates  of Uncertain Viability
☐  Employees
☐  Prisoners
☐  Illiterate  Individuals
☒  Non-English Speaking
☐  Students
☐  None
1.If the research involves students or employees,  describe how  you will recruit  so that: 
a) Employers  or educators do not know if someone  participated (until after grades have 
been assigned in the case of educators) 
b) Employers or educators do not directly recruit their own  students or employees,  and 
anything else to prevent feelings of coercion  to those subordinate  to their employer or 
educator. 
  
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 5 of 272.If the research involves individuals that  are included in a special/vulnerable population, 
describe the additional safeguards included to protect  the rights  and welfare of the 
individuals for each  population indicated. Click here  to enter text.
3.If excluding pregnant  women, illiterate or non-English speaking individuals, provide a 
scientific rationale for the  exclusion.   Inconvenience or cost is  not an acceptable 
rationale. Persons who  are illiterate are excluded from the study due to an inability to 
engage with the  program materials, such as the written workbook and text  materials.  
7.0 International information
☒  This is  not an international study – please leave rest of  this section blank.
☐  We will be  conducting this research at the following international sites:
Click here to enter  text.
☐  We are  recruiting participants outside of the US from the following locations:
Click here to enter  text.
☐  We are  sending data outside of the US to the following  locations:
Click here to enter  text.
☐  We are  receiving  data from outside of the  US from the following locations:
Click here to enter  text.
8.0 Recruitment Methods
Note: Attach all applicable recruitment  materials to the last section of  the Smart form under 
“Recruitment Materials.”
1.Which of  the following methods will be used to recruit  research participants? – Select all 
that apply
☒  Email
☒  Phone call
☐  Letter
☒  Advertisement (e.g., poster, flyer,  etc.)
☒  I attest that  advertisements will only be placed with permission 
☒  Social media
Indicate the platform(s): Facebook
☒  I attest that  recruitment information will only be posted  with  permission 
☐  Other. Please specify:  Click here to enter  text.
2.Describe when, where,  how and  by whom potential research participants  will be  
recruited. Individuals  involved in recruitment should be identified by role and not by 
name (e.g. study coordinator, co-investigator,  research assistant).
Information  about CONFIDENCE will be shared  by email blast sent to  caregivers in  the 
USC FCSC  mailing list.  USC FCSC Family Consultants will also share information  
about the program with clients who may  benefit (See  Talking Points document.). 
Caregivers may also learn  about the study on the Alzheimer’s Association TrialMatch  
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 6 of 27site. Participants who register on Eventbrite and indicate interest  in learning  more about 
the study will receive  calls and emails  from the study team with  information about the 
study. If interested, eligibility screening will be conducted by phone and  they will be sent 
an email with  a REDCap consent form  to review.  Participants who  complete the 
eligibility screening  online will receive  a link to the  consent  form and a  telephone 
confirmation. Once  enrolled, participants will receive a baseline survey up to 3 weeks 
before their  first scheduled  CONFIDENCE session. 
3.Describe the feasibility of recruiting the required number of suitable  research participants 
within the agreed recruitment period.  For example, how many potential research 
participants do  you have access  to? 
The anticipated recruitment period  will begin in March 2024 to  August  2025. We aim  to 
enroll 5-6 caregivers per cohort. Each cohort will take 4-5 weeks  to complete. We  aim to 
use the same  recruitment  approach as was done in the original CONFIDENCE study, 
relying heavily on the USC FCSC  client list. USC  FCSC serves over 500 caregivers 
yearly, among whom 60% are Latino/Hispanic and  38% care for someone living  with  
AD/ADRD. Although recruitment  into the  initial study was  far lower than anticipated, 
multiple factors are expected to contribute  to higher enrollment in  this study, including 1) 
reduced burden of participation in the intervention  (e.g., reduction  of synchronous  
sessions from 5 to 4), 2)  reduced burden of study participation (e.g.,  removal  of daily  
spending diary component), and 3)  expansion of age  eligibility  criteria from caregivers 
ages 50+ to 18+ in the  current study.  Further,  we have expanded our recruitment  
approach during the initial CONFIDENCE study. 
9.0 Setting
Directions: Describe the sites and  locations where your research team will conduct the 
research.
 All research will be conducted at Case Western Reserve University where  the study team 
has lab space to collect  data by telephone,  REDCap, and Zoom  in a private  space.  Some data 
on app utilization will be collected  by Amicus Brain Innovations for use by Case Western 
Reserve University researchers. 
10.0 Consent Process
Indicate whether you will be obtaining consent:
☒  Yes ☐  No
If yes, answer the following questions:
1.Describe who  will consent the subjects and where the consent process  will take  
place: The consent process will be completed using an online consent  
form completed in REDCap,  wherein participants will be asked to 
review a written consent  form and answer 5 true or false questions 
about participation to check  understanding. If these questions are 
not answered correctly,  a study team member will contact the 
participant to clarify information and resend  the consent  form. If 
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 7 of 27answers are still incorrect,  the participant will be deemed ineligible  
to participate and notified of their removal from the study.
  
2.The time  that will  be devoted  to the consent discussion: The  time  to complete  
the online consent form will vary among  participants, though  we 
anticipate it will take  no more than  1 hour and, for most 
participants, around 20 minutes.
3.Any waiting period available between informing  the prospective  subject  and 
obtaining the  consent: There is no required waiting period between 
informing the participant of their  eligibility and the consenting 
process. However,  participants may choose  to delay consent  
following notification  of eligibility, such as by taking  additional time  
to complete the online consent  form.
4.Steps  that will be  taken to ensure the  research  participants’ understanding:  
Participants will be asked to complete  5 questions about  what is 
involved in the study to ensure  understanding of the written consent  
form. They may also contact members of the study team with  any 
questions they may have.
5.Any process to ensure ongoing consent: We will assume ongoing consent if 
the participant chooses to complete surveys. At the top of each 
survey, participants  will be reminded that participation is voluntary
6.Steps  that will be  taken to minimize the possibility  of coercion  or undue influence 
to the subjects: While consenting participants, we will remind  them  
that participation is voluntary  and that they  are welcome to 
participate in CONFIDENCE regardless of their choice  to participate 
in the research  study
For Adult Participants
Indicate if you will be asking for  a waiver  or alteration of consent process or  
documentation (consent will not be obtained,  or written consent  will not be documented)
☒  Yes ☐  No
If yes, explain  how the research involves no more than minimal risk.  We are  requesting a  
waiver of  consent related  to provision of a signature for a sub-study,  wherein  we will ask 
caregivers who  are not in the parent  study to participate in a qualitative interview.  The 
interview content focuses on their experience in the CONFIDENCE  program  and is aligned  
with the goals of program evaluation/quality  improvement. It is  unlikely  private or 
embarrassing information  would be shared.  
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 8 of 27Indicate which  part  of the consent process you are requesting be waived or altered  and 
the rationale for requesting the waiver or alteration:
☒  I will  obtain  consent, but not participant’s signature.
1.Give the rationale for  the request of a waiver of signed consent. Those  
individuals who did not enroll in the  study  are likely busier than those  who 
are enrolled in  the parent research study. Asking for a consent signature 
may add additional burden  to a minimal-risk component of the study.
2.Please describe  how you will be documenting that a  participant  has 
consented. The  interviewer  will ask the participant if  they consent to  
participate at the beginning of the  interview. They  interview will not  
proceed unless consent is  given  
3.Indicate if the  subjects will be provided with written information about the 
study, and provide justification if you will not be providing a written  
explanation of the research. Caregivers will be sent a copy  of the 
information sheet prior to the scheduled interview,  if they agree to be  
interviewed. This  will be  reviewed  at the beginning of the  interview.
☐   I will obtain consent, but request  a waiver  of some  of the elements of consent 
                      (e.g. use of deception).
☐   I will not obtain any  consent, and I am requesting a  full waiver  of consent.
If you are requesting  an alteration  of consent, or a waiver  of consent,  please answer  
the following:
1.Give the rationale for  the request of a waiver or alteration of the consent  
process. See above
2.Explain why  the waiver or alteration  of consent  will not  adversely affect 
the rights and  welfare of the participants. The  questions asked  in the 
qualitative interview are unlikely to result in disclosure of sensitive information, and  are more aligned with the goals  of program  evaluation or 
quality improvement than research. 
3.Explain why  the research could  not practicably be carried  out without the 
waiver or  alteration of  consent. Requiring a signature would put additional  
burden on caregivers without necessarily reducing already minimal risks.
4.Indicate if the  subjects will be provided with additional  information about 
the study after  participation. Caregivers will be provided additional 
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 9 of 27information at  the end of  the study,  including  a written summary and 
invitation to  view  a presentation about  results 
*Be sure to upload a consent script or information  sheet with your study  protocol
Additional Considerations for Consent Process with Adults
Non English Speakers (Please select one)
☐  I am not  enrolling non-English speaking individuals in this research study. The following is 
justification for  why non-English  speaking  individuals  cannot  be enrolled: Click  here  to enter 
text.
☒  I will be targeting non-English speaking  adults
1.Describe the process to ensure that  the oral and  written  information provided to  those  
research participants will be in that language during  initial consent  as well as throughout 
the study. Study, intervention, and  communicative documents have been translated from 
the English version  to Spanish by a  professional translation service and checked  by 
research assistants  that are fluent/native in both English and Spanish languages. When 
available, we use validated translations of scales; for those  scales  that are not validated,  
we use forward and  back translation with at  least two study team  members  fluent in  
Spanish. Qualitative interviews will also be translated  by a  professional translation team 
(ASTA USA). Interventionists responsible  for delivering the Spanish version of 
CONFIDENCE at the  USC Family Caregiver  Support  Center  are fluent  in Spanish. Study 
team members who conduct  enrollment  of participants and review the consent process 
will also be native  Spanish speakers.  Three  RAs  have been  hired to ensure sufficient 
coverage for  this,
2.List the language(s)  other than English that will be targeted:  Spanish  
☐  I am not  targeting non-English speaking  individuals. If a  non-English speaking  individual  is 
eligible for the study, we will use the following  procedures  to enroll: 
1.Describe the process to ensure that  the oral and  written  information provided to  those  
research participants will be in that language during  initial consent  as well as throughout 
the study. Click here  to enter  text.
2.List the language(s)  other than English that will be targeted:  Click here to enter text.
Adults Unable  to Consent
☒  I am not  enrolling adults unable  to consent in this research study – please  leave the rest of  
this section  blank.
☐  There is an  anticipated direct  benefit to the subject.  Explain: Click  here  to enter text.
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 10 of 27☐  There is NOT an anticipated direct  benefit  to the subject. Explain: Click  here to  enter 
text.
1.Describe the process to determine whether an individual is capable of consent. Click here to enter text.
2.List the individuals from  whom permission will be  obtained  in order of priority (e.g.  
durable power of attorney  for health care, court appointed guardian for health  care 
decisions, spouse,  and adult child). Click here to enter text.
3.For research  conducted outside of  the state, provide information that describes which 
individuals are authorized under applicable  law to consent on behalf of a  prospective  
subject to their participation in the procedure(s) involved in the research.  Click  here to 
enter text.
☐ N/A  
4.Describe the process for assent  of the research participants. Indicate:
Which subjects  that are unable  to consent will be  required to  give  assent? If not  all, 
explain why. Click here to enter text.
Describe whether assent of the  research  participants  will be documented and the 
process to document assent. Click here to enter text.
☐  The subject  will be informed about  the research to the extent  compatible with the 
subject’s understanding.
☐   Subjects will be closely  monitored.
☐  The subject will be withdrawn if they  appear unduly distressed.
Research Participants Who Are Not Yet  Adults (infants, children, teenagers)
☒  I am not enrolling participants who are not yet adults in  this research study. – please leave the  
rest of this section blank
1.Will parental permission  be obtained from:
☐  One  parent even if the  other parent is alive, known,  competent, reasonably 
available, and  shares legal responsibility for the care and  custody  of the child
☐  Both parents  unless one parent  is deceased, unknown,  incompetent, or not  
reasonably available, or when only one parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child
☐  Requesting a  waiver of parental  permission
If you are getting parental/guardian permission:
a.Indicate how  you will be documenting the permission:
☐  Signed consent form
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 11 of 27☐  Requesting a  waiver of documentation  of parental permission
b.Describe whether permission will be obtained from individuals other than parents, and if so, who will be allowed to provide  permission. Describe the 
process used to determine these individuals’ authority to consent  to each child’s 
participation in  research. Click here to enter  text.
If a waiver of parental  permission is being  requested:
a.Describe how  the study is designed  for a subject  population for which 
parental/guardian permission is not a reasonable  requirement to protect the 
subjects, if  applicable.  Click here to enter  text.
b.Describe how  the research could not practicably  be carried out without the 
waiver of  parental permission. Click here to enter text.
c.Indicate if the  subjects will be provided with additional  information about the 
study after participation.  Click  here to enter text.
2.  Will assent be  obtained from:
☐  all  of the children
☐  some of  the children
☐  none  of the children
If assent will be obtained  from  some children, indicate which children will be 
required to assent. Click here to enter text.
If assent will be obtained  from  none of the children,  indicate the rationale. Click  here 
to enter text.
When assent of children is obtained,  describe how it will be documented. Click  here 
to enter text.
3.For children who are pregnant, describe how assent and  permission are  obtained. Click  
here to  enter  text.
☐ N/A 
11.0 Sharing  of Results with Research Participants
Individual test or research  results  will be  shared  with research participants  (this is not  referring to 
sharing through  standard academic channels,  e.g.,  publishing, presentation, etc.):
☐ Yes ☒ No
If yes, describe  how the results will be shared. Click here to  enter text.
Individual test results will be shared with others  (e.g., lab results given to a primary care 
physician):
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 12 of 27☐ Yes ☒ No
If yes, describe  with whom and how the results will be  shared. Click here to enter text.
12.0 Study Design/Procedures
Directions: 
1) Describe  the overall study design  (e.g.: single visit, single-blind, double-blind, 
non-randomized, randomized, blood draw, investigational drug, device etc.).
2) Provide a description of all study-related  research procedures  being performed, 
including the length  of time  involved. 
3) Include  procedures being performed to monitor research participants for safety 
or minimize risks.  
4) Describe  the source records including medical or educational  records, which will 
be used to  collect data about subjects.
5) Include  a description  of any device being used  to collect data (e.g., eye tracker,  
step counter).  If the device itself  is being studied,  include additional  information  in 
Section 29.
Overall design. A single-arm pre-  and post-test clinical trial of the  CONFIDENCE  
intervention will be conducted. This study  builds on the original CONFIDENCE  study 
(STUDY20221010), but with a modified  version of the intervention and minor updates in 
data collection protocols  to reduce  participant burden. Participation will be offered  to any 
caregiver of persons living with dementia nationally  who register for the program via  the 
USC Family Caregiver Support Center  (USC FCSC) Eventbrite.  Study  participation is 
optional. CONFIDENCE will be delivered  in English and  Spanish, and participants may 
participate in the study  in either language.
Intervention The intervention includes participation  in four,  1.5 hour group discussion 
sessions delivered by Family Consultants from the USC Family Caregiver Support Center. Zoom sessions  will be attended  by other  caregivers and will feature vignette-style  
videos featuring family  caregivers as well as peer-learning activities. Between the 
sessions, caregivers will receive text messages  from NeuViCareTM with informational 
tips and reminders  to complete practice  exercises.  They may also choose  to interact  with  
Keiko, the apps conversational AI assistant that  generates responses  to questions based 
on sources selected or created by the study team. Caregivers can also participant in a  
monitored community forum, wherein  they  will be able to  communicate  with other 
caregivers in the program. Participants  will be sent instructions on how to  register for the 
NeuViCare App,  and will have a dedicated  “NeuViCare champion” at the USC FCSC 
who they can turn to if they need additionals support. Total time for intervention 
participation in  8 to 10 hours over  4 weeks.
Recruitment strategy. Caregivers will primarily  be recruited from the USC FCSC by 
sending information about CONFIDENCE via email  blast, as well as individual email  
invitations and  follow-up  calls sent to participants who  are likely to  be eligible for the 
study. The USC FCSC  may also advertise this program via social media channels and 
with community partners, as they would any program they  offer  to the community. 
Caregivers may also learn  about the study on the Alzheimer’s Association TrialMatch  
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 13 of 27site.Enrollment and consenting. Participants who register on Eventbrite  and are interested  in 
learning about the study will receive up to four calls and emails by a study  team  member 
to learn more about the  study. If  interested  in participating, eligibility screening and a  
review of  the study consent  information  will be conducted by phone with  the PI or a 
trained study team member. (Participants  may complete the screening process  online,  but 
are asked to complete a telephone follow up where they will be asked  the screening item  
about the Global  Deterioration Scale and other questions they did  not respond to.) 
Participants will then  be sent an email  with a REDCap consent form to review  and 
signature. Total enrollment and  consenting time is estimated to take up to  1 hour.
Survey administration. Once enrolled, participants will  receive  the baseline survey up 
to 3 weeks before  their first CONFIDENCE session by  email, which includes questions 
about spending  on out-of-pocket care costs, financial strain, resourcefulness, self-
efficacy, and information about the caregiving context and use of supports.  The first  
follow-up survey will be sent mediately post-intervention (i.e., within 1 week). A  second  
follow-up survey will be sent two months following intervention completion to understand the maintenance  of outcomes. We  estimate follow  up surveys take  about  30 to 
45 minutes to complete.Qualitative interviews.  In-depth, open-ended, semi-structured qualitative interviews will 
be conducted with at least 12  participants  by phone  and/or  Zoom,  both  in Spanish  and 
English. Questions will be based  on caregiver’s  experiences  and opinions  about their  
participation in  CONFIDENCE  2. The  interview guide will be based on the seven  
components of the  Theoretical Framework  of Acceptability. This guide will be previously 
reviewed by an  advisory council.  Questions about  the theory of resourcefulness will be 
also included to better understand its application.  Depending on how much participants 
would like to share, we estimate  interviews will last 15 minutes to  1 hour. Update 
9/2/2024: The research team may  also follow up with caregivers who  participated in 
CONFIDENCE but did not enroll in the research study to  conduct qualitative interviews. 
The process  for these interviews are consistent with those  used  for caregivers enrolled in 
the parent study.  We will use purposeful sampling according to engagement  int the 
program (e.g., attended  all four sessions). 
NeuViCare Utilization data. Data  on app utilization will be available on a dashboard 
viewable to the study team and  facilitator  on the NeuViCare App. They PI will be able to 
view and record data stored in the secure NeuViCare Google Cloud on a secure  
dashboard using a  unique login. Aggregated  information on Care  Advisory  search subject  
will be shared by email;  that is, we  will not  see questions individuals submitted to  Keiko. 
Payment. Participants will receive  up to $160 for  their participation using emailed 
Amazon Gift  Cards.  They  will receive $50 for the baseline survey completion and $50 
and $60 for the first and second follow-up survey, respectively. 
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 14 of 27Fidelity monitoring. Fidelity will be monitored  using a form developed for the initial 
CONFIDENCE intervention with  additional  refinements from  talking to  interventionists. 
This form will be  completed by an observer who views a video recording of selected 
sessions. Questions will  be based on adherence to the session  agenda, timing, participant 
experience, and quality  of delivery. One session per  cohort will be  randomly selected for 
fidelity monitoring.Attendance. Attendance to each session will be recorded by facilitators and shared  with 
Case Western using a  Box folder.  The average number of sessions attended by 
participants and the standard  deviation will be reported and  compared between the 
English and the Spanish  sessions. Another comparison, in the  form  of percentage based 
on the different  number of possible sessions to attend, will be made on attendance 
between CONFIDENCE vs CONFIDENCE.Participant safety  monitoring. Confidentiality. All survey data  will be de-identified and 
only the PI will have access to the identifier information. NeuViCare  user data will be 
tracked using  an email address and  phone number.  Only the PI will have access to  the 
study key that  will allow  link study data to contact information, and will not  share this 
with other  study team members to prevent breach of privacy. Transient emotional  
distress. If caregivers  experience  emotional  distress while interacting with a study team 
member, they will be referred to resources of self-care, community support and  the 
Alzheimer’s Association  24/7  Helpline.  Adverse events. All suspected  study adverse  
events will  be reported using a standardized  form  in REDCap. These  will be  tracked and 
monitored by  the PI. All study team  members will be trained to  identify on risk 
management protocols,  such as when to immediately contact the PI about a suspected 
adverse event. See the  Adverse Event Form.  
13.0 Study Timeline  (optional)
14.0 ClinicalTrials.gov InformationPre-Screening
Visit 1 Visit 2
Visit 3
Six week Follow up
Estimated time  
requirement of visit
Data Collection
Study Procedure 1
Study Procedure 2
Study Procedure 3
Phone Call Questionnaire
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 15 of 27Directions: If  this study has been registered on ClinicalTrials.gov, provide  the 
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier  and the investigator/sponsor responsible for registering. If this 
study has not been registered  on ClinicalTrials.gov, provide the rationale  as to why and  
if/when it will be. If it does not meet the requirement for being registered on ClinicalTrials.gov, please state that.
 Unique Protocol  ID: STUDY20230876. 
15.0 List  of Data to  be Collected
1.Indicate what identifiers you will collect
☒ Name
☒ Address (e.g., Zip  code, other geographical designation, etc.)
☐ Dates related to  an individual (e.g.,  Date of admission, birth, surgery, etc.)
☒ Telephone  number
☐ Fax number
☒ Email  address
☐ Social security number
☐ Medical record number
☐ Health plan  beneficiary  number
☐ Account number
☐ Certificate/license number
☐ Any vehicle or other device serial
☐ Device  identifiers or serial numbers
☐ Web URL
☐ Internet protocol (IP) address
☒ Finger or  voice prints (includes  audio recordings)
☒ Photographic  images (includes video recordings)
☐ Other: Any characteristic  that would uniquely  identify  the individual
If other, please  explain: Click here to  enter text.
2.List all other data to be collected for the research study. Attach all data collection  tools  on 
the Local  Site Documents  page of the SpartaIRB smart form (Other Attachments). 
Baseline, Follow  Up 1, and Follow Up 2 Surveys; Qualitative interviews (recordings  
and transcripts); Utilization of NeuViCare App  including logins,  completion  of 
activities, receipt of text messages,  community forum posts,  and AI prompts (de-
identified; includes non-study participants); Intervention fidelity, including selected  
CONFIDENCE session recordings; Characteristics of study participants and non-
study participants (USC FCSC Eventbrite  registration); intervention  attendance; 
Study adverse events; Study retention
16.0 Online Data  Collection
☐ We will not collect data through an online platform.
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 16 of 271. List the online platform to be used.  The  preferred platforms  are REDCap and Qualtrics, 
as these provide good data security and have options for collecting data without individually identifiable  information.
All survey  data will be collected  through REDCap. Qualitative interview data will be 
collected on an institutional Zoom account  and recorded.  Eventbrite data will also  
be downloaded on registrants, regardless of study participation. Eventbrite data, 
also collected in the previous  CONFIDENCE study, includes information such  as 
demographics information to help us understand  the characteristics of those  who  
participate in the CONFIDENCE  program when  delivered in a community setting. 
Finally, app utilization data in the NeuViCare  program will be stored  in a dashboard  
and made accessible to the study team by individual password  protected  accounts . 
2.If your intent  is to collect the data without identifiers linked  to an individual (including IP  
addresses), describe how you will ensure that no identifiable information will be  
associated with  the data.  
☐ Qualtrics:  enable Anonymize Responses setting (removes  IP addresses and 
location data) 
☐ REDCap:  use  of the Public Survey Link
☐ REDCap:  use  of a Participant List without a Participant Identifier field 
(Note: this  does  maintain  a connection between the data and the individual, but it is  only 
accessible to REDCap support  personnel and not the  researchers.  Data collected in  this manner  
should not  be referred to as anonymous, but rather as data that is deidentified to the researchers).
☐ Other: Click here to enter text.
17.0 Data Analysis  Plan
Directions: Describe the data analysis  plan,  including any statistical  procedures.  If 
applicable, provide  a power analysis,  and study/safety  endpoints. 
Outcome measures. Resourcefulness  (primary outcome). Resourcefulness skills help family 
caregivers lower material  out-of-pocket costs through identification of community resources and 
alternative ways of  managing  costs. This will be  measured using Resourcefulness  Scale, a 28-
item scale  used to measure potential and social resourcefulness (alpha=0.83;  range: 0 to  140). 
Self-efficacy (second  primary outcome) is measured using  the Caregiver  Self-Efficacy Scale. 
This 8-item  scale combines domains of  self-efficacy (e.g., managing behavioral symptoms,  
accessing respite, and controlling upsetting thoughts. It demonstrates high reliability  
(alpha=0.89) and  good test-retest reliability (0.73). Scores range from 8 (lowest) to 80 (highest). 
Financial strain (secondary outcome) . Interventions to reduce  caregiver financial strain are 
needed across multiple levels, individual-level behavioral interventions are needed  given the 
slow pace  of policy change to promote caregiver’s financial security. This will be primarily 
measured using the  11-item Comprehensive  Score  for Financial  Toxicity (COST) Scale, which 
has been  modified from  the cancer  field,  which demonstrates validity  and reliability (a=0.91;  
range: 0 to 44). We will  also use  a secondary measure of psychological financial  strain that was 
used in the initial CONFIDENCE study. (See  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] for details on this  measure.) 
Community Resource Access  (ancillary  outcome). This  author made item asks  about caregivers’ 
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 17 of 27access to community resources that may reduce  the costs of caregiving. We will assess whether  
or not caregiver accessed 1 or  more new community resources since  beginning  CONFIDENCE. 
Outcome Analysis. Scores for  resourcefulness, self-efficacy, and financial  strain  will be  
analyzed using t-test  analyses, where we will compare baseline scores to  scores from each 
follow-up survey. If there is a  p-value  <0.05,  this indicates  that there was a  statistically 
significant difference between scores.  Mean scores  and standard deviation for all scores on each 
scale will be also examined. (We  will use descriptive statistics alone to assess whether  or not a 
caregiver accessed  new  resources following program  participation.) 
Satisfaction surveys. To analyze  Likert  responses to satisfaction surveys,  a percentage for each 
response will be  provided. Each item will be compared to  items  collected for  the initial 
CONFIDENCE study, as well as scores  for items of CONFIDENCE between Spanish and 
English intervention.Attendance. We will report the  average  number  of sessions attended (range 0 to 4) and the 
standard deviation. Comparison on the number  of sessions attended will be compared  between  
the English and the  Spanish  sessions  as well  as between the earlier and current version of 
CONFIDENCE in the form of  percentages  to allow  us to  draw preliminary comparisons, given  
the different  number of possible sessions to attend (3 vs.  5). The average number of sessions will 
be calculated both with and without accounting for make-up sessions. (i.e., giving credit for attendance in Session  1 if the caregiver attended  the makeup session for  this lesson.)
App Utilization . Usage data from NeuViCareTM Care and Resources Advisors will be  reported 
in aggregate  Individual-level data  will be collected on the average number of text received, 
average interactions on the Community  Hub, and  average number of practice activities 
completed on  NeuViCare.
Fidelity. Fidelity reports will  be evaluated using total scores averaged across all CONFIDENCE   
sessions observed.  Sub scores will be  reported for adherence to  the facilitator guide, participant 
experience, and quality  of delivery. These  will be reported separately for English and Spanish 
participants by  using a percentage, as well as means  and standards of deviation,  to examine 
variability. Qualitative interviews . Qualitative interviews will be transcribed  verbatim, and for the ones 
conducted in Spanish,  they will be previously translated.  Transcription  and translation of 
interviews conducted  in Spanish will be by ASTA-USA.  English Transcriptions will be  done by 
GMR. A preliminary code book will be developed by at least two research members and will be  
refined prior to applying  codes to the remaining interviews. At least  two coders will analyze each  
transcript independently  and will meet  to compare  the codes. The second  round of  coding will be  
conducted to integrate new codes  if needed.
18.0 Confidentiality of Data
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 18 of 271.To maintain the confidentiality of the data:☒ I will use a  unique study identifier  to code individuals’ identifiable data  and will 
store the master list separate from  the study data.
☐  I will use a  unique  study identifier  to code individuals’ data, but  it will never  be 
linked to a master list.
☒ Other- please explain:  Utilization data collected from the NeuViCare  app will be 
manually entered into study survey linked with individual contact information. The PI will, using  the study key, merge data on app  utilization with  study data to  examine 
“exposure” to the intervention prior  to analysis. Aggregate deidentified data about 
questions asked to the  conversational AI assistant will be shared by Amicus Brain by 
email. By  limiting who has access  to utilization  data from NeuViCare, reporting  
questions to NeuViCare in aggregate, and storing data in  secure  locations,  we will protect 
participant confidentiality.  Caregivers who participate in the CONFIDENCE will be  
notified that their app utilization  data will be recorded.
Provide a  plan  to maintain or destroy identifiers  once analysis of identifiable information  
is complete.    All identifiers will be removed by the PI  from  study data prior to long-term 
storage in an encrypted  Box folder.  For survey  data,  this will be done  first by 
downloading data in REDCap using the “Remove  Identifiers” function,  followed by 
visual examination to confirm all variables with identifying information is removed. Columns in Eventbrite (e.g., email  addresses) will be manually  deleted prior to  saving. 
The electronic study key will be deleted.
☒  I attest that  any recordings (audio or video)  saved to a portable device  will be  
deleted by formatting the  device’s storage memory.
How are you storing your  electronic data?
☒CWRU Redcap  
☐CWRU Secure  Research Environment  (SRE)
☒CWRU Box
☐OnCore
☐CWRU Secure  Network Drive
☐Zoom Cloud
☒  Portable device (must be encrypted, not just password protected)
☒Other -  List storage method and  provide  justification: Downloaded  data is stored in  Box 
on portable devices,  rather  than in less secure locations (e.g.,  Documents  or Desktop). 
Eventbrite information on program  registrations  is maintained by USC;  USC  will share login 
information with the  PI so she  can manually  download data on registrants  for analysis to  
reduce the need for data transferring  by email.  Intervention recordings  will be  temporarily  
stored in a Case Western’s Box drive with limited access while the  study team checks for 
fidelity, and then deleted  at the end of this research study. Electronic data on caregiver 
utilization of the NeuViCare app is maintained by Amicus Brain in a  HIPAA compliant 
Google Drive Folder.  The PI will have access to user data via a dashboard  with a  unique  
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 19 of 27login. See attached  NeuViCare s security information. 
Please note: if you’re storing or entering your electronic data  in any system other than an 
approved system  listed  above,  please  contact the CWRU IRB ( cwru-irb@case.edu ).
2.☐ I acknowledge that paper  research data and documents will be stored  in a double-
locked secure environment in the  following location: Click here to  enter text. 
 ☒ We will not have paper research  documents.
3.Will data be shared?
☒ Yes  
List the exact data elements that will be shared:  De-identified survey  data  from 
the surveys will be shared,  as well as de-identified qualitative  interview 
transcripts with investigators at the University  of Southern California, led by 
Donna Benton, PhD, who  co-developed  CONFIDENCE with the PI. The Case 
Western study  team  will also  provide “over the shoulder” (i.e., Zoom  share 
screen) access  to review de-identified data to other investigators to support  
analyses. Further, screening and enrollment data will be shared  with the 
National Institute  on Aging, the study’s funder, which requires these  data to 
be uploaded  as a part of their CROMS requirements on a monthly basis: 
https://www.nia.nih.gov/research/grants-funding/nias-clinical-research-
operations-management-system-croms 
Data sharing  with NeuViCare: Identifiable information about participants  will 
be shared with the NeuViCare app to administer the CONFIDENCE study. 
With the participant’s consent, we will add their email and phone number to 
register them for the CONFIDENCE app. We will also add their preferred 
topics on financial well-being  in order  to send  tailored text messages.  This 
information will be drawn from the baseline survey and Eventbrite 
registration, and will be entered directly into the NeuViCare  app. The 
research team  will also be able to view  the app participant’s completion  of 
activities.
Data sharing  with USC  Family Consultants: In order to administer the 
CONFIDENCE program  to caregivers, we will share the names,  email  
addresses, and phone numbers of eligible caregivers with the USC  Family 
Consultants. Family  consultants will receive an affiliate  ID at Case Western to 
receive emails  about participant information,  and to deliver sessions using at 
Case Western HIPAA-compliant Zoom account. Recordings  for fidelity 
monitoring and attendance reports will be stored in a Case  Western  Box 
folder.
 
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 20 of 27Describe how  data will be sent: De-identified data will be shared  by email
Contact information to use the app will be entered directly into the 
appAffiliate accounts will be set up for USC Family Consultants to 
receive names by email, and for them to store recordings and 
attendance information in Boxl
☐ No
☐ N/A  
 If sharing  data, please  complete a request to ensure  the proper contracts/agreements are in  
place:  https://case.edu/research/faculty-staff/technology-transfer/material-transfer-data-use-
agreements
18.0 HIPAA Authorization 
Does this study collect,  access, use, or distribute any  Protected Health Information (PHI)?  
Protected Health  Information (PHI) is (1) any individually identifiable health information  transmitted  or maintained  
in a medical record, paper  or electronic, or (2) designated data set that  was created, disclosed, or used  in the 
course of providing a health care service such  as diagnosis, payment  or treatment.
☐  Yes ☒ No
If yes, indicate how HIPAA authorization will be  obtained (check all that  apply):
☐  HIPAA  authorization is in the consent form
☐  I am receiving  a Limited Data  Set under a Data  Use Agreement (DUA)
☐  Requesting a  full or partial waiver of HIPAA for prescreening
☐  I will complete  the Request for Waiver  of HIPAA Authorization form.  See 
SpartaIRB Library
☐  Requesting a  full or partial waiver of HIPAA
☐  I will complete  the Request for Waiver  of HIPAA Authorization form.  See 
SpartaIRB Library
19.0 FERPA Authorization 
Does this study collect,  access, use, or distribute any  personally identifiable  information from 
student records or personal education information from  an education program (defined as: any 
program principally engaged in the  provision of education, including, but not limited to, early 
childhood education, elementary and secondary education, postsecondary education, special education, job  training, career and technical  education, and adult  education)? This includes,  but 
is not limited to, classroom assignments and  course  evaluations.
☐  Yes ☒ No
If yes, how do you plan  to get written authorization  from the student (or parent if the student is a  
minor)?
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 21 of 27☐  I will incorporate FERPA language* into the consent and  obtain written and  dated 
signature or  authorized electronic  signature using REDCap
☐  I will incorporate FERPA language* into a separate form  and obtain written  and dated 
signature or  authorized electronic  signature using REDCap
20.0 Risks to Research Participants
1.List the reasonably foreseeable  risks such as  breach  of confidentiality, discomforts, 
hazards, or inconveniences to the research participants related to their participation in the research. Include a  description of the probability,  magnitude, duration,  and reversibility 
of the risks.  Include the physical  psychological, social, legal, and economic  risks.
 Breach of confidentiality.  This is  unlikely  to occur,  as all  the research  data collected will 
de de-identified  and each participant  will be assigned a different  ID that only  the PI  will 
have access to. Emotional distress, such as finding intervention activities and  survey  
questions uncomfortable or upsetting is also unlikely but possible.  Participants will be 
reminded that participation is voluntary in each  moment, and survey questions can be 
chosen to be skipped. Finally, there  is a slight possibility that participants would receive  
information that  is incorrect for their  individual situations while  using  the NeuViCare  
app. The  most likely  outcome, if this occurs,  is inconvenience, such as applying  for a 
financial aid program that  is not relevant to the  caregiver. It would be  unlikely  that a 
caregiver would receive  information that would harm them financially, given that all  
sources from which the AI  responses  will be drawn are either hand-picked (e.g., 
Department of Labor’s information on Family  Medical  Leave)  or developed  by the 
research team. Further,  multiple elder  law professionals were involved in  generating  or 
reviewing intervention materials. However, we include language  in the consent form 
notifying participants of this possibility.  
2.If applicable,  indicate  which experimental procedures may have risks  to the research  
participants that are currently unforeseeable. We cannot identify  any 
unforeseeable risks to participation
☐ N/A  
3.If applicable,  describe the risks to others who are not  research participants. Click here to  
enter text.
☒ N/A  
4.Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources that research participants might need.  As a part of the CONFIDENCE intervention, participants are 
provided with multiple resources to help with  caregiving,  including 
information about  how  to access counseling, support  groups, and respite 
care for caregiver stress
☐ N/A  
21.0 Provisions to Protect the Privacy  Interests of Research Participants
* FERPA language: 1. Specify  the educational records  that may be both  accessed and used  in the research. 2. State 
the purpose of the access  and use of records. 3. Identify to whom  the records  disclosure  may  be made. 
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 22 of 27Directions: Indicate  the measures  that will be taken  to protect  research participants’ 
privacy interests.  Select all that apply:
☐  In person interactions will be conducted in a private space where conversations would not be 
overheard by others  -- this could be at  a specific  location  determined by the research team 
or at a location that the participant chooses.
☒  For online/remote  data collection,  participants will be advised to  choose a location  that would 
be private.
☐  Researchers  will only contact participants if permission has been given to  do so.
☒ Other: Participants will be notified both during an initial telephone call,  in the consent form, 
and when registering for the  NeuViCare app that their information, including inquiries  
submitted to “Keiko”  will be stored  for the purpose of evaluation.  These reminders are 
intended to prevent caregivers from providing personal information they would not wish to  
share when communicating  with  the AI assistant. Even if  this does occur, these entries will be 
reported in aggregate and will not be linked  to individual  participants.  
22.0 Potential Benefit to Research  Participants
☒ There  is potential benefit to research participants.
Describe the potential benefits  that individual research participants  may experience from  
taking part in the research.  Include  the probability,  magnitude, and duration  of the  
potential benefits. Do not list compensation. Participants will learn about resources on how to reduce caregiving costs (e.g., reduced  cost home modifications) and they may 
discuss challenges experienced with other caregivers, which could be  therapeutic.  
☐ There  is no direct benefit to research participants.
If no direct benefit, state the potential benefit to society or others. Do not list 
compensation. Click here to enter text.
23.0 Withdrawal of Research Participants
Directions: Describe the anticipated circumstances under which  research participants will 
be withdrawn  from the  research without  their  consent. Also include  the procedures that  
will be followed when a research  participant withdraws or are withdrawn  from  the 
research, including partial withdrawal from procedures with continued data  collection.  
Participants will be removed from the study if the study team believes  the participant is 
fraudulent (e.g., inconsistencies in study information provided), submits surveys  that  are 
excessively incomplete (e.g.,  more than 50% of responses are missing), or is no 
longer eligible  (e.g.,  care recipient passes away). Participants will be notified  by email if 
they are removed  from the study. Participants  may continue to participate in the study to 
complete the second follow up survey,  even  if the first follow up survey is not complete.  
The research team  will retain study data  for participants  who  are withdrawn or lost to 
follow up, unless it is specifically requested by the participant that data be removed  prior  
to de-identification.
☐ N/A
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 23 of 2724.0 Alternatives to Participation
Directions: List other options  to participation.  If subjects will be compensated  with extra  
course credit, the course instructor offering  extra  course credit must provide  alternatives  
to earn extra course credit.  The alternative assignment must require  equal or less time and 
effort for the same  amount of earned extra credit that you can earn through participation 
in research.   If there  are other available clinical treatments, what would be included if  a 
subject continued on  standard of care therapy.  If there is a viable alternative you must list 
it in the consent.
 Participants may  still participate in the CONFIDENCE program, regardless of 
study participation.  
☐   The alternative is  for research subjects not to participate.
25.0 Costs to Research Participants
☐  There  are no costs to research participants or their insurance companies (there are  no clinical  
visits or  billable  procedures.) – please leave rest of this  section blank 
1. Describe what costs research participants will be responsible for as a result of their  
participation in  the research, including but not limited to: clinical services required by the 
protocol deemed billable to  insurance, transportation to  study visits, parking,  costs of drugs,  
cost of  therapy, lost  broken or stolen devices, etc.  Participants, if they choose to receive 
text messages, will be responsible  for costs based on applicable charges  from their 
carrier. Participants may  choose to end text messages at any time.
2. Explain who  will be  responsible for payment of provided services in the event of insurance 
denials. Not applicable
3. List what procedures,  drugs, devices,  supplies will be paid by the study sponsor or covered by 
other funding. List the  other funding source.  None
26.0 Research Participant Compensation
☐  There  is no compensation or reimbursement  for research participants – please  leave rest of  
this section blank
☒  There  is compensation for research participants.  
Describe the schedule, payment method, and payment total of any incentives or compensation that research participants  will receive for participation  in the research (e.g., gift 
cards or  cash with amount, t-shirts, devices, bags, swag, etc.)  Amazon gift cards will be sent to participants  by 
email for each study activity  (surveys and interviews). We will pay participants for the baseline  survey within  a week of completion  ($50). A second  
payment will be administered within  a week of the first follow  up survey  being  completed ($50), and a third payment  1 week after the third follow up 
is complete ($60).  Payment for interviews will be sent  within 1 week  of completing  the interview ($25). Participants may earn up to $160 for 
participating, or $185  if they  complete  the qualitative  interview. .
☐  There  will be  reimbursement for research participants. 
Describe the schedule, payment method, and payment total of any reimbursement that  
research participants will receive for participation  in the  research  (e.g.,  gift cards or cash with  
amount, etc.)  Click here to enter  text.
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 24 of 2727.0 Compensation for  Research  Related Injury
Describe who  will pay  for the costs of medical treatment and/or compensation in  the event of a 
research related injury:
☐  Funding  agency is providing some/all payment for injury
☐  Funding  agency is providing no payment for  injury
☒  N/A 
28.0 Provisions to Monitor the  Data to Ensure the  Safety  of Research  
Participants
1.Describe how  often  the data will be  monitored for completeness, accuracy  and adherence 
to the protocol. All baseline and follow up surveys will be visually assessed  
for completeness and unusual responses (e.g., “straight line” 
responses) within  1 week of completion. In addition,  the investigator  team 
will complete  a Data Safety Monitoring Report  every 6 months of the study.  
The Data Safety Monitoring Report will include  the following  core  
elements: a) Progress  towards  enrollment and participant retention;  2) 
Participant characteristics  for enrolled and retained participants (e.g., age, 
race, ethnicity,  gender, aspects  of the caregiving situation) according to 
intervention status; and 3) Documentation of adverse events, serious  
adverse events,  and unanticipated problems,  as defined  below,  including 
resolution of these events  and study  protocol modifications.  Weekly  team 
meetings will also provide a time and space to identify and discuss  non-
adherence to study  protocols. Further, all study incidents will be reported. 
If there is any observation of harm to a participant, this will be reported  to 
the IRB and study  funder by the PI as soon as possible for serious adverse 
events or within 48 hours, whichever is sooner,
2.Indicate if there will be a  Data and Safety  Monitoring Board  or Committee:
☒ There will not be  a formal  Data and Safety Monitoring  Board/Committee.
☐ There will be a formal Data  and Safety Monitoring Board/Committee. 
Provide information about the DSMB/C including  the contact information of the committee  
member(s) (as applicable); whether it is independent  from the study sponsor; how  often it 
meets; the type of data that will be used; written reports, etc. Click here to enter  text.
29.0 Additional Information
If you have any additional information regarding your study not covered in  the template, please 
include it here. .
30.0 Devices
Does the study include  the use of a  device  that is integral to  the study question?
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 25 of 27☐  Yes – Answer the questions below.
☒  No – Leave the rest of this section blank.
☐  There is an  active IDE  (Investigational Device Exemption) for the proposed study.
Attach an official letter of support or proof  of approval which identifies the IDE holder and 
IDE number to  the SpartaIRB smartform.
List devices:  Click here  to enter text.
☐  The device has  obtained a 501k clearance.
Attach 501k documentation to the SpartaIRB  smartform.
List devices:  Click here  to enter text.
☐  The device meets the criteria for  an IDE Exemption.
Download the IDE Exemption Form from the SpartaIRB library (HRP-580) and attach  to 
the SpartaIRB smartform.
List devices:  Click here  to enter text.
☐  The device (and its use) is a non-significant risk device  for the proposed study design.
List devices  here and provide the PI’s rationale  for the non-significant risk device  
determination. Click here to enter text.
If the research  involves device(s),  describe your plans  to use, store, handle, administer and 
track those device(s) to ensure that they will be used only on research participants and be used 
only by authorized  investigators. Click here  to enter text.
31.0 Community-Based Participatory Research
☒  This is not  a community-based participatory research project  – please leave the rest of 
this section blank
☐ This is a community-based  participatory  research project
Describe the involvement of the community  in the design and conduct  of the research.  
Click here to enter  text.
 
Note: Community based research is research that is conducted as an equal partnership between academic investigators and members of a community. In Community Based Participatory Research (CBPR) projects, the  community participates fully in all  aspects  of the research 
process.  
32.0 MULTI-SITE RESEARCH (when  CWRU is  the IRB of Record)
Does this project have multiple sites?
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 26 of 27☐  Yes
☒  No – please leave  the rest of this section blank
Non-Local Site Information for  Multi-Site Studies
If this is  a multi-site study where you  are the lead investigator, list the following information  for 
each relying  site:
1.Name of  site:  Click  here  to enter text.
2.PI of relying  site: Click here  to enter text.
3.Name of  IRB contact: Click here to enter text.
4.Phone number of IRB contact: Click here to enter text.
5.Email address  of IRB  contact: Click  here  to enter text.
Non-Local Recruitment Methods for  Multi-Site Studies
If this is  a multi-site study and research participants  will be recruited by methods not under  the 
control of the local site  (e.g. call centers, national advertisements) describe those methods. 
Local recruitment methods are described  above. 
1.Describe when, where, and how potential research participants will  be recruited. Click  
here to  enter  text.
2.Describe the methods that will be used to identify  potential  research  participants.  Click 
here to  enter  text.
3.Describe the materials that will be used to recruit research participants. Click  here  to 
enter text.
Multi-Site Research Communication Plan (when you are the lead  investigator)
If this is  a multi-site study where you  are the lead investigator, describe the processes to ensure 
communication among sites including:
☐  All sites will have the most  current  version of the protocol, consent document,  and 
HIPAA authorization     
☐ All required  approvals (initial, continuing  review and modifications) have been obtained 
at each site (including approval by the  site’s IRB of record)    
☐ All modifications have been communicated to sites, and approved (including approval  of 
the site’s  IRB of record) before  the modification is  implemented     
☐ All engaged participating  sites will  safeguard data, including secure transmission  of 
data, as required by local  information  security  policies
☐ All engaged participating  sites will  safeguard data, including secure transmission  of 
data, as required by local  information  security  policies     
☐ All local  site investigators  conduct  the study in accordance with applicable  federal 
regulations and local laws     
☐ All non-compliance with the study  protocol or applicable requirements will be reported  
in accordance with local policy      
If this is  a multi-site study where you  are the lead investigator, describe the method for 
communicating to engaged participant sites the following: 
1.   Problems:  Click here to enter text.     
HRP-
503SBERTEMPLATE: CWRU SBER Protocol
Approved: 09/2021 Prior Version: 05/2021
Additional information can be provided  in section 29, or  added  as a comment. Page 27 of 272.   Interim results:  Click here to enter text.     
3.   The closure  of the study: Click here  to enter text.    
33.0 References
Click here to enter  text.