	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	Cover	Letter: 	
Routine	Early	Antibiotic	use	in	SymptOmatic	preterm	Neonates	(REASON):	a	prospective	randomized	controlled	trial.	 	
Protocol	without	Statistical	Analysis	Plan 	
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 	
	
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	Antibiotic Effects on the Developing Microbiome, Metabolome and M orbidities in Preterm Neonates  
 
SPECIFIC AIMS  
This research challenges existing dogma for pre -emptive antibiotic use in preterm infants immediately after birth. Antibiotic use, especially when 
repeated, induces a perturbation (“dysbiosis”)  in gut microbiota that may not recover to the basal state.1-3 Antibiotic use increases the risk of 
subsequent disease  and adverse outcomes . 4-8 The dependence of the developing immune system on the intestinal microbiota is supported by 
emerging evidence from studies in animals  demonstrating decreased resistance to subsequent disease with early exposure to antibiotics . 9-11 A 
majority of preterm very low birthweight (VLBW) infants are exposed to antibiotics. 12Surveys from large databases in the US show that the rate of 
culture proven bacteremia in  these infants at birth is only between 1 -2 percent,12,13 which is consistent with our data from 3 University of Florida 
Hospitals, where we routinely do blood cultures after birth, but could find only 9 of nearly 900 infants less than 1,250 gram s over a 5 year period 
whose cultures were positive. When cultures are done on cord blood with increased vo lumes of blood , there  is a higher yield of positive cultures, but 
these are largely Ureaplasma urealyticum  and Mycoplasma hominis14, mircoorganisms that are not that are not sensitive to the usual routine 
antimicrobial regimens provided right after birth. A retrospective review of 50,0261 neonates across 127 neonatal intensive care units (NICUs) from 
California showed a forty -fold variation in NICU antibiotic prescribing practice with similar burdens of proven infection and mortality.15 Based on 
this review, a large number of preterm infants are thus subjected to a potentially harmful course of antibiotics that provides no clear benefit. T here 
remains a major gap in our understanding of antibiotic -related intestinal microbial dysbiosis and how this may result in disea se.  
Our hypothesis is that early and prolonged antibiotic use in preterm neonates has significant consequences on the developing intestinal microbi ome, 
metabolome and host response, predisposing the neonate to various major morbidities.   It is possible th at the effect of this widespread antibiotic use 
outweighs the potential benefits. We propose a randomized trial of pre -emptive antibiotics versus no -pre-emptive antibiotics in preterms born at <33 
weeks’  gestation.   The purpose of this research is to evalu ate the risks and benefits of current practice to determine optimal levels of antibiotic use 
that protects the babies from infection with minimal effect on the microbiome  and subsequent adverse outcomes related to overuse of antibiotics . We 
will take advan tage of the unique expertise of our team and facilities to achieve the following aims : 
Aim 1.  In a prospective, randomized pilot study, test the effects of pre -emptive postnatal antibiotics on t he microbiome, metabolome and 
inflammatory responses in the neonate during the NICU course.  We hypothesize that antibiotic use results in alterations in the microbial ecology of 
the intestinal microbiome that lasts well beyond discontinuance of antibiotic use and that this in turn results in altered fe cal metabolic  and 
inflammatory profiles  that are associated with a higher incidence of adverse outcomes (Aim 2) while these infants are in the neonatal intensive care 
unit. .  
Aim 2.  In this same prospective, randomized pilot study, test the effects of pre -emptive post natal antibiotics on adverse outcomes in the neonate 
while in the NICU . We hypothesize that higher antibiotic use will not be associated with decreased early onset sepsis and will be associated with 
increased adverse outcomes including necrotizing enteroco litis, late onset sepsis and mortality.  
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	Impact: Here we will provide new data on the functional consequences of the widespread use of antibiotics in care of infants born pre term using 
novel multi -omic and systems biology approaches that will provide a bett er understanding of how these relate to common morbidities in the NICU. 
Fulfilling the aims of this research should stimulate multicenter trials that could ultimately lead to beneficial changes in perinatal and neonatal 
intensive care.  
I. SIGNIFICANCE  
The use  of routine antibiotics during pregnancy in order to avoid adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes is widespread despite a rela tive lack of 
evidence for efficacy.16  One exception to this has been intrapartum antimicrobial prophylaxis for Group B -Streptococcal disease . 17 There are no 
studies showing efficacy of postpartum prophylaxis against early onset sepsis. Antibiotics are by far the most common drugs g iven to neonates in the 
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU).12  The cost of these practices in terms of antibiotic -induced harm has only recently been quest ioned.18-22 In the 
preterm neonate, the rationale to routinely and pre -emptively give these antibiotics shortly after birth is speculative ra ther than evidence based and 
includes the immature immune system of these infants, the possibility that preterm delivery may have been caused by infection  in the mother, that the 
immaturity -related respiratory distress cannot be readily distinguished from infectious pneumonia and that antibiotic use is safe.  This may be 
incorrect.  The average length of treatment of this “standard of care” practice is between 5 -7 days.4,13 Recent studies have shown an association 
between duration of early antibiotic use with increased odds of developing NEC, 4,5a disease with extremely high mortality and mor bidity.23 We 24-
26and others27,28 have shown that NEC and late onset sepsis (LOS) are preceded by an intestinal dysbiosis, which may partially be due to antibi otic 
usage. There has also been a trend toward resistant microbes causing late on set sepsis in infants treated with an early course of antibiotics and the gut 
is a major source of entry into the bloodstream for microorganisms via translocation.28 It has been shown that the intestinal microbiome is 
significantly affected by the ea rly use of antibiotics, and that this effect often persists after discontinuation of the antibiotic.2,19,21,29 It is very 
concerning that infants who receive 5 -7 days of antibiotics in their first week had i ncreased relative abundance of Enterobacteriacae  and low 
diversity in the second and third weeks after birth.29 These infants also experienced more NEC, sepsis and death than those not exposed.  29 
 
These studies beg for a systematic study of the antibiotic effects on the microbiomes and metabolomes of the infant along wit h the effects on 
morbidity to better understand the consequences of these practices.  We hypothesize  that early and prolonged antib iotic use in preterm neonates has 
significant consequences on the developing intestinal microbiome, metabolome and host response, predisposing the neonate to  adverse outcomes . 
Since the rationale for this possible abuse of antibiotics is based on tradition  and fear rather than evidence, equipoise amongst neonatologists for a 
large randomized trial is currently lacking:  better evidence to support and guide such a trial is clearly needed. We propose that a systems biology 
approach utilizing “multi -omic” data  will begin to fill a major gap in our knowledge of the consequences of antibiotic use in these infants that will 
lead to changes in practice. The data gathered in this pilot study will clarify the consequences of such widespread antibioti c use, and will b e highly 
significant  for lending credence for a larger trial which could lead to a paradigm shift  in clinical neonatology. Our long -term goal is the 
development of regimes of antibiotic use (and perhaps microbial therapeutic measures) that provide protecti on against infection while maintaining 
gut health through a diverse microbiome.   
 
 
 
  
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	 
II. INNOVATION  
• First randomized study of the effects of withholding pre -emptive antibiotics from preterm infants.  
• First comprehensive evaluation of the microbiome, metabolo me and inflammatory response in relation to adverse outcomes in neonates 
exposed to routine versus non -preemptive antibiotic s.  
• Development and use of novel bioinformatics tools that link clinical complex clinical metadata to the microbiome and metabolo mes of 
preterm infants and their mothers.  
III. APPROACH  
 
 
Rationale. We previously showed that providing maternal antibiotics resulted in a lower microbial diversity of meconium in preterm infan ts born 
less than 32 week ’s gestation . 30 Preterm infants whose meconium microbes are less diverse have a greater association with  late onset sepsis. 31 A 
single dose of intrapartum antibiotics in another study resulted in significant shifts of the microbiota in the infants most evident at 30 days after 
birth.19  A recent study in mice elegantly showed that antepartum antibiotics can alter the offspring’s postnatal intestin al microbiota, decrease 
neutrophil and macrophage production via an interleukin -17 mediated mechanism, which in turn contributed to increased susceptibility of antibiotic -
exposed neonatal mice to Escherichia coli K1 and Klebsiella pneumoniae sepsis.10 A recent Cochrane review included a total of 14 studies 
randomizing 7,837 women. An increase in neonatal deaths was shown for infants of women receiving prophylactic antibiotics  when compared with 
placebo. Comparing any antibiotics  with plac ebo, a marginally non -statistically significant increase  was shown in any functional impairment.32 In 
addition to the dysbiosis -inducing effects that antibiotics can cause in the pregnant mother, routine antibiotic use in the preterm infant  requires further 
investigation.  
 Dysbiosis consists of one or a combination of several types: loss of keystone bacteri a, loss of diversity, shifts in metabolic components and/or a 
bloom of pathogens that increases systemic inflammation . Preliminary studies by our group using Shannon Diversity Index on fecal samples obtained 
from infants less than 33 week ’s gestational age show that those infants who received no antibiotics had considerably higher diversity at 6 weeks’  
post-birth compared to those infants who received ampicillin and gentamicin for only 1 week or longer. This suggests a major effec t of postn atal 
antibiotics on the microbiota and begs further studies evaluating the effects of  pre -emptively used antibiotics on preventing sepsis and their 
potentially detrimental effects using a “meta -biome” approach 33 
Patients and samples.  
All stud ies will be done at University of Florida Children’s neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) under an institutional review board (IRB) approved 
protocol. Mothers will undergo usual clinical care as per obstetrics. We plan to enroll 185maternal subjects and 185 neonatal subjects  (approximately 
half of those available) during the course of the first year of this study. Informed consent will be obtained prior to delive ry or within the first hours 
after birth.  
Aim 1.  In a prospective, randomized pilot study, t est the effects of pre -emptive postnatal antibiotics on the microbiome, metabolome and inflammatory responses in the neonate during the NICU course.   
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	A telephonic consent will be utilized  when mothers  are not available to be consented in person. This includes  consenting mothers of neonatal subjects 
that are born  in an outside facility and then  transferred to UFHealth Shands’ NICU. Most often, the mother is not transferred with the infant and in 
such cases,  the mother will be contacted at the outside facility for consent.   
 
Subject to availability, w e will be collecting a cutaneous microbiome sample  within 24 hours of collecting a stool sample . This addition will allow 
for comparisons between the developmen t of the microbiome in both the skin and gut within the same subject. It will also allow us to explore the 
impact of antibiotic exposure on cutaneous microbial diversity and adverse outcomes including sepsis. Skin swabs are collecte d using sterile 
techniqu e. A cotton  tip applicator will be rubbed  on the subject’s forearm , or other area of skin easily accessible , in a circular motion for 20 seconds 
and placed in a sterile transport tube. Additional swabs will be collected at each time point to include a control “air” swab and an isolette/crib swab.  
The air swab will be opened and allowed to rest on the sterile field during the procedures and then place into a sterile tran sport tube.  The crib swab 
will be opened and the cotton tip applicator will be rubbed on the inside of the isolette on the same side as the subject’s f orearm that is used for the 
study.  All three swabs will be moistened with 2 -3 drops of sterile saline (sodium chloride) prior to collection.  
 
In the event of adverse outcomes, cultured pathogenic organisms will be compared to microbial profiles of the skin and intest ine to explore which site 
was likely breached.  The skin swab s will be collected within 24 hours of stool samp le collection.  
 
Maternal diet can affect the fetal microbiome. We would like to gather information about the mother’s typical diet. We will p rovide the mothers an 
optional dietary recall form. As available, infant  meconium and subsequent fecal samples (at least once a week), gastric fluid  (from an existing 
standard of care gastric tube) , and one breast milk sample  (obtained in the first week afte r birth  from mothers who choose to breast feed ) will be 
collected and analyzed using techniques described in the approach section of the application.  Fecal samples  and skin swabs  will be placed in -80-
degree  C freezers as soon as possible.  
 
In terms of the rationale for obtaining the breast milk samples, t he NICU at the Shands Hospital only provides human milk to ba bies born <33 weeks 
gestation in the first few weeks after birth. This can consist of milk from babies' own mothers or donor milk that is bought from a milk bank. Donor 
milk is pasteurized and should not contain live microbes, whereas babies' own mothers m ilk is known to contain cultivable microbes that may have a 
beneficial effect on the baby's developing gastrointestinal tract via alteration of the intestinal microbiome. In this study we have the opportunity to 
track whether the microbes from the mother's  milk may be found in the infant GI tract and whether providing baby's own mothers milk versus donor 
milk may be a confounding factor that alters the microbial profile of the babies receiving antibiotics or not receiving the a ntibiotics. We will thus do 
16S sequencing analysis on the microbial profile of both donor and breast milk samples provided to the infants.  
Valuable information can be obtained from all groups of babies <33 weeks’  gestation, so all will be enrolled and have their microbiome, 
metabolome, inflammatory mediators and clinical outcomes analyzed. All of the individual groups will be categorized in intent  to treat or not treat. 
Clinicians need to have the option to change  treatment based on safety concerns for the patients.  
Our overarching goal is to establish the effects of early antibiotic use on the infant intestinal microbial ecology as well a s the effects on intestinal 
microbial metabolite and inflammatory marker pro duction and subsequent morbidities. Extensive metadata from both mothers and infants for the 
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	newly derived samples will be transferred from our hospital EPIC electronic hospital record system into the REDCAP System. An enrollment log 
linking the subject’s name with their unique identifier will be kept in a password -protected, UF server. All other su bject  PHI will be transferred from 
directly from EPIC to  REDCap. In order for our data to be able to interface with data sets being used for similar studies, we will utilize a newly 
developed standardized template for clinical studies in preterm birth.  
Subjects will be de -identified by assigning the mother and the neonate(s) dyad a unique identifier.  REDCap will assign n eonatal subjects a subject  
number upon group assignment in REDCap.  Maternal subjects will use the same subject number but will be linked to the neonate’s ID.  
After samples are collected, they will be labelled with the above mentioned identifi er and kept in a freezer in the PI’s  lab. This lab is locked . 
 
 
Covariates for the mother include:  
• Antibiotic use, type of antibiotic, and duration of therapy  
• Length of rupture of amniotic membranes  
• Prior or current infections  
• C-section versus vaginal delivery  
• Other drug use such as antacids  or steroids  
• Dietary history  
• Body habitus  
• Placental pathology reports  
 
Covariates for the neonate include:  
• Feeding type (baby’s own mothers’ milk, donor milk, formula, fortification)  
• Morbidities (retinopathy of prematurity  (ROP) , chronic lung disease  (CLD ), bronchopulmonary dysplasia  (BPD) , necrotizing Enterocolitis 
(NEC) , spontaneous ileal perforations (SIP), intraventricular hemorrhage  (IVH) , periventricular leukomalacia  (PVL) , sepsis after the first 
three days of life , sepsis before the first 3 days of life, death ) 
• Length of time on parenteral nutrition  
• Duration of use of central arterial or venous catheters  
• Growth velocities  
• Complete blood count, blood culture, C -reactive protein  results ,  
• Antibiotic use, type of antibiotic, and duration of therapy  
• Date  of birth  
• Gestational age  
 
Additional Covariates for the skin microbiome include:  
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	 
• Location of swab collection (left arm, right arm),  
• Time of last meal/feeding  
• Time of last bath  
• Type of last bath including soap/wipe details (if recorded)  
• Topical medications and lotions applied  
• Time of last handling/kangaroo care  
• Time of last 2 diaper changes  
• Type of bed (isolette, crib, etc)  
• Start/stop dates of isolette humidity  
 
 
 
Randomization:  
We hypothesize that antibiotics will affect the microbial taxonomy, metabolic and inflammatory milieu of the developing gastr ointestinal tract, and 
that non -pre-emptive use will not result in increased sepsis. We will have 3 groups to compare: the antibiot ic-indicated group, the antibiotic not 
indicated group, and  the  randomized group, which will consist of 2 arms , subjects randomized to antibiotic therapy and those randomized to 
withhold antibiotic therapy  
 
The “Antibiotic Indicated Group” is one that we cannot justify randomizing because they are highly likely to be septic. This would represent about 
15% of the patients in our NICU as per our recent survey over the past 2 years. Guidelines for treating patie nts will be derived from newly published 
review based on a recent NIH workshop. As an example, if the mother has a temperature >39 degrees C. and if there are other s ymptoms such as fetal 
tachycardia, purulent fluid from the cervical os, maternal white blo od cell count >15,000 in the absence of corticosteroids, the infant will be treated 
with antibiotics.   
The “Antibiotics Not Indicated Group” comprises babies who are at extremely low risk. This would represent about 20% of patie nts <33 weeks’  
gestational age admitted to our NICU as per a recent survey over the past 2 years. These infants are ‘asymptomatic” showing no significan t signs of 
respiratory distress or having other risk factors.  
Most of the infants who are “symptomatic” with respiratory distress requiring respiratory support over this time in our NICU were started on pre -
emptive antibiotic therapy.  This represents approximately 65% of the infants in our NICU over the past 2 years and is the gr oup that will be 
randomized into “receive antibiotics”  or “do not receive antibiotic” arms .  Group allocation will not be blinded. Standard open label UF Clinical 
Research Center methodology will be used for randomization.   Respiratory distress, apnea and bradycardia, feeding intolerance or other factors 
clearly associated with prematurity will not be exclusion criteria . The intent will be that no baby randomized to receive antibiotics (ampicillin and 
gentamicin) will be treated for more than 48 hours.  If the baby is allocated to the no antibiotic group and s hows symptoms of deterioration along 
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	with lab values (e.g., increasing CRP, abnormal CBC) that could be consistent with sepsis, the clinician can choose to “bail out” and initiate 
antibiotics.   
It is strongly suggested that a ll of these enrolled infants h ave blood cultures, complete blood counts and C -reactive proteins done shortly after birth as 
per routine care in our NICU.  Infants whose blood cultures are positive at any time will have intravenous antibiotics initia ted as per clinical team 
discretion.  
 
 
The following scheme will be used for patient enrollment :  
 
 
 
Schedule of events:  
 
Prenatally:  
ICF is obtained from mother . This will be our primary means to obtain consent.   
0-6 Hours after birth :  Babies <33 weeks 
gestation 
Antibiotics Indicated Antibiotics not indicated Randomized into 
Antibiotic Yes or No 
Groups Informed Consent: 
Samples collected as 
below.  
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	Informed consent obtained if not done prenatally and mother is able to give informed consent  
• Infant is assigned to group A, B, or C based on obstetrical history and clinical appearance of subject. Subjects assigned to group C will be 
randomized to pre -emptive antibiotics or no pre -emptive antibiotics  
• Obtain gastric aspirate from standard of care gastric decompression tube , if gastric fluid is present  
1-3 days after birth:  
• Collect meconium sample , if available  
• Obtain 3ml of breast milk or donor milk if available  
• Collect skin swab  
      
Every week until neonate’s discharge : 
• Collect stool samples , if available  
• Collect skin swabs. .  
 
Approximately 60% of the mothers delivering babies who are born <33 weeks’  gestation at UF receive prenatal antibiotics and 80 % of these infants 
begin to receive antibiotics starting in the first 12 hours after birth. The usual postnatal antibiotic regimen (>95%) in con sists of intravenously 
administered ampicillin and gentamic in. In order for our data to be able to interface with data sets being used for similar studies, we will utilize a 
newly developed standardized template for clinical studies in preterm birth34.   
 
Inclusion Criteria : Valuable information can be obtained from all groups of babies <33 weeks’  gestation, so all  consented neonatal subjects will have 
their microbiome, metabolome, inflammatory mediators and clinical covariates analyzed. All of the individual groups will be categorized in intent to 
treat or not treat. Clinicians need to have the option to change treatment based on safety concerns for the patients.  
Exclusion Criteria : The only exclusions will be those from whom we are not able to obtain informed consent and those infants likely considered to  be 
non-viable. Respiratory distress , apnea and bradycardia, feeding intolerance or other factors clearly associated with prematurity will not be exclusion 
criteria . 
It will be strongly suggested that a ll enrolled infants will have blood cultures, complete blood counts and C -reactive proteins done shortly after birth 
as per routine care in our NICU.  Infants in the “Antibiotics Not Indicated Group” and those “symptomatic”  infants randomized to “do not receive 
antibiotics” whose blood cultures are positive at any time will have intraven ous antibiotics initiated as per clinical team discretion.  
For additional clarification on the length of time the antibiotics will be provided and the risks and benefits of the antibio tics, please note the 
following:  
a) Statistics  from the literature sugg est that the average number of days preterm babies undergo treatment with antibiotics after birth is 5 -7 days. This 
varies tremendously between different NICUs, with many trying to limit antibiotic use to 48 hours and in some cases 24 -48 hours. In our prot ocol, 
the group that will likely undergo this length of treatment (5 -7 days) is the first group where the suspicion for early onset sepsis is very high. 
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	However, in the group that is randomized, the length of time the babies randomized to receive antibioti cs will be treated is projected to 48 hours. This 
48 hour course is  consistent with current practice in our NICU when the level of suspicion is actually low, but the babies are still given a co urse of 
antibiotics pre -emptively until cultures can be read an d the results returned to the physician. Thus, the randomized group will actually not be 
undergoing an alternative treatment.  
b) The risks of the antibiotics include: 1) the emergence of resistant microbes that may be much more difficult to treat;2) a  higher risk of adverse 
outcomes such as increased necrotizing enterocolitis, late onset sepsis with more resistant organisms; 3) antibiotic  induced metabolic alterations and 
epigenetic effects that may lead to diseases such as obesity in later life. The risk of not giving the antibiotic is that the baby may be harboring 
microbes that could cause an infection that is not being treated. We do not know whether the risks outweigh the benefits and that is the purpose of 
this study.  
c) Occasionally a regimen of ant ibiotics other than ampicillin and gentamicin is chosen, usually for suspicion of renal failure risk or an infection that 
may be incurred by a microbe that is not sensitive to ampicillin and/or gentamicin. This occurs relatively seldom, and we wil l only us e babies who 
receive this regimen in the randomized part of the study.  
Risks : 
The are no risks to the mothers who are enrolled in this study.  
There is a potential risk that a neonate who is randomized to not receive antibiotics or in the “antibiotic not in dicated group” could develop an 
infection. The primary medical team has the option to “bail out” of the randomization and initiate antibiotic therapy if the neonate shows signs of 
clinical deterioration along with corresponding lab values that support a pr esumptive diagnosis of sepsis (increasing C reactive protein, abnormal 
complete blood count values). Infants randomized to not receive antibiotics will receive a standard of care sepsis rule -out (CBC with differential, 
CRP, and blood cultures).  
Benefits:  
There are no benefits to the mothers wh o are enrolled in this study.  
Potential benefits for the neonate are decreased rates of late onset sepsis , NEC , death . 
Expected outcomes, potential pitfalls, and alternative strategies . We hypothesize that antibiotics  will affect the microbial taxonomy, metabolic 
and inflammatory milieu of the developing gastrointestinal tract . We anticipate that non-pre-emptive use will not result in increased sepsis  (non-
inferiority) . As in our previous research that related the development of the microbiome to NEC, sepsis, and preterm birth, we will evaluat e microbial 
taxonomy25,35-38, as well as more sophisticated metagenomics, metabolomics and inflammatory mediators (see below). We are well poised to analyze 
multi -omics data with our collaborator, Dr. Ana Conesa, who has specific expertise in multi -omic systems. We anticipate finding significant and 
lasting differences in the microbiome, metabolome and host inflammatory response related to antibiotic usage. For example, al ong with 
altered microbiota at 30 days after birth, we will find altered metabolites with antibiotic treatment. We are cognizant that these studies are not 
designed to determine specific mechanisms of disease pathogenesis, but instead, they are likely to provide ro bust associations in human preterm 
infants that will provide critical information for future studies of mechanisms as well as data that will provide strong impe tus for prospective clinical 
trials to evaluate the necessity for the current widespread use of antibiotics.  
 
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	 
 
 
. 
Aim 2 Test the effects of pre -emptive postnatal antibiotics on adverse outcomes in the neonate while in the NICU. We hypothesize that higher antibiotic use will not be associated 
with decreased early onset sepsis and will be associated  with increased adverse outcomes including necrotizing enterocolitis, late onset sepsis, BPD, and mortality.	
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	 
Rationale . Currently there are no studies correlating the developing microbiome, metabolome and inflammatory responses to subsequent adverse 
outcomes in the neonate in a prospective controlled manner. For aim 2, subjects enrolled in the Aim 1 studies will be followed in terms of their 
clinical status. The incidence of early onset sepsis (culture proven and suspected) will be evaluated and compared among and between the groups. 
Multivariable logistic regression will be cond ucted to determine independent relationships between initial empirical antibiotic therapy and study 
outcomes that control for birth weight, gestational age, race, prolonged premature rupture of membranes, days on mechanical ventilation, and the 
amount of b reast milk received in the first 14 days after birth . 
Expected outcomes, potential pitfalls, and alternative strategies . We anticipate there will be an increase in adverse outcomes that correspond to 
perturbations in the microbiome, metabolome and inflammatory markers  in the group receiving antibiotics . There are several confounding factors 
including maternal antibiotics, mode of delivery , gestational age, and length of rupture of membranes that will be taken into account  using multiple 
regressions .  
Specific Methodologies  
Microbiota 16s rRNA, metagenomic sequencing, and analyses.  DNA, RNA and protein extraction, 16S rRNA amplication and sequencing, 16S 
rRNA analyses, metagenomic sequencing and genome assembly will be done as described previously. 39 In our previous work where certain bacteria 
were negatively correlated with gestational age 24, we found that a single bacterial genus would dominate the microbiome (>50% of the population).  
If we see several samples dominated by a single genus, we will mine these samples for whole genomes using PacBio sequencing to get a broader 
view of their physiology as we have done in the past. 39,40 Where shotgun metagenomics are needed for other, more complex samples, either PacBio 
or Illumina sequencing will be done and the data analyzed using MG -RAST.41 Dr. Triplett’s lab is hig hly capable of culturing difficult to culture 
microbes, if needed.  
Basic diversity indices (Chao1, Shannon) & ordination methods (DCA with adonis).   Microbial diversity is assessed using Chao1, Shannon, and 
ordination methods implemented using the phyloseq package in R.42 Chao1 e stimates the species richness for each sample, while the Shannon Index 
scores richness and abundance, though is not sufficient in assessing overall microbiome differences. Detrended Correspondence  Analysis (DCA), a 
multivariate statistical method, will be applied to detect overall microbiome differences. Adonis methods were used to attribute additional variables’ 
contribution to microbial variance.  
 
Inflammatory markers.  Inflammatory markers will be analyze d by Dr. Nan Li using a combination of multiplex technologies using the BioRad 
Bio-Plex platform to obtain the comparative data from meconium samples. The markers evaluated include  common markers of intestinal 
inflammation including calprotectin  and S100A12 , in addition to other markers such as IL-6, TNF, IL -10 and other cytokines and chemokines that 
may play a role  in the inflammatory and/or anti -inflammatory process . These assays will be done on the stools of the babies. The data will be 
analyzed using dir ect comparisons of  the 4 groups of infants using a nalysis of Variance and subsequent individual comparisons.  
 
Metabolomics.  The microbiome plays a prominent role in human metabolism because microbes produce harmful and beneficial small molecules 
such as vi tamins, polyphenols, cholesterol and short chain fatty acids43.  These analyses will be conducted at the CTSI Southeast Center for 
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	Integrated Metabolomics at the University of Florida: 	http://secim.ufl.edu/.  Metab olites in stool as biomarkers of microbial -host metabolism and 
breast milk samples will be identified by state -of-the-art NMR and MS.  
Data integration.    
Since this research will also include a clinical trial, DHHS regulations to protect humans from resea rch risks will be undertaken. This will include 
parental informed consent, IRB approval, and registration with ClinicalTrials.gov.  
Safety:  It is strongly suggested that a ll subjects have infection -screening labs done soon after delivery as per NICU standard of care to include CBC 
with differential, blood cultures, and C -reactive protein. Final determination about screening labs will be left to the judgment of the primary m edical 
team. Subjects who are randomized to Group C, no antibiotics, have a small risk of developing an early onset infection. Adverse eve nts for the study 
will include septicemia and death.  
Common morbidities which will be recorded are NEC, SIP, IVH/PVL, ROP, CLD, BPD , and rates of sepsis . 
DSMB is in place. The DSMB will meet after of 20 and 50 subjects have attained  32 weeks corrected age or discharge or earlier if there is any 
suggestion of greater than usual number of adverse events in patients enrolled in the study.  
Conflict of interest:  
The principal investigator and co -investigators have no conflict s of interest in this study.  
     
 
Summary: At the end of this 2 year project, we will have effectively challenged existing dogma that nearly all preterm infants require  at least a short 
course of intravenous antibiotics. We will have a better understanding of the risks versus benefits of early pre -emptive antibiotic use in preterm 
infants. We will have a better understanding of the effects of antibiotics routinely given to pregnant women and preterm infa nts on the developing 
intestinal and human milk microbiome, metabolome and inflammatory status. I t is anticipated that correlations to common morbidities such as late 
onset sepsis and necrotizing enterocolitis will be found. These will provide targets for future mechanistic based studies of causality. A greater 
justification for larger randomized tria ls may also result.  
 
 
 
 
 
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	References  
1.	 Dethlefsen	L,	Huse	S,	Sogin	ML,	Relman	DA.	The	pervasive	effects	of	an	antibiotic	on	the	human	gut	microbiota,	as	revealed	by 	deep	16S	rRNA	
sequencing.	PLoS	Biol	2008;6:e280. 	
2.	 Dethlefsen	L,	Relman	 DA.	Incomplete	recovery	and	individualized	responses	of	the	human	distal	gut	microbiota	to	repeated	antibiotic	perturbation.	 Proc	
Natl	Acad	Sci	U	S	A	2011;108	Suppl	1:4554 -61.	
3.	 Fouhy	F,	Guinane	CM,	Hussey	S,	et	al.	High -throughput	sequencing	reveals	the	 incomplete,	short -term	recovery	of	infant	gut	microbiota	following	
parenteral	antibiotic	treatment	with	ampicillin	and	gentamicin.	Antimicrob	Agents	Chemother	2012;56:5811 -20.	
4.	 Cotten	CM,	Taylor	S,	Stoll	B,	et	al.	Prolonged	duration	of	initial	empirical	 antibiotic	treatment	is	associated	with	increased	rates	of	necrotizing	
enterocolitis	and	death	for	extremely	low	birth	weight	infants.	Pediatrics	2009;123:58 -66.	
5.	 Alexander	VN,	Northrup	V,	Bizzarro	MJ.	Antibiotic	exposure	in	the	newborn	intensive	care	un it	and	the	risk	of	necrotizing	enterocolitis.	J	Pediatr	
2011;159:392 -7.	
6.	 Blaser	M.	Antibiotic	overuse:	Stop	the	killing	of	beneficial	bacteria.	Nature	2011;476:393 -4.	
7.	 Tripathi	N,	Cotten	CM,	Smith	PB.	Antibiotic	use	and	misuse	in	the	neonatal	intensive 	care	unit.	Clin	Perinatol	2012;39:61 -8.	
8.	 Kuppala	VS,	Meinzen -Derr	J,	Morrow	AL,	Schibler	KR.	Prolonged	initial	empirical	antibiotic	treatment	is	associated	with	adverse	outcomes	in	prema ture	
infants.	J	Pediatr	2011;159:720 -5.	
9.	 Maynard	CL,	Elson	CO,	Ha tton	RD,	Weaver	CT.	Reciprocal	interactions	of	the	intestinal	microbiota	and	immune	system.	Nature	2012;489:231 -41.	
10.	 Deshmukh	HS,	Liu	Y,	Menkiti	OR,	et	al.	The	microbiota	regulates	neutrophil	homeostasis	and	host	resistance	to	Escherichia	col i	K1	sepsis 	in	neonatal	
mice.	Nat	Med	2014;20:524 -30.	
11.	 Lamouse -Smith	ES,	Tzeng	A,	Starnbach	MN.	The	intestinal	flora	is	required	to	support	antibody	responses	to	systemic	immunization	in	i nfant	and	germ	
free	mice.	PLoS	One	2011;6:e27662. 	
12.	 Clark	RH,	Bloom	BT,	Sp itzer	AR,	Gerstmann	DR.	Reported	medication	use	in	the	neonatal	intensive	care	unit:	data	from	a	large	national	data	set.	
Pediatrics	2006;117:1979 -87.	
13.	 Stoll	BJ,	Gordon	T,	Korones	SB,	et	al.	Early -onset	sepsis	in	very	low	birth	weight	neonates:	a	report 	from	the	National	Institute	of	Child	Health	and	Human	
Development	Neonatal	Research	Network.	J	Pediatr	1996;129:72 -80.	
14.	 Goldenberg	RL,	Andrews	WW,	Goepfert	AR,	et	al.	The	Alabama	Preterm	Birth	Study:	umbilical	cord	blood	Ureaplasma	urealyticum	a nd	 Mycoplasma	
hominis	cultures	in	very	preterm	newborn	infants.	Am	J	Obstet	Gynecol	2008;198:43	e1 -5.	
15.	 Schulman	J,	Dimand	RJ,	Lee	HC,	Duenas	GV,	Bennett	MV,	Gould	JB.	Neonatal	intensive	care	unit	antibiotic	use.	Pediatrics	2015; 135:826 -33.	
16.	 Thinkhamrop	 J,	Hofmeyr	GJ,	Adetoro	O,	Lumbiganon	P,	Ota	E.	Antibiotic	prophylaxis	during	the	second	and	third	trimester	to	reduce	adverse 	pregnancy	
outcomes	and	morbidity.	The	Cochrane	database	of	systematic	reviews	2015;1:CD002250. 	
17.	 Schrag	SJ,	Verani	JR.	Intrapart um	antibiotic	prophylaxis	for	the	prevention	of	perinatal	group	B	streptococcal	disease:	experience	in	the	United	States	
and	implications	for	a	potential	group	B	streptococcal	vaccine.	Vaccine	2013;31	Suppl	4:D20 -6.	
18.	 Dardas	M,	Gill	SR,	Grier	A,	et	al.	T he	impact	of	postnatal	antibiotics	on	the	preterm	intestinal	microbiome.	Pediatr	Res	2014;76:150 -8.	
19.	 Arboleya	S,	Sanchez	B,	Milani	C,	et	al.	Intestinal	microbiota	development	in	preterm	neonates	and	effect	of	perinatal	antibio tics.	J	Pediatr	2015;166:53 8-
44.	
20.	 Fricke	WF.	The	more	the	merrier?	Reduced	fecal	microbiota	diversity	in	preterm	infants	treated	with	antibiotics.	J	Pediatr	20 14;165:8 -10.	
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
	21.	 DiGiulio	DB.	Prematurity	and	perinatal	antibiotics:	a	tale	of	two	factors	influencing	development	of	the 	neonatal	gut	microbiota.	J	Pediatr	2015;166:515 -
7.	
22.	 Tzialla	C,	Borghesi	A,	Serra	G,	Stronati	M,	Corsello	G.	Antimicrobial	therapy	in	neonatal	intensive	care	unit.	Italian	journa l	of	pediatrics	2015;41:27. 	
23.	 Neu	J,	Walker	WA.	Necrotizing	enterocolitis .	N	Engl	J	Med	2011;364:255 -64.	
24.	 Torrazza	RM,	Ukhanova	M,	Wang	X,	et	al.	Intestinal	microbial	ecology	and	environmental	factors	affecting	necrotizing	enteroco litis.	PLoS	One	
2013;8:e83304. 	
25.	 Mai	V,	Torrazza	RM,	Ukhanova	M,	et	al.	Distortions	in	develo pment	of	intestinal	microbiota	associated	with	late	onset	sepsis	in	preterm	infants.	PLoS	
One	2013;8:e52876. 	
26.	 Mai	V,	Young	CM,	Ukhanova	M,	et	al.	Fecal	microbiota	in	premature	infants	prior	to	necrotizing	enterocolitis.	PLoS	One	2011;6 :e20647. 	
27.	 Wang	 Y,	Hoenig	JD,	Malin	KJ,	et	al.	16S	rRNA	gene -based	analysis	of	fecal	microbiota	from	preterm	infants	with	and	without	necrotizing	enterocolitis.	
ISME	J	2009;3:944 -54.	
28.	 Carl	MA,	Ndao	IM,	Springman	AC,	et	al.	Sepsis	from	the	gut:	the	enteric	habitat	of	ba cteria	that	cause	late -onset	neonatal	bloodstream	infections.	Clin	
Infect	Dis	2014;58:1211 -8.	
29.	 Greenwood	C,	Morrow	AL,	Lagomarcino	AJ,	et	al.	Early	Empiric	Antibiotic	Use	in	Preterm	Infants	Is	Associated	with	Lower	Bacte rial	Diversity	and	Higher	
Relativ e	Abundance	of	Enterobacter.	J	Pediatr	2014. 	
30.	 Mshvildadze	M,	Neu	J,	Schuster	J,	Theriaque	D,	Li	N,	Mai	V.	Intestinal	microbial	ecology	in	premature	infants	assessed	with	n on-culture -based	
techniques.	J	Pediatr	2010;156:20 -5.	
31.	 Madan	JC,	Farzan	SF,	Hib berd	PL,	Karagas	MR.	Normal	neonatal	microbiome	variation	in	relation	to	environmental	factors,	infection	and	allergy.	Curr	
Opin	Pediatr	2012;24:753 -9.	
32.	 Flenady	V,	Hawley	G,	Stock	OM,	Kenyon	S,	Badawi	N.	Prophylactic	antibiotics	for	inhibiting	preterm	l abour	with	intact	membranes.	The	Cochrane	
database	of	systematic	reviews	2013;12:CD000246. 	
33.	 Fritz	JV,	Desai	MS,	Shah	P,	Schneider	JG,	Wilmes	P.	From	meta -omics	to	causality:	experimental	models	for	human	microbiome	research.	Microbiome	
2013;1:14. 	
34.	 Myatt	L,	Eschenbach	DA,	Lye	SJ,	et	al.	A	standardized	template	for	clinical	studies	in	preterm	birth.	Reprod	Sci	2012;19:474 -82.	
35.	 Mshvildadze	M,	Neu	J,	Schuster	J,	Theriaque	D,	Li	N,	Mai	V.	Microbial	Ecology	of	the	premature	infant	using	non	Culture	ased	 techniques.	2009. 	
36.	 Mai	V,	Young	CM,	Ukhanova	M,	et	al.	Fecal	microbiota	in	premature	infants	prior	to	necrotizing	enterocolitis.	PLoS	One	2011;6 :e20647. 	
37.	 Murgas	Torrazza	R,	Neu	J.	The	developing	intestinal	microbiome	and	its	relationship	to	health	an d	disease	in	the	neonate.	J	Perinatol	2011;31:S29 -34.	
38.	 Ardissone	AN,	de	la	Cruz	DM,	Davis -Richardson	AG,	et	al.	Meconium	microbiome	analysis	identifies	bacteria	correlated	with	premature	birth.	PLoS	One	
2014;9:e90784. 	
39.	 Davis -Richardson	AG,	Ardissone	 AN,	Dias	R,	et	al.	Bacteroides	dorei	dominates	gut	microbiome	prior	to	autoimmunity	in	Finnish	children	at	high	risk	for	
type	1	diabetes.	Frontiers	in	microbiology	2014;5:678. 	
40.	 Leonard	MT,	Davis -Richardson	AG,	Ardissone	AN,	et	al.	The	methylome	of	the	g ut	microbiome:	disparate	Dam	methylation	patterns	in	intestinal	
Bacteroides	dorei.	Frontiers	in	microbiology	2014;5:361. 	
41.	 Meyer	F,	Paarmann	D,	D'Souza	M,	et	al.	The	metagenomics	RAST	server	 -	a	public	resource	for	the	automatic	phylogenetic	and	function al	analysis	of	
metagenomes.	BMC	bioinformatics	2008;9:386. 	
42.	 McMurdie	PJ,	Holmes	S.	phyloseq:	an	R	package	for	reproducible	interactive	analysis	and	graphics	of	microbiome	census	data.	P loS	one	2013;8:e61217. 	
43.	 Nicholson	JK,	Holmes	E,	Kinross	J,	et	al. 	Host -gut	microbiota	metabolic	interactions.	Science	2012;336:1262 -7.	
	
201501045	revision	5/8/18 	
		
	
	
	
	