Protocol # 2016 -0527  
January 11, 2021,  
Page 1 of 44  
 
 
 
 
MD Anderson IND Sponsor Cover Sheet  
 
Protocol ID  2016 -0527  
Protocol Title  A Pre -Operative Study to Assess the Effects of Apalutamide 
plus LHRH Agonist  
or Apalutamide plus Abiraterone Acetate plus LHRH 
Agonist for Six Months for Prostate Cancer Patients 
at High Risk for Recurrence  
 
Protocol Phase  Phase 11  
Protocol Version  10 
Version Date  01/11/2021  
 
Protocol PI  Christopher J. Logothetis MD  
Department  Genitourinary Medical  
Oncology  
MD Anderson Cancer  Center  
1155 Pressler Street, Unit 1374  
Houston, TX  77030  
Phone:  (713) 563- 0894 
Email: eefstathiou@mdanderson.org  
 
IND Sponsor  MD Anderson Cancer Center  
IND #  136288  
 
 
 
Biostatistician:  Becky Slack  Tidwell , MS 
1400 Pressler Street, Unit 1411  
Houston, TX 77030 
Email: rsslack@mdanderson.org  
 
 
Funding and Drug Supply: Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC  
 
 
 
MDACC Version Tracking Table  
Version 00  04/14/2017  Pre-submission packet  
Version 01  05/01/2017  CRC  
Version 02  05/26/2017  CRC Resubmission  
Version 03  06/19/2017  IRB Submission  
Version 04  06/19/2017  IRB Resubmission  
Version 05 06/19/2017  IRB Resubmission  
Version 06  09/14/2017  IRB Resubmission  
Version 07  02/13/2018  IRB Resubmission  
Version 08  01/04/2019  IRB Resubmission  
Version 09  04/23/2019  IRB Resubmission  
Version 10  01/11/2021  IRB Resubmission  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
January 11, 2021,  
Page 2 of 44  
 
 
 
 
SCHEMA  
   
 
 
 

Protocol # 2016 -0527  
January 11, 2021,  
Page 3 of 44  
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Page  
 
 
Contents  
1.0 OBJECTIVES  ........................................................................................................ 4 
2.0 BACKGROUND  .................................................................................................... 4 
3.0 PATIENT  SELECTION .......................................................................................... 9 
4.0 TREATMENT  PLAN  ......................................................................................................13 
5.0 DOSING  DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS ....................................................... 20 
6.0 ADVERSE EVENTS  ............................................................................................ 25 
7.0 PHARMACEUTICAL  INFORMATION  .................................................................  30 
8.0 STUDY CALENDAR  ............................................................................................ 32 
9.0 MEASUREMENT  OF EFFECT  ............................................................................ 34 
10.0  STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  .................................................................... 34 
11.0  ETHICAL  ASPECTS  ............................................................................................ 38 
APPENDIX 1  ................................................................................................................. 39 
APPENDIX 2  ................................................................................................................. 40 
APPENDIX 3  ................................................................................................................. 41 
APPENDIX 4:  ................................................................................................................ 42 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
January 11, 2021,  
Page 4 of 44  
 
1.0 OBJECTIVES  
 
1.1. Primary  Objectives 
 
To assess the rate of pathologic stage ≤ pT2N0 at prostatectomy for Group A (LHRHa 
plus apalutamide 240 mg PO daily for 6 months as preoperative therapy) and Group B 
(LHRHa plus apalutamide 240 mg PO daily plus abiraterone acetate 1000 mg PO daily 
and prednisone 5 m g PO QD for 6 months as preoperative therapy)  
 
1.2. Secondary Objectives 
 
• To assess the tumor epithelium volume following treatment in groups A and B 
• To assess the rate of positive surgical margins in Group A and Group B. 
• To assess the time to PSA recurrence (TTR PSA) 
• To assess the safety  profile  of the two treatment  arms  (apalutamide  with and 
without abiraterone acetate and low dose prednisone) for six months in a 
preoperative setting.  
 
1.3 Exploratory  Objectives 
 
• Assessment of the steroid hormone metabolome in blood plasma and tissue  by 
liquid chromatography tandem mass  spectrometry  
• Assessment  of androgen signaling (canonical  and non-canonical)  and candidate 
pathways of resistance to androgen signaling inhibition by protein and RNA 
analysis  
• Assessment  of citrate  intracellular  TCA cycle  metabolite concentrations  with 
LCMS/MS  
• Proportion of patients who achieve pathological  CR 
• Hyperpolarized 1-13C-pyruvate imaging at study  entry  and at 3 months  in Arm A 
and Arm  B. 
 
2.0 BACKGROUND  
 
2.1 Introduction 
 
Many patients diagnosed with localized prostate cancer are curable with local therapy, 
however approximately 20% of patients in modern series initially present with locally 
advanced or high- grade prostate cancer not amenable to a single therapeutic approach  
i.e. surgery or radiation therapy alone. The prostate cancer experience with 
preoperative therapy over the past 15 years has differed significantly from other solid 
tumors; pathologic complete response is rarely achieved with fi rst generation anti - 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
January 11, 2021,  
Page 5 of 44  
 
 
androgens including flutamide and cyproterone or LHRH analogues alone. The addition 
of pre- operative chemotherapy has provided similarly disappointing results. While pCR 
remains elusive, several studies of pre- operative androgen ablations have reported 
reduction in the rate of positive surgical margins, rates of lymph node involvement, and 
increased rates of organ confined disease. Importantly, such trials have failed to impact 
outcomes to date for a variety of reasons. Ensuing knowledge challenges the potential 
association of pCR with improved outcomes and underscores the importance of minimal 
residual tumor volume. Moreover high risk locally advanced prostatic carcinoma is 
characteristic for biologic heterogeneity that invariably will govern responsiveness to 
therapeutic choices suggesting the need for predictive markers of outcome.  
 
In recent years, three pre- operative trials incorporating a new generation of androgen-  
targeting agents including abiraterone and enzalutamide have been reported. These 
have documented rates of conversion to pathologic stage ≤pT2N0 ranging from 40-  
55%;1,2,3 reinforcing the anticipated association with underlying biologic heterogeneity 
within this disease stage . Correlative biomarkers have been evaluated, and while these 
remain investigational at this time, with further validation these may ultimately be used 
to provide a predictive framework to identify patients with high risk localized disease 
who will benefit from intensive pre- operative androgen deprivation.  
 
Combination anti -androgen therapy with abiraterone and enzalutamide has 
demonstrated safety and profound depletion of intraprostatic androgens in metastatic 
CRPC 3,4. Localized prostate cancer is dependent on androgens for proliferation, 
providing the rationale for moving a combination approach with LHRHa, apalutamide 
and abiraterone acetate to the hormone- naïve but high- risk prostate cancer setting. We 
hypothesize that intensification of pre- operative androgen deprivation will further 
decrease intraprostatic androgens, leading to decreased cell proliferation and less 
advanced pathologic stage at prostatectomy.  
 
Apalutamide is an investigational agent not yet approved by the FDA, and is an 
androgen receptor antagonist similar in structure to enzalutamide, an FDA -approved 
agent for the treatment of metastatic CRPC. Both agents prevent AR translocation to 
the nucleus and binding to androgen response elements. A proposed advantage of 
Apalutamide over enzalutamide may include an improved therapeutic index including 
limited CNS toxicity.5 Phase I/II trials have demonstrated safety and tolerance in 
humans.6 
 
2.2 Agents  
 
i. Apalutamide is an androgen- receptor antagonist that prevents AR translocation 
to the nucleus and binding to androgen response elements. In preclinical models, 
Apalutamide produced responses in both castration- sensitive and castration-  
resistant human prostate cancer xenograft models and showed maximal 
antitumor efficacy in these models at a three- fold lower dose and approximately 
nine- fold lower plasma level than enzalutamide, suggestive of a higher 
therapeutic  index.5 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
January 11, 2021,  
Page 6 of 44  
 
 
 
The first in- human phase I study of Apalutamide was published in 2013, and a 
recommended phase II dose of 240mg PO daily was established. This study 
reported ≥50% decline in PSA at 12 weeks in 46.7% of patients, with grade 1/2 
fatigue the most frequently reported adverse effect.6 
 
ii. LHRH Agonists (ie, Leuprolide Acetate, Goserelin,  Triptorelin)  
At the time of diagnosis localized prostate cancers are categorized as low, 
intermediate or high risk based on clinical stage, prostate specific antigen (PSA) 
level/velocity and tumor Gleason score. Patients who fall into intermediate and 
high risk categories have unacceptably high relapse rates (30- 80%) after primary 
local therapy or salvage local approaches. The standard systemic  treatment for 
prostate cancer is androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) most commonly 
administered with an LHRHa with/without an antiandrogen. Treatment of systemic 
prostate cancer with ADT is not curative as patients develop castration resistant 
prostate cancer (CRPC).  
 
To date, ADT in high risk localized prostate cancer patients using LHRHa alone 
has reduced prostate volume by roughly 30% and decreased the rate of positive 
surgical margins, but has not been shown to improve the biochemical relapse rate 
for patients who undergo radical prostatectomy. However, because the addition of 
novel androgen targeting agents like abiraterone and Apalutamide to LHRHa 
further lowers androgen levels compared to LHRHa alone in CRPC, there is a 
strong scientific rationale to test whether this more potent combination therapy can 
improve surgical outcomes.  
 
iii. Abiraterone Acetate  
Abiraterone acetate (ZYTIGA) is converted in vivo to abiraterone, an androgen 
biosynthesis inhibitor that inhibits 17 α hydroxylase/C17, 20- lyase (CYP17).  This 
enzyme is expressed in testicular, adrenal and prostatic tumor tissues and is 
required for androgen biosynthesis.  
 
CYP17 catalyzes two sequential reactions: 1) the conversion of pregnenolone and 
progesterone to their 17α -hydroxy derivatives by 17α -hydroxylase activity and 2) 
the subsequent formation of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and 
androstenedione, respectively, by C17, 20 lyase activity. DHEA and 
androstenedione are androgens and are precursors of testosterone. Inhibition of 
CYP17 by abiraterone can also result in increased mineralocorticoid production by 
the adrenals.  
 
Abiraterone acetate has received marketing approval in more than 100 countries 
for the treatment of men with metastatic castration- resistant prostate cancer 
(mCRPC) after docetaxel  treatment. It is also approved for the treatment of 
mCRPC in men who have not previously received chemotherapy. The pre-  
operative combination proposed in this protocol is not FDA approved.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
January 11, 2021,  
Page 7 of 44  
 
 
2.3 Rationale 
 
Abiraterone has demonstrated activity  in patients  with mCRPC who have progressed on 
hormonal and currently available chemotherapeutic options. Apalutamide is a novel, 
potent inhibitor of the androgen receptor that has demonstrated safety in patients with 
CRPC. Both alterations in the steroid m etabolism and the androgen receptor are 
implicated in the clinically observed resistance to castration. Importantly as we have 
first reported in the more advanced disease setting each agent alone induces 
physiologic feedbacks that may contribute to treatment resistance. Taken together, 
these observations provide compelling rationale to combine optimum medical 
castration, inhibition of the androgen receptor, and altered androgen biosynthesis in 
patients at high risk for  recurrence.  
 
The proposed study will e xamine this combination in the pre- operative, hormone- naïve 
but high risk setting. A prior phase II study has examined pre- operative LHRHa plus 
abiraterone compared with LHRHa alone in patients with localized high risk prostate 
cancer (LHRPC). At the time of prostatectomy, pathology staging ≤ pT2N0 occurred in 
24/44 (54.5%) for Abiraterone plus LHRHa versus 8/21 (33.1%) for LHRHa alone, P =  
0.21. Tumor Epithelial density for Abiraterone plus LHRHa was lower compared to 
LHRHa alone (P < 0.0001). Post -treatme nt prostate- specific antigen (PSA) nadir was ≤  
0.2 ng/ml in 41/44 (93.2%) for Abiraterone + LHRHa versus 3/21 (14.3%) for LHRHa 
alone (P < 0.0001). For the cohort of patients receiving abiraterone and LHRHa, higher 
ARV7, GR, both by protein and RNA assays were associated with increased residual 
tumor. These findings suggest resistance emerges within 3 months of androgen 
signaling inhibition despite universal serum PSA declines, which have clinical 
implications on designing combinational treatment strategies  for LHRPC.  
 
Another phase II study has examined pre- operative LHRHa plus abiraterone plus 
enzalutamide compared with LHRHa plus abiraterone. Complete molecular 
characterization of these results are still pending, but suggestions of early resistance 
and responsiveness were identified, with tumors with favorable pathology stage (≤ 
pT2N0) demonstrating higher canonical androgen signaling  
 
The studies summarized above have outline proposed biomarker profiles of resistance 
and responsiveness to LHRHa alone, LHR Ha plus abiraterone, and LHRHA plus 
abiraterone plus enzalutamide. The proposed study will add to these results by 
characterizing the biomarker profiles of responsiveness and resistance to apalutamide 
plus LHRHa and apalutamide plus LHRHa plus abiraterone.  These profiles may 
ultimately provide the framework for personalized pre- operative treatment for LHRPC. 
 
This knowledge will build on our understanding of the effect of optimum androgen 
inhibition in the setting of newly diagnosed, high- risk prostate canc er. The findings will 
lead to a framework that will allow us to personalize androgen signaling targeted 
therapy, by stage of progression, within individual patients and assure the safe use of 
the drug and the development of a rational combination therapy. Exploratory biomarker 
studies will be used to explore the subset of patients who benefit most from two- agent  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
January 11, 2021,  
Page 8 of 44  
 
 
or three- agent pre- operative androgen ablation, and a subset with early resistance. 
Ultimately, biomarker patterns of pre- operative androgen resistance may be used to 
guide intensification of alternative therapies for patients who demonstrate resistance 
despite maximal androgen ablation.  
 
2.4 Correlative Studies Background 
 
The diagnosis of prostate cancer is dependent on core needle biopsy, as will be our 
assessments of correlative biomarkers (discussed below) in the proposed study. Core 
needle biopsy is associated with morbidity, and is by definition susceptible to 
overlooking areas of interest due to sampling. The ramifications of our current reliance 
on prostate biopsies are demonstrated by the significant number of patients who are up-  
staged at the time of prostatectomy.  
 
2.4.1  Magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
 
Hyperpolarized magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is a functional imaging 
technique that allows for acquisition of detailed metabolic information during non-  
invasive MR imaging, eliminating both the sampling error and the morbidity associated 
with core needle biopsy. Incorporating MRS into our assessment of high- risk localized 
prostate cancer will validate its use in this setting and allow for comprehensive 
assessment of metabolism in all foci of prostate cancer. We hypothesize that pre-  
operative intensive androgen depletion will also have differential  effects  on citrate  flux in 
responders and non- responders. Normal prostate cells have the unique characteristic 
of accumulating and secreting high concentrations of citrate, usually employed by 
eukaryotic cells in the oxidative metabolism of carbohydrates via the tricarboxylic aci d 
(TCA) cycle. Loss of this high citrate concentration is an early hallmark of malignant 
transformation, and is consistently observed in prostate cancers. In prostate cancer 
cells, citrate is diverted to anabolic pathways including fatty acid (FA) synthesi s and de 
novo testosterone synthesis via acetyl -CoA; therefore citrate serves as the central link 
between intermediary  metabolism  and androgen signaling in the prostate cancer  cell. 
Citrate flux profiles after pre -operative androgen deprivation will enable non-invasive 
monitoring of efficacy, that when paired with cell density and molecular characterization 
will enable early identification resistance to androgen deprivation in the localized setting.  
 
 
2.4.2  Laboratory  Biomarkers 
 
Efstathiou and Titus have present ed and published extensively on molecular 
characterization of CRPC treated with Abiraterone, enzalutamide and the combination 
in the metastatic setting. Responders to both Abiraterone and enzalutamide have 
increased nuclear N -terminal AR staining and ≥10% CYP17 tumor expression. These 
studies serve as proof of principle that molecular characterization can yield predictive 
information.  
Protocol  # 2016 -0527   
April 23 , 2019,  
Page 9 of 44 
 
 
3.0 PATIENT  SELECTION 
 
3.1 Eligibility  Criteria  
 
a) Patients must have histologically or cytologically confirmed adenocarcinoma of 
the prostate with no histological variants (such as small cell, sarcomatoid, pure 
ductal cancer, transitional cell  carcinoma).  
 
b) Patients  may have received one prior depot  injection of LHRH agonist  or LHRH 
antagonis t ( degarelix) within 30 days prior to study entry. Patients who have 
received any other prior hormonal therapy or any chemotherapy for prostate 
cancer will be excluded.  
 
(Patients who have discontinued finasteride or dutasteride or testosterone 
supplementation for at least 2 weeks will be allowed to enroll)  
 
3.1.1  Each patient must meet the following criteria to be enrolled in this study:  
 
 
1) Be willing/able  to adhere to the prohibitions  and restrictions  specified in this 
protocol.  
2) Have signed an informed consent document indicating that the subject 
understands  the purpose of and procedures  required for the study  and is willing 
to participate in the study.  
3) Written  Authorization for Use and Release  of Health  and Research Study 
Information has been obtained.  
4) Age >18 years . Because no dosing or adverse event data are currently 
available on the use of Abiraterone in combination with apalutamide (in patients  
<18 years of age, children are excluded from this study.  
5) Pathology review at MD Anderson (Note: if patient’s prostate biopsy was not 
read at MD Anderson,  it must  be reviewed at the study  site to confirm  eligibility).  
6) Prostate Biopsy. If previous biopsy has been performed within 3 months of 
screening,  second biopsy procedure will not be required,  if archival  biopsies 
and at least one formalin fixed paraffin embedded biopsy tissue block 
containing tumor is available. (Refer to section 4.2.5)  
 
7) The following tumor stage and Gleason scores:  
• Clinical ≥stage T1c/T2 tumor with Gleason score ≥8 
• Clinical stage ≥T2b tumor with Gleason score ≥7 and PSA >10 ng/ml  
8) Serum testosterone >150 ng/dL. For patients treated up to 1 month of LHRH 
agonist,  a testosterone measurement  prior to the LHRH treatment  will be used 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 10 of 44  
 
 
to determine eligibility, and must have been > 150 ng/dL. If no testosterone 
level is available  from before LHRHa  injection up to 30 days  prior to study  entry, 
the patient will be ineligible.  
9) Patient is suitable for  prostatectomy.  
10) No evidence of metastatic disease as determined by imaging procedures.  
11) Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status of 0 or  1. 
12) Hemoglobin ≥9.0 g/dL independent of  transfusion.  
13) Platelet count  ≥100,000/µL.  
14) Patients  should have adequate bone marrow  function defined as an absolute 
peripheral neutrophil count (ANC)  >1,000.  
15) Creatinine clearance ≥50 mL/min 
16) Serum potassium ≥3.5 mmol/L.  
17) Serum bilirubin ≤ 1.5x ULN or ALT and AST ≤ 2.5x  ULN 
18) Serum Albumin ≥ 3.0  g/dl 
19) Able to swallow the st udy drug whole as a tablet.  
20) Patients  must  have normal  coagulation profile and no history  of substantial  non- 
iatrogenic bleeding diathesis.  
21) Agrees to use a condom (even men with vasectomies) and another effective 
method of birth control if he is having sex with a woman of childbearing 
potential or agrees to use a condom if he is having sex with a woman who is 
pregnant  while  on study  drug and for 3 months  following  the last dose of study 
drug. Must also agree not to donate sperm during the study and for 3 months 
after receiving the last dose of study  drug.  
22) Willing to take abiraterone acetate on an empty stomach; no food should be 
consumed at least two hours  before and for at least  one hour after the dose of 
abiraterone acetate is  taken.  
23) Life expectancy of greater than 12 months.  
 
3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 
 
1) Patients  who have had any prior chemotherapy  or radiotherapy  for prostate 
cancer.  
2) Patients  who have had >1 LHRH  agonist  or antagonist  depot  injection or 
received depot injection >30 days before study  entry.  
3) Patients may not be receiving any other investigational  agents.  
4) Patients  may not be receiving the concomitant  administration of any systemic 
therapy, biologic therapy, or other agents with anti-tumor activity against 
prostate cancer while the are on study.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 11 of 44  
 
 
5) Patients with known metastatic prostate cancer.  
6) History of allergic reactions attributed to compounds of similar chemical or 
biologic  composition to Leuprolide acetate,  abiraterone  acetate,  prednisone or 
apalutamide or other agents used in the study.  
7) Uncontrolled intercurrent  illness  including,  but not limited  to, ongoing or active 
infection, symptomatic congestive heart failure, unstable angina pectoris, 
cardiac arrhythmia, or psychiatric illness/social situations that would limit 
compliance with study  requirements.  
8) HIV-positive patients on combination antiretroviral therapy are ineligible 
because of the potential  for pharmacokinetic  interactions  with apalutamide and 
abiraterone. Appropriate studies will be undertaken in patients receiving 
combination antiretroviral therapy when indicated.  
9) Avoid concomitant strong CYP3A4 inducers during abiraterone acetate 
treatment.  If a strong CYP3A4  inducer  must  be co-administered,  increase the 
abiraterone acetate dosing frequency.  
10) Avoid co -administration of abiraterone acetate with CYP2D6 substrates that 
have a narrow therapeutic index. If an alternative treatment cannot be used, 
exercise caution and consider a dose reduction of the concomitant CYP2D6 
substrate.  
 
11. patients receiving medications known to lower the seizure threshold are 
ineligible  unless discontinued or substituted at least  4 weeks prior  to study  entry.  
 
These include:  
 
• Aminophylline/theophylline;  
• Atypical antipsychotics (e.g., clozapine, olanzapine, risperidone,  ziprasidone);  
• Bupropion;  
• Lithium;  
• Pethidine;  
• Phenothiazine antipsychotics  (e.g., prochlorperazine (compazine), 
chlorpromazine, mesoridazine,  thioridazine);  
• Tricyclic  and tetracyclic antidepressants  (e.g.,  amitriptyline,  desipramine, 
doxepin, imipramine, maprotiline,  mirtazapine).  
 
 
 
12. Chronically  uncontrolled hypertension,  defined conventionally  as consistent  systolic 
pressures above 170 or diastolic pressures above 110 despite anti -hypertensive 
therapy. Note that this is NOT a criterion related to particular BP results at the time of 
assessment for eligibility, nor does it apply to acute BP excursions that are related to 
iatrogenic causes, acute pain or other transient, reversible causes. (For example 
doctor’s visit related stress i.e. “white coat  syndrome”.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 12 of 44  
 
 
13. Requirement  for corticosteroids  greater  than the equivalent  of 10 mg of 
prednisone daily for more than 2 weeks.  
14. Poorly controlled diabetes defined by Hemoglobin A1C > 9.0 at  screening  
15. Active or symptomatic viral hepatitis or chronic liver  disease.  
16. Known history of pituitary or adrenal  dysfunction.  
17. Other  malignancy,  except  non-melanoma skin cancer,  that is active  or has a ≥ 
30% probability of recurrence within 12 months.  
18. History  of gastrointestinal  disorders  (medical  disorders  or extensive surgery) 
which may interfere with the absorption of the study  drug.  
19. Prior  hormone therapy  for prostate  cancer  including orchiectomy,  antiandrogens, 
ketoconazole, or estrogens (5- α reductase inhibitors allowed), or LHRH 
agonists/antagonists (*Note: LHRH allowed if begun within 1 month of Day  1). 
20. Prior systemic treatment with an azole drug within four weeks of Cycle 1 Day1.  
21. Current  enrollment  in an investigational  drug or device study  or participation in 
such a study within 30 days of Cycle 1 Day  1. 
22. Allergies, hypersensitivity, or intolerance to prednisone, LHRH analog or 
excipients  of prednisone LHRH analog,  abiraterone acetate and apalutamide.  
23. Previous  use of abiraterone acetate or other  investigational  CYP17  inhibitor  (e.g., 
TAK- 700).  
24. Previous  investigational  antiandrogens  (e.g., apalutamide,  enzalutamide,  BMS-  
641988).  
25Condition or situation which,  in the investigator’s  opinion,  may put the patient 
at significant risk, may confound the study results, or may interfere significantly 
with patient’s participation in the study.  
26. Patients unable to tolerate transrectal  ultrasound.  
27. Anti-androgens  (steroidal  or non-steroidal)  such  as cyproterone acetate, 
flutamide, nilutamide, bicalutamide, etc. other than assigned study drug unless 
given for <=4 weeks.  
28. Estrogens,  progestational  agents  such  as megestrol,  medroxyprogesterone, 
DES, cyproterone, spironolactone > 50 mg/kg, etc. unless discontinued at 
least two weeks prior to  randomization  
29. Androgens  such  as testosterone,  dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEA],  etc. unless 
discontinued at least two weeks prior to randomization.  
30. Herbal  products  that may decrease PSA levels  (e.g.,  saw palmetto)  unless 
discontinued two weeks prior to randomization 
31. Active  infection or other  medical  condition that would  make prednisone/ 
prednisolone (corticosteroid) use contraindicated.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 13 of 44  
 
 
32. Severe hepatic impairment (Child -Pugh Class  C). 
33. History  of significant  bleeding disorder  unrelated to cancer,  including:  
• Diagnosed congenital  bleeding disorders  (e.g., von Willebrand’s 
disease)  
• Diagnosed acquired bleeding disorder  within  one year (e.g.,  acquired 
anti-factor VIII antibodies) of screening visit. 
• History  of GI bleeding  within  3 months  of screening visit requiring ≥2 
units packed red blood  cells.  
 
3.2.1 Clinically  significant  cardiovascular  disease including:  
 
• Myocardial  infarction within  6 months  of Screening visit; 
• Uncontrolled angina within  3 months  of Screening visit; 
• Congestive heart failure New York Heart Association (NYHA) class 3 or 4, 
or subjects  with history  of congestive heart  failure NYHA class 3 or 4 in the 
past, or history of anthracycline or anthracenedione (mitoxantrone) 
treatment, unless a screening echocardiogram or multi -gated acquisition 
scan (MUGA) performed within three months of the Screening visit results 
in a left ventricular ejection fraction that is ≥  50%.  
• History  of clinically  significant  ventricular  arrhythmias  (e.g.,  ventricular 
tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, torsade de pointes).  
• Prolonged corrected QT interval  by the Fridericia  correction formula  (QTcF) 
on the screening Electrocardiogram (ECG)  > 470 msec.  
• History  of Mobitz  II second degree or third degree heart  block  without  a 
permanent pacemaker in place.  
• Hypotension (systolic blood pressure < 86 mmHg  or bradycardia with a 
heart rate of <50 beats per minute on the Screening ECG., unless 
pharmaceutically  induced and thus reversible  (i.e. beta blockers).  
 
3.3 Inclusion of  Minorities  
 
Men of all races and ethnic groups are eligible for this trial.  
 
4.0 TREATMENT  PLAN  
 
4.1 Agent  Administration  
 
Treatment will be administered on an outpatient basis. Reported adverse events and 
potential risks for apalutamide, leuprolide, and abiraterone acetate are described in 
Section 6. Appropriate dose modifications for apalutamide and abiraterone acetate are 
described in Section 5.0. No investigational or commerci al agents or therapies other 
than those described below may be administered with the intent to treat the patient's 
malignancy.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 14 of 44  
 
 
 
REGIMEN DESCRIPTION  
Agent  Premedications/ 
Precautions  Dose  Route  Schedule  Cycle 
Length  
Leuprolide*   22.5 mg IM IM every 
3 months  4 
weeks 
(28 
days)  Abiraterone 
Acetate  Take on an 
empty stomach  1000 mg PO Daily, 
days 1 -28 
Prednisone   5 mg PO QD, days 
1-28 
Apalutamide  240 mg PO Daily, 
days 1 -28 
* Any analogue or antagonist of equivalent dosing and schema as long as the total 
dosing does not exceed 6 months.  
 
4.1.1  Apalutamide 
 
No specific prophylactic or supportive care regimen is required.  
 
4.1.2  Abiraterone Acetate  
 
Co-administration with prednisone 5mg PO QD is indicated for the prevention of 
mineralocorticoid excess.  
 
4.1.3  LHRH Agonist/  Antagonist  
 
No specific prophylactic or supportive care regimen is required.  
 
4.1.4  Medication Compliance  
Compliance (individual drugs) within 80% of instructed dose and schedule is expected of 
participants each cycle. Variations in dosing within expected compliance will not 
constitute a protocol deviation or violation. Missed dosed may be documented in the 
electronic case report form.  
 
 
4.2 Surgical  Procedures  
 
4.2.1  Radical  Prostatectomy  
 
Tissue from the prostatectomy and baseline pretreatment prostate biopsies will be 
collected for correlative studies.  
 
4.2.2  Extent of  Operation  
 
All patients will have a planned radical prostatectomy.  
 
4.2.3  Timing of  Prostatectomy  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 15 of 44  
 
The surgery will be planned at the end of Cycle 6. Patients must be off apalutamide and, 
if applicable, abiraterone acetate no less than 48 hours prior to surgery. Prednisone 
discontinuation will be up to provider’s determination. To permit flexibility in surgical 
scheduling a study window of a maximum of four weeks will be allowed. In the event the 
surgery is delayed, the patient will be required to return to the clinic for safety 
assessment.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 16 of 44  
 
 
Surgery will be performed only after recovery from any side effects from abiraterone 
acetate or apalutamide to a level considered safe for surgery. In the event of delayed 
recovery, the patient will be maintained on LHRHa until the clinical condition permits 
surgery.  
 
4.2.4  Assessment of Surgical  Complication 
 
It will be the responsibility of the attending surgeon to accurately tabulate complications 
and the progress of the surgical procedure. Specifically tabulated will be the duration of 
anesthesia, blood product requirement blood loss, fluid requirement, and gross 
description of the operative field (presence or absence of desmoplasia).  
 
4.2.5  Prostate Tissue Handling 
 
An archival tumor tissue block (or at least 20 unstained slides from the tumor tissue 
block; archived or recent) or fresh frozen tissue in liquid nitrogen will be required from 
the patient’s initial prostate biopsy. These will be reviewed by the pathologist for 
confirmation of cancer and Gleason scoring. The patient will not be required to undergo 
a second biopsy procedure prior to starting study therapy (screening) if archival biopsies 
and unstained slides are available.  
 
In order to preserve androgen levels in tissues, open intraoperative cores biopsies will 
be obtained prior to prostatectomy.  The biopsies  must  be obtained prior to ligation  of the 
vascular supply to the prostate. A minimum of 6 biopsies will be obtained attempti ng to 
focus on known regions of cancer. Each biopsy core should be placed in a separate 2 
ml screwtop cryotube and immediately snap frozen in liquid nitrogen or dry ice/ethanol 
bath and stored at - 80°C. If there is palpable tumor, it is recommended that at  least 3 
cores be obtained from the area of suspected tumor.  
 
To process the radical prostatectomy specimen post -operatively, the following 
procedures must be followed:  
 
• The prostate will be inked in four colors  depicting left, right,  superior  and inferior  
sections and serially  sectioned.  
Alternate coronal sections will be numbered sequentially from apex to base, 
divided into 4 quadrants (also labeled clockwise from the superoposterior 
quadrant as A, B, C, D) and immediately frozen in OCT (liquid nitrogen or dry 
ice/ethanol bath) for subsequent evaluation. The alternate sections will be placed 
in formalin, then processed and imbedded in paraffin using the tissue- tek®vip® 6 
system (for histology analysis) and stored in the Prostate Tissue Bank at MDACC 
for fu ture analysis. The coronal sections embedded in OCT will be stored, in the 
GU biorepository located at MDACC, for future analysis.  
Any future additional analyses not specified in this protocol will be agreed upon 
by prior approval from Janssen Scientific A ffairs, LLC. 
• Tissue samples  collected on this study  for future  analysis  are optional  and not a 
requirement to be enrolled on this  protocol.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 17 of 44  
 
 
4.2.7 Correlative Biomarkers 
 
 
For all patients  who provide informed consent,  prostate  tumor  and normal  prostate tissue 
will be obtained by macrodissection when possible. Testosterone and DHT and steroid 
metabolites of interest will be analyzed by a research laboratory at MD  Anderson.  
 
Standard methods such as IHC and whole exome sequencing will be us ed to assess 
prostate tumor for canonical and non- canonical androgen signaling proliferation cell 
cycle neuroendocrine markers, angiogenesis (CD31, VEGF, VEGFR,) and other 
relevant biomarkers likely associated with steroid metabolism and prostate cancer wi ll 
be analyzed by the Stanford Alexander laboratory at MD Anderson.  
 
Transcriptomic characterization of the tumor will be conducted in the Laboratory of Dr. 
Mark Titus at MD Anderson. Where available, analysis will be carried out on the pre-  
prostatectomy specimens, and prostatectomy specimens using fresh frozen tissue for 
primary tumor. RNA Analysis will include long non coding RNA (lnRNA) examples as 
per www.lncrnadb.org;  oncomir  RNA;  and micro  RNA (miRNA)  such  as #205,  146, 1256 
and let7. DNA analysis wi ll also be performed.8,9 DNA analysis will also be  performed.  
Upon completion of research any remained tissue or other sample will be returned to 
institutional tissue bank after publication of research. Patient Identity will be 
safeguarded in accordance wi th HIPAA and MDACC guidelines.  
 
 
 
4.3 General Concomitant Medication and Supportive Care Guidelines  
 
4.3.1  Effects of Apalutamide on Drug Metabolizing Enzymes 
 
Because there is a potential for interaction of apalutamide with other concomitantly 
administered drugs through the cytochrome P450 system, the concurrent use of all 
other drugs, over -the-counter medications, or alternative therapies will be recorded in 
the patient’s medical records. The Principal Investigator should be alerted by the 
research nurse or study coordinator performing current medication review at 
each study visit if the patient is taking any agent known to affect or with the 
potential to affect  selected CYP450 isoenzymes.  
In vitro, CYP3A4 and CYP2C8 are the enzymes primarily responsible for the 
metabolism of apalutamide.  
 
Coadministration of a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor (itraconazole) had no clinically 
meaningful effect on the PK of apalutamide and its metabolite JNJ -56142060 (M3). 
Coadministration of a strong CYP2C8 inhibitor (gemfibrozil) increased the AUC of 
apalutamide by 68% but decreased the AUC of JNJ -56142060 (M3) by 15%. Use 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 18 of 44  
 
 
caution if strong CYP2C8 inhibitors (eg, gemfibrozil) are coadministered with 
apalutamide.  
 
The effects of CYP3A4 inducers or CYP2C8 inducers on the PK of apalutamide have 
not been evaluated in vivo. Coadministration of apalutamide with the following drugs 
that can induce CYP3A4 or CYP2C8 should be avoided as coadministration with any of 
these agents may decrease apalutamide plasma concentrations. Alternative therapies 
should be used when available.  
 
• Strong CYP3A4  inducers:  phenytoin,  carbamazepine,  rifampin,  rifabutin, 
rifapentin, phenobarbital, efavirenz, tipranivir, St. John's  wort 
• CYP2C8 inducers:  rifampin  
 
4.3.2  Effects of Abiraterone on Drug Metabolizing Enzymes 
 
Abiraterone acetate is an inhibitor of the hepatic drug- metabolizing enzyme CYP2D6. In 
a CYP2D6 drug -drug interaction trial, the C max and AUC of dextromethorphan (CYP2D6 
substrate) were increased 2.8-  and 2.9- fold, respectively, when dextromethorphan was 
given with abiraterone acetate 1000 mg daily and prednisone 5 mg twice daily. Avoid 
co-administration of abiraterone acetate with subs trates of CYP2D6 with a narrow 
therapeutic index (e.g., thioridazine). If alternative treatments cannot be used, exercise 
caution and consider a dose reduction of the concomitant CYP2D6 substrate drug.  
 
In a CYP2C8 drug- drug interaction trial in healthy subjects, the AUC of pioglitazone was 
increased by 46% and the AUCs for M -III and M -IV, the active metabolites of 
pioglitazone, each decreased by 10%, when pioglitazone was given together with a 
single dose of 1000 mg abiraterone acetate. Although these results indicate that no 
clinically meaningful increases in exposure are expected when abiraterone acetate is 
combined with drugs that are predominantly eliminated by CYP2C8, patients should be 
monitored for signs of toxicity related to a CYP2C8 substrate with a narrow therapeutic 
index if used concomitantly with abiraterone acetate.  
 
4.3.3  Drugs that Inhibit or Induce CYP3A4 Enzymes 
 
1) Based on in vitro data, abiraterone acetate is a substrate of CYP3A4. The effects 
of strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, itr aconazole, clarithromycin, 
atazanavir, nefazodone, saquinavir, telithromycin, ritonavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, 
voriconazole) or inducers (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin, rifabutin, 
rifapentine, and phenobarbital) on the pharmacokinetics of abiraterone have not 
been evaluated, in vivo. Avoid or use with caution, strong inhibitors and inducers 
of CYP3A4 during abiraterone acetate treatment.Avoid concomitant strong 
CYP3A4 inducers during abiraterone acetate treatment. If a strong CYP3A4 
inducer must  be co -administered, increase the abiraterone acetate dosing 
frequency.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 19 of 44  
 
 
2) Avoid  co-administration of abiraterone acetate with CYP2D6  substrates  that have 
a narrow therapeutic index. If an alternative treatment cannot be used, exercise 
caution and consider a dose reduction of the concomitant CYP2D6 substrate  
 
 
4.3.4  Previous Medication (Drugs and Therapies)  
 
Medication taken within four weeks prior to registration must be captured in the medical 
record. At each visit, all concomitant treatments, including blood and blood products, 
must be reported on the source documentation. Concomitant medications must also be 
documented at the time of discontinuation and at the 30 day follow -up visit.  
 
The dosage and regimen of the following medications and any  chronic permitted 
concomitant medications should be stabilized for 4 weeks prior to Day 1 and held 
constant throughout the study:  
 
• Bisphosphonates  
• Denosumab (or other RANK -ligand  inhibitor)  
• GnRH agonist/antagonist  
 
No other new systemic therapy or new radiotherapy for treatment of prostate cancer is 
permitted while subject is on study.  
 
The following medications are prohibited while the subject is on study drug:  
 
• Chemotherapeutic,  biologic,  or other  agents  with anti-tumor  activity  against 
prostate cancer other than assigned study  drug.  
• Anti-androgens  (steroidal  or non-steroidal)  such  as cyproterone acetate, 
flutamide,  nilutamide,  bicalutamide,  etc. other  than assigned study  drug.  
• Estrogens,  progestational  agents  such  as megestrol,  medroxyprogesterone, 
DES,  cyproterone,  etc. 
• Androgens  such  as testosterone,  dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEA], 
etc.Ketoconazole.  
• Herbal products that may decrease PSA levels (e.g., saw  palmetto).  
 
Medications that inhibit platelet function and anticoagulants should be used with caution 
while the subject is on study drug, including:  
 
• Aspirin or aspirin -containing combinations.  
• Clopidogrel,  dipyridamole,  tirofiban,  dipyridamole,  epoprostenol,  eptifibatide,  and 
cilostazol.  
• Abciximab, ticlopidine, cilostazol,  warfarin.  
• Heparin/low  molecular  weight  heparin [eg, danaparoid,  dalteparin,  tinzaparin, 
enoxaparin].  
• Use of heparin for flushes of intravenous lines is  allowed.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 20 of 44  
 
 
4.4 Duration of  Therapy  
 
In the absence of treatment delays due to adverse events, treatment may continue for 6 
cycles or until one of the following criteria applies:  
 
Χ Disease progression,  
 
Χ Intercurrent  illness  that prevents  further  administration of treatment, 
Χ Unacceptable adverse events(s),  
Χ Patient decides to withdraw from the study,  or 
 
Χ General  or specific  changes  in the patient's  condition render  the patient 
unacceptable for further treatment  in the judgment  of the investigator.  
 
4.5 Duration of Follow Up 
 
Patients will be followed for 4 weeks after removal from study or until death, whichever 
occurs first. Patients removed from study for unacceptable adverse events will be 
followed until resolution or stabilization of the adverse event.  
 
4.6 Criteria for removal from Study  
 
To discontinue Study Treatment, any of the criteria below must be met:  
 
• The patient completed 6 cycles of study  treatment.  
• Sustained side effects: patients who have sustained toxicities, such as 
hyperglycemia or hypertension that do not return to NCI CTCAE (version 
4.03) grade 1 or less with appropriate medical management, should be 
discontinued from the study treatment phase. All end- of-study treatment 
procedures should be conducted. The patient will be followed to 4 weeks after 
the EOS visit.  
• Dosing noncompliance: study treatment administration and dosing compliance 
will be assessed on Day 1 of all cycles and at Pre- surgery/End of  Study  Visit.  A 
count of study treatment will be conducted during this visit and patient dosing 
compliance will be assessed. If dosing compliance is not >75% in the absence of 
toxicity, patient should be re-instructed  regarding  proper dosing procedures 
and continue  in the protocol. Subsequent dosing compliance procedure will be 
conducted at each study  visit. If a patient misses 14 or more doses within 4 
weeks, the patient should be discontinued from the st udy treatment phase. All 
end-of-study treatment procedures should be followed. The patient will be 
followed to 4 weeks after the EOS  visit. 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 20 of 44  
 
 
• Initiation  of  new  anticancer  treatment:  patients  will  be  discontinued  from 
the study treatment when investigator, in  his  or  her  judgment,  determines 
new treatment for prostate cancer is warranted. All end- of-study treatment 
procedures  should be conducted and the patient  will be followed to 4 weeks  after 
the EOS  Visit.  
Administration of prohibited medications: the patient will be discontinued from the 
protocol treatment when prohibited drug is administered. All end- of-study treatment 
procedures should be conducted and the patient will be followed to 4 weeks after the 
EOS visit. Supportive care medications are permitted with their use following 
institutional guidelines.  The  concurrent  administration  of  other  anticancer  therapy, 
including cytotoxic, hormonal, or  immunotherapy  is  prohi bited  during  study 
treatment phase. Use of other investigational drug therapy for any reason is  prohibited.  
 
Patient met Grade 4 criteria for elevated Liver Function Tests or the criteria for dose 
discontinuation of non- mineralocorticoid based side- effec ts. 
Subjects  experiencing toxicity  considered to be related to the use of prednisone  for which 
a dose reduction is needed, which that would require discontinuation of study  drugs.  
 
5.1 DOSING DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS  
 
In subjects who experience toxicity who cannot be ameliorated by the use of adequate 
medical intervention, dose reductions can be performed. In these cases dose reductions 
of abiraterone acetate should be performed first, followed by reduction in apalutamide 
doses (if needed).  
 
For abiraterone acetate, 2 dose reductions are allowed, though dosing may be interrupted 
without a dose reduction. Patients who experience a Grade 3 or greater toxicity 
considered to be related to abiraterone acetate will be dose reduced per the following 
schema. At each dose reduction, one tablet of abiraterone acetate will be removed, e.g., 
4→3 tablets, and 3→2 tablets. Any return to protocol dose level after dose reduction or 
after treatment interruption must follow documentation of adverse event resolut ion and a 
discussion with the Principal Investigator. Dosing with abiraterone may be held for up to 
28 days  without discontinuation from therapy.  
 
Patients who experience a Grade 3 or greater toxicity considered to be related to 
apalutamide that cannot be ameliorated by the use of adequate medical intervention 
should have their treatment interrupted until the toxicity improves to a Grade 2 or lower 
severity. Patients may subsequently be re- started on study drug at a reduced dose as per 
the discretion of the Principal Investigator. Dosing with apalutamide may be held for up to 
28 days without discontinuation from therapy. Subjects will remain on abiraterone acetate 
and prednisone during apalutamide dose interruption.  
 
No dose reductions for leuprolide or prednisone are allowed. Subjects experiencing 
toxicity considered to be related to the use of prednisone for which a dose reduction is 
needed will require discontinuation of study drugs.  
 
Subjects should be able to take all four study drugs (abiraterone acetat e, apalutamide,  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 21 of 44  
 
 
leuprolide, and prednisone) to participate in the study. An interruption of one of these 
drugs is allowed as per instruction above.  
Discontinuation of one of these drugs, while continuing the two other drugs, is permitted 
per investigator’s discretion.  
 
 
Study treatment will be stopped in all patients experiencing grade 4 toxicity  which is 
clinically significant per PI discretion. Patients will be recommended to proceed to 
planned surgery upon recovery.  
 
 
 
5.2 Dose Modification Tables 
 
Dose modifications are provided as guidance and should not replace the  
investigator’s own clinical judgment.  
Table 5.1.1 Dose Modifications for Toxicity Attributed to Apalutamide 
 
 
Toxicity  Dose of abiraterone acetate  Dose of apalutamide  Dose of prednisone  
Grade 1 or 2  No change  No change  No change  
≥Grade 3 or higher   
No change  Hold until Grade 1 or baseline, resume 
at full dose  No change  
First Recurrence  
≥Grade 3  No change  Hold until Grade 1 or baseline, resume 
at 180 mg (3 tablets)  No change  
Second Recurrence  
≥Grade 3   
No change  Hold until Grade 1 or baseline, resume 
at 120 mg (2 tablets)   
No change  
Third Recurrence 
≥Grade 3  No change  Discontinue  No change  
First occurrence of 
seizure of any  grade 
or Grade 4 
neurotoxicity   
No change   
Discontinue   
No change  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 22 of 44  
 
 
5.1.2 Dose Modifications for  Rash  
Dose modifications are provided as guidance and should not replace 
the investigator’s own clinical  judgment.  
 
Dose modifications for rash are allowed only for apalutamide and are summarized in below table.  
If the skin rash has any component  of desquamation,  mucosal  involvement,  or pustules,  stop dosing  with 
apalutamide,  refer  to dermatologist  for evaluation,  and a skin biopsy  is recommended  (in addition  to the 
interventions  listed  in below  Table)  If the skin rash is Grade  3 or higher,  asking  the subject to consent  to 
documentation by a photograph  and further  evaluation  by a dermatologist  should  also be considered.  
 
Severity  Intervention  
 
 
Grade 1  • Continue apalutamide at current  dose 
• Initiate dermatological  treatmenta 
o Topical steroid cream  AND  
o Oral Antihistamines  
• Monitor  for change  in severitya 
 
 
Grade 2 (or symptomatic 
Grade 1)b • Hold apalutamide for up to 28  days 
• Initiate dermatological  treatmenta 
o Topical steroid cream  AND  
o Oral Antihistamines  
• Monitor  for change  in severitya 
o If rash or related  symptoms  improve,  reinitiate  apalutamide  when  rash 
is Grade≤1.  Consider  dose reduction  at a 1 dose level  reductionc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grade ≥3d • Hold apalutamide for up to 28  days 
• Initiate dermatological  treatmenta 
o Topical steroid cream  AND  
o Oral Antihistamines  AND  
o Consider short course of oral  steroids  
• Reassess after 2 weeks (by site staff), and if the rash is the same or has 
worsened,  initiate  oral steroids  (if not already  done)  and refer  the subject to 
a dermatologist  
o Reinitiate apalutamide at a 1 dose level reductionc when rash is 
Grade≤1.  
o If the dose reduction will lead to a dose less than 120mg, the study 
drug must be stopped (discontinued)  
• If after 28 days,  rash has not resolved to Grade≤1,  contact  study  PI. 
 
Note:  Rash  may be graded  differently  according  to the type of rash and associated  symptoms.  For example,  maculo - 
papular rash is graded by body surface area covered and not severity of the rash. Please consult NCI -CTCAE 
Version  4.03 for specific  grading criteria  for other  types  of rash.  
a Obtain bacterial/viral cultures if infection is suspected  
b Subject presents with other rash related symptoms such as pruritus, stinging, or burning 
c 1 dose level reduction = 60mg (1 apalutamide tablet)  
d If there  is blistering  or mucosal  involvement,  stop apalutamide  dosing immediately  and contact  PI 
e If a subject previously  started  oral corticosteroids,  continue  for at least 1 week  after resumption of 
reduced  dose of apalutamide.  If the proposed  total oral steroid  use will exceed  28 days,  contact  PI. 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 23 of 44  
 
 
 
Table 5.1.3 Dose Modifications for LFT Abnormalities Attributed to Abiraterone 
Acetate  
 
Dose modifications are provided as guidance and should not replace the investigator’s own clinical judgment.  
 
Toxicity  Dose of abiraterone acetate  Dose of apalutamide  Dose of prednisone  
Grade 1 or 2  No change  No change  No change  
 
 
Grade 3   
Hold until return to baseline 
or to AST or ALT  
≤2.5 x ULN and total bilirubin  
≤1.5 x ULN, resume at 750 
mg (3 tablets)   
 
 
Hold until return to baseline   
 
 
No change  
 
 
Recurrence 
Grade 3   
Hold until return to baseline 
or to AST or ALT  
≤2.5 x ULN and total bilirubin  
≤1.5 x ULN, resume at 500 
mg (2 tablets)   
 
 
Hold until return to baseline   
 
 
No change  
Grade 4   
Discontinue AA treatment  Hold until return to baseline  No change or consider 
tapering if AA discontinued  
Concurrent 
elevation of 
AST/ALT >  3x 
ULN with bilirubin  
>2x ULN (unless 
the concurrent 
elevation is related 
to biliary 
obstruction or  other 
causes unrelated to 
study  treatment)   
 
 
 
 
Discontinue AA treatment    
 
 
 
 
No change or consider 
tapering if AA discontinued  
 
AA=abiraterone acetate;  ALT=alanine aminotransferase;  AST=aspartate aminotransferase;  LFT=liver  function  tests; 
ULN=upper limit of  normal  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 24 of 44  
 
 
 
Table 5.1.4 Dose Modifications for Hypokalemia Attributed to Abiraterone Acetate  
 
Dose modifications are provided as guidance and should not replace the investigator’s own clinical judgment.  
 
 
Toxicity  Dose of abiraterone acetate  Dose of apalutamide  Dose of prednisone  
 
 
Grade 1 or 2  Initiate oral potassium 
supplementation, titrate to  
≥3.5 to ≤5.0 mmol/L, 
maintenance at ≥4.0 mmol/L 
recommended   
 
No change   
 
No change  
 
 
≥Grade 3   
 
Hold and initiate IV potassium 
and cardiac monitoring   
 
No change   
No change  or consider  tapering  if 
AA is  discontinued  
 
 
 
 
Table 5.1.5 Dose Modifications for Hypertension and Edema/Fluid Retention 
Attributed to Abiraterone Acetate  
 
Dose modifications are provided as guidance and should not replace the investigator’s own clinical judgment.  
 
 
 
Toxicity  Dose of abiraterone acetate  Dose of apalutamide  Dose of prednisone  
Grade 1 or 2  No change  No change  No change  
 
≥Grade 3  Hold until Grade 1 or 
baseline, resume at full dose   
No change   
No change  
First 
Recurrence  
≥Grade 3  Hold until Grade 1 or baseline, 
resume at 750 mg (3 tablets)   
No change   
No change  
Second 
Recurrence  
≥Grade 3  Hold until Grade 1 or baseline, 
resume at 500 mg (2 tablets)   
No change   
No change  
Third 
Recurrence  
≥Grade 3   
Discontinue   
No change  No change or consider 
tapering if AA is discontinued  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 25 of 44  
 
 
6.1 ADVERSE EVENTS  
 
6.2 Adverse Event  Monitoring 
 
Adverse events will be evaluated according to the NCI CTCAE Version 4.03 on a 
continuous  basis  starting  from when the patient  takes  the first dose of abiraterone acetate 
or apalutamide to follow up visits. Events, such as abnormal laboratory values, considered  
by the principal  investigator  to be not clinically  significant  (related to the study or study 
drug) will not be documented. The investigator (or physician designee) is responsible 
for verifying and providing source documentation for all adverse events and 
assigning the attribution for all adverse events for subjects enrolled. If abnormal lab 
values, which were not pre- existing or which worsened after the first dose of  study  drug,  
meet  Common Terminology  Criteria  (CTC)  for reporting as adverse events (AE), they will 
be documented in the AE source document and captured i n an institutionally approved 
database. For the lab results that do not meet the CTC for reporting as an AE, they will 
be considered not clinically significant (NCS). No additional documentation will be 
required to neither specify NCS lab results nor requi re physician investigator  signature  
 
6.3 Adverse Events for  Apalutamide 
 
In a phase I dose- finding trial of apalutamide, treatment -emergent AEs were reported in 
97% of subjects. Related treatment -emergent AEs were reported in 93% of subjects. 
Serious adverse events (SAEs) were reported in 23% of subjects. 7% of subjects 
experienced SAEs  assessed as treatment -related.  Grade 3 AEs were reported in 17% of 
subjects; no Grade 4 AEs were reported. Adverse events leading to permanent 
discontinuation of study  drug were  reported in 10% of subjects.  No deaths  were  reported. 
Treatment -related AEs observed  in >10%  of subjects  were  fatigue (53%),  nausea (30%), 
abdominal  pain (20%),  diarrhea (17%),  arthralgia (13%),  dyspnea (13%),  hot flush  (13%), 
and peripheral sensory neuropathy  (13%).  
 
In Phase II studies,  all subjects  experienced at least  1 treatment -emergent  AEs.  Related 
treatment -emergent AEs were reported in 87% of subjects. Serious adverse events 
were reported in 27% of subjects; no subject experienced an SAE assessed as 
retreatment -related. Grade 3 AEs were reported in 34% of subjects; Grade 4 AEs were 
reported in 3% of subjects. Adverse events leading to permanent discontinuation of 
study drug were reported in 10% of subjects. Two deaths were reported.  
 
6.4 Adverse E vent List(s) for Abiraterone Acetate 
 
• Joint swelling or  discomfort  
• Muscle aches and fatigue  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23, , 2019 
Page 26 of 44  
 
 
• Fluid retention  
• Hot flashes  
• Hypertension 
• Diarrhea  
• GERD  
• Hypokalemia  
• Hepatotoxicity  
• Acute liver failure/hepatitis which might be fatal 
• Allergic  alveolitis  
 
Refer to the package insert for a comprehensive list of adverse events.  
 
Hypertension, Hypokalemia and Fluid Retention Due to Mineralocorticoid Excess  
 
Abiraterone acetate may cause hypertension, hypokalemia, and fluid retention as a 
consequence of increased mineralocorticoid levels resulting from CYP17 inhibition. Co - 
administration of a corticosteroid suppresses adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
drive,  resulting in a reduction in the incidence and severity of these adverse reactions. 
Use caution when treating patients whose underlying medical conditions might be 
compromised by increases in blood pressure, hypokalemia or fluid retention, e.g., those 
with heart failure, recent myocardial infarction or ventricular arrhythmia. The safety of 
abiraterone acetate in patients with left ventricular ejection fraction <50% or NYHA 
Class III or IV heart failure has not been established because these patients were 
excluded from the randomized clinical trial. Monitor patients for hypertension, 
hypokalemia,  and fluid retention at least  once a month.  Control  hypertension and correct 
hypokalemia before and during treatment with abiraterone acetate.  
 
Adrenocortical Insufficiency  
 
Adrenocortical insufficiency has been reported in clinical trials in patients receiving 
abiraterone acetate in combination with prednisone, following interruption of daily 
steroids and/or with concurrent infection or stress. Use caution and monitor for 
symptoms and signs of adrenocortical insufficiency, particularly if patients are withdrawn 
from prednisone, have prednisone dose reductions, or experience unusual physiologic 
stress. Symptoms and signs of adrenocortical insufficiency may be mas ked by adverse 
reactions associated with mineralocorticoid excess seen in patients treated with 
abiraterone acetate. If clinically indicated, perform appropriate tests to confirm the 
diagnosis of adrenocortical insufficiency. Increased dosage of corticosteroids may be 
indicated before, during and after physiologically stressful situations . 
 
Hepatotoxicity  
 
Marked increases in liver enzymes leading to drug discontinuation or dosage 
modification have occurred. Measure serum transaminases (ALT and AST) and 
bilirubin levels prior to starting treatment with abiraterone acetate, every two weeks for 
the first three months of treatment, and monthly thereafter. In patients with baseline 
moderate hepatic impairment receiving a reduced abiraterone acetate dose, measure 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23, , 2019 
Page 27 of 44  
 
 
ALT, AST, and bilirubin prior to the start of treatment, every week for the first month, 
every two weeks for the following two months of treatment and monthly thereafter. If 
elevations in ALT and/or AST greater than 5 × upper limit of normal (ULN) or total 
bilirubin greater than 3.0 × ULN occur in patients with baseline moderate hepatic 
impairment, discontinue abiraterone acetate and do not re- treat patients wit h 
abiraterone acetate.  
 
The safety of abiraterone acetate re- treatment of patients who develop AST or ALT 
greater than or equal to 20X ULN and/or bilirubin greater than or equal to 10X ULN is 
unknown.  
 
Refer to the package insert for a comprehensive list of adverse events associated with 
abiraterone acetate.  
 
6.5 Adverse Event List(s) for LHRH Agonist/  Antagonist  
 
• Hot flashes,  characterized by sudden intense feelings  of heat over the face and 
body, often with sweating.  
• Decrease in sexual  desire  
• Osteopenia and osteoporosis with chronic  use 
• Headaches  
• Pain or local skin reaction at the injection site 
• Fluid retention  
• Potentially life -threatening blood clots are rare but serious potential  AE’s 
• Allergic  reaction 
 
Refer to the package insert for a comprehensive list of  adverse events.  
 
6.6 Adverse Event List(s) for  Prednisone 
 
• Mood changes, rarely  severe 
• GERD  
• Glucose intolerance  
• Increased intra- ocular  pressure 
• Cushing syndrome,  immunosuppression,  and adrenocortical  and pituitary 
unresponsiveness in times of stress (with prolonged use) 
 
Refer to the package insert for a comprehensive list of adverse events.  
 
6.7 Adverse Event  Characteristics 
 
CTCAE term (AE description) and grade: The descriptions and grading scales found 
in the revised NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23, , 2019 
Page 28 of 44  
 
 
4.03 will be utilized for AE reporting. All appropriate treatment areas should have 
access to a copy of the CTCAE version 4.03. A copy of the CTCAE version 4.03 can be 
downloaded from the CTEP web site ( http://ctep.cancer.gov ). We will collect data in 
accordance with phase II trials from the table below.  
Recommended Adverse Event Recording Guidelines  
Attribution  Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4 Grade 5 
Unrelated  Phase  I Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  
Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  
 Phase III  Phase III  
Unlikely  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  
Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  
 Phase III  Phase III  
Possible  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  
Phase II Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  
 Phase III  Phase III  Phase III  Phase III  
Probable  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I  
Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  
 Phase III  Phase III  Phase III  Phase III  
Definitive  Phase I  Phase I  Phase I Phase I  Phase I  
Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  Phase II  
 Phase III  Phase III  Phase III  Phase III  
 
 
6.7 Serious Adverse Event Reporting (SAE) for MD Anderson- Sponsored IND 
Trials 
 
An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “serious” if, in the view of 
either the investigator or the sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes:  
 
• Death  
• A life-threatening adverse  drug experience – any adverse experience that places  the 
patient, in the view of the initial reporter, at im mediate risk of death from the adverse 
experience as it occurred. It does not include an adverse experience that, had it 
occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.  
• Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• A persis tent or significant  incapacity  or substantial  disruption  of the ability  to conduct 
normal life  functions.  
• A congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
 
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse drug experience when, based 
upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23, , 2019 
Page 29 of 44  
 
 
require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this 
definition. Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring 
intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions 
that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse (21 CFR 312.32).  
 
• Important medical events as defined above, may also be considered 
serious adverse events. Any important medical event can and should be 
reported as an SAE if deemed appropriate by the Principal Investigator  or 
the IND Sponsor, IND  Office.  
 
• All events  occurring during the conduct  of a protocol  and meeting  the definition of 
a SAE must be reported to the IRB in accordance with the timeframes and 
procedures outlined in “The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center 
Institutional Review Board Policy for Investigators on Reporting Unanticipated 
Adverse Events for Drugs and Devices”. Unless stated otherwise in the protocol, 
all SAEs, expected or unexpected, must be reported to the IND Office, 
regardless of attribution (within 5 working days of knowledge of the event).  
 
• All life-threatening or fatal events, that are unexpected, and related to the 
study drug, must have a written report submitted within 24 hours (next working 
day) of knowledge of the event  to the Safety  Project  Manager  in the IND Office. 
 
• Unless  otherwise  noted,  the electronic  SAE application (eSAE)  will be utilized  for 
safety reporting to the IND Office and MDACC  IRB. 
 
• Serious  adverse events  will be captured from the time of the first protocol -specific 
intervention, until 30 days after the last study treatment/intervention, unless the 
participant withdraws c onsent. Serious adverse events must be followed until 
clinical recovery is complete and laboratory tests have returned to baseline, 
progression of the event has stabilized, or there has been acceptable resolution 
of the event.  
 
• Additionally,  any serious  adverse events  that occur  after the 30 day time period 
that are related to the study treatment must be reported to the IND Office. This 
may include the development of a secondary  malignancy . 
 
6.8 Reporting to FDA:  
 
• Serious  adverse events  will be forwarded to FDA by the IND Sponsor  (Safety 
Project Manager IND Office) according to 21 CFR  312.32.  
 
It is the responsibility of the PI and the research team to ensure that serious adverse 
events are reported according to the Code of Federal Regulations, Good Clinical 
Practices, the protocol guidelines, the sponsor’s guidelines, and Institutional Review 
Board policy.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23,  2019 
Page 30 of 44  
 
 
6.9 Investigator Communications with Janssen Scientific Affairs,  LLC 
 
6.9.1  Possible Reports That Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC May  Receive 
 
• Seriou s Adverse Events Exceptions (See Appendix  2) 
• Adverse Events of Special Interest (See Appendix  3) 
• Safety data includes adverse events  (AE)s  
• Product quality complaints  (PQC’s)  
• Special situations including pregnancies  
• SAEs  
• Non-serious  AEs 
 
6.9.2  Transmission Methods 
 
The following methods are acceptable for transmission of safety information to the 
Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC:  
• Electronically via Janssen SECURE Email service  (preferred)  
• For business continuity purposes, if SECURE Email is  non-functional:  
• Facsimile  (fax), receipt  of which  is evidenced in a successful  fax transmission 
report  
• Telephone (if fax is  non-functional).  
 
Please use the contact information and process information provided by Janssen 
Scientific Affairs, LLC.  
 
7.1 PHARMACEUTICAL  INFORMATION  
 
A list of the adverse events and potential risks associated with the investigational or 
commercial agents administered in this study can be found starting in Section 6.0.  
 
7.2 Apalutamide 
 
Apalutamide is an immediate- release oral tablet containing 60 mg of Form B drug 
substance, with a non- functional green film coat.  
 
7.3 Abiraterone 
 
• Abiraterone acetate 250 mg tablets  are white  to off-white,  oval tablets  debossed 
with AA250 on one side. Abiraterone acetate 250 mg tablets are available in 
high- density polyethylene bottles of 120 tablets.  
• Food effect: Abiraterone acetate must be taken on an empty stomach. No food 
should be consumed for at least  two hours  before the dose  of abiraterone acetate 
is taken and for at least  one hour after the dose  of abiraterone acetate is taken.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23,  2019 
Page 31 of 44  
 
 
Abiraterone C max and AUC0 -∞ (exposure) were increased up to 17-  and 10- fold 
higher, respectively, when a single dose of abiraterone acetate was administered 
with a meal compared to a fasted state. The safety of these increased exposures 
has not been assessed.  
 
7.4 Handling abiraterone acetate and apalutamide tablets  
 
• These medicines  may cause harm  to the unborn child if taken by women who are 
pregnant. They should not be taken by women who are breast -feeding. Women 
who are pregnant or who may be pregnant should wear gloves if they need to 
touch abiraterone acetate or apalutamide tablets . Study staff and caregivers will 
be notified of this information, to ensure the appropriate precautions are taken.  
 
7.5 Pharmacy Storage Requirements 
 
• The study treatment must be stored in a secure area and administered only to 
patients  entered into the clinica l study  in accordance with the conditions  specified 
in this protocol. Bottles of study treatment should be stored at 20°C to 25°C 
(68°F to 77°F); excursions are permitted to 15°C to 30°C (59°F to 86°F) in the 
original container/closure with the cap on tightly; it should never be refrigerated. 
Additional information is provided in the abiraterone acetate and apalutamide 
respective Investigator’s Brochure.  
 
7.6 Leuprolide acetate 
 
• Leuprolide acetate 22.5 mg is available in a prefilled dual -chamber syringe 
containing sterile lyophilized microspheres which, when mixed with diluent, 
become a suspension  intended as an intramuscular  injection  to be given once 
every 3 months  
 
7.7 Prednisone 
 
• Prednisone  5 mg tablets  are white  to off-white,  round tablets  debossed with 
MP51 on one side.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23,  2019 
Page 32 of 44  
 
 
8.0 STUDY CALENDAR  
 
 
 
All events have a 
window of +/ - 7 
days   
 
Screening   
 
C1D1c Day 15 
of  
Cycle  1, 
2 & 3  Day 1 
of 
Cycles 
2,3,5,  
& 6  
 
C4D1   
Pre-Surgery 
Visit/End  of 
Treatment   
 
Surgerye  
4 Weeks Post - 
Surgeryj 
Physical Exam at  
MD Anderson Xa X  X  X  X 
Vital Signs  Xa X  X  X  X 
Weight  Xa X  X     
Height  Xa        
ECOG PS  Xa X  X  X  X 
CBC/diff and pit  Xa X    X  X 
Serum 
Chemistry  Xa,b Xb  
Xb  
Xb  
Xb 
Liver Function Tests 
(AST, ALT, LDH, 
ALK-P, total 
Bilirubin)   
Xd  
Xd  
Xd  
Xd  
Xd  
Xd   
Xd 
PT/PTT  Xa     X   
PSA a X X  X  X  X 
HGB A1C, 
ACTH   
a 
X X   
X X  
X 
Serum 
Testosterone   
a X      
X 
TSH Monitoring  Xa,f Xf  Xf Xf    
Urinalysis  Xa X    X   
CT Scan Abd/ 
CT Scan or  MRI  
Pelvis   
Xa        
Magnetic 
Resonance 
Spectroscopy/ 
MRI of  
ProstateK  
X      
X   
Prostate Biopsy  Xh        
Chest X -Ray or CT 
Chest  Xa     X  X 
MUGA or ECHO Xa        
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23,  2019 
Page 33 of 44  
 
 
 
All events have 
a window of +/ - 
7 days   
 
Screening   
 
C1D1c  
Day 15 
of  
Cycle  1, 
2 & 3  Day 1 
of 
Cycles 
2, 3, 5,  
& 6  
 
C4D1  Pre- 
Surgery 
Visit/End 
of 
Treatmen 
t  
 
Surgerye  
 
4 Weeks Post - 
Surgery  
Monitor Adverse 
Events   
 
Concomitant  
Medications   
 
Bone Scan  Xa        
Blood for 
Correlative  
Studies  Xa,i Xi  
Xg,i  
Xi  
Xi 
Tissue for 
Correlative  
Studies        
Xi  
Archived Tissue 
for Correlative  
Studies  Xh        
 
a) Within 30 days of  registration  
b) Serum  Chemistry  with electrolytes:  albumin,  calcium,  lactate dehydrogenase  (LDH),  sodium,  potassium, 
chloride, magnesium, carbon dioxide, creatinine, BUN, total protein, Vitamin D 25OH and glucose. At 
screening and the pre -surgery visit, C4D1 the following will also be done: total cholesterol, high density 
lipoprotein  (HDL),  low density  lipoprotein  (LDL),  cholesterol  and triglycerides.  
c) If visit occurs  within  7 days of screening  visit,  C1D1  procedures  will not be repeated.  
d) Liver  Function  Tests ONLY:  AST,  ALT,  LDH,  ALKP  and Total  Bilirubin.  These  LFTs  may be done  at a local 
physician’s office. Results should be faxed to MDACC.  
e) Study  medication  will be continued up  to 48 hours  prior  to surgery  
f) Thyroid stimulating  hormone  (TSH) should be evaluated  throughout the study  (with  T3 and T4 done  only if 
TSH is  abnormal).  
g) Occurs at cycles 2,3, and  6 
h) If previous  biopsy  has been  perform  with 3 months  of screening,  second  biopsy  procedure  will not be required, 
if archival  biopsies  and unstained  slides  are available.  
i) Optional  Procedure  
j) Patients  who are free of PSA recurrence at the 4 week  post- surgery  follow -up will continue  to be followed  until 
PSA recurrence,  death,  or until 6 months  after the last patient  is enrolled,  whichever  comes  first. 
 
kOptional procedure.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23,  2019 
Page 34 of 44  
 
 
Correlative studies will include:  
 
1. Assessment of the steroid hormone metabolome in blood plasma (pretreatment, C3 
and C6) and tissue  by liquid  chromatography  tandem  mass  spectrometry.  Measured 
components will be testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, androstenedione, and 
pregnenolone.  
2. Assessment of steroid signaling components  including:  
• Protein and DNA/RNA assessment of canonical and noncanonical androgen 
signaling  including glucocorticoid receptor.  Markers  of cell cycle  angiogenesis 
and neuroendocrine markers  
• AR copy number by PC pre, during, and post -treatment in the primary tumor 
microenvironment  
3. Assessment  of intracellular  TCA cycle  metabolite concentrations  with LCMS/MS 
assessment of pyruvate and lactate, and assessment of citrate concentration 
4. Proportion of patients who achieve pathological  CR 
5. Cell density in Group A and Group B on prostatectomy  
6. Hyperpolarized 1- 13C-pyruvate imaging at study entry and at 3 months and 6 
months in Arm A and Arm B. MRS data obtained at baseline and at three months 
will be compared with pyruvate,  lactate and citrate  concentrations  as determined by 
LCMS/MS in #3  above.  
 
9.0 MEASUREMENT OF  EFFECT  
 
Assessment of effect will be assessed by reporting pathologic T and N stage at the time 
of prostatectomy.  
 
10.0 STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS 
10.1 General Considerations  
The goal of this trial is to estimat e clinical efficacy of both treatment arms while also having 
sufficient patients to achieve secondary and exploratory objectives.  At the completion of the 
original 66 patients, no patients had been able to be measured hyperpolarized 1- 13C-pyruvate 
imaging results  due to a delay in approval of the FDA IND for this procedure. In order to accomplish 
this goal, an additional 20 patients are planned for the revised protocol in March 2019.  This is 
reasonable based on the observed safety and efficacy to date.  A mong the 34 patients receiving 
surgery, 15 have achieved the primary endpoint, which is very close to the target improvement.  
There are no alternative effective treatments for these patients.  No patients have died prior to 
going  to surgery.  
 
10.2 Study  Design/Endpoints 
 
10.2.1  Primary  Endpoint  
 
The primary endpoint is the rate of pathologic stage ≤ pT2N0 at prostatectomy. Patients 
who do not undergo prostatectomy will be included in this evaluation as not achieving 
pathologic stage ≤ pT2N0.  
 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23,  2019 
Page 35 of 44  
10.2.2  Secondary/Exploratory  Endpoints 
 
• Tumor epithelium volume in the surgical  specimen 
• Presence of positive surgical margins in the surgical  specimen  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23,  2019 
Page 36 of 44  
 
 
• Time to PSA recurrence (TTR PSA) will be measured from the date of  
randomization until PSA recurrence,  death,  or date of last follow- up without 
recurrence.  
• Adverse events  according to CTCAE (version 4.03)  and attribution to study 
treatment  
• Steroid  hormone metabolome in blood plasma  and tissue  by liquid 
chromatography tandem mass  spectrometry  
• Protein  and RNA analysis  results  of canonical  and non-canonical  androgen 
signaling candidate pathways of resistance to androgen signaling inhibition  
• Citrate intracellular TCA cycle metabol ite concentrations  
• Pathological  response 
• Hyperpolarized 1- 13C-pyruvate imaging results  
 
10.2 Sample Size/Accrual  Rate  
 
A previous study of neoadjuvant LHRHa alone in high risk localized prostate cancer as 
defined in this study demonstrated a rate of pathologic ≤ pT20N0 of 33.3%. Taking this 
as P0, we propose a P 1 of 55% for each arm. The original sample size of 33 patients  
per arm would provide  82% power  to detect  a documented ≤ pT20N0 of 33% vs. 55% 
based on a one- sided binomial test with a targeted 5% significance level. The actual 
significance level for this test is 0.047. Calculations were performed in PASS 2005. We 
propose the same P1 in both arms, as there is insufficient data to support the 
hypothesis that one arm will be superior to the other among these patients.  With the 
increased sample size of 43 patient per arm, we would have nearly 90%  power to 
detect the same difference and 80% power to detect a difference of 33% vs. 52%.  
 
With the March 2019 protocol ammendment eighty -six patients will be enrolled and 
randomized equally over a 12- 18 month period. Our group has extensive experience 
conducting neoadjuvant trials for prostate cancer with both androgen deprivation 
therapy and chemotherapy. Furthermore, we have recent experience with conducting 
trials on intensive androgen deprivation such as the one proposed; a recent pre-
operative androgen deprivation trial comparing LHRH agonist plus abiraterone vs LHRH 
agonist plus abiraterone plus enzalutamide opened in October 2013, accrued 62 
patients over the following 14 months, and first results were reported as an abstract at 
ASCO 2015. A similar timeline is expected with the proposed protocol.  The original 66 
patients were enrolled between Nov 2017 and January 2019 in just over 14 months.  
The next 20 are expected to accrue at a similar rate, allowing completion within 4- 5 
months after re- initiation enrollment.  
 
10.3 Randomization 
 
This is a randomized, parallel, single- stage phase II trial. A total of 86 patients will be 
randomized via permuted block randomization of random block sizes to Group A 
(LHRHa  + apalutamide)  or Group B (LHRHa  + apalutamide + abiraterone acetate)  in a 
1:1 ratio.  Randomization will be performed in CORe in collaboration with the trial 
biostatistician.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23,  2019 
Page 37 of 44  
 
 
• If an arm is stopped for safety  reasons  as described below,  then randomization 
will stop and the other arm will continue to accrue as a single arm  trial. 
 
 
As all patients will be newly diagnosed with high risk localized prostate cancer, no 
stratification is proposed.  
 
10.4 Interim  Analysis  
 
Monitoring for safety  will be implemented separately  for each arm based on the method 
of Thall et al. (1995) using an initial cohort of 6 patients and then continuously 
thereafter. The first assessment will occur once the first 6 patients have been treated 
for the first cycle, with continuous monitoring implemented monthly. Calculati ons were 
performed in MultcLean 2.1. We will continue enrollment during assessment of each 
arm so the average number  of patients  treated will be slightly  larger  than the calculated 
operating characteristics, but the overrun expected is only 1- 1.5 patients per arm per 
month.  
 
For trial monitoring and decisions about future trials, extreme toxicities (TOX) will be 
defined as any adverse event preventing surgery or death from any cause before 
surgery.  A patient  who voluntarily  leaves  the trial for any reason,  including toxicity,  but is 
still able to have surgery off protocol will not count as having a TOX. Denote the 
probability of TOX by θT. Our stopping rule is given by the following probability 
statement: Pr (θT > 0.20 | data) >0.95. That is, we will stop th e relevant arm of the trial  
if, at any time during the study, we determine that there is more than an 95% chance 
that the TOX rate is more than 20% in that arm. TOX rate is estimated with a prior θ T ~ 
beta (1, 1) for the current study. The stopping boundar ies for this toxicity rule are to 
terminate the arm if the number of patients with TOX compared to the number of 
patients having received treatment exceeds the limits in the table below. Each arm will 
stop at 33 patients, but if there are 11 or more TOX ev ents by the end, then that 
combination will be unsafe for future trials at these doses in this patient  population.  
Accrual will not be held during TOX review. Patients who started treatment early enough 
to complete the first cycle will be included. However , a TOX event may occur later and 
will be counted at the next monthly monitoring. The operating characteristics are 
described below.  
 
Stopping Criteria for Excessive TOX for Each Arm  
If there are this many (or more) 
patients with TOX:  3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
 13 
Stop the arm if there are this many 
(or fewer) evaluable  
patients:  6 9 13 16 20 24 28 31 35 39 43* 
*Always stop with 4 3 patients, but if 13  or more have TOX, then this combination is  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23,  2019 
Page 38 of 44  
 
 
not safe for further investigation in these patients.  
 
The operating characteristics are described in Table 4.  Note, that with 0 patients missing 
surgery due to toxicity or death out of the 66 enrolled (34 with surgery so far) prior to the 
revision, these operating characteristics are not accounting for the good toxicity profile so 
far.  The probability of stopping early is overestimated and numbers of patients treated may 
be underestimated.  
 
Table 4. The Operating Characteristics under Varying Toxicity Rates  
True Overall  
Toxicity Rate  Probability of  
Stopping Early  Average number of  
patients Treated*  Median (25th 
%ile, 75th %ile)  
0.05 0.003  42.9 43 (43, 43) 
0.10 0.02 42.2 43 (43, 43) 
0.20 0.24 35.9 43 (43, 43) 
0.30 0.70 23.2 20 (6, 43) 
0.40 0.96 13.1 8 (6, 16)  
0.50 >0.99 8.6 6 (6, 9)  
*The average number of patients treated may be slightly higher due to allowing accrual 
to continue during assessment.  
 
The Investigator is responsible for completing a safety/Efficacy summary report and 
submitting it to the IND office Medical Affairs and Safety  Group for review. This should 
be submitted after the first 6 evaluable patients per cohort reach 6 months after starting 
study treatment, and every 10 evaluable patients per arm, thereafter  
 
10.5 Analysis Plan 
 
Patient characteristics will be summarized using descriptive statistics for each arm. For 
the primary endpoint, we will provide a point estimate and 95% confidence interval of 
the proportion of patients with pathologic stage ≤ pT2N0 at prostatectomy for each arm.  
 
Secondary and exploratory continuous end points will be summarized descriptively and 
graphically. Comparisons between two the arms or patient subgroups will use a t -test or 
non-parametric alternative as indicated. Secondary and exploratory categorical 
endpoints will be summarized using proportions with 95% confidence intervals.  
Comparisons between the two arms will use a chi -square test or Fisher’s exact if 
indicated. TTR PSA will be summarized by Kaplan- Meier estimates and confidence 
intervals. Treatment -related adverse events will be summarized according to CTCAE 
v4.03, and the incidence of SAE and 95% confidence interval will be provided overall as 
well as for each major affected organ category. We will explore whether subsets of 
patients will benefit more from one arm than then other with logist ic regression for 
pathologic stage ≤ pT2N0 or Cox regression for TTR PSA. 
 
10.6 Analysis Populations 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23,  2019 
Page 39 of 44  
 
 
10.6.1  Toxicity  Evaluable 
 
All patients will be evaluable for toxicity from the time of their first treatment with 
apalutamide, abiraterone or leuprolide.  
 
10.6.2  Response Evaluable  
 
All randomized patients will be included in the primary analysis as part of an intention to 
treat analysis.  
 
Exploratory analyses will be performed on all patients with available information 
depending on tissue procurement,  especially at diagnostic and 3 month biopsy. The 
number of patients included in each exploratory analysis will be reported with the results 
of that analysis.  
 
11.1 ETHICAL  ASPECTS 
 
11.2 Privacy of Personal  Data  
 
The collection and processing of personal data from s ubjects enrolled in this study will 
be limited to those data that are necessary to fulfill the objectives of the study.  
 
This data must be collected and processed with adequate precautions to ensure 
confidentiality and compliance with applicable data privacy protection laws and 
regulations. Appropriate technical and organizational measures to protect the personal 
data against unauthorized disclosures or access, accidental or unlawful destruction, or 
accidental loss or alteration must be put in place. Personnel whose responsibilities 
require access to personal data agree to keep the identity of subjects confidential.  
 
Data will be entered into MD Anderson institutionally approved and compliant 
database(s). The database(s) have secure portal that requires user s to login with 
validated credentials, uses approved encryption protocols as defined by institutional 
information security standards. Systems have granular data access controls to ensure 
that the minimal amount of information required to complete a task is  presented, can 
handle de- linking and de- identification of patient information to maintain patient 
confidentiality if necessary. The system(s) are 21 CFR 11 compliant. Standard data 
collection, storage procedures, and quality assurance procedures will be f ollowed, to 
ensure integrity and auditability of all information entered.  
All patients will be registered in the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center 
Office of Research Administration database. Registration will occur following informed 
consent  process and prior to initiation of investigational intervention(s). All eligibility 
criteria must be satisfied.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23,  2019 
Page 40 of 44  
 
 
11.3 Long- Term Retention of Samples for Additional Future Research  
 
Samples will only be used to understand apalutamide or abiraterone acetate, to 
understand prostate cancer, to understand differential drug responders, and to develop 
tests/assays related to apalutamide or abiraterone acetate. The research may begin at 
any time during the study or the post study period.  
 
Stored samples will be coded throughout the sample storage and analysis process and 
will not be labeled with personal  identifiers.  Subjects  may withdraw  their consent  for their 
samples to be stored for  research.  
 
 
 
APPENDIX 1  
 
Performance Status Criteria  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about more than 50% of waking  
 
 
 
  
ECOG Performance Status Scale  
Karnofsky Performance Scale  
Grade  Descriptions  Percent  Description  
 
 
0  
Normal activity. Fully active, 
able to carry on all pre -disease  100 Normal, no complaints, no  
evidence of disease.  
 
90 Able to carry on normal activity; 
minor signs or symptoms of 
disease.  performance without restriction.  
 
 
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory. 
Restricted in physically 
strenuous activity, but 
ambulatory and able to carry  
out work of a light or sedentary   
80 Normal activity with effort; some 
signs or symptoms of disease.  
 
70 Cares for self, unable to carry on 
normal activity or to do active 
work.  nature (e.g., light housework, 
office work).  
 
 
2 In bed <50% of the time. 
Ambulatory and capable of all 
self-care,  but unable to carry 
out any work activities. Up and  
60 Requires occasional assistance, 
but is able to care for most of  
his/her needs.  
 
50 Requires considerable 
assistance and frequent medical 
care.  hours.  
 
3 In bed >50% of the time. 
Capable of only limited self - 
care, confined to bed or chair  40 Disabled, requires special care  
and assistance.  
30 Severely disabled, 
hospitalization indicated. Death  more than 50% of waking  
 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 40 of 44  
 
 
 hours.   not imminent.  
 
4 100% bedridden. Completely 
disabled. Cannot carry on any 
self-care. Totally confined to 
bed or chair.  20 Very sick, hospitalization  
indicated. Death not imminent.  
10 Moribund, fatal processes  
progressing rapidly.  
5 Dead.  0 Dead.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 2  
 
Serious Adverse Events Exceptions 
 
 
• A standard procedure for protocol therapy administration will not be reported as a 
serious adverse event. Hospitalization for a complication of therapy administration 
will be reported as a serious adverse event.  
• A procedure for protocol/disease- related investigations (eg, surgery, scans, 
sampling for laboratory  tests, or biomarker  blood sampling).  Hospitalization or 
prolonged hospitalization for a complication of such procedures remains a 
reportable serious adverse event.  
• Surgery  or procedure planned before entry  into the study.  Note:  Hospitalizations  that 
were planned before the signing of the ICF, and where the underlying condition for 
which the hospitalization was planned has not worsened, will not be cons idered 
serious adverse events. Any adverse event that results in a prolongation of the 
originally  planned hospitalization is to be reported as a new serious  adverse event.  
• Disease  progression should not be recorded as an adverse event  or serious  adverse 
event term; instead, signs and symptoms of clinical sequelae resulting from disease 
progression/lack of efficacy will be reported if they fulfill the serious adverse event 
definition.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 41 of 44  
 
 
APPENDIX 3  
 
Adverse Events of Special Interest  
 
Adverse events of special interest are events that the Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC is 
actively monitoring as a result of a previously identified signal (even if non- serious).  
There are no adverse events of special interest identified for apalutamide or 
abiraterone acetate.  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 42 of 44  
 
 
APPENDIX 4:  
 
PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED MEDICATIONS OR SUPPLEMENTS WHILE ON 
STUDY  
 
Medications that are PROHIBITED while on study:  
• Aminophylline/theophylline  
• Atypical antipsychotics  (e.g., clozapine,  olanzapine,  risperidone,  ziprasidone)  
• Buproprion  
• Lithium  
• Meperidine and pethidine 
• Phenothiazine antipsychotics  (e.g., chlorpromazine,  mesoridazine,  thioridazine)  
• Tricyclic  and tetracyclic antidepressants  (e.g.,  amitriptyline,  desipramine, 
doxepin, imipramine, maprotiline,  mirtazapine)  
 
Supplements that are RESTRICTED while on study:  
 
• Pomegranate 
 
Medications that are RESTRICTED while on study:  
 
Investigators should refer to the apalutamide Investigator’s B rochure and associated 
addenda for complete details on the drug interaction potential of apalutamide. 
Highlights of drug interaction are summarized below.  
 
• . 
• Medications that inhibit CYP2C8 or CYP3A4: Co- administration of a strong CYP2C8 or 
CYP3A4 inhibito r is predicted to increase the steady -state exposure of the active moieties 
(sum of unbound apalutamide plus the potency- adjusted unbound N -desmethyl 
apalutamide). No initial dose adjustment is necessary however, consider reducing the 
apalutamide dose based on individual tolerability (see Section 6.2). Mild or moderate 
inhibitors of CYP2C8 or CYP3A4 are not expected to affect the exposure of  apalutamide.  
• Effect of apalutamide on drug metabolizing enzymes: Apalutamide is a strong inducer of 
CYP3A4 and CYP2C19, and a weak inducer of CYP2C9 in humans. Concomitant use of 
apalutamide with medications that are primarily metabolized by CYP3A4, CYP2C19, or 
CYP2C9 can result in lower exposure to these medications. Substitution for these 
medications is recommend ed when possible or evaluate for loss of efficacy if medication 
is continued. Concomitant administration of apalutamide with medications that are 
substrates of UGT can result in decreased exposure. Use caution if substrates of UGT must 
be co -administered w ith apalutamide and evaluate for loss of  efficacy.  
• Effect of apalutamide on drug transporters: Apalutamide was clinically shown to be a weak 
inducer of P -gp, BCRP, and OATP1B1. Concomitant use of apalutamide with medications 
that are substrates of P -gp, BC RP, or OATP1B1 can result in lower  exposure  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 43 of 44  
of these medications. Use caution if substrates of P -gp, BCRP or OATP1B1 must be co-  
administered with apalutamide and evaluate for loss of efficacy if medication is continued.  
• Abiraterone is a mode rate inhibitor of CYP2D6 in humans. Caution is advised when AA is 
administered with medicinal products activated by or metabolized by CYP2D6, particularly 
with medicinal products that have a narrow therapeutic index. Dose reduction of medicinal 
products wi th a narrow therapeutic index that are metabolized by CYP2D6 should be  
considered.  
• Abiraterone is a weak inhibitor of CYP2C8 in humans. When AA is combined with drugs 
that are predominantly eliminated by CYP2C8, subjects should be monitored for signs of 
toxicity related to a CYP2C8 substrate with a narrow therapeutic index if used 
concomitantly with  AA. 
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 43 of 44  
 
 
• Corticosteroids  (Oral, IV, or IM): due to possible resistance  mechanisms,  which 
may be contributed by glucocorticoid receptor signaling, concurrent use of 
corticosteroids during the study is not recommended; short term use (≤ 4 
weeks) will be allowed if clinically indicated, however, its use must be tapered 
off as soon as  possible.  
 
 
Additional Information on CYP450 Drug Interactions 
http://www.fda.gov/drugs/developmentapprovalprocess/developmentresources/druginter  
actionslabelin g/ucm093664.htm  
 
http://medicine.iupui.edu/clinpharm/ddis/table.aspx  
Protocol # 2016 -0527  
April 23 , 2019 
Page 44 of 44  
 
REFERENCES  
 
 
1 Efstathiou E, Troncoso P, Tapia E et al. (2015, May). Effects of preoperative abiraterone 
acetate (AA) plus enzalutamide (E) and leuprolide acetate (LHRHa) versus AA and LHRHa in 
localized high -risk prostate cancer (LHRPC). Presented at ASCO 2015, Chicago, IL.  
2 Efstathiou E, Troncoso P, Li W et al. (2012, May). Biologic Heterogenei ty in a study of 
abiraterone plus leuprolide acetate (LHRHa) versus LHRHa in localized high -risk prostate 
cancer. Presented at ASCO 2012, Chicago, IL.  
3 Efstathiou E, Titus M, Tsavachidou D et al. Effects of abiraterone acetate on androgen 
signaling in cas trate-resistant prostate cancer in bone. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Feb  20;30(6):637- 43. 
4 Efstathiou E, Titus M, Wen S et al. Molecular characterization of enzalutamide- treated bone 
metastatic castration -resistant prostate cancer. Eur Urol. 2015  Jan;67(1):53- 60 
5 Clegg N, Wongvipat J, Joseph JD et al. ARN -509: a novel antiandrogen for prostate cancer 
treatment. Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 15;72(6):1494 -503 
6 Rathkopf DE, Morris MJ, Fox JJ et al. Phase I study of ARN -509, a novel antiandrogen, in the 
treatment of castration -resistant prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Oct 1;31(28):3525 -30. 
7 Thall PF, Simon RM, and Estey EH. Bayesian sequential monitoring designs for single -arm 
clinical trials with multiple outcomes. Stat Med. 1995;14(4):357- 79. 
8 Quek XC, Thomson DW, Maag JL, Bartonicek N, Signal B, Clark MB, Gloss BS and Dinger  
ME (2014) lncRNAdb v2.0: expanding the reference database for functional long noncoding 
RNAs. Nucleic Acid Res 43: D168 -D173 
9 Amaral PP, Clark MB, Gascoigne DK, Dinger ME, Mattick JS (2011). lncRNAdb: a reference 
database for long noncoding RNAs. Nucleic Acids Res 39: D146- 151. 