Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
 
    
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate  Ahmed Glaucoma Valves  
 
Protocol Version Date : March 25, 2015   
   Sponsor:   University of Virginia   
   Department of Ophthalmology  
   P.O. Box 800715  
   Charlottesville, VA  22908- 0715  
   Tel: (434) 243-2852 
   Fax: (434) 243- 4393  
  Correspondence:  Peter A. Netland, M .D, Ph .D. 
   Department of Ophthalmology  
   University of Virginia     
   1300 Jefferson Park Ave, R oom 2815B / P.O. Box 800715  
   Charlottesville, VA USA 22903  
   Tel: (434) 982-1086 
   Fax: (434) 924-5180  
  Medical Monitor:  Peter A. Netland, M .D., Ph .D. 
 
Page 1 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1. Introduction and Background  
 
2. Device Description  
 3. Study Objective  
 4. Study Hypothesis  
 5. Study Endpoints  
5.1 Primary Endpoint  
5.2 Secondary Endpoint s  
 6. Study Synopsis  
 7. Study Population  
7.1 Study I nclusion Criteria  
7.2 Study Exclusion Criteria 
 
8. Study Design 8.1 Screening Visit / Baseline Evaluation  
8.2 Surgical Procedure  
8.3 Post-Operative Follow -Up Visits  
8.4 Unscheduled Visits  
8.5 Early Withdrawal  
8.6 Schedule of Visit Tests and Procedures  
 
9. Concomitant Medications and Proc edures  
9.1 Prohibited Concomitant Medications  
9.2 Glaucoma Medication Management  
9.3 Post-Operative Medications  
9.4 Device Explant, Repositioning, or Replacement  
 
10.  Safety  
10.1 Anticipated Adverse Events  
10.2 Unanticipated Adverse Events  
10.3 Serious Adverse Events  
10.4 Assessment of Adverse Event Severity  
10.5 Reporting Adverse Events  
10.6 Follow -up of Adverse Events  
10.7 Aggregate Review of Adverse Events  
 
11. Statistical Considerations  
11.1 Determination of Sample Size  
11.2 Assessment of Primary Endpoint  
Page 2 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
11.3 Assessment of Secondary Endpoints  
11.4 Accrual  
11.5 Plans for Interim Anal ysis 
11.6 Plans for Final Analysis  
11.7 Rules for Termination of Study  
 
12. Recruitment  
 
13. Good Clinical Practice  
 
14. Retention of Records  
 
15. References  
  
       
Page 3 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
 
1. Introduction and Background  
Glaucoma with optic nerve damage is usually associated with abnormal elevation 
of intraocular pressure (IOP) in the eye.  Uncontrolled intraocular pressure may 
result in progressive and painless blindness from optic neuropathy.  This  damage 
to the optic nerve is permanent and irreversible.  To  prevent damage to the optic 
nerve and subsequent visual field loss, the intraocular pressure in the eye may 
be lowered using medical and/or surgical intervention.   
 Glaucoma drainage devices are helpful in the management of intractable 
glaucoma, which does not respond well to conventional medical and surgical 
therapies .  The Ahmed Glaucoma Valve is a glaucoma drainage device that has 
a flow -resistive valve mechanism.
1-3 This valve is helpful in minimizing 
postoperative hypotony and complications associated with hypotony, including 
flat anterior cha mber, choroidal effusions, and suprachoroidal hemorrhage.4,5 
 
After Ahmed Glaucoma Valve implantation, patients may require adjunctive anti -
glaucoma medications for adequate control of intraocular pressure.4-6  With 
smaller glaucoma valve implants, such as  the Molteno implant, increasing the 
device surface area may lead to lower mean intraocular pressure and fewer 
adjunctive glaucoma medications.7,8   However, additional surface area does not 
dramatically improve the results with larger implants, such as the Ahmed Valve and the Baerveldt implant.
9-12   In contrast with trabeculectomy, use of adjunctive 
mitomycin C does not appear to improve the results with the Ahmed Glaucoma Valve.
13 
 In experimental studies, different glaucoma drainage implant plate materi als may 
influence capsule formation and influence the results of glaucoma drainage implants.
14,15   In clinical comparisons, different plate materials have been 
associated with significant difference of mean postoperative intraocular pressure in some
16-18  but not  in all studies.19,20   In a randomized prospective trial, 
transient elevation of intraocular pressure during the early postoperative period, 
Page 4 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
known as a "hypertensive phase," was less frequent after silicone plate 
compared with polypropylene plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valve implantation.16   In 
addition to implant plate size and material, other variables influencing success of glaucoma drainage implant surgery have been identified, including race, 
treatment with silicone oil endotamponade, and neovascular  glaucoma.
21   
 A silicone plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valve has demonstrated efficacy and safety in 
clinical studies.
16-20 An Ahmed Glaucoma Valve plate constructed with por ous 
material, which is  Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved,  but has not 
been studied in clinical trials, may offer advantages in reducing encapsulation of 
the implant, thereby potentially improving postoperative intraocular pressure control.   
 
2.  Device Description  
Glaucoma drainage i mplants used in this study are  the Ahmed Glaucoma Valve 
(New World Medical , Inc., Rancho Cucamonga, CA)  Model FP7 (silicone plate, 
184 mm
2 surface area) and Model M4 (porous polyethylene plate, 191 mm2 
surface area) .  Both  the Model FP7 and Model M4 are F ood and Drug 
Administration- approved for implantat ion in humans  with intractable glaucoma .  
Both of these valves will be supplied free of charge by New World Medical Inc for 
use in this study.  Each participating site will be responsible for obtaining FP7 
and M4 valves from New World Medical.  The valves will not be shipped to UVA 
and then distributed to participating sites.   
 The Model M4 plate is approximately the same size as the Model FP7 plate (191 
mm
2 and 184 mm2 surface area, respectively).  However, t he theoretical surface 
area of the M4 is much higher because of the porous nature of the material.   The 
porous polyethylene material is formed by a proprietary process (Porex 
Corporation, Fairburn, GA).  The porous plate material is high density 
polyethylene with a long history of use in surgical implants (MEDPOR Biomaterial 
implants).   Average pore sizes are greater than 100 micro- meters and pore 
Page 5 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
volume is in the 50 percent range, with an interconnecting open pore structure 
that allows for tissue ingrowth.   
 
3. Study Objective  
To evaluate and compare the clinical outcomes after implantation of the porous  
plate (polyethylene) Ahmed Glaucoma Valve with the silicone plate Ahmed 
Glaucoma Valve in subjects with intractable glaucoma . 
 
4. Study Hypothesis  
Eyes undergoing implantation with the porous plate Ahmed Gl aucoma Valve are 
less likely to develop an elevation of intraocular pressure during the post -
operative period and subsequently will have lower intraocular pressure and possibly require fewer glaucoma medications as compared with the silicone plate  
Ahmed Gl aucoma Valve.  
 
5. Study Endpoints  
All study endpoints refer to the selected study eye only and are measured from 
Baseline to 12 months post -operative in the porous plate Ahmed Glaucoma 
Valve group as compared to the silicone plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valve group.   
 
5.1 Primary Endpoint  
The primary endpoint is the mean intraocular pressure in the porous plate 
group as compared to the silicone plate group at 12 months . 
 5.2 Secondary Endpoint s  
(a) The mean number of anti -glaucoma medications  in the porous plate 
group as compar ed to the silicone plate group at 12 months.  
(b) Surgical success in the porous plate group as compared to the silicone 
plate group at 12 months.   Surgical success is defined as:   
Page 6 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
  Unqualified surgical success : 5 mmHg < intraocular pressure < 22  
  mmHg with  no loss of light perception and no additional glaucoma  
  procedures or glaucoma medications.   
  Qualified surgical success : 5 mmHg < intraocular pressure  < 22  
  mmHg with no loss of light perception and no additional glaucoma  
  procedures , but with th e adjunctive use of glaucoma medications.   
   
6. Study Synopsis  
Title:  Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed 
Glaucoma Valves  
Study Period:  12 months , 9 visits:  Screening/Baseline ; Day of 
Surgery ; Post-Operative Days 1 and 7 ; and Post-
Operative Month s 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12.  Unscheduled 
visits will be performed and recorded as required for 
the optimal treatment and follow up of the subject . 
Study design:  A prospective, two -arm, unmasked, randomized , 
controlled study.  
Objectives:  A prospective , randomiz ed trial to evaluate and 
compare the clinical outcomes after implantation of the 
porous plate (polyethylene) with the silicone plate 
Ahmed Glaucoma Valve in subject s with intractable 
glaucoma.  
Control Arm : Subjects undergoing surgery with the silicone pla te 
Ahmed Glaucoma Valve (Model FP7)  
Treatment Arm : Subjects undergoing surgery with the porous plate 
Ahmed Glaucoma Valve (Model M4)  
Subject 
Population:  Patients with intractable glaucoma who are candidates 
for valve surgery.   
Sample Size:  Total of 88 subjects with a planned 40 subjects in each 
arm. Each site can enroll a maximum of 40 subjects . 
Follow -up 
duration:  12 months.  
 
7.  Study Population  
This is a prospective, two -arm, unmasked, randomized, controlled study of 80 
enrolled subjects with intractable glaucoma that have not responded to 
conventional medical and surgical therapy.  The study will accrue up to 88 
subjects to allow for a dropout rate of 10 %.  
Page 7 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
 
7.1  Inclusion Criteria  
• Male or female of any race ≥18 years ≤ 80 years of age.  
• Diagnosis of i ntractable glaucoma in the study eye, with the exception of 
silicone oil endotamponade induced glaucoma, which  has not responded  
to conventional medical and surgical therapy.   
• Elevated intraocular pressure > 21 mmHg  in the study eye. Two 
consecutive measurements using Goldmann Applanation Tonometry will 
be obtained and the mean of those two measurements will be considered 
the subject’s baseline intraocular pressure.   
• Subject is a candidate for surgery in the study eye with a glaucoma 
drainage device.  
• Subject is willing and able to sign the informed consent.  
 
7.2 Exclusion Criteria  
• Diagnosis of silicone oil endotamponade induced glaucoma in the study 
eye. 
• History of prior drainage implant surgery in the study eye.  
• History of c yclophotocoagulation  of the study ey e.   
• Pregnancy.  
• Prisoner.   
 
Eligible subjects  may have significant conjunctival scarring, precluding 
trabeculectomy  in the study eye.  Presence of diabetes mellitus, prior ocular 
surgery  (with the exception of prior drainage implant surgery)  or laser trea tment 
for glaucoma, and use of glaucoma medications  in the study eye will be noted, 
but are not  exclusion criteria for determining eligibility .   
 
8. Study Design 
 
8.1   Screening Visit  / Baseline Evaluation  (Days -60 to - 1) 
Page 8 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
After obtaining informed consent in t he patient’s, all potential subjects will 
undergo a baseline examination to determine study eligibility .  Standard- of-
care evaluations for glaucoma patients that are documented by the 
investigator may be utilized as the baseline evaluation to determine subject 
eligibility, provided the evaluations occur within 60 days prior to the planned 
surgical intervention, even if these evaluations occur prior to the subject 
consenting to participate in the study.  This avoids the potentially 
unnecessary repetition of screening evaluations that are a part of the 
standard- of-care for glaucoma patients.   
 The following examinations, tests, and procedures are required as part of the 
baseline evaluation to determine subject eligibility  and must be conducted 
within 60 days of the  planned surgical intervention:  
• Signing of the informed consent  
• Review of Inclusion / Exclusion Criteria  
• Demographic Information ( Date of Birth, Sex, Self -Identified Ethnicity ) 
• Type of Glaucoma (Diagnosis)  
• Review of Medical and Ocular Surgical Histor y 
• Review of Concomitant Systemic Medications  
• Review of Concomitant Glaucoma Medications  
• Review of History of Previous Glaucoma Treatments (laser and surgery)  
• Review of Other Concomitant Ocular Medications  
• Manifest Refraction and Snellen Visual Acuity  
• Intraocular Pressure  
• Intraocular Pressure will be measured utilizing Goldmann 
applanation tonometry.  Two consecutive measurements will be obtained and the mean of those two measurements will be considered the subject’s 
baseline intraocular pressure.  The intra ocular pressure should be 
performed at the same time of day  at all visits, when possible.  
• Slit Lamp Examination  
• Gonioscopy  
Page 9 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
• Funduscopic Examination  
• 30-2 or 24- 2 SITA Standard Humphrey Visual Field (if available, and may 
be used if obtained within 12 months of the planned surgical intervention)  
• Determination of the study eye and subject eligibility (if both eyes qualify, 
the study eye will be the eye with the highest baseline intraocular 
pressure, then worst baseline visual acuity, then the right eye; unles s in 
the investigator’s best judgment the other eye should be selected)  
• Urine or Serum Pregnancy Test for women of child- bearing potential (to 
be conducted as part of the site’s standard pre- operative testing) .  The 
test must be negative to be eligible to participate.  
 
All ophthalmic tests and examinations are for the selected study eye only.   
If the subject satisfies all inclusion and exclusion criteria, the subject will be 
enrolled into the study.   
 
8.2   Surgical Procedure (Day 0)  
The surgical procedure must be performed within 60 days of the completion 
of the screening evaluation.  The subject will be randomized to undergo 
surgical intervention with either the Model FP7, Silicone Plate Ahmed 
Glaucoma Valve (Group A) or the Model M4, Porous Plate Ahmed Gl aucoma 
Valve (Group B), using the sealed envelope method of randomization.   
Randomization will take place on the day of surgery.    
 
The following steps are considered guidelines for implantation of both the 
Model FP7 and Model M4.  However, t he use of any specific surgical 
technique or maneuver is at the sole discretion of the surgeon.   
 
1. The implant should be examined and primed prior to implantation.  Priming is accomplished by injecting 1cc balanced salt solution or 
sterile water through the drainage tube and valve, using a blunt 
26 gauge cannula.  
Page 10 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
2. A fornix -based incision is made through the conjunctiva and 
Tenon’s capsule.  A pocket is formed at the superior quadrant 
between the medial or lateral rectus muscles by blunt dissection 
of Tenon’s capsule from the episclera.   
3. The valve body is inserted into the pocket between the rectus muscles and sutured to the episclera.  The leading edge of the 
device should be at least 8- 10mm from the limbus.   
4. The drainage tube is trimmed to permit 2- 3mm insertion of the 
tube into the anterior chamber.  The tube should be bevel out to 
an anterior angle of 30 ° to facilitate insertion.  
5. A paracentesis is performed and the anterior chamber is entered 
at the limbus with a sharp 23 gauge needle, parallel to the iris.  
Caution: C are must be taken to ensure that the drainage tube 
does not contact the iris or corneal endothelium after insertion.  
6. The drainage tube is inserted into the anterior chamber 
approximately 2- 3mm, through the needle track and parallel to the 
iris.  The leadin g edge of the device should be 8- 10mm from the 
limbus.  
7. The exposed drainage tube is covered with a small piece of preserved, donor sclera or pericardium, which is sutured into 
place and the conjunctiva is closed.  Note:  As an alternative, a 2/3 thickness limbal- based scleral flap may be made.  The tube is 
inserted into the anterior chamber through a 23 gauge needle puncture made under the flap.  The flap is sutured closed.   
 8.3   Post -Operative Follow -Up Visits  (1 Day; 7 Day ; 1, 3, 6, 9, 12 months)  
Follow -up visits will be conducted at  the following post -operative time points : 
• 1 Day Post -Operative ( 1 Day + 1 day)  
• 7 Day  Post-Operative ( 7 Days +/ - 4 days)  
• 1 Month Post -Operative ( 30 Days +/ - 7 days)  
• 3 Months Post -Operative ( 90 Days +/ - 14 days)  
Page 11 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
• 6 Months Post -Operative ( 180 Days +/ - 14 days)  
• 9 Months Post -Operative ( 270 Days +/ - 14 days)  
• 12 Months Post -Operative ( 360 Days +/ - 28 days)  
 
The following examinations, tests, and procedures are required at each post -
operative follow -up visit:  
• Review of  Adverse Events and Assessment of Device Complications  
• Review of Concomitant Systemic Medications  
• Review of Concomitant Glaucoma Medications  
• Review of Other Concomitant Ocular Medications  
• Snellen Visual Acuity and Manifest Refraction (per clarification in 
Administrative Letter #2 dated Oct 3, 2013, Manifest Refraction is 
optional).  
• Intraocular Pressure  
• Intraocular Pressure will be measured utilizing Goldmann 
applanation tonometry.  Two consecutive measurements will be obtained .  
The intraocular pressure should be performed at the same time of day at 
all visits, when possible.  
• Slit Lamp Examination  
• Gonioscopy  (at Months 3, 6, 9, and 12 only)  
• Funduscopic Examination  
• Ultrasound biomicroscopy or Anterior Segment Optical Coherence 
Tomography to measure the capsule thickness ar ound the plates (Months 
6 and 12 only) (optional)  
 
Post -Operative Follow -Up Visits (1 Day; 7 Day ; 1, 3, 6, 9, 12 months)  
All ophthalmic tests and examinations are for the selected study eye only.   
  
8.4   Unscheduled Visits  
Additional (unscheduled) visits will be performed and recorded as required for 
the optimal treatment and follow -up of the subject.  The tests, exams, and 
Page 12 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
procedures required at the unscheduled visit are dependent upon the reason 
for the unscheduled visit  and will be performed at the investi gator’s discretion .  
The following tests, exams, and procedures may be conducted at the 
unscheduled visit:  
• Review of  Adverse Events and Assessment of Device Complications  
• Review of Concomitant Systemic Medications  
• Review of Concomitant Glaucoma Medications  
• Review of Other Concomitant Ocular Medications  
• Manifest Refraction and Snellen Visual Acuity  
• Intraocular Pressure  
• Intraocular Pressure will be measured utilizing Goldmann 
applanation tonometry.  Two consecutive measurements will be obtained . 
The intraocular pressure should be performed at the same time of day at all visits, when possible.  
• Slit Lamp Examination  
• Gonioscopy  
• Funduscopic Examination  
• Ultrasound biomicroscopy or Anterior Segment Optical Coherence 
Tomography to measure the capsule thickness around the plates (Months 6 and 12 only)  
 8.5   Early Withdrawal  
All subjects have the right to withdraw from the study at any point.  The site 
investigator or the Medical Monitor may discontinue a subject from the study  
for any of the following reasons:  
 a.   Noncompliance with the study requirements  
b. At the discretion of the Investigator  or Medical Monitor , due to 
 subject safety concerns.   
If a subject withdraws prematurely from the study, a genuine effort must be made to determine the reason(s) for the subject ’s early discontinuation and 
the subject should complete an Early Withdrawal visit , which includes  the 
Page 13 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
same tests, exams, and procedures required at the Month 12 Post -Operative 
Visit.  
 
Page 14 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
 
8.6   Schedule of Visit Tests and Procedures  
 
 SCR²  Day 
0 POD 
1 POD 
7 Mo 
1 Mo 
3 Mo 
6 Mo 
9 Mo 
12/ 
Early 
Term  Un-
sched  
Visit  
Informed Consent  X          
Inclusion/ Exclusion 
Criteria Review  X          
Demographic 
Information  X          
Glaucoma Diagnosis  X          
Review of Medical & 
Ocular Surgical History  X          
Review of Concomitant 
Systemic Medications  X          
Review of Concomitant 
Glaucoma Medications  X          
Review of History of 
Previous Glaucoma 
Surgeries  X          
Review of Other  
Concomitant Ocular 
Medications  X          
Manifest Refraction & 
Snellen  Visual Acuity  X  X X X X X X X X³ 
Intraocular Pressure  X  X X X X X X X X³ 
Slit Lamp Examination  X  X X X X X X X X³ 
Gonioscopy  X     X X X X X³ 
Funduscopic 
Examination  X  X X X X X X X X³ 
Visual Field  Test X          
Study Eye Determination  X          
Pre-operative tests 
(labwork, EKG, physical 
exam ) ¹ X          
Randomization   X         
Surgical Intervention   X         
Concomitant Medication 
Review    X X X X X X X X³ 
Adverse Event Review    X X X X X X X X³ 
Ultrasound 
Biomicroscopy  or 
Anterior  Segment OCT ³       X X X X³ 
1. A serum or urine pregnancy test is required for women of child- bearing potential only, 
prior to randomization.   
2. All Screening Exams must be completed within 60 days of the planned Surgical 
Intervention , except the visual fiel d test which must be completed within 12 months of the 
planned Surgical Intervention.   
3. Optional .  
 
Page 15 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
 
9. Concomitant Medications and Procedures  
 
9.1 Prohibited Concomitant Medications  
There are no prohibited concomitant ocular or non- ocular medications during 
participation in this study.  
 9.2 Glaucoma Medication Management  
Use of topical or systemic glaucoma medications will be documented at baseline and throughout the post -operative follow -up period for the study eye.  
Glaucoma medications for the study eye sh ould be suspended only  on the 
day of surgery and reinstituted, if indicated,  with necessary adjustments after 
surgery to manage any elevated intraocular pressure in the study eye.  The decision to re- institute glaucoma medications in the stu dy eye will be made at 
the discretion of the investigator.  
 
9.3 Post -operative Medications  
Selection, dosage, and frequency of the study eye post -operative topical 
antibiotic agent and post -operative anti -inflammatory  agent will be made at 
the discretion of the investi gator.  All prescribed post -operative ocular 
medications must be recorded in the study records.  
 9.4 Device Explant, Repositioning, or Replacement  
The device may be revised, repositioned, removed, or replaced by the same kind of device or another marked dr ainage device if the original device was 
damaged or determined to be not functioning. If surgical intervention for 
repositioning or replacement is required, the subject will be required at a 
minimum to complete all of the protocol required post -operative v isits.  If 
sequalae persist, the subject  should be followed until all sequalae are 
considered to be stabilized or resolved.  
 
 
Page 16 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
 
10. Safety  
 
At each visit, the ocular health of the subject  will be assessed.   The cornea, 
anterior chamber, trabecular meshwork, d evice implant location (if available) , and 
fundus  will be examined.  Any ocular unanticipated adverse events occurring 
during the study  whether they are considered to be device related or not , must be 
documented on the Adverse Event Case Report Form .  Date  and time of the 
event, event severity, treatment (if any) , and the assessed relationship of the 
event to the study devices  will be recorded on the Adverse Event Case Report 
Form.  Conditions that exist at the time the subject is enrolled  in the study  do not 
need to be recorded on the Adverse Event Form as adverse events , unless they 
increase i n severity during the study  and constitute an unanticipated adverse 
event. .   
 
The collection and recording of unanticipated adverse events will begin at the 
start of  the surgical intervention and will end at the subject’s Month 12 or Early 
Termination Visit.  Unanticpated adverse events must be followed until the 
adverse event has recovered or recovered with ongoing sequelae that will likely 
not change in the view of the investigator.  This period may  extend beyond study 
termination.  
 
A brief overview of the differences between anticipated, unanticipated and 
serious adverse events is provided.  
 
10.1 Anticipated Adverse Events  
Anticipated adverse events include those that m ight reasonably be expected 
to occur in this study because they are associated with glaucoma surgical 
procedures.   Anticipated adverse events for both the porous plate and 
silicone plate glaucoma valves include:  
 * Woun d Leak  
 * Shallow Anterior Chamber  
Page 17 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
 * Flat Anterior Chamber  
 * Choroidal effusion  
 * Exposure of Tube, Patch Graft, Plate  
 * Severe Inflammation  
 * Tube and/or Flow Obstruction  
 * Corneal Edema  
 * Motility Disturbance (i.e. Diplopia)  
 * Suprachoroidal hemorrhage  
 * Hypotony  (≤ 5 mmHg)  
 * Elevated intraocular pressure  
 * Retinal Detachment  
   
 
10.2 Unanticipated Adverse Events  
Unanticipated adverse events  include any serious adverse effects on health 
or safety or any life- threatening problem or death caused by or likely direct ly 
related to the Ahmed Glaucoma Valve (M4 or F P7) or the placement of the 
Ahmed Glaucoma Valve (M4 or F P7) within the eye that are not typically 
associated with glaucoma surgical procedures.   
 
10.3 Serious Adverse Events   
Serious adverse events include those events that require (≥ 24 hours)  or 
prolong hospitalization, require surgical intervention, are sight or life-
threatening or fatal, or result in significant disability or incapacity.    
 
10.4 Assessment of Adverse Event Severity  
The investigator will make an assessment of ev ent severity for each 
unanticipated adverse event and serious adverse event reported during the 
study according to the following definitions:  
 Mild:  An event that is easily tolerated by the subject , causing minimal 
 discomfort and not interfering with ever yday activities.  
Page 18 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
 Moderate:  An event that is sufficiently discomforting to interfere with 
 the subject’s normal everyday activities.  
 Severe:  An event that prevents the subject’s normal everyday activities.   
 
10.5 Reporting Adverse Events   
Identificatio n and collection of anticipated and unanticipated adverse event 
information is the responsibility of the study investigator.  All unanticipated 
adverse events should be documented by completing the Adverse Event 
Case Report Form .  and submitted to t he study coordinating site per study 
Manual of Procedures .    All adverse events  (whether anticipated or 
unanticipated)  should be reported to the Institutional Review Board according to site 
guidelines.  
 
The identification and collection of serious adverse events  is the responsibility 
of the study investigator.  All serious adverse events should be d ocumented 
by completion of  the Serious Adverse Event Case Report Form.  All Serious 
Adverse events should be reported to the Medical Monitor within 24 hours of the sit e’s notification of the event and to the Institutional Review Board 
according to site guidelines.   
  
10.6 Follow -up of Adverse Events  
The investigator is responsible for recommending the type and duration of follow -up for each subject who experiences an adverse event.  All 
unanticipated events must be followed until study completion or adverse 
event resolution or stabilization of adverse event sequelae if the unanticipated 
adverse event(s) persists post study completion.   All follow -up must be 
documented and submitted to the study coordinating site via   the Adverse 
Event Case Report Form  within the appropriate time frames per the study 
Manual of Operations .    
  
10.7 Aggregate Review of Adverse Events 
Page 19 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
The Medical Monitor will be responsible for the continuous review of 
unanticipated adverse events.   
 11.  Statistical Considerations  
This prospective, two- arm, unmasked, randomized,  controlled trial will evaluate 
and compare the clinical outcomes after implantation of the porous plate 
(polyethylene) Ahmed Gla ucoma Valve (M4) with the silicone plate Ahmed 
Glaucoma Valve (FP7) in patients with intractable glaucoma.  Subjects will be 
randomized in a 1:1 ratio to one of two surgical intervention arms - surgical 
intervention with the Model FP7, Silicone Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valve (Group 
A) or the Model M4, Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valve (Group B).  The 
computer -generated randomization scheme (using varying block sizes of 2 to 4)  
will be completed by a staff member of  the University of Virginia , Department of 
Opht halmology , whose sole role in this study is to generate the randomization 
scheme.  The subject surgical intervention arm assignment will be placed in a sealed envelope, securely delivered to the sites, and will be accessed by the site 
study staff in the si te Surgical Admission Suite immediately prior to local 
anesthesia injection for the surgical procedure.  Post -randomization, the 
assigned surgical intervention arm will be unmasked to the  subject .    
 
11.1 Sample Size Considerations  
With a sample size of 40 in each group, the power of the study will be 0.8 
(80%) to detect a 1.5 mmHg difference  in intraocular pressure with a 
standard deviation of 3 mmHg.   Investigators will screen and treat patients 
.until the study is fully enrolled or the study is terminated .  All subjects 
undergoing surgical intervention will be entered in the statistical analysis.  
Based on prior studies, failure to complete the 12 month post -operative 
period is not likely to exceed 10% of randomized subjects.  
 
11.2 Assessment  of the Prim ary Endpoint   
Page 20 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
The primary efficacy endpoint  is the mean intraocular pressure in the 
porous plate group as compared to the silicone plate group at 12 months  
The analysis will compare t he changes of intraocular pressure after the 
surgical intervention in the porous plate group as compared to the silicone 
plate group .  Baselines will be compared to check for statistically significant 
differences and, if needed, a change from baseline analysis will be 
performed.   The statistical significance of the differences  in intraocular 
pressure will be determined using two- tailed paired t -tests.  
 
11.3 Assessment of the Secondary Endpoints  
Thesecondary endpoint is the mean number of anti -glaucoma medications 
and surgical success in the porous plate group as compared to th e silicone 
plate group at 12 months.  The b aseline number of medications will be 
compared to check for statistically significant differences and, if needed, a 
change from baseline analysis will be performed.   The statistical 
significance of the differences  in the number of medications will be 
determined using two- tailed paired t -tests.   The mean number of 
medications at individual time points will be compared in the two groups.  Kaplan- Meier survival analysis will be performed for statistical analysis of 
success rates, with comparisons of groups using the log rank test.  
Complications will be compared using comparison of proportions (z) test.  
 11.4 Accrual  
Maximum study accrual  is estimated to be 88 subjects to accrue the 
target ed 80 subjects required to meet the study objectives.  Maximum 
accrual allows for a 5% ineligibility rate and a 5% rate of coming off study 
before the planned surgical intervention.   Once target accrual is  reached, 
the study allows those within the screening process to be enrolled.   As this 
allowance is not to exceed 4 patients, up to 84 patients may be treated with 
Ahmed Glaucoma Valves.  Based upon accrual rates to prior drainage 
Page 21 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
implant studies, accrual is estimated at 15 per month; thus, accrual to the 
study should be completed in less than 6 months.  
 11.5 Plans for Interim Analysis 
There will be no formal interim analysis.  However, for purposes of safety and surgical failures only, unanticipated adverse events will be reviewed 
periodically by the Medical Monitor to detect  a statis tically significant 
increase of vision- threatening complications (e. g., suprachoroi dal 
hemorrhage, endophthalmitis,  and surgical failures .  If vision -threatening 
complications and surgical failures exceed a threshold of 30% during the 
study , consideration will be given by the Medical Monitor to terminate the 
study early.   
   
11.6 Plans for Final Analysis  
Subjects will be monitored until they complete the study period.  Primary 
analysis will include all subjects undergoing the study surgical intervention.  
All subjects who receive any study intervention will be monitored for 
adverse events.  Adverse event information will be tabulated by type and 
severity of adverse events.   If the subject is determined to be a treatment 
failure (e.g., increased intraocular  pressure, hypotony, loss of light 
perception vision, or additional glaucoma surgery),  this will be documented 
in the study database.  
 
11.7 Rules for Termination of Study  
The Medical Monitor will conduct periodic reviews of unanticipated adverse 
events  and will terminate the study as necessary.  
 
12.  Recruitment  
To allow the coordinating site to monitor accrual , all study sites must email 
the coordinating site prior to the randomization of each subject .  No other 
Page 22 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
study documentation needs to be sent to the coordinating site at t his time 
point.   
13. Good Clinical Practice (GCP)  Compliance  
This study will be conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practice (GCP) 
using the guidance documents and practices offered by the International 
Conference on Harmonization (I CH) and United States Food and Drug 
Administration ( FDA), and in accordance with site local regulations.  
 
14. Retention of Records  
The site investigator is responsible for maintaining intact study records for a period of at least 6  years following the complet ion of the study.  Study 
records may be retained for a longer period if specified by local policies.  
 
 
15. References  
1. Eisenberg DL, Koo EY, Hafner G, Schuman JS.  In vitro flow properties of 
glaucoma implant devices.  Ophthalmic Surg Lasers 1999; 30: 662- 667. 
2. Francis BA, Cortes A, Chen J, Alvarado JA.  Characteristics of glaucoma drainage implants during dynamic and steady -state flow conditions.  
Ophthalmology 1998; 105: 1708- 1714.  
3. Prata JA Jr, Mermoud A, LaBree L, Minckler DS.  In vitro and in vivo flow 
characteristics of glaucoma drainage implants.  Ophthalmology 1995; 102: 
894-904. 
4. Coleman AL, Hill R, Wilson MR, Choplin N, Kotas -Neumann R, Tam M, 
Bacharach J, Panek WC.  Initial clinical experience with the Ahmed 
Glaucoma Valve implant.  Am J Ophthalmol 1995; 120: 23- 31. 
5. Huang MC, Netland PA, Coleman AL, Siegner SW, Moster MR, Hill RA.  Intermediate- term clinical experience with the Ahmed Glaucoma Valve 
implant.  Am J Ophthalmol 1999; 127: 27- 33. 
6. Ayyala RS, Zurakowski D, Smith JA, Monshizadeh R, Netland PA,  Richards 
DW, Layden WE.  A clinical study of the Ahmed glaucoma valve implant in 
advanced glaucoma.  Ophthalmology  1998; 105: 1968- 1976.  
Page 23 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
7. Heuer DK, Lloyd MA, Abrams DA, Baerveldt G, Minckler DS, Lee MB, 
Martone JF.  Which is better?  One or two?  A random ized clinical trial of 
single -plate versus double- plate Molteno implantation for glaucomas in 
aphakia and pseudophakia.  Ophthalmology 1992: 99: 1512- 1519.  
8. Broadway DC, Iester M, Schulzer M, Douglas GR. Survival analysis for success of Molteno tube implant s. Br J Ophthalmol 2001;85:689- 695.  
9. Smith MF, Doyle JW, Sherwood MB.  Comparison of the Baerveldt glaucoma implant with the double- plate Molteno drainage implant.  Arch Ophthalmol 
1995; 113: 444- 447. 
10. Siegner SW, Netland PA, Urban RC Jr, Williams AS, Richa rds DW, Latina 
MA, Brandt JD.  Clinical experience with the Baerveldt glaucoma drainage implant.  Ophthalmology 1995; 102: 1298- 1307.  
11. Britt MT, LaBree LD, Lloyd MA, et al. Randomized clinical trial of the 350-mm2 versus the 500- mm2 Baerveldt implant: longer term results. Is bigger 
better? Ophthalmology 1999;106:2312- 2318.  
12. Al-Aswad LA, Netland PA, Bellows AR, et al. Clinical experience with the 
double- plate Ahmed glaucoma valve. Am J Ophthalmol 2006;141:390- 391.  
13. Costa VP, Azuara- Blanco A, Netland PA, Lesk MR, Arcieri ES. Efficacy and 
safety of adjunctive mitomycin C during Ahmed glaucoma valve implantation. A prospective randomized clinical trial. Ophthalmology 2004;111:1071- 1076.  
14. Ayyala RS, Harman LE, Michelini -Norris B, Ondrovic LE, Haller E, Margo 
CE, S tevens SX.  Comparison of different biomaterials for glaucoma 
drainage devices.  Arch Ophthalmol 1999; 117: 233- 236. 
15. Ayyala RS, Michelini- Norris B, Flores A, Haller E, Margo CE.  Comparison of 
different biomaterials for glaucoma drainage devices: part 2.  Arch Ophthalmol 2000; 118: 1081- 1084.  
16. Ishida K, Netland PA, Costa VP, Shiroma L, Khan B, Ahmed II. Comparison of polypropylene and silicone Ahmed glaucoma valves. Ophthalmology 
2006;113:1320- 1326.  
Page 24 
 
Comparison of Silicone and Porous Plate Ahmed Glaucoma Valves        CONFIDENTIAL                    
Version: March 25, 2015  
17. Hinkle DM, Zurakowski D, Ayyala RS. A comparison of the pol ypropylene 
plate Ahmed glaucoma valve to the silicone plate Ahmed glaucoma flexible 
valve. Eur J Ophthalmol 2007;17:696- 701. 
18. Mackenzie PJ, Schertzer RM, Isbister CM. Comparison of silicone and polypropylene Ahmed glaucoma valves: two- year follow -up. Can J 
Ophthalmol 2007;42:227 -232. 
19. Law SK, Nguyen A, Coleman AL, Caprioli J. Comparison of safety and 
efficacy between silicone and polypropylene Ahmed glaucoma valves in 
refractory glaucoma. Ophthalmology 2005;112:1514- 1520.  
20. Brasil MV, Rockwood EJ, Smith SD. Comparison of silicone and polypropylene Ahmed glaucoma valve implants. J Glaucoma 2007;16:36- 41. 
21. Netland PA.  The Ahmed Glaucoma Valve in neovascular glaucoma.  Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 2009; 107: 325- 342. 
Page 25 
 