Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 1of 90REVISION HISTORY
Revisions per Amendment 2.0
Date: 20 Dec2018
Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
Number of sites increased to 40 Increased to help to achieve 
recruitment targets.Synopsis -Sites
Section 6
Twoexploratory objectives of 
DOR and OS were changed to 
secondary objectives.Follow ing feedback from the FDA 
and the EMA PDCO. These 
objectives have moved from 
exploratory to secondary 
objectives.Synopsis -Objectives
Section 8.2, Section 8.3
Number of subjects planned was 
increased to 45 and hence the 
number of subjects in each of the 
histology groups was increased to 
approximately 15. The 
determination of sample size text 
updated accordingly .Follow ing feedback from the EMA 
PDCO , the sample size was 
increased to be compliant with the 
EMA Pediatric Investigational 
Plan.Synop sis-Study Design, 
Number of Subjects , 
Efficacy Analysis , Sample 
Size Rationale
Section 9.3, Section 9.7.2
Changed inclusion criteria #5 
“Performance level: Performance 
score ≥50%. Karnofsky (for 
subjects >16 years of age) or 
Lansky (for subjects ≤16 years of 
age).  “Subjects who are unable 
to walk because of paralysis 
and/or previous surgeries, but 
who are in a wheelchair, will be 
considered ambulatory for the 
purpose of assessing 
perform ance score. ”Clarification of inclusion criteria # 
5.Synopsis -Inclusion 
Criteria
Section 9.3.1
Changed inclusion criteria #6 
“Monoclonal antibodies: ≥ 3 half -
lives must have elapsed from 
infusion of last dose of antibody 
(including checkpoint inhibitors), 
and toxicity related to prior 
antibody therapy must be 
recovered to Grade ≤1.”
“Hematopoietic growth factors: 
≥14 days after the last dose of a 
long-acting growth factor (eg, 
Neulasta) or 7 days for a short -
acting growth factor.  For agents 
that have known AEs occurring 
beyond 7 days after administration, 
this period must be extended 
beyond the time during which AEs Clarification of inclusion criteria 
#6.Synopsis -Inclusion 
Criteria
Section 9.3.1
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 2of 90Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
are known to occur. The duration 
of this interval m ust be discussed 
with the sponsor .”
Changed inclusion criteria #8 “Or 
creatinine clearance or radioisotope
GFR ≥50 mL/min/1.73 m2based 
on a 12 or 24 hour urine creatinine 
collection. ”Correction to inclusion criteria #8. Synopsis -Inclusion 
Criteria
Section 9.3.1
Changed exclusion criteria # 1 “For 
sites outside of the EU, it is 
permissible that if a highly 
effective method of contraception 
is not appropriate or acceptable to 
the subject, or the subject has 
comm enced/adjusted/ changed 
oral hormonal contraceptive 
product/dose w ithin 4 weeks prior 
to study drug administration, then 
the subject must agree to use a 
medically acceptable method of 
contraception, ie, double barrier 
methods of contraception such as 
condoms plus diaphragm or 
cervical/vault cap with 
spermicide. ”
“**Must be on a stable dose of the 
same oral hormonal contraceptive 
product for at least 4 w eeks before 
dosing with study drug and for the 
duration of the study and for 6 
months aft er study drug 
discontinuation. For sites outside 
of the EU, double barrier methods 
of contraception mu st be used for 
subjects who have 
commenced/switched oral 
contraceptive, or adjusted dose, 
within 4 weeks prior to dosing ”
Males who have not had a 
successful vasectomy (confirmed 
azoospermia) or if they and their 
female partners do not meet the 
criteria ab ove (ie, not of 
childbearing potential or practicing 
highly effective contraception 
throughout the study period or for 
28 days 3 months after study drug 
discontinuation).  No sperm 
donation is allowed during the 
study period or for 28 days
3months after s tudy drug Clarification of exclusion criteria 
#1 and removal of duplicate text.
Updated duration of 
contraception/window  before 
sperm donation to 3 months (after 
study drug discontinuation) for 
male subjects following site 
feedback to be more conservative 
and more in line with USPI.Synopsis -Exclusion 
Criteria
Section 9.3.2
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 3of 90Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
discontinuation.
Added text to exclusion criteria # 2 
“Concomitant medications:
“•Strong C YP3A4 
inducers/inhibitors (See Section 
9.4.6.1.1, Drug -Drug 
Interactions) ”.Updated in line with eribulin study 
protocols.Synopsis -Exclusion 
Criteria
Section 9.3.2
Added 18fluordeoxyglucose (FDG) -
PET/CT scans .Included FDG/PET scans, a s per 
standard of practice at many sitesSynopsis -Efficacy 
Assessment
Section 9.5.1.4, Section 
9.5.1.6.7, Section 9.5.2 , 
Table 9
The exploratory endpoints of DOR 
and OS were changed to secondary 
endpoints.Follow ing feedback from the FDA 
and the EMA PDCO. These 
endpoints have moved from 
exploratory to secondary 
endpoints.Synopsis -Exploratory 
Endpoints
Section 9.7.1.1.2, Section 
9.7.1.1.3, Section 9.7.1.6.2
E7389- G000 -223 is a Phase 2, 
multicenter , open -label study to 
conduct a preliminary assessment 
of the safety and activity of 
eribulin mesylate in pediatric 
subjects with relapsed/refractory 
RMS, NRSTS, or EWS.   If there is 
at least 1 response (PR or CR) in at 
least 1 of these histology types, the 
study will proceed to a second 
study , a two -arm, random ized, 
open -label study to assess the 
efficacy and safety of eribulin 
mesylate versus a com parator .Study design text a mended in line 
with the change in sample size.Synopsis -Study Design
Section 9.1, Section 9.2
Changed text “ In Study E7389 -
G000 -223, up to 3045pediatric 
subjects , with up to 10 
approximately 1 5 subjects each 
with RMS, NRSTS, or EWS, will 
be enrolled to receive eribulin
mesylate as an intravenous (IV) 
infusion at a dose of 1. 4 mg/m2
(Recommended Phase 2 Dose 
[RP2D]) on Days 1 and 8 of each 
21-day cycle as determined by the 
dose finding study ADVL1314 
(Eisai Study E7389 -A001 -113)”.
Rem oved study design figure.Study design text amended in line 
with the change in sample size.Synopsis –Study Design
Section 9.1
Changed text: For each histology 
type, up to 10 approxim ately 15 Test amended for clarification and 
in line with change in sample size.Synopsis -Study Design, 
Efficacy Analyses, Interim 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 4of 90Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
subjects will be treated.  “Data will 
be m onitored on an ongoing 
basis; depending on evaluation 
by the investigators and sponsor, 
if sufficient responses If there is at 
least 1 response (PRs or CRs) are
observed, then this histology type 
will be recommended for inclusion 
in the follo w-upsubsequent
study. ”Analyses
Section 9.1, Section 9.7.3
Extended screening period from 14 
to 28 days.Follow ing feedback from 
investigators, to allow  more time 
for completion of screening 
procedures and to prevent 
unnecessary repeat scans.   The 
screening period w as extended 
from 14 to 28 days.Synopsis –Study Design
Section 9.1 , Section 9.5.2, 
Table 9
Text clarified: a ll subjects w ill 
have an end of treatment visit 
within 28 days of the last dose of 
study medication. The follow -up 
period w ill begin immediately after 
the end of treatment visit until
death ,the subject w ithdraws 
consent unless study is terminated 
by sponsor .Updated f or clarification Synopsis –Study Design
Section 9.1
Added text to clarify the frequency 
of follow up and to increase the 
duration of follow  up for long term 
survival.  Follow ing feedback from the EMA 
PDCO, the duration of follow up 
was clarified and i ncreased.Synopsis –Duration of 
Treatment
Section 9.1
Section 9.5.2, Table 9
Changed text “ The primary 
analysis is to examine the number 
of responders w ithin each 
histology subject cohort.  If there is 
at least 1 response in a subject 
cohort, the corresponding histology 
will be recommended for inclusion 
in a randomized study.   Confirmed 
response (PR or CR) w ill be used 
in this analysis.  The analysis is 
planned using data from up to 24 
weeks after 150 subjects in each 
cohort have completed response
assessments. In each of the 
histology groups of RMS, 
NRSTS, and EWS, 
approximately 15 subjects will be 
enrolled and treated with 
eribulin mesylate.  Data will be Follow ing feedback from the EMA 
PDCO and increased sample size.Synopsis – Efficacy 
Analysis
Section 9.7.1.6.1
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 5of 90Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
monitored on an ongoing basis; 
depending on evaluation by the 
investigators and sponsor, if 
sufficient responses (partial 
response [PR] or com plete 
response [CR]) are observed, 
then this histology type will be 
recommended for inclusion in 
the subsequent study.  At the 
latest, the prim ary analysis will 
be perform ed when 
approximately 15 subjects ha ve 
completed 24 weeks of response 
assessments.
The secondary analyses were 
updated to include DOR and OS.  
The exploratory analyses of DOR 
and OS were removed.Follow ing feedback from the FDA 
and the EMA PDCO, exploratory 
endpoints of DOR and OS were 
moved to secondary endpoints.Synopsis -Secondary 
Efficacy Analyses
Section 9.7.1.6
Schafer, et al 2016 reference 
updated from abstract to full 
publication 2018.Reference updated with recent 
publication.Section 7.1.3.2, Section 
7.2, Section 10
Changed text “Additional 
exploratory endpoints efficacy 
assessments on the exposure of 
eribulin will be evaluated and the 
relationship betw een exposure and 
AEs and efficacy will also be 
explored.on DOR and OS (for up 
to 1 year after last subject in), will 
also be assessed.”Follow ing feedback from the FDA 
and the EMA PDCO. These 
endpoints have moved from 
exploratory to secondary 
endpoints.Section 9.5.1.3.3
Magnesium added to the chemistry 
panel for Clinical Laboratory 
Tests.Updated in line with eribulin study 
protocols.Section 9.5.1.6.3, Table 8.
Added Appendix 2 Modified 
“Balis” Pediatric Scale of 
Peripheral Neuropathies.Included as an appendix for easy
reference.Appendix 2
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 6of 90Revisions per Amendment 1.1
Date: 29 Sep 2017
Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
Subjects will be followed for 
survival approximately every 12 
weeks and the follow -up period 
will begin immediately after the 
End of Treatment visit.
During the follow -up period, 
subjects who have gone off study 
without progression should have 
tumor assessments every 6-12 
weeks, at the investigators 
discretion, from the date of last 
tumor assessment until disease 
progression, death, or initiation of 
another anticancer therapy.The text has been updated for 
clarification purposes . 
In-view of the patient population, 
CNS imaging will o nly be required 
for subjects with a history of 
protocol eligible bra in metastasis 
and as clinically indicated.Synopsis ( Study Design; 
Follow -up section)
9.1 Overall Study Design 
and Plan, Follow -up 
section
Assessment grade added for 
NRSTSUpdated for clarification. Synopsis Inclusion 
Criteria
Section 9.3.1
Time of full neurological 
examination and assessment 
criteria used was modified.Updated for clarity. Synopsis, Other 
Assessments
Section 9.5.1.2.1
Section 9.5.1.3.2
Section 9.5.1.6
Table 9, Footnote n
Note: CNS imaging is required to 
confirm eligibility for subjects w ith
a known history of CNS d isease.In-view of the patient population, 
CNS imaging will o nly be required 
for subjects with a history of 
protocol eligible brain metastasis 
and as clinically indicated.Synopsis (Exclusion 
criteria)
Section 9.3.2 Exclusion 
Criteria
Antibodies: 3 half-lives must have 
elapsed from infusion of last dose 
of antibody (including checkpoint 
inhibitors), and toxicity related to 
prior antibody therapy must be 
recovered to Grade ≤1Update in -line with Eribulin study 
protocolsSynopsis (Inclusion 
Criteria)
Section 9.3.1 Inclusion 
Criteria
For sites outside of the EU, it is 
permissible that if a highly 
effective method of contraception 
is not appropriate or acceptable to 
the subject, or the subject has 
changed oral hormonal 
contraceptive product/dose w ithin 
4weeks prior to study drug Clarification that for sites outside 
the EU, double barrier method of 
contraception is acceptable for 
those subjects that are not on a 
stable dose of hormonal 
contraception.Synopsis (Exclusion 
Criteria)
Section 9.3.2 Exclusion 
Criteria
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 7of 90Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
administration, then the subject 
must agree to use a medically 
acceptable method of 
contraception, ie, double barrier 
methods of contraception such as 
condoms p lus diaphragm or 
cervical/vault cap with spermicide.
If hematological toxicities do not 
recover follow ing a dose reduction 
to dose level -1 and the use of 
hematopoietic grow th factors, the 
dose should be reduced to dose 
level -2. If non -hematological 
toxicities do not recover following 
a dose reduction to dose level -1, a 
second dose reduction to dose level 
-2 should be made. If either 
hematologic or non -hematologic 
toxicities do not recover despite 
two dose reductions , the subject 
should be discontinued from 
treatment.  How ever, if the subject 
is deemed to have clinical benefit, 
continuation of treatment may be 
discussed with the sponsor.The text has been updated for 
clarification purposes.Synopsis (Study 
treatments)
Section 9.4.1.1.1 Eribulin 
Mesylate
Brain scan swill not be performed 
at screening, but will be performed
as clinically indicated to assess 
potential CNS disease and/or 
metastases. For subjects w ith a 
history of protocol -eligible treated 
brain metastases, a brain scan will 
be required at screening and all 
tumor assessment time points (eg, 
every 6 weeks). Brain scans will 
not be performed for subjects with 
a CR outside the brain.In-view of the patient population, 
CNS imaging will o nly be required 
for subjects with a history of 
protocol eligible brain metastasis 
and as clinically indicated.Synopsis (Efficacy 
Assessments)
9.5.1.4 Tumor 
Assessments
Confirmed response (PR or CR) 
will be used in this analysis.The text has been updated for 
clarification purposes; responses 
confirmed 4 w eeks post initial 
assessment of PR/CR per RECIST 
1.1 w ill be used in the analysis.  
The text has been updated for 
clarification purposes; responses 
confirmed 4 w eeks post initial 
assessment of PR/CR per RECIST 
1.1 w ill be used in the analysis.  Synopsis (Efficacy 
Analysis )
Section 9.7.1.6.1 Primary 
Efficacy Analysis
Synopsis (Interim 
Analysis)
Section 9.7.3 Interim 
Analysis
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 8of 90Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
The mainstay of the treatment of 
sarcoma in all age groups is
surgical excision (Table 4).The text has been amended for 
clarification purposes.Section 7.1.1 Current 
Therapeutic Options
The prognosis for children with 
metastatic NRSTS at diagnosis 
and, recurrent NRSTS is poor.Text updated for clarification 
purposes.Section 7.1.1.2 Treatment 
Strategies for Non -
rhabdomyosarcoma Soft 
Tissue Sarcoma
Standard first -line treatment for
patients with metastatic EWS is 
either a 3 drug regimen of 
vincristine, doxorubicin and 
cyclophosphamide or a 5 drug 
regimen VAC with 
ifosfamide/etoposide.
Confirmatory Phase 2 trials 
demonstrated a response rate of 
only 8% (Balamuth and Womer, 
2010). The development of the 
IGF1R monoclonal antibody, 
Ganitumab, is ongoing (COG study 
AEWS1221).Text updated for clarification 
purposes.7.1.1.3 Treatment 
Strategies for Ewing 
Sarcoma
Laboratory assessment of 
cholesterol, globulin, and 
triglycerides was removedText updated due to typographical 
errorTable 8 Clinical 
Laboratory Tests
Concomitant radiotherapy for local 
control is allow ed from  Week 24.From  week 24, the subject may 
receive radiotherapy for local 
control and continue to receive 
drug on studySection 9.4.6
A CT/MRI scan of the brain will 
not be performed during the 
Screening Phase, but will be 
performed as clinically indicated to 
assess potential CNS disease 
and/or metastases and as clinically 
indicated andat all time points
(including screening )for subjects 
with protocol -eligible treated brain
metastases .In-view of the patient population, 
CNS imaging will o nly be required 
for subjects with a history of 
protocol eligible brain metastasis 
and as clinically indicated.
In-view of the patient population, 
CNS imaging will o nly be required 
for subjects with a history of 
protocol eligible brain metastasis 
and as clinically indicated.9.5.1.6.7 Other Safety
Assessments , Brain Scan
Table 9 Schedule of 
Assessments
Footnote k. was modified to note 
Pre-study phase: Screening CT or 
MRI of the brain should be 
performed between Day -14 and 
Day -1for subjects with previously 
treated protocol -eligible brain 
metastases only.In-view of the patient population, 
CNS imaging will o nly be required 
for subjects with a history of 
protocol eligible brain metastasis 
and as clinically indicated.Table 9 Schedule of 
Assessments
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 9of 90Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
For subjects w ith previously 
treated protocol -eligible brain 
metastases, a brain scan must be 
perform ed at all tumor assessment 
time points. The same 
methodology and scan acquisition 
techniq ues used at screening 
should be used throughout the 
study to ensure comparability.
Global change: removal of 
Appendix 1 Sponsor ’s Grading for 
Laboratory ValuesFor clarification purposes since the 
Sponsor’s grading is aligned with 
CTCAE V4.0Appendix 1
Revisions per Amendment 1.0
Date: 05 Jul2017
Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
Update from Ewing’s sarcoma to 
Ewing sarcomaConsistency of text Global change
Previous text:
Or creatinine clearance or 
radioisotope GFR ≥70 
mL/min/1.73 m2based on a 12 or 
24 hour urine creatinine collection.
Amended text:
Or creatinine clearance or 
radioisotope GFR ≥50
mL/min/1.73 m2based on a 12 or 
24 hour urine creatinine collection.Inclusion criteria was carried over 
from pediatric phase 1 study 113 
and therefore has been updated i n-
line with the label for Halaven
where impaired renal function is 
defined as creatinine clearance 
<50 m L/min. Additionally, 
considering that renal elimination 
accounts for approx imately 10% 
total systemic clearance of 
eribulin,  adjustment for a pediatric 
population is not required.Synopsis (Inclusion Criteria 8)
Section 9.3.1 Inclusion 
Criteria 8
Previous text:
2. Concomitant medications:
Receiving drugs that 
prolong the QTc.
Amended text:
2. Concomitant medications:
Receiving drugs that 
prolong the QTc.The inclusion criteria were carried 
over from pediatric phase 1 study 
113. The criteria have been 
updated in -line with the Halaven 
label where concomitant use of 
drugs that prolong the QTc is not 
contraindicated.Synopsis (Exclusion Criteria 
2)
Section 9.3.2 Exclusion 
Criteria 2
Previous text:
Increase the frequency of ECG and 
electrolyte monitoring in subjects 
who develop Grade 2 QTc 
prolongation or have clinically The text has been updated in -line 
with the Halav en label.Section 9.4.1 1.1 ERIBULIN 
MESYLATE, Instructions for 
QTc Prolonga tion on 
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 10of 90Revisions per Amendment 1.0
Date: 05 Jul2017
Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
relevant electrolyte abnormalities.  
Perm anently discontinue eribulin 
mesylate in subjects who develop 
≥Grade 3 QTc prolongation, and 
monitor ECGs and electrolytes 
frequently until the QTc interval 
return to baseline.
Amended text:
Increase the frequency of ECG and 
electrolyte monitoring in subjects 
who:develop Grade 2 QTc 
prolongation, are receiving agents 
that are known to prolong QTc 
interval, or have clinically 
relevant el ectrolyte abnormalities.  
Perm anently discontinue eribulin 
mesylate in subjects who develop 
≥Grade 3 QTc prolongation, and 
monitor ECGs and electrolytes 
frequently until the QTc interval 
return sto baseline.
Previous text:
2. Concomitant medications:
Corticosteroids: Subjects receiving 
corticosteroids w ho have not been 
on a stable or decreasing dose of
corticosteroid for at least 7 days 
prior to study drug administration 
(except when indicated for Central 
Nervous System (CNS) 
metastases, when the exclusion is 
at least 28 days).
Amended text:
Concomitant medications:
Corticosteroids: Subjects receiving 
corticosteroids w ho have not been 
on a stable or decreasing dose of 
corticosteroid for at least 7 days 
prior to study drug administration
(except when indicated for Central 
Nervous System (CNS) 
metastases, then subjects must 
not have received corticosteroids 
forwhen the exclusion is at least Text updated to clari fythat for 
patients with brain metastase swho 
have discontinued cortico steroids,
a 4 weekwashout period is 
required per exclusion 9 , for 
inclusion into the study.Section 9.3.2 Exclusion 
Criteria 2
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 11of 90Revisions per Amendment 1.0
Date: 05 Jul2017
Change Rationale Affected Protocol Sections
28 days ).
Previous text:
A serum β -hCG or urine test 
(depending on local practice) will 
be performed for females of 
childbearing potential prior to 
starting treatment (within 7 days 
prior to randomization).
fFemale subjects of childbearing 
potential require a negative urine 
or serum (depending on local 
practice) pregnancy test prior to 
starting treatment (within 7 days 
prior to Cycle 1 Day 1). 
Amended text:
A serum β -hCG or urine test 
(depending on local practice) will 
be performed for females of 
childbearing potential prior to 
starting treatment (within 7 days
72 hours prior to randomization
the first dose of study drug ).
fFemale subjects of childbearing 
potential require a negative urine 
or serum (depend ing on local 
practice) pregnancy test prior to 
starting treatment (within 7 days
72 hours prior to Cycle 1 Day 1). Text amended to clarify that serum 
β-hCG or urine test is required 
within 72 hours of first dose of 
study drug and to align exclusion 
criteria 1, section 9.5.1.6.7 and 
Schedule of Procedures/
Assessments (Table 9) .Section 9.5.1.6.7, OTHER 
SAFETY 
ASSESSMENTS, 
Pregnancy test ,Schedule 
of 
Procedures/ Assessments 
(Table 9) , pregnancy test, f
Footnote k updated to j, footnote l 
and m updated to k, footnote n 
updated to l and footnote o updated 
to m.
Footnote m removed from tumor 
assessment at follow -upAlignment of Schedule of 
Procedures/ Assessments and 
footnotesSchedule of Procedures/
Assessments (Table 9).
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 12of 901TITLE PAGE
Clinical Study  Protocol
Study Protocol 
Number:E7389- G000 -223
Study Protocol 
Title:A Phase 2, multicenter, open -label stud y to assess safet y and 
preliminary  activity  of eribulin mesy late in pediatric subjects with 
relapsed/refractory  rhabdomy osarcoma (RMS), non-
rhabdom yosarcoma soft tissue sarcoma (NRSTS) and Ewing sarcoma 
(EWS)
Sponsor : Eisai I nc.
155 Tice Boulevard
Woodcliff L ake, 
New Jersey  07677
USEisai L td.
European Knowledge 
Centre
Mosquito Way
Hatfield, Hertfordshire 
AL10 9SN UK
Investigational 
Product Name:E7389/Halaven®(eribulin/eribulin mesy late/eribulin mesy late)
Indication: Relapsed/refractory  Rhabdomy osarcoma, Non rhabdomy osarcoma 
Soft Tissue Sarcoma and Ewing sarcoma in Pediatric Subjects 
Phase: 2
Approval Date (s): 20 Mar 2017 (Original Protocol)
05Jul2017 (Amendment 1.0)
29 Sep 2017 (Amendment 1.1)
20Dec2018 (Amendment 2.0)
IND Number: 116,292
GCP Statement: This study  is to be performed in full compliance with I nternational 
Council on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for 
Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) and all 
applicable local Good Clinical Practi ce (GCP) and regulations.  All 
required stud y documentation will be archived as required b y 
regulatory  authorities.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 13of 90Confidentiality 
Statement:This document is confidential.  I t contains proprietary  information of 
Eisai (the sponsor).  An y viewing or disc losure of such information 
that is not authorized in writing b y the sponsor is strictly  prohibited.  
Such information may  be used solely  for the purpose of reviewing or 
performing this study .
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 14of 902CLINICA L PROTOCOL SYNO PSIS
Compound No.:  E7389
Name of Active Ingredient s:  eribulin mesylate
Study Protocol Title
A Phase 2, multicenter, open- label study to assess safety and preliminary activity of eribulin mesylate 
in pediatric subjects with relapsed/refractory rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), non -rhabdomyosarcoma 
soft tissue sarcoma (NRSTS) and Ewing sarcoma (EWS)
Investigator
Douglas S Hawkins , MD.
Katie Albert , MD.
Sites
Approximately 40 sites in the US. The Study will be conducted by the COG network.
Study Period and Phase of Development
Approximately 24 to 36 months from first subject providing signed inform edconsent to last subject 
last visit (LSLV).  
Phase 2
Objectives
Primary Objectives
To conduct a preliminary assessment of activity of eribulin mesylate in pediatric subjects 
with relapsed/refractory RMS, NRSTS or EWS to determine whether each cohort warrants 
further investigation.
Secondary Objectives
To evaluate the progression -free survival (PFS), using Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid 
Tumors ( RECIST )1.1, of eribulin mesylate in pediatric subjects with relapsed/refractory 
RMS, NRSTS, or EWS in all cohorts combined .
To evaluate the safety and tolerability of eribulin in the pediatric subjects with 
relapsed/refractory RMS, NRSTS, or EWS in all cohorts combined .
To evaluate the duration of response (DOR) of eribulin mesylate in pediatric subjects with 
relapsed/refractory RMS, NRSTS, or EWS .
To evaluate the overall survival (OS) of pediatric subjects with relapsed/refractory RMS, 
NRSTS and EWS .
Exploratory Objectives
To evaluate the exposure of eribulin mesylate in pediatric subjects with relapsed/refractory 
RMS, NRSTS, or EWS .
To explore the relationsh ip between exposure to eribulin mesylate and adverse events (AE) 
and efficacy.

Study Design
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 15of 90E7389- G000 -223 is a Phase 2, multicenter, open -label study to conduct a preliminary assessment of 
the safety and activity of eribulin mesylate in pediatric subjects with relapsed/refractory RMS, 
NRSTS, or EWS.  
Forty -fivepediatric subjects , with approximately 15subjects each with RMS, NRSTS, or EWS, will 
be enrolled to receive eribulin mesylate as an intravenous (IV) infusion at a dose of 1.4 mg /m2
(Recommended Phase 2 Dose [RP2D]) on Days 1 and 8 of each 21 -day cycle , asdetermined by the 
dose f inding study ADVL1314 (Eisai Study E7389 -A001 -113). 
Outline
Pediatric subjects with relapsed/refractory RMS, NRSTS or EWS will be enrolled to receive 
therapy with eribulin mesylate. 
For each histology type, approximately 15 subjects will be treated.  Data will be monitored 
on an ongoing basis ;depending on evaluation by the investigators and sponsor, if sufficient 
responses (partial response [PR] or complete response [CR]) are observed, then this histology 
type will be recommended for inclusion in the subsequent study.
Subjects will continue study therapy until progression of disease (per RECIST 1.1), 
intolerable toxicity or withdrawal of consent.
Pre-study Phase:
Day -28 to -1, computed tomography (CT) / magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans must be 
performed within 28 days prior to study drug administration.  All clinical and laboratory test results 
to determine eligibility must be performed within 7 days prior to study drug administrati on, unless 
otherwise indicated.
Treatment Phase:
The treatment phase will start on Day 1 o f Cycle 1 .
Follow -up:
The follow -up period will begin immediately after the End of Treatment visit until death or informed 
consent is withdrawn , unless the study is terminated by the sponsor . Subjects will be followed for 
survival approximately every 12 weeks for 1 year and then annually thereafter . As well as follow -up 
for survival, the annual surveillance will also assess any long term effects of the study treatment.
During the follow -up period, subjects who have gone off study treatment without progression should 
have tumor assessments every 6 -12weeks , at the investigators discretion, from the date of last tumor 
assessment until disease progression, death, or initiation of another anticancer therapy , whichever 
occurs first, unless the study is terminated by the sponsor .  Follow -up data will be required unless 
consent is withdrawn.
Number of Subjects
The target enrollment is 45subjects.
Inclusion Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria to be included in this study:
1.Age: ≥12 months to <18 years old at the time of informed consent .
2.Diagnosis: Histologically confirmed RMS, NRSTS (Grade 2 or 3) or EWS which is relapsed or 
refractory (failed front line therapy).
3.The presence of measurable disease meeting the following criteria:
At least 1 lesion of ≥1.0 cm in the longest diameter for a non -lymph node or ≥1.5 cm in the 
short -axis diameter for a lymph node that is serially measurable according to RECIST 1.1 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 16of 90using computerized tomography/magnetic resonance imaging (CT/MRI ).
Lesions that have had radiotherapy must show subsequent radiographic evidence of increase 
in size by at least 20% to be deemed a target lesion.
4.Therapeutic options: Subject’s current disease state must be one for which there is no known 
curative therapy or therapy proven to prolong survival with an acceptable quality of life.
5.Performance level: Performance score ≥50%. Karnofsky ( for subjects >16 years of age) or 
Lansky (for subjects ≤16 years of age).   Subjects who are unable to walk because of paralysis 
and/or previous surgeries, but who are in a wheelchair, will be considered ambulatory for the 
purpose of assessing performance s core. 
6.Subjects must have fully recovered from the acute toxic effects of all prior anticancer therapy and 
must meet the following minimum duration from prior anticancer directed therapy prior to study 
drug administration.  If, after the required time f rame, the numerical eligibility criteria are met, 
eg, blood count criteria, the subject is considered to have recovered adequately :
Cytotoxic chemotherapy or other chemotherapy known to be myelosuppressive :≥21 days 
after the last dose of cytotoxic or myel osuppressive chemotherapy (42 days if prior 
nitrosourea).
Anticancer agents not known to be myelosuppressive (eg, not associated with reduced 
platelet or Absolute neutrophil count [ ANC ]counts): ≥7 days after the last dose of agent.
Monoclonal a ntibodies: ≥3 half -lives must have elapsed from infusion of last dose of 
antibody (including checkpoint inhibitors), and toxicity related to prior antibody thera py must 
be recovered to Grade ≤1.
Hematopoietic growth factors: ≥14 days after the last dose of a long -acting growth factor (eg, 
Neulasta) or 7 days for a short -acting growth factor.  For agents that have known AEs 
occurring beyond 7 days after administration, this period must be extended beyond the time 
during which AEs are known to occur. The duration of th is interval must be discussed with 
the sponsor.
Interleukins, interferons, and cytokines (other than hematopoietic growth factors): ≥21 days 
after the completion of interleukins, interferons or cytokines (other than hematopoietic 
growth factors).
Stem cell infusions (with or without total body irradiation [TBI]): ≥84 days .
Allogeneic (non -autologous) bone marrow or stem cell transplant, or any stem cell infusion 
including donor lymphocyte infusion or boost infusion :≥84 days after infusion and no 
evidence of graft versus host disease (GVHD ).
Autologous stem cell infusion including boost infusion: ≥42 days.
Cellular therapy:   ≥42 days after the completion of any type of cellular therapy (eg, modified 
T-cells, natural killer cells, dendritic cells, etc).
Radiation therapy ( XRT )/External Beam Irradiation including Protons: ≥14 days after local 
XRT ; ≥150 days after TBI, craniospinal XRT or if radiation to ≥50% of the pelvis ; ≥42 days 
if other substantial BM radiation .
Radiopharmaceutical therapy (eg, radiolabeled antibody, 131I-Metaiodobenzylguanidine):  
≥42 days after systemically administered radiopharmaceutical therapy. 
7.Adequate bone marrow function, defined as:
ANC ≥1.0 x 109/L.
Platelet count ≥100 x 109/L(transfu sion independent, defined as not receiving platelet 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 17of 90transfusions within a 7 -day period prior to study drug administration ).
Hemoglobin at least 8.0 g/dL at Baseline (blood transfusions are allowed during the 
screening period to correct hemoglobin values less than 8.0 g/dL) .
Note: As blood t ransfusions are permitted to meet the hemoglobin criteria , subjects requiring 
transfusion must not be known to be refractory to red blood cell or platelet transfusions .
8.Adequate renal function, defined as 
A serum creatinine based on age/gender , derived from the Schwartz formula for estimating 
glomerular filtration rate ( GFR) ( see table below ).
Age Maximum Serum Creatinine (m g/dL)
Male Fem ale
6 months to <1 year 0.5 0.5
1 to <2 years 0.6 0.6
2 to <6 years 0.8 0.8
6 to <10 years 1 1
10 to <13 years 1.2 1.2
13 to <16 years 1.5 1.4
≥16 years 1.7 1.4
The threshold creatinine values in this Table were derived from the Schwartz 
formula for estimating glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (Schwartz and 
Gauthier. J Pediatr. 1985;106:522 –6)utilizing child length and stature data 
published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Or creatinine clearance or GFR ≥50 mL /min/1.73 m2based on a 12 or 24 hour urine 
creatinine collection. 
9.Adequate live r function, defined as:
Bilirubin (sum of conjugated + unconjugated) ≤1.5 x upper limit of normal (ULN) for age .
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ≤110 U/L. For the purpose of this study, the ULN for ALT
is 45 U/L.
Serum albumin ≥2 g/dL .
10.Informed consent: All subjects and/or their parents or legally authorized representatives must 
sign a written informed consent.  Assent, when appropriate, will be obtained according to 
institutional guidelines.  Subjects must be willing to comply with all aspects of the pr otocol.
Exclusion Criteria
Subjects who meet any of the following criteria will be excluded from this study:
1.Pregnancy, breastfeeding, contraception:  Females who are breastfeeding or pregnant at 
Screening or Baseline (as documented by a positive beta -human chorionic [ β-hCG] (or human 
chorionic gonadotropin [hCG] test with a minimum sensitivity of 25 IU/L or equivalent units of 
β-hCG [or hCG]).  A separate baseline assessment is required if a negative screening pregnancy 
test was obtained more than 72 hours before the first dose of study drug.
-Females of childbearing potential* who:
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 18of 90◦Do not agree to use a highly effective method of contraception for the entire study period 
and for 6 months after study drug discontinuation, ie:
◦Total abstinence (if it is their preferred and usual lifestyle).
◦An intrauterine device (IUD) or intrauterine system (IUS) .
◦A contraceptive implant .
◦an oral contraceptive** .
OR
◦Do not have a vasectomized partner with confirmed azoospermia.
For sites outside of the EU, it is per missible that if a highly effective method of contraception 
is not appropriate or acceptable to the subject, or the subject has 
commenced/adjusted/ changed oral hormonal contraceptive product/dose within 4 weeks prior 
to study drug administration, then the subject must agree to use a medically acceptable 
method of contraception, ie, double barrier methods of contraception such as condoms plus 
diaphragm or cervical/vault cap with spermicide.
*All post pubertal females will be considered to be of childbearing potential unless they have 
early menopause (amenorrheic for at least 12 consecutive months, in the appropriate age group, 
and without other known or suspected c ause) or have been sterilized surgically ( ie, bilateral tubal 
ligation, total hysterectomy, or b ilateral oophorectomy, all with surgery at least 1 month before 
dosing ).
**Must be on a stable dose of the same oral hormonal contraceptive product for at least 4 weeks 
before dosing with study drug and for the duration of the study and for 6 months after study drug 
discontinuation. ..
◦Males who have not had a successful vasectomy (confirmed azoospermia) or if they and 
their female partners do not meet the criteria above (ie, not of childbearing potential or 
practicing highly effective contraception through out the study period or for 3 months 
after study drug discontinuation).  No sperm donation is allowed during the study period 
or for 3 months after study drug discontinuation.
2.Concomitant medications:
Corticosteroids: Subjects receiving corticosteroids who have not been on a stable or 
decreasing dose of corticosteroid for at least 7 days prior to study drug administration (except 
when indicated for Central Nervous System (CNS )metastases, then subjects must not have 
received corticosteroids for at least 28 days).
Anticancer Agents: Subjects who are currently receiving other anticancer agents.
Anti- GVHD agents post -transplant: Subjects who are receiving cyclosporine, tacrolimus or 
other agents to prevent graft -versus -host disease post bone marrow transplant .
Strong CYP3A4 inducers/inhibitors (See Section 9.4.6.1 .1, Drug -Drug Interactions ).
3.Received prior therapy with eribulin mesylate .
4.Any other malignancy that required treatment (except for non -melanoma skin cancer, or 
histologically confirmed complete excision of carcinoma in situ), within 2 years prior to study 
drug administration .
5.Has hypersensitivity to eribulin or any of the excipients .
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 19of 906.Has a prior history* of viral hepatitis (B or C) as demonstrated by positive serology (presence of 
antigens) or have an uncontrolled infection requiring treatment (* Subjects with a known prior 
history of hepatitis B or C may be eligible pending agreement with the sponsor ).
7.Has > Grade 1 peripheral sensory neuropathy or > Grade 1 peripheral motor neuropathy graded 
according to the Modified (“Balis”) Pediatric Scale of Peripheral Neuropathies .
8.Has cardiac pathology: 
Subjects with known congestive heart failure, symptomatic or left ventricular (LV) ejection 
fraction <50% or shortening fraction <27% 
Subjects with congenital long QT syndr ome, bradyarrhythmias, or QTc >480 msec on at least 
2 separate ECGs .
9.Has C NSDisease:  Subjects with brain or subdural metastases are not eligible unless the 
metastases are asymptomatic and do not require treatment or have been adequately treated by 
local therapy (eg, surgery or radiotherapy) and have discontinued the use of corti costeroids for 
this indication for at least 4 weeks prior to study drug administration .  Confirmation of 
radiographic stability must be done by comparing the brain scan (CT or MRI) performed during 
the Screening Period, using the same imaging modality, to a brain scan performed earlier (and 
following local therapy where applicable). Subjects must be clinically stable.  It is not the 
intention of this protocol to treat subjects with active brain metastases.
Note: CNS imaging is required to confirm eligibility for subjects with a known history of CNS 
disease.
10.Have had or are planning to have the following invasive procedures:
Major surgical procedure or significant traumatic injury within 28 days prior to study drug 
administration .
Laparoscopic proce dure or open biopsy within 7 days prior to study drug administration.
Central line placement or subcutaneous port placement is not considered major surgery but 
must be placed at least 2 days prior to study drug administration .
Core biopsy, including bone m arrow biopsy within 2 days prior to study drug administration.
Fine needle aspirate within 3 days prior to study drug administration.
11.Has any serious concomitant illness that in the opinion of the investigator(s) could affect the 
subject’s safety or interf ere with the study assessments .
12.Subjects with known human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); due to lack of available safety data 
for eribulin therapy in HIV infected subjects.
Study Treatment(s)
Administration of eribulin mesy late by 2 -5 min IV infusion at 1.4 mg/m2on Days 1 and 8 of each 
21-day cycle.  Eribulin may be diluted in up to 100 mL 0.9% sodium chloride, and administered as an 
IV infusion over 15 minutes (maximum infusion duration), where clinically appropriate.
Criteria for Dosing Modifications
Dose reduction and interruption for eribulin mesylate related toxicity will be performed according to 
the following instructions.
Treatment will not be administered when any of the following values are recorded ( Table 1).
Table 1 Criteria for A dministration of Eribulin Mesy late
a):Do not adm inister Cycle 1 Day 1 treatm ent where:
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 20of 90Absolute Neutrophil Count <1.0 ×109/L  or 1,000/ mm3
Platelets <100 × 109/L or 100,000/mm3
Non-hematological toxicity Any > Grade 2 except for inadequately treated nausea 
and/or vomiting
b):Do not adm inister any Day 8 treatm ent where:
Absolute Neutrophil Count <0.75 ×109/L or 750/mm3
Platelets <75×109/L or 75,000/mm3
Non-hematological toxicity Any > Grade 2 except for inadequately treated nausea 
and/or vomiting
c):Do not adm inister any subsequent Day 1 treatm ent where:
Absolute Neutrophil Count <1.0 ×109/L or 1,000/mm3
Platelets <75×109/L or 75,000/mm3
Non-hematological toxicity Any > Grade 2 except for inadequately treated nausea 
and/or vomiting
If the dose cannot be administered as planned due to treatment -related toxicity, the dose should be 
delayed according to the following instructions.
Day 1 of each cycle: If treatment cannot be administered on Day 1, the dosing should be delayed 
until recovery to above the values in Table 1 or Grade ≤2 as appropriate (forCycle 1 & subsequent 
cycles). The Day 1 dose will be rescheduled for when the criteria for treatment administration are 
met. The dose level may have to be reduced following a dose delay in accordance to the instructions 
for dose reduction ( Table 2and Table 3).
Day 8 of each cycle: If treatment cannot be administered on Day 8, the dosing should be delayed 
until recovery to above these values ( Table 1). The Day 8 dosing will be delayed for a maximum of 
7 days and as follows:
If recovery occurs on or before Day 15, dosing will be resumed at the next lower dose level 
(Table 3) and this will be the new Day 8.  
If hematological or non- hematological toxicity has not reso lved to the above values on 
Day 15, the second administration in the cycle will be omitted.  Dosing will be resumed at 
the next lower dose level ( Table 3) and as scheduled on Day 1 of the next cycle if recovery 
has occurred to the above values.  
Please note, use of hematopoietic growth factor sis not permitted in Cycle 1 and is only permitted in 
subsequent cycles as per instituti onal guidelines.
The treatment will be permanently reduced to the next lowest dose level ( Table 3) after the 
occurrence of any of the following events :
Table 2 Criteria for Reduction of Eribulin Mesy lateto the Next Lo west Dose 
Level
Absolute Neutrophil Count Grade 4 neutropenia >7 days
Grade 3 or 4 febrile neutropenia and/or infection requiring treatment 
with antibiotics and/or grow th factors
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 21of 90Platelets Grade 4 thrombocytopenia
Grade 3 thrombocytopenia requiring platelet or blood transfusion or 
both
Non-hematological toxicity Grade 3 or 4 non -hematological toxicities (attributable to study drug); 
except Grade 3 hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia or 
hypomagnesemia that respond to supplementation
Table 3 Eribulin Mesy late Dose Modifications
Dose modifications based on adverse events ( AEs)for eribulin mesylate (Starting dose determined 
by COG protocol ADVL1314/Eisai Study E7389 -A001 -113; 1.4 mg/m2).
Dose LevelEribulin mesylate
(mg/m2)
0* 1.4
-1 1.1
-2 0.8
* Dose level 0 refers to the starting dose.
If hematological toxicities do not recover following a dose reduction to dose level -1 and the use of 
hematopoietic growth factors the dose should be reduced to dose level -2. If non-hematological 
toxic ities do not recover following a dose reduction to dose level -1, a second dose reduction to dose 
level -2 should be made. If either hematologic or non -hematologic toxicities do not recover despite 
two dose reductions, the subject should be discontinue d from treatment.  However, if the subject is 
deemed to have clinical benefit, continuation of treatment may be discussed with the sponsor.
Do not re -escalate dose after t he dose level has been reduced.
Duration of Treatment
Subjects may remain on study treatment as long as they do not meet any of the followi ng criteria:  1) 
experience objective progression of disease (according to RECIST 1.1) ;2) exhibit no clinical benefit 
(in the opinion of the investigator) ;3) experience unacceptable toxicity leading to withdrawal from 
the study ;4) withdraw or are withdr awn from the study for any reason, or ;5) termination of the study 
program , whichever occurs first . 
As long as the subject is still receiving clinical benefit and has not experienced intolerable toxicity, he 
or she can continue to receive study treatment.   An end of treatment (EOT) visit within 28days after 
last date of receiving investigational drug will be performed for subjects who discontinue study 
treatment.   After discontinuation of treatment and completion of the EOT visit, subjects will be
followed up for survival approximately every 12 weeks for 1 year, and then annually thereafter, 
unless consent is withdraw n or death .  
Concomitant Drug/Therapy
Supportive care will be allowed as per institutional guidelines.  Growth factors that suppor t platelet or 
white blood cell number or function can only be administered in accordance with dose modification 
guidelines or for culture proven bacteremia or invasive fungal infection. Prophylactic granulocyte 
colony -stimulating factor should NOT be admi nistered during Cycle 1.
Subjects should not receive any other anticancer therapy (including chemotherapy, radiation therapy, 
immunotherapy or biologic therapy) or investigational agents while receiving study drug.  If these 
therapies are administered, the subject will be removed from the study.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 22of 90Assessments
Efficacy Assessments
Tumor response and progression will be evaluated according to RECIST 1.1 criteria.  Copies of all 
scans for tumor assessments will be sent to an imaging core laboratory designated by the sponsor for 
quality assessment, archiving and potential independent r eview. Tumor assessment scans will be 
performed following the guidelines provided by the imaging core laboratory.  Decisions concerning 
treatment discontinuation due to progressive disease will be based on investigator assessment.
Tumor assessments (CT ch est, and CT or MRI abdomen, pelvis, and other known or suspected sites 
or disease) will be performed during screening and then every 6 weeks (within the sixth week) on a 
fixed schedule from the date of first study drug administration. Magnetic resonance i maging scans 
may be used instead of CT scans for abdomen and pelvis; however, chest must be assessed using CT.  
Scans that were performed within the screening window, but before informed consent, may be used if 
they were acquired consistent with the guidel ines provided by the imaging core laboratory.  The same 
method of assessment must be used at all time -points as used at pre -study.  Partial and complete 
responses will be confirmed at least 4 weeks after initial documentation of PR or CR typically on the 
next consecutive scheduled tumor assessment. After 24 weeks subjects with CR, PR or stable disease 
(SD) may have imaging decreased to every 9 weeks (within the ninth week).  
Abone scan or 18FDG -PET/CT scan will be performed during screening to establish a baseline (a 
historical bone scan performed within 6 weeks before study drug administration is acceptable),
approximately every 24 weeks (in conjunction with a scheduled tumor assessment visit) and as 
clinically indicated. Lesions identified on bone scans should be followed with cross -sectional 
imaging. 
Brain scan swill be performed as clinically indicated to assess potential CNS disease and/or 
metastases.  For subjects with a history of protocol -eligible treated brain metastases, a brain scan will 
be required at screening and all tumor assessment time points (eg, every 6 weeks). 
Subjects who discontinue treatment without objective evidence of disease progression will continue 
to have tumor assessments, per the schedule of assessments, until disease prog ression, death, or 
initiation of another anticancer therapy.  
Pharmacokinetic Assessments
Blood samples will be collected for PK analysis of eribulin as follows:
1.Immediately post -infusion on Day 1 of each cycle for the first 3 cycles
2.Pre-infusion and imme diately post -infusion on Day 8 of each cycle for the first 3 cycles
Pharmacodynamic, Pharmacogenomic, and Other Biomarker Assessments
Exposure -response Analyses
Following FDA guidance, PK sampling will be conducted in subjects across the pediatric program at 
regular intervals in order to adequately characterize the PK of eribulin in the pediatric population in 
the various age cohorts to explore exposure -response r elationships for activity/efficacy and safety.  
The relationship between exposure to eribulin mesylate and AE and efficacy will be explored 
graphically.
Safety Assessments
Safety assessments will consist of monitoring and recording all adverse events ( AEs)according to
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE v4.03 ).This includes listing of all 
grades (for both increasing and decreasing severity) and serious adverse events (SAEs); regular 
laboratory evaluation for hematology, blood chemistry, and urine values; periodic measurement of 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 23of 90vital signs , the performance status, and physical examinations.
Other Assessments
ECG monitoring to evaluate RR, PR, QRS, and QT intervals and QTc interval (corrected for heart 
rate [QTc] using Fridericia's [QTcF] and Bazett's [QTcB] correction factors) at pre -study, during 
Cycle 1 (pre -and post -infusion Day1 and Day 8) and as clinically indicated during subsequent cycles 
and during follow -up (28 days after the last dose of drug).
A full neurologic alexamination w ill be conducted at Screening .On subsequent cycles an assessment 
of neuropathy (neuropathy present/absent and CTC AE Grade )will be assessed as part of the physical 
exam ination
Bioanalytical Methods
Plasma concentrations of eribulin mesylate will be determined using a validated liquid 
chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC -MS/MS) method.  The lower limit of 
quantification (LLOQ) is 0.2 ng/mL.
Statistical Methods
Study Endpoints
Primary Endpoints
Objective response:  number of subjects achieving a best objective response of partial or 
complete response (PR or CR), by up to 24 weeks after all subjects have completed response 
assessment. Response assessment will be as determined by investigator.
Secondary Endpoints
PFS: defined as the time from the first dose date to the date of disease progression or date of 
death (whichever occurs first) .
Safety and tolerability: AEs, SAEs , clinical laboratory values, ECG parameters, vital sign 
measurements ,and performance statu s.
DOR: defined as the time from the first date of documented PR or CR to the date of disease 
progression or date of death (whichever occurs first) .
OS: defined as the time from the first dose date to the date of death .
Exploratory Endpoi nts
Exposure of eribulin mesylate .
Analysis Sets
Full Analysis Set (FAS) will consist of all subjects who receive at least 1 dose of study drug.
Safety Analysis Set (SAS) will consist of all subjects who receive at least 1 dose of study drug. 
Pharmacokinetic Analysis Set (PAS) will include subjects who have at least 1 evaluable plasma 
concentration and sufficient dosing information.
Efficacy Analyses
The primary analysis will be based on investigator assessments of tumor response.
The primary a nalysis is to examine the number of responders within each histology subject cohort. 
Confirmed response (PR or CR) will be used in this analysis.  In each of the histology groups of 
RMS, NRSTS, and EWS, approximately 15subjects will be enrolled and treat ed with eribulin 
mesylate.  Data will be monitored on an ongoing basis; depending on evaluation by the investigators 
and sponsor, if sufficient responses (partial response [PR] or complete response [CR]) are observed, 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 24of 90then this histology type will be recommended for inclusion in the subsequent study.  At the latest, the 
primary analysis will be performed when approximately 15 subject s have completed 24 weeks of 
response assessments.
Secondary Efficacy Analyses
The secondary analyses will be to estimate the PFS , DOR ,and OS in all cohorts combined.  Median 
PFS, DOR, and OS will be estimated using Kaplan -Meier method. 
Pharmacokinetic Analyses
Observed eribulin concentrations from this study will be overlaid with existing observed 
concentrations and model -predicted 90% prediction intervals at the same dose level from other 
studies to demonstrate comparability in exposure.
Safety Analyse s
Safety analyses will be performed on all subjects who receive at least 1 dose of study drug.  It will 
include safety data collected from screening to data cut -off. Safety data include the incidence and 
severity of AEs, clinical laboratory test results, performance status, ECG readings, and vital signs 
measurements.
Vital signs, resting 12 -lead ECGs, hematology, clinical chemistry ,and urinalysis data will be listed.  
Descriptive summary statistics (mean, standard deviation, median, minimum ,and maximum) of 
clinical laboratory test results, vital signs measurements, ECG parameters, and changes from Baseline 
will be presented by cohort and overall.  Treatment -emergent abnormal laboratory test results, vital 
signs, and ECGs will be listed.
All AEs and SAEs w ill be listed.  Treatment -emergent AEs (TEAEs) , treatment -related TEAEs, and 
SAEs will be summarized by cohort, system organ class, preferred term ,and CTCAE v. 4.03 grade.  
QT intervals will be measured from Lead II and will be corrected for heart rate (Q Tc) using QTcF 
and QTcB correction factors.  The primary QTc parameter will be QTcF.  Secondary parameters will 
be QTcB, QT, QRS, and heart rate.
Interim Analyses
Data will be monitored on an ongoing basis; depending on evaluation by the investigators and 
sponsor, if sufficient responses (PR or CR) are observed, then this histology type will be 
recommended for inclusion in the subsequent study.
Sample Size Rationale
A total of 45 subjects will be enrolled. In each of the histology groups of RMS, NRSTS, and EWS, 
approximately 15 subjects will be enrolled and treated with eribulin mesylate.   The sample size is 
considered sufficient based on clinical judgment and is not obtained from statistical calculation. 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 25of 903TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 TITLE PAGE ...................................................................................................................12
2 CLINICAL PROTOCOL SY NOPSI S.............................................................................14
3 TABLE OF CONTENTS ................................
.................................................................25
4 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS ..................................30
5 ETHI CS................................................................
............................................................33
5.1 Institutional Review Boards/I ndependent Ethics Committees ..............................33
5.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study .................................................................................33
5.3 Subject I nformation and Informed Consent...........................................................34
6 INVESTIGATORS AND ST UDY PERSONNEL ..........................................................35
7 INTRODUCTION ................................................................
...........................................35
7.1 Childhood Soft Tissue Sarcomas ...........................................................................35
7.1.1 Current Therapeutic Options........................................................................35
7.1.1.1 Treatment Strategies for Rhabdomy osarcoma .....................................36
7.1.1.2
Treatment Strategies for Non- rhabdom yosarcoma Soft Tissue 
Sarcoma ................................
................................................................37
7.1.1.3 Treatment Strategies for Ewing Sarcoma ............................................37
7.1.2 Fulfillment of a Therapeutic Need ...............................................................38
7.1.3 E7389 (eribulin mes ylate)............................................................................38
7.1.3.1 Mechanism of Action................................
...........................................38
7.1.3.1.1 Tumor Biology -Based Mechanisms
..............................................39
7.1.3.2 Clinical Experience With Eribulin.......................................................39
7.1.3.3 Non-Clinical Evidence for Activity  of Eribulin in Pediatric 
Sarcomas ................................
..............................................................41
7.2 Study  Rationale ......................................................................................................41
8 STUDY OBJECTIVES ....................................................................................................42
8.1 Primary  Objective ..................................................................................................42
8.2 Secondary  Objectives ................................ ................................ ............................. 42
8.3 Exploratory  Objective(s)................................ ................................ ........................ 42
9 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN ..........................................................................................43
9.1 Overall Study  Design and Plan ..............................................................................43
9.2 Discussion of Study  Design ...................................................................................44
9.3 Selection of Study  Population ................................................................................44
9.3.1 Inclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ ......................... 44
9.3.2 Exclusion Criteria ................................ ................................ ........................ 46
9.3.3 Removal of Subjects From Therap y or Assessment ................................ ....49
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 26of 909.4 Treatments ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 49
9.4.1 Treatments Administered .............................................................................49
9.4.1.1 Criteria for Dosing Modifications........................................................49
9.4.1.1.1 Eribulin Mesy late................................
...........................................49
9.4.2 Identity  of Investigational Products .............................................................52
9.4.2.1 Chemical Name, Structural Formula of Eribulin Mesy late.................52
9.4.2.2 Labeling for Study  Drug ......................................................................52
9.4.2.3 Storage Conditions ...............................................................................52
9.4.3 Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups ...................................53
9.4.4 Selection of Doses in the Study ...................................................................53
9.4.5 Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Subject ..........................................53
9.4.6 Prior and Concomitant Therap y...................................................................53
9.4.6.1 Drug -Drug Interactions ................................
........................................53
9.4.6.1.1 Eribulin mesy late...........................................................................53
9.4.6.2 Prohibited Concomitant Therapies and Drugs .....................................54
9.4.7 Treatment Compliance .................................................................................54
9.4.8 Drug Supplies and Accountability ................................ ............................... 54
9.5 Study  Assessments .................................................................................................56
9.5.1 Assessments .................................................................................................56
9.5.1.1 Demograph y.........................................................................................56
9.5.1.2 Baseline Assessments ................................
..........................................56
9.5.1.2.1 Medical History  and Physical Examinations .................................56
9.5.1.3 Efficacy  Assessments ...........................................................................57
9.5.1.3.1 Primary ...........................................................................................57
9.5.1.3.2 Secondary .......................................................................................57
9.5.1.3.3 Exploratory ....................................................................................57
9.5.1.4 Tumor Assessments .............................................................................57
9.5.1.5 Pharmacokinetic, Pharmacod ynamic, Pharmacogenomic, and 
Other Biomarker Assessments .............................................................58
9.5.1.5.1 Pharmacokinetic Assessments .......................................................58
9.5.1.5.2 Pharmacod ynamic, Pharmacogenomic, and Other Biomarker, 
Assessments ...................................................................................58
9.5.1.6 Safety  Assessments ................................ ................................ .............. 58
9.5.1.6.1 Adverse Events ..............................................................................59
9.5.1.6.2 Serious Adverse Events and Events Associated with Special 
Situations ........................................................................................60
9.5.1.6.3 Laboratory  Measurements .............................................................61
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 27of 909.5.1.6.4 Vital Signs and Weight Measurements ..........................................63
9.5.1.6.5 Physical Examinations ...................................................................63
9.5.1.6.6 Electrocardiograms ........................................................................63
9.5.1.6.7 Other Safet y Assessments ..............................................................63
9.5.2 Schedule of Procedures/Assessments ..........................................................64
9.5.3 Appropriateness of Measurements ...............................................................
69
9.5.4 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events, Pregnancy , and Events 
Associated with Special Situations ..............................................................69
9.5.4.1 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events ..................................................69
9.5.4.2 Reporting of Pregnancy  and Exposure to Study  Drug Through 
Breastfeeding .......................................................................................70
9.5.4.3 Reporting of Events Associated with Special Si tuations .....................70
9.5.4.3.1 Reporting of Adverse Events Associated With Study  Drug 
Overdose, Misuse, Abuse, or Medication Error ............................70
9.5.4.4 Expedited Reporting ............................................................................71
9.5.4.5 Regulatory  Reporting of Adverse Events ............................................71
9.5.5
Completion/Discontinuation of Subjects .....................................................71
9.5.6 Abuse or Diversion of Study  Drug ..............................................................
72
9.6 Data Qualit y Assurance .........................................................................................72
9.6.1 Data Collection ............................................................................................72
9.6.2 Clinical Data Management ..........................................................................72
9.7 Statistical Methods .................................................................................................72
9.7.1 Statistical and Analy tical Plans ....................................................................73
9.7.1.1 Study  Endpoints ...................................................................................73
9.7.1.1.1 Primary  Endpoint ...........................................................................73
9.7.1.1.2 Secondary  Endpoints .....................................................................73
9.7.1.1.3 Exploratory  Endpoints ...................................................................73
9.7.1.2 Definitions of Anal ysis Sets.................................................................73
9.7.1.3 Subject Disposition ................................
..............................................74
9.7.1.4 Demographic and Other Baseline Characteristics ............................... 74
9.7.1.5 Prior and Concomitant Therap y...........................................................74
9.7.1.6 Efficacy  Anal yses................................ ................................ ................ 74
9.7.1.6.1 Primary  Efficacy  Anal ysis.............................................................74
9.7.1.6.2 Secondary  Efficacy  Analy ses........................................................74
9.7.1.7 Pharmacokinetic, Pharmacod ynamic, Pharmacogenomic, and 
Other Biomarker Anal yses...................................................................75
9.7.1.7.1 Pharmacokinetic Analy ses................................ ............................. 75
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 28of 909.7.1.7.2 Pharmacod ynamic, Pharmacogenomic, and Other Biomarker 
Analy ses.........................................................................................75
9.7.1.8 Safety  Anal yses....................................................................................75
9.7.1.8.1 Extent of Exposure .........................................................................75
9.7.1.8.2 Adverse Events ..............................................................................75
9.7.1.8.3 Laboratory  Values ..........................................................................76
9.7.1.8.4 Vital Signs ......................................................................................76
9.7.1.8.5 Electrocardiograms ........................................................................77
9.7.1.8.6 Other Safet y Anal yses....................................................................77
9.7.2 Determination of Sample Size .....................................................................77
9.7.3 Interim Anal ysis...........................................................................................77
9.7.4 Other Statistical/Analy tical I ssues ...............................................................78
9.7.5 Procedure for Revising the Statistical Analy sis Plan ...................................78
10 REFERENCE LI ST.........................................................................................................79
11 PROCEDU RES AND I NSTRUCTI ONS (ADMINISTRATIVE PROC EDURES) .......82
11.1 Changes to the Protocol .........................................................................................82
11.2 Adherence to the Protocol................................
......................................................82
11.3 Monitoring Procedures ...........................................................................................82
11.4 Recording of Data ..................................................................................................83
11.5 Identification of Source Data .................................................................................83
11.6 Retention of Records ..............................................................................................83
11.7 Auditing Procedures and Inspection ................................ ................................ ......84
11.8 Handling of Study  Drug .........................................................................................84
11.9 Publication of Results ............................................................................................84
11.10 Disclosure and Confidentiality ..............................................................................85
11.11 Discontinuation of Study .......................................................................................85
11.12 Subject I nsurance and Indemnity ...........................................................................85
12 APPENDI CES ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 86
LIST OF IN -TEXT TABLES
Table 1 Criteria for Administration of Eribulin Mesy late......................................19
Table 2 Criteria for Reduction of Eribulin Mesy late to the Next L owest Dose 
Level ..........................................................................................................20
Table 3 Eribulin Mesy late Dose Modifications ................................ ...................... 21
Table 4 Principles of RMS, N RSTS and EWS Treatment ......................................36
Table 5 Criteria for Administration of Eribulin Mesy late......................................49
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 29of 90Table 6 Criteria for Reduction of Eribulin Mesy late to the Next L owest Dose 
Level ..........................................................................................................51
Table 7 Eribulin Mesy late Dose Modifications ......................................................51
Table 8 Clinical L aboratory  Tests ...........................................................................62
Table 9 Schedule of Procedures/Assessments in Study  E7389 -G000 -223.............65
LIST OF APPENDI
CES
Appendix 1 Measurements of Performance Status ........................................................87
Appendix 2 Modified “Balis” Pediatric Scale of Peripheral Neuropathies...................88
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 30of 904LIST OF A BBREVIAT IONS A ND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
Abbreviation Term
ADI adipocytic soft tissue sarcoma
AE adverse event
ALL acute lymphoblastic leukemia
ALT alanine aminotransferase
ANC absolute neutrophil count
AST aspartate aminotransferase
BSA body surface area
CI confidence interval
CNS central nervous system
COG Children ’s Oncology Group
CR complete response
CRA clinical research associate
CT computed tomography
CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
CV curriculum vitae
DOR duration of response
ECG Electrocardiogram
EFS event -free survival
EMT epithelial -mesenchymal transition
EWS Ewing sarcoma
FDA Food and Drug Administration
GCP good clinical practice
GFR glomerular filtration rate
GVHD graft versus host disease
hCG human chorionic gonadotropin
HIV human immunodeficiency virus
HR hazard ratio
ICF informed consent form
ICH International Council on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for 
Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
IEC Independent Ethics Committee
IIR Independent imaging review
IRB Institutional Review Board
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 31of 90Abbreviation Term
IUD intrauterine device
IUS intrauterine system
IV Intravenous
IxRS interactive voice / webresponse system
LLN lower limit of normal
LMS Leiomyosarcoma
MCR maintained complete response
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MHRA Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
MTD maximum tolerated dose
NCI National Cancer Institute
NRSTS non-rhabdomysosarcoma soft tissue sarcoma
ORR objective response rate
OS overall survival
PD progressive disease
PET positron emission tomography
PFS progression -free survival
PI principal investigator
PK Pharmacokinetic
PPTP Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program
PR partial response
PT preferred term
RECIST Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
RMS Rhabdomyosarcoma
RP2D recommended Phase 2 dose
SAE serious adverse event
SAP statistical analysis plan
SAS safety analysis set
SD stable disease
SOC system organ class
STS softtissue sarcoma
TEAE treatment -emergent adverse event
TBI total body irradiation
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 32of 90Abbreviation Term
ULN upper limit of normal
VAC vinca alkaloid, actinomycin D, and cyclophosphamide
WHO DD World Health Organization Drug Dictionary
XRT Radiation therapy
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 33of 905ETHICS
5.1 Institutional Review Boards/Independent Ethics Committees
The protocol, Informed Consent F orm (ICF), and appropriate related documents will be
reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) or Independent Ethics 
Committee (IEC) constituted and functioning in accordance with ICH E6 ( Good Clinical 
Practice), Section 3, and any  local regulations, ie, Federal Reg ulations, Title 21 CFR Part 56.  
Any protocol amendment or revision to the I CF will be resubmitted to the IRB/IEC for 
review and approval, except for changes involving only  logistical or administrative aspects of 
the study  
(eg, change in CRA[s], change of telephone number[s]).  Documentation of 
IRB/IEC compliance with the I CH E6 and an y local regulations regarding constit ution and 
review conduct will be provided to the sponsor.
A signed letter of stud y approval from the IRB/IEC chairman must be sent to the principal 
investigator with a cop y to the sponsor before study start and the release of any  study  drug to 
the site by  the sponsor or its designee ( ICH E6, Section 4.4).  If the IRB/IEC decides to 
suspend or terminate the study , the investigator will immediately  send the notice of study  
suspension or termination by  the IRB/IEC to the sponsor.
Study  progress is to be reported to I RB/IECs annually  (or as required) b y the investigat or or 
sponsor, depending on local regulatory  obligations.  If the investigator is required to report to 
the IRB/IEC, he/she will forward a copy  to the sponsor at the time of each periodic report.  
The investigator (s) or the sponsor will submit, depending o n local regulations, periodic 
reports and inform the I RB/IEC of any  repor table adverse events ( AEs) per I CH guidelines 
and local IRB/ IEC standards of practice.  Upon completion of the study, the investigator will 
provide the IRB/IEC with a brief report of the outcome of the study , if required.
At the end of the stud y, the sponsor should notify  the I RB/IEC and Competent Authority  
(CA) within 90 days.  In the case of early  termination/temporary  halt of the study , the 
investigator should notify  the IRB/IEC and CA within 15 calendar days, and a detailed 
written explanation of the reasons for the termination/halt should be given.
The definition for end of the study , as required b y certain regulatory  agencies, is the time of 
data cut -off for the final anal ysis or the time of last subject/last visit, whichever occurs later. 
5.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
This study  will be conducted in accordance with standard operating procedures of the 
sponsor (or designee), which are designed to ensure adherence to GCP guidelines as required 
by the following:
Principles of the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki 2008.
ICH E6 Guideline for GCP ( CPMP/I CH/135/95) of the European Agency  for the 
Evaluation of Medicinal Products, Committee for Proprietary  Medicinal Products, 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 34of 90International Council on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for 
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use .
Title 21 of the United States Code of Federal Regulations ( US 21 CFR) regarding 
clinical studies, including Part 50 and Part 56 concerning informed subject consent 
and I RB regulations and applicable section s of US 21 CFR Part 312.
European Good Clinical Practice Directive 2005/28/EC and Clinical Study Directive 
2001/20/EC for studies conducted within any EU country.  All SUSARs will be 
reported, as required, to the Competent Authorities of all involved EU member states.
5.3 Subject Information and Informed Consent
As part of administering the informed consent document , the investigator must explain to 
each subject or guardian/le gally  authorized representative the nature of the study , its purpose, 
the procedures involved, the expected duration, the potential risks and benefits involved, any  
potential discomfort, potenti al alternative procedure (s) or course (s) of treatment available to 
the subject, and the extent of maintaining confidentiality  of the subject’s records.  Each 
subject must be informed that participation in the study  is voluntary , that he/she may  
withdraw fr om the study  at any  time, and that withdrawal of consent will not affect his/her 
subsequent medical treatment or relationship with the treating ph ysician.
This informed consent should be given b y means of a standard written statement, written in 
nontechnic al language.  The subject or the subject’s legally  authorized representative should 
understand the statement before signing and dating it and will be given a copy  of the signed 
document.  If a subject is unable to read or if a legally  authorized representa tive is unable to 
read, an impartial witness should be present during the entire informed consent discussion.  
After the ICF and an y other written information to be provided to subjects is read and 
explained to the subject or the subject’s legally  authoriz ed representative, and after the 
subject or the subject’s legall y authorized representative has orall y consented to the subject’s 
participation in the study and, if capable of doing so, has signed and personally  dated the 
ICF, the witness should sign and p ersonall y date the consent form.  The subject will be asked 
to sign an ICF before an y study -specific procedures are performed.  No subject can enter the 
study  before his/her informed consent has been obtained.
An unsigned cop y of an IRB/IEC -approved ICF must be prepared in accordance with 
ICH E6, Section 4, and all applicable local regulations , eg Federal Regulations, Title 21 CFR 
Part50.  Each subject must sign an approved ICF before stud y participation.  The form must 
be signed and dated by the appropria te parties.  The original, signed ICF for each subject will 
be verified b y the sponsor and kept on file according to local procedures at the site.
The subject or the subject’s legally  authorized representative should be informed in a timely  
manner if new i nformation becomes available that may  be relevant to the subject’s 
willingness to continue participation in the study .  The communication of this information 
should be documented.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 35of 906INVESTIGA TORS AND ST UDY PERSONNEL
This study  will be conducted by  qualified investigators under the sponsorship of Eisai (the 
sponsor) at approximately 40 sites in the US. 
The name and telephone and fax numbers of the medical monitor and other contact personnel 
at the sponsor are listed in the Investigator Study  File provided to each site.
7INTRODUCTION
7.1 Childhood Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Sarcomas represent about 6% of all malignancies in children and adolescents, and 1% in 
adults, with an annual incidence of 10 in 1 million children under the age of 15 years and 2 to 
3 per 100,000 in a dults ( German Childhood Cancer Registry , 2010; Storm, 1998). The 
incidence of sarcomas increased b y almost 2% per year in children during 1988 to 1997, 
mainly  due to an increase in urogenital rhabdom yosarcoma ( RMS )
(Pastore, etal.,2006).  
Although the 
incidence of sarcoma increases with age, sarcoma makes up a larger proportion 
of all cancers in children ( Gurney ,etal.,1999). The most common histological ty pe in 
childhood is 
rhabdomy osarcoma ( RMS ), which accounts for approximately 39% of all cases 
of soft tissue sarcoma ( STS), followed b y fibrohistiocytic tumors (10%), s ynovial sarcoma 
(9%), Ewing sarcoma (EWS) and (also known as primitive neuroectodermal tumor [ PNET ]
of soft tissue ;9.2%), fibroblastic and my ofibroblastic tumors (6%), nerve sheath tu
mors 
(5%), liposarcoma (2.3%), extrarenal rhabdoid tumors (2%), leiom yosarcoma ( LMS; 2%), 
alveolar soft parts sarcoma (1.4%), and blood vessel tumors (1.4%).  An additional 9.3% of 
tumors are unspecified sarcoma ( National Cancer Institute, 2016).
7.1.1 Current T herapeutic Options
The mainstay of the treatment of sarcoma in all age groups is definitive local therap y 
(surgical excision, radiotherap y or both (Table 
4).  The consensus is that all patients with 
RMS and EWS should receive chemotherap y as part of their primary  treatment (surgery  or if 
surgery  is not feasible, radiotherapy ) (Van Gaal, etal., 2012).  The role of chemotherap y in 
the primary  treatment of non- rhabdomyosarcoma ( NRSTS )has not been established.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 36of 90Table 4 Principles of RMS, NRSTS and EWS Treatment
Treatm ent RMS EWS NRSTS
Primary Surgical excision (where 
feasible)
Definitive radiotherapy if 
wide excision not possible
Multi -agent neo/adjuvant 
chemotherapy (all patients)Surgical excision (where 
feasible)
Definitive radiotherapy if 
wide excision not possible
Multi -agent neo/adjuvant 
chemotherapy (all patient s)Surgical excision (where 
feasible)
Radiotherapy (residual or 
high-risk disease or 
inoperable)
± Adjuvant chemotherapy 
(role not established)
First 
RelapseMulti -agent chemotherapy Multi -agent chemotherapy Single -agent or combination 
chemotherapy
≥Second 
RelapseInvestigational treatments Investigational treatments Investigational treatments
EWS = Ew ing sarcoma, NRSTS = non -rhabdomyosarcoma soft tissue sarcoma, RMS =rhabdomyosarcoma.
Source:  National Cancer Institute, 2016. Childhood Soft Tissue Sarcoma Treatment for Health Professionals 
PDQ®.  Retrieved Feb 2016, from http://www.cancer.gov/publications/pdq/information -summaries
Treatments for relapsed/refractory  disease are broadly  similar across the tumor ty pes ( Table
4).  Further information on treatment options for each tumor t ypes is provided below.
7.1.1.1 Treatment Strategies for Rhabdomyosarcoma
Patients with RMS who relapse after initial treatment, or who exp erience progressive disease 
while on treatment, have a poor prognosis.  The 5 -year survival rate for these patients varies 
between 17% and 24%, and is only  5% in patients with alveolar RMS ( Pappo, etal.,1999; 
Dantonello, et al., 2009).  Standard treatmen t for patients following relapse is suboptimal and 
no standard regimen has been identified.  Local therap y (surgery and/or radiotherap y) should 
be considered where feasible.  
Treatment selection for patients with relapsed or progressive RMS depends on the site(s) of 
recurrence, prior chemotherap y, and individual patient factors.  Treatment for local or 
regional recurrence may  include wide local excision, surgical removal of tumor, 
metastatectom y for isolated pulmonary  metastasis, or radiotherapy .  The stan dard approach at 
first relapse is active single agent or combination chemotherap y not previously used in the 
treatment of the patient’s sarcoma.  The following are treatment options for relapsed, 
progressive, or recurrent RMS ( Saylors, etal., 2001 ;Mascar enhas, etal.,2010 ):
Etoposide -containing regimens: ifosfamide and etoposide, or ifosfamide, carboplatin, 
and etoposide.
Cyclophosphamide- containing regimens: cy clophosphamide and topotecan, or 
vinorelbine and cy clophosphamide.
Topoisomerase inhibitor
-containing regimens: irinotecan with or without vincristine, 
or topotecan, vincristine, and doxorubicin.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 37of 90Several factors can adversely  influence the possibility  of cure with further treatment after the 
first relapse: presence of metastatic disease, prior use of radiotherap y and chemotherap y 
containing alky lating agents, large size and unfavorable site of the tumor, nodal involvement 
at initial diagnosis, alveolar histology , and short time to relapse ( Chisholm, etal.,2011).  The 
presence of metastatic disease is the strongest predictor of clinical outcomes in patients with 
RMS.  Despite aggressive multimodality  treatments, these children fare poorly ; only 25% are 
expected to be free of disease 3 years after diagnosis ( Maurer, et al., 1993; Crist, etal.,2001).
Following the second relapse, there is no evidence- based standard therap y in this setting and 
the goal of treatment is no longer curative intent.  The choice of agent(s) is based upon the 
treatment options available at the institution including access to c linical studies , individual 
patient/tumor factors (eg, extent of disease, comorbidities, intensity  of prior treatment, age) 
and patient/parent choice.  
The evaluation of new agents in development is therefore particularl y relevant in this setting.  
This a pproach of study ing single agent investigational agents in the relapsed setting has been 
followed for targeted agents (eg, bortezomib and pazopanib) and new chemotherapeutic 
agents ( eg, ixabepilone, irinotecan, vinorelbine, and temozolomide).
7.1.1.2 Treatment Str ategies for Non- rhabdomyosarcoma Soft Tissue Sarcoma
The prognosis for children with metastatic NRSTS at diagnosis 
and,recurrent NRSTS is 
poor.  Decisions about treatment options are based on site of recurrence, tumor biologic 
characteristics, prior thera pies and individual patient considerations.
Standard treatment options for metastatic childhood STS include multimodality  therapy  with 
chemotherap y, radiotherapy , and surgical resection of pulmonary  metastases.  Only  3 
prospective multi -institutional clini cal trials for NRSTS have been conducted, with fewer 
than 200 subjects enrolled.  Thus, the approach to the treatment of NRSTS in children 
depends largely  on the experience in adults with STS ( Meyerand Spunt, 2004 ).The 
treatment paradigms in adults tend to include an anthracy cline in first -line with or without 
ifosfamide, followed b y gemcitabine and docetaxel or trabectedin as second- line therap y.  
Several combination regimens have undergone clinical evaluation in subjects with recurrent, 
unresectable or metastatic disease, but none of these regimens improved the outcome for 
these subjects.
The NRSTS is a broad category  that includes many  subty pes of sarcoma, any  of which may  
be enrolled on this study .It is noted that in the adult sarcoma experience with eribulin 
mesy late, responses have been observed in leimy ocsarcoma, liposarcoma, synovial sarcoma , 
undifferentiated sarcoma,
and vascular sarcomas.
7.1.1.3 Treatment Strategies for Ewing Sarcoma
Standard first -line treatment for patients with metastatic EWS is either a 3 drug regimen of 
vincristine, doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide ora 5 drug regime n VAC with 
ifosfamide/etoposide .  In patients who relapse after initial therapy  the disease is almost 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 38of 90universally  fatal.  Salvage therapies include ifosfamide and etoposide, cy clophosphamide and 
topotecan, and temozolomide and irinotecan, or investigational therapies.  Although the 
sarcoma can respond to these combinations, all responses are partial and tend to be of short 
duration.
The addition of ifosfamide and et oposide or dose intensification has failed to improve 
outcomes in patients with metastatic disease.  Patients with lung only  metastases seem to 
have a better prognosis than patients with bone metastases.  Up to 20% of patients will have 
long term remissions with chemotherap y and local treatment, but those results have not 
improved in the past 20 years.  
Survival after relapse is ty pically  less than 1 year.  There is no standard therapy  for third line 
treatment of EWS, and investigational therapies are reco mmended.  There is no targeted 
therap y approved for EWS.  Several years ago there was enthusiasm for Insulin -like growth 
factor (IGFR) inhibitors after several anecdotal responses were observed in earl y phase trials.  
Confirmatory  Phase 2 trials demonstrat ed a response rate of onl y 8% ( Balamuth and 
Womer , 2010) . The development of the IGF1R monoclonal antibo
dy, Ganitumab, is ongoing 
(COG study  AEWS1221) .
7.1.2 Fulfillment of a Therapeutic Need
The backbone of the established gold standard treatment for RMS is a v inca alkaloid with 
actinomy cin-D and cy clophosphamide (VAC).  The activity  of VAC in RMS has not been 
improved by  regimens that alter this backbone.  For NRSTS the standard treatment of 
doxorubicin with or without ifosfamide has not been improved upon for 20 years.  For EWS 
the established standard of 5 drug regimen including vincristine, doxorubicin, 
cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide and etoposide has marginally improved the outcomes for 
patients with localized disease but not for those with relapsed or metasta tic disease.
  As a 
consequence, new alternatives to the available therapies for children who have failed 
standard treatments for advanced RMS, EWS, and NRSTS, are urgentl y needed.
7.1.3 E7389 (eribulin mesylate )
7.1.3.1 Mechanism of Action
Eribulin is a sy nthetic analog ue of halichondrin B, a product isolated from the marine sponge 
Halichondria okadai .  Eribulin is an inhibitor of microtubule dy namics with a unique 
microtubule binding site and different effects on microtubule dy namics compared with other 
marketed tubulin -targeting agents.  Eribulin binds with high affinity  to the plus ends of 
microtubules, where it suppresses the growth phase of microtubule d ynamics without 
affecting the corresponding shortening phase ( Jordan, etal.,2005; Smith, et al., 2010 ).  
Vinca alkaloids (eg, vinblastine) also bind to the plus ends of the microtubule and, with 
lower affinity , along the sides of the microtubule, whereas taxanes (eg, paclitaxel and 
docetaxel) and epothilones (eg, ixabepilone) bind to β- tubulin subunits inside the 
microtubule ( Jordan andWilson, 2004).  I n addition to directly  suppressing microtubule 
growth, eribulin mesy lateinduces formation of nonproductive tubulin aggregates, lowering 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 39of 90concentrations of free tubulin available for pol ymerization and thus further in hibiting 
microtubule growth.  It is not known whether these differences will offer a potential 
advantage in terms of safety  or efficacy  in comparison to existing microtubule inhibitors used 
for treating pediatric cancers.  The tubulin -targeting agents pacl itaxel and docetaxel have 
shown minimal activity  in pediatric clinical trials, whereas the vinca alkaloids have an 
established role in the treatment of childhood RMS and EWS ( Ferrari andCasanova, 2005). 
Due to some similarity  with vinca alkaloid microtub ule binding sites, eribulin may  have a 
broader spectrum of antitumor activity  in childhood cancers than the taxanes, even in the 
presence of multidrug resistance ( Cortes, etal.,2011). 
7.1.3.1.1 TUMOR BIOLOGY -BASED MECHANISMS
Numerous investigations in human breas t cancer models have shown that eribulin induces 
therapeutically meaningful changes in tumor biology  and tumor
-host interactions that go 
beyond its known classical antimitotic actions ( sNDA 201532/S -013; Yoshida, etal.,2014; 
Funahashi, etal.,2014).  Ev idence for eribulin -induced changes in tumor biology  and tumor-
host interactions falls into 3 main areas:  effects on tumor vascular function and remodeling; 
effects on phenot ype and the epithelial -mesench ymal transition ( EMT), or more specifically  
the rev ersal of EMT; and effects on tumor cell migration, invasiveness, and metastatic 
capacity .  In summary , eribulin treatment of human breast cancer cells caused changes in 
morphology  and gene expression as well as decreased migration and invasiveness in vitro.  I n 
human breast cancer xenograft models in immunocompromised mice, eribulin treatment was 
associated with increased vascular perfusion and permeability in the tumor cores, resulting in 
reduced tumor h ypoxia, and changes in the expression of genes in tum or specimens 
associated with a change in phenoty pe (ie, reversal of EMT).
As found in human breast cancer models, recentl y completed nonclinical investigations of 
effects of eribulin on human adipocy tic (ADI)sarcoma and LMS cell lines and tumor 
xenograft models (submitted to I ND 067193, sequence 0665) have also shown that eribulin 
exerts effects on tumor biology  and phenoty pe that go well bey ond its classical antimitotic 
effects in this tumor ty pe.  Such effe cts include morphologic changes in SW872 ADI  
sarcoma and SK -UT1 LMS cell lines consistent with transitioning to a more differentiated 
phenoty pe (Study  Nos. W -
20150640, W- 20150639), increased perfusion in SK -LMS-1 
human LMS xenografts (Study  No. M15014), a nd upregulation of adipocyte and smooth 
muscle differentiation markers in SW872 ADI sarcoma and SK -UT-1 LMS cells, 
respectivel y (Stud y Nos. W -20150640, W- 20150639).  These results, analogous to the 
reported findings associated with reversal of the EMT in h uman breast cancer models (sNDA 
201532/S -013; Yoshida, etal.,2014; Funahashi, etal.,2014) , suggest that eribulin can cause 
phenoty pic changes in human ADI sarcomas and LMS that result in more differentiated, less 
aggressive residual tumors.  
7.1.3.2 Clinical Experience W ithEribulin
A Phase 1 study  (Eisai Study  E7389- A001 -113, Study  113) of eribulin mesy late in pediatric 
patients with recurrent or refractory  solid tumors (excluding CNS), including l ymphomas has 
been conducted. Eribulin mesy late wasadministere d intravenousl y, once per day  on Day s 1 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 40of 90and 8 of a 21- day cycle. This study aimed to determine the MTD and/or the RP2D of this
regimen in Part A1 (patients ≥12 months and <18 years). Additionally , this study  aimedto 
describe the toxicities and the pharm acokinetics of eribulin mesy late when administered to 
children. In a preliminary manner, the antitumor effect of eribulin mesy late was also
described.  The MTD was determined to be 1.4 mg/m2, which is the same dose as in the adult 
population.  No major differences were observed in the safet y profile between adults and 
pediatric subjects (Schafer , et al., 2018).
A Phase 2 proof of concept study  (Eisai Study  E7389 -E044- 207, Study  207), a 
non-randomized, multicenter Phase 2 stud y in adults with intermediate or high grade 
advanced STS ( Schӧffski, et al., 2011
), was conducted with a primary  endpoint of 
progression- free rate at Week 12 (PFR 12weeks ).  This study  reached statistical significance in 
the ADI (46.9%, 95% 2- sided confidence interval [CI ]; 29.1, 65.3) and LMS (31.6%, 95% 
2-sided CI ; 17.6, 48.7) strata.  The study  concluded that eribulin has activity  in pretreated 
subjects with ADI sarcoma and LMS; however, outcomes in pretreated subjects with 
synovial sarcoma and other ty pes of STS did not meet the pre -specified primary  efficacy  
criteria for activity .  The study  yielded objective responses in 2 subjects with ADI sarcoma 
(n=32), with 1 subject experiencing a complete response (CR) and the other a partial 
response (PR).  
Following the result of this proo
f of concept study  (Study  207), a pivotal Phase 3 study  (Eisai 
Study  E7389 -G000 -309, Study  309) in adult ADI and L MS subt ypes ‘A randomized trial of 
eribulin versus dacarbazine in advanced leiom yosarcoma and liposarcoma’ was conducted. 
The primary  endpoin t was to evaluate the efficacy  of eribulin compared with dacarbazine in 
terms of overall survival ( OS).  
This study  demonstrated that eribulin had an OS benefit over 
dacarbazine, Hazard Ratio (HR) 0.768, P=0.02 with an OS of 13.5 months for subjects on the
eribulin arm compared with 11.5 months for subjects on the dacarbazine arm.  There was no 
significant difference in progression -free survival (PFS) between the treatment arms in the 
overall population (Schöffski et al ., 2016). 
Pre-planned, exploratory  subgroup anal yses of OS and PFS by  histology  showed that eribulin 
significantl yfavored subjects with the ADI subt ype.  For OS, this y ielded a HR of 0.51 
(95% CI 0.35, 0.75), P=0.0006, with a median OS of 15.6 months for subjects o n the eribulin 
arm compared with 8.4 months for subjects on the dacarbazine arm.  The difference in PFS 
was also highl y significant in subjects with the ADI subty pe in favor of eribulin, with a HR 
of 0.52 (95% CI 0.35, 0.78), P=0.0015 and a m edian PFS of 2 .9 months for subjects on the 
eribulin arm compared with 1.7 months for subjects on the dacarbazine arm .  No significant 
difference between the treatment arms was observed for OS or PFS in subjects with L MS 
histology  (Halaven USPI, 2016
).
This is the first time any  agent has demonstrated improved OS in late line adult liposarcoma.  
Following the results of this study , regulatory  applications were submitted globall y and on 
28Jan 2016 eribulin was approved b y the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA )for the 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 41of 90treatment of patients with unresectable or metastatic liposarcoma who have received a prior 
anthracy cline -containing regimen. 
In addition to the pivotal study  (Study  309) and following the results of Study  207, a Phase 2 
study  was also conducted in Japan ( Eisai Study  E7389 -J081 -217, NDA 201532/Seq 0102).  
This study  evaluated the safet y and efficacy of eribulin in previously  treated Japanese 
subjects with advanced STS.  The primary  efficacy  endpoint was PFR 12weeks .   The results of 
this study  demonstrated si gnificant activity  in the ADI and LMS subty pes.  The PFR 12weeks 
was 60.0% (95% CI:42.1, 76.1) in the ADI or LMS stratum, 31.3% (95% CI : 11.0, 58.7) in 
the OTH stratum, and 51.0% (95% CI: 36.6, 65.2) in total (Study  E7389 -J088 -217 Clinical 
Study  Report). 
7.1.3.3 Non-Clinical Evidence for Activity of Eribulin in Pediatric Sarcomas
The potential antitumor activity  of eribulin in human pediatric tumor models was evaluated 
in the NCI’s Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program ( PPTP ;Study  Nos. PPC -2-
12-02N 
submitted to I ND 067193, sequence 0636 and PPC -2013-01N submitted to IND 067193, 
sequence 0652).  In the 24 cell line in vitro screening panel, eribulin demonstrated potent 
cytotoxic activity  with a median relative half maximal inh ibitory  concentration value of 
0.27 nM (range: <0.10 to 14.8
nM).  The panel included 4 RMS (RD, Rh18, Rh30, and 
Rh41) and 4 EWS cell lines.  The in vitro pattern of activity  for eribulin was similar to that 
previously  described b y the PPTP for vincristine (Kolb, et al., 2013 ).  
In the PPTP’s in vivo panel of 
43 human pediatric tumor xenografts, eribulin induced 
significant differences in event- free survival (EFS) distribution compared with control in 
26of 30 ( 83%) of the evaluable solid tumor xenografts and in 
8 of 8(100%) of the evaluable 
acute l ymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) xenografts.  An objective response was observed in 
18of 35 (
51%) solid tumor xenografts.  Complete responses (CRs) or maintained CRs 
(MCRs) were observed in 6 of 7 
RMS xenograft mode ls (Rh28, Rh30, Rh30R, and Rh41 
cells).  CRs or MCRs were also observed in 1 of 2 Wilms’ tumor, 4 of 5 EWS, 2 of 4 
glioblastoma, and 3 of 6 osteosarcoma xenografts.  For the ALL panel, all 8 xenografts 
achieved CR or MCR (Kolb, et al., 2013).
The PPTP conc luded that the high level of activit y observed for eribulin against the PPTP 
preclinical models made eribulin an interesting agent to consider for pediatric evaluation.  
The activity  pattern observed for eribulin in the solid tumor panels is comparable or superior 
to that observed previously  for vincristine.  Eribulin showed high activity  against RMS, 
EWS, osteosarcoma, and ALL xenografts
(Kolb, et al., 2013).
7.2 Stud y Rationale
The unique survival advantage seen in Study  309, and the activit y of eribulin seen in both 
Studies 207 and 217, suggests that it is desirable to pursue development in pediatric 
sarcomas.  However, the potential differences in the sensitivity  of specific tum or subty pes to 
microtubule inhibition make it difficult to justify  development of eribulin in pediatric 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 42of 90populations based on the clinical antitumor activity  in adults alone.  Strong supportive 
evidence from nonclinical studies is provided in S ection 7.1.3.3.
In addition to the encouraging results seen in the PPTP, and the unique survival advantage 
observed in adult liposarcoma subtype, the aim of eribulin development in childhood 
sarcoma is also based upon and the unmet medical need in advanced RMS, EWS, and 
NRSTS.  Eribulin may  offer a potential new alternative to the available therapies for children 
who have failed standard treatments for advanced RMS, EWS, and NRSTS.  
A Phase 1 study  (Eisai Study  E7389- A001 -113, Study  113) of eribulin mesy
late in pediatric 
patients with recurrent or refractory  solid tumors (excluding CNS), including l ymphomas has 
been conducted.  The MTD was determined to be 1.4 mg/m2, which is the same dose as in 
the adult population.  No major differences were observed in the safet y profil e between 
adults and pediatric subjects ( Schafer, et al., 2018).
8STUDY OBJECTIVES
8.1 Primary  Objective
The primary  objectives of the study  are:
To conduct a preliminary assessment of activity  of eribulin mesy late in pediatric 
subjects with relapsed/refractory RMS, NRSTS or EWS to determine whether each 
cohort warrants further investigation.
8.2 Secondary  Objectives
The secondary  objectives of the study  are:
To evaluate the PFS, using Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 
(RECI ST)1.1, of eribulin mesy late in pediatric subjects with relapsed/refractory  
RMS, NRSTS, or EWS in all cohorts combined.
To evaluate the safet y and tolerability  of eribulin in the pediatric subjects with 
relapsed/refractory  RMS, NRSTS, or EWS in all cohorts combined .
To evaluate the 
duration of response ( DOR )of eribulin mesy late in pediatric subjects 
with relapsed/refractory  RMS, NRSTS, or EWS.
To evaluate the overall survival ( OS)of pediatric subjects with relapsed/refractory  
RMS, NRSTS and EWS.
8.3 Exploratory  Objective (s)
To evaluate the exposure of eribulin mesy late in pediatric subjects with 
relapsed/refractory  RMS, NRSTS, or EWS .
To explore the relationship between exposure to eribulin mesy late and AEs and 
efficacy .
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 43of 909INVESTIGA TIONAL PLA N
9.1 Overall Study  Design and Plan
E7389- G000 -223 i s a Phase 2, multicenter , open -label study  to conduct a preliminary  
assessment of the safet y and activity  of eribulin mesy late in pediatric subjects with 
relapsed/refractory  RMS, NRSTS, or EWS.  
Forty-fivepediatric subjects , with approximately 15subjects each with RMS, NRSTS , or 
EWS, will be enrolled to receive eribulin mesylate as an intravenous (IV) infusion at a dose 
of 1.4 mg /m2(Recommended Phase 2 Dose [RP2D]) on Day s 1 and 8 of each 21- day cycle
asdetermined b y the dose finding stud y ADVL1 314(Eisai Study  E7389- A001 -113). 
Outline
Pediatric subjects with relapsed/refractory  RMS, NRSTS or EWS will be enrolled to 
receive therap y with eribulin mesy late. 
For each histology  type, approximately 15 subjects will be treated.  Data will be 
monitored on an ongoing basis ;depending on evaluation by  the investigators and 
sponsor , if sufficient responses (PR s or CRs) areobserved, then this histology  type 
will be recommended for inclusion in the subsequent study .
Subjects will continue study  therapy  until progression of disease (per RECIST 1.1), 
intolerable toxicity  or withdrawal of consent.
Pre-study Phase:
Day -28 to -1, computed tomograph y (CT) / magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans must 
be performed within 28days prior to study  drug adm inistration.  All clinical and laboratory  
test results to determine eligibility  must be performed within 7 day s prior to study  drug 
administration, unless otherwise indicated.
Treatment Phase:
The treatment phase will start on Day  1 of C ycle 1 .
Follow -up:
The follow -up period will begin immediatel y after the End of Treatment visit until death or 
informed consent is withdrawn, unless the stud y is terminated by the sponsor . Subjects will 
be followed for survival approximately  every  12 weeks for 1 y ear and then annually  
thereafter . As well as follow -up for survival, the annual surveillance will also assess any  
long term effects of the study  treatment .
During the follow -up period, subjects who have gone off study  treatment without progression 
should have tum or assessments every  6 - 12 weeks , at the investigator’s discretion, from the 
date of last tumor assessment until disease progression is documented, death , orinitiation of
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 44of 90another anticancer therapy ,which ever occurs first, unless the study is terminated by the 
sponsor .  Follow -up data will be required unless consent is withdrawn.
9.2 Discussion of Study  Design
This is an open -label study  to conduct a preliminary  assessment of safet y and activity of 
eribulin mesy late in pediatric subjects with relapsed/refract ory RMS, NRSTS, or EWS . The 
secondary objective of PFS is an appropriate surrogate endpoint for studies in STS as there 
are significant correlations between PFS and OS ( R=0.61) and between objective response 
rate ( ORR )and OS ( R=0.51) ( Zer, at al., 2016 ).  
9.3 Selection of Study  Population
The subject population for this study  comprises pediatric subjects aged ≥12 months to 
<18years at the time of informed consent , with a histologically  confirmed diagnosis of RMS, 
NRSTS, or EWS, that is considered to be relapsed or refractory  (ie, subjects have failed 
front -line therapy ).
Approximately  45 subjects will be enrolled. Subjects who do not meet all of the inclusion 
criteria or who meet an y of the exclusion criteria will not be eligible to receive study  drug.
9.3.1 Inclusion Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria to be included in this study :
1.Age: ≥12 months to <18 y ears old at the time of informed consent .
2.Diagnosis: Histologically confirmed RMS, NRSTS (Grade 2 or 3) or EWS which is 
relapsed or refrac tory (failed front line therap y).
3.The presence of measurable disease meeting the following criteria:
At least 1 lesion of ≥1.0 cm in the longest diameter for a non -lymph node or 
≥1.5 cm 
in the short -axis diameter for a l ymph node that is serially  measurabl e according to 
RECI ST 1.1 using CT/MRI .
Lesions that have had radiotherap y must show subsequent radiographic evidence of 
increase in size by  at least 20% to be deemed a target lesion.
4.Therapeutic options: Subject’s current disease state must be one for whi ch there is no 
known curative therap y or therap y proven to prolong survival with an acceptable quality  
of life.
5.Performance level: Performance score ≥50%. Karnofsky  (for subjects >16 y ears of age) 
or Lansk y (for subjects ≤16 y ears of age). Subjects who are unable to walk because of 
paral ysis and/or previous surgeries, but who are in a wheelchair, will be considered 
ambulatory  for the purpose of assessing performance score.
6.Subjects must have fully  recovered from the acute toxic effects of all prior anticancer 
therap y and must meet the following minimum duration from prior anticancer directed 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 45of 90therap y prior to stud y drug administration.  If, after the required time frame, the 
numerical eligibility  criteria are met, eg, blood count criteria, the subject is considered to 
have recovered adequately:
Cytotoxic chemotherap yor other chemotherap y known to be myelosuppressive : 
≥21days after the last dose of cy totoxic or my elosuppressi ve chemotherap y (42 day s 
if prior nitrosourea).
Anticancer agents not known to be my elosuppressive (eg, not associated with reduced 
platelet or absolute neutrophil count [ ANC ]counts): ≥7 day s after the last dose of 
agent.
Monoclonal a ntibodies: 3 half -lives must have elapsed from infusion of last dose of 
antibody  (including checkpoint inhibitors), and toxicity  related to prior antibody  
therap y must be recovered to Grade ≤1.
Hematopoietic growth factors: ≥14 day s after the last dose of a long -acting growth
factor (eg, Neulasta) or 7days for a short-acting growth factor.  For agents that have 
known AEs occurring beyond 7 day s after administration, this period must be 
extended bey ond the time during which AEs are known to occur. The duration of this 
interva l must be discussed with the sponsor.
Interleukins, interferons, and cy tokines (other than hematopoietic growth factors): 
≥21 day s after the completion of interleukins, interferons or cy tokines (other than 
hematopoietic growth factors).
Stem cell infusions (with or without total body  irradiation [ TBI]): ≥84 days.
Allogeneic (non -autologous) bone marrow or stem cell transplant, or an y stem cell 
infusion including donor ly mphocy te infusion or boost infusion: ≥84 day s after 
infusion and no evidence of graft versus host disease ( GVHD ).
Autologous stem cell infusion including boost infusion: ≥42 day s.
Cellular therap y: ≥42 day s after the completion of any  type of cellular therapy  (eg, 
modified T-cells, natural killer cells, dendritic cells, etc).
Radiation ther apy (XRT )/External Beam Irradiation including Protons: ≥14 day s after 
local XRT, ≥150 days after TBI, craniospinal XRT or if radiation to ≥50% of the 
pelvis, ≥ 42 day s if other substantial BM radiation.
Radiopharmaceutical therap y (eg, radiolabeled antibody, 
131I-metaiodobenz ylguanidine ):  ≥42 days after s ystemically administered 
radiopharmaceutical therapy . 
7.Adequate bone marrow function, defined as:
ANC ≥1.0 × 109/L 
Platelet count ≥100 × 109/L(transfusion independent, defined as not receiving platelet 
transfusions within a 7- day period prior to study  drug administration )
Hemoglobin at least 8.0 g/dL at Baseline (blood transfusions are allowed during the 
screening period t o correct hemoglobin values less than 8.0 g/dL)
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 46of 90Note: As blood transfusions are permitted to meet the hemoglobin criteria, s ubjects 
requiring transfusion must not be known to be refractory  to red blood cell or platelet 
transfusions.
8.Adequate renal function, defined as :
A serum creatinine based on age/gender as follows, derived from the Schwartz 
formula for estimating glomerular filtration rate (GFR ) (see table below )
Age Maximum Serum
Creatinine (m g/dL)
Male Fem ale
6 months to <1 year 0.5 0.5
1 to <2 years 0.6 0.6
2 to <6 years 0.8 0.8
6 to <10 years 1 1
10 to <13 years 1.2 1.2
13 to <16 years 1.5 1.4
≥16 years 1.7 1.4
The threshold creatinine values in this table were derived from the Schwartz formula for estimating 
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (Schwartz and Gauthier . J Pediatr. 1985;106:522 –6)utilizing child 
length and stature data published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Or creatinine clearance or GFR ≥50 
mL/min/1.73 m2based on a 12 or 24 hour urine 
creatinine collection. 
9.Adequate liver function, defined as:
a.Bilirubin (sum of conjugated + unconjugated) ≤1.5 ×upper limit of normal (ULN) for 
age
b.ALT≤110 U/L .For the purpose of this study , the ULN for ALT is 45 U/L .
c.Serum albumin ≥2 g/dL
10.Informed consent:  All subjects and/or their parents or legally  authorized representatives 
must sign a written informed consent.  Assent, when appropriate, will be obtained 
according to institutional guidelines.  Subjects must be willing to comply  with all aspects 
of the protocol.
9.3.2 Exclusion Criteria
Subjects who meet a ny of the following criteria will be excluded from this study :
1.Pregnancy , breastfeeding, contraception:  Females who are breastfeeding or pregnant at 
Screening or Baseline (as documented b y a positive beta -human chorionic [ β-hCG] (or 
human chorionic gonado tropin [hCG] test with a minimum sensitivity  of 25 IU/L  or 
equivalent units of β
-hCG [or hCG]).  A separate baseline assessment is required if a 
negative screening pregnancy  test was obtained more than 72 hours before the first dose 
of study  drug.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 47of 90-Females of childbearing potential* who:
◦Do not agree to use a highly  effective method of contraception for the entire study  
period and for 6 months after stud y drug discontinuation, ie:
◦Total abstinence (if it is their preferred and usual lifesty le)
◦An intrauterin e device (IUD) or intrauterine s ystem (IUS)
◦A contraceptive implant
◦ A n oral contraceptive**
OR
◦Do not have a vasectomized partner with confirmed azoospermia.
For sites outside of the EU, it is permissible that if a highl y effective method of 
contraception is not appropriate or acceptable to the subject, or the subject has 
commenced/adjusted/changed oral hormonal contraceptive product/dose within 4 
weeks prior t o study  drug administration, then the subject must agree to use a 
medically  acceptable method of contraception, ie, double barrier methods of 
contraception such as condoms plus diaphragm or cervical/vault cap with spermicide.
*All post pubertal females will be considered to be of childbearing potential un less they  
have earl y menopause ( amenorrheic for at least 12 consecutive months, in the 
appropriate age group, and without other known or suspected cause )or have been 
sterilized surgicall y (ie, bilateral tu bal ligation, total hy sterectom y, or bilateral 
oophorectom y, all with surgery at least 1 month before dosing ).
**Must be on a stable dose of the same oral hormonal contraceptive product for at least 
4 weeks before dosing with study  drug and for the duration of the study  and for 6 months 
after stud y drug discontinuation.
◦Males who have not had a successful vasectom y (confirmed azoospermia) or if
they and their female partners do not meet the criteria above (ie, not of 
childbearing potential or practicing hi ghly effective contraception throughout the 
study  period or for 3 months after stud y drug discontinuation).  No sperm 
donation is allowed during the stud y period or for 3 months after study  drug 
discontinuation.
2.Concomitant medications:
Corticosteroids: Subjects receiving corticosteroids who have not been on a stable or 
decreasing dose of corticosteroid for at least 7 days prior to study  drug administration
(except when indicated for C entral N ervous S ystem ( CNS )metastases, then subjects 
must not have recei ved corticosteroids for at least 28 day s)
Anticancer Agents: Subjects who are currentl y receiving other anticancer agents 
Anti-GVHD agents posttransplant: 
-Subjects who are receiving cy closporine, tacrolimus or other agents to prevent 
graft -versus- host disease post bone marrow transplant
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 48of 90Strong CYP3A4 inducers/inhibitors ( See Section 9.4.6.1.1, Drug -Drug Interactions ).
3.Received prior therapy  with eribulin mesy late(when confirmed) 
4.Any 
other malignancy  that required treatment (except for non -melanoma skin cancer, or 
histologically  confirmed complete excision of carcinoma in situ), within 2 y ears prior to 
study  drug administration.
5.Has h ypersensitivity  to eribulin or any of the excipients .
6.Has a prior history * of viral hepatitis (B or C) as demonstrated by positive serology  
(presence of antigens) or have an uncontrolled infection requiring treatment (* Subjects 
with a known prior history  of hepatitis B or C may be eligible pending agreement with 
the 
sponsor .
7.Has >Grade 1 peripheral sensory  neuropathy  or >Gr ade 1 peripheral motor neuropathy  
graded according to the Modified (“Balis”) Pediatric Scale of Peripheral Neuropathies
8.Has cardiac pathology : Subjects with known congestive heart failure, s ymptomatic or left 
ventricular (LV) ejection fraction <50% or shortening fraction < 27% and subjects with 
congenital long QT s yndrome, brad yarrhythmias, or QTc > 480 msec on at least 2 
separate ECGs
9.Has CNS Disease:  Subjects with brain or subdural metastases are not eligible unless the 
metastases are as ymptomatic and do not require treatment or have been adequately  
treated b y local therap y (eg, surgery  or radiotherapy ) and have discontinued the use o f 
corticosteroids for this indication for at least 4 weeks prior to study  drug administration .  
Confirmation of radiographic stability  must be done by  comparing the brain scan (CT or 
MRI ) performed during the Screening Period, using the same imaging modali ty, to a 
brain scan performed earlier (and following local therapy where applicable). Subjects 
must be clinically  stable.  I t is not the intention of this protocol to treat subjects with 
active brain metastases.
Note:   CNS imaging is required to confirm eligibility  for subjects with a known history  
of CNS disease 
10.Have had or are planning to have the following invasive procedures:
Major surgical procedure or significant traumatic injury  within 28 day s prior to study  
drug administration
Laparoscopic procedure or open biopsy  within 7 day s prior to study  drug 
administration
.
Central line placement or subcutaneous port placement is not considered major 
surgery  but must be placed at least 2 day s prior to study  drug administ ration.
Core biopsy , including bone marrow biops y within 2 days prior study  drug 
administration
Fine needle aspirate within 3 day s prior to study  drug administration.
11.Has an y serious concomitant illness that in the opinion of the investigator(s) could affe ct 
the subject’s safety  or interfere with the study  assessments
12.Subjects with known human immunodeficiency  virus (HIV); due to lack of available 
safet y data for eribulin therap y in HIV infected subjects.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 49of 909.3.3 Removal of Subjects From Therapy or Assessment
The i nvestigator may  discontinue treating a subject with study  treatment or withdraw the 
subject from the stud y at any time for safet y or administrative reasons.  The subject may 
decide to discontinue study treatment or withdraw from the study  at any  time for a ny reason.  
The reason for discontinuation will be documented.  If a subject discontinues study  
treatment, the subject will enter the Follow -Up Period and complete protocol -specified 
off-treatment visits, procedures, and survival follow-up unless the subje ct withdraws consent.  
The investigator should confirm whether a subject will withdraw from study treatment but 
agree to continue protocol- specified, off -treatment study  visits, procedures, and survival 
follow -up, or whether the subject will withdraw conse nt.  If a subject withdraws consent, the 
date will be documented in the source documents.  A subject removed from the study  for any  
reason other than toxicity  or progression may  be replaced.  
During the Follow -Up Period, subjects who have discontinued stu
dy treatment without 
progression should have disease assessments as per the Schedule of Assessments from the 
date of the last assessment until disease progression as per RE CIST 1.1 is documented , death
or another anticancer therap y is initiated.
All subjec ts will be followed for survival until death, except where a subject withdraws 
consent or the sponsor chooses to halt survival follow -up after completion of the primary  
study  anal ysis.
9.4 Treatments
9.4.1 Treatments Administered
Eribulin mesy latewill be administer ed by IV infusion over 2 -5 minutes on Day s 1 and 8 of 
each 21 -day cycle.  Eribulin may  be diluted in up to 100 mL  0.9% sodium chloride, and 
administered as an IV infusion over 15 minutes (maximum infusion duration), where 
clinically  appropriate.
9.4.1.1 Criteria f or Dosing Modifications
Dose reduction and interruption will be performed a ccording to the instructions in
Section 9.4.1.1.1.
9.4.1.1.1 ERIBULIN MESYLATE
Treatment will not be administered when any of the following values are recorded ( Table 5).
Table 5 Criteria for A dministration of Eribulin Mesylate
a):Do not adm inister Cycle 1 Day 1 treatm ent where:
Absolute Neutrophil Count <1.0× 109/L or 1,000/mm3
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 50of 90Platelets <100 × 109/L or 100,000/mm3
Non-hematological toxicity Any > Grade 2 except for inadequately treated nausea 
and/or vomiting
b):Do not adm inister any Day 8 treatm ent where:
Absolute Neutrophil Count <0.75 ×109/L or 750/mm3
Platelets <75×109/L or 75,000/mm3
Non-hematological toxicity Any > Grade 2 except for inadequately treated nausea 
and/or vomiting
c):Do not adm inister any subsequent Day 1 treatm ent where:
Absolute Neutrophil Count <1.0 ×109/L or 1,000/mm3
Platelets <75×109/L or 75,000/mm3
Non-hematological toxicity Any > Grade 2 except for inadequately treated nausea 
and/or vomiting
If the dose cannot be administered as planned due to treatment -related toxicity , the dose 
should be delay ed according to the following instructions.
Day 1 of each cycle: If treatment cannot be administered on Day 1, the dosing should be 
delay ed until recovery  to above these values in Table 5or Grade ≤ 2 as appropriate ( for Cycle 
1 & subsequent cycles). The Day 1 dose will be rescheduled for when the criteria for 
treatment administration are met. The dose level may have to be reduced following a dose 
delay  in accordance to the instructions for dos e reduction ( Table 6andTable 7).
Day 8 of each cycle: If treatment cannot be administered on Day 8, the dosing should be 
delay ed until recovery  to above these values ( Table 5). The Day  8 dosing will be delayed 
for a maximum of 7 days and as follows:
If recovery  occurs on or before Day  15, dosing will be resumed at the next lower dose 
level ( Table 7)and this will be the new Day  8.
If hematological or non -hematological toxicity  has not resolved to the above values 
on Day  15, the second administration in the 
cycle will be omitted.  Dosing will be 
resumed at the next lower dose level ( Table 7)and as scheduled on Day  1 of the next 
cycle if recovery  has occurred to the above values.  
Please note, use of hematopoietic growth factor
sis not permitted in Cy cle 1 and is only  
permitted in subsequent cy cles as per institutional guidelines.
The treatment will be permanently  reduced to the next lowest dose level ( Table 6) after the 
occu rrence of the following events:
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 51of 90Table 6 Criteria for Reduction of Eribulin Mesy lateto the Next Lowest 
Dose Level
Absolute Neutrophil Count Grade 4 neutropenia > 7 days
Grade 3 or 4 febrile neutropenia and/or infection requiring treatm ent 
with antibiotics and/or grow th factors
Platelets Grade 4 thrombocytopenia
Grade 3 thrombocytopenia requiring platelet or blood transfusion or both
Non-hematological toxicity Grade 3 or 4 non -hematological toxicities (attributable to study drug); 
except Grade 3 hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia or 
hypomagnesemia that respond to supplementation
If hematological  toxicities do not recover following a dose reduction to dose level -1 and the 
use of hematopoietic growth factors,  the dose should be reduced to dose level -2. If non -
hematological toxicities do not recover following a dose reduction to dose level -1, a second 
dose reduction to dose level -2 should be made. If either hematologic or non -hematologic 
toxicities do not recover despite 
two dose reductions, the subject should be discontinue d from
treatment . However, if the subject is deemed to have clinical benefit, continuation of 
treatment may  be discussed with the sponsor.
Dose modifications are based on AEs for eribulin mesy late(starting dose determined b y 
COG protocol ADVL1314/Eisai Study  E7389 -A001 -113; 1.4 mg/m2; Table 7).
Table 7 Eribulin Mesylate Dose Modifications
Dose level Eribulin mesylate (mg/m2)
0* 1.4
-1 1.1
-2 0.8
* Dose level 0 refers to the starting dose.
Do not re-escalate dose level after the dose level has been reduced.
Instructions for QTc Prolongation on Electrocardiogram (ECG):
Increase the frequency  of ECG and electrol yte monitoring in subjects who: develop Grade 2 
QTc prolongation , are receiving agents that are known to prolong QTc interval, or have 
clinically  relevant electroly te abnormalities.  Permanently  discontinue eribulin mesy latein 
subjects who develop ≥Grade 3 QTc prolongation, and monitor ECGs and electroly tes 
frequentl y until the QTc interval return sto baseline.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389 -G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 52of 909.4.2 Identity of Investigational Products
Eribulin mesy latewill be supplied by  the sponsor in labeled containers.
9.4.2.1 Chemical Name, Structural Formula of Eribulin Mesylate
Test drug code:  E7389
Generic name:  Eribulin Mesy late
Chemical name (IUPAC) :  11,15:18,21:24,28 -Triepox y-7,9-ethano -12,15 -methano -
9H,15H-furo[3,2 -i] furo[2',3':5,6]py rano[4,3 -b][1,4]dioxacy clopentacosin -5(4H)-one, 
2-[(2S)-3-amino -2-hydroxy propyl]hexacosahy dro-3-methoxy -26-methy l-20,27 -
bis(methy lene) -,(2R,3R,3aS,7R,8aS,9S,10aR,11S, 
12R,13aR ,13bS,15S,18S,21S,24S,26R,28R,29aS )-, methanesulfonate (salt)
Molecular formula:  C41H63NO 14S (C 40H59NO 11・CH 4O3S)
Molecular weight:  826.0
Structural formula:  
9.4.2.2 Labeling for Study Drug
Eribulin mesy latewill be labeled in accordance with text that is in full regulatory  compliance 
with each participating country  and is translated into the required language (s) for each of 
those countries.
9.4.2.3 Storage Conditions
Study  drug will be stored in accordance with the labeled storage conditions.  Te mperature 
monitoring is required at the storage location to ensure that the study drug is maintained 
within an established temperature range.  The investigator or designee (or if regionally  
required, the head of the medical institution) is responsible for ensuring that the temperature 
is monitored throughout the total duration of the study and that records are maintained; the 
temperature should be monitored continuously b y using either an in- house validated data 

Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 53of 90acquisition sy stem, a mechanical recording de vice, such as a calibrated chart recorder, or by  
manual means, such that minimum and maximum thermometric values over a specific time 
period can be recorded and retrieved as required.
9.4.3 Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups
Thesubjects will receive eribulin mesy lateonly.
9.4.4 Selection of Doses in the Study
Eribulin mesy latewill be administered at the RP2D (1.4 mg/m2; Eisai Study 
E7389- A001 -113) .  Further information on dose modification is provided in Section 9.4.1.
9.4.5 Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Subject
Eribulin mesy lateshould be administered by  IV infusion over 2- 5 minutes on Day s 1 and 8 
of a 21 -day cycle.Eribul
in may  be diluted in up to 100 mL  0.9% sodium chloride, and 
administered as an IV infusion over 15 minutes (maximum infusion duration), where 
clinically  appropriate.
9.4.6 Prior and Concomitant Therapy
All prior medications (including over -the-counter medications) administered 30 day s before 
the first dose of stud y drug and an y concomitant therap y administered to the subject during 
the course of the study  (starting at the date of informed consent) until 28 day s after the final
dose of study  drug will be recorded.  Additionall y, all diagnostic, therapeutic, or surgical 
procedures relating to malignancy  should be recorded.  Any  medication that is considered 
necessary  for the subject’s health and that is not expected to interfere with the evaluation of 
or interact with eribulin may be continued during the study .
Supportive care will be allowed as per institutional guidelines.  Growth factors that support 
platelet or white blood cell number or function can only  be administered in ac cordance with 
dose modification guidelines or for culture proven bacteremia or invasive fungal infection. 
Prophy latic granulocy te colony -stimulating factor should NOT be administered in C ycle 1.
Subjects should not receive an y other anticancer therap y (including chemotherap y, radiation 
therap y, immunotherap y or biologic therapy) or investigational agents while receiving stud y 
drug.  If these therapies are administered, the subject will be removed from the study .From 
week 24, the subject may receive radiot herap y for local control and continue to receive drug 
on study .  
9.4.6.1 Drug -Drug Interactions
9.4.6.1.1 ERIBULIN MESYLATE
In adults, n o drug -
drug interactions are expected with CYP3A4 inhibitors, CYP3A4 inducers 
or P-glycoprotein (P -gp) inhibitors. Clinically  meaningful differences in exposure (AUC) 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 54of 90were not observed in patients with advanced solid tumors when Halaven was administered 
with or without ketoconazole (a strong inhibitor of CYP3A4 and a P -gp inhibitor) and when 
Halaven was administered with or without rifampi n (a CYP3A4 inducer) .  Eribulin does not 
inhibit CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1 or CYP3A4 enzy mes or induce 
CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 or CYP3A4 enzy mes at relevant clinical concentrations. 
Eribulin is not expected to alter the plasma concentrations of drugs that are substrates of 
these enzy mes(Halaven USPI , 2016).
Currently , drug -drug interactions of eribulin mesylate have not been studied in children, 
therefore pediatric subjects taking medications that are strong CYP3A4 inducers (eg, 
pheny toin, c arbamazepine, rifampin, rifabutin, rifapentine, phenobarbital , St. John’s Wort ) or 
inhibitors (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole, clarithromy cin, atazanavir, nefazodone, 
saquinavir, telithromy cin, ritonavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, voriconazole) or taking nutr itional 
supplements known to inhibit CYP3A4, will be excluded from the study .
Please refer to http://medicine.iupui.edu/flockhart/ table .htm for th
e most current information.
9.4.6.2 Prohibited Concomitant Therapies and Drugs
Subjects should not receive other antitumor therapies while on study .  If subjects receive 
additional antitumor therapies ,such as chemotherapy , hormone therapy , palliative 
radiotherap y (up to week 24) , or immunotherap y, this will be judged to represent evidence of 
disease progression, and study  medication will be discontinued.  These subjects should 
complete all off -treatment assessments and continue to be followed for survival in the 
Follow -Up Period.
Details of other prohi bited concomitant therapies and drugs are provided in Section 9.3.2
(Exclusion criterion #2).
9.4.7 Treatment Compliance
Records of treatment compliance for each subject will be kept during the study .  Clinical 
research associates (CRAs) will review treatment compliance during site visits and at the 
completion of the study .
9.4.8 Drug Supplies and Accountability
In compliance with local regulatory  requirements, drug supplies wi ll not be sent to the 
investigator until the following documentation has been received b y the sponsor:
A signed and dated confidentiality  agreement .
A cop y of the final protocol signature page, signed and dated b y both the sponsor and 
investigator .
Written proof of approval of the protocol, the ICFs, and an y other information 
provided to the subjects by  the IRB/IEC for the institution where the study  is to be 
conducted .
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 55of 90A copy of the IRB/IEC -approved ICF and any other documentation provided to the 
subjects to be used in this study .
The I RB/IEC membership list and statutes or Health and Human Services Assurance 
number .
A cop y of the certification and a table of the normal laboratory  ranges for the 
reference laboratory  conducting the clinical laboratory  tests required b y this protocol .
An investigator -signed and dated FDA Form FDA 1572, where applicable.
Financial Disclosure form (s) for the principal investigator (PI) and all 
subinvestigators listed on Form FDA 1572, where applicable.
A signed and dated curricu lum vitae (CV) of the PI  including a cop y of the PI’s 
current medical license or medical registration number on the CV .
A signed and dated clinical studies agreement .
The investigator and the study  staff will be responsible for the accountability  of all study  
drugs (dispensing, inventory , and record keeping) following the sponsor’s instructions and 
adherence to Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines as well as local or regional 
requirements.
Under no circumstances will the investigator allow the study drugs to be used other than as 
directed b y this protocol.  Study  drugs will not be dispensed to any  individual who is not 
enrolled in the study .  
The site must maintain a n accurate and timel y record of the following:  receipt of all study  
drugs, dispensing of study drugs to the subject, collection and reconciliation of unused study  
drugs that are either returned by  the subjects or shipped to site but not dispensed to subje cts, 
and return of reconciled study  drugs to the sponsor or (where applicable) destruction of 
reconciled stud y drugs at the site.  This includes, but may  not be limited to: ( a) 
documentation of receipt of study  drugs, (b) study drugs dispensing/return reconciliation log, 
(c) stud y drugs accountability  log, (d) all shipping service receipts, (e) documentation of 
returns to the sponsor, and ( f) certificates of destruction for an y destruction of study 
drugs/stud y supplies that occurs at the site.  All forms wi ll be provided by  the sponsor.  Any  
comparable forms that the site wishes to use must be approved b y the sponsor.
The study  drugs and inventory  records must be made available, upon request, for inspection 
by a designated representative of the sponsor or a representative of a health authority  (eg, 
FDA, Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory  Agency  [MHRA ]).  As applicable, all 
unused study  drugs and empty  and partially  empty containers from used study  drugs are to be 
returned to the investigator by  the subject and ,together with unused study  drugs that were 
shipped to the site but not dispensed to subjects , are to be returned to the sponsor’s 
designated central or local depot (s) during the study  or at the conclusion of the study , unless 
provision is made by the sponsor for destruction of study  drugs and containers at the site.  
Destruction at the site will only  occur under circumstances where regulation or supply  type 
prohibits the return of study  drugs to the central or local depot (s).  Approval for dest ruction 
to occur at the site must be provided b y the sponsor in advance.  Upon completion of drug 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 56of 90accountability  and reconciliation procedures by  the site’s personnel and documentation 
procedures b y the sponsor’s personnel, study drugs that are to be retur ned to the sponsor’s 
designated central or local depot (s) must be boxed, sealed ,and shipped back to the central or 
local depot (s) following all local regulatory  requirements.  In some regions, study  drugs may  
be removed from the site and hand delivered to the central or local depot by sponsor 
representatives.  Where study  drugs are approved for destruction at the site, destruction will 
occur following the site’s standard procedures and certificates of destruction will be provided 
to the sponsor.
Drug accountability  will be reviewed during site visits and at the completion of the study .
9.5 Stud y Assessments
9.5.1 Assessments
9.5.1.1 Demography
Subject demograph y information will be collected at the Screening Visit.  Demograph y 
information includes date of birth ( or age), sex , race/ethnicity .
9.5.1.2 Baseline Assessments
Baseline characteristics and assessments will be collected at the Screening Visit .  End-of-
Treatment assessments will be collected within 28 day s of the last dose of study  drug.  
Screening and Baseline characteristics and End- of-Treatment assessments are listed in the 
Schedule of Procedures/Assessments ( Table 9
).
9.5.1.2.1 MEDICAL H ISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS
Medical and surgical history  and current medical conditions will be recorded at the Screening 
Visit.  All medical and surgical history  relating to anticancer treatment
must be noted in the 
Medical History  and Current Medical Conditions CRF.
Physical examin ations ( comprehensive or s ymptom directed) will be performed as designated 
in the Schedule of Procedures/Assessments ( Table 9).  A comprehensive phy sical 
examination will include evaluations of the head, eyes, ears, nose, throat, neck, chest 
(including heart and lungs), abdomen, limbs, skin, and at baseline
, acomplete neurological 
examination.  On subsequent evaluations a n assessment of neuropathy  (neuropathy  
present/absent and CTC AE Grade ) will be made as part of the ph ysical examination. A 
urogenital examination will only  be required in the presence of clinical symptoms related to 
this region.  Documentation of the phy sical examination will be include d in the source 
documentation at the site.  Significant findings at the Screening Visit will be recorded on the 
Medical History  and Current Medical Conditions CRF.  Changes from screening ph ysical 
examination findings that meet the definition of an AE will be recorded on the Adverse 
Events CRF.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 57of 909.5.1.3 Efficacy Assessments
9.5.1.3.1 PRIMARY
Efficacy  will be evaluated by  objective tumor responses provided as determined by  the 
investigator according to RECI STv1.1. For anal ysis purposes, ORR is defined as the 
proportion of subjects who achieve a C R plus those who achieve a PR. 
9.5.1.3.2 SECONDARY
Efficacy  will also be evaluated according to a secondary  endpoint (PFS; defined as the time 
from the date of the first dose of stu dy treatment until the date of first documentation of 
progressive disease ( PD)or date of death [whichever occurs first]) .  Assessments for these 
endpoints are to be performed every  6weeks by  use of consistent imaging methodology  (ie, 
CT scan/MRI  or bone scan) and consistent use or nonuse of contrast media) until Week 24, 
then every  9 weeks .  In addition, OS status (disposition) and DOR will be assessed 
throughout the stud y.  For subjects receiving radiotherap y and/or surgery for local control 
post week 24, progression will be assessed as the date of radiotherap y/surgical procedure.
9.5.1.3.3 EXPLORATORY
Additional exploratory  endpoints on the exposure of eribulin will be evaluated and the 
relationship between exposure and AEs and efficacy  will also be explored.
9.5.1.4 Tumo r Assessments
Tumor response and progression will be evaluated according to RECI ST 1.1 criteria.  Copies 
of all scans for tumor assessments will be sent to an imaging core laboratory  designated by  
the sponsor.  Tumor assessments will be carried out following the guidelines provided b y the 
imaging core laboratory . Decisions concerning treatment discontinuation for PD will be 
based on investigator assessment.
Tumor assessments (CT chest, and CT or MRI abdomen, pelvis, and other known or 
suspected sites or disease) will be performed during screening and then every  6 weeks 
(within the sixth week) on a fixed schedule from the date of first study  drug administration.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans may  be used i nstead of CT scans for abdomen and 
pelvis; however, chest must be assessed using CT.  The same method of assessment must be 
used at all time -points as used at pre -study .  Partial and complete responses will be confirmed 
at least 4 weeks after initial documentation of PR or CR , typicall y on the next consecutive 
scheduled tumor assessment.  After 24 weeks subjects with CR, PR or stable disease (SD) 
may have imagining decreased to every  9 weeks (within the ninth week).  A bone scan using 
whole body  bone MRI, 99m-technetium based bone scans, 18fluordeox yglucose (FDG) -
PET/CT scans or 18F-sodium fluoride positron emission tomograph y [NaF PET] will be 
performed during screening to establish a baseline (a historical bone scan performed within 6 
weeks before study drug administration is acceptable), approximately  every 24 weeks (in 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 58of 90conjunction with a scheduled tumor assessment visit), and as clinicall y indicated. Lesions 
identified on bone scans should be followed with cross -sectional imaging. 
Brain scans
will be performed as clinicall y indicated to assess potential CNS disease and/or 
metastases.  For subjects with a history  of protocol -eligible treated brain metastases, a brain 
scan will be required at screening and all tumor assessment time points (eg, every  6 weeks). 
Subjects who discontinue treatment without objective evidence of disease progression will 
continue to have tumor assessments performed, per the schedule of assessments, until disease 
progression, death, or initiation of another anticancer therap y.  
9.5.1.5 Pharmacokinetic, Pharmacodynamic, Pharmacogenomic , and Other Biomarker
Assessments
9.5.1.5.1 PHARMACOKINETIC ASSESSM ENTS
Samples for PK anal ysis of eribulin will be collected immediately  post -infusion on Day  1 
each cy cle for 3 cy cles, and pre -infusion and immediatel y post -infusion on Day  8 each cy cle 
for 3 cycles (Table 9).  Plasma concentrations of eribulin will be tabulated and summarized 
by dose level and time.
9.5.1.5.2 PHARMACODYNAMIC , PHARM ACOGENOMIC ,AND OTHER BIOMARKER , ASSESSMENTS
Not applicable.
9.5.1.6 Safety Assessm ents
Safety  assessments will consist of monitoring and recording all AEs, according to Common 
Terminology  Criteria for Adverse Events ( CTCAE) v 4.03.  This includes listing of all grades 
(for both increasing and decreasing severity), and SAEs; regular moni toring of hematology , 
blood chemistry , and urine values; periodic mea surement of vital signs ; performance status, 
andphysical examinations as detailed in Table 9.
Other Assessments
ECG monitoring to evaluate RR, PR, QRS, and QT intervals and QTc interval (corrected for 
heart rate [QTc] using Fridericia's [QTcF] and Bazett's [QTcB] correction factors) at pre -
study , during C ycle 1 (pre -and post -infusion Day1 and Day  8) and as clinically  indicated 
during subsequent cy cles and during follow -
up (28 days after the last dose of drug).
A full neurologic examination will be conducted at Screening. 
On subsequent cy cles an 
assessment of neuropathy  (neuropathy  present/absent an d CTC AE Grade) will be made as 
part of the ph ysical examination .
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 59of 909.5.1.6.1 ADVERSE EVENTS
An adverse event (AE) is any  untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical 
investigation subject admin istered an investigational product.  An AE does not necessaril y 
have a causal relationship with the medicinal product.  For this study , the study  drug is
eribulin mesy late.
The criteria for identify ing AEs in this study  are:
Any unfavorable and unintended sign ( including an abnormal laboratory  finding), 
symptom, or disease temporally  associated with the use of an investigational product, 
whether or not considered related to the investigational product (Note:  Every  sign or 
symptom should not be listed as a separate AE if the applicable disease [diagnosis] is 
being reported as an AE) .
Any new disease or exacerbation of an existing disease . However, worsening of the 
primary  disease should be captured under efficacy assessments a s disease progression 
rather than as an AE.
Any deterioration in nonprotocol -required measurements of a laboratory  value or 
other clinical test (eg, ECG or x -ray) that results in sy mptoms, a change in treatment, 
or discontinuation of study  drug .
Recurrence of an intermittent medical condition (eg , headache) not present 
pretreatment (Baseline) .
An abnormal laboratory  test result should be considered an AE if the identified 
laboratory  abnormality  leads to any  type of intervention , withdrawal of study drug, or
withholding of study  drug , whether pr escribed in the protocol or not .
All A Esand SAEs , regardless of relationship to study  drug or procedure, should be recorded
beginning from the time the subject and/or their parents or legall y authorized representatives 
signs the s tudy ICF through the last visit.  
Abnormal laboratory  values should not be listed as separate AEs if they  are considered to be 
part of the clinical s yndrome that is being reported as an AE.  It is the responsibility  of the 
investigator to review all laboratory  findings in all subjects and determine if they  constitute 
an AE.  Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether an isolated 
laboratory  abnormality  should be classified as an AE.  Any laboratory  abnormality  
considered to constitute an AE should be reported on the Adverse Event CRF. 
Abnormal ECG (QTc) results, if not otherwise considered part of a clinical sy mptom that is 
being reported as an AE, should be c onsidered an AE if the QTc interval is more than 450 ms 
and there is an increase of more than 60 ms from baseline.  Any  ECG abnormality  that the 
investigator considers as an AE should be reported as such.
All AEs must be followed for 28 days after the subject’s last dose , or until resolution, 
whichever comes first. SAEs will be collected for 28 day s posttreatment and followed until 
resolution or, if resolution is unlikely , until the event or sequelae stabilize .
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 60of 90Progression of malignant disease should not be recorded as an adverse event in studies where 
it is included as an endpoint for underl ying disease. However, the s ymptoms experienced as 
part of progression of disease should be recorded as the adverse event. If the progre ssion 
leads to an untoward medical occurrence (increased pain, pleural effusion, etc), then this 
medical occurrence should also be recorded as the adverse event.
Every effort must be made by the investigator to categorize each AE according to its 
severity and its relationship to the study treatment.
Assessing Severity of A dverse Events
Adverse events will be graded on a 5 -point scale according to CTCAE v 4 (National Institutes 
of Health Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, 2010) .  Investigators will report CTC AE 
grades for all AEs (for both increasing and decreasing severity ).
Assessing Relationship to Study Treatment
Items to be considered when assessing the relationship of an AE to the study treatment are:
Temporal relationship of the onset of the event to th e initiation of the study  treatment
The course of the event, especiall y the effect of discontinuation of study  treatment or 
reintroduction of stud y treatment, as applicable
Whether the event is known to be associated with the study  treatment or with other 
similar treatments
The presence of risk factors in the study  subject known to increase the occurrence of 
the event
The presence of nonstudy, treatment -related factors that are known to be associated 
with the occurrence of the event
Classification of Causal ity
The relationship of each AE to the study  drug will be recorded on the CRF in response to the 
following question:
Is there a reasonable possibility  that the study  drug caused the AE?
Yes (related) A causal relationship between the stud y drug and the AE is a reasonable 
possibility .
No (not related) A causal relationship between the study drug and the AE is not a 
reasonable possibility .
9.5.1.6.2 SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS AND EVENTS ASSOCIATED WITH SPECIAL SITUATIONS
A serious adverse event (SAE) is any  untoward medical occurrence that at any  dose:
Results in death
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 61of 90Is life -threatening (ie, the subject was at immediate risk of death from the adverse 
event as it occurred; this does not include an event that, had it occurred in a more 
severe form or was allowed to co ntinue, might have caused death)
Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization
Results in persistent or significant disability /incapacity
Is a congenital anomal y/birth defect ( in the child of a subject who was exposed to th e 
study  drug)
Other important medical events that may  not be immediately  life-threatening or result in 
death or hospitalization but, when based on appropriate medical judgment, may  jeopardize 
the subject or may  require intervention to prevent one of the ou tcomes in the definition of 
SAE listed above should also be considered SAEs.  Medical and scientific judgment should 
be exercised in deciding whether expedited reporting is appropriate in such situations. 
Every effort must be made to identify the cause of death if it occurs within 28 days of 
last dose. The cause of death must be recorded on the Adverse Event page.
In addition to the above, events associated with special situations include pregnancy  or 
exposure to study  drug through breastfeeding; AEs assoc iated with study  drug overdose, 
misuse, abuse, or medication error.  These events associated with special situations are to be 
captured using the SAE procedures but are to be considered as SAEs onl y if they  meet one of 
the above criteria.  All AEs associated with special situations are to be reported on the CRF 
whether or not they  meet the criteria for SAEs.  
All SAEs must be followed to resolution or, if resolution is unlikely , to stabilization.
The following hospitalizations are not considered to be SAEs because there is no “adverse 
event” (ie , there is no untoward medical occurrence) associated with the hospitalization:
Hospitalizations f or respite care.
Planned hospitalizations required b y the protocol .
Hospitalization planned before informed co nsent (where the condition requiring the 
hospitalization has not changed after study  drug administration) .
Hospitalization for administration of study  drug or insertion of access for 
administration of study  drug .
Hospitalization for routine maintenance of a device (eg, battery  replacement) that was 
in place before stud y entry .
If possible, a blood sample for the measurement of study  drug plasma concentration should 
be drawn at the first report of an SAE or a severe unexpected AE and at its resolution.
9.5.1.6.3 LABOR ATORY MEASUREMENTS
Clinical laboratory  tests to be performed, including hematology , chemistry , and urinal ysis, 
are summarized in Table 8.  Subjects sh ould be in a seated or supine position during blood 
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 62of 90collection.  The Schedule of Procedures/Assessments ( Table 9) shows the visits and time 
points at which blood for clinical laboratory tests and urine for urinal ysis will be collected in 
the study .
Efforts should be made to conduct study  visits on the day  scheduled.  If holiday s or other 
reasons make the day  impossible, then sample 
collection may be up to 2 day s sooner or later. 
Clinical laboratory  assessments may  be conducted based on Table 9.
Table 8 Clinical Laboratory  Tests
Category Param eters
Hem atology Hem atocrit , hemoglobin, platelets, RBC count, and WBC count 
with differential (bands, basophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, 
monocytes, neutrophils)
Chemistry
Electrolytes Chloride , potassium, sodium , magnesium
Liver function tests Alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, aspartate 
aminotransferase, total bilirubin
Renal function tests Blood urea/blood urea nitrogen, creatinine
Other * Albumin , calcium (total + ionized) ,  glucose, lactate 
dehydrogenase, phosphorus, total protein, uric acid
Urinalysis Bacteria , casts, crystals, epithelial cells, glucose, ketones, occult 
blood, pH, protein, RBCs, specific gravity, WBCs
RBC = red blood cell, WBC = white blood cell.
*All to be assessed at baseline.  U ric acid is not required at 
subsequent chemistry measurement time points.
Clinical laboratory  tests during the Treatment Phase will be performed b y designated local
laboratories .  All blood and urine samples will be collected and sent to the local laboratory  on 
the day  of collection unless otherwise instructed 
Local laboratories will perform tests to qualify  subjects for entry  into the study .  Laboratory  
certification as availabl e will be included in the final clinical study  report for this study .
All hematology , blood chemistry  (including pregnancy  test, as applicable), and urinal ysis 
samples are to be obtained prior to study  drug administration and results reviewed prior to 
admi nistration/dispensing of stud y drug at the beginning of each treatment cycle. Refer to 
Section 9.4.1.1 for the management of clinicall y significant laboratory abn ormalities.
A laboratory  abnormality may  meet the criteria to qualify as an AE as described in this 
protocol (seeSection 9.5.1.6.1 and the CRF Completion Guidelin es).  In these instances, the 
AE corresponding to the laboratory  abnormality  will be recorded on the Adverse Event CRF.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 63of 909.5.1.6.4 VITAL SIGNS AND WEIGHT MEASUREMENTS
Vital sign measurements (ie, systolic and diastolic blood pressure [BP] [mmHg], pulse [beats 
per minute], respiratory  rate [per minute], body  temperature [in centigrade]), and weight ( kg) 
will be obtained at the visits designated in the Schedule of Procedures/Assessments ( Table 9) 
by a validated method.  
9.5.1.6.5 PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS
Physical examinations will be performed as designated i n the Schedule of 
Procedures/Assessments ( Table 9
).  Documentation of the phy sical examination will be 
included in the source documentation at the site.  Only  changes from screening phy sical 
examinatio n findings that meet the definition of an AE will be recorded on the Adverse 
Events CRF.
9.5.1.6.6 ELECTROCARDIOGRAMS
Electrocardiograms will be obtained as designated in the Schedule of 
Procedures/Assessments ( Table 9).  Complete, standardized, 12 -lead ECG recordings that 
permit all 12 leads to be display ed on a single page with an accompany ing lead II rh ythm 
strip below the customary 3 × 4 lead format are to be used.  In addition to a rhy thm strip, a 
minimum of 3full complexes should be recorded from each lead simultaneously
.  Subjects 
must be in the recumbent position for a period of 5 minutes prior to the ECG.
An ECG abnormality  may  meet the criteria of an AE as described in this protocol (see
Section 9.5.1.6.1
) and the CRF Completion Guidelines.  In these instances, the AE 
corresponding to the ECG abnormality  will be recorded on the Adverse Events CRF.
9.5.1.6.7 OTHER SAFETY ASSESSMENTS
Brain Scan
A CT/MRI  scan of the brain will be performed as clinically  indicated and at all time points 
(including screening) for subjects with protocol- eligible treated brain metastases.
Bone Scan
Bone scans may  be performed every  24 weeks during the Treatment Phase, and as cl
inicall y 
indicated, using 99Tc bone scans, NaF (PET) bone scans,18FDG -PET/CT scans or whole 
body  bone MRI.  The same methodology  used at screening should be performed at all 
subsequent bone assessments.
Pregnancy  Test
A serum β -hCG or urine test (dependin g on local practice) will be performed for females of 
childbearing potential prior to starting treatment (within 7
2hours prior to the first dose of 
study  drug ).
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 64of 90Karnofsky  and Lansky Performance Status
Karnofsk y (for subjects >16 y ears of age) or Lansky (for subjects ≤16 y ears of age)
performance status will be assessed at Screening, Days 1 and 8 during C ycle 1, Day  1 of each 
subsequent treatment cy cle, and at the End -of-Treatment Visit.  
9.5.2 Schedule of Procedures/Assessments
Table 9presents the schedule of procedures/assessments for the study.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 65of 90Table 9 Schedule of Procedures/A ssessments in Study E7389 -G000- 223
Phase Pretreatm e
nt Treatm entFollow -up
until 1 -
yearAnnual 
Follow -up
PeriodScreeningaCycle 1 Cycle 2bCycle 3bAdditional 
CyclesbEOT
Visit 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11+ 11+
Day
–28to –1 1 8 15 1 8 15 1 8 15 1 8 15Within 28
days after 
last dose of 
drug
Procedures/Assessmen
ts
Informed consent X
Medical history X
Inclusion/exclusion X
Vital signscX X X X X X X X X X
HeightdX X X X
Weight, BSA X X X X X X X
Physical examination X X X X X X X
Performance statuseX X X X X X X
Pregnancy testfX X
Hem atologygX Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly X
Chemistry X Weekly X X X X
Eribulin mesylate 
administration (21 -Day X X X X X X X X
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 66of 90Table 9 Schedule of Procedures/A ssessments in Study E7389 -G000- 223
Phase Pretreatm e
nt Treatm entFollow -up
until 1 -
yearAnnual 
Follow -up
PeriodScreeningaCycle 1 Cycle 2bCycle 3bAdditional 
CyclesbEOT
Visit 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11+ 11+
Day
–28to –1 1 8 15 1 8 15 1 8 15 1 8 15Within 28
days after 
last dose of 
drug
Procedures/Assessmen
ts
cycle
Neurologic 
examinationn X X X X
Pharm acokinetic 
samplingh X X X X X X
ECGiX X X Clinically indicated X
Urinalysis X X Clinically indicated X
Tumor assessmentjXEvery 6 weeks (counting from 
date of Cycle 1 Day 1) until 
Week 24, then every 9 weeksX
Brain CT/MRIkXAs clinically indicated and at all time points for subjects w ith protocol -eligible treated 
brain metastases at screening
Bone scanlX Every 24 w eeks and as clinically indicated
Prior/concomitant 
medicationsThroughout
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 67of 90Table 9 Schedule of Procedures/A ssessments in Study E7389 -G000- 223
Phase Pretreatm e
nt Treatm entFollow -up
until 1 -
yearAnnual 
Follow -up
PeriodScreeningaCycle 1 Cycle 2bCycle 3bAdditional 
CyclesbEOT
Visit 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11+ 11+
Day
–28to –1 1 8 15 1 8 15 1 8 15 1 8 15Within 28
days after 
last dose of 
drug
Procedures/Assessmen
ts
Adverse events Throughout X
Survival status XmXo
BSA = body surface area, CT = computed tomography, ECG = electrocardiogram, EOT = end of treatment, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging.
a.The Screening Period extends from Day -28to Day -1. Day -28to -1, computed tomography (CT) / magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans must be
performed within 28days prior to study drug administration.  For logistical purposes, informed consent may be obtained from Day -29.  All clinical and 
laboratory studies to determine eligibility must be performed within 7 days prior to study drug adm inistration unless otherw ise indicated.  Laboratory 
values used to assess eligibility must be no older than 7 days at the start of therapy.
b.Assessments/procedures may b e obtained within 72 hours prior to the start of the subsequent cycle. 
c.Vital signs should be performed Day 1 , Day  8, and at the End of Treatment (EOT) for subjects receiving eribulin mesylate. 
d.Height should be measured every other cycle from Cycle 3. 
e.Performance status will be measured using Karnofsky or Lansky scales.
f.Female subjects of childbearing potential require a negative urine or serum (depending on local practice) pregnancy test prio r to starting treatment (within 7 2 
hours prior to Cycle 1 Day 1 ). 
g.Subjects will need to have hematology samples obtained weekly; an outside complete blood count can be performed when at the p hysician ’s discretion.
h.PK sample collection schedule: 
1. Immediately post -eribulin infusion on Day1 of each cycle for the first 3 cycles
2. Pre- eribulin infusion and immediately post -infusion on Day 8 of each cycle for the first 3 cycles. 
i.On Days 1 and 8 of Cycle 1, two 12-lead EC Gs will be obtained :one 15 -30 m inutes before infusion and a second one immediately after the i nfusion. The 
post-infusion E CG should precede the collection of the post -infusion PK sample on Day s1 and 8 of Cycle 1.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 68of 90j.Pre-study phase :  Screening tumor assessments using CT of the chest/abdomen and pelvis and other areas of known disease or newly suspected disease 
should be performed betw een Day  -28and Day -1.  Detailed image acquisition guidelines will be provided by the imaging core laboratory. Scans that w ere 
performed within this window but before informed consent may be used if they were acq uired consistent with the guidelines provided by the imaging core 
laboratory.  Scans of the abdomen, pelvis, and other areas of the body may be done with MRI instead of CT, but evaluation of the chest must be done with 
CT.
Treatment phase:  Tumor assessmen ts of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis and other areas of known disease that were scanned at screening, or newly suspected 
disease, must be performed every 6 weeks (within Week 6) during Treatment Cycles, counting from the date of first dose (or so oner if th ere is evidence of 
progressive disease) until Week 24 and then every 9 weeks (or sooner if clinically indicated) thereafter and should utilize t he same methodology (CT/MRI) 
and scan acquisition techniques (including use or nonuse of IV contrast) as were us ed for the screening assessments.  A chest x -ray or skeletal x -ray that 
clearly demonstrates a new metastatic lesion may be used to document progression in lieu of the CT/MRI scans.  
Follow -Up Period : Subjects who have gone off study without progression should have tumor assessments every 6 w eeks from the date of last tumor 
assessment until disease progression or initiation of another anti -cancer therapy.  At week 24 and thereafter, these scans may be conducted every 9 weeks.
k.Pre-study phase :  Screening C T or MRI of the brain should be performed betw een Day - 28and Day -1for subjects w ith previously treated protocol -eligible 
brain metastases only .
For subjects with previously treated protocol -eligible brain metastases, a brain scan must be performed at al l tumor assessment time points.  The same 
methodology and scan acquisition techniques used at screening should be used throughout the study to ensure comparability.
l.Bone scans may be performed, where indicated, using 99Tc based bone scans, NaF (PET) bone scans,18FDG -PET/CT scans or whole body bone MRI.  The 
same methodology used at screening should be performed at all subsequent bone assessments.
m. Subjects will be followed for survival approximately every 12 w eeks from the end of treatment for1 year, unless consent is withdrawn or death
n.A full neurological examination will be conducted at Screening.  During Cycle 2 (Day 1), Cycle 3 (Day 1), and Day 1 of any ad ditional cycle, neurological
status ( as a minimum, neuropathy present/absent and NCI CTC Grade ) will be assessed as part of the physical examination.
o.Subjects will be followed up annually after the 1 year follow up is complete (See footnote ‘m ’), for survival and assessment of any latent effects of the study 
treatment, unless consent is withdrawn or death
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 69of 909.5.3 Appropriateness of Measurements
All clinical assessments are standard measurements commonly  used in studies of soft tissue 
sarcomas .
The safet y assessments to be performed in this study , including hematology  anal yses, blood 
chemistry  tests, urinaly sis, radiologic studies, and assessment of AEs, are standard 
evaluations to ensure subject safet y.
9.5.4 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events, Pregnancy, and Events Associated 
with Special Situations
9.5.4.1 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events
All SAEs, regardless of their relationship to study treatment, must be reported on a 
completed SAE form by email or fax as soon as possible but no later than 1 business 
day from the date the investigator becomes aware of the event.
Serious adverse events, regardless of causalit y assessment, must be collected through t he last 
visit in the Treatment Phase, and for 28daysafter the subject’s last dose.  All SAEs must be 
followed to resolution or, if resolution is unlikely , to stabilization.  Any  SAE sjudged b y the 
investigator to be related to the study  treatment or any  protocol -required procedure should be 
reported to the sponsor regardless of the length of time that has passed since study  
completion.
The detailed contact information for reporting of SAEs is provided in the Investigator Study  
File.
For urgent safety issu es, please ensure all appropriate medical care is administered to the 
subject and contact the appropriate stud y team member listed in the I nvestigator Study  File.
It is very  important that the SAE report form be filled out as completely  as possible at the
time of the initial report.  This includes the investigator’s assessment of causality .
Any follow -up information received on SAEs should be forwarded within 1 business day  of 
its receipt.  If the follow-up information changes the investigator’s assessment of causality , 
this should also be noted on the follow- up SAE form.
Preliminary  SAE reports should be followed as soon as possible by  detailed descriptions 
including copies of hospital case reports, autops y reports, and other documents requested b y 
the sponsor.
The investigator must notify  his/her IRB/IEC of the occurrence of the SAE in writing, if 
required b y their institution .  A cop y of this communication must be forwarded to the sponsor 
to be filed in the sponsor’s Trial Master File.
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 70of 909.5.4.2 Reporting of Pregna ncy and Exposure to Study Drug Through Breastfeeding
Any pregnancy  in a female subject (or partner of a male subject) in which the estimated date 
of conception is either before the last visit, or within 28 days of last study  treatment ,or an y 
exposure to s tudy drug through breastfeeding during study  treatment or within 28daysof last 
study  treatment ,must be reported.
If an adverse outcome of a pregnancy  is suspected to be related to stud y drug exposure, this 
should be reported regardless of the length of time that has passed since the exposure to study  
treatment.
A congenital anomal y, death during perinatal period, an induced abortion, or a spontaneous 
abortion are considered to be an SAE and should be reported in the same time frame and in 
the same format as all other SAEs (see Reporting of Serious Adverse Events 
[Section 9.5.4.1]).
Pregnancies or exposure to study  drug through breastfeeding must be reported by  fax or 
email as soon as possible but no later than 1 business day  from the date the investigator 
becomes awa re of the pregnancy .  The contact information for the reporting of pregnancies 
and exposure to study  drug through breastfeeding is provided in the I nvestigator Study  File.  
The Pregnancy  Report Form must be used for reporting.  All pregnancies must be foll owed to 
outcome.  The outcome of the pregnancy  must be reported as soon as possible but no later 
than 1 business day  from the date the investigator becomes aware of the outcome.
A subject who becomes pregnant must be withdrawn from the study.
9.5.4.3 Reporting of Events Associated with Special Situations
9.5.4.3.1 REPORTING OF ADVERSE EVENTS ASSOCIATED WITH STUDY DRUG OVERDOSE
,
MISUSE, A BUSE, OR MEDICATION ERROR
Adverse e vents associated with study drug overdose, misuse, abuse, and medication error 
refer to AEs associated wi th uses of the study  drug outside of that specified by  the protocol.  
Overdose, misuse, abuse, and medication error are defined as follows:
Overdose Accidental or intentional use of the stud y drug in an amount higher 
than the protocol -defined dose .
Misuse Intentional and inappropriate use of stud y drug not in accordance with 
theprotocol
Abuse Sporadic or persistent intentional excessive use of study  drug 
accompanied b y harmful physical or ps ychological effects
Medication error Any unintentional event that causes or leads to inappropriate stud y 
drug use or subject harm while the study  drug is in the control of site
personnel or the subject.
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 71of 90All AEs associated with overdose , misuse, abuse, or medication error should be captured on 
the Adverse Event CRF a nd also reported using the procedures detailed in Reporting of 
Serious Adverse Events ( Section 9.5.4.1) even if the AEs do not meet serious criteria .  Abuse 
is alway s to be captured as an AE.  If the AE associated with an overdose, misuse, abuse, or 
medication error does not meet serious criteria, it must still be reported using the SAE form 
and in an expedited manner but should be noted as non -serious on the SAE form and the 
Adverse Event CRF.
9.5.4.4 Expedited Reporting
The sponsor must inform investigators and regulatory  authorities of repor table events, in 
compliance with applicable regulatory  requirements, on an expedited basis (ie, within 
specific time f rames).  For this reason, it is imperative that sites provide complete SAE 
information in the manner described above.
9.5.4.5 Regulatory Reporting of Adverse Events
Adverse events will be reported by  the sponsor or a third part y acting on behalf of the 
sponsor to regulatory  authorities in compliance with local and regional law and established 
guidance.  The format of these reports will be dictated b y the local and regional 
requirements.
9.5.5 Completion/Discontinuation of Subjects
A subject may  elect to discontinue the study  at any  time for any  reason.  All subjects who 
discontinue the study  are to complete the study ’s discontinuation procedures indicated in the 
Schedule of Procedures/Assessments 
(Table 9).
The investigator will promptly  explain to the subject involved that the study  will be 
discontinued for that subject and provide appropriate medical treatment and other necessary 
measures for the subject.  A subject who has ceased to return for visits will be followed up b y 
mail, phone, or other means to gather information such as the reason for failure to return, the 
status of treatment compliance, the presence or absence of AEs, and clinical courses of signs 
and sy mptoms.  
Subjects who discontinue from th e study  will be discontinued for 1of these primary  reasons: 
AE(s), lost to follow -up, subject choice, inadequate therapeutic effect, progression of disease, 
withdrawal of consent, pregnancy , study  terminated by  sponsor , or other.  In addition to the 
prima ry reason, the subject may  indicate 1or more secondary  reason (s)for discontinuation.  
Study  disposition information will be collected on the Subject Disposition CRF.
A subject removed from the study  for any  reason other than toxicity  or progression may  be 
replaced.
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 72of 909.5.6 Abuse or Diversion of Study Drug
During the study , the investigator will report any  concern about abuse or diversion of study  
drugs b y completing the Abuse or Diversion of Study  Drug CRF.
Adverse events associated with abuse or diversion will b e appropriatel y reported as AEs and 
monitored per Section 9.5.1.6.1 .  Abuse is alway s to be captured as an AE.
During the study , the investigator should be aware o f the possibility  of abuse or diversion of 
study  drugs and should report any concern about mishandling, abuse, loss, theft, or diversion 
of study  drugs b y completing the Potential Abuse -related Medication Handling Event CRF.
9.6 Data Quality  Assurance
This study  will be organized, performed, and reported in compliance with the protocol, 
SOPs, working practice documents, and applicable regulations and guidelines.  Site audits 
will be made periodically by  the sponsor’s or the CRO’s qualified compliance auditing t eam, 
which is an independent function from the stud y team responsible for conduct of the study.  
9.6.1 Data Collection
Data required b y the protocol will be collected on the CRFs and entered into a validated data 
management s ystem that is compliant with all reg ulatory  requirements.  As defined by  ICH 
guidelines, the CRF is a printed, optical, or electronic document designed to record all of the 
protocol -required information to be reported to the sponsor on each study  subject.
Data collection on the CRF must foll ow the instructions described in the CRF Completion 
Guidelines.  The investigator has ultimate responsibility  for the collection and reporting of all 
clinical data entered on the CRF.  The investigator or designee as identified on Form 
FDA 1572 must sign t he completed CRF to attest to its accuracy , authenticity , and 
completeness.
Completed, original CRFs are the sole propert y of Eisai and should not be made available in 
any form to third parties without written permission from Eisai, except for authorized 
representatives of Eisai or appropriate regulatory  authorities.
9.6.2 Clinical Data Management
All software applications used in the collection of data will be properly  validated following 
standard computer s ystem validation that is compliant with all regulatory  requirements.  All 
data, both CRF and external data (eg, laboratory  data), will be entered into a clinical s ystem.
9.7 Statistical Methods
All statistical analy ses will be performed b y the sponsor or designee after the study  is 
completed and the database is lo
cked.  Statistical analy ses will be performed using SAS 
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 73of 90software or other validated statistical software as required.  Details of the statistical analy ses 
will be included in a separate statistical anal ysis plan (SAP).
9.7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
The statistical anal yses of study  data are described in this section.  Further details of the 
analytical plan will be provided in the SAP, which will be finalized before database lock.
9.7.1.1 Study Endpoints
9.7.1.1.1 PRIMARY ENDPOINT
The primary  endpoint is :
Objective response : number of subjects achieving a best objective response of partial 
or complete response (PR or CR ), by up to 24 weeks after all subjects have completed 
response assessment. Response assessment will be as determined b y investigator.
9.7.1.1.2 SECONDARY ENDPO INTS
The secondary  endpoints are:
PFS:defined as the time from the first dose date to the date of disease progression or 
date of death (whichever occurs first) .
Safety  and tolerability : AEs, SAEs , clinical laboratory values, ECG parameters, vital 
sign mea surements, andperformance statu s.
DOR: defined as the time from the first date of documented PR or CR to the date of 
disease progression or date of death (whichever occurs first) .
OS: defined as the time from the first dose date to the date of death .
9.7.1.1.3 EXPLORATORY ENDPOINTS
The exploratory  endpoints are:
Exposure of eribulin mesylate .
9.7.1.2 Definitions of Analysis Sets
The Full Analysis Set(FAS)will consist of all subjects who receive at least 1 dose of study  
drug.
The Safety Analysis Set (SAS) will consist of allsubjects who receive at least 1 dose of 
study  drug. 
The Pharmacokinetic Analysis Set (PAS) will include subjects who have at least 1 
evaluable plasma concentration and sufficient dosing information.
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 74of 909.7.1.3 Subject Disposition
The numbe r and percentage of subjects who discontinue the study  treatment as well as the 
reason for discontinuation will be summarized.
9.7.1.4 Demographic and Other Baseline Characteristics
Demographic and other baseline characteristics will be summarized using descriptiv e 
statistics.  Continuous demographic and baseline variables include age, weight, and vital 
signs; categorical variables include sex, age group, and race.
9.7.1.5 Prior and Concomitant Therapy
All investigator terms for medications recorded in the CRF will be code d to an 11 -digit code 
using the World Health Organization Drug Dictionary  (WHO DD) ( 2017 or current ).  The 
number ( percentage) of subjects who took prior and concomitant medications will be 
summarized on the FullAnaly sis Set by treatment, Anatomical Thera peutic Chemical (ATC) 
class (ie , anatomical class, therapeutic class), and WHO DD preferred term.  Prior 
medications will be defined as medications that stopped before the first dose of study  drug.  
Concomitant medications will be defined as medications th at (1) started before the first dose 
of study  drug and were continuing at the time of the first dose of study  drug, or (2) started on 
or after the date of the first dose of study  drug (or, started at the time of or after the first dose 
of study  drug) up to 28 days after the subject’s last dose.  All medications will be presented 
in subject data listing s.
9.7.1.6 Efficacy Analyses
Efficacy  anal yses will be performed onthe FAS. 
9.7.1.6.1 PRIMARY EFFICACY ANALYSIS
The primary  anal ysis will be based on investigator assessments of tumor response.
The primary  anal ysis is to examine the number of responders within each histology  subject 
cohort. Confirmed response (PR or CR) will be used in this analy sis.  In each of the 
histology  groups of RMS, NRSTS, and EWS , approximately 15 subjects will be enrolled and 
treated with eribulin mesylate .  Data will be monitored on an ongoing basis; depending on 
evaluation b y the investigators and sponsor , if sufficient responses (PRs or CRs) are
observed, then this histology  type will be recommend ed for inclusion in the subsequent 
study .At the latest, the primary  anal ysis will be performed when approximately 15 subjects 
have completed 24 weeks of response assessments.
9.7.1.6.2 SECONDARY EFFICACY ANALYSES
The secondary  analy ses will be to estimate the PFS ,DOR, and OS in all cohorts combined.  
Median PFS , DOR, and OS will be estimated using Kaplan -Meier method. Descriptive 
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 75of 90statistics will be provided. Duration of response (DOR) will be calculated for subjects with 
an objective response of PR or CR.
9.7.1.7 Pharmaco kinetic, Pharmacodynamic, Pharmacogenomic , and Other Biomarker
Analyses
9.7.1.7.1 PHARMACOKINETIC ANALYSES
Blood samples will be collected for the PK analysis of eribulin as follows:
1.Immediately  post -infusion on Day  1 of each cy cle for the first 3 cy cles
2.Pre-infusion and immediately  post -infusion on Day  8 of each cy cle for the first 3 cycles
9.7.1.7.2 PHARMACODYNAMIC , PHARM ACOGENOMIC ,AND OTHER BIOMARKER ANALYSES
Exposure- response A nalyses
Following FDA guidance, PK sampling will be conducted in subjects across the pediatric 
program at regular intervals in order to adequatel y characterize the PK of eribulin in the 
pediatric population in the various age cohorts to explore exposure -response r elationships for 
activity /efficacy  and safety .  The relationship between exposure to eribulin mesy late and AE 
and efficacy  will be explored graphicall y.
9.7.1.8 Safety Analyses
All safet y anal yses will be performed on the Safety  Analy sis Set.  Safety  data, present ed by 
treatment arm , will be summarized on an “as treated” basis using descriptive statistics (eg, n, 
mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, maximum for continuous variables; n [%] for 
categorical variables).  Safet y variables include adverse events , clinical laboratory  
parameters, vital signs, 12- lead ECG results, and performance status. 
9.7.1.8.1 EXTENT OF EXPOSURE
The number of cy clesadministered, duration of treatment , and the number of subjects who 
had dose reduction anddose
delay  will be summarized for e ribulin mesy late.
9.7.1.8.2 ADVERSE EVENTS
The AE verbatim descriptions (investigator terms from the CRF) will be classified into 
standardized medical terminology  using the Medical Dictionary  for Regulatory  Activities 
(MedDRA).  Adverse events will be coded to the MedDRA ( Version 20.0 or higher) lower 
level term (LLT) closest to the verbatim term.  The linked MedDRA preferred term ( PT) and 
primary  system organ class (SOC) are also captured in the database.
A treatment -emergent adverse event ( TEAE) is defined as an AE that emerges during 
treatment, having been absent at pretreatment (Baseline) or 
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 76of 90Reemerges during treatment, having been present at pretreatment (Baseline) but 
stopped before treatment, or 
Worsens in severity  during treatment relative to the pretreatment state, when the AE 
is continuous.
Only  those AEs that a re treatment -emergent will be included in summary  table s.  All AEs, 
treatment -emergent or otherwise, will be presented in subject data listing s.
The incidence of TEAEs will be summarized with the number and percentage of subjects 
with TEAEs by  SOC and PT.  A subject will be counted only  once within a nSOC and PT, 
even if the subject experienced more than 1TEAE within a specific SOC and PT.  The 
number and percentage of subjects with TEAEs will also be summarized by  highest CTCAE 
grade (CTCAE v4
.03).
The number and percentage of subjects with treatment -related TEAEs will also be 
summarized by MedDRA SOC and PT.  
The number and percentage of subjects with treatment -emergent SAEs will be summarized 
by MedDRA SOC and PT .A subject data listing of all SAEs will be provided.
The number and percentage of subjects with TEAEs with fatal outcome will be summarized 
by MedDRA SOC and PT.  A subject data listin gof all AEs with fatal outcome will be 
provided.
The number and percentage of subjects with TEAEs leading to study  drug discontinuation 
will be summarized by  MedDRA SOC and PT. A subject data listing of all AEs leading to 
study  drug discontinuation will be provided.
9.7.1.8.3 LABORATORY VALUES
Laboratory  results will be summarized using Sy stème International (SI) units, as appropriate.  
For all quantitative parameters listed in Section
9.5.1.6.3, the actual value and the change 
from baseline and to the end of treatment (defined as the last on- treatment value) will be 
summarized using descriptive statistics.  Qualitative parameters listed in Section 9.5.1.6.3
will be summarized using frequencies (number and percentage of subjects) . Shift table s will 
be provided presenting post
-baseline against the baseline with number and percentage of
subjects .  Percentages will be based on the number of subjects with both baseline and the 
corresponding post-baseline measurements.
Laboratory  test results will be assigned a classification according to CTCAE grade. 
Summaries of CTCAE grade and shifts from baseline will be presented.
9.7.1.8.4 VITAL SIGNS
Descriptive statistics for vital signs parameters (s ystolic and diastolic BP, pulse, temperature,
weight ,and height ) and changes from b aseline will be presented b y visit .
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 77of 909.7.1.8.5 ELECTROCARDIOGRAMS
ECG assessments will be performed. QT intervals will be measured from Lead II and will be 
corrected for heart rate (QTc) using Fridericia's (QTcF) and Bazett's (QTcB) correction 
factors. The primary  QTc parameter will be QTcF. Secondary  parameters will be QTcB, 
QT, QRS, and heart rate .
Shift table s will present shifts from baseline to end of treatment in ECG interpretation 
(categorized as normal; abnormal, not clinically  significant; and abnormal, clinically  
significant). 
In addition, the number and percentage of subjects with at least 1 post- baseline abnormal 
ECG result in QTc Fridericia during the treatment period will be summarized.  Clinically  
abnormal ECG results in QTc Fridericia will be categorized as follows:
Absolute QTc interval prolongation:
QTc interval >450 ms
QTc interval >480 ms
QTc interval > 500 ms
Change from baseline in QTc interval:
QTcinterval increase from baseline >30 ms
QTc interval increase from baseline >60 ms
9.7.1.8.6 OTHER SAFETY ANALYSES
Performance Status
Karno fsky and Lansky  performance status scores and their changes from baseline will be 
summarized using descriptive statistics.
9.7.2 Determination of Sample Size
A total of 45 subjects will be enrolled. In each of the histology  groups of RMS, NRSTS, and 
EWS , approximately 15 subjects will be enrolled and t reated with eribulin mesy late.  The 
sample size is considered sufficient based on clinical judgment and is not obtained from 
statistical calculation.
9.7.3 Interim Analysis
Data will be monitored on an ongoing basis; depending on evaluation by  the investigators 
and sponsor, if sufficient responses (PR or CR) are observed, then this histology  type will be 
recommended f or inclusion in the subsequent study .
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 78of 909.7.4 Other Statistical/Analytical Issues
Not applicable.
9.7.5 Procedure for Revising the Statistical Analysis Plan
If the SAP needs to be revised after its initial finalization , the sponsor will determine how the 
revision impacts the study and how the revision should be implemented.  The details of the 
revision will be documented and described in the clinical study  report.
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 79of 9010REFERENCE LIST
Balamuth NJ, Womer RB. Ewing’s sarcoma. Lancet Oncology . 2010;11(2):184-92.
Chisholm JC, Marandet J, Rey  A, Scopinaro M, de Toledo JS, Merks JH, et al. Prognostic 
factors after relapse in nonmetas tatic rhabdom yosarcoma: a nomogram to better define 
patients who can be salvaged with further therap y. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Apr 1;29(10):1319-25.
Cortes J, O'Shaughness y J, Loesch D, Blum JL , Vahdat LT, Petrakova K, et al. Eribulin 
monotherap y versus treatme nt of phy sician's choice in patients with metastatic breast cancer 
(EMBRACE): a phase 3 open -label randomised study . Lancet. 2011 Mar 12;377(9769):914 -
23.
Crist WM, Anderson JR, Meza JL , Fry er C, Raney RB, Ruy mann FB, et al. Intergroup 
rhabdom yosarcoma stu dy-IV: results for patients with nonmetastatic disease. J Clin Oncol. 
2001 Jun 15;19(12):3091 -102.
Dantonello TM, Int -Veen C, Harms D, Leuschner I , Schmidt BF, Herbst M, et al. 
Cooperative trial CWS-91 for localized soft tissue sarcoma in children, adolesc ents, and 
young adults. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Mar 20;27(9):1446 -55.
Ferrari A, Casanova M. Current chemotherapeutic strategies for rhabdom yosarcoma. Expert 
Rev Anticancer Ther. 2005 Apr;5(2):283-94.
Funahashi Y, Okamoto K, Adachi Y, Semba T, Uesugi M, Ozawa Y, et al. Eribulin mesy late 
reduces tumor microenvironment abnormalit y by vascular remodeling in preclinical human 
breast cancer models. Cancer Sci. 2014;105(10):1334-42.
German Childhood Cancer Registry . (2010). Annual Report. Retrieved Mar 2016, from 
http://www.unimedizin -mainz.de/index.php?id=22651.
Gurney  JG, Young J, Roffers SD, Smith MA, Bunin GR. Soft tissue sarcomas . In: Ries LAG, 
Smith MA, Gurney  JG, Linet M, Tamra T, Young JL , et al. editors. Cancer incidence and 
survival among children and adoles cents: United States SEER Program 1975 -1995. 
Bethesda, MD: NIH Pub. No. 99- 4649; 1999.
Halaven full prescribing information, 2016, available from 
http://www.halaven.com/hcp/sites/default/files/HALAVEN -Full-Prescribing -Information-
2015.pdf.  Accessed March 2016.
Jacobs S, Fox E, Krailo M, Hartley  G, Navid F, Wexler L , et al. Phase II trial of ixabepilone 
administered dail y for five days in children and young adults with refractory  solid tumors: a 
report from the children's oncology  group. Clin Cancer Res. 20 10 Jan 15;16(2):750-4.
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 80of 90Jordan MA, Kamath K, Manna T, Okouneva T, Miller HP, Davis C, et al. The primary  
antimitotic mechanism of action of the s ynthetic halichondrin E7389 is suppression of 
microtubule growth. Mol Cancer Ther. 2005;4:1086-95.
Jordan MA, Wi lson L . Microtubules as a target for anticancer drugs. Nat Rev Cancer. 
2004;4:253-65.
Kolb EA, Gorlick R, Reynolds P, Kang MH, Carol H, L ock R, et al. Initial testing (Stage 1) 
of eribulin, a novel tubulin binding agent, b y the pediatric preclinical testin g program. Pediatr 
Blood Cancer. 2013 Aug; 60(8): 1325-32.
Mascarenhas L, Lyden ER, Breitfeld PP, Walterhouse DO, Donaldson SS, Paidas CN, et al. 
Randomized phase II window trial of two schedules of irinotecan with vincristine in patients 
with first relapse or progression of rhabdom yosarcoma: a report from the Children's 
Oncology  Group. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Oct 20;28(30):4658 -63.
Maurer HM, Gehan EA, Beltangad y M, Crist W, Dickman P S, Donaldson SS, et al. The 
Intergroup Rhabdom yosarcoma Study -II. Cancer. 199 3 Mar 1;71(5):1904- 22.
Meyer WH, Spunt SL . Soft tissue sarcomas of childhood. Cancer Treat Rev. 2004 
May;30(3):269 -80.
National Cancer Institute, 2016. Childhood Soft Tissue Sarcoma Treatment for Health 
Professionals PDQ®.  Retrieved Feb 2016, from 
http://www.cancer.gov/publications/pdq/information -summaries
Pappo AS, Rao BN, Jenkins JJ, Merchant T, Poquette CA, Cain A, et al. Metastatic 
nonrhabdom yosarcomatous soft -tissue sarcomas in children and adolescents: the St. Jude 
Children's Research Hospital experience. Med Pediatr Oncol. 1999 Aug;33(2):76-82.
Pastore G, Peris -Bonet R, Carli M, Martínez-García C, Sánchez de Toledo J, Steliarova-
Foucher E. Childhood soft tissue sarcomas incidence and survival in European children 
(1978 -1997): report from the Au tomated Childhood Cancer Information System project. Eur 
J Cancer. 2006;42(13):2136 -49.
Saylors RL 3rd, Stine KC, Sullivan J, Kepner JL , Wall DA, Bernstein ML, et al. 
Cyclophosphamide plus topotecan in children with recurrent or refractory  solid tumors: a 
Pediatric Oncology  Group phase II study. J Clin Oncol. 2001 Aug 1;19(15):3463-9.
Schafer E, Rau RE, Berg S, Liu X, Minard CG, D'Adamo DR, et al. A phase 1 study  of 
eribulin mesy late (E7389), a novel microtubule targeting chemotherapeutic agent in children 
with refractory  or recurrent solid tumors (excluding CNS), including ly mphomas: a 
Children's Oncology  Group Phase 1 Consortium study  (ADVL1314). Pediatr Blood Cancer. 
2018; 65 (8)  .
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 81of 90Schöffski P, Chawla S, Maki RG, I taliano A, Gelderblom H, Choy  E, et al. Eribulin versus 
dacarbazine in previously treated patients with advanced liposarcoma or leiomy osarcoma: a 
randomized, open -label, multicenter, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2016; Feb 10. pii: S0140 -
6736(15)01283- 0. doi: 10.1016/S0140 -6736(15)01283- 0. [Epub ahead o f print].
Schöffski P, Ray -Coquard IL, Cioffi A, Bui NB, Bauer S, Hartmann JT, et al. Activity  of 
eribulin mesylate in patients with soft -tissue sarcoma: a phase 2 stud y in four independent 
histological subty pes. Lancet Oncol. 2011 Oct;12(11):1045 -52.
Schw artz, GJ, Gauthier, B. A simple estimate of glomerular filtration rate in adolescent bo ys. 
J Pediatr. 1985;106:522 –526.
Smith JA, Wilson L , Azarenko O, Zhu X, Lewis BM, L ittlefield BA, et al. Eribulin binds at 
microtubule ends to a single site on tubulin to suppress d ynamic instability. Biochemistry. 
2010 Feb 16;49(6):1331 -7.
Storm HH. Survival of adult patients with cancer of soft tissues or bone in Europe. 
EUROCARE Working Group. Eur J Cancer. 1998;34(14 Spec No), 2212-7.
Van Gaal JC, De Bont ES, Kaal SE, Versleijen- Jonkers Y, van der Graaf WT. Building the 
bridge between rhabdomyosarcoma in children, adolescents and young adults: The road 
ahead. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2012 Jun;82(3):259 -79.
Yoshida T, Ozawa Y, Kimura T, Sato Y, Kuznetsov G, Xu S, et al. Eribulin mesy late
suppresses experimental metastasis of breast cancer cells b y reversing phenotype from 
epithelial -mesench ymal transition (EMT) to mesenchy mal-epithelial transition (MET) states. 
Br J Cancer. 2014;110(6):1497-505.
Zer A, Prince RM, Amir E, Razak AA. Evolution of randomized trials in 
advanced/metastatic soft tissue sarcoma: endpoint selection, surrogacy , and quality  of 
reportin g.  J Clin Oncol . 2016; doi:10.1200/JCO.2016.66.4581. Epub ahead of print.
RECIST Reference
Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, Schwartz LH, Sargent D, Ford R, et al. New 
response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: revised RECI ST guideline ( version 1.1). Eur J 
Cancer. 2009;45( 2):228 -47.
CTCAE Reference
Cancer Therap y Evaluation Program, Common Terminology  Criteria for Adverse Events 
(CTCAE) version 4.0 [published 28 May 2009 (v4.03: June 14, 2010)].  Available from: 
http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/CTCAE_4.03_2010-06-14_QuickReference_8.5x11.pdf. 
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 82of 9011PROCE DURES AND INSTRUCTIO NS (ADM INISTRA TIVE 
PROCEDURES)
11.1 Changes to the Protocol
Any change to the protocol requires a written protocol amendment or administrative change 
that must be approved b y the sponsor before implementation.  Amendments specificall y 
affect ing the safety  of subjects, the scope of the investigation, or the scientific quality  of the 
study  require submission to health or regulatory  authorities as well as additional approval by  
the applicable IRBs/IECs.  These requirements should in no way  preve nt any  immediate 
action from being taken by  the investigator, or by the sponsor, in the interest of preserving 
the safet y of all subjects included in the study.  If the investigator determines that an 
immediate change to or deviation from the protocol is n ecessary for safet y reasons to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to the subjects, the sponsor’s medical monitor and the 
IRB/IEC for the site must be notified immediately.  The sponsor must notify the health or 
regulatory  authorit y as required per local regulations.
Protocol amendments that affect only  administrative aspects of the study  may  not require 
submission to health or regulatory  authorit y or the I RB/IEC, but the health or regulatory  
authority  and IRB/IEC should be kept informed of such changes as requir ed by  local 
regulations.  In these cases, the sponsor may  be required to send a letter to the I RB/IEC and 
the Competent Authorities detailing such changes.
11.2 Adherence to the Protocol
The investigator will conduct the study  in strict accordance with the prot ocol (refer to 
ICH E6, Section 4.5).
11.3 Monitoring Procedures
The sponsor’s CRA will maintain contact with the investigator and designated staff by  
telephone, letter, or email between study visits.  Monitoring visits to each site will be 
conducted b y the assi gned CRA as described in the monitoring plan.  The investigator will 
allow the CRA to inspect the clinical, laboratory , and pharmacy  facilities to assure 
compliance with GCP and local regulatory  requirements.  The CRFs and subject’s 
corresponding original medical records (source documents) are to be full y available for 
review b y the sponsor’s representatives at regular intervals.  These reviews verify  adherence 
to study  protocol and data accuracy  in accordance with local regulations.  All records at the 
site are subject to inspection by  the local auditing agency  and to IRB/IEC review.
In accordance with ICH E6, Section 1.52, source documents include, but are not limited to ,
the following:
Clinic, office, or hospital charts
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 83of 90Copies or transcribed health care p rovider notes that have been certified for accuracy  
after production
Recorded data from automated instruments such as I xRS, x -rays, and other imaging 
reports (eg , sonograms, CT scans, magnetic resonance images, radioactive images, 
ECGs, rhy thm strips, EEGs , poly somnographs, pulmonary  function tests) regardless 
of how these images are stored, including microfiche and photographic negatives
Pain, quality  of life, or medical history  questionnaires completed b y subjects
Records of telephone contacts
Diaries or evaluation checklists
Drug distribution and accountability  logs maintained in pharmacies or by  research 
personnel
Laboratory  results and other laboratory  test outputs (eg , urine pregnancy  test result 
documentation and urine dip- sticks)
Correspondence regar ding a study  subject’s treatment between ph ysicians or 
memoranda sent to the IRBs/IECs
CRF components (eg, questionnaires) that are completed directl y by subjects and 
serve as their own source
11.4 Recording of Data
A CRF is required and must be completed for e ach subject by  qualified and authorized 
personnel.  All data on the CRF must reflect the corresponding source document, except 
when a section of the CRF itself is used as the source document.  Any  correction to entries 
made on the CRF must be documented in a valid audit trail where the correction isdated, the 
individual making the correct is identified , the reason for the 
change is stated, and the 
original data are not obscured.  Onl y data required by the protocol for the purposes of the 
study  should be co llected.
The investigator must sign each CRF.  The investigator will report the CRFs to the sponsor 
and retain a cop y of the CRFs.
11.5 Identification of Source Data
All data to be recorded on the CRF must reflect the corresponding source documents.
11.6 Retention of Records
The circumstances of completion or termination of the study notwithstanding, the 
investigator is responsible for retaining all study  documents, including but not limited to the 
protocol, copies of CRFs, the I nvestigator's Brochure, and regulator y agency registration 
documents (eg , Form FDA 1572, I CFs, and IRB/IEC correspondence).  In addition, the 
sponsor will send a list of treatment codes b y study subject to the investigator after the 
clinical database for this study  has been locked.  The site should plan to retain study  
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 84of 90documents, as directed by  the sponsor, for at least 2 y ears after the last approval of a 
marketing application in an I CH region and until there are no pending or contemplated 
marketing applications in an I CH region or at least 3 years have elapsed since the formal 
discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product.
It is requested that at the completion of the required retention period, or should the 
investigator retire or relocate, the investigator contact th e sponsor, allowing the sponsor the 
option of permanentl y retaining the stud y records.
11.7 Auditing Procedures and Inspection
In addition to routine monitoring procedures, the sponsor’s Clinical Quality Assurance 
department conducts audits of clinical research activities in accordance with the sponsor’s 
SOPs to evaluate compliance with the principles of I CH GCP and all applicable local 
regulations.  If a government regulatory  authorit y requests an inspection during the stud y or 
after its completion, the investi gator must inform the sponsor immediately .
11.8 Handling of Study  Drug
All study  drug will be supplied to the principal investigator (or a designated pharmacist) b y 
the sponsor.  Drug supplies must be kept in an appropriate secure area (eg, locked cabinet) 
and stored according to the conditions specified on the drug labels.  The investigator (or a 
designated pharmacist) must maintain an accurate record of the shipment and dispensing of 
the study  drug in a drug accountability  ledger, a copy  of which must be given to the sponsor 
at the end of the stud y.  An accurate record of the date and amount of study drug dispensed to 
each subject must be available for inspection at any  time.  The CRA will visit the site and 
review these documents along with all other stud y con duct documents at appropriate 
intervals once stud y drug has been received b y the site.
All drug supplies are to be used onl y for this study and not for an y other purpose.  The 
investigator ( or site personnel) must not destroy  any drug labels or any  partly  used or unused 
drug suppl y before approval to do so by the sponsor.  At the conclusion of the study and as 
appropriate during the study , the investigator (or a designated pharmacist) will return all used 
and unused drug containers, drug labels, and a copy of the completed drug disposition form 
to the sponsor’s CRA or, when approval is given by the sponsor, will destroy supplies and 
containers at the site.
11.9 Publication of Results
All manuscripts, abstracts, or other modes of presentation arising from the resu lts of the 
study  must be reviewed and approved in writing by  the sponsor in advance of submission 
pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in the executed Clinical Trial Agreement 
between the sponsor/CRO and the institution/investigator.  The review is aimed at protecting 
the sponsor's proprietary  information existing either at the date of the commencement of the 
study  or generated during the study .
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 85of 90The detailed obligations regarding the publication of an y data, material results, or other 
information generated or created in relation to the study  shall be set out in the agreement 
between each investigator and the sponsor or CRO, as appropriate.
11.10 Disclosure and Confidentiality
The contents of this protocol and an y am endments and results obtained during th e stud y 
should be kept confidential by the investigator, the investigator’s staff, and the IRB/IEC and 
will not be disclosed in whole or in part to others, or used for an y purpose other than 
reviewing or performing the study , without the written consent of the sponsor.  No data 
collected as part of this study  will be used in an y written work, including publications, 
without the written consent of the sponsor.  These obligations of confidentiality  and non- use 
shall in no way  diminish such obligations as set forth in either the Confidentiality  Agreement 
or Clinical Trial Agreement executed between the sponsor/CRO and the 
institution/investigator.
All persons assisting in the performance of this study  must be bound by  the obligations of 
confidentiality  and non -use set forth in either the Confidentiality  Agreement or Clinical Trial 
Agreement executed between the institution/investigator and the sponsor/CRO.
11.11 Discontinuation of Study
The sponsor reserves the right to discontinue the study  for medical reasons or any other 
reason at an y time.  If a study is prematurel y terminated or suspended, the sponsor will 
promptly  inform the investigators/institutions and regulatory  authorities of the termination or 
suspension and the reason (s) for the termination or suspension. The IRB/ IEC will also be 
informed promptly and provided the reason (s) for the termination or suspension by  the 
sponsor or by the investigator/institution, as specified by  the applicable regulatory  
requirement (s).
The investigator reserves the right to dis continue the study  should his/her judgment so 
dictate.  If the investigator terminates or suspends a study  without prior agreement of the 
sponsor, the investigator should inform the institution where applicable, and the 
investigator/institution should prom ptly inform the sponsor and the IRB/ IEC and provide the 
sponsor and the IRB/ IEC with a detailed written explanation of the termination or 
suspension.  Study  records must be retained as noted above.
11.12 Subject Insurance and Indemnity
The sponsor will provide i nsurance for an y subjects participating in the study  in accordance 
with all applicable laws and regulations.
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 86of 9012APPENDICES
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 87of 90Appendix 1 Measurements of Performance Status
Karno fsky Performance Status and Lansky Play -Performance Scale for Pediatric 
Patients
Rating/ScoreDescription
Lansky Karno fsky
100 Fully  active, normal Normal, no complaints
90 Minor restrictions with strenuous 
physical activityAble to carry  on normal activities. 
Minor signs or s ymptoms of disease
80 Active, but gets tired more quickl y Normal activity  with effort
70 Both greater restriction of, and less 
time spent in, active playCare for self. Unable to carry  on 
normal activity  or do active work
60 Up and around, but minimal active 
play; keeps bus y with qui eter 
activitiesRequiring occasional assistance, but 
able to care for most needs
50 Lying around much of the day , but 
gets dressed; no active play ; 
participates in all quiet play  and 
activitiesRequires considerable assistance and 
frequent medical care
40 Mostly  in bed; participates in quiet 
activitiesDisabled, requires special care and 
assistance
30 Stuck in bed; needs help even for 
quiet playSeverel y disabled, Hospitalization 
indicated though death nonimminent
20 Often sleeping; play  is entirely  
limited to very passive activitiesVery  sick. Hospitalization necessary . 
Active supportive treatment 
necessary
10 Does not play  nor get out of bed Moribund
0 Unresponsive Dead
Clini cal Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 88of 90Appendix 2 M odified “Balis” Pediatric Scale of Pe ripheral 
Neuropathies
Peripheral Motor Neuropathy:
Grade 1 : Subjective weakness, but no deficits detected on neurological exam, other than 
abnormal deep tendon reflexes.
Grade 2 : Weakness that alters fine motor skills (buttoning shirt, coloring, writing or 
drawing, using eating utensils) or gait without abrogating abilit y to perform these tasks.
Grade 3 : Unable to perform fine motor tasks (buttoning shirt, coloring, writing or drawing, 
using eating utensils) or unable to ambulate without assistance.
Grad e 4:Paral ysis.
Peripheral Sensory Neuropathy:
Grade 1 : Paresthesias, pain, or numbness that do not require treatment or interfere with 
extremity  function.
Grade 2 : Paresthesias, pain, or numbness that are controlled by  non- narcotic medications 
(without causing loss of function), or alteration of fine motor skills (buttoning shirt, writing 
or drawing, using eating utensils) or gait, without abrogating ability  to perform these tasks.
Grade 3 : Paresthesias or pain that are controlled by  narcotics, or inte rfere with extremity  
function (gait, fine motor skills as outlined above), or quality  of life (loss of sleep, ability to 
perform normal activities severel y impaired).
Grade 4 :Complete loss of sensation, or pain that is not controlled by  narcotics.
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 89of 90PROTOCOL SIGNATURE P AGE
Study Protocol Number: E7389- G000 -223
Study Protocol Title: A Phase 2, multicenter, open -label stud y to assess safet y and 
preliminary  activity  of eribulin mesy late in pediatric subjects 
with relapsed/refractory  rhabdomy osarcoma (RMS), non -
rhabdom yosarcoma soft tissue sarcoma (N RSTS) and Ewing 
sarcoma (EWS)
Investigational Product 
Name:E7389 (eribulin mes ylate)
IND Number: 116,292
SIGNATURES
Authors:
Oncology  Business Group, Eisai Ltd.Date
Date
nc.Date
Associate Director, Biostatistics
Oncology  Business Group, Eisai I nc.Date
PPD
PPD
PPD
PPD
Clinical Study Protocol
incorporating Amendment 2.0E7389- G000 -223
Eisai
FINAL: 20 Dec 2018Confidential Page 90of 90INVESTIGA TOR SIGNA TURE PA GE
Study Protocol Number: E7389- G000 -223
Study Protocol Title: A Phase 2, multicenter, open -label stud y to assess safet y and 
preliminary  activity  of eribulin mesy late in pediatric subjects 
with relapsed/refractory  rhabdomy osarcoma (RMS), non -
rhabdom yosarcoma soft tissue sarcoma (NRSTS) and Ewing 
sarcoma (EWS)
Investi gational Product 
Name:E7389 (eribulin mesylate)
IND Number: 116,292
I have read this protocol and agree to conduct this study in accordance with all stipulations of 
the protocol and in accordance with International Council on Harmonisation of Technical 
Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use ( ICH) and all applicable 
local Good Clinical Practice ( GCP) guidelines, including the Declaration of Helsinki.
Medical Institution
Investigator Signature Date