IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 1 of 23  
 
Official study title:  
Development of an Adjunctive Video -Based Suicide Prevention Intervention Immediately Following 
Psychiatric Hospitalization  
 
NCT number:  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document date:  
3/28/202 2 
  
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 2 of 23 Local IRB # 1910 -001   IRBNet # 1505531  
 
 
BUTLER HOSPITAL  
INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
PROTOCOL  
 
1.) Project   
Title of Project: ___Development of an Adjunctive Video -Based Suicide Prevention Intervention Immediately 
Following Psychiatric Hospitalization ____________________________ _____________________  
Principal  Investigator (PI):  Lisa Uebelacker, Ph.D.                     
Other Investigator(s):    Brandon Gaudiano, Ph.D., Sarah Arias, Ph.D., Ivan Miller, Ph.D., Lauren Weinstock, 
Ph.D.                                       
                              
2.) Description of Study  
 
A.  Specific Aims    
 
1) Phase 1 : We will interview patients  (n = 36 ; Phase 1a ) with a history of psychiatric hospitalization for 
suicidality about their life experiences and coping history. Working with a local film production company, 
we will invite a subset  (n = 12 ; Phase 1b ) of these individuals back to be interviewed on camera f or a series 
of documentary -style videos that will form the basis of LifePlans . After the filming of additional clinician -
related content, we will create 5, 30 -min LifePlans  episodes using narrative methods. We also will develop 
an accompanying  LifePlans  workbook using a similar process of feedback and refinement.  
 
2) Phase 2 : We will conduct an open trial (n=10) to test the feasibility/acceptability of LifePlans  for 
hospitalized patients with a pre -admission suicide plan/attempt  in the past month . In the hospi tal, patients 
will watch the first episode and meet with a hospital social worker, and then watch one episode per week 
during the first month post -discharge. Patients will be assessed at baseline, and 1- and 6 -months  post -
discharge on suicidal behaviors (primary), suicidal ideation, psychiatric symptoms, functioning, 
rehospitalization rate, and mechanisms. We will also conduct qualitative interviews with  clinical 
stakeholders (n=12) at mental health hospitals or outpa tient treatment centers in the RI area. These 
clinicians may or may not have treated a patient who participated in the open trial. Stakeholder interview 
agendas will assess: a) barriers to patients' medication/appointment adherence, b) how the field can us e a 
video intervention to support aftercare, c) challenges patients face upon return to the community post -
discharge, d) challenges faced by clinicians/organizations treating individuals with suicidal thoughts and/or 
behaviors.  Modifications will be made t o LifePlans  based on lessons learned from the open trial.  
 
3) Phase 3 : We will conduct a pilot RCT (n=40) of hospitalized patients (including people enrolled in a partial 
hospital program) with a recent suicide attempt/plan who will receive treatment as usual  (TAU) plus 
LifePlans  vs TAU only. We will examine LifePlans  feasibility and acceptability (video viewing, engagement, 
satisfaction, recruitment/retention), treatment differences (within relevant confidence intervals) on 
outcomes (e.g., suicide behaviors),  and change on potential mechanisms.  
 
B.  Background   
 
Suicide and attempted suicide are major public health issues in the U.S., accounting for almost 45,000 deaths 
in 2016, and over 1 million attempts each year. Although recent years have seen significant advances in our 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 3 of 23 knowledge of efficacious treatments fo r many psychiatric disorders, the suicide rates in the U.S. have been 
increasing since 2000. Even with increased efforts in recent years, there still has been a relative paucity of 
research devoted to developing or testing innovative interventions directly  targeting suicidal behavior to reach 
those most in need. Some treatments (e.g., cognitive behavior therapies) have been found to reduce rates of 
suicide attempts, but these interventions require substantial training and are lengthy and costly to administe r. 
On the other hand, minimally intensive interventions (e.g., follow -up letters, postcards) have shown mixed 
results. More efficient and effective “middle ground” interventions developed to prevent suicidal behavior are 
clearly needed. We urgently need in terventions based on evidence -based principles that decrease suicidal 
behavior and are feasible to deliver to large numbers of patients at times when their risk for suicide is high.  
Narrative communication is an alternative strategy for disseminating beha vior change principles that has 
shown efficacy for improving health behaviors. Our own pilot work suggests it may be useful for treating 
depression. Narrative methods refer to people with lived experience talking about both their struggles and 
successful w ays of coping. Narrative strategies are consistent with social learning theory: people learn by 
observing others like themselves. An advantage of narrative communication that it is often viewed as more 
engaging by patients (than didactic communication) and , with the help of video, is easier to disseminate than 
traditional interventions delivered by clinicians. Narrative communication interventions can be designed to 
promote key principles from evidence -based psychotherapies.  
In this treatment development p roject, we propose to develop and test a narrative -based video intervention 
for people with suicidal behavior or plan (with or without intent ) being discharged from psychiatric 
hospitalization. The period immediately following discharge, and the entire yea r after discharge, is a time of 
substantially increased risk for suicidal behavior. In response to the need for treatment over this transition, we 
previously developed a psychosocial intervention, Coping Long Term with Active Suicide Program (CLASP), in 
which clinicians deliver up to 15 in -person and telephone sessions with patients and families starting during a 
hospitalization and continuing for 6 months post -discharge. CLASP targets risk factors associated with suicidal 
behavior (coping strategies, socia l support, adherence, hopelessness) in order to reduce subsequent risk. Initial 
research on CLASP is promising, with a 40% reduction in suicide attempts compared to controls over 6 months 
follow -up.  
In this project, we propose to develop a new interventio n, called LifePlans , based on the CLASP model but 
using an easily disseminable video -based format in which real patients discuss their history of suicidal behavior 
and the coping strategies that they used to stay safe. LifePlans  will consist of 5, 30 -min e pisodes that highlight 
patients’ experiences consistent with the CLASP model. Episodes will cover these topics: 1) developing a 
personalized “Life Plan” to stay safe and restrict means, 2) clarifying valued life domains and related goals to 
improve hopeful ness, 3) using informal problem solving to cope better with illness, 4) improving 
communication with family/friends to increase social support, and 5) adhering to primary treatments including 
pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy to promote illness management.  To aid in video content development 
and planning, we will also conduct qualitative interviews of clinical stakeholders regarding their perspectives 
on the video series . 
 
C.  Experimental Method  
 
C1.  Brief Description of Subjects  
 
 Phase 1: Participants with a history of psychiatric hospitalization for suicide plan and intent or attempt 
(n=36) will be initially interviewed  (Phase 1a) , with a subset (n=12) selected to be part of the LifePlans videos  
(Phase 1b) .  
 
 Phase 2: Participants currently psychiatrically hospitalized with suicide plan (with or without  intent ) or 
recent suicide attempt in the past month (n=10) will receive TAU + LifePlans starting during their 
hospitalization and continuing after discharge.  We also wil l conduct 30 -minute individual interviews of clinical 
stakeholders (n = 12). Interviews will be led by members of the investigator team and a study research 
assistant (RA) listening to the conversation and taking notes. Interview agendas will be developed so that 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 4 of 23 participants will receive similar types of questions, as well as those that may be specific to their job 
responsibilities (e.g., clinical counselor  vs psychiatrist) . 
 
 Phase 3: Participants currently psychiatrically hospitalized or enrolled in a pa rtial hospital program with 
suicide plan (with or without  intent ) or attempt ( n=40) will be randomized to receive TAU vs TAU + LifePlans  
starting during their hospitalization and continuing after discharge.  
 
C2.  Study Design  
 
Phase 1: Development Phase  
 
The aim of this phase is to develop a brief narrative -based video intervention (LifePlans) for use with 
hospitalized patients with a suicide intent and plan or suicide attempt prior to admission. Consistent with our 
own previous work and that of others,1,2 we will use a research strategy that allows us to elicit compelling 
participant nar ratives from a specific community (people with a history of suicide plans/behaviors) that are 
chosen and framed in order to communicate evidence -based therapeutic strategies.1 This series of videos will 
be intended to be adjunctive to treatment from community mental health providers that occurs during the very 
high risk period of one month post -hospitalization. Ultimately, this type of video program can be one component 
of a Ze ro Suicide package as implemented in a health system of care. The five steps to the intervention 
development strategy are: 1) initial qualitative interviews to identify participants for videorecording (n=36 total); 
2) selection of a subset of participants initially interviewed in step 1 for participation in videorecordings; 3) 
videorecording and editing of the selected participant interviews (n=12 total); 4) stakeholder feedback on video 
content; 5) professional framing, editing, and workbook creation for f inal LifePlans intervention. This process 
will be done in an iterative fashion to allow us to incorporate stakeholder feedback and lessons learned from 
earlier iterations to finalize the video product and workbook. The first four steps will be repeated thr ee times 
each in order to yield the final set of videos featuri ng 12 participant interviews  We have previously used this 
methodology to successfully complete a previous video -based narrative intervention.3 
 
Development:  Recruitment  
 
We will select participants to interview about their experiences with suicidality and their recovery process. 
See full inclusion criteria below. Recruitment will occur via advertisements in the community and outpatient 
mental health settings and in collabo ration with community patient support groups. We will also recruit via 
social media and other online forums. We will attempt to recruit participants who have successfully completed 
previous CLASP studies who gave us permission to contact them about future studies. Interested participants 
will be invited to call research staff or will request a call via a secure online format. Staff will describe the goals 
of the study over the phone and conduct an assessment of inclusion criteria. If they are eligible, we w ill schedule 
them for an in -person interview  OR a remote video -based interview using a HIPAA compliant online platform , 
or a phone call if they prefer or don’t have access to a computer or smartphone .  At the start of that appointment, 
we will conduct an i nformed consent process and obtain written  OR verbal  consent  (depending on whether the 
interview is in -person or remote)  
Given our modest goals, we do not anticipate problems with recruitment. However, it is possible that some 
individuals will not want to be featured in videos that talk about suicide and that will be shown to other people. 
To address this concern, we will give participants the opportunity to view their completed video (which will 
portray the participants in a favorable light) and to withdra w the video, or parts of the video, at that time. We 
will also create the final intervention in such a way that participants may request to withdraw their videos even 
once they are live, and we will do so.  See Human Subjects Phase 1 for details.  
 
Developm ent Step 1. Narrative Collectio n (Phase 1a)  
  
We will design an interview guide, and Drs. Gaudiano, Uebelacker, and Arias , and Mr. Audet,  will conduct 
initial 60 min interviews. Based on our previous project, we estimate that we will have to conduct these initial 
interviews with 36 participants total (12 participants x 3 iterations) to identify 12 (i.e., 4 participants x 3 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 5 of 23 iterations) who u ltimately will be eligible and willing to be videorecorded for LifePlans (in the next step). The 
interview guide will be designed to elicit experiences of successful coping with suicide -related thoughts, 
feelings, behaviors, and situations  that are consist ent with CLASP principles  (see next section) . For example, we 
will ask: “Tell me about your experiences coping with suicide thoughts or behaviors.” “What have you found 
works for you?” “Tell me about your experience with psychiatric hospitalization. What w as helpful for you 
when you were leaving the hospital and transitioning home?” We will directly ask about risk factors targeted in 
CLASP: “What are reasons for living? What important personal values guided your recovery? What kept you 
going through this cr isis?” “What helped you to manage feelings of hopelessness?” “Were there difficult 
problems you needed to solve when you left the hospital?” “How did friends or family help or not help?” “How 
has mental health treatment been helpful for you?” “What barrier s did you need to cope with to access 
treatment?” We will audiorecord or video record and transcribe interviews. Audio and video will be stored in a 
secure, CNE -compliant  location (See section D2, page 14, for details) . 
 We will also collect self -report inf ormation on demographics and current treatment status. Participants will 
be paid $ 40 at this stage.  
 
Development Step 2. Selection of interviewees for participation in LifePlans video  
 
We will next code interview transcripts based on consistency with the CLASP model. Two members of 
research team (i.e., the person conducting the interview + one other member of the research team) will code 
each interview on consistency with the following CLASP principles  that will be the focus of the video series:   
 
• Hopefulness by clarifying life values and consistent actions (e.g., “I thought about how being a mother was really 
important to me, and how I could spend more time with my son helping him with his homework);  
• Use of problem -solving  strategies to cope better with illness including a positive problem -solving orientation (e.g., I 
wanted to look for a new job, so I first started to update my resume.”);  
• Improving communication with and support fr om family/friends  and treatment providers (e.g., “When I was feeling like 
things would never get better, I reached out to my sister and let her know what was wrong.”);  
• Treatment adherence  and engagement (e.g., “In addition to my medication, I decided to gi ve the therapist I was referred 
to a call to schedule an appointment.”);  
• Safety planning , use of a safety plan, and discussion of means restriction.  
 
We will also rate interviewees on their overall story -telling ability: Do they tell stories that have a beginning, 
middle, and end? Are the stories detailed and engaging? Similar to previous work, coders will use a scale of 0 
(CLASP -inconsistent); 1 (not p resent) to 3 (very strong and consistent with CLASP). Discrepancies will be resolved 
via consensus. Based on these ratings, the study team will choose 12 interviewees total for participation in the 
LifePlans video. Selection will be based on consistency wi th CLASP and story -telling ability within the context of 
ensuring demographic diversity (race, ethnicity, age, gender, sexual orientation) as well as clinical diversity 
(those with a recent attempt vs. those without) in the ultimate product.  
 
Development Step 3. Videorecording and editing  (Phase 1b)  
 
We will invite the 12 chosen interviewees (4 in each iteration) to participate in a videorecording session. 
Given that the videos may be widely viewed, one of the PIs or Co -Is will conduct the informed consent process 
in order to ensure that participants have a full understanding of the process. We will review the American 
Foundation for Suicide Prevention ’s (AFSP) “Speaking out about Suicide” guidelines with interviewees before 
the session ( https://www.sprc.org/resources -programs/speaking -out-about -suicide ). Next, Mr. Kahn, our 
expert film producer, will re -interview each of the chosen participants, using the interview guide described 
above and with input from the investigators about previous  statements made by the interviewee that are 
judged to be important. Interviews will be videorecorded with expert videographers (from FlatIron Works) in 
order to ensure a high -quality product. Mr. Kahn is very experienced with this approach, and has produc ed 
numerous engaging, documentary style videos for hospitals and non -profit organizations. He has previously 
worked with this research team, and his staff  have received human subjects training. He and his staff will 
complete necessary Butler Hospital paper work (e.g., HIPAA and independent contractor agreements) to work 
on the project.  
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 6 of 23  
Because some interviewees may not feel comfortable attending an in -person interview, we will also offer an 
option for remote professional videorecording. After a remote (vide o or audio) informed consent process, 
participants will sign all informed consent documents, including acknowledgment that parts of the video 
produced will be public, on REDCap. The videorecording team will send a package to the participants  via mail 
or de liver it in person  that includes a videocamera and other equipment, with instructions for how to set it up.  
This team has successfully done this process with other people, and can guide participants through the set -up, 
and then conduct the interview remot ely.  
 
Even when the equipment is delivered in person for local participants, the  actual interview will still be 
conducted with the crew outside the participant’s home.  However, the videographers  may need to enter the 
participant’s home briefly to help se t up equipment or solve technical issues (e.g., 5 -10 minutes) with the 
participant’s permission and with everyone properly masked and socially distanced.  The participant will be free 
to not permit the videographers in the home if they are not comfortable w ith this.  
 
Next, videographers and investigators will work together to edit video from each person into narrative clips 
that focus on key CLASP principles (described above) and omit aspects of the interview that are less relevant. 
We will follow the  safe s tory guidelines set by the AFSP when  editing the clips  (e.g., avoiding phrases such as 
“committing suicide” and details about suicide methods) . When we have done this previously, this has yielded 
a series of four to six 3 -5 minute “vignettes” for each inte rviewee. Other video footage is discarded. We will 
then  give participants the opportunity to  screen the ir own  video vignettes before moving on to the next step in 
the research process in order to be sure that participants  are comfortable with the dissemination of the video.  
 
Development Step 4. Stakeholder feedback  
 
We will screen selected vignettes with the Pat ient and Family Advisory Council at Butler Hospital in order to 
get their feedback on the clips. This Council is made up of volunteers who are current or former patients at the 
hospital, and family members of current or former patients. It meets monthly an d provides input on various 
hospital programs and policies. We will ask members of the Council about engagement in videos or 
“transportation” (e.g., What aspects of the videos were engaging? What was not engaging or not believable? Do 
you think that this p erson has a message that is useful or relevant for patients who are just discharged from the 
hospital?). We also will ask the Council about video “message”: “What did you think was the most important 
point of the video?” “What might Butler patients learn f rom this video?”. We will audiorecord and transcribe 
member responses. Lessons learned regarding transportation and message from the Advisory Council may 
guide: 1) final choice of vignettes to be used in LifePlans; 2) refinement of interview guide for the next iteration; 
3) who we choose for future videos; 4) how the videos are further edited; 5) how the videos may be framed and 
6) what workbook exercises would be most helpful, understandable, and effective.  
 
Development: Repetition of steps 1 -4 
 
We will r epeat steps 1 -4 three separate times until we have video narratives recorded from 12 individuals. 
We will divide the video content into 5 separate, 30 min “episodes,” with each episode centered on a key CLASP 
principle: 1) Values Clarification and Goal Set ting; 2) Problem -Solving Part 1; 3) Communication with Family, 
Friends, and Professionals; 4) Problem -Solving Part 2; 5) Communication Part 2. The principles of Treatment 
Adherence/Engagement and Safety Planning/Means Restriction will be included throughou t the five videos. For 
example, values clarification might naturally lead to means restriction, and one might problem -solve about how 
to enact means restriction. We will always shoot more video than will actually be used and choose video clips to 
include b ased on our conceptual framework. However, if there is other content that that is not directly related 
to these concepts but  seems to be very useful and potentially consistent (even if novel), we will consider 
including this as supplemental video material.  
 
Development Step 5. Professional framing, final editing, and workbook creation  
 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 7 of 23 We will write a series of “frames” for the patient narratives consisting of clips in which professionals 
introduce key concepts, provide background information on patient narratives, and summarize ideas. 
Professional frames will be written to keep the focus on the patient narratives (rather than on the professional), 
but highlight key CLASP principles  (consistent with the AFSP’s safe stories guidelines) . We will scr een these 
“professional frames” with the Patient and Family Advisory Council so that we may incorporate their feedback. 
The patient narratives and professional frames will be combined to develop a series of 5 videos, with each 
episode being 30 minutes long  but divided into smaller sections for ease of viewing and editing.   
In addition, we will develop an accompanying workbook or “personal journal” for participants that includes 
a self -help guide which encourages participants to write about what they learne d in the videos and how they 
will take similar steps in their own lives to cope with suicide ideation/ behavior . In brief, steps will include: 1) 
eliciting treatment strategies that our initial pool of interviewees report they have found helpful in managin g 
their own suicidality; 2) coding these strategies for consistency with the CLASP model; 3) filming and editing the 
selected interviewees discussing their use of CLASP -consistent strategies for potential inclusion in the workbook; 
4) obtaining stakeholder  feedback and refining the strategies to be included in the workbook; and 5) final 
framing, editing, and creation of workbook content. Through a variety of exercises, they will be encouraged to 
write their own narrative and life plan. Research demonstrates  the potential utility of written emotional 
disclosure for depression.4,5  
Exercises include: 1) completing the LifePlan document, 2) guidance on identifying personal values, potential 
barriers/obstacles, and a plan for engaging in values -consistent actions, 3) guidance on identifying and 
addressing treatment beliefs/barriers,  4) practice problem -solving to cope with stressors, and 5) developing 
strategies for effective communication for engaging with friends/family.  
 
Phase 2: Open Trial  
 
The aim of this phase is to conduct an open pilot study (n=10) to test the feasibility an d acceptability of 
LifePlans in conjunction with treatment as usual (TAU). We will enroll hospitalized patients with a suicide 
plan/attempt prior to admission in the past month (see full inclusion criteria below). Patients will watch the first 
episode prior to discharge, and then watch one episode per week during the first month post -discharge. Patients 
will be assessed at baseline, and 1- and 6 -months  post -discharge on suicidal attempts and deaths (primary), 
suicidal ideation, depressive symptoms, functioning, and target mechanisms (i.e., CLASP risk factors). We will 
examine and seek to improve feasibility and acceptability of LifePlans. Modifications will be made to LifePlans 
as needed based on lessons learned from the open trial.  
 
LifePlans  Intervention  
 
One advantage of video is that it can be made available in multiple formats at low -cost. In order to ensure 
that watching of the videos is spaced ou t over time, and to serve as a reminder to watch the videos, we will have 
the participants watch their first video at baseline (in the hospital) and give them their workbook. This will 
provide the chance for the interventionist to address any questions th ey may have about the video . 
Subsequently, we will send them a link to the first episode at home and encourage them to rewatch it to increase 
of the “dose” of the intervention. (If a participant prefers, we will send him/her DVDs as an alternative).  We will 
send a one link per week via email to the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th episodes throughout the month after hospitalization. 
We send the videos separately to spread out the dose of the intervention over the first month as they will be 
design ed to help the patient transition from hospitalization to outpatient care at home. In addition, sending one 
video per week allows the patient time to fully absorb the message of that video before moving on to the next. 
Patients will have access to all prev ious videos; we will encourage them to watch each video twice to improve 
their understanding.  
Between 4-7 days after the patient receives  the link to the 2nd episode , the study clinician  will call the patient 
to check -in. During the call which will last 1 0-15 minutes, the clinician  will inquire about the participant’s 
perceptions of the videos and encourage them to update their Safety Plan/Life Plan based on what they watched 
in the videos. If the patient reports suicidal ideation, the clinician will follo w the study safety protocol to conduct 
a risk assessment.  
LifePlans Promotion/Adherence. Participants will complete brief REDCap surveys after viewing each 
LifePlans video that will allow us to track adherence. We will send out automated prompts and remind ers via 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 8 of 23 email to increase adherence. At patient discharge, we also will send patients’ outpatient clinicians information 
on LifePlans (along with video links) and update them during the study as to their patients’ progress via messages 
sent using electroni c medical records. We will emphasize the importance of use of the workbook during the pre -
discharge session with the hospital interventionist  at the start of LifePlans . We plan to develop the workbook in 
conjunction with our storytelling videos using a similar process involving patient feedback and refinement. We 
will integrate the workbook exercises into the LifePlans videos to prompt completion.  
 
Treatment as usual (TAU)  
 
Butler Hospital. On the inpatient units, we will include two study  interventionists  as part of our research 
team. They will be responsible for checking in with the patient, discussing video content, and answering 
questions after he/she views t he first video as an inpatient. As part of our treatment development aims, these 
interventionists  will provide feedback about integration of video viewing with other therapeutic activities on the 
inpatient units. Dr s. Gaudiano  and Uebelacker will meet wit h the interventionists  on a weekly basis.  
The average length of stay as a psychiatric inpatient at Butler Hospital is 5-6 days. In the context of the 
therapeutic milieu, patients receive individual treatment and attend group therapy. Families are included in 
treatment and treatment planning as appropriate. Additional therapeutic activities include sensory modulation 
activit ies, daily exercise, and recreational activities. Patients with suicide risk are involved in a safety planning 
process prior to discharge. (If a study participant does not have a written safety plan when they enroll in the 
study, the study interventionist  will be responsible for ensuring that this treatment goal is accomplished.)  
Outpatient Treatment .  
Whenever a patient is enrolled and is receiving LifePlans, we will send the outpatient clinician a note via the 
EHR or fax describing the patient’s participa tion. The clinician also will be offered links to the videos  and 
workbook,  and a summary of each “episode” to inform them about the patient’s study participation. This will 
ensure that the videos serve as an adjunctive treatment, and that patients have the  opportunity to discuss videos 
with a clinician (and vice versa) should they choose to do so. The research team will conduct qualitative 
interviews with a subset of these clinicians in order to better understand how the videos may be integrated into 
ongoin g outpatient treatment.  
 
Screening Process and Recruitment  (phases 2 and 3)  
 
Our team has developed effective procedures for recruiting from the inpatient milieu  (during Phases 2 and 
3) as well as the partial hospital milieu (only during Phase 3) . We will obtain a Protected Health Information (PHI) 
waiver for review preparatory to research. Then, we will screen electronic medical records at Butler Hospital to 
iden tify potentially eligible participants. Patients meeting inclusion criteria that can be assessed via chart review 
(i.e., criteria 1, 3, 5), and after obtaining attending physicians’ permission, will be approached by research staff. 
Patients will be approac hed in -person on the units or if they are attending a partial hospital program virtually, 
they will be contacted by phone using the number provided in their chart. Staff will provide a description of the 
study and invite patients to participate in addition al screening to determine study eligibility. Those consenting 
and meeting all inclusion criteria will be invited to participate in the study.   
 
Research Assessments  (phases 2 and 3)  
 
Assessments will be conducted: 1) to assess feasibility and acceptabilit y, uptake, transportation, and 
understanding of key messages; 2) to assess inclusion criteria; or 3) to pilot outcome measures or potential 
mediators for the eventual large -scale RCT. See the table below  for the purpose of each instrument and the 
assessmen t schedule. A trained research assistant will conduct all assessments.  After the baseline assessment, 
we will conduct assessments at 1- and 6 -months  post -discharge. We will also administer weekly post -video 
surveys in order to assess completion and acceptability ratings.  
Treatment acceptability/feasibility . Intervention credibility and patient expectations for intervention 
success after viewing the f irst episode will be measured with the Credibility Expectancy Questionnaire (CEQ).6 
The Client Satisfaction Questionnaire  (CSQ -8)7,8 will be used post -treatment to assess satisfaction with 
interventions. We will also use qualitative  responses to a detailed post -treatment interview to gain participants’ 
feedback about interventions and research procedures , including whether there was any contamination 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 9 of 23 between arms, with participants in LifePlans sharing videos or video content with participants in the treatment 
as usual arm .  
We will ask participants to complete additional assessments reflecting the content of LifePlans. Participants 
will complete video completion surveys  of the time that they spend watching the video and the particular 
sections watched. If they did not watch t he videos, participants will answer questions on any barriers that 
prevented them from watching. To assess transportation/engagement, we use a modified version of the 
Transportation Scale  9 (11 items) we previously developed that is appropriate for watching a video. Sample items 
include: “The [video about XX] affected me emotionally” or “I found my mind wandering while [watching the 
video about XX.]” Items are rated from 1 “not at all” to 7 “very much.” The total scale score is calculated by 
taking the average of all items . In addition, participants will complete a Video Acceptability Scale , which is 
adapted from a 7 -item Likert -scale measure (1=not at all and 7=very much)  designed for technology -assisted 
interventions by Ondersma et al.10 that assesses how participants feel about their experience: overall liking, 
interesting,  ease of use, understandable, respectful, or annoying. To assess message understanding, we will use 
a Message Scale , which consists of questions designed to: 1) enhance the impact of the intervention; and 2) 
provide data to us about their reactions to the video. The questionnaire includes these questions: 1) What did 
you like about this video? What did you not like about this video?; 2) What was the main message that you got 
from watching this video?; 3) Does this video have any relevance to your life? What  relevance does it have to 
your life?; and 4) What might you do differently as a result of watching this video? We will use qualitative data 
analysis techniques to analyze participants’ responses.  
 
Research Assessments – Open Trial and Pilot RCT  (phases 2 and 3)  
 Purpose  Timepoints  
Treatment Acceptability, Feasibility, Uptake, Transportation  
Credibility Expectancy Questionnaire  
Client Satisfaction Questionnaire  
Qualitative Interview  
Video Completion Surveys  
Transportation Scale  
Video Acceptability Scale  
Message Scale  P 
P,O 
P  
P 
P 
P 
P BL 
M1 
M1 
  W1, W2, W3, W4  
  M1*  
  M1*  
  M1*  
Psychiatric Symptoms and Functioning  
Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale  
Modified Scale for Suicide Ideation - 
PROMIS -29 
PROMIS  Depression Short Form *** 
Hospital chart review  
Psychosis Screening Questionnaire  O** 
O 
O 
O 
I,O 
I BL, M1, M6  
BL, M1, M6  
BL, M1, M6  
W1, W2, W3, W4  
BL, M6  
BL 
Mental Help Seeking Attitudes Scal e  
Personal Suicide Stigma Questionnaire  (self -blame subscale only)  O 
O BL, M 1, M6  
BL, M1, M6  
Potential Mechanisms (CLASP Targets)  
 Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support  
 Brief COPE  
 Valuing Questionnaire  Med  
Med  
Med  BL, M1, M6  
BL, M1, M6  
BL, M1, M6  
Treatment Utilization  
Treatment History Interview  
Outpatient and Hospital Chart Review   
 BL, M1, M6  
BL, M1, M6  
Note.  Purpose: P=Pilot study target outcome; O=Outcome in large -scale RCT; I=Inclusion criteria; O**=Primary outcome in large -
scale RCT; C=Characterize sample; Med=Potential mediator in a larger scale RCT. Timepoints: BL=baseline; W1, W2, W3, W4=Week 
1, 2, 3, a nd 4 of the intervention. M1 and M6=Month 1 and 6. M1*=M1 during the pilot RCT, but weekly during the open trial .*** 
The PROMIS Depression Short Form was added for the pilot RCT.  
 
Suicidal Behaviors. The Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS)  11 will be used to assess suicide 
ideation, intent, plans, and behavior. C -SSRS interviews will be conducted by trained research staff supervised 
by Dr. Uebelacker with consultation from Drs. Miller and Weinstock. Training procedures consist of: a) review of  
written materials, b) didactic instruction; c) practice interviews with review and feedback from senior staff; and 
4) continued practice, training and feedback until high agreement with established consensus ratings are met 
(e.g. 3 consecutive C -SSRS rati ngs are within 2 points of our consensus ratings). We will assess interviewers’ 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 10 of 23 reliability in an ongoing manner. Following initial training, interviewers and senior staff meet on a monthly basis 
to review tapes, address questions/issues, and monitor inter rater reliability.  
 To ensure that we capture as much suicide -related data as possible, we will utilize procedures that have 
been developed for current ongoing large -scale suicide prevention clinical trials led by Dr. Miller (RO1 
MH101129) and Dr. Weinsto ck (U01 MH106660). We obtain releases of information from patients at study start 
to conduct chart reviews throughout the study covering the two major healthcare systems in RI (CNE and 
Lifespan) and their corresponding EDs and inpatient units.  We also col lect treatment utilization data via self -
report (THI) during follow -up assessments, and, at that point, we can ask participants for releases of information 
to request discharge summaries from additional hospitals that the patient may report attending. Cons istent with 
previous studies, we scrutinize all hospitalizations or ED visits with any of the following characteristics: evidence 
of self -injury, mental health concerns, ingestion/overdose, and traumatic injury. Staff then read the discharge 
summary to det ermine if there is any evidence of current or recent intentional self -harm ideation or behavior, 
including whether any injury is sustained. Staff also use carefully developed definitions of suicide ideation and 
suicide attempt (from C -SSRS criteria) to det ermine whether there is evidence of either event in the medical 
record.  
If the patient dies, staff record the death and whether there was any evidence of intentional self -injury 
leading to the death. As we have done in previous studies, if we are unable t o locate a participant at follow -up, 
we will state or national death registries to ascertain whether he/ she died, and if so, cause of death. Thus, 
suicide outcomes will be determined using all data collected during the study from all possible sources, inc luding 
follow -up assessments (C -SSRS), b) hospital chart reviews, c) and community clinician reports. Data from all 
sources will be reviewed by two research team members for congruence.  Note that we will obtain releases of 
information from patients at stud y start to conduct chart reviews throughout the study covering the two major 
healthcare systems in RI (CNE and Lifespan) and their corresponding EDs and inpatient units.  Disagreements 
between raters will be reviewed and adjudicated by Drs. Gaudiano (MPI) a nd Arias (Co -I). All reports will be 
classified using C -SSRS criteria. In a larger -scale clinical trial, our primary outcome will be a composite: a) suicide 
attempts or b) suicides.  
Other Symptoms.  We will use the following self -report scales: the Modifie d Scale for Suicide Ideation 
(MSSI)13 which provides a score indicating overall severity of suicide ideation; and the PROMIS -29, which 
assesses pain intensity on seven health domains (physical function, fatigue, pain interference, depressive 
symptoms, anxiety, ability to participate in social roles and activities, and sleep disturbance ). We will also have  
participants in both study conditions  complete the PROMIS Depression Short Form  each week of the 
intervention to assess depressive symptoms . In addition, we also will assess the change in distress and 
perceived  helpfulness during each week of the interven tion for those assigned to LifePlans:  1) how distressed 
participants felt while watching the videos (5 point scale from “more distressed ” to “less distressed ”), 2) how 
distressed they felt after watching the videos (5 point scale from “more distressed ” to “less distressed ”), and 3) 
how helpful they felt the videos were (5 point scale from “very unhelpful ” to “very helpful ”). In order to 
ascertain inclusion crit eria, we will use chart review and the Psychosis Screening Questionnaire31  to screen out 
people at baseline.  Finally, we will use the  self-blame subscale on the  Personal Suicide Stigma Questionnaire 
(PSSQ ) which is a  self-report measure that has been found to be reliable and valid for assessing stigma in 
persons who have suicidal behaviors.  
Potential Mediators. Potential mechanisms will be assessed using the following self -report scales: the 
Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support   (MSPSS)21, which is a reliable and valid measure of 3 aspects 
of social support  (family, friends, and significant other); the Brief Cope22, which assesses stra tegies used for 
coping in response to negative life experiences ; and the Valu ing Questionnaire (VQ) which is a reliable and valid 
measure that assesses the extent to which a person lives by their values.  
Potential Moderators . We have identified several potential moderators of CLASP effects in our previous 
research that we believe may also be relevant to the proposed project, which we will consider testing in future, 
larger -scale studies. The manuscript describing these result s is currently in preparation. The following factors 
were found to moderate the effects of CLASP in the previous ED -SAFE study (U01 MH088278) and are also 
potentially relevant to LifePlans:  marital status (CLASP more effective for those not married) and n umber of 
previous psychiatric hospitalizations (CLASP more effective for those with more hospitalizations). We will also 
consider whether recent suicide attempt status and lifetime suicide attempt status moderates outcome.  
Treatment utilization.  We have ad apted a brief, structured Treatment History Interview (THI)25 which allows 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 11 of 23 us to collect information about other depression treatments such as inpatient hospitalization or p sychotherapy, 
including any care that happens outside of the CNE system. We will combine this with information from the 
outpatient chart review (i.e., from the Providence Center) and inpatient chart review (from Butler Hospital) to 
gain a full picture of t reatment utilization.  
Clinical stakeholder interviews. Basic demographic information will be collected from all participants using 
a short self -report measure. These data will include age, gender, ethno -racial background, education level, 
duration of empl oyment in current position, and duration of employment in the field. Participants will complete 
a 30-minute  individual interview by telephone or videoconference . Prior to the interview, we will send 
participants a brief description of the video series  and sample content. This interview will be scheduled at the 
participant's convenience and will be audio  or video recorded . Stakeholder interview agendas will assess: : a) 
barriers to patients' medication/appointment adherence, b) how the field can use a video intervention to 
support aftercare, c) challenges patients face upon return to the community post -discharge, d) challenges faced 
by clinicians/organizations treatin g individuals with suicidal thoughts and/or behaviors.  Questions will be 
delivered in an open -ended format to allow participants to share their opinions.  
 
Retention and Adherence  
 
We will use several strategies to increase retention for assessments. Resear ch staff will remind participants 
about appointments, maintain a list of locator contacts for each participant, reach out to contacts as needed, 
schedule assessments regardless of intervention participation, and have flexibility in when assessments are 
scheduled. Finally, we will provide transportation if needed for appointment s.  
 
Phase 3: Pilot RCT  
 
The aim is to conduct a pilot RCT (n=40), with participants randomized to treatment as usual (TAU) or TAU + 
LifePlans. We will enroll hospitalized patients with a suicide plan/attempt prior to admission  in the past month  
(see full inclusion criteria below). Methods will be similar to those described in the open trial  (see previous 
section for Phase 2) , with only the differences noted below. We will continue to focus on acceptability and 
feasibility, including an evaluatio n of the proposed research design.  
 
Phase 3: Control condition description and rationale  
 
The control condition will be TAU, which, as noted above, will include Hospital Safety and Discharge Planning 
as part of inpatient care, followed by outpatient care at a CNE outpatient site. In choosing TAU as a control 
condition, we considered the nature of the LifePlans intervention. LifePlans is designed to be adjunctive to TAU 
and in fact to encourage adherence to outpatient treatment plans developed in the hospit al. We did not choose 
a more robust control condition because LifePlans is designed to be a lower -intensity intervention (thus 
increasing its potential reach) and not to replace existing treatments (but, in fact, to enhance them).  
 
Phase 3: Randomization  
 
Participants will be randomized using a 1:1 ratio to either TAU or TAU + LifePlans. Randomization will be 
stratified by: a) gender (male/ female/ non -binary) and b) suicide attempt vs. plan prior to admission. Treatment 
arm assignments will be blocked in blocks of 4 or 6 participants (randomly ordered). A staff member with no 
other study responsibilities will set up randomization tables in REDCap, and other research staff will not have 
access to the tables. Participants will be randomized following the bas eline assessment using the randomize 
feature in REDCap. This ensures allocation concealment.  
 
C3.  Specific Procedures or Treatments  
 
See C2. Study Design.  
 
C4.  Data Analysis   
 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 12 of 23 This pilot study has the primary aims of refining interventions and research procedures for a subsequent 
RCT to test the efficacy of LifePlans. In the past, researchers have used pilot data to estimate an effect size to 
assist in future power calculations.  Kraemer et al.26,27 emphasized the limitations of this practice due to the 
likelihood of large standard errors surrounding effect size estimates, and t he concern that RCTs should be 
powered to detect a difference between groups that is considered to be a minimally clinically significant 
difference . In light of these concerns, we propose the following analysis plan.  
 
Target  treatment development outcomes  
 
We will use descriptive statistics to summarize all variables. At the end of the open trial, and midway and at 
the end of the pilot RCT, we will examine acceptability and satisfaction  outcomes for LifePlans and for the overall 
study. When the outcome is no t met, the research team will investigate and discuss the issue, and depending 
on the perceived reasons for the discrepancy, may modify relevant research procedures to address the issue. 
For example, if uptake is low, we will try to modify instructions to participants in order to increase uptake.  
  
Qualitative data analyses  
 
This is a mixed methods study and requires the use of qualitative data analytic techniques to understand 
feedback from qualitative interviews in the open trial and pilot RCT (section C 3.6), and to code the Message 
Scale . For post -treatment interviews,  and clinician interviews , we will audiorecord and transcribe interviews, 
and use a template organizing style to analyze these data.28 That is, using an iterative approach, Dr. Uebelacker 
will develop a codebook with categories of responses. After the team codes 3 -5 interviews together, and further 
refines the codeb ook, all members of the investigative team will separately categorize quotes from the 
additional transcripts using qualitative data analysis software (atlas.ti). Then the entire research team will meet 
to review quotes and categories, and differences of op inion will be resolved via consensus. If necessary, new 
categories will be developed.  
For the Message Scale , we will train two research assistants who are otherwise unconnected with this study 
to use a coding system. They will independently code all respo nses; 25% of responses will be coded by both 
research assistants in order to examine inter -rater reliability. For each of the key CLASP principles, coders will 
use a scale of 0 (CLASP -inconsistent); 1 (not present) to 3 (very strong/ consistent) to code re sponses on the key 
CLASP elements. To be considered to have understood the intended message, participants must have a score of 
“2” or greater on at least 2 of the key CLASP elements.  
 
Change over time  
 
In the open trial, we will examine within -group changes over time (from baseline to 1 -month and baseline 
to 6 -month), on suicide outcomes including attempts and deaths, psychiatric symptoms, psychosocial 
functioning, rehospitalizations due to suicide behavior, and potential mechanisms. In t he pilot RCT, we will also 
use effect size estimates to characterize group differences on these outcomes at 1 - and 6 -month follow -ups. We 
will calculate 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Because the CIs will likely be large, these analyses may not permit 
definitive conclusions. Given the limitations and goals of small n studies, we hope t o build our case for a future 
full-scale RCT by focusing primarily on  the feasibility, acceptability of LifePlans and of the research design. 
Some parameters estimated in thi s pilot study (e.g., stability of outcome measures across timepoints) will be 
used to generate empirical power estimates for a large scale, adequately powered RCT.  
 
Power  
 
Our primary aim in the current study is to examine treatment development variables (acceptability, 
feasibility, uptake, message) to inform a future full scale trial, rather than to power the study for certain p 
values.26,27 In future studies, we will base power on a minimally clinically significant effect size. For example, in 
our previous study of CLAS P vs. TAU for people transitioning from inpatient to outpatient treatment, we found 
that, during the 6 month follow -up period, subjects assigned to CLASP  in our pilot studies  had lower rates of 
suicide attempts compared with TAU: 8.3% vs 21%, OR=2.77 (95% CI=0.71 -10.76). In the context of suicide 
prevention, these effects are within the range reported for other efficacious interventions. Although LifePlans 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 13 of 23 has a different format, it is based on similar principles as CLASP.  
 
D.  Material Inducements  
 
Phase 1:  Participants completing the interview phase (n = 36) will receive $ 40, mailed to them by check, or (when 
available) gift card . The subset (n = 12) of participants who complete the video recording will be compensated $75.  
 
Phase 2:   For the open t rial (n = 10 ), we will pay participants for assessment interviews: $20 for baseline, and $40 
for Month 1 and 6 assessments (up to $ 100 total). We will  also provide transportation if needed for appointments.  For 
the clinician stakeholder interviews  (n=1 2), we will pay participants $50 for completion of the interviews.  
 
Phase 3:  Similar to Phase 2, for the pilot RCT (n = 40),  we will pay participants for assessment interviews: $20 for 
baseline, and $40 for Month 1 and 6 assessments (up to $100). We will also pay participants $5 for each weekly survey 
they complete (up to $20 total). Therefore, they  may receive up to $120 total for their  participation. We will also 
provide transportation if needed for appointments . 
 
E.   Training of Research Personnel  
 
All study staff will have undergone mandatory online education in human research participants’ protection.  
PIs and research assistants will have training in Good Clinical Practice via an online program.  All study staff will 
undergo specific training rele vant to their study roles and responsibilities. Training will be documented via 
collection of training certificates.  
 
3)  Human Subjects  
 
A.  Subject Population   
 
 Phase 1: Participants (n=36) will be initially interviewed,  with a subset (n=12 ) selected to be part of 
LifePlans videos . Participants must meet the following criteria:  
1. Have  a history of psychiatric hospitalization for suicide plan and intent, or attempt;   
2. Be aged 18 or older;  
3. Agree that they have developed strategies for successful  coping with suicide -related thoughts, feelings, 
behaviors, and situations;  
4. Deny current active suicidal ideation or recent (past 3 month) behavior.  
5. No cur rent significant substance use (defined by  Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) score 
< 8 29; Drug Use Diso rders Identification Test (DUDIT)30  score <8 if only substance used is marijuana; 
DUDIT score < 6  for males and < 2 for females   for any other substance)  
6. No current psychotic symptoms (defined by  a positive answer to any item on the Psychosi s Screening 
Questionnaire  31) 
 
 Phase 2: Participants (n=10) will receive TAU + LifePlans  starting during their hospitalization and continuing 
after discharge.  
1. Current psychiatric hospitalization with recent (past month)  suicide plan (with or without  intent ), or a 
suicide attempt within 48 hours prior to hospitalization, as indicated on the ho spital chart and 
confirmed by administration of the C -SSRS  11. Specifically, on the C -SSRS, this is operationalized to a 
“yes” on item  3, 4, OR 5,  AND/OR a “yes” to suicide attempt/ interrupted attempt/ or aborted attempt.  
2. Ability to speak, read, and understand English well enough to complete the pro cedures of the study.  
3. Aged 18 or older.  
4. Regular access to a means of watching videos, i.e., a smartphone, tablet, computer, or DVD player.  
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 14 of 23 5. No current psychotic symptoms (based on chart review and the Psychosis Screening Questionnaire ) 
6. Plan to continue outpatient treatment .  
 
We also will select  clinical stakeholders (n=12) for participation . Inclusion criteria are: (1) age 18 or older, and 
(2) works as a clinician  in a mental health program or facility providing services to patients with suicidal 
thoughts and/or behaviors . 
 
 Phase 3: Participants  (n=40)  will be randomized to receive TAU vs TAU + LifePlans  starting during their 
hospitalization a nd continuing after discharge.   
 Participants  must meet the following criteria  (same as Phase 2) :  
1. Current psychiatric hospitalization with recent (past month)  suicide plan (with or without  intent ), or a 
suicide atte mpt within 48 hours prior to hospitalization, as indicated on the hospital chart and confirmed 
by administration of the C -SSRS  11. Specifically, on the C -SSRS, this is operationalized to a “yes” on item 3, 
4, OR 5, AND/OR a “yes” to suicide attempt/ in terrupted attempt/ or aborted attempt.  
2. Ability to speak, read, and understand English well enough to complete the procedures of the study.  
3. Aged 18 or older.  
4. Regular access to a means of watching videos ( i.e., a smartphone, tablet, computer, or DVD player ) in 
the place they expect to live after discharge . 
5. No current psychotic symptoms (based on chart review and the Psychosis Screening Questionnaire)  
6. Plan to continue outpatient treatment.   
 
No minors, prisoners, fetuses/neonates, or decisionally/ cognitively impaired individuals will be recruited.  
 
B.  Recruitment and Consent Procedures  
 
Phase 1 a: Recruitment will occur via advertisements in the community and outpatient mental health 
setting s and in collaboration with community patient support groups. We will also recruit on social media and 
other online platforms. We will attempt to recruit participants who have successfully completed previous 
CLASP studies who gave us permission to contact them about future studies. Interested participants will be 
invited to call research staff or will request a call via a secure o nline format. Staff will describe the goals of the 
study over the phone and conduct an assessment of inclusion criteria. If they are eligible, we will schedule 
them for either a) an in -person interview or b) a remote video -based interview using a HIPAA com pliant online 
platform, or  c) a phone call if they prefer or don’t have access to a computer or smartphone.   
 
If we scheduled an in-person interview , we will  obtain written informed consent at that interview.  
 
If we schedule a remote video -based interview , with the  participant’s  verbal permission  (see attached 
script; answers to questions in script will be recorded in REDCap ), we will email them a link to our  video 
meeting as well as a REDCap link that will bring them to a copy of the Phase 1a consent form that they will be 
able to use to follow along as we conduct the consent process with them  at the beginning of that video 
meeting.  If we schedule a phone cal l, we will send them a copy of the Phase 1a consent form via mail.  
 At the start of th e next  appointment  (i.e., the video meeting on the HIPAA compliant online platform  or 
the phone call ), we will conduct an informed consent process  for this study , reviewing the consent document 
that we sent the participant. We will audio/video record their verbal consent as described in the consent 
document .  
 
Once we have obtained informed consent , we will start the assessment interview. With parti cipant’s 
permission, we will  audio - or videorecord th is interview . Audio and video recordings will be stored in a s ecure, 
CNE approved location (See section D2, page 14, for details) . 
 
Phase 1b:  We will invite a subset of 12 chosen interviewees to participate in a subsequent videorecording 
session  with professional videographers . At that point, we will re -consent these participants , and ask them to 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 15 of 23 sign, in addition to the study consent form,  a) a Media Release; b) Public Disclosure; and c) COVID 
acknowledgement (for as long as COVID remains a risk) .  We will send these forms to participants ahead of 
time, and a research staff member will offer to schedule a phone call to go over each form in depth , by phone, 
so as to minimize time in -person. Participants will then be asked to sign consent and release forms once they 
arrive for their in -person visit. At that point,  given that the videos may be widely viewed, one of the PIs or Co -Is 
will briefly revi ew the consent documents and answer any remaining questions  to ensure that participants 
have a full understanding of the process.  
 
We will also offer the option for remote professional videorecording. This will follow similar steps to the in -
person video recording, and will include:  
1. Participants will be sent REDCap links to consent documents  
2. A study PI or co -I will have an audio or video call to review the study and consent documents, including 
the study consent form, Media Release, and Public Disclosure.  
3. Videographers will mail a package to the participant that includes a camera and other items needed to 
set up the videography session.  
4. Videographers will help the participants with set -up in their homes, and then conduct the session. A 
study staff member will also observe remotely.  
5. Participants will then mail the equipment back to the videographers.  
 
Phase s 2 and 3: With a HIPAA waiver (see below) we will screen medical records at Butler Hospital to 
identify potentially eligible participants. Patients me eting inclusion criteria that can be assessed via chart 
review (i.e., criteria 1, 3, 5), and whose attending physician does not mark as ineligible for research , will be 
approached by research staff. Patients will be approached in -person on the units or if they are attending a 
partial hospital program virtually, they will be contacted by phone using the number provided in their chart. 
Staff will provide a description of the study and invite patients to  participate in screening to determine study 
eligibility. Those consenting and meeting all inclusion criteria will be invited to participate in the study.  
 
For the clinical stakeholder interview during Phase 2, we will consult with our investigator team to identify 
appropriate clinical stakeholders to approach about study participation. Once identified, Drs. Gaudiano or 
Uebelacker or another member of the res earch team will contact the stakeholder directly to introduce the 
study. If interested, the participant will be mailed or emailed (via REDCap link) a copy of the Stakeholders 
Informed Consent form  in addition to a brief description of the video series . The  participant will then  be 
consented over the phone  or via videoconferencing . The consent process will be documented either through  
audio  or video  record ing or via electronic REDCap signature.  
 
 For Phase 3 , some patients attend the partial hospital programs remotely and cannot be consented in 
person. With  the participant’s verbal permission (see attached “Verbal Consent (by Phone) for Use of Email 
and Videoconferencing” ; answers to questions in script will be recorded in REDCap), we will send them a link 
for videoconferencing  (i.e., video meeting on the HIPAA compliant online platform) . In addition we will send a 
REDCap link that will bring them to a copy of the Phase 3 consent form that they will be able to use to follow 
along as we conduct the consent process with them at the beginning of that meeting. If we schedule a phone 
call, we will send them a copy of the Phase 3 consent form via email  REDCap link . At the start of the meeting , 
we will conduct an informed consent process for this study , reviewing the consent document that we sent the 
participant. Participants will answer the questions and electronically sign the consent form in REDCap .  
 
C.  Potential Risks    
Potential risks include coercion, discomfort or increased distress due to study procedures, suicide ideation or 
behavior, and breach of confidentiality. See information below about risk level and impact to subjects.  
D.  Protection of the Subject   
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 16 of 23  
 D1. Me asures to Minimize Potential Risks  
 
Coercion  
Description.   Participants could feel that they must participate in the study or, once enrolled, continue to 
participate.  
Risk Level and Likelihood.  This is a serious risk but the likelihood of it occurring is judged to be minimal.  
Minimization.  The risk of coercion  will be minimized by following standard procedures for obtaining 
informed consent. We will fully explain the study procedures, risks, benefits, and alternatives to all patients. 
Also, patients who do not consent or who withdraw at any time will receive us ual clinical treatment with no 
prejudice. Participant remuneration will be set at modest monetary levels as used in similar studies. In 
Phases 2 and 3, we will obtain permission form the patient’s treating physician to ensure that approaching 
the patient f or research participation is clinically appropriate.  
Discomfort or increased distress due to study participation  
Description.   Some participants may find that they feel discomfort or distress in response to completing 
study assessments or interviews , or wh en watching LifePlans videos .  
Risk Level and Likelihood.  This may occur for some participants. Based on our previous experience with this 
population, we believe that any distress that occurs is likely to be minor and transient.  
Minimization.  During asses sments, research staff will remind participants that they may refuse to answer 
any question or take a break at any time.  Participants will also be reminded that they can choose not to 
watch a video if they find it too distressing. We will encourage partic ipants to inform research staff if a 
study procedure is distressing . Finally, we will also encourage participants to talk with their outpatient 
mental health providers if they find that they are experiencing increased distress for any reason. We will 
provi de referrals to outpatient providers if any participants would like them.  
Suicide ideation or behavior or psychiatric hospitalization  
Description.   Participants may reveal active suicide ideation/ plan/ intent/ or behavior during the course of 
a research  interview.  
Risk Level and Likelihood.  These events may occur in a portion of enrolled participants, particularly in 
Phases 2 and 3. However, it is ve ry unlikely that these events will be related to study participation.  
Minimization . Suicide ideation and behavior, and psychiatric hospitalization, will be monitored via 
assessment interviews and chart reviews. In assessments, study staff will inquire abo ut suicidal ideation 
and behavior using the C -SSRS.  If any patient reports suicidal ideation, plans, or behavior during the study 
assessments or other study contacts, the action we will take is dependent on whether the participant is 
inpatient  or he/ she  is being treated as an outpatient. If the patient is inpatient, research staff will notify 
the treating clinician on the inpatient unit, so he/she is aware of the risk reported by the patient. If the 
patient is outpatient, at the time that suicidality and /or clinical deterioration is identified , a study clinician 
will immediately evaluate the participant. In such cases, research staff will immediately contact one of the 
Principal Investigators, Drs. Uebelacker or Gaudiano, or one of the Co -Is, Drs. Miller or Weinstock.  All are 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 17 of 23 licensed clinical  psychologists; one of the MPIs or Co -Is will be on call at all times. The clinician will conduct 
a suicide risk assessment. Depending upon the specific situation, steps taken to ensure a participant’s 
safety may involve: (1) escorting the patient to the h ospital’s ER for evaluation by an independent clinician 
and possible hospitalization, (2) alerting inpatient staff to the patient’s level of risk, (3) notifying the 
patient’s outpatient clinician(s) at CNE for whom we have releases of information, or (4) c alling the 
appropriate police departments. We will follow the protocol outlined in the DSMP for reporting SAEs to the 
IRB and other monitoring entities.  
 D2. Measures to Ensure Confidentiality  
 
 Throughout this protocol, we use the term “secure, CNE -compl iant location” for storage of electronic files. 
This refers to the following options:   
• CNE research server  
• CNE instance of REDCap  
• CNE instance of HIPAA -compliant Box  
• CNE computer (i.e, password -protected)  
• Password -protected, encrypted (128 AES bit or high er) storage device (e.g., audiorecorder , hard 
drive ) 
 
Potential risks due to loss of confidentiality will be minimized by having all information collected and handled 
by research staff from this study trained to deal appropriately with sensitive clinical issues. All information will 
be treated as confidential  material and will be available only to research and clinical staff. All data collected 
will be kept in a CNE -compliant location. Patient identifying information will be stored in a separate database 
and will be password protected. Any paper files  with any  identifying information  will be kept in a locked filing 
cabinet. No subject will be identified in any report of the project.  
 
In Phase 1b, which includes work with professional videographers, a t the earliest possible time after capturing 
video and/or audi o content concerning a research subject or subjects, we will move the content from the 
camera's memory, storage, SD  Cards, etc. to a secure, CNE -compliant location .  Once moved, the content will 
be immediately deleted from the camera's memory, storage etc.  This should usually occur within 48 hours of 
obtaining the content. Audiorecorders and v ideocameras will be kept in a locked location (e.g., drawer, filing 
cabinet) except when being used or transported.   
 
Audio/video recordings will be stored on a secur e, CNE -compliant location as defined above . Video recordings  
collected by videographers (consultants) in Phase 1 b will be stored on a secure external storage device  that is 
encrypted and  password protected  per CNE standards (128 bit  AES encryption or higher) . Once the  
videographers  have completed their work, this storage device will be given to the study investigators. External 
consultants (videographers) will receive education in Human Subjects (e.g., CITI training) and will also si gn a 
Business Associates Agreement . At the conclusion of the project, any video footage not used in the final 
product will be destroyed.  
 
Participants in Phase 1 who are chosen to be filmed to be part of the LifePlans videos will be re -consented 
immediate ly prior to the time when the raw footage will be shot. Participants will be informed that once the 
final product is completed and made available to study participants or patients via a web -hosting site on the 
internet, CNE will no longer have complete con trol over the video. After the raw footage is shot and edited, 
participants will have an opportunity to view any footage of them that may be used in the final LifePlans video.  
At that point, they may request that part or all of the footage not be used  in the LifePlans videos , and we will 
respect their wishes and not use that footage.  If participants wish for their videos to be withdrawn at a later 
date, i.e., after they are hosted on a website, we will make every effort to withdraw those videos from the 
website. However, in the consent process, we will make it clear that we cannot guarantee that the video has 
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 18 of 23 not been copied by an external party, as the copying could occur even though we will take available measures 
to prevent it.  
 
 D3. Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
A.  Data safety and storage . 
 
Please see section D.2 above.  
 
B. Data access .  
 
Only study staff will have access to data. No confidential information may be released outside Butler Hospital 
without the express written consent of the study  participants, unless mandatory for child and elder abuse and 
in situations in which the risk of suicide or homicide is imminent.  
  
C.  Educational training .   
 
Please see section on training of research personnel above.  
 
D.  Adverse events and unexpecte d problems.   
  
The MPIs and Co -Investigator Dr. Arias will be responsible for monitoring and reporting adverse events. They 
will meet with staff weekly to review any adverse events.  
 
Definitions  
Serious Adverse Events. An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in a subject during 
participation in the clinical study or with use of the experimental agent being studied. A serious adverse event 
(SAE) is one that meets one or more of the following criteria:  
• Results in death  
• Is life -threate ning (places the subject at immediate risk of death from the event as it occurred; includes 
a suicide attempt or drug overdose)  
• Results in inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
• Results in a persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
• Results in a congenital anomaly or birth defect   
An important medical event that may not result in death, be life threatening, or require hospitalization may be 
considered an SAE when, based upon appropriate medical ju dgment, the event may jeopardize the subject and 
may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  
 
In this study, we will monitor and report on the following SAEs:  
• Suicide behavior  
• Inpatient hospitaliz ations that are:  
o Suicide -related or  
o Psychiatric in nature or  
o Due to substance use or overdose  
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 19 of 23 • Death for any cause  
Unanticipated Problems (UPs).  The Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) considers unanticipated 
problems involving risks to subjects or others to include, in general, any incident, experience, or outcome that 
meets all of the following criteria:  
• Unexpected in terms of nature, severity, or frequency given (a) the research procedures that are 
described in the protocol -related documents, s uch as the IRB -approved research protocol and 
informed consent document; and (b) the characteristics of the subject population being studied;  
• Related or possibly related to participation in the research (“possibly related” means there is a 
reasonable possi bility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have been caused by the 
procedures involved in the research); and  
• Suggests that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of harm (including physical, 
psychological, economic, or social ha rm) than was previously known or recognized.  
 
SAE Monitoring and Reporting  
Given that we are recruiting a hospitalized sample with suicide risk and possible substance use disorders , we 
expect serious adverse events to occur, including suicide attempts , non -suicidal drug overdoses, and 
psychiatric rehospitalizations, . However, given the nature of the study, it is unlikely that SAEs will be related to 
the study procedures. If any of these adverse events occur, or any other unanticipated problems are identified, 
the following procedure will be activated: the research staff member who observes or is notified of an adverse 
event (e.g., suicide attempt) will notify the MPIs or their designee immediately. All study staff will be educated 
on the definit ion of SAEs and UPs so that they may report them to the MPIs as soon as possible after becoming 
aware of the occurrence of an SAE or UP. We will systematically assess for adverse events throughout the 
course of the trial (for Phase 2 and 3) via patient int erview (C -SSRS, THI) and chart review at Baseline, Month 1, 
and Month 6. In addition, if a patient reports one of the above SAEs at any time, we will record and review  it. 
The MPIs or their designee will complete an Adverse Event Form for each event that will include a level of 
severity and determine attribution (intervention -related or not).  Reporting timeframes will vary by SAE type. 
Please see the table below for mor e details.  
Data type  Frequency of 
review  Reviewer  
SAEs ( expected OR unrelated, 
including psychiatric 
rehospitalizations and suicide 
attempts ) Per occurrence  MPIs (within 72 hours)  
 
Reported to SMC in bi -annual 
reports  
Reported to NIH in annual 
progress re ports  
SAEs ( related ) Per occurrence  MPIs (within 72 hours)  
 
Reported to IRB and SMC within 
10 days  
Reported to NIH in annual 
progress reports  
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 20 of 23 All deaths  Per Occurrence   MPIs (within 72 hours)  
Reported to IRB, SMC, NIH  within 
5 days  
UPs Per Occurrence  MPIs (within 72 hours)  
Reported to IRB and SMC within 
10 days  
Reported to NIH in annual 
progress reports  
 
Interim Analysis and Stopping Rules  
 
There is no interim analysis planned.  
This study will be stopped prior to its completion if: (1) the intervention is associated with adverse effects that 
call into question the safety of the intervention; (2) difficulty in study recruitment or retention will significantly 
impact the ability to  evaluate the study endpoints; (3) any new information becomes available during the trial 
that necessitates stopping the trial; or (4) other situations occur that might warrant stopping the trial.  
 
Safety Monitoring Committee  
We will appoint a Safety Moni toring Committee (SMC) for trial monitoring. This will be composed of three 
independent experts with relevant experience. They will receive reports and convene meetings for this study 
on a twice -yearly  basis. They will also receive reports per occurrence o f SAEs as described in the table above.  
E.  Potential Benefits  
 
Phase 1:  Benefits to the participant may include satisfaction with having a chance to tell one’s story, talk about 
successful coping strategies, and potentially help other people.   
Phases 2 and 3:   For all participants in Phases 2 and 3, we will conduct research assessments 1 -month and 6 -
months post -hospitalization. If we identify risk for suicide at those assessments, we will work with participants 
to ensure that they receive appropriate treatment. Benefits to the participants receiving the LifePlans 
intervention may include education about and increased motivation for use of coping skills in the following 
areas: identification of life values and implementing values -consistent behavior; problem -solvi ng strategies; 
communication with family, friends, and treatment providers; treatment adherence and engagement; and 
safety planning and means restriction.   
All phases/ knowledge to be gained: This study will allow us to develop and pilot test a video -base d self -help 
intervention for use at the high -risk time period of transition from psychiatric hospitalization to community 
outpatient treatment. We will assess acceptability, feasibility, and safety of this intervention. The proposed 
project, including the open trial and pilot RCT, will prepare us to conduct the next study in this line of research, 
i.e., a full -scale effectiveness study. Ultimately, we hope this will result in another tool to be used for suicide 
prevention in a high -risk clinical group.  
F.  Risk-Benefit Ratio  
 
Phase 1:  The risks to participants are judged to be acceptable relative to the anticipated benefits. Serious risks 
related to study participation are unlikely to occur. Benefits to the participant may include satisfaction with 
having a  chance to tell one’s story, talk about successful coping strategies, and potentially help other people.   
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 21 of 23  
Phases 2 and 3:   The risks to participants are judged to be acceptable relative to the anticipated benefits. 
Serious risks related to study participation are unlikely to occur. Benefits may include education if receiving the 
LifePlans intervention, and risk assessments and  assistance obtaining appropriate treatment if needed at 
follow -up assessments.  
 
4) REFERENCES  
 
 
1. Houston TK, Cherrington A, Coley HL, et al. The art and science of patient storytelling -harnessing narrative 
communication for behavioral interventions: the ACCE project. Journal of health communication. Aug 
2011;16(7):686 -697.  
2. Houston TK, Allison JJ, S ussman M, et al. Culturally appropriate storytelling to improve blood pressure: a 
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. Jan 18 2011;154(2):77 -84. 
3. Gaudiano BA, Davis CH, Miller IW, Uebelacker LA. Development of a Storytelling Video Self -Help Intervention 
Based on Acceptance and Commitment Therapy for Major Depression: Open Trial Results. Behav Modif. Oct 1 
2017:145445517738932.  
4. Gortner EM, Rude SS, Pennebaker JW. Benefits of expressive writing in lowering rumination and depressive 
symptoms. Behavior therap y. Sep 2006;37(3):292 -303.  
5. Graf MC, Gaudiano BA, Geller PA. Written emotional disclosure: a controlled study of the benefits of expressive 
writing homework in outpatient psychotherapy. Psychother Res. Jul 2008;18(4):389 -399.  
6. Devilly GJ, Borkovec TD. Psychometric properties of the credibility/ expectancy questionnaire. Journal of 
Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry. 2000;31:73 -86. 
7. Larsen DL, Attkisson CC, Hargreaves WA, al. e. Assessment of client/ patient satisfaction: development of a 
general scale. Evaluation and Program Planning. 1979;2:197 -207.  
8. Nguyen TD, Attkisson CC, Stegner BL. Assessment of patient satisfaction: development and refinement of a 
service evaluation questionnaire. Evaluation and Program Planning. 1983;6(299 -313).  
9. Green MC, Brock TC. The role of transportation in the persuasiveness of public narratives. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology. Nov 2000;79(5):701 -721.  
10. Ondersma SJ, Chase SK, Svikis DS, Schuster CR. Computer -based brief motivational interventi on for perinatal drug 
use. J Subst Abuse Treat. Jun 2005;28(4):305 -312.  
11. Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, et al. The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale: initial validity and internal 
consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents a nd adults. Am J Psychiatry. Dec 
2011;168(12):1266 -1277.  
12. Posner K. C -SSRS Training. 2012.  
13. Miller IW, Norman WH, Bishop SB, Dow MG. The Modified Scale for Suicidal Ideation: reliability and validity. J 
Consult Clin Psychol. Oct 1986;54(5):724 -725.  
14. Derogatis L. The Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI): Administration, scoring and procedures manual. Baltimore: 
Clinical Psychometric Research;1992.  
15. Sheehan DV. MINI: Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview, English Version 7.0.2 for DSM -5. 2016.  
16. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. "Mini -mental state". A practical method for grading the cognitive state of 
patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res. Nov 1975;12(3):189 -198.  
17. World Health Organization. WHO DAS II. Disabiltiy Assessment Schedule. 2003; 
http://www.who.int/icidh/whodas/generalinfo.html . Accessed October 24, 2003.  
18. Novak SP , Colpe LJ, Barker PR, Gfroerer JC. Development of a brief mental health impairment scale using a 
nationally representative sample in the USA. Int J Methods Psychiatr Res. Jun 2010;19 Suppl 1:49 -60. 
19. Chwastiak LA, Von Korff M. Disability in depression a nd back pain. Evaluation of the World Health Organization 
Disability Assessment Schedule (WHO DAS II) in a primary care setting. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 
2003;56:507 -514.  
20. Batterham PJ, Calear AL, Christensen H. The Stigma of Suicide Scale. Psy chometric properties and correlates of 
the stigma of suicide. Crisis. Jan 1 2013;34(1):13 -21. 
21. Vaux A, Riedel S, Stewart D. Modes of Social Support: The Social Support Behaviors (SS -B) Scale. American Journal 
of Community Psychology. 1987;15:209 -232.  
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 22 of 23 22. D'Zurilla T, Nezu A, Maydeu Olivares A. Manual for the Social Problem Solving Inventory -revised. North 
Tonawanda, NY: Multi -health Systems;1999.  
23. Wilson KG, Sandoz EK, Kitchens J, Roberts ME. The Valued Living Questionnaire: Defining and measuring val ued 
action within a behavioral framework. The Psychological Record. 2010;60:249 -272.  
24. Morisky DE, Green LW, Levine DM. Concurrent and predictive validity of a self -reported measure of medication 
adherence. Med Care. Jan 1986;24(1):67 -74. 
25. Linehan MM.  Therapist Interview. University of Washington, Seattle, WA1987.  
26. Kraemer HC, Kupfer DJ. Size of treatment effects and their importance to clinical research and practice. Biol 
Psychiatry. Jun 1 2006;59(11):990 -996.  
27. Kraemer HC, Mintz J, Noda A, Tinklenberg J, Yesavage JA. Caution regarding the use of pilot studies to guide 
power calculations for study proposals. Arch Gen Psychiatry. May 2006;63(5):484 -489.  
28. Crabtree BF, Miller WL. Using codes and code manuals: a template organizing style of interpretation. In: Crabtree 
BF, Miller WL, eds. Doing Qualitative Research,  2nd edition . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1999:163 -177.  
29. Babor TF, Higgins -Biddle JC, Saunders JB, Monteiro MG. AUDIT: The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test. 
Guidelines for use in primary care, 2nd edition.  World Health Organization;20 01. 
30. Berman AH, Bergman H, Palmstierna T, Schlyter F. DUDIT Manual: The Drug Use Disorders Identification Test, 
Version 1.0. Stockholm: Karolinska Institutet, Department of Clinical Neuroscience;2005.  
31. Bebbington P, Nayani T. The Psychosis Screening Questionnaire. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric 
Research. 1995;5:11 -19. 
 
5) CRITERIA FOR WAIVER OF AUTHORIZATION FOR USE OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION (PHI)  
 
5A. Does the requested use of PHI involve more than minimal risk to privacy?  
 YES [if " YES," project is not eligible for PHI Waiver]     
 NO [if "NO," address 1 -3 below]  
 
1. Plan to Protect Patient Identifiers from Improper Use and Disclosure :   
Potential risks due to loss of confidentiality will be minimized by having all information collected and 
handled by research staff trained to deal appropriately with sensitive clinical issues. All research personnel 
will receive training in research ethics  and be approved by the institution to conduct research. All 
information will be kept in locked files. Electronic data will be stored on encrypted drives/servers and 
password protected.  Data will be available only to authorized personnel and subject codes  will be used to 
store information in databases. No subject will be identified in any report of this project.  
 
2. Plan to Destroy Identifiers or Justification for Retaining Identifiers : 
PHI will be destroyed upon study completion plus 1 year.  
 
3. Assurances that the PHI will not be Re -used or Disclosed : 
Information collected will only be used for the purposes described below and will be treated as 
confidential material as described above.  
 
5B. Could the research be practicably conducted without a w aiver?    YES     NO 
5C. Could the research be practicably conducted without access to and use of the PHI?    YES     NO 
5D. PHI is only needed for activities preparatory to research   YES    NO 
 
6) DESCRIPTION OF PHI TO BE COLLECTED UNDER WAIVER   
 
Chart reviews of new patients will be routinely conducted by study staff to determine if they are likely to meet 
inclusion/exclusions criteria for the study as described above.  PHI to be obtained:  patient demographic and 
contact information (name, address, telephone numbers, gender, age, race, marital  status, occupation status) 
and patient psychiatric/treatment history (diagnoses and suicide history, past and current psychological and/or 
pharmacological treatments, current mental health provider contact information, lab results).  
IRB v. 20 20.09.04  
Date most recently revised 3/22/2022  
Protocol Version  2.5  Page 23 of 23  
7) ADVERTISEMENTS  
 
Docu ment attached.  
 
8) INFORMED CONSENT FORM (ICF) , ASSENT  OF MINOR & PARENTAL PERMISSION FORM  
 
 
Indicate number of consent(s): 9 
    
Identify each consent (i.e., Main, Screening, DNA):  
• Verbal Consent for email and videorecording prior to enrollment  
• Phase 1 A – Written consent  
• Phase 1A -- Verbal consent  
• Phase 1 B- Consent for use of videos in LifePlans intervention  
• Phase 1B – HIPAA release ; media release ; materials release; COVID risk acknowledgment  
• Phase 2 – Main - Written consent  
• Phase 2 – Stakeholders – Written consent   
• Phase 3 – Written consent  
• Phase 3 – Email/Videoconferencing verbal consent  
 
 
 