Department of Veterans Affairs
Quality Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI)
Evaluation of Implementation of a National Point-of-Care Ultrasound Training 
Program
Partnered Evaluation Initiative
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED])
September 9, 2016
Principal Investigator
Nilam Jayant Soni, MD, MSc
VA San Antonio
nilam.soni@va.gov
1. Specific Aims
 Point -of-care  ultrasonography (POC US) is a focused, goal -directed bedside ultrasound examination to 
guide evaluation and management of patients. POCUS allows clinicians to rapidly detect conditions and 
reduces the number of diagnostic imaging tests, particularly computed tomography (CT) scans.1 POCUS can 
also be used to guide procedur es and has been s hown to reduce procedural  complications and improve 
procedural  success rates .2 Thus, POCUS improves patient care by expediting diagnosis, especially of life -
threatening conditions; reducing radiation ex posure from unnecessary diagnostic imaging tests; and minimizing 
risks of complications from  invasive bedside procedures. By reducing the number of imaging tests  and time to 
diagnosis, POCUS r educes healthcare costs .3    
 Despit e its potential advantages, increased  availability , and supporting evidence, POCUS has not been 
incorporated into  routine clinical practice. For i nstance, despite both strong evidence from randomized trials  
and recommendations from national patient safety organizations over the past 20 years, ultrasound guidance 
for central line insertion has not been universally adopted, and adoption rates may be worse in the VA 
healthcare system .4-7 Data from a national survey conducted by our group revealed that only 49% of VA 
providers use ultrasound guidance to insert central lines  compared to 72 -88% of non -VA providers, and VA 
medical coding data revealed only 21% were inserted with ultrasound guidance.8  Barriers to POCUS  use 
include limited access to ultrasound machines, lack of training, and provider resistance to change.9, 10  
The VHA Specialty Care Centers of Innovation (SCC OI) and Simulation Learning, Education and 
Research Network (SimLEARN) are partnering to develop a national POCUS training program to teach VA 
providers basic  POCUS applications. Starting in October 2016, hands -on POCUS training courses will be held 
at the new SimLEARN National Simulation Center in Orlando.  Training of providers has traditionally consisted 
of a combination of didactics and supervised scanning on live models to learn image acquisition and 
interpretation skills.  
 The goal of our partnered evaluation is to assess the effect of the VA’s national POCUS training 
program on local implementation of POCUS use. First, we will evaluate the effectiveness of  the 2.5 -day 
POCUS Training Course  on provider POCUS skill acquisition and skill retention.  Second, we will ass ess the 
frequency of POCUS use by providers before and 6 months after participation in the POCUS Training Course. Third , we will survey providers and facilities to identify  provider and facility barriers to POCUS use.  T his 
evaluation plan will allow us to  accomplish the following objectives:  
Objective 1.  Evaluate  provider skill acquisition and retention, and frequency of POCUS use 
after participation in the POCUS T raining Course. Pre- and post -course testing will be used to assess 
acquisition of knowledg e and technical skills to perform POCUS exams .  Post-course testing for knowledge 
and skill retention, and frequency of use, will be performed 6 months after the training course.  We postulate 
that immediate post -course knowledge and skills test scores will improve by ≥25% or to a minimum passing 
score of >75% for the majority of providers.  After returning to their facilities , providers that use POCUS 
frequently (>3 times/week) will have better skill retention (reduction in 6 -month post -course test scores <10%) 
after 6 months vs. providers that use POCUS infrequently (<3 times/week) who will have worse skill retention 
(reduction in 6 -month post -course test scores >10%) . 
Objective 2.  Determine the effect of the POCUS Training Course and implementation faci litation 
on facility -level  frequency of POCUS use.  Facilities with providers that infrequently use POCUS will be 
eligible to participate in  the POCUS Training Course.  However, not all facilities will be able to be 
accommodated  in the 1
st year of the trai ning program, requiring a facility waiting list. Facilities with providers 
participating in the POCUS Training Course will be compared to wait -listed  facilities  with regard to frequency of 
POCUS use. Using the Brief Provider POCUS Survey , frequency of POCU S use by providers in both 
participating and wait-listed facilities  will be compared.  Additionally, coding data will be reviewed to assess 
frequency of procedures performed with and without imaging guidance and procedural complication rates 
comparing the two groups of facilities. We postulate that facilities with trained providers will have a higher frequency of POCUS use to guide bedside procedures (>10%) and relatively lower procedural complication 
rates compared to wait -listed facilities over the same t ime interval. 
Objective 3.  Determine provider  and facility -level barriers and facilitators to POCUS use. 
Provider and facility -level barriers will be assessed using 3 tools:  Provider POCUS Survey (trained providers), 
Brief Provider POC US Survey (wait -listed and participating facilities), and Facility POCUS Survey  (all facilities) . 
Differences in barriers reported and their relationship to frequency of POCUS use will be compared.  We 
postulate the frequency of POCUS use by providers will be inversely proportional to the number of provider - 
and facility -level barriers reported.  Further, providers at facilities where barriers to POCUS are relatively low 
will have greater skill retention after 6 months.  Specific Aims Page 2Contact PD/PI: Soni, Nilam Jayant
2. Research Plan  
Background:   
Medical error i s estimat ed to be the third leadi ng cause of death in the United States.  
Implementati on gaps exists for i ntegrati on of existing technologies to intercept and recor d medical errors,  
rescu e patients when errors occur, and  reduce  the frequency of preventabl e errors.9  Point -of-care 
ultrasonography  is one  such  technology that can reduce  the frequency  of preventable errors but has been slow 
to integrate into patient care.    
Point -of-care ultrasonography improv es patient care.  The advent of compact, portable ultrasound 
devices over the past 25 years has given rise to point -of-care ultrasonography (POCUS) – real-time use of 
ultraso und by clinicians at the bedside to guide the evaluati on and management of patients.   POCUS can be 
used to guide invasiv e bedside procedures,  or perform goal-direct ed diagnostic examinations.  Use of POCUS 
in clinical care has been show n to expedit e diagnostic work -ups and reduc e the number of required tests,  
especially computed tomography (CT) scans that are costly and harmful throug h cumulativ e radiation 
exposure; reduce  the risk of procedure- related complications,  especially for central line placement; and reduce  
the risk of failed procedures.1, 2, 10-13 
 POCUS is underutilize d by provider s in current clinical practice .  POCUS has chang ed the 
standard of care for ce rtain conditions, but gaps in adopti on are evident.  For example, national safety 
organizations,  including the Agency  for Healthcar e Research  and Quality (AHRQ), National Institut e for Health 
and Care Excellence  (NICE), and Centers for D isease  Control and Preventi on (CDC), have recomm ended the 
use of ultraso und guidance  to insert central lines since  2001.5, 14, 15 However, approximately half of providers 
do not use POCUS to guide inserti on of central lines.4, 8 Data from a recent national survey conduct ed by our 
group reveal ed that only 49% of VA providers use ultrasound guidance  to insert central lines compar ed to 72-
88% of non-VA providers, and these  numbers likely overestimat e the actual frequency  of use.16   
Many veter ans woul d benefit from integration of POCUS in VA healthcare.  Based on 2015 
inpatient ICD-9 CM coding data for VA hospitals,  a substantial number of veterans would  benefit from the 
procedural and diagnostic applications of POCUS. Below are the numbers of Veterans that could potentially  be 
im
pacted by POCUS, although we anticipat e the actual numbers to be greater due to underreportin g and 
under -coding using ICD-9 codes , especially for procedural complications.   We believ e ICD-10 may differentiate 
procedures performed with or without imagin g guidance, reducing under -coding compar ed to ICD-9.       
Diagnostic Application s Procedural  Applications  & Complications  
Heart failure  110,263  Central line 
placement  35,448  Arterial injury  4 
Shock  37,551  Pneumothorax  355 
Hypotension  33,208  Thoracentesis  7,423  Pneumothorax  295 
Joint effusion  27,026  Paracentesis  7,130  Hemoperitoneum  29 
Urinary retention  20,929  Bowel injury  167 
Pneumonia  13,794  Lumbar 
puncture  2,477  Subarachnoid 
bleeding  8 
Pleural effusion  15,603  Subdural bleeding  15 
Peritoneal free fluid  10,997  Arthrocentesis  1,904  ---- --- 
Limited provider training is a barrier to POCUS use in clinical care.  Slo w integration of POCUS in 
clinical care has been attributed to the limited number of trained providers.7, 8 Peer institutions, national patient 
safety organizations, and educational  accreditation bodies  are increasingly pressuring healthcare systems  to 
incorporate POCUS training into  clinical practice.  The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education 
(ACGME) now requires ultrasound training for at least nine different medical specialties.17  However, most  
practicing providers, including faculty supervising trainees in ACGME -accredited residencies  and fellowships, 
are unfamiliar with POCUS use because they have not been trained . Despit e the ACGME requirement s, only 
25% of accredited internal medicine residency programs reported having a formal POCUS curriculum in 
2013.18  The provider training gap is likely to persist until large- scale POCUS training programs are developed 
and deployed in healthcare systems, such as the National POCUS Training Program  for the VHA.19 
The VHA’s Simulation Learning, Education and Research Network (SimLEARN) and Specialty 
Care Centers of Innovation (SCC OI) are collaborating to develop a National POCUS Training P rogram.  
Frontline VA providers have voiced the need for the VHA to offer POCUS tra ining, and SimLEARN has been 
tasked to bridge  this gap. SimLEARN’s primary goal is to develop an effective training program to teach basic 
POCUS applications, and SCCO I’s primary goal is to support SimLEARN’s efforts and facilitate dissemination 
of POCUS training nationally . Research Plan Page 3Contact PD/PI: Soni, Nilam Jayant
The goals of our proposal are consistent with the goals of SimLEARN and SCC OI.   Our 
evaluation plan will measure the outcomes of the initial implementation of the National POCUS Training 
Program .  First, we will assess the change in provider skill acquisition after participation in the POCUS Training 
Course, and assess skill retention  6 months post -course. Second, we will compare  the difference  in frequency 
of POCUS use and procedural  complication rates  between facilities that participated in POCUS training and 
wait-listed  control  facilities  using data reported by providers and system -level coding data.  Lastly, b y defining 
the provider and facility -level barriers to POCUS use, our findings  will guide our operating partners’ efforts  to 
implement  POCUS use nationally in the VA healthcare system.     
Implementation of a national POCUS training program fulfills several VA national priorities in 
the VA’s Blueprint for Excellence .  First, Strategy 2 under Theme 1 in the Blueprint for Excellence is to 
“delive r high -quality, Veteran- centered care that compares favorably to the best of private sector in measured 
outcomes, value, access, and patient experience.”20 Successful implementation of POCUS use in the VHA is 
an opportunity for the VHA to provide high- quality, patient -centered care that is equal to or better than the care 
provided in the private sector.  POCUS use can flourish quickly in the VHA because the patient benefits and 
healthcare system incentives are well aligned.  Second, our project also fulfills Strategy 5 under Theme 2 to 
“foster an environment of continuous learning, responsible risk -taking, and personal accountability.”20  By 
encour aging learning of new skills among providers, this project supports the “continuous development of 
clinical, technical and professional skills to assure the highest levels of competency” among those providing direct patient care.  Third, this project meets  the requirements of Theme 3 to “advance healthcare innovation 
for veterans and the country .”  System -wide implementation of POCUS use in a large integrated healthcare 
system like VHA has not been previously described.  Findings from our project will serve as a national model 
for system -wide implementation of POCUS.  Finally, integration of POCUS use in the VHA meets the Institute 
for Healthcare Improvement’s Triple Aim of “improving the patient experience of care (including quality and satisfaction); improving the health of populations; and reducing the per capita cost of health care,” because 
POCUS improves provider and system efficiency, reduces the number of imaging tests, and reduces patient 
risk of harm from radiation exposure or invasive bedside procedures.  
Our evaluation plan is based on the i -PARIHS 
framework for implementation of innovations (Figure 1) 
as modified by Harvey and Kitson.
21 This framework was 
chosen because it guides  us in the assessment of  the 
multiplicity of factors (barriers and facilitators) that can 
impact the success of POCUS implementation. The 
PARIHS framework recognizes that successful implementation is t he result of the interrelationship of 
evidence, context, and process. The i -PARIHS framework, 
in contrast, recognizes the role of facilitation in the 
implementation process as well as the role of the 
innovation recipient as they act within the local organi zational and system context.
21  The revised 
framework, acknowledges the role of individual and group agency in not only defining how an innovation is 
implemented but also how knowledge is diffused given 
both local and broader organizational contexts. The 
complexity of these interactions at the local (micro) and 
system (macro) levels is spanned by the active facilitation of the innovation in each facility which enables innovation spread.
21   
The factors for predicting successful implementation of the national POCUS training program 
are based on the i -PARIHS Framework.  The external context  to develop the national POCUS training 
program is driven by patient safety organizations, accreditation organizations, and clinical practice guidelines recommending adoption of POCUS use based on current evidence as well as third party payers denying reimbursement of p otentially preventable procedural  complications.  The 
inner organizational context  of the 
VHA system includes SimLEARN, SCCO I, and the National Emergency Medicine Field Advisory Group (EM 
FAG) .  In addition, providers advocating for the VHA to provide POCUS training are part of this inner context  
because the initiative to develop a VHA  POCUS training program was driven by requests from frontline 
providers. The inner local facility context  includes assessment of the local barriers and facilitat ors to POCUS 
implementation that will be performed using the national Facility POCUS Survey  completed by Chiefs of Staff   
              Figure 1.  i -PARIHS Framework
Research Plan Page 4Contact PD/PI: Soni, Nilam Jayant
and Provider POCUS Survey complet ed by VA providers.    The recipients are the frontli ne providers that desire 
acquisition of POCUS skills,  and the facilitation strategy is the 2.5-day POCUS Training Course , monthly 
conference  calls,  and SharePoint® website. The assessment tools for the recipients and facilitati on strategy 
include the Pre- and Post-course  Knowledg e and Skills Tests, Provi der POCUS survey, and Course  
Evaluation.  Specific questions will assess the provider’s frequency of us e and comfort level for POCUS 
applications.21   
Methods (Evaluation Plan):  
Study Design.  A prospective, observational study with wait-l isted control facilities will be conducted to: 
1) evaluate the effectiveness of the POCUS Training Course on provider skill acquisition and retention, 2) 
assess the frequency of POCUS use after the POCUS Training Course, and 3) identify provider and facility-
level barriers to POCUS use. Providers from facilities that participated in the POCUS Training Course will be 
compared to wait-l isted  control facilities  with regard to frequency of POCUS  use and procedural complications.
Project Preparation.  In April of 2016, a national Facility POCUS Survey  was sent to all Chiefs of Staff 
(COS) in the VA healthcare system. Also, t he core faculty of the national POCUS training program will gather to 
pilot test the POCUS Training Course curriculum, Pre-/p ost-course Knowledge and S kills Tests,  and the 
Provider POCUS Survey during four pilot courses at the SimLEARN National Simulation Center in April, June, 
July, and August of  2016.  Feedback from thes e pilot courses w ill be incorporated to fine tune the course and 
assessment
 tools.  Logistics will be finalized in preparation for full launch of the POCUS Training Course in 
October of 2016  (FY1 7) with 2 sessions per month  during most months. 
Population 
and Sampling Plan. Provider Recruitment:  A pproximately 200 participants f rom 15 
different VA medical centers will participate in the 2.5-d ay POCUS Training Course at the National Simulation 
Center 
in Orlando.  F ifteen V A medical centers will be selected based on data gathered from the VA Facility 
Survey: 1) COS financial support to pay for travel to Orlando, 2) COS support for release from clinical duties, 3)  
Facilities with providers that infrequently u se POCUS, and 4)  Availability of ≥2 p ortable ultrasound machines at 
the facility.  F acilities (n=22 per preliminary data) reporting no POCUS use will be excluded from this first  
training cohort due to high likelihood of providers not having access to a portable ultrasound machine, a barrier  
that 
has to be surmounted before training ensues.  Approximately 10 providers  per course will participate in the  
POCUS 
Training Course from October 2016 to September 2017. Provider Sites :  Facilities p articipati ng in the  
POCUS Training Course will constitute the “intervention” sites w hile the wait-l isted “ control” facilities  will be 
similar VA facilities based on eligibility criteria above.  A fter closure of the Facility POCUS Survey in June of  
2016, intervention and waitlist facilities will be selected.  Provider Specialties:  N ovice physician providers  
without prior ultrasound training or experience p rimarily  from emergency medicine, internal medicine/hospital  
medicine, 
and critical care medicine will be invited to participate in the 2.5-d ay POCUS Training Co urse.  
Completion of all surveys and skills assessments will be a course requirement disseminated by SimLEARN in  
the invitation letter and emphasiz ed at t he start of the POCUS Training Courses.
           POCUS Training Course.  The 2.5-d ay course will combine focused didactics and supervised hands-
on ultrasound
 scanning practice wit h live and simulation models.  A standard provider to core Factor  Who/What  Assessment Tool  
External Context  Patient safety organizations
Accreditation organizations
Clinical practice guidelines
PayersNone  
Inner Context:  
Veterans Health 
Administration  SimLEARN
Specialty Care Centers of Innovation
National Emergency Medicine Field
Advisory Group
Providers interested in POCUSMonitor  VHA policies a nd requirements
for POCUS use by t eam members that
are operating partner leaders or membersof the national Emergency Medicine Field
Advisory Group
Inner Context: 
Local VHA 
facility  Local barriers and facilitators to
implementation of POCUS
Providers interested in POCUSFacility POCUS survey
Provider  POCUS survey
Recipients  Providers participating in POCUS
Training C oursePre-/post-course Knowledge & Skills
Tests
Facilitation 
Strategy  POCUS Training Course
Monthly conference calls
SharePoint® websiteProvider POCUS Survey
Course evaluationResearch Plan Page 5Contact PD/PI: Soni, Nilam Jayant
faculty ratio of 3 -4:1 will be maintained.  Each course will have a maximum of 10 providers and minimum of 3 
faculty.    
Data Sources  and Asse ssment Tools.  Here is a summary of  the data sources and ass essment tools.  
Assessment Tool s Source  Data Elements  Timing 
VA Facility POCUS 
Survey  Chiefs of Staff / 
Service Chiefs  1.Provider and facility -level barriers Pre-course  and 18 
months   
POCUS SkillsTest Course  
Participants  1. Image acquisition skills
2. Image interpretation skillsPre-course, immediately 
and 6 months  post-course  
POCUS Knowledge  
Test Course  
Participants  1. POCUS knowledge Pre-course, immediately 
and 6 months post -course  
Provider POCUS 
Survey  Course  
Participants  1.Frequency of POCUS use
2.Self-efficacy
3.Procedural  complications
4.Provider and facility -level barriersPre-course , 6 months and 
18 months post-course  
Brief Provider  
POCUS Survey  Providers at  both 
participating &  
wait-listed  
facilities  1. Frequency of POCUS use
2. Self -efficacy
3. Procedural  complicationsPre-course and 18 
months  
Coding Data 
Review  VHA Corporate 
Data Warehouse  1.Frequency of POCUS use  for
procedure guidance
2. Procedur al complicationsPre-course, 18  months  
Course Evaluation  Course  
Participants  Feedback on t raining course:  
1. Lectures
2. Hands -on training sessions
3. FacultyImmediately post -course  
Monthly 
Conference Calls  All Course  
Participants  and 
Faculty  Narrative summary of:  
1. Provider and facility -level b arriers
2.POCUS training course  feedbackEvery 1 month 
SharePoint® 
website  All Course 
Participants and 
Faculty  Narrative summary of:  
1. Provider and facility -level b arriersOpen access for all 
course participants and 
faculty  
Pre-c ourse Assessments.  VA Facility POCUS Survey: This survey was disseminated in April 2016 to 
COS’s by the HAIG (Healthcare Analysis and Information Group)  to gather baseline data on the use of 
POCUS, assess provider training needs, and identify potential barriers/facilitators to POCUS use at individual 
facilities. The survey will be repeated at 18 months.  Pre-c ourse  Provider POCUS Survey:  Prior to starting the 
POCUS Training Course, providers will complete the Pre-c ourse Provider POCUS Survey using REDCap™ 
survey software.  The Pre -course Provider POCUS Survey will be available only to registered providers.  The 
survey should be completed befor e arriving at the National Simulation Center, but staff will ensure completion 
by all providers before starting the course. This survey will assess the pre-c ourse frequency  of POCUS  use, 
known procedural
 complications, provider self-e fficacy (i.e., confidence in POCUS), and provider and facility-
level barriers t o POCUS use. Provider demographic data will also be gathered 
(gender,
 age, primary specialty, practice  setting, percentage of time providing direct  clinical care).  The 
provider questions were devel oped by POCUS subject  matter experts and educati on sp ecialists, and self-
efficacy  scales are base d on publish ed scales.22 Pre-course  Knowl edge and Skills Tests (A ppendices 8 and 9): 
To assess  baseli ne knowledg e and skills , providers will t ake an electronic  Pre-co urse Knowledg e Test and 
hands -on Pre-course  Skills Test using standardiz ed checklists. The tests are based on similar tools used by 
nati
onal professional society POCUS training course s and input from our multidisciplinary group of core faculty. 
Clinica l knowledg e relevant POCUS applications,  image acquisition , and image interpretation skills will be 
assessed. The Skills Test will be  administered by the same  core faculty to ensure consistency in grading. 
Cours
e Evaluation:  A standard course evaluation survey  administered by Employee Education System (EES) 
will gather feedback on the course structure, facilities, and faculty.   Brief Provider POCUS Survey:  This survey 
will be administered
 by the HAIG (Healthcare Analysis and Information Group) t o gather facility-l evel 
comparison data from physicians specializing in emergency medicine, critical  care medicine, and internal 
medicine/hospital medicine that are not participating in the POCUS Training Research Plan Page 6Contact PD/PI: Soni, Nilam Jayant
Course , but practicing at both participating and wait-listed facilities . This survey will assess  providers’  
frequency of POCUS use, known procedural complications, provider self -efficacy (i.e., confidence in POCUS), 
and barriers to POCUS use.  Coding Data Review:  Using Coding Dat a from the VHA Corporate Data 
Warehouse, we will assess frequency of procedures  performed with and without imaging guidance and rates of 
specific  procedural complications.  The rationale to focus on procedures is 1) POCUS diagnostic a pplications 
are not currently coded, 2)  Procedural coding is relatively more specific, and 3) Reduction on procedural 
complications has
 the strongest evidence base. 
Post -cour
se Follow -up.  Monthly Conference  Calls:   After p articipati on in the POCUS training course, 
providers will be invited to participat e in monthly conference  calls led by one of the core faculty.  The 
conference  calls will be unstructured discussions to address  technical questions,  gather feedback on provider 
and facility barriers encountered to POCUS use in clinical practice, and discuss  potential short -term and long-
term solutions to overcom e barriers.  Conference  calls will be recor ded and transcribed.  Facult y w ill also keep 
notes.  These  qualitativ e data will be reviewed and present ed in the final report to inform our operati ng partners 
and the VHA about provider experiences that will be important for sy stem -wide 
implementation.  SharePoint® website:  A website will be establish ed on the VA intranet for the POCUS 
Training Progra m by SimLEA RN to facilitat e dialogue betw een faculty and provider s, and amongst providers.  
Documents from t he SharePoint® websit e will be archived and synthesiz ed for inclusion in the final project 
report. 
Post-c ourse Assessments.  VA Facility POCUS Survey :  This survey will be repeated 18-m onths into 
the grant period (April 2018) to assess for changes in POCUS use, provider training needs, and barriers/
facilitators 
to POCUS at individual facilities.  Post-c ourse Provider POCUS Survey:  The Post-c ourse Provider 
POCUS Survey will contain additional  questions about facilitation (monthly  conference  calls, SharePoint 
website) compared to the pre-c ourse Provider POCUS survey.  The post-c ourse survey will be distributed 
electronically to providers at the time of the 6-month post-c ourse Skills and Knowledge Test and at 18 months.  
Post-c ours
e Knowledge and Skills Test (Appendices 8 and 9):  An immediate Post-c ourse Knowledge and 
Skills Test to assess skill acquisition and a 6-month Post-c ourse Knowledg e and Skills Tests to assess skill 
retention will be conducted.  The  same Knowledge and  Skills Test templates will be used pre- and post-c ourse.  
However, the 6-month Post-c ourse Skills  Test will be administered remotely using REACTs™ simulation 
services, a program designed specifically for remote ultrasound training. REACTs™ will allow the faculty to see 
the ultrasound probe position on the body by camer a while simultaneously seeing the ultrasound images on the 
screen.  Paid volunteers  that may be administrative personnel or non-p articipating providers will be us ed for the 
6-month Post-c ourse Skills  Test.  Each patient volunteer will receive a $50 incentive each time they volunteer 
for a Post-c ourse Skills Test.  If REACTs™ is not available, an alternative strategy will be to use Microsoft 
Lync® to videoconference.  Brief  Provider POCUS Survey:  The HAIG (Healthcare Analysis and Information 
Group) will be repeat administration of the Brief Provider POCUS Survey to providers at both participating and 
wait-l isted facilities after  18 months to asses change in frequency of POCUS use, known procedural 
complications, provider self -efficacy (i.e., confidence in POCUS), and barriers to POCUS.  Coding Data 
Review:  Coding data  from facilities of providers that participated in the POCUS Training Course and wait-l isted 
facilities will be reviewed at 18 months post-c ourse.
Data C
ollecti on Procedures:  The Facility POCUS Survey and Brief Provider POCUS Survey have been 
devel oped by the HAIG (Healthcar e Analysis and Informati on Group) who will administer the survey and collect  
survey responses.   The Pre-course  and Post-course  Provider POCUS Survey s and POCUS Knowledge and 
Skills Tests will be administer ed and collected using REDCap™ survey softwar e availabl e throug h VA servers .  
The Course  Evaluati on will be administer ed by the Employ ee Educati on System using the Talent Management 
System (TMS) at the conclusion of the POCUS Training Course  before providers depart the National 
Simulati on Center . Codin g data from the VHA Corporate Data Warehouse  will be collect ed and analyz ed with 
SAS.  F ield notes collected during the monthly conference  calls led by core faculty and from the SharePoint® 
website will be analyz ed qualitatively.  
Data Analysis: 
Objectiv e 1.  Evaluate provider skill acquisiti on and retention, and frequency of POCUS use 
after participati on in the POCUS Training Course. The statistical approach  used for this specific aim i s 
hierarchical repeat ed measures (mixed effects)  analysis.   The repeated learner a ssessments collect ed f or t his 
aim
 have a natural hierarchical structur e with level 1 being the repeated assessment, level 2 being the 
individual learner, and level 3 being the facility/organizati on with which  the individual learner is associated.  Research Plan Page 7Contact PD/PI: Soni, Nilam Jayant
Level 1 will capture within subject variation while level 2 captures the between subjects variability, and level 3 
captures the between organizations variability.  Our analyses will enable us to identify key determinants 
associated with our outcomes and our estimated mixed effects models will have the following general form:  
〖E(Y(i
,j,k))=f -1 (α+X(i,j) β + Z(j) γ + μ(j) + W(k)η + ε(i,j,k))  
Regres
sion models will be estimated using the PROC MIXED procedure in SAS 9.4. We will conduct 
diagnosti c tests to ensure appropriate model specifications and we will also estimate intraclass correlation 
coefficients relating the percent of variation in the assessment score explained by individual learner 
characteristics (demographics) and by organizational -level factors.  
Objectiv e 2.  Determine the effect of the POCUS Traini ng Course and implementati on facilitation 
on facility -level frequency of POCUS use. The frequency  of POCUS use by each  provider and by each 
facility would ideally be measured quantitatively using encounter or codin g data.  Captur e of POCUS usage is 
an active area working groups are addressing.  In the regressi on model for this ob jective, the outcom e variable 
will be the difference  in self-reported frequency  of use by providers from the Brief POCUS survey administered 
by the HAIG at 0 and 18 months. Predictor variables will include the vector of organization- level barriers and 
facilitators, whether t he facility participat ed in POCUS traini ng or was wait-l isted, and a variabl e that 
categorizes the facility’s frequency  of POCUS use at the start of the study (e.g., 0-25%, 26-50%, etc.).   
Objective 3.  Determine provider and facility-l evel barriers and facilitators to POCUS use.    
Descriptive Analysis:  The Facility POCUS Survey will be analyzed for the following: number of responding 
VHA facilities that use POCUS; reasons why facilities are not using POCUS; for those facilities u sing POCUS 
the following: how POCUS is specifically being used (both diagnostic and procedural applications), what new 
POCUS applications facilities would like to incorporate in the future, the clinical areas t hat are  using POCUS, 
the specialties of the providers  performing POCUS  including whether trainees use it and who trains them; do 
local policies or practice guidelines exist for POCUS, is there a formal credentialing process for POCUS  and/or 
a competency evaluation; is a quality assurance process for POCUS in place; how is workflow documented 
and captured; and how  are providers trained in POCUS.  These data will be used to guide the implementation 
strategies to be used in the monthly conference calls and on the SharePoint website. The barriers to POCUS 
use in the participating and wait-l isted facilities  will be captur ed in the Brief Provider POCUS Survey and VHA 
Facility POCUS Survey  that will  both be repeated at 18 months.  Categorical variables will be compar ed using 
chi
-squared test and continuous variables using t-test or Mann-W hitney if data are not normally distributed.   
Relevant variables will  be used in the models described in Objectives 1 and 2 for the facility level.  Qualitative 
Analysis:  In additi on to the descriptive analysis of the Brief Provider POCUS Survey and the VHA Facility 
POCUS Survey, the core faculty will interface with providers  during monthly conference calls to create field 
notes to record  the barriers/facilitators to POCUS  implementation. These activities will als o be recorded to 
facilitate verification of fiel d notes. Dr. Soni will maintain a database of the barriers and facilitators.  He will 
group them first by know n themes and add  to the list of themes as new barriers and facilitators are revealed.  
The investigative team w ill group these barriers that should be addressed at a national policy level vs. those 
that shoul
d be addressed at a local level using activ e facilitation.  This qualitative description of barriers and 
facilitators will be part of the final report to SimLEARN and SCCOI, Variable  Definition  Project Data Elements  
Y(i,j,k)  learner assessment score for learner i 
within organization j, at time k  Post-course and 6 -month Knowledge and Skills Test 
scores, Self -efficacy, Self -reported frequency of 
POCUS use  
X(i,j) vector of learner characteristics  Provider demographics (age, post -graduate year, 
specialty), Pre -course knowledge/skills/self -efficacy  
Z(j) vector of organization -level variables  Barriers/facilitators identified from Facility POCUS 
Survey, Provide r POCUS Survey  
μ(j) organization -level random intercept  N/A 
W(k)  time element  W = 0 post -course, W=1 at 6 -month assessment  
ε(i,j,k)  error term  N/A 
f(∙) functional form for f(∙) will be determined 
by the data generating process of the 
learner assessment score  N/A Research Plan Page 8Contact PD/PI: Soni, Nilam Jayant
but will also be relayed in real- time as new barriers are identified.   Solutions to overcoming barriers described 
by facilities will be coded as well.   
Proj
ect Deliverables.   We will provide a narrative summary of ou r project’s findings to our operating 
partners , SimLEARN and SCCO I, and make the report available to all VHA facilities .  The final report will be a 
narrative summary that will include four sections: 1. A report of effectiveness of training on provider  skill 
acquisition and retention.  This report will guide SimLEARN ’s ongoing training courses, and provide data for 
SCCO I to plan its facilitation strategy for s ystem -wide POCUS implementation through its regional training 
centers ; 2. A report of frequency  of POCUS  use by providers before and after participation in the POCUS 
Training Course, as well as any relationships revealed between frequency of use, skills retention , and/or 
barriers/facilitators to POCUS use.  This report will provide insight to the overall effectiveness of the POCUS 
Training Course based on an intermediate outcome, frequency of POCUS use;  3.  A r eport of barriers  and 
facilitators  to POCUS  implementation per providers and facilities. This report will also synthesize all available 
data about potential or proven solutions that were shown to be effective during the project period, and that may 
be used to overcome local  and system -level barriers to implementation.  This data will primarily serve SCC OI in 
its efforts to develop solutions to barriers and facilit ate implementation of POCUS use nationally .  
Potential Obstacles and Solutions.  One potential obstacle is use of  REACTs ™ simulation services 
which requires internet access to perform post -course testing remotely.  Although REACTs ™ meets HIPAA 
compliance and other patient privacy requirements, it is not currently an approved software in the VHA.  We 
have applied for approval more than 5 months prior to project launch.  However, if we are unable to utilize 
REACTs ™ simulation services  for remote post -course skills testing, then Microsoft Lync® that is available 
throughout the VA system is an alternate program.  Although survey response rates in the U.S. are steadily 
declining,23, 24 our team has conducted 8 major surveys in the past three years and found this strategy 
produces response rates of approximately 27- 30% among patients, and we believe that our results will be 
higher among this group of providers given their individual  investment in POCUS training.  To minimize 
provider attrition, our research associate will directly contact providers not responding to email communications, and if a provider does not respond to the research associate’s requests, the provider’s 
supervisor will be contacted.  During the POCUS Training Course orientation, the expectation for post -course 
follow -up will be emphasized.    
Research Team and Relevant Experience : 
We have selected a multidisciplinary team of experts in collaboration with our operational partners, 
Sim
LEARN and SCCO I, to do this evaluation, and our team brings diverse skill sets in administration , 
evaluation, and clinical education to the project.   
The primary evaluation team for this project will be led by Nilam Soni, MD, Mary Bollinger, PhD, MPH,  
Jacqueline Pugh, MD, Jacqueline Pugh, MD , Erin Finley, PhD, MPH, Brian Lucas, MD, MSc, Michael Mader, 
MS, and Erika Bowen, MA.   All team members, except Brian Lucas, are located at the South Texas Veterans 
Health Care Systems (STVHCS) in San Antonio.  Nilam Soni, MD, is the principal investigator for this project, 
and he has been collaborating with SimLEARN and SCC OI to develop the VHA’s National POCUS Training 
Program .  Dr. Soni is an internationally recognized physician educat or in PO CUS and will serve as the Course 
Director and Assistant Director of Point -of-care Ultrasound Training for SimLEARN.  Mary Bollinger, PhD, MPH 
will serve as a co -investigator for this project.  Dr. Bollinger is an expert in creating geographic and spatial 
models, and has led multiple needs assessments and program evaluations for the VHA.  Jacqueline Pugh, MD 
will serve as a co -investigator and senior mentor for this project.  She is an implementation scientist and the 
Associate Chief of Staff for Research at  the STVHCS.   
The evaluation team for this project will be led by Mary  Bollinger, PhD, MPH, Jacqueline Pugh, MD , 
Erin Finley, PhD, MPH, Brian Lucas, MD, MSc, Michael Mader, MS, and Erika Bowen, MA.  Dr. Finley is a medical anthropologist and health services researcher at the STVHCS who will serve as a co- investigator. Her 
research has focused on mental health concerns among U.S. Veterans, and implementation of evidence-based practices in VHA healthcare settings.  Dr. Lucas is a research scholar  at the Whi te River Junction VA 
Hospital  who will serve as a co -investigator for this project.  He has led previous POCUS research project s to 
locally implement POCUS training and assess provider competency, as well as measurement of impact of POCUS use on clinical outcomes.   Michael Mader is a statistician with extensive experience in health services 
research data analysis.  Erika Bowen will serve as a research associate for this project, and her research 
interest is assessment of impact of quality improvement programs on learners and healthcare systems.  
The clinical education team will be led by Nilam Soni, MD, Christopher Schott, MD, MS, Jeremy Bo yd, Research Plan Page 9Contact PD/PI: Soni, Nilam Jayant