Any and all information presented in this document shall be treated as confidential and shall remain the exclusive property o f Sanofi (or any of its 
affiliated companies). The use of such confidential information m ust be restricted to the recipient for the agreed purpose and must not be 
disclosed, published or otherwise communicated to any unauthorized persons, for any reason, in any form whatsoever without th e prior written 
consent of Sanofi (or the concerned affil iated company); ‘affiliated company’ means any corporation, partnership or other entity which at the date 
of communication or afterwards (i) controls directly or indirectly Sanofi, (ii) is directly or indirectly controlled by Sanof i, with ‘control’ meaning  
direct or indirect ownership of more than 50% of the capital stock or the voting rights in such corporation, partnership or o ther entity  
According to template: QSD -002579 VERSION N°15.0 (22 -MAR -2017) Page 1 
Internal  
AMENDED CLINICAL TRIAL PROTOCOL 10  
COMPOUND: isatuximab/SAR650984  
Randomized, open label, multicenter study assessing the clinical benefit of 
isatuximab combined with carfilzomib (Kyprolis®) and dexamethasone versus 
carfilzomib with dexamethasone in patients with relapsed and/or refractory 
multiple myeloma previously treated with 1 to 3 prior lines  
STUDY NUMBER: EFC15246  
STUDY NAME: IKEMA  
VERSION DATE / STATUS: 24-Nov-2022  / Approved  
Version Number:  1 EudraCT  2017 -001940 -37 
IND Number(s)  103217  
WHO universal trial number  U1111 -1195 -5957  
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date:  24-Nov-2022 Total number of pages:  180 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 2 Internal  
NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF  
COORDINATING 
INVESTIGATOR  
 Name:  
Address:  
 
 
Tel: 
Fax: 
E-mail:   
 
MONITORING TEAM’S 
REPRESENTATIVE  
 Name:  
Address:  
 
 
 
Tel: 
Fax: 
E-mail:   
 
SPONSOR  
 Company:  
Address:  
 
 
 
 Sanofi -Aventis Recherche & Développement  
1 avenue Pierre Brossolette  
91380 Chilly -Mazarin  
France  
 
OTHER EMERGENCY 
TELEPHONE NUMBERS  
   
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 3 Internal  
PROTOCOL AMENDMENT SUMMARY OF CHANGES   
DOCUMENT HISTORY   
 
Document  Country/countries 
impacted by amendment  Date, version  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10 All 24 November  2022 , version 1 ( electronic 10.0) 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 09  All 14 September 2021, version 1 (electronic 9.0)  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 08  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 07  All 
All 11 March 2021, version 1 (electronic 8.0)  
10 August 2020, version 1 (electronic 7.0)  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 06  All 13 Nov 2019, version 1 (electronic 6.0)  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 05  All 11 Sep 2019, version 1 (electronic 5.0)  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 04  All 11 June 2019, version 1 (electronic 4.0)  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 03  All 02 July 2018, version 1 (electronic 3.0)  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 04 (GB)  Great Britain only  02 July 2018, version 1 (electronic 3.0)  
Protocol Amendment 04  All 02 July 2018, version 1 (electronic 1.0)  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 02  All 08 February 2018, version 1 (electronic 2.0)  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 03 (GB)  Great Britain only  08 February 2018, version 1 (electronic 2.0)  
Protocol Amendment 03  All 08 February 2018, version 1 (electronic 1.0)  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 02 (GB)  Great Britain only  30 August 2017, version 1 (electronic 1.0)  
Protocol Amendment 02 (GB)  Great Britain only  30 Augu st 2017, version 1 (electronic 1.0)  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 01  All 21 August 2017, version 1 (electronic 1.0)  
Protocol Amendment 01  All 21 August 2017, version 1 (electronic 1.0)  
Original Protocol   05 July 2017, version 1 (electronic 1.0)  
Amended protocol 10 (24-Nov-2022 )   
This amended protocol 10 is considered to be substantial based on the criteria set forth in Article 
2(2)(13) of the Regulation No 536/2014  of the European Parliament and the Council of the 
European Union.  
OVERALL RATIONALE FOR THE AMENDMENT   
An overwhelming treatment effect of isatuximab carfilzomib dexamethasone ( IKd) arm in 
comparison to carfilzomib dexamethasone ( Kd) arm was observed at the time of the pre -specified 
interim analysis performed  with a data cut -off date of 07  February  2020 . However,  the median 
progression free survival ( PFS) was not reached for IKd arm while it was reached for Kd arm. It 
was anticipated that the median PFS could  be not reached  at the time of the pre -specified final 
analysis. Therefore, a descriptive additional PFS analysis was added in the amended protocol #08 
dated 11  March  2021  to increase the possibility of observing the median PFS time for the IKd arm 
when approximately 180 PFS events  as per Independent Response Committee (IRC)  are observed .  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 4 Internal  
The final PFS analysis was performed with a data cut-off date of 14 January 2022 and median 
PFS was reached in the IKd arm at the time of this analysis. The refore, the  reason to perform  
additional descriptive analysis when approximately 180 PFS events are occurred  is no longer  
necessary,  and this amendment removes this analysis from the study protocol.  
Protocol amendment summary of changes table  
Section # and Name  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Title Page  ClinicalTrials.gov identifier was added.  To include the 
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier in 
the amended protocol.  
Protocol Amendment 
Summary of Changes  “This amended protocol 09 is substantial based on the criteria 
set forth in Article 10(a) of Directive 2001/20/EC of the 
European Parliament and the Council of the European Union” 
was replaced by “This amended protocol 10 is considered to 
be substantial based on the criteria set forth in Article 2(2)(13) 
of the Regulation No 536/2014 of the European Parliament and 
the Council of the European Union”  To reflect the current 
amendment number and for 
consistency with the protocol 
template released in 
September 2022.  
Clinical Trial Summary:  
Assessment Schedule  Text related to additional descriptive  PFS analysis was 
removed and the management of patients still on treatment or 
in the follow -up was updated accordingly . Median PFS was reached at 
the final PFS analysis; 
therefore, additional descriptive 
PFS analysis is no longer 
necessary . 
Clinical Trial Summary: 
Statistical Considerati ons, 
Primary analysis  The following sentences were removed: “An additional PFS 
analysis will be performed when approximately 180 events 
assessed by the IRC have been observed to better 
characterize the distribution of PFS in the IKd arm in a 
descriptive wa y. This analysis will be performed at the latest 15 
months after the 159 PFS event analysis cut -off date in case of 
the approximately 180 PFS events are not observed at that 
time”.  Median PFS was reached at 
the final PFS analysis; 
therefore, additional des criptive 
PFS analysis is no longer 
necessary.  
Clinical Trial Summary: 
Statistical Considerations, 
Interim analysis, Planned 
PFS and OS cut -off dates  The following sentences were removed: “Efficacy results will be 
updated in a descriptive way (non-inferential analysis) at the 
time of the PFS additional analysis (approximately 180 
events)” . 
“The cut -off date for the additional PFS analysis will be the 
date when approximately 180 PFS events assessed by the IRC 
have occurred or 15 months after 159 PFS events analysis cut -
off date, whichever comes first”.  Median PFS was reached at 
the final PFS analysis; 
therefore, additional descriptive 
PFS analysis is no longer 
necessary.  
Clinical Trial Summary: 
Duration of Study Period 
(per patient)  All wordings  related to additional PFS analysis was removed 
and the management of patients still on treatment or in the 
follow -up was updated accordingly.  Median PFS was reached at 
the final PFS analysis; 
therefore, additional descriptive 
PFS analysis is no l onger 
necessary.  
Section 6.2.1 Duration of 
study participation for 
each patient  Text related to 180 additional PFS events was removed and 
management of patients still on treatment or in follow -up was 
updated accordingly.  Median PFS was reached at 
the fina l PFS analysis; 
therefore, additional descriptive 
PFS analysis is no longer 
necessary.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 5 Internal  
Section # and Name  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Section 6.2.2 
Determination of end of 
clinical trial (all patients ) The following sentences were removed: “ An additional PFS 
analysis will be performed at approximately  180 events. The 
additional analysis will be performed at the latest 15 months 
after the 159 PFS event analysis cut -off date in case of the 
approximately 180 PFS events are not observed at that time ”. Median PFS was reached at 
the final PFS analysis; 
therefore, additional descriptive 
PFS analysis is no longer 
necessary.  
Section 6.4 Study 
Committees  “No IRC review will be performed after the additional PFS 
analysis cut -off date” was replaced by “IRC will review disease 
assessments until the l ast time point with M  protein assessed 
by central laboratory or overall survival cut -off date, whichever 
comes first”.  To analyze all samples drawn 
before implementation of 
amended protocol  #10. 
Section 10.1.6 After 
Implementation of 
Amended Protocol #10  Previous heading “Post additional PFS analysis cut -off date 
(approximately 180  PFS events as per IRC)” and the 
applicable text in this section w ere replaced by “After 
implementation of amended protocol #10”.  To reflect removal of the 
additional  PFS analysis.  
Section 10.1.6 After 
Implementation of 
Amended Protocol #10  Added that following additional information will be collected 
during the study treatment administration after the 
implementation of amended protocol #10:  
“Hematology and biochemistry, or any other laboratory results 
supporting the reported AE s.” 
“Other procedures supporting the reported AEs .” To include the additional 
information required to be 
collected after implementation 
of amended protocol  #10. 
Section 10.1.6 After 
Implementation of 
Amended Protocol #10  Updated that survival status and further anti -myeloma 
therapies will be collected twice a year if study treatment is 
stopped before the OS cut -off date.  To correct inconsistency with 
Section  6.2.1.  
Section 10.1.7 Post OS 
analysis cut -off date  Added that following additional information will be collected 
during the study treatment administration post OS analysis cut -
off date:  
“Hematology and biochemistry,  or any other laboratory results 
supporting the reported AE s.” 
“Other procedures supporting the reported AEs .” 
“Death date and reason if occurred during study treatment .” To include the additional 
information required to be 
collected post OS analysis cut -
off date.  
Section 10.1.7 Post OS 
analysis cut -off date  Added that following additional information will be collected 
after the discontinuation of study treatment:  
“Death date and reason if occurred in follow -up period due to 
related AE .” To include the additional 
information required to be 
collected post OS analysis cut -
off date.  
Section 11.4.2.1 Analysis 
of primary efficacy 
endpoint  The following sentences were removed: “An additional PFS 
analysis (non -inferential analysis) will be performed  when 
approximately 180 events assessed by the IRC have been 
observed to better characterize the distribution of PFS in the 
Ikd arm in a descriptive way. The additional analysis will be 
performed at the latest 15 months after the 159 PFS event 
analysis cut -off date in case of the approximately 180 PFS 
events are not observed at that time”.  Median PFS was reached at 
the final PFS analysis; 
therefore, additional descriptive 
PFS analysis is no longer 
necessary.  
Section 11.4.2.3 
Multiplicity considerations  The following sentence was removed:  “Efficacy results will be 
updated at the time of the PFS additional analysis 
(approximately 180 events) but will be only descriptive (non -
inferential analysis)”.  Median PFS was reached at 
the final PFS analysis; 
therefore, additional descriptive 
PFS analy sis is no longer 
necessary.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 6 Internal  
Section # and Name  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Section 11.5 Interim 
analysis  The following sentences were removed:  “Efficacy results will be 
updated at the time of the PFS additional analysis 
(approximately 180 events) but will be only descriptive (non -
inferential analysis) . No α -spending or formal testing is planned 
for the PFS additional analysis”.  Median PFS was reached at 
the final PFS analysis; 
therefore, additional descriptive 
PFS analysis is no longer 
necessary.  
Section 12.1 Ethical and 
Regulatory 
Considerations  Additional details regarding ethical and regulatory standards 
included as per the updated protocol template.  For consistency with the 
protocol template released in 
September 2022.  
Section 14.5 Data 
Protection  Additional details regarding data protection metho ds included 
as per the updated protocol template.  For consistency with the 
protocol template released in 
September 2022.  
Appendix O (Protocol 
amendment history)  Changes related to amended protocol #09 were moved to 
Appendix O.  History of amendment to this 
protocol added.  
 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 7 Internal  
CLINICAL TRIAL SUMMARY  
COMPOUND: 
isatuximab/SAR650984  STUDY No: EFC15246  
TITLE  Randomized, open label, multicenter study assessing the clinical benefit of 
isatuximab combined with carfilzomib (Kyprolis®) and dexamethasone versus 
carfilzomib with dexamethasone in patients with relapsed and/or refractory 
multiple myeloma previously treated with 1 to 3  prior lines.  
INVESTIGATOR/TRIAL LOCATION  Worldwide  
PHASE OF DEVELOPMENT  Phase 3  
STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 Primary objective:  
To demonstrate the benefit of isatuximab in combination with carfilzomib and 
dexamethasone in the prolongation of progression free survival (PFS) using 
International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) criteria as compared to 
carfilzomib and de xamethasone in patients with relapsed and/or refractory 
multiple myeloma (MM) previously treated with 1 to 3  lines of therapy.  
Secondary objectives:  
Key efficacy objectives  
• To evaluate overall response rate (ORR).  
• To evaluate rate of very good partial res ponse (VGPR) or better.  
• To evaluate rate of VGPR or better (IMWG criteria) with minimal residual 
disease (MRD) negativity in both arms.  
• To evaluate complete response (CR) rate in both arms (IMWG criteria).  
• To evaluate overall survival (OS) in both arms.  
Other secondary objectives  
• To evaluate safety in both arms.  
• To evaluate duration of response (DOR) in both arms.  
• To evaluate time to progression (TTP) in both arms.  
• To evaluate time from the date of randomization to the date of second 
PD or death from any ca use, whichever happens first (PFS2) in 
both arms.  
• To evaluate time to first response in both arms  
• To evaluate time to best response in both arms  
• To determine the pharmacokinetic (PK) profile of isatuximab and 
carfilzomib when combined together.  
• To evaluate immunogenicity of isatuximab in isatuximab arm.  
• To evaluate generic and disease - and treatment -specific health -related 
quality of life (HRQL), and changes in HRQL, health state utility, and 
health status in both arms.  
Exploratory objectives:  
• To explore PK and pharmacodynamics relationship.  
• To explore the relationship between immune genetic determinants and 
efficacy endpoints.  
• To explore relationship between cytogenetics abnormalities not part of 
Revised International Staging System (R -ISS) includ ing but not limited to 
del (1p) and gain (1q) and efficacy endpoints.  
• To explore the impact of M -protein measurement without isatuximab 
interference on best overall response assessment.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 8 Internal  
STUDY DESIGN  This is a prospective multicenter, multinational, random ized, open label, parallel 
group, 2 -arm study assessing the clinical benefit of isatuximab at 10  mg/kg 
weekly in the first cycle (4 weeks) and then combined with carfilzomib at 
56 mg/m² twice weekly 3 out of 4 weeks and dexamethasone (IKd arm) twice 
weekly  versus carfilzomib at 56  mg/m² twice weekly 3 out of 4  weeks and 
dexamethasone  twice weekly (Kd arm), in terms of PFS in patients with 
relapsed and/or refractory MM previously treated with 1 to 3  prior lines.  
Patients will be treated until disease progre ssion, unacceptable adverse event 
(AE), patient decision to stop the study treatment, or any other reasons.  
Isatuximab, carfilzomib, and dexamethasone are defined in this protocol as 
“study treatment”.  
Treatment allocation will be performed by an Interacti ve Response Technology 
(IRT). All eligible patients will be randomly assigned to the IKd (experimental) 
arm or Kd (control) arm in a 3:2  ratio.  
Randomization will be stratified by number of prior lines 1 vs. >1 and R -ISS I or 
II vs. III vs. not classified  (inconclusive fluorescence in situ hybridization [FISH] 
unless stage can be determined on lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), albumin, and 
β2 microglobulin only) (see Appendix A ). 
STUDY POPULATION  
Main selection criteria  Inclusion criteria:  
I 01. Multiple myeloma.  
I 02. Measurable disease:  
Serum M protein ≥0.5  g/dL measured using serum protein 
immunoelectrophoresis;  
and/or  
Urine M protein ≥200  mg/24  hours measured using urine protein 
immunoelectrophoresis.  
I 03. Patient with relapsed and/or refractory MM with at least 1  prior line and 
no more than 3  prior lines.  
I 04. Patient has given voluntary written informed consent before performance 
of any study related procedures not part of normal medical care.  
Exclusion criteria:  
E 01. Less than 18  years (or country’s legal age of majority if the legal age 
is >18  years).  
E 02. Primary refractory MM defined as patients who have never achieved at 
least a minimal response with any treatment during the disease course.  
E 03. Patient with serum free light chain (FLC) measurable disease only.  
E 04. Patient with prior anti -CD38 monoclonal antibody (mAb) treatment with 
progression on or within 60 days after end of anti -CD38 mAb trea tment 
or failure to achieve at least minimal response to treatment (ie,  refractory 
to anti -CD38).  
E 05. Any anti -myeloma drug treatment within 14  days before randomization, 
including dexamethasone.  
E 06. Patient who has received any other investigational drugs or proh ibited 
therapy for this study within 28 days prior to randomization  
(Section  8.8.2 ). 
E 07. Prior treatment with carfilzomib.  
E 08. Known history of allergy to Captisol (a cyclodextrin derivative used to 
solubilize carfilzomib), prior hypersensitivity to sucrose, histidine 
(as base and hydrochloride salt), polysorbate 80, or any of the 
components  (active substance or excipient) of study treatment that are 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 9 Internal  
not amenable to premedication with steroids, or H2 blockers, that would 
prohibit further treatment with these agents.  
E 09. Patients with contraindication to dexamethasone.  
E 10. Prior allogenic hematopoieti c stem cell transplant with active graft versus 
host disease (any grade and/or being under immunosuppressive 
treatment within 2  months before randomization).  
E 11. Known amyloidosis or concomitant plasma cell leukemia.  
E 12. Pleural effusions requiring thoracentesis o r ascites requiring 
paracentesis or any major procedures within 14  days before 
randomization: eg, plasmapheresis, curative radiotherapy, major surgery 
(kyphoplasty is not considered a major procedure).  
E 13. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance  status 
(PS) >2. 
E 14. Platelets <50,000 cells/µ L if <50% of bone marrow (BM) nucleated cells 
are plasma cells and <30,000 cells/µL if ≥50% of BM nucleated cells are 
plasma cells. Platelet transfusion is not allowed within 3 days before the 
screening hematologic al test.  
E 15. Absolute neutrophil count (ANC) <1000 μ/L (1 x 109/L). The use of 
granulocyte colony stimulating factor is not allowed to reach this level.  
E 16. Creatinine clearance <15 mL/min/1.73 m² (Modification of Diet in Renal 
Disease [MDRD] Formula).  
E 17. Total bilir ubin >1.5 x upper limit of normal (ULN), except for known 
Gilbert syndrome.  
E 18. Corrected serum calcium >14 mg/dL (>3.5 mmol/L).  
E 19. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and/or alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT) >3 x ULN.  
E 20. Ongoing toxicity (excluding alopecia and those lis ted in eligibility criteria) 
from any prior anti -myeloma therapy of Grade >1 (National  Cancer 
Institute Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events [NCI -CTCAE] 
v4.03).  
E 21. Prior malignancy. Adequately treated basal cell or squamous cell skin or 
superficial (pT is, pTa, and pT1) bladder cancer or low risk prostate 
cancer or any in situ malignancy after curative therapy are allowed, as 
well as any other cancer for which therapy has been completed ≥5  years 
prior to randomization and from which the patient has been disease -free 
for ≥5 years.  
E 22. Any of the following within 6 months prior to randomization: myocardial 
infarction, severe/unstable angina pectoris, coronary/peripheral artery 
bypass graft, New York Heart Association class III or IV congestive heart 
failure, Grade  ≥3 arrhythmias, stroke, or transient ischemic attack.  
E 23. Left ventricular ejection fraction <40%.  
E 24. Known acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) related illnesses or 
HIV dise ase requiring antiretroviral treatment, or to have active hepatitis 
A, B (defined as a known positive hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) 
result), or C (defined as a known quantitative hepatitis C [HCV] 
ribonucl eic  acid RNA   results greater than the lower limits of detection 
of the assay or positive HCV antigen) infection.  
E 25. Any of the following within 3 months prior to randomization: treatment 
resistant peptic ulcer disease, erosive esophagitis or gastritis, infectious 
or inflammatory bowel disease, diverticulitis, pulmonary embolism, or 
other uncontrolled thromboembolic event.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 10 Internal  
E 26. Any severe acute or chronic medical condition which could impair the 
ability of the patient to participate in the study or interfere with 
interpretation of the study results (eg, systemic infection unless 
anti-infective therapy is employed), or patient unable to comply with the 
study procedures.  
E 27. Female patients who are pregnant or lac tating.  
E 28. Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) not protected by   
highly -effective method of birth control and/or who are unwilling or 
unable to be tested for pregnancy (see Appendix C ). 
E 29. Male participant with a female partner of childbearing potential not 
protected by highly effective method of birth control.  
Total expected number of patients  Approximately 300 (180 patients in IKd arm and 120 patients in Kd arm)  
STUDY TREATMENTS   
Investigational medicinal product  Isatuximab  
Formulation:  The drug product is presented as a concentrate for solution for infusion in vials 
containing 20 mg/mL (500  mg/25 mL) of isatuximab in 20 mM histidine, 
10% (w/v) sucrose, 0.02% (w/v) polysorbate 80, and pH 6.0 buffer. It is packed 
in 30 mL glass vials fitted with elastomeric closure. Each vial contains a 
nominal content of 500 mg of isatuximab. The fill volume has been established 
to ensure rem oval of 25 mL.  
Route of administration:  Intravenous (IV)  
Dose regimen:  Isatuximab will be given at 10  mg/kg IV on Days  1, 8, 15, and 22 in Cycle 1 and 
then on Days  1 and 15 in subsequent cycles. The duration of each cycle is  
28 days.  
Premedication will include acetaminophen or paracetamol, ranitidine or 
equivalent, and diphenhydramine or equivalent, in addition to dexamethasone.  
Dose omission/delay will be applied in case of toxicity.  
Investigational medicinal product  
Formulation:   Carfilzomib (Kyprolis® )  
Carfilzomib for injection is presented as a lyophilized parenteral product in 
single -use vials. The lyophilized product is reconstituted with water for injection 
to a final carfilzomib concentration of 2.0  mg/mL prior to administrat ion. 
Route of administration:  IV 
Dose regimen:  
 
 Carfilzomib (after appropriate hydration) will be given as a 30 -minute infusion 
on Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16 of 28 day cycles at the dose of 20 mg/m² on 
Day 1 and Day  2 in Cycle 1 and then escalated to 56  mg/m² on Days 8, 9, 15, 
and 16 of Cycle 1 and Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16 for subsequent cycles. 
The carfilzomib infusion should follow the isatuximab infusion and should begin 
just after the end of the isatuximab infusion.  
Patients with a body surface area (BSA) >2.2 m² will use 2.2 m² for the 
determination of carfilzomib dose.  
Hydration is required for the first cycle and left to the Investigator’s judgment for 
further administrations.  
Premedication will include dexamethasone.  
Anti-viral p rophylaxis will be done according to site’s/Investigator’s practice.  
Dose modifications will be applied in case of toxicity.  
Investigational medicinal product  
Formulation:  Dexamethasone  
The drug product is presented as 4 mg tablets; and 3.3  mg/mL for IV injection 
(8.3 mg/mL in the United States).  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 11 Internal  
Routes of administration:  IV/orally (PO)  
Dose regimen:  
 
 Dexamethasone will be given at 20  mg for patients on Days  1, 2, 8, 9, 15, 16, 
22, and 23 in a 28 -day cycle. Patients will be asked to maintain a diary to  
record the doses of dexamethasone PO to document all oral administrations.  
Dexamethasone will be administered IV on the days of isatuximab and/or 
carfilzomib infusions, and PO on the other days.  
Dose modifications will be applied in case of toxicity.  
Dexamethasone will have also intent of premedication for infusion acute 
reaction related to both isatuximab and carfilzomib.  
Non-investigational medicinal 
products (premedication)   
Product:  Acetaminophen or paracetamol  
Route of administration:  PO 
Dose regimen:  
 Acetaminophen or paracetamol will be given 650 to 1000 mg 15  to 30 minutes 
(but no longer than 60 minutes) before isatuximab infusion.  
Product:  Ranitidine or equivalent  (other approved H2 antagonists [eg,  cimetidine] or 
oral proton pump inhibitors [eg, omeprazole, esomeprazole]).  
Route of administration:  IV 
Dose regimen:  Ranitidine or equivalent will be given 50  mg 15 to 30  minutes (but no longer 
than 60  minutes) before isatuximab infusion.  
Product:  Diphenhydramine or equivalent  (eg, cetirizine, promethazine, or 
dexchlorpheniramine, according to local approval and availability). Intravenous 
route is preferred for at least the first 4 infusions.  
Route of administration:  IV 
Dose regimen:  Diphenhydrami ne or equivalent will be given 25 to 50  mg 15  to 30 minutes (but 
no longer than 60  minutes) before isatuximab infusion.  
ENDPOINTS  
 Primary endpoint:  
The primary endpoint is PFS, defined as the time from the date of 
randomization to the date of first documentation of progressive disease (PD) 
(as determined by the Independent Response Committee [IRC]) or the date of 
death from any cause, whichever comes first. Response will be determined 
according to IMWG  criteria. Progression based on paraprotein will be confirmed 
based on 2  consecutive assessments.  
Secondary endpoints:  
The key secondary efficacy endpoints are:  
• ORR:  Defined as the proportion of patients with stringent complete 
response (sCR), CR, VGPR, and partial response (PR) as best 
overall response assessed by IRC using the IMWG response criteria.  
• Rate of VGPR or better : Defined as the proportion of patients with  
sCR, CR, and VGPR.  
• Rate of VGPR or better with MRD negativity:  Defined as the 
proportion of patients for whom MRD assessed by sequencing is 
negative at any time after first dose of study treatment. Minimal 
residual disease will be assessed centrally by ne xt-generation 
sequencing in BM aspiration samples from patients who achieve 
VGPR or better, to determine the depth of response at the molecular 
level. Threshold for negativity will be at least 10-5. 
• CR rate : Defined as the proportion of patients with sCR a nd CR.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 12 Internal  
• OS: Defined as the time from the date of randomization to death from 
any cause.  
The other secondary efficacy endpoints are:  
• DOR:  Defined as the time from the date of the first IRC determined 
response for patients achieving PR or better to the date o f first 
documented PD determined by IRC or death, whichever happens 
first. 
• TTP:  Defined as time from randomization to the date of first 
documentation of PD (as determined by the IRC).  
• PFS2:  Defined as time from the date of randomization to the date of 
first documentation of PD (as assessed by investigator) after initiation 
of further  anti-myeloma treatment or death from any cause, whichever 
happens first.  
• Time to first response: Defined as the time from randomization to 
the date of first IRC determined response (PR or better) that is 
subsequently confirmed.  
• Time to best response: Defined as the time from randomization to 
the date of first occurrence of IRC determined best overall response 
(PR or better) that is subsequently confirmed.  
Safety evaluation:  
The secondary safety endpoints are:  
• Treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs)/serio us adverse events 
(SAEs). Treatment -emergent AEs are defined as AEs that develop, 
worsen (according to the Investigator opinion) or become serious 
during the treatment period. The treatment period is defined as the 
time from first dose of study treatment u p to 30 days after last dose of 
study treatment.  
• Infusion associated reactions (IARs).  
• Laboratory parameters.  
• Vital signs and electrocardiogram (ECG).  
• Findings from physical examination.  
Adverse events and laboratory parameters will be graded using NCI -CTCAE 
v4.03.  
 PK evaluation:  
The PK evaluation of isatuximab will be performed in all patients in the IKd arm. 
Among them, approximately 12 patients will be sampled for carfilzomib PK 
evaluation.  
Isatuximab:  
• Blood samples will be collected up to Cycle 10 from all patients 
treated with isatuximab using a sparse sampling strategy in order to 
assess the PK profile of isatuximab using population PK approach. 
This analysis will involve an estimation of inter -patient PK variability, 
the population PK parameters estimates, and the assessment of 
carfilzomib and pathophysiologic covariate effects on the main 
PK parameters. Empirical Bayesian estimation of individual 
parameters and of individual exposure will also be performed.  
Carfilzomib:  
• Blood samples will be co llected at selected time points in a subset of 
12 patients in the IKd arm at Cycle 1 Day 15.  
The following PK parameters will be estimated by non -compartmental 
analysis:  
• Ceoi, Cmax, tmax, Clast, tlast, Ctrough, AUC last and AUC.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 13 Internal  
Anti-drug antibodies (ADA):   
• Presence of isatuximab ADA in the IKd arm will be assessed in all 
patients up to Cycle 10. If ADA positive or inconclusive at Cycle 10, 
one additional sampling time for ADA evaluation will be collected  
3 months later. No further ADA will be sampled, eve n if this 3 -month 
sample is positive.  
HRQL:   
• Health -related quality of life will be assessed using the European 
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) 
myeloma module with 20 items (QLQ -MY20) and EORTC quality of 
life questionnaire with 3 0 questions (QLQ -C30).  
• Health state utility and health status will be assessed using the 
European Quality of Life Group questionnaire with 5  dimensions and  
5 levels per dimension (EQ -5D-5L). 
Exploratory endpoints:  
• Pharmacokinetic estimates will be investigated as prognostic factors 
for clinical outcome including safety and efficacy endpoints if 
possible.  
• Blood sample will be collected and analyzed for immune genetic 
determinants such as Fcγ receptor polymorphism and correlated with 
efficacy endpoint s, including ORR, DOR, PFS, and OS.  
• In addition to the cytogenetic abnormalities assessed by FISH at 
baseline to determine R -ISS, other cytogenetic abnormalities such as 
but not limited to del(1p) and gain(1q) will be assessed and correlated 
with parameter s of clinical response.  
• M protein measurement without isatuximab interference and impact 
on BOR will be assessed. Blood sample will be collected up to 
Cycle  30 for all patients in isatuximab arm. After Cycle 30, blood 
sample will be collected until disease  progression only for patients 
who reach at least VGPR at this cycle.  
ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE  The following evaluations will be performed at Screening/Baseline only:  
• Demographic characteristics and medical/surgical history.  
• Prior MM history (diagnosis, stage at diagnosis and at study entry, 
and prior anti -MM therapies).  
• Cardiac ultrasonography (multigated acquisition (MUGA) scan or MRI 
are accepted).  
• Serum β2 -microglobulin.  
• Molecular analysis on BM sampl es (FISH for high risk cytogenetics 
[central laboratory]).  
The following laboratory assessments will be performed before study treatment 
initiation:  
• Blood typing: Complete blood phenotyping if not already available 
and antibody screening (indirect Coombs test or indirect antiglobulin 
test) in the IKd arm only (local laboratory). Indirect Coombs test will 
be repeated once after study treatment initiation.  
• Immune genetic determinants, such as Fc γ receptor polymorphism, 
will be performed prior to study treatment administration (central 
laboratory).  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 14 Internal  
 Safety evaluation will be performed during the treatment period and will include 
the following:  
• Serum or urine pregnancy test at Screening/Baseline, before each 
cycle, at end of treatment (EOT), and mo nthly during follow -up up to 
the end of contraception period.  
• Vital signs and physical examination.  
• ECOG PS.  
• AE evaluation. Severity grade will be determined according to the 
NCI-CTCAE v4.03.  
• Concomitant medications.  
• Laboratory tests (including coagulation  urine analysis at baseline and 
then if clinically indicated).  
• ECG.  
• Presence of ADA in the IKd arm will be assessed in all patients up to 
Cycle 10. If ADA positive or inconclusive at Cycle 10, one additional 
sampling time for ADA evaluation will be collect ed 3 months later. 
No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is 
positive.  
• Hepatitis B virus (HBV) serology in patients with unknown HBV 
status.  
The following disease assessment procedures will be performed at Screening (for 
eligibility) and again at Cycle  1 Day 1 prior to study treatment administration, Day 1 
of every cycle during treatment up to progression, and at EOT:  
• M protein quantification (serum and 24 -hour urine, protein 
immunoelectrophoresis, and immunofixation [IF])  (central laboratory). 
An additional sample (serum) will be collected for patients in the IKd 
arm to evaluate the potential isatuximab interference with the M 
protein assessment in immunoelectrophoresis and IF assays. This 
additional sample will be collect ed at all time points at which 
M protein is collected up to Cycle 30. After Cycle 30, this sample will 
be collected only for patients who reach at least VGPR at this cycle 
until disease progression. In case of isatuximab is stopped before 
progression, samp le interference assay will be collected up to  
3 months or when PD is observed, whichever comes first.  
• Free light chains quantification (central laboratory).  
• Quantitative immunoglobulins (central laboratory).  
• For patients who discontinue study treatment fo r reasons other than 
disease progression, serum M protein, urine M  protein, and serum 
FLCs are to be performed every 4  weeks (central laboratory) during 
the follow -up period until progression even if further  
anti-myeloma therapy is started before PD is di agnosed.  
 Other examinations for disease assessment include:  
• Bone marrow aspiration for plasma cell infiltration assessment (local 
laboratory) at baseline and then in case of VGPR and/or to confirm 
CR or as clinically indicated.  
In case of VGPR , plasma ce ll infiltration assessment is mandatory for 
patients in IKd arm with residual serum M protein of Ig G ≤0.5 g/dL 
and/or residual kappa IF positivity in urine, due to potential 
interference between isatuximab and M protein.  
In case of CR on M protein , plasma  cell infiltration assessment is 
mandatory in IKd arm and in Kd arm, unless a previous assessment 
was made within 3 months and showed plasma cells ≤  5%. 
Bone marrow biopsy can be done for stringent CR (sCR) assessment as 
per investigator decision.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 15 Internal  
 • Bone marrow aspiration for MRD assessment at baseline and in case 
of VGPR or better (central laboratory). If the patient presents ≥VGPR 
but is determined MRD positive, another BM sample will be collected 
3 months (3  cycles) later, in order to identify late  negativity. A third 
sample may be collected after another 3  months if the patient remains 
MRD positive and is still being treated. If a patient becomes CR after 
a third BM sample MRD positive performed during VGPR, up to 
3 additional BM samples will be co llected after CR. Therefore, a 
maximum of 6 BMA could be performed by patient (no more than 
3 per category of response). However, because BMA is invasive 
procedure, the following guidance is given in the purpose to limit as 
much as possible the number of B MA 
For patients with CR without previous documentation of VGPR , 
first bone marrow for MRD assessment will be collected at time of 
confirmation of CR (ie, at the second time point showing CR). If 
patient is determined MRD positive, another BM sample will be  
collected 3  months (3 cycles) later, in order to identify late negativity. 
A third sample may be collected after another 3 months if the patient 
remains MRD positive and is still being treated.  
• For patients with VGPR:  
- First bone marrow will be collected when VGPR is confirmed at the 
second time point or at a later time point as per investigator 
judgement based on kinetic of M protein decrease and/or if a 
plateau phase is reached (plateau is defined as variation less than 
20% over 12 weeks).  
- If MRD is positive on first BMA, a second BMA will be collected 
3 months later (3 cycles) to identify late negativity.  
- In case of MRD is still positive on second BMA made while patient 
is in VGPR, the timing to perform the third BMA can be postponed 
until CR a chievement.  
- In case of the patient becomes CR and patient was MRD positive 
on the last BMA performed during VGPR, a BMA will be done for 
MRD assessment at time of confirmation of CR.   
- After the first BMA during CR is done and in case patient was 
MRD posi tive on this BMA, the additional BMA planned by the 
protocol can be discussed with the patient.  
• Radiological disease assessment.  
• Skeletal survey or whole -body low -dose computed tomography 
(WBLDCT) scan at baseline, then once a year and anytime during the 
study if clinically indicated.  
• Plasmacytoma assessment.  
• If known extramedullary disease at baseline, CT scan or magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) is to be done at baseline, every  
12 weeks (± 1 week) until PD (even for patients who would initiate 
further anti -myeloma therapy without PD) and if clinically indicated.  
• If suspected extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) at baseline, 
CT scan or MRI is to be done at baseline. In case of confirmation of 
existing plasmacytoma, CT or MRI will be repeated every  
12 weeks (± 1  week) until PD (even for patients who would initiate 
further anti -myeloma therapy without PD) and if clinically indicated.  
• CT scan or MRI to be done in case of suspicion of progression or if 
clinically indicated in a patient with no previous positive image for 
extramedullary disease.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 16 Internal  
Note: For bone lesion or  extramedullary disease assessment, the same 
modality should be used throughout the study for each individual 
patient. All imaging must be sent for central review.  
Carfizomib PK will be assessed on D15 cycle 1 in approximately 12 patients.  
Further anti -myeloma therapies, best overall response and date of progression 
on further anti myeloma therapies according to Investigator’s assessment and 
survival status will be collected at every 3 months follow -up visit. In case of 
initiation of first further anti -myeloma therapy without PD, disease assessment 
will continue to be performed monthly as done during study treatment up to PD 
and then follow -up done as described just above.  
HRQL  will be assessed electronically on Day 1 prior to first study treatment 
adminis tration, on Day 1 of each cycle throughout the study treatment period, at 
EOT 30  ± 5 days after last study treatment administration (or before further 
anti myeloma therapy whichever comes first), and 90 days after last study 
treatment administration (first or second FU visit in case of study treatment due 
discontinuation due to PD or without PD, respectively).  
The PK samples will be collected from all patients receiving isatuximab using a 
sparse sampling strategy (central laboratory) up to Cycle 10 (stopped at  
Cycle 11).  
For all alive patients at the implementation of amended protocol #10 , survival 
status will be collected approximately twice a year, until death, or OS analysis 
cut-off date, whichever comes first.  
Patients still on treatment at the implement ation of amended protocol # 10 or 
OS analysis cut -off date and benefitting from the study treatment can continue 
the study treatment until disease progression, unacceptable AEs, patient wish 
to discontinue further study treatment, or any other reasons. For cycles 
completed after the cut -off dates, all SAEs (related or not) and all related non -
serious AEs ongoing at the cut -off date, and then all new related AEs (serious 
or not) occurred post cut -off date, IP administration, and reason of end of 
treatment (EO T) will continue to be collected. If last ADA before cut -off date is 
positive or inconclusive, one additional sampling time for ADA evaluation 
should be collected 3 months later. No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 
3-month sample is positive.  
STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 Sample size determination:  
A total of 159 PFS events will be needed to detect a hazard ratio of 0.59  using 
a log rank test at the 1 -sided level of 0.025 and a 90% power. Assuming 
proportional hazards and based on an anticipated median PFS time of 
19-months in the Kd arm; this is expected to correspond to a median PFS of 
32-months in the IKd arm.  
In addition, with a total of 300 patients (180 patients in IKd arm and 120 
patients in Kd arm) and assuming a uniform accrua l rate of 19 patients per 
month, the cut -off date for the final analysis of PFS is expected to be 
approximately 36 months after first patient in.  
Main analysis populations:  
Intent -to-treat (ITT) population : This population will include all patients who 
have given their informed consent and for whom there is a confirmation of 
successful allocation of a randomization number by the IRT. This population is 
the primary population for all efficacy parameters. All analyses using this 
population will be based on th e treatment assigned at randomization.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 17 Internal  
 Primary analysis:  
Primary analysis will consist of PFS comparison between the IKd arm versus 
the Kd arm through a log -rank test procedure stratified by stratification factors 
as entered in the IRT. The significance levels at the interim and final analyses 
will be determined using alpha -spending function (see below).  
The analysis of PFS will be based on the following censoring rules:  
• If progression and death are not observed before the analysis cut -off 
date or the da te of initiation of further anti -myeloma treatment, PFS 
will be censored at the date of the last valid disease assessment not 
showing disease progression performed prior to initiation of a further 
anti-myeloma treatment (if any) or the analysis cut -off dat e, whichever 
comes first.  
• A patient without an event (death or disease progression) and without 
any valid post -baseline disease assessments will be censored at the 
day of randomization (Day 1).  
The cut -off date for the final analysis of PFS will be the date when the 
159th PFS event assessed by the IRC has been observed.  
The estimates of the hazard ratio and corresponding (1 -2α)% (α being the 
one-sided  nominal significance level: α=0.023 at final analysis and 0.005 at 
PFS interim analysis) confidence int ervals (CI) will be provided using the Cox 
proportional hazard model stratified by stratification factors as entered in the 
IRT. The median PFS and probabilities of being progression free at different 
time points calculated using the Kaplan -Meier methods a s well as 
corresponding CI will be presented by treatment arm. The Kaplan -Meier PFS 
curves will also be presented.  
Sensitivity analyses of PFS will be performed (eg, different censoring rules and 
PFS assessed by the Investigator). Subgroup analyses of PFS (eg, by high risk 
status, number of prior lines of treatment) will also be conducted.  
 Analysis of key secondary efficacy endpoints:  
Key secondary endpoints other than OS will be analyzed at the time of the 
primary and/or the final analysis of PFS. The CR  rate will only be tested for 
comparison when the antibody -capture interference assay will be available.  
Key secondary endpoints other than OS will be summarized with descriptive 
statistics per treatment arm. They will be compared between treatment arms 
using Cochran Mantel Haenszel stratified method. The (1 -2α) % 2 -sided CI will 
be also computed for these endpoints using the Clopper -Pearson method.  
The OS analysis will be similar to what is described for PFS and will be 
performed approximately 3 years afte r the primary PFS analysis cut -off date. It 
will be based on the following censoring rules: patients without death prior to 
the OS analysis cut -off date will be censored at the last date the patient was 
known to be alive or the OS analysis cut -off date, wh ichever comes first.  
Analysis of other secondary efficacy endpoints:  
Other secondary endpoints will be analyzed at the time of the primary and/or 
the final analysis of PFS.  
The analyses of TTP, PFS2, DOR, time to first response and time to best 
response will be similar to what is described for PFS and will be based on the 
following censoring rules:  
• TTP:  If progression is not observed before the PFS analysis cut -off 
date or t he date of initiation of further anti -myeloma treatment, TTP 
will be censored at the date of the last valid disease assessment not 
showing disease progression performed prior to initiation of a further 
anti-myeloma treatment (if any) or the analysis cut -off date, whichever 
comes first.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 18 Internal  
 • PFS2:  For patients alive without a progression after initiation of 
further anti -myeloma treatment before the PFS analysis cut -off date, 
PFS2 will be censored at the date of the last follow -up visit not 
showing disease progr ession after initiation of further anti -myeloma 
treatment or the analysis cut -off date, whichever comes first.  
• DOR:  In the absence of the confirmation of subsequent disease 
progression or death before the analysis cut -off date, the DOR will be 
censored at the date of the last valid disease assessment not 
showing disease progression performed prior to initiation of a further 
anti-myeloma treatment or the analysis cut -off date, whichever is 
earlier.  
• Time to first response: in the absence of response, patients  will be 
censored at the earliest of the date of the last valid disease 
assessment before disease progression or death, the date of the last 
valid disease assessment before initiation of a further anti -myeloma 
treatment (if any) or the analysis cut -off dat e, whichever comes first.  
• Time to best response: The same censoring rules as time to first 
response will be used.  
Multiplicity issues:  Hypothesis testing of the key secondary efficacy endpoints 
will be performed using a closed test procedure. The hierarchi cal procedure will 
follow the order of the list of key secondary objectives.  
 Analysis of safety endpoints:  
Number (%) of patients experiencing TEAEs by primary system organ class 
and preferred term will be summarized by NCI -CTCAE v4.03 grade (all grades 
and Grade ≥3) for the safety population. The same summaries will be prepared 
for treatment -related TEAEs, TEAEs leading to premature/definitive 
discontinuation, TEAEs leading to dose modification, serious TEAEs, and 
TEAEs with fatal outcome. For pat ients with multiple occurrences of the same 
AE within treatment period, the worst grade will be used.  
Hematology and biochemistry results will be graded according to NCI -CTCAE 
v4.03, when applicable. Number (%) of patients with laboratory abnormalities 
(ie, all grades and by grade) using the worst grade during the treatment period 
will be provided for the safety population.  
Analysis of HRQL endpoints:  
Compliance rates (%) for completion of the EORTC QLQ -C30, QLQ -MY20, and 
EQ-5D-5L at each time point will be  calculated via number of received 
assessments divided by number of expected assessments.  
Changes in health state utility (EQ -5D-5L) values and health status between 
treatment arms will be assessed by analyzing change scores from Day 1 of 
each cycle to EOT  and 90 days after last study treatment administration.  
Interim analysis:  
An interim analysis for efficacy assessment of PFS is planned when 65% of the 
159 PFS events have been observed. An O’Brien and Fleming α -spending 
function will be used to obtain the  nominal significance levels for the interim and 
final analyses of survival. The 1 -sided nominal significance level to terminate 
the study for efficacy at 65%  information fraction (103 PFS events) is 0.005 
(corresponding to a hazard ratio [HR] of 0.6). The  1-sided nominal significance 
level to declare superiority of IKd at the final analysis (159 events) is 
0.023  (corresponding to a HR of 0.725). For key secondary efficacy endpoints, 
the significance levels for the interim and final analyses will be determi ned 
using alpha -spending function specific to each endpoint except if the 
information fraction is 100% at the interim analysis of PFS (ie, information on 
secondary endpoints available for every patient).  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the Sanofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 19 Internal  
 Planned PFS and OS cut -off dates:  
Estimated cut -off dates will be approximately 24 months and 36 months after 
first patient in (FPI) for the interim PFS analysis and for the final PFS analysis, 
respectively. The cut -off date for analysis of OS will be 3 years after the primary 
PFS analysis  cut-off date. The primary PFS analysis corresponds either to the 
positive interim PFS analysis or the final PFS analysis.  
DURATION OF STUDY PERIOD 
(per patient)  The duration of the study for a patient will include a period for screening of up to 
3 weeks. The cycle duration is 28 days.  
Patients will be treated until disease progression, unacceptable AE, or patient 
decision to stop the study treatment.  
After study treatment discontinuation, patients will return to the study site 30 
days after the last dose of study treatment or before further anti myeloma 
therapy whichever comes first for EOT assessments, and 90 days after the last 
dose of study treatmen t for HRQL questionnaires.  
Patients who discontinue the study treatment due to PD will be followed every 
3 months (12 weeks) for HRQL at first FU visit (90 days after last study 
treatment), further anti -myeloma therapies, second primary malignancies, PFS2  
and survival until death or the implementation of amended protocol #10 , 
whichever comes first. Patients who discontinue the study treatment prior to 
documentation of PD will be followed -up every 4  weeks until disease 
progression (even for patients who wou ld initiate further anti -myeloma therapy 
without PD) and HRQL 90 days after last study treatment, and then after 
confirmation of disease progression, every 3 months (12  weeks) for further anti -
myeloma therapies, second primary malignancies, PFS2 and surviv al, until 
death or the implementation of amended protocol #10 , whichever comes first.  
For all alive patients in follow -up at the implementation of amended protocol 
#10, survival status will be collected twice a year until death, or OS analysis 
cut-off date , whichever comes first.  
If a patient is still on treatment at the implementation of amended protocol #10  
or OS analysis cut -off date and benefitting from the study treatment, the patient 
can continue the study treatment until disease progression, unaccep table AEs, 
patient wish to discontinue further study treatment, or any other reason.  
 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the S anofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 20 Internal  
1 FLOW CHARTS   
The sponsor collects only those data that are strictly relevant and necessary in view of the objectives of the research.  
1.1 GRAPHICAL STUDY DESIGN   
 

Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the S anofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 21 Internal  
1.2 STUDY FLOW CHART   
 
Evaluationa Screening/ 
Baseline  Cycle 1c Subsequent Cyclesc End of Treatment 
(EOT)   Follow -up Period  
Day -21  
to 1 D1, 
D2 D8, 
D9 D15,  
D16 D22,  
D23 D1, 
D2 D8, 
D9 D15,  
D16 D22,  
D23 30 days after last 
study treatment 
administrationcc Every 3 months after 
last study treatment 
administrationdd 
Informed Consenta, Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  X           
Randomizationb X           
Demography, Medical/Surgical Historyd X           
Prior anti -myeloma treatment and Myeloma 
historye X           
Physical examinationf X X X X X X    X  
Vital signsg X X X X X X X X  X  
Cardiac Ultrasonographyh X           
12-Lead ECGh X Xh    X    X  
ECOG PS  X X    X    X  
LOCAL LAB 
Assessments  
 Pregnancy testi X Xi    X     X Xi 
Hematologyj X X X X X X  X  X  
Blood chemistryk X Xk Xk Xk Xk Xk Xk Xk  X  
Complete blood phenotyping 
(IKd  arm only)l X     Xl      
Coagulationm X As clinically indicated  As clinically indicated   
Urinalysisn X As clinically indicated  As clinically indicated   
Serum β2 -microglobulino X           
Hepatitis B virus serology   Once at any time if HBV status unknown before treatment 
started and to be repeated if clinically indicated  
(see Section  8.2.7 )   
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the S anofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 22 Internal  
Evaluationa Screening/ 
Baseline  Cycle 1c Subsequent Cyclesc End of Treatment 
(EOT)   Follow -up Period  
Day -21  
to 1 D1, 
D2 D8, 
D9 D15,  
D16 D22,  
D23 D1, 
D2 D8, 
D9 D15,  
D16 D22,  
D23 30 days after last 
study treatment 
administrationcc Every 3 months after 
last study treatment 
administrationdd 
CENTRAL LAB  
Assessmentsp 
 IKd arm only:  
 PKq  See PK flow chart Section  1.3   
ADAr  X    X      
Exploratory (both arms):  
Immune genetic 
determinants (blood)t  X          
Disease assessment labs:  
Serum M proteinu 
Immunoelectrophoresis and 
Immunofixation (IF)  X X    X    X If EOT without PD disease 
assessment as during study 
treatment up to PDdd 
Urine M protein (24 -hour 
urine)u 
Immunoelectrophoresis and 
IF  X X    X    X If EOT without PD disease 
assessment as during study 
treatment up to PDdd 
Serum Free light chainsu X X    X    X If EOT without PD disease 
assessment as during study 
treatment up to PDdd 
Immunoglobulins: IgG, IgA, 
IgM, IgD, IgEu X X    X    X If EOT without PD disease 
assessment as during study 
treatment up to PDdd 
 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the S anofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 23 Internal  
Evaluationa Screening/ 
Baseline  Cycle 1c Subsequent Cyclesc End of Treatment 
(EOT)   Follow -up Period  
Day -21  
to 1 D1, 
D2 D8, 
D9 D15,  
D16 D22,  
D23 D1, 
D2 D8, 
D9 D15,  
D16 D22,  
D23 30 days after last 
study treatment 
administrationcc Every 3 months after 
last study treatment 
administrationdd 
Other Disease assessments   
Bone Marrow for disease assessments:  
FISH (aspirate)s  X    
MRD assessment (aspirate)s X In case of VGPR or better  As clinically indicated   
Bone disease involvement (plasma cell infiltration)  X In case of VGPR or better and as clinically indicated  As clinically indicated   
Radiological disease assessment:  
Skeletal surveyv X Once a year and if clinically indicated  As clinically indicated   
Extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) (CT scan 
or MRI)v X  If present at baseline every 12 weeks, and if clinically 
indicatedv As clinical ly indicated   If EOT without PD disease 
assessment as during study 
treatment up to PDdd 
Electronic 
HRQLw  QLQ -C30  X    X    X X (90 days only)  
QLQ -MY20   X    X    X X (90 days only)  
EQ-5D-5L  X    X    X X (90 days only)  
Study Treatmentsx:            
Isatuximab (IKd arm only)   D1, D8, D15, D22  D1, D15    
Carfilzomib   D1, D2, D8, D9, D15, D16    
Dexamethasone (IV/PO)y  D1, D2, D8, D9, D15, D16, D22, D23    
AE Assessmentz X Continuously throughout study period  X X (related AEs, all SAEs)  
Prior/Concomitant Medicationaa X Continuously throughout study period  X  
Further anti -myeloma therapybb           X 
Survival status    X 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the S anofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 24 Internal  
a Evaluation : Assessments to be performed prior to study treatment administration and prior to any premedication arm unless otherwise ind icated.  Inform consent should be signed before any study specific 
procedures. It can be signed more than 21 days prior to randomization. Screening time indicates in which time frame exams use d to support eligibility have to be done prior to randomization.  
b Randomi zation : To take place once the consented patient has completed all the necessary screening procedures and is deemed eligible (based  on myeloma -specific results from the central laboratory [see 
footnote u]) and hematology/biochemistry local laboratory results) for study entry by the Investigator or designee. All eligible patien ts must be randomized using Interactive Response Technology (IRT). Every effort 
should be made to start treatment within 3 working days of randomization.  
c Cycle:  A cycle duration is 28  days. Day 1 of Cycle  1 refers to the day the patient receives the first study treatment administration. Day  1 of each subsequent cycle corr esponds to Day  29 of the previous cycle. The 
time window for Days  8, 9, 15, 16, 22, and 23 is ± 1  day; any delay above this time window or any omission due to AEs will be documented in the electronic case report form (eCRF) .  
d Demography : Includes age, gende r, and race. Medical/Surgical History, other than MM, includes relevant history of previous/associated pathologies including respiratory function history (smoking status will be 
collected).  
e Prior anti -myeloma treatment and myeloma history : Includes date of  initial diagnosis of symptomatic MM, stage of the disease at diagnosis and at study entry, type of disease at diagnosis and a t study entry 
(heavy and light chain component), and previous anti -myeloma therapy (transplant if any, drug name, start and stop d ates, intent, date of progression, best response, and reason for discontinuation).  
f Physical Examination : To be performed at screening ( <7 days prior to randomization), prior to study treatment administration on Days 1, 8, 15, and 22 of Cycle  1, and then on Day 1 of each subsequent cycle, 
and at the EOT visit. Consists of examination of major body systems including neurological, digestive, respiratory (signs and  symptoms, respiratory rate), hepatic and spleen span, and lymph node examinations, 
plus we ight and height (height at baseline only). Only the main diagnoses will be reported in the eCRF as AEs or medical history. Si gns and symptoms related to MM ongoing at baseline will be recorded in the 
patient’s medical history and will be reported in the AE  page in case they worsen or become serious during study treatment. Laboratory abnormalities at baseline will be recorded in t he laboratory pages.  
g Vital Signs : Blood pressure, heart rate, temperature, and respiration rate will be recorded at screening, on Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16 of Cycle  1 in both arms, and on Day 22 of Cycle 1 in IKd arm. For each 
subsequent cycle, vital signs are to be measured on Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16 in both arms. In addition, in the IKd arm, vi tal signs are to be taken just b efore starting infusion, 1 hour after starting infusion, and at 
EOI on Days 1, 8, 15, and 22 of Cycle  1, Days 1 and 15 of each subsequent cycle up to Cycle  4, and as clinically indicated. The final measurements will be performed at the EOT visit in both ar ms. 
h Cardiac ultrasonography and 12 -Lead ECG : Cardiac ultrasonography (MUGA scan or MRI are accepted) to be performed at screening; 12 -Lead ECG to be performed at screening and repeated within 1  day 
prior to Cycle  1 Day 1 if screening test >7 days of Day 1 Cycle 1, within 1 day prior each cycle administration, at EOT, and as clinically indicated.  
i Pregnancy tests (serum or urine) for WOCBP to be performed prior to randomization (should be within 7 days prior to first study treatment administration), within 1 day before each cycle initiation, at EOT visit, 
and monthly during follow -up (up to 3 months in the Kd arm and up to 5 months in the Ikd arm). It can be performed at home during the follow -up period..  
j Hematology : To be performed at screening and repeated w ithin 1  day prior to Cycle  1 Day 1 if screening test >7 days of Day 1 Cycle 1, on Days  8, 15, and 22 of Cycle  1, on Days 1 and 15 of every subsequent 
cycle, at the EOT visit, and as clinically indicated. Hematology includes hemoglobin, hematocrit, red bloo d cells (RBC), white blood cells (WBC) with differential and platelet count. In the event of Grade 4 
neutropenia, ANC is assessed every 2 to 3  days until ANC ≥0.5  x 109/L and at least weekly thereafter until ANC ≥1.0  x 109/L (test to be done prior to study  treatment administration). Hematological abnormalities 
will be recorded as AEs only if they are serious or lead to study treatment modification or discontinuation.  
k Blood Chemistry : Full blood biochemistry (see below) to be performed at screening and repea ted within 1  day prior to Cycle  1 Day 1 if screening test >7 days of Day 1 Cycle 1. Full biochemistry will be performed 
prior to study treatment administration on Days 1, 8, 15, and 22 at Cycle 1, and on Day 1 for subsequent cycles. Restricted b iochemistry  (see below) will be performed on Days 2, 9, and 16 at Cycle 1, and then on 
Days 8 and 15 at Cycle 2, and then on Day 15 for subsequent cycles. Full biochemistry will be performed at the EOT visit and as clinically indicated throughout the study treatment.   
Full biochemistry/blood chemistry includes AST, ALT, bilirubin (total and direct), alkaline phosphatase, LDH, sodium, potassi um, chloride, bicarbonate or carbon dioxide (venous) (if bicarbonate or carbon dioxide 
are assessed only on arterial blood at sit e level, to be done only if clinically indicated), calcium, corrected serum calcium, magnesium, phosphate, uric acid, serum c reatinine and estimated creatinine clearance 
(MDRD Formula), urea or blood urea nitrogen (BUN), fasting glucose (according to site guidelines), albumin, and total protein. Biochemistry abnormalities will be recorded as AEs only if they are serious or lead to 
study treatment modification or discontinuation. Restricted biochemistry includes sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate/ca rbon dioxide, urea or BUN, serum creatinine, and estimated creatinine clearance 
(MDRD Formula).  
l Blood typing (A, B, O, and Rh),  complete blood phenotyping  (C,c; E,e; Kell. Kidd; Duffy; S,s is recommended, if not available follow site’s standard), and antibody  screening  (Indirect Coombs Test, Indirect 
Antiglobulin Test) in IKd arm only to be drawn after randomization and prior first study treatment administration if not alre ady available. The blood type card will be kept by the patient with the study card. 
Blood transfusions are to be recorded in the eCRF. The blood bank needs to be informed that the patient is receiving a treatment wi th an anti -CD38 and a potential interference with the Coombs test is possible. 
Indirect Coombs test will be repeated once after s tudy treatment initiation (on Day 1 at Cycle 2 or on Day 1 of a later cycle if not done at Cycle 2).  
m Coagulation : To be performed at screening and then as clinically indicated. Coagulation includes prothrombin time or international norma lized ratio, and ac tivated partial thromboplastin time.  
n Urinalysis : To be performed at screening and as clinically indicated. Quantitative or semi quantitative (according to site practice and  if semi -quantitative method can provide with an absolute numeric value of the 
param eters) urinalysis (ie, RBCs, protein, glucose, pH, ketones, bilirubin, and leucocytes) at baseline and qualitative (dipstick;  ie, blood, protein, glucose, pH, ketones, bilirubin, and leucocytes).  
o Serum β2 -microglobulin : To be performed at screening.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the S anofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 25 Internal  
p Centra l Labs : Refer to laboratory manual for sample collection and shipping information.  
q Pharmacokinetics (PK) : Refer to Pharmacokinetics/Pharmacodynamics Flow Chart in Section  1.3. 
r ADA  (IKd arm only): To be performed on Day 1 of every cycle prior to each isatuximab administration up to Cycle 10. If the test is positive or inconclusive at Cycle 10, additional ADA samples will be done 
3 months later. If isatuximab is stopped prior to carfilzomib and dexamethasone administration, ADA will be tested 3 months lat er. 
s Bone marrow aspirate :  
• At screening : Bone marrow aspirate (BMA) will be collected for FISH (including, but may not be limited to, del(17p), t(4:14), t(14:16)), and MRD analyses in central laboratory. Central laboratory samples for FISH 
will be collected and analyzed for all patient s, R-ISS used as stratification factor will be assessed with FISH central laboratory results. Central laboratory samples for MRD w ill be collected for all patients but will 
be analyzed only for patients who will reach VGPR or better. Bone marrow aspirate o r core biopsy (as clinically indicated) will be collected for bone marrow involvement assessment (local laboratory).  
In case of randomization would be delayed due to unplanned event after BMA was done, BMA will not need to be done again if BM A remains with in 8 weeks prior to randomization,  
• During study treatment :  
For plasma cell infiltration  assessment (local laboratory) in case of VGPR and/or to confirm CR or as clinically indicated. In case of VGPR , plasma cell infiltration assessment is mandatory for p atients in IKd arm 
with residual serum M protein of Ig G ≤0.5 g/dL and/or residual kappa IF positivity in urine, due to potential interference b etween isatuximab and M protein. In case of CR on M protein , plasma cell infiltration 
assessment is mandatory in  IKd arm and in Kd arm, unless a previous assessment was made within 3 months and showed plasma cells ≤5 %.  
Bone marrow biopsy can be done for stringent CR (sCR) assessment as per investigator decision.  
For MRD assessment in case of VGPR or better  (centra l laboratory), and if MRD positive to be repeated 3 months later for late negativity (one additional sample can be collected if patient remains MRD positive 
at the second assessment). No more than 3 post -baseline samples are to be obtained unless a patient  becomes CR after a third BM sample MRD positive performed during VGPR. In this case no more than 3 
additional BM samples will be collected. Therefore a maximum of 6 BMA could be performed by patient (no more than 3 per categ ory of response). However, beca use BMA is invasive procedure, the following 
guidance is given in the purpose to limit as much as possible the number of BMA.  
For patients with CR without previous documentation of VGPR , first bone marrow for MRD assessment will be collected at time of con firmation of CR (ie, at the second time point showing CR) If patient is 
determined MRD positive, another BM sample will be collected 3 months (3 cycles) later, in order to identify late negativity.  A third sample may be collected after another 3 months if the patient remains MRD 
positive and is still being treated.  
For patients with VGPR :  
- First bone marrow will be collected when VGPR is confirmed at the second time point or at a later time point as per investiga tor judgement based on kinetic of M protein d ecrease and/or if a plateau 
phase is reached (plateau is defined as variation less than 20% over 12 weeks).  
- If MRD is positive on first BMA, a second BMA will be collected 3 months later (3 cycles) to identify late negativity.  
- In case of MRD is still pos itive on second BMA made while patient is in VGPR, the timing to perform the third BMA can be postponed until CR achievement.   
- In case of the patient becomes CR and patient was MRD positive on the last BMA performed during VGPR, a BMA will be done for MRD assessment at time of confirmation of CR.   
- After the first BMA during CR is done and in case patient was MRD positive on this BMA, the additional BMA planned by the pro tocol can be discussed with the patient.  
t Blood sample for immune genetic determinants (such as Fcγ receptor polymorphism): To be performed on Cycle  1 Day 1 prior to study treatment administration (central laboratory).  
u Laboratory evaluation of disease assessment  (central laboratory for each plann ed and any unplanned time point): At screening, all laboratory assessments are to be performed within 21  days prior to 
randomization. Eligibility will be assessed based on central laboratory results. Results for central M protein must be availa ble before t he patient may be randomized.  
All laboratory assessments to be performed again prior to first study treatment administration on Cycle 1 Day 1 and response evaluation will be calculated compared to Cycle 1  Day 1 assessments. In the IKd arm 
only, an additio nal blood sample will be collected at all time -points to evaluate the potential interference of isatuximab in the M protein assessment (central laboratory) up to Cycle 30. After Cycle 30, this sample 
will be collected only for patients who reach at least V GPR at this cycle until disease progression. In case of isatuximab is stopped before progression, sample interference assay w ill be collected up to 3 months or 
PD, whichever comes first.  
Laboratory findings on Day 1 of every cycle will be used for response  assessment, to confirm response, and to confirm disease progression. Efficacy analyses will be performed according to IRC ass essment, 
which will use central laboratory data.  
• Serum -Protein immunoelectrophoresis (SPEP ) and IF: To be performed at screening and again at Cycle 1 Day 1 ( -1 day) prior to study treatment administration, then at Day 1 ( -1 day) of every subsequent cycle 
prior to study treatment admi nistration, and at the EOT visit.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the S anofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 26 Internal  
• Urine M protein (24 -hour urine) immunoelectrophoresis (UPEP ) and IF: To be performed at screening, Cycle 1 Day 1, Day 1 of every subsequent cycle prior to stud y treatment administration, and at the EOT 
visit. If urine M protein is negative at baseline and Cycle 1 Day 1, this assessment is to be repeated every 3 cycles only (C ycle 4, Cycle 7, Cycle 10, etc) to confirm CR on blood labs .  
After Cycle 1 Day 1, IF to  be done if UPEP is negative in patients whose disease is evaluable in urine. The 24 -hour urine collection should be completed prior new cycle initiation.  
• Serum FLCs (quantification and ratio): To be performed at screening, Cycle 1 Day 1, Day 1 of every su bsequent cycle, and at EOT.  
• Immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD, and IgE): To be performed at screening, Cycle 1 Day 1, Day 1 of every subsequent cycle p rior to study treatment administration, and at EOT (IgD or E only if the heavy 
chain component of the d isease is known to be E or D).  
For patients who discontinue study treatment for reasons other than disease progression, serum M protein, urine M protein, an d serum FLCs to be performed monthly (central laboratory) during the follow -up period 
until progress ion (even for patients who would initiate further anti -myeloma therapy without PD).  
In case of PD diagnosis made on laboratory criteria, this must be confirmed by 2 consecutive measures before to treatment dis continuation. Treatment should continue until c onfirmation of the PD.  
v Radiological assessment:  
Bone lytic disease assessment: Skeletal survey (including skull, spine, all long bones, pelvis, and chest) or low dose whole body CT scan (see Appendix M ) at baseline (within 21 days prior to randomization), once 
a year, and anytime during the study if clinically indicated.  
Extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) assessment (including bone plasm acytoma):  
• If known extramedullary disease at baseline, CT scan or MRI is to be done at baseline, repeated every 12 weeks (± 1 week) unti l PD (even for patients who would initiate further anti -myeloma therapy without PD), 
and if clinically indicated.  
• If sus pected extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) at baseline, CT or MRI is to be done at baseline and if plasmacytoma confirmed o n the exam to be repeated every 12 weeks (± 1  week) until PD (even for 
patients who would initiate further anti -myeloma therapy with out PD) and if clinically indicated.  
• To be done in case of suspicion of progression or if clinically indicated in a patient with no previous positive image for ex tramedullary disease.  
• Note: For bone lesion assessment and extramedullary disease, the same mo dality (skeletal survey or low -dose whole body CT scan; CT scan or MRI) should be used throughout the study for each individual 
patient when radiological follow -up is needed. All imaging will be sent for central review. Intravenous contrast is recommended if not medically contra -indicated. Patients who have contra -indication to CT scan 
with IV contrast may have MRI exams performed instead.  
w ePRO (EORTC QLQ -C30, QLQ -MY20, and EQ -5D-5L): To be completed by the patient at the center prior to discussing their he alth/disease status, prior to study treatment administration or other study -related 
procedures on Day 1 of every cycle, at the EOT visit, and 90 days (± 5 days) after last study treatment administration. The ti me estimated to complete the EORTC QLQ -C30 is a pproximately 10 to 15 minutes. The 
time estimated to complete the QLQ -MY20 and EQ -5D-5L is approximately 5 to 10 minutes.  
x Study treatments : In both arms, carfilzomib will be given as a 30 -minute infusion at a dose of 20 mg/m² Day 1 and Day 2 on Cycle 1 and  then escalated to 56  mg/m² on Days 8, 9, 15, and 16 of Cycle 1 and 
Days  1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16 for subsequent cycles. The carfilzomib infusion should follow the isatuximab infusion and should begin  just after the end of the isatuximab infusion. Dexamethas one will be given at 
20 mg for patients on Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, 16, 22, and 23. Patients will be asked to maintain a diary to record the doses of dex amethasone PO to document all oral administration. In addition, in the IKd arm, 
isatuximab will be given at  a dose of 10 mg/kg IV on Days 1, 8, 15, and 22 in the first cycle, then Days 1 and 15 in subsequent cycles (premedication wil l include acetaminophen or paracetamol, ranitidine or 
equivalent, and diphenhydramine or equivalent, in addition to dexamethasone) . 
y Dexamethasone : Oral dexamethasone will be recorded in patient diaries when not taken at the site level.  
z AE/SAE assessment : All AEs, including AEs of new onset as well as worsening of baseline signs and symptoms are to be reported from the signing  of the informed consent to 30  days following the last 
administration of study treatment. When diagnosis can be done, only main diagnosis (without its signs and symptoms) will be r ecorded as AE. After the 30 -day follow -up, all ongoing related AEs, all ongoing SAEs  
whatever relationship with study treatment, all new related AEs whatever seriousness, and second primary malignancy are to be  reported and followed up until resolution or stabilization. Severity will be graded 
according to NCI -CTCAE v4.03.  
aa Prior medicatio ns (which are not prior anti -myeloma therapy) administered within 21 days prior to randomization will be collected. Concomitant medications  to be collected from randomization to EOT.  
bb Further anti -myeloma treatments will be collected: drug name, start and s top date, best overall response and date of PD.  
cc EOT: EOT visit will be done 30 days after last study treatment administration or before further anti myeloma therapy initiation whichever comes first.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the S anofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 27 Internal  
dd Follow -up: 
Patients who discontinue study treatment due to PD: Follow -up visit will be done every 3  months from the date of last study treatment administration until death: AEs according to footnote z, ePROs (at EOT and 
90 days [± 5 days] after last study treatment administration), further anti -myeloma therapies (up to OS cut -off date), and survival status will be collected. Every effort wi ll be made to follow all patients. If survival 
follow -up is missed and is not obtained at the time of the scheduled interval, it should be retrieved immediately. For subsequent su rvival follow -up, the patient follow -up visit should be scheduled at the orig inal 
scheduled survival follow -up interval. If the patient is unable to visit the clinical center, the follow -up may be done via phone from the Investigator or designee to the patient or the patient's caregiver or a family 
member, but this should be except ion and any effort should be done to schedule follow -up visit at clinical center.  
Patients who discontinue the study treatment without PD  will be followed every month for laboratory disease assessment (central laboratory) and radiological assessment every 12 weeks (± 1 week) in case of 
extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) at baseline and once a year and as clinically indicated for bone lytic disease assessme nt (skeletal survey or whole body CT -scan) until confirmation of PD (even for patients 
who would init iate further anti -myeloma therapy without PD), BMA for plasma cell involvement and MRD assessment if appropriate, AEs according to footnote z, further anti -myeloma therapy if any. In addition, 
ePROs will be assessed at EOT and 90 days [± 5 days] after last study treatment administration. After PD, patients will be fol lowed every 3 months as described above.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the S anofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 28 Internal  
1.3 PHARMACOKINETIC/PHARMACODYNAMIC FLOW CHART   
1.3.1  Cycle 1: IKd arm only (approximately 12 patients)   
 
  Cycle 1  
Day within the cycle  Day 1  Day 8  Day 15  Day 18  Day 22  
Time relative to isatuximab  
(decimal hours)  SOI EOI 1h  
post 
EOI SOI SOI EOI       4.5h  
post EOI  72h  
post 
EOI SOI 
Time windowa -10min  ± 10min  ± 10min  -10min           ± 5h -
10min  
Time relative to carfilzomib  
(decimal hours)       SOI EOI 5 mins  
post EOI  15 mins  
post 
EOI 30 mins  
post 
EOI 1h  
post EOI  2 h  
post EOI  4h  
post EOI    
Indicative clock time  8:00 
AM 12:00  
PM 1:00 
PM 8:00 
AM 8:00 
AM 12:00  
PM 12:30  
PM 12:35  
PM 12:45  
PM 1:00 
PM 1:30 
PM 2:30 
PM 4:30 
PM 12:00  
PM 8:00 
AM 
Treatment  
Isatuximab (IV infusion)  X  X X         
X 
Carfilzomib (IV infusion)   
X    
X        
 
Pharmacokineticb  
Isatuximab  RNT (hour)  0 4 5 0 0 4       
8.5 76 0 
Sample ID  P00c P01d P02e P03c P04c P05d       
P06 P07 P08c 
Carfilzomib  RNT (min/ 
hour)    
  
0  
30 min  35 min  45 min  60 min  1h 30 
min 2h 30 
min 4h 30 
min  
 
Sample ID    
  
P00c  
P01d P02 P03 P04 P05 P06 P07  
 
Immunogenicity   
ADA (anti -drug antibody)f AB00c               
a Time window permitted for PK/PDy and immunogenicity sampling. No time window are allowed on Cycle 1 Day 15 for the 12 patients with carfilzomib PK sampling.  
b Refer to laboratory manual for sample collection, processing and shipping.  
c Sample collected just (within 10 mins) and strictly before th e start of isatuximab infusion (ie, after administration of the isatuximab premedications).  
d Sample collected just before actual EOI.  
e Sample collected 1  hour after the actual end of infusion.  
f The sampling times for ADA detection can be modified based on the  updated knowledge of isatuximab on immunogenicity.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the S anofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 29 Internal  
1.3.2  Subsequent cycles: IKd arm only (approximately 12 patients) up to Cycle 10   
 
 Cycle 2  Cycle 3  Cycle 4  Up to Cycle 10  3 months later  
Day within the cycle  Day 1  Day 1  Day 1  Day 1  ±5 days after last ADA 
positive at cycle 10  
Time relative to isatuximab  
(decimal hours)  SOI EOI SOI SOI SOI  
Time windowa -10 mins  ± 10 mins  -10 mins  -10 mins  -10 mins   
Indicative clock time  8:00 AM  12:00 PM  8:00 AM  8:00 AM  8:00 AM  8:00 AM  
Treatment  
Isatuximab (IV infusion)  X X X X  
Carfilzomib (IV infusion)   
X     
Pharmacokineticb 
Isatuximab  RNT (hour)  0 4 0 0 0  
sample ID  P00c P01d P00c P00c P00c  
Immunogenicity  
ADA (anti -drug antibody)e AB00c  
AB00c AB00c, f AB00c AB F00f 
a Time window permitted for PK/PDy and immunogenicity sampling.  
b Refer to laboratory manual for sample collection, processing and shipping.  
c Sample collected just (within 10 mins) and strictly before the start of isatuximab infusion (ie, after administration of the isatuximab premedications).  
d Sample collected just before actual EOI.  
e The sampling times for ADA detection can be modified based on the updated knowledge of isatuximab on immu nogenicity.  
f At Cycle 10, if patient is positive or inconclusive for ADA, additional ADA will be collected 3 months later. No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is positive. If isatuximab is stopped prior to 
carfilzomib and dexamethaso ne, before Cycle 10 and last ADA is positive or inconclusive, ADA will be sampled 3 months later. No further ADA will be samp led, even if this 3 -month sample is positive. For patients 
with less than 10 cycles at the cut -off date, both PK and ADA samples co llection will be stopped from the cut -off date. If last ADA before cut -off date is positive, one additional sampling time for ADA evaluation 
should be collected 3 months later. No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is positive.  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
Property of the S anofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 30 Internal  
1.3.3  All cy cles: IKd arm only (approximately 168 patients) up to Cycle 10   
 
Study Phase  Treatment Phase  3 months later  
 Cycle 1  Cycle 2  Cycle 
3 Cycle 4  Subsequent 
Cycles up to 
10 cycles  ±5 days after last ADA 
positive at cycle 10  
Day Day 1  Day 8  Day 15  Day 22  Day 1  Day 1  Day 1  Day 1  
Time (decimal hours)  SOI EOI EOI + 1h  SOI SOI SOI SOI EOI SOI SOI SOI  
Time windowa -10min  ± 10min  ± 10min  -10min  -10min  -10min  -10min  ± 10min  -10min  -10min  -10min   
Indicative clock time  8:00 
AM 12:00  
PM 1:00 
PM 8:00 
AM 8:00 
AM 8:00 
AM 8:00 
AM 12:00  
AM 8:00 
AM 8:00 
AM 8:00 
AM 8:00 
AM 
Treatment  
isatuximab (IV infusion)  X  X X X X X X X  
Pharmacokineticsb 
isatuximab  RNT (hour)  0 4 5 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0  
Sample ID  P00c P01d P02e P03c P04c P05c P00c P01d P00c P00c P00c  
Immunogenicity  
ADA (anti -drug antibody)f AB00c      AB00c  AB00c AB00c AB00g ABF00h 
a Time window permitted for PK/PDy and immunogenicity sampling.  
b Refer to laboratory manual for sample collection, processing and shipping.  
c Sample collected just (within 10 mins) and strictly before the start of isatuximab infusion (ie, after administration of the isatuximab premedications).  
d Sample collected just before actual EOI.  
e Sample collected 1  hour after the actual end of infusion.  
f The sampling times for ADA detection can be mo dified based on the updated knowledge of isatuximab on immunogenicity.  
g At Cycle 10, if patient is positive or inconclusive for ADA, additional ADA will be sampled 3 months later.  
h At Cycle 10, if patient is positive or inconclusive for ADA, additional ADA w ill be sampled 3 months later. No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is positive. If isatuximab is stopped prior to 
carfilzomib and dexamethasone before Cycle 10 and last ADA was positive or inconclusive, additional ADA will be sample d 3 months later. No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is positive. 
For patients with less than 10 cycles at the cut -off date, both PK and ADA samples collection will be stopped from the cut -off date. If last ADA before cut -off date is positive, one additional sampling time for ADA 
evaluation should be collected 3 months later. No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is positive.  
  
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 31 Internal  
2 TABLE  OF CONTENTS   
AMENDED CLINICAL TRIAL PROTOCOL 10  ................................ ................................ ..............................  1 
PROTOCOL AMENDMENT SUMMARY OF CHANGES  ................................ ................................ ...............  3 
1 FLOW CHARTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  20 
1.1 GRAPHICAL STUDY DESIGN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 20 
1.2 STUDY FLOW CHART  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  21 
1.3 PHARMACOKINETIC/PHARMACODYNAMIC FLOW CHART  ................................ ....................  28 
1.3.1  Cycle 1: IK d arm only (approximately 12 patients)  ................................ ................................ ........  28 
1.3.2  Subsequent cycles: IKd arm only (approximately 12 patients) up to Cycle 10  ..............................  29 
1.3.3  All cycles: IKd arm only (approximately 168 p atients) up to Cycle 10  ................................ ...........  30 
2 TABLE OF CONTENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  31 
2.1 LIST OF TABLES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  38 
2.2 LIST OF FIGURES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  38 
3 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  39 
4 INTRODUCTION AND RATIONALE  ................................ ................................ .............................  42 
4.1 ISATUXIMAB  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 42 
4.1.1  Isatuximab description  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  42 
4.1.2  Isatuximab non -clinical and clinical data  ................................ ................................ ........................  42 
4.2 CARFILZOMIB  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  43 
4.2.1  Carfilzomib description  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  43 
4.2.2  Carfilzomib clinical data  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  43 
4.3 ISATUXIMAB IN COMBINATION WITH CARFILZOMIB  ................................ ...............................  44 
4.4 STUDY DESIGN RATIONALE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 45 
4.4.1  Choice of standard arm  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  45 
4.4.2  Isatuximab dose and regimen  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  45 
4.5 BENEFIT RISK ASSESSMENT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 46 
4.5.1  Efficacy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  46 
4.5.2  Safety  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  46 
5 STUDY OBJECTIVES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  48 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 32 Internal  
5.1 PRIMARY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 48 
5.2 SECONDARY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  48 
5.3 EXPLORATORY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  48 
6 STUDY DESIGN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  49 
6.1 DESCRIPTION OF THE STUDY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 49 
6.2 DURATION OF STUDY PARTICIPATION  ................................ ................................ ....................  50 
6.2.1  Duration of study participation for each patient  ................................ ................................ .............  50 
6.2.2  Determination of end of clinical trial (all patients)  ................................ ................................ ..........  51 
6.3 INTERIM ANALYSIS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  51 
6.4 STUDY COMMITTEES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  51 
7 SELECTION OF PATIENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  53 
7.1 INCLUSION CRITERIA  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  53 
7.2 EXCLUSION CRITERIA  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  53 
8 STUDY TREATMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  56 
8.1 INVESTIGATIONAL MEDICINAL PRODUCTS  ................................ ................................ .............  56 
8.1.1  Isatuximab  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 56 
8.1.1.1  Pharmaceutical form  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  56 
8.1.1.2  Dilution method  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  56 
8.1.2  Carfilzomib  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 57 
8.1.2.1  Dilution method  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  57 
8.1.3  Dexamethasone IV/PO  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  57 
8.2 DOSAGE AND SCHEDULE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  57 
8.2.1  Study treatments (IMP)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  57 
8.2.2  Premedication (NIMP): prevention of infusion associated reactions  ................................ .............  59 
8.2.2.1  Ranitidine or equivalent  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  60 
8.2.2.2  Diphenhydramine or equivalent  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 60 
8.2.2.3  Acetaminophen or equivalent  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  60 
8.2.3  Carfilzomib hydration  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  61 
8.2.4  Dose modifications  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  61 
8.2.4.1  General rules  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 61 
8.2.4.2  Modification of isatuximab/carfilzomib/dexamethasone dose levels in case of dose 
reduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  63 
8.2.4.3  Dose adjustments in IKd arm  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  64 
8.2.4.4  Dose adjustments in Kd arm  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  69 
8.2.5  Infusion reactions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  73 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 33 Internal  
8.2.6  Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome and progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalop athy ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  74 
8.2.7  Hepatitis B virus infection  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  75 
8.2.8  Cardiac failure  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  75 
8.2.9  Tumor Lysis syndrome  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  76 
8.2.10  Other adverse drug reactions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  76 
8.3 BLINDING PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  77 
8.4 METHOD OF ASSIGNING PATIENTS TO TREATMENT GROUP  ................................ ..............  77 
8.5 INVESTIGATIONAL MEDICINAL PRODUCT PACKAGING AND LABELING  .............................  77 
8.5.1  Isatuximab  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 77 
8.5.2  Carfilzomib  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 78 
8.5.3  Dexamethasone IV/PO  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  78 
8.6 STORAGE CONDITIONS AND SHELF LIFE  ................................ ................................ ................  78 
8.6.1  Isatuximab  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 78 
8.6.2  Carfilzomib  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 78 
8.6.3  Dexamethasone IV/PO  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  78 
8.7 RESPONSIBILITIES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  78 
8.7.1  Treatment accountability and compliance ................................ ................................ ......................  79 
8.7.2  Return and/or destruction of treatments  ................................ ................................ ........................  79 
8.8 CONCOMITANT MEDICATION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 80 
8.8.1  G-CSF prophylaxis  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  80 
8.8.2  Prohibited concomitant therapy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 80 
9 ASSESSMENT OF INVESTIGATIONAL MEDICINAL PRODUCT  ................................ ..............  81 
9.1 PRIMARY ENDPOINT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  81 
9.2 SECONDARY ENDPOINTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  82 
9.2.1  Key secondary efficacy endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 82 
9.2.2  Other secondary efficacy endpoints  ................................ ................................ ...............................  84 
9.2.3  Safety endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  84 
9.2.4  Patient -reported outcomes (HRQL/health economic variables/other endpoints)  ..........................  84 
9.2.4.1  EORTC QLQ -C30 ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  85 
9.2.4.2  EORTC QLQ -MY20  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  86 
9.2.4.3  EQ-5D-5L ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 86 
9.2.5  Pharmacokinetics  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  87 
9.2.5.1  Sampling time  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  87 
9.2.5.2  Pharmacokinetics handling procedure  ................................ ................................ ...........................  87 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 34 Internal  
9.2.5.3  Bioanalytical method  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  87 
9.2.5.4  Pharmacokinetics parameters  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 88 
9.2.6  Immunogenicity  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  88 
9.3 EXPLORATORY ENDPOINTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 90 
9.3.1  Exploratory biomarker analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 90 
9.4 FUTURE USE OF SAMPLES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  91 
9.5 APPROPRIATENESS OF MEASUREMENTS  ................................ ................................ ..............  91 
10 STUDY PROCEDURES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  92 
10.1  VISIT SCHEDULE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  92 
10.1.1  Screening/baseline ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  92 
10.1.2  Randomization  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  94 
10.1.3  Treatment period  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  94 
10.1.3.1  Cycle 1 (Days 1 -2, Days 8 -9, Days 15 -16, and Days 22 -23) ................................ .........................  94 
10.1.3.2  Subsequent cycles (Days 1 -2, Days 8 -9, Days 15 -16, and Days 22 -23) ................................ ...... 96 
10.1.4  End of treatment  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  99 
10.1.5  Post study treatment follow -up ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 101 
10.1.6  After Implementation of Amended Protocol #10  ................................ ................................ ..........  104 
10.1.7  Post OS analysis cut -off date  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 104 
10.2  DEFINITION OF SOURCE DATA  ................................ ................................ ................................  105 
10.3  HANDLING OF PATIENT PERMANENT TREATMENT DISCONTINUATION AND OF 
PATIENT STUDY DISCONTINUATION  ................................ ................................ ......................  105 
10.3.1  Permanent treatment discontinuation with investigational medicinal product(s)  .........................  105 
10.3.2  List of criteria for permanent treatment discontinuation  ................................ ...............................  106 
10.3.3  Handling of patients after permanent treatment discontinuation  ................................ .................  106 
10.3.4  Procedure and consequence for patient withdrawal from study  ................................ ..................  107 
10.4  OBLIGATION OF THE INVESTIGATOR REGARDING SAFETY REPORTING  ........................  108 
10.4.1  Definitions of adverse events  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 108 
10.4.1.1  Adverse event  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  108 
10.4.1.2  Serious adverse event  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  108 
10.4.1.3  Adverse event of special interest  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 109 
10.4.1.4  Pregnancy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 109 
10.4.1.5  Overdose  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 109 
10.4.2  General guidelines for reporting adverse events  ................................ ................................ .........  110 
10.4.3  Instructions for reporting serious adverse events  ................................ ................................ ........  110 
10.4.4  Guidelines for reporting adverse events of special interest  ................................ .........................  111 
10.4.5  Guidelines for reporting product complaints  ................................ ................................ ................  111 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 35 Internal  
10.5  OBLIGATIONS OF THE SPONSOR  ................................ ................................ ...........................  112 
10.6  SAFETY INSTRUCTIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  112 
10.6.1  Guidelines for the management of potential infusion associated reactions ................................ . 112 
10.6.2  Guidelines for the management of tumor lysis syndrome  ................................ ...........................  112 
10.7  ADVERSE EVENTS MONITORING  ................................ ................................ ............................  112 
11 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  ................................ ................................ ............................  113 
11.1  DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE  ................................ ................................ .........................  113 
11.2  DISPOSITION OF PATIENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 113 
11.3  ANALYSIS POPULATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  114 
11.3.1  Efficacy populations  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  114 
11.3.1.1  Intent -to-treat population  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  114 
11.3.2  Safety population  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  114 
11.3.3  Pharmacokinetic population  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  114 
11.3.4  ADA population  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  114 
11.4  STATISTICAL METHODS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  114 
11.4.1  Extent of study treatment exposure and compliance  ................................ ................................ ... 115 
11.4.2  Analyses of efficacy endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 116 
11.4.2.1  Analysis of primary efficacy endpoint ................................ ................................ ...........................  116 
11.4.2.2  Analyses of secondary efficacy endpoints  ................................ ................................ ...................  117 
11.4.2.3  Multiplicity considerations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  118 
11.4.3  Analyses of safety data  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  119 
11.4.3.1  Adverse events  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  119 
11.4.3.2  Treatment -emergent adverse events  ................................ ................................ ...........................  120 
11.4.3.3  Deaths  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  121 
11.4.3.4  Other safety evaluation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  121 
11.4.4  Analyses of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic variables  ................................ ..................  122 
11.4.4.1  Analysis of pharmacokinetic variables  ................................ ................................ .........................  122 
11.4.5  Analysis of immunogenicity variables  ................................ ................................ ..........................  123 
11.4.6  Analyses of biomarker variables  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 123 
11.4.7  Analyses of PRO (health -related quality of life/health economics variables)  ..............................  123 
11.5  INTERIM ANALYSIS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  124 
12 ETHICAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  ................................ ................................ . 125 
12.1  ETHICAL AND REGULATORY STANDARDS  ................................ ................................ ............  125 
12.2  INFORMED CONSENT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  126 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 36 Internal  
12.3  HEALTH AUTHORITIES AND INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD/INDEPENDENT 
ETHICS COMMITTEE (IRB/IEC)  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 126 
13 STUDY MONITORING ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  128 
13.1  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR(S)  ................................ ................................ ..... 128 
13.2  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SPONSOR  ................................ ................................ ...................  128 
13.3  SOURCE DOCUMENT REQUIREMENTS  ................................ ................................ ..................  129 
13.4  USE AND COMPLETION OF CASE REPORT FORMS (CRFS) AND ADDITIONAL 
REQUEST  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 129 
13.5  USE OF COMPUTERIZED SYSTEMS  ................................ ................................ ........................  129 
14 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 130 
14.1  CURRICULUM VITAE ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  130 
14.2  RECORD RETENTION IN STUDY SITES  ................................ ................................ ..................  130 
14.3  CONFIDENTIALITY  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  130 
14.4  PROPERTY RIGHTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  131 
14.5  DATA PROTECTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  131 
14.6  INSURANCE COMPENSATION  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 132 
14.7  SPONSOR AUDITS AND INSPECTIONS BY REGULATORY AGENCIES  ...............................  132 
14.8  PREMATURE DISCONTINUATION OF THE STUDY OR PREMATURE CLOSE -OUT OF 
A SITE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  133 
14.8.1  By the Sponsor  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  133 
14.8.2  By the Investigator  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  133 
14.9  CLINICAL TRIAL RESULTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  133 
14.10  PUBLICATIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS  ................................ ................................ ...............  133 
15 CLINICAL TRIAL PROTOCOL AMENDMENTS  ................................ ................................ ........  135 
16 APPENDICES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  136 
APPENDIX A  REVISED INTERNATIONAL STAGING SYSTEM  ................................ ............................  136 
APPENDIX B  MODIFICATION OF DIET IN RENAL DISEASE (MDRD) EQUATION  .............................  137 
APPENDIX C  CONTRACEPTIVE GUIDANCE AND COLLECTION OF PREGNANCY 
INFORMATION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  138 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 37 Internal  
APPENDIX D  EASTERN COOPERATIVE ONCOLOGY GROUP PERFORMANCE STATUS 
SCALE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  141 
APPENDIX E  NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE COMMON TERMINOLOGY CRITERIA FOR 
ADVERSE EVENTS ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  142 
APPENDIX F  INTERNATIONAL MYELOMA WORKING GROUP RESPONSE CRITERIA  ...................  143 
APPENDIX G  GUIDELINES FOR THE DETERMINATION OF THE NUMBER OF PRIOR LINES 
OF THERAPY IN MULTIPLE MYELOMA  ................................ ................................ ....................  147 
APPENDIX H  DEFINITION OF RELAPSED AND REFRACTORY MYELOMA  ................................ ...... 148 
APPENDIX I  EORTC -QLQ -C30 SCALES, ITEMS, AND CLINICALLY IMPORTANT 
DIFFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  149 
APPENDIX J  QLQ -MY20 SCALES, ITEMS, AND CLINICALLY IMPORTANT DIFFERENCES  .............  152 
APPENDIX K  EQ-5D-5L SCALES, ITEMS, AND CLINICALLY IMPORTANT DIFFERENCES  ..............  155 
APPENDIX L  CD38 BLOOD TEST INTERFERENCE GUIDELINE AABB2016  ................................ ...... 158 
APPENDIX M  LOW DOSE WHOLE BODY CT SCAN  ................................ ................................ ............  162 
APPENDIX N  CONTINGENCY MEASURES FOR A REGIONAL OR NATIONAL EMERGENCY 
THAT IS DECLARED BY A GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY  ................................ ..........................  163 
APPENDIX O  PROTOCOL AMENDMENT HISTORY  ................................ ................................ .............  165 
17 BIBLIOGRAPHIC REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ...............................  178 
 
Amended Clinical Trial Protocol 10   24-Nov-2022  
SAR650984 -EFC15246  - isatuximab  Version number: 1 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 38 Internal  
2.1 LIST OF TABLES   
Table  1 - Dose levels for carfilzomib dose reduction  ................................ ................................ ....................  63 
Table  2 - Dose levels for dexamethasone dose reduction  ................................ ................................ ............  63 
Table  3 - Guidelines for dose adjustments for hematological toxicities - 
isatuximab/carfilzomib/dexamethasone combination  ................................ ................................ ....................  64 
Table 4 - Guidelines for dose adjustments for non -hematologic adverse events –  
isatuximab/carfilzomib/dexamethasone combination  ................................ ................................ ....................  65 
Table  5 - Guidelines for dose adjustments for hematologic toxicities –  carfilzomib/dexamethasone 
combination  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  69 
Table  6 - Guidelines for dose adjustments for non -hematologic adverse events –  
carfilzomib/dexamethasone combination  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 70 
Table  7 - Management of infusion associated reactions  ................................ ................................ ...............  74 
Table  8 - Management of tumor lysis syndrome  ................................ ................................ ...........................  76 
Table  9 - Bioanalytical methods for isatuximab and carfilzomib pharmacokinetic analysis  ..........................  87 
Table  10 - List of pharmacokinetic parameters and definitions  ................................ ................................ ..... 88 
Table  11 - Bioanalytical method for isatuximab immune response assessment  ................................ ..........  89 
Table  12 - Summary of adverse event reporting instructions ................................ ................................ ...... 111 
 
2.2 LIST OF FIGURES   
Figure  1 - Study design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 49 
 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 39 Internal  
3 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS   
 
ADA:  anti-drug antibody  
AEs:  adverse event  
AESI:  adverse event of special interest  
AIDS:  acquired immunodeficiency syndrome  
ALT:  alanine aminotransferase  
ANC:  absolute neutrophil count  
anti-HBc:  Hepatitis B core antibody  
anti-HBs:  Hepatitis B surface antibody  
ASCT:  autologous stem cell transplantation  
AST:  aspartate aminotransfe rase 
BM: bone marrow  
BSA:  body surface area  
BUN:  blood urea nitrogen  
CHF:  congestive heart failure  
CI: confidence interval(s)  
CID:  clinically important difference  
CR: complete response  
CT: computed tomography  
CV: coefficient of variation  
DL: dose level(s)  
DMC:  data monitoring committee  
DOR:  duration of response  
DRF:  discrepancy resolution form  
ECG:  electrocardiogram  
ECOG:  eastern cooperative oncology group  
eCRF:  electronic case report form  
ELISA:  enzyme -linked immunosorbent assay  
EOI:  end of infusi on 
EORTC:  European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer  
EOT:  end of treatment  
ePROs:  electronic patient -reported outcome(s)  
EQ-5D-5L: european quality of life group questionnaire with 5 dimensions and 5 levels per 
dimension  
FISH:  fluorescence in situ hybridization  
FLC:  free light chain  
FSH:  follicle stimulating hormone  
GCP:  good clinical practice  
G-CSF:  granulocyte colony stimulating factor  
GHS:  Global Health Status  
GMP:  Good Manufacturing Practice  
HBsAg:  Hepatitis B surface antige n 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 40 Internal  
HBV:  Hepatitis B Virus  
HCV:  Hepatitis C  
HLGT:  high-level group term  
HLT:  high-level term  
HR: hazard ratio  
HRQL:  health -related quality of life  
HRT:  hormonal replacement therapy  
IAR:  infusion associated reaction  
ICH:  International Council for Harmonisatio n of Technical Requirements for 
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use  
IEC:  independent ethics committee  
IF: immunofixation  
IKd: isatuximab carfilzomib dexamethasone  
IMWG:  International Myeloma Working Group  
IRB:  institutional review board  
IRC:  Independent Respons e Committee  
IRT:  Interactive Response Technology  
ITT: intent -to-treat 
IUD:  intrauterine device  
IUS:  intrauterine hormone -releasing system  
IV: intravenous(ly)  
Kd: carfilzomib dexamethasone  
KRd:  carfilzomib lenalidomide dexamethasone  
LC-MS/MS:  liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry  
LDH:  lactate dehydrogenase  
mAb:  monoclonal antibody  
max:  maximum  
MDRD:  modification of diet in renal disease  
min: minimum  
MM:  multiple myeloma  
MR: minimal response  
MRD:  minimal residual disease  
MRI:  magnetic res onance imaging  
MUGA:  multigated acquisition  
NCI-CTCAE:  National Cancer Institute Common Terminology for Adverse Events  
ORR:  overall response rate  
OS: overall survival  
PCSA : potentially clinically significant abnormalities  
PD: progressive disease  
PDy:  pharm acodynamic(s)  
PFS:  progression free survival  
PFS2:  time from the date of randomization to the date of second PD or death from any 
cause, whichever happens first  
PK: pharmacokinetic(s)  
PML:  progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy  
PO: oral(ly)  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 41 Internal  
PR: partial  response  
PRES:  posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome  
PS: performance status  
PT: preferred term  
QLQ -C30:  quality of life questionnaire with 30 questions  
QLQ -MY20:  EORTC myeloma module with 20 items  
RBC:  red blood cell(s)  
Rd: lenalidomide dexamethasone  
RDI:  relative dose intensity  
R-ISS: Revised International Staging System  
RNA:  ribonucleic  acid  
RNT:  relative normal time  
RRMM:  relapsed refractory multiple myeloma  
SAE:  serious adverse event  
SAP:  statistical analysis plan  
sCR:  stringent comp lete response  
SCT:  stem cell transplantation  
SD: stable disease  
SEM:  standard error of the mean  
SOC:  system organ class  
SOI:  start of infusion  
SPD: sum of the products of the maximal perpendicular diameters of measured lesions  
SPEP:  serum immunoelectrophoresis  
TBD:  to be determined  
TEAEs:  treatment -emergent adverse event  
TLS:  tumor lysis syndrome  
TTP:  time to progression  
ULN:  upper limit of normal  
UPEP:  urine immunoelectrophoresis  
US: United States  
VAS:  visual analog scale  
Vd: bortezomib de xamethasone  
VGPR:  very good partial response  
WBC:  white blood cell(s)  
WOCBP:  woman/women of childbearing potential  
 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 42 Internal  
4 INTRODUCTION AND RATIONALE   
Multiple myeloma (MM ), with 114,251 new cases per year, is the third most frequent 
hematological mal ignancy worldwide, after leukemia and non -Hodgkin lymphoma  (1). 
The treatment of MM has improved remarkably over the last 2  decades with the development and 
introduction of numerous novel agents leading to more effective treatments, including 
3 generations of immunomodulator agents (thalidomide, lenalidomide, pomalidomide), 
2 generations proteasome inhibitor (bortezomib, then carfilzomib and ix azomib), and the most 
recent one, the first anti -CD38 antibody (daratumumab). These novel agents improved 
significantly overall survival (OS ) of MM patients with a median OS improving from 3 to 
6 years  (2); however, MM remains a fatal disease in majority of cases and the development of 
new therapeutic strategies with this evolving armamentarium  and new drugs are still needed.  
Front line strategy is well defined with treatment sequence including induction plus or minus 
maintenance (with/without consolidation), depending on response induced by each regimen. For 
younger and fit patients, autologous  stem cell transplantation (ASCT ) is part of the front line 
strategy. For patients who are not eligible for high -dose therapy and ASCT, conventional 
treatments with immunomodulator ag ents, proteasome inhibitors, and other agents will be utilized. 
However , and whatever the front line treatment, the vast majority of the patients will progress or 
relapse and will need further lines of therapies. Drugs used in front line include more and more 
often thalidomide, bortezomib, and/or lenalidomide and new therapeut ic options are to be 
developed for further lines.  
4.1 ISATUXIMAB   
4.1.1  Isatuximab description   
CD38 (see  Appendix L ) is the most strongly and uniformly expressed antigen identified on the 
malignant clonal populations of myeloma cells compared with its pattern of expression on normal 
cells. Therefore, this antigen may be a useful target for the in vivo depletion of tumor cells while 
sparing normal cells ( 3). 
Isatuximab (SAR650984) is a naked chimeric monoclonal antibody (mAb ) that binds selectively 
to a unique epitope on the human surface antigen CD38. Isatuximab kills tumor cells via multiple 
biological mechanisms, antibody -dependent cellular -mediated cytotoxicity, 
complement -dependent cytotoxicity, direct induction of apoptosis (pro -apoptosis) without 
crosslinking, and inhibition of CD38 enzymatic activity.  
4.1.2  Isatuximab non -clinical and clinical da ta  
For preclinical and clinical data of isatuximab in single agent and in combination with proteasome 
inhibitors (bortezomib and carfilzomib), please refer to the Investigator’s Brochure.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 43 Internal  
4.2 CARFILZOMIB   
4.2.1  Carfilzomib description   
Carfilzomib is a tetrapeptide epoxyketo ne proteasome inhibitor that irreversibly binds to the 
N-terminal threonine -containing active sites of the 20S proteasome, the proteolytic core particle 
within the 26S proteasome. Carfilzomib had antiproliferative and proapoptotic activities in vitro 
in so lid and hematologic tumor cells. In animals, carfilzomib inhibited proteasome activity in 
blood and tissue and delayed tumor growth in models of MM, hematologic, and solid tumors.  
Carfilzomib is structurally and mechanistically different from bortezomib. I t has improved 
specificity for the proteasome and has less off -target activity when measured against a broad panel 
of proteases including metallo, aspartyl, and serine proteases compared to bortezomib. Thus, the 
selectivity of carfilzomib may be responsibl e for the reductions in myelosuppression and 
neuropathy observed in preclinical studies comparing carfilzomib with bortezomib ( 4). In animal 
models, carfilzomib has been administered intravenously (IV ) for 5 consecutive days with 
excellent tolerability and prolonged proteasome inhibition ( 5). In contrast, uninterrupted daily 
dosing of boronated proteasome inhibitors in animal models demonstrated substantial morbidity 
and mortality ( 6). In addition, following brief exposure, carfilzomib was more cytotoxic than 
bortezomib, regardless of cell type, in multiple tumor cell lines ( 5). Carfilzomib was able to 
overcome acquired drug resistance in human MM cell lines.  
4.2.2  Carfilzomib clinical data   
Carfilzomib was first approved in the United States (US ) in 2012 based on response rate in 
monotherapy reported in a single -arm m ulticenter study conducted in patients with at least 2 prior 
lines, having responded to at least 1 prior line and being refractory to the most recent therapy ( 7). 
Patients received carfilzomib 20 mg/m2 at each dose in Cycle 1, and 27 mg/m2 in subsequent 
cycles. Dexamethasone 4 mg orally (PO ) or IV was administered prior to carfilzomib doses in the 
first and second cycles. A total of 266 patients were enrolled. The overall response rate (ORR ) as 
determined by the Independent Response Committee (IRC ) assessment using International 
Myeloma Working Group (IMWG ) criteria was 23.7% (95% confidence interval [CI ]: 18.7 to 
29.4) (N = 257 evaluable patients). The median duration of response was 7.8 months  
(95% CI: 5.6  to 9.2). Common adverse events (AEs ) were fatigue (49%), anemia (46%), 
nausea  (45%), and  thrombocytopen ia (39%). Thirty -three patients (12.4%) experienced peripheral 
neuropathy, primarily Grades 1 or 2. Thirty -three patients (12.4%) withdrew because of an AE.  
Carfilzomib has been further approved in combination with lenalidomide and dexamethasone in 
relaps ed refractory multiple myeloma (RRMM; see Appendix H ) patients with 1 to 3 prior lines 
(see Appendix G ), based on the result of a study in which 792 patients were randomized 1:1 to 
receive carfilzomib biweekly 20 mg/m2 on Days 1 and 2, and then 27  mg/m2/day plus 
lenalidomide (Revlimid®) 25 mg per day over 21  days and dexamethasone 40  mg on Days 1, 8, 
15, and 22 (KRd ) or lenalidomi de 25 mg per day over 21 days and dexamethasone 40 mg (Rd ) 
(8). Patients were pre viously pretreated with 1 to 3  lines of therapy. Patients in the KRd arm 
demonstrated improved progression free survival (PFS ) compared with those in the Rd arm 
(hazard ratio [HR ] = 0.69, with 2 -sided p -value  = 0.0001) as determined using standard objective 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 44 Internal  
IMWG/European Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation response criteria by an IRC. 
The median PFS was 26.3 months (95% CI: 23.3 to 30.5 month s) in the KRd arm versus 
17.6 months (95% CI: 15.0 to 20.6 months) in the Rd arm. The results of OS were not 
significantly different at the interim analysis. The most frequent AEs were diarrhea (42.3%), 
fatigue (32.9%), cough, pyrexia and upper respiratory  tract infection (28.8% each), 
hypokalemia  (27.6%), and muscle spasm (26.5%).  
Clinical data of isatuximab in combination with carfilzomib and dexamethasone (IKd ) are detailed 
in next section.  
4.3 ISATUXIMAB IN COMBINATION WITH CARFILZOMIB   
One Investigator -sponsored Phase Ib study (TCD12795) is currently ongoing in US in patients 
with RRMM ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) with the objective to determine the maximum tolerated dose of 
isatuximab when combined with carfilzomib. Three dose levels (DL )/schedules of isatuximab are 
being assessed: 10  mg/kg Q2W (DL1), 10 mg/kg QW/Q2W (DL2), and 20 mg/kg  QW/Q2W 
(DL3). Isatuximab is combined to a fixed dose of carfilzomib 20 mg/m2 on Day 1 and Day 2 and 
then 27  mg/m2 on Days  8, 9, 15, and 16 on Cycle  1; twice weekly, 3  weeks out of 4  from Cycle 2 
to 8 and twice every 2  weeks after Cycle 8. Dexamethasone 20  mg is given as premedication prior 
to first infusion of isatuximab, and then 10  to 20 mg prior to each infusion. In addition, 
dexamethasone 4  mg is given as premedication prior to each carfilzomib infusion at Cycle 1 and 
then is given at the Investigator discretion.  
Recruitment is ongoing and preliminary data of this ongoing study were presented at American 
Society of Hematology meeting in 2016 ( 9), on the first 11 treated patients: 3, 3, and 5  patients 
treated at DL1, DL2, and DL3, respectively. The median number of prior lines was 4.5  (2 to 8), all 
patients were previously treated with lenalidomide, and 10 patients previously received 
bortezo mib. Ten patients were refractory to their previous therapy. The median number of cycles 
administered was 6 (minimum [min ]-maximum [max ]: 1 to 20). No dose -limiting toxic ity was 
reported. Infusion associated reaction was reported in 6 (54%) patients (4 patients with Grade 1 
and 2 patients with Grade 2), and all infusions were completed. The other most frequent 
treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs ) were dyspnea (45%), fatigue (45%), nausea (45%), 
pain (back, chest wall, and pelvis; 36%), peripheral neuropathy (36%), hypertension (27%), 
cough  (27%), anorexia (27%), gastroesophageal reflux disease (18%),  constipation (18%), 
diarrhea  (18%), nasal congestion (18%), and hypokalemia (18%). Grade 3/4 non -hematological 
TEAEs were reported in fewer than 5% of patients. Hematological abnormalities were mild; 
9% Grade  3/4 anemia, 9% Grade 3/4 neutropenia, and 64% Grade 3/4 lymphopenia. The most 
frequent serious adverse event (SAE ) was Grade 3 pneumonia (18%).  
Interesting preliminary efficacy results were reported in 10 patients evaluable for response: 
2 patients had very good partial response (VGPR ), 6 patients had partial response (PR ), 1 patient 
had minimal response (MR ), and 1  patient had stable disease (SD ). 
The pharmacokinetics (PK ) of isatuximab analyzed in 10 patients are not modified by the  
co-administration of carfilzomib (unpublished data).  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 45 Internal  
4.4 STUDY DESIGN RATIONALE   
4.4.1  Choice of standard arm   
Bortezomib in combination with dexamethasone (Vd ) has been utilized as standard of treatment 
for RRMM for over 10 years globally. Recently, the results of a Phase 3 study 
(ENDEAVOR  study) conducted in 929 patients with RRMM after 1 to 3 prior treatments showed 
superiority of carfilzomib in combination with dexamethasone (Kd) versus Vd leading to 
registration of the Kd combination in this patient population in 2016 ( 10). A pre -specified interim 
analysis was planned when 395 (75%) of the 526  required progression or death events occurred. 
At the time of the interim analysis (made with 414 events and all patient were already recruited), 
the experimental arm (carfilzomib 20/56  mg/m2) demonstrated significant advantage in PFS with 
a median of 18.7  vs 9.4 months (HR: 0.53, 95% CI: 0.44 to 0.65, p <0.0001) crossing the  
pre-specified O’Brien -Fleming stopping boundary for efficacy of 0.023, adding this combination 
to the available therapeutic armamentarium for RRMM. The objective response rate was also 
significantly better in favor of Kd (77% vs. 63%, p <0.0001). The AEs of  any grade occurring in 
more than 15% of patients were diarrhea (27%), fatigue (24%), dyspnea (23%), pyrexia (26%), 
anemia and cough (25%), insomnia (24%), peripheral edema (21%), upper respiratory syndrome, 
nausea and muscle spasm (18% each), asthenia (17 %), and hypertension and headache 
(16%  each). Grade 3/4 AEs occurring in ≥5% of patients were hypertension (9%, no Grade 4), and 
fatigue and dyspnea (5%  each, no Grade 4). Grade 4 was reported for pyrexia in 2 patients and 
back pain in 1 patient.  
At the ti me of the interim analysis for PFS, OS data were immature. Results of a planned OS 
interim analysis showed a significant increase in OS in favor of Kd vs. Vd, with a median OS of 
47.6 months for Kd versus 40.0 for Vd, (HR = 0.79, 95%  CI, 0.65 to 0.96) ( 11). Adverse events 
observed in this updated analysis were consistent with those previously reported for 
ENDEAVOR. The most common AEs (≥20%) in  patients receiving Kd were anemia, diarrhea, 
pyrexia, dyspnea, fatigue, hypertension, cough, insomnia, upper respiratory tract infection, 
peripheral edema, nausea, bronchitis, asthenia, back pain, thrombocytopenia, and headache.  
Consistent efficacy result s on PFS and OS of the Kd combination clearly established this regimen 
as standard treatments for patients with RRMM and demonstrated Kd being a better treatment 
option than Vd. This support Kd as standard arm in this Phase 3 study.  
Comparison of the IKd c ombination to the standard treatment option Kd will allow clear 
assessment of the effect of the addition of isatuximab to the standard treatment.  
4.4.2  Isatuximab dose and regimen   
Isatuximab single agent has shown an efficacy dose effect between 3 and 10 mg/kg and above.  
The recommended dose of isatuximab when administered in combination has been determined 
based on the study TCD11863 (lenalidomide and dexamethasone combination), and was then 
used in expansion cohorts of Phase I combination studies TCD14079 (pomalidomide and 
dexamethasone combination) and TCD13983 (bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and 
dexamethasone combination) as well as in new studies TCD14906 (REGN2801 combination) 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 46 Internal  
and EFC14335 (pomalidomide and dexamethasone combination). In the dose escalation part of 
studies TCD14079, TCD13983, and TCD12795 (carfilzomib and dexamethasone combination), 
exposure of isatuximab when administered with these combinations was in the range o f exposure 
reported in TCD11863 and in single agent, for all explored dose levels.  
No evident difference was seen for safety and tolerability across the different dose levels. 
Analogously, the available data in combination with lenalidomide and pomalidomid e do not 
demonstrate major differences in efficacy between 10 and 20 mg/kg with comparable response 
rate in heavily pretreated patients. Pharmacokinetic/PDy analyses performed with TCD11863 
data, including trial simulations and simulations of serum M prote in-profiles, showed higher 
predicted ORR and reduction in M protein at 8/12 weeks at doses ≥10 mg/kg. However, the 
benefit in terms of ORR increase or in terms of serum M protein reduction appeared limited when 
increasing the dose from 10 to 20 mg/kg QW x 4, Q2W. Therefore, based on clinical efficacy, 
safety, PK simulations, and PK/PDy analyses, the dose selected for further isatuximab 
combination studies is 10 mg/kg QW x 4 administrations followed by 10 mg/kg Q2W (refer to 
Investigator’s Brochure).  
Based on these data, the dose of isatuximab 10 mg/kg is the selected dose for combination 
therapies.  
4.5 BENEFIT RISK ASSESSMENT   
4.5.1  Efficacy   
All patients randomized in the study will receive Kd combination, an established standard 
treatment option for patients with MM having received 1 to 3 prior lines of treatment, either alone 
or with addition of isatuximab, which means that all patients will receive effective treatment.  
As of 05 January 2017, 323 patients have received isatuximab across 5 ongoing or completed 
Phase I/II clinical studies conducted in patients with MM or other hematological malignancies 
(319 patients  with MM). Isatuximab has been investigated either as a monotherapy or in 
combination with conventional treatment regimens in MM. Anti -tumor activity of isatuximab has 
been shown in heavily pre -treated MM patients across these clinical studies and prelimin ary 
efficacy results reported in the ongoing study assessing isatuximab in combination with 
carfilzomib support further evaluation of this combination.  
4.5.2  Safety   
Isatuximab used as monotherapy or in combination treatments was well tolerated with a 
manageable safety profile consistent across multiple studies. Infusion associated reaction is the 
main AE related to isatuximab and is adequately managed with steroid and antihistamine 
premedication. All grades and Grade ≥3 infusion associated reactions (IAR s) were reported in 
49.5% a nd 2.2% of the patients treated with isatuximab single agent, respectively. With 
premedication, IAR were Grade 1 or 2 in more than 95% of the patients who experienced IARs. 
Infusion -associated reactions occurred once at the first infusion in more than 90% of the patients 
and led to treatment discontinuation in fewer than 5% of patients.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 47 Internal  
The safety profile of Kd combination is known and manageable.  
Beside the IARs, other adverse drug reactions known to be associated with both isatuximab and 
carfilzomib (incl uding symptoms of IAR reported as AEs in previous isatuximab studies) are 
anemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, chills, fatigue, fever, 
pneumonia, headache, cough, dyspnea, and hypertension. In the ongoing study assessing 
isatu ximab with carfilzomib twice weekly at 27 mg/m2, preliminary safety results showed a safety 
profile consistent with the known safety profile of each drug, supporting the feasibility of this 
combination for further assessment.  
Close monitoring of the safet y is planned and an independent data monitoring committee (DMC ) 
will regularly monitor the safety of the patients. The first safety review will be done after the 
first 15 patients will have compl eted 2 cycles in the isatuximab in combination with carfilzomib 
and low -dose dexamethasone (IKd ) arm.  
Based on available data, the overall risk/benefit appears favorable and supports t he evaluation of 
the combination of isatuximab with carfilzomib and dexamethasone in MM patients previously 
treated with 1 to 3 prior lines.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 48 Internal  
5 STUDY OBJECTIVES   
5.1 PRIMARY   
The primary objective of this study is to demonstrate the benefit of isatuximab in combination 
with carfilzomib and dexamethasone in the prolongation of PFS using IMWG criteria  
(see Appendix F ) as compared to carfilzomib and dexamethasone in patients with relapsed and/or 
refractory MM previously treated with 1 to 3 lines of therapy.  
5.2 SECONDARY   
The key efficacy objectives are as follows:  
• To evaluate ORR.  
• To evaluate rate of VGPR or better.  
• To evaluate rate of VGPR or better (IMWG criteria) with minimal residual disease (MRD ) 
negativity in both arms.  
• To evaluate complete response (CR ) rate in both arms (IMWG criteria).  
• To evaluate OS in both arms.  
Other secondary objectives are as follows:  
• To evaluate safety in both arms.  
• To evaluate duration of response (DOR ) in both arms.  
• To evaluate time to progression (TTP ) in both arms.  
• To evaluate PFS2 (see definition in Section  9.2.2 ) in both arms.  
• To evaluate time to first response in both arms  
• To evaluate time to best response in both arms  
• To determine the PK profile of isatuximab and carfilzomib when combined together.  
• To evaluate immunogenicity of isatuximab in isatuximab arm.  
• To evaluate generic and disease - and treatment -specific health -related quality of life 
(HRQL ), and changes in HRQL, health state utility, and health status in both arms.  
5.3 EXPLORATORY   
Exploratory objective s are as follows:  
• To explore PK and pharmacodynamics (PDy ) relationship.  
• To explore the relationship between immune genetic determinants and efficacy endpoints.  
• To explore relationship between cytogene tics abnormalities not part of Revised 
International Staging System (R -ISS) including but not limited to del (1p) and gain (1q) 
and efficacy endpoints.  
• To explore the impact of M -protein measurement without isatuximab interference on best 
overall response assessment.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 49 Internal  
6 STUDY DESIGN   
6.1 DESCRIPTION OF THE STUDY   
This is a prospective multicenter, multinational, randomized, open label, parallel group, 2 -arm 
study assessing the clinical benefit of isatuximab at 10 mg/kg weekly in the first cycle (4 weeks) 
and then combined with carfilzomib at 56  mg/m2 twice  weekly 3 out of 4 weeks and 
dexamethasone twice weekly (IKd arm) versus carfilzomib at 56 mg/m2 twice weekly 3 out of  
4 weeks and dexamethasone twice weekly (Kd arm), in terms of PFS in patients with relapsed 
and/or refractor y MM previously treated with 1 to 3 prior lines. After confirmation of eligibility 
criteria, patients will be randomly assigned to 1 of the 2 arms using an Interactive Response 
Technology (IRT ) system in a 3:2 ratio:  
• Isatuximab in combination with carfilzomib and low -dose dexamethasone  
(IKd [experimental] arm).  
• Carfilzomib and low -dose dexamethasone (Kd [control] arm).  
Isatuximab, carfilzomib, and dexamethasone are defined in this protocol as “study treatment”.  
Randomization will be stratified by number of prior lines 1 versus >1 and R -ISS ( 12) I or II 
versus  III versus not classified (inconclusive fluoroscence in situ hybridization [FISH ] unless 
stage can be determined on lactate dehydrogenase [LDH ], albumin, and β2  microglobulin only)  
(See Appendix A ). 
Patients will be treated until disease progression, unacceptable AE, or patient decision to stop the 
study treatment.  
Study design is summarized in Figure  1. 
Figure  1 - Study design   
 

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 50 Internal  
6.2 DURATION OF STUDY PARTICIPATION   
6.2.1  Duration of study participation for each patient   
The patient will be considered in the study from informed consent signature until death, consent 
withdrawal, or the OS analysis cut -off date, whichever comes first.  
The duratio n of the study for a patient will include a period for screening of up to 3 weeks. 
A cycle duration is 28 days. Patients will continue study treatment until disease progression, 
unacceptable AEs, patient wish to discontinue further study treatment, or any other reasons  
(see Section  10.3). All AEs occurring after informed consent signat ure will be reported up to  
30 days after last study treatment administration.  
After study treatment discontinuation, patients will return to the study site 30 days after the last 
dose of study treatment for end of treatment or before further anti myeloma therapy initiation, 
whichever comes first (EOT ) assessments, and 90 days after the last dose of study treatment for 
HRQL questionnaires.  
Related AEs and all SAEs regardless of relationship to the study tr eatment ongoing at the time of 
study treatment discontinuation will be followed during the follow -up period until resolution or 
stabilization. During the follow -up period, all (serious or non -serious) new AEs related to study 
treatment and any second prima ry malignancy will be collected and followed up until resolution 
or stabilization.  
Patients who discontinue the study treatment due to progressive disease (PD ) will be followed up 
every 3 months (12  weeks) for HRQL at first FU visit (90 days after the last study treatment)  and 
for further anti -myeloma therapies, second primary malignancies, PFS2, and survival until death 
or the implementation of amended protocol #10 , whichever comes first. Patients who d iscontinue 
the study treatment prior to documentation of PD will be followed -up every 4 weeks until disease 
progression (even for patients who would initiate further anti -myeloma therapy without PD), 
HRQL 90 days after last study treatment, and then after confirmation of disease progression, 
every 3  months (12 weeks) for further anti -myeloma therapies, second primary malignancies, 
PFS2, and survival, until death or the implementation of amended protocol #10 , whichever comes 
first. 
For all alive patients at the implementation of amended protocol #10 , survival status will be 
collected approximately twice a year until death, or OS analysis cut -off date, whichever comes 
first.  
Patients still on treatment at the time of the implementati on of amended protocol #10  or OS 
analysis cut -off date, and benefitting from the study treatment, can continue the study treatment 
until disease progression, unacceptable AEs, patient wish to discontinue further study treatment, 
or any other reasons. For c ycles administered after the cut -off dates, all ongoing SAEs (related or 
not) and all ongoing related non serious AEs at this cut -off date, all new related AEs (serious or 
not), IP administration, and reason of EOT will continue to be collected. If a patie nt received less 
than 10 cycles at the final PFS analysis cut -off date, anti -drug antibodies (ADA)/PK samples will 
be stopped. In case of the last ADA is positive or inconclusive an additional ADA will be  sampled  
3 months later. No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is positive.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 51 Internal  
6.2.2  Determination of end of clinical trial (all patients)   
The PFS analysis (primary  endpoint analysis) is event driven and the final PFS analysis cut -off 
date will be the date when 159  PFS events (progression or death, whichever comes first) assessed 
by the IRC have occurred (around 36 months from first patient being randomized).  
It is a ssumed that OS will not be mature at the time of the PFS analysis. The OS analysis cut -off 
date will be approximately 3 years after the primary PFS analysis cut -off date. The primary 
analysis of PFS corresponds either to the positive interim analysis or th e final PFS analysis.  
The end of the study is defined as the date of the last visit of the last participant in the study.  
6.3 INTERIM ANALYSIS   
An interim analysis for efficacy assess ment of PFS is planned when 65% of the 159 PFS events 
will be observed. The interim PFS cut -off date is expected approximately 24 months after the FPI. 
The procedure and criteria for undertaking an interim analysis are described in  Section  11.5. 
6.4 STUDY COMMITTEES   
The Steering Committee  will include a Chairman, investigators, and sponsor’s representatives. 
The Steering Committee will be responsible for:  
• Supervising the progress of the trial towards its overall objectives.  
• Reviewing at regular intervals relevant information that may affec t the study conduct.  
• Discussing the implementation of the recommendations of the independent DMC.  
An independent  DMC , consisting of 3 external independent members (2 physicians with MM 
expertise and 1 statistician), not associated with the conduct of the s tudy or other study 
committees will meet regularly to as specified in the DMC charter:  
• Review the progress of the trial.  
• Review the safety data.  
• Advise the sponsor on potential modifications or communications that may be necessary to 
ensure the patient saf ety or protect the scientific integrity of the trial. The sponsor will 
make the final decision(s).  
• Review the results of the planned PFS interim analysis by arm during the course of the 
study.  
The first meeting will be set up to review early safety results  (eg, after approximately 15 patients 
have completed at least 2 cycles in IKd arm), and then periodically. Ad -hoc DMC meetings may 
also be held if a significant safety issue or issue deemed important for discussion arise on this or 
any other studies of isa tuximab. After each meeting, the DMC will advise the Steering Committee 
and the sponsor’s representatives on recommendations regarding the continued safety of treating 
ongoing and future study patients, as well as the course of action regarding the conduct  of the 
trial.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 52 Internal  
One PFS interim analysis is planned and, after review of the results by arm, the DMC will make 
recommendations on continuation of the study or not according to the stopping rules pre -specified 
in the protocol (see Section  11.5). 
The DMC procedures will be detailed in the DMC charter and approved by the DMC members. 
The charter will be finalized before the first patient enrolled.  
An IRC will determine disease response and progression according to efficacy MM laboratory 
data (centr al laboratory results), local bone marrow (BM ) for plasma cell infiltration assessment 
as recorded in the eCRF, and imaging as per IMWG criteria and in line with the IRC charter up to 
additional analysis on PFS . IRC will review disease assessments until the last time point with M 
protein assessed by the central laboratory  or overall survival cut -off date, whichever comes first .  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 53 Internal  
7 SELECTION OF PATIENTS   
7.1 INCLUSION CRITERIA   
Patients will be considered for inclusion in this study if they meet all of the following criteria 
(all necessary baseline studies for determin ing eligibility must be obtained within 21  days prior to 
randomization):  
I 01. Multiple myeloma.  
I 02. Measurable disease: Serum M protein ≥0.5  g/dL measured using serum protein 
immunoelectrophoresis and/or urine M protein ≥200  mg/24  hours measured using urine 
protein  immunoelectrophoresis.  
I 03. Patient with relapsed and/or refractory MM with at least 1 prior line and no more than 
3 prior lines.  
I 04. Patient has given voluntary written informed consent before performance of any study 
related procedures not part of normal medical  care.  
7.2 EXCLUSION CRITERIA   
Patients who have met all the inclusion criteria listed in Section  7.1 will be screened for the 
following exclusion criteria:  
 Less than 18 years (or country’s legal age of majority if the legal age is >18 years).  
 Primary refractory MM defined as patients who have never achieved at least a MR with 
any treatment during the disease course.  
 Patient with serum free light chain (FLC ) measurable disease only.  
 Patient with prior anti -CD38 mAb treatment w ith progression on or within 60 days after 
end of anti -CD38 mAb treatment or failure to achieve at least MR to treatment 
(ie, refractory to anti -CD38).  
 Any anti -myeloma drug treatment within 14 days before randomization, including 
dexamethasone.  
 Patient wh o has received any other investigational drugs or prohibited therapy for this 
study within 28 days prior to randomization ( Section  8.8.2 ). 
 Prior treatment with carfilzomib.  
 Known history of allergy to captisol (a cyclodextrin derivative used to solubilize 
carfilzomib), prior hypersensitivity to sucrose, histidine (as base and hydrochl oride salt), 
polysorbate 80, or any of the components (active substance or excipient) of study treatment 
that are not amenable to premedication with steroids, or H2 blockers, that would prohibit 
further treatment with these agents.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 54 Internal  
 Patients with contraindi cation to dexamethasone.  
 Prior allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplant with active graft versus host disease (any 
grade and/or being under immunosuppressive treatment within 2  months before 
randomization).  
 Known amyloidosis or concomitant plasma cell leukemia.  
 Pleural effusions requiring thoracentesis or ascites requiring paracentesis or any major 
procedures within 14 days before randomization: eg, plasmapheresis, curative 
radiotherapy, major surgery (kyphoplasty is not considered a major procedure).  
 Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG ) performance status (PS ) >2  
(see Appendix D ). 
 Platelets <50,000 cells/µL if <50% of BM nucleated cells are plasma cells and 
<30,000  cells/µL if ≥50% of BM nucleated cells are plasma cells. Platelet transfusion is 
not allowed within 3 days before the screening hematological test.  
 Absolute neutrophil count (ANC ) <1000 μ/L (1 x 109/L). The use of granulocyte colony 
stimulating factor (G -CSF) is not allowed to reach this level.  
 Creatinine clearance <15 mL/min/1.73 m2 (Modification of Diet in Renal Disease 
[MDRD ] Formula, see Appendix B ). 
 Total bilirubin >1.5 x upper limit of normal (ULN ), except for known Gilbert syndrome.  
 Corrected serum calcium >14 mg/dL (>3.5 mmol/L).  
 Aspartate aminotransferase (AST ) and/or alanine aminotransferase (ALT ) >3 x ULN.  
 Ongoin g toxicity (excluding alopecia and those listed in eligibility criteria) from any prior 
anti-myeloma therapy of Grade >1 (National Cancer Institute Common Terminology for 
Adverse Events [NCI -CTCAE ] v4.03; see Appendix E ). 
 Prior malignancy. Adequately treated basal cell or squamous cell skin or superficial 
(pTis,  pTa, and pT1) bladder cancer or low risk prostate cancer or any in situ malignancy 
after curative therapy are allowed, as well as any other cancer for which therapy has been 
completed ≥5 years prior to randomization and from which the pa tient has been 
disease -free for ≥5 years.  
 Any of the following within 6 months prior to randomization: myocardial infarction, 
severe/unstable angina pectoris, coronary/peripheral artery bypass graft, New York Heart 
Association class III or IV congestive he art failure (CHF ), Grade ≥3 arrhythmias, stroke, 
or transient ischemic attack.  
 Left ventricular ejection fraction <40%.  
 Known acquired AIDS related illness or HIV disease requiring antiretroviral treatment, or 
to have active hepatitis A, B (defined as a known positive hepatitis B surface antigen 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 55 Internal  
(HBsAg) result), or C (defined as known quantitative HCV RNA results greater than the 
lower limits of detection of the assay or positive HCV antigen) infec tion. 
 Any of the following within 3 months prior to randomization: treatment resistant peptic 
ulcer disease, erosive esophagitis or gastritis, infectious or inflammatory bowel disease, 
diverticulitis, pulmonary embolism, or other uncontrolled thromboemboli c event.  
 Any severe acute or chronic medical condition which could impair the ability of the patient 
to participate in the study or interfere with interpretation of the study results (eg, systemic 
infection unless anti -infective therapy is employed), or patient unable to comply with the 
study procedures.  
 Female patients who are pregnant or lactating.  
 Women of childbearing potential (WOCBP ) not protected by highly -effective method of 
birth control and/or who are unwilling or unable to be tested for pregnancy  
(see contraceptive guidance in Appendix C ). 
 Male partic ipant with a female partner of childbearing potential not protected by 
highly -effective method of birth control.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 56 Internal  
8 STUDY TREATMENTS   
8.1 INVESTIGATIONAL MEDICINAL PRODUCTS   
In case of a regional or national emergency declared by a governmental agency that results in 
travel restrictions, confinement, or restricted site access, the oral IMP may be supplied at the site 
or from the PI/site/Sponsor to the participant via a Sponsor -approved courier company where 
allowed by local regulations and agreed upon by the participant during the time the measures are 
applied.  
8.1.1  Isatuximab   
8.1.1.1  Pharmaceutical form   
The C1P2F2 drug product is presented as a concentrate for solution for infusion in vials 
containing 20 mg/mL (500 mg/25 mL) isatuximab in 20 mM histidine, 10% (w/v) sucrose, 
0.02%  (w/v) polysorbate 80, and pH 6.0 buffer.  
It is supplied for parenteral administration as a sterile, nonpyrogenic, injectable, 20  mg/mL 
concentrate for solution for infusion essentially free of visible particulates and is packaged in  
30 mL glass vials fitted with elastomeric closure. Each vial contains a nominal content of 500 mg 
of isatuximab. The fill volume has been established to ensure removal of 25  mL. 
For administration to patients, th e appropriate volume of isatuximab will be diluted in a 250 -mL 
infusion bag of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% dextrose solution.  
Please refer to the Pharmacy Manual for more information.  
8.1.1.2  Dilution method   
Isatuximab concentrate for solution for infusion will be diluted in an infusion bag with 
0.9%  sodium chloride or 5% dextrose solution to achieve the appropriate drug concentration for 
infusion.  
Infusion via a central line is preferred , if available. In case of patients with local intolerance after 
peripheral IV infusion, the decision to use a central line is left to the Investigator’s decision. The 
final infusion volume corresponding to the dose of isatuximab will be administered by IV  infusion 
for the period of time that will depend on total dose administered.  
Prior to dosing, each patient's dose will be individually prepared by the study pharmacist and 
labeled with protocol number, patient number, and treatment description. The total dose will be 
calculated based on the most recent weight available the day of the infusion preparation: the 
weight on the day of the infusion or the most recent weight assuming it was assessed in a 
reasonable time frame according to investigator assessment.  If the infusion is prepared with the 
most recent weight assessed in a reasonable time frame, this will not prevent to assess the weight 
on D1 of each cycle, which has to be recorded in the eCRF.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 57 Internal  
Detail instructions for dilution of the isatuximab concentr ate for solution for infusion is provided 
in a Pharmacy Manual.  
8.1.2  Carfilzomib   
Carfilzomib (Kyprolis®) from available commercial supplies will be used for this study where 
applicabl e; otherwise, it will be re -labeled by the sponsor according to Good Manufacturing 
Practice (GMP ) guidelines before supplies are provided to the study sites.  
Please refer to package insert for further details as regards to formulation, storage, and handling 
procedures.  
8.1.2.1  Dilution method   
The lyophilized product is reconstituted with water for injection to a final carfilz omib 
concentration of 2 mg/mL prior to administration.  
8.1.3  Dexamethasone IV/PO   
Dexamethasone IV/PO from available commercial supplies will be used for this study where 
applicable; o therwise, it will be re -labeled by the sponsor according to GMP guidelines before 
supplies are provided to the study sites.  
Please refer to package insert for further details as regards to formulation and handling 
procedures.  
8.2 DOSAGE AND SCHEDULE   
There is no limitation in the number of cycles to be administered in the absence of major toxicity, 
disease progression or any other discontinuation criteria as defined in Section  10.3. In case of 
PD diagnosis made on laboratory criteria, this needs to be confirmed by 2 consecutive measures 
before to treatment discontinuation, the treatment should continue until confirmatio n of the PD.  
Dose adjustment (dose delay, dose omission, and for carfilzomib and dexamethasone dose 
reduction) will be permitted for subsequent treatment cycles based on individual patient tolerance. 
No dose reductions are allowed for isatuximab infusion ( see Section  8.2.4 ). 
8.2.1  Study treatments (IMP)   
Study treatment is defined as isatuximab/carfilzomib/dexamethasone in IKd experimental arm and 
carfilzomib/dexamethasone in Kd control arm.  
Both isatuximab and carfilzomib can induce IARs and premedication is require d prior to their 
administration.  
Patients allocated to IKd arm should routinely receive premedications, which also includes 
dexamethasone, prior to isatuximab infusion to reduce the risk and severity of IARs commonly 
observed with mAbs and with carfilzomib . Dexamethasone should be administered prior to 
carfilzomib for patients allocated to the Kd arm, and for patients allocated to IKd arm, 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 58 Internal  
dexamethasone should be administered prior to carfilzomib administration when there is no 
isatuximab infusion (on Days 2, 9, and 16 at Cycle 1 and on Days 2, 8, 9, and 16 at further 
cycles).  
Hydration is required prior to the 2 first carfilzomib administrations (on Day 1 and Day 2 
Cycle  1). Hydration should be started orally at least 48 h prior Day 1 Cycle 1. Hydration for  
further infusions within cycle 1 and further cycles is left to Investigator judgment. Details for 
hydration are given in Section  8.2.3 .  
Patients with a BSA >2.2 m2 will use 2.2 m2 for the determination of carfilzomib dose.  
Detailed guidelines for the premedication are provided in Section  8.2.2  and details for 
management of IARs are provided in Section  10.6.1 . 
IKd arm (experimental arm)  
Drug administration (after pre -medication as described Section  8.2.2 ) for patients treated with 
isatuximab, carfilzomib, and dexamethasone combination is as follows:  
• Dexamet hasone 20 mg on Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, 16, 22, and 23 in a 28 -day cycle, between 
15 to 30  minutes (but no longer than 60 minutes) prior to isatuximab or at least 30 minutes 
prior to carfilzomib on the days when there is no isatuximab administration. 
Dexameth asone will be administered IV on the days of isatuximab and/or carfilzomib 
administration and PO on the other days (see Section  8.2.2 ). 
• Isatuximab is to be administered IV at a dose of 10 mg/kg weekly for the first month, then 
Q2W thereafter. The rate of infusion for isatuximab should be initiated at 175  mg/hour.  
Patients still receiving isatuximab will switch to the registered infusion rate as described 
below. For those patients, premedication for the prevention of infusion reaction (IR) has to 
be given for the first isatuximab infusions. Patients who do not experience an IR upon 
4 consecutive administrations of isatuximab may have their need for subsequent 
premedication reconsidered, at the Investigator’s discretion.    
- First isatuximab infusions: initiate infusion at 25 mL/hour. In the absence of IRs after 
1 hour of infus ion, increase infusion rate by 25 mL/hour increments every 30 minutes, 
to a maximum of 150 mL/hour. In case of grade 2 IR during first infusion, infusion 
could be restarted at one -half of the initial infusion rate (12.5 mL/hour) when the IR 
improves to Gra de ≤1. If symptoms do not recur after 30 minutes, the infusion rate 
may be increased by 25 mL/hour increments every 30 minutes, until the total volume 
is infused to maximum rate of 150 mL/hr.  
- Second infusion: Initiate infusion at 50 mL/hour. In the absence  of Grade 2 IR after 
30 minutes of infusion, increase rate to 100 mL/hour for 30 minutes, then, to 
200 mL/hour until the total volume is infused.  
- In case of Grade 2 IR during second infusion, infusion could be restarted at one -half of 
the initial infusion rate (25 mL/hour) when the IR improves to Grade ≤1. If symptoms 
do not recur after 30 minutes, the infusion rate may be increased by 50 mL/hour 
increments every 30 minutes, until the total volume is infused to maximum rate of 
200 mL/hr.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 59 Internal  
- Third and subsequen t infusions: Initiate infusion at a fixed infusion rate of 
200 mL/hour, until the total volume is infused. In case of Grade 2 IR during third 
infusion, infusion could be restarted at one -half (100 mL/hour) of the infusion rate 
(100 mL/hour) when the IR imp roves to Grade ≤1. If symptoms do not recur after 
30 minutes, the infusion rate may be increased by 50 mL/hour increments every 
30 minutes, until the total volume is infused to maximum rate 200 mL/hr.  
- Guidelines for patients who develop IARs are provided i n Section  10.6.1 . 
• Carfilzomib (after appropriate hydration, see Section  8.2.3 ) is to be administered IV over 
30 minutes at a dose of 20 mg/m2 on Days 1 and 2, 56 m g/m2 on Days 8, 9, 15, and 16 of 
Cycle 1, and then 56  mg/m2 on Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16 of all further cycles. The 
carfilzomib infusion should follow the isatuximab infusion and should begin just after the 
end of the isatuximab infusion. The dose will b e escalated to 56 mg/m2 on Day 8 and for 
further administrations if the patient did not experience any toxicity Grade >2 (except non -
complicated hematological toxicity (toxicity meaning related to study treatment) or 
recovered tumor lysis syndrome (TLS)).  
Kd arm (control arm)  
Drug administration for patients treated with carfilzomib and dexamethasone combination is as 
follow:  
• Dexamethasone 20 mg on Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, 16, 22, and 23, at least 30 mins prior to 
carfilzomib on the days of carfilzomib administration. Dexamethasone will be 
administered IV on the days of carfilzomib administration and PO on the other days.  
• Carfilzomib (after appropriate hydration, see Section  8.2.3 ) is to be administered IV over 
30 mins at a dose of 20 mg/m2 on Days 1 and 2, 56 mg/m2 on Days 8, 9, 15, and 16 of 
Cycle 1, then 56  mg/m2 on Da ys 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16 of all further cycles. The dose will 
be escalated to 56  mg/m2 on Day 8 and for further administrations if the patient did not 
experience any toxicity higher than Grade 2 (except non -complicated hematological 
toxicity (toxicity mea ning related to study treatment) or recovered TLS).  
As per amended protocol 09, for patients still on treatment in IKd arm and patients in Kd 
arm, the omission of carfil zomib dosing on Days 8 and 9 while keeping or not dex amethasone 
dosing on Day 8, 9, 22,  23 is authorized if patient requests a more convenient schedule and if 
investigator judges that the maximum benefit has been reached with the weekly schedule.  Same 
dose modification recommendations will be followed. If carfilzomib dose was decreased due to 
adverse event at the time the decision is taken, dose of carfilzomib cannot be re -increased while it 
could be possible for dexamethasone based on Investigator judgement .  
8.2.2  Premedication (NIMP): prevention of infusion associated reactions   
Patients allocated to the IKd arm should routinely receive premedication prior to isatuximab 
infusion to reduce the risk and severity of IARs commonly observed with mAbs. The 
recom mended premedication agents are diphenhydramine 25 to 50 mg IV (or equivalent), 
dexamethasone IV/PO (dose defined below), ranitidine 50 mg IV (or equivalent), and 
acetaminophen 650 to 1000 mg PO 15 to 30 minutes (but no longer than 60 minutes) prior to 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 60 Internal  
isatuximab infusion. Once the premedication regimen is completed, the isatuximab infusion must 
start immediately.  
The day of isatuximab administration, the following order is recommended:  
• Acetaminophen (paracetamol) 650 mg to 1000 mg PO.  
• Ranitidine 50 mg IV (or equivalent). The use of ranitidine or equivalent as IR 
premedication will be based on Investigators’ judgement.  
• Diphenhydramine 25 mg to 50 mg IV (or equivalent).  
• Dexamethasone 20 mg IV (which is also part of study treatment).  
In countries where there is no IV formulation of diphenhydramine or equivalent, per os 
formulation is allowed from the first isatuximab infusion. In this case, it should be taken one to 
two hours prior to isatuximab infusion start.  
When carfilzomib is administered without isatuxim ab (patients allocated to the Kd arm and on 
Days  2, 8, and 16 for patients allocated to the IKd arm), dexamethasone is to be administered at 
least 30  minutes prior to carfilzomib infusion.  
In case of dexamethasone being prematurely stopped and other study treatment being continued, 
steroid premedication can be considered with methylprednisolone 100 mg IV if IAR 
premedication is still needed for isatuximab and/or carfilzomib according to investigator 
judgment.  
For the patients who do not experience an IAR up on 4 consecutive administrations of isatuximab, 
the Investigator may reconsider the need of specific isatuximab premedication for IAR.  
General guidelines for the management of the IAR are provided in Section  10.6.1.  
8.2.2.1  Ranitidine or equivalent   
Ranitidine is pres ented as a solution for IV infusion. Commercial supplies of ranitidine or 
equivalent (other approved H2 antagonists, oral proton pump inhibitors) will be used for this 
study. Please refer to package insert for further details as regards to formulation, sto rage, and 
handling purposes.  
The use of ranitidine or equivalent as IR premedication will be based on Investigators’ judgement.  
8.2.2.2  Diphenhydramine or equivalent   
Diphenhydramine is p resented as a solution for IV infusion. Commercial supplies of 
diphenhydramine or equivalent (cetirizine, promethazine) will be used for this study. Please refer 
to package insert for further details as regards to formulation, storage, and handling purpose s. 
8.2.2.3  Acetaminophen or equivalent   
Commercial supplies of acetaminophen or equivalent will be used for this study. Please refer to 
package insert for further details as regards to fo rmulation, storage, and handling purposes.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 61 Internal  
8.2.3  Carfilzomib hydration   
At least 48 hours before Cycle 1 Day 1, oral hydration should be given as follows: 30 mL/kg/day 
(approximately 6 to 8 cups of liquid per day) continuing up to the time of treatment. Patient 
compliance must be assessed before initiating treatment, which is to be delayed if oral hydration is 
not adequate. Oral hydration may be continued for infusions w ithin Cycle 1 and in Cycle 2 and 
beyond at the Investigator’s discretion. In case of TLS occurred after prior study treatment 
administration, hydration for subsequent infusions will be done as needed as per investigator 
judgement.  
Patients with a history o f cardiac disease (such as CHF and cardiomyopathy) or pulmonary edema 
should be monitored closely for signs of fluid overload. Patients with hypertension in medical 
history must have controlled blood pressure before treatment initiation.  
Intravenous hydrat ion will be given immediately prior to carfilzomib on D1 and D2 during 
Cycle  1, and at the Investigator’s discretion after Cycle 1. This will consist of 500 mL normal 
saline or other appropriate IV fluid prior to carfilzomib infusion over 30 to 60 minutes.  The goal 
of the hydration program is to maintain robust urine output (eg, ≥2 L/day). Patients should be 
monitored periodically during this period for evidence of fluid overload.  
The days where both isatuximab and carfilzomib are administered, the volume o f isatuximab 
infusion should be considered in hydration required prior to carfilzomib infusion. If the volume of 
isatuximab infusion does not reach at least 500 mL, additional hydration should be administered 
to reach at least 500 mL. In this case, additio nal volume should be administered prior start of 
isatuximab infusion. Total volume of hydration can be less than 500 mL (no less than 250  mL) or 
kept at 500 mL but administered on a longer time for patients with borderline LVEF (above, but 
close to the eli gibility criteria threshold of 40%) and/or for whom there is a risk of cardiac 
decompensation according to investigator’s judgement. The carfilzomib infusion should be started 
after isatuximab infusion is completed.  
8.2.4  Dose modifications   
8.2.4.1  General rules   
Dose modifications are permitted according to the guidelines described in this section.  
Dose reduction and/ or cycle delay are permitted in case of toxicity. Patients may have a dose 
omitted (isatuximab and/or carfilzomib and/or dexamethasone) within a cycle if toxicity occurs 
and the patient does not recover within 3 days after the planned day of infusion/admin istration. 
If a patient experiences several toxicities and there are conflicting recommendations, the most 
conservative dose adjustment recommended (dose reduction/omission/delay appropriate to the 
most severe toxicity) should be followed. Once a dose of c arfilzomib or dexamethasone has been 
decreased, intra -patient re -escalation back to the previous dose level is not permitted , except for 
dexamethasone in case of dexamethasone if maintained on Day 8 , and 9 and decision was taken 
after patient request for c onvenience to omit carfilzomib dosing on Days 8 and 9  
(see Section  8.2.1 ). If a dos e reduction is required, it is to be applied compared to the last dose 
level received by the patient.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 62 Internal  
Administration of the study treatment (isatuximab and/or carfilzomib and/or dexamethasone) will 
be discontinued in the event of an AE that persists despit e appropriate dose modifications or any 
other AE that, in the opinion of the Investigator, warrants discontinuation.  
All changes to study treatment administration must be recorded in the electronic case report form 
(eCRF ). 
Patients will receive the next cycle of study treatment after recovery of the toxicity as described 
below.  
A new cycle of study treatment may begin on the scheduled Day  1 of a subsequent cycle if the 
following criteria are m et. 
• ANC >1000/ mm3. 
• Platelet count ≥50,000/ mm3. For patients with plasma cells >50% of BM nucleated 
cells at baseline, to initiate Cycle 2, platelet counts should be ≥30,000/mm3 regardless 
response status at end of Cycle 1. During Cycles 2 to 4, platelet counts should be 
≥30,000/mm3, if last response is not better than SD, but if last response is PR or better 
during Cycles 2 to 4, Day 1 next cycle can be administered only if plat elet counts 
≥50,000/mm3. For Day 1 administration beyond Cycle 4, platelet counts should be 
≥50,000/mm3. 
• Any other carfilzomib, dexamethasone, or isatuximab related AE that may have 
occurred in the previous cycle has recovered to Grade ≤1 or baseline sever ity 
(or according to the dose modifications shown in Section  8.2.4.3  and Section  8.2.4.4 . 
If these criteria are not met on the scheduled Day  1, Day 1 should be delayed until patients 
recover as defined above and if D1 delay is more than 3 days, the reason should be documented. If 
these criteria are not met within 14 days of the scheduled Day  1 (planned Day 1 Cycle n +1 
corresponds to Day 29 cycle n), the patient should be discontinued from study treatment, unless 
there is strong evidence of clinical benefit to justify continuation of dosing with study treatment. 
The Investigator must discuss the rationale with the sponsor before a decision is taken. A delay 
for pa tient’s convenience should be avoided during the first cycles and a delay more than 14 days 
has to be discussed with the Sponsor before a decision is taken.   
If there are dose modifications within the previous cycle, these guidelines should be followed fo r 
the initiation of a new cycle:  
• If carfilzomib dosing was omitted during the previous cycle and was restarted with a 
1-level dose reduction without requiring an interruption for the remainder of the cycle, 
then that reduced dose level will be initiated on  Day 1 of the new cycle. Once a dose of 
carfilzomib or dexamethasone has been reduced, intra -patient re -escalation back to the 
previous dose level is not permitted.  
• If there are no other AEs that require a dose reduction and thrombocytopenia and/or 
neutrop enia can be managed with supportive measures, no dose reductions are required.  
• Patients may have study treatment dose delay within a cycle if toxicity occurs and recovers 
within the 3 days after the planned day. If toxicity does not recover within these 3 days, 
the dose should be omitted. The reason for a dose delay of more than 1 day and dose 
omission should be documented. Patients will receive the next treatment administration 
after recovery of the toxicity as described in Section  8.2.4.2 . 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 63 Internal  
If one of the study treatments is prematurely permanently discontinued, then other drug(s) can be 
continued until disease progression, unacceptable toxicity, or the patient wishes to discontinue 
further study treatment. The end of study treatment in this case will be 30 day after the date of the 
last study treatment administration.  
8.2.4.2  Modif ication of isatuximab/carfilzomib/dexamethasone dose levels in case of 
dose reduction   
No dose reduction of isatuximab is permitted. Dose omissions are allowed in case of toxicity.  
If the dose of carfilzomib or dexamethasone requires reduction due to AEs, the dose will be 
reduced by 1 dose level relative to the current dose the patient is receiving. Several dose 
reductions are permitted and weekly doses can be omitted in ca se of ongoing AEs. Dose reduction 
steps for carfilzomib are shown in Table  1 and dose reduction steps for dexamethasone are shown 
in Table  2. 
Table  1 - Dose levels for carfilzomib dose reduction   
Starting dose (IV)  Dose level -1 Dose level -2 Dose level -3 
20 mg/m²  15 11 - 
56 mg/m²  45 36 27 
Table  2 - Dose levels for dexamethasone dose reduction   
Starting dose 
(PO/IV)  Dose level -1 Dose level -2 Dose level -3 
20 mg  12 8 4 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 64 Internal  
8.2.4.3  Dose adjustments in IKd arm   
Details of the guidelines for dose adjustments in the case of hematologic toxicities are presented 
in Table  3. 
Table  3 - Guidelines for dose adjustments for hematological toxicities - 
isatuximab/carfilzomib/dexamethasone combination   
Adverse event  Recommended action on isatuximab, carfilzomib, and 
dexamethasone  
Platelets   
Platelet count <30  x 109/L  Platelet count between 
10 x 109/L and 30  x 109/L 
without bleeding  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Maintain same dose isatuxima b, carfilzomib, 
and dexamethasone.  
Platelet count <10 x  109/L 
or evidence of bleeding  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Hold isatuximab, carfilzomib, and 
dexamethasone until platelets counts improve to ≥10 
x 109/L and/or bleeding is controlled, and then re -start all 
study treatment at the same dose level.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
For each subsequent drop in 
platelet count to <30  x 109/L Platelet count between 
10 x 109/L and 30  x 109/L 
without bleeding  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Main tain same dose of isatuximab, 
carfilzomib, and dexamethasone.  
Platelet count <10 x  109/L 
or evidence of bleeding  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya as 
defined in Section  8.2.4.1   and then administer with 
reduction of carfilzomib by 1 dose level and same dose of 
isatuximab and dexamethasone.  
Within cycle: Hold isatuximab, carfilzomib, and 
dexamethasone until platelets counts improve to ≥10 x  109/L 
and/or bleeding is controlled, and then re -start with reduction 
of carfilzomib by 1 dose level and same dose of isatuximab 
and dexamethasone.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Neutropenia    
Neutrophil count <1.0  x 109/L  Neutrophil count between 
0.5-1.0 x  109/L  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Maintain same dose of isatuximab, 
carfilzomib, and dexamethasone.  
Neutrophil count between 
<0.5 x 109/L Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Full dose isatuximab and dexamethasone 
and omit dose carfilzomib until neutrophil counts improve 
to ≥0.5  x 109/L and then re -start all study treatments a t the 
same dose level.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 65 Internal  
Adverse event  Recommended action on isatuximab, carfilzomib, and 
dexamethasone  
For each subsequent drop in 
neutrophil count to <1.0  x 109/L Neutrophil count between 
0.5 to 1.0  x 109/L  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Maintain same dose of isatuximab, 
carfilzomib, and dexamethasone.  
Neutrophil count between 
<0.5 x  109/L Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Full dose isatuximab and dexamethasone 
and omit dose carfilzomib until neutrophil counts improve 
to ≥0.5  x 109/L and then re -start with reduction of 
carfilzo mib by 1 dose level and same dose of isatuximab 
and dexamethasone.  
Febrile neutropenia and/or 
neutropenic infection  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya and add G -CSF until 
ANC >1  x 109/L. 
Within cycle: Omit isatuximab, carfilzomib, and dexamethasone (use of G -CSF can be 
considered) until ANC >1  x 109/L and fever/infection resolved. If no oth er AEs, then 
resume study treatment at the same dose. If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
If further episodes, same instructions, but then reduce by 1 dose level of carfilzomib.  
a A dose delay of up to 14 days between cycles is permitted in order for a patient to recover to their baseline status. Beyond 14 days, the 
patient must be permanently discontinued from the study (see Section  8.2.4.1 ). 
Dose adjustments for patients treated with isatuximab, carfilzomib, and dexamethasone 
combination in the case of non -hematological toxicity are shown in Table  4. 
Table  4 - Guidelines for dose adjustments for non -hematologic adverse events –  
isatuximab/carfilzomib/dexamethasone combination   
Adverse event  Recommended action  
 Isatuximaba Carfilzomiba Dexamethasonea 
Renal dysfunction  
CrCl ≥15 mL/mins  Full dose isatuximab and same dose level of carfilzomib and dexamethasone.  
CrCl <15 mL/mins  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until CrCl returns to ≥15 mL/minsb. 
Within cycle: Omit isatuximab, carfilzomib, and dexamethasone. When CrCl returns to 
≥15 mL/mins, resume full dose isatuximab, and same dose level of carfilzomib and 
dexamethasone.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Liver function     
AST, ALT, or total bilirubin 
Grade ≥3  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until improvement to Grade 2 and then resume 
isatuximab and dexamethasone at the same dose level and reduce carfilzomib by 1 dose 
levelb. 
Within cycle : Full dose isatuximab, dexamethasone at the same dose level, and hold 
carfilzomib until improvement to Grade 2 and resume carfilzomib with dose reduction by 1 dose 
level.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Discontinue carfilzomib if recurrence despi te 3 dose reductions.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 66 Internal  
Adverse event  Recommended action  
 Isatuximaba Carfilzomiba Dexamethasonea 
Grade 3 -4 infection without 
concomitant neutropenia  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until systemic treatment of infection completeb. 
Within cycle : Hold study treatment until systemic treatment of infection complete.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Resume isatuximab, carfilzomib, and dexamethasone at the same dose leve l. 
Peripheral neuropathy     
Grade 2 with pain or Grade 3  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until improvement to Grade 2 without pain and 
administer isatuximab and dexamethasone at the same dose level, and reduce carfilzomib by 
1 dose levelb. 
Within cycle : Full dose isatuximab, dexamethasone at the same dose level, and hold 
carfilzomib until improvement to Grade 2 without pain and red uce by 1 dose level.  
Discontinue carfilzomib if recurrence despite 3 dose reductions.  
Grade 4  Discontinue carfilzomib and hold isatuximab and dexamethasone. When improvement at least 
Grade 2 with pain or Grade 3, resume isatuximab and dexamethasone at the same dose level.  
Cardiac toxicity  
Congestive heart failure  
or Decreased LVEF <40% or 
reduction LVEF to <55% 
with drop greater than 20% 
from baseline  
 Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until returns to >40%, or if held due to a drop 
to >55% until returns to within 15% of baseline  and resume full dose isatuximab, 
dexamethasone at the same dose level, and based on benefit risk assessment to re -start 
carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level or to stop carfilzomibb. 
Within cycle : Hold study treatment until returns to >40%, or until returns to within 15% of 
baseline and resume full dose isatuximab, dexamethasone at the same dose level and based 
on benefit risk assessment to re -start carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level or to stop 
carfilzomib.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Discontinue carfilzomib if recurrence despite 1 dose reduction.  
Myocardial infarction  Discontinue carfilzomib.  
Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until recovery, resume full isatuximab dose and 
dexamethasone at the same dose level if and when clinically appropriateb. 
Within cycle : After recovery, resume full isatuximab dose and dexamethasone at the same 
dose level if and when clinically appropriate.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Pulmonary hypertension  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recovery or return to baseline value and then 
resume full isatuximab dose and dexamethasone at the same dose level, and based on benefit 
risk assessment to re-start carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level or to stop 
carfilzomibb. 
Within cycle: Hold study treatment until resolution or return to bas eline value and resume 
dexamethasone at the same dose level and based on benefit risk assessment to re -start 
carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level or to stop carfilzomib.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Discontinue carfilzomib if recurrence des pite 1 dose reduction.  
Pneumonitis/interstitial disease (as ADRS were associated with these symptoms)  
Including acute distress 
respiratory syndrome, acute 
respiratory failure  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until Grade ≤1, and resume full isatuximab dose 
and dexamethasone at the same dose level, and based on benefit risk assessment to re -start 
carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level or to stop carfilzomib.  
Within cycle: Hold study treatment until Grade ≤1 and resume full isatuximab do se and 
dexamethasone at the same dose level, and based on benefit risk assessment to re -start 
carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level or to stop carfilzomib.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Discontinue carfilzomib if recurrence despite 1 dose red uction.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 67 Internal  
Adverse event  Recommended action  
 Isatuximaba Carfilzomiba Dexamethasonea 
Thrombotic microangiopathy  
Including thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura 
and hemolytic uremic 
syndrome  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until Grade ≤1, and resume full isatuximab dose 
and dexamethasone at the same dose level, and based on benefit risk assessment to re -start 
carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level or to stop carfilzomib.  
Within cycle: Hold study treatment until Grade ≤1 and resume isatuximab dose and 
dexamethasone at the same dose level, and based on benefit r isk assessment to re -start 
carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level or to stop carfilzomib.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Discontinue carfilzomib if recurrence despite 1 dose reduction.  
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES)  
Symptom can include 
headaches, altered mental 
status, seizures, visual loss, 
and hypertension  Discontinue carfilzomib.  
Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until recovery, resume full isatuximab dose and 
dexamethasone at the same dose level if and wh en clinically appropriateb. 
Within cycle : After recovery, resume full isatuximab dose and dexamethasone at the same 
dose level if and when clinicall y appropriate.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Edema excluding infusion associated reaction and excluding edema from cardiac origin  
Grade ≥3 (limiting function 
and unresponsive to therapy 
or anasarca)  Day 1 of cycle or within 
cycle : Maintain full dose 
isatuximab as planned.  Day 1 of cycle or within cycle : 
Maintain full dose carfilzomib 
as planned.  Diuretics as needed, and 
decrease dexamethasone 
dose by 1 dose level; if 
edema persists despite 
above measures, decrease 
dose another dose level. If 
symptoms persist despite 
second reduction, 
dexamethasone permanently 
discontinued.  
Confusion or mood alteration not related to PRES  
Grade ≥2 (interfering with 
function ± daily activities)  Day 1 of cycle or within 
cycle : Maintain full dose 
isatuximab as planned.  Day 1 of cycle or within cycle : 
Maintain same dose level of 
carfilzomib as planned.  Hold dexamethasone until 
symptoms resolve. Restart 
with 1  dose level reduction. 
If symptoms persist despite 
above measures, 
dexamethasone permanently  
discontinued.  
Herpes zoster  Hold study treatment until lesions are dry, then resume all at the same dose level with 
appropriate prophylaxis.  
Gastrointestinal Dyspepsia, gastric or duodenal ulcer, gastritis  
Grade  1-2 (requiring medical 
management)  Day 1 of cycle or within 
cycle : Maintain full dose 
isatuximab as planned.  Day 1 of cycle or within cycle : 
Maintain same dose level of 
carfilzomib as planned.  Maintain same dose level of 
dexamethasone. Treat with 
H2 blockers, sucralfate, or 
omeprazole. If symptoms 
persist despite above 
measures, decrease 
dexamethasone dose by 
1 dose level.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 68 Internal  
Adverse event  Recommended action  
 Isatuximaba Carfilzomiba Dexamethasonea 
Grade >3 (requiring 
hospitalization or surgery)  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until recoveryb.Then, restart full dose isatuximab 
and same dose level of carfilzomib, and decrease dexamethasone by 1 dose level of current 
dose along with concurrent therapy with H2 blockers, sucralfate, or omeprazole.  
Within cycle : Hold study treatment until symptoms adequately controlled. Then, restart full dose 
isatuximab and same dose level of carfilzomib, and decrease dexamethasone by 1 dose level 
of current dose along with concu rrent therapy with H2 blockers, sucralfate, or omeprazole.  
If delay >3 days, omit the dose.  
If symptoms persist despite above measures, dexamethasone permanently discontinued.  
Acute pancreatitis  Dexamethasone permanently discontinued.  
Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until recoveryc and re -start full dose isatuximab and 
same dose level of carfilzomibb. 
Within cycle : Hold all study treatment until recovery and re -start full dose isatuximab and same 
dose level of carfilzomib.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Hyperglycemia  
Grade ≥ 3  Day 1 of cycle or within 
cycle : Maintain full dose 
isatuximab as planned.  Day 1 of cycle or within cycle : 
Maintain same dose level of 
carfilzomib as planned.  Treatment with insulin or oral 
hypoglycemic agents as 
needed. If uncontrolled 
despite above measures, 
decrease dose by 1  dose 
level until levels are 
satisfactory.  
Muscle weakness  
Grade ≥2 (symptomatic and 
interfering with function 
± daily activities)  Day 1 of cycle or within 
cycle : Maintain full dose 
isatuximab as planned.  Day 1 of cycle or within cycle : 
Maintain same dose level of 
carfilzomib as planned.  Decrease dexamethasone by 
1 dose level. If weakness 
persists despite above 
measures decrease dose by 
1 level. If symptoms persist, 
dexamethasone permanently 
discontinued.  
Any other  drug related non -
hematologic Grade 3 -4 AE  
(please also refer to  
Section  8.2.9  for handling of 
TLS)  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until recovery and apply rules of dose modification 
described belowb. 
Within cycle :  
For isatuximab attribution, omit dose if the event has not recovered within 3 days. Resume at 
full dose when toxicity has improved to Grade 2 or less or to baseline grade. Sec ond episode, 
isatuximab discontinuation.  
For dexamethasone attribution omit dose if the event has not recovered within 3 days. Resume 
with 1 dose level decrease when toxicity has resolved to Grade 2 or less or to baseline grade. 
Second episode, apply new d ose reduction. Third episode, dexamethasone discontinuation.  
For carfilzomib attribution, hold dose. Resume with 1 dose level decrease when toxicity has 
improved to Grade 2 or less or recovered to baseline grade. Second episode, apply new dose 
reduction. T hird episode, carfilzomib discontinuation.  
a Patients may have isatuximab, carfilzomib, and/or dexamethasone dose omission within a cycle if certain toxicities do not rec over within 
3 days following the day of planned infusion (see Section  8.2.4.1 ). 
b A dose delay of up to 14 days between cycles is permitted in order to recover to the patient´s baseline status. Beyond 14 day s, the  patient 
must be permanently discontinued from the study (s ee Section  8.2.4.1 ). 
c See Section  10.6.1  for IAR management.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 69 Internal  
8.2.4.4  Dose adjustments in Kd arm   
Dose adjustments for patients treated with carfilzomib and dexamethasone combination in the 
case of hematological toxicity are shown in Table  5. 
Table  5 - Guidelines for dose adjustments for hematologic toxicities –  
carfilzomib/dexamethasone combination   
Adverse event  Recommended action  
Platelets  Carfilzomib  Dexamethasone  
Platelet count <30  x 109/L  Platelet count between 
10 x 109/L and 30  x 109/L 
without bleeding  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Maintain same dose of carfilzomib and 
dexamethasone  
Platelet count <10 x  109/L 
or evidence of bleeding  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Hold carfilzomib and dexamethasone until 
platelets counts improve to ≥10 x  109/L and/or ble eding is 
controlled, and then re -start all study treatment at the same 
dose level.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
For each subsequent drop in 
platelet count to <30  x 109/L Platelet count between 
10 x 109/L and 30  x 109/L 
without bleeding  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Maintain same dose of carfilzomib and 
dexamethasone.  
Platelet count <10 x  109/L 
or evidence of bleeding  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1   and then administer with 
reduction of carfilzomib by 1 dose level and same dose of 
dexamethasone.  
Within cycle: Hold carfilzomib and dexamethasone until 
platelets counts improve to ≥10 x  109/L and/or bleeding is 
controlled, and then re -start with reduction of carfilzomib by 
1 dose level and same dose of dexamethasone.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Neutropenia    
Neutrophil count <1.0  x 109/L  Neutrophil count between 
0.5-1.0 x  109/L  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Maintain same dose of carfilzomib and 
dexamethasone.  
Neutrophil count between 
<0.5 x  109/L Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Hold carfilzomib and dexamethasone until 
neutrophil counts improve to ≥0.5 x  109/L and then re -start 
all study treatment at the same dose level.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 70 Internal  
Adverse event  Recommended action  
For each subsequent drop in 
neutrophil count to <1.0  x 109/L Neutrophil count between 
0.5-1.0 x  109/L  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Maintain same dose of carfilzomib and 
dexamethasone.  
Neutrophil count between 
<0.5 x  109/L Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya 
as defined in Section  8.2.4.1  and maintain same dose.  
Within cycle: Hold carfilzomib and dexamethasone until 
neutrophil counts improv e to ≥0.5 x  109/L and then re -start 
with reduction of carfilzomib by 1 dose level and same 
dose of dexamethasone.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Febrile neutropenia and/or 
neutropenic infection  Day 1 of cycle: Delay Day 1 administration until recoverya. and add G -CSF until 
ANC >1  x 109/L. 
Within cycle: Omit carfilzomib and dexamethasone (use of G -CSF can be considered) 
until ANC >1  x 109/L and fever/infection resolved. If no other AEs, then resume study 
treatment at the same dose. If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
If further episodes, same instructions, but then reduce by 1 dose level of carfilzomib.  
a A dose delay of up to 14 days between cycles is permitted in order for a patient to recover to their baseline status. Beyond 14 days, the 
patient must be permanently discontinued from the study (see Section  8.2.4.1 ). 
Dose adjustments for patients treated with carfilzomib and dexam ethasone combination in the 
case of non -hematological AEs are shown in Table  6. 
Table  6 - Guidelines for dose adjustments for non-hematologic adverse events –  
carfilzomib/dexamethasone combination   
Adverse event  Recommended action  
 Carfilzomiba Dexamethasonea 
Renal dysfunction  
CrCl ≥15 mL/mins  Same dose level of carfilzomib and dexamethasone.  
CrCl <15 mL/mins  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until CrCl returns to ≥15 mL/mins.b  
Within cycle : Hold carfilzomib and dexamethasone. When CrCl returns to ≥15 mL/mins, 
resume same dose level of carfilzomib and dexamethasone.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Liver function  
AST, ALT, or total bilirubin Grade 
≥3 Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until improvement to Grade 2 and then resume 
dexamethasone at the same dose level and reduce carfilzomib by one dose levelb. 
Within cycle : Dexamethasone at the same dose level, and omit carfilzomib until 
improvement to Grade 2 and th en resume carfilzomib with dose reduction by 1 dose level.  
Discontinue carfilzomib if recurrence despite 3 dose reductions.  
Grade 3 -4 infection without 
concomitant neutropenia  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until systemic treatment of infection completeb. 
Within cycle : Hold study treatment until systemic treatment of infection complete.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Resume carfilzomib and dexamethasone at the same dose level.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 71 Internal  
Adverse event  Recommended action  
 Carfilzomiba Dexamethasonea 
Peripheral neuropathy  
Grade 2 with pain or Grade 3  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until improvement to Grade 2 without pain and 
administer dexamethasone at the same dose level and reduce carfilzomib by 1  dose level.  
Within cycle : Dexamethasone at the same dose level and hold carfilzomib until 
improvement to Grade 2 without pain and reduce by 1 dose level.  
Discontinue carfilzomib if recurrence despite 3 dose reductions.  
Grade 4  Discontinue carfilzomib and hold dexamethasone. When improvement at least Grade 2 
with pain or Grade 3 resume dexamethasone at the same dose level.  
Cardiac toxicity  
Congestive heart failure  
or  
Decreased LVEF <40% or 
reduction LVEF to  <55% with 
drop greater than 20% from 
baseline  
 Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until returns to >40% or, if held due to a drop, 
to >55%, until returns to within 15% of baseline and resume dexamethasone at the same 
dose level, and carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level based on benefit risk 
assessmentb. 
Within cycle : Hold study treatment until returns to >40%, or until returns to within 15% of 
base line and resume dexamethasone at the same dose level and carfilzomib with dose 
reduced by 1 dose level based on benefit risk assessment.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Discontinue carfilzomib if recurrence despite 1 dose reduction.  
Myocardial infarction  Discontinue all study treatment.  
Pulmonary hypertension  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until recovery or return to baseline value and 
then resume dexamethasone at the same level, and based on benefit risk assessment to 
re-start carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level or to stop carfilzomibb. 
Within cycle : Hold study treatment until resolution or  return to baseline value and resume 
dexamethasone at the same dose level and carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level 
based on benefit risk assessment.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Discontinue study treatment if recurrence despite 1 dose reduc tion. 
Pneumonitis/interstitial disease (as ADRS were associated with these diagnoses)  
Including acute distress 
respiratory syndrome, acute 
respiratory failure  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until Grade ≤1, and based on benefit risk 
assessment to re -start carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level and same dose 
dexamethasone or to stop study treatment.  
Within cycle : Hold study treatment until Grade ≤1 and based on benefit risk assessment to 
re-start carfilzomib with dose reduced by  1 dose level and same dose of dexamethasone 
or to stop study treatment.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Discontinue study treatment if recurrence despite 1 dose reduction.  
Thrombotic microangiopathy  
Including thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura and 
hemolytic uremic syndrome  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until Grade ≤1, and based on benefit risk 
assessment to re -start carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level and same dose 
dexamethasone or to stop study tr eatment.  
Within cycle : Hold study treatment until Grade ≤1 and based on benefit risk assessment to 
re-start carfilzomib with dose reduced by 1 dose level and same dose of dexamethasone 
or to stop study treatment.  
If delay is >3 days, omit the dose.  
Discont inue study treatment if recurrence despite 1 dose reduction.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 72 Internal  
Adverse event  Recommended action  
 Carfilzomiba Dexamethasonea 
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES)  
Symptom can include headaches, 
altered mental status, seizures, 
visual loss and hypertension  Discontinue all study treatment.  
Edema excluding infusion associated reaction and excluding edema from cardiac origin  
Grade ≥3 (limiting function and 
unresponsive to therapy or 
anasarca)  Day 1 of cycle or within cycle : Maintain 
full dose carfilzomib as planned.  Diuretics as needed and decrease  
dexamethasone dose by 1 dose level; if 
edema persists despite above measures, 
decrease dose another dose level. If 
symptoms persist despite second reduction, 
dexamethasone permanently discontinued.  
Confusion or mood alteration not related to PRES  
Grade ≥2 (interfering with 
function ± daily activities)  Day 1 of cycle or within cycle : Maintain 
same dose level of carfilzomib as 
planned.  Hold dexamethasone until symptoms resolve. 
Restart with 1 dose level reduction. If 
symptoms persist despite above measures, 
dexamethasone permanently discontinued.  
Herpes zoster  Hold study treatment until lesions are dry, then resume all at the same dose level with 
appropriate prophylaxis.  
Gastrointestinal Dyspepsia, gastric or duodenal ulcer, gastritis  
Grade  1-2 (requiring medical 
management)  Day 1 of cycle or within cycle : Maintain 
same dose level of carfilzomib as 
planned.  Treat with H2 blockers, sucralfate, or 
omeprazole. If symptoms persist despite 
above measures, decrease dexamethasone 
dose by 1 dose level.  
Grade  ≥3 (requiring 
hospitalization or surgery)  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until recovery.c Then, restart same dose level 
of carfilzomib, and decrease dexamethasone by one dose level of current dose along with 
concurrent therapy with H2 blockers, sucralfate, or omeprazole.  
Within cy cle: Hold study treatment until symptoms adequately controlled. Then, restart 
same dose level of carfilzomib, and decrease dexamethasone by 1 dose level of current 
dose along with concurrent therapy with H2 blockers, sucralfate, or omeprazole.  
If delay >3 days, omit the dose.  
If symptoms persist despite above measures, dexamethasone permanently discontinued.  
Acute pancreatitis  Dexamethasone permanently discontinued.  
Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until recoveryc and re -start same dose level of 
carfilzomib.  
Within cycle : Hold all study treatment until recovery and re -start same dose level of 
carfilzomib.  
Hyperglycemia  
Grade ≥3  Day 1 of cycle or within cycle : Maintain 
same dose level of carfilzomib as 
planned.  Treatment with insulin or oral hypoglycemic 
agents as needed. If uncontrolled despite 
above measures, decrease dose by 1 dose 
level until levels are  satisfactory.  
Muscle weakness  
Grade ≥2 (symptomatic and 
interfering with function ± daily 
activities)  Day 1 of cycle or within cycle : Maintain 
same dose level of carfilzomib as 
planned.  Decrease dexamethasone by 1 dose level. If 
weakness persists despite above measures 
decrease dose by 1 level. If symptoms persist 
dexamethasone permanently discontinued.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 73 Internal  
Adverse event  Recommended action  
 Carfilzomiba Dexamethasonea 
Any other drug related 
non-hematologic Grade 3 -4 AE 
(please also refer to Section  8.2.9  
for handling of TLS)  Day 1 of cycle : Delay Day 1 administration until recoveryc and apply rules of dose 
modification described below.  
Within cycle :  
For dexamethasone attribution omit dose if the event has not recovered within 3 days. 
Resume with 1 dose level decrease when toxicity has resolved to Grade 2 or less or to 
baseline grade. Second episode, apply new dose reduction. Third episo de, 
dexamethasone discontinuation.  
For carfilzomib attribution, hold dose. Resume with 1 dose level decrease when toxicity 
has improved to Grade 2 or less or recovered to baseline grade. Second episode, apply 
new dose reduction. Third episode, carfilzomib discontinuation.  
a Patients may have carfilzomib and/or dexamethasone dose omission within a cycle if certain toxicities do not recover within 3  days 
following the day of planned infusion (see Section  8.2.4.1 ). 
b A dose delay of up to 14 days between cycles is permitted in order to recover to the patient´s baseline status. Beyond 14 day s, the patient 
must be permanently discontinued from the study (s ee Section  8.2.4.1 ). 
c See Section  10.6.1  for IAR management.  
8.2.5  Infusion reactions   
Patients should receive premedications prior to isatuximab and carfilzomib infusion as detailed in 
Section  8.2.2  to reduce the risk and severity of IARs commonly observed with mAbs and with 
carfilzomib. Infusion associated reactions (including, for example, NCI -CTCAE v4.03 terms 
‘infusion related reaction’, ‘anaphylactic reaction’, or  ‘cytokine release syndrome’) are defined as 
AEs related to product administration with onset typically within 24  hours from the start of the 
infusion. Possible increase in creatinine has been reported on the subsequent day of carfilzomib 
administration wh ich may be the clinical sequelae of rapid tumor lysis and/or cytokine release.  
Please refer to the current edition of the Investigator’s brochure for IARs manifestations reported 
in patients treated with isatuximab and refer to carfilzomib product informat ion for IARs 
manifestation reported with carfilzomib.  
In case of IAR while receiving or after isatuximab/carfilzomib administration, additional 
medication can be provided for symptom treatment as per Investigator judgment including 
diphenhydramine 25 mg IV  (or equivalent) and methylprednisolone 100  mg IV, IV fluids, 
vasopressors, oxygen, bronchodilators, and acetaminophen or paracetamol. These patients must be 
informed of the potential risk of recurrent IARs.  
Further treatment with isatuximab (subsequent in fusions) with the fixed rate:  
•  In case of Grade 2 IR during second infusion, infusion could be restarted at one -half of 
the initial infusion rate (25 mL/hour) when the IR improves to Grade ≤1. If symptoms do 
not recur after 30 minutes, the infusion rate ma y be increased by 50 mL/hour increments 
every 30 minutes, until the total volume is infused to maximum rate of 200 mL/hr.  
• In case of Grade 2 IR during third infusion and subsequent, infusion could be restarted at 
one-half (100 mL/hour) of the infusion rate  (100 mL/hour) when the IR improves to  
Grade ≤1. If symptoms do not recur after 30 minutes, the infusion rate may be increased 
by 50 mL/hour increments every 30 minutes, until the total volume is infused to maximum 
rate 200 mL/hr.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 74 Internal  
Patients with a Grade 3  or 4 IAR must have the causative study treatment permanently 
discontinued and appropriate supportive therapy should be administered. If there is no possibility 
to distinguish which drug induced the IAR, study treatment should be permanently discontinued.  
In case of Grade 3 or 4 IAR occurring during isatuximab infusion, carfilzomib infusions will be 
postponed by one day (eg, planned D1 will be done on D2 and planned D2 will be done on D3) 
assuming that the IAR improved to Grade ≤1.  
Grade ≥3 IARs must be re ported as AESIs (see Section  10.4.1.3 ). 
Table  7 - Managem ent of infusion associated reactions   
NCI-CTCAE v4.03 criteria definition  Intervention recommendation  
Mild (Grade 1)  
Infusion interruption or intervention not indicated  Continuation of isatuximab/carfilzomib infusion per the 
judgment of the Investigator following close direct monitoring 
of the patient’s clinical status. Isatuximab/carfilzomib infusion 
may be stopped at any time if deemed necessary. If stopped, 
IAR will be  classified as Grade 2 as per NCI -CTCAE.  
Moderate (Grade 2)  
Therapy or infusion interruption indicated but responds 
promptly to symptomatic treatment (eg, antihistamines, 
NSAIDs, narcotics, IV fluids); prophylactic medications 
indicated for ≤24 hours  Stop isatuximab/carfilzomib infusion. Give additional 
medication with IV diphenhydramine 25  mg IV (or equivalent,  
see Section  8.2.3 ) and/ or IV methylprednisolone 100  mg (or 
equivalent) as needed. Isatuximab/carfilzomib may be 
resumed only after patient recovery, with slower infusion rate 
for isatuximab and with close monitoring.  
Severe or life -threatening (Grade 3 or 4)  
Grade 3: Prolonged (eg, not rapidly responsive to 
symptomatic medication and/or brief interruption of infusion); 
recurrence of symptoms following initial improvement; 
hospitalization indicated for clinical sequelae  
Grade 4: Life -threatening consequences; urgent intervention 
indicated  Stop isatuximab/carfilzomib infusion. Give additional 
medication with diphenhydramine 25  mg IV (or equivalent,  
see Section  8.2.3 ) and/ or IV methylprednisolone 100  mg 
(or equivalent) and/or epinephrine as needed. If responsible 
drug has been clearly identified, perm anent discontinuation of 
this drug. If responsible drug cannot be clearly identified, 
definitive study treatment discontinuation.  
Note: The infusion should be completed within 16 hours from the end of infusion preparation or a new infusion should be prepared with the 
remaining dose to be administered the same day.  
8.2.6  Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome and progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy   
Patients should be monitored for any new or worsening neurologic, cognitive or behavioral signs 
and symptoms.  
If posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES ) or progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy (PML ) is suspected, study treatment should be interrupted and the 
Investigator should refer patient to a specialist and appropriate diagnosis testing should be 
initiated.  
If PRES or PML is confirmed, carfilzomib should be discontinued. The full dose of isatuximab 
and dexamethasone at the same dose level should be resumed if and when clinically appropriate. 
If the delay is more than 14 days, the study treatment shou ld be discontinued unless there is strong 
evidence of clinical benefit to justify continuation of dosing with isatuximab and dexamethasone. 
The Investigator must discuss the rationale with the sponsor before a decision is taken.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 75 Internal  
8.2.7  Hepatitis B virus infection   
An active hepatitis B (defined as a known positive HBsAg) is an exclusion criterion. Patients with 
resolved HBV infection (HBsAg negative and anti -HBc and/or anti -HBs positive) are allowed to 
be enrolled. HBV reactivation was noted in MM patients with reso lved HBV infection who are 
treated with immunosuppressive chemotherapy and either novel agents. Following identification 
of risk of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection reactivation among patients treated with carfilzomib 
reported in September  2019, HBV serol ogy (HBsAg , hepatitis B core antibody [anti -HBc] and 
hepatitis B surface antibody [anti -HBs]) should be done once for patients still receiving 
carfilzomib with unknown HBV status. Serology will be repeated if clinically indicated. Patients 
with HBsAg positive and/or anti -HBc antibody positive should also have HBV DNA  testing by 
polymerase chain reaction.  
To consider consulting a specialist for patients who test positive for HBV during study treatment 
with carfilzomib.  
For patients who are carriers of HBV (HBsAg negative and anti -HBc positive [ 13]), prophylaxis 
with antivirals should be considered. These patients should be closely monitored for signs and 
symptoms of active HBV infection throughout and follo wing the end of treatment with 
carfilzomib (up to 3  months or initiation of further anticancer therapy).  
Carfilzomib should be withheld for patients with active HBV infection until infection is 
adequately controlled. The safety of resuming carfilzomib aft er HBV reactivation is adequately 
controlled is not known.  
Patients with HBV positive serology should be monitored throughout the study treatment and in 
follow -up up to 3  months or initiation of further anticancer therapy.  
8.2.8  Cardiac failure   
Death due to cardiac arrest has occurred within a day of carfilzomib administration. New onset or 
worsening of pre -existing CHF with decreased left ventricular function or myocardial ischemia 
has occurred following administration of carfilzomib. Cardiac failure events (eg, cardiac failure 
congestive, pulmonary edema, and ejection fraction decreased) were reported in 7% of patients. 
Close monitoring should therefore be done for cardiac complicatio ns, which should be managed 
promptly.  
Any patients with symptoms of CHF or any other suspected acute cardiac event, whether or not 
drug related, must have study treatment held until resolution. After the event has resolved or 
returned to baseline, treatmen t may continue at a reduced carfilzomib dose. In case of recurrence 
occurs despite 1 dose level reduction of carfilzomib, after the event has resolved or returned to 
baseline, carfilzomib will be discontinued and the full dose of isatuximab and dexamethaso ne at 
the same level dose can be continued. Treatment may continue at a reduced carfilzomib dose.  
In the case of any sign of persistent CHF or LV dysfunction as described in Table  4 and Table  5, 
or if there is no resolution of CHF after 2 weeks, study treatment is to be discontinued unless there 
is strong evidence of clinical benefit to justify continuation of dosing with isatuximab and 
dexamethasone. The Investigator must discuss the rationale with the sponsor before a decision is 
taken.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 76 Internal  
8.2.9  Tumor Lysis syndrome   
Tumor lysis syndrome may occur and is a life threatening event. Hydration prior carfilzomib is 
required for all patients prior D1 and D2 infusions of Cycle 1 and is left to Investigator judgment 
for further cycles.  
The patients at greatest risk of TLS  are those with high tumor burden prior to treatment. These 
patients should be monitored closely and appropriate precautions should be taken (such as use of 
prophylacti c uric acid lowering agents [eg, allopurinol or rasburicase], regular measurement of 
electrolytes).  
Tumor lysis syndrome has to be managed according to site usual practice. Table  8 provides some 
parameters to be checked in case of TLS suspicion and high level recommendations for TLS 
management. Abnormalities listed in Table  8 do not support exclusively TLS diagnosis and any 
differential diagnosis also needs to be assessed if appropriate.  
After recovery, study treatment can be re -administered as planned at the same do se.  
Table  8 - Management of tumor lysis syndrome   
TLS main possible diagnosis criteria  Recommended action  
Laboratory TLS:  ≥2 simultaneous abnormalities within 3 days prior to and up to 
7 days after treatment start:  
• Uric acid >8  mg/dL (>475.8  µ mol/L)  
• Potassium >6.0  mmol/L  
• Phosphorus >4.5  mg/dL (>1.5  mmol/L)  
• Corrected calcium <7.0  mg/dL (<1.75  mmol/L), ionized calcium 
<1.12  mg/dL (<0.3mmol/L)a  Omit study treatment until all serum 
chemistries have resolved.  
Ensure adequate hydration, correct 
laboratory abnormalities, fluid overload, 
uric acid lowering agents (such as 
rasburicase), electrolyte, or acid -base 
deviation.  
Monitor TLS complications including renal 
functions.  
Reinstitute study treatment at full dose 
after resolution.  Clinical TLS:  Laboratory TLS in addition to 1 of the following complications:  
• Acute kidney injury: Increase in the serum creatinine level of 0.3  mg/dL 
(26.5 µ mol/L) or the presence of oliguria, defined as an average urine 
output of <0.5  mL/kg/hour for 6 hours.  
• Seizures , cardiac dysrhythmia, neuromuscular irritability (tetany, 
paresthesias, muscle twitching, carpopedal spasm, Trousseau’s sign, 
Chvostek’s sign, laryngospasm, bronchospasm), hypotension, or heart 
failure probably or definitely caused by hypocalcemia.  
• Dysrhy thmias probably or definitely caused by hyperkalemia.  
a The corrected calcium level in milligrams per deciliter = measured calcium level in milligrams per deciliter + 0.8  x (4-albumin in grams per 
deciliter).  
Adapted from Howard et al ( 14). 
8.2.10  Other adverse drug reactions   
For Grade ≥3 ADRs except fatigue, local reaction, fluid retention, anemia, and other ADRs that 
are uncomfortable but do not cause serious morbidity, study treatment should be he ld for a 
maximum of 2 weeks from the planned date of next cycle until resolution to Grade ≤1, then 
reinstituted, if medically appropriate. A reduction of subsequent doses will be left to the 
Investigator’s judgment.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 77 Internal  
8.3 BLINDING PROCEDURES   
During the trial, administration of isatuximab is to be open -label, and no attempt will be made to 
blind administration.  
Despite the open -label administration of isatuximab, assessment of outcomes will be based on the 
review of the data objectively collected for disease evaluation (radiological assessment and central 
laboratory disease assessments) by IRC blinded to study tr eatment arms.  
Blinding rules for the sponsor study team will be detailed in a separate document.  
8.4 METHOD OF ASSIGNING PATIENTS TO TREATMENT GROUP   
All eligible patients will be r andomly assigned to a treatment group (either IKd arm or Kd arm) in 
a 3:2 ratio using an IRT. Patient assignment to a treatment group will be performed according to a 
stratified randomization list according to number of prior lines 1 vs. >1 and R -ISS I or II versus 
III versus not classified (inconclusive FISH unless stage can be determined on LDH, albumin, and 
β2 microglobulin only).  
After each patient has completed the necessary screening visit procedures, the corresponding 
baseline eCRFs have been complet ed and the patient is deemed eligible for study entry by the 
Investigator or designee based on the laboratory evaluations as defined in the study flow chart, the 
study site will contact the IRT.  
Screen failure patients can be re -screened and all screen pro cedures will have to be re -started for 
these patients.  
The randomization strata will be used by the IRT to assign the patient to the IKd or Kd arm 
according to the predefined randomization schedule. Details of the IRT procedure will be 
provided in the IRT  Site Manual.  
WARNING: Randomization will be blocked if study treatment is not available at site level. A 
minimum of time will be required between screening registration call and study treatment delivery 
at site level. Please consider this time between scr eening call and randomization call, which 
indicated in the IRT manual.  
Study treatment should be initiated within 3 working days after randomization.  
8.5 INVESTIGATIONAL MEDICINAL PRODUCT PACKAGING AND LABELING   
8.5.1  Isatuximab   
Isatuximab is packaged in 30 mL glass vials fitted with elastomeric closure.  
Packaging is in accordance with the administration schedule. The content of the labeling is in 
accordance with the local regulatory specifications and requirements.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 78 Internal  
8.5.2  Carfilzomib   
Please refer to package insert for further details for formula tion and handling purposes.  
For carfilzomib supplied by the Sponsor, the content of the labeling is in accordance with the 
local regulatory specifications and requirements.  
8.5.3  Dexamethasone IV/PO   
Please refer to package insert for further details for formulation and handling purposes.  
For dexamethasone supplied by the Sponsor, the content of the labeling is in accordance with the 
local regulatory specifications and requirements.  
8.6 STORAGE CONDITIONS AND SHELF LIFE   
8.6.1  Isatuximab   
Investigators or other authorized persons (eg, Pharmacist s) are responsible for storing isatuximab 
in a secure and safe place with restricted access in accordance with local regulations, labeling 
specifications, policies, and procedures.  
Control of isatuximab storage conditions, especially control of temperatur e (eg, refrigerated 
storage), and information on in -use stability and instructions for handling the Sanofi compound 
should be managed according to the rules provided by the Sponsor.  
Isatuximab is to be stored at +2°C to +8°C (36°F to 46°F). All vials must be kept in their box until 
use. 
No protection from light is required for storage in the infusion bags.  
Details of the storage conditions for the diluted solution are provided in the Pharmacy Manual.  
8.6.2  Carfilzomib   
Please refer to package insert for storage conditions.  
8.6.3  Dexamethasone IV/PO   
Please refer to package insert for storage conditions.  
8.7 RESPONSIBILITIES   
The Investigator, the hospital pharmacist, or other personnel allowed to store and dispense the 
study treatment will be re sponsible for ensuring that the study treatment used in the clinical trial is 
securely maintained as specified by the Sponsor and in accordance with applicable regulatory 
requirements.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 79 Internal  
All study treatment will be dispensed in accordance with the Investigat or's prescription and it is 
the Investigator's responsibility to ensure that an accurate record of study treatment issued and 
returned is maintained.  
Any quality issue noticed with the receipt or use of a study treatment (deficiency in condition, 
appearanc e, pertaining documentation, labeling, expiration date, etc.) must be promptly notified to 
the Sponsor. Some deficiencies may be recorded through a complaint procedure  
(see Section  10.4.5 ). 
A potential defect in the quality of study treatment may be subject to initiation of a recall 
procedure by the Sponsor. In this case, the Investiga tor will be responsible for promptly 
addressing any request made by the Sponsor, in order to recall the study treatment and eliminate 
potential hazards.  
Under no circumstances will the Investigator supply study treatment to a third party (except for 
DTP sh ipment, for which a courier company has been approved by the Sponsor), allow the study 
treatment to be used other than as directed by this clinical trial protocol, or dispose of study 
treatment in any other manner.  
8.7.1  Treatment accountability and compliance   
Administration of the study treatment will be supervised by the Investigator or Subinvestigator.  
The person responsible for dispensing study treatment is required to maintain adeq uate records of 
the study treatment. These records (eg, drug movement form) include the date the study treatment 
is received from the Sponsor, dispensed for patient and destroyed or returned to the Sponsor. 
The packaging batch number (PR  Nr) on the vial mu st be recorded on the drug accountability 
form.  
The person responsible for study treatment administration to the patient will record precisely the 
date and the time of the study treatment administration to the patient.  
For dexamethasone PO, a patient diary  will be used to document all oral dexamethasone (if not 
administered at the site level).  
8.7.2  Return and/or destruction of treatments   
Partially -used and used study treatment will be destroyed at the study site according to the 
standard practices of the site after an accurate accountability has been performed and signed by 
the Investigator (or the Pharmacist). A detailed treatment log form of the destroyed study 
treatment will be estab lished with the Investigator (or the Pharmacist) and countersigned by the 
Investigator and the Monitoring Team.  
The Investigator must not destroy the unused study treatment unless Sanofi provides written 
authorization.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 80 Internal  
8.8 CONCOMITANT MEDICATION   
A concomitant medication is any treatment received by the patient concomitantly to any study 
treatment(s).  
All treatments being taken by the patient 21 days prior to randomization, at any time  during the 
treatment period and up to 30 days after the last dose are regarded as prior and concomitant 
treatments respectively, and will be reported on the appropriate pages of the eCRF.  
Concomitant medications are allowed if not listed in prohibited med ications and if these are 
considered necessary for the patient's welfare and are unlikely to interfere with the investigational 
product. They may be given at the discretion of the Investigator and recorded in the eCRF.  
Antiviral prophylaxis, antibacterial prophylaxis and thromboprophylaxis will be done according 
to site/Investigator practice and local labelling of carfilzomib. For patients who are HBV carriers, 
prophylaxis with antivirals should be considered.  
Co-treatment of dexamethasone with CYP3A inhibitors should be avoided unless the benefit 
outweighs the increased risk of systemic corticosteroid side -effects, in which case patients should 
be monitored for systemic corticosteroid side -effects (please refer to dexamethason e package 
insert).  
8.8.1  G-CSF prophylaxis   
Prophylactic administration of G -CSF in a patient who is experiencing recurrent difficulties with 
neutropenia, or therapeutic use in patients  with serious neutropenic complications (such as tissue 
infection, sepsis syndrome, or fungal infection) may be considered at the Investigator’s discretion, 
consistent with American Society of Clinical Oncology guidelines (2006) in order to decrease the 
risk of neutropenia specially in patients with baseline extensive BM involvement and/or low 
neutrophil count.  
8.8.2  Prohibited concomitant therapy   
• Concurrent treatment with any other ant i-myeloma therapy not specified in the protocol, 
including immunotherapy, hormonal therapy, targeted therapy, biological therapies, other 
investigational drug, or curative radiotherapy. However, palliative radiotherapy may be 
given to control pain. The irr adiated area should be as small as possible and should never 
involve more than 20% of the BM in any given 3 -week period. In all such cases, the 
possibility of tumor progression should be ruled out by physical, biochemical, and 
radiological assessments of t he tumor. The irradiated area cannot be used as a parameter 
for response assessment.  
• Concomitant systemic corticosteroids, other than as part of the protocol -specified 
therapeutic regimen or for treatment of hypersensitivity reaction, are prohibited. 
Addit ional glucocorticoids, antihistamines, and analgesics for the management of IAR are 
permitted. Inhaled glucocorticosteroids may be used whenever indicated.  
• Live vaccines should be avoided; however, given the increased risk of infection, routine 
vaccination s are recommended for the patients and their contacts. Prophylactic vaccination 
is recommended for influenza A and B virus, pneumococci, and hemophilus influenza.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 81 Internal  
9 ASSESSMENT OF INVESTIGATIONAL MEDICINAL PRODUCT   
9.1 PRIMARY ENDPOINT   
The primary endpoint is PFS.  
Progression free survival is defined as the time from the date of randomization to the date of firs t 
documentation of PD (as determined by the IRC) or the date of death from any cause, whichever 
comes first. Response will be determined according to IMWG criteria. Progression based on 
paraprotein will be confirmed based on 2 consecutive assessments.  
The following disease assessment procedures will be performed at screening (for eligibility), at 
Cycle 1 Day 1 prior to study treatment administration (baseline for response assessment), Day  1 
of every cycle during treatment up to progression, EOT, and for pat ients who discontinue study 
treatment without PD, every month during follow -up until PD (even patients who would initiate 
further anti -myeloma therapy without PD):  
• M protein quantification (serum and 24 -hour urine, protein immunoelectrophoresis, and 
IF) (c entral laboratory). After Cycle 1 Day 1, IF will be done in case of undetectable M 
protein (serum and urine).  
• Serum free light chains quantification (central laboratory).  
• Quantitative immunoglobulins (central laboratory).  
• Bone marrow aspiration (or biopsy as clinically indicated) at baseline (bone marrow 
disease involvement, FISH, and MRD), and then in case of VGPR or better (local 
laboratory for bone marrow disease involvement and central laboratory will be done to 
assess MRD).  
• Bone disease assessment:  
- Skeletal survey or low -dose whole body computed tomography (CT ) scan at baseline, 
then once a year, and anytime during the study if clinically indicated.  
• Extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) assessment (i ncluding bone plasmacytoma):  
- If known extramedullary disease at baseline, CT scan or magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI ) is to be done at baseline, repeated every 12 weeks (±1 week) until PD (even for 
patients who would initiate further anti -myeloma therapy without PD), and if clinically 
indicated.  
- If suspected extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) at baseline, CT scan or MRI is to 
be done at baseline and in case plasmacytoma is confirmed, CT scan o r MRI is to be 
repeated every 12  weeks (±1 week) until PD (even for patients who would initiate 
further anti -myeloma therapy without PD), and if clinically indicated.  
- At any time during study treatment in case of suspicion of progression of existing 
plasma cytoma or if clinically indicated in a patient with no previous positive image for 
extramedullary disease.  
Note: For bone lesion assessment and extramedullary disease, the same modality 
(skeletal  survey or low -dose whole -body CT scan; CT scan or MRI) should be used 
throughout the study for each individual patient. All imaging must be sent for central 
review.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 82 Internal  
Central labs will be used for investigator’s assessment of response and continuation of treatment 
decisions. Response/progression will be determin ed according to IMWG criteria ( Appendix F ). 
Response/progression based on paraprotein will be confirmed based on 2 consecutive 
assessments. A blinded IRC will evaluate disease response at each cycle including progression 
and response status of each patient per IMWG criteria ( Appendix F ) and as described in the IRC 
Charter. The IRC assessment of response will be performed using results from central laboratory, 
central assessment of radiological images and, if any, local bone marrow assessment (plasma cell 
infiltration). Furth er details on the handling of missing disease assessments and the IRC process 
for determining the date of disease progression and overall objective response are described in the 
IRC Charter and/or the statistical analysis plan (SAP ). 
Progressive disease (IMWG criteria) is defined for patients with measurable serum and/or urine 
M protein as any one of the following (biological criteria in 2 consecutive assessments)::  
• Increase of ≥25% in Serum M -component from nadir (the absolute increase must be 
≥0.5 g/dL); serum M component increases ≥1 g/dL in 2  consecutive assessments are 
sufficient to define relapse if starting M component is ≥5  g/dL; and/or  
• Increase of ≥25% in Urine M -component from nadir (the  absolute increase must be 
≥200  mg/24 hour); and/or  
• Definite development of new bone lesions or soft tissue extramedullary disease or increase 
≥50% from nadir in the sum of perpendicular diameters of existing soft tissue 
extramedullary disease lesions if >1 lesion or ≥50% increase in the longest diameter of a 
previous soft tissue extramedullary disease lesion >1 cm in short axis.  
Clinical deterioration could be considered progression in the primary analysis of PFS if IRC 
considers clinical data reported in  the CRF supports clinical progression. In case of 
hypercalcemia, a full disease assessment will be performed in order to identify any measurable 
parameter of myeloma progression (eg, serum and urine M protein, lytic lesions assessment and 
plasmacytoma ass essment) and potential alternative causes of hypercalcemia should be ruled out.  
Progression cannot  be diagnosed on FLC progression only.  
Patients with only FLC measurable disease are not allowed in the protocol.  
In case of both serum and urine M protein b ecomes below level of eligibility on efficacy 
laboratory performed on Cycle 1 Day 1, please refer to Appendix F  for assessment of progression 
and o verall response.  
9.2 SECONDARY ENDPOINTS   
9.2.1  Key secondary efficacy endpoints   
The key secondary efficacy endpoints are:  
• ORR : Best overall response per patient will be assessed in order to determine ORR, 
defined as the proportion of patients with stringen t complete response (sCR ), CR, VGPR, 
and PR as best overall response as assessed by the IRC using the IMWG response criteria. 
Bone marrow biopsy can be done for sCR assessment as per investigat or decision.  
• Rate of VGPR or better:  Defined as the proportion of patients with sCR, CR, and VGPR.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 83 Internal  
• Rate of VGPR or better with MRD negativity ( 15): Defined as the proportion of 
patients for whom MRD assessed by sequencing is negative at any time after first dose of 
study treatment. Minimal residual disease will be assessed centrally by next -generation 
sequencing in BM samples from patients who achieve VGPR or better, to determine the 
depth of response at the molecular level. Threshold for negativity will be at least 10-5. 
Bone marrow aspirates will be collected at screening and at the time of VGPR or better 
confirmation. If the patient presents with VGPR or better but is determined MRD positive, 
another BM sample will be collected 3 months (3  cycles) later, in order to identify late 
negativity. A third sample may be collected after another 3  months, if the patient remains 
MRD positive and is stil l being treated. No more than 3  on-treatment BM samples are to 
be obtained unless a patient achieves CR after a third BM sample MRD positive 
performed during VGPR. In  this case no more than 3 additional BM samples will be 
collected. Therefore, a maximum of  6 BMA could be performed by patient (no more than 
3 per category of response). However, because BMA is invasive procedure, the following 
guidance is given in the purpose to limit as much as possible the number of BMA.  
For patients with CR without previous  documentation of VGPR , first bone marrow for 
MRD assessment will be collected at time of confirmation of CR (ie, at the second time 
point showing CR) If patient is determined MRD positive, another BM sample will be 
collected 3 months (3 cycles) later, in order to identify late negativity. A third sample may 
be collected after another 3 months if the patient remains MRD positive and is still being 
treated.  
For patients with VGPR :  
- First bone marrow will be collected when VGPR is confirmed at the second time  point 
or at a later time point as per investigator judgement based on kinetic of M protein 
decrease and/or if a plateau phase is reached (plateau is defined as variation less than 
20% over 12 weeks [ 16]).  
- If MRD is positive on first BMA, a second BMA will be collected 3 months later 
(3 cycles) to identify late negativity.  
- In case of MRD is still positive on second BMA made while patient is in VGPR, the 
timing to perform the third BMA can be postponed until  CR achievement.  
- In case of the patient becomes CR and patient was MRD positive on the last BMA 
performed during VGPR, a BMA will be done for MRD assessment at time of 
confirmation of CR.   
- After the first BMA during CR is done and in case patient was MRD  positive on this 
BMA, the additional BMA planned by the protocol can be discussed with the patient.  
• CR rate:  Defined as the proportion of patients with sCR and CR. Patients with 
demonstrated isatuximab interference will be considered in the BOR category 
corresponding to the M protein assessment obtained without interference, when the 
antibody -capture interference assay will be available.  
• OS: Defined as the time from the date of randomization to death from any cause.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 84 Internal  
9.2.2  Other secondary efficacy endpoints   
Other secondary efficacy endpoints will be evaluated as follows:  
• DOR: Defined as the time from the date of the first IRC determined response for patients 
achieving PR or better to the date of first documented PD determined by IRC or death, 
whichever happens first.  
• TTP:  Defined as time from randomization to the date of f irst documentation of PD 
(as determined by the IRC).  
• PFS2:  Defined as time from the date of randomization to the date of first documentation 
of PD (as assessed by investigator) after initiation of further anti -myeloma treatment or 
death from any cause, whi chever happens first.  
• Time to first response: Defined as the time from randomization to the date of first IRC 
determined response (PR or better) that is subsequently confirmed.  
• Time to best response: Defined as the time from randomization to the date of fi rst 
occurrence of IRC determined best overall response (PR or better) that is subsequently 
confirmed.  
9.2.3  Safety endpoints   
Safety in terms of TEAEs/AEs/SAEs, IARs, ECOG PS, laborator y parameters, vital signs, and 
findings from physical examination will be assessed through the study and will be reported in the 
eCRF.  
Adverse event data will be collected throughout the study . Treatment -emergent AEs are defined 
as AEs that develop, worsen  (according to the Investigator opinion), or become serious during the 
treatment period. The treatment period is defined as the time from first dose of study treatment up 
to 30 days after last dose of study treatment. Adverse events and laboratory paramete rs will be 
graded using NCI -CTCAE v4.03 ( Appendix E ). 
Full details of safety reporting and AE monitoring procedures are provided in Section  10.4 and 
Section  10.7. 
9.2.4  Patient -reported outcomes (HRQL/health economic variab les/other endpoints)   
Patient -reported outcome measures to be included are the European Organization for Research 
and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC ) Quality of Life questionnaire with 30 questions (QLQ -C30), 
the EORTC myeloma module with 20 items (QLQ -MY20 ), and the European Quality of Life 
Group measure with 5 dimensions and 5 levels per dimension (EQ -5D-5L). Each questionnaire is 
described in this section and presented in Appendix I  (QLQ -C30), Appendix J  (QLQ -MY20), and 
Appendix K  (EQ-5D-5L). 
All 3 questionnaires have been designed for self -completion. All PROs are in electronic form 
(ePROs ) and are to be completed at the site by the patient using  the study tablet provided. To 
minimize any bias, patients will fill out the ePROs before clinician assessments and discussion of 
their clinical condition, treatment plan, AEs, and any other related topics that could influence 
patient’s perception and feel ings prior to responding to the questions.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 85 Internal  
Timing of Assessments  
Cycle 1 Day 1 will serve as the baseline assessment for all patients. While on treatment, ePROs 
are to be completed prior to treatment on Day 1 of every cycle, at the EOT visit and at 90  ±5 days 
after last study treatment administration. The time estimated to complete the EORTC QLQ -C30 
and the EORTC QLQ -MY20 together is approximately 10 to 15 minutes. The time estimated to 
complete the EQ -5D-5L is approximately 5 to 10 minutes.  
Since the patie nts are to complete ePRO questionnaires on their own, there will be 20 minutes 
time allocated for training patients on ePRO technology at Cycle 1 Day 1 visit. Meanwhile, 
assistance will be provided if a patient needs longer time to learn or have training q uestions  
(eg, a refresher) during consequent cycles. For the ePRO data it is mandatory that a key person 
(eg, research nurse) at each center be responsible for ePRO data collection, in order to optimize 
compliance of the patient and to ensure completeness  of the data.  
The planned statistical analysis of the 3 ePROs will be detailed in the SAP.  
9.2.4.1  EORTC QLQ -C30  
The EORTC QLQ -C30 is a cancer -specific instrument that contains 30 items and provides a 
multidimensional assessment of HRQL ( 17, 18, 19). The validity and reliability of the EORTC 
QLQ -C30 has been establis hed in various types of cancers ( 20). 
The EORTC QLQ -C30 provides a comprehensive assessment of the principal HRQL dimensions 
identified as re levant by cancer patients (physical functioning, emotional functioning, cognitive 
functioning, role functioning, social functioning, global HRQL, and impact of symptoms and of 
toxicities). The EORTC QLQ -C30 is one of the standard instruments used in oncolo gy for the 
evaluation of new cancer therapies.  
The QLQ -C30 is composed of 3 domains with multi -item scales. These include:  
• Global health status (GHS )/quality of life (2 items).  
• Functional scales:  
- Physical functioning (5 items).  
- Role functioning (2 items).  
- Emotional functioning (4 items).  
- Cognitive functioning (2 items).  
- Social functioning (2 item s). 
• Symptom scales/items:  
- Fatigue (3 items).  
- Nausea and vomiting (2 items).  
- Pain (2 items).  
- Dyspnea; Insomnia; Appetite loss; Constipation; Diarrhea; Financial impact (item 
each).  
Scoring is based on 4 -point Likert scales and 7 -point numerical rating scales. All of the scales and 
single -item measures range in score from 0 to 100. A higher score for a functional scale/GHS 
represents a higher/healthy level of HRQL, whereas a higher score for symptoms/ items represents 
a higher level of symptomatology/pro blems. The recall period for this instrument is 1 week.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 86 Internal  
9.2.4.2  EORTC QLQ -MY20   
The EORTC QLQ -MY20 is to be used in conjunction with the EORTC QLQ -C30 to assess 
symptoms and side effects due to the treatment or the disease which impact HRQL in patients 
with MM ( 21, 22). It contains 20 items, 4 independent subscales covering 2 functional domains:   
• Symptom scales:  
- Disease symptoms (6 items).  
- Side-effects of treatment (10 items).  
• Function scale:  
- Future perspective (3 items).  
- Body image (1 item).  
Scores are based on the 4 -point Likert scale ranging from "Not at all" to "Very much", ranging by 
items from 0 to 100. Higher scores for Disease Symptoms and Side Effects of Treatment indicate 
more symptoms and side effects and lower HRQL, whereas a high score for Future Perspective 
and Body Image represents better outcomes.  
These are reliable and valid measures of HRQL in cancer patients and the 2 EORTC instruments 
(QLQ -C30 and QLQ -MY20) together (50 items) take appr oximately 15 minutes on average to 
administer. The instruments have been validated and used in many countries.  
9.2.4.3  EQ-5D-5L  
The EQ -5D-5L is a standardized measure of health status th at provides a simple, generic measure 
of health utility, and consists of 2 sections: descriptive and visual analog scale (VAS ). 
The descriptive system consists of 5 dimensions:  
• Mobility.  
• Self-care.  
• Usual activities.  
• Pain/discomfort.  
• Anxiety/Depression.  
Each dimension has 5 levels: no problems, slight problems, moderate problems, severe problems, 
and extreme problems. Once the data have been collected and a database created, a scoring 
function can be us ed to assign a value (ie, EQ -5D™ index score) to self -reported health states 
from a set of population -based preference weights. For the US general population, the possible 
EQ-5D™ index scores range from -0.11 (ie, 33333) to 1.0 (ie, 11111) on a scale where  
0.0 = death and 1.0 = perfect health.  
The VAS records the respondent’s self -rated health on a 20 cm vertical VAS with endpoints 
labelled ‘the best health you can imagine’ and ‘the worst health you can imagine’, anchored from 
0 to 100 respectively. This in formation can be used as a quantitative measure of health as judged 
by the individual respondents.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 87 Internal  
The instrument is designed for self -completion by patients. Response options are measured with a 
5-point Likert scale with higher scores indicate better HRQL . The EQ -5D™ produces 3 types of 
data for each respondent:  
• A profile indicating the extent of problems on each of the 5 dimensions represented by a 
5-digit descriptor  
• A population preference weighted -health index score based on the descriptive system  
• A self -reported assessment of health status based on the EQ -VAS  
9.2.5  Pharmacokinetics   
Pharmacokinetic evaluation for isatuximab will be performed in all patients in the IKd arm . Blood 
samples will be collected from all patients treated with isatuximab up to Cycle 10 using a sparse 
sampling strategy in order to assess the PK profile of isatuximab using population PK approach.  
In a subset of approximately 12 patients from the IKd  arm, blood samples will be collected at 
selected time points at Cycle 1 Day 15 for carfilzomib PK evaluation. Non evaluable patients will 
be replaced (see Section  11.3.3  for definition of evaluable patient).  
9.2.5.1  Sampling time   
The sampling times for blood collecti on can be found in the PK Flow Chart ( Section  1.3). 
• It is of utmost importance to  collect all blood samples at the specified times and according 
to the specifications.  
• Samples not collected, missed or lost, for any reason should be recorded.  
• Actual days and times of blood collection should be recorded in the eCRF.  
• The days and the ti mes of drug administration should also be precisely recorded.  
9.2.5.2  Pharmacokinetics handling procedure   
Special procedures for collection, storage, and shipment will be provided in a separate laboratory 
manual.  
9.2.5.3  Bioanalytical method   
The bioanalytical method is summarized in Table  9. The sites of bioanalyses will be specified in 
the PK manual.  
Table  9 - Bioanalytical methods for isatuximab and carfil zomib pharmacokinetic analysis   
Analyte  Isatuximab  Carfilzomib  
Matrix  Plasma  Plasma  
Analytical technique  ELISA  LC-MS/MS  
Assay volume  100 μL  250 μL  
Lower limit of quantification  0.500 ng/mL  0.250 ng/mL  
Site of bioanalysis  Refer to PK manual  Refer to PK manual  
Elisa: enzyme linked immunosorbant assay, LC -MS/MS: liquid chromatography mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectometry  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 88 Internal  
9.2.5.4  Pharmacokinetics parameters   
9.2.5.4.1  Non-compartmental analysis for carfilzomib   
The following PK parameters will be calculated with PKDMS software (Pharsight) using 
non-compartmental methods from plasma of carfilzomib concentrations. The parameters will 
inclu de, but may not be limited to, the following:  
Table  10 - List of pharmacokinetic parameters and definitions   
Parameters  Definition  
Ceoi Concentration observed at the end of IV infusion  
Cmax Maximum concentration observed after the first infusion  
tmax Time to reach C max 
Clast Last concentration observed above the lower limit of quantification  
tlast Time of C last 
Ctrough Plasma concentration observed just before treatment administration during repeated dosing  
AUC last Area under the plasma concentration versus time curve calculated using the trapezoidal method from time 0 
to t last 
AUC  Area under the plasma concentration versus time curve extrapolated to infinity according to the following 
equation : AUC= AUC last + C last/λz 
9.2.5.4.2  Population approach for isatuximab   
Blood concentrations of isatuximab will be used for population PK analysis by non -linear mixed 
effects modeling. Additional details of the analysis plan and the results will be provided in a 
separate document. This analysis will involve an estimation of inter -patient PK variability, the 
population PK parameters estimates, and the assessments of carfilzomib and pathophysiologic 
covariate effects on CL and possibly on volume if war ranted. Empirical Bayesian estimation of 
individual parameters and of individual exposure (AUCs, C max and trough) will also be performed. 
The PK estimates will then be investigated as prognostic factors for clinical outcome, including 
safety and efficacy e ndpoints, if possible.  
9.2.6  Immunogenicity   
Human ADA to isatuximab will be assessed for the IKd patients only on Day 1 prior to 
isatuximab administration from Cycle 1 to Cycle 10. Blo od samples will be collected for ADA 
detection according to the Flow Charts (see Section  1.2 and Section  1.3). 
It is of utmost importance to collect all blood samples at the specified times and according to the 
specifications.  
Samples missed or lost, for any reason should be recorded. Actual times of blood collection 
should be recorded in the eCRF. The days of sampling and times of drug administration shou ld 
also be precisely recorded.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 89 Internal  
Special procedures for collection, storage, and shipment will be provided in a separate laboratory 
manual.  
Bioanalytical method used for immunogenicity assessment is summarized in Table  11. 
Table  11 - Bioanalytical method for isatuximab immune response assessment   
Analyte  Isatuximab  
Matrix  Plasma  
Analytical technique  Polyethylene glycol precipitation and acid dissociation  method (PandA)  
Assay volume  100 μL  
Lower limit of detection  Not applicable  
Site of bioanalysis  Refer to PK manual  
A sample will be considered as ADA positive if ADA is detected ie, sample generates an assay 
signal equal to or greater than the cut -point in the screening assay and is tested positive in the 
confirmatory assay.  
A sample will be considered as ADA inconclusive if ADAs are n ot detected but drug is present in 
the same sample at a level that can interfere in the ADA detection method then the negative ADA 
result cannot be incontrovertibly confirmed.  
In case of positivity or inconclusive sample at Cycle 10, additional assessment of ADA will be 
performed 3 months later. No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is 
positive.  
If isatuximab is stopped prior to carfilzomib and dexamethasone and prior to Cycle 10 and last 
ADA is positive or inconclusive, one  additional sampling time for ADA evaluation will be 
collected 3 months later. No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is 
positive. For patients with less than 10 cycles at the cut -off date, the ADA sample collection will 
be stopped fro m the cut -off date. If last ADA before the final PFS analysis cut -off date is positive, 
one additional sampling time for ADA evaluation should be collected 3 months later. No further 
ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is positive.  
The samplin g times for ADA detection of isatuximab can be modified based on the updated 
knowledge of isatuximab immunogenicity.  
Definitions:  
• Pre-existing ADA: Defined as ADA that are present in samples drawn during the 
pre-treatment period (ie, before the first isat uximab administration).  
• Treatment -induced ADA: Defined as ADA that developed at any time during the ADA 
on-study observation period in patients without pre -existing ADA (including patients 
without pre -treatment samples).  
• Treatment boosted ADA: Defined as p re-existing ADA with an increase in titer during the 
ADA on -study observation period.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 90 Internal  
• Transien t ADA response:  
- Treatment -induced ADA detected only at 1 sampling time point during the treatment 
or follow -up observation period (excluding the last sampling tim e point, which ought 
to be considered persistent unless shown to be undetectable at a later time) or  
- Treatment -induced ADA detected at 2 or more sampling time points during the 
treatment (including follow -up period if any), where the first and last ADA -positive 
samples (irrespective of any negative samples in between) are separated by a period 
less than 16 weeks, and the patient’s last sampling time point is ADA -negative.  
• Persistent ADA response:  
- Treatment -induced ADA detected at 2 or more sampling t ime points during the 
treatment (including follow -up period if any), where the first and last ADA -positive 
samples (irrespective of any negative samples in between) are separated by at least 
16 weeks.  
• Intermediate ADA response  
- Only the last sampling time p oint is positive or  
- The last two samples separated by a period less than 16 weeks are positive.  
• ADA positive patients: Defined as patients with at least 1 treatment -induced or 
treatment -boosted ADA positive sample at any time following the first isatuximab  
administration.  
• ADA prevalence: Defined as the sum of the number of patients with pre -existing ADA and 
the number of patients with treatment induced ADAs, divided by the number of evaluable 
patients.  
• ADA incidence: Defined as the number of ADA positive pa tients divided by the number 
of evaluable patients.  
9.3 EXPLORATORY ENDPOINTS   
9.3.1  Exploratory biomarker analysis   
A blood sample will be collected on Day 1 of Cycle 1. Leukocyte DNA will be extracted and 
analyzed for immune genetic determinants (such as Fcγ receptor polymorphisms) and correlated 
with parameters of clinical response.  
In IKd arm only, an additional  blood sample will be collected at all time -points to evaluate the 
potential interference of isatuximab in the M protein assessment (central laboratory) up to 
Cycle  30. This sample will be collected after Cycle 30 and until disease progression only for 
patients who reach at least VGPR at this cycle. In case of isatuximab is stopped before 
progression, sample interference assay will be collected up to 3 months or PD, whichever comes 
first. After Cycle 1 Day 1, IF sample is analyzed in case of M protein is 0 g/dL in all patients. In 
addition, in order to identify patients with potential isatuximab interference, IF samples will be 
analyzed also in patients with serum M protein ≤0.2 g/dL.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 91 Internal  
In addition to the 3 cytogenetic abnormalities (del(17p), t(4:14) and t(14 :16)) assessed by FISH at 
baseline to determine R -ISS stage which is stratification factor, other cytogenetic abnormalities 
such as but not limited to del (1p) and gain (1q) deletion will be assessed and correlated with 
parameters of clinical response.  
9.4 FUTURE USE OF SAMPLES   
For patients who have consented to it, the samples that are unused or left over after testing may be 
used for other research purposes (excluding genetic analys is providing information on the 
likelihood of developing a disease) related to isatuximab efficacy, safety, and metabolism, or 
related to MM.  
These other research analyses will help to understand either disease subtypes or drug response, to 
develop and/or validate a bioassay method, and/or to identify new drug targets or biomarkers.  
These samples will remain labelled with the same identifiers used during the study 
(ie, patient  ID). They will be transferred to a Sanofi site (or a subcontractor site) which c an be 
located outside of the country where the study is conducted. The Sponsor has included safeguards 
for protecting patient confidentiality and personal data (see Section  14.3 and Section  14.5). These 
samples may be stored for a period of up to 5 years after completion of the final study report. 
After that period, any samples remaining will be destroyed.  
9.5 APPROPRIATENESS OF MEASUREMENTS   
Each of the efficacy and safety assessments chosen for use in this study is considered well 
established and relevant in a hemato -oncology setting. In addition, suitable steps have been buil t 
into each of these assessments to ensure their reliability and accuracy and to minimize any risks to 
patient safety.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 92 Internal  
10 STUDY PROCEDURES   
10.1 VISIT SCHEDULE   
All patients entering the study must be evaluated according to the schedule outlined in the 
Flow  Charts (see Section  1.2 and Section  1.3) and described below. The results of the evaluation 
will be recorded in the eCRF pages until the patients a re no longer followed.  
10.1.1  Screening/baseline   
The screening assessments are to be performed within 21 days prior to randomization, unless 
indicated otherwise. All of the inclusion criteria (and none of the exclusion criteria) must be met, 
and informed consent must be signed by the patient before any study -specific procedure is 
performed. Inform consent can be signed more than 21 days prior to randomization. Screening 
time indicates in which time frame exams used to support eligibility have to be done prior to 
randomization.  
The following procedures are to be performed/assessed:  
• Signed  informed consent.  
• Demography (age, gender, and race) and medical/surgical history (includi ng smoking 
status).  
• Myeloma history and prior anti -myeloma treatment: Includes date of initial diagnosis of 
symptomatic MM, stage and type of disease at diagnosis and study entry (heavy and light 
chain component) and previous anti -myeloma therapy (includin g transplant if any, drug 
name, start and stop dates, intent, date of progression, best response, and reason for 
discontinuation).  
• Physical examination (≤7 days prior to randomization): Includes examination of main 
body systems including neurological, dige stive, respiratory (signs and symptoms, 
respiratory rate), hepatic and spleen span, and lymph node examinations. Patient’s weight 
and height will be recorded.  
• Vital signs including blood pressure, heart rate, body temperature, and respiratory rate.  
• Cardiac  ultrasonography (MUGA scan or MRI are accepted if it is the site practice).  
• 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG ). 
• ECOG PS.  
• Prior medications use in the 21 days prior to randomization.  
• All AEs/SAE s occurring after signed informed consent for all patients.  
Local laboratory assessments  
• Serum or urine pregnancy test to be performed prior to randomization (should be within 
7 days prior to first study treatment administration) for females of childbearing potential.   
• Hematology: Hemoglobin, hematocrit, red blood cells (RBC ), white blood cells (WBC ) 
with differential and platelet count.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 93 Internal  
• Blood chemistry: AST, ALT, bilirubin (total and direct), alkaline phosphatase, LDH, 
sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate or carbon dioxide (venous) (if bicarbonate or 
carbon dioxide are assessed only on arterial blood at site level, to be done only if clinic ally 
indicated), calcium, corrected serum calcium, magnesium, phosphate, uric acid, serum 
creatinine and estimated creatinine clearance (MDRD Formula), urea or blood urea 
nitrogen (BUN ), fasting glucos e (according to site guidelines), albumin, and total protein.  
• Coagulation: Prothrombin time or international normalized ratio and activated partial 
thromboplastin time.  
• Quantitative or semi quantitative (according to site practice and if semi quantitative 
method can provide with an absolute numeric value of the parameters) urinalysis: RBCs, 
protein, glucose, pH, ketones, bilirubin, and leucocytes.  
• Serum β2 -microglobulin.  
• Complete blood phenotyping (IKd arm only) if not already available (C,c; E,e; Kell. Kid d; 
Duffy; S,s is recommended, if not available follow site’s standard) and antibody screening 
(Indirect Coombs Test or Indirect Antiglobulin Test [IAT]), after randomization and prior 
to study treatment initiation. The blood type card will be kept by the p atient with the study 
card. Blood transfusions are to be recorded in the eCRF. The blood bank needs to be 
informed that the patient is receiving a treatment with an anti -CD38 and a potential 
interference with the Coombs test is possible.  
Disease assessment : 
• Laboratory disease assessment (central laboratory):  
- Serum M protein: Immunoelectrophoresis and IF.  
- Urine M protein (24 -hour urine): Immunoelectrophoresis and IF.  
- Serum FLCs: Quantification and ratio involved/non -involved.  
- Immunoglobulins: IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD, and IgE (IgD or E only if the heavy chain 
component of the disease is known to be E or D).  
• Bone marrow aspirate will be collected (local and central laboratory):  
- FISH (including, but may not be limited to, del(17p), t(4:14), t(14:16) and MRD 
analyses in central laboratory. Central laboratory samples for FISH will be collected 
and analyzed for all patients; R -ISS used as stratification factor will be assessed with 
FISH central laboratory results. Additional cytogenetic abnormalities will be tested 
including, but may not be limited to, del (1p) and gain (1q). Central laboratory samples 
for MRD will be collected for all patients but will be analyzed only for patients who 
will reach VGPR or better.  
- Bone marrow disease assessment (plasma cells involveme nt) in local laboratory. 
For this assessment, biopsy can be done if clinically indicated.  
Note: In case of randomization would be delayed due to unplanned event after BMA was done, 
BMA will not need to be done again if BMA remains within 8 weeks prior to randomization.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 94 Internal  
• Radiological disease assessment:  
- Skeletal survey (including skull, spine, all long bones, pelvis, and chest) or low dose 
whole body CT scan at baseline ( see Appendix M , within 21 days prior to 
randomization).  
- Extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) assessment (including bone plasmacytoma):  
- If known extramedullary disease at baseline, CT scan or MRI is to be done at 
baseline until PD (even for patients who would initiate further anti -myeloma 
therapy without PD).  
- If suspected extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) at baseline, CT scan or MRI is 
to be done at baseline.  
Note: For bone lesion assessment and extramedullary disease, the same modality (skeletal survey 
or low -dose whole body CT scan; CT scan or MRI) should be used throughout the study for each 
individual patient. All imaging should be sent for central review. Intravenous contrast is 
recommended if not medically contra -indicated.  Patients who have contra -indication to CT scan 
with IV contrast may have MRI exams performed instead.  
10.1.2  Randomization   
Randomization will take place once the consented patient has completed all the necessary 
screening procedures and is deemed eligible for study entry by the Investigator or designee (based 
on myeloma specific results from central laboratory [see below] and hematology/biochemistry 
local laboratory results).  
Results fo r central paraprotein must be available before the patient is randomized.  
All eligible patients must be randomized by contacting the IRT (see Section  8.3). 
The results of the screening examinations will be recorded in each randomized patient’s eCRF. 
Source documentation to support the screening results must be maintained in the patie nt’s medical 
record. Every effort should be done to start treatment within 3 working days of randomization.  
10.1.3  Treatment period   
Procedures to be performed on Day 1, Day 8 and on Day  15 can be performed within one day 
prior to study treatment administration unless specified otherwise. This is not applicable for 
samples to be drawn on D2, D9 and D16.  
10.1.3.1  Cycle 1 (Days 1 -2, Days 8 -9, Days 15 -16, and Days 22 -23)  
The following procedures are to be performed/assessed prior to first study treatment 
administration in both arms unless specified otherwise:  
• Physical examination on Days 1, 8, 15, and 22: Only main diagnoses will be reported in 
the eCRF as AEs or medical history. Signs and symptoms related to MM ongoing on 
Day 1 Cycle 1 will be recorded in AE page.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 95 Internal  
• Vital signs including blood pressure, heart rate, body temperature, and respiratory rate on 
Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16 in both arms, plus on Day 22 in the IKd arm. In the IKd arm, 
vital signs are to be measured prior to start of each isatuximab infusion, 1 hour after start 
of each infusion, and at the end of each infusion.  
• 12-lead ECG on Day 1 if Screening  test >7 days prior Day 1.  
• ECOG PS on Day 1.  
• Study treatment administration:  
- Isatuximab (IKd only) on Days 1, 8, 15, and 22.  
- Carfilzomib: Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16.  
- Dexamethasone: Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, 16, 22, and 23. Oral dexamethasone will be 
recorded i n patient diaries when not taken at site level.  
• ePROs on Day 1: EORTC QLQ -C30, QLQ -MY20, and EQ -5D-5L. 
• All AEs/SAEs throughout the cycle.  
• Concomitant medications from 21 days prior to randomization and then throughout the 
cycle.  
Local laboratory assessment s: 
• Blood Chemistry  
- Full blood biochemistry prior to Day 1 if Screening test >7 days prior Day 1, and on 
Days 8, 15, and 22 administration: AST, ALT, bilirubin (total and direct), alkaline 
phosphatase, LDH, sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate or carbon  dioxide 
(venous) (if bicarbonate or carbon dioxide are assessed only on arterial blood at site 
level, to be done only if clinically indicated), calcium, corrected serum calcium, 
magnesium, phosphate, uric acid, serum creatinine and estimated creatinine cl earance 
(MDRD Formula), urea or BUN, fasting glucose (according to site guidelines), 
albumin, and total protein.  
- Restricted biochemistry on Days 2, 9, and 16: Sodium, potassium, chloride, 
bicarbonate or carbon dioxide (venous), urea or BUN, serum creatinin e, and estimated 
creatinine clearance (MDRD formula).  
• Hematology on Day 1 if Screening test >7 days prior Day 1, and on Days 1, 8, 15, and 22: 
Hemoglobin, hematocrit, RBC, WBC with differential and platelet count.  
• Serum or urine pregnancy test for females of childbearing potential.  
Central laboratory disease assessments:  
Values of the tests performed on Day 1 of Cycle 1 (prior to study treatment administration) will 
be the reference value to assess response during study treatment. Assessments on Day 1 incl ude: 
• Serum M protein: Immunoelectrophoresis and IF . 
• Urine M protein (24 -hour urine): Immunoelectrophoresis and IF.  
• Serum FLCs: Quantification and ratio involved/non -involved.  
• Immunoglobulins: IgG, IgA, IgM, I gD, and IgE (IgD or E only if the heavy chain 
component of the disease is known to be E or D).  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 96 Internal  
Any unplanned laboratory disease assessment should be sent to central laboratory.  
Central laboratory assessments:  
• Immune genetic determinants (such as Fcγ receptor polymorphism).  
• IKd arm only:  
- Blood sample collection for PK (see Section  1.3). 
- Blood sample collection on Day 1 for ADA evaluation.  
- An additional blood sample will be collected to evaluate the potential interference of 
isatuximab in the M protein assessment (central l aboratory).  
If clinically indicated only:  
• Coagulation at any time during the cycle.  
• Urinalysis at any time during the cycle: quantitative (RBC, protein, glucose, pH, ketones, 
bilirubin, and leucocytes) or qualitative (dipstick: blood, protein, glucose, pH,  ketones, 
bilirubin, and leucocytes).  
• Bone marrow aspirate (BMA) for:  
- MRD analyses in central laboratory. Central laboratory samples for MRD will be 
collected only for patients who will reach VGPR or better (when it is confirmed).  
- Bone marrow disease asses sment (% plasma cells) in case of VGPR or better (when it 
is confirmed) (local laboratory). Bone marrow biopsy can be done for sCR assessment 
as per Investigator decision.  
• Radiological disease assessment (the same method of assessment as at Screening is t o be 
used throughout the study):  
- Skeletal survey (including skull, spine, all long bones, pelvis, and chest).  
- Extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) assessment.  
10.1.3.2  Subsequent cycles (Days 1 -2, Days 8 -9, Days 15 -16, and Days 22 -23)  
The following procedures are to be performed/assessed prior to Day 1 administration in both arms 
unless specified otherwise:  
• Physical examination: Only the main diagnoses will be reported in the eCRF as AEs.  
• Vital signs including blood pressure, heart rate, body temperature, and respiratory rate on 
Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16 in both arms. In the IKd arm, vital signs are to be measured 
prior to start of each isatuximab infusion, 1 hour after start of each  infusion and at the end 
of each infusion (on Days 1 and 15 up to Cycle 4 and as clinically indicated).  
• 12-lead ECG.  
• ECOG PS.  
• Study treatment administration:  
- Isatuximab (IKd only) on Days 1 and 15.  
- Carfilzomib: Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16.  
- Dexamethasone: D ays 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, 16, 22, and 23. Oral dexamethasone will be 
recorded in patient diaries when not taken at site level.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 97 Internal  
• ePROs: EORTC QLQ -C30, QLQ -MY20, and EQ -5D-5L. 
• All AEs/SAEs throughout the cycle.  
• Concomitant medications at any time during the treatme nt period and up to 30 days after 
the last dose.  
Local laboratory assessments:  
• Blood chemistry:  
- Full blood biochemistry prior to Day 1 administration: AST, ALT, bilirubin (total and 
direct), alkaline phosphatase, LDH, sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbona te or 
carbon dioxide (venous) (if bicarbonate or carbon dioxide are assessed only on arterial 
blood at site level, to be done only if clinically indicated), calcium, corrected serum 
calcium, magnesium, phosphate, uric acid, serum creatinine and estimated c reatinine 
clearance (MDRD Formula), urea or BUN, fasting glucose (according to site 
guidelines), albumin, and total protein.  
- Restricted biochemistry prior to Days 8 and 15 administrations at Cycle 2, and then 
prior to Day 15 administration of each cycle th ereafter: Sodium, potassium, chloride, 
bicarbonate or carbon dioxide (venous), urea or BUN, serum creatinine, and estimated 
creatinine clearance (MDRD formula).  
• Hematology prior to Days 1 and 15 administrations: Hemoglobin, hematocrit, RBC, WBC 
with differ ential and platelet count.  
• Serum or urine pregnancy test is to be done within one day before each cycle initiation for 
females of childbearing potential.  
• Indirect Coombs test will be repeated once after study treatment initiation on Day 1 at 
Cycle 2 or on Day 1 of a later cycle if not done at Cycle 2, only for patients in IKd arm.  
• One HBV serology test (HBsAg, anti -HBc and anti -HBs) in patients with HBV status 
unknown in September 2019. Patients with HBsAg positive and/or anti -HBc antibody 
positive should have also HBV DNA testing by polymerase chain reaction. To be repeated 
if clin ically indicated.  
Central laboratory disease assessment:  
Assessments on Day 1 include:  
• Serum M protein: Immunoelectrophoresis and IF.  
• Urine M protein (24 -hour urine): Immunoelectrophoresis and IF.  
After Cycle 1 Day 1, IF to be done if UPEP is negative in patients whose disease is 
evaluable in urine. The 24 -hour urine collection should be completed prior new cycle 
initiation. If urine M protein is negative at baseline and Cycle 1 Day 1, this assessment is 
to be repeated every 3 cycles only (Cycle 4, Cycle 7, Cycle 10, etc) to confirm CR on 
blood labs.  
• Serum FLCs: Quantification and ratio involved/non -involved.  
• Immunoglobulins: IgG, IgA, I gM, IgD, and IgE (IgD or E only if the heavy chain 
component of the disease is known to be E or D).  
Any unplanned laboratory disease assessment should be sent to central laboratory.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 98 Internal  
Central laboratory assessments  IKd arm only:  
• Blood sample collection for P K (see Section  1.3) up to Cycle 10. Pharmacokinetic samples 
are stopped after Cy cle 10.  
• Blood sample collection on Day 1 up to Cycle 10 for ADA evaluation. In case of 
ADA  positive or inconclusive at Cycle 10, one additional ADA will be sampled 3 months 
later. No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is positive.  
• An additional blood sample will be collected at all time -points to evaluate the potential 
interference of isatuximab in the M protein assessment (central laboratory) up to Cycle  30. 
This sample will be collected after Cycle 30 for patients who reach at least VGPR at this 
cycle until disease progression. In case of isatuximab is prematurely stopped definitive 
treatment discontinuation, sample interference assay will be collected up to 3 months after 
isatuximab discontinuation or PD, whichever comes first.  
If clinically indicated only:  
• Coagulation at any time during the cycle.  
• Urinalysis at any time during the cycle: Quantitative (RBC, protein, glucose, pH, ketones, 
bilirubin, and leucocytes) or qualitative (dipstick: blood, protein, glucose, pH, ketones, 
bilirub in, and leucocytes).  
• Bone marrow aspirate will be collected for:  
- MRD analyses in central laboratory. Central laboratory samples for MRD will be 
collected only for patients who will reach VGPR or better (when it is confirmed). If a 
patient presents ≥ VGPR b ut is determined MRD positive, another BM sample will be 
collected 3 months (3 cycles) later, in order to identify late negativity. A third sample 
may be collected after another 3 months if the patient remains MRD positive and is 
still being treated. No mo re than 3 post -baseline samples are to be obtained unless a 
patient achieves CR after a third BM sample MRD positive performed during VGPR. 
In this case, no more than 3 additional BM samples will be collected. Therefore, a 
maximum of 6 BMA could be perform ed by patient (no more than 3 per category of 
response). However, because BMA is invasive procedure, the following guidance is 
given in the purpose to limit as much as possible the number of BMA.  
For patients with CR without previous documentation of VGPR , first bone marrow 
for MRD assessment will be collected at time of confirmation of CR (ie, at the second 
time point showing CR) If patient is determined MRD positive, another BM sample 
will be collected 3 months (3  cycles) later, in order to identify late negativity. A third 
sample may be collected after another 3 months if the patient remains MRD positive 
and is still being treated.  
For patients with VGPR :  
- First bone marrow will be collected when VGPR is confirmed at the second time 
point or at a later ti me point as per investigator judgement based on kinetic of M 
protein decrease and/or if a plateau phase is reached (plateau is defined as variation 
less than 20% over 12  weeks [ 16]).  
- If MRD is positive on first BMA, a second BMA will be collected 3 months later 
(3 cycles) to identify late negativity.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 99 Internal  
- In case of MRD is still positive on second BMA made while patient is in VGPR, 
the timing to perform the third BMA can be postponed until  CR achievement.  
- In case of the patient becomes CR and patient was MRD positive on the last BMA 
performed during VGPR, a BMA will be done for MRD assessment at time of 
confirmation of CR.   
- After the first BMA during CR is done and in case patient was MRD  positive on 
this BMA, the additional BMA planned by the protocol can be discussed with the 
patient.  
- Bone marrow disease assessment (plasma cells involvement) in local laboratory in 
case of VGPR or better (when it is confirmed).  
In case of VGPR , plasma ce ll infiltration assessment is mandatory for patients in 
IKd arm with residual serum M protein of Ig G ≤ 0.5 g/dL and/or residual kappa IF 
positivity in urine, due to potential interference between isatuximab and M protein.  
In case of CR on M protein , plas ma cell infiltration assessment is mandatory in 
IKd arm and in Kd arm, unless a previous assessment was made within 3 months and 
showed plasma cells ≤5%.  
Bone marrow biopsy can be done for sCR assessment as per investigator decision.  
• Radiological disease a ssessment (the same method of assessment as at Screening is to be 
used throughout the study):  
- Skeletal survey (including skull, spine, all long bones, pelvis, and chest X -rays) or 
whole body CT scan once a year and additional exam as clinically indicated.  
- Extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) assessment every 12 weeks in case of existing 
plasmacytoma at baseline or as clinically indicated if no plasmacytoma at baseline.  
10.1.4  End of treatment   
The EOT visit will occur 30 days after last study treatment administration or before further 
anti-myeloma therapy initiation whichever comes first. The following procedures are to be 
performed at the EOT visit:  
• Physical examination.  
• Vital signs.  
• 12-lead ECG.  
• ECOG PS.  
• Serum or urine pregnancy for females of childbearing potential.  
• ePROs (EORTC QLQ -C30, QLQ -MY20, and EQ -5D-5L). 
• All AEs/SAEs occurring up to 30 days after last study treatment administration (will be 
collected in last treatment cycle).  
• Concomitant medications up to 30 days from last study treatment administration.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 100 Internal  
Local laboratory tests:  
• Blood chemistry: AST, ALT, bilirubin (total and direct), alkaline phosphatase, LDH , 
sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate or carbon dioxide (venous) (if bicarbonate or 
carbon dioxide are assessed only on arterial blood at site level, to be done only if clinically 
indicated), calcium, corrected serum calcium, magnesium, phosphate, uri c acid, serum 
creatinine and estimated creatinine clearance (MDRD Formula), urea or BUN, fasting 
glucose (according to site guidelines), albumin, and total protein.  
• Hematology: hemoglobin, hematocrit, RBC, WBC with differential and platelet count.  
Central laboratory disease assessment:  
• Serum M protein: Immunoelectrophoresis and IF.  
• Urine M protein (24 -hour urine): Immunoelectrophoresis and IF.  
• Serum FLCs: Quantification and ratio involved/non -involved.  
• Immunoglobulins: IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD, and IgE (IgD or E only if the heavy chain 
component of the disease is known to be E or D).  
Any unplanned laboratory disease assessment should be sent to central laboratory.  
Central laboratory assessment IKd arm only:  
• Additional blood sample collected until disease progressi on for patients who experienced 
at least a VGPR up to 3 months after end of isatuximab (central laboratory).  
• ADA if the “3 -month later” sample time is needed and occurs at EOT visit. No further 
ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is positive.  
If clinically indicated only:  
• Coagulation.  
• Urinalysis: quantitative (RBC, protein, glucose, pH, ketones, bilirubin, and leucocytes) or 
qualitative (dipstick: blood, protein, glucose, pH, ketones, bilirubin, and leucocytes).  
• Bone marrow aspirate will be collected for:  
- MRD analyses in central laboratory. Central laboratory samples for MRD will be 
collected only for patients who will reach VGPR or better (when it is confirmed). If a 
patient presents ≥ VGPR but is determined MRD positive, another BM sample w ill be 
collected 3 months (3 cycles) later, in order to identify late negativity. A third sample 
may be collected after another 3 months if the patient remains MRD positive and is 
still being treated. No more than 3 post -baseline samples are to be obtained  unless a 
patient achieves CR after a third BM sample MRD positive performed during VGPR. 
In this case, no more than 3 additional BM samples will be collected. Therefore, a 
maximum of 6 BMA could be performed by patient (no more than 3 per category of 
response). However, because BMA is invasive procedure, the following guidance is 
given in the purpose to limit as much as possible the number of BMA.  
For patients with CR without previous documentation of VGPR , first bone marrow 
for MRD assessment will be coll ected at time of confirmation of CR (ie, at the second 
time point showing CR) If patient is determined MRD positive, another BM sample 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 101 Internal  
will be collected 3 months (3  cycles) later, in order to identify late negativity. A third 
sample may be collected after another 3 months if the patient remains MRD positive 
and is still being treated.  
For patients with VGPR :  
- First bone marrow will be collected when VGPR is confirmed at the second time 
point or at a later time point as per investigator judgement based on ki netic of M 
protein decrease and/or if a plateau phase is reached (plateau is defined as variation 
less than 20% over 12  weeks [ 16]).  
- If MRD is positive on first BMA, a second BMA will be collected 3 months later 
(3 cycles) to identify late negativity.  
- In case of MRD is still positive on second BMA made while patient is in VGPR, 
the timing to perform the third BMA can be postponed until CR ach ievement.  
- In case of the patient becomes CR and patient was MRD positive on the last BMA 
performed during VGPR, a BMA will be done for MRD assessment at time of 
confirmation of CR.   
- After the first BMA during CR is done and in case patient was MRD positi ve on 
this BMA, the additional BMA planned by the protocol can be discussed with the 
patient.  
- Bone marrow disease assessment (plasma cells involvement) in local laboratory in 
case of VGPR or better (when it is confirmed).  
In case of VGPR , plasma cell infi ltration assessment is mandatory for patients in IKd 
arm with residual serum M protein of Ig G ≤0.5 g/dL and/or residual kappa IF 
positivity in urine, due to potential interference between isatuximab and M protein.  
In case of CR on M protein , plasma cell infiltration assessment is mandatory in IKd 
arm and in Kd arm, unless a previous assessment was made within 3 months and 
showed plasma cells ≤5%.  
Bone marrow biopsy can be done for sCR assessment as per investigator decision.  
• Radiological disease assessmen t (the same method of assessment as at Screening is to be 
used throughout the study):  
- Skeletal survey (including skull, spine, all long bones, pelvis, and chest X -rays) or 
whole body CT scan once a year and additional exam as clinically indicated.  
- Extramed ullary disease (plasmacytoma) assessment every 12 weeks in case of existing 
plasmacytoma at baseline or as clinically indicated if no plasmacytoma at baseline.  
10.1.5  Post study treatment follow -up  
Periodicity of follow -up visits to be performed after last study treatment administration will 
depend on reason of study treatment discontinuation:  
• Every 3 months for patients with previous confirmed disease progression.  
• Monthly for patients w ithout previous confirmed disease progression up to confirmed 
disease progression (even if further anti -myeloma has been initiated before PD), and then 
every 3 months.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 102 Internal  
The following procedures are to be performed at each follow -up visit, whatever periodici ty of 
FU visit:  
• All ongoing related AEs/all SAEs to be reported and followed up until resolution or 
stabilization , all new AEs (serious or not) related to study treatment  up until resolution or 
stabilization  and any second primary malignancy . 
• Further anti -myeloma therapies: Drug name, start and stop date, best overall response and 
date of PD according to Investigator assessment will be collected.  
• Survival status.  
For all patients, ePRO questionnaires 90 days after last study treatment administration will be 
completed (which corresponds to first FU visit in case of study treatment discontinuation due to 
PD or second FU visit in case of study treatment discontinuation without PD).   
Serum or urine pregnancy test  for females of childbearing potential will be performed monthly 
during follow -up up to 3 months in the Kd and 5 months in IKd, and can be performed at home 
for the patients with follow -up every 3  months or if date of test does not match with a FU visit.  
The following procedures are to be performed every month in addition to the procedures above 
for patients without previous confirmed disease progression (even patients who would initiate 
further anti -myeloma therapy without PD, unless otherwise specified):  
• Central laboratory disease assessment:  
- Serum M protein: Immunoelectrophoresis and IF.  
- Urine M protein (24 -hour urine): Immunoelectrophoresis and IF.  
- Serum FLCs: Quantification and ratio involved/non -involved.  
- Immunoglobulins: IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD, and IgE (I gD or E only if the heavy chain 
component of the disease is known to be E or D).  
Any unplanned laboratory disease assessment should be sent to central laboratory.  
• Central laboratory assessment IKd arm only:  
- In IKd arm only, additional blood sample collecte d until disease progression for 
patients who experienced at least a VGPR up to 3 months after end of isatuximab 
(central laboratory).  
• Radiological disease assessment (the same method of assessment as at Screening is to be 
used throughout the study) if indi cated : 
- Skeletal survey (including skull, spine, all long bones, pelvis, and chest X -rays) or 
whole body CT scan once a year and additional exam as clinically indicated.  
- Extramedullary disease (plasmacytoma) assessment every 12 weeks in case of existing 
plasmacytoma at baseline or as clinically indicated if no plasmacytoma at baseline.  
• Bone marrow aspirate  will be collected (except if further anti myeloma therapy is 
started):  
- For MRD analyses in central laboratory. Central laboratory samples for MRD will be 
collected only for patients who will reach VGPR or better (when it is confirmed). If a 
patient presents ≥ VGPR but is determined MRD positive, another BM sample will be 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 103 Internal  
collected 3 months (3 cycles) later, in order to identify late negativity. A third samp le 
may be collected after another 3 months if the patient remains MRD positive and is 
still being treated. No more than 3 post -baseline samples are to be obtained unless a 
patient achieves CR after a third BM sample MRD positive performed during VGPR. 
In this case, no more than 3 additional BM samples will be collected. Therefore, a 
maximum of 6 BMA could be performed by patient (no more than 3 per category of 
response). However, because BMA is invasive procedure, the following guidance is 
given in the purp ose to limit as much as possible the number of BMA.  
For patients with CR without previous documentation of VGPR , first bone marrow 
for MRD assessment will be collected at time of confirmation of CR (ie, at the second 
time point showing CR) If patient is de termined MRD positive, another BM sample 
will be collected 3 months (3  cycles) later, in order to identify late negativity. A third 
sample may be collected after another 3 months if the patient remains MRD positive 
and is still being treated.  
For patients with VGPR :  
- First bone marrow will be collected when VGPR is confirmed at the second time 
point or at a later time point as per investigator judgement based on kinetic of M 
protein decrease and/or if a plateau phase is reached (plateau is defined as variat ion 
less than 20% over 12  weeks [ 16]).  
- If MRD is positive on first BMA, a second BMA will be collected 3 months later 
(3 cycles) to identify  late negativity.  
- In case of MRD is still positive on second BMA made while patient is in VGPR, 
the timing to perform the third BMA can be postponed until CR achievement.  
- In case of the patient becomes CR and patient was MRD positive on the last BMA 
performed during VGPR, a BMA will be done for MRD assessment at time of 
confirmation of CR.   
- After the first BMA during CR is done and in case patient was MRD positive on 
this BMA, the additional BMA planned by the protocol can be discussed with the 
patient.  
- For bone marrow disease assessment (plasma cells involvement) in local laboratory in 
case of VGPR or better (when it is confirmed).  
In case of VGPR , plasma cell infiltration assessment is mandatory for patients in IKd 
arm with residual serum M protein of Ig G ≤0.5 g/dL and/or residual kappa IF 
positivity in urine, due to potential interference between isatuximab and M protein.  
In case of CR on M protein , plasma cell infiltration assessment is mandatory in IKd 
arm and in Kd arm, unless a previous assessmen t was made within 3 months and 
showed plasma cells ≤5%.  
Bone marrow biopsy can be done for sCR assessment as per investigator decision.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 104 Internal  
10.1.6  After Implementation of Amended Protocol #10   
Death date will be collected when site is informed of death. In addition, survival status will be 
collected twice a year after the  implementation of amended protocol #10  until d eath, or OS 
analysis cut -off date, whichever comes first.   
Patients still on study treatment at the implementation of amended protocol #10  can continue 
study treatment until at least 1 treatment discontinuation criterion as defined in Section  10.3.2  is 
met. Patients will be managed according to the site practice. The following informati on will be 
collected during the study treatment administration:  
• IP ad ministration.  
• All SAEs regardless of relationship to study treatment, AEs considered related to study 
treatment and any second primary malignancy . 
• Hematology and biochemistry, or any othe r laboratory results supporting the reported 
AEs. 
• Other procedures supporting the reported AEs.  
• Serum or urine pregnancy test for females of childbearing potential  
• End of treatment reason . 
• If patients received 10 or less cycles at the cut -off date and last  ADA prior the final PFS 
analysis cut -off date is positive or inconclusive, additional ADA 3 months later sample to 
be done. No further ADA will be sampled, even if this 3 -month sample is positive (central 
laboratory).  
No follow -up information will be collected after these patients discontinue study treatment except:  
• All SAEs still ongoing at the end of study treatment and all AEs considered as related to 
study treatment still ongoing or occurring after the end of study treatment, which will be 
followed  until resolution/stabilization . 
• Survival status and further anti -myeloma therapies twice  a year if study treatment is 
stopped before the OS cut -off date.  
• Serum or urine pregnancy test for females of childbearing potential will be performed 
monthly during follow -up up to 3 months in the Kd and 5 months in IKd, and can be 
performed at home.  
10.1.7  Post OS analysis cut -off date   
Patients still on study treatment at the OS analysis cut -off d ate can continue study treatment until 
at least 1  treatment discontinuation criterion as defined in Section  10.3.2  is met. Patients will be 
managed according to the site practice. The following information will be collected during the 
study treatment administration:  
• IP administration.  
• All SAEs regardless of relationship to study treatme nt and AEs considered related to study 
treatment . 
• Hematology and biochemistry, or any other laboratory results supporting the reported 
AEs. 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 105 Internal  
• Other procedures supporting the reported AEs . 
• Serum or urine pregnancy test for females of childbearing potential  
• End of treatment reason . 
• Death date and reason if occurred during study  treatment.   
No follow -up information will be collected after these patients discontinue study treatment except:  
• All SAEs still ongoing at the end of study treatment and all AEs considered as related to 
study treatment still ongoing or occurring after the end of study treatment, which will be 
followed until resolution/stabilization . 
• Death date and reason if occurred in follow -up period due to related AE . 
• Serum or urine pregnancy t est will be performed monthly during follow -up up to 3 months 
in the Kd and 5 months in IKd, and can be performed at home.  
10.2 DEFINITION OF SOURCE DATA   
Source data includes all information in original records and certified copies of original records of 
clinical findings, observations, or other activities necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation 
of the trial. Source data are contained in source documents.  
Source documents a re original documents, data, and records (eg, hospital records, clinical and 
office charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, patient diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy 
dispensing records, recorded data from automated instruments, copies or transcripts certified after 
verification as being accurate and complete, microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm or 
magnetic media, X -rays, patient files, and records kept at the pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at 
medical -technical departments) involved in t he clinical study. Source documentation must be 
maintained to support information provided within a CRF.  
10.3 HANDLING OF PATIENT PERMANENT TREATMENT DISCONTINUATION AND OF 
PATIENT STUDY DISCONTINUATION   
The study treatment should be continued whenever possible. Any study treatment discontinuation 
must be fully documented in the eCRF. In any case, the patient should remain in the study as long 
as possible.  
Pregnancy will lead to definit ive treatment discontinuation in all cases.  
10.3.1  Permanent treatment discontinuation with investigational medicinal product(s)   
Permanent treatment discontinuation is any treatment dis continuation associated with the 
definitive decision from the Investigator not to re -expose the patient to the study treatment at any 
time during the study, or from the patient not to be re -exposed to the study treatment whatever the 
reason.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 106 Internal  
10.3.2  List of criter ia for permanent treatment discontinuation   
The patients may withdraw from treatment with the study treatment if they decide to do so, at any 
time and irrespective of the reason, or this may be the Investigator’s decision. All efforts should 
be made to document the reason(s) for treatment discontinuation and this should be documented 
in the eCRF.  
Isatuximab, carfilzomib, and/or dexamethasone can be discontinued prematurely. The pat ient will 
remain on study treatment until the last study treatment is discontinued. The reason for premature 
discontinuation will be captured in the appropriate eCRF page.  
All efforts should be made to document the reason for discontinuation of treatment w ith the study 
treatment:  
• At the patient’s request, at any time and irrespective of the reason (consents withdrawal), 
or at the request of their legally authorized representative. “Legally authorized 
representative” is considered to be an individual or jud icial or other body authorized under 
applicable law to consent on behalf of a prospective patient to the patient’s participation in 
the procedure(s) involved in the research. Withdrawal of consent for treatment should be 
distinguished from withdrawal of co nsent for follow -up visits and from withdrawal of 
consent for non -patient contact follow -up, eg, medical records check. Patients requesting 
withdrawal should be informed that withdrawal of consent for follow -up may jeopardize 
the public health value of the  study. The Investigator should make every effort to 
re-contact the patient, to identify the reason why he/she decided to withdraw, and to 
determine his/her health status, including at least his/her vital status.  
• If, in the Investigator’s opinion, continu ation of the study treatment would be detrimental 
to the patient’s wellbeing, such as:  
- Disease progression.  
- Unacceptable AE.  
- Poor compliance to the study protocol.  
- Any other reason such as intercurrent illness that prevents further administration of 
study treatment (will be specified).  
• Patient is lost to follow -up. 
If patients are clinically stable, and possibly deriving clinical benefit from therapy with minimal 
toxicity, the patient will be maintained on treatment for the maximum period of time defined in  
Section  6.2. 
Patients who have been withdrawn from the study treatment cannot be re -included in the study. 
Their inclusion and treatment number must not be re -used.  
10.3.3  Handling of patients after permanent treatment discontinuation   
Patients will be followed -up according to the study procedures specified in this protocol up to the 
scheduled date of study completion, or up to recovery or stabilization of any AE to be 
followed -up as specified in this protocol, whichever comes last.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 107 Internal  
If possible, and after the permanent discontinuation of treatment, the patients will be assessed 
using the procedure normally planned for the EOT and follow -up visits. 
All cases of permanent treatment discontinuation must be recorded by the Investigator in the 
appropriate pages of the eCRF when considered as confirmed.  
10.3.4  Procedure and consequence for patient withdrawal from study   
The patients may withdraw from the study before study completion if they decide to do so, at any 
time and irrespective of the reason without any effect on their care. However, if patients no longer 
wish to take the  study treatment, they will be encouraged to remain in the study.  
The Investigators should discuss with them key visits to attend. The value of all their study data 
collected during their continued involvement will be emphasized as important to the public health 
value of the study.  
Patients who withdraw from the study treatment should be explicitly asked about the contribution 
of possible AEs to their decision, and any AE information elicited must be documented.  
All study withdrawals must be recorded by th e Investigator in the appropriate screens of the eCRF  
and in the patient’s medical records. In the medical record, at least the date of the withdrawal and 
the reason should be documented.  
In addition, a patient may withdraw his/her consent to stop particip ating in the study. Withdrawal 
of consent for treatment should be distinguished from withdrawal of consent for follow -up visits 
and from withdrawal of consent for non -patient contact follow -up, eg, medical record checks. The 
site should document any case o f withdrawal of consent.  
For patients who fail to return to the site, unless the patient withdraws consent for follow -up, the 
Investigator must make the best effort to recontact the patient (eg, contact patient’s family or 
private physician, review availab le registries or health care databases), and to determine his/her 
health status, including at least his/her vital status. Attempts to contact such patients must be 
documented in the patient’s records (eg, times and dates of attempted telephone contact, rec eipt 
for sending a registered letter).  
The SAP will specify how these patients lost to follow -up for their primary endpoint will be 
considered.  
Patients who have withdrawn from the study cannot be re -randomized (treated) in the study. Their 
inclusion and t reatment numbers must not be reused.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 108 Internal  
10.4 OBLIGATION OF THE INVESTIGATOR REGARDING SAFETY REPORTING   
10.4.1  Definitions of adverse events   
10.4.1.1  Adverse event   
An AE is any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical investigation patient 
administered a pharmaceutical product and which do es not necessarily have to have a causal 
relationship with this treatment.  
10.4.1.2  Serious adverse event   
An SAE is any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose:  
• Results in death, or  
• Is life -threatening, or  
Note: The term “life -threatening” in the definition of “serious” refers to an event in which 
the patient was at risk of death at the time of the event; it does not refer to an event which 
hypothetically might have caused death if it  were more severe.  
• Requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, or  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or  
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or  
• Is a medically important event.  
Medical and scient ific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether expedited 
reporting is appropriate in other situations, such as important medical events that may not 
be immediately life -threatening or result in death or hospitalization but may jeopardize the 
patient  or may require medical or surgical intervention (ie, specific measures or corrective 
treatment) to prevent one of the other outcomes listed in the definition above.  
Note: The following list of medically important events is intended to serve as a guideline  
for determining which condition has to be considered a medically important event. The list 
is not intended to be exhaustive:  
- Intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home for:  
- Allergic bronchospasm.  
- Convulsions (seizures, epilepsy, epileptic fit, absence, etc.).  
- Development of drug dependence or drug abuse.  
- Suicide attempt or any event suggestive of suicidality.  
- Syncope, loss of consciousness (except if documented as a consequence of blood 
sampling).  
- Bullous cutaneous eruptions.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 109 Internal  
10.4.1.3  Adve rse event of special interest   
An adverse event of special interest (AESI ) is an AE (serious or nonserious) o f scientific and 
medical concern specific to isatuximab, for which ongoing monitoring and immediate notification 
by the Investigator to the Sponsor is required. Such events may require further investigation in 
order to characterize and understand them. Adv erse events of special interest may be added, 
modified or removed during a study by protocol amendment.  
The following AEs are considered AESIs:  
• IARs Grade ≥ 3 (please refer to the current edition of the Investigator’s brochure for IARs 
manifestations repor ted in patients treated with isatuximab). An IAR is a related AE 
typically with onset within 24 hours from the start of drug infusion.  
• Pregnancy of a female patient entered in a study as well as pregnancy occurring in a 
female partner of a male patient ent ered in this study (see Section  10.4.1.4 ). 
• Symptomatic overdose (serious or nonser ious) with study treatment (isatuximab or 
carfilzomib or dexamethasone) / NIMP (see Section  10.4.1.5 ): 
- An overdose (accidental or intentional) with the study treatment is an event suspected 
by the Investigator or spontaneously notified by the patient (not based on systematic 
pills count).  
- Of note, asymptomatic overdose has to be reporte d as a standard AE.  
10.4.1.4  Pregnancy   
Pregnancy of a female patient entered in a study (as well as pregnancy occurring in a female 
partner of a male patient entered in this study) will be recorded as an AE in all cases. It will be 
qualified as a SAE only if it fulfills SAE criteria (See Section  10.4.1.2 ). 
In the event of pregnancy in a female patient, study treatment should  be discontinued and the 
Monitoring Team should be informed immediately (within 24 hours), even if the event does not 
fulfill a seriousness criterion, using the AE form together with the SAE complementary form to be 
sent to the representative of the Monito ring Team whose name, address and fax number appear on 
page 2 of the clinical trial protocol.  
Follow -up of the pregnancy is mandatory until the outcome has been determined and for up to 
1 year after the delivery of a newborn.  
10.4.1.5  Overdose   
In case of accidental or intentional overdose (at least 30% above the intended administered dose  
of isatuximab and carfilzomib at each  administration, at least 30% above the intended 
administered do se of dexamethasone at each cycle) with the study treatment, even not fulfilling a 
seriousness criterion, is to be reported to the Sponsor immediately (within 24 hours) using the AE 
form together with the SAE complementary form to be entered in the eCRF.  
Non-investigational medicinal product overdose is defined as at least twice the intended dose 
within the intended therapeutic interval.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 110 Internal  
10.4.2  General guidelines for reporting adverse events   
• All AEs, regardless of seriousness or relationship to study treatment, spanning from the 
signature of the informed consent form until the end of the study as defined by the protocol for 
that patient, are to be recorded on the corresponding page(s) or screen(s) of the eCRF.  
• Whenever possible, diagnosis or single syndrome should be reported instead of symptoms. 
The Investigator should specify the date of onset, intensity, action taken with respect to 
study treatment, corrective treatment/therapy given, additional investigations performed, 
outcome, and his/her opinion as to whether there is a reasonable possibility that the AE 
was caused by the study treatment or by the study procedure(s).  
• The Investigator should take appropriate measures to follow all AEs until clinical recovery 
is complete and laboratory results have returned to normal, or until progression has been 
stabilized, or until death, in order to ensure the safety of the patients. This may imply that 
observations will co ntinue beyond the last planned visit per protocol, and that additional 
investigations may be requested by the monitoring team up to as noticed by the Sponsor. 
Patients who experience an ongoing SAE or an AESI, at the prespecified study end -date, 
should be followed until resolution, stabilization, or death and related data will be 
collected. The duration of post -study follow -up and reporting of AEs will be specified  
(eg, until recovery).  
• When treatment is prematurely discontinued, the patient’s observations  will continue until 
the end of the study as defined by the protocol for that patient.  
• Laboratory abnormalities are to be recorded as AEs only if the lead to an action taken on 
study treatment (dose reduction, dose delay, dose interruption, study treatment  
discontinuation) or if they are serious.  
• Vital signs or ECG abnormalities are to be recorded as AEs only if:  
- Symptomatic and/or  
- Requiring either corrective treatment or consultation, and/or  
- Leading to study treatment discontinuation or modification of dosing, and/or  
- Fulfilling a seriousness criterion, and/or  
- Defined as an AESI.  
Instructions for AE reporting are summarized in Table  12. 
10.4.3  Instructions for reporting serious adverse events   
In the case of occurrence of an SAE, the Investigator or any d esignees must immediately:  
• ENTER (within 24 hours) the information related to the SAE in the appropriate screens of 
the eCRF; the system will automatically send a notification to the monitoring team after 
approval of the Investigator within the eCRF or aft er a standard delay.  
• There may be instances when copies of medical records for certain cases are requested by 
Sanofi. In such case, care should be taken to ensure that the patient's identity is protected 
and the patient's identifiers in the study are prope rly mentioned on any copy of a source 
document provided to the Company. For laboratory results, include the laboratory normal 
ranges.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 111 Internal  
• All further data updates should be recorded in the eCRF, as appropriate, within 24 hours of 
knowledge of the SAE. In addi tion, every effort should be made to further document any 
SAE that is fatal or life -threatening within a week (7 days) of the initial notification.  
• A back -up plan (using a paper CRF process) is available and should be used when the 
eCRF system does not wor k. 
Any SAE brought to the attention of the Investigator at any time after the end of the study for the 
patient and considered by him/her to be caused by the study treatment with a reasonable 
possibility, should be reported to the monitoring team.  
10.4.4  Guideline s for reporting adverse events of special interest   
For AESIs, the Sponsor must be informed immediately (ie, within 24 hours), as per SAE 
notification guidelines described in Section  10.4.3 , even if not fulfilling a seriousness criterion, 
using the correspondin g screens in the eCRF. Instructions for AE reporting are summarized in 
Table  12. 
10.4.5  Guidelines for reporting product complaints   
Any defect in the study treatment must be reported as soon as possible by the Investigator to the 
monitoring team that will complete a product complaint form within required tim elines.  
Appropriate information (eg, samples, labels or documents like pictures or photocopies) related to 
product identification and to the potential deficiencies may need to be gathered. The Investigator 
will assess whether or not the quality issue has to be reported together with an AE or SAE.  
Table  12 - Summary of adverse event reporting instructions   
Event 
category  Reporting 
timeframe  Specific even ts in this 
category  Case Report Form completion  
AE form  Safety  
Complementary 
Form  Other 
specific 
forms  
Adverse Event 
(non-SAE, 
non-AESI)  Routine  Any AE that is not SAE or AESI  Yes No No 
Serious Adverse 
Event (non -AESI 
or AESI)  Expedited 
(within 24 
hours)  Any AE meeting seriousness criterion 
per Section  10.4.1.2 Yes Yes No 
Adverse Event 
of Special 
Interest  Expedited 
(within 24 
hours)  IARs of Grade ≥3  Yes Yes No 
  Pregnancy  Yes Yes Yes 
  Symptomatic overdose  Yes Yes No 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 112 Internal  
10.5 OBLIGATIONS OF THE SPONSOR   
During the course of the study, the Sponsor will report in an expedited manner:  
• All SAEs that are both unexpected and at least reasonably related to the study treatment, to 
the regulatory authorities, independent ethics committee (IEC s)/institutional review boards 
(IRB s) as appropriate and to the Invest igators.  
• All SAEs that are expected and at least reasonably related to study treatment to the 
regulatory authorities, according to local regulations.  
• The AESIs listed in Section  10.4.1.3  to the regulatory authorities requiring such reporting.  
Adverse events that are considered expected will be specified by the reference safe ty information 
(see the current version of the Investigator’s Brochure).  
The Sponsor will report all safety observations made during the conduct of the trial in the clinical 
study report.  
10.6 SAFETY INSTRUCTIONS   
10.6.1  Guidelines for the management of potential infusion associated reactions   
Patients should routinely receive premedications prior to study treatment infusion as detailed in 
Section  8.2.2  to reduce the risk and severity of IARs commonly observed with mAbs.  
Details for management of IARs are provided in Section  8.2.5 . 
10.6.2  Guidelines for the management of tumor lysis syndrome   
Details for the management of TLS are provided in Section  8.2.9 . 
10.7 ADVERSE EVENTS MONITORING   
All adverse events will be managed and reported in compliance with all applicable regula tions, 
and included in the final clinical study report.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 113 Internal  
11 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS   
The statistical considerations presented in this section forms the basis for the SAP, which wil l 
provide accurate definitions and detailed specifications for the analyses to be performed on the 
data collected from this study. A final SAP will be issued prior to first patient treated.  
11.1 DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE   
The sample size calculation is based on the primary efficacy endpoint (ie, PFS). The following 
assumptions were used:  
• Kd arm has a median PFS of 19 months.  
• IKd arm will have 41% risk reduction in hazard rate in comp arison to Kd arm. The 
targeted hazard ratio is 0.59. Assuming proportional hazards, this is expected to 
correspond to an improvement in the true median PFS time from 19  months to 32 months.  
• Log-rank test at a 1 -sided 2.5% significance level.  
• 3:2 randomizat ion ratio (IKd:Kd).  
• An interim analysis for efficacy assessment of PFS is planned when 65% of the 159 PFS 
events will be observed. An O’Brien and Fleming α -spending function will be used to 
obtain the nominal significance levels for the interim and final a nalyses of PFS  
(see Section  11.5 for details).  
Based on the above assumptions, a total of 159 PFS events are needed to achieve a 90% power for 
the study.  
In addition, with a total of 300 patients (180 patients in IKd arm an d 120 patients in Kd arm) and 
assuming a uniform accrual rate of 19 patients per month, the final PFS analysis cut -off date is 
expected to be approximately 36 months after first patient in.  
Calculations were made using East 6.4 software.  
11.2 DISPOSITION OF PAT IENTS   
Screened patients are defined as any patients who signed the study informed consent.  
Randomized patients consist of all patients with a signed informed consent who have bee n 
allocated a randomization number by the IRT, regardless of whether the patient was treated or not.  
Patients treated without being randomized will not be considered as randomized and will not be 
included in any analysis population. The safety experience o f such patients will be reported 
separately.  
For any patient randomized more than once, only the data associated with the first randomization 
will be used in any analysis population. The safety experience associated with any later 
randomization will be ass essed separately.  
The number of screened patients as well as the number and percentage of patients included in the 
analysis populations defined in Section  11.3 will be provided.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 114 Internal  
A summary of the reasons for definitive and premature treatment discontinuation by treatment 
group will be provided.  
11.3 ANALYSIS POPULATIONS   
11.3.1  Efficacy populations   
11.3.1.1  Intent -to-treat population   
The intent -to-treat (ITT ) population is the randomized population. All patients who have given 
their informed consent and for whom there is confirmation of successful allocation of a 
randomization number by the IRT will be included in this population. Patients will be analyzed 
according to the treatment group allocated by IRT, regardless of whether the patients received any 
study treatment or receive a different study treatment fr om that to which they were randomized.  
This population is the primary population for all efficacy analyses.  
11.3.2  Safety population   
The safety population will include ITT patients who received at least 1 dose or a part of a dose of 
study treatment.  
This population is the primary population for the analysis of all safety parameters. All analyses 
using this population will be based on the actual treatment received. For instance, patients who 
receive at least 1 isatuximab dose (even incomplete) during the trial, will be allocated to the 
IKd arm. 
11.3.3  Pharmacokinetic  population   
The PK population will include safety population patients from the IKd arm who receive at least 
1 dose of isatuximab, even if incomplete, with data for at least 1 PK concentration available 
post-baseline.  
11.3.4  ADA population   
The ADA population will include safety population patients from the IKd arm with a least 1  ADA 
assessment during the ADA on -study observation period with a reportable result.  
11.4 STATISTICAL METHODS   
A list of study endpoints and their definitions are provided in Section  9. 
Continuous data will be summarized for each treatment group using number of available 
observations, mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, and maximum. Categorical and 
ordinal data will be summarized using number and percentage of patients.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 115 Internal  
11.4.1  Extent of study treatment exposure and compliance   
The extent of study treatment exposure will be assessed and summarized by actual treatment 
received within the safety population.  
The following variables will be described to summarize the overall study treatment exposure 
(all study treatments together):  
• Overall number of cycles started, defined by the total number of cycles in which at least 
one dose of any study treatments is administered.  
• Overall duration of exposure in weeks defined as [(last day of last cycle – first day of first 
cycle)/7].  
The first  day of the first cycle is defined as the date of the first dose of study treatment at Cycle 1.  
The last day of last cycle is defined as the last date among the following:  
• Date of last dose of isatuximab + 7 days if last cycle is Cycle 1 or date of last do se of 
isatuximab + 14 days if last cycle is Cycle 2 or later,  
• Date of last dose of carfilzomib + 7 days if the last dose is administered on Day 1 or 8; or 
date of last dose of carfilzomib + 6 days if the last dose is administered on Day 2 or 9; or 
date of  last dose of carfilzomib + 14 days if the last dose is administered on Day 15; or 
date of last dose of carfilzomib + 13 days is the last dose is administered on Day 16,  
• Date of last dose of dexamethasone + 7 days if the last dose is administered on Days 1, 8, 
15, or 22; or date of last dose of dexamethasone + 6 days if the last dose is administered on 
Days 2, 9, 16, or 23.  
Cycle delay will be computed to describe overall dose modification. A cycle is deemed to have 
been delayed if the start date of the current cycle is >28 + 3 days beyond the start date of the 
previous cycle (planned cycle duration is 28 days).  
In addition, the following variables will be summarized with descriptive statistics for isatuximab, 
carfilzomib, and dexame thasone separately:  
• Number of cycles started with each drug.  
• Duration of exposure in weeks, defined as:  
- For isatuximab:  
[date of last dose of isatuximab + 7 days - first dose of isatuximab] / 7  if last cycle is 
Cycle 1 or [date of last dose of isatuximab + 14 days - first dose of isatuximab] / 7 if 
last cycle is Cycle 2 or later,  
- For carfilzomib:  
[date of last dose of carfilzomib + 7 days - first dose of carfilzomib] / 7 if the last dose 
is administered on Day 1 or 8; or [date of last dose of carfilzomib + 6 days - first dose 
of carfilzomib] / 7 if the last dose is administered on Day 2 or 9; or  
[date of last dose of carfilzomib + 14  days - first dose of carfilzomib] / 7 if the last 
dose is administered on Day 15; or  
[date of last dose of carfilzomib + 1 3 days - first dose of carfilzomib] / 7 if the last 
dose is administered on Day 16,  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 116 Internal  
- For dexamethasone: [date of last dose of dexamethasone + 7 days - first dose of 
dexamethasone] / 7 if the last dose is administered on Days 1, 8, 15, and 22; or  
[date of l ast dose of dexamethasone + 6 days - first dose of dexamethasone] / 7 if the 
last dose is administered on Days 2, 9, 16, and 23.  
• Cumulative dose: The cumulative dose is the sum of all doses administered from first to 
last dose.  
• Actual dose intensity: Defin ed as the cumulative dose divided by the duration of exposure.  
• Relative dose intensity (RDI ): Defined as the ratio of the actual dose intensity to the 
planned dose intensity. The RDI is an indicato r of the feasibility of the chosen schedule of 
administration.  
• Number of infusions (excluding dexamethasone).  
• Infusion interruption (excluding dexamethasone): An infusion is considered to be 
interrupted if the administration is stopped during an infusion b efore it is completed 
regardless it is further restarted or not.  
• Infusion/dose delay within cycle: An infusion/dose is deemed to have been delayed if the 
actual start date is >1 day beyond the theoretical day of treatment. Infusion/dose delay 
does not appl y to the first infusion/dose of each cycle, in which case it is considered as 
cycle delay.  
• Dose reduction: A dose is considered to be administered at a reduced dose if the actual 
dose administered at the current administration is at least one level below the prior 
administration. In addition, if the dose of carfilzomib is not increased to 56 mg/m 2 from 
C1D8 as planned per protocol, this will be also considered as a dose reduction. Although 
not allowed in the study protocol for isatuximab, potential dose re duction will be screened 
and reported in the clinical study report.   
• Dose omission: A dose is considered omitted if the dose is not administered for the 
scheduled visit and there are positive dose(s) afterwards.  
11.4.2  Analyses of efficacy endpoints   
11.4.2.1  Analysis of primary efficacy endpoint   
Primary analysis will consist of PFS comparison between IKd arm versus Kd a rm through a 
log-rank test procedure stratified by stratification factors as entered in the IRT (ie, number of 
previous lines of therapy and R -ISS). The significance levels at the interim and final analyses will 
be determined using alpha -spending function (see Section  11.5). 
This analysis will be performed on the ITT population.  
The an alysis of PFS will be based on the following censoring rules:  
• If progression and death are not observed before the PFS analysis cut -off date or the date 
of initiation of further anti -myeloma treatment, PFS will be censored at the date of the last 
valid dis ease assessment not showing disease progression performed prior to initiation of a 
further anti -myeloma treatment (if any) or the analysis cut -off date, whichever comes first.  
• A patient without an event (death or disease progression) and without any valid  
post-baseline disease assessments will be censored at the day of randomization (Day 1).  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 117 Internal  
The date of disease progression is the date of the first documented (that is subsequently 
confirmed, if based on paraprotein) progression according to IMWG criteria as assessed by IRC 
(see Appendix F ). 
The final PFS analysis cut -off date will be the date when the 159th event (first occurrence of either 
disease progression or death due to any cause) assessed by the IRC has been observed.  
The estimates of the hazard ratio and corresponding (1 -2α) % CI (α being the one -sided nominal 
significance level: α=0.023 at final analysis and 0.005 at PFS interim analysis) will be provided 
using a Cox proportional hazard model stratified by the stratifi cation factors as entered in the IRT. 
The median PFS and probabilities of being progression free at different time points calculated 
using the Kaplan -Meier method as well as corresponding CI will be presented by treatment arm. 
The Kaplan -Meier PFS curves w ill also be presented.  
Sensitivity analyses of PFS will be performed (eg, different censoring rules and PFS assessed by 
the Investigator). In particular, a sensitivity analysis has been added to evaluate the impact of late 
progressions and deaths. In this sensitivity analysis, progressions or deaths occurring more than 
8 weeks after the last disease assessment (corresponding to two consecutive missed assessments) 
will be censored at the earliest of the date of last valid disease assessment without evidence of 
progression before initiation of new anti -myeloma treatment and the cut -off date. Subgroup 
analyses of PFS (eg, by high risk cytogenetic status, number of prior lines of treatment) will also 
be conducted.  
11.4.2.2  Analyses of secondary efficacy endpoints   
11.4.2.2.1  Analysis of key secondary efficacy endpoints   
Key secondary endpoints other than OS will be analyzed in the ITT population at the time of the 
primary and/or the final analysis of PFS (based on data collected up to the PFS analysis cut -off 
date). The CR rate will only be tested for comparison when the antibody -capture interference 
assay will be available.  
Key sec ondary endpoints other than OS will be summarized with descriptive statistics per 
treatment arm. The (1 -2α) % 2 -sided CI will be computed using the Clopper -Pearson method. 
These endpoints will be compared between treatment arms using Cochran Mantel Haensze l 
stratified method.  
For analysis purpose, subjects in the ITT population without MRD assessment will be considered 
as having positive MRD. In addition, analyses on MRD negativity rate will be also performed on 
the ITT population but restricted to patients  with VGPR or better as per investigator, as 
exploratory analyses.  
The OS analysis will be similar to what is described for PFS and will be performed approximately 
3 years after the primary PFS analysis cut -off date. The analysis of OS will consist of comp arison 
between the IKd arm versus Kd arm through a log -rank test procedure stratified by stratification 
factors as entered in the IRT (ie, number of previous lines of therapy and R -ISS) at the 1 -sided 
level of 0.025. The analysis will be based on the follo wing censoring rule:  
• Patients without death prior to the OS analysis cut -off date will be censored at the last date 
the patient was known to be alive or the OS analysis cut -off date, whichever comes first.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 118 Internal  
The estimates of the hazard ratio and correspondin g 95% CI will be provided using a Cox 
proportional hazard model stratified by the stratification factors as entered in the IRT. The median 
OS and probabilities of being surviving at different time points calculated using the Kaplan -Meier 
method as well as corresponding CI will be presented by treatment arm. The  Kaplan -Meier OS 
curves will also be provided.  
Subgroup analyses of OS (eg, by high risk cytogenetic status, number of prior lines of treatment) 
will also be conducted.  
11.4.2.2.2  Analysis of other secondary eff icacy endpoints   
Other secondary endpoints will be analyzed at the time of the primary analysis and/or the final 
PFS analysis.  
The analyses of TTP, PFS2, DOR, time to first respon se and time to best response will be similar 
to what is described for PFS and will be based on the following censoring rules:  
• TTP: If progression is not observed before the PFS analysis cut -off date or the date of 
initiation of further anti -myeloma treatm ent, TTP will be censored at the date of the last 
valid disease assessment not showing disease progression performed prior to initiation of a 
further anti -myeloma treatment (if any) or the analysis cut -off date, whichever comes first.  
• PFS2: For patients alive without a progression after initiation of further anti -myeloma 
treatment before the PFS analysis cut -off date, PFS2 will be censored at the date of the last 
follow -up visit not showing disease progression after initiation of further anti -myeloma 
treatment or the analysis cut -off date, whichever comes first.  
• DOR: In the absence of the confirmation of subsequent disease progression or death 
before the analysis cut -off date, the DOR will be censored at the date of the last valid 
disease assessme nt not showing disease progression performed prior to initiation of a 
further antimyeloma treatment or the analysis cut -off date, whichever is earlier.  
• Time to first response:  in the absence of response, patients will be censored at the earliest 
of the dat e of the last valid disease assessment before disease progression or death, the 
date of the last valid disease assessment before initiation of a further anti -myeloma 
treatment (if any) or the analysis cut -off date, whichever comes first.  
• Time to best respo nse: The same censoring rules as time to first response will be used  
11.4.2.3  Multiplicity considerations   
Hypothesis testing of the key secondary efficacy endpoints will be carried out. A  closed test 
procedure will be used to control the type I error rate meaning that no further testing will be 
performed unless the significance level had been reached on PFS. The hierarchical procedure will 
be then performed according to the following order : 
• ORR at the time of the primary PFS analysis and/or the final PFS analysis.  
• Rate of VGPR or better at the time of the primary PFS analysis on and/or the final PFS 
analysis.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 119 Internal  
• Rate of VGPR or better with MRD negativity at the time of the primary PFS analysis 
and/or the final PFS analysis.  
• CR rate will only be tested for comparison when the antibody -capture interference assay 
will be available  
• OS tested at End -of-Study.  
The significance levels at the interim and final analyses will be determined using  alpha -spending 
function specific to each endpoint (see Section  11.5). The primary  analysis of PFS corresponds 
either to the positive interim analysis or the final PFS analysis.  
No update of PFS, ORR, rate of VGPR or better, VGPR or better with MRD negativity rate, and 
rate of CR will be provided at the time of OS analysis.  
11.4.3  Analyses of safety data   
All safety analyses will be performed on the safety population unless otherwise specified. The 
summary of safety results will be presented by actual treatment group. The analysis of the safety 
variables will be essentially descriptive and no systematic testing is planned.  
For each of the safety parameters, a baseline value will be defined as the last value or 
measurement taken up to the first dose in the study.  
The obs ervation period will be divided into 3 periods:  
• The pre -treatment period is defined as the time form the signed informed consent date up 
to the first dose of study treatment.  
• The treatment period is defined as the time from the first dose of study treatmen t up to the 
last dose of study treatment +30 days.  
• The post -treatment period is defined as the period of time starting the day after the end of 
the treatment period up to the end of the study.  
11.4.3.1  Adverse events   
Adverse event observation period:  
• Pre-treatment AEs are defined as any AE reported during the pre -treatment period.  
• TEAEs are defined as AEs that developed or worsened or became serious during the 
treatment period.  
• Post-treatment AEs are defined as AEs that developed or worsened or become serious 
during the post -treatment period.  
The primary focus of AE reporting will be on TEAEs. Pre -treatment and post -treatment AEs will 
be described separately.  
All AEs will be grad ed according NCI -CTCAE v4.03 ( Appendix E ) and coded to a lower -level 
term, preferred term (PT ), hig h-level term (HLT ), high -level group term (HLGT ), and associated 
primary system organ class (SOC ) using the version of Medical Dictionary for Regulatory 
Activities currently in effect at Sanofi at the time of database lock.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 120 Internal  
The grade will be taken into account in the summary. For patients with multiple occurrences of 
the same AE, the maximum (wors t) grade by period of observation will be used. Summaries will 
be provided for all grades combined and for Grade ≥3 (including Grade 5). Missing grades, if any, 
will be included in the “all grades” category.  
Method for handling incomplete dates of onset w ill be described in SAP.  
Regarding treatment discontinuation, following definitions will be used:  
• Premature  treatment discontinuation is defined as the discontinuation of at least 1 of the 
study treatments but at least 1 is continued.  
• Definitive  treatment discontinuation is defined as the discontinuation of all the study 
treatments.  
11.4.3.2  Treatment -emergent adverse events   
An overview table summarizing the number (%) of patients with the following TEAEs will be 
generated for the safety population:  
• TEAEs any grade.  
• TEAEs of Grade ≥3.  
• TEAEs of Grade  3 or 4.  
• TEAEs of Grade 5 (any TEAE with a fatal outcome during the treatment period).  
• Serious TEAEs.  
• Serious treatment -related TEAEs.  
• TEAE leading to definitive (all study drugs) discontinuation.  
• TEAE leading to premature discontinuation of isatuximab.  
• TEAE leading to premature discontinuation of carfilzomib.  
• TEAE leading to premature discontinuation of dexamethasone.  
• IARs of Grade ≥3.  
• Treatment -related TEAEs.  
• Treatment -related TEAEs of Grade ≥3.  
The number and percentage of patients experien cing TEAEs by primary SOC and PT will be 
summarized by NCI CTCAE grade (all grades and Grade ≥3). Similar tables will be prepared for 
treatment -related TEAEs, AESIs, TEAEs leading to permanent/premature discontinuation, 
TEAEs leading to dose modification, serious TEAEs, TEAEs with fatal outcome, and AEs/SAEs 
occurring during the post -treatment dosing period.  
Sorting within tables should ensure the same presentation for the set of all AEs within the 
observation period (pre -treatment, on -treatment, and post -treatment). For that purpose, the table of 
all TEAEs presented by SOC and PT sorted by internationally agreed order and decreasing 
frequency of PTs within SOCs will define the presentation order for all other tables unless 
otherwise specified. Sorting will be based on results for the IKd arm.  
The number and percentage of patients experiencing TEAEs presented by primary SOC, HLGT, 
HLT, and PT sorted by SOC internationally agreed order, then by alphabetic order of HLGT, 
HLT, and PT will be provided. This table  will be provided for all TEAEs, serious TEAEs, and 
TEAEs leading to permanent/premature treatment discontinuation.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 121 Internal  
11.4.3.3  Deaths   
An overview of Grade 5 AEs will be provided summarizing  number (%) of patients with any:  
• Grade 5 AE (TEAE and post -treatment).  
• Fatal TEAE (regardless date of death/period).  
- Grade 5 TEAE (TEAE with a fatal outcome during the treatment period).  
- Any TEAE leading to death during the post -treatment period (worsened  to Grade 5 in 
the post -treatment period).  
• Post-treatment Grade 5 AE (excluding a TEAE that worsened to Grade 5 during the 
post-treatment period).  
The following death summaries will be generated for the safety population:  
• Number (%) of patients who died by study period (treatment, and post -treatment) and 
reasons for death (disease progression, AE, other) by treatment received.  
• Listing of deaths in non -randomized patients or randomized but not treated patients (this 
listing will be generated on the sc reened patients).  
• All TEAEs leading to death by primary SOC and PT, sorted by the internationally agreed 
SOC order and by decreasing incidence of PTs.  
• All TEAEs related to treatment and leading to death by primary SOC and PT sorted by the 
internationally a greed SOC order and by decreasing incidence of PTs.  
• Number (%) of patients with TEAE(s) leading to death regardless of relationship and 
related to study treatment by Primary SOC, HLGT, HLT, and PT.  
• Summary of AEs leading to death, by Primary SOC and PT.  
- In context of disease progression (death within 30 days from last study treatment 
administration and the cause of death is disease progression).  
- In context other than disease progression (death within 30 days from last study 
treatment administration and for whom cause of death is not disease progression, or the 
death occurred more than 30 days from last study treatment administration and the 
cause of death is AE).  
11.4.3.4  Other safety evaluation   
11.4.3.4.1  Laboratory data   
Clinical laboratory values will be analyzed after conversion into standard international units. 
International units will be used in all listings and tables.  Hematological and biochemistry results 
will be graded according to NCI -CTCAE v4.03, when applicable. For patients with multiple 
occurrences of the same laboratory variable during the treatment period, the maximum grade 
(worst) per patient will be used.  
For hematological parameters and for some selected biochemistry parameters, Sanofi generic 
ranges (lower limit of normal, ULN) are defined and will be used for grading. For other 
biochemistry parameters (eg, for hepatic enzymes ALT, AST, alkaline phosphatase , total 
bilirubin), grading will be derived using local laboratory normal ranges.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 122 Internal  
The number and proportion of patients with abnormal laboratory tests at baseline (ie, last 
assessment before the first dose of study treatment administration) will be present ed by grade and 
all grades together. A similar table showing abnormalities during the treatment period will be 
provided. The denominator used for percentage calculation is the number of patients with at least 
1 evaluation of the laboratory test during the considered observation period.  
For laboratory tests for which NCI-CTCAE v4.03 scale is not applicable , potentially clinically 
significant abnormality (PCSA ) values are def ined as abnormal values considered medically 
important by the Sponsor according to predefined criteria/thresholds based on literature review. 
The PCSA criteria will determine which patients had at least 1 PCSA during the treatment period, 
taking into accou nt all evaluations performed during the on -treatment period, including 
nonscheduled or repeated evaluations. The incidence of PCSA any time during the on -treatment 
period will be summarized by treatment group irrespective of the baseline level.  
11.4.3.4.2  ECOG Perfor mance Status   
A shift table of baseline ECOG PS versus best and worst ECOG PS on treatment will be provided.  
11.4.3.4.3  Vital signs   
For blood pressure/heart rate parameters, the incidence of PCSAs prior to study treatment 
administration at any cycle during the on -treatment period will be summarized by treatmen t group 
whatever the baseline level and/or according to the following baseline categories:  
• Normal/missing.  
• Abnormal according to PCSA criterion or criteria.  
The incidence of PCSAs during and after isatuximab administration at any cycle during the 
treatment  period in the IKd arm will also be summarized.  
11.4.3.4.4  Electrocardiogram   
The incidence of patients with at least 1 abnormal ECG at any time during the treatment period 
will be summarized by treatment group irrespective of the baseline level and/or according to the 
following baseline status categories:  
• Normal/missing.  
• Abnormal.  
11.4.4  Analyses of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic variables   
11.4.4.1  Analysis of pharmacokinetic variables   
Individual concentrations and PK parameters of carfilzomib will be summarized by descriptive 
statistics (such as mean, geometric mean, median, standard deviation, standard error of the mean 
[SEM ], coefficient of variation [CV ], minimum, and maximum) .  
The population PK of isatuximab will be characterized in the population of patients in the 
IKd arm, using a nonlinear mixed effect model based  on PK data from Phase I/II studies and III in 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 123 Internal  
which intensive and sparse blood sampling protocols were used. The population estimates from 
this analysis will provide a prior distribution from which individual Bayesian estimates of the 
PK parameters for ea ch patient in this study will be derived.  
Pharmacokinetic parameters of isatuximab will be summarized by descriptive statistics (such as 
mean, geometric mean, median, standard deviation, SEM, CV, minimum, and maximum).  
11.4.5  Analysis of immunogenicity variables   
The observation period for ADAs will be divided into 2 periods:  
• The ADA pre -treatment period will be defined as the time that informed consent is signed 
until the first isatuxima b administration.  
• The ADA on -study observation period will be defined as the time from the first isatuximab 
administration until the end of the study.  
Patients with at least 1 evaluable ADA result during the ADA pre -treatment period will be 
considered as e valuable at baseline. Patients with at least 1 evaluable ADA result during the ADA 
on-study observation period will be considered evaluable during the on -study observation period.  
The immunogenicity for isatuximab will be assessed by summarizing the number  (%) of patients 
with pre -existing ADA and ADA negative at baseline, and by summarizing the number (%) of 
ADA positive patients (including treatment -induced ADA and treatment boosted ADA) during the 
on-study observation period.  
Anti-drug antibody prevalenc e and ADA incidence will be also described.  
The impact of positive immune response will be evaluated on efficacy, PK, and safety endpoints, 
when relevant.  
11.4.6  Analyses of biomarker variables   
Biomarker endpoints will be analyzed using patients from the ITT population who have at least 
1 evaluable assessment on the biomarker of interest.  
Each genetic biomarker will be summarized with descriptive statistics by treatment group and 
overall . Further analyses will be described in the SAP.  
11.4.7  Analyses of PRO (health -related quality of life/health economics variables)   
The PRO endpoints for each of the 3 selected HRQL an d health utility instruments (EORTC 
QLQ -C30, QLQ -MY20, and EQ -5D-5L) will be analyzed in patients from the safety population 
who have completed the baseline and at least 1 post -baseline assessment.  
For each questionnaire the compliance profile over time will be summarized (number and 
percentage of forms received versus expected, and number and percentage of forms evaluable 
versus expected). Reasons for non -completion will be summarized.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 124 Internal  
A descriptive summary at each visit and change from baseline will be provided for each group for 
the following variables:  
• EORTC QLQ -C30: GHS/quality of life scale, the 5 functional scales (physical, emotional, 
cognitive, role, and social), the 3 symptom scales (fatigue, nausea/vomiting, and pain) and 
the 6 additional single items (dyspnea, insomnia, appetite loss, constipation, diarrhea, and 
financial impact).  
• QLQ -MY20: Future perspective, body image, disease symptoms and side effects of 
treatment.  
• EQ-5D-5L: Health state utility value and VAS scores.  
11.5 INTERIM  ANALYSIS   
An interim analysis for efficacy assessment of PFS is planned when 65% of the 159 PFS events 
have been observed. The interim PFS cut -off date is expected approximately 24 months after the 
FPI.  
An O’Brien and Fleming α -spending function will be used to obtain the nominal significance 
levels for the interim and final analyses of survival on PFS. The 1 -sided nominal significance 
level to terminate the study for efficacy at  65% information fraction (103  PFS events) is 0.005 
(corresponding to a HR of 0.6). The 1 -sided nominal significance level to declare superiority of 
IKd at the final analysis (159 events) is 0.023 (corresponding to a HR of 0.725). In case of 
positive resul ts at interim analysis, PFS results will be updated in a descriptive way (non -
inferential analysis) at the analysis cut -off date when 159 PFS events are observed.  
For the key secondary endpoints, the significance levels at the interim and final analyses wi ll be 
determined using α -spending function specific to each endpoint, except if the information fraction 
is 100% at the interim analysis of PFS (ie, information on secondary endpoints available for every 
patient) . For ORR and rate of VGPR or better, a Poco ck-type boundary will be used. For rate of 
VGPR or better and MRD negative rate, the O’Brien -Fleming alpha -spending function will be 
used. OS will be tested only at End -of-Study (ie, 3  years after the primary PFS analysis cut -off 
date).  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 125 Internal  
12 ETHICAL AND REGULAT ORY CONSIDERATIONS   
12.1 ETHICAL AND REGULATORY STANDARDS   
This clinical trial will be conducted by the Spo nsor, the Investigator, and delegated Investigator 
staff and Subinvestigator, in accordance with consensus ethics principles derived from 
international ethics guidelines, including the Declaration of Helsinki, and the International 
Council for Harmonisatio n of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH ) 
guidelines for Good Clinical Practice (GCP ), all applicable laws, rules, and regulations.  
This clinical trial will be recorded in a free, publicly accessible, internet -based registry, no later 
than 21 days after the first patient enrollment, in compli ance with applicable regulatory 
requirements and with Sanofi public disclosure commitments.  
The Investigator will be responsible for the following:  
• Providing written summaries of the status of the study to the IRB/IEC annually or more 
frequently in accord ance with the requirements, policies, and procedures established by 
the IRB/IEC Determining whether an incidental finding should be returned to a participant 
and, if it meets the appropriate criteria, to ensure the finding is returned (an incidental 
findin g is a previously undiagnosed medical condition that is discovered unintentionally 
and is unrelated to the aims of the study for which the tests are being performed). The 
following should be considered when determining the return of an incidental finding:  
- The return of such information to the study participant (and/or his/her designated 
healthcare professional, if so designated by the participant) is consistent with all 
applicable national, state, or regional laws and regulations in the country where the 
study is being conducted, and  
- The finding reveals a substantial risk of a serious health condition or has reproductive 
importance, AND has analytical validity, AND has clinical validity.  
- The participant in a clinical study has the right to opt out of being notified by the 
Investigator of such incidental findings. In the event that the participant has opted out 
of being notified and the finding has consequences for other individuals, eg, the 
finding relates to a communicable disease, Investigators should seek  independent 
ethical advice before determining next steps.  
- In case the participant has decided to opt out, the Investigator must record in the site 
medical files that she/he does not want to know about such findings.  
According to the Regulation No 536/2014  of the European Parliament and the Council of the 
European Union and as specified by the applicable regulatory requirements in non -European 
Union /European Economic Area countries, Sanofi, as the clinical trial Sponsor, needs to report to 
the concerned regulatory agency/ies serious breaches without undue delay but not later than 
7 calendar days of becoming aware of that breach. A serious breach is defined as a deviation o f 
the version of the protocol applicable at the time of the breach or the applicable clinical trial 
regulation that is likely to affect to a significant degree the safety and rights of a subject or the 
reliability and robustness of the data generated in th e clinical trial.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 126 Internal  
The Sponsor shall ensure that all parties involved in the conduct of the clinical trial promptly 
report any events that might meet the definition of a serious breach.  
Therefore, Investigators shall within 48 hours after being aware of a d eviation that might meet the 
definition of a serious breach, report to the Sponsor any suspected serious breach to enable the 
Sponsor to carry out the required assessment and notify the regulatory agency/ies in the event of a 
confirmed serious breach. To t hat extent, the principal Investigator must have a process in place to 
ensure that the site staff or service providers engaged by the principal Investigator/institution are 
able to identify the occurrence of a (suspected) serious breach and that a (suspect ed) serious 
breach is promptly reported to the Sponsor through the contacts (e -mail address or telephone 
number) provided by the Sponsor.  
12.2 INFORMED CONSENT   
The Investigator (according to applicable regulatory requirements), or a person designated by the 
Investigator, and under the Investigator's responsibility, should fully inform the patient of all 
pertinent aspects of the clinical trial including the written information giving approval/favorable 
opinion by the ethics committee (IRB/IEC). All participants should be informed to the fullest 
extent possible about the study, in languag e and terms they are able to understand.  
Prior to a patient’s participation in the clinical trial, the written informed consent form should be 
signed, name filled in and personally dated by the patient or by the patient’s legally acceptable 
representative,  and by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion. A copy of the 
signed and dated written informed consent form will be provided to the patient.  
The informed consent form used by the Investigator for obtaining the patient's informed consent  
must be reviewed and approved by the Sponsor prior to submission to the appropriate ethics 
committee (IRB/IEC) for approval/favorable opinion.  
For a regional or national emergency declared by a governmental agency, contingency measures 
refer to Appendix N . 
12.3 HEALTH AUTHORITIES AND INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD/INDEPENDENT 
ETHICS COMMITTEE (IRB/IEC)   
As required by local regulation, the Investigator or the Sponsor must submit this clinical trial 
protocol to the health authorities (competent regulatory authority) and the appropriate IRB/IEC, 
and is required to forward to the respect ive other party a copy of the written and dated 
approval/favorable opinion signed by the chairman with IRB/IEC composition.  
The clinical trial (study number, clinical trial protocol title and version number), the documents 
reviewed (clinical trial protocol , informed consent form, Investigator’s Brochure with any 
addenda or labeling documents (summary of product characteristics, Investigator’s curriculum 
vitae, etc.) and the date of the review should be clearly stated on the written (IRB/IEC) 
approval/favora ble opinion.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 127 Internal  
The study treatment will not be released at the study site and the Investigator will not start the 
study before the written and dated approval/favorable opinion is received by the Investigator and 
the Sponsor.  
During the clinical trial, any am endment or modification to the clinical trial protocol should be 
submitted to the health authorities (competent regulatory authority), as required by local 
regulation, in addition to the IRB/IEC before implementation, unless the change is necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to the patients, in which case the health authorities (competent 
regulatory authority) and the IRB/IEC should be informed as soon as possible. They should also 
be informed of any event likely to affect the safety of patients or th e continued conduct of the 
clinical trial, in particular any change in safety. All updates to the Investigator’s Brochure will be 
sent to the IRB/IEC and to health authorities (competent regulatory authority), as required by 
local regulation.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 128 Internal  
13 STUDY MONITORING   
13.1 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR(S)   
The Investigator is required to ensure compliance  with all procedures required by the clinical trial 
protocol and with all study procedures provided by the Sponsor (including security rules). The 
Investigator agrees to provide reliable data and all information requested by the clinical trial 
protocol (wi th the help of the eCRF, Discrepancy Resolution Form [DRF ], or other appropriate 
instrument) in an accurate and legible manner according to the instructions provided and to ensure 
direct access  to source documents by Sponsor representatives.  
If any circuit includes transfer of data particular attention should be paid to the confidentiality of 
the patient's data to be transferred.  
The Investigator may appoint such other individuals as he/she may deem appropriate as 
Subinvestigators to assist in the conduct of the clinical trial in accordance with the clinical trial 
protocol. All Subinvestigators shall be appointed and listed in a timely manner. The 
Subinvestigators will be supervised by and work u nder the responsibility of the Investigator. The 
Investigator will provide them with a copy of the clinical trial protocol and all necessary 
information.  
13.2 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SPONSOR   
The Sponsor of this clinical trial is responsible to regulatory authorities for taking all reasonable 
steps to ensure the proper conduct of the clinical trial as regards ethics, clinical trial protocol 
compliance, and integrity and validity of the data recorded on the eCRFs. Thus, the main duty of 
the monitoring team is to help the Investigator and the Sponsor maintain a high level of ethical, 
scientific, technical, and regulatory quality in all aspects of the clinical trial.  
At regular intervals du ring the clinical trial, the site will be contacted, through monitoring visits, 
letters, or telephone calls, by a representative of the monitoring team to review study progress, 
Investigator and patient compliance with clinical trial protocol requirements,  and any emergent 
problems. These monitoring visits will include but not be limited to review of the following 
aspects: patient informed consent, patient recruitment and follow -up, SAE documentation and 
reporting, AESI documentation and reporting, AE docum entation, study treatment allocation, 
patient compliance with the study treatment regimen, study treatment accountability, concomitant 
therapy use, and quality of data. Monitoring details describing strategy (eg, risk -based initiatives 
in operations and qu ality such as Risk Management and Mitigation Strategies and Analytical 
Risk-Based Monitoring), methods, responsibilities and requirements, including handling of 
noncompliance issues and monitoring techniques (central, remote or on -site monitoring) are 
provided in separate study documents.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 129 Internal  
13.3 SOURCE DOCUMENT REQUIREMENTS   
According to the ICH GCP, the monitoring team must check the eCRF entries against the source 
documents, except for the pre -identified source data directly recorded in the eCRF. The informed 
consent form will include a statement by which the patient allows the Sponsor’s duly authorized 
personnel, the ethics committee (IRB/IEC), and the regulatory authorities to have dir ect access to 
original medical records which support the data on the eCRFs (eg, patient's medical file, 
appointment books, original laboratory records, etc.). These personnel, bound by professional 
secrecy, must maintain the confidentiality of all personal  identity or personal medical information 
(according to confidentiality and personal data protection rules).  
13.4 USE AND COMPLETION OF CASE REPORT FORMS (CRFS) AND ADDITIONAL 
REQUEST   
It is the responsibility of the Investigator to maintain adequate and accurate eCRFs (according to 
the technology used) designed by the Sponsor to record (according to Sponsor instructions) all 
observations and other data pertinent to the clinical investi gation in a timely manner. All eCRFs 
should be completed in their entirety in a neat, legible manner to ensure accurate interpretation of 
data.  
Should a correction be made, the corrected information will be entered in the eCRF overwriting 
the initial infor mation. An audit trail allows identifying the modification.  
Data are available within the system to the Sponsor as soon as they are entered in the eCRF.  
The computerized handling of the data by the Sponsor may generate additional requests (DRF) to 
which t he Investigator is obliged to respond by confirming or modifying the data questioned. The 
requests with their responses will be managed through the eCRF.  
13.5 USE OF COMPUTERIZED SYSTEMS   
The complete list of computerized systems used for the study is provided  in a separate document 
which is maintained in the  Sponsor trial master file.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 130 Internal  
14 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS   
14.1 CURRICULUM VITAE   
A current copy of the curriculum vitae describing the experience, qualification an d training of 
each Investigator and Subinvestigator will be signed, dated, and provided to the Sponsor prior to 
the beginning of the clinical trial.  
14.2 RECORD RETENTION IN STUDY SITES   
The Investigator must maintain confidential all study documentation, and take measures to 
prevent accidental or premature destruction of these documents.  
The Investigator should retain the study documents at least 15 years after the completion or 
discon tinuation of the clinical trial.  
However, applicable regulatory requirements should be taken into account in the event that a 
longer period is required.  
The Investigator must notify the Sponsor prior to destroying any study essential documents 
following th e clinical trial completion or discontinuation.  
If the Investigator's personal situation is such that archiving can no longer be ensured by him/her, 
the Investigator shall inform the Sponsor and the relevant records shall be transferred to a 
mutually agree d upon designee.  
14.3 CONFIDENTIALITY   
All information disclosed or provided by the Sponsor (or any company/institution acting on their 
behalf), or produced during the clinical trial,  including, but not limited to, the clinical trial 
protocol, personal data in relation to the patients, the CRFs, the Investigator's Brochure, and the 
results obtained during the course of the clinical trial is confidential, prior to the publication of 
results. The Investigator and any person under his/her authority agree to undertake to keep 
confidential and not to disclose the information to any third party without the prior written 
approval of the Sponsor.  
However, the submission of this clinical trial protocol and other necessary documentation to the 
ethics committee (IRB/IEC) is expressly permitted, the IRB/IEC members having the same 
obligation of confidentiality.  
The Subinvestigators shall be bound by the same obligation as the Investigator. Th e Investigator 
shall inform the Subinvestigators of the confidential nature of the clinical trial.  
The Investigator and the Subinvestigators shall use the information solely for the purposes of the 
clinical trial, to the exclusion of any use for their own or for a third party's account.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 131 Internal  
14.4 PROPERTY RIGHTS   
All information, documents, and study treatment provided by the Sponsor or its designee are and 
remain the sole property of the Sp onsor.  
The Investigator shall not and shall cause the delegated Investigator staff/Subinvestigator not to 
mention any information or the Product in any application for a patent or for any other intellectual 
property rights.  
All the results, data, documents , and inventions, which arise directly or indirectly from the clinical 
trial in any form, shall be the immediate and exclusive property of the Sponsor.  
The Sponsor may use or exploit all the results at its own discretion, without any limitation to its 
property right (territory, field, continuance). The Sponsor shall be under no obligation to patent, 
develop, market, or otherwise use the results of the clinical trial.  
As the case may be, the Investigator and/or the Subinvestigators shall provide all assistan ce 
required by the Sponsor, at the Sponsor's expense, for obtaining and defending any patent, 
including signature of legal documents.  
14.5 DATA PROTECTION   
• The patient's personal data,  which are included in the Sponsor database shall be treated in 
compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.  
• When archiving or processing personal data pertaining to the Investigator and/or to the 
patients, the Sponsor shall take all appropriate me asures to safeguard and prevent access to 
this data by any unauthorized third party.  
• The Sponsor also collects specific data regarding Investigator as well as personal data 
from any person involved in the study which may be included in the Sponsor’s databa ses, 
shall be treated by both the Sponsor and the Investigator in compliance with all applicable 
laws and regulations.  
Patient race or ethnicity (including ‘Caucasian/white, Black, Asian/Oriental’) will be collected in 
this study because these data are req uired by several regulatory authorities (eg, on Afro -American 
population for the Food and Drug Administration, on the Japanese population for the 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency in Japan, or on the Chinese population for the 
China Food and Drug Administration in China).  
The data collected in this study will only be used for the purpose(s) of the study and to document 
the evaluation of the benefit/risk ratio, efficacy, and safety of the product(s). They may be further 
processed if they have been a nonymized.  
The contract between Sponsor, Investigators, and study sites specifies responsibilities of the 
parties related data protection, including handling of data security breaches and respective 
communication and cooperation of the parties. Accordingly, the Investigator and the institution 
will promptly notify the Sponsor about any data security breaches and detail in the notification the 
nature of the breach, the categories (eg, Sponsor’s personnel, study participants or their relatives, 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 132 Internal  
healthcare professionals, etc.), the approximate number of subjects concerned, the type and 
approximate number of data records concerned and the likely consequences of the breach. The 
institution and/or Investigator will investigate the causes of the data sec urity breach and take 
actions to minimize the effects of said breach. The institution and/or Investigator will record all 
information relating to the breach, including the results of their own investigations and 
investigations by authorities, as applicable , and will take all measures as necessary to prevent 
future data security breaches . 
14.6 INSURANCE COMPENSATION   
The Sponsor certifies that it has taken out a liability insurance polic y covering all clinical trials 
under its sponsorship. This insurance policy is in accordance with local laws and requirements. 
The insurance of the Sponsor does not relieve the Investigator and the collaborators from any 
obligation to maintain their own li ability insurance policy. An insurance certificate will be 
provided to the IECs/IRBs or regulatory authorities in countries requiring this document.  
14.7 SPONSOR AUDITS AND INSPECTIONS BY REGULATORY AGENCIES   
For the purpose of ensuring compliance with the clinical trial protocol, GCP, and applicable 
regulatory requirements, the Investigator should permit auditing by or on the behalf of the 
Sponsor and inspection by regulatory authorit ies. 
The Investigator agrees to allow the auditors/inspectors to have direct access to his/her study 
records for review, being understood that these personnel is bound by professional secrecy, and as 
such will not disclose any personal identity or personal  medical information.  
The Investigator will make every effort to help with the performance of the audits and inspections, 
giving access to all necessary facilities, data, and documents.  
As soon as the Investigator is notified of a planned inspection by the  authorities, he will inform 
the Sponsor and authorize the Sponsor to participate in this inspection.  
The confidentiality of the data verified and the protection of the patients should be respected 
during these inspections.  
Any result and information arisi ng from the inspections by the regulatory authorities will be 
immediately communicated by the Investigator to the Sponsor.  
The Investigator shall take appropriate measures required by the Sponsor to take corrective 
actions for all problems found during the  audit or inspections.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 133 Internal  
14.8 PREMATURE DISCONTINUATION OF THE STUDY OR PREMATURE CLOSE -OUT OF 
A SITE   
14.8.1  By the Sponsor   
The Sponsor has the right to terminate the participation of either an individual site or the study at 
any time, for any reason, including but not limited to the following:  
• The information on the product leads to doubt as to the benefit/risk ratio.  
• Patient  enrollment is unsatisfactory.  
• The Investigator has received from the Sponsor all study treatment, means, and 
information necessary to perform the clinical trial and has not included any patient after a 
reasonable period of time mutually agreed upon.  
• Nonco mpliance of the Investigator or Subinvestigator, delegated staff with any provision 
of the clinical trial protocol, and breach of the applicable laws and regulations or breach of 
the ICH GCP.  
• The total number of patients are included earlier than expected.  
In any case the Sponsor will notify the Investigator of its decision by written notice.  
14.8.2  By the Investigator   
The Investigator may terminate his/her participation upon 30 days' pr ior written notice if the study 
site or the Investigator for any reason becomes unable to perform or complete the clinical trial.  
In the event of premature discontinuation of the study or premature close -out of a site, for any 
reason whatsoever, the approp riate IRB/IEC and regulatory authorities should be informed 
according to applicable regulatory requirements.  
14.9 CLINICAL TRIAL RESULTS   
The Sponsor will be responsible for preparing a clinical study report and to provide a summary of 
study results to the Investigator.  
14.10  PUBLICATIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS   
The Investigator undertakes not to make any publication or release pertaining to the study and/or 
results of the study prior to the Sponsor’s written consent, being understood that the Sponsor will 
not unreasonably withhold its approval . 
As the study is being conducted at multiple sites, the Sponsor agrees that, consistent with 
scientific standards, a primary presentation or publication of the study results based on global 
study outcomes shall be sought. However, if no multicenter publication is submitted, underway, 
or planned within 12 months of the complet ion of this study at all sites, the Investigator shall have 
the right to publish or present independently the results of this study in agreement with other 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 134 Internal  
Investigators and stakeholders. The Investigator shall provide the Sponsor with a copy of any such 
presentation or publication for review and comment at least 30 days in advance of any 
presentation or submission for publication. In addition, if requested by the Sponsor, any 
presentation or submission for publication shall be delayed for a limited time, n ot to exceed 
90 days, to allow for filing of a patent application or such other justified measures as the Sponsor 
deems appropriate to establish and preserve its proprietary rights.  
The Investigator shall not use the name(s) of the Sponsor and/or its emplo yees in advertising or 
promotional material or publication without the prior written consent of the Sponsor.  
The Sponsor shall not use the name(s) of the Investigator and/or the collaborators in advertising or 
promotional material or publication without h aving received his/her and/or their prior written 
consent(s).  
The Sponsor has the right at any time to publish the results of the study.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 135 Internal  
15 CLINICAL TRIAL PROTOCOL AMENDMENTS   
All ap pendices attached hereto and referred to herein are made part of this clinical trial protocol.  
The Investigator should not implement any deviation from, or changes to the clinical trial protocol 
without agreement by the Sponsor and prior review and documen ted approval/favorable opinion 
from the IRB/IEC and/or notification/approval of health authorities (competent regulatory 
authority) of an amendment, as required by local regulation, except where necessary to eliminate 
an immediate hazard(s) to clinical tri al patients, or when the change(s) involves only logistical or 
administrative aspects of the trial. Any change agreed upon will be recorded in writing, the 
written amendment will be signed by the Investigator and by the Sponsor and the signed 
amendment wil l be filed with this clinical trial protocol.  
Any amendment to the clinical trial protocol requires written approval/favorable opinion by the 
IRB/IEC prior to its implementation, unless there are overriding safety reasons.  
In case of substantial amendment to the clinical trial protocol, approval from the health authorities 
(competent regulatory authority) will be sought before implementation.  
In some instances, an amendment may require a change to the informed consent form. The 
Investigator must receive an IRB/IEC approval/favorable opinion concerning the revised informed 
consent form prior to implementation of the change and patient signature should be re -collected if 
necessary.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 136 Internal  
16 APPENDICES   
Appendix A  Revised international staging system   
Disease staging is to be done according to R -ISS ( 12).  
R-ISS will be classified undetermined in case of inconclusive FISH, unless Stage can be 
determined on lactate dehydrogenase, albumin, and β2 microglobulin only.  
 

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 137 Internal  
Appendix B  Modification of diet in renal disease (MDRD) equation   
Glomerular filtration rate (mL/mins/1.73 m2) = 175 x (Scr)-1.154 x (Age)-0.203 x (0.742 if Female) x 
(1.212 if African -American)  
 
 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 138 Internal  
Appendix C  Contraceptive guidance and collection of pregnancy information   
No reproductive toxicology studies have been conducted with isatuximab, so the most 
conservative contraceptive recommendation has  to be followed. Females of childbearing potential 
or male subjects with female partners of childbearing potential shall be required to use effective 
contraceptive methods starting 2 weeks before first study treatment administration, while on 
therapy and f or 12 weeks for Kd and 5 months for IKd following the last dose of study treatment.  
DEFINITIONS  
Nonreproductive potential  
1. Premenopausal female with 1 of the following:  
- Documented hysterectomy.  
- Documented bilateral salpingectomy.  
- Documented bilateral oophorectomy.  
2. Postmenopausal:  
- A postmenopausal state is defined as no menses for 12 months without an alternative 
medical cause. A high follicle stimulating hormone (FSH ) level in th e postmenopausal 
range may be used to confirm a postmenopausal state in women not using hormonal 
contraception or hormonal replacement therapy (HRT ). However, in the absence of 
12 months of am enorrhea, a single FSH measurement is insufficient.  
- Females on HRT and whose menopausal status is in doubt will be required to use 1 of 
the highly effective contraception methods if they wish to continue their HRT during 
the study. Otherwise, they must dis continue HRT to allow confirmation of 
postmenopausal status before study enrolment.  
Reproductive potential  
A woman is considered of reproductive potential (WOCBP), ie, fertile, following menarche and 
until becoming postmenopausal unless permanently sterile . Permanent sterilization methods 
include hysterectomy, bilateral salpingectomy and bilateral oophorectomy.  
CONTRACEPTIVE GUIDANCE  
Male subjects  
• Male subjects with heterosexual partners of reproductive potential (WOCBP) are eligible 
to participate if they agree to use the following during the protocol defined timeline:  
- Refrain from donating sperm  
and 
- At least 1 of the following conditions applies:  
- Are and agree to remain abstinent from penile -vaginal intercourse on a long term and 
persistent basis, when thi s is their preferred and usual lifestyle  
or 
- Agree to use a male condom plus an additional contraceptive method with a failure 
rate of 1% per year (see table for female subjects).  
• Men with a pregnant or breastfeeding partner must agree to remain abstinent from 
penile -vaginal intercourse or use a male condom for the time defined in the protocol.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 139 Internal  
Female subjects:  
Highly Effective Contraceptive Methods That Are User Dependent  
Failure rate of <1% per year when used consistently and correctlya 
• Combined (estrogen - and progestogen -containing ) hormonal contraception associated with inhibition of ovulationb 
- Oral.  
- Intravaginal.  
- Transdermal.  
• Progestogen -only hormone contraception associated with inhibition of ovulationb 
- Oral.  
- Injectable.  
Highly Effective Methods That Are User Independent  
• Implantable progestogen -only hormone contraception associated with inhibition of ovulationb 
• IUD 
• IUS 
• Bilateral tubal occlusion  
• Vasectomized partner  
(Vasectomized partner is a highly effective contraceptive method provided that the partner is the sole sexual partner of 
the woman of  childbearing potential and the absence of sperm has been confirmed. If not, an additional highly effective 
method(s) of contraception should be used. Spermatogenesis cycle is approximately 90 days.)  
• Sexual abstinence  
(Sexual abstinence is considered a hi ghly effective method only if defined as refraining from heterosexual intercourse 
during the entire period of risk associated with the study treatment. The reliability of sexual abstinence needs to be 
evaluated in relation to the duration of the study and the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject.)  
NOTES:  
a Typical use failure rates may differ from those when used consistently and correctly. Use should be consistent with local reg ulations 
regarding the use of contraceptive methods for subjects participating in clinical studies.  
b Hormonal contraception may be susceptible to interaction with the study treatment, which may reduce the efficacy of the contr aceptive 
method. In this case 2 highly effective methods of contraception should be used during the treatment period and for at least 3 months 
for Kd and 5 months for IKd after the last dose of study treatment.  
 
COLLECTION OF PREGNANCY INFORMATION  
Male subjects with partners of reproductive potential who become pregnant  
• The Investigator will attemp t to collect pregnancy information on any female partner of a 
male study subject who becomes pregnant while participating in this study. This applies 
only to subjects who receive study treatment.  
• After obtaining the necessary signed informed consent from t he pregnant female partner 
directly, the Investigator will record pregnancy information on the appropriate form and 
submit it to the Sponsor within 24 hours of learning of the partner’s pregnancy.  
• Partner will also be followed to determine the outcome of the pregnancy. Information on 
the statu s of the mother and child will be forwarded to the Sponsor.   
• Generally , follow -up will be no longer than 1 year following the estimated delivery date. 
Any termination of the pregnancy will be reported regardless of fetal status (presence or 
absence of anomalies) or indication for procedure.   
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 140 Internal  
Female subjects who become pregnant  
• The In vestigator will collect pregnancy information on any female subject, who becomes 
pregnant while participating in this stu dy.  
• Information will be recorded on the appropriate form and submitted to the Sponsor within 
24 hours of learning of a participant's pregnancy.  
• Participant will be followed to determine the outcome of the pregnancy. The Investigator 
will collect follow -up information on participant and neonate, which will be forwarded to 
the Sponsor. Generally, follow -up will not be required for longer than 1 year beyond the 
estimated delivery date.  
• Any termination of pregnancy will be reported, regardless of fetal statu s (presence or 
absence of anomalies) or indication for procedure.  
• While pregnancy itself is not considered to be an AE or SAE, any pregnancy complication 
or elective termination of a pregnancy will be reported as an AE or SAE.  
• A spontaneous abortion is a lways considered to be an SAE and will be reported as such.  
• Any SAE occurring as a result of a post -study pregnancy which is considered reasonably 
related to the study treatment by the Investigator, will be reported to the Sponsor as it will 
be described i n the full protocol . While the Investigator is not obligated to actively seek 
this information in former study subjects, he or she may learn of an SAE through 
spontaneous reporting.   
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 141 Internal  
Appendix D  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status scale   
 
Performance  
Status  Description  
0 Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease performance without restriction.  
1 Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or sedentary 
nature, eg, light house work, office work.  
2 Ambulatory and capable of all selfcare but unable to carry out any work activities; up and about more than 
50% of waking hours.  
3 Capable of only limited selfcare; confined to bed or chair more than 50% of waking hours.  
4 Completely disabled; cannot carry on any selfcare; totally confined to bed or chair.  
5 Dead.  
Developed by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, , Group Chair ( 23). 
 

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 142 Internal  
Appendix E  National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse 
Events   
Refer to NCI -CTCAE v4.03 in the Study Reference Manual, or online at the following NCI 
website:  
https://www.eortc.be/services/doc/ctc/CTCAE_4.03_2010 -06-14_QuickReference_5x7.p df 
Toxicity grade should reflect the most severe degree occurring during the evaluated period, not an 
average.  
When 2 criteria are available for similar toxicities, the one resulting in the more severe grade 
should be used.  
The evaluator must attempt to discriminate between disease/treatment and related 
signs/symptoms.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 143 Internal  
Appendix F  International Myeloma Working Group Response Criteria   
Disease response will be assessed using the up dated International Myeloma Working Group 
Response Criteria (IMWG) ( 24). A confirmation assessment for disease response within 4  weeks 
is requ ired in this protocol (either PR or better, or PD).  
As a reminder, patients with measurable FLC only at screening are not eligible in the study.  
M protein value on Cycle 1 Day 1 will be taken as baseline value for response assessment.  
PD cannot not be diag nosed on FLC increase only , even in patients for whom serum and urine 
M protein become below level of eligibility on efficacy laboratory performed on Cycle 1 Day 1  
(see below the table for assessment of overall response and progression diagnosis of these 
patients).  
Adapted from updated International Myeloma Working Group Response Criteria  
IMWG MRD criteria (requires CR as defined below)  
Sustained 
MRD -negative  MRD n egativity in the marrow (NGF or NGS, or both) and by imaging as defined below, confirmed minimum 
of 1 year apart. Subsequent evaluations can be used to further specify the duration of negativity (eg, MRD -
negative at 5 years)  
Flow MRD -
negative  Absence of phenotypically aberrant clonal plasma cells by NGF on BMAs using the EuroFlow standard 
operation procedure for MRD detection in multiple myeloma (or validated equivalent method) with a minimum 
sensitivity of 1 in 105 nucleated cells or higher  
Sequencing 
MRD -negative  Absence of clonal plasma cells by NGS on BMA in which presence of a clone is defined as less than two 
identical sequencing reads obtained after DNA sequencing of BMAs using the LymphoSIGHT platform (or 
validated equivalent method) wi th a minimum sensitivity of 1 in 105 nucleated cells or higher  
Imaging -
positive 
MRD -negative  MRD negativity as defined by NGF or NGS plus disappearance of every area of increased tracer uptake 
found at baseline or a preceding PET/CT or decrease to less m ediastinal blood pool SUV or decrease to less 
than that of surrounding normal tissue  
Standard IMWG response criteria  
Respon se IMWG criteria  
CR • Negative immunofixation on the serum and urine and  
• disappearance of any soft tissue plasmacytomas and  
• <5% plasma cells in BMAs.  
Two consecutive assessments are needed. No known evidence of progressive disease or new bone 
lesions if radiographic studies were performed  
sCR CR as defined above plus:  
• Normal FLC ratio (0.26 to 1.65) and 
• Absence of clonal cells in BM by immunohistochemistry (κ/λ ratio ≤4:1 or ≥1:2 for κ and λ patients, 
respectively, after counting ≥100 plasma cells).  
Two consecutive assessments of laboratory parameters are needed. No known evidence of 
progressive di sease or new bone lesions if radiographic studies were performed  
VGPR  • Serum and urine M protein detectable by immunofixation but not on electrophoresis or  
• ≥90% reduction in serum M protein plus urine M protein level <100 mg/24 hour.  
• ≥90% decrease in  the sum of the products of maximal perpendicular diameter compared to baseline in soft 
tissue plasmacytoma.  
Two consecutive assessments are needed. No known evidence of progressive disease or new bone 
lesions if radiographic studies were performed.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 144 Internal  
PR • ≥50% reduction of serum M protein and reduction in 24 hours urinary M protein by ≥90% or to <200  mg/24 
hour 
• In addition to the above listed criteria, if present at baseline, a ≥50% reduction in the size ( sum of the 
products of the maximal perpendicular diameters ) of soft tissue plasmacytomas is also required  
Two consecutive assessments are needed. No known evidence of progressive disease or new bone 
lesions if radiographic studies were performed.  
MR  ≥25% but ≤49% reduction in serum M protein and reduct ion in 24h urine M protein by 50 to 89%, which still 
exceed 200 mg/24 hour.  
In addition to the above listed criteria, if present at baseline, ≥50% reduction in size (SPD) of soft tissue 
plasmacytomas is also required.  
Two consecutive assessments are needed . No known evidence of progressive disease or new bone 
lesions if radiographic studies were performed.  
Stable 
Disease  • Not meeting criteria for CR, VGPR, PR, MR or progressive disease.  
No known evidence of progressive disease or new bone lesions if radiographic studies were 
performed.  
Progressive 
disease  Any 1 or more of the following criteria:  
Increase of ≥25% from lowest confirmed value in any 1 of the following criteria:  
• Serum M protein (the absolute increase must be ≥0.5 g/dL).  
• Serum M prote in increase ≥1 g/dL if the lowest M component was ≥5 g/dL.  
• Urine M -component (the absolute increase must be ≥200 mg/24 hour).  
Appearance of new lesion(s), ≥50% increase from nadir in SPD of >1 lesion, or ≥50% increase in the longest 
diameter of a previou s lesion >1 cm in short axis.  
Two consecutive assessments are needed  for PD on M protein.  
Abbreviations: CR = complete response, FLC = free light chain, IMWG = International Myeloma Working Group, M = monoclonal, MR D = 
minimal residual disease, NGF = next -generation flow, NGS = next -generation sequencing, PD = progressive disease, PET = positron 
emission tomography, MR = minor response, PR = partial response, sCR = stringent complete response, SD = stable disease, SPD = sum of 
the produc ts of the maximal perpendicular diameters of measured lesions, SUV = maximum standardized uptake value, VGPR = very good 
partial response.  
Patients with disease only measurable by FLC are not allowed.  
A plasmacytoma that has been radiated is not suitable for response assessment; however, it must 
be monitored to assess for progressive disease.  
For patients achieving VGPR by other criteria, a soft tissue plasmacytoma must decrease by more 
than 90% in the sum of the products of the maximal perpendicu lar diameters of measured lesions 
(SPD ) compared with baseline.  
For IgA and IgD myeloma, quantitative immunoglobulin measurements are preferre d for 
assessments, the same percentage changes apply fornserum M -spike (see table above).  
Definite increase in the size of existing bone lesions or soft tissue plasmacytomas is defined as 
below:  
• ≥50% increase in the size of at least one bidimensionally measurable lesion (in  comparison 
with the measurements at Nadir) or appearance of a new lesi on.  
• Pathological fracture or collapse of bone are not necessarily evidence of disease 
progression.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 145 Internal  
Reminder: definitions of Response and Progression are based on IMWG Uniform Reporting 
Criteria:  
• Any response (sCR, CR, VGPR, PR) or progression needs to be  confirmed by 
two consecutive disease assessments according to the Study Flow Chart. A disease 
assessment at one time point not matched by the same disease assessment at the next time 
point will be considered unconfirmed (except for progression by imaging,  BM plasma cell 
counts, where one time point is adequate for confirmed progression).  
• Urine M protein is not needed to document PR or minor response if baseline urine 
M protein was not measurable; however, it is still required for CR and very good PR.  
• Docum entation of response requires two consecutive readings of the applicable disease 
parameter (serum M protein, urine M protein), performed at any time (no minimum 
interval is required, it can be done the same day); however, to confirm response or 
progressive  disease, 2 discrete samples are required; testing cannot be based upon the 
splitting of a single sample.  
• Patients will continue in the last confirmed response category until there is confirmation of 
progression or improvement to a higher response status; patients cannot move to a lower 
response category.  
• Percent decreases for response calculations are from baseline values (Cycle 1 Day 1).  
• Percent increases for progression calculations are from lowest response values or baseline 
values, whichever is the sma ller number. The lowest value does not need to be confirmed.  
• The lowest confirmed value before suspected progression will be used as baseline for 
calculation of progression; if a serum and/or urine spike is considered too low to 
quantitate, this value can be assigned as 0 as a baseline for documentation of subsequent 
progressive disease. Patients will be considered to have progressive disease if they meet 
the criteria for progression by a variable that was not considered measurable at baseline; 
however, for  patients who had a measurable serum or urine M -spike at baseline, 
progression cannot be defined by increases in serum FLC alone.  
Patients with serum and urine M protein below level of eligibility on efficacy laboratory 
performed on Cycle 1 Day 1 (eg, pati ents with only FLC measurable disease according to 
IMWG, M -protein value >0 [or IF positive] and <0.5 g/dL):  
• These patients can have only 2 possible overall response: CR, non-PD or PD. 
• Patients with M -protein (urine and/or serum) below the level of measura bility  
(M protein value >0 [or IF positive] and <0.5 g/dL) can have CR, non -PD, or PD 
responses only according to the increase or decrease of M protein or extramedullary 
disease if applicable, following the IMWG criteria.  
• Patients with FLC measurable disea se only (M protein =  0 and IF negative), can have 
either non -PD or PD responses (PD will be an absolute increase of >10 mg/dL in the 
difference between involved and uninvolved FLC).  
• Patients with serum M protein value >0 g/dL (or serum IF positive) and <0. 5 g/dL, 
independently of FLC can only be qualified as: CR, non -PD, or PD.  
AND/OR  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 146 Internal  
• Patients with urine M protein value >0 mg/24h (or urine IF positive) and <200 mg/24h, 
independently of FLC can only be qualified as: CR, non -PD, or PD.  
OR 
• Patients with serum M protein value =  0 g/dL and serum IF for intact Ig negative and urine 
M-protein =  0 mg/24h and urine IF negative, independently of FLC can only be qualified 
as: non -PD or PD.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 147 Internal  
Appendix G  Guidelines for the determination of the number of prior lines of 
therapy in Mult iple Myeloma   
Line of Therapy  
A line of therapy consists of ≥1 complete cycle of a single agent, a regimen consisting of a 
combination of several drugs, or a planned sequential therapy of various regimens (eg, 3 to 
6 cycles of initial therapy with bortezomib -dexamethasone followed by stem cell transplantation 
[SCT] consolidation, and lenalidomide maintenance is considered 1st line).  
New line of Therapy  
A treatment is considered a new line of therapy if any 1 of the following 3 conditions are met:  
Start of a new line of treatment after discontinuation of a previous line.  If a treatment 
regimen is discontinued for any reason and a different regimen is starte d, it should be 
considered a new line of therapy. A regimen is considered to have been discontinued if all the 
drugs in that given regimen have been stopped. A regimen is not considered to have been 
discontinued if some of the drugs of the regimen, but not  all, have been discontinued.  
The reasons for discontinuation, addition, substitution, or SCT  do not influence how lines are 
counted. It is recognized that reasons for change may include end of p lanned therapy, toxicity, 
progression, lack of response, inadequate response.  
The unplanned addition or substitution of 1 or more drugs in an existing regimen. 
Unplanned addition of a new drug or switching to a different drug (or combination of drugs) 
due to any reason is considered a new line of therapy.  
SCT : In patients undergoing >1 SCT, except in the case of a planned tandem SCT with a 
predefined interval (such as 3 months), each SCT (autologous or allogeneic) should be 
considered a new line of therapy regardless of whether the conditioning regimen used is the 
same or different. It is recommended that data on type of SCT also be captured.  
Planned tandem SCT is considered 1 line. Planned induction and/or consolidation, maintenance 
with any SCT (frontline,  relapse, autologous, or allogeneic) is considered 1  line. 
Interruptions and dose modifications  
• If a regimen is interrupted or discontinued for any reason and the same drug or 
combination is restarted without any other intervening regimen, then it should b e counted 
as a single line.  
• However, if a regimen is interrupted or discontinued for any reason, and then restarted at a 
later time point but 1 or more other regimens were administered in between, or the 
regimen is modified through the addition of 1 or mor e agents, then it should be counted as 
2 lines.  
• Modification of the dosing of the same regimen should not be considered a new line of 
therapy.  
Based on Rajkumar, Richardson and San Miguel, 2015 ( 25). 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 148 Internal  
Appendix H  Definition of relapsed and refractory myeloma   
Refractory Myeloma:  
Refractory myeloma is defined as disease that is non -responsive (failure to achieve MR or 
develops PD while on therapy) while on primary or salvage therapy, or progresses within 60 days 
of last therapy. There are 2 categories of refractory myeloma:  
• Relapsed and refractory myeloma: Defined as disease that is non-responsive while on 
salvage therapy or progresses within 60 days of last therapy in patients who have achieved 
MR or better at some point previously to then progressing in their disease course.  
• Primary refractory myeloma: Defined as disease that is non -responsive in patients who 
have never achieved MR or better with any therapy. It includes patients who never achieve 
MR or better in whom there is no significant change in M protein and no evidence of 
clinical progression; as well as primary refractory, p rogressive disease where patients meet 
criteria for true progressive disease.  
Relapsed myeloma  
Relapsed myeloma is defined as previously treated myeloma which progresses and requires the 
initiation of salvage therapy but does not meet the criteria for eith er primary refractory myeloma 
or relapsed and refractory myeloma.  
Adapted from Rajkumar et al, 2011 ( 26). 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 149 Internal  
Appendix I  EORTC -QLQ -C30 scales, items, and clinically important differences   
 
 

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 150 Internal  
 

Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 151 Internal  

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 152 Internal  
Appendix J  QLQ -MY20 scales, items, and clinically important differences   
 
 

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 153 Internal  
 
 

Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 154 Internal  

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 155 Internal  
Appendix K  EQ-5D-5L scales, items, and clinically important differences   

Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 156 Internal  
 
©EuroQol Research Foundation. EQ -5D™ is a trade mark of the EuroQol Research Foundation  

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 157 Internal  

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 158 Internal  
Appendix L  CD38 blood test interference guideline AABB2016   
 

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 159 Internal  

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 160 Internal  

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 161 Internal  
 

 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 162 Internal  
Appendix M  Low dose whole body CT scan   
Low dose whole body CT scan (LDWB CT) allows radiation dose reduction compared to 
conventional exam and lasts usually no more than 2 minutes. It is done without oral or IV contr ast 
and patient position is supine, head first, arms at the side ( 32, 33). 
Example of parameters used to perform a LDWB CT:  
• FOV – mm (small) adapted to subject’s circumference  
• Technical Factors – 16 x 1.5 collimation/0.5 rotation time  
• Tube current – 50-70 mAs (could exceed 70 mAs for larger subjects)  
• Image Reconstruction – Bone kernel/512 x 512 matrix  
• Long bones should be covered: through knees and elbows  
All sites have the option of adapting this protocol or using their own local LDWB or 
manufacturer’s recommended protocol.  
PET C T scan are not allowed for assessment of the disease.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 163 Internal  
Appendix N  Contingency measures for a regional or national emergency that is 
declared by a governmental agency   
COVID -19 Pandemic Conti ngency Measures:  
Continuation of the study in the event of a regional or national emergency declared by a 
governmental agency:  
A regional or national emergency declared by a governmental agency (eg, public health 
emergency, natural disaster, pandemic, and terrorist attack) may prevent access to the clinical trial 
site. 
Contingency procedures are suggested for an emergency that prevents access to the study site, to 
ensure the safety of the participants, to consider continuity of the clinical st udy conduct, protect 
trial integrity, and assist in maintaining compliance with GCP in Conduct of Clinical Trials 
Guidance. Sponsor agreement MUST be obtained prior to the implementation of these procedures 
for the duration of the emergency.  
The decision f or each individual participant to remain and/or start in the study should be made on 
a case by case basis based on best Investigator medical judgment. The clinical judgment of the 
treating physician should guide the management plan of each participant base d on individual 
benefit/risk assessment and the evolving situation at the site.  
When participants are already randomized and/or treated, attempts should be made to perform all 
assessments in accordance with the protocol to the extent possible.  
When possib le, the focus should be on IMP administration and safety blood collection 
(eg, biochemistry and hematology). However, all efforts should be made to perform the 
measurements of key parameters for efficacy endpoints (eg, tumor assessments). The deviations 
from the study protocol (eg, treatment delay, omission, tests not performed…) should be 
documented in the source document and collected in the appropriate pages of the eCRF.  
Procedures to be considered in the event of a regional or national emergency declare d by a 
governmental agency:  
• If onsite visits are not possible, remote visits (eg, with home nurses, home health vendor, 
etc) may be planned for the collection of possible safety data.  
• If onsite visits are not possible visit windows may be extended for ass essment of safety 
and/or efficacy data that cannot be obtained remotely.  
• The Direct -to-Patient supply of oral dexamethasone from the site/sponsor where allowed 
by local regulations and agreed upon by participant ( Section  8.1). 
Contingencies implemented due to emergency will be documented.  
The impact of the regional or national emergency declared by a governmental agency on study 
conduct will be assessed. Additional analyses may be performed to evaluate the impact on 
efficacy (eg, missing data due to the emergency) and safety.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 164 Internal  
For a regional or national emergency declared by a go vernmental agency, contingency procedures 
may be implemented for the duration of the emergency. The participant or their legally authorized 
representative should be verbally informed prior to initiating any changes that are to be 
implemented for the durati on of the emergency (eg, study visit delays/treatment extension, use of 
local labs) ( Section  12.2). 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 165 Internal  
Appendix O  Protocol amendment history   
The “Protocol Amendment Summary of Changes Table” for the current amendment is located 
directly before the Clinical Trial Summary secti on of this amended protocol.  
Amended Protocol 0 9 (14 -September -2021)  
Last patient in (LPI) occurred in March 2019, so patients randomized in the study and still on 
treatment are now treated for at least 2 years and half with a regimen requiring coming to t he 
study site 2 days weekly 3 out of 4 weeks. The purpose of this amendment was to allow to omit 
carfilzomib dosing on Days 8 and 9 in case a patient requests for a more convenient schedule and 
in case Investigator judges that the maximum benefit is reache d. 
Protocol amendment summary of changes table  
Section # and Name  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
8.2.1 Study treatments (IMP)  Addition of the possibility to omit carfilzomib 
dosing on Days 8 and 9 if a patient asks for a 
more convenient schedule and Investigator 
agrees because she/he judges that the 
maximum benefit is reached.  Two administrations per 
week for a duration of more 
than 2 years can become 
tiring for the patients.  
8.2.4.1 General rules  If dexamethasone dosing is maintained o n 
Days 8 and 9 while carfilzomib on Days 8 and 9 
is omitted, possibility to re -increase the dose of 
dexamethasone if dose previously reduced, 
based on Investigator judgement.  Omission of carfilzomib on 
Days 8 or 9 could allow in 
some cases re -increase the  
dose of dexamethasone 
previously decreased.  
Appendix O (Protocol amendment history)  Amendments to amended protocol 08 are 
summarized.  History of amendments to 
this protocol added.  
Amended Protocol 08 (11-March -2021)  
Based on the positive interim PFS data, the treatment effect of IKd is expected to be better than 
initially anticipated in comparison to Kd. A descriptive PFS analysis is added when approximately 
180 PFS events have been reached. Based on more PFS events accumulated, this additional 
analys is would help to better characterize the distribution of PFS in a descriptive way for the IKd 
arm. With approximately 180 PFS events planned, the possibility of observing the median PFS 
time for the IKd arm is expected to be increased.  
Clarification of acc idental or intentional overdose of isatuximab and carfilzomib is defined by 
each administration and dexamethasone will be defined by cycle.  
Appendix N is added for contingency measures for a regional or national emergency declared by a 
governmental agency . 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 166 Internal  
Protocol amendment summary of changes table  
Section # and Name  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Names and Addresses Page  Sponsor information added  Sponsor information added 
according to regulatory 
requirements  
Clinical Trial Summary: 
Assessment Schedule, Other 
examinations for disease 
assessment:  “additional” and “twice a year until death, or OS 
analysis cut -off date, whichever comes first” were 
added. The word final was changed to “additional”  Frequency of sur vival status 
collection have been increased 
from once to twice a year to better 
follow the occurrence of the events  
Clinical Trial Summary: Statistical 
Considerations, Primary Analysis  “An additional PFS analysis will be performed when 
approximately 180 e vents assessed by the IRC have 
been observed to better characterize the distribution 
of PFS in the IKd arm in a descriptive way. This 
analysis will be performed at the latest 15 months 
after the 159 PFS event analysis cut -off date in case 
of the approximat ely 180 PFS events are not 
observed at that time” was added  To better characterize the 
distribution of PFS in a descriptive 
way for the IKd arm, including the 
increased possibility of observing 
median PFS  
Clinical Trial Summary: Statistical 
Considerations , Interim Analysis, 
Planned PFS and OS cut -of dates  “Efficacy results will be updated in a descriptive way 
(non-inferential analysis) at the time of the PFS 
additional analysis (approximately 180 events)” and  
“The cut -off date for the additional PFS analy sis will 
be the date when approximately 180 PFS events 
assessed by the IRC have occurred or 15 months 
after 159 PFS events analysis cut -off date, whichever 
comes first” were added  To better characterize the 
distribution of PFS in a descriptive 
way for the IKd arm, including the 
increased possibility of observing 
median PFS  
Clinical Trial Summary: Duration of 
Study Period (per patient)  “Approximately 180” was added to the cut -off date for 
the additional PFS analysis   
 The last PFS analysis being the 
additional PFS analysis, the cut -off 
for this analysis has been added  
 
 “or 15 months after 159 PFS events analysis cut -off 
date, whichever comes first” was added  
Survival status collection was changed from “one” to 
“twice a year” and “additional PFS anal ysis cut -off 
date for all patients still alive at the additional PFS 
analysis cut -off date, until death, or OS analysis cut -
off date, whichever comes first” was added  Frequency of survival status 
collection have been increased 
from once to twice a year to better 
follow the occurrence of the events  
 
 The word “final” was changed to “additional”  
 The last PFS analysis being the 
additional PFS analysis, “final” has 
been updated by “additional” in the 
document where it was necessary  
Section 6.2.1 Duration of study 
participation for each patient  The word “final” was changed to “additional”  
 
 
“twice a year” and  
“until death, or OS cut -off date, whichever comes 
first” were added  The last PFS analysis being the 
additional PFS analysis, “final” has 
been updated by “additional”  
Frequency of survival status 
collection have been increased 
from once to twice a year to better 
follow the occurrence of the events  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 167 Internal  
Section # and Name  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Section 6.2.2 Determination of end 
of clinical trial (all patients)  “An additional PFS analysis w ill be performed at 
approximately 180 events. The additional analysis 
will be performed at the latest 15 months after the 
159 PFS event analysis cut -off date in case of the 
approximately 180 PFS events are not observed at 
that time” was added  
 
“The end of the study is defined as the date of the 
last visit of the last participant in the study” was 
added  To better characterize the 
distribution of PFS in a descriptive 
way for the IKd arm, including the 
increased possibility of observing 
median PFS  
 
 
To clarify  definition of end of the 
study visit  
Section 6.4 Study Committees  The words “primary” and “final” were changed to 
“additional”  The last PFS analysis being the 
additional PFS analysis, “final” has 
been updated by “additional”  
Section 8.2.1 Study treatments 
(IMP): IKd arm (experimental arm)  The infusion maximum rate was changed from “200” 
to “150” mL/hr for the first infusion done with fixed 
volume  Typo was fixed  
Section 10.1.6 Post additional PFS 
analysis cut -off date (approximately 
180 PFS even ts as per IRC)  “(approximately 180 PFS events as per  
IRC)” was added to the section title  
 
 
 
 
Survival status collection was changed from “once” to 
“twice” a year  
“Death date will be collected when site is informed of 
death. In addition,” was added and “ at approximately 
the anniversary date of the final PFS analysis cut -off 
date” was removed  
 
The word “final” was changed to “additional”  To better characterize the 
distribution of PFS in a descriptive 
way for the IKd arm, including the 
increased possibility  of observing 
median PFS  
 
Frequency of survival status 
collection have been increased 
from once to twice a year to better 
follow the occurrence of the events.  
Redundant text was removed.  
 
 
The last PFS analysis being the 
additional PFS analysis, “final” h as 
been updated by “additional”  
Section 10.4.1.5 Overdose  “…of isatuximab and carfilzomib at each 
administration, at least 30% above the intended 
administered dose of dexamethasone at each cycle” 
was added to the definition of overdose for 
isatuximab and  carfilzomib  
 
 To clarify that overdose of 
isatuximab and carfilzomib is 
defined by administration and not 
on the total dose administered on 
over the cycle. Overdose definition 
of dexamethasone is based on all 
the dose over the cycle based on 
different therapeutic index of 
dexamethasone and the two other 
IMPs  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 168 Internal  
Section # and Name  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Section 11.4.2.1 Analysis of primary 
efficacy endpoint  “In particular, a sensitivity analysis has been added to 
evaluate the impact of late progressions and deaths. 
In this sensitivity an alysis, progressions or deaths 
occurring more than 8 weeks after the last disease 
assessment (corresponding to two consecutive 
missed assessments) will be censored at the earliest 
of the date of last valid disease assessment without 
evidence of progression  before initiation of new anti -
myeloma treatment and the cut -off date” and  
“An additional PFS analysis (non -inferential analysis) 
will be performed when approximately 180 events 
assessed by the IRC have been observed to better 
characterize the distributio n of PFS in the Ikd arm in 
a descriptive way. The additional analysis will be 
performed at the latest 15 months after the 159 PFS 
event analysis cut -off date in case of the 
approximately 180 PFS events are not observed at 
that time.” were added  This analy sis has been requested 
by United States Food and Drug 
Administration as post -hoc PFS 
analysis  
 
 
 
 
 
To better characterize the 
distribution of PFS in a descriptive 
way for the IKd arm, including the 
increased possibility of observing 
median PFS  
Section 11. 4.2.3 Multiplicity 
considerations  It is added that “efficacy results will be updated at the 
time of the PFS additional analysis (approximately 
180 events) but will be only descriptive (non -
inferential analysis)”  Description of the PFS analysis 
added to be tter characterize the 
distribution of PFS in a descriptive 
way for the IKd arm, including the 
increased possibility of observing 
median PFS   
Section 11.5 Interim analysis  It is clarified that “in case of positive results at interim 
analysis, PFS results will be updated in a descriptive 
way (non -inferential analysis) at the analysis cut -off 
date when 159 PFS events are observed”  
“Efficacy results will be updated at the time of the 
PFS additional analysis (approximately 180 events) 
but will be only descript ive (non -inferential analysis). 
No α -spending or formal testing is planned for the 
PFS additional analysis” was added  Clarification added in the protocol 
but already specified in the SAP.  
 
 
Description of the PFS analysis 
added to better characterize the 
distribution of PFS in a descriptive 
way for the IKd arm, including the 
increased possibility of observing 
median PFS   
Section 12.2 Informed consent  “For a regional or national emergency declared by a 
governmental agency, contingency measures refer to 
Appendix N” was added  To refer to the added Appendix for 
procedures to inform patient in case 
of regional or national emergency 
declared by governmental  agency  
Section 13.2 Responsibilities of the 
Sponsor  “Monitoring details describing strategy (eg, risk -based 
initiatives in operations and quality such as Risk 
Management and Mitigation Strategies and Analytical 
Risk-Based Monitoring), methods, responsibi lities 
and requirements, including handling of 
noncompliance issues and monitoring techniques 
(central, remote or on -site monitoring) are provided in 
separate study documents” was added to the section  To clarify where the monitoring 
techniques are located.  
Appendix N (Contingency 
measures for a regional or national 
emergency that is declared by a 
government agency, COVID -19 
Pandemic Contingency Measures)  Appendix N “Contingency measures for a regional or 
national emergency that is declared by a government 
agency, COVID -19 Pandemic Contingency 
Measures” was added  To clarify the procedure during 
National Emergencies  
Appendix O (Protocol amendment 
history)  Amendments to protocol v7.0 are summarized. This 
section was shifted down from Appendix N  History of ame ndments to this 
protocol added  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 169 Internal  
Amended Protocol 07 (10-August -2020)  
Instruction for collecting hospitalization report and exams reports in case of serious adverse 
events section is updated.  
Option of direct supplies of oral investigational medicinal products (IMPs) to patients has been 
added in case of regional or national emergency declared by a governmental agency that results in 
travel restrictions, confinement, or restricted site access.  
Protocol amendment summary of changes table  
Sectio n # and Name  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Section 8.1 (Study treatments)  Option of direct supplies of investigational 
medicinal products (IMPs) to patient has 
been added  In emergency situations, when patient 
cannot conduct on -site visits, a Sponsor -
approved courier company could deliver 
the IMPs from the site to the patient.  
Section 8.1.1.1, Section 8.2.1, 
Section 8.2.5  Improvement in isatuximab administration 
implementing the approved administration 
mode with fixed volume.  Switching to fast er infusion schedule with 
a fixed distribution volume will reduce 
hospital chair time (particularly in some 
specific challenging situations like 
pandemic restrictions) and increase 
convenience for patients and sites).  
Section 8.2.2 and Section 8.2.2.1  Use of ranitidine or equivalent will be 
considered as an optional premedication and 
will be based on Investigators; judgement.  To provide option to adapt the 
premedication depending on individual 
situation  
Section 10.4.3  Instruction for collecting hospitalization report 
and exams reports in case of serious 
adverse events has been updated.  Only necessary copies of medical records 
are to be shared with the Sponsor  
Appendix N (Protocol amendment 
history)  Amendments to protocol v6.0 are 
summarized.  History of amendments to this protocol 
added  
Amended Protocol 06 (13-November -2019)  
Censoring rules for the Progression -free survival (PFS) analysis were changed following 
interaction with Health Authorities. PFS2 definition was updated according to this change.  
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA testing by polymerase chain reaction was added for patients with a 
positive hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) test and/or anti -Hepatitis B core (HBc) antibody test.  
Second primary malignancies, if any, should be repor ted also in follow -up period.  
Statistical sections were updated in line with the changes made in the Statistical Analysis Plan 
(SAP) amendment of July 2019.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 170 Internal  
Protocol amendment summary of changes table  
Section # and Name  Description of Change  Brief Rational e 
Clinical trial summary, 9.2.2 Other 
secondary efficacy endpoints, 11.4.2.1 
Analysis of primary efficacy endpoint, 
11.4.2.2.2 Analysis of other secondary 
efficacy endpoints  Change in censoring rules for the primary PFS 
analysis and update of PFS2 definition related to this 
change.  According to Health 
Authorities feedback  
Clinical trial summary, 5.2 Secondary, 
9.2.1 Key secondary efficacy endpoints, 
9.2.2 Other secondary efficacy 
endpoints, 11.4.1 Extent of study 
treatment exposure and compliance, 
11.4.2.2.1 Analysis of key secondary 
efficacy endpoints, 11.4.2.2.2 Analysis 
of other secondary efficacy endpoints, 
11.4.2.3 Multiplicity considerations, 
11.4.7 Analyses of patient reported 
outcomes (health -related quality of 
life/health economics variable s), 11.5 
Interim analysis  Update of statistical sections in order to reflect the 
changes made in the SAP amendment of July 2019:   
Update of definitions and analysis of minimal residual 
disease (MRD) negativity rate and complete 
response (CR) rate  To clarify the definitions 
and the analyses of efficacy 
endpoints  
• Update of the handling of multiplicity and 
spending functions for secondary endpoints  To clarify the analyses of 
efficacy endpoints  
• Addition of other secondary endpoints (time 
to first resp onse and time to best response)  To further characterize the 
efficacy of study treatments  
• Update of the definition of overall number 
of cycles started  To clarify the definition  
• Update of the analysis of electronic patient -
reported outcomes (ePROs)  To clarify the analysis  
1.2 Study flow chart, 8.2.7 Hepatitis B 
virus infection, 10.1.3.2 Subsequent 
cycles (Days 1 -2, Days 8 -9, 
Days  15-16, and Days 22 -23) Hepatitis B virus DNA testing by polymerase chain 
reaction was added for patients with a p ositive 
HBsAg test and/or HBc antibody test  To complement HBV 
investigations  
Clinical trial summary, 1.2 Study flow 
chart, 6.2.1 Duration of study 
participation for each patient, 10.1.5 
Post study treatment follow -up, 10.1.6 
Post final PFS analysis cut -off date  Second primary malignancies occurring during the 
follow -up period should be reported  To secure to collect any 
second primary malignancy 
during follow -up period  
12.1 Ethical and regulatory standards  Description of Investigator’s respo nsibility regarding 
incidental findings  To clarify Investigator’s 
responsibility regarding 
incidental findings  
Entire document  Editorial changes  Correction of typographical 
errors and inconsistencies 
between different sections, 
and clarifications  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 171 Internal  
Amended Protocol 05 (11 September 2019)  
Implementation of safety monitoring measures following identification of 2 new risks related to 
carfilzomib:  
• Carfilzomib may increase risk of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (4 cases 
reported as of 17 July  2019 among 4,156 patients in Amgen Sponsored clinical trials and 
estimated 126, 638 patients in post marketing).  
• Carfilzomib may increase risk of hepatitis B virus reactivation (frequency of Hepatitis B 
virus [HBV ] reactivation is 0.1% in Amgen Sponsored clinical trials).  
Protocol amendment summary of changes table  
Section # and Name  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
Clinical Trial Summary,  
1.2 Study Flow Chart  
8.2.7 Hepatitis B virus Infection  
8.8 Concomitant Medication  
10.1.3.2 Subsequent cycles (Days  1-2, 
Days 8 -9, Days 15 -16, and Days 22 -23) Addition of HBV serology assessment in patients with 
unknown HBV status including safety measures.  Implement ation of safety 
monitoring measures 
following identification of 
new risk ( hepatitis B virus 
reactivation ) related to 
carfilzomib  
8.2.6 Posterior reversible 
encephalopathy syndrome and 
progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy  Addition of measures for man agement of progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy  Implementation of safety 
monitoring measures 
following identification of 
new risk ( progressive 
multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy ) 
related to carfilzomib  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 172 Internal  
Amended Protocol 04 (11 June 2019)  
REASON FOR AMENDMENT:  
Based on updated pharmacokinetic characterization of isatuximab, the plasma half -life has been 
re-estimated to 28 days. As duration of contraceptive measures is required to last for 5 half -lives, 
a revised duration of contraceptive measures of 5 months after the last dose of isatuximab is 
required.  
* Contraception duration after end of isatuximab changed from 3 months (12 weeks) to 5 months  
In sections:    Appendix C Contraceptive Guidance and Collection of Pregnancy Inf ormation .  
Rationale:   Duration of contraception has been impacted by the updated pharmacokinetic 
characterization of the isatuximab half -life leading to an increase by 2  months (ie, 12 weeks to 
5 months), the time for continuing contraception after the la st dose of isatuximab.  
* Pregnancy test will be performed before each cycle and then monthly during the follow -up 
period up to 3 months (12  weeks) in the Kd arm and up to 5  months in the IKd arm   
In sections:  Clinical Trial Summary, 1.2 Study Flow Chart, 1 0.1.3.1 Cycle 1 (Days 1 -2, Days 8 -9, 
Days 15 -16, and Days 22 -23), 10.1.3.2 Subsequent cycles (Days 1 -2, Days 8 -9, Days 15 -16, and 
Days 22 -23), 10.1.5 Post study treatment follow -up, 10.1.6 Post final PFS analysis cut -off date, 
10.1.7 Post OS analysis cut -off date.  
Rationale:  To detect any pregnancy during relevant systemic exposure of study treatment .   
Amended Protocol 03, Amended Protocol 04 (GB) based on Protocol Amendment 04: 
(02 July 2018)  
REASON FOR AMENDMENT:  
The main reason of this amendment is to  modify Appendix N, to clarify timing for minimal 
residual disease (MRD) assessment in patient reaching very good partial response (VGPR), and to 
leave possibility to IRC to consider clinical progression as event. Editorial changes, corrections of 
inconsis tencies and typographic errors, clarifications, and deletion of redundancies were also 
done.  
* To add Czech Republic in the Appendix N  
In sections:    Appendix N.  
Rationale:   Due to local requirement, Czech Republic is adding in the list of countries wher e 
pregnancy test is to be performed before each cycle initiation in addition to before study treatment 
initiation and end of treatment.    
* To clarify timing for BMA samplings    
In sections:   clinical trial summary, Section 1.2, Section 9.2.1, Section 10.1 .3.2, Section 10.1.4, 
Section 10.1.5.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 173 Internal  
Rationale:   Bone marrow aspiration (BMA) is an invasive procedure and study allow up to 6 
BMA. In order to limit as much as possible the number of BMA, wording to trigger BMA has 
been clarified.    
* To include possibility for Independent Response Committee (IRC) to consider clinical 
progression as PD event  
In sections:   Section 9.1.  
Rationale: In absence of radiological and M protein progression, if clinical and biological data all 
together provid e with clear evidence of clinical progression based on IRC judgement, in this case 
IRC could consider clinical progression as PFS event.    
* To clarify 2 exclusion criteria  
In sections:    tabulated Clinical Trial Summary, Section 7.2.  
Rationale:   To clar ify which type of radiotherapy is allowed within 14 days prior to randomization 
and that therapy (not only chemotherapy) should be completed by at least 5 years in case of prior 
other cancer in medical history.  
* Miscellaneous  
In sections:     Title page,  Section 1.1, Section 3, Section 6.1, Section 8.2.2, Section 8.2.3, Section 
8.2.4.1, Section 8.2.8, Section 8.8, Appendix K.  
* Typo on version date of amended protocol 02 GB and protocol amendment 02 GB.  
* Typo in graphical study design.  
* Addition of 2  definitions in abbreviation list.  
* To allow per os diphenhydramide or equivalent in country where the is no longer iv 
formulation.  
* To mention possibility to keep same volume of hydration on a longer time of administration in 
case of cardiac decompens ation risk.  
* To clarify some rules of dose modifications.  
* To add protocol recommendations regarding antibacterial prophylaxis and thromboprophylaxis, 
and to add caution regarding co -treatment of dexamethasone with CYP3A inhibitor in 
concomitant medica tions section.  
* To add copyrights information at the bottom of the EQ -ED questionnaire.  
* Correction of inconsistencies.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 174 Internal  
Amended protocol 02, Amended protocol 03 (GB) based on Protocol Amendment 03 :  
(08 February 2018 ) 
REASON FOR AMENDMENT:  
The main reasons of this amendment are to add minimal residual disease (MRD) assessment in 
patients reaching very good partial response (VGPR) and to remove local laboratory disease 
assessment from the protocol. Editorial changes, co rrections of inconsistencies and typographic 
errors, clarifications, and deletion of redundancies were also done.  
Modifications implemented through local amendment for United Kingdom (amendment02 -gb) is 
included in this global amendment (amendment #3) spe cifying when changes are applicable for 
UK only, to go back to a unique protocol version for all participating countries.    
* To add  MRD assessment in VGPR patients  
In sections:    tabulated Clinical Trial Summary, 1.1, 1.2, 5.2, 9.1, 9.2.1, 10.1.1, 10.1.3 .1, 10.1.3.2, 
10.1.4, 10.1.5, 11.4.2.2.1, 11.4.2.3, 11.5, 16.  
Rationale:   Addition of MRD assessment in VGPR patients is based on recent data strongly 
suggesting MRD negativity as prognostic factor for PFS and OS in patients with CR or not. 
Indeed, this h as been reported also in patients MRD -negative despite a persistent M -component 
who showed similar PFS and OS to patients with MRD -negative disease in CR (Lahuerta et al, 
JCO 2017). Because the sample size of patients MRD negativity increases, the order of  the key 
secondary endpoints is also modified: patients with at least VGPR with MRD negativity will be 
tested prior to patients with CR.    
* To remove local laboratory efficacy samples:  
In sections:    tabulated Clinical Trial Summary, 1.2, 8.4, 9.1, 10.1. 1, 10.1.2, 10.1.3.1, 10.1.3.2, 
10.1.4, 10.1.5.  
Rationale:   PFS being the primary endpoint and in order to limit the risk of inconsistency in date 
of progression as per investigator assessment versus as per IRC assessment and to reduce the 
number of blood samples drawn by patient, local laboratory efficacy assessments are removed. 
Investigator will assess disease response using the central laboratory results.    
* To clarify what will be done with the samples collected for the interference of isatuximab with  
M protein measurement by adding a formal exploratory objective.  
In sections:    tabulated Clinical Trial Summary, 5.3.  
Rationale:   Assessment of potential interference was listed in endpoint assessment in section 
9.3.1, but was not listed in exploratory objectives and exploratory endpoints.  
* To add a Coombs test after initiation of isatuximab    
In sections:    tabulated C linical Trial Summary, 1.1, 1.2, 10.1.3.2.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 175 Internal  
Rationale:   Interference in Coombs test has been reported with anti CD38 agents. Coombs test is 
currently planned to be assessed before study initiation for all patients randomized in isatuximab 
arm. A systematic  Coombs test is added after initiation of study treatment to describe incidence of 
patients with interference in Coombs test after isatuximab initiation.    
* To change to the frequency of pregnancy test depending on country requirements  
In sections:    tabulated Clinical Trial Summary, 1.2, 10.1.1, 10.1.3.2.  
Rationale:    To provide clarity when the serum pregnancy should be performed. Carfilzomib 
having shown possible fetal harm in preclinical studies, pregnancy test (urine or serum) is to be 
done before e ach new cycle administration in addition to effective contraception, according to 
country requirement (list of country provided in Appendix N, which is added in this amendment).  
* To allow urine pregnancy test  
In sections:     tabulated Clinical Trial Sum mary, 1.2, 10.1.1, 10.1.4, 10.1.3.2.  
Rationale:    pregnancy test may be requested before each cycle administration according to local 
requirement; urine test is added as an allowed procedure.  
* To allow semi -quantitative urinalysis    
In sections:    1.2, 10.1.1.  
Rationale:   to allow semi -quantitative instead of quantitative urinalysis if semi -quantitative 
method used at site level can provide with an absolute numeric value of the parameters.      
* To correct rounding error in required number of PFS  
In se ctions:    Clinical trial summary, sections 6.2.2, 6.3, 11.1, 11.4.2.1, 11.5  
Rationale: number of required PFS events has been corrected from 158 to 159 events. All sections 
impacted and modified in the study protocol are listed above but all are not in th e detailed 
description of changes in the amendment.    
* To add grade 5 IARs and symptomatic NIMP overdose as AESI  for Adverse Event of Special 
Interest (AESI) reporting  
In section(s):    10.4.1.3.  
Rationale:   Grade 5 IARs are to be considered as AESIs, for reporting purposes.  
* To add duration of contraceptive measure during the study  
In section:    Appendix C  
Rationale:   to have clear instruction on duration of contraceptive measures.  
* Miscella neous clarifications, correction of inconsistencies    
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 176 Internal  
In sections:    title page, tabulated Clinical Trial Summary, Sections 1.2, 6.1, 6.4, 7.2, 8.1.1.1, 
8.1.1.2, 8.2.1, 8.2.3, 8.2.4.1, 8.2.4.4, 8.2.5, 8.4, 8.8.1, 10.1.3.1, 10.1.6, 12.3, 16, Appe ndix A, 
Appendix F, Appendix M, Appendix N.  
Rationale: include but not limited to:  
* Correction typo in IND number.  
* Correction that in case of FISH unknown, for some patients the possibility to assess R -ISS is not 
limited to stage III.    
* To provide serologic definition of active hepatitis B and C.  
* To clarify that further anti myeloma therapies will continue to be collected after final PFS 
analysis until OS analysis.    
* Correction of inconsistency between protocol and pharmaceutical m anual regarding 
pharmaceutical form.    
* Clarification in instruction of hydration prior carfilzomib and to allow less than 500 mL 
(remaining above 250 mL) during the 2 first infusions for patients at risk of cardiac 
decompensation (as per carfilzomib labe lling).  
* Clarification and correction of inconsistencies in dose modifications.  
* G-CSF use is not limited to the first 3 cycles.  
* To correct in which CRF page to report ongoing signs and symptoms related to multiple 
myeloma.  
* To specify that re -screening of patient in case of screen failure is allowed.  
* Editorial correction in IMWG criteria Appendix.  
* To provide clarification on low dose whole body CT scan in a specific Appendix and provide 
with 2 supporting bibliographic references.  
* To speci fy which countries will have pregnancy test during study treatment in Appendix N  
Amended protocol 02 (GB) based on Protocol Amendment 02 (GB) : (30 August 2017 ) 
* Change to the frequency of pregnancy test   
In section(s): study flow chart (with footnote “i” ), and sections 10.1.1 and 10.1.3.2 of the protocol  
Rationale: carfilzomib having shown possible fetal harm in preclinical studies, pregnancy test 
(urine or serum) is to be done before each new cycle administration in addition to effective 
contraception, according to country requirement.    
* To add duration of contraceptive measure during the study  
In section(s): Appendix C  
Rationale: to have clear instruction on duration of contraceptive measures.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 177 Internal  
Amended protocol 01 based on Protocol Amendment 01 : (21 August 2017 ) 
 REASON FOR AMENDMENT:  
* Rectification of error in the infusion time of carfilzomib to be consistent with SMP C/PI  
In section(s):    tabulated Clinical Trial Summary (Investigational product(s)), sections 1.2, 1.3.1 
and 8.2.1 of the protocol.  
Rationale:   Rectification of an error in the infusion time of carfilzomib to be consistent with 
SmPC/PI.   As a consequence  information on indicative clock time and relative nominal time in 
PK flowchart have also been corrected.  
* Typographical corrections    
In section(s):    1.2, 3, 6.1, 8.2.4.3, 8.2.4.4, 8.2.5 and 9.2.3 of the protocol.  
Rationale:   deletion of duplicate abb reviation, grammatical and cosmetic corrections will not be 
described.    
In addition, other minor changes are listed in the description of changes (next section).  
* Deletion of wording of Absolute neutrophil count    
In section(s):    sections 1.2, 10.1.1, 10.1.3.1, 10.1.3.2 and 10.1.4 of the protocol.  
Rationale:   The wording of ANC is a redundancy when it is with the White Blood Count 
differential.  
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 178 Internal  
17 BIBLIOGRAPHIC REFERENCES   
1. International Agency for Research on Cancer, GLOBOCAN 2012 database. Available at 
http://globocan.iarc.fr/. 2016.  
2. Rölling C, Knop S, and Bornhäuser M. Multiple Myeloma. Lancet. 2015;385(9983): 2197 -
208. 
3. Ocio EM, Mitsiades CS, Orlowski RZ and Anderson KC. Future agents and treatment 
direction in Multiple myeloma. Expert Rev hematol. 2014;7(1):127 -41. 
4. Kuhn DJ, Chen Q, Voorhees PM, Strader JS,  Shenk KD, Sun CM et al. Potent activity of 
carfilzomib, a novel, irreversible inhibitor of the ubiquitin - proteasome pathway, against 
preclinical models of multiple myeloma. Blood. 2007;110(9):3281 -90. 
5. Demo SD, Kirk CJ, Aujay MA, Buchholz TJ, Dajee M, Ho MN et al. Anti -tumor activity of 
PR 171, a novel irreversible inhibitor of the proteasome. Cancer Res. 2007;67(13):6383 -91. 
6. Bross PF, Kane R, Farrell AT, Abraham S, Benson K, Brower ME et al. Approval summary 
for bortezomib for injection in the treatment of multiple myeloma. Clin Cancer Res. 
2004;(10):3954 –64. 
7. Siegel DS, Martin T, Wang M, Vij R, Jakubowiak AJ, Lonial S et al. A Phase 2 study of 
single -agent carfilzomib (PX -171-003-A1) in patients with relapsed and refractory multiple 
myeloma. Blood. 2012;120(14):2817 -25. 
8. Stewart AK, Rajkumar SV, Dimopoulos MA, Masszi T, Spicka I, Oriol A et al. Carfilzomib, 
lenalidomide, and dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372(2):142 -52. 
9. Martin T, Gabriel NM, Ajai C, et al. Phase Ib Study of Isatuximab and Carfilzomib in Relapse 
and Refractory Multiple Myeloma. Blood. 2016, AB 2111.  
10. Dimopoulos MA, Moreau P, Palumbo A, Joshua D, Pour L, Hajek R et al. Carfilzomib and 
dexamethasone versus bortezomib and dexamethasone for patients with relapsed or refractory 
multiple myeloma (ENDEAVOR): a randomized, Phase 3, open -label, multicenter stud y. 
Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(1):27 -38. 
11. Dimopoulos MA, Goldschmidt H, Niesvisky R, et al. Overall Survival of patients with 
relapsed or refractory Multiple Myeloma treated with Carfilzomib and dexamethasone versus 
Bortezomib and dexamethasone in the Randomized Phase 3 ENDEAVOR Trial. IMWG 
congress 2017: LBA.  
12. Palumbo A, Avet -Loiseau H, Oliva S, Lokhorst HM, Goldschmidt H, Rosinol  L et al. Revised 
International Staging System for Multiple Myeloma: A Report From International Myeloma 
Working Group. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(26):3863 -9. 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 179 Internal  
13. European Association for the Study  of the Liver. EASL 2017 Clinical Practice Guidelines on 
the management of hepatitis B virus infection. J hepatol. 2017; 67(2):370 -398. 
14. Howard SC, Jones DP, Pui C -H. The tumour lysis syndr ome. N Engl J Med. 
2011;364(19):1844 -54. 
15. Lahuerta JJ, Paiva B, Vidriales MB, Cordon L, Cedena MT, Puig N, et al. Depth of Response 
in Multiple Myeloma: A Pooled Analysis of Three PETHEMA/G EM Clinical Trials. J Clin 
Oncol. 2017;35(25):2900 -10. 
16. The Nordic Myeloma Group. Interferon -a2b Added to Melphalan -Prednisone for Initial and 
Maintenance Therapy in Multiple Myeloma. Ann I ntern Med. 1996,124(2):212 -22. 
17. Aaronson NK, Bullinger M, Ahmedzai S. A modular approach to quality -of-life assessment in 
cancer clinical trials. Recent Results Cancer Res 1988;111:231 -49. 
18. Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Bullinger M, Crabeels D, Estape J, Filiberti AN, et al. The 
EORTC Core Quality of Life Questionnaire: Interim Results of an International Field Study. 
In: OSOBA D,  editor. Effect of Cancer on Quality of Life. Vancouver: 1991 185 -202. 
19. Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Bergman B, Bullinger M, Cull A, Duez NJ et al. The European 
Organization for Research and Tr eatment of Cancer QLQ -C30: a quality -of-life instrument for 
use in international clinical trials in oncology. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993;85(5):365 -76. 
20. Fayers PM, Aaronson NK, Bjordal K, Groenvold M, Curran D, Bottomley A. EORTC QLQ -
C30 Scoring Manual (3rd edition), on behalf of the EORTC Quality of Life Group. Brussels: 
EORTC, 2001.  
21. Stead ML, Brown JM, Velikova G, Kaasa S, Wisløff F, Child JA, et al. Development of an 
EORTC questionnaire module to be used in health -related quality -of-life assessment for 
patients with multiple myeloma. European Organ ization for Research and Treatment of 
Cancer Study Group on Quality of Life. Br J Haematol. 1999;104(3):605 -11. 
22. Graham L, Phillips A, Stead M, Velikova G, Brown J; EORTC Quality of Life Gr oup. An 
international field study of the reliability and validity of a disease -specific questionnaire 
module (the QLQ -MY20) in assessing the quality of life of patients with multiple myeloma. 
Eur J Cancer. 2007;43(11):1670 -8. 
23. Oken MM, Creech RH, Tormey DC, Horton J, Davis TE, McFadden ET, et al. Toxicity and 
Response Criteria of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Am J Clin Oncol. 1982;5:649 -
55. 
24. Kumar S, Paiva B, Anderson KC, Durie B, Landgren O, Moreau P et al. International 
Myeloma Working Group consensus criteria for response and minimal residual disease 
assessment in multiple myeloma. Lancet Oncol 2016;1 7(8):328 -46. 
25. Rajkumar VS, Richardson P, San Miguel F. Guidelines for the determination of the number of 
prior lines of therapy in multiple myeloma. Blood 2015;127(7):921 -2. 
 
Property of the San ofi Group - strictly confidential  Page 180 Internal  
26. Rajkumar SV, Harousseau JL, Durie B, Anderson KC, Dimopoulos M, Kyle Ret al. 
Consensus recommendations for the uniform reporting of clinical trials: report of the 
International Myeloma Workshop Consensus  Panel 1. Blood 2011:117(18):4691 -5. 
27. Delforge M, Minuk L, Eisenmann JC, Arnulf B, Canepa L, Fragasso A, et al.  Health -related 
quality -of-life in patients with newly diagnosed multiple mye loma in the FIRST trial: 
lenalidomide plus low -dose dexamethasone versus melphalan, prednisone, thalidomide. 
Haematologica. 2015;100(6):826 -33. 
28. Dimopoulos MA, Terpos E, Goldschmidt H, Aleg re A. Treatment with lenalidomide and 
dexamethasone in patients with multiple myeloma and renal impairment. Cancer Treat Rev. 
2012;38(8):1012 -9. 
29. Cocks K, Cohen D, Wisløff F, Sezer O, Lee S , Hippe E, et al. An international field study of 
the reliability and validity of a disease -specific questionnaire module (the QLQ -MY20) in 
assessing the quality of life of patients with multiple myeloma. Eur J Cancer. 
2007;43(11):1670 -8. 
30. Revicki DA, van den Eertwegh AJ, Lorigan P, Lebbe C, Linette G, Ottensmeier CH, et al. 
Health related quality of life outcomes for unresectable stage III or IV melanoma patients 
receiving ipilimumab treatm ent. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2012; 13;10:66.  
31. Kvam AK, Fayers P, Wisloff F. What changes in health -related quality of life matter to 
multiple myeloma patients? A prospective study. Europ ean Journal of Haematology 2010; 
84(4):345 -53. 
32. Pianko MJ, Terpos E, Roodman GD, Divgi CR, Zweegman S, Hillengass J et al. Whole -Body 
Low-Dose Computed Tomography and Advanced Imaging Techn iques for Multiple Myeloma 
Bone Disease. Clin Cancer Res. 2014;20(23):5888 -97. 
33. Mangiacavalli S, Pezzatti S, Rossini F, Doni E, Cocito F, Bolis S et al. Implemented myeloma 
management with whole -body low -dose CT scan: a real life experience. Leuk Lymphoma. 
2016;57(7):1539 -45. 