 
 
  
Wound Dressing in P atients with Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A 
Pilot Study  
 
STUDY PROTOCOL  
PROTOCOL NUMBER 20191046 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Principal Investigator:  
Hadar Lev -Tov, MD  
Dr. Phillip Frost Department of Dermatology & Cutaneous 
Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.  
 
Phone number: (305) 243 -8485 or 305 -243-1000 (24 -hour page 
operator)  
Email Address: hlevtov@med.miami.edu  
 
Protocol Version No. 3 Date: April 6, 2022  
 
 
 
         
 
1) Objectives * 
The primary purpose of this research is to determine how the types of 
wound dressings affect quality of life for people with Hidradenitis Suppurativa (HS). The secondary purpose is to evaluate the utility of a starter kit concept for wound care in people with HS.  
1. Primary outcome: quality of life as measured by the DLQI 
instrument.  
2. Secondary outcomes include:  
a. Average pain  as measured on NRS  
b. Maximal pain as measured on NRS  
c. Sleep assessment as measured on 5 -point likert scale  
d. Drainage assessment as measured on 4 -point likert scale  
e. Odor assessment as measured on 4- point likert scale  
f. Patients’ overall preference of dressings for HS as 
measured on a 5 -point likert scale  
g. Which dressings work best for which parts of the body as measured by patient log  
h. Frequency of dressing changes required as measured by patient log  
i. HS-Physician’s Global Assessment (HS -PGA)  
j.  
 
Study Endpoint s: 
Primary 
endpoint  Change in DLQI from baseline to week 6  
Secondary endpoint  Change in average pain NRS from baseline to week 6  
Secondary endpoint  Change in maximal pain NRS from baseline to week 6  
Secondary endpoint  Change in sleep  rating from 
baseline to week 6  
Secondary endpoint  Change in drainage  rating 
from baseline to week 6  
Secondary endpoint  Change in odor rating from baseline to week 6  
Secondary 
endpoint Overall dressing preference for HS as noted by subjects on patient log 
Secondary endpoint Dressing preference for body parts as noted by subjects on patient log  
Secondary endpoint Average frequency of dressing changes as noted by subjects on patient log 
Secondary endpoint Change in HS- PGA at 6 
weeks after initial assessment  
 
 
2) Background* 
Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic , inflammatory , skin  condition 
characterized by recurrent , painful, draining nodules and abscesses, with 
resultant skin tunneling and scar formation. HS most commonly affects 
intertriginous areas such as the axillae, groin, buttocks, and breasts or 
inframammary region.1 In moderate to severe stages of disease , destruction 
of the normal skin’s architecture leads to the formation of sinus tracts and 
fistulas with dermal and subcutaneous fibrosis.1 It is estimated that 1- 4% of 
the population is affected by HS .1  
One of the many challenging aspects that HS  patients are faced with on a 
daily basis is wound care. Many  HS abscesses and draining nodules and 
tunnels require frequent dressing changes, up to multiple times daily, given 
their high exudative nature.1 Wound care in HS is further complicated by the 
anatomical predilection of HS wounds. Many  dressings on the market are 
designed to be placed over flat surfaces, and it is often difficult for HS patients to accommodate  these flat dressings over the dynamic contours of 
intertriginous areas such as the axillae, groin, and buttocks. 
It is well known that the  need for frequent dressing changes due to the 
heavy exuda te in some patients and its odor , significantly impacts patient’s 
quality of life.
1 However, there currently is no standard wound care protocol 
in place for addressing the wide variety of lesions seen in HS.2 Therefore, 
we have designed a study where we will provide HS patients with different types, sizes, and quantities of FDA- cleared  dressings, and we will ask them 
to keep a log of which types of dressings they found most useful for their wounds. Average as well as maximal pain scores will be measured on a numeric scale (NRS). Patient satisfaction, ease of use of dressings, and dressing preferences will be measured with a 5 -point likert scale . Patients 
will also be asked to log their dressing changes in order to track how often 
dressing changes are needed in HS.  HS-PGA, d rainage, perceived odor, and 
quality of sleep will be assessed (Table 1).  
We will  additionally  study how the usage of antimicrobial dressings will 
have an effect on  the wound microbiome in order to see how this affects 
healing in the setting of HS . The presence of bacteria in the wound bed will 
be determined by analyzing the collected wound swab samples. Standard molecular techniques will be utilized for bacterial analysis. The  purpose of 
collecting swab samples is purely qualitative in its intent to gather data on bio-bioburden and microbiome composition. Ulcer swab results are not indicated  for therapeutic treatment nor diagnosis of infection. The results of 
sample swabs will not have an impact on the treatment plan for each participant.  
 
3) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria* 
 Inclusion criteria:  
• Men and women ≥ 18 years of age  
• D iagnosed with Hidradenitis Suppurativa (all stages of disease)  by Dermatologist  
• Presence of at least one lesion with active drainage  
• Willing and able to provided informed consent 
 
Exclusion criteria:  
• Subjects younger than 18- years -old. 
• Prisoners 
• Pregnant or lactating women  
• Adults unable to consent  
 
4) Procedures Involved*  
Study duration: Each subject will have three visits total  over a 6-week  period.  
 
Recruitment and procedures:  
Participants recruited for this study will be patients at University of Miami 
Hospital (UMH) outpatient dermatology clinics and wound care centers, who present to UMH with a diagnosis of Hidradenitis Suppurativa (HS). During the ir 
office visit, p atients will be invited to participate in a  six-week  study to determine 
which dressings are best suited for patients with HS.   
 
Potential subjects will be informed of the study during their standard of care 
appointment and then asked if they would like to participate. After signing informed consent, a physical exam will be performed and  information on the subjects’ 
demographics, and medical history will be collected  (visit 0 ). Quality of life will be 
assessed with DLQI instrument. Maximal  and average pain will be assessed on a 5 -
point likert scale. Quality of sleep, drainage, and odor will be assessed as well 
(Table 1). Photographs and measurements  will be taken of wounds associated with 
HS. Any active wounds will receive standard of care,  including cleaning and 
debridement to remove all nonviable soft tissue from the wound by scalpel, tissue nippers and/or curettes when appropriate. Wound swab samples will be collected 
from patients from one active wound at each visit. This site  will be identified  during 
the baseline visit . If debridement is indicated as part of standard care, p rior to 
debridement of the wound, a wound swab sample will be collected from the wound bed. In circumstances where a layer of nonviable tissue is preventing swab collection, the swab sample should be collected during the course of the 
debridement process wherein the wound bed has been exposed. S ubjects will be 
provided with a kit that will include  3 types of FDA -cleared dressings ( 1) 
Cutimed® Sorbact® Hydroactive B , 2) Cutimed® Siltec ®, and, 3) Sorbion® Sana 
multi-s tar) that are available on the market and general wound care supplies (i.e. 
tape, gauze) that are also FDA -cleared and available on the market . Dressing 
instructions involve applying desired dressing daily to affected areas and securing with tape as needed. Participants may change dressings as needed. Instructions will be reviewed with participants upon enrollment. Participating subjects will also be given a 2-week log where they will be instructed to fill in which dressings they used on which wounds, and how often they changed the dressings. 
 
Subjects will receive weekly phone calls in between follow ups (for a total of 4 
phone calls) by the research team where they will be asked to answer questions on average and maximal pain, quality of sleep, drainage and odor. Subjects will be asked to follow up in 14 +/- 3 days from visit  0 (visit 1 ), at which point the physical 
exam will be performed. Maximal and average pain will again be assessed on a 5 -
point likert scale. Quality of sleep, drainage, and odor will be assessed as well (Table 1). Photographs and measurements of HS wounds will be taken and the 
dressing logs will be collected and evaluated. Wound swab samples will be collected from the wound that was pre -identified at baseline visit. Participants will 
share with study personnel which dressings were most useful to them, and this will dictate the dressing type that each subject receives for the remaining 4 weeks of the study period.  
 Visit 2 will take p lace 28 +/ - 3 days after visit 1 . Subjects will  follow up for an 
end of treatment visit where they will have a physical exam. Maximal and average pain will again be assessed on a 5 -point likert s cale. Quality of sleep, drainage, and 
odor will be assessed as well (Table 1). Photographs and measurements of HS 
wounds will be taken. Wound swab samples will be collected from the wound that was pre- identified at baseline visit.  Subjects’ medical records will be reviewed to 
collect medical history, treatment plans and disease progress. Please see Table 1 below detailing the schedule of events. 
 Finally, in order to correlate the above outcomes with independent disease 
progression, HS- PGA score will be cal culated at visits 0, 1 and 2. The HS- PGA 
instrument is a 6 -point scale used to assess overall disease severity.  HS -PGA will 
be completed at baseline and follow up visits (Table 1). HS affected areas will be 
evaluated and given a numerical score based on presence of abscesses, draining fistulas, inflammatory nodules, and non-inflammatory nodules. Then the points are added to create one global score. A 2 point reduction and above is considered a meaningful clinical response.  
 
Assessments:  
1. Maximal NRS:  
Please rate your pain at its worse over the last 24 hours on the scale below. 
 
 
  
  
2. Average NRS:  
Please rate your pain on average  over the last 24 hours on the scale below. 
 
 
    
3. Drainage assessment:  
How much did your lesion(s) drain during the past 24 hours? 
 
No draining  A little 
draining  Moderate 
draining  A lot of 
draining  
1 2 3 4 
 

 
      
4. Sleep assessment:  
How much was your sleep disturbed by HS last night?  
Not at all  A little bit  Moderately  A great deal  Unable to 
sleep  
1 2 3 4 5 
    
5. Odor assessment:  
How would you rate the odor caused by the draining of your lesion(s) during the past 24 hours? 
 
No odor  A little odor  Moderate odor  A lot of odor  
1 2 3 4 
   
6. Dressing’s ease of use assessment:  
How easy to use are your current dressings?  
 
Very  Difficult  Difficult  Neutral  Easy  Very  Easy  
1 2 3 4 5 
 
 
 
7. Dressing satisfaction:  
How satisfied are you with your current dressings? 
 
Strongly 
Dissatisfied  Dissatisfied  Neutral  Satisfied  Strongly 
Satisfied  
1 2 3 4 5 
 
 
    8.  HS -PGA:  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 1: Schedule of Events  
 Baseline 
Visit  
Day 0  Phone 
call 1  
Day 7 
 Follow -
Up Visit   
Day 14  Phone 
call 2  
Day 21 
 Phone 
call 3  
Day 28 
 Phone 
call 4  
Day 35 
 End of 
Treatment 
Visit  
Up to Day 
42 after 
Baseline 
Visit  
Visit Window   7 +/- 3 
Days 
from 
Baseline 
Visit  14 +/ - 3 
Days 
from 
Baseline 
Visit  7+/- 3 
Days 
from 
Follow -
Up Visit  14+/- 3 
Days 
from 
Follow -
Up Visit  21+/- 3 
Days 
from 
Follow -
Up Visit  28+/- 3 
Days from 
Follow -Up 
Visit  
Visit #  0  1    2 
Informed 
Consent/PHI 
authorization  X       
Demographics  
X       
Medical HistoryA 
X       
Concomitant 
Medications & 
Procedures 
Assessment  X  X    X 
Physical ExamB 
X  X    X 
Inclusion/Exclusion 
Determination  X       
Wound(s) 
Photograph X  X    X 
Dermatology Life 
Quality Index 
(DLQI)  X      X 
Average 24 hours 
pain Score (NRS)  X X X X X X X 
Maximal 24 hours 
pain Score (NRS)  X X X X X X X 
Review Dressing 
Logs    X    X 
Sleep assessment  
X X X X X X X 
Drainage assessment  
X X X X X X X 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
A: Detailed HS history will be gathered, including current wound care regime (types and number of 
dressings utilized per week, including an estimate of anticipated dressings needed per week), exacerbating 
and alleviating factors ; B: Hurley  staging will be assessed, as well as types (inflammatory,  sinus tracts, 
ulcerations) , number, and location of lesions  
 
 
5) Data and Specimen Banking*  
 6.1 Collection and Analysis of Wound Swabs  
 The following study procedures for wound swabs will be performed at the pre -
designated wound sites only. Wound swab samples will be collected at the Baseline 
Visit 0, Follow -Up Visit 1,  and Follow -Up Visit 2 . 
 Wound swabs will be collected from all study wounds. If deb ridement is indicated 
as part of  standard care, wound swabs will be performed p rior to  the debridement 
Wound swab sample will be collected from the wound bed using the Levine 
technique. In circumstances where a layer of nonviable tissue is preventing swab collection, the swab sample should be collected during the course of the debridement process wherein the wound bed has been exposed. Wound swab samples f rom enrolled subjects will be collected and sent out for further processing 
and analysis to Dr. Irena Pastar’s laboratory . The labels of the tubes will be coded 
to protect the identity of the subjects. Samples will be stored in a - 80°C freezer 
prior to shi pment to the processing laboratory. Samples will be shipped on dry ice. 
 
6.2 Dressing Logs and Photographs  The dressing logs and photographs collected from each patient will be de- identified 
and stored in a computer
 located in the Dermatology Research office. The computer Dressing 
Satisfaction  X  X    X 
Dressings’ Ease of 
Use  X  X    X 
Odor assessment  
X X X X X X X 
HS-PGA  
X  X    X 
Wound Swab 
Sample Collection  X  X    X 
Adverse Events 
Assessment   X    X 
is located in a locked room in the University of Miami Hospital West Building, 
Room 506, 1321 NW 14th St, Miami, Fl, 333125.  
 Statistical analysis will be performed using software already available in the lab.  
This information will be protected in a locked office (see Confidentiality section below) and will only be able to be accessed by the primary investigator and the co-investigators. The photographs will then be downloaded as encrypted, de- identified 
JPEG/TIFF files and stored in the PI computers protected by login and password (see section 16 ). 
 
6) Data Management* 
 
The investigator (or research staf f) will record the data collected in a manner that 
does not include any direct identifiers of the subject. The investigator will assign a 
code to each subject and link the code to the subject’s identity.  The link to the 
subject’ s identity will be maintained on a document separate from the research data.  
Both documents will be stored on password- protected media on a University of 
Miami encrypted device. The data will be stored for at least 3 years after the study 
has concluded  and will be destroyed at the earliest opportunity  in accordance with 
University of Miami’s policies thereafter.  Data will only be accessed by designated 
study team members.  
 
Statistical analysis of collected data will be performed using IBM SPSS Statistics 
for Windows (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA). Mean and range will be 
calculated for continuous variables. Pearson’s chi -squared test will be used to test 
for independence between categorical variables; for expected values less than 5, 
Fisher’s exact test of independence will be used.  
 
Adverse Events 7) Adverse Events* 
 
8.1 Definition of Adverse events  
 An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence (e.g., any unfavorable and unintended sign [including abnormal laboratory findings], symptom or disease) in a subject or clinical investigation subject after providing written informed consent for pa rticipation in the study. Therefore, an AE may or may not be 
temporally or causally associated with the use of a medicinal (investigational) product. In addition, all reports of intentional misuse and abuse of the product are also considered an adverse eve nt irrespective if a clinical event has occurred. The 
investigator has the responsibility for managing the safety of individual subject and identifying adverse events. Qualified study personnel will be readily available to 
advise on trial related medical q uestions or problems. The occurrence of adverse 
events must be sought by non-directive questioning of the subject at each visit 
during the study. Adverse events also may be detected when they are volunteered by the subject during or between visits or through physical examination findings, laboratory test findings, or other assessments. Adverse events must be recorded in the Adverse Events eCRF under the signs, symptoms or diagnosis associated with them, accompanied by the following information (as far as possible) (if the event is serious refer to Section 8 .2):  
1. The severity grade.  
• mild: usually transient in nature and generally not interfering with normal 
activities  
• moderate: sufficiently discomforting to interfere with normal activities  
• severe: prevents normal activities  
2. its relationship to the study treatment (suspected: Yes/No). If the event is due to 
lack of efficacy or progression of underlying illness (i.e. progression of the study indication), the assessment of causality will usually be ‘Not suspected’. The rationale for this guidance is that the symptoms of a lack of efficacy or progression of underlying illness are not caused by the trial drug, they happen in spite of its administration and/or both lack of efficacy and progression of underlying disease can only be evaluated meaningfully by an analysis of cohorts, not on a single subject.  3. its duration (start and end dates) or if the event is ongoing, an outcome of not recovered/not resolved must be reported.  4. whether it constitute s a serious adverse event (SAE - see Section 8 .2 for 
definition of SAE) and which seriousness criteria have been met.  
5. action taken regarding with study intervention . 
 All adverse events must be treated appropriately. Treatment may include one or more o f the following:  
• study dressing regime not changed  
• study dressing regime interrupted/ dressings withdrawn  
 Conditions that were already present at the time of informed consent should be recorded in medical history of the subject. Adverse events (incl uding lab 
abnormalities that constitute AEs) should be described using a diagnosis whenever possible, rather than individual underlying signs and symptoms. Adverse event 
monitoring should be continued for at least 10 weeks following the last date of 
study dressing usage . Once an adverse event is detected, it must be followed until 
its resolution or until it is judged to be permanent (e.g. Continuing at the end of the study), and assessment must be made at each visit (or more frequently, if necessary) of any changes in severity, the suspected relationship to the interventions required to treat it, and the outcome.  
 8.2 Serious adverse events   
An SAE is defined as any adverse event [appearance of (or worsening of any pre-
existing)], undesirable sign(s), sympt om(s) or medical conditions(s) which meets 
any one of the following criteria:  
• fatal  
• life -threatening . Life -threatening in the context of a SAE refers to a reaction in 
which the subject was at risk of death at the time of the reaction; it does not refer to 
a reaction that hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe  
• results in persisten t or significant disability/incapacity  
• constitutes a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
• requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, 
unless hospitalization is for:  
• routine treatment or monitoring of the studied indication, not associated with any deterioration in condition  
• elective or pre -planned trea tment for a pre -existing condition that is 
unrelated to the indication under study and has not worsened since signing 
the informed consent  
• social reasons and respite care in the absence of any deterioration in the 
subject’s general condition  
• treatmen t on an emergency outpatient basis for an event not fulfilling any 
of the definitions of a SAE given above and not resulting in hospital 
admission  
• is medically significant, e.g. defined as an event that jeopardizes the subject or 
may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed 
above 
 Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether other situations should be considered serious reactions, such as important medical events that might not be immediately life threatening or result in death or hospitalization but might jeopardize the subject or might require intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed above. Such events should be considered as “medically significant”. Examples of such events are intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home for allergic bronchospasm, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in hospitalization or development of dependency or abuse (please refer to the ICHE2D Guidelines).  
 8.3 SAE reporting   To ensure subject safety, every SAE, regardless of causality, occurring after the 
subject has provided informed consent and until 10 weeks following the last administration of study dressings must be reported within 24 hours of learning of its 
occurrence.  
 All follow -up information for the SAE including information on complications, 
progression of the initial SAE and recurrent episodes must be reported as follow-up to the original episode within 24 hours of the investigator receiving the follow -up 
information. An SAE occurring at a different time interval or otherwise considered 
completely unrelated to a previously reported one must be reported separately as a 
new event.   If the SAE is not previously documented (new occurrence) and is thought to be related to the study treatment, a CMO & PS Department associate may urgently require further information from the investigator for health authority reporting.  
 Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSARs) will be collected and reported to the competent authorities and relevant ethics committees in accordance with EU Guidance 2011/C 172/01 or as per national regulatory requirements in participating countries. Any SAEs experienced after the 10 week period following the last administration of study treatment should only be reported if the investigator suspects a causal relationship to study treatment. Any SAEs reported up to the subject’s last visit will be reported in the AE eCRF. SAEs beyond that date will only be recorded in the Safety database. 
Risks to subjects in this study include contact dermatitis in the skin areas 
exposed to the dressings provided in this study. However, we will be 
utilizing FDA -cleared dressings that are available on the market and 
therefore pose a risk that is no higher than the current risk subjects are undertaking while utilizing other dressings over the same skin areas.  
 
8) Potential Benefits to Subjects* 
 
Direct benefits to subjects include complimentary  access to various high 
quality dressings that they  might otherwise not have had access to as they 
may not be covered by insurance for HS . 
 
9) Vulnerable Populations* 
 Pregnant women, prisoners, and children younger than 18 years old are excluded.   
10) Setting  
 
Patients will be recruited  from outpatient dermatology clinics  and wound 
centers at the University of Miami Clinics and Hospital at 1295 NW 14th St, 
Suite K/L/M, Miami, FL 33125. Subjects will be offered follow up at outpatient dermatology research offices located at the University of Miami Hospital West Building, 1321 NW 14
th St., Suite 506, Miami , FL, 33125. 
All of the necessary procedures for the study will take place at this  location.  
 
11) Resources Available  
 
Hadar Lev -Tov, M.D., is a dermatologist with expertise in wound healing disorders 
including Hidradenitis Suppurativa ; he will be the primary investigator on this 
study. All subjects will be recruited from outpatient dermatology clinics  and wound 
centers and he can perform detailed wound and skin evaluations.  All associated study personnel are CITI certified and have extensive data analysis training.  
 
12) Prior Approvals  
 
None. 
 
13) Recruitment Methods  
 
Thirty  subjects (30) with a diagnosis of Hidradenitis S uppurativa will be 
recruited  by the Investigator and study staff.  Subjects will be recruited from 
outpatient dermatology clinics  and the Wound Care Center at the University 
of Miami. During their standard visit, subjects will be offered the opportunity to enroll in the study. If subjects agree to take part in this study, 
study staff will guide subjects through the informed consent process. Subjects will be asked to sign the informed consent form and the photo consent form before t he study procedures begin. Subjects will be given 
ample time to consider the study and all questions will be answered by study staff. Subjects will be enrolled from the date of protocol approval for a 12 months period. 
 14) Local Number of Subjects  
 This is a pilot study for which we intend to reach 20 subjects. We anticipate a high 
drop-out rate, and therefore intend to recruit and enroll a total of 30 subjects locally. 
 
15) Confidentiality  
 
The camera will be stored in a locked office in 1321 NW 14th St. University of Miami H ospital West Building, Suite 506, Miami FL 33125 until the end of the 
recruitment. The collected coded and encrypted images will be stored in the 
computers found at the research office protected by a password . The collected 
coded dressing logs will be stored at the research office in a locked cabinet . Both 
the encrypted images and the dressing  logs will be  securely stored for at least 3 
years after the research project has concluded . Please see section 7 (‘ Data 
Management’) for more details on data coding and storage . Only the primary 
investigator and co- investigators will have access to the images, camera,  and 
subject information.  
 
16) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
 
All study records will be stored a password- protected computer, in a 
locked room. A separate datasheet will be created that will tabulate 
patients’ names, MRN, date of birth and assign a subject ID.  This subject 
ID will act as a code during the 6 weeks the subject is actively 
participating in the study.  A second datasheet will contain only the subject 
ID and study relevant data. This will effectively create a de -identified 
database that will be use d for analysis at the end of the study. 
 
17) Consent Process  
 
Consent will be obtained by a member of the study team  in writing and will take 
place in outpatient dermatology clinics and wound centers after the subject 
completed their clinic visit.  In the clinic, study staff will guide the subjects through 
the consent process. Study staff will describe the study and the procedures involved 
to the subject and review the potential risks and benefits. The subject will be given 
ample  time to consider the study. Once the subject agrees to participate, an 
Informed Consent Form will be signed. 
 
18) Process to Document Consent in Writing  
 
Attached.  
 
NOTE: IT IS UNCLEAR WHETHER YOU WILL NEED A PARTIAL 
WAIVER OF HIPAA FOR RECRUITMENT PURPOSES.  IF YOU 
NEED IT, YOU NEED TO ADD THE FOLLOWING:  
19) Authorization for Use and Disclosure of Protected Health Information (HIPAA)  
 
If the research team will access patient medical records or other identifiable health information for this research, you must obtain a waiver of the requirement for written authorization from the patients to access their medical records.   
 
Confirm that yo u will destroy or de -identify the information you collect at the 
earliest opportunity .   I confirm  
 Confirm that the information you collect will not be reused or disclosed to any other pe
rson or entity, except as required by law, for authorized oversight of the research 
study or for other research for which the use or disclosure of PHI is permissible.          
   I confirm    
 
 
References  
1. Falola RA, DeFazio MV, Anghel EL, Mitnick CD, Attinger CE, Evans KK. What 
Heals Hidradenitis Suppurativa: Surgery, Immunosuppression, or Both? Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 2016;138(3 Suppl):219S-229S. 
2. Alavi A, Kirsner RS. Local wound care and topical management of hidradenitis 
suppurativa. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015;73(5 Suppl 1):S55- 61. 
 