1 
 
 Mindfulness -Oriented Recovery Enhancement for Opioid Misuse and Chronic Pain in Primary 
Care: A Randomized Controlled Trial  
 
NCT 02602535  
 
 
Statistical  Analysis Plan  Version  2.0 
March  1, 2020  
 
 Table  of Contents  
 
1. BACKGROUND  
2. AIMS  
3. STUDY  DESIGN  
4. ENDPOINTS  
4.1 Primary  
4.2 Secondary  
4.3 Tertiary  
5. RANDOMIZATION  
5.1 Method  of Randomization  
5.2 Allocation  Concealment  
6. SAMPLE  SIZE  
6.1 Preliminary  Data 
6.2 Sample  Size Determination for Primary  Outcome  
6.3 Power  for Secondary  Outcomes  
6.4 Power  for Tertiary  Outcomes  
7. INTERIM  MONITORING  PLAN  
7.1 Overview  
7.2 Trial Adaptation  Guidelines  
7.3 Monitoring  Inter-practice  Variation  
7.4 Monitoring  of Efficacy  and Futility  
7.5 Monitoring  of Safety  
8. ANALYTICAL  PLAN  
8.1 Overview  
8.2 Comparability  of Treatment Groups  
8.3 Analysis  of Primary  Outcome  
8.4 Analysis  of Secondary  and Tertiary  Outcomes  
 
 Title Mindfulness -Oriented Recovery Enhancement for Opioid Misuse 
and Chronic Pain in Primary Care: A Randomized Controlled Trial  
  
Study  Design  The design  is a parallel  group  superiority  trial. The unit of 
randomization is the individual patient.  
Study  Duration  5 years.  
Trial Sites  University of Utah Health – Community Physicians Group.  
 
Objective  Conduct  a randomized  controlled trial to determine  the efficacy  of a 
Mindfulness -Oriented Recovery Enhancement intervention for opioid 
misuse and chronic pain in primary care.  
 
Number  of Subjects  The target  sample  size is 260 participants  enrolled  (200 + 
oversampling by 30% for attrition) to provide  80% prob ability that a 
two-sided 95% confidence interval will have a margin (half -width) less 
than +/ - .18 standard deviation for the between -groups difference in 
the study outcomes . 
 Main  Inclusion  
Criteria  Age ≥18 with a chronic pain-related diagnosis, reporting  current pain 
≥3 on a 0 -10 scale, currently taking prescription opioids for ≥3 months, 
and surpassed a validated cutpoint for opioid misuse on the Current 
Opioid Misuse Measure (COMM).  
 
 
 
Intervention  Mindfulness -Oriented Recovery Enhancement (MORE) is a group 
behavioral intervention that unites mindfulness training, cognitive 
reappraisal, and positive psychological principles into an integrative 
intervention strategy targeting mechanisms of pain and opioid misuse.  
 
Duration  of 
Intervention  8 weeks.  
 
 
Primary  Outcome  The primary  outcome  is opioid misuse measured by the Drug Misuse 
Index,  operationalized  as scores on the COMM and triangulated by 
blinded clinical interview and urine drug screen. The co -primary 
outcome is chronic pain symptomology, operationalized as pain 
severity and functional interference scores on the Brief Pain 
Inventory (BPI).  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Primary  Analysis  Effects of treatment on the DMI will be analyzed with generalized 
mixed effects models, and effects on the BPI will be analyzed  with 
mixed effect ANCOVA models, adjusting for baseline levels.  
Secondary  
Outcomes  Opioid dose, psychological distress, and opioid craving.  
 
 
 
Interim Analysis  Interim monitoring  will focus  on patient  accrual,  baseline  comparability  
of treatment  groups,  protocol  adherence,  data completeness  and 
quality,  and safety. No interim outcome analysis is planned.  
 
 
 1. BACKGROUND  
 
Prescription opioid misuse among chronic pain patients is an  emerging public health threat that 
is being addressed with heightened urgency at both clinical and policy levels. Though opioid 
analgesic therapy can manage chronic pain, it may confer with significant health risks, including 
dependence, overdose, and misuse. Opioid misuse is evidenced by abe rrant drug -related 
behaviors such as unauthorized dose escalation or use of prescribed opioids to self -medicate 
negative emotions that exacerbate craving.6 Research on treatments for opioid misuse among 
chronic pain patients is scant; according to a 2015 NIH -AHRQ systematic review of  long-term 
opioid therapy for chronic pain, “no study evaluated the effectiveness of risk mitigation 
strategies for improving outcomes related to overdose, addiction, abuse, or misuse.”7 Extant 
therapies may have limited efficacy because they fail  to directly target cognitive -affective neural 
circuits that govern hedonic regulatory responses elicited by pain -, opioid -, and reward -related 
stimuli.8 To address this need, the PI translated mechan istic findings from behavioral 
neuroscience into an innovative treatment for prescription opioid misuse, called Mindfulness -
Oriented Recovery Enhancement  (MORE). MORE integrates training in mindfulness, 
reappraisal, and savoring of natural rewards to enhan ce hedonic regulation and target the risk 
chain at the point where maladaptive emotion -cognition interactions link chronic pain to opioid 
misuse. MORE is innovative in that it aims to modify associative learning mechanisms 
dysregulated by the allostatic ef fects of opioid misuse on brain reward systems via 
strengthening top-down cognitive control to restructure bottom -up reward learning from 
valuation of drug reward to natural reward  – something that no other behavioral intervention 
for opioid misuse has bee n designed to do. Accordingly, this project  funded  by the National  
Institute  on Drug Abuse (NIDA) is a randomized  clinical  trial (RCT)  of MORE to reduce opioid 
misuse and chronic pain symptoms among patients receiving long -term opioid therapy in primary 
care.   
 
 
2. AIMS  
 
AIM 1. To conduct a RCT of the Mindfulness -Oriented Recovery Enhancement (MORE) 
intervention for co -occurring aberrant drug -related behaviors and chronic pain in primary 
care.  
We will compare the therapeutic impact of MORE and a conventional supportive group (SG) 
psychotherapy  active control condition on clinical outcomes germane to opioid misuse and 
chronic pain. Hypotheses : Opioid misusing patie nts assigned to MORE, as compared to SG 
participants, will evidence decre ased opioid misuse  and pain ( PRIMARY OUTCOMES ), as well 
as reduced opioid craving, opioid dosing, and psychological distress ( SECONDARY 
OUTCOMES ) from pre - to post -treatment through 9 -month follow -up.  
 
AIM 2. To test and quantify the degree to which MORE’s impact on opioid misuse  and 
pain is mediated by proactive control over emotion -cognition interactions (top -down 
mechanism).  
Hypotheses : The impact of MORE on opioid misuse  and pain will be mediated by  
impro vements in : a) attentional disengagement from  opioid -related cues  (reduced attentional 
bias) ; b) emotion regulation ; and c) cognitive coping (e.g., reinterpretation of pain as innocuous 
sensory information ).  
 
AIM 3 . To test and quantify the degree to which MORE’s impact on aberrant drug -related 
behaviors  is mediated by restructuring of reward processing  (bottom -up mechanism).  
 
 Hypotheses : The impact of MORE on aberrant drug -related behaviors  will be mediated by 
restructured reward processing, as indicated by a) decreases in psychophysiological indices of 
opioid cue -reactivity ; b) increases in r esponsiveness to natural reward cues; and c) a shift in the 
relative salience of these cues.   
 
3. STUDY  DESIGN  
 
A two -arm parallel RCT design with an active control group will minimize internal threats to 
validity. Mindfulness -Oriented Recovery Enhancement ( MORE ; n=130) and the Supportive 
Group Psychotherapy control ( SG; n=130) will be equated for time spent  in treatment. 
Assessors will be blind to treatment condition.  Target sample sizes were determined via power 
and precision analyses.  The unit of randomization  is the individual patient.  The co -primary  
outcomes are opioid misuse and chronic pain symptoms. Participants will complete a clinical  
assessment battery at pre - and post -treatment, and at 3-, 6-, and 9 -month follow -ups. 
Participants will complete a psychophysiological assessment protocol at pre - and post -
treatment. P articipants will complete ecologic al momentary assessments ( EMAs ) of symptoms,  
skill practice,  and opioid use during treatment and 1 month afterward  up to 3 times/day 
(morning, noon, and night).   
 
4. ENDPOINTS  
 
The primary , secondary, and tertiary  outcome  measures  are summarized  in Table 1.  
 
Event  Screen  Pre -Tx In 
Tx Post-Tx Follow -Up 
1 Mo  3 Mo  6 Mo  9 Mo  
Screening and Stratification Measures  
Informed Consent  X        
Demo graphics & 
Medical History  X        
MINI  X        
Primary and Secondary Outcome Measures  
BPI Pain severity and 
interference   X  X  X X X 
DMI: ABC,  COMM  & 
Urine screen   X  X  X X X 
Opioid dosing – TLFB 
and chart review   X  X  X X X 
DASS Psychological 
distress   X  X  X X X 
Opioid Craving NRS – 
EMA (see below)    X   X   
Mediators  
Self-report  
mediators : 
CSQ Reinterpretation  
FFMQ Mindfulness  
CERQ Reappraisal  
WOS Savoring   X  X  X X X 
Other tertiary 
measures:  
PANAS Affect  
CSQ Pain 
Catastrophizing  
MLQ Meaning in Life  
SHAPS Anhedonia  
PCL PTSD  
Self-Transcendence   X  X  X X X 
Psychophysiological 
protocol   X  X     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1 Primary Outcomes  
 Intervention Process Measures and Ecological Momentary Assessments  
TMS State 
mindfulness (after 
each session)    X      
Opioid c raving NRS - 
EMA    X   X   
Opioid dosing – EMA    X   X   
Affect NRS - EMA    X   X   
Pain Intensity & 
Unpleasantness NRS 
- EMA    X   X   
Therapeutic skill 
practice    X   X   
 
 The primary  outcome  is opioid misuse measured by the Drug Misuse Index,  operationalized  
as scores on the COMM and triangulated by blinded clinical interview and urine drug 
screen. The co -primary outcome is chronic pain symptomology, operationalized as pain 
severity and functional interference scores on the Brief Pain Inventory (BPI). Overall 
success of the intervention will occur if opioid misuse decreases and pain functioning improves, 
while pain severity does not worsen.  For conservatism, we evaluate all outcomes with two -
sided tests, and the Bonferroni correction to control for multiple compa risons.     
 
Primary outcomes (PRE/POST/FOLLOW -UP). Our pre -specified primary opioid misuse  
outcome in clinicaltrials.gov is a validated composite measure - the Drug Misuse Index (DMI).11 
Because there is no single way to identify patients who misuse opioids,12 the DMI uses 3 levels 
of data to triangulate opioid misuse: self -reports on a structured questionnaire (i.e., the COMM); 
clinical assessment  of opioid misuse —the Addiction Behaviors Checklist (ABC)13—rated by 
clinical staff (i.e., ps ychologists, social workers, and nurses) blinded to treatment assignment; 
and urine toxicology screens. The COMM consists of 17 items rated on a Likert scale (0=never, 
4=very often) regarding how often in the past 30 days patients engaged in opioid misuse -related 
behaviors (e.g., used opioids in ways other than prescribed). COMM scores ≥9 and ABC scores 
≥2 are considered positive. A positive rating from the urine screen is given when subjects test 
positive for illicit drugs or a non -prescribed opioid. Subje cts with positive COMM scores will be  
given a positive DMI and classified as a misuser. If patients deny engaging in opioid misuse -
related behavior (COMM scores <9), then positive ratings on both the urine screen and the ABC 
are needed for a positive DMI, because urine screens can be inaccurate due to variable drug 
metabolites, and clinician ratings may unreliable.14,15 Otherwise, subjects will be  given a 
negative DMI. Multiple studie s support the validity of this DMI scoring method.11,16 –18 Chronic 
pain symptoms  (pain severity and functional interference) will be assessed with the Brief Pain 
Inventory (BPI ).19 
 
4.2 Secondary  Outcomes  
 
Opioid craving  will be measured with 2 items “How much do you want to take your opioids right 
now? ” and “How strong of an urge do have to take opioids right now?” using 0 -10 Numeric 
Rating Scales (NRS) delivered via EMA. Single item measures of craving have been shown to 
validly predict opioid misuse16 and be sensitive to MORE treatment effects.3 Reduction in 
opioid dose will be assessed by the Timeline Followback Procedure (TLFB) and triangulated 
by chart review of prescription history by the study coordi nator.20 Opioid dose will be converted 
to oral morphine -equivalent using standardized equianalgesic conversions. Subjects will also 
document daily opioid dose via EMA. Psycho logical distress  will be measured with the 
Depression Anxiety Stress Scale -21 (DASS -21), a validated, reliable scale (α=.87 -.94).21  
 
4.3 Tertiary  Outcomes  
 
The tertiary  outcomes  include psychophysiological measures, self -report mediators, and other 
EMA ratings of momentary affective state and momentary pain ratings.  
 
5. RANDOMIZATION  
 
5.1 Method  of Randomization  
 
An electronic random number generator will randomize participants with simple random 
assignment in blocks of varying sizes (2 - 4) to preserve unpredictability of allocation, which 
will be  concealed by opaque envelopes.   
 
  
All participants who  met trial eligibility  criteria  were  randomized via simple random 
assignment.   
A computerized random number generator produced the simple random assignment. An 
investigator uninvolved in recruitment, consenting, assessment, or follow -up generated the 
assignment. No  one else from the trial was involved  in the process.  To minimize  the risk of 
selection bias,  the investigator who generated assignments had no contact with or 
knowledge of study participants at the time of random assignment.  
 
5.2 Allocation  Concealment  
 
Allocation  concealment is an  important  consideration for randomized trials to control  for 
selection  bias.  To prevent bias and maintain allocation concealment, participants will not be 
allocated until the  day of the  first treatment session.  Assessments will be  conduc ted by project 
staff blinded to group assignment (which remained concealed throughout the study). To 
maintain blinding, the allocation list was inaccessible to project staff involved in assessment 
or treatment, and before each assessment, participants were  reminded to not reveal anything 
that would disclose their treatment assignment to study staff.  
 
6. SAMPLE SIZE  
 
6.1 Preliminary  Data  
 
Sample size  considerations  are based the effects of MORE versus SG on opioid - and pain -
related variables from the PI’s NIDA R03 grant (R03DA032517). The PI’s R03 -funded Stage 2 
RCT identified medium to large effect sizes on pain and  opioid -related variables over the course 
of the study (Cohen’s d=.50 - .84). 
 
6.2  Sample Size Determination  
 
The table indicates the smallest detectab le effects for a treatment X time interaction term given 
different sample sizes, assuming a Type I error rate of .05 and varying correlations between 
repeated measures, which ranged from .34 -.56 per outcome in the R03. Cohen26 defined 
f=0.10 and f=0.25 as small and medium effects, respectively. Thus our target N of 260 (N=200 + 
oversampling by 30% for attrition) will allow us to detect small -to-medium effects on continuous 
outcomes.  Based on dichotomous clinical classification of opioid misuse dat a from the R03 
(68% improvement for MORE versus 32% for SG), the proposed sample size will offer 
outstanding power (>.99) to detect differences of this magnitude on this outcome. (b) Precision 
of parameter estimation . Our target N will allow model paramete rs to be estimated with a high 
degree of precision. A per group sample size of N=130 provides 80% probability that a two -
sided 95% confidence interval will have a margin (half -width) less than +/ - .18 standard 
deviation. Thus the proposed sample will provi de precision more than adequate for estimating 
small clinical effects with high confidence. (c) Multivariate models . Generally, structural equation 
power calculations for the full information maximum likelihood sensitivity analyses can be based 
on Root Mea n Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) comparisons of nested models. The 
proposed sample provides, in a realistic testing scenario, greater than 80% power in a 1  df test 
(26 versus 25) of close fit comparing two models with RMSEA of .06 and .05 at α=.05.  These 
calculations are conservative. Maximum likelihood techniques retain all observations at all 
times, and efficiently incorporate correlated observations to yield an Effective Sample Size that 
is quantifiably larger than the number of subjects. With ful ly specified repeated dimensions, the 
anticipated correlations will yield an effective sample size that is 40% larger, or roughly N=360.  
 
 Table  2. Sample  Size Estimates  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Due to COVID -19 and related research restrictions at the University of Utah, recruitment  ended 
on March  31, 2020,  with a total of 250 participants  enrolled (10 participants less than the 
originally anticipated target N).  
 
7. INTERIM  MONITORING  PLAN  
 
7.1 Overview  
 
Interim monitoring  will focus  on patient  accrual,  baseline  comparability  of treatment  groups in 
terms of demographic and clinical characteristics,  protocol  adherence,  loss to follow -up, data 
completeness  and quality,  and safety .  
 
7.2 Monitoring  of Safety  
 
Details of the safety and adverse event monitoring plan were provided in the study protocol. 
This is a minimal risk trial . Adverse and serious adverse events will be collected. Unanticipated 
problems will also be reported to the Medical Safety Monitor.  
 
8. ANALYTIC  PLAN  
 
8.1 Overview  
 
The analysis  of the primary  and secondary  outcomes  will be according  to the principle of 
intent -to-treat,  i.e., participants  will be analyzed  according  to their original  treatment  
assignment  regardless  of adherence  to protocol.  SAS 9.4, MPlus,  and R 3.0.2  software  will be 
used  for all analyses.  
 
8.2 Comparability  of Treatment Groups  
 
Comparability  of treatment  groups  will be assessed  by comparing  the distribution  of baseline  
characteristics  in the two groups  using  appropriate graphical  procedures,  summary  statistics 
and multivariate  methods.  The randomization  is designed  to produce  balance  on important  
covariates and baseline levels of the outcome measures. Nonetheless, some degree of pre -
randomization imbalance in study outcomes may occur, and we regress post -randomization 
observations on baseline scores to adjust for such imbalance .   
 
8.3 Analysis of the Primary  Outcomes  
 
Effects of treatment on opioid misuse and chronic pain symptoms will be evaluated using linear 
and nonlinear mixed models with fixed effects consisting of a time factor and between -subjects 
treatment factor (MORE vs. SG), and will adjust for randomization imbalance by covarying 
baseline levels of the outcome. For the continuous pain symptom outcome measured by the Minimally detectable effect sizes (Cohen’s f) for 
treatment X time interaction (pre -tx, post -tx, follow -up) 
Correlation  N = 100  N = 110  N = 120  N = 130  
0.25  0.16  0.15  0.14  0.14  
0.50  0.13  0.12  0.12  0.11  
0.75  0.09  0.09  0.08  0.08  
 
 Brief Pain Inventory (BPI), the longitudinal trajectory for individual i on outcome j in treatment 
group g at post -randomization time t is modele d, under the full -rank parameterization, as  
(1) 
, 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , ~ (0, ) , ~ (0, )ijg t ijg ijg t jg t ijg t ijg j ijg t jy a y a N MVN              ,  
where  
aijg is a random intercept with zero mean and variance j , 
β is the fixed regression coefficient of the post measures on pre -randomization baseline (time 1) 
score y ijg,t=1  
jg,t>1 are the post -randomization treatment arm means at times 2 through 5, conditioned on 
baseline, equivalent in this parameterization to distinct intercept terms 
1 , 1 , 1 ( | , )jgt ijg t i ijg t E y a y  
for each group and time, and ijg,t>1 are multivariate norma l random 
error terms assumed to follow either an independent scaled diagonal or AR1 error structure, as 
determined by comparison of BIC model statistics.  
Opioid misuse as measured by the Drug Misuse Index (DMI) is a dichotomous longitudinal 
variable Y, and  we will evaluate treatment impact with a generalized linear mixed model 
specifying a binary distribution and logit link, with time t and group g as categorical factors and a 
random intercept i :   
log( / (1 ))i i g t gt i         
  
 
| ~ ( ) , ~ (0, )igt i igt iY Bernoulli iid N    .   
For the opioid misuse outcome (Drug Misuse Index; DMI), it is not necessary to adjust for 
baseline differences, as all participants exhibited opioid misuse at baseline.   
Our primary interest lies in estimating, for the BPI  co-primary pain outcome j, the adjusted main 
effect, which represents the overall benefit of treatment across all four post-treatment 
measurement points conditional on baseline:  
(2) 
5
,, 2ˆ ˆˆ (1/ 4)t
j g SG t g MORE t t  
 , a linear combination over the four post-randomization 
(t>1) a djusted treatment means. The key estimand for binary DMI will be the main effect on the 
additive logit scale over the four post -randomization occasions.  
This estimand is meaningful whether a time -by-treatment arm interaction is present or not, as it 
repre sents the expected overall treatment benefit for individuals randomly selected from the two 
populations.  The null hypothesis of no treatment impact is 
0:0jjH , a single numerator 
degree -of-freedom test, which we evaluate at alpha=.05/3 = .0167 (i.e., Bonferroni adjustment 
for the three primary variables) under restricted maximum likelihood with Kenward -Roger 
denominator degrees of freedom. To control for false discovery in the three primary outcomes, 
we will compare  the unadjusted  p-values against  Bonferroni -adjusted  alpha  =.05/3  = .0167.   
 
The analysis of primary outcomes achieves unbiased estimates of model parameters when 
missingness arises from processes that depend on observed covariates (Missing at Random, or 
MAR).  Maximum likeliho od estimation (MLE) procedures under an intent -to-treat philosophy are 
robust against common patterns of missing data .27,33 MLE is based on all data observations; no 
values are deleted or imputed. In our tables and reporting, we refer to the p -values under the 
standard MAR assumption as p MAR.  There is however no definitive test for the MAR 
assumption.  But we investigate sensitivity to missing data and possible other covariates using 
two other approaches.  We extend the scope of the MAR analysis us ing Full Information (Direct) 
Maximum Likelihood under broader multivariate patterns of missingness, incorporating 
simultaneous longitudinal outcomes and key sociodemographic variables as auxiliary variables 
correlated with the outcome. In simulations, thi s approach often yields performance equal to or 
better than achieved by multiple imputation and explicit nonignorable missingness models .34–36 
These analyses will be conducted with the latent variable modeling program MPlus, which 
 
 incorporates full information maximum likelihood estimation in multivariate models.  The global 
hypothesis test will be examined under three sensitivity  variations:  
 
a) Replication of the analysis model (1) under simultaneous inclusion of the three primary 
outcomes of drug misuse, pain severity, and pain interference, repeated over post -
randomization assessments, along with respective baseline predictor values.  In thi s multivariate 
analysis, pain severity and pain interference are continuous variables, while drug misuse is 
represented as a dichotomous outcome under a logit link.  All three outcomes are free to 
correlate in the analysis, with the global hypothesis test imposed by nonlinear equality 
constraints on the net benefits 
0:0jjH for j=1,2,3, a 3 df test.   
 
b) Replication of the 3 df global hypothesis test in (a) with the addition of the continuous log -
transformed opioid use secondary outcome, and the continuous Distress secondary outcome as 
correlated variables.   
 
c) Replication of (b) with the addition of the demographic predictor variables gender and 
continuous age at baseline.  
 
(d-f) Re -running variations a, b, and c under constrained longi tudinal analysis (CLDA) rather 
than regression adjustment for baseline.  Under CLDA, the baseline means are constrained to 
be equal across arms.  These constraints are straightforward under multivariate modeling. The 
overall benefit contrasts among the pos t-baseline means, conditional on within -outcome 
baseline treatment arm equalities, are equivalent to the difference in areas under the curve for 
the conditional post -baseline mean trajectories.   
 
In the text and tables, we report p -values obtained under M odel C as p MAR+ , to indicate that the 
standard MAR analysis has been supplemented with several auxiliary variables, as described 
above.  
 
Finally, we re -estimated all analyses under a simple selection model37,38 in which missingness is 
dependent on the value of the unobserved outcome in as  well as the prior observed responses.  
In the text and table, we report p -values obtained under this model as p NMAR.  The Not Missing 
at Random designation indicates that this model does not require the more restrictive 
assumptions of MAR, but may be vali d when missingness depends on underlying and 
unobserved values.   
 
8.4 Analysis of the Secondary  and Tertiary  Outcomes.  
 
Analysis of opioid medication dose will also be implemented as a linear mixed effects model of 
longitudinal morphine equivalent intake, conditional on baseline, under a log transformation to 
reduce skew.  Distress and other psychological outcomes will similarly be  analyzed  using  
linear mixed models adjusted for randomization imbalance by covarying baseline levels of the 
outcome. Exact unadjusted p -values are reported for the secondary and tertiary outcomes.  
As in the analysis of our continuous primary outc omes, our primary interest lies in the 
adjusted main effect of treatment, which with this model specification represents the average 
effect of treatment across all post -treatment measurement points.   
 
Control for multiple comparisons among the  secondary an d tertiary variables is provided by a 
global hypothesis test evaluated at alpha=.05 in the multivariate mixed effects model as 
0,joint: , 0j Hj 
 versus 
1, joint:0j H some  for some j. Multivariate contrasts may be 
 
 implemented in the univariate mixed model framework of SAS 9.4 by introducing a categorical 
indicator variable for outcome  j, interacting this variable with all other effects, and specifying 
distinct covariance matrices for each  j.  The global net benefit hypothesis is a cus tom contrast 
with J df, where J is the number of non -primary outcomes. Rejection of the global hypothesis 
test implies a significant treatment impact on at least one secondary outcome  j, and we report 
exact p -values for the univariate tests.  
  
Descriptive analysis of opioid dosing data will examine group differences in the proportion of 
participants who achieve an opioid dose reduction of ≥50% at each time point.   
 
To explore whether the cognitive, affective, and physiological mediators specified in Aims 2  and 
3 statistically mediate the effect of treatment on outcome variables, we will conduct structural 
equation path analyses according to established guidelines28 by evaluating three regression 
paths: A) ‘a’ path between treatment indicator and change in outcome (e.g., opioid misuse) from 
pre-treatment to follow -up; B) the ‘b’ path between pre -post treatment change in the mediator 
(e.g., attentional bias) and pre -treatment to follow -up change in the outcome ( e.g., opioid 
misuse); and C) the ‘c’ path between treatment and pre -post treatment change in the mediator 
(e.g., attentional bias). We will test mediation by evaluating the significance of the joint product 
of the a and b paths, with bootstrapping29 used to test the significance of the indirect effect. Our 
team developed a comprehensive analysis of mediation under possible moderation for clinical 
trials,30 allowing for the possibility that treatment has changed relationships, not just levels, 
among variables - this will further guide analyses for Aims 2 a nd 3. Path models will be 
corrected for multiple comparisons. Mediational analyses will be published in a subsequent 
report following publication of the primary trial outcomes.  
 
For EMA, we will use growth curve analysis31 to examine treatment and homework practice 
effects on:  trajectories of  craving (and other tertiary EMA outcomes – e.g., affective state).  The 
basic growth curve model will be specified with fixed effects consisting of continuous time t (in 
days), ca tegorical period p (AM, Noon, or PM reporting) and the categorical between -subjects 
treatment factor ( g = MORE vs. SG).  Random effects will incorporate correlated intercept and 
period -specific trend components, as in standard growth models:  
2
0 1 0 1 0 1 ; , ~ ([ , ]', ) , ~ (0, )itpg i ipg itpg i ipg p pg itpgy b b t b b MVN N         Ψ
. 
The model allows different trends in the three different reporting periods of the day. The key null 
hypothesis of treatment impact in EMA will be evaluated by testing the equality of the three fixed 
effect period trends between arms:   
0 1 , 1 , 1: / 3 / 3 / 3p g SG p g MORE p p p pH    
 
Additional temporal complexity and serial dependence will be considered in polynomial and 
autoregressive models, as evaluated with the Bayesian Information Criterion.  More complicated 
relationships will be considered in ALT models tha t include additional cross -lagged and auto -
regressive effects.    
 