Version Date: 1/ 15/23  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acute Effects of Exogenous Ketone Ester Administration in  
Heart Failure  
 
Protocol  
 
Clinicaltrials.gov identifier : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version date : 1/15/2023  
 
  
 2 1. CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE  
Despite  advances in the treatment of patients with heart failure ( HF), there remains  substantial 
residual morbidity and mortality. Even with  insights into diverse mechanisms of myocardial 
dysfunction, virtually all current medical treatment is focused on  modulating  the “neurohormonal axis”. 
Our project extends the HF treatment principles  to an emerging frontier , the ketone “metabolic axis” , 
as a means of ameliorating symptoms through exogenous delivery of a ketone ester. We seek to 
understand whether supplementation with a ketone ester can improve functional capacity in patients 
with H F and preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF ), while simultaneously performing deep phenotyping 
to fully characterize metabolic , hemodynamic, and echocardiographic pathways a ltered with such 
therapy.  If beneficial, our results would provide critical proof of concept for targeting the “metabolic 
axis” a s a treatment strategy to help improve exercise capacity and quality of life  in heart failure and 
would inspire  larger, randomi zed trials of ketone therapy.  
 
2.    SPECIFIC AIMS   
HF is a major public health problem: it affects 6.2 million people in the U.S.1 The lifetime risk for 
developing HF after the age of 40 years approaches 20%,2 and five -year survival after HF 
hospitalization is a dismal 35%,  regardless of the underlying ejection fraction (EF).3 These statistics 
highlight the urgent need to identify novel therapies to reduce the substantial morbidity and mortality 
of the disease  process .  
 
At its most basic level , howe ver, HF  is a metabolic imbalance - an inability of the heart to generate 
sufficient energy to adequately supply  blood to  the body, or only to do so at elevated filling pressures. 
The heart is a very metabolically demanding organ , which requires nearly 12 times its own body 
weight in ATP daily.4 Abnormal myocardial energetics have been described in HFpEF.5 Targeting the 
metabolic axis in HF therefore may hold great therapeutic promise.  
 
Under physiol ogic conditions, fatty acids are the predominant energetic substrate for the heart, 
providing 50 -70% of the ATP need . Glucose  serves as a secondary source , necessary for flexibility 
and adaptive fuel utilization shifts during embryologic develo pment and during a diverse array of 
nutritional and physiologic conditions.6, 7 However, two important studies  lead by our team  have 
demonstrated that free fatty acid oxidation is impaired  in advanced HF due to mitochondrial substrate 
reprogramming, and the hypertrophied and failing heart utilizes ketone bodies  as a metabolic 
substrate , in both animals and humans .4, 8 It was previously unknown whether this shift was adaptive 
or maladaptive, but recent small and large animal data demonstrate s that ketone  body oxidation is an 
adaptive feature of the failing heart . Importantly, delivery of exogenous ketones improve s pathologic 
cardiac remodeling and dysfunction while enhancing mitochondrial bioenergetic s.7 Concordant with 
this animal  data, medications that also increase systemic levels of ketone bodies, such as SGLT2 
inhibitors, significantly decrease HF  hospitalizations  among patients with HFpEF  raising the question 
as to  whether therapeutic ketosis can provide benefit in HF pEF. 
 
We now have a unique opportunity to study  a nutraceutical  ketone ester ( KE), (R)-3-hydroxybutyl (R) -
3-hydroxybutyrate  (commercially known as “DeltaG”) , that provides systemic ketosis  in a deep 
phenotyping study of  HFpEF patients .9 Initial studies  of DeltaG  demons trated significant improvement 
in exercise capacity among endurance athletes.10 Because exercise limitation is a cardinal feature of 
HF, KE therapy has the potential  to likewise improve exercise capacity in HF pEF.  
 
Our Specific Aims  and Hypotheses  are as follows:  
Aim 1. To determine the acute effects of single dose DeltaG  administration on maximal (peak VO 2) 
and submaximal exercise capacity  (exercise time) assessed by cardiopulmonary exercise 
testing (CPET ) among patients with HFpEF. 
 3  Hypothesis: DeltaG  will improve peak VO 2 and submaximal exercise time compared to a 
matching placebo . 
Suba im 1. To determine the impact of DeltaG  on metabolic  and biomarker profiles  
during exercise.  
Hypothesis: DeltaG  will reduc e lactate production  during exercise .  
 
Aim 2. To assess the effects of DeltaG on cardiovascular hemodynamics  during exercise.  
Hypothesis: DeltaG  will reduce  systemic  vascular resistance  as well as demonstrate 
improvements in cardiac output  at peak exercise compared to placebo.  
 
Aim 3. To profile the effects of ketone ester versus placebo on systemic and plasma carbohydrate 
metabolism during exercise using indirect calorimetry and stable isotopes (2H-glucose) techniques  
 Hypothesis: Delta G will reduce systemic carbohydrate utilization at steady -state during  
submaximal exercise, with concordant reductions in plasma glucose oxidation  
  
Overall  impact : Our objective is to determine whether nutritional ketosis provide s a therapeutic benefit 
in HFpE F). Strengths include the use a readily available KE drink with a favorable safety profile as 
well as detailed phenotyping to understand the mechanism s of potential benefit among patients with 
HFpEF. We leverage the expertise of collaborators with rich experience and expertise in ketone 
metabolism in HF, metabolomic profiling, deep phenotyping during early stage studies of HF 
therapeutics , and assessment s of ventriculoarterial interactions.  We anticipate that our results will  
enhance  the understanding of “metabolic axis” of HF and identify a therapeutic intervention of 
substantial importance . Further, o ur methodology provides a robust framework to underst and the 
impact of altered metabolism  and exogenous ketone delivery  in HF pEF that can easily be scaled and 
applied to other cardiovascular diseases , such as left ventricular hypertrophy, inherited 
cardiomyopathies , and/or  cardiogenic shock , as well as test the ergogenic benefits of other 
pharmacologic therapies . 
 
3. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
HF affects 6.2 million Americans and is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality in the 
contemporary era.1 By 2030, the burden of HF is anticipated to  surpass  8 million with an associated 
economic toll of a staggering $69.8 billion .1 The cardinal clinical feature of  patients with HF is reduced  
exercise capacity, which is associ ated with a substantial reduction  in quality of life.11 Despite 
significant advancements in therapy for patients with HF,  particularly among those with reduced 
ejection fraction (EF),  many still suffer from limitations in exercise capacity  and a poor prognosis . As 
such, exploring other avenu es to reduce  morbidity from HF is of vital interest from  societal, economic, 
clinical,  and patient -centered perspectives .  
 
Ketone bodies  (acetoacetate, β -hydroxybutyrate [ BHB ], and acetone)  are water -soluble molecules 
produced from acetyl -CoA following  breakdown of fatty acids  (and amino acids) mainly in hepatic 
cells. Ketone bodies are typically absent from the circulation during the normal fed state, but are 
produced continuously during metabolic stress conditions and/or periods of carbohydrate depriv ation 
such as acute medical stress, prolonged exercise , or starvation,  and become  a key source of energy 
to vital organs including the brain and heart under th ese circumstances.12 Ketone production has long 
been teleologically considered as a means to provide the brain with an efficient, alternative fuel 
source  during starvation, sparing carbohydrate and protein stores, since the brain cannot effectively 
metabolize free fatty acids  (which represent 99% of the body’s energy stores ).12, 13 When  completely 
oxidized in the citric acid cycle , ketones have a respiratory quotient similar to glucose (acetoacetate = 
1.0, BHB = 0.89)  and produce greater amounts of ATP,  releasing approximately 30% more energy 
per molecule than pyruvate.14, 15 The liver produces ketone bodies from mobilized fat stores that then 
can be utilized by neural tissue  to produce ATP . It is therefore not surprising that several neurologic  
 4 diseases have been treated, or are under study , with ketone therapy, such as epilepsy, Parkinson’s 
disease, and Alzheimer’s disease.16  
 
Given  the beneficial effects on glucose control and weight loss, ketone therapy has also been 
considered to treat diabetes mellitus.17 Indeed, ketone therapy has been shown to reduce insulin, 
ghrelin, and GLP -1.18 Macronutrient resourc es (low glucose, high free fatty acids) and hormonal 
signaling (low insulin, high glucagon, high cortisol) are the primary methods of regulat ing ketone 
production, and thus dietary modification has been studied extensively to treat these conditions (the 
“ketogenic diet”).  Adherence to this diet, however,  can be challenging,  and may also be accompanied 
by dyslipidemia  (due to increased flux of free fatty acids) , impaired cardiac metabolism,  or gastro -
intestinal upset,  leading to interest in  alternative exogenous modes of delivery.19, 20 Exogenous 
delivery of ketones holds several advantages over dietary modification  such as increased 
compliance, l ack of alteration on other fuel stores (such as intramuscular glycogen) , and its unique 
effect of lower ing both  glucose and free fatty acids due to  negative feedback on lipolysis.21  
 
Different formulations of oral ketone therapy have been studied, including ketone salts and KE. Oral 
ketone salts , unfortunately,  result in a very high amount of salt intake (which would be problematic for 
patients with HF)  and results in half  the plasma concentration of D -betahydroxybu tyrate (D -BHB).19 A 
novel KE compound, (R) -3-hydroxybutyl (R) -3-hydroxybutyrate  (DeltaG) , has been extensively 
studied for the purposes of th erapeutic exogenous ketosis and is approved as a nutraceutical by the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA).9, 10, 18, 19, 22 -24 Advantages of DeltaG  consumption include a  
rapid rise of blood levels of BHB in humans  to ~3 mmol/L  within 60 minutes of consumption  of 282 
mg/kg of KE , equivalent to a week of fasting , which is markedly increased from the levels of 
detectable ketones in normal populations (<0.5 mmol/L).9, 19, 23 By way of comparison, a 
carbohydrate -restricted (high -fat) diet typically results in mild hyperketonemia, with BHB levels of  
0.5 mmol/L, which is currently considered as the accepted definition of ketosis.25  
 
Benefits of KE therapy among athletes have already been demonstrated. In a blinded, crossov er 
study of endurance athletes, DeltaG  increased exercise distance by an average of 411 meters over 
30 minutes cycling duration, demonstrating that ketone therapy improve s exercise capacity among 
highly trained athletes.10 Importantly, it has been suggested that pathologic conditions that cause 
metabolic dysregulation, and where incremental improvements in energy transduction may translate 
to significant increases in exercise capacity, may afford the greatest clinical benef it, such as in HF.10  
 
Recently, further  data has emerged regarding potential benefits of intravenous infusions of sodium -3-
hydroxybutyrate.26 In a crossover study of 16 patients with HF and reduced EF (HFrEF) randomized 
to 6 hours of ketone infusion vs. isotonic saline (placebo arm),  infusion of the ketone increased 
cardiac out put by 2 L/min with an absolute improvement in left ventricular EF of 8%. Importantly, 
systemic vascular resistance decreased by 30% with the ketone infusion.26 This may be uniquely 
important in HFpEF patients, who demonstrate an impaired ability to reduce systemic vascular 
resistance with exercise.27 Furthermore, to contextualize the magnitude of increase , this improvement 
in cardiac output is comparable to that achieved with an intra -aortic balloon pump (typically increases  
cardiac output typically by 0.5-1.0 L/min ) or an Impella 2.5 ( typically increases cardiac output by 2.0 -
2.5L/min ).28 Notably, the hemodynamic effects of ketones were dose -dependent and detectable  even  
in the physiological concentration range.  While important, this trial was limited by use of an 
intravenous infusion (impractical for the outpatient management ), enrollment only of patients with 
reduced EF, and concerns related to salt infusion , such as pH disturbances and sodium loading. In 
addition, this trial did not assess patient -centered metrics, such as exercise capacity, which is an 
important determinant of quality of life in HF.29 However , the fact that intravenous ketone therapy  
increase d cardiac output to this extent support s the hypothesis that there is a fundamental limitation 
of fuel utilization in HF  that can be therapeutically targeted . 
 5  
There is rationale to suspect that such benefits exten d to the HFpEF popu lation , which  accounts for 
at least half of all cases of HF in the United States.30 Among patients with pres erved EF and pressure 
overload induced by aortic stenosis (conditions that simulate non -valvular HFpEF wit h resultant left 
ventricular hypertrophy) , there is a significantly greater myocardial uptake of ketones compared to 
controls.31 Because  “late”  left ventricular systolic loading from reflected waves in the periphery induce  
left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction, it stands to reason that the vasodilatory effect of 
KE therapy may be beneficial.32, 33 In addition,  among diabetic patients (a population at significant risk 
for HFpEF), SGLT2 inhibitors reduce HF hospitalization and also increase systemic ketosis, an 
intriguing pair of findings that may be  causally linked.34  
 
We therefore seek  to determine whether exogenous ketosis can improve exercise capacity among 
patients with HF. We will assess  whether exogenous ketosis can acutely affect systoli c function 
(myocardial strain) , diastolic function,  autonomic tone, and ventriculo -vascular interactions . We 
further seek  to understand the changes in metabolism induced by ketone therapy during exercise.  
 
4.   Preliminary Results  
DeltaG is a  ketone ester (KE) that undergoes complete enzymatic hydrolysis to form BHB (and R-1,3-
butanediol)  by carboxylesterases expressed widely, including within the gastrointestinal tract, liver , 
and blood. R -1,3-butanediol, itself, is further metabolized in the liver by first -pass metabolism to 
produce BHB by alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehydye dehydrogenase. BHB undergoes further 
metabolism to acetoacetat e and acetone, though only BHB and acetoacetate are taken up by extra 
hepatic tissues as energy sources.   
 
KE is eliminated through at least first order kinetics and capacity limited elimination. Elimination is 
accomplished via 3 predominant means, including  (1) conversion to acetone and lung exhalation, (2) 
renal elimination (of BHB and acetoacetate, though this contribution is negligible particularly during 
exercise), and (3) uptake by tissues using monocarboxylate transporters for conversion to AT P.10, 23  
 
Concentrations of the KE compound of roughly  3-5 mmol/L are reached within 60 minutes  at doses 
studied here .9, 10 The half -life of the compound is 0.8 -3.1 hours.9 The KE compound has a very 
favorable safety profile  with adverse effects limited to dose -dependent, gastro intestinal distress that 
typically occur only at the highest levels of administration (714 mg/kg).9, 35  
 
 
5.   Research Design and Methods  
Overview:  The overall study design  will be a randomized , double -blind  crossover  comparison of 
DeltaG  therapy vs. KE -free vehicle in 20 patients with HFpEF. The main outcomes will be measures 
of exercise performance  (peak and submaximal exercise)  and associated metab olic and 
cardiovascular metrics.  The CHPS will provide many  study services requested through a Doris Duke 
Charitable Foundation award (to SS) . 
 
The overall structure include 3 visits:  
• 3 Visits  during which  cardiopulmonary exercise testing will be performed (and related testing at 
these visits), with 1 baseline visit and 2  exercise  endpoint assessment  visits.  
 
Study population  (Inclusion criteria)  
Participants aged 18 -85 years of age , stable medical therapy for 2 weeks,  and New York Heart 
Association ( NYHA ) class II or III will be included for this study. We will recruit 20 HFpEF participants. 
Participants will be recruited from UPHS enterprise . Given the challenges of the diagnosis of HFpEF, 
and to include a more homogenous  cohort , we have the following inclusion criteria : 
 6  
1. Left ventricular ejection fraction ≥ 50%  
2. Evidence for elevated filling pressures as follows  (at least one of the following between a -
d):  
a. Mitral early (E)/mitral septal tissue annular (e’) velocity ratio > 8 in addition to one of 
the following:  
i. Large left atrium ( LA>4.0 cm width or LA volume index >34 mL/m2)36, 37 
ii. Chronic loop diuretic use for control of symptoms  
iii. Elevated natriuretic peptides within the past year  (NT-proBNP>125 pg/ml or 
BNP>35 pg/ml)  
b. Mitral  E/e’ ratio > 1437 at rest or with exercis e 
c. Elevated invasively -determined filling pressures previously (resting left ventricular 
end-diastolic pressure  >16 mm Hg or pulmonary capillary wedge pressure > 15 
mmHg; or PCWP/LVEDP ≥ 25 mmHg with exercise)38 
d. Prior episode of acute heart failure requiring IV diuretics  with evidence of volume 
overload on exam/radiology o r elevated natriuretic peptides.  
 
Exclusion Criteria   
1. Intentional k etogenic (h igh fat, low carbohydrate) diet  in the last week  or use of ketogenic 
medications (SGLT2 inhibitors)  
2. Significant  liver disease  (liver function tests  > 3x upper limit of normal , cirrhosis)  or alcohol 
abuse disorder  (>14 drinks/week) .   
3. Contraindications to stress testing , conditions that limit exercise, and other clinically -significant 
causes of exertional limitation  (claudication with peripheral artery disease, atrial fibrillation and 
heart rate >110 at rest, systo lic blood pressure >180 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure >110 
mmHg , infiltrative/hypertrophic /inflammatory  cardiomyopathy, clinically significant pericardial 
disease, joint or neuromuscular disease that precludes exercise , acute cor onary syndrome 
within the last 2  months, estimated glomerular filtration rate <30 mL/min/ 1.73 m2, and 
hemoglobin < 9 mg/ dL).  
4. Clinically significant lung disease . This would be defined by severe obstructive lung disease 
(Gold stage 3) , a requirement for supplemental oxygen, or chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease with an  exacerbation requiring steroids or antibiotics within the last 2 months .  
5. > Moderate aortic stenosis, >mild mitral stenosis, > moderate aortic or mitral regurgitation on 
screening echocardiogram  
6. Type 1 diabetes  mellitus   
7. Pregnant women. Due to unknown affects of nutritional ketosis in pregnant women, pregnancy 
will be an exclusion.  Accordingly, women of childbearing age with a  menstrual cycle within the 
past year will be a sked to submit a urine specimen for pregnancy testing .  
8. Angina due to epicardial  coronary disease or known presence of clinically -significant , 
unrevascularized  epicardial coronary disease , in the investigator’s opinion.  
9. Prior reduced LVEF to < 45%  
 
Participant clinical data collection  
We wil l assess the following clinical data parameters on study intake , which may include  but are not 
limited to :  
1. Age, date of birth, gender, race (white, black, Hispanic , other)   
2. New York Heart Association  class  
3. Smoking status, alcohol status.  
4. Comorbidities (supplemented by chart view of the problem list): previous HF hospitalization in 
last 6 months, myocardial infarction, stroke, coronary artery bypass graft surgery, 
percutaneous coronary intervention, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder, a sthma, 
 7 hypertension, peripheral artery disease, atrial fibrillation or flutter, dyslipidemia, implanted 
cardioverter -defibrillator, pacemaker, hyp othyroidism, diabetes mellitus , and others.  
5. Vital signs  and anthropomorphic measures, including : height, weigh t, waist circumference, 
heart rate, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure , oxygen saturation, and others  
6. Quality of life, assessed using a validated tool (Kansas City Cardiomyop athy Questionairre)39 
7. Medications will be obtained from the medical chart  and confirmed with the participant .  
 
Overall structure of Exercise Visits  (visits 1 -3) 
 
Figure 1. Flow Diagram of CPET Study V isit Days  

Version Date: 1/ 15/23  
 
Partipants first come for a baseline visit (Figure 1 ) during which they will undergo cardiopulmonary 
stress testing in order to determine ~75% of peak work rate . This will allow us to determine  the 
workload for  submaximal testing  (Table 1 ). We will also perform baseline echocardiography at this 
visit.  
 
Rationale for selection of exercise tolerance 75% peak work rate  and titration procedure:  
We aim to target a workload that resembles the workload experienced by subjects during routine daily 
activities, increasing clinical applicability. Selecting too low of a workload, however, could lead to 
subjects stopping exercise prematurely due to mental fatigue, as opposed to the physiologic 
processes we seek to modify.   Given this, we will perform a familiarization exercise test at ~75% peak 
work rate  during the baseline visit, foll owing the maximal effort study, and modify our submaximal 
exercise workload based on the subject’s performance.  We will titrate the workload to target a time to 
exhaustion of ~3-6 minutes, as longer tests may be limited by boredom or discomfort as opposed  to a 
physiologic limitation.  Subjects will begin with a 1 minute period of exercise at 0W, followed by a step 
increase to 75% peak work load performed until exhaustion. If the subject exercises for >6 minutes, 
the workload to be used in subsequent studies will be increased by 10W or 15%, whichever is 
greater; if the exercise time is <3 minutes, the workload will be reduced by 10W or 15%, whichever is 
less. 
While the preceding maximal effort study may confound  submaximal  exercise time, the 
submaximal  protocol will always follow a maximal effort study during the assessments. Moreover, 
adding another study visit to perform this familiarization study would increase subject burden . 
 
Table 1. Visits and Related Rationale  for Testing  
Visit Number  Purpose for CPET Testing  Procedures performed  Intervention  
1 Perform incremental CPET testing to 
determine 75% of peak workload (PW) 
for submaximal testing for Visits 2 and 
3. Familiarization study at 75% PW 
after maximal intensity protocol.  Blood draws, CPET 
testing, rest and 
stress 
echocardiography, 
arterial tonometry test, 
HRV test  
KCCQ  
 None  
2 Perform CPET testing using a maximal 
incremental effort protocol to 
determine peak VO 2, then after 1 -2 
hours, perform CPET testing using a 
submaximal protocol  (75% PW)  Same as visit 1 and 
also includes possible  
additional IV with  
stable isotope infusion  KE drink or placebo  
 WASHOUT PERIOD (1 -4 week)  
3 Perform CPET testing using a maximal 
incremental effort protocol to 
determine peak VO 2, then after 1 -2 
hours, perform CPET testing using a 
submaximal protocol  (75% PW).  Same as visit 1 and 
also includes possible 
additional IV with 
stable isotope infusion  KE drink or placebo (the 
opposite  arm from Visit 2)  
 
Approximately w ithin 2 weeks of Visit 1 (range of 1 -4 weeks) , participants will undergo 
cardiopulmonary (VO 2) exercise testing during Visit 2  following a dose of KE versus PB. Visit 2  
includes a  maximal intensity CPET , followed by a submaximal intensity CPET  at 75% PW . After a >5 
day washout period ( 1-4 weeks ), partic ipants return for Visit 3. Visit 3 is identical to Visit 2, except that 
the study participant will receive the other intervention not receive d during the previous visits  (cross -
over) . These visits will allow us to determine the difference in maximal and submaximal exercise 
 9 capacity between KE drink and placebo.  We note that in our previous studies of HFpEF subjects, our 
patients were able to perform a maximal effort study, followed by a submaximal testing, without 
difficulty .40  
  
Some participants will also be enrolled in a companion study performed by our team looking at the 
impact of exogenous ketones on lactate production on MRI. In these participants, the MRI scanning 
sessions may be interleaved with the visits delineated in thi s protocol. For example, following CPET 
Visit 2, participants may undergo skeletal muscle MRI with plantar flexion exercise ~3 -7 days later, 
receiving the same interventional compound as Visit 2  (Placebo or Ketone) . Following CPET Visit 3, 
participants may  then undergo a skeletal muscle MRI with plantar flexion exercise, receiving the 
same interventional compound as Visit 3  (Ketone or Placebo) . If scheduling does not allow for this, 
the MRI studies will be performed following a waiting period of at least a week after the last CPET 
study.  
 
 
CPET Study Design  
Patients will be asked  (though not required)  to avoid alcohol and caffeine consumption in the 24 
hours prior to testing  and to refrain from strenuous activity for 48hrs prior to study visits . Subjects will 
be asked to fast beginning at midnight  prior to study initiation ,19 though water consumption will be 
freely permitted. Treatm ent order will be randomized prior to commencement using a random number 
generator  by the Univ ersity  of Penn sylvanina  Investigational Drug Pharmacy . Participants will be 
randomized in a crossover, double -blind fashion to: 1) 500 mg/kg (prior to max incremental CPET) 
and 250 mg/kg ( prior to submax CPET) KE versus a  placebo  drink . By way of comparison, the liver  
produces 30 -60 grams of ketones  after overnight fasting , accounting for 2 -6% of energy needs .23, 41 
Weight -based dosing of ketone therapy has been shown to be crucial to replicating ketone levels 
between participants.19 The control drink  will be furnished by the UPenn Nutrition Core and made of 
foodstuffs to roughly match  taste .42 Compliance will be defined as consumption of >85% of the drink 
volume. Light breakfast and lunch will be provided  through CHPS . 
  
The study intervention  will be administered approximately 1 hour prior to exercise for the maximal 
incremental  protocol .9, 10 Because of logistical issues, up to 105 minutes after drink consumption will 
be allowable without deviation. For the submax protocol, we will provide  a half -dose of study drug  ~30 
minutes prior to exercise since it is expected that some of the compound will be in the body still from 
the max effort CPET. For similar logistical issues, up to 60 minutes will be allowable without deviation. 
For comparison, website marketing of the commercial drink recommends ingestion 30 minutes prior 
to athletic performance , with additional dosing  every 1.5 -2.0 hours (https://hvmn.com/ketone -ester , 
accessed 12/7/2019) . 
 
At the end of Visit 3, the participants will be asked if they knew which arm th ey were randomized to 
and how confident they were  using a validated blinding assessment tool .43  
 
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing  
We will use  a supine  cycle ergometer along  will a metabolic cart to measure  expired gas es.  
 
Maximal intensity protocol: Subjects will perform a maximal exertion -limited exercise test using a 
graded -exercise protocol. Resistance will begin at 15 Watts (W) for 3 minutes, increasing to 25W for 
3 minutes, then increasing by 25W every 3 minutes thereafter. Vital signs  will be mo nitored during the 
test.  
 
We will define p eak oxygen uptake (VO 2) as the average value during the final 30 seconds of 
exercise. The gas exchange/ventilatory threshold (VT) will be  determined using both the V -slope and 
 10 ventilatory equivalent methods, with the results of the two measurements averaged  when both are 
valid. VE/VCO 2 slope will be  calculated from the beginning of exercise until exhaustion . The 
respiratory exchange ratio (RER) will be  calculated as the ratio of VCO 2 to VO 2 during the final 30  
seco nds of exercise . We will model heart rate  and VO 2 recovery following exercise.   
 
The primary outcome of the maximal testing study will be  difference  in peak VO 2 following  ketone 
therapy as compared to the placebo  drink . Secondary cardiopulmonary exe rcise testing endpoints 
include  exercise efficiency ( ratio of work performed to oxygen  consumed ), total work performed , 
ventilatory threshold, VE/VCO 2 slope , VO 2 and heart rate recovery.  
 
Submaximal intensity protocol: Resistance will begin with 1 minute of unloaded pedaling followed  by 
a step -increase to 75 % of peak workload  (or the workload determined at the first visit). Workload  will 
then be held at this intensity until volitional exhaustion or limiting symptoms prevail (e.g. subject 
cann ot continue despite verbal encouragement, or subject is unable to maintain pre -specified pedal 
cadence despite verbal encouragement) . Vital signs will be monitored during the test.  We will assess 
exercise endurance time at 75% peak work rate. We may also assess VO 2 kinetics , including Tau, 
which is the time needed to reach 63% of the total response amplitude , and describe the rate/slope of 
VO 2 recovery. We will also  assess VO 2 efficiency (total O 2 consumed to total work performed) , and 
the respiratory exch ange ratio, amongst other parameters gathered during the exercise test s. 
 
The primary outcome for this submaximal part of the study is the difference in exercise endurance at 
75% peak work rate  following ketone therapy as compared to placebo.  
 
Electrocardiograph y 
A resting 12 -lead ECG and prolonged rhythm strip  will be obtained prior to exercise, and will be 
analyzed for  rate, rhythm, intervals, and morphology. Heart rate variability  metrics will be computed 
following KE and following the placebo intervention.  
 
Blood sampling and metabolomic profiling  
Standard blood testing is performed at Visit 1 for baseline analysis. This may include  a CMP, CBC, 
NT-proBNP, lipid profile, hemoglobin  A1c (approximately 20 mL of blood).  
 
We will draw blood frequently before drug, after drug, and during exercise and recovery for 
measurements. The lab testing protocols  are in  Table 2  with approximate  times noted  for planned  
lab draws ( note: given the multitude of lab draws, missing laboratory draws will not be counted as 
deviations  nor is exact timing required for laboratory draws) . At Visit 2 and 3 , a tertiary goal of  blood 
sampling is to assess the pharmacokinetic (assess circulating ketone levels resulting from the 
DeltaG ) and pharmacodynamic (assess biologic effects of the DeltaG ) impact of DeltaG . BHB will be 
the primary means of determining therapeutic absorption . We will recreate pharmacokinetic  curves 
including C max (peak serum concentration achieved by drug), T max (time at peak serum concentration), 
and area under the curve (AUC).  
 
Blood samples will be stored at -80C f or later analysis . We may perform comprehensive metabolomic 
profiling from this peripheral blood , in addition to other tests .  
 
Table 2. Timing of Laboratory Draws during Study Protocol  for Visit 2 and 3 WITHOUT  Stable Isotope  Infusion  
Study Time  Plasma and/or Serum Tube Draw  
0-30 minutes (baseline)  x 
60 minutes (intervention given)  – blood draw 
immediately before intervention  x 
90 minutes  (start of echo)  x 
 11 105 minutes  (mid-echo)  x 
120 minutes (start of maximal effort exercise)  x 
Every 3 minutes during maximal effort  exercise  x 
Standardized draw at 25 Watts (if not already  
drawn)  x 
Time of exhaustion  after maximal effort 
exercise  x 
Following 15 minutes of rest after completion  of 
peak VO 2 study  recovery  and prior to lunch  x 
~160 minutes  (1/2 dose of intervention prior to 
submax  CPET – blood draw immediately prior 
to intervention ) x 
~190 minutes (submaximal CPET) : At rest, 4 
minutes (standardized draw), and time of 
exhaustion  x 
    Total blood drawn at Visit 2 and 3 : ~180 mL /visit  
 
Stable Isotope Infusion  
 A secondary goal of this proposal is to understand the metabolic changes induced by acute 
ketone administration. As described above, ketones have been shown to reduce glucose utilization in 
both healthy10, 24, 44 and disease population s.45 Systemic substrate utilization can be estimated 
through indirect calorimetry, using the data from gas exchange (c arbon dioxide production rate and 
oxygen uptake rate) to derive rates of systemic carbohydrate and fatty acid oxidation.46, 47 Yet 
systemic measurements do not identify the source of the substrate utilized (i.e. plasma -derived 
versus intramuscular) , which may vary with exercise intensity,  gender, and possibly disease state.48-50 
Knowing whether there is a deficit in substrate import, leading to alterations in utilization, could lead to 
new therapeutic opportunities.  
 Stable isotopes, in which the molecular weight of an atom is slightly increased due  to 
additional neutrons  within the nucleus , are naturally -occurring, non -radioactive, and are handled 
similarly by the body to their more abundant counterparts.51 The higher molecular weight of the 
compound allows this ‘label’ to be traced throughout the body and the plasma using mass -
spectometry. When infused into the blood , rates of endogenous production  and utilization  can be 
computed . Comparison  of systemic oxidatio n rates with those derived from plasma measurements 
allows for an estimation of oxidation rates from intramuscular stores.48  
To define how exogenous ketones affect endogenous glucose utilization, we may infuse [6,6 -
2H2] glucose during the submaximal exercise in a subset of participants.  Participants will be 
administered stable isotope pending ability to place a second, contralatera l IV. In such cases, 
infusions will be started ~1.5 hour prior to submaximal exercise, and initiated with a 5 mg/kg priming 
dose (MW 182.17 g/mole; 27.45 umol/kg ; delivered over 5 minutes ) followed by a continuous infusion 
at 0.05 mg/kg/min (0.2745 umol/kg /min), leading to a 100:1 prime/continuous infusion ratio.52 We note 
that this prime/infusion protocol is well established and is used on campus by other  investiga tors.53 
The stable isotope will be infused intravenously, with sampling done from a peripheral vein on the 
contralateral extremity . A typical blood sampling schema may be as follows: (a) prior to s tart of 
infusion, (b) every ten minutes following the start of the continuous infusion, (c) densely around 1 
hour after delivery of the prime and start of the continuous infusion  (for example, at 55, 60, and 65 
minutes) , (c) every ten minutes following administration of the study intervention and immediately 
prior to the start of exercise, (d) every 2 minutes during  exercise, ( e) at the time of exhaustion, ( f) 
every 2 minutes during  recovery for 10 minutes  (Table 3) . Plasma samples will be stored for later 
mass -spec analysis.  Additional blood samples may also be taken.  It is anticipated that the addition of 
stable isotopes to the submaximal study will only require ~30 mL/ of additional blood /endpoint 
assessment visit , as mass spec trometry  measurements can be  made on a small volume  (<2 mL) .  
 12  
We estimate that sampling blood for the stable isotope measurements during submaximal exercise 
will increase the amount of blood drawn by approximately 30 mL/visit (total of 60 mL for Visits 2 and 
3).  
 
 
Table 3. Approxim ate Timing of Laboratory Draws during Study Protocol  for Visit 2 and 3 WITH  Stable Isotope 
Infusion  
Study Time  Plasma and/or Serum Tube Draw  
0-30 minutes (baseline)  x 
60 minutes  (intervention given)  x 
90 minutes  (start of echo)  x 
105 minutes  (mid-echo)  x 
120 minutes  (start of maximal effort exercise)  x 
Every 3 minutes during maximal effort  exercise  x 
Standardized draw at 25 Watts (if not already 
drawn)  x 
Time of exhaustion after maximal effort 
exercise  x 
Following 15 minutes of rest after competion  of 
peak VO 2 study  x 
Immediately prior to start of stable isotope 
infusion  x 
10, 20, and 30 min, 40, 50, 55, 60, 65 min after 
start of the prime/continuous infusion  x 
~200 minutes  (1/2 dose of intervention given)  
*lunch is provided after submaximal CPET  x 
Every 10 min prior to the start of the 
submaximal CPET (e.g. 10, 20, 30 min after 
intervention)  x 
~230 minutes  (submaximal CPET) : At rest, 
every 2 minutes during exercise , and every 2 
min of recovery for 10 minutes  x 
Standardized draw at 4 minutes and at the time 
of exhaustion (if not already drawn)  x 
  Stable Isotope Studies: Total blood drawn at Visit 2 and 3  ~ 210 mL/visit (each visit).  Note, if stable 
isotope infusion being performed, additional blood draws will be performed prior to the start of the 
infusion and  every 10 minutes following infusion. Additionally, after  ~1 hour of infusion  dense sampling 
will be done  (55 minutes, 60 minu tes, and 65 minutes)  prior to administration of the intervention.  After 
the intervention, s amples will be drawn every 10 minutes until the start of submaximal exercise at which 
time, b lood samples will be drawn approximately every 2 minutes of exercise, at  the time of exhaustion , 
and every 2 min of recovery for 10 minutes . The  stable isotope infusion will then be discontinued.  
 
 
Routine, s tress, and strain echocardiography  
A transthoracic echocardiogram will be performed in accordance with American Society of 
Echocardiography recommendations, with special attention to endocardial border and left ventricular 
outflow tract velocity optimization. Standard  views will be obtained  at rest and during exercise (though 
views may be more limited during exercise due to respir ophasic motion of the heart) . Metrics of 
cardiac performance and hemodynamics will be measured and may include  (pending adequate 
border definition) : left atrial str ain, g lobal  left ventricular  longitudinal strain , and strain rate may be 
 13 assessed using TomTec Cardiac Performance Analyses (TomTec Imaging Systems, 
Unterschleissheim, Germany)  or similar commercial software in the apical 4 chamber, apical 3 
chamber, and a pical 2 chamber views . Myocardial strain is a sensitive marker of subclinical function 
and is a well validated, reproducible,  and highly prognostic marker of systolic function.54-56 A Doppler -
derived  LVOT VTI will be acquired at rest, each stage of exercise and at peak exertion to calculate 
cardia c output . Diastolic function will be assessed at rest and during the exercise study . In total, 
endpoints may include , but not limited to,  left atrial strain, left ventricular global longitudinal strain, 
ejection fraction, stroke volume, and cardiac output,  as well as diastolic indices of tissue relaxation 
(tissue Doppler E’ velocity) , filling pressure (E/e’ ratio) , and pulmonary artery systolic pressure .  
 
Lung Ultrasound  
Lung ultrasound will be performed in order to assess extravascular lung water, similar  to what h as 
previously  been  performed  during stress echocardiography protocol s.57, 58 B-lines can be summed to 
give an approximation of the severity of extravascular lung water accumulation.  
 
Arterial tonometry  
We will use a commercially  available  system  with a high-fidelity  applanation  tonometer  to assess 
arterial stiffness at both rest and stress . The tonometer  will record  radial  arterial  pressure  
waveforms  with participants  in a recumbent  position at rest and during exercise . We will pair arterial 
waveforms with LVOT Doppler profiles to assess ventricular -vascular coupling.  Additional pressure 
waveforms may be obtained at the carotid, femoral, and brachial arteries.  
 
Heart rate variability (HRV)  
HRV  is a non -invasive surrogate measure of autonomic tone  (the balance of the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic nervous systems), which is a critical determinant of outcomes in many 
cardiovascular conditions.59, 60 This analysis will offer insight into mechanisms responsible from a 
neuromodulatory  perspective. A  15-minute single -lead reading will be performed  including at rest and 
after randomization arms , with a n ~5 minute  segment  exported for analysis (e.g. Kubios HRV 
software ). This analysis will only be performed in participants in sinus rhythm . We will measure 
standard indi ces in HRV analysis  (including time - and frequency -domain indices) . The principal  index 
will be standard deviat ion of the N -N (R-R) intervals.  We may also assess high frequency and low 
frequency power, as well as their ratio.  
 
Potential Pitfalls and Troubleshooting Strategies  
Absorption of the compound is brisk and results in serum BHB levels of roughly 3 mmol/L in healthy 
volunteers at the dose studied here. Among HF patients, gut absorption might be reduced or delayed , 
leading to different peak effects of the compound. To address this potential problem, we have used a 
moderate dose of the  compound  to ensure we achieve therapeutic ketosis. Even if our goal levels of 
serum BHB are not achieved, recent data has demonstrat ed the benefits of ketone therapy accrue at 
even low levels (<1 mmol/L).61 
 
Risks and Safety Assessment  
KE risks: Rigorous previous analysis of the compound at doses (714 mg/kg) greater than  what  is 
administered here revealed a very favorable safety profile when administered as a single dose, with 
only 1 adverse event reported (transient mild rise in triglycerides that resolved by study completion).9 
While ketoacidosis can induce pH disturbances or neurologic complications, this i s seen only at 
supraphysiologic levels (10 -20 mmol/L ); our study  is anticipated to  achieve levels  of around 3 mmol/L, 
similar to the levels observed  with fasting for a few days  (for example, levels of roughly 2 mmol/L are 
achieved after 48 hours of fasting) .41, 62 We are also excluding type 1 diabetics, who are at risk of 
ketoacidosis for other reasons  as well as those on SGLT2 inhibitors which can lead to keto acidosis as 
well. Given that type 2 diabetics are not generally at risk for diabetic ketoacidosis, we will include 
 14 them in our study. Vital signs will be monitored closely during the study visits. Documentation of 
adverse event monitoring will take place during the study . Given the short half -life of the compound, 
adverse events will be considered up to the time of the participant leaving the research unit.  
 
We will also review the medical charts of patients with an implantable cardioverter -defibrillator t o 
determine therapy zones prior to exercise . The primary safety outcome will be stress -induced 
sustained arrhythmias during exercise (atrial arrythmias, ventricular t achyca rdia).  Participants are free 
to termin ate study involve ment at any time, at which time they may be asked t he reason for study 
termination.  
 
Stable Isotope  Infusion  [(6,6-2H2)glucose] : There are no known risks associated with the use of 
stable isotopes as proposed in this study.51 Stable isotopes are not radioactive. Solutions will be 
prepared by UPenn IDS and will be tested for sterility and the absence of pyrogens.    
 15 References  
 
1. Benjamin EJ, Muntner P, Alonso A, Bittencourt MS, Callaway CW, Carson AP, Chamberlain AM, 
Chang AR, Cheng S, Das SR, Delling FN, Djousse L, Elkind MSV, Ferguson JF, Fornage M, Jordan LC, Khan 
SS, Kissela BM, Knutson KL, Kwan TW, Lackland DT, Lewis TT, Lich tman JH, Longenecker CT, Loop MS, 
Lutsey PL, Martin SS, Matsushita K, Moran AE, Mussolino ME, O'Flaherty M, Pandey A, Perak AM, Rosamond 
WD, Roth GA, Sampson UKA, Satou GM, Schroeder EB, Shah SH, Spartano NL, Stokes A, Tirschwell DL, 
Tsao CW, Turakhia MP, VanWagner LB, Wilkins JT, Wong SS, Virani SS, American Heart Association Council 
on E, Prevention Statistics C and Stroke Statistics S. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics -2019 Update: A 
Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation . 2019;139:e56 -e66. 
2. Lloyd -Jones DM, Larson MG, Leip EP, Beiser A, D'Agostino RB, Kannel WB, Murabito JM, Vasan RS, 
Benjamin EJ and Levy D. Lifetime risk for developing congestive heart failure: the Framingham Heart Study. 
Circulation . 2002;106:3068 -72. 
3. Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, Jacobsen SJ, Roger VL and Redfield MM. Trends in prevalence and 
outcome of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med . 2006;355:251 -9. 
4. Bedi KC, Jr., Snyder NW, Brandimarto J, Aziz M, Mesaros C, Worth AJ, Wang LL, Javaheri A, Blair IA, 
Margulies KB and Rame JE. Evidence for Intramyocardial Disruption of Lipid Metabolism and Increased 
Myocardial Ketone Utilization in Advanced Human Heart Failure. Circulation . 2016;133:706 -16. 
5. Phan TT, Abozguia K, Shivu GN , Mahadevan G, Ahmed I, Williams L, Dwivedi G, Patel K, Steendijk P, 
Ashrafian H, Henning A and Frenneaux M. Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction Is Characterized by 
Dynamic Impairment of Active Relaxation and Contraction of the Left Ventricle on  Exercise and Associated 
With Myocardial Energy Deficiency. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2009;54:402 -409. 
6. Lopaschuk GD, Ussher JR, Folmes CD, Jaswal JS and Stanley WC. Myocardial fatty acid metabolism 
in health and disease. Physiol Rev . 2010;90:207 -58. 
7. Horton JL, Davidson MT, Kurishima C, Vega RB, Powers JC, Matsuura TR, Petucci C, Lewandowski 
ED, Crawford PA, Muoio DM, Recchia FA and Kelly DP. The failing heart utilizes 3 -hydroxybutyrate as a 
metabolic stress defense. JCI Insight . 2019;4.  
8. Aubert G, Martin O J, Horton JL, Lai L, Vega RB, Leone TC, Koves T, Gardell SJ, Kruger M, Hoppel CL, 
Lewandowski ED, Crawford PA, Muoio DM and Kelly DP. The Failing Heart Relies on Ketone Bodies as a 
Fuel. Circulation . 2016;133:698 -705. 
9. Clarke K, Tchabanenko K, Pawlosky R , Carter E, Todd King M, Musa -Veloso K, Ho M, Roberts A, 
Robertson J, Vanitallie TB and Veech RL. Kinetics, safety and tolerability of (R) -3-hydroxybutyl (R) -3-
hydroxybutyrate in healthy adult subjects. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol . 2012;63:401 -8. 
10. Cox PJ, K irk T, Ashmore T, Willerton K, Evans R, Smith A, Murray AJ, Stubbs B, West J, McLure SW, 
King MT, Dodd MS, Holloway C, Neubauer S, Drawer S, Veech RL, Griffin JL and Clarke K. Nutritional Ketosis 
Alters Fuel Preference and Thereby Endurance Performance in Athletes. Cell Metab . 2016;24:256 -68. 
11. Lewis EF, Lamas GA, O'Meara E, Granger CB, Dunlap ME, McKelvie RS, Probstfield JL, Young JB, 
Michelson EL, Halling K, Carlsson J, Olofsson B, McMurray JJ, Yusuf S, Swedberg K, Pfeffer MA and 
Investigators C. Charac terization of health -related quality of life in heart failure patients with preserved versus 
low ejection fraction in CHARM. Eur J Heart Fail . 2007;9:83 -91. 
12. Cahill GF, Jr. Fuel metabolism in starvation. Annu Rev Nutr . 2006;26:1 -22. 
13. Owen OE, Morgan AP, Kemp HG, Sullivan JM, Herrera MG and Cahill GF, Jr. Brain metabolism during 
fasting. J Clin Invest . 1967;46:1589 -95. 
14. Sato K, Kashiwaya Y, Keon CA, Tsuchiya N, King MT, Radda GK, Chance B, Clarke K and Veech RL. 
Insulin, ketone bodies, and mitochond rial energy transduction. FASEB J . 1995;9:651 -8. 
15. Veech RL. The therapeutic implications of ketone bodies: the effects of ketone bodies in pathological 
conditions: ketosis, ketogenic diet, redox states, insulin resistance, and mitochondrial metabolism. 
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids . 2004;70:309 -19. 
16. Veech RL, Chance B, Kashiwaya Y, Lardy HA and Cahill GF, Jr. Ketone bodies, potential therapeutic 
uses. IUBMB Life . 2001;51:241 -7. 
17. Feinman RD, Pogozelski WK, Astrup A, Bernstein RK, Fine EJ,  Westman EC, Accurso A, Frassetto L, 
Gower BA, McFarlane SI, Nielsen JV, Krarup T, Saslow L, Roth KS, Vernon MC, Volek JS, Wilshire GB, 
Dahlqvist A, Sundberg R, Childers A, Morrison K, Manninen AH, Dashti HM, Wood RJ, Wortman J and Worm 
N. Dietary carbohyd rate restriction as the first approach in diabetes management: critical review and evidence 
base. Nutrition . 2015;31:1 -13. 
 16 18. Stubbs BJ, Cox PJ, Evans RD, Cyranka M, Clarke K and de Wet H. A Ketone Ester Drink Lowers 
Human Ghrelin and Appetite. Obesity (S ilver Spring) . 2018;26:269 -273. 
19. Stubbs BJ, Cox PJ, Evans RD, Santer P, Miller JJ, Faull OK, Magor -Elliott S, Hiyama S, Stirling M and 
Clarke K. On the Metabolism of Exogenous Ketones in Humans. Front Physiol . 2017;8:848.  
20. Holloway CJ, Cochlin LE, Em manuel Y, Murray A, Codreanu I, Edwards LM, Szmigielski C, Tyler DJ, 
Knight NS, Saxby BK, Lambert B, Thompson C, Neubauer S and Clarke K. A high -fat diet impairs cardiac high -
energy phosphate metabolism and cognitive function in healthy human subjects. Am J Clin Nutr . 2011;93:748 -
55. 
21. Mikkelsen KH, Seifert T, Secher NH, Grondal T and van Hall G. Systemic, cerebral and skeletal muscle 
ketone body and energy metabolism during acute hyper -D-beta-hydroxybutyratemia in post -absorptive healthy 
males. J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2015;100:636 -43. 
22. Cox PJ and Clarke K. Acute nutritional ketosis: implications for exercise performance and metabolism. 
Extrem Physiol Med . 2014;3:17.  
23. Shivva V, Cox PJ, Clarke K, Veech RL, Tucker IG and Duffull SB. The Population P harmacokinetics of 
D-beta-hydroxybutyrate Following Administration of (R) -3-Hydroxybutyl (R) -3-Hydroxybutyrate. AAPS J . 
2016;18:678 -88. 
24. Holdsworth DA, Cox PJ, Kirk T, Stradling H, Impey SG and Clarke K. A Ketone Ester Drink Increases 
Postexercise Muscl e Glycogen Synthesis in Humans. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2017;49:1789 -1795.  
25. Gibson AA, Seimon RV, Lee CMY, Ayre J, Franklin J, Markovic TP, Caterson ID and Sainsbury A. Do 
ketogenic diets really suppress appetite? A systematic review and meta -analysis. Obes Rev . 2015;16:64 -76. 
26. Nielsen R, Moller N, Gormsen LC, Tolbod LP, Hansson NH, Sorensen J, Harms HJ, Frokiaer J, 
Eiskjaer H, Jespersen NR, Mellemkjaer S, Lassen TR, Pryds K, Botker HE and Wiggers H. Cardiovascular 
Effects of Treatment With the Ketone B ody 3 -Hydroxybutyrate in Chronic Heart Failure Patients. Circulation . 
2019;139:2129 -2141.  
27. Borlaug BA, Olson TP, Lam CS, Flood KS, Lerman A, Johnson BD and Redfield MM. Global 
cardiovascular reserve dysfunction in heart failure with preserved ejection f raction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 
2010;56:845 -54. 
28. Miller PE, Solomon MA and McAreavey D. Advanced Percutaneous Mechanical Circulatory Support 
Devices for Cardiogenic Shock. Crit Care Med . 2017;45:1922 -1929.  
29. Lewis EF, Claggett BL, McMurray JJV, Packer M, Lefkowitz MP, Rouleau JL, Liu J, Shi VC, Zile MR, 
Desai AS, Solomon SD and Swedberg K. Health -Related Quality of Life Outcomes in PARADIGM -HF. Circ 
Heart Fail . 2017;10.  
30. Shah AM, Claggett B, Loehr LR, Chang  PP, Matsushita K, Kitzman D, Konety S, Kucharska -Newton A, 
Sueta CA, Mosley TH, Wright JD, Coresh J, Heiss G, Folsom AR and Solomon SD. Heart Failure Stages 
Among Older Adults in the Community: The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study. Circulation . 
2017;135:224 -240. 
31. Voros G, Ector J, Garweg C, Droogne W, Van Cleemput J, Peersman N, Vermeersch P and Janssens 
S. Increased Cardiac Uptake of Ketone Bodies and Free Fatty Acids in Human Heart Failure and Hypertrophic 
Left Ventricular Remodeling. Circ He art Fail . 2018;11:e004953.  
32. Weber T and Chirinos JA. Pulsatile arterial haemodynamics in heart failure. Eur Heart J . 2018;39:3847 -
3854.  
33. Reddy YNV, Andersen MJ, Obokata M, Koepp KE, Kane GC, Melenovsky V, Olson TP and Borlaug 
BA. Arterial Stiffening With Exercise in Patients With Heart Failure and Preserved Ejection Fraction. J Am Coll 
Cardiol . 2017;70:136 -148. 
34. Lytvyn Y, Bjornstad P, Udell JA, Lovshin JA and Cherney DZI. Sodium Glucose Cotransporter -2 
Inhibition in Heart Failure: Potential Mechani sms, Clinical Applications, and Summary of Clinical Trials. 
Circulation . 2017;136:1643 -1658.  
35. Stubbs BJ, Cox PJ, Kirk T, Evans RD and Clarke K. Gastrointestinal Effects of Exogenous Ketone 
Drinks are Infrequent, Mild and Vary According to Ketone Compoun d and Dose. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab . 
2019:1 -23. 
36. Nagueh SF, Appleton CP, Gillebert TC, Marino PN, Oh JK, Smiseth OA, Waggoner AD, Flachskampf 
FA, Pellikka PA and Evangelista A. Recommendations for the evaluation of left ventricular diastolic functi on by 
echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr . 2009;22:107 -33. 
37. Nagueh SF, Smiseth OA, Appleton CP, Byrd BF, 3rd, Dokainish H, Edvardsen T, Flachskampf FA, 
Gillebert TC, Klein AL, Lancellotti P, Marino P, Oh JK, Popescu BA and Waggoner AD. Recommendatio ns for 
the Evaluation of Left Ventricular Diastolic Function by Echocardiography: An Update from the American 
 17 Society of Echocardiography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am Soc 
Echocardiogr . 2016;29:277 -314. 
38. Borlaug BA, Nishim ura RA, Sorajja P, Lam CS and Redfield MM. Exercise hemodynamics enhance 
diagnosis of early heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail . 2010;3:588 -95. 
39. Green CP, Porter CB, Bresnahan DR and Spertus JA. Development and evaluation of the Kansas City 
Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire: a new health status measure for heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol . 
2000;35:1245 -55. 
40. Zamani P, Tan V, Soto -Calderon H, Beraun M, Brandimarto JA, Trieu L, Varakantam S, Doulias PT, 
Townsend RR, Chittams J, Margulies KB, Cappola TP, Poole DC, Ischiropoulos H and Chirinos JA. 
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of Inorganic Nitrate in Heart  Failure With Preserved Ejection 
Fraction. Circ Res . 2017;120:1151 -1161.  
41. Laffel L. Ketone bodies: a review of physiology, pathophysiology and application of monitoring to 
diabetes. Diabetes Metab Res Rev . 1999;15:412 -26. 
42. Myette -Cote E, Caldwell HG,  Ainslie PN, Clarke K and Little JP. A ketone monoester drink reduces the 
glycemic response to an oral glucose challenge in individuals with obesity: a randomized trial. Am J Clin Nutr . 
2019;110:1491 -1501.  
43. Schulz KF and Grimes DA. Blinding in randomise d trials: hiding who got what. Lancet . 2002;359:696 -
700. 
44. Gormsen LC, Svart M, Thomsen HH, Sondergaard E, Vendelbo MH, Christensen N, Tolbod LP, Harms 
HJ, Nielsen R, Wiggers H, Jessen N, Hansen J, Botker HE and Moller N. Ketone Body Infusion With 3 -
Hydr oxybutyrate Reduces Myocardial Glucose Uptake and Increases Blood Flow in Humans: A Positron 
Emission Tomography Study. J Am Heart Assoc . 2017;6.  
45. Bleeker JC, Visser G, Clarke K, Ferdinandusse S, de Haan FH, Houtkooper RH, L IJ, Kok IL, 
Langeveld M, van  der Pol WL, de Sain -van der Velden MGM, Sibeijn -Kuiper A, Takken T, Wanders RJA, van 
Weeghel M, Wijburg FA, van der Woude LH, Wust RCI, Cox PJ and Jeneson JAL. Nutritional ketosis improves 
exercise metabolism in patients with very long -chain acyl -CoA dehy drogenase deficiency. J Inherit Metab Dis . 
2020;43:787 -799. 
46. Frayn KN. Calculation of substrate oxidation rates in vivo from gaseous exchange. J Appl Physiol 
Respir Environ Exerc Physiol . 1983;55:628 -34. 
47. Peronnet F and Massicotte D. Table of nonprot ein respiratory quotient: an update. Can J Sport Sci . 
1991;16:23 -9. 
48. Romijn JA, Coyle EF, Sidossis LS, Gastaldelli A, Horowitz JF, Endert E and Wolfe RR. Regulation of 
endogenous fat and carbohydrate metabolism in relation to exercise intensity and dura tion. Am J Physiol . 
1993;265:E380 -91. 
49. Romijn JA, Coyle EF, Sidossis LS, Rosenblatt J and Wolfe RR. Substrate metabolism during different 
exercise intensities in endurance -trained women. J Appl Physiol (1985) . 2000;88:1707 -14. 
50. Kelley DE, Goodpaster B, Wing RR and Simoneau JA. Skeletal muscle fatty acid metabolism in 
association with insulin resistance, obesity, and weight loss. Am J Physiol . 1999;277:E1130 -41. 
51. Schellekens RC, Stellaard F, Woerdenbag HJ, Frijlink HW and Kosterink JG. Applications of stable 
isotopes in clinical pharmacology. Br J Clin Pharmacol . 2011;72:879 -97. 
52. Allsop JR, Wolfe RR and Burke JF. Tracer priming the bicarbonate pool. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ 
Exerc Physiol . 1978;45:137 -9. 
53. Teff KL, Rickels MR, Grudziak J, Fu ller C, Nguyen HL and Rickels K. Antipsychotic -induced insulin 
resistance and postprandial hormonal dysregulation independent of weight gain or psychiatric disease. 
Diabetes . 2013;62:3232 -40. 
54. Selvaraj S, Djousse L, Aguilar FG, Martinez EE, Polsinelli V B, Irvin MR, Arnett DK and Shah SJ. 
Association of Estimated Sodium Intake With Adverse Cardiac Structure and Function: From the HyperGEN 
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;70:715 -724. 
55. Aguilar FG, Selvaraj S, Martinez EE, Katz DH, Beussink L, Kim KY, Ping J, Rasmussen -Torvik L, Goyal 
A, Sha J, Irvin MR, Arnett DK and Shah SJ. Archeological Echocardiography: Digitization and Speckle 
Tracking Analysis of Archival Echocardiograms in the HyperGEN Study. Echocardiography . 2016;33:386 -97. 
56. Selvaraj S, Aguilar FG, Martinez EE, Beussink L, Kim KY, Peng J, Rasmussen -Torvik L, Sha J, Irvin 
MR, Gu CC, Lewis CE, Hunt SC, Arnett DK and Shah SJ. Association of comorbidity burden with abnormal 
cardiac mechanics: findings from the HyperGEN study. J Am Heart Assoc . 2014;3 :e000631.  
 18 57. Coiro S, Simonovic D, Deljanin -Ilic M, Duarte K, Carluccio E, Cattadori G, Girerd N and Ambrosio G. 
Prognostic Value of Dynamic Changes in Pulmonary Congestion During Exercise Stress Echocardiography in 
Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction. Circ Heart Fail . 2020;13:e006769.  
58. Picano E and Pellikka PA. Ultrasound of extravascular lung water: a new standard for pulmonary 
congestion. Eur Heart J . 2016;37:2097 -104. 
59. Heart rate variability: standards of measurement, physiological interpretation an d clinical use. Task 
Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology. 
Circulation . 1996;93:1043 -65. 
60. Soares -Miranda L, Sattelmair J, Chaves P, Duncan GE, Siscovick DS, Stein PK and Mozaffarian D. 
Physical activity and heart rate variability in older adults: the Cardiovascular Health Study. Circulation . 
2014;129:2100 -10. 
61. Nielsen R, Moller N, Gormsen LC , Tolbod LP, Hansson NH, Sorensen J, Harms HJ, Frokiaer J, 
Eiskjaer H, Jespersen NR, Mellemkjaer S, Lassen TR, Pryds K, Botker HE and Wiggers H. Cardiovascular 
Effects of Treatment with the Ketone Body 3 -Hydroxybutyrate in Chronic Heart Failure Patients. Circulation . 
2019.  
62. Browning JD, Baxter J, Satapati S and Burgess SC. The effect of short -term fasting on liver and 
skeletal muscle lipid, glucose, and energy metabolism in healthy women and men. J Lipid Res . 2012;53:577 -
86. 
 