 
SVC diameter and Collapsibility Index and its Relationship to Central Venous P ressure Measurements in 
Patients undergoing Liver Transplantation  
Argalious et al  
  
SVC diameter and Collapsibility Index and its Relationship to Central Venous P ressure Measurements in 
Patients undergoing Liver Transplantation  
Argalious et al  
 
Introduction 
 Central venous pressure  (CVP)  measured invasively through a central venous catheter in the internal 
jugular vein or through a right atrial port of a pulmonary artery catheter is  commonly used during liver 
transplant surgery. CVP measurements  at the SVC -RA junction are a function of circulating blood 
volume, right ventricle function, intrathoracic pressure . (1) CVP measurements  can also be affected by 
the presence of tricuspid regurgitation. Because central venous pressure measurements are determined 
by several factors and do not predict the response to  subsequent  fluid bolus administration, they are 
considered “static measures” and are poor indicators of fluid responsiveness . (2) 
 
CVP measurements remain an important measurement during liver transplant surgery  (3) since a rise in 
CVP especially during the postanhepatic phase  can alert the perioperative team to worsening pulmonary 
artery elevations and/or a decline in RV function. (4)This in turn triggers several therapeutic 
interventions aimed at reducing an increasing afterload on the newly transplanted liver, which can  
otherwise result in disruption of liver anastomoses, increased bleeding  and coagulopathy and liver 
failure of the transplanted liver. (5) 
 
In spontaneously breathing patients, transthoracic echocardiographic measurements of the inferior 
vena caval diameter an d its change with inspiration ( sniff) is routinely used to estimate right atrial 
pressure measurements  (Size < 2.1 cm; collapses >50% during sniff = RAP 0 –5 mm H; g Size > 2.1 cm; 
collapses >50% during sniff = 5 –10 mm Hg Size > 2.1; collapses <50% during sniff = 10 –20 mm Hg.  This 
echocardiographic measurement allows noninvasive estimation of pulmonary artery systolic pressure based on the modified Bernoulli equation (PASP=RVSP= 4v2 + RA pressure) . (6) 
Due to its intraabdominal location, the IVC is less suited for estimation of right atrial pressure during 
mechanical ventilation;  especially that positive pressure ventilation causes a dilation of IVC diameter. ( 7)  
Given the entirely intrathoracic location of the superior vena  cava (SVC), its diameter and collapsibility 
with positive pressure ventilation it is a potentially attractive method of non -invasively estimating CVP . 
(8)  
SVC diameter and collapsibility index , dynamic measures of fluid responsiveness have been successfully 
utilized as echocardiographic indices for fluid responsiveness in ventilated septic  patient s. (9)Whether 
SVC collapsibility is correlated with CVP measurements in liver transplant patients is not known.  
 
Significance:  
 While most centers utilize central venous catheters or pulmonary artery catheters during liver 
transplant surgery , (3) there are complications associated with central invasive catheter use. ( 10) 
If SVC collapsibility index is correlated with CVP measurements, it would allow: 
1- Less reliance on central invasive catheter use especially in select population of liver transplant 
recipients especially those with normal pulmonary artery pressures and normal right ventricle 
function. Large bore peripheral venous catheters that allow rapid administration of fluids and 
blood products would substitute central venous catheter use with transesophageal monitoring 
of SVC diameter and collapsibility for calculation of pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) . 
2- Noninvasive measurement of PASP in mechanically ventilated patients  with no central venous 
monitoring (not just in patients undergoing liver transplantation) especially that IVC 
measurement in mechanically ventilated patients may be inaccurate in identifying CVP.  (7) Since 
the SVC is entirely located  intrathoracic  its collapsibility with positive pressure ventilation 
makes it an attractive method of non -invasively estimating CVP.(8)  
3- There are no studies that identify the changes in SVC diameter and collapsibility index during IVC 
cross - clamping (during the anhepatic phase of liver transplant surgery). This study will provide 
insight to changes in SVC diameter and collapsibility index in response to IVC crossclamping during the anhepatic phase.  
 
   Hypothesis:  
SVC diameter and SVC collapsibility index is correlated with CVP measurement  in patients undergoing 
liver transplant surgery (liver  transplant recipients)  
  
Aim of the study: 
1- To assess the correlation of SVC diameter and  SVC collapsibility index measurements obtained 
intraoperatively by Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE)  with simultaneous CVP 
measurements obtained  and recorded electronically ( via an automated intraoperative record  
keeping system)  through a centrally inserted central venous catheter or a right atrial port of a 
pulmonary artery catheter  
2- To identify the changes in SVC diameter and SVC collapsibility index that occur with inferior vena cava cross clamping  during  liver transplant cases performed using IVC cross clamping  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
Adult patients => 18 years of age undergoing liver transplantation surgery (cadaveric and living related ) 
Exclusion criteria:  
Contraindication to Transesophageal echocardiography: Esophageal pathology (stricture, trauma, 
tumor, scleroderma, Mallory -Weiss tear, diverticulum), Active upper gastrointestinal bleed, perforated 
viscous, esophagogastrectomy, esophagectomy, recent upper gastrointestinal surgery. (11)  
Methods:  
 Following RAC and IRB approval, consecutive patients undergoing liver transplant surgery will be 
included in the study. We will ask the IRB for informed consent waiver since both TEE and central venous monitoring are used routinely in liver transplant recipients.  
Simultaneous measur ements of SVC diameter , SVC collapsibility index , CVP (captured  electronically 
through an automated record keeping system) will be recorded by experienced anesthesiologists with 
expertise and qualifications in Transesophageal Echocardiography . Simultaneou s cardiac output 
measurements (thermodilution) will also be recorded.  
Measurements of the SVC will be taken in the midesophageal  bicaval view (90-110 degrees ) using M-
mode echocardiography, 1 to 2 cm away from the entry point into the right atrium. This  technique is 
analogous to that recommended when measuring I VC diameter and collapsibility (7) and was previously 
described by Cowie et al. (8)  
The maximum and minimal diameter of the SVC  will be measured and recorded.   
Collapsibility index of SVC, “SVC collapsibility  index” which is a measure of  the inspiratory decrease in 
SVC diameter will be determined based on the following formula  
 (Maximum diameter on expiration— minimum d iameter on inspiration)/M aximum diameter on 
expiration,  expressed as a percentage  
 
Patients will be ventilated using Pressure Control Ventilation with a tidal volume of 6 to 8 ml/kg with a 
respiratory rate of 10 -12/min and a positive end expiratory pressure of 5 to 8 cmH20.  
Measurements will be recorded d uring the following time periods:  
1- Before surgical incision ( following induction of General Anesthesia and placement of invasive 
monitoring and TEE)  
2- Preanhepatic phase  
3- Anhepatic phase  
4- Postanhepatic phase ( following reperfusion)  
5- Following closure of the deep fascial layer of the anterior abdominal wall  
Simultaneously, CVP will recorded from the right atrial port of the pulmonary artery catheter or from 
the proximal port of a CVC inserted in the internal jugular vein  
Patients will be placed in the supine position with pressure transducers zeroed to atmospheric pressure and located at the mid- thoracic position, half-way between the sternum and bed, as recommended in 
recent guidelines. (12)  
 
Statistical methods  
Demographics and perioperative characteristics of this cohort will be summarized using the standard 
summary statistics.  
We will use a linear mixed effect model with repeated measures to estimate the correlation between (1) SVC diameter and (2) SVC collapsibility index and simultaneously measured CVP across over the five 
measurement times, including before surgical incision, start of preanhepatic phase, start of anhepatic 
phase, start of postanhepatic phase, and after closure of deep fascial layer of the anterior abdominal wall (13). In the mixed model, an unstructured covariance matrix will be used to account for within -
patient correlation. The significance criterion will be 0.025 for each analysis; thus 97.5% CI will be reported (i.e., 0.05/2, Bonferroni correction).  
In addition, we will assess whether the correlation between SVC diameter and SVC collapsibility index 
and CVP differs over measurement time (time interaction) using a separate linear mixed effect model 
with a time interaction term. Regardless of the significance of the interaction, we will repot the 
correlation coefficient at each of the five measurement times along with 99.5% confidence interval (i.e., 0.025/5, Bonferroni correction) for information purpose.  
Secondly, we will also assess whether the correlation between SVC diameter and SVC collapsibility index 
and CVP differs between patients with and without normal pulmonary artery pressures and normal right 
ventricle function. If the above interaction exists, we will repot the correlation separately.  
The changes in SVC diameter and SVC collapsibility index that occur with inferior vena cava cross 
clamping during liver transplant will be summarized.  
 
Sample Size Considerations  
With 100 patients and 5 pairs of measurement per patients we will provide enough data to adequately 
study the accuracy. For example, the width of our 9 7.5% CI for Pearson  correlation will range from 0. 19 
to 0.15 for correlations ranging from  0.2 to 0. 5, respectively , assuming a within -subject correlation of 0 
(i.e., equivalent to 500 independent patients). In the other of the extreme scenario (i.e., within -subject 
correlation of 1), the width of our 9 7.5% CI for Pearson  correlation will range from 0. 43 to 0.34  for 
correlations ranging from  0.2 to 0. 5, respectively . Approximately 10 liver transplant cases per month are 
conducted at the Cleveland Clinic main campus. Thus, a plan of 100 patients is feasible within 1 year. SAS software version 9.4  for Windows (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) will be  used for all analyses.  
 
                
References:  
1- Vieillard -Baron A, Augarde R, Prin S, Page B, Beauchet A, Jardin F (2001) Influence of superior 
vena caval zone conditions on cyclic changes in right ventricular outflow during respiratory 
support. Anesthesiology 95:1083 –1088 
2- Trepte CJ, Haas SA, Nitzschke R, Salzwedel C, Goetz AE, Reuter DA. Prediction of volume -
responsiveness during one -lung ventilation: a comparison of static, volumetric, and dynamic 
parameters of cardiac preload. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2013 Dec;27(6):1094 -100. doi: 
10.1053/j.jvca.2013.05.003. Epub 2013 Aug 22.  
3- Schumann, Roman, M. Susan Mandell, Nathan Mercaldo, Damon Michaels, Amy Robertson, Arna Banerjee, Ramachander Pai, John Klinck, Pratik Pandharipande, and Ann Walia. 
"Anesthesia for liver transplantation in United States academic centers: intraoperative practice." Journal of clinical anesthesia 25, no. 7 (2013): 542 -550.  
4- Acosta, F., T. Sansano, C. G. Palenciano, P. Domenech, L. Falcon, R. Robles, F. S. Bueno, P. 
Ramirez, and P. Parrilla. "Portopulmonary hypertension and liver transplantation: hemodynamic 
consequences at reperfusion." In Transplantation proceedings, vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 3865 -3866. 
Elsevier, 2005.  
5- Yassen, Amr M., Waleed R. Elsarraf, Mohamed Elsadany, Mohamed M. Elshobari, Tarek Salah, and Ahmed M. Sultan. "The impact of portopulmonary hypertension on intraoperative right ventricular function of living donor liver transplant recipients." Anesthesia & Analgesia 115, no. 
3 (2012): 689- 693.  
6- Rudski LG, Lai WW, Afilalo J, Hua L, Handschumacher MD,Chandrasekaran K, et al. Guidelines for 
the echocardiographic assessment of the right heart in adults: a report from the American 
Society of Echocardiography.Endorsed by the European Association of Echocardiography, a  
registered branch of the European Society of Cardiology, and the Canadian  
Society of Echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2010;23:685 -713.  
7- Beigel R, Cercek B, Luo H, Siegel RJ. Noninvasive evaluation of right atrial pressure. J Am Soc 
Echocardiogr 2013; 26:1033 -1042.  
8- Cowie, B. S., Roman Kluger, Steffen Rex, and Carlo Missant. "The relationship between superior 
vena cava diameter and collapsibility and central venous pressure." Anaesthesia and intensive 
care 43, no. 3 (2015): 357- 360.  
9- Antoine Vieillard -BaronKarim CherguiAnne RabillerOlivier PeyrousetBernard PageAlain Beauchet 
Francois Jardin. Superior vena caval collapsibility as a gauge of volume status in ventilated septic patients. Intensive Care Med (2004) 30:1734 –1739  
10- Parienti, Jean -Jacques, Nicolas Mongardon, Bruno Mégarbane, Jean -Paul Mira, Pierre Kalfon, 
Antoine Gros, Sophie Marqué et al. "Intravascular Complications of Central Venous 
Catheterization by Insertion Site." New England Journal of Medicine 373, no. 13 (2015): 1220 -
1229.  
11- Robertson, Amy C., and Susan S. Eagle. "Transesophageal echocardiography during orthotopic liver transplantation: maximizing information without the distraction." Journal of cardiothoracic 
and vascular anesthesia 28, no. 1 (2014): 141 -154.  
12- Kovacs G, Avian A, Olschewski A, Olschewski H. Zero reference level for right heart 
catheterisation. Eur Respir J 2013;42:1586 -1594.  
13- Hamlett A,Ryan L, Wolfinger R. On the use of PROC MIXED to Estimate Correlation in the 
Presence of Repeated Measures . SUGI 198 -29. 
 
  