Online Consent  Aim 2
Version Date: 6.4.2018Title of  Research Study: Using Text Messaging to Promote Young 
Men’s Health (txt2protect) 
Investigator: Brian  Mustanski, PhD
Supported By:  The National Cancer Institute and Northwestern 
University
Why am I  being asked to take part in this research study?
You are  being asked to take part in this study because you are male, between the ages of 18-25, identify 
as gay, bisexual or queer and/or are physically attracted to men, and are the exclusive owner of a cell 
phone with an unlimited text messaging plan. 
What should  I know about a research study?
Someone  will explain this research study to you.
Whether  or not you take part is up to you.
You  can choose not to take part.
You  can agree to take part and later change your mind.
Your  decision will not be held against you.
You  can ask all the questions you want before you decide.
Why is  this research being done?
The purpose of  this study is to compare two different versions of a text messaging sexual health program 
for young gay, bisexual and queer men. Your participation in this study will help us to determine the 
usefulness of these interventions. We hope to use this information to later modify, enhance, or expand 
the interventions to better address the needs of men in this community. To evaluate their effectiveness, 
we will need to ask you questions about yourself, including questions about your sexual orientation, 
sexual experiences, health practices, and health knowledge.
How long  will the research last and what will I need to do?
Your participation  in this study will last for approximately 9 months. 
You will  receive text messages about things like relationships, sex, and how to protect yourself from 
sexually transmitted diseases. You will be asked to complete three brief online surveys. 
More detailed  information about the study procedures can be found under the section What happens if I 
say “Yes, I want to be in this research”?Key Information:  
The first few pages of this document include a summary of this study to help you 
decide whether or not to participate. Detailed information is provided after the 
summary.
IRB #: STU00202705-MOD0014 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 6/15/2018 through 2/27/2019.
Online Consent  Aim 2
Version Date: 6.4.2018Is there any way  being in this study could be bad for me?
The primary  risk of participation is that your privacy may be broken if someone sees the messages on 
your cell phone. It also is possible that a question in the surveys might make you feel uncomfortable. If 
this happens, you can select “I do not want to answer” or skip the survey question.
More detailed  information about the risks of this study can be found under “Is there any way being in 
this study could be bad for me? (Detailed Risks)”
Will being in this  study help me any way?
We cannot promise  any benefits to you or others from your taking part in this research. However, possible 
benefits include your learning about HIV/STIs and options for preventing them. Information collected in 
this study may be used to later modify, enhance, or expand interventions to better address the needs of 
men in your community.
What happens  if I do not want to be in this research?
Participation in  research is completely voluntary. You decide whether or not to participate. If you choose 
to not participate, there will be no penalty to you or loss of benefit to which you are entitled. Your 
alternative to participating in this research study is to not participate.
Who can  I talk to?
If you  have questions, concerns, or complaints, or think the research has hurt you, talk to the Principal 
Investigator, Brian Mustanski, at (312) 503-5421.
This research has  been reviewed and approved by an Institutional Review Board (“IRB”). You may talk to 
them at (312) 503-9338 or irb@northwestern.edu if:
Your  questions, concerns, or complaints are not being answered by the research team.
You  cannot reach the research team.
You  want to talk to someone besides the research team.
You  have questions about your rights as a research participant.
You  want to get information or provide input about this research.
How many  people will be studied?
We expect about  460 people will be in this research study.
What happens  if I say “Yes, I want to be in this research”?
If you  agree to participate, you will be invited to take part in a 9-month study. There are two different text 
messaging programs that we are testing. We do not know which program works better to promote healthy 
sexual behavior for guys like you. You will be randomly assigned to one of the two programs. This means 
you have an equal chance of being assigned to either program. You will not be told which treatment you 
are getting, however the study team will know. We will not tell you to which program you are assigned to 
until after everyone has finished the program.
The study  is split into two phases. During Phase 1, you will receive text messages every day for 3 weeks. 
During Phase 2, which lasts for the rest of the study, you will receive text messages only once or twice Detailed Information:
The rest
 of this document includes detailed information about this study (in addition to the 
information listed above).
IRB #: STU00202705-MOD0014 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 6/15/2018 through 2/27/2019.
Online Consent  Aim 2
Version Date: 6.4.2018per month. The messages will  talk about things like relationships, sex, and how to protect yourself from 
sexually transmitted diseases. 
Before you  start receiving the messages you will be asked to complete an online survey, which should 
take about 15-20 minutes. Please be prepared to sit and answer the questions in a private area.
You will  then take part in the text messaging intervention called txt2protect (t2p). During Phase 1 you will 
receive about 10 messages every day for 3 weeks. Texts will be sent in small batches that should arrive 
about the same time every day. Each week will focus on a different topic. During Phase 2 you will receive 
text messages much less often (only a few messages per month). 
At the end  of Phase 1 (3 weeks into the study), you will be asked to complete an online survey to provide 
your initial feedback about the program. For example, we will ask you about your satisfaction with the 
program and your thoughts on the different topics that were covered. The survey will take about 25-30 
minutes.
At the end  of Phase 2 (9 months into the study), you will be asked to complete a final online survey. The 
final survey will ask you for your feedback on the text messaging program and will ask some questions 
about your sexual behavior and health-related practices since the study began. The survey will take about 
15-20 minutes. During Phase 2 you may also be asked to complete up to three “pop-up” surveys that will 
include only one or two questions. 
What happens  if I say “Yes”, but I change my mind later?
You can  leave the research at any time and it will not be held against you. 
If you  decide to leave the research, contact the investigator so that the investigator can remove you from 
the study and stop the delivery of text messages to your phone number.
Choosing not  to be in this study or to stop being in this study will not result in any penalty to you or loss of 
benefit to which you are entitled.  Specifically, your choice not to be in this study will not negatively affect 
your right to any present or future medical treatment. No additional data will be collected after you 
withdraw. If you share your intent to withdraw, the investigator will ask if the information already collected 
can be used or whether it should be destroyed.
Detailed Risks:  Is there any way being in this study could be bad for 
me?
The text  messages talk about being gay, bisexual, or queer and guys having sex with guys. It is possible 
that your privacy will be broken if someone sees the messages on your cell phone. Please think about 
what it would mean for you if this happens. We want you to be sure it’s safe for you to take part in the 
program.  
It also  is possible that a question in the surveys might make you feel uncomfortable. If this happens, you 
can select “I do not want to answer” or skip the survey question. If the program messages make you feel 
uncomfortable, you can stop being in the study completely.   
This study  involves the use of your identifiable, personal information and there is a chance that a loss of 
confidentiality could occur. The researchers have procedures in place to lessen the possibility of this 
happening.  See the section below titled: “What happens to the information collected for the research?”.
Will it  cost me anything to participate in this research study?
Taking part in  this research study will not lead to any cost to you. 
IRB #: STU00202705-MOD0014 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 6/15/2018 through 2/27/2019.
Online Consent  Aim 2
Version Date: 6.4.2018What happens  to the information collected for the research?
Efforts will  be made to limit the use and disclosure of your personal information, including research study 
records, to people who have a need to review this information. We cannot promise complete secrecy. 
Organizations that may inspect and copy your information include the IRB and other representatives of 
this institution and the US Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).
We will  keep a copy of your survey responses so we can evaluate the effects of the program. Only Dr. 
Mustanski and people who work with him will be able to see your answers. You will be identified only by a 
unique subject number. Your contact information will be stored separately from your responses. All 
information will be kept on a password protected computer only accessible by the research team. The 
results of the research study may be published, but your name will not be used. 
Data Sharing 
De-identified data  from this study may be shared with the research community at large to advance 
science and health. We will remove or code any personal information that could identify you before files 
are shared with other researchers to ensure that, by current scientific standards and known methods, no 
one will be able to identify you from the information we share. Despite these measures, we cannot 
guarantee anonymity of your personal data.
Can I  be removed from the research without my OK?
The person  in charge of the research study or the sponsor can remove you from the research study 
without your approval. Possible reasons for removal include providing fraudulent data or the study team 
determining from your survey responses that you no longer meet eligibility requirements to participate in 
the study.
What else  do I need to know?
You can  receive up to $75 in online gift cards (i.e., Visa prepaid card) for completing this study. Gift cards 
will be sent to your email address. You will receive a $15 online gift card for completing the survey at the 
beginning of the study, another $15 online gift card for the completing the survey at the end of Phase 1, 
and a $45 online gift card for completing the final survey at the end of the study (end of Phase 2). During 
Phase 2, you may also be eligible to take part in up to three e-raffles for an additional $50 online gift card. 
 
The study  number for this project is: STU00202705
If you  receive any doses of HPV vaccine during the study we may ask you to complete a medical release 
form at the end of the study. Signing this form indicates that you are willing to let a member of the study 
team contact your doctor to ask for specific information from your medical chart. The only data that would 
be requested is whether you received any doses (shots) of HPV vaccine while you took part in this study. 
If you do not sign the medical release form, your medical chart information will not be requested. 
Consent
If you  want a copy of this consent for your records, you can print it from the screen. 
If you  wish to participate, please click the “I Agree” button and you will be taken to the survey.
If you  do not wish to participate in this study, please select “I Disagree” or select X in the corner of your 
browser. 
I  Agree 
I  Disagree 
IRB #: STU00202705-MOD0014 Approved by NU IRB for use on or after 6/15/2018 through 2/27/2019.