ORI IRB# 00000278  
 
Protocol Version 8/19/2020  
 
Official Title: Talk STEM Familia: Dual -Language Academic V ocabulary -Building Technology to 
Improve Educational, Career, and Health Outcomes Among Latinx Students  
 
Principal  Investigators: Jessie Marquez and Patricia Vadasy , Ph.D.  
 
Oregon Research Behavior Interventions Strategies, dba Influents Innovations  
 
Award No. 2 R44 MD013619 -02 
 
Final Version Dated: 5/1/2025  
  
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
Participant Recruitment , Enrollment , and Overall Design  
Families were recruited to participate in the evaluation study via distribution of study 
information through school districts, community organizations, and community health promoters  
around the United States . Interested parents who contacted project staff were provided additional 
information about the study and screened for eligibility; those eligible were consented via phone 
call or sent online Qualtrics consent form . After signing the consent, primary parents  and their 
participating student  completed the pretest /baseline  (T1) assessment and then were randomized 
into the treatment group or waitlist control group . The group  assignment lasted 6 months.  
Parent /student dyads  in the treatment group received  the Mi Familia STEM program app and 
Amazon Alexa with skill programmed onto it.  Parent /student dyads  in the waitlist control 
received an Amazon Alexa without the Mi Familia STEM program. Treatment group dyad s 
received  reminder text messages to use Mi Familia  STEM with their child 3/days a week for 
approximately 10 -minutes. Control group dyads  were able to use their Amazon Alexa for normal 
use. At 3-month s, both treatment and waitlist control groups were administered the  mid-
treatment  (T2) questionnaire. Both group s received $100 for completing the T 2 assessment . At 6-
months  from baseline,  both waitlist control and treatment groups received post-treatment ( T3) 
questionnaire . The treatment group  also completed a consumer satisfaction  and usability 
questionnaire .  After completion of T3 questionnaire, treatment and control dyads  received $100. 
Following T3, the w aitlist control group also received access to the Mi Familia STEM app and 
Amazon Alexa skill.  
Mi Familia STEM Program  
The Mi Familia STEM program is a dual -language, vocabulary acquisition learning tool that 
employs integrated web -app and s mart speaker technology (phone app and Amazon Alexa 
Skill) to engage English learner students, grades 4 -8, and their families in evidence -based, 
culturally relevant, home -based learning activities on 72 scientific academic vocabulary  
(SA V) words that support success in middle and high -school STEM classes.  
Measures  
T1, T2, and T3 questionnaires measured student knowledge of academic vocabulary meaning  
and usage ( Academic V ocabulary Meaning ( A VM ) and Academic V ocabulary Word Usage 
(A VWU ); student SA V usage behaviors  and behaviors related to academic learning (Academic 
V ocabulary Usage Behaviors  (A VUB)  and Academic Learning Behaviors ( ALB ); student 
confidence in using SA V words  (Academic V ocabulary Con fidence  (A VC )); and student interest 
in choosing STEM careers (STEM).  
 
T1, T2, and T3 questionnaires also measured parent  knowledge of SA V meaning  and usage 
(Academic V ocabulary Meaning ( A VM ) and  Academic V ocabulary Word Usage ( A VWU ); Paren t 
SA V usage behaviors (Academic V ocabulary Usage Behaviors  (A VUB )); parent confidence 
using SA V words (Academic V ocabulary Confidence  (A VC)) ; and parent academic support 
behaviors ( Academic Enabling Behaviors  (AEB)).  
 
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
The evaluation study had three main goals: (a) determine whether statistically significant 
condition effects were found  between T1 and T3 on the outcome measures; (b) determine the 
program effect sizes; and (c) determine the parents’ and students’ reaction to the program and 
amount of program use. The evaluation of group effects included an intent -to-treat analysis using 
mixed -effects growth models with the SAS PROC MIXED software, which was estimated with 
maximum likelihood. Models included an intercept, defined as the T1 ass essment, time coded in 
months since the T1 assessment, a main effect for condition, and a condition × time interaction. 
The condition × interaction tests whether a change in the outcome from the T1 to T3 assessment 
significantly differed by condition and i s a direct test of the program's efficacy. Cohen’s d-
statistic is provided as a measure of effect size for the condition × time effects and follows the 
convention of .2, .5, and .8 for small, medium, and large, respectively. Examining descriptive 
statistics for the user satisfaction items provided informati on on parents’ and students’ reactions 
to the program.  
 