Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
 
Phase II study of front line therapy with nivol umab and salvage nivolum ab + ipilimumab in 
patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma HCRN: GU16-260 
 
Sponsor Investigator 
Michael B. Atkins, MD 
Deputy Director, Georgetown-Lombard i Comprehensive Cancer Center 
3970 Reservoir Road NW Research Build ing, Room E501 Washington, DC  20057 
Phone: (202) 687-2795 
Fax: (202) 687-1370  
Email: mba41@Georgetown.edu 
 
Co-Investigators 
Geoffrey T. Gibney, MD 
MedStar Georgetown University Hospital 
3800 Reservoir Rd, NW Washington DC, 
20057 
Geoffrey.T.Gibney@gunet.georgetown.edu 
 
Hans Hammers, MD, PhD 
UT Southwestern Medical Center 
6001 Forest Park Rd, ND3.120B, Dallas, TX 
75390-8852 
Hans.Hammers@utsouthwestern.edu  
David F. McDermott, MD 
Beth Israel Deacone ss Medical Center 
350 Longwood Ave, Rm 412 Boston, MA 
02215 
Phone (617) 632-9250 
Dmcdermo@bidmc.harvard.edu 
 
Sabina Signoretti, MD 
Department of Pathology 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital Boston, 
MA 
 
Statistician 
Paul Catalano, ScD 
Department of Biostatistics  and Computational Biology 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston MA  
 
 
Trial Supported by  
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company (BMS) 
BMS Protocol # CA209-669 
  
Trial Management Provided by  
Hoosier Cancer Research Network, Inc. 
7676 Interactive Way Suite 120 
Indianapolis, IN 46278
 
Investigational New Drug (IND) # 133893 
  
Initial Protocol Version Date:  05FEB2017  
Protocol Amendment Version Date:  
28MAR2017 
15DEC2017 02JUL2018 16NOV2018 14MAY2020 25MAR2021 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 Conf idential Page 2 of 71 PROTOCOL SIGNATURE PAGE 
 
Study Title: Phase II study of front line ther apy with nivolumab and salvage nivolumab + 
ipilimumab in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma 
  
VERSION DATE:  25MAR2021 
I confirm I have read this prot ocol, I understand it, and I will work  according to this protocol and 
to the ethical principles stated in  the latest version of the Declaration of Helsinki, the applicable 
guidelines for good clinical practices, whiche ver provides the greater  protection of the 
individual. I will accept the monitor’s oversee ing of the study. I will promptly submit the 
protocol to applicable institutional review board(s).  
 
  ____________________________________ ________________________ 
 Signature of Site Invest igator       Date 
  ____________________________________  Site Investigator Name (printed)   
____________________________________ 
 Site Investigator Title   ____________________________________  Name of Facility   ____________________________________  Location of Facility (City and State)    
 PLEASE COMPLETE AND EMAI L A COPY TO HCRN 
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 Conf idential Page 3 of 71 SYNOPSIS  
TITLE Study Title: Phase II study of fro nt line therapy with nivolumab 
and salvage nivolumab + ipilimumab in patients with advanced 
renal cell carcinom a 
PHASE  II 
BACKGROUND 
AND SIGNIFICANCE Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC) is th e most common malignant lesion 
of the kidney, with an estimated an nual incidence in the U.S. of 
over 50,000 new cases and 13,000 deaths  per year. With currently 
available treatments, the median  overall survival is around 28 
months.   First-line treatment for clear ce ll RCC typically involves vascular 
endothelial growth fa ctor receptor (VEGFR ) tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (TKIs) sunitinib or pazopanib. Additional agents for second-line therapy have includ ed alternative VEGFR TKIs (e.g. 
axitinib), the mTOR inhibitor ever olimus as well as agents active 
against multiple tyrosine kinases. Recently both nivolumab an anti-
PD1 based immunotherapy (see belo w) and cabozantinib a TKI 
targeting both VEGFR and Met, have  shown OS benefits relative to 
mTOR inhibition in patients with prior VEGRF TKI therapy 
resulting in their FDA approval.   Nivolumab in the treatme nt of RCC. Preclincal and clinical studies 
have identified critic al mechanisms by which cancers subvert 
normal immunomodulatory mechan isms (referred to as 
“checkpoints”) to block the initiat ion, delivery, or activation of 
effective anti-tumor surveillance. These insights have led to the development of a new class of i mmunotherapeutics referred to as 
“checkpoint inhibitors,” which in clude nivolumab, a human IgG4 
monoclonal antibody that binds to the programmed death receptor-1 
(PD-1) and blocks its interacti on with PD-L1 and PD-L2, releasing 
PD-1 pathway-mediated inhibition of the immune response, including the anti-tumor immune response.   Nivolumab was approved in N ovember 2015 by the US FDA for 
use in patients with advanced RCC who have received prior VEGFR TKI therapy.  The approval was based on a randomized (1:1) open-label study of nivolum ab or everolimus. Nivolumab 
demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in overall survival (OS) compared to everol imus, with a median survival of 
25.0 vs. 19.6 months (hazard ratio 0.73, p<0.002) and confirmed objective response rates of 21.5%  vs 3.9%, respectively.  In 
addition, 
grade 3 toxicit y was si gnificantl y less and qualit y of life 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 Conf idential Page 4 of 71 significantly improved in patients treated with nivolumab relative to 
those receiving everolimus.  
The OS benefit, history of durab le responses and tolerability of 
nivolumab suggest that it be a pr eferred treatment for a subset of 
treatment naïve patients. However, currently there is very limited 
single agent data on the activity of  nivolumab in treatment naïve 
patients with ccRCC. The BMS-sponsored study CA 209009 included 23 subjects with treatment -naïve RCC. In these patients, 
treatment with nivolumab 10 mg/kg every 3 weeks resulted in an 
overall response rate of 13% (3/23).   
 Further anti-PD1/PDL1 therapies ha ve shown anti-tumor activity in 
patients with over 20 different t ypes of malignancy; however only 
anecdotal reports exist for this treatment approach in patients with non-clear cell (ncc)RCC.     Finally, the combination of nivol umab and the CTLA4 checkpoint 
inhibitor ipilimumab has produced greater antitumor activity than 
nivolumab alone in patients with advanced melanoma and encouraging response rates in pa tients with ccRCC.  It remains 
uncertain whether the addition of  ipilimumab to nivolumab in 
patients who have failed to re spond to nivolumab monotherapy 
could produce antitumor activity. To address all these concerns, we 
propose to conduct a study of nivol umab monotherapy in treatment 
naïve patients with advanced cc or nccRCC (Part A), with the addition of ipilimumab in patients with disease progression or who 
have failed to respond by 48 weeks into therapy (Part B) that will 
focus on uncovering biomarkers of re sponse and resistance to PD-1 
blockade, as well as possible predic tors of subsequent response to 
CTLA-4 blockade.  In this trial, we examine the following questions: 
1) How active is PD-1 blockade in  treatment naïve kidney cancer?  
2) What factors, in addition to PD-L1 expression, can reliably 
predict durable response?  3) Do gene expression signature s which are likely capturing the 
presence, magnitude, and activity of adaptive immune infiltrates 
reliably predict durable response?  4) Is there a threshold for PD-L1 expression in either the tumor or 
immune cell infiltrate that accurate ly predicts durable response?  
5) Is PD-L1 expression uniform a nd stable in an individual tumor 
and between a primary tumo r and its metastases?  
6) What are the mechanisms of i nnate resistance to PD-1 pathway 
blockade?   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 Conf idential Page 5 of 71 7) Can the addition of ipilimuma b overcome resistance and/or 
enhance response it patients w ith prolonged stable disease? 
8) Do gene expression analyses of  biopsies in PD1 resistant tumors 
predict the response to ipili mumab/nivolumab combination 
therap y? 
OBJECTIVES Primary Objective: 
Determine the PFS rate at 1 year of nivolumab in patients with 
treatment naïve ccRCC based on tumor PD-L1 expression. 
 
Secondary Objectives: 
 Determine the PFS rate at 1 year- by both RECIST and 
irRECIST of nivolumab in pa tients with treatment naïve 
ccRCC based on the PD1- Blockade Durable Response Predictive (PRP) biomarker model developed in the DFHCC Kidney Cancer SPORE 
 Determine the objective res ponse rate (CR/PR=ORR), the 
ORR based on PDL1 expressi on and the PRP model, and 
duration of response for nivolumab in patients with treatment naïve ccRCC 
 Determine the response rate of combined nivolumab and 
ipilimumab therapy at the time of nivolumab failure (or lack 
of response at 1 year) 
 Determine the clinical activ ity (CR, PR and SD) and PFS 
rate at 1 year of nivolumab in  patients with treatment naive 
nccRCC 
 Assess the toxicity of nivol umab monotherapy in patients 
with treatment naïve cc or nccRCC 
 Correlative Objectives: 
 Explore novel potentia l predictive biomarke rs for patients 
with treatment naïve ccRCC and nccRCC 
 Explore the mechanisms  of innate and acquired resistance to 
nivolumab therapy in treatment  naïve patients with ccRCC 
 Identify biomarkers associated  with response to nivolumab 
+ ipilimumab in patients w hose disease has not responded 
or pro gressed on nivolumab monotherap y 
STUDY DESIGN The study will be a prospective Phase II trial of nivolumab in 134 
treatment naïve patients with clear cell (cc)RCC and 40 treatment 
naïve patients with non-clear cell (ncc)RCC. Eligible patients with 
tumor tissue available will receive nivolumab 240 mg flat dose IV 
q 2 weeks for 12 weeks then every 3 weeks at a dose of 360 mg IV 
for 12 weeks followed by nivolumab 480 mg IV every 4 weeks.  Tumor response will be assessed at weeks 12, 18 and 24 and then every 12 weeks.  For patients who experience RECIST defined 
PD, but remain clinically asym ptomatic with maintenance of 
performance status, a confirmator
y scan after 4-6 weeks of 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 Conf idential Page 6 of 71 additional therapy is suggested. Pa tients with persistent PD at 
confirmatory scan will be evalua ted for enrollment on Part B of 
this study.  Patients without confir med PD can continue nivolumab 
therapy.  Patients with symptoma tic and radiographic PD will not 
require a confirmatory scan before proceeding to Part B of this study. Adverse events will be recorded continuously.  Patients who experience symptoma tic or confirmed PD (or have 
best response of SD at 48 week s) on nivolumab monotherapy will 
be eligible for consideration for Part B (ipilimumab/nivolumab re-
induction). Part B involves the addi tion of ipilimumab for up to 4 
doses while maintaining nivolumab  therapy. Dose of ipilimumab 
will be 1 mg/kg every 3 weeks together with nivolumab changed to 3 mg/kg every 3 weeks for up to 4 doses (must complete by 
week 16). Nivolumab will revert to 360 mg every 3 weeks for 12 weeks followed by nivolumab 480 mg IV every 4 weeks after the completion of treatment with ip ilimumab (beginning week 13-19 
of Part B).  Patients will continue to be fo llowed with serial 
imaging assessments 12, 18 and 24 weeks after the initiation of 
ipilimumab (Part B) and then every 12 weeks.  The tumor 
measurements at the time of ipilimumab institution will be the new baseline.  If unequivocal sympto matic or confirmed new PD (as 
defined above) develops, treatment will be discontinued.  Patients for Part B must still meet the elig ibility criteria for initial study 
enrollment.  Patients with Gr ade 3 toxicity on nivolumab 
monotherapy, (excluding endocrine toxicity), serious symptomatic 
disease that in the opinion of the site investigator requires 
immediate use of an alternative treatment approach or continued 
PR/CR will be excluded from enrolling in Part B.  It is estimated 
that roughly half of th e patients accrued to th e first line treatment 
will go on to enroll in Part B. 
 
KEY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA (See Section 3 for full eligibility criteria) Part A 
1. Patients must have adva nced RCC (any histology) 
Collecting duct tumors and tumors originating from the renal pelvis or upper urinar y tract are considered of 
urothelial origin and are excl uded from this protocol.   
2. Patients must have at least one  measurable site of disease 
that has not been previously irradiated. If the patient has 
had previous radiation to the marker lesion(s), there must 
be evidence of progre ssion since the radiation 
3. Archival tissue of a metastatic  lesion obtained within 1 year 
prior to study registration (w ithin 4 weeks preferred) and 
tumor tissue from nephrectomy is required if available.  In 
addition to archival tissue of a metastatic lesion and 
nephrectom
y, patients must have at least one site of disease 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 Conf idential Page 7 of 71 (not including bone metastases) accessible for biopsy.  If 
biopsy/resection of a new lesi on or primary tumor and slow 
freezing of fresh tissue for single cell RNAseq study (as 
specified in the CLM) is not feasible, the subject is not 
eligible for the study. All biopsies must be core needle or excisional. Fine needle aspirate is not acceptable. NOTE:  
The tissue collected from a surgical resection or multiple core biopsies of either a meta static lesion or primary tumor 
for the slow freezing of fres h tissue after the patient has 
signed consent for the study could also be used for collecting the FFPE specimens. 
4. ECOG performance status 0-2 5.  Age ≥ 18 years 
6. Patients must have adequate organ and marrow function 
within 14 days prior to study entry  
7. Patients with controlled brai n metastases are allowed on 
protocol if they have had brain metastases that were 
surgically resected withou t recurrence and/or up to 3 
metastases treated with SR S without progression on MRI 
obtained at least 2 weeks afte r completion of radiation and 
within 28 days prior to in itiation of nivolumab.    
 Part B 
1. Meet eligibility for Part A with exception that prior anti-
PD1 therapy (must be with nivolumab in Part A of this study) is allowed 
2. No grade 3 IrAE on nivol umab (excluding endocrine 
toxicity managed with replacement therapy) 
3. Tumor biopsy prior to combin ation treatment is mandatory. 
If a biopsy/resection of a new lesion or primary tumor and 
slow freezing of fresh tissue  for single cell RNAseq study 
(as specified in the CLM) is not  feasible, the subject is not 
eligible for the study. All biopsies must be core needle or excisional. Fine needle aspi rate is not acceptable.  
 Exclusion 1. Untreated brain metastases 2. Major surgery or radiation therapy within 14 days of 
starting study treatment 
3. Subjects with active autoimmune disease (see protocol for 
exceptions) 
4. Concurrent medical conditi on requiring use of systemic 
corticosteroids with pred nisone >10 mg per day. 
5.   Prior systemic therapy for Stage IV RCC (except for 
nivolumab as part of part  A of this protocol).  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 Conf idential Page 8 of 71 STATISTICAL 
CONSIDER ATIONS 
 The primary focus of this trial will be in the evaluation of PD-L1 to 
predict outcome and, also, secondari ly to use the PRP model as a 
basis for outcome pred iction. We expect that  about 45% (or 54 
expected) patients will have 0% PD-L1 and roughly 15% (or 18 
expected) patients will expre ss PD-L1 > 20%, which, given the 
sample size of 120 ccRCC patient s provides 90% power using a 
0.05 level two-sided test to test  the hypothesis that PD-L1 >20% 
will be associated with significan tly improved 1-year PFS rate for 
patients treated with PD-1 bloc kade (55% vs 13% taken as a 
binomial quantity). Consideri ng the four groups of PD-L1 
expression (0%, 1-5%, 5-20%, >20%),  and with an expected patient 
allocation within groups of (45%, 25%, 15%, 15%), the Cochran-Armitage test gives at least 90% po wer to detect a trend in 1-year 
PFS of (13%, 19%, 35%, 55%) using a two-sided 0.05 level test for 
trend. Modest changes in the propor tions of patients in the various 
PD-L1 categories will not substa ntially affect the power. For 
example, if the distribution acro ss PD-L1 categories is [25%, 25%, 
25%, 25%] rather than the anti cipated [45%, 25%, 15%, 15%] the 
power for the trend test re mains greater than 90%. 
 As a secondary objective, we will apply the PRP model, developed in the DF/HCC Kidney SPORE Proj ect 4, to assign each patient a 
probability of having PFS > 1 year.  This will be assessed by both RECIST and irRECIST. The validity of the model will be assessed by the Brier score as well as via evaluation of the AUC.  The exact 
distribution is unknown, but assumi ng an overall 1-year PFS of 
28% and that 40% of patients are expected to be “positive” by the PRP model, 120 ccRCC patients give  90% power to detect a 29% 
higher 1-year PFS between 48 positive patients and 72 negative patients (via Fisher’s exact test and assuming a difference in PFS of 
46% vs 17%). All testing above will be done at 1-sided α = 0.025. 
The specific distributional breakdowns are unknown but the power is relatively robust. For example,  if the split be tween positive and 
negative is more even (50/50) th en power for the above difference 
in 1-yr PFS remains over 90%. If th e actual difference in 1-yr PFS 
is smaller than anticipated for ex ample 25% (44% vs 19%) then the 
test will still have at least 80% power.  At this time, 10 fresh frozen base line tumor specimens and 3 pairs 
of specimens have been collected with an additional patient likely 
to be collected before accrual of the original 120 patients is 
complete. Therefore, fourteen additi onal patients are to be enrolled 
to collect fresh frozen specimens necessary to provide 25 baseline 
and 15 paired baseline and resistan t fresh frozen samples to be used 
for single cell RNAseq experime nts aimed at identifying factors 
associated to resistance as outlined in the DOD Translational 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 Conf idential Page 9 of 71 Research Partnership grant to Drs. Atkins and Wu. Assuming 15 
patients non-responsive to nivol umab and up to 10 patients 
responding, comparisons of any quan titative expression level using 
a 0.05 level two-sided two-group t-te st will have 80% power to 
detect at least a 1.2 SD shift in me ans using baseline samples. With 
15 paired samples at baseline and at confirmed radiologic 
progression among the non-responders, there is at least 80% power 
to detect a change in expression of 0.78 SD in any markers using a two-sided 0.05 level paired t-test. For two binary markers that are 
at least 50% discordant there is at  least 80% power to detect a +/- 
versus -/+ discordance of at leas t 47% using a two-sided 0.05 level 
McNemar’s test.  Non-clear cell (ncc) RCC patient s (comprising a heterogeneous 
group of histologies) will also be enro lled in the trial, at an accrual 
rate that is expected to be 33% th at of clear cell patients. Therefore, 
an expected cohort of 40 nccRCC patients will be enrolled in the 
trial and analyzed separately fo r evidence of anti-tumor activity, 
principally focusing on overall resp onse rate (CR or PR). With 40 
patients, the 95% confidence interv al on the true objective response 
proportion will be no wider than 32.4 percentage points and the 
probability of observing five or more responses under the hypothesis that the true response ra te is 0.20 is at least 92%, hence 
there is high power to detect res ponses in this cohort should the true 
response rate be interesting. Othe r endpoints of inte rest in this 
group of patients will include ra tes of SD and PFS at 1-year. 
 Clear cell patients who reach best response of SD at 48 weeks or 
who experience progression will be offered the opportunity to enroll in the second component of the study, Part B, continued 
treatment with the addition of ip ilimumab. The primary endpoint of 
this portion of the trial will be ob jective response (CR or PR) taking 
as baseline tumor measurements at th e patient’s start of Part B. It is 
expected that roughly one-half of  the Part A patients will be 
eligible for and choose to enroll in Part B, or roughly 60 total 
patients. A two-stage design will be  used for this portion of the 
study where in the first cohort 29 pa tients will be accrued, treated 
and evaluated for response in or der to provide guidance on whether 
to continue to enroll the entire cohort of 60 patients. The first stage 
analysis will be conducted without pausing accrual to Part B. If 
among the first 29 Part B patients there are at least 2 responses, 
there will be sufficient evidence to continue recruitment to Part B. 
With a true uninteresting respons e rate of 5%, there is a 57% 
chance of declaring the regimen un interesting; however, with an 
interesting response rate of 20%, th ere is greater than 95% chance 
of continuin
g. If after enrollment of 60 pa tients there are at least 11 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 10 of 71 total responses, the lower limit on the 90% confidence interval for 
the true response rate will excl ude 10% (ie, the 95% confidence 
interval will range from 10.6% to 28.5%, adjusted for the two-stage 
design). With 18 total responses, the 90% confidence interval on 
the true objective response proportion will exclude 20% (it, the confidence interval will range fr om 20.4% to 41.2%, adjusted for 
the two-stage design).   Ncc RCC patients will also be availa ble to enroll in Part B of the 
study.  An estimated 20 patients will be enrolled and response rates 
in this resistant population will be  reported.  If no responses are 
seen in the first 14 patients that  response rate will be deemed 
uninteresting. If any confirmed re sponses are seen, accrual of 
nccRCC patients will continue for al l eligible patients completing 
Part A.    
ACCRUAL GOALS With multicenter accrual of 6-7 patients per month, the study 
should accrue 134 ccRCC patients (original 120 plus an additional 14 to provide paired baseline and resistant samples) 
to Part A in 2 years with an a dditional 1 year of follow-up time 
for Part A (1.5 years for Part B).  
 
The cohort of 40 nccRCC patients will be enrolled and analyzed separately for evidence of anti-t umor activity (CR, PR and SD 
and PFS at 1 year of nivolumab). These patients will also be eligible for participation in Pa rt B.  We anticipate that the 
accrual of these 40 patients will be able to be completed within the 1.5 
years needed for accrual of the ccRCC patients. 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 11 of 71 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Schema ........................................................................................................................ ..... 12  
1. Background and Rationale ................................................................................... 13  
2. Study Objectives and Endpoints........................................................................... 21  
3. Eligibility Criteria .................................................................................................. 22  
4. Subject Registration............................................................................................... 25  
5. Treatment Plan....................................................................................................... 26   
6. Toxicities and Dose Delays .................................................................................... 29  
7. Study Calendar & Evaluations ............................................................................. 34  
8. Biospecimen Studies and Procedures ................................................................... 37  
9. Criteria for Disease Evaluation ............................................................................ 39  
10. Drug Information ................................................................................................... 45  
11. Adverse Events ....................................................................................................... 50  
12. Statistical Methods ................................................................................................. 53  
13. Trial Management ................................................................................................. 57  
14. Data Handling and Record Keeping .................................................................... 58  
15 Ethics ....................................................................................................................... 59 
16 References ............................................................................................................... 60  
17. Appendix A ............................................................................................................. 64  
 
    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 12 of 71 SCHEMA 
 
 
                   
 
  
 
    
     
 
PR or CR → PART A  
Continue Nivolumab 360 mg IV  
every 3 weeks for 4 doses (12 weeks) then 
Nivolumab 480 mg IV every 4 weeks until 
PD, toxicity or completion of 72 weeks of 
study treatment. Total = 96 weeks  PD or SD @ 48 weeks → PART B 
Re-induce with Nivolumab 3mg/kg and 
Ipilimumab 1 mg/kg every 3 weeks x 4 doses 
(must complete by week 16)  
Metastatic RCC 
Treatment Naïve 
134 ccRCC 40 nccRCC 
Screen for Eligibility 
Nivolumab 240 mg IV every 2 weeks x 6 do ses (12 weeks) then initial disease assessment  
Toxicity that requires discontinuation of 
study drug or CR/PR or SD 
Continue Nivolumab with a total of  
60 weeks of treatment completed 
continue being followed per protocol  
PD 
Discontinue 
nivolumab  
per Part A and 
evaluate subject 
for Part B  
Tumor Assessments weeks 12, 18 and 24 then every 12 weeks on both Part A and Part B.    
Baseline reset for Part B.  
 
Archival tumor tissue as descr ibed in eligibility and Section 8 is re quired if available prior to treatment 
on Part A.  A fresh biopsy is requi red after the patient signs consent.  Tumor tissue should be slow 
frozen for single cell RNAseq as described in the CLM.  Such biopsy collection and processing is 
required for protocol eligibility for patients 121- 134 with ccRCC accrued to this study. Tumor Biopsy 
required at crossover to Part B with slow frozen tissue processing for scRNAseq  
Toxicity that 
requires 
discontinuation of 
study drug or 
CR/PR with a 
total of  
96 weeks of 
treatment 
completed 
continue being 
followed per 
protocol Nivolumab 360 mg every 3weeks  
starting week 13-19 for 4 doses (12 weeks) 
then Nivolumab 480 mg IV every 4 weeks 
until PD, toxicity or completion of 48 weeks. 
Total = 60 weeks  

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 13 of 71 1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 
 1.1 Renal Cancer 
The global incidence of RCC exceeds 300,000 worldw ide with nearly 150,000 deaths annually 
with worsening mortality trends in the develo ping world compared to advanced countries in 
Europe and the United States.[1] In the US, the American Cancer Society’ s most recent estimates 
for kidney cancer for 2016 include approxi mately 62,700 new cases (39,650 in men and 23,050 
in women) and about 14,240 deaths (9,240 men a nd 5,000 women) from the disease [2]. In the 
US, RCC is the 10th most common cancer with a 1.6%  (1 in 63) lifetime risk of developing the 
disease. Metastatic disease is the proximate cau se of death for most patients and can present 
equally as either de novo advanced RCC or as re lapse following surgery fo r early stage disease. 
Decrements in life expectancy due to RCC have been estimated to  be about 15 years for patients 
in several Western countries and th ere is a substantial health relate d quality of life impact [3]. 
Kidney cancer has a propensity to hematogene ously metastasize to any possible location, 
propagate tumor thrombus thr ough the inferior vena cava into the heart, and due to the 
hypervascularity of the tumor is  susceptible to tumo r hemorrhage, causing additional morbidity 
and extended hospitalizations for management.  Several distinct  subtypes of RCC have been 
identified, including: clear cell cancer, compri sing the majority of tumors and papillary, 
chromophobe collecting duct and unc lassified tumors representi ng 15-25% of all tumors.  
 1.1.1 Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma 
Clear cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCC) represent 75-85% of all RCC.  They typically arise 
from the proximal renal tubule. Ma croscopically, they may be solid  or less commonly, cystic. In 
addition to occurring sporadically, ccRCC is specifically associated  with von Hippel-Lindau 
(VHL) disease (a tumor suppressor gene). Both  sporadic and VHL associated RCC typically 
have a deletion in 3p the site of the VHL ge ne [4] which leads to upregulation of hypoxia-
inducible factor (HIF), even in the absen ce of hypoxia and promotes VEGF related tumor 
angiogenesis. A poor prognosis is associated with higher nuclear grade or the presence of a 
sarcomatoid pattern.[5]  1.1.2 Non Clear Cell  
Papillary RCC accounts for approx imately 15% of all kidney cancer s, and these can be divided 
into type 1 and type 2 lesions based upon histopa thologic features. Type 1 and type 2 papillary 
carcinomas differ in both clinical  features and in their underlying genetic abnormalities. As with 
ccRCCs, papillary RCC originates from the proximal tubule, but these tumors are 
morphologically and genetically distinct maligna ncies. Type 1 papillar y RCC typically presents 
with stage I or II disease, and these patients ha ve a relatively favorable prognosis.  Although type 
1 lesions occur in patients with hereditary papillary RCC, the majo rity of these are sporadic. In 
the hereditary form of this disease, activating germline mutations are seen in MET. In nonhereditary forms of the disease, somatic mu tations in MET have been identified in 
approximately 10 to 20 percent of cases [6]. In total, altered M ET status (defined as mutation, 
splice variant, or gene fusion)  or increased chromosome 7 copy number (which encodes MET 
but may also involve other genes) was identified in 81% of type 1 papillary renal-cell carcinoma.  
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 14 of 71 Type 2 papillary RCC is frequently a ssociated with aggressive tumors  that are stage III or IV at 
presentation and are associated with a poor prognos is. These tumors have also been seen in the 
hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer syndrome,  which is caused by germline 
mutation in the gene for fumarate hydratase (FH) . Very few patients had alterations in the MET 
pathway.  Chromophobe carcinomas make up approximately 5% of all RCCs.  Hist ologically, they are 
composed of sheets of cells that  are darker than ccRCC (Thoenes). They lack the abundant lipid 
and glycogen that is characteristic of most RCCs, and originate from the inte rcalated cells of the 
collecting system. Chromophobe ca rcinomas may have a lower ri sk of disease progression and 
death compared with ccRCC which likely relates to  both their presentation at earlier stage and 
overall slower growth rate.   1.2 Renal Cancer Therapy First-line treatment for clear cell RCC typically involves vascul ar endothelial growth factor 
receptor (VEGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI s) sunitinib or pazopanib. Additional agents for 
second-line therapy have included alternative VEGFR TKIs (e.g. axitinib ) the mTOR inhibitor 
everolimus. as well as agents ac tive against multiple tyrosine ki nases. Recently both nivolumab 
an anti- programmed death-1 (PD1) based immu notherapy (see below) and cabozantinib a TKI 
targeting both VEGFR and Met, have shown overa ll survival (OS) benefits relative to mTOR 
inhibition in patients with prior VEGRF TKI therapy resulting in their FDA approval. 
 1.3 Nivolumab +/- Ipilimumab Summary Nivolumab (also referred to as BMS-936558 or  MDX1106) is a human monoclonal antibody 
(HuMAb; immunoglobulin G4 [IgG4]-S228P) that  targets the program med death-1 (PD-1) 
cluster of differentiation 279 (CD279) cell surf ace membrane receptor. PD-1 is a negative 
regulatory molecule expressed by activated T and B lymphocytes [7]. Binding of PD-1 to its 
ligands, programmed death–ligands 1 (PD-L1) and 2 (PD-L2), results in the down-regulation of 
lymphocyte activation. Inhibition of the interaction between PD -1 and its ligands promotes 
immune responses and antigen-specific T-cell respons es to both foreign antigens as well as self-
antigens. Nivolumab is expresse d in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)  cells and is produced using 
standard mammalian cell cultiva tion and chromatographic purificat ion technologies. The clinical 
study product is a sterile solu tion for parenteral administra tion.  OPDIVO (nivolumab) is 
approved for use in multiple coun tries including the United States  (US, Dec-2014), the European 
Union (EU, Jun-2015), and Japan (Jul-2014).  1.3.1 Non-Clinical Studies  Nivolumab has been shown to bind specifically to  the human PD-1 receptor and not to related 
members of the CD28 family [8, 9]. Nivolumab inhibits the interac tion of PD-1 with its ligands, 
PD-L1 and PD-L2, resulting in enhanced T-ce ll proliferation and in terferon-gamma (IFN- γ) 
release in vitro [9-11]. Nivolumab binds with high  affinity to activated human T-cells expressing 
cell surface PD-1 and to cynomol gus monkey PD-1.  In a mixe d lymphocyte reaction (MLR), 
nivolumab promoted a reproducible concen tration-dependent enhancement of IFN- γ release [12] 
In intravenous (IV) repeat-dose toxicology studie s in cynomolgus monkeys, nivolumab was well 
tolerated at doses up to 50 mg/ kg, administered weekly for 5 week s, and at doses up to 50 mg/kg, 
administered twice weekly for 27 doses. Wh ile nivolumab alone wa s well tolerated in 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 15 of 71 cynomolgus monkeys, combination st udies have highlighted the pot ential for enhanced toxicity 
when combined with other immunostimulatory ag ents [13]. In addition, an enhanced pre- and 
postnatal development (ePPND) study in pregna nt cynomolgus monkeys with nivolumab was 
conducted [14]. Administration of nivolumab at up to 50 mg/kg 2QW was well tolerated by 
pregnant monkeys; however, nivolu mab was determined to be a selective developmental toxicant 
when administered from the peri od of organogenesis to parturiti on at > 10 mg/kg). Specifically, 
increased developmental mortality (including late gestational fetal losses and extreme 
prematurity with associated ne onatal mortality) was noted in the absence of overt maternal 
toxicity. There were no nivolumab -related changes in surviving infants tested throughout the 6-
month postnatal period. Although the cause of these pregnanc y failures was undetermined, 
nivolumab-related effects on pregna ncy maintenance are consistent with the established role of 
PD-L1 in maintaining fetomate rnal tolerance in mice [15]. 
 1.3.2 Effects in Humans The PK, clinical activity, and safe ty of nivolumab have been asse ssed in subjects with non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC),  melanoma, and ccRCC in addition to  other tumor types. Nivolumab 
is being investigated both as monotherapy and in combination with chemotherapy, targeted 
therapies, and other immunotherapi es. Nivolumab is approved in mu ltiple countries including the 
US for treatment of previously treated, unresec table or metastatic melanoma and previously 
treated, metastatic squamous NSCLC, the EU for treatment of previously treated, unresectable or 
metastatic melanoma, an d Japan for treatment of  unresectable melanoma. 
 1.3.2.1  Clinical Pharmacokinetics The pharmacokinetics (PK) of ni volumab was studied in subjects over a dose range of 0.1 to 10 
mg/kg administered as a single dos e or as multiple doses of nivol umab every 2 or 3 weeks. The 
geometric mean (% CV%) clearance (CL) was 9.5 mL/h (49.7 %), geometric mean volume of 
distribution at steady state (Vss)  was 8.0 L (30.4%), and geometri c mean elimination half-life 
(t1/2) was 26.7 days (101%). Steady-state con centrations of nivolum ab were reached by 12 
weeks when administered at 3 mg/kg Q2W, and systemic accumulation was approximately 3-fold. The exposure to nivolumab increased dose proportionally over the dose range of 0.1 to 10 
mg/kg administered every 2 weeks. The cleara nce of nivolumab increas ed with increasing body 
weight. A PK analysis suggested that the following factors had no clinically important effect on 
the CL of nivolumab: age (29 to 87 years), gende r, race, baseline LDH, PD-L1. A PK analysis 
suggested no difference in CL of nivolumab ba sed on age, gender, race, tumor type, baseline 
tumor size, and hepatic impairme nt. Although ECOG status, baseline  glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR), albumin, body weight, and mild hepatic im pairment had an effect  on nivolumab CL, the 
effect was not clinically meaningful. When ni volumab is administered  in combination with 
ipilimumab, the CL of nivolumab  was increased by 24%, whereas  there was no effect on the 
clearance of ipilimumab. Additiona lly, PK and exposure response analyses have been performed 
to support use of 240 mg Q2W dosing as a subst itute for the previously studied 3 mg/kg Q2W 
regimen. Using a PK model, exposure of nivoluma b at 240 mg flat dose was identical to a dose 
of 3 mg/kg for subjects weighing 80 kg, whic h was the approximate median body weight in 
nivolumab clinical trials. The 240 mg q 2 week flat dose of ni volumab monotherapy has recently 
received FDA approval.  
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 16 of 71 1.3.2.2 Clinical Efficacy 
Nivolumab has demonstrated durable responses  exceeding 6 months as monotherapy and in 
combination with ipilimumab in several tumo r types, including NSCLC, melanoma, RCC, and 
some lymphomas. In confirmatory trials, nivolumab as monotherapy demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in OS as compared with the current standa rd of care in subjects with 
advanced or metastatic NSCLC and in subjects  with unresectable or metastatic melanoma. 
Nivolumab in combination with ipilimumab improved PFS and ORR over ipilimumab alone in 
subjects with unresectable or metastatic melanoma.   1.3.2.3 Clinical Safety The overall safety experience wi th nivolumab, as a monotherapy or  in combination with other 
therapeutics, is based on experience in appr oximately 8,600 subjects tr eated to date. For 
monotherapy, the safety profile is similar ac ross tumor types. There is no pattern in the 
incidence, severity, or causality of AEs to nivol umab dose level. In Phase 3 controlled studies, 
the safety profile of nivolumab monotherapy is acceptable in the context of the observed clinical 
efficacy, and manageable using esta blished safety guidelines. Clinic ally relevant AEs typical of 
stimulation of the immune system were infrequent and manageable by delaying or stopping nivolumab treatment and timely immunosuppressive therapy or othe r supportive care.  In several 
ongoing clinical trials, the safety of nivolumab in combinatio n with other therapeutics such as 
ipilimumab, cytotoxic chemotherapy, anti-angiogenic s, and targeted therapies is being explored. 
Most studies are ongoing and, as such, the safety profile of nivolumab comb inations continues to 
evolve. The most advanced combination under development is nivolumab + ipilimumab in 
subjects with unresectable or meta static melanoma. Results to date suggest that the safety profile 
of nivolumab + ipilimumab combination therapy is consistent with the mechanisms of action of 
nivolumab and ipilimumab. Th e nature of the AEs is similar to  that observed with either agent 
used as monotherapy; however, both frequency and severity of most AEs are increased with the 
combination.  1.4 Nivolumab in RCC A first-in-human Phase I study of nivolumab was pe rformed in patients with  treatment refractory 
solid tumors [16]. Nivolumab was administered as a single dose ranging from 0.3 to 10mg/kg 
and objective responses were not ed including in a patient with  RCC and there were no dose 
limiting toxicities observed within 4 weeks of th e initial dose. The serum half-life of nivolumab 
ranged from 12 to 20 days. A multi-dose Phas e I dose escalation trial extended the above 
findings in 296 patients with advanced solid tumors given nivolumab at doses from 0.1 to 10 
mg/kg every 2 weeks for up to 2 years [17].  Ob jective tumor responses were noted in 9 of 33 
patients with RCC. Common treatmen t related side effects were fa tigue, anorexia, nausea, rash, 
and diarrhea. Grade 3 or 4 toxic ities were reported in 14% of patients and evident at all dose 
levels without obvious dose dependency but onl y 15 patients (5%) discon tinued treatment for 
toxicity reasons. Immune related adverse events  of special interest were observed including 
pneumonitis, colitis, hepatitis, hypophys itis and thyroiditis but were reversible. Extended follow 
up of patients on this study showed a median  response duration of 12.9 months and median 
overall survival in this heav ily pretreated population was 22.4 m onths [18]. Three of 5 patients 
who stopped treatment while res ponding continued to respond fo r at least 45 weeks. Among 168 
RCC patients randomized in blinded fashion to nivolumab dosed at 0.3, 2 and 10mg/kg, there 
was no observable dose-response relationship with objective responses in 20-22% of patients and 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 17 of 71 median survival ranging from 18.2 to 25.5 months [19]. In the Ch eckmate 025 Phase III trial, 
821 patients with advanced RCC with a clear ce ll component who had received previous 
antiangiogenic therapy, were rando mly assigned to receive 3 mg/ kg of nivolumab every 2 weeks 
or everolimus [19, 20]. The prim ary outcome, overall survival was significantly improved for 
nivolumab (median 25.0 versus 19.6 months) with HR 0.73 (98.5% CI, 0.57 to 0.93; P=0.002).  
The objective response rate was higher with ni volumab (25% vs. 5%; P< 0.001) but the median 
progression-free survival was simi lar at 4.6 months versus 4.4 m onths. Grade 3 or 4 treatment-
related adverse events were lower at 19% for ni volumab versus 37% for everolimus. Quality of 
life improved significantly more in the nivolumab  group over 2 years relative to the everolimus 
group. These results led to the ap proval of nivolumab as second line therapy for patients with 
advanced RCC in the US. The absence of improv ement in PFS with nivolumab suggested that 
many patients did not have bene fit from nivolumab, highlighting the importance of predictive 
biomarker research.   In a biomarker-based trial of  91 patients with advanced RCC, 67 pretreated patients were 
randomized to receive 0.3, 2 or 10mg/kg of ni volumab every 3 weeks and 24 treatment-naïve 
patients received the 10mg/kg dose [21]. The primary objective was to study the 
immunomodulatory activity of nivolumab on tu mor biopsies and serum chemokines. Among 56 
evaluable specimens, 18 (32%) were PD-L1 positive defined as > 5% tumor cells with any tumor 
membrane staining by the Dako assay. Four of 18 (22%) of PD-L1(+) and 3/38 (8%) PD-L1(-) patients had objective responses a nd the overall response rate in th e entire cohort was 16% with 
expected grade 3 immune related adverse events in 15%.  1.5 Nivolumab + Ipilimumab in RCC The combination of nivolumab and ipilimumab has been extensively tested in patients with 
metastatic melanoma and found to have superior clinical outc omes to ipilumumab and likely 
nivolumab alone but at the cost of a higher frequency of serious  adverse events [22, 23]. In a 
Phase I trial (CheckMate 016) patients with  advanced RCC were ra ndomized to receive 
nivolumab 3 mg/kg plus ipilimuma b 1 mg/kg (N3 + I1, 47 patients ) or nivolumab 1 mg/kg plus 
ipilimumab 3 mg/kg (N1 + I3, 47 pa tients) intravenously every 3 weeks for 4 doses followed by 
nivolumab every 2 weeks [24]. An exploratory nivolumab 3 mg/kg plus ipilimumab 3 mg/kg arm 
(N3 + I3) showed unacceptable ear ly toxicity after 6 patients  and did not proceed to the 
expansion phase. Approximately half the patie nts were previously tr eated. Treatment-related 
toxicities were seen in 88% of patients and 16% discontinue d therapy for toxicity reasons. 
Serious Grade 3 or 4 treatment-rel ated adverse events occurred in 34% and 64% of patients in 
N3 + I1 and N1 + I3, respectively, most commonly  manifest as elevated lipase or amylase, 
elevated liver function tests, di arrhea and colitis. After a medi an 8 months of follow up, the 
objective response rate was 38% and 43% and me dian progression free survival was 30.3 and 36 
weeks respectively in N3 + I1 and N1 + I3 arms. Among responders, th e median duration of 
response was 67.7 weeks (range 4.1+ to 91.1+) in the N3 + I1 arm and 81.1 weeks (range 6.1+ to 
81.1+) in the N1 + I3 arm. Overal l both treatment arms appeared to confer similar anti-tumor 
activity but the N1 + I3 arm was associated with  higher gastrointestinal and hepatic toxicities. 
The promising activity and tolerabi lity of the N3 + I1 schedule  has led to an ongoing randomized 
Phase III registrational trial comparing this combination to sunitinib monotherapy in the 
approved schedule, in patients with advanced cl ear cell RCC.  This trial reached its accrual goal 
of 1070 patients in the fall of 2015. The co-prima ry endpoints are progression free and overall 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 18 of 71 survival.  Trial results were reported in 2017 and published in 2018 [25] . The combination of 
nivolumab with ipilimumab im proved PFS, ORR and OS over sunitnib in patients with 
intermediate and poor risk tr eatment naïve RCC and was FDA a pproved in April of 2018 for 
these patients.  The nivo/ipi combination also prolonged OS relative to sunitinib when the good 
risk group was included in the analysis.  The tr eatment was reasonably we ll tolerated with only a 
3rd of patients having grade 3 IrAes and Quality of  Life analyses showed the combination to be 
superior to sunitinib [25].   1.6 Biomarkers for Response and Resistance to Anti-PD1 Based Immunotherapy Several prognostic clinical factor s and models (e.g. MSKCC, Heng) have been developed to risk 
stratify survival outco mes for patients with advanced RCC.  However, predictive biomarker 
development is critical to identify patient subgr oups who are likely to ex perience frequent and/or 
durable responses to particular th erapies. The importance of this unmet need is heightened by the 
expense, prolonged duration of e xposure to, or toxicities of curre nt therapeutic agents. Tumor 
associated PD-L1 expression has been proposed as  a potential biomarker fo r sensitivity to PD-1 
pathway inhibitors in other tumors.   In the phase I trial of nivolumab in patients with  advanced solid tumors, 9 of 25 patients with 
PD-L1 positive tumors responded co mpared with 0 of 17 patients with PD-L1 negative tumors 
(p=0.006); only 5 of these patients had mRCC.[ 17] In the Checkmate 025 registration Phase III 
trial of nivolumab versus everolimus,  tumor PD-L1 membrane expression ( ≥1% vs. <1% and 
≥5% vs. <5%) was evaluated centr ally using the Dako PD-L1 imm unohistochemical stain [20]. 
Among 756 patients with quantifiable PD-L 1 expression, 181 (24%) had > 1% PD-L1 
expression in at least 100 tumor cells. However, the benefit of nivolumab relative to everolimus 
on overall survival did not differ in these two PDL1 defined subgroups at either this cutoff or 
when a 5% cut off was used. Interestingly, patien ts bearing PD-L1 positiv e tumors appeared to 
have shorter overall survival on either treatment relative to those with PD-L1 negative tumors, 
consistent with previous reports of PD-L1 e xpression being a marker of poor prognosis.  The 
lack of predictive value for PD-L1 expression in  RCC diverges from data for nivolumab in lung 
cancer and melanoma. However, it should be noted that those data primarily focused on ORR 
rather than overall survival a nd ORR data for the Checkmate 025 st udy has yet to be reported.  In 
the aforementioned Phase I study of atezolizum ab in RCC, there was no suggestion of a 
correlation between tumor cell PD-L1 status a nd antitumor activity. Ho wever immune cell PD-
L1 expression measured using a diagnostic  Spring Biosciences PD-L1 antibody SP142, 
suggested a trend towards improved ORR, P FS and OS with > 1% immune cell PD-L1 
expression which was observed in 63 % of the informative patients.  
 These data highlight the limitations of using PD-L 1 expression to select patients for PD-1 axis 
targeting antibodies. The assays for PD-L1 expressi on are difficult to standardize, use distinct 
proprietary antibodies that have not been compared with each ot her, use different cutoff points 
and measure expression on di fferent cells within the tumor micr oenvironment (tumor cells or an 
aggregate reading of a variety of  immune cells). Furt hermore, PD-L1 is an  inducible molecule 
and tumors are frequently hete rogeneous, affecting assay reproduc ibility especially at the low 
end of the range. Discordance between primary tumor and metastases for PD-L1 positivity in 
both directions was observed in kidney cancer in 11 of 53 cases (20.8%) using a validated anti-
PD-L1 antibody (405.9A11) and formally quantified membranous expression in  tumor cells [26].  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 19 of 71 The predictive utility of PD-L1 expression is li kely to be more challenging in combination 
regimens. Lastly, while PD-L1 pos itivity is associated  with poorer survival  in non-clear cell 
RCC, its predictive value for immunotherapy is unknown [27].  
 At this time therefore, PD-L1 a ssay results are inadequate to be  used to select or otherwise 
manage patients with advanced  RCC receiving PD-1 targeting agents. Continued prospective 
biomarker validation studies, part icularly looking at factors such  as CD8 cell infiltrate and IFN-
related gene expression signature s alone or in combination with  PD-L1 expression which have 
shown more predictive power in other tumo r sets, are clearly necessary in RCC.  
 1.7 Rationale for the Current Trial Agents that target the VEGF and mTOR path ways significantly prolong progression free and 
likely overall survival for patien ts with metastatic ccRCC, but re sistance invariably develops, 
often within the first year [28]. The clinical experience with high dose (HD) IL-2 has provided 
proof of principle that immunot herapy can produce durable respons es in a small percentage of 
patients with ccRCC and obviate the need for subse quent therapy [29]. Howe ver, its toxicity and 
limited efficacy has severely na rrowed its application. Agents that induce a high proportion of 
durable tumor responses with accep table toxicity remain a critic al unmet need for RCC patients. 
Tumor-induced immune suppression may e xplain why immunotherapies often fail to 
demonstrate clinical activity. The programmed death-1 (PD-1) pathway is one of the most 
critical mediators of tumor-induced immune  suppression [30]. Many human solid tumors, 
including cc and non-ccRCC, express PD-L1, one of  the ligands for PD-1, as a consequence of 
oncogene expression or as an adapti ve response to exposure from IFN- γ produced by cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes [31]. PD-1 engageme nt by its ligands (PD-L1, PD-L2)  inhibits T-cell proliferation, 
cytokine production, cytolytic function and surviv al [32]. Tumor-infiltra ting lymphocytes (TIL) 
from patients typically express PD-1 and subseq uently have impaired anti-tumor functionality 
[33, 34]. PD-L1 expression on renal tumors porte nds worse prognosis high lighting the clinical 
impact of this interaction [35].  Ongoing clinical trials evaluati ng PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies have de monstrated promising clinical 
efficacy with durable benefit in a subset of  ccRCC patients who have progressed after prior 
therapy [17, 36-38]. Preliminary co rrelative studies have demonstr ated that while tumor PD-L1 
expression may increase the likelihood of benefit with PD-1 blockade, it  fails to identify all 
responders. [17, 37, 39, 40]. Given the robust antitumor activity of VEGF pathway inhibitors, the application of single agent PD-1 blockade in  the treatment naïve setting will require the 
development of biomarkers with greater positiv e predictive value. Combination approaches are 
actively being investigated (e.g. combined inhibition of both CTLA -4 and PD-1 and need to be 
rationally designed and impl emented, given their additive toxic ity and cost. In particular, tumors 
may escape PD-1 or PD-L1 blockade due to subo ptimal T-cell activation, and CTLA-4 blockade 
could potentially overcome this escape mechanis m [41]. Prior to PD-1 or PD-L1 blockade, 
CTLA-4 blockade could facilitate naïve T- cell activation and boost tumor reactive T-cells, 
producing interferon and resulting in upregul ation of PD-L1 expression in the tumor 
microenvironment [42]. When us ed after PD-1 or PD-L1 bloc kade, CTLA-4 blockade could 
deplete T-regulatory cells that impair CD8-positive T-cell function [43]. Further work is needed 
to investigate the hypothesis that  patients who do not respond to PD-1 or PD-L1 blockade may 
be salvaged by the addition of CTLA-4 blockade. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 20 of 71 To optimize the therapeutic potent ial of single agent, PD-1 bloc kade in patients with kidney 
cancer, we propose a translational clinical trial that integrates clinic opathologic assessment, 
genomics and immunology to gain clearer mechanistic understandi ng of the effects of PD-1 
blockade.   Our goals are to address several critical unanswered questions incl uding: 1) How active is PD-1 
blockade in treatment naïve ki dney cancer? 2) What factors, in addition to PD-L1 expression, 
can reliably predict durable res ponse? 3) Do gene expression  signatures which are likely 
capturing the presence, magnitude, and activity of adaptive immune  infiltrates reliably predict 
durable response 4) Is there a threshold for PD-L 1 expression in either the tumor or immune cell 
infiltrate that accurately predic ts durable response? 5) Is PD-L1 expression uniform and stable in 
an individual tumor and between  a primary tumor and its me tastases? 6) What are the 
mechanisms of innate resistance to PD-1 pathway blockade?  7)  Can the addition of ipilimumab 
overcome resistance and/or enha nce response it patients with prolonged stable disease?  
 Both the PD-1 blocking antibody nivolumab and PD -L1 blocking antibody atezolizumab are well 
tolerated and have shown efficacy  in mRCC as monotherapy [34]. Nivolumab is a high affinity 
humanized monoclonal IgG4 antibo dy directed against human PD- 1. It blocks its interaction 
with its ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2.  It has shown encouraging efficacy in patients with 
melanoma and lung cancer [44, 45] and is curr ently FDA approved for patients with VEGFR 
TKI resistant RCC.   The application of PD-1 pa thway blockade in the treatment naïve setting 
may yield even better results and delay the need  for subsequent lines of  therapy in selected 
patients.  Patients with melanoma who were prev iously untreated had greater response rates to 
nivolumab than ipilimumab-treated patients (40%  vs 28% respectively).  While combination 
therapies will likely play a large role in the future  for many patients, there is  a distinct subset of 
patients with RCC that will likely benefit with dura ble responses and increased PFS rate at 1 year 
to single immune checkpoint blockade [24, 37, 38, 46]. This hypothesis will be explored in Part 
A. The ability of the addition of ipilimumab to overcome resistance or improve response in 
patients following nivolumab will  be explored in Part B.  
 Approximately 20% of all patients with kidney cancer have ncc RCC. A recent analysis of tumor 
specimens revealed that while nccRCC expresses less PD-L1 on average, a substantial portion of 
nccRCC tumors express >5% PD-L1 on their surface , including: 43% of translocation-positive 
(3/7), 50% of oncocytoma (2/4), and 10% of papi llary RCC (5/50) [47]. In the Phase 1 trial of 
atezolizumab, 1/7 non-clear cell m RCC patients had a partial respons e to therapy [37]. Given the 
current lack of effective ther apies for sarcomatoid and non-cl ear cell kidney cancer and the 
preliminary evidence of clinical activity, the explor ation of PD-1 blockade seems rational in this 
substantial group of patients.      
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 21 of 71 2. STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS 
 2.1 Objectives 
 2.1.1 Primary Objective 
Determine the PFS rate at 1 year  of nivolumab in patients with  treatment naïve ccRCC based on 
tumor PD-L1 expression.  
 2.1.2 Secondary Objectives 
 Determine the PFS rate at 1 year- by both RECIST and irRECIST of nivolumab in 
patients with treatment naïve ccRCC base d on the PD1- Blockade Durable Response 
Predictive (PRP) biomarker model devel oped in the DFHCC Ki dney Cancer SPORE 
 Determine the objective response rate (CR/PR=ORR), the ORR based on PDL1 
expression and the PRP model, and duration of  response for nivolumab in patients with 
treatment naïve ccRCC 
 Determine the response rate of combined ni volumab and ipilimumab therapy at the time 
of nivolumab failure (or l ack of response at 1 year) 
 Determine the clinical activity (CR, PR a nd SD) and PFS at 1 year of nivolumab in 
patients with treatment naive nccRCC 
 Assess the toxicity of nivol umab monotherapy in patients with treatment naïve cc or 
nccRCC 
 2.1.3 Correlative/Exploratory Objectives 
 Explore novel potential predictive biomarkers for patien ts with treatment naïve ccRCC 
and nccRCC 
 Explore the mechanisms of innate and acquired resistan ce to nivolumab therapy in 
treatment naïve patients with ccRCC 
 Identify biomarkers associated with res ponse to nivolumab + ipilimumab in patients 
whose disease has not responded or pr ogressed on nivolumab monotherapy 
 
2.2 Endpoints 
 2.2.1 Primary Endpoint 
 PFS is defined as the time from Day 1 of treatment until the criteria for disease 
progression is met as defined by RECIST 1.1 or death as a result of any cause.  
 The primary focus of this trial will be in the evaluation of PD-L1 expression levels to 
predict outcome. We expect that about 45% (o r 54 expected) patients will have 0% PD-
L1 and roughly 15% (or 18 expected) patien ts will express PD-L1 > 20%, which, given 
the sample size of 120 ccRCC patients provide s 90% power using a 0.05 level two-sided 
test to test the hypothesis th at PD-L1 >20% will be asso ciated with significantly 
improved 1-year PFS rate for patients treated w ith PD-1 blockade (55% vs 13% taken as 
a binomial quantity).  
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 22 of 71 2.2.2 Secondary Endpoints 
 Apply the PRP model, developed in the DF/HCC Kidney SPORE Project 4, to assign 
each patient a probability of having PFS > 1 year. 
 The endpoint for Part B (addition of ipilimuma b) will be objective response (CR or PR) 
taking as baseline tumor measurements at the patient’s start of Part B. 
 An expected cohort of 40 nccRCC patients will  be enrolled in the trial and analyzed 
separately for evidence of anti-tumor activ ity, principally focusing on objective response 
rate (CR or PR). 
 Toxicity by CTCAE criteria of  nivolumab monotherapy in tr eatment naïve patients with 
cc and nccRCC.  
 2.2.3 Correlative Endpoint 
 Additional correlative studies will be perform ed in order to iden tify predictors of 
response and resistance.  
 
3. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
 3.1 Inclusion Criteria-Part A 
Subject must meet all of the follo wing applicable inclusion criteria  to participate in this study: 
 1. Patients must have histologically confirmed advanced RCC (any histology).  Collecting duct 
tumors and tumors originating from the renal pe lvis or upper urinary tr act are considered of 
urothelial origin and are excl uded from this protocol.   
 
2. Patients must have at least one measurable site of disease, per RECIST 1.1, that has not been 
previously irradiated. If the patient has had pr evious radiation to the marker lesion(s), there 
must be evidence of prog ression since the radiation. 
 
3. Archival tissue of a metastat ic lesion obtained within 1 y ear prior to study registration 
(within 4 weeks preferred) and tu mor tissue from nephrectomy is required if available.  In 
addition to archival tissue of a metastatic lesion and nephrectomy, patients must have at least 
one site of disease (not incl uding bone metastases) accessible for biopsy.  If biopsy/resection 
of a new lesion or primary tumo r and slow freezing of fresh ti ssue for single cell RNAseq 
study (as specified in the CLM) is  not feasible, the subject is not eligible for the study. All 
biopsies must be core needle or excisional. Fine needle aspirate is not acceptable. NOTE:  
The tissue collected from a surgical resection or multiple core biopsies of either a metastatic lesion or primary tumor for the slow freezing of fresh tissue after the patient has signed 
consent for the study could also be us ed for collecting the FFPE specimens. 
 
4. ECOG performance status 0-2. 
 
5. Age 
≥ 18 years. 
 
6. Have signed the current appr oved informed consent form. 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 23 of 71 7. Patients must have adequate organ function with in 14 days prior to study entry as evidenced 
by screening laboratory values that must meet the following criteria:  
 
System Laboratory Value 
Hematological  
White blood cell (WBC) ≥ 2000/µL  
Absolute Neutrophil Count (ANC) ≥ 1500/μL 
Platelets (Plt) ≥ 100 x103/μL 
Hemoglobin (Hgb) > 9.0 g/dL (with or without transfusion)  
Renal  
Serum Creatinine OR ≤ 1.5 x ULN; if creatinine > 1.5, subject 
must demonstrate CrCl outlined below. 
Calculated or measured creatinine clearance1 ≥ 40 mL/min using Cockcroft-Gault formula  
Hepatic  
Bilirubin2 ≤ 1.5× upper limit of normal (ULN)  
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)  ≤ 3 × ULN  
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)  ≤ 3 × ULN  
1: Female CrCl = (140 - age in years) x weight in kg x 0.85 
                           72 x serum creatinine in mg/dL Male CrCl = (140 - age in years) x weight in kg x 1.00  
                            72 x serum creatinine in mg/dL 
2: Except subjects with Gilbert Syndrome, who can have total bilirubin < 3.0 mg/dL
 
 
8. Patients should not have received prior sy stemic therapy for metastatic RCC. Prior 
radiotherapy must have been completed at l east 2 weeks prior to th e administration of study 
drug.  Patients must be 2 w eeks from prior major surgery a nd 1 week from pre-treatment 
biopsy.  Prior systemic adjuva nt therapy (excluding with PD 1 or CTLA4 pathway blockers) 
is allowed if treatment comple ted > 12 months previously.  
 9. Women of childbearing poten tial (WOCBP) must use a ppropriate method(s) of 
contraception. WOCBP should use an adequate  method to avoid pregnancy for 5 months 
after the last dose of study drug. NOTE:  Contraception is not requi red for male participants. 
 10. Women of childbearing potential  must have a negative seru m or urine pregnancy test 
(minimum sensitivity 25 IU/L or  equivalent units of HCG) dur ing screening for registration 
purposes. This pregnancy test should be repe ated within 24 hours pr ior to the start of 
nivolumab. NOTE:  “Women of childbearing potential” is defined as any female who has 
experienced menarche and who has not undergon e surgical steriliza tion (hysterectomy or 
bilateral oophorectomy) or who is  not postmenopausal. Menopause is defined clinically as 12 
months of amenorrhea in a woman over 45 in the absence of other biological or physiological 
causes. In addition, women under the age of 55  must have a documented serum follicle 
stimulating hormone (FSH) level less than 40 mIU/ml. 
 11. Women must not be breastfeeding.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 24 of 71 12. Be willing and able to comply with this protocol. 
 3.2 Exclusion Criteria 1. Patients are excluded if they have active br ain metastases or lept omeningeal metastases. 
Subjects with brain metastases are eligible if metastases have been treated and there is no 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evidence of  progression for at least 2 weeks after 
treatment is complete and within 28 days prio r to the first dose of nivolumab administration. 
There must also be no requireme nt for immunosuppressive doses of systemic co rticosteroids 
(> 10 mg/day prednisone equivalents) for at least 2 weeks prior to study drug administration. 
 2. Patients with controlled brain me tastases are allowed on protocol if they had brain metastases 
that were surgically resected without recurren ce and/or up to 3 metast ases treated with SRS 
without progression on MRI obtained at least 2 weeks after completi on of radiation and 
within 28 days prior to in itiation of nivolumab.    
 3. Patients should be excluded if they have an  active, known or suspected  autoimmune disease. 
Subjects are permitted to enroll if they have  vitiligo, type I diabet es mellitus, residual 
hypothyroidism due to autoimmune  condition only requiring hor mone replacement, psoriasis 
not requiring systemic treatment , or conditions not expected to  recur in the absence of an 
external trigger 
 4. Patients should be excluded if they have a c ondition requiring systemic treatment with either 
corticosteroids (> 10 mg daily prednisone equivalents) or othe r immunosuppressive 
medications within 14 days of study drug admi nistration. Inhaled or topical steroids and 
adrenal replacement doses > 10 mg daily prednis one equivalents are permitted in the absence 
of active autoimmune disease. 
 5. As there is potential for hepatic toxic ity with nivolumab or nivolumab/ipilimumab 
combinations, drugs with a predisposition to he patoxicity should be us ed with caution in 
patients treated with nivo lumab-containing regimen. 
 6. Active infection requiri ng systemic therapy  
 7. Has any other medical or personal condition that, in the opinion of the site investigator, may 
potentially compromise the safety or compliance of the patient, or may preclude the patient’s 
successful completion of the clinical trial.  
 8. Patients should be excluded if they are posi tive test for hepatitis B virus surface antigen 
(HBV sAg) or hepatitis C viru s ribonucleic acid (HCV antibody)  indicating acute or chronic 
infection 
9. Patients should be excluded if they have  known history of testing positive for human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or known ac quired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) 
 10. Allergies and Adverse Drug Reaction 
 History of allergy to  study drug components 
 History of severe hypersensitivity reaction to any monoclonal antibody 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 25 of 71 11. Known additional malignancies within the past 3 years (exc luding basal of squamous cell 
skin cancers, CIS or localized prostate cancer that has been treated or is being observed) 
 12. Prior solid organ or stem cell transplant 
 
3.3 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria- Part B 1. Must meet eligibility criteria for initiation of  Part A with the exception of being allowed to 
have prior nivolumab in Pa rt A of this protocol. 
 2. Must have evidence of either RECIST 1.1 de fined Disease Progression or Stable Disease 1 
year after initiating nivolumab therapy 
 3. Tumor biopsy prior to combination treatment is mandatory. If a biops y/resection of a new 
lesion or primary tumor and sl ow freezing of fresh tissue fo r single cell RNAseq study (as 
specified in the CLM) is not f easible, the subject is  not eligible for th e study. All biopsies 
must be core needle or excisional. Fi ne needle aspirate is not acceptable. 
 4. Must not have had a Grade ≥ 3 irAE on nivolumab monothe rapy (excluding endocrine 
toxicity managed with replacement therapy). 
 5. Must not have untreat ed brain metastases. 
 6 Must not have had major surgery or radia tion therapy within 14 days of starting study 
treatment. 
 
7. Must not have active autoimmune disease (see protocol for exceptions). 
 8.  Must not have a concurrent medical condi tion requiring use of syst emic corticosteroids 
with prednisone >10 mg per day. 
 9. Must not have had prior systemic thera py for Stage IV RCC (except for nivolumab as 
part of part A of this protocol).  
  
4. SUBJECT REGISTRATION 
All subjects must be registered  through HCRN’s electronic data capture (EDC) system. A subject 
is considered registered when an “On St udy” date is entered into the EDC system. 
 Subjects must be registered  prior to starting protocol  therapy and begin therapy within  5 
business days  of registration.  
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 26 of 71 5. TREATMENT PLAN 
We will conduct a prospective Phase II trial of ni volumab in 134 treatment naïve patients with 
ccRCC. Eligible patients with bi opsiable (biopsied) disease will receive nivolumab 240 mg IV 
every 2 weeks x 6 doses (2 cycles) then nivolum ab every 3 weeks at a dose of 360 mg IV for 4 
doses (2 cycles) followed by nivolumab 480 mg  IV every 4 weeks. Tumor response will be 
assessed at weeks 12, 18 and 24 and then every 12 weeks.  For patients who experience RECIST 
1.1 defined PD, but remain clinically stable (and  asymptomatic), a confir matory scan after 4-6 
weeks of additional therapy is suggested. Patients w ith persistent PD at confirmatory scan will be 
evaluated for enrollment on Part B of this study. Symptomatic patients may be evaluated for Part 
B immediately.  Patients without confirmed PD can continue on nivolumab therapy.   
 Patients who experience symptomatic or confir med PD (or have best response of SD at 48 
weeks/end of Cycle 6) on nivolumab monotherapy will be eligible for consideration for Part B. 
Part B involves the addition of ipilimumab fo r up to 4 doses while maintaining nivolumab 
therapy. Dose of ipilimumab will be 1 mg/kg every 3 weeks togeth er with nivolumab changed to 
3 mg/kg every 3 weeks for up to 4 doses  (must complete by week 16 of Part B). Nivolumab will 
revert to 360 mg every 3 weeks after the completi on of treatment with ipi limumab for 4 doses (2 
cycles)  followed by nivolumab 480 mg IV every 4 week s (must be started between week 13-19).  
Patients will be followed with serial imaging assessm ents weeks 12, 18 and 24 and then every 12 
weeks after the initiation of ipilimumab. The tu mor measurements at th e time of (or within 4 
weeks of) ipilimumab institution wi ll be the new baseline.   
 Patients for Part B must still m eet the eligibility crit eria for initial study enrollment.  Patients 
with Grade 3 toxicity on nivol umab monotherapy, serious symp tomatic disease that in the 
opinion of the site investigator requires immediate use of an alte rnative treatment approach or 
continued PR/CR will be excluded from enrolling in Part B.  It is estima ted that roughly half of 
the patients accrued to the first-line trea tment will go on to enroll in Part B.  
 An additional biopsy will be performed of a metast atic lesion at time of confirmed PD in all 
patients enrolling in Part B. Conf irmation of tumor in the biopsy specimen must occur prior to 
initiation of treatment on Part B.  Subjects unable to undergo a new tumor biopsy and have tissue 
slow frozen for scRNAseq are not eligible for Part B.   An additional cohort of 40 non-ccRCC patients will be enrolled and analyzed separately for 
evidence of anti-tumor activity ( CR, PR and SD and PFS at 1 year of nivolumab). These patients 
will also be eligible for partic ipation in Part B (as described for patients with ccRCC).  We 
anticipate that the accrual of these 40 patients will  be able to be completed within the 1.5 years 
needed for accrual of  the ccRCC patients.  
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 27 of 71 5.1 Part A: Nivolumab  Administration 
Nivolumab will be given every 2 weeks x 6 doses  (2 cycles) at a dose of 240 mg Intravenously  
(IV) then every 3 weeks at a dos e of 360 mg IV for 4 doses (2 cycles) followed by nivolumab 
480 mg IV every 4 weeks until toxi city, disease progression, SD at 48 weeks (end of Cycle 6) or 
complete response with a maximum of 96 total weeks (12 weeks induction, 84 weeks 
maintenance) Patients with dise ase progression (at any time) or SD  at 48 weeks (end of Cycle 6) 
will be eligible to be considered for participation in Part B of the study.   
 Part A  
Drug Dose  Route3  Schedule1 Cycle Length Cycles/Weeks 
Nivolumab 240 mg  IV over 
30 minutes Day 1, 15, and 29 6 weeks  C1 and C2 
Weeks 1-12 
Nivolumab 360 mg  IV over 
30 minutes Day 1 and 22 6 weeks  C3 and C4  
Weeks 13-24 
Nivolumab 480 mg IV over  
30 minutes Day 1, 29 and 57 12 weeks C5-C10 
Weeks 25-96 
1 A window of ± 3 days may be applied to all stud y visits to accommodate obs erved holidays, inclement 
weather, scheduling conflicts etc. Date and time of each drug administration should be clearly documented in 
subject’s chart and electroni c case report forms (eCRFs). 
2 Treatment will continue until toxicity, PD, SD at 48 w eeks (end of Cycle 6) or CR with a maximum of 96 
weeks 
3. Infusion window of ± 10 minutes 
 
5.2 Part B: Nivolumab + Ipilimumab Patients with Grade 3 toxicity on nivolumab monotherapy, (excluding endocrine toxicity), 
serious symptomatic disease that in  the opinion of the site investigator requires immediate use of 
an alternative treatment approach or continued PR /CR will be excluded from enrolling in Part B.  
It is estimated that r oughly half of the patients accrued to th e first line treatm ent will go on to 
enroll in Part B.  Part B treatme nt is encouraged to start within 7 weeks of the last dose of Part A 
study drug, although there is no limit to the interval so long as there is no in tervening systemic 
treatment for the metastatic RCC.  
 Ipilimumab will be given 1 mg/kg every 3 week s together with nivolumab 3 mg/kg every 3 
weeks for up to 4 doses. NOTE:  ipilimumab/nivolumab combination treatment must be 
completed by week 16 even if < 4 doses are administered.  Nivolumab will revert to 360 mg 
every 3 weeks after the completion of combina tion treatment with ipilimumab for 4 doses (2 
cycles) followed by nivolumab 480 mg IV every 4 weeks until toxi city, disease progression or a 
maximum of 60 total weeks (12 weeks induction, 48 weeks maintenance) beginning week 13 to 
19 of Part B depending on how long it takes to  recover from any side  effects related to 
combination therapy. Patients may be dosed no less than 18 days from the previous dose of drug; 
and dosed up to 3 days after the scheduled date, if necessary.  
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 28 of 71 Part B 
Drug1 Dose  Route4  Schedule3 Cycle Length Cycles/Weeks 
Nivolumab 3 mg/kg  IV over 
30 minutes 
Day 1 and 22  6 weeks  C1 and C2 
Weeks 1-12 
Ipilimumab 1mg/kg IV over 
30 minutes 
Nivolumab 360 mg IV over 
30 minutes Day 1 and 22 6 weeks C3 and C4  
Weeks 13-24 
Nivolumab 480 mg  IV over  
30 minutes Day 1, 29 and 57 12 weeks  C5-C7 
Weeks 25-60 
1 When study drugs (ipilimumab and nivolumab) are to be administered on the same day, separate infusion bags 
and filters must be used for each infusion. It is recomme nded that nivolumab be administered first. The second 
infusion will always be ipilimumab, an d will start approximately 30 minutes after completion of the nivolumab 
infusion 
2 The dosing calculations should be based on the body weight where applicable. Institutional standards for 
recalculating the dose based on weight changes should be used. All doses should be rounded up or to the nearest 
milligram per institutional standard. 
3 A window of ± 3 days may be applied to all study vis its to accommodate observed ho lidays, inclement weather, 
scheduling conflicts etc. Date and time of each drug administration should be clearly documented in subject’s 
chart and electronic case report forms (eCRFs). 
4 Infusion window of ± 10 minutes 
 
5.2 Concomitant Medications 
 5.2.1 Allowed Concomitant Medications 
All treatments that the investigator consider s necessary for a subj ect’s welfare may be 
administered at the discretion of the investigator  in keeping with the community standards of 
medical care.  
 5.2.2 Prohibited Concomitant Medications  Concomitant systemic or local an ti-cancer medications or treatme nts are prohibited in this study 
while receiving ipilimumab /nivolumab treatments.  
 Patients may not use any of the fo llowing therapies during the study: 
 Any non-study anti-cancer agent (investigational or  non-investigational) 
 Any other investigational agents 
 Immunosuppressive agents (except as needed to  treat toxicities that  develop on therapy) 
 Physiologic replacement dos es of corticosteroids are permitted if required 
 Any non-oncology vaccine therapies used for the prevention of infecti ous diseases (for up 
to 30 days prior to or af ter any dose of study drug) 
NOTE: Patients are permitted to receive the seasonal influenza vaccine. If seasonal 
influenza vaccine is considered, killed vaccines are mandatory. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 29 of 71 6. TOXICITIES AND DOSE DELAYS 
The NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Advers e Events (CTCAE) v4.03 will be used to 
grade adverse events.   Subjects enrolled in this study will  be evaluated clini cally and with standa rd laboratory tests 
before and at regular interval s during their particip ation in this study as specified in Study 
Calendar & Evaluations.  Subjects will be evaluated for a dverse events (all grades), seri ous adverse events, and adverse 
events requiring study drug interruption or disc ontinuation as specified  in Study Calendar & 
Evaluations.    6.1 Dose Delays/Dose Modifications  
There will be no dose modifications permitted. Dose reductions or dos e escalations are not 
permitted.  6.1.1  Dose Delay Criteria Dose delay criteria apply for all drug-related ad verse events (regardless of whether or not the 
event is attributed to nivolumab, ipilimumab or  both). Study drugs (bot h agents if on induction 
phase of Part B) must be held/omitted until tr eatment can resume.  Please see Appendix A for 
AE management guidelines.  Nivolumab and ipilimumab administration should be omitted for the following: 
 Any Grade ≥ 2 non-skin, drug-related adverse event, with the following exceptions: 
o Grade 2 drug-related fatigue  or laboratory abnormaliti es that do not require a 
treatment delay (with the exception of Gr ade 3 AST, ALT or total bilirubin in 
patients with normal base line values-see below).  
 Any Grade 3 skin, drug-related adverse event 
 Any Grade 3 drug-related laboratory abnor mality, with the following exceptions: 
o Grade 3 amylase or lipase abnormalities that  are not associated with symptoms or 
clinical manifestations of pancreatitis do not require a dose delay. It is 
recommended to consult with the principa l investigator for Grade 3 amylase or 
lipase abnormalities. 
o If a subject has a baseline AS T, ALT, or total bilirubi n that is within normal 
limits, delay dosing for drug-related Grade ≥ 2 toxicity 
o If a subject has baseline AST,  ALT, or total bilirubin w ithin the Grade 1 toxicity 
range, delay dosing for drug-related Grade ≥ 3 toxicity 
 Any adverse event, laboratory abnormality, or intercurrent illness which, in the judgment 
of the site investigator , warrants delaying the do se of study medication. 
 6.1.2 Criteria to Resume Treatment 
Subjects may resume treatment w ith study drugs when the drug-re lated AE(s) resolve to Grade ≤ 
1 or baseline value, with  the following exceptions: 

 Subjects may resume treatment in the presence of Grade 2 fatigue  
 Subjects who have not experienced a Grad e 3 drug-related skin AE may resume 
treatment in the presence of Grade 2 skin toxicity  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 30 of 71  Subjects with baseline Grade 1 AST/ALT or to tal bilirubin who require dose delays for 
reasons other than a 2-grade sh ift in AST/ALT or total biliru bin may resume treatment in 
the presence of Grade 2 AS T/ALT OR total bilirubin 
 Subjects with combined Grade 2 AST/A LT AND total bilirubin values meeting 
discontinuation parameters (Section 6.3.3)  should have treatment permanently 
discontinued 
 Drug-related pulmonary toxicity, diarrhea, or colitis, must have resolved to baseline 
before treatment is resumed 
 Drug-related endocrinopathies adequately controlled with only physiologic hormone 
replacement may resume treatment 
 If the criteria to re sume treatment are met, the subject should restart treatment at the next 
scheduled timepoint per protocol (i .e., missed doses are NOT made up).  
 If treatment is delayed > 6 weeks,  (from the first misse d dose) the subject should be permanently 
discontinued from study therapy, except as sp ecified in discontinuation section below. 
 6.1.3 Discontinuation Criteria Treatment should be permanently discontinued for the following: 
 Any Grade 2 drug-related uveitis or eye pain or blurred vision th at does not respond to 
topical therapy and does not imp rove to Grade 1 severity w ithin the re-treatment period 
OR requires systemic treatment  
 Any Grade 3 non-skin, drug-related adverse ev ent lasting > 7 days, with the following 
exceptions for drug-related laborator y abnormalities, uve itis, pneumonitis, 
bronchospasm, diarrhea, colitis, neurologic adve rse event, hypersensitivity reactions, and 
infusion reactions 
o Grade 3 drug-related uveitis, pneumonitis, bronchospasm, diarrhea, colitis, 
neurologic adverse event, hypersensitivity  reaction, or infusion reaction of any 
duration requires discontinuation ( NOTE:  Subjects with Grade 3 diarrhea or 
colitis while on Part B ipilimumab/nivolum ab combination therapy could resume 
nivolumab alone if toxicity resolves to at least Grade 1 off of immunosuppressive 
drugs by end of week 16. Nivolumab monot herapy cannot start until toxicity is 
resolved to at least Grade 1 off i mmunosuppression x 2 weeks and cannot begin 
before week 13 or after week 19.  
 Grade 3 drug-related laboratory abnorma lities do not require permanent treatment 
discontinuation except those noted below 
o Grade 3 drug-related thrombocytopenia > 7 days or associated with bleeding  
o Any drug-related liver function test (LFT ) abnormality that meets the following 
criteria require discontinuation:  
 AST or ALT > 8 x ULN 
 Total bilirubin > 5 x ULN 
 Concurrent AST or ALT > 3 x UL N and total bilirubin > 2 x ULN
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 31 of 71  Any Grade 4 drug-related adverse event or  laboratory abnormality, except for the 
following events which do not  require discontinuation: 
o Isolated Grade 4 amylase or lipase abnor malities that are not associated with 
symptoms or clinical manifest ations of pancreatitis and: 
 Decrease to < Grade 4 within 2 w eeks of onset in the absence of 
immunosuppressive therapy.  
 Decrease to < Grade 4 and maintain < Grade 4 for a minimum of 1 week 
after stopping immunosu ppressive therapy. 
o Isolated Grade 4 electrolyte imbalances /abnormalities that are not associated 
with clinical sequelae and are correct ed with supplementation/appropriate 
management within 72 hours of their onset 
 Any dosing interruption lasting > 6 weeks (from scheduled dose) with the following 
exceptions: 
o Dosing interruptions to allow for prolonged steroid tapers to manage drug-related 
adverse events are allowed. Prior to re-i nitiating treatment in a subject with a 
dosing interruption lasting > 6 weeks, the sponsor-investigator must be consulted. 
Tumor assessments should continue as per protocol even if do sing is interrupted 
o Dosing interruptions > 6 weeks that occu r for non-drug-relate d reasons may be 
allowed if approved by the sponsor-investigator. Prior to re-initiating treatment 
in a subject with a dosing interrupt ion lasting > 6 weeks, the Principal 
Investigator must be consulted. Tumor assessments should continue as per 
protocol even if dosing is interrupted. 
 Any adverse event, laboratory abnormality, or intercurrent illness which, in the judgment 
of the site investigator, presents a substantia l clinical risk to the subject with continued 
nivolumab or ipilimumab dosing  
 6.2 Treatment of Nivolumab or Ipili mumab Related Infusion Reactions 
Since nivolumab and ipilimumab contain only human immunoglobu lin protein sequences, it is 
unlikely to be immunogenic and induce infusion or  hypersensitivity reactions. However, if such 
a reaction were to occur, it might  manifest with fever, chills, rigors, headache, rash, pruritis, 
arthralgias, hypo- or hypertension, bronchospasm, or other symptoms.  
 All Grade 3 or 4 infusion reacti ons should be reported as an SA E if criteria are met. Infusion 
reactions should be graded accord ing to NCI CTCAE v4.03 guidelines. 
 Treatment recommendations are provided below and may be modified ba sed on local treatment 
standards and guideli nes as appropriate: 
 
 Grade 1 symptoms: (Mild reaction; infusion interruption not indicat ed; intervention not 
indicated).  Remain at bedside and monito r subject until recovery  from symptoms. The 
following prophylactic premedic ations are recommended for future infusions:  
o Diphenhydramine 50 mg (or equivalent) and/or paracetamol 325 to 1000 mg 
(acetaminophen) at least 30 minutes before additional nivolumab administrations. 
 Grade 2 symptoms: (Moderate reaction requi res therapy or infu sion interruption but 
responds promptly to symptomatic treatment  [eg, antihistamines,  non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, narcotics, corticostero ids, bronchodilators, IV fluids]; prophylactic 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 32 of 71 medications indicated for 24 hours).  Stop the nivolumab or  ipilimumab infusion, begin 
an IV infusion of normal saline, and treat th e subject with diphenhydramine 50 mg IV (or 
equivalent) and/or paracetamol 325 to 1000 mg  (acetaminophen); rema in at bedside and 
monitor subject until resolution of symptoms . Corticosteroid or bronchodilator therapy 
may also be administered as appropriate. If the infusion is interrupted, then restart the 
infusion at 50% of the original infusion rate  when symptoms resolve; if no further 
complications ensue after 30 minutes, the rate may be increased to 100% of the original 
infusion rate. Monitor subject closely. If symptoms recur, then no further nivolumab or 
ipilimumab will be administered at that vi sit. Administer diphenhydramine 50 mg IV, and 
remain at bedside and monito r the subject until resolution of symptoms. The amount of 
study drug infused must be recorded on th e electronic case repor t form (eCRF). The 
following prophylactic pre-medications are recommended for future infusions:  
o Diphenhydramine 50 mg (or equivalent) and/or paracetamol 325 to 1000 mg 
(acetaminophen) should be ad ministered at least 30 mi nutes before additional 
nivolumab or ipilimumab administra tions. If necessary, corticosteroids 
(recommended dose: up to 25 mg of IV hydrocortisone or eq uivalent) may be 
used. 
 Grade 3 or Grade 4 symptoms: (Severe react ion, Grade 3: prolonged [ie, not rapidly 
responsive to symptomatic medi cation and/or brief interrupti on of infusion]; recurrence 
of symptoms following initial improvement; hospitalization indicated  for other clinical 
sequelae [eg, renal impairment, pulmonary infiltrates]). Grade 4: (life threatening; pressor 
or ventilatory support indicated).  Immediat ely discontinue infusion of nivolumab or 
ipilimumab. Begin an IV infu sion of normal saline, and tr eat the subject as follows. 
Recommend bronchodilators, epinephrine 0.2 to 1 mg of a 1:1,000 solution for 
subcutaneous administration or 0.1 to 0.25 mg  of a 1:10,000 solution injected slowly for 
IV administration, and/or diphenhydramine 50 mg IV with methylprednisolone 100 mg 
IV (or equivalent), as needed. Subject s hould be monitored until the investigator is 
comfortable that the symptoms will not recur. Nivolumab or ipilimumab will be 
permanently discontinued.  Site investigators should follow their institutional guidelines 
for the treatment of anaphylax is. Remain at bedside and mo nitor subject until recovery 
from symptoms. In the case of late-occurring hypersensitivity symptoms (eg, appearance 
of a localized or generalized pruritis w ithin 1 week after treatment), symptomatic 
treatment may be given (eg, oral an tihistamine, or corticosteroids). 
 6.3 Protocol Therapy Discontinuation In addition to discontinuation from therapy related to toxicities as outlined above, a subject will 
also be discontinued from prot ocol therapy and followed per protocol under the following 
circumstances outlined below.  The reason for discontinuation of prot ocol therapy will be 
documented on the electronic ca se report form (eCRF)   
 Documented disease progression NOTE:  Repeat scan should be performed in 4-6 weeks 
to confirm PD. A subject may be granted an  exception to continue on treatment with 
confirmed radiographic progression if clinical ly stable or clinically improved. If PD 
confirmed patient can move to Part  B and or go off study treatment.   
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 33 of 71  Completed 96 weeks of treatment  with nivolumab (Part A) or  60 weeks of (nivolumab + 
ipilimumab for 12 w eeks followed by nivolumab monothera py for up to 48 weeks) (Part 
B).  NOTE:  96 or 60 weeks of study medication are ca lculated from the date of first dose 
of each Part. 
 Site investigator determines a change of th erapy would be in the best interest of the 
subject 
 Subject or legal representative (such as a pa rent or legal guardian) withdraws consent and 
requests to discontinue protoc ol therapy, whether due to un acceptable toxicity or for 
other reasons o In a subject decides to prematurely di scontinue protocol therapy (“refuses 
treatment”), the subject should be asked if he  or she may still be contacted for further 
scheduled study assessments. The outcome of  that discussion should be documented 
in both the medical records and in the eCRF. 
 Female subject becomes pregnant 
 Unacceptable adverse experiences  
 Intercurrent illness that prevents further administration of treatment 
 Protocol therapy is interrupted  for > 6 weeks (calculated from the date of the first missed 
dose). Any potential exceptions to this crite rion must be discussed with and approved by 
the study chair.  
 Noncompliance with protocol trea tment or procedure requirements 
 The subject is lost to follow-up 
 Administrative reasons 
 6.2 Protocol Discontinuation  
If a subject decides to discontinue  from the protocol (and not just  from protocol therapy) all 
efforts should be made to complete and report study assessments as thoroughly as possible. A 
complete final evaluation at the time of the su bject’s protocol withdraw al should be made with 
an explanation of why the subject is withdrawin g from the protocol. If th e reason for removal of 
a subject from the study is an adverse event, it will be recorded on the eCRF. 
 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 34 of 71 7. STUDY CALENDAR & EVALUATIONS   
 
Screening Part A (± 3 days)  Part B (± 3 days) End of 
Treatment 
(EOT) Follow 
Up12 Induction Maintenance Prior 
to  
Part 
B Induction Maintenance 
Study Evaluation 
 Cycle = 6 weeks  Cycle = 
12 weeks Cycle = 6 weeks Cycle = 
12 weeks Safety 
Visits 
± 7 days11 C1-C2 C3-C4 C5-C10 C110-C2 C3-C4 C5-C7 
-28 
days -14 
days D
1 D 
15/29 D  
1 D 
22 D  
1 D  
29/57 -28 
days D  
1 D 
22 D
1 D 
22 D 
1 D 
29/57 D 
30 D 
100 ± 14 
days 
REQUIRED  ASSESSMENTS  
Informed Consen t X                   
Medical Histor y/Smokin g histor y X                   
Diagnosis and Sta ging X                   
Physical Exa m1 X  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  
Vital si gns/ECOG PS Status1 X  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  
AEs & concomitant medications X  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  
LABORATORY ASSESSMENTS  
Complete Blood Cell Count with 
diff (CBC)2 X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  
Comprehensive Metabolic Profile 
(CMP)2 X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  
Amylase, Lipase, LDH, CPK3 X  X  X  X  X X  X  X  X   
HBV, HCV3 X                   
Thyroid Function (TSH)3 X  X  X  X  X X  X  X  X   
Pregnanc y test (serum or urine)4    X      X          
DISEASE ASSESSMENT  
CT of chest5 X    X5  X5  X   X5  X5    X5 
CT or MRI of abdomen and pelvis5 X    X5  X5  X   X5  X5    X5 
TREATMENT EXPOSURE  
Nivolumab6   X X X X X X  X X X X X X    
Ipilimumab6          X X        
SPECIMEN COLLECTION  
Whole Blood for Somatic Testing7   C1                
PBMCs and plasma 7   X7  X7  X7  X7          
Archival Tumor Tissue8 X8                  
Fresh Tissue8  X8       X8          
SPECIMEN BANKING  
Whole Blood, Plasma and Serum9   C1             X   
FOLLOW UP  
Survival Status,Therapy                  X  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 35 of 71 Key to Footnotes  
 
1. If the screening physical exam is conducted within 24 hours of dosing on Day 1, then a single examination may count as both the  screening and pre-dose 
evaluation. Vitals required are temperature, pulse, r espiratory rate, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation.  
2. Hematology Labs should include CBC with diffe rential (hemoglobin, hematocrit, white bl ood cells, platelets, neutrophils, lympho cytes, eosinophils and 
monocytes). Additional draws must be incorporated when monitori ng recovery from any hematologic AE.  Chemistry Labs should incl ude albumin, BUN, 
creatinine, ALT, AST, bilirubin serum alkaline phosphatase, gluco se, total protein, sodium, potassium, chloride, HCO3, calcium.   Labs should be performed 
on the day of treatment but may be drawn up to 72 hours before to ensure return of  results prior to dosing. 
3. Other labs to be drawn: amylase, lipase, LDH, direct bilirubin ( only if total bilirubin is elevated), uric acid and CPK Day 1 o f every Cycle during treatment.  
Thyroid function will be monitored Day 1 of each cycle during treat ment. TSH will be monitored and T3 and T4 (free versus total ) should be drawn at site 
investigators discretion. It is suggested that if TSH is elev ated T3 and T4 values may be done. At screening, testing should be  performed for hepatitis C 
antibody and HBs Ag utilizing local standard informed consent pr ocedures prior to this laboratory collection. These tests could  be repeated later during the 
course of the study if clinically indicated.  
4. Women of child-bearing potential must have a negative serum or ur ine pregnancy test within 24 hours prior to treatment with niv olumab and again at 
crossover to Part B for screening purposes. 
5. Non-CNS Imaging should include a chest, abdomen and pelvis CT. Im aging of other sites should be obtained when clinically indica ted. If follow up scans 
indicate partial or complete response, a repeat confirmatory scan  should be obtained within 12 weeks (but no sooner than 6 week s). Subjects with equivocal 
disease progression (e.g. a new lesion in the setting of major di sease regression and the absence of or improvement in disease related symptoms) should have a 
scan confirming disease progression 4-6 weeks following the initial scan  showing RECIST defined PD.  Part A imaging will occur at baseline within 4 weeks 
of C1D1 of Part A, then at week 12 (after C1 and C2 of Part A Induction), week 18 (after C3 and before C4 of Part A Maintenance ), week 24 (after C4 of Part 
A maintenance) and then every 12 weeks (± 1 week).  Patients w ith symptomatic and radiographic PD will not require a confirmato ry scan before proceeding 
to Part B of this study. Following crossover, imaging and calenda r will be reset at Cycle 1.  Part B imaging will occur at base line within 4 weeks prior to 
crossover, then at week 12 (after C1 and C2 of Part B Induction) , week 18 (after C3 and before C4 Part B Maintenance), week 24 (after C4 Part B 
Maintenance) and then every 12 weeks (± 1 week). Every 12 week s radiology imaging will occur if the patient is < 2 years from s tudy entry (or < 2 years from 
crossover), then radiology imaging will o ccur every 6 months (± 4 weeks) until 5 y ears from study entry. If tumor assessments a re available for subjects who 
have not yet experienced progressive disease (PD) at the time treat ment is discontinued, the follow-up tumor evaluations will b e documented in the eCRF until 
PD or death is confirmed, or until another treatment is initiated.   
6. 1 Cycle= (6 weeks) for Part A (induction and maintenance C3 and C4) and Part B (induction and maintenance C3 and C4). 1 Cycle =  12 weeks for Part A 
maintenance C 5-10 and Part B maintenance C5-C7. Treatment and follow-up schedule is the same for either nivolumab monotherapy or 
ipilimumab/nivolumab combination. Patients r esponding in Part A will receive treatment at most through Cycle 10 (week 96).  Pat ients crossing over to Part B 
will receive treatment at most through Cycle 7 (week 60) from star t of Part B.  They will then have treatment stopped and be fo llowed until disease progression 
or study closure. Once confirmed progression is confirmed or stab le disease for 48 weeks (end of Cycle 6), nivolumab monotherap y will be discontinued for 
Part A and the patient will undergo evaluation for Part B treatment.  
7. Mandatory Samples: Peripheral blood for somatic baseline testing w ill be collected prior to treatment on C1D1 Part A.  PBMCs an d plasma are preferred (or 
whole blood) for TCR assay and will be collected prior to treatme nt (C1D1), C3D1, C5D1 (Part A) and at time of progression (Pri or to Part B). See 
Correlative Laboratory Manual (C LM) for additional details. 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 36 of 71 8. Archival tissue of a metastatic lesion obtained within 1 year prior to study registration (within 4 weeks preferred) and tumor tissue from nephrectomy is 
required if available.  In addition to archival tissue of a meta static lesion and nephrectomy, patients must have at least one site of disease (not including bone 
metastases) accessible for biopsy.  If biopsy/resection of a new lesion or primary tumor and slow freezing of fresh tissue for single cell RNAseq study (as 
specified in the CLM) is not feasible, the subject is not eligib le for the study. All biopsies must be core needle or excisiona l. Fine needle aspirate is not 
acceptable. NOTE: The tissue collected from a su rgical resection or multiple core biopsies of either a metastatic lesion or pri mary tumor for the slow freezing 
of fresh tissue after the patient has signed consent for the st udy could also be used for collecting the FFPE specimens. See Co rrelative Laboratory Manual for 
complete details.  
9. For Part A only: Whole blood will be collected prior to treatment  C1D1. Whole blood for plasma and serum prior to treatment on C1D1and at the D30 end of 
treatment visit. All samples will be banked for unspecified can cer related research (optional) . See Correlative Laboratory Manu al for complete details. 
10. Patients on Part B should be contacted weekly during Cycles 1 a nd 2. If a patient reports symptoms at any time during these cyc les or abnormal labs are noted 
at the regularly scheduled visits (C1 D22, C2 D1 or D22) then  more frequent laboratory testing and clinic visits are encouraged .. This decision is at the 
discretion of the site investigator. 
11. An End of Treatment (EOT) visit should occur 30 and 100 days (±  7 days) from last dose of study drug. For patients experiencing  toxicities, additional visits 
may be necessary and may occur occur every 2 weeks (± 3 days) unt il toxicities resolve, are stable, or start of new systemic th erapy.  Depending upon the 
toxicity, the every 2-week assessment may be accomplished via ph one call, email or other avenues as appropriate.  Mode of asses sment will be at site 
investigator’s discretion. If patients have progressive disease as the reason for discontinuation from study, the D100 may be a  phone call. 
12. Follow up is for subjects that have discontinued study treatme nt. Subjects should be followed every 3 months if < 3 years f rom study registration and every 6 
months if 3-5 years from study registration. Patients who deve lop disease progression on Part B or on Part A (if ineligible for  Part B) will be followed for 
survival only.  Follow up may be accomplished via clinic visit, phone call, or other avenues as appropriate. A wi ndow of ± 14 days will be appl ied to follow up.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 37 of 71 8. BIOSPECIMEN STUDIES AND PROCEDURES 
A variety of factors that may impact the immunomodulatory propert ies and efficacy of 
nivolumab or nivolumab-ipilimumab combination will be investigated in tumor tissue and from 
all registered subjects prior to Part A and in those patients going onto to Part B as outlined in 
Section 7.   8.1 Analyses  
 8.1.1 Assessment of PD-L1 Expression on Tumo r and Infiltrating Mononuclear Cells  
Tumor cell surface PD-L1 expression on prim ary tumor specimens se rves as a potential 
predictive biomarker of durable response to PD-1 antibody thera py [17]. However, data from 
several recent studies su ggest that IHC staining for PD-L1 alone fails to identify all responders to 
PD-1 blocking Abs [39, 40]. Some patients w ith PD-L1 negative tumors respond to PD-1 
pathway blockade, while many patients with PD-L1 positive tumors fail to do so. Interestingly, in melanoma, the benefit of combined PD-1 and CTLA-4 bloc kade versus PD-1 alone appeared 
to be greatest in patients with negative PD-L 1 tumor expression [22]. We will test whether PD-
L1 status is indeed predictive of higher response to combined  checkpoint blockade. 
 8.1.2 Assessment of Tumor IFN Gamma Signat ure, Mutational Load, and Maximum 
Fuhrman Grade  In patients with metastatic RCC,  treatment with nivolumab result ed in increased expression of 
genes indicative of Th1-type inflammatory res ponse and cytotoxic T cel l activation, such as 
ICOS, interferon-gamma, granzy mes, and perforin [48]. In addition, CXCL9 and CXCL10, two 
interferon-gamma-regulated chemokines that in turn  regulate trafficking of T cells, and are both 
prognostic [49] and predictive of response to  ipilimumab [50]. We propose to study tumor 
interferon-gamma signature using RNA sequencing as a marker of  response to PD-1 and PD-
1/CTLA-4 blockade.  Accumulating evidence shows that anti-tumor immune responses focus on neoantigens generated 
by tumor mutation, and responsiv eness to immunotherapy correla tes with neoantigen burden. 
[51, 52]. Mutational load has been  correlated with response to C LTA-4 and PD-1 blockade in 
melanoma [53, 54] and multiple ot her tumor types [55-57]. These data motivate us to perform a 
systematic analysis of mutation burden and ne oantigen load using Whole Exome Sequencing 
(WES). We will explore potential neoantigen s in subsets of responding and non-responding 
patients. We will also evaluate changes in neoant igen load at the time of resistance compared 
with baseline samples.  Tumor cell PD-L1 expression has been correlated with higher Fuhrman nuc lear grade [26]. In a 
cohort of mRCC patients treated with PD-L1 anti body, overall response rate was slightly higher 
in patients with Fuhrman grade 4 and/or sarc omatoid histology (ORR 22 % versus 15% in the 
overall cohort) [58]. Therefore, we will asse ss Fuhrman grade and sarcomatoid histology as 
predictors of response.     
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 38 of 71 8.1.3 Investigation of Mechanisms of Innate  and Acquired Resistance to Nivolumab 
Therapy Resistance to PD-1 blockade may occur as as pr imary or secondary event.  In order to elicit a 
successful anti-tumor immune response, tumor neoantigens must be presented by antigen-presenting cells to CD8+ T cells via major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) 
molecules. Then, lymphocytes must be primed a nd activated. Lymphocytes must be trafficked to 
the tumor and subsequently infiltrate the tumor, then they must recognize the tumor cells, and 
finally they must produce cyto toxic effect. “Non-inflamed” tu mors, those that lack tumor-
infiltrating lymphocytes, may have  a defect in early steps of the generation of this immune 
response and may have primary re sistance to PD-1 blockade. “Inf lamed” tumors, those that do 
contain tumor-infiltrating lymphocyt es, may have defects in later st eps such as loss or alteration 
of MHC-I [59-61]. Multiple ot her checkpoints may become activ ated [62-65] Finally other 
immunosuppressive cells in the tumor microenvironment may blunt  the T-cell response. We will 
perform exploratory analyses to evaluate thes e mechanisms further, including exploratory 
analyses of immune cells using immunosequencing.   8.2. Tissue Collections SEE CLM FOR ADDITIONAL DETAILS.  8.2.1 Archival Tumor Tissue Archival tissue of a metastatic lesion (from core needle or excisional biopsy) obtained within 1 
year prior to study registration (within 4 weeks preferred) and tumor tissue from nephrectomy is 
required if available. Confirmation of sufficient archival tissue must be obtained prior to C1D1 
and shipped to the appropriate lab by end of Cycl e 2.  Biopsies must be co re needle or excisional 
biopsies of primary tumor or vis ceral or lymph node metastases. Fine needle aspirates of any 
metastatic site, and biopsies of bone lesions are not acceptable.   
 8.2.2 Pre-Treatment Tumor Tissue Patients must have at least one site of diseas e (not including bone me tastases) accessible for 
biopsy after confirmation of eligibility/consent and prior to initiation of treatment.  If 
biopsy/resection of a new lesion or  primary tumor and slow freezing of fresh tissue for single cell 
RNAseq study (as specified in the CLM) is not f easible, the subject is no t eligible for the study. 
All biopsies must be core needle or excisional. Fine needle aspi rate biopsies are not acceptable, 
nor are biopsies of non soft tissu e components of bone metastases. NOTE:  The tissue collected 
from a surgical resection or multip le core biopsies of either a me tastatic lesion or primary tumor 
for the slow freezing of fresh ti ssue after the patient has signed consent for the study could also 
be used for collecti ng the FFPE specimens  
 8.2.3 Tumor Tissue- At Progression  
Tumor biopsy prior to combination treatment is mandatory. If a biopsy/re section of a new lesion 
or primary tumor and slow freezi ng of fresh tissue for single ce ll RNAseq study (as specified in 
the CLM) is not feasible, the s ubject is not eligible for the study. All biop sies must be core 
needle or excisional. Fine needle  aspirate biopsies are not acceptable, nor ar e biopsies of non soft 
tissue components of bone metastases.     
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 39 of 71 8.2.4 Tumor Tissue for RNAseq 
Part of the tissue collected prior to C1D1 and at  progression will be used for single cell RNAseq 
analysis. This analysis will be  funded through the Department of  Defense (DoD) via a proposal 
entitled, "Using Single Cell Transcriptomics to Understand Tumor and Immune Heterogeneity 
Driving Resistance and to Rationa lly Select Immune Th erapy in Advanced RCC.” In addition to 
the data from the sample analysis, the DoD will have access to de-identified subject data such as response outcomes.  8.3 Peripheral Blood Samples  8.3.1 Mandatory Whole Blood for Somatic Baseline Testing  
Whole blood will be collected prior to treatment Cycle 1 Day 1 for somatic testing. 
 8.3.2 Mandatory PBMCs and Plasma (preferred ) or Whole Blood for TCR analysis  
Whole blood for PBMCs and plasma  isolation for TCR analysis s hould be collected at baseline 
(C1D1), C3D1, C5D1 and at time of disease pr ogression.  If PBMCs cannot be processed on site, 
whole blood may be collected. See CLM fo r collection and processing instructions. 
 8.3.3 Optional Whole Blood, Plasma and Serum for Banking  Subject consent will be obtained for additional samples to be collected for future unspecified 
cancer related research studies. HCRN will mana ge the banked samples. Samples will be banked 
indefinitely in the HCRN Biorepository. 
 This includes: 
 Pre whole blood: Whole blood for banking will be  collected for Part A only; prior to 
treatment Cycle 1 Day 1. 
 Pre and Post  Treatment plasma and serum: Whole bl ood for plasma and serum will be 
collected for Part A only; prior to treatme nt on Cycle 1 Day and at the D30 end of 
treatment visit. 
 8.4 Storage of Biospecimens All specimens not exhausted in plan ned correlative studies for this trial will be banked for future 
unspecified cancer related research. Patient c onsent will be obtained for banking of these 
samples.  8.5 Confidentiality of Biospecimens Samples that are collected will be  identified by a subject’s sequence ID at the time of registration 
to the trial. Any material issued to collabo rating researchers will be anonymized and only 
identified by the subject’s sequence ID.  9. CRITERIA FOR DISEASE EVALUATION 
For the purposes of this study, subjects should be  evaluated for response every 12 weeks.  Non-
CNS Imaging should include a chest, abdomen and pelvis CT. Imaging of other sites should be 
obtained when clinically indica ted. If follow up scans indicate part ial or complete response, a 
repeat confirmatory scan shoul d be obtained within 12 weeks (but no sooner than 6 weeks). 
Subjects with equivocal disease progression (e.g. a new lesion in the setting of major disease 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 40 of 71 regression and the absence of or  improvement in disease relate d symptoms) should have a scan 
confirming disease progression 4- 6 weeks following the initial s can showing RECIST defined 
PD.  Patients with symptomatic and radiographic PD  will not require a confirmatory scan before 
proceeding to Part B of this study.  The date of the first scan will be th e documented date of 
progression.  Response and progression will be evaluated in th is study using the intern ational criteria proposed 
by the revised Response Evaluation Criteria in So lid Tumors (RECIST) guideline (version 1.1) 
[Eur J Ca 45:228-247, 2009] and irRECIST. Change s in the largest diameter (unidimensional 
measurement) of the tumor lesi ons and the shortest diameter in the case of malignant lymph 
nodes are used in RECIST.  The following general princi ples must be followed: 
1. To assess objective response, it is necessary  to estimate the overall tumor burden at 
baseline to which subsequent  measurements will be compar ed. All baseline  evaluations 
should be performed as closel y as possible to the beginning of treatment and never more 
than four weeks before registration. 
2. Measurable disease is defined by the pres ence of at least one  measurable lesion. 
3. All measurements should be recorded in me tric notation by use of a ruler or calipers.  
4. The same method of assessment and the same  technique must be used to characterize 
each identified lesion at baseline and during follow-up.  
 9.1 Definitions  9.1.1 Evaluable for Objective Response 
Only those subjects who have meas urable disease present at baselin e, have received at least one 
cycle of therapy, and have had their disease re -evaluated will be considered evaluable for 
response. These subjects will have their response classified according to the definitions stated 
below.  Those subjects that ar e inevaluable will not be replaced. 
 (NOTE:  Subjects who exhibit objective disease progres sion prior to the end of Cycle 1 will also 
be considered evaluable.)  9.1.2 Evaluable Non-Target Disease Response Patients who have lesions present at baseline that  are evaluable but do not meet the definitions of 
measurable disease, have received at least one cycle of therapy, and have  had their disease re-
evaluated will be considered evaluable fo r non-target lesion asse ssment. The response 
assessment is based on the presence, absence,  or unequivocal progressi on of the lesions. 
 
9.2 Disease Parameters 
 
9.2.1 Measurable Disease Measurable disease is defined as the presence of at least one measur able lesion. Measurable 
lesions are defined as those that can be accurate ly measured in at leas t one dimension (longest 
diameter to be recorded) as >20 mm by chest x-ray, as >10 mm with CT scan, or >10 mm with 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 41 of 71 calipers by clinical exam. All tumo r measurements must be record ed in millimeters (or decimal 
fractions of centimeters). 
 NOTE: Tumor lesions that are situated in a previ ously irradiated area might or might not be 
considered measurable. If the site investigator  thinks it appropriate to include them, the 
conditions under which such lesions should be co nsidered must be defi ned in the protocol. 
 9.2.2 Malignant Lymph Nodes 
To be considered pathologically enlarged a nd measurable, a lymph node  must be >15 mm in 
short axis when assessed by CT scan (CT scan  slice thickness recommended to be no greater 
than 5 mm). At baseline and in follow-up, only the short axis will be measured and followed. 
 9.2.3 Non-measurable Lesions 
All other lesions (or sites of disease), including small lesions  (longest diameter <10 mm or 
pathological lymph nodes with ≥ 10 to <15 mm short axis), ar e considered non-measurable 
disease. Bone lesions, leptomeni ngeal disease, ascites, pleural/p ericardial effusi ons, lymphangitis 
cutis/pulmonitis, inflammatory br east disease, and abdominal ma sses (not followed by CT or 
MRI), are considered as non-measur able. Non-measurable also incl udes lesions that are < 20 mm 
by chest x-ray.  NOTE:   Cystic lesions that meet th e criteria for radiographically defined simple cysts should not 
be considered as malignant lesions (neither me asurable nor non-measurable) since they are, by 
definition, simple cysts. ‘Cystic le sions’ thought to represent cystic  metastases can be considered 
as measurable lesions, if they meet the definition of measurabili ty described above. However, if 
non-cystic lesions are present in the same subjec t, these are preferred fo r selection as target 
lesions. 
 9.2.4 Target Lesions 
All measurable lesions up to a maximum of 2 lesions per organ and 5 lesions in total, 
representative of all involved organs, should be identified as target lesions and recorded and 
measured at baseline. Target lesi ons should be selected on the basis of their size (lesions with the 
longest diameter), be representa tive of all involved organs, but in addition should be those that 
lend themselves to reproducible repeated measurements. It may be the case that, on occasion, the 
largest lesion does not lend itself to reproducible  measurement in which circumstance the next 
largest lesion which can be measured reproducib ly should be selected. A sum of the diameters 
(longest for non-nodal lesions, shor t axis for nodal le sions) for all target  lesions will be 
calculated and reported as the ba seline sum diameters. If lymph node s are to be included in the 
sum, then only the short axis is added into the sum. The baseline sum diameters will be used as reference to further characteri ze any objective tumor regression in  the measurable dimension of 
the disease.  9.2.5 Non-target Lesions 
All other lesions (or sites of disease) including any measurable  lesions over and above the 5 
target lesions should be identified  as non-target lesions and should also be r ecorded at baseline. 
Measurements of these lesions are not required, but the presence, absence, or in rare cases 
unequivocal progression of each sh ould be noted throughout follow-up.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 42 of 71 9.3 Evaluation of Target Lesions 
NOTE:  In addition to the informatio n below, also see section 4.3.2 in the international criteria 
proposed by the Response Evaluation Criteria in  Solid Tumors (RECIST) Committee, version 
1.1 (Eur J Cancer 45;2009:228-247)  for special notes on the assessment of  target lesions.  
 
Complete 
Response (CR) Disappearance of all target lesions. Any pathological lymph nodes 
(whether target or non-target) must  have reduction in short axis to 
<10 mm. To be assigned a status of complete response, changes in 
tumor measurements must be confirmed by a repeat assessment 
performed no less than six weeks after the criteria for response is met. 
Partial Response (PR) At least a 30% decrease in the sum of the diameters of target lesions, 
taking as reference the baseline sum diameters.  To be assigned a status of partial response, changes in tumor measurements must be confirmed by a repeat assessment performed no less than six weeks after the criteria for response is met. 
Progressive Disease (PD) At least a 20% increase in the sum of the diameters of target lesions, 
taking as reference the smallest  sum on study (this includes the 
baseline sum if that is the smalle st on study). In addition to the 
relative increase of 20%, the sum must  also demonstrate an absolute 
increase of at least 5 mm. ( NOTE:   the appearance of one or more 
new lesions is also considered progressions).  Subjects with equivocal disease progression (e.g. a new lesion in the setting of 
major disease regression and the absence of or improvement in 
disease related symptoms) should have a scan confirming disease progression 4-6 weeks following the initial scan showing RECIST defined PD.  Subjects may continue on protocol therapy until repeat scan confirms PD. If repeat scan does not confirm PD, subjects 
should proceed with treatment and evaluation as directed by the 
protocol with the confirmatory scan (if between 4 and 6 weeks from last scan) being counted as the 6 week interval scan. 
Stable Disease (SD) Neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify for PR nor sufficient increase 
to qualify for PD, taking as reference the smallest sum diameters while on study.  NOTE:  a change of 20% or more that does not 
increase the sum of the diameters by 5 mm or more is coded as stable disease). To be assigned a status of stable disease, measurements 
must have met the stable disease criteria at least once after study 
entry at a minimum interval of 24 weeks. 
 
  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 43 of 71 9.4 Evaluation of Non-Target Lesions 
 
Complete Response (CR) Disa ppearance of all non-target lesions.  All lymph nodes 
must be non-pathological in size (<10 mm short axis) 
Non-CR/ Non-PD Persistence of one  or more non-target lesion(s)  
Progressive Disease (PD) Appearance of one or more new lesions and/or 
unequivocal progression of existing non-target lesions. 
Unequivocal progression should not normally trump target 
lesion status. It must be representative of overall disease status change, not a single lesion increase.  When the subject also has measurable disease, there must be an overall level of substantial wo rsening in non-target disease 
such that, even in the presence of SD or PR in target 
disease, the overall tumor burden has increased sufficiently to merit discontinuation of therapy.  A modest “increase” in the size of one or more non-target lesions is usually not sufficient to qualify for unequivocal progression status. The designation of overall progression 
solely on the basis of change in non-target disease in the 
face of SD or PR of target disease will therefore be extremely rare.  When the subject only has non-measurable disease, the increase in overall disease burden should be comparable in magnitude to the increase that 
would be required to declare PD for measurable disease: 
i.e., an increase in tumor burd en from “trace” to “large”, 
an increase in nodal disease from “localized” to “widespread”, or an increase sufficient to require a change in therapy. Although a clear progression of “non-target” lesions only 
is exceptional, the opinion of the site investigator should 
prevail in such circumstances, and the progression status should be confirmed at a later time by the review panel (or sponso
r-investigator). 
 
9.5 Evaluation of New Lesions The appearance of new lesions constitutes Progr essive Disease (PD).  A growing lymph node 
that did not meet the criteria for reporting as a measurab le or non-measurable lymph node at 
baseline should only be reported as a new lesi on (and therefore progressive disease) if it:  
 Increases in size to ≥ 15 mm in the short axis, or  
 There is new pathological confirmation that it is disease (regardless of size). New 
effusion or ascites that appears during trea tment should only be re ported as a new lesion 
(and therefore progressive dis ease) if it has cytological confirmation of malignancy. 
 9.6 Evaluation of Best Overall Response The best overall response is the best response recorded from the start of the treatment until 
disease progression/recurrence or  non-protocol therapy (taking as reference for progressive 
disease the smallest measurements recorded si nce the treatment starte d). The patient’s best 
response assignment will depend on the achieveme nt of both measurem ent and confirmation 
criteria. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 44 of 71 9.7 Evaluation of Best Overall Response 
 
Target 
Lesions Non-Target Lesions New 
Lesions* Overall 
Response Remarks 
CR C R No C R **** 
CR Non-CR/ Non-PD*** No P R 
**** CR Not evaluate d No P R 
PR Non-PD*** 
 or not all evaluate d No PR 
SD Non-PD*** 
 or not all evaluated No SD Documented at least once 
≥ 24 weeks from study 
entry 
PD An y Yes or No PD 
No prior SD, PR or CR Any PD** Yes or No PD*** 
Any An y Yes PD 
*          See RECIST 1.1 manuscript for furt her details on what is ev idence of a new lesion. 
**        In exceptional circumstances, unequi vocal progression in non- target lesions may be 
accepted as disease progression. 
***     PD in non-target lesions should not nor mally trump target lesi on status. It must be 
representative of overall di sease status change, not a single lesion increase. Please 
refer to the Evaluation of Non-Target Le sions – Progressive Disease section for 
further explanation.  
****    To be assigned a status of partia l or complete response, changes in tumor 
measurements must be conf irmed by a repeat assessmen t performed no less than six 
weeks after the criteria  for response is met. 
NOTE:  Patients with a global deterioration of health status requir ing discontinuation of 
treatment without objective eviden ce of disease progression at that time should be reported 
as “symptomatic deteriorati on.” Every effort should be ma de to document the objective 
progression even after discontinuation of treatment.  
 
9.8 Definitions for Response Evaluation – RECIST 1.1 
 9.8.1 Duration of Overall Response The duration of overall response is measured from the time meas urement criteria are met for CR 
or PR (whichever is first record ed) until the first date that recurrent or progressive disease is 
objectively documented (taking as reference for progressive disease the smallest measurements 
recorded since the treatment started).  The duration of overall CR is m easured from the time measurement criteria are first met for CR 
until the first date that progressive disease is objectively documented.   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 45 of 71 9.8.2 Duration of Stable Disease 
Stable disease is measured from the start of the treatment until the criteria for progression are 
met, taking as reference the smallest measur ements recorded since the treatment started, 
including the baseline measurements.   To be assigned a status of stable  disease, measurements must have  met the stable disease criteria 
at least once after study entry at  a minimum interval of 24 weeks.  
 9.8.3 Additional Criteria to Conti nue Treatment after Progression 
Patients may continue on protocol  therapy until repeat s can confirms PD.  If repeat scan does not 
confirm PD, patients should proceed with treatme nt and evaluation as di rected by the protocol 
with the confirmatory scan (if between 4 and 6 weeks from last scan) being counted as the 6 
week interval scan.  9.8.4 Overall Survival Overall survival is defined by the date of registration to date of  death from any cause. 
 9.9 Immune Related RECIST (irRECIST)  
PFS, ORR and duration of respons e per irRECIST are defined as  specified for the respective 
endpoints using RECIST 1.1 above, with the excepti on that a confirmation a ssessment of PD (4-
6 weeks after the initial PD a ssessment) is required for subj ects who remain on treatment 
following a documented PD per RECIST 1.1.  The first date of progre ssion, confirmed on the 
subsequent imaging study, will be considered th e date of progression. Subjects who discontinue 
treatment following a documented PD assessmen t per RECIST 1.1 will be counted as having 
disease progression on the date of the documented PD assessment.   
 
10. DRUG INFORMATION 
 10.1 Nivolumab Nivolumab was selected for dosage form develo pment and is also referred to as BMS-936558-01 
or BMS-936558. Nivolumab is a so luble protein consisting of 4 polypeptide chains, which 
include 2 identical heavy chains  and 2 identical light chains. 
Other Names  Nivolumab, BMS-936558, MDX1106, anti-PD-1 
Molecular Wt 146,221 daltons (143 ,619.17 daltons, protein portion) 
Appearance  Clear to opalescent, colorless to  pale yellow liquid, few particulates may be 
present  Solution pH  5.5 to 6.5  10.1.1 Supplier/How Supplied Nivolumab Injection, 100 mg/10 mL (10 mg/mL)  
BMS will supply nivolumab at no charge to subject s participating in this clinical trial.  
   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 46 of 71 The site investigator shall take responsibility fo r and shall take all steps to maintain appropriate 
records and ensure appropriate supply, storage, handling, dist ribution, and usage/evidence of 
destruction of investigational pr oduct in accordance with the prot ocol and any applicable laws 
and regulations.  10.1.2 Preparation  Nivolumab Injection, 100 mg/10 mL  (10 mg/mL). Nivolumab injecti on is to be administered as 
an IV infusion through a 0.2-micron to 1.2-micro por e size, low-protein bi nding in-line filter at 
the protocol-specified doses and infusion times. It is not to be  administered as an IV push or 
bolus injection. Nivolumab injec tion can be infused undiluted (10 mg/mL) or diluted with 0.9% 
Sodium Chloride Injection, USP or 5% Dextrose Injection, USP to protein concentrations as low 
as 0.35 mg/mL. Total infusion volume not to exceed 120 mL. During drug product preparation 
and handling, vigorous mixing or sh aking is to be avoided. Instru ctions for dilution and infusion 
of nivolumab injection may be prov ided in the clinical protocol or  investigator’s brochure. Care 
must be taken to assure sterili ty of the prepared solution as the product does not contain any 
antimicrobial preservative or bact eriostatic agent. No incompatibilities between nivolumab and 
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and non-PVC/non-DEHP (di(2-ethylhe xyl)phthalate) containers/IV 
components or glass bottle s have been observed. 
 10.1.3 Storage and Stability Nivolumab Injection, 100 mg/10 mL (10 mg/mL). Vials of nivolumab injection must be stored at 
2° to 8°C (36° to 46°F) and pr otected from light and freezing.   
 Undiluted Nivolumab Injection and Diluted Nivo lumab Injection in the IV Container. The 
administration of nivolumab infusion must be completed within 24 hours of preparation. If not 
used immediately, the infusion so lution may be stored under refri geration conditions (2°to 8°C, 
36°to 46°F) for up to 24 hours, and a maximum of  8 hours of the total 24 hours can be at room 
temperature (20° to 25°C, 68° to 77°F) and room light. The maximum 8 hour period under room 
temperature and room light conditions in cludes the product ad ministration period. 
 After final drug reconciliation, unus ed nivolumab vials should be disposed at the site following 
procedures for the disposal of  anticancer drugs. Certificate of  destruction for unused supply 
should be retained for BMS  10.1.4 Handling and Disposal Preparation should be performed by trained pers onnel in accordance with  good practices rules, 
especially with respect to asepsis.  10.1.5 Dispensing Nivolumab must be dispensed only from official study sites and to  eligible subjects under the 
supervision of the site investigator. Nivolumab should be st ored in a secure area according to 
local regulations. It is the respons ibility of the site investigator to ensure that study drug is only 
dispensed to subjects.      
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 47 of 71 10.1.6 Adverse Events 
Please see the current Investigator’s Brochure fo r complete details regarding AEs of nivolumab. 
The most common side effects of nivolumab are: 
 Fatigue  
 Skin reactions: including rash, itching, hive s, redness, and dry skin.  Toxic epidermal 
necrolysis, a potentially life threatening disease characterized  by blistering and peeling of 
the top layer of skin resembling that of a severe burn, has occurred in one subject who 
received ipilimumab after nivolumab treatment. 
 Diarrhea 
 Nausea 
 Abdominal pain 
 Decreased appetite 
 Low red blood cells 
 Fever 
 Joint pain or stiffness 
 10.2 Ipilimumab Ipilimumab is a recombin ant, human monoclonal antibody that binds to the CTLA-4. Ipilimumab 
is an IgG1 kappa immunoglobulin with an approximate molecular weight of 148 kDa. 
Ipilimumab is produced in mammalian (Chinese hamster ovary) cell culture. 
 
Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS) will supply ipilimuma b.  Ordering of ipilimumab will take place 
through the BMS vendor.  10.2.1 Pharmacokinetics (PK) Ipilimumab as a single agent: The pharmacokinetics  of ipilimumab was st udied in 499 subjects 
with unresectable or metastatic melanom a who received doses of 0.3, 3, or 10 mg/kg 
administered once every 3 weeks for four doses. Peak concentr ation (Cmax), trough 
concentration (Cmin), and area under the curve (AUC) of ipilimumab were found to be dose 
proportional within the dose range examined. Up on repeated dosing of ipilimumab administered 
every 3 weeks, ipilimumab clearance was found to  be time invariant, and minimal systemic 
accumulation was observed as evident by an accumulation index of 1.5-fold or less. Ipilimumab steady-state concentration was reached by th e third dose. The following mean (percent 
coefficient of variation) para meters were generated through popul ation PK analysis: terminal 
half-life of 14.7 days (30.1%); systemic clearance (C L) of 15.3 mL/h (38.5%); and volume of 
distribution at steady-state (Vss) of 7.21 L ( 10.5%). The mean (±SD) ipilimumab Cmin achieved 
at steady-state with the 3-mg/ kg regimen was 21.8 mcg/mL (±11.2). 
 Nivolumab in combination with ipilimumab: The geometric mean (%CV) CL, Vss, and terminal 
half-life of nivolumab were 10.0 mL/h ( 50.3%), 7.92 L (30.1%), and 24.8 days (94.3%), 
respectively. When administere d in combination, the CL of nivolumab was increased by 24%, 
whereas there was no effect on th e clearance of ipilimumab. When  administered in combination, 
the clearance of nivolumab incr eased by 42% in the presence of  anti-nivolumab antibodies. 
There was no effect of anti-ipilimumab antibodies on the clearance of ipilimumab.   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 48 of 71 Specific Populations: Cross-study anal yses were performed on data from subjects with a variety 
of conditions, including 420 subjec ts with melanoma who receive d single or multiple infusions 
of ipilimumab at doses of 0.3, 3, or 10 mg/kg. The effects of va rious covariates on ipilimumab 
PKs were assessed in populat ion pharmacokinetic analyses. 
 Ipilimumab CL increased with increasing body weight; however, no dose adjustment of 
Ipilimumab is required for body weight after adminis tration on a mg/kg basis. The following 
factors had no clinically meaningf ul effect on the CL of ipilim umab: age (range 26 to 86 years), 
gender, concomitant use of budesonide, perform ance status, HLA-A2*0201 status, positive anti-
ipilimumab antibody status, prior use of systemic anticancer th erapy, or baseline lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH) levels. The effect of race was not examined as there were insufficient 
numbers of subjects in n on-Caucasian ethnic groups. 
 Renal Impairment: Creatinine clea rance at baseline did not have a clinically important effect on 
ipilimumab pharmacokinetics in su bjects with calculated creatinine clearance values of 29 
mL/min or greater.  Hepatic Impairment: Baseline AST, total bilirubi n, and ALT levels did no t have a clinically 
important effect on ipilimumab pharmacokinetics in subjects w ith various degrees of hepatic 
impairment.  10.2.2 Preparation Ipilimumab is a sterile, preservative-free, clear to  slightly opalescent, colorless to pale yellow 
solution for intravenous infusion, which may cont ain a small amount of vi sible translucent-to-
white, amorphous ipilimumab partic ulates. It is supplied in si ngle-use vials of 200 mg/40 mL 
Each milliliter contains 5 mg of ipilimumab a nd the following inactive ingredients: diethylene 
triamine penta acetic acid (DTPA) (0.04 mg), ma nnitol (10 mg), polysorbate 80 (vegetable 
origin) (0.1 mg), sodium chloride (5.85 mg),  tris hydrochloride (3.15 mg), and Water for 
Injection, USP at a pH of 7.  Do not shake product.  Inspect parenteral drug products visually for particulate matte r and discoloration prior to 
administration. Discard vial if so lution is cloudy, there is pronoun ced discoloration (solution may 
have pale yellow color), or ther e is foreign particulate matter other than translucent-to white, 
amorphous particles.  Preparation of Solution: 
 Allow the vials to stand at room temperat ure for approximately 5 minutes prior to 
preparation of infusion.  
 Withdraw the required volume of ipilimuma b and transfer into an intravenous bag. 
 Dilute with 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injecti on, USP or 5% Dextrose Injection, USP to 
prepare a diluted solution with a final con centration ranging from 1 mg/mL to 2 mg/mL. 
Mix diluted solution by gentle inversion.  
 Store the diluted solution for no more than 24 hours under refr igeration (2°C to 8°C, 36°F 
to 46°F) or at room temperatur e (20°C to 25°C, 68°F to 77°F).  
 Discard partially used vials or empty vials of ipilimumab.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 49 of 71 10.2.3 Storage and Stability 
Store ipilimumab under refr igeration at 2°C to 8°C (36°F to 46°F). Do not freeze. Protect vials 
from light.  10.2.4 Administration Do not mix ipilimumab with, or administer as an  infusion with, other me dicinal products. Flush 
the intravenous line with 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection, USP or 0.5% Dextrose Injection, USP 
after each dose. Administer diluted solution over 30 minutes (+/- 10 minutes) through an 
intravenous line containing a sterile, non-pyroge nic, low-protein-bind ing in-line filter. 
 
10.2.5 Handling and Disposal Accountability for investig ational product is the responsibility of the investigator. The research 
pharmacy will maintain a careful record of the in ventory and disposition of the agent using the 
NCI Drug Accountability Record Form (DARF) or another comparable drug accountability 
form.    Qualified personnel, familiar w ith procedures that minimize u ndue exposure to themselves and 
the environment, should undert ake the preparation, handling, and safe disposal of the 
chemotherapeutic agent in a self-con tained and protective environment. 
 Drug should be destroyed at the si te, after the investigator approve s the drug destruction policy at 
the site. Drug will not be returned to BMS.  Destruction will be documented in the Drug 
Accountability Record Form and certifi cate of destruction provided to BMS. 
 10.2.6 Compatibility 
No incompatibilities between the nivolumab a nd ipilimumab have been  observed. When both 
study drugs are to be administered on the same day, separate infu sion bags and filters must be 
used for each infusion. Nivolumab is to be admini stered first. The nivolumab infusion must be 
promptly followed by a saline flus h to clear the line of nivolumab before starting the ipilimumab 
infusion. The second infusion will always be ipil imumab, and will start at  least 30 minutes after 
completion of the nivolumab infusion.  Ipilimumab may be diluted in 0.9% Sodium Chlo ride Solution or 5% Dextrose solution.  
 Nivolumab may be diluted in 0.9%  Sodium Chloride Solution. 
 10.2.7 Adverse Events Based on data from the Phase I study, nivolumab in combina tion with ipilimumab has an 
acceptable safety profile in RCC. In summary, AE s were reported in 97.7 % of subjects treated 
with nivolumab in combination with ipilimuma b. The most frequently re ported drug-related AEs 
in subjects treated with 3-mg/kg nivolumab + 1- mg/kg ipilimumab include d fatigue (11 subjects, 
52.4%), rash (8 subjects, 38.1%), diarrhea (6 subj ects, 28.6%), and pruritus (6 subjects, 28.6%); 
the majority were Grade 1-2. The most frequently  reported drug-related AEs in subjects treated 
with 1-mg/kg nivolumab  + 3-mg/kg ipilimumab included fatigue (16 subjects, 69.6%); nausea, 
ALT increased, AST increased (9  subjects each, 39.1%); and diarrh ea (8 subjects, 34.8%). The 
majority were Grade 1-2. The majority of de aths were due to dis ease progression. No drug-
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 50 of 71 related deaths have been reported to date. Please refer to the most current IB for a comprehensive 
list of AEs.  11. ADVERSE EVENTS 
The descriptions and grading scales found in the NCI CTCAE v4.03 will be utilized for AE 
assessment throughout the life of the protocol. A copy of th e CTCAE v4.03 criteria can be 
downloaded from the CTEP website  at http://ctep.can cer.gov. All forms for AE/SAE recording 
and reporting can be found in the Study Proce dure Manual or in the EDC system (Documents 
and Information Tab).  11.1 Definitions 
 11.1.1  Adverse Event (AE) 
An AE is any untoward medical occurrence whethe r or not considered re lated to the study drug 
that appears to change in intens ity during the course of the stu dy. The following are examples of 
AEs:  
 Unintended or unfavorable sign or symptom 
 A disease temporally associated w ith participation in the protocol 
 An intercurrent illness or injury that  impairs the well-be ing of the subject 
 
Abnormal laboratory values or diag nostic test results constitute AEs only if they induce clinical 
signs or symptoms or require treatme nt or further di agnostic tests   
 Hospitalization for elective surgery or routine clini cal procedures that are not the result of an AE 
(e.g., surgical insertion of central line) should not be recorded as an AE.  
 Disease progression should not be recorded as an AE, unless it is attributable to the study 
regimen by the site investigator.  
11.1.2  Serious Adverse Event (SAE) 
A SAE is an adverse event that: 
 Results in death. NOTE:  Death due to disease progressi on should not be reported as a 
SAE, unless it is attributable by the s ite investigator to  the study drug(s) 
 Is life-threatening (defined as an event in wh ich the subject was at risk of death at the 
time of the event; it does not refer to an event which hypothetically might have caused 
death if it were more severe) 
 Requires inpatient hospitalization for >24 hours or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization. NOTE:  Hospitalization for anticipated or  protocol specified procedures 
such as administration of chemotherapy, central  line insertion, metast asis interventional 
therapy, resection of primary tu mor, or elective surgery, will  not be considered serious 
adverse events. 
 Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity 
 Is a congenital anomal y or birth defect 
 
Is an important medical event (defined as a medical event(s) that may not be immediately 
life-threatening or re sult in death or hospitalization but, based upon appropriate medical 
and scientific judgment, ma y jeopardize the subject or may require intervention (e.g., 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 51 of 71 medical, surgical) to prevent one of the ot her serious outcomes listed in the definition 
above). Examples of such events include, but are not limited to, inte nsive treatment in an 
emergency room or at home for allergic bronchospasm; blood dyscr asias or convulsions 
not resulting in hospitalization; or the de velopment of drug dependency or drug abuse.  
 
11.1.3  Unexpected Adverse Event 
For this study, an AE is considered unexpected when it varies in nature , intensity or frequency 
from information provided in the cu rrent IB, prescribing information or when it is not included in 
the informed consent document as a potential ri sk. Unexpected also refers to AEs that are 
mentioned in the IB as occurring with a cl ass of drugs or are anticipated from the 
pharmacological properties of the drug, but are not specifically me ntioned as occurring with the 
particular drug under investigation.    11.1.4  Relatedness 
AEs will be categorized according to the likeliho od that they are related to the study drug(s). 
Specifically, they will be categorized using the following terms:   
Unrelated Adverse Event is not related  to the study drug(s)  
Unlikely Adverse Event is doubtfully related  to the study drug(s)  
Possible Adverse Event may be related  to the study drug(s)  
Probable Adverse Event is  likely related  to the study drug(s)  
Definite Adverse Event is clearly related  to the study drug(s)  
 
11.1.5 Pregnancy If, following initiation of the study drugs, it is subs equently discovered that a subject is pregnant 
or may have been pregnant at the time of study drug exposure, in cluding during at least 6 half 
lives after study drug administration, the study drug will be permanently discontinued in an 
appropriate manner (eg, dose tapering if  necessary for subject safety).  
 The site investigator must immediately notif y HCRN who will then notify Worldwide Safety 
@BMS of this event via the HCRN Pregna ncy Form in accordance with SAE reporting 
procedures. Follow-up information regarding the c ourse of the pregnancy,  including perinatal 
and neonatal outcome and, where applicable, offspring informat ion must be reported on the 
HCRN Pregnancy Form. Any pregnancy that occu rs in a female part ner of a male study 
participant should be reported to HCRN who w ill then report it to BMS. Information on this 
pregnancy will be collected on the HCRN Pregnancy Form.  11.1.6 Overdose An overdose is defined as the accidental or in tentional administration of any dose of a product 
that is considered both excessive  and medically importa nt. All occurrences of overdose must be 
reported as a SAE.    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 52 of 71 11.2 Reporting 
 11.2.1  Adverse Events  
 AEs will be recorded from time of signed informed consent until 100 days after 
discontinuation of study drug(s)  or until a new anti-cancer tr eatment starts, whichever 
occurs first.  
 AEs will be recorded regardless of whether or  not they are consider ed related to the study 
drug(s).   
 All AEs will be recorded in the subject’s medical record and on  the appropriate study 
specific eCRF form within the EDC system. 
 AEs considered related to study drug(s) wi ll be followed until resolution to Grade ≤ 1 or 
baseline, deemed clinically insignificant, and/or until a new anti-cancer treatment starts, whichever occurs first.  
11.2.2  Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) 
 11.2.2.1 Site Requirements for Re porting SAEs to HCRN 
 SAEs will be reported from time of signe d informed consent until 100 days after 
discontinuation of study drug(s)  or until a new anti-cancer tr eatment starts, whichever 
occurs first.  
 SAEs will be reported on the SAE Submission Form within  1 business day  of discovery 
of the event.   
 SAEs include events related and unrelated to the study drug(s).  
 All SAEs will be recorded in the subject’s  medical record and on the appropriate study 
specific eCRF form within EDC system.   
 All SAEs regardless of relation to study drug will be followed until resolution to ≤ Grade 
1 or baseline and/or deemed clinically insignificant and/or until a new anti-cancer 
treatment starts, whichever occurs first. 
 The site will submit the complete d SAE Submission Form to HCRN within  1 business day of 
discovery of the event . The form may be submitted to HCRN electronically to 
safety@hoosiercancer.org . The site investigator is responsible  for informing the IRB and/or other 
local regulatory bodies as per local requirement s.  The original copy of the SAE Submission 
Form and the email corresponden ce must be kept within the study file at the study site. 
 
Once the SAE has resolved (see resolution gui delines listed in 11.2.2.1), sites must submit a 
follow-up SAE Submission Form within a reason able timeframe to HCRN electronically to 
safety@hoosiercancer.org .   
 
11.2.2.2 HCRN Requirements for Reporting SAEs to BMS  HCRN will report all SAEs to BMS within 1 business day  of receipt of the SAE Submission 
Form from a site. Follow-up information will be provided to BMS as it is received from site.  
Contact information fo r sending SAE information to BMS below: 
 SAE Email Address:  Wo rldwide.Safety@BMS.com 
SAE Facsimile Number:  609-818-3804 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 53 of 71 HCRN and the Sponsor-investigator will ensure th at all SAEs in the clinical database are 
reported to BMS and any applicable health authority during the conduct of the study. This 
reconciliation will occur at least quarterly  and be initiated by HCRN on behalf of the sponsor-
investigator. HCRN will request on behalf of the sponsor-investigator a reconciliation report 
from: aepbusinessprocess@bms.com. During reconc iliation, any events found to not be reported 
previously to BMS must be sent  to Worldwide.Safety@BMS.com.  
 
11.3 Sponsor-Investigator Responsibilities  HCRN will send a SAE summary to the sponsor-investigator within 1 business day  of receipt of 
SAE Submission Form from a site.  The sponsor -investigator will promptly review the SAE 
summary and assess for expectedness and relatedness.    11.4 HCRN Responsibilities to FDA HCRN will manage the Investig ational New Drug Application (IND) associated with this 
protocol on behalf of the sponsor-investigator. H CRN will cross-reference this submission to the 
BMS’s parent IND at the time of submission. Additionally, HCRN will s ubmit a copy of these 
documents to BMS at the ti me of submission to FDA. 
 HCRN will be responsible for all communication with the F DA in accordance with 21CFR312 
including but not limited to the 7 and 15 Day Reports, as well as an Annual Progress Report. 
Additionally, HCRN will submit a co py of these reports to BMS at  the time of submission to 
FDA.  11.5 IND Safety Reports Unrelated to this Trial BMS will provide to HCRN IND safety reports from external studies that involve the study 
drug(s) per their guidelines.  H CRN will forward safety reports to the sponsor-investigator who 
will review these reports and determine if revision s are needed to the protocol or consent. HCRN 
will forward these reports to participating sites within 1 business day  of receiving the sponsor-
investigator’s review.  Based on the sponsor-inv estigator’s review, applicable changes will be 
made to the protocol and inform ed consent document (if required).  All IND safety reports will 
also be made available to sites via the EDC system.     Upon receipt from HCRN, site investigators (or designees) are responsible for submitting these 
safety reports to their respective IRBs, as per their IRB policies. 
 12. STATISTICAL METHODS 
 12.1 Part A Primary Endpoint The primary focus of this trial will be in the evaluation of PD-L1 to pr edict outcome and, also, 
secondarily to use the PRP mode l as a basis for outcome predic tion. We expect that about 45% 
(or 54 expected) patients will have 0% PD-L1 and roughly 15% (or 18 expected) patients will express PD-L1 > 20%, which, given the sample  size of 120 ccRCC patient s provides 90% power 
using a 0.05 level two-sided test to test the hypoth esis that PD-L1 >20% will be associated with 
significantly improved 1-year PFS rate for patients  treated with PD-1 blockade (55% vs 13% 
taken as a binomial quantity). C onsidering the four groups of PD-L1 expression (0%, 1-5%, 5-
20%, >20%), and with an expected patient allo cation within groups of (45%, 25%, 15%, 15%), 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 54 of 71 the Cochran-Armitage test gives at least 90% power to detect a trend in 1-year PFS of (13%, 
19%, 35%, 55%) using a two-sided 0.05 level test for trend. Modest changes in the proportions 
of patients in the variouse PD -L1 categories will not substantiall y affect the power. For example, 
if the distribution across PD-L1 categories is [25%, 25%, 25%, 25 %] rather than the anticipated 
[45%, 25%, 15%, 15%] the power for the tr end test remains greater than 90%. 
 As a secondary objective, we will apply the PRP model, developed in the DF/HCC Kidney 
SPORE Project 4, to assign each patie nt a probability of having PFS >1 year.  The validity of the 
model will be assessed by the Brier score as well as via evaluation of the AUC.  The exact 
distribution is unknown, but assuming  an overall 1-year PFS of 28% and that 40% of patients are 
expected to be “positive” by the PRP model, 120 ccRCC patients give 90% power to detect a 
29% higher 1-year PFS between 48 positive patients a nd 72 negative patients (via Fisher’s exact 
test and assuming a difference in PFS of 46% vs 17%). All testing above will be done at 1-sided 
α=0.025. The specific distributional breakdowns are unknown but the po wer is relatively robust. 
For example, if the split between positive and nega tive is more even (50/50) then power for the 
above difference in 1-yr PFS rema ins over 90%. If the actual diffe rence in 1-yr PFS is smaller 
than anticipated for example 25% (44% vs 19%) th en the test will still ha ve at least 80% power. 
 12.2 Part B Clear cell patients who reach best response of SD at 48 weeks or who experience progression 
will be offered the opportunity to  enroll in the second component of the study, Part B, continued 
treatment with the addition of ipilimumab. The primar y endpoint of this por tion of the trial will 
be objective response (CR or PR) ta king as baseline tumor measuremen ts at the patient’s start of 
Part B. It is expected that r oughly one-half of the Part A patients will be eligible for and choose 
to enroll in Part B, or roughly 60 total patients. A two-stage design will be  used for this portion 
of the study where in the first cohort 29 patient s will be accrued, trea ted and evaluated for 
response in order to provide guidance on whether to  continue to enroll th e entire cohort of 60 
patients. The first stage analysis  will be conducted without pausi ng accrual to Part B. If among 
the first 29 Part B patients there are at least 2 responses, there will be sufficient evidence to 
continue recruitment to Part B.  With a true uninteresting resp onse rate of 5%, there is a 57% 
chance of declaring the regimen un interesting; however, with an  interesting response rate of 
20%, there is greater than 95% ch ance of continuing. If after enrol lment of 60 patients there are 
at least 11 total responses, the lower limit on the 90% confidence in terval for the true response 
rate will exclude 10% (ie, the 95% confidence in terval will range from 10 .6% to 28.5%, adjusted 
for the two-stage design). With 18 total response s, the 90% confidence interval on the true 
objective response proportion will exclude 20% (i t, the confidence interval will range from 
20.4% to 41.2%, adjusted for the two-stage design).   12.3 Non-clear cell (ncc) RCC: Part A Subjects (comprising a heterogeneous group of histologi es) will also be enrolled in the trial, at an 
accrual rate that is expected to be 33% that of clear cell patients. Therefore, an expected cohort 
of 40 nccRCC patients will be enrolled in the trial and analyzed separately for evidence of anti-
tumor activity, principall y focusing on overall response rate (CR or PR). With  40 patients, the 
95% confidence interval on the true objectiv e response proportion will be no wider than 32.4 
percentage points and the probability of observi ng five or more responses under the hypothesis 
that the true response rate is 0.20 is at least 92%, hence there is hi gh power to detect responses in 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 55 of 71 this cohort should the true res ponse rate be interesting. Other e ndpoints of interest in this group 
of patients will include rates of SD and PFS at 1-year.  12.4 NccRCC patients: Part B  These subjects will also be av ailable to enroll in Part B of the study.  An estimated 20 patients 
will be enrolled and response rates in this re sistant population will be reported.  If no responses 
are seen in the first 14 patients that response ra te will be deemed uninteresting. If any confirmed 
responses are seen accrual of ncc patients will co ntinue for all eligible patients completing Part 
A.  12.5 Single Cell RNA seq Correlative (ccRCC)  
At this time, 10 fresh frozen baseline tumor sp ecimens and 3 pairs of specimens have been 
collected with an additional pati ent likely to be collected befo re accrual of the original 120 
patients is complete. Therefore, fourteen additional patients are to be enrolled to collect fresh frozen specimens necessary to provide 25 baselin e and 15 paired baseline and resistant fresh 
frozen samples to be used for single cell RNAs eq experiments aimed at identifying factors 
associated to resistance as out lined in the DOD Translational Res earch Partnership grant to Drs. 
Atkins and Wu. Assuming 15 patients non-responsi ve to nivo and up to 10 patients responding, 
comparisons of any quan titative expression level using a 0.05 level two-sided two-group t-test 
will have 80% power to detect at least a 1.2 SD shift in means using baseline samples. With 15 
paired samples at baseline and at confirmed radiologic pr ogression among the non-responders, 
there is at least 80% power to detect a change  in expression of 0.78 SD in any markers using a 
two-sided 0.05 level paired t-test. For two binary markers that are at  least 50% discordant there is 
at least 80% power to detect a +/- versus -/+ discordance of at  least 47% using a two-sided 0.05 
level McNemar’s test. 
 
12.6 Study Design 
This is a phase II open-labeled study or single ag ent nivolumab involving tw o distinct groups of 
systemic treatment naïve patients – those with either metastatic clear cell (cc) or non-clear cell 
(ncc) RCC. One hundred and twenty patients will be accrued to the ccRCC group and up to 40 to the nccRCC group. Eligible patients will be enro lled at time of documented progression or 
prolonged SD, into Part B of the study, which in volves the addition of ip ilimumab to nivolumab. 
Part B will constitute a separate  open-labeled phase II study with baseline parameters being reset 
at time of subject enrollment.  With multicenter accrual of 6-7 patients per month, the study 
should accrue in 2 years.    12.7 Endpoints 
 12.7.1  Definition of Primary Endpoint 
 PFS is defined as the time from Day 1 of treatment until the criteria for disease 
progression is met as defined by RECIST 1.1 or death as a result of any cause.  
 The primary focus of this trial will be in the evaluation of PD-L1 expression levels to 
predict outcome. We expect that about 45% (o r 54 expected) patients will have 0% PD-
L1 and roughly 15% (or 18 expected) patien ts will express PD-L1 > 20%, which, given 
the sample size of 120 ccRCC patients provide s 90% power using a 0.05 level two-sided 
test to test the hypothesis th at PD-L1 >20% will be asso ciated with significantly 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 56 of 71 improved 1-year PFS rate for patients treated w ith PD-1 blockade (55% vs 13% taken as 
a binomial quantity).  
 12.7.2  Secondary Endpoints 
 Apply the PRP model, developed in the DF/HCC Kidney SPORE Project 4, to assign 
each patient a probability of having PFS > 1 year. 
 The endpoint for Part B (addition of ipilimuma b) will be objective response (CR or PR) 
taking as baseline tumor measurements at the patient’s start of Part B. 
 An expected cohort of 40 nccRCC patients will  be enrolled in the trial and analyzed 
separately for evidence of anti-tumor activ ity, principally focusing on overall response 
rate (CR or PR). 
 Toxicity by CTCAE criteria of  nivolumab monotherapy in tr eatment naïve patients with 
cc and nccRCC.  
 12.8 Analysis Datasets 
The primary analysis for both Part A and Part B will be the enrolled population comprising all 
subjects who meet eligib ility criteria and are re gistered onto the study.  
 12.9 Assessment of Safety 
This will be performed in all subjects that contri bute data to the safety analysis e.g any subject 
who receives at least one dose of treatment on Part  A of this protocol. The safety analysis for 
Part B will be considered separately and will in clude any subject who receives at least one dose 
of treatment on Part B. Safety will be asse ssed using the National Cancer Institute (NCI) 
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Ev ents (CTCAE), v4.03.  In addition, Immune 
Related Adverse events IrAE will also be recorded.  12.10  Assessment of Efficacy 
All subjects with ccRCC who are registered  on study will be assessed for progression free 
survival in order to determine the PFS rate at 1 year.  Those patients who cross over to Part B of 
the study and have measurable disease will be assessed for tumor response using RECIST 1.1 with the pre-Part B tumor measur ements serving as baseline.   
 All subjects with nccRCC who are registered on study will be assessed for tumor response using 
traditional RECIST 1.1 criteria both for Part A and Part B (if they have measurable disease at 
time of crossover).   12.11  Interim Analysis/Criteri a for Stopping Study 
A two-stage design will be us ed for Part B for the ccRCC popul ation. In this study the first 
cohort 29 patients will be accrued, treated and evaluated for response in order to provide 
guidance on whether to continue to  enroll the entire cohort of 60 pa tients. The first stage analysis 
will be conducted without pausing accrual to Part B. If among the first 29 Part B patients there are at least 2 responses, there will  be sufficient evidence to continue recruitment to Part B. With 
a true uninteresting response ra te of 5%, there is a 57% chan ce of declaring the regimen 
uninteresting; however, with an in teresting response rate of 20 %, there is greater than 95% 
chance of continuing.   
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 57 of 71 13. TRIAL MANAGEMENT 
 13.1 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) 
The study will be conducted with guidance fro m the Georgetown-Lombardi Comprehensive 
Cancer Center’s (Georgetown LCCC) DSMP.   HCRN oversight activities include: 
 Review all adverse events requiring expedite d reporting as define d in the protocol 
 Provide trial accrual progress, safety info rmation and data summary reports to the 
sponsor-investigator  
 Submit data summary reports to the lead institution Data Safety Monitoring Committee 
per Georgetown LCCC’s DSMP. 
 Submit data summary reports to th e DSMC for review per DSMC SOP 
 13.2 Georgetown-Lombardi Comprehensive Ca ncer Center’s Data Safety Monitoring 
Committee HCRN will provide the following for the Georgetown LCCC’s DSMC to review: 
 Adverse event summary report 
 Monitoring reports and aud it results if applicable 
 Data related to stopping/decision rules described in study design 
 Study accrual patterns  
 Protocol deviations 
 
The Georgetown LCCC DSMC will review study data every quarter.  Documentation of DSMC 
reviews will be provided to spons or-investigator and HCRN.  Issu es of immediate concern by the 
DSMC will be brought to the attention of the spons or-investigator and other regulatory bodies as 
appropriate.  The sponsor-investigator will work w ith HCRN to address the DSMC’s concerns.    
 13.3 Data Quality Oversight Activities Remote validation of the EDC system data will be completed on a continual basis throughout the 
life cycle of the study.  Automated edit check listings will be used to generate queries in the EDC 
system and transmitted to the si te to address in a timely fashi on. Corrections will be made by the 
study site personnel.  Monitoring visits to the trial sites may be made pe riodically during the tria l to ensure key aspects 
of the protocol are followed. For cause audits  may be performed as necessary. During onsite 
monitoring visits, source documents will be revi ewed for verification of agreement with data 
entered into the EDC system.  It is important for the site investig ator and their relevant personnel 
to be available for a sufficient amount of time during th e monitoring visits or audit, if applicable. 
The site investigator and inst itution guarantee access to sour ce documents by HCRN or its 
designee.  The trial site may also be subject to quality a ssurance audit, as well as  inspection by appropriate 
regulatory agencies.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 58 of 71 13.4 Compliance with Trial Registration and Results Posting Requirements 
Under the terms of the Food and Drug Adminis tration Modernization Act (FDAMA) and the 
Food and Drug Administration Amen dments Act (FDAAA), the sponsor -investigator of the trial 
is solely responsible for dete rmining whether the tr ial and its results are subject to the 
requirements for submission to th e Clinical Trials Data Bank, http://www.clinicaltrials.gov . All 
results of primary and secondary objectives must be posted to CT.gov within a year of 
completion.  The sponsor-investigator has delegate d responsibility to HCRN  for registering the 
trial and posting the results on clinicaltrials.gov. Info rmation posted will allow subjects to 
identify potentially appropriate trials for thei r disease conditions and pursue participation by 
calling a central contact number for further info rmation on appropriate tr ial locations and study 
site contact information.    14. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPING  14.1 Data Management 
HCRN will serve as the Clinical Research Organization for this trial. Data will be collected 
through a web based clinical resear ch platform, a system complian t with Good Clinical Practices 
and Federal Rules and Regulations.  HCRN pers onnel will coordinate and manage data for 
quality control assurance and integrity. All data  will be collected and entered into the EDC 
system
 by study site personnel from part icipating institutions.   
 14.2 Case Report Forms and Submission 
Generally, clinical data will be elec tronically captured in the EDC system
 and correlative results 
will be captured in the EDC system or other secure database(s). If procedures on the study 
calendar are performed for standard of care, at minimum, that data will be captured in the source 
document. Select standard of care data will also be captured in the EDC system, according to 
study-specific objectives.   The completed dataset is the sole property of  the sponsor-investigator’s institution and should 
not be exported to third parties, except for authorized representa tives of appropriate 
Health/Regulatory Authorities, without permis sion from the sponsor-i nvestigator and HCRN. 
 14.3 Record Retention 
To enable evaluations and/or audits from Health Authorities/HCRN, the site investigator agrees 
to keep records, including the identity of all s ubjects (sufficient informat ion to link records; e.g., 
hospital records), all original si gned informed consent fo rms, copies of all source documents, and 
detailed records of drug disposi tion. All source documents are to re main in the subject’s file and 
retained by the site investigator in compliance wi th the site contract w ith HCRN.  No records 
will be destroyed until HCRN confirms destruction is permitted.  14.4 Confidentiality 
There is a slight risk of loss of  confidentiality of subject info rmation. All records identifying the 
subjects will be kept confidential and, to the extent permitted by the a pplicable laws and/or 
regulations, will not be made publ icly available. Information co llected will be maintained on 
secure, password protected electronic systems. Paper files that contain personal information will 
be kept in locked and secure locations only accessible to the study site personnel.  
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 59 of 71 Subjects will be informed in wr iting that some organizations including the sponsor-investigator 
and his/her research associates, HCRN, BMS, IR B, or government agencies, like the FDA, may 
inspect their medical records to verify the information collected, and that all personal 
information made available for inspection will be handled in strictes t confidence and in 
accordance with local data protection laws.  If the results of the study are published, the s ubject’s identity will remain confidential. 
 15 ETHICS 
 15.1 Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approval 
The final study protocol and the final version of the informed c onsent form must be approved in 
writing by an IRB. The site investigator must  submit written approval by the IRB to HCRN 
before he or she can enroll subjects into the study.   
 The site investigator is respons ible for informing the IRB of a ny amendment to the protocol in 
accordance with local requi rements. In addition, the IRB must approve all advertising used to 
recruit subjects for the study. The protocol must be re-approved by the IRB, as local regulations 
require.   Progress reports and notifications of serious a nd unexpected adverse events will be provided to 
the IRB according to local re gulations and guidelines. 
 15.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study 
The study will be performed in accordance with  ethical principles originating from the 
Declaration of Helsinki.  Conduc t of the study will be in comp liance with ICH Good Clinical 
Practice, and with all applicable  federal (including 21 CFR parts 56 & 50), state, or local laws. 
 15.3 Informed Consent Process 
The site investigator will ensure the subject is given full and ade quate oral and written 
information about the nature, purpose, possible risks and benefits of the study. Subjects must 
also be notified they are free to discontinue from the study at any time. The subject should be 
given the opportunity to ask questions and allo wed time to consider th e information provided. 
 The subject’s signed and dated informed cons ent must be obtained  before conducting any 
procedure specifically for the study. The site in vestigator must store the original, signed 
informed consent form. A copy of  the signed informed consent form must be given to the 
subject.     
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 60 of 71 16 REFERENCES 
 1. Znaor, A., et al., Internationa l variations and trends in re nal cell carcinoma incidence and 
mortality. Eur Urol, 2015. 67(3): p. 519-30. 
2. Society, A.C. Kidney Cancer (Adult) - Re nal Cell Carcinoma. 2016 February 28, 2016]; 
Available from: http://www.can cer.org/cancer/kidneycancer/de tailedguide/kidney-cancer-
adult-key-statistics. 
3. Gupta, K., et al., Epidemiologic and socioec onomic burden of metasta tic renal cell carcinoma 
(mRCC): a literature review. Can cer Treat Rev, 2008. 34(3): p. 193-205. 
4. Yao, M., et al., VHL tumor suppressor gene alterations associated  with good prognosis in 
sporadic clear-cell renal carci noma. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 2002. 94(20): p. 
1569-1575. 
5. Oda, H. and R. Machinami, Sarcomatoid rena l cell carcinoma. A study of its proliferative 
activity. Cancer, 1993. 71(7): p. 2292-2298. 
6. Cancer Genome Atlas Research, N., et al., Comprehensive Molecular Characterization of 
Papillary Renal-Cell Carcinoma.  N Engl J Med, 2016. 374(2): p. 135-45. 
7. Sharpe, A.H., et al., The func tion of programmed cell death 1 and its ligands in regulating 
autoimmunity and infection. Nat Immunol, 2007. 8(3): p. 239-45. 
8. Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Nonclini cal Study Report: Medarex Study No. MDX1106-
025-R. In vitro characterization of a fully human anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody. Document 
Control No. 930046580, 2006. 
9. Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Nonclini cal Study Report: Medarex Study No. MDX1106-
028-R. Binding and blocking characteristics of chimeric anti-mous e PD-1 antibody, 4H2. 
Document Control No. 930046578., 2007. 
10. Velu, V., et al., Enhancing SIV-specific im munity in vivo by PD-1 blockade. Nature, 2009. 
458(7235): p. 206-10. 
11. Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Nonclini cal Study Report: Medarex Study No. MDX1106-
032-R. Effects of anti-PD-1 administration on staged MC38 tumors in mice. Document 
Control No. 930046566., 2006. 
12. Wang, C., et al., In vitro characterization of the anti- PD-1 antibody nivolumab, BMS-
936558, and in vivo toxicology in non-human pr imates. Cancer Imm unol Res, 2014. 2(9): p. 
846-56. 
13. Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Nonclin ical Study Report: Study No. DN12123; BMS-
986016 and BMS-936558: Four-week intravenous co mbination toxicity study in monkeys 
with a 6-week recovery. Document Control No. 930070016, 2013. 
14. Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, BMS-936558: In travenous Study of pre- and postnatal 
development in cynomolgus monkeys with a 6- month postnatal evaluati on. Final report for 
Study DN12001. . Document Control No. 930073964. 
15. Habicht, A., et al., A Link between PDL1 and T Regulatory Cells in Fe tomaternal Tolerance. 
The Journal of Immunology, 2007. 179(8): p. 5211-5219. 
16. Brahmer, J.R., et al., Phase I study of singl e-agent anti-programmed death-1 (MDX-1106) in 
refractory solid tumors: safe ty, clinical activity, pharma codynamics, and immunologic 
correlates. J Clin Oncol, 2010. 28(19): p. 3167-75. 
17. Topalian, S.L., et al., Safety, activity, and immune correlates of anti-PD-1 antibody in cancer. 
N Engl J Med, 2012. 366(26): p. 2443-54. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 61 of 71 18. McDermott, D.F., et al., Surviv al, durable response, and long-t erm safety in patients with 
previously treated advanced renal cell carci noma receiving nivolumab. Journal of Clinical 
Oncology, 2015: p. JCO. 2014.58. 1041. 
19. Motzer, R.J., et al., Nivolumab for Metast atic Renal Cell Carcinoma: Results of a 
Randomized Phase II Trial. J C lin Oncol, 2015. 33(13): p. 1430-7. 
20. Motzer, R.J., et al., Nivolumab versus Ever olimus in Advanced Re nal-Cell Carcinoma. N 
Engl J Med, 2015. 373(19): p. 1803-13. 
21. Choueiri, T.K., et al. Imm unomodulatory activity of nivolumab  in previously treated and 
untreated metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC): Biomarker-bas ed results from a 
randomized clinical trial. in AS CO Annual Meeting Proceedings. 2014. 
22. Larkin, J., et al., Combined Nivolumab a nd Ipilimumab or Monot herapy in Untreated 
Melanoma. N Engl J Med, 2015. 373(1): p. 23-34. 
23. Postow, M.A., et al., Nivolum ab and ipilimumab ve rsus ipilimumab in untreated melanoma. 
N Engl J Med, 2015. 372(21): p. 2006-17. 
24. Hammers, H., et al., 1050OPhase I study of ni volumab in combinati on with ipilimumab in 
metastatic renal ce ll carcinoma (MRCC). Annals of Oncology, 2014. 25(suppl 4): p. iv361-
iv362. 
25. Motzer R. J., et al, Nivolumab plus Ipilimu mab versus Sunitinib in Advanced Renal-Cell 
Carcinoma. N Engl J Med.  2018 Apr 5;378(14):1277-1290. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1712126. 
Epub 2018 Mar 21.  
26. Callea, M., et al., Differentia l Expression of PD-L1 between Pr imary and Metastatic Sites in 
Clear-Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma. Ca ncer Immunol Res, 2015. 3(10): p. 1158-64. 
27. Choueiri, T.K., et al., PD-L1 expression in nonclear-cell renal cell ca rcinoma. Ann Oncol, 
2014. 25(11): p. 2178-84. 
28. Motzer, R.J., et al., Sunitinib versus interferon alfa in metastatic rena l-cell carcinoma. N Engl 
J Med, 2007. 356(2): p. 115-24. 
29. McDermott, D.F., et al., Randomized phase II I trial of high-dose interleukin-2 versus 
subcutaneous interleukin-2 and interferon in pa tients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J 
Clin Oncol, 2005. 23(1): p. 133-41. 
30. Keir, M.E., et al., PD-1 and its ligands in  tolerance and immunity. Annu Rev Immunol, 2008. 
26: p. 677-704. 
31. Keir, M.E., G.J. Freeman, and A.H. Sharpe , PD-1 regulates self-reactive CD8+ T cell 
responses to antigen in lymph nodes a nd tissues. J Immunol,  2007. 179(8): p. 5064-70. 
32. Dong, H., et al., Tumor-associated B7-H1 prom otes T-cell apoptosis: a potential mechanism 
of immune evasion. Nat Med, 2002. 8(8): p. 793-800. 
33. Blank, C., et al., Blockade of PD-L1 (B7- H1) augments human tumor-specific T cell 
responses in vitro. Int J Cancer, 2006. 119(2): p. 317-27. 
34. Ahmadzadeh, M., et al., Tumor antigen-specif ic CD8 T cells infiltra ting the tumor express 
high levels of PD-1 and are func tionally impaired. Bl ood, 2009. 114(8): p. 1537-44. 
35. Thompson, R.H., et al., Costimulatory B7-H1 in  renal cell carcinoma patients: Indicator of 
tumor aggressiveness and potential therapeu tic target. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2004. 
101(49): p. 17174-9. 
36. Brahmer, J.R., et al., Safety and activity of anti-PD-L1 antibody in patients with advanced 
cancer. N Engl J Med, 2012. 366(26): p. 2455-65. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 62 of 71 37. Cho, D.C., et al. Clinical activity, safety, and biomarkers of MPDL 3280A, an engineered 
PD-L1 antibody in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (m RCC). in ASCO Annual 
Meeting Proceedings. 2013. 
38. McDermott, D.F., et al., C linical activity and safety of anti-PD-1 (BMS-936558, MDX-1106) 
in patients with previously treated metastat ic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC). J Clin Oncol, 
2012. 30(15 Suppl): p. 4505. 
39. Callahan, M.K., et al. Peripheral and tumor immu ne correlates in patients with advanced 
melanoma treated with combination ni volumab (anti-PD-1, BMS-936558, ONO-4538) and 
ipilimumab. in ASCO Annual Meeting Proceedings. 2013. 
40. Grosso, J., et al. Association of tumor PD -L1 expression and imm une biomarkers with 
clinical activity in patients (pts) with advanced  solid tumors treated w ith nivolumab (anti-PD-
1; BMS-936558; ONO-4538). in ASCO A nnual Meeting Proceedings. 2013. 
41. Kim, J.M. and D.S. Chen, Immune escape to PD-L1/PD-1 blockade: seven steps to success 
(or failure). Ann Oncol, 2016. 
42. Serra-Bellver, P., S. Valpione, and P. Lo rigan, Sequential immunotherapy regimens—expect 
the unexpected. The Lancet Oncology, 2016. 
43. Simpson, T.R., et al., Fc-dependent depleti on of tumor-infiltrating regulatory T cells co-
defines the efficacy of an ti-CTLA-4 therapy against melanoma. J Exp Med, 2013. 210(9): p. 
1695-710. 
44. Hamid, O., et al., Safety and tumor responses with lambrolizumab (ant i-PD-1) in melanoma. 
N Engl J Med, 2013. 369(2): p. 134-44. 
45. Gandhi, L., et al., Abstract CT105: MK-3475 (a nti-PD-1 monoclonal an tibody) for non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC):  Antitumor activity and associa tion with tumor PD-L1 expression. 
Cancer Research, 2014. 74(19 Supplement): p. CT105-CT105. 
46. Wolchok, J.D., et al., Nivolumab plus ipilimu mab in advanced melanoma. N Engl J Med, 
2013. 369(2): p. 122-33. 
47. Callea, M., et al. PD-L1 expression in primar y clear cell renal cell ca rcinomas (ccRCCs) and 
their metastases. in ASCO A nnual Meeting Proceedings. 2014. 
48. Choueiri, T.K., et al., Immunomodulatory Activ ity of Nivolumab in Metastatic Renal Cell 
Carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res, 2016. 
49. Kondo, T., et al., Favorable prognos is of renal cell carcinoma with increased expression of 
chemokines associated with a Th1-type immune  response. Cancer Sci, 2006. 97(8): p. 780-6. 
50. Ji, R.R., et al., An immune-active tumor mi croenvironment favors clinical response to 
ipilimumab. Cancer Immunol Im munother, 2012. 61(7): p. 1019-31. 
51. Fritsch, E.F., et al., HLA-binding properties  of tumor neoepitopes in humans. Cancer 
Immunol Res, 2014. 2(6): p. 522-9. 
52. Rajasagi, M., et al., Systemat ic identification of personal tumor-specific ne oantigens in 
chronic lymphocytic leuke mia. Blood, 2014. 124(3): p. 453-62. 
53. Snyder, A., et al., Genetic basis for clinical response to CTLA-4 blockade in melanoma. N 
Engl J Med, 2014. 371(23): p. 2189-99. 
54. Van Allen, E.M., et al., Genomic correlates of response to CTLA-4 blockade in metastatic 
melanoma. Science, 2015. 350(6257): p. 207-11. 
55. Le, D.T., et al., PD-1 Blockade in Tumors with Mismatch-Repair De ficiency. N Engl J Med, 
2015. 372(26): p. 2509-20. 
56. Rizvi, N.A., et al., Cancer im munology. Mutational landscape de termines sensitivity to PD-1 
blockade in non-small cell lung can cer. Science, 2015. 348(6230): p. 124-8. 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 63 of 71 57. Rosenberg, J.E., et al., Atezolizumab in pati ents with locally adva nced and metastatic 
urothelial carcinoma who have progressed following treatment with platinum-based 
chemotherapy: a single-arm, multicentre,  phase 2 trial. Lancet, 2016. 387(10031): p. 1909-
20. 
58. McDermott, D.F., et al., Atezolizumab, an Anti-Programmed Death-Ligand 1 Antibody, in 
Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma: Long-Term Safety, Clinical Activity, and Immune Correlates From a Phase Ia Study. J Clin Oncol, 2016. 34(8): p. 833-42. 
59. Seliger, B., Molecular mechan isms of MHC class I abnormalit ies and APM components in 
human tumors. Cancer Immunol Immunother, 2008. 57(11): p. 1719-26. 
60. Campoli, M. and S. Ferrone, HLA antigen  changes in malignant  cells: epigenetic 
mechanisms and biologic signifi cance. Oncogene, 2008. 27(45): p. 5869-85. 
61. Garrido, F., T. Cabrera, and N. Aptsiauri, "H ard" and "soft" lesions underlying the HLA class 
I alterations in cancer cells:  implications for immunothe rapy. Int J Cancer, 2010. 127(2): p. 
249-56. 
62. Sakuishi, K., et al., Targeti ng Tim-3 and PD-1 pathways to  reverse T cell exhaustion and 
restore anti-tumor immunit y. J Exp Med, 2010. 207(10): p. 2187-94. 
63. Woo, S.R., et al., Immune inhi bitory molecules LAG-3 and PD-1  synergistically regulate T-
cell function to promote tumoral immune escape. Cancer Res, 2012. 72(4): p. 917-27. 
64. Goding, S.R., et al., Restoring immune func tion of tumor-specific CD4+ T cells during 
recurrence of melanoma. J Immunol, 2013. 190(9): p. 4899-909. 
65. Jing, W., et al., Combined immune checkpoi nt protein blockade and low dose whole body 
irradiation as immunothera py for myeloma. J Immunothe r Cancer, 2015. 3(1): p. 2. 
66. Bu, X., K.M. Mahoney, and G.J. Freema n, Learning from PD-1 Resistance: New 
Combination Strategies. Trends Mol Med, 2016. 22(6): p. 448-51. 
67. Gerlinger, M., et al., Genomic  architecture and evolution of clear cell renal cell carcinomas 
defined by multiregion sequenci ng. Nat Genet, 2014. 46(3): p. 225-33. 
68. Hugo, W., et al., Genomic and Tr anscriptomic Features of Res ponse to Anti-PD-1 Therapy in 
Metastatic Melanoma. Cell, 2016. 165(1): p. 35-44. 
69. Stadler, Z.K., et al., Reliable Detection of Mismatch Repair De ficiency in Colorectal Cancers 
Using Mutational Load in Next-Generati on Sequencing Panels. J Clin Oncol, 2016. 
70. Van Allen - Genomic correlates of CTLA i response in melanoma (Science 2015).pdf. 
71. Cancer Genome Atlas Research, N., Comprehe nsive molecular character ization of clear cell 
renal cell carcinoma. Na ture, 2013. 499(7456): p. 43-9. 
    
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 64 of 71  
17. APPENDIX A 
Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 65 of 71  
 

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 66 of 71  
 
 

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 67 of 71  

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 68 of 71  
 

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 69 of 71  
 

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 70 of 71  
  

Clinical Study Protocol 
HCRN GU16-260 
Version Date: 25MAR2021 C onfidential Page 71 of 71  
