Version 16 (Amendment N) 1 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD CLINICAL RESEARCH PROJECT    
        PROTOCOL #11-H-0068 
      D r u g  N a m e :  aerosolized cyclosporine A in solution with 
propylene glycol (CIS)  
        I N D  N u m b e r :  109,707 
Sponsor:  Richard Childs, MD  
 
Title :  Phase II Trial of Cyclosporine Inhalation Solution (CIS) in Lung Transplant and Hematopoietic 
Stem Cell Transplant Recipients for Treatment of Bronchiolitis Obliterans 
 
Other identifying words : Lung transplant, Single lung transplant, Double lung transplant, Peripheral blood 
stem cell transplant, Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome, myeloablative stem cell transplant, 
nonmyeloablative stem cell transplant, inhaled cyclosporine 
 
Principal Investigator: 
*Nicole Gormley, MD, NHLBI, OCD (V)   240-402-0210  WO22 RM2113, FDA, 
       10903 New Hampshire Ave, Silver Spring, MD  20903 
 
Medically Responsible Investigator:    
*Richard W. Childs, MD, NHLBI, HB (E)     594-8008   Bldg 10, CRC 3-5332 
 
Lead Associate Investigator 
*Anthony Suffredini, MD, CC, CCMD (E)                       402-3485   Bldg 10, 2C145 
 
Associate Investigators:  
Clara Chen, MD, CC,  Nuclear Medicine (E)   496-5675           Bldg 10, 1C401 
Corina Millo, MD, CC, PET (E)                                                     402-4297           Bldg 10, 1C490 
Robert Danner, MD, CC, Critical Care (E)                                    496-9320           Bldg 10, 2C145 
Sandra Mitchell, PhD, CRNP, AOCN, NCI (E)   240-276-6929 Bldg 9609, 3E448 
Lisa Cook, RN, Research Nurse, HB, NHLBI (E)    402-5609 Bldg 10, CRC 3-3485 
Nancy Geller, PhD, Director, OBR, NHLBI (E)    435-0434  Rockledge 2, 9202 
Xin Tian, PhD, Biostatistician, OBR, NHLBI (E)  435-1298 Rockledge 2, 9208 
Thomas Hughes, PharmD, CC, Pharmacy (E)  451-0495 Bldg 10, 1N257 Debra Reda, RN, CC (E)     496-9320 Bldg 10, 2C145 
Robert Reger, NHLBI (E)     594-8004 Bldg 10, CRC 3-5332 
Brian Wells, HB, NHLBI (E)     451-7128 Bldg 10, 3-1341 
Georg Aue, MD, HB, NHLBI (E)    451-7141 Bldg 10, CRC 3-3216 
Tatyana Worthy, RN, OCD, NHLBI (E)    594-8013 Bldg 10, CRC 3-3485 * = Investigators who can obtain informed consent  
 
Collaborators: 
 
Aldo T. Iacono, M.D., Medical Director, Lung Transplant Program U of MD Med Center, 655 West 
Baltimore Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21201-1559, 
aiacono@umm.edu  1-800-373-4111  
 
Michael Terrin, MD, Professor of Epidemiology and Medicine, University of Maryland, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, 655 West Baltimore Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21201-1559,  
mterrin@epi.umaryland.edu    410-706-6139. 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 2 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Timothy Corcoran, PhD, Professor of Medicine and Bioengineering, Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care 
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, NW 628 UPMC Montefiore, 3459 Fifth Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 
15213  corcorante@MSX.upmc.edu     412-647-5473. 
 
Independent Medical Monitor : Stewart Levine, MD NHLBI (E) 402-1448, Bldg 10 6D16 
 
Collaborating Pharmaceutical Company:  
APT Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 700 Airport Blvd., Suite 350, Burlingame, CA 94010 
 
 
 Subject of Study:     Number Sex  Age range 
       Screen up to         5 0  t o  g e t  
Hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients (group A)     up to 39 Either                   10-
80                                         
       Screen up to  
       5 0  t o  g e t  
Lung transplant recipients (Group B)     up to 39           either                    10-80   
(No longer enrolling)     Screen up to  
       100 to get 
Total subjects         up to 78 either     10-80 
 
Project involves ionizing radiation?   Yes   Off site project?     No 
Multi-institutional project?   No 
DSMB involved    Yes 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 3 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Precis 
 
Bronchiolitis Obliterans (BO) is an obstructive lung disease that can affect individuals that have undergone 
a lung or hematopoietic stem cell transplant.  BO has been studied most extensively in lung transplant 
recipients, where it is considered to represent chronic lung rejection.  It is the leading cause of death after 
lung transplant, with mortality rates up to 55%.  In hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, BO is thought 
to be a manifestation of chronic graft-vs-host di sease (GVHD).  Up to 45% of patients undergoing 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation at the NHLBI develop a decline in pulmonary function.  
Conventional therapy for patients who develop BO consists of augmentation of systemic 
immunosuppressants.  Systemic immunosuppression has limited efficacy for BO and is associated with 
deleterious consequences including increased risk of infections and decreased graft-versus tumor/leukemia 
effects.  
Recently, cyclosporine inhalation solution (CIS) in solution with propylene glycol has been shown to 
improve overall survival and chronic rejection-free survival in lung transplant patients.
(8)  These findings 
suggest targeted delivery of immunosuppressive therapy to the diseased organ warrants further 
investigation as this may minimize the morbidity as sociated with systemic immunosuppression.  However, 
there currently exists limited data regarding the overall efficacy of inhaled cyclosporine to treat established 
BO following lung transplantation. Furthermore, inhaled cyclosporine has not been studied in the treatment of BO following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. 
 
Here, we propose to evaluate the safety, efficacy, and pharmacodynamics of inhaled cyclosporine for the 
treatment of BO.  Two distinct patient populations  will be offered enrollm ent in this protocol: 
hematopoietic transplant recipients with BO (group A) and lung transplant recipients with BO (group B).  Study participants will receive CIS at an initial dose of 150mg, three times weekly.  Patients will undergo 
dose titration to a maximum dose of 300mg, three times weekly.  Drug deposition and pharmacokinetic 
analyses will be performed at the initiation of treatment.  Clinical parameters, including pulmonary 
function tests, will be measured in addition to laborato ry markers of the anti-inflammatory response to CIS.  
Adverse events associated with  treatment will be recorded. 
 
The primary objective is to 1) assess the safety and efficacy of inhaled cyclosporine as a new therapy in 
hematopoietic transplant patients and lung transplant patients with established BO.
  Additionally, we seek 
to promote a better understanding of the pathogenesis of BO in these two transplant groups and to assess 
the anti-inflammatory effects of inhaled cyclosporine in patients that develop this complication.  
 
The primary endpoint of each study group is the best response, FEV 1 improvement or stabilization from 
study baseline at week 18 for two successive measures, at least 1 week apart, no more than 2 weeks apart. 
Secondary endpoints  include the toxicity profile as measured by CTCAE criteria (safety), the study of 
pharmacokinetics and lung deposition characteristic s of inhaled cyclosporine, improvement in high 
resolution chest CT images, results of peripheral bl ood and bronchoalveolar cytokine arrays to assess 
secondary markers of inflammation, and functional capa city measurements using a six-minute walk test. 
 
 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 4 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Table of Contents 
 
1. Objectives 
2. Background 
3. The investigational product: Inhaled CsA 
4. Study Design 
5. Eligibility Assessment 
6. Treatment Plan 
7. Study Assessments 
8. Assessment tools and procedures 
9. Ancillary Laboratory Research Studies 
10. Biostatistical Considerations 
11. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
12. Adverse Events 
13. Human Subjects Protection 
14. Pharmaceuticals 
15. Role of Collaborators 
16. References   
Appendix  
A MEDWATCH Form FDA3500A 
B IRB Approved List of Laboratory Research Studies 
C Protocol Definitions. D  Schedule of events 
E  Event Characterization and Reporting to the I RB, Clinical Director (CD), and (as applicable) 
Sponsor 
 
See Also: PATIENT ASSESSMENT FORMS  
 Initial assessment  
 Interim clinical assessment  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 5 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD 1.0  OBJECTIVES 
 
1.1 Primary objective:  
 
To assess the safety and efficacy of inhaled aerosolized cyclosporine A solution in hematopoietic 
(group A) and lung transplant patients (group B) with bronchiolitis obliterans (BO) or BO syndrome 
(BOS). As of Amendment M, lung transplant patients are no longer being enrolled on this protocol. 
 
1.2 Secondary Objectives 
x To evaluate the lung deposition and phar macokinetics of this CSA preparation 
x To investigate the inflammatory pathways that lead to the development of BO 
x To ascertain the anti-inflammatory effects of this CSA preparation ex vivo and in vivo 
 
2.0  BACKGROUND 
 
2.1  Introduction 
 
After the first year post lung transplant, BO is the leading cause of death, accounting for 26% of all 
deaths between post transplant years 1 and 3(1).  Annually, approximately 15,000 allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplants are performed.  BO as a manifestation of chronic graft-vs.-host 
disease (GVHD) can also occur after hematopoietic st em cell transplantation.  Up to 45% of patients 
undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation at the NHLBI develop a decline in pulmonary 
function, with a significant proportion of these patients being diagnosed with BO(2).  Although 
similarities and differences in the pathogenesis of BO following lung and hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation have not been well characterized, bot h present with similar clinical manifestations and 
are treated similarly with increased doses of syst emic immunosuppressants.  The current treatment for 
BO is inadequate and involves increasing systemic immunosuppression or immune-modulating 
therapies, which are of marginal efficacy. 
  
2.2  Hematopoietic Transplant and BO / BOS 
 
Hematopoietic stem cell transplant is an established therapy for the treatment of many life-
threatening diseases.  However, there are many life-long complications associated with this treatment, especially lung disease.  Pulmonary dysfunction after hematopoietic stem cell transplant 
has been well documented, and is one of the most frequent complications seen after transplant 
(2, 3, 4).  
The incidence of BO after hematopoietic transplant has been estimated between 5 and 60% (4, 10).  The 
underlying pathophysiology is not completely understood, but it is thought that BO represents a form 
of chronic GVHD, with the lung epithelium serving as a target for immune-mediated injury induced by transplanted donor T lymphocytes 
(5).  In concert with this proposed mechanism is the observation 
that GVHD is the greatest risk factor for the development of BO after stem cell transplant (4).  This is 
also supported by the very low incidence of BO occurring after autologous stem cell transplant.  It 
has been proposed that additional factors may have a role in the development of BO.  Other factors 
may include recurrent aspiration due to GVHD induced esophagitis, infection, HLA mismatched transplant, use of busulfan or methotrexate, or lung disease prior to transplant 
(3, 4). 
 
2.3  Lung transplant and BO / BOS 
 
Bronchiolitis obliterans is the characteristic lesion seen on histology in chronic rejection after lung 
transplant.  It is estimated that 50% of lung transplant recipients will develop BOS within five years 
of transplantation, with mortality rates upwards of 55% ( 10, 8).  The pathogenesis of BOS development 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 6 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD after lung transplant is thought to have immune and non-immune facets.  It has been postulated that 
airway inflammation and epithelial cell injury result in a disordered repair process that leads to the 
fibroproliferative obstruction of the small airways.  The initial injury may result from allo-immune or 
immune-independent factors or both, but have a common final pathway, BO.  Various immune 
mediated risk factors, which have been proposed as inciting events include: increased HLA 
mismatching, acute rejection, and lymphocytic bronchitis and bronchiolitis in the absence of infection.  Non-immune mediated risk factors include chronic aspiration, infection, especially with 
CMV, and ischemic graft injury 
(6,10). 
 
2.4  BO clinical findings and diagnosis 
 
BO is an obstructive lung disease of the small airways.  Patients may present with cough, dyspnea, 
wheezing, or may be asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis.  Cough is present in 60-100% of patients 
and dyspnea in 50-70% (3).  In patients who have received a hematopoietic stem cell transplant, signs 
and symptoms of chronic graft versus host disease (GVHD) affecting other organs are often present. 
 
The gold standard for the diagnosis of BO is histologic.  On histology, there is fibrous proliferation 
affecting the small airways due to injury and inflammation of the epithelial cells.  However, histologic evidence of disease is often difficult to obtain due to the patchy nature of the small airway 
involvement.  As such, a set of clinical diagnostic criteria has been proposed by the NIH working 
group 
(7).  When histology is not available, the term Bronchiolitis Obliterans Syndrome (BOS) is 
used.  The diagnostic criteria for bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome is largely based on the presence of 
obstructive pattern pulmonary function tests with ex clusion of other causes of airway obstruction 
such as asthma, infection or emphysema. 
 
Criteria for the diagnosis of BOS, as proposed by the NIH working group, are met when all of the 
following are met: 
 
x FEV 1/FVC less than 0.7 and a FEV 1 less than 75% predicted 
x Evidence of air trapping on high-resolution chest CT or residual volume t120% 
x Absence of infection in the respiratory tract 
x One or more manifestations of chronic GVHD in another organ system 
x A 10% decline from pre-transplant baseline in the FEV 1 and one of the following: 
FEV1/FVC less than 0.7, evidence of air trapping on CT or residual volume t120% 
 
It is generally thought that this definition is too restrictive, and it has on more than one occasion 
excluded patients with biopsy proven BO.  As such, in this study we will require for diagnosis of 
BOS an FEV 1 less than 75% predicted, absence of infection or other causative etiology, a 10% 
decline from pre-transplant baseline in the FEV 1 and one of the following: FEV1/FVC less than 0.7, 
evidence of air trapping on CT or residual volume t120%, or in hematopoietic transplant recipients 
at least one other manifestation of cGVHD involving another organ system.  In lung transplant 
recipients, the same criteria will be used, but the FEV 1 decline required will be greater than 20% 
compared to best post-transplant measurement. 
 
For a determination of baseline values and diagnosis of BOS, FEV 1 measurements will be determined 
by the average of 2 sequential measurements taken at least 3 weeks apart up to 6 months apart.  
Patients can be on a bronchodilator; however, its use will be suspended during pulmonary function 
testing. 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 7 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD 2.5  Current Treatment for BO 
 
Current treatment for BO is inadequate and involves increasing systemic immunosuppression or 
immune-modulating therapies.  In patients who are not already on immunosuppressive therapy, as 
may be the case in hematopoietic stem cell patients, prednisone is commonly used as an initial 
treatment.  If there is no improvement, immunosuppression with cyclosporine or azathioprine is initiated.  While on immunosuppression, prophylaxis for pneumocystis carinii and streptococcus 
pneumonia should be given 
(3).  Despite these treatments, improvement or stabilization in lung 
function is noted in only 10-60% of patients (3, 4, 11).  Additionally, increased immunosuppression is 
associated with increased risk of infection, morbidity, and disease relapse. 
 In lung transplant –associated BO, the response rates to conven tional therapy, while varied, are quite 
disappointing.  Generally, only stabilization of FEV1  or a less steep, but continued decline is noted in 
response to therapy
25.  Recently, the use of azithromycin has shown promise for the treatment of BO 
in lung transplant recipients.  In a study by Gottleib et al, they were able to achieve an improvement, 
defined as FEV1 increase ≥ 10% in 30% of patients after 6 months of treatment26.  In hematopoietic 
stem cell transplant recipients, the response afte r therapy has been less well characterized.  One 
retrospective review by Sanchez et al demonstrated that with conventional immunosuppression, 30% improved (defined by normalization of PFTs), 30% had a partial response (improvement in PFTs, but 
not normalization), and 30% had no response, with continued decline in PFTs
27.  A study by Dudek 
et al, using more aggressive immunosuppressive regimens including ATG, thalidomide, 
methylprednisolone, cyclosporine, azathioprine, note d an improvement (10% increase in FEV1) rate 
of 49%, stabilization of 17%, and progression of 34%28.  A precipitous decline in lung function is 
often consistent with the natural disease progression29. 
 
2.6 The Investigational Product: Cyclosporine Inhalation Solution  
 
2.6.1 Background 
 
Cyclosporine Inhalation Solution (cyclosporine A in solution with propylene glycol, CIS) is a novel 
therapeutic agent in late stage development designed  to deliver cyclosporine topically to the airways 
of lung transplant recipients in combination with standard immunosuppressive regimens.  By 
administering cyclosporine through an inhaled route, augmented immunosuppression is provided 
directly to the diseased, target tissue while minimizing the systemic exposure and subsequent toxicity 
of the parent compound.   
 
2.6.2 Pharmacology  
 
CIS consists of the active ingredient cyclosporine (USP) dissolved in propylene glycol.  Cyclosporine 
is among the most common immunosuppressants used for the prevention and treatment of renal, 
liver, and heart allograft rejection.  Cyclosporine has also been demonstrated to extend the graft 
survival of bone marrow, skin, small intestine, pancreatic, and lung transplants, as well as treats a 
variety of rheumatologic conditions.  Cyclosporine suppresses the immune response by inhibiting 
evolutionarily conserved signal transduction pathways necessary for T lymphocyte activation and 
proliferation.  
Cyclosporine is an 11 amino acid cyclic peptide derived from a naturally occurring fungus.  It is 
highly lipophilic and can readily cross the cell membrane of T-lymphocytes without receptor 
activation.  Once in the cytoplasm, cyclosporine forms a drug-protein complex with a specific 
immunophilin (cyclophilin) that can block the function of calcineurin, a T cell serine threonine 
phosphatase.  When blocked, calcineurin cannot facilitate the translocation of a nuclear transcription 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 8 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD activation factor (NFAT) from the cytoplasm to the nucleus where it would normally activate 
transcription of interleukin-2 (IL-2) and other cytokines.  As a result, early T cell activation and 
proliferation are inhibited in a potent manner.  By delivering cyclosporine directly to the affected 
airways, early lymphocyte activation is diminished and intra-graft immune events that can contribute 
to the development of BO are controlled. 
 In vivo preclinical pharmacology and pharmacokinetic experiments have not been performed with 
the current formulation of cyclosporine dissolved in propylene glycol.  However, earlier experiments 
in dogs and rats conducted with cyclosporine dissol ved in ethanol revealed that exposure to inhaled 
cyclosporine was well tolerated and resulted in lung concentrations that were several hundred-fold 
higher than concentrations in liver, kidney, heart and blood 
(12).  In rat lung transplant models, 
treatment with inhaled cyclosporine provided pr otection from allograft rejection compared to 
untreated animals and led to a dose-dependent reduction in pro-inflammatory cytokine production.  
Furthermore, the degree of protection was superior to animals treated with cyclosporine via a 
systemic intramuscular route ( 13).  Similar results were found when inhaled cyclosporine was 
evaluated in a canine orthotopic lung transplant model (14). 
 
 2.6.3 Animal models 
 
Two 28-day inhalational toxicology studies spon sored by Chiron Corporation (Battelle studies 
N103752 in rats and N103751 in dogs) provide the core data for direct toxicity evaluation (both 
systemic and local) of both CIS and propylene glycol.  These studies were performed with daily 
dosing at maximally tolerated (rats) or maximally fe asible (dogs) doses of CIS.  Exposure in these 
studies was in excess of the maximum clinical exposure, both in terms of overall dose given per day 
for both cyclosporine and propylene glycol as well as in frequency of dosing (daily in animals vs. 
three times/week clinically).  These studies demonstrated that the local effects of cyclosporine in the 
respiratory tract should be tolerable in human s at the proposed clinical doses.  There was no 
unexpected systemic toxicity or significant loca l respiratory system toxicity associated with 
inhalation exposures up to approximately 2.7 times the maximum human exposure per dose.  
Mortality associated with the pulmonary effects of CIS was observed in rats at pulmonary deposited 
doses more than 5 times the maximum human exposure per dose. 
 
Toxicokinetic data generated in these animal studies indicate that after inhalation, lung exposure to cyclosporine is 10 to 20-fold greater than systemic exposure as measured by peak concentrations, 
trough concentrations, and area under the curve (AUC ) analyses.  Cyclosporine from the propylene 
glycol formulation is partially absorbed systemic ally and does not accumulate with daily repeated 
dosing. Half-life (t
1/2) in the blood was consistent with that observed with intravenous (IV) exposure 
in both rats and dogs.  Thus, once the compound reaches the systemic circulation, the disposition 
should be similar to the disposition of the compound after IV and/or oral administration. 
 
2.6.4 Previous Human Experience 
 
The systemic toxicity of cyclosporine has been well characterized in humans and animals.  The most 
common toxicities associated with systemic expos ures include renal dysfunction, hypertension, 
dyslipidemia, hirsutism, headache, increased risk of infections, and tremor.  Additional, less common 
toxicities include gum hyperplasia, hyperkalemia , thrombocytopenia, and seizure.  Hypertension, 
dyslipidemia, and renal dysfunction are particularly prevalent in the lung transplant population with 
extended use. 
 
As cyclosporine is partially systemically absorbed following inhalation, the risk of systemic toxicities 
in addition to the risk of local respiratory tract toxicities was evaluated in repeat dose animal studies. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 9 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD After demonstrating efficacy in preclinical cani ne and rodent transplant models, ethanol-based 
inhaled cyclosporine was tested in a series of open-label protocols evaluating its safety and efficacy 
in lung transplant recipients with established BO and/or refractory acute rejection (AR).  In patients 
with established BO, the administration of inha led cyclosporine in conjunction with standard 
immunosuppressive therapy led to improvement in re jection histology, stabilization of pulmonary 
function, and improvement in survival compared to contemporary and historical controls (15,16).  In 
patients with AR that failed to respond to high-dose pulsed methylprednisolone, the administration of 
inhaled cyclosporine in conjunction with standard immunosuppressive therapy led to improvement in 
AR histology, improvement in pulmonary function, a decline in pro-inflammatory cytokine 
production in bronchoalveolar samples, and improv ement in survival compared to contemporary 
control patients (17,18,19).  Although these studies demonstrated the safety of inhaled cyclosporine, the 
ethanol solvent was associated with substantial respiratory tract irritation and was subsequently 
changed to propylene glycol. 
 
These open label protocols were followed by a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study 
of CIS designed to test the efficacy of CIS in  preventing lung allograft rejection and improving 
outcomes when given as prophylactic therapy (8).  A total of 56 subjects were enrolled within 7 to 42 
days following their single- or double lung transplant and treated with either CIS or placebo (propylene glycol alone).  Of these 56 subjects, a total of 26 subjects received CIS and 30 subjects 
received placebo.  All subjects underwent an initial dose-titration period to find the maximum 
tolerated dose up to a protocol-specified maximum of 300 mg (or the equivalent volume of propylene 
glycol in the placebo group).  After this 10-day period, subjects were to continue therapy 3 times per 
week for a period of 2 years.  The study concluded on August 21, 2003, when the 56th subject completed the full 2 years of treatment.  Follow-up in the randomized cohort ranged from 24 to 56 
months. 
 
Results of the study demonstrated that treatment with CIS was associated with a 79% decreased risk 
of death compared with treatment with placebo (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.213; log-rank p = 0.007).  This 
statistically significant survival advantage was also observed when stratified by transplant type, 
primary diagnosis, cytomegalovirus (CMV) donor positive/recipient negative mismatch, or the 
occurrence of a grade 2 or higher AR episode prior to enrollment.  The survival advantage from CIS 
treatment may have arisen from a decreased incidence of chronic rejection, consistent with the mode 
of delivery to the airway epithelium.  Subjects tr eated with CIS had significantly improved chronic 
rejection-free survival (HR = 0.28; log-rank p = .001) compared with subjects treated with placebo. 
Chronic rejection was diagnosed either through biopsy  by the presence of BO or clinically by the 
presence of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS).  Among the 30 placebo-treated subjects, only 8 
(27%) survived free of chronic rejection compared with 18 (69%) CIS-treated subjects.  Analyses of 
BOS-free survival and BO-free survival revealed co mparable results.  However, treatment with CIS 
did not lead to significant difference in the occurrence of AR (p = 0.73). 
 
Further analysis of the study population revealed that CIS had a favorable safety profile, and long-
term administration did not lead to exacerbations  of known toxicities of oral and intravenous 
cyclosporine.  In particular, there was no evidence th at administration of CIS led to increased risk of 
nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity, increased risk of in fections, or increased risk of malignancies.  
Treatment with CIS was found to be associated with respiratory tract irritation and bronchospasm, but these events were generally mild/moderate, occurred early in subjects’ treatment course, 
diminished with time, and were not associated with the development of more serious respiratory 
complications.  These findings were consistent with the analysis of the larger, 70 subject, safety 
database. 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 10 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD In March 2005, an open label early access treatment IND was initiated.  The purpose of this protocol 
was to provide CIS to lung transplant physicians for use in suitable lung transplant recipients.  Since 
that time, over 60 lung transplant recipients have received CIS.  Data collection is limited to early 
tolerability subject diaries and serious adverse events (SAEs).  Analysis of this safety database has 
not led to the emergence of any new safety findings.  However, in recipients with poor pulmonary 
reserve (such as those with advanced BOS), intolerance to dosing is more common, and dose titration to the maximal 300 mg dose is sometimes not possible.  
 
The safety and efficacy of CIS in preventing chronic rejection and improving survival in this 
population of lung transplant subjects has been previously demonstrated in a randomized double-
blind, placebo-controlled, clinical study.
(8)  This study was the basis for a new drug application 
(NDA) to regulatory authorities.  This application received an approvable letter, with approval 
contingent on additional supporting clinical data .  There is currently a multicenter, phase III, 
randomized, controlled trial designed to assess the efficacy of prophylactic inhaled cyclosporine for 
the prevention of bronchiolitis obliterans in lung transplant recipients.  However, there currently 
exists limited data on the efficacy of CIS in propylene glycol to treat established BO/BOS occurring 
in lung transplant recipients and no data in HSCT recipients with established BOS.  
 
2.7  Rationale for Dose, Route and Schedule 
 
Most of the previous clinical trials have taken place at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center 
(UPMC), which is a leading center in lung transpla ntation research and clinical management of lung 
transplant recipients.  We will conduct this study using the same dose of CIS as was used in the Pittsburgh chronic lung rejection prevention trial, specifically 300 mg cyclosporine (or maximally 
tolerated dose up to 300 mg) administered three tim es per week after an initial 6-week titration 
period.  The formulation is 325 mg cyclosporine in 5.2 mL of propylene glycol (62.5 mg/mL). 
 
2.8 Rationale for including pediatric Subjects  
 
 There are no alternative treatment options for chil dren who develop this often-fatal consequence of 
lung or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.  Therefore the potential efficacy of inhaled CsA 
would be relevant to children.  We do not expect an extraordinary effort will be required to accrue 
pediatric subjects as our transplant program offers transplant procedures to minors.  At present there 
is limited data on the use of CIS in children.  CIS has been administered to two pediatric lung 
transplant recipients, but this is the extent of the pediatric data available.  However, there are studies 
investigating inhaled medications in children vs. adults which suggest systemic absorption of inhaled 
drugs, even when administered at the same doses, are not higher in pediatric populations compared to 
adults. A study investigating lung deposition of inha led steroids in children and adults (children 2-3 
years, children 4-6 years, adults 10-41years) with asthma receiving the same fixed dose of inhaled 
budesonide (2 x 200 ug via Nebuchamber pMDI with mouthpiece and nose clip) showed that 
systemic absorption of budesonide (as measured by plasma AUC) was similar for all age groups
21. 
This data suggests, from a safety standpoint, that the prescribed dose of inhaled budesonide need not 
be adjusted for age.  A previous pharmacokinetic study of CIS in adults with BO/BOS found that the 
systemic exposure of CSA using comparable doses of CIS as used in this study, is about 7-fold lower 
than is achieved with CSA given orally (Neoral®) at comparable doses22.  Maximum blood 
concentrations of cyclosporine after aerosol admi nistration of CIS ranged from 119 to 402 ng/mL, 
while 24 hr concentrations ranged from 9 to 48 ng/mL (versus reported C max concentrations of 1555 
ng/mL and trough concentrations of 268 ng/mL in liver transplant recipients, according to the 
Neoral® label).  From these data we infer that inhaled CIS in pediatric populations age 10 and older 
will not result in toxic systemic levels of CSA, however, adjustments will be made for pediatric 
dosing per APT recommendations.  We will perform lung deposition and pharmacokinetic studies in 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 11 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD all pediatric subjects and will closely monitor their plasma cyclosporine levels during the study.  
Pediatric subjects 10 years of age or older will be allowed to participate in this study as they are at an 
age where they can cooperate sufficiently with drug administration and required study tests. 
Although there is limited data to judge potential risk in children, the seriousness of BO in children we 
believe warrants their participation.  
 
2.9   Rationale for pediatric dosing   
(per Charles Johnson, MD, Chief Medical Officer, APT Pharmaceuticals) 
 
The main safety concerns in this age group are to ensure that there is not excessive systemic exposure 
to cyclosporine and there is no impact on lung functi on.  It is normal practice to dose the currently 
licensed forms of cyclosporine (eg Neoral) on the basis of weight and monitor blood levels of 
cyclosporine.  In addition, data from Chua et al, 1994 in 8 children (median age 10.8 y) with cystic 
fibrosis showed that in this age group, age was not a factor in the amount of drug deposited following 
aerosol delivery.  Therefore, it is proposed to use weight as the main determinant of dose and divide 
the pediatric population into two groups on the basis of weight.  Current experience in the adult 
population indicates that six adult subjects weighing less than 45 Kg (range 34.5 - 44.3 Kg) have 
been exposed to CIS.  All six achieved a dose of 300 mg in the titration phase and none have reported adverse events associated with study drug.  The lightest subject had a peak serum cyclosporine level 
of 39.7 ng/mL one hour after the inhalation.  This level is substantially below the therapeutic level set 
for systemic therapy (250 -350 ng/mL), suggesting that systemic exposure is not likely to be dose 
limiting at least in children above 35 kg. 
 
Since the same nebulizer/compressor system will be used in the pediatric population, the proportion 
of nominal dose which is emitted at the mouth-piece will remain constant.  The lung delivered dose is 
then dependent upon minute ventilation (slightly lowe r than adults across this age group) and air 
entrainment (less dilution of the dose due to a lower inspiratory flow rate in children) these factors 
will exist as a continuum across the population having a greater impact in the smaller younger 
subjects.  Although the adult data suggests that there is a wide therapeutic margin (very low systemic 
cyclosporine exposure) it would seem prudent to reduce the nominal dose in the youngest, lightest 
population.  The proposed dose for the pediatric age group is as follows:  
Weight ≥ 35 Kg dose at 300 mg  
Weight < 35 Kg dose at 200 mg 
This dosing schedule is being used in a multicenter phase III Trial, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]. 
 
2.10   Clinical and Scientific Justification   
 
Bronchiolitis Obliterans (BO) is an obstructive lung disease that can affect individuals after lung transplant or hematopoietic stem cell transplant.  Patients with BOS report more restrictions in their 
functional capacity than transplant patients with out BOS.  There are preliminary studies suggesting 
that depressive symptoms, fatigue, and decrements in physical function occur in association with 
bronchiolitis obliterans in lung transplant recipients 
(30).  However, the characteristics and correlates 
of adverse changes in quality of life domains, including mood disturbance, in patients with 
bronchiolitis obliterans following stem cell transplantation have not been examined in prior research.  
Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome in both lung and hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients is associated with significant mortality.  Median survival after the development of BOS in 
hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients is only 2.5 years
(10).  Mortality related to BOS is greater 
than 60% in patients after hematopoietic stem cell transplant and 55% in lung transplant recipients 
(4,8,9). 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 12 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Currently, there are very few treatment options for patients who develop bronchiolitis obliterans.  
Patients are managed with increasing systemic im munosuppressants with limited success.  This is 
associated with increased infections and in the setting of a hematopoietic stem cell transplant can 
decrease the graft-versus tumor/leukemia effect.  Recent studies by Iacono, et al have demonstrated 
that inhaled cyclosporine (CSA) in solution with propylene glycol when given prophylactically, can 
improve overall survival and chronic rejection-free survival in lung transplant patients(8).  However, 
data on the efficacy of inhaled CSA to treat established BOS in lung transplant recipients is limited.  
Because targeted delivery to the diseased organ that minimizes the morbidity associated with 
systemic immunosuppression warrants further investigation in both the lung transplant and 
hematopoietic transplant setting, we propose this phase II clinical trial designed to evaluate the 
safety, efficacy, and pharmacodynamics of inhaled cy closporine in lung transplant and hematopoietic 
transplant recipients. 
 
This study also seeks to further define the inflammatory pathways associated with BOS in stem cell 
transplant and lung transplant recipients and to investigate and compare similarities and differences 
in the pathogenesis of BOS in these two transplant groups.  Bronchial epithelial cells and peripheral 
blood cells will be studied using multiplex cytokine arrays, flow cytometry, and gene expression 
profiling.  These studies will be performed on samples collected from subjects and will promote further delineation of the underlying pathogenesis in BOS.  Additionally, this study will examine the 
anti-inflammatory effects of cyclosporine on me diators of inflammation and differential gene 
expression in these populations.  This has not been thoroughly studied in hematopoietic stem cell 
transplant recipients.  This study evaluating aerosolized cyclosporine will contribute to a greater 
understanding of the pathogenesis of bronchiolitis ob literans, and set the stag e for larger trials in 
hematopoietic stem cell transplant and lung transplant recipients.  
 
3.0 INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT 
 
Please refer to the Investigator’s brochure for Cyclosporine Inhalation Solution (CIS) . 
 
4.0 STUDY DESIGN 
 
The study is designed as a non-randomized, Phase II study of aerosolized cyclosporine A in solution 
with propylene glycol (CIS) in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients at least 99 days post 
transplant (Group A) or lung transplant recipients at least 6 months post transplant (Group B) who 
have been diagnosed with biopsy proven bronchiolitis obliterans or Bronchiolitis Obliterans 
Syndrome.  The primary endpoint of each study group is FEV 1 improvement or stabilization from 
study baseline at week 18 for two successive measures, at least 1 week apart, no more than two 
weeks apart.  Subjects who cannot tolerate the medication (at least 150mg dose), have disease 
progression (beginning at week 9) as defined by a 20% or more decline in FEV 1 on two successive 
measurements at least 2 weeks apart or require >25% increase in one or more existing 
immunosuppressive agents or the addition of new systemic immunosuppressive therapies due to 
worsening symptoms related to BOS will go off study. As of Amendment M, lung transplant patients 
are no longer being enrolled on this protocol. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Labs 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 13 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD  
 
18 or 39 
PBSCT pt and  
 18 or 39 
End 
of 
Study  
Week 0  
Week 6  
 Week 18  
 Week 9  
 Week 12  
 Wee
 Week  15 
 Week 19  
PFTs  
Labs  
BAL  
QOL  
CT 
LD 
PFTs  
Labs  
BAL  
QOL  
CT 
LD 
PFTs  
Labs  
BAL  
QOL  
CT 
PFTs  
Labs  
PFTs  
 PFTs  
Labs  
P
LPFTs  
Labs  
CSA 
150mg
Progression*  
FEV1≥20% decline, worsening status,  
or increase in systemic immunosuppression
* Based on two successive measures at least two weeks apart, 
beginning at week 9  
Primary Endpoint  
CSA 
300mg
Version 16 (Amendment N) 14 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD 5.0   ELIGIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
 
5.1 Inclusion criteria  
 
5.1.1 History of   
  
x Hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients at least 99 days post transplant (Group A) 
 
5.1.2 Biopsy proven bronchiolitis obliterans (confirmed by NIH pathology department) or 
Bronchiolitis Obliterans Syndrome (BOS) as defined by: 
x FEV 1 <75% predicted and  
x No evidence of pulmonary infection as a causative etiology to lung dysfunction or 
other causative etiology and 
x Decline in FEV 1 (The FEV 1 values used to determine BOS will be the average of 2 
measurements of FEV 1 taken sequentially at least 3 weeks apart up to 6 months apart) 
compared to pre-transplant baseline for Group A. 
o For hematopoietic transplant patients, FEV 1 must have declined >10% from pre-
transplant baseline (group A)  
x And one of the following: 
o FEV 1/FVC <0.7 
o Air trapping seen on CT scan or RV t120% predicted 
o Evidence of cGVHD affecting at least one other organ system (group A) 
  
5.1.3 Age 10-80 years 
 
5.1.4 Progressive disease or stable disease (active BOS, stable by FEV 1 criteria) on 
immunosuppressants at study entry 
 
5.1.5 Progressive disease at study entry:  Diagnosis of BO or BOS with evidence of a 
progressive decline in FEV 1.  A documented decline ( ≥10%) in FEV 1 has occurred within 
18 weeks (minimum documentation of 3 weeks) preceding study enrollment. 
 
5.1.6 Stable disease at study entry:  Diagnosis of BO or BOS on immunosuppressive therapy 
with evidence of stable disease (active BOS, stable by FEV 1 criteria), as documented by a 
stable FEV 1 (increase <5% and decrease <10%) within 18 weeks (minimum documentation 
of 3 weeks) preceding study enrollment. 
 
5.1.7 Subjects on calcineurin inhibitors at study entry will be required to be on a stable dose of 
the calcineurin inhibitor for 4 weeks prior to study enrollment. 
 
Prior to Amendment M, patients with lung transplant –associated BOS were eligible for the trial. 
 
5.2   Exclusion criteria 
    
5.2.1  Evidence of uncontrolled, pulmonary infection 
 
5.2.2 Subjects with unstable coronary insufficiency, severe cardiac arrhythmias, and/or 
uncontrolled hypertension.  
 
5.2.3 History of hypersensitivity to propylene glycol 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 15 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD  
5.2.4 History of allergic reaction or hypersensitivity to Technetium- 99m sulfur colloid, used in 
lung deposition studies 
 
5.2.5 ECOG performance status greater than or equal to 3 
 5.2.6 Serum creatinine >2.5 mg/dl  
 
5.2.7 Documented allergy or intolerance to cyclosporine 
 
5.2.8 Women pregnant or breast feeding or not willing to use an approved method of birth 
control 
 
5.2.9 Inability to comprehend the investigational nature of the study and provide informed 
consent 
 
5.2.10  Life expectancy less than 18 weeks 
 5.2.11  An increase ≥ 5% and an a bsolute increase ≥ 0.05  in FEV1 in the 18 weeks (minimum 
documentation of 3 weeks) preceding study enrollment 
 
5.2.12  Subjects who have had prior administration of inhaled cyclosporine. 
 
6.0  TREATMENT PLAN 
 
6.1 Pre-treatment Medication (albuterol)  
 
Subjects will receive metered dose inhaler albuterol, 2 puffs as needed for prevention of 
bronchospasm or 3 ml solution for nebulization.  Subjects  may receive levalbuterol in place of 
albuterol or not receive pre-treatment.  
6.1.1 Inhalation device:  Subjects will be instructed regarding the use of the inhalation device as 
follows:   
x Shake the inhaler well. 
x Breathe out as completely as possible through your mouth. 
x Hold the canister with the mouthpiece on the bottom, facing you and the canister pointing 
upward.  Place the open end of the mouthpiece into your mouth.  Close your lips tightly 
around the mouthpiece. 
x Breathe in slowly and deeply through the mouthpiece.  At the same time, press down once 
on the container to spray the medication into your mouth. 
x Try to hold your breath for 10 seconds, remove the inhaler, and breathe out slowly.  
x Wait 10 minutes before beginning cyclosporine nebulizer treatment. 
 
6.1.2 Nebulizer: Subjects will be instructed regarding the use of the nebulizer device as follows: 
x Before treatment, wash your hands with soap and water and dry completely. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 16 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD x Place the air compressor on a sturdy surface that will support its weight.  Plug the cord 
from the compressor into a properly grounded (three-prong) electrical outlet. 
x Carefully measure medications exactly as you have been instructed and put them into the 
nebulizer cup. 
x Assemble the nebulizer cup and mask or mouthpiece. 
x Connect the tubing to both the aerosol comp ressor and nebulizer cup (with filter if 
beginning treatment with cyclosporine). 
x Turn on the compressor to make sure it is working correctly.  You should see a light mist 
coming from the back of the tube opposite the mouthpiece. 
x Sit up straight on a comfortable chair.  If the treatment is for your child, he or she may sit 
on your lap.  If you are using a mask, position it comfortably and securely on you or your 
child's face.  If you are using a mouthpiece, pl ace it between you or your child's teeth and 
seal the lips around it. 
x Take slow, deep breaths. 
x Continue the treatment until the medication is gone (an average of 10 minutes for 
albuterol).  The nebulizer will make a sputtering noise, and the cup will have just a little 
medication remaining. 
x If dizziness or jitteriness occurs, stop the treatment and rest for about 5 minutes.  Continue 
the treatment, and try to breathe more slowly.  If dizziness or jitteriness continues to be a 
problem with future treatments, inform your doctor. 
x During the treatment, if the medication sticks to the sides of the nebulizer cup, you may 
shake the cup to loosen the droplets. 
x After each treatment, rinse the nebulizer cup thoroughly with warm water, shake off excess 
water, and let air-dry. 
x Wait 10 minutes before beginning cyclosporine nebulizer treatment. 
6.1.3 Concomitant Medications of Concern with albuterol  (concurrent use will be per PI 
discretion and carefully monitored)  Subjects will be queried as to what prescription 
medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products they are taking, or have 
stopped taking within the past two weeks as medication dose adjustments may be required or subjects carefully monitored for side effects with the following medications: 
x beta blockers such as atenolol (Tenormin), labetalol (Normodyne), metoprolol (Lopressor, 
Toprol XL), nadolol (Corgard), and propranolol (Inderal); digoxin (Lanoxin); diuretics; epinephrine (Epipen, Primatene Mist); other inhale d medications used to relax the air passages 
such as metaproterenol (Alupent) and leval buterol (Xoponex); and medications for colds 
x antidepressants such as amitriptyline (Elavil), amoxapine (Asendin), clomipramine 
(Anafranil), desipramine (Norpramin), doxepin (Adapin, Sinequan), imipramine (Tofranil), 
nortriptyline (Aventyl, Pamelor), protriptyline (Vivactil), and trimipramine (Surmontil); 
and monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, including isocarboxazid (Marplan), phenelzine 
(Nardil), selegiline (Eldepryl, Emsam), and tranylcypromine (Parnate). 
 
6.1.4   Subjects will also be instructed to discontinue albuterol and notify the research team 
immediately if they: 
x become pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 17 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD x experience severe wheezing and difficulty breathing immediately after it is inhaled. 
 6.1.5   Subjects will be instructed not to administer the albuterol and /or study drug on the day of 
assessments, as the albuterol and/or CsA may complicate the interpretation of the pulmonary function testing.  
 
6.2 Study Drug (Aerosolized Cyclosporine A in solution with Propylene glycol) Administration 
 
6.2.1   Treatment plan: 
 
Week 1:  Subjects will receive aerosolized cyclosporine A in solution with propylene glycol using a 
Sidestream nebulizer with the Invacare Mobilaire compressor at 30 psi
.  During the first week, 
subjects will receive 150 mg (total volume 2.4 ml), 3 times weekly.  During the first and second 
doses of 150mg of study drug, subjects will be monitored for correct use of the aerosolizing device 
under direct supervision of the research team.  An individualized maximum tolerated dose may be 
recommended.  Pediatric dosing  per APT recommendation:  During the first week, subjects will 
receive 150 mg (total volume 2.4 ml), 3 times weekly.  Subjects may not initiate aerosolized 
cyclosporine based on the results of the bronchoscopy, at the discretion of the PI. 
  
 Weeks 2-5:  Subjects (adults and pediatric) will con tinue self administration of aerosolized 
cyclosporine A in solution with propylene glycol 150 mg (total volume 2.4 ml), 3 times weekly.  A 
member of the study team will periodically (during weeks 2 – 5) call the subjects to discuss any 
concerns or issues related to study drug administration.  
 
 Weeks 6-8:  Subjects will  undergo a dose escalation to 300 mg inhalation dose (total volume 4.8ml) 
three times weekly.  This is the dose that has been used previously in lung transplant recipients by 
Iacono et al (8).  During dose escalation, subjects will be monitored under direct supervision of the 
research team.  If a subject is unable to tolerate the dose escalation, they will be able to continue at 
the 150mg dose given three times per week or 125mg (total volume 2.0 mL) daily . 
Pediatric dosing  per APT recommendation: 
 Weight ≥ 35 Kg dose at 300 mg (total volume 4.8ml three times weekly).  
Weight < 35 Kg dose at 200 mg (total volume 3.2 ml three times weekly).  If the subject weighs 
less than 35 Kg and is unable to tolerate the dose escalation to 200 mg they can continue at 150 
mg three times weekly or 85 mg (total volume 1.36 mL) daily. 
 
 Weeks 9-18:   Continued dosing will be dependent on response and tolerance.   Formal PFTs 
performed at NIH will be obtained to determine respon se to treatment.  Subjects will continue at the 
300mg inhalation dose (total volume 4.6ml) three times weekly or maximally tolerated dose. 
 
 Any subject that demonstrates disease progression (beginning at week 9) as defined by a 20% or 
more decline in FEV 1 on two successive measurements at least 2 weeks apart, or >25% increase in 
existing or addition of new immunosuppressive therapies (sustained for 3 weeks, excluding 
adjustments made for target drug levels), above baseline levels, due to worsening symptoms related to BOS, will be categorized as a treatment failure and will discontinue study drug administration and 
proceed with end of study drug assessment.  For all others, study drug administration will end at 
week 19 assessment. 
 Deviation plan for a missed dose:  Subjects will be treated with CIS three times weekly ideally on 
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday of the week.  Should a subject miss a scheduled dose of CIS, we will attempt to alter the dosing regimen for that week so that the subject will still receive three doses 
of CIS over a week with a limit of 1 dose per day.  Data will be captured and reported for subjects 
who deviate from the treatment plan. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 18 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD  
Medication Holds:  During study participation, subjects may be instructed to hold administration of 
CIS after development of an adverse event or other reason at the discretion of the PI.  Information 
pertaining to the reason for and the duration of the medication hold will be captured in the subjects’  
medical record.  If study drug is held for more than 7 days, the time of the hold will not be counted 
towards the overall study week count.  Study drug can be held for up to 12 weeks.  
6.2.2   Special Instructions Regarding the Admi nistration of Aerosolized Cyclosporine A 
  
Subjects will follow nebulizer instructions (section 6.1.2) with the following instructions specific to 
CsA:  Continue the treatment until the medication is gone (approx. 20-30 minutes for cyclosporine). 
 
A new nebulizer should be used after albuterol admi nistration.  Aerosolized CsA is provided in single 
use vials.  Any CsA remaining in the vial after administration should be discarded immediately. 
 
Aerosolized CsA should be administered such as to avoid others being exposed to CsA during the 
inhalation process. 
 Subjects will be given a medication log and asked to record their CIS administration on the log.  
Subjects will be encouraged to capture this information, but failure to comply with this request will 
not be reported as a protocol deviation. 
 
 6.2.3 Permitted Concomitant Medications 
  
Post Transplant Medications:  Subjects that require an increase in existing immunosuppressive meds 
by 25% due to worsening BOS symptoms (sustained for 3 weeks, excluding adjustments made for 
target drug levels) or need addition of new im munosuppressive therapies (sustained for 3 weeks), 
above baseline levels, due to worsening lung disease or BOS symptoms after week 9 will be 
categorized as treatment failures.  However, if the increase or addition of new immunosuppressive therapies is for GVHD not involving the lung or to maintain baseline drug levels, this data will be 
captured and the subject will continue on study.  Efforts will be made to make no changes in existing 
medical therapies other than tapering immunosuppressants in subjects who have PFTs showing stable 
or improved pulmonary function. 
 Systemic immunosuppressants will be tapered beginning at week 6, if subjects have an improvement 
or stabilization of FEV
1 compared to study baseline values, at the discretion of the PI, taking into 
account the subject’s other manifestations of GVHD.  Attempts will be made to taper prednisone 
first, before other systemic immunosuppressants.  Prednisone will be decreased by 25% at the first 
taper.  Subsequent tapers will be at the discretion of the PI.  Lung transplant recipients will not have systemic immunosuppressants tapered. 
 
Subjects that have improvement or stabilization of FEV
1, are not on prednisone, and are only on 
calcineurin inhibitors, will have their steady state calcineurin inhibitor (systemic cyclosporine or 
tacrolimus) dose tapered at the discretion of the PI.  The calcineurin inhibitor dose will be decreased 
by 25% at the first taper.  Subsequent tapers will be at the discretion of the PI. 
  
Lung Infection Prophylaxis : 
Lung infection prophylaxis will be at the discretion of the PI, taking into account the patient’s other 
concomitant medications and medical history. The following are guidelines: 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 19 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD x For PCP pneumonia prophylaxis, subjects will take Bactrim, one double strength tablet 
(800/160mg) orally three times weekly or aerosolized pentamidine 300mg every four 
weeks by inhalation. 
 
x For antiviral prophylaxis, subjects will receive acyclovir 800 mg twice daily.  Pediatric 
subjects less than 40kgs will receive acyclovir 20mg/kg po twice daily to a maximum dose 
of 800mg twice daily. 
 
x For antibacterial prophylaxis, subjects will receive penicillin 500mg twice daily or for 
penicillin allergic patients, azithromycin 250mg daily. 
 
x Subjects who are already on adequate, alternative prophylaxis agents prescribed by their 
primary transplant teams can remain on their prior regimens. 
 
6.2.4 Concomitant Medications of Concern with CsA (concurrent use will be per PI discretion 
and carefully monitored)  
 
x Due to potential for drug interactions, other short acting sympathominetic aerosolized 
bronchodilators, beta-adrenergic receptor blocking agents, digoxin, monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressant s will be allowed per PI discretion. 
    
x Due to the potential for compromising the primary endpoint, subjects requiring an increase in 
systemic immunosuppression or who initiate new immunosuppressive agents, such as oral 
tacrolimus, CSA, prednisone, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) or azathioprine due to 
symptoms of GVHD  not involving the lung, will remain on study and will have concurrent 
use of these medications carefully tracked and accounted for during and at the end of study 
data analysis. 
 
x Cyclosporine can interfere with or be affected by multiple drugs due to its metabolism 
through the CYP3A4 enzyme. As such, patients who are taking medications, which are either substrates for inducers of, or inhibitors of CYP3A4 (i.e. oral cyclosporine) will be closely 
monitored (see appendix c). 
 
7.0   STUDY ASSESSMENTS 
 
7.1 Screening Evaluation (Screening will be done  under protocol 97-H-0041 and will be used to 
establish eligibility and baseline status) 
 
x History and Physical with emphasis on symptom assessment 
x ECOG 
x Review of concomitant medications  
x Vital signs 
x CBC with differential 
x Acute Care, Mineral and Hepatic Panels  
x Serum Beta- HCG in female subjects  
x When applicable (i.e. on oral CSA), a CSA trough level 
x Pulmonary Function tests  
o Forced Spirometry  
o Slow Spirometry 
o Lung volumes with nitrogen washout 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 20 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD o Single Breath Diffusion 
o Exhaled Nitric Oxide (subset of subjects) 
x Six minute walk test 
x EKG  
x High Resolution Chest CT (HRCT) 
x Determination of baseline status 
o Progressive disease at study entry 
 Diagnosis of BO or BOS with evidence of a progressive decline in FEV 1.  
Documented decline ( ≥10%) in FEV 1 has occurred within 18 weeks (minimum 
documentation of 3 weeks) preceding study enrollment 
o Stable disease (active BOS, stable by FEV 1 criteria) at study entry on 
immunosuppressants 
 Diagnosis of BO or BOS on immunosuppressive therapy with evidence of stable 
disease (active BOS, stable by FEV 1 criteria), as documented by a stable FEV 1 
(increase <5% and decrease <10%) within 18 weeks (minimum documentation of 3 
weeks) preceding study enrollment 
7.2   Enrollment 
x The informed consent process will begin and the written informed consent document will be 
signed. 
 
7.3 Week 1 Assessments 
 
x Peak Flow measurement with instructions on home peak flow measurement 
x Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) to be analyzed by  
o Gram stain 
o Routine cultures 
o Luminex cytokine arrays 
o Flow Cytometry 
o Gene expression profiles 
o Proliferative, cytotoxic, and apoptotic response of BAL lymphocytes to 3rd party 
epithelial cells and allogeneic lymphocyte population 
o T regulatory cell quantification by real time PCR on CD4+ selected T-cells using primers 
to fox p3 
x Peripheral Blood sample for 
o Luminex cytokine arrays 
o Flow Cytometry 
o Gene expression profiles 
o Lymphocyte extended phenotypic analysis: Trail, Fas ligand, Perforin Granzyme B 
o Lymphocyte response to non-specific mitogens 
o Lymphocyte cytotoxic assays 
o T regulatory cell quantification by real time PCR on CD4+ T-cells using primers to fox 
p3 
o Proteomics 
x Quality of life assessments  
o SF36 
o GVHD questionnaire (PBSC transplant subjects only) 
o HAP Questionnaire 
o CRQ-SAS questionnaire 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 21 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD The following assessments may be repeated at week one if the screening assessments were performed 
greater than 7 days prior to enrollment or if there are any changes in the subjects condition that may 
warrant repeat testing . The decision to repeat these assessments will be at the PI’s discretion.  
 
x Repeat History and Physical with emphasis on symptom assessment 
x ECOG 
x Review of concomitant medications 
x Vital signs 
x CBC with differential 
x Acute Care, Mineral and Hepatic Panels 
x Serum Beta- HCG in female subjects 
x When applicable (i.e. on oral CSA), a CSA trough level 
x Pulmonary Function tests 
o Forced Spirometry  
o Slow Spirometry 
o Lung volumes with nitrogen washout 
o Single Breath Diffusion 
o Exhaled Nitric Oxide (subset of subjects) 
x Six minute walk test 
x High Resolution Chest CT (HRCT) 
 
7.4 End of Week 1 Assessments (+/- 3 days) 
 
x Interim assessment with emphasis on symptomatology  
x Vital signs 
x ECOG performance status  
x Assessment of comprehension of medication self-administration and adherence  
x Review of concomitant medications 
x CBC with differential (when pos sible done concurrently with post transplant monitoring) 
x Acute Care, Mineral and Hepatic Panels (when possible done concurrently with post 
transplant monitoring) 
x Repeat Serum Beta- HCG in women of childbearing potential 
x Plasma cyclosporine level 
x Radiolabelled lung deposition studies (+/- 10 days; to be performed in a subset of patients  
x Pharmacokinetics (subset of subjects) 
x Review Peak Flow measurements  
 
7.5 Week 6 Assessments (+/- 5 days)   
x Interim assessment with emphasis on symptomatology  
x Vital signs  
x ECOG performance status  
x Review of concomitant medications and adherence  
x CBC with differential (when possi ble, done concurrently with post transplant monitoring) 
x Acute Care, Mineral and Hepatic Panels (when possible done concurrently with post 
transplant monitoring) 
x Plasma cyclosporine level 
x Repeat Serum Beta- HCG in women of childbearing potential 
x Pulmonary Function tests 
o Forced Spirometry 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 22 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD o Slow Spirometry 
o Lung volumes with nitrogen washout 
o Single Breath Diffusion 
o Exhaled Nitric Oxide (subset of subjects) 
x Six minute walk test 
x Review Peak Flow measurements  
x Peripheral blood samples 
o Luminex cytokine arrays 
o Flow Cytometry 
o Gene expression profiles 
o Lymphocyte extended phenotypic analysis: Trail, Fas ligand, Perforin Granzyme B 
o Lymphocyte response to non-specific mitogens 
o Lymphocyte cytotoxic assays 
o T regulatory cell quantification by real time PCR using primers to fox p3 
o Proteomics 
 
7.6 Week 9 assessments (+/- 5 days) 
 
x Interim assessment with emphasis on symptomatology  
x Vital signs  
x ECOG performance status  
x Review of concomitant medications and adherence  
x CBC with differential (if possible, done concurrent with post transplant monitoring) 
x Acute Care, Mineral and Hepatic Panels (if possible, done concurrently with post transplant 
monitoring) 
x Plasma cyclosporine level 
x Repeat Serum Beta- HCG in women of childbearing potential 
x Pulmonary Function tests  
o Forced Spirometry 
o Slow Spirometry 
o Lung volumes with nitrogen washout 
o Single Breath Diffusion  
o Exhaled Nitric Oxide (subset of subjects) 
x Six minute walk test 
x Review Peak Flow measurements 
x Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) to be analyzed by  
o Gram stain 
o Routine cultures 
o Luminex cytokine arrays 
o Flow Cytometry 
o Gene expression profiles 
o Proliferative, cytotoxic, and apoptotic response of BAL lymphocytes to 3rd party 
epithelial cells and allogeneic lymphocyte population 
o T regulatory cell quantification by real time PCR  
x Peripheral blood samples 
o Luminex cytokine arrays 
o Flow Cytometry 
o Gene expression profiles 
o Lymphocyte extended phenotypic analysis: TRAIL, Fas ligand, Perforin Granzyme 
B 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 23 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD o Lymphocyte response to non-specific mitogens 
o Lymphocyte cytotoxic assays 
o T regulatory cell quantification by real time PCR  
o Proteomics 
x High Resolution Chest CT 
x Radiolabelled lung deposition studies (+/- 2 weeks) (subset of subjects) 
x Pharmacokinetics studies (subset of subjects) 
x Quality of life assessments 
o SF36 
o GVHD questionnaire (PBSC transplant subjects only) 
o HAP Questionnaire 
o CRQ-SAS questionnaire 
 
7.7 Week 12 Assessments ( +/- 7 days) 
x Interim assessment with emphasis on symptomatology  
x Vital signs  
x ECOG performance status  
x Review of concomitant medications  
x CBC with differential (when possi ble, done concurrently with post transplant monitoring) 
x Acute Care, Mineral and Hepatic Panels (when possible done concurrently with post 
transplant monitoring) 
x Plasma cyclosporine level 
x Repeat Serum Beta- HCG in women of childbearing potential 
x Pulmonary Function tests 
o Forced Spirometry 
o Slow Spirometry 
o Lung volumes with nitrogen washout 
o Single Breath Diffusion 
o Exhaled Nitric Oxide (subset of subjects) 
x Six minute walk test 
x Review Peak Flow measurements  
x Peripheral blood samples 
o Luminex cytokine arrays 
o Flow Cytometry 
o Gene expression profiles 
o Lymphocyte extended phenotypic analysis: TRAIL, Fas ligand, Perforin Granzyme 
B 
o Lymphocyte response to non-specific mitogens 
o Lymphocyte cytotoxic assays 
o T regulatory cell quantification by real time PCR  
o Proteomics 
 
7.8 Week 15 Assessments (+/- 7 days) 
x Interim assessment with emphasis on symptomatology  
x Vital signs  
x ECOG performance status  
x Review of concomitant medications  
x CBC with differential (when possi ble, done concurrently with post transplant monitoring) 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 24 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD x Acute Care, Mineral and Hepatic Panels (when possible done concurrently with post 
transplant monitoring) 
x Plasma cyclosporine level 
x Repeat Serum Beta- HCG in women of childbearing potential 
x Pulmonary Function tests  
o Forced Spirometry 
o Slow Spirometry 
o Lung volumes with nitrogen washout 
o Single Breath Diffusion 
o Exhaled Nitric Oxide (subset of subjects) 
x Six minute walk test 
x Review Peak Flow measurements 
x Peripheral blood samples 
o Luminex cytokine arrays 
o Flow Cytometry 
o Gene expression profiles 
o Lymphocyte extended phenotypic analysis: TRAIL, Fas ligand, Perforin Granzyme 
B 
o Lymphocyte response to non-specific mitogens 
o Lymphocyte cytotoxic assays 
o T regulatory cell quantification by real time PCR 
o Proteomics 
 
7.9 Week 18 Assessments (+/- 7 days) 
x Final assessment with emphasis on symptomatology  
x Vital signs  
x ECOG performance status  
x Review of concomitant medications and compliance  
x CBC with differential (if possible, done concurrent with post transplant monitoring) 
x Acute Care, Mineral and Hepatic Panels (if possible, done concurrently with post transplant 
monitoring) 
x Plasma cyclosporine level 
x Pulmonary Function tests  
o Forced Spirometry 
o Slow Spirometry 
o Lung volumes with nitrogen washout 
o Single Breath Diffusion 
o Exhaled Nitric Oxide (subset of subjects) 
x Six minute walk test 
x Review Peak Flow measurements  
x Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). BAL to be analyzed by 
o Gram Stain 
o Routine cultures 
o Luminex cytokine arrays 
o Flow Cytometry 
o Gene expression profiles 
o Proliferative, cytotoxic, and apoptotic response of BAL lymphocytes to 3rd party 
epithelial cells and allogeneic lymphocyte population 
o T regulatory cell quantification by real time PCR using primers to fox p3 
x Peripheral blood samples 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 25 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD o Luminex cytokine arrays 
o Flow Cytometry 
o Gene expression profiles 
o Lymphocyte extended phenotypic analysis:  Trail, Fas ligand, Perforin Granzyme B 
o Lymphocyte response to non-specific mitogens 
o Lymphocyte cytotoxic assays 
o T regulatory cell quantification by real time PCR using primers to fox p3 
o Proteomics 
x High Resolution Chest CT 
x Quality of life assessments 
o SF36 
o GVHD questionnaire (PBSC transplant subjects only) 
o HAP Questionnaire 
o CRQ-SAS questionnaire 
 
7.10 Week 19 (+/- 1 week) Confirmation of Week 18 Assessment   
x Pulmonary Function tests 
o Forced Spirometry 
o Slow Spirometry 
o Lung volumes with nitrogen washout 
o Single Breath Diffusion 
o Exhaled Nitric Oxide (subset of subjects) 
x End of Study Assessment (see section 7.10) 
 
 
After week 19 assessment is completed, subjects will end study drug administration.  PFTs from 
week 19 assessments will be used to confirm 18-week response assessment.  Subjects with stabilized 
or improved disease will be offered the option of continuing CsA on an extended access protocol  
(see section 10.5, Off study).  Those that choose to enroll on the extended access protocol will not 
have study drug therapy interrupted. 
 
7.11  End of Study Assessment 
 
Before subjects can be taken off-study (see section 10.5), the following assessment will be done:  
 
7.11.1 Subjects completing study drug (Week 19)  
 
x CBC with differential (if possible, done concurrent with post transplant monitoring) 
x Acute Care, Mineral and Hepatic Panels (if possible, done concurrently with post transplant 
monitoring) 
x Plasma cyclosporine level 
 
 7.11.2 2 weeks (+/- 1 week) after subjects are ta ken off study drug early (see section 10.5) 
 
x Pulmonary Function tests 
o Forced Spirometry 
o Slow Spirometry 
o Lung volumes with nitrogen washout 
o Single Breath Diffusion 
o Exhaled Nitric Oxide (subset of subjects) 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 26 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD x CBC with differential (if possible, done concurrent with post transplant monitoring) 
x Acute Care, Mineral and Hepatic Panels (if possible, done concurrently with post transplant 
monitoring) 
x Plasma cyclosporine level 
x Quality of life assessments (except for subjects taken off study drug at the week 9 assessment) 
o SF36 
o GVHD questionnaire (PBSC transplant subjects only) 
o HAP Questionnaire 
o CRQ-SAS questionnaire 
 Note: These assessments may be obtained from the subject’s home facilities, if feasible.  
 
7.12 International and Long-Distance Subjects 
 
Subjects that are travelling internationally or more than 50 miles away from the NIH, at the 
discretion of the principal investigator, may have their schedules modified.  The week 9 assessment 
may be moved forward to as early as week 7.  The week 12, week 15, and end of study assessments 
may be obtained from the subject’s home facilities if feasible.  
 
8.0 ASSESSMENT TOOLS and PROCEDURES 
Other than the pre-study evaluations to determine eligibility/baseline status and subsequent PFTs 
used to guide therapy, subjects will be able to refuse any radiologic test or bronchoscopy procedure unless clinically indicated.  
8.1 Pulmonary Function tests 
 
Spirometry  measures how much and how quickly air is moved in and out of the lungs.  For these 
tests, the subject breathes into a mouthpiece attached to a recording device (spirometer).  The 
information collected by the spirometer may be printed out on a chart called a spirogram.  The 
more common lung function values measured used to assess the subjects on this trial will include: 
Forced vital capacity (FVC) .  This measures the amount of air you can exhale with force after 
you inhale as deeply as possible. 
Forced expiratory volume (FEV) .  This measures the amount of air you can exhale with force 
in one breath.  The amount of air you exhale may be measured at 1 second (FEV 1). 
Peak expiratory flow (PEF) .  This measures how quickly you can exhale.  It is usually 
measured at the same time as your forced vital capacity (FVC). 
Total lung capacity (TLC) .  This measures the amount of air in your lungs after you inhale as 
in your lungs after a normal exhale (FRC) and the amount after you exhale with force (RV). 
Maximum voluntary ventilation (MVV) . This measures the greatest amount of air you can 
breathe in and out during one minute. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 27 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Exhaled Nitric Oxide.   This measures the amount of nitric oxide in your breath after 
exhalation.  This will be performed in a subset of subjects based on the availability of testing 
staff and scheduling. 
Lung Volumes using Nitrogen Washout.  This measures the total lung capacity and provides an 
estimate of residual volume of the lung. 
Diffusing Capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO ).  This measures the ability of the 
lungs to transfer gas from inhaled air to the red blood cells in pulmonary capillaries. 
Peak Flow Measurements:  Subjects will be given a home peak flow meter that will measure their 
peak flow and FEV1.  The results will be recorded, and subjects will be given a level below which 
they should call the research team.  Subjects with a decline in peak flow of >20% compared to 
pretreatment baseline will be instructed to return  to the NIH for formal pulmonary function testing 
and clinical evaluation.  Subjects will be encouraged to perform peak flow testing daily, however, 
failure to perform peak flow measurements will  not be considered a protocol deviation. .  
8.2 Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and Biopsy 
 
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) is a medical proced ure in which a bronchoscope is passed through 
the mouth or nose into the lungs and fluid is squirted into a small part of the lung and then 
recollected for examination.  A BAL sample (minimal 30 mL) will be obtained from upper and 
lower lobes using conventional techniques prior to initiating CIS as well as at the end of the week 9 and 18 assessments.  The following research investigations will be performed: Gram stain, routine 
cultures, Luminex cytokine arrays, flow Cytometr y, gene expression profiles, examination of 
proliferative, cytotoxic, and apoptotic response of BAL lymphocytes to 3
rd party epithelial cells and 
allogeneic lymphocyte population, and T regulatory cell quantification by real time PCR using17 
primers to fox p3. 
 
8.3 High Resolution Chest CT 
 
HRCT is performed using a conventional CT scanner.  However, imaging parameters are chosen so 
as to maximize spatial resolution: 
x A narrow slice width is used (usually 1-2 mm) 
x A high spatial resolution image reconstruction algorithm is used 
x Field of view is minimized, so as to minimize the size of each pixel 
x Other scan factors (e.g. focal spot) may be optimized for resolution at the expense of scan 
speed 
The aim of performing a HRCT is to assess generalized lung disease.  As such the test is 
conventionally performed by taking thin sections 10-40 mm apart.  The result is a few images 
which should be representative of the lungs in general, but which cover only approximately one 
tenth of the lungs. 
Intravenous contrast agents are not used for HRCT as the lung inherently has very high contrast 
(soft tissue against air).  
8.4 Six Minute Walk Test 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 28 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD The six-minute walk test is generally used at the start of a Pulmonary Rehabilitation program 
and/or in the evaluation of lung transplant and will be used in this study to evaluate the primary 
endpoint, which is change in BO status.  The object of this test is to walk on a flat surface such as a 
hallway for 6 minutes during which time subjects will be asked to rate their degree of breathlessness and fatigue levels.  The distance walked during the 6 minutes is measured. 
Blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and resting blood saturation by pulse oximetry will be 
taken after the test.  Oxygen saturation will be taken during the walk.  Subjects will be asked to assess their breathing status using a 0-10 scale. 
 Subjects will be  instructed to: 
x Wear comfortable clothing 
x Wear shoes that are comfortable to walk in, such as tennis shoes. 
x Take their medications as prescribed. 
x Eat a light meal before early morning or early afternoon tests. 
x Not to exercise vigorously within 2 hours of beginning the test. 
 
8.5 Quality of Life Measurements  
Participants sixteen years and older that speak English will perform self-report questionnaires using 
the SF36, Human Activity Profile (HAP), Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire Self-
Administered Standardized CRQ-SAS), and GVHD questionnaire.  These assessments will occur at 
baseline, 9 weeks, and the 18-week evaluation, or at study conclusion if that should occur earlier. 
 
x The SF36 is a 36 item self-report questionnaire that measures the impact of physical and 
emotional health status on functional performance.  It has been used extensively, and is 
accepted by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as proof of therapeutic benefit for 
improved functioning and other subject-reported outcomes. 
x The HAP is a 94-item questionnaire that assesses the frequency with which individuals 
perform common activities. 
x  The CRQ-SAS is a 20-item questionnaire that assesses dyspnea, fatigue, emotional 
functioning, and mastery. 
x The GVHD questionnaire (PBSC transplant subjects, group A) designed by Lee and colleagues 
is a 30-item symptom scale with seven subscales to capture cGVHD symptom burden. 
9.0 ANCILLARY LABORATORY RESEARCH STUDIES 
Human Biologic materials will be collected as follows for the clinical evaluation and management of the 
subject.  Samples will be ordered and tracked through the CRIS screens.  Should a CRIS screen not be 
available, the NIH form 2803-1 will be completed and will accompany the specimen and be filed in the 
medical record.  Lung deposition studies will be conducted and reviewed by the nuclear medicine 
department. 
9.1 Sample Collection:  During the course of participating on this study (screening appointment, 6, 9, 
12, 15, and 18 week visits) blood and bronchoalveolar lavage samples will be collected for correlative laboratory research studies.  
Version 16 (Amendment N) 29 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD 9.2 Intended Use:  These specimens will not be used for diagnostic purposes.  Studies conducted on 
these samples will not be used in assessing the primary endpoint but are undertaken for secondary 
endpoints (Tissue pathogenesis of BO as detailed below) and/or exploratory ancillary research, 
which are approved by the NHLBI IRB and listed in Appendix B of the protocol. As these tests are 
being performed for secondary or exploratory purposes, failure to obtain the tests will not be 
considered a protocol deviation.  
9.2.1  Multiplex Cytokine Arrays  
Biopsies, BAL, and peripheral blood samples will be prepared for multiplex cytokine array 
analysis. Multiplex bead arrays allow one to independently and quantitatively assay multiple 
analytes simultaneously in small volumes of material.  
 
9.2.2  Flow Cytometry  
 BAL and peripheral blood samples will be prepared for analysis using flow cytometry. 
Samples will be analyzed for T cell, NK cell and neutrophils expression. 
 
9.2.3  Gene Expression Profiling 
BAL, and peripheral blood samples will be prepared for the gene array analysis.  
Specifically, arrays focused on Apoptosis, Dend ritic cells/Antigen Presentation, Cytokines, 
and Chemokines/Adhesion Molecules will be used.  The use of smaller, more focused arrays 
decreases statistical problems associated with multiple testing and simplifies data analysis.  
Most interesting and significant findings will be validated by PCR and protein based assays 
such as immunohistochemistry and ELISA. 
 
9.2.4  Pharmacokinetic Studies  
All pediatric subjects and 20 adult subjects will be asked to participate in this portion of the 
study:  from group A:  5 PBSC transplant subjects that are not on oral cyclosporine, and 5 
PBSC transplant subjects that are on oral cyclosporine and from group B: 10 lung transplant 
subjects. 
 
For all subjects, 2ml of blood will be collected at the following approximate time points after 
administration of inhaled cyclosporine: 0 (prior  to), immediately after, 40 min, and 1, 2, 4, 6, 
8, 12, 18, and 24 h.  For transplant subjects on oral cyclosporine, 2ml of blood will be 
collected at the following time points after administration of their steady state dose of oral cyclosporine but before their first administration of inhaled cyclosporine: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 
and 12 h.  These subjects will then receive their first inhalation treatment with the inhaled 
cyclosporine, and will have the post inhalation measurements taken.  Participation in this 
portion of the study will require a brief hospital admission.  Pharmacokinetic studies will 
then be repeated during week 9 in subjects that have undergone the dose escalation.  On the days that the pharmacokinetic study is performed, oral cyclosporine will be taken on an 
empty stomach and no food will be consumed for 4 hours after drug administration.
  For all 
other administration, oral  cyclosporine should be taken on a consistent schedule with relation 
to meals and time of day to avoid significant changes in absorption. 
 
9.2.5  Pharmacogenetic Analysis 
For some subjects who participate in the pharmacokinetic study, a single 7 mL EDTA blood 
sample will be collected at baseline for pharmacogenetic analysis.  For some stem cell transplant recipients frozen samples or buccal swab will be used for this analysis if they are 
available.  Genotypes for drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters will be determined 
using PCR-based methods and correlated with pharmacokinetic parameters. 
 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 30 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD 9.2.6  Lung Deposition Studies 
After subjects have acclimated to the nebulized cyclosporine, we will perform lung 
deposition studies in a subset of patients, while the participants are taking 150mg of inhaled 
cyclosporine.  The cyclosporine in propylene glycol will be mixed with 0.3ml of normal 
saline containing the radioisotope tracer Technetium- 99m sulfur colloid.  The total aerosol 
deposition will be measured and SPECT/CT imaging will be performed.  The lung deposition studies will be repeated again at 9 weeks in a subset of subjects.  
9.3 Storage:   Research specimens will be stored in the laboratories of Dr. Richard Childs (NHLBI) 
and/or Dr. Anthony Suffredini (Clinical Center/C ritical Care Medicine Department) under the care 
and supervision of the principal investigator of this study.  All laboratory personnel with access to 
samples or subject information will complete the NIH online course in Protection of Human 
Subjects.  Efforts to ensure protection of subject information include: 
x The laboratory is located in a controlled access building and laboratory doors are kept 
locked at all times.  Visitors to the laborato ry are required to be accompanied by laboratory 
staff at all times. 
x Hard copy records or electronic copies of documents containing subject information are 
kept in the locked laboratory or other controlled access locations. 
x An electronic database is used to store information related to subject samples processed by 
the laboratory. 
x All samples collected will be assigned a unique code. 
x Vials holding subject samples are labeled with the sequential laboratory accession ID 
number that does not contain any personal identifier information. 
x Samples will be stored until they are no longer of scientific value or until the subject 
withdraws consent, at which time they will be destroyed. 
x If a subject withdraws consent for their continued use, their sample will be destroyed. 
 
Tracking:   Samples will be ordered and tracked through the CRIS Research Screens.  Should a 
CRIS screen not be available, the NIH form 2803-1 will be completed and will accompany the 
specimen and be filed in the medical record.  Samples will not be sent outside NIH without IRB 
notification and an executed MTA.  
 
9.4 End of study procedures :  Samples from consenting subjects will be stored until they are no 
longer of scientific value or if a subject withdraws consent for their continued use, at which time 
they will be destroyed.  
 
9.5 Loss or destruction of samples :  Should we become aware that a major breech in our plan for 
tracking and storage of samples has occurred, the IRB will be notified. 
 
10.0 BIOSTATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 10.1 Primary and secondary endpoints  
  
The primary objective is to assess the safety and efficacy of inhaled aerosolized cyclosporine A 
solution in hematopoietic (group A) and lung tran splant patients (group B) with bronchiolitis 
obliterans (BO) or BO syndrome (BOS).  The primary endpoint of each study group is FEV
1 
improvement or stabilization from study baseline at week 18 for two successive measures, at least 
1 week apart, no more than two weeks apart. 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 31 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Criteria for response:   
For subjects with progressive disease at study entry,(subjects with a documented decline ( ≥10%) in 
FEV 1 within 18 weeks of study enrollment), improvement in BO is defined as an FEV 1 increase 
≥10% compared to baseline and stabilization of BO is defined as less than 10% increase to less 
than 10% decline in FEV 1 as compared to baseline. 
 For subjects with stable disease (active BOS, stable by FEV
1 criteria) at study entry (a stable FEV 1 , 
increase < 5% and decrease < 10% within the 18 weeks preceding study enrollment), improvement 
in BO is defined as an FEV 1 increase ≥ 10%compared to baseline and stabilization of BO is 
defined as less than 10% increase to less than 10% decline in FEV 1 with a minimum 25% decrease 
in the dose of one or more systemic immunosuppres sive drugs(assessed at week 18, sustained for 3 
weeks, excluding adjustments made for target drug levels) while being treated with CIS.  Subjects 
with stable BO at study entry that have less than a 10% increase to less than a 10% decline in FEV 1 
as compared to baseline that have no reduction in systemic immunosuppression while receiving 
CIS will be considered non-responders.  Response will require a confirmatory PFT result at least 1 
week after 18 week assessment.  The average of these two measurements will be used for 
assessment of response. 
 The treatment will be considered successful in each cohort if there is a more than 30% 
improvement or stabilization.  Adverse events associated with the treatment will also be assessed. 
(Please see the table below) 
 
The secondary objectives of the study are to assess  the lung deposition and pharmacokinetics of 
this CSA preparation, the inflammatory pathways that lead to the development of bronchiolitis 
obliterans and the anti-inflammatory effects of this CSA preparation ex vivo and in vivo.  
Secondary endpoints  will be measured in the laboratory us ing the results of multiplex cytokine 
arrays, flow cytometry and gene expression profiling from peripheral blood and bronchoalveolar 
lavage samples, lung deposition studies and pharmacokinetic studies.  Secondary endpoints will 
also include changes in the six-minute walk tests, high-resolution chest CT images, and quality of 
life measurements.  
 
We will evaluate response for group A and group B subjects separately, in order to assess if the 
treatment is effective in each disease.  
Response Criteria 
 
Disease at study entry  FEV1  Systemic 
Immunosuppression  Final Response 
classification  
Progressive  
(≥10% decline in 
preceeding 18 wks)  Improvement ( ≥10%)  N/A Improvement  
Progressive  Stabilization  
(<10% increase and decrease <10%)
 N/A Stabilization  
Progressive or Stable*  Decline ≥10% N/A Non-responder  
Stable  
(<5% increase and decrease <10% in preceeding 18 wks)
 Improvement ( ≥10%)  N/A Improvement  
Version 16 (Amendment N) 32 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Stable  Stabilization  
(<10% increase and 
decrease <10%)  Minimum 25% 
decrease  Stabilization  
Stable  Stabilization  
(<10% increase and 
decrease <10%)  N/A Non-responder  
* Subjects that have decline more than 20% are also non-responders 
  
10.2  Sample size 
 
For each study group, we determine the sample size using the Two-Stage Minimax Design of 
Simon (1989)20.  We test the null hypothesis that the proportion of subjects that respond to therapy 
(improvement or stabilization) is 0.3 or less agai nst the alternative hypothesis that the proportion of 
subjects that respond to therapy (improvement or stabilization) is 0.5 or more.  With alpha = 0.05 
and 80% power, a maximum of 39 subjects will be needed for each of study groups A and B.  In 
each study group, at the first stage, up to 19 subjects will be accrued and if 6 or fewer subjects have 
a response to CIS at 18 weeks, we will conclude that the treatment is not effective and we will stop that study group.  Note that all 19 subjects may not need to be accrued, as long as 13 subjects do 
not show improvement or stabilization.  If 7 or more of the 19 subjects respond to therapy at 18 
weeks at the first stage in one of the study groups, then an additional 20 subjects will be accrued, 
bringing the total number of subjects to a maximum of 39.  If the total number of subjects 
responding is 16 or fewer, we conclude that the treatment is not effective.  If at least 17 of 39 subjects respond we will consider this treatment successful.  Once again, this may happen before 
all 39 subjects are accrued.  A 95% confidence interval for the proportion of subjects improving or 
stabilizing will be given.  Based on the sample size of the study, the two-sided confidence interval 
will be obtained with the binomial exact method or the normal approximation, if appropriate.  We 
will test our null hypothesis (that the proportion of response is 0.3 or less) formally using the 
confidence interval approach.  If the lower 95% limit of the confidence interval is greater than 0.3, 
we will conclude the null hypothesis is rejected and the study treatment is successful.  If the lower 95% limit of the confidence is less than 0.3, we will not reject the null hypothesis. 
 
Subjects who are unable to tolerate a dose escalation to 300 mg but are able to tolerate 150 mg 
inhalation for at least two weeks will be included in the primary analysis.  Subjects who will be 
considered treatment failures include: 1) those who develop progression of baseline BO (>20% decline in FEV1) during the 18 week 
course of the study  
2) those who are deemed to have progressed at the end of study as evidenced by an FEV1 decline ≥ 
10%  
3) subjects who require increases in existing or addition of new immunosuppressive therapies due 
to worsening symptoms related to BOS (sustained for 3 weeks, excluding adjustments made for 
target drug levels) after week 9  
4) subjects with BO or BOS who had stable disease (active BOS, stable by FEV
1 criteria) at study 
entry and are deemed to have a stable FEV 1 , increase < 10% and decrease < 10% at the end of 
study, with less than a 25% reduction in one or more systemic immunosuppressive medications (sustained for 3 weeks, excluding adjustments made for target drug levels) while receiving CIS. 
 5) subjects that aren’t able to tolerate the 150mg dose for more than two weeks.  
 
All subjects who begin treatment will be included in the primary analysis, except those subjects 
that are unable to tolerate the 150mg dose for at least two weeks.  In order to maintain an adequate 
sample size, additional subjects will be offered enrollment in order to account for those subjects 
that were unable to tolerate the 150mg dose for at least two weeks. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 33 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD  
10.3 Data Analyses 
 
All subjects who begin treatment will be included in the primary analyses, except those subjects 
that are unable to tolerate the 150mg dose for at least two weeks.  The subject who goes off study 
before the time when the primary endpoint is eval uated will be considered as a non-responder.  
Every effort will be made to reach and evaluate the subjects at the 6 week, 9 week, 12 week, 15 
week, 18, and 19 week end of intervention period.  Adverse events will be tabulated by severity 
and disease (lung versus hematopoietic).  For se condary endpoints, especially, the endpoints that 
were measured at multiple times such as 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 19 weeks or until study end, a mixed-
effects regression approach will be used to estimate the change of the endpoints and the effect of prognostic factors. 
 
Final statistical analysis will be performed onc e all subjects have completed the end of study 
assessments and all data have been archived for analysis.  We will use stratified analyses to account 
for effects of systemic immunosuppressive agents and other prognostic factors. 
 
Secondary endpoints (such as change of 6 minute walk and the quality of life, etc) will be studies 
by repeated measured mixed effects regression, multiple regression, logistic regression and nonparametric regression models, if deemed appropriate. 
 
Pharmacokinetic analysis  
Inhaled cyclosporine pharmacokinetics will be determined by non-compartmental or 
compartmental analysis using WINNOLIN (Pharsight, Mountain View, CA) or other software as appropriate.  For subjects who are administered bo th oral and inhaled cyclosporine, concentrations 
will be analyzed using the superposition principle.  Parameters estimated will include but not 
limited to eliminate rate constant, volume of distribution, and area under the concentration versus 
time curve. 
 
10.4 Stopping Rule 
 
The study will be monitored to ensure that the occurrence of a specified set of treatment related 
serious adverse events (TRSAEs) during the 18 weeks of intervention does not substantially exceed 
an anticipated rate.  The following TRSAEs will be considered for early stopping of either one of groups A or B: 
 
 Death considered to be probably or definitely related to the inhaled CsA or 
 Any grade IV toxicity considered to be probably or definitely related to inhaled CsA, i.e. 
opportunistic infection such as tissue-invasive CMV or Pneumocystis carinii , with 
exception of temporary cytopenias. 
 
We will monitor the numbers of subjects who have developed any of the above specified TRSAEs 
using the stopping rule outlined below.  The trial will be seriously considered for early stopping if 
the number of subjects in the trial who develop TRSAEs is over the pre-specified threshold value 
in the Table. 
 From experience using this agent in other clinical se ttings as detailed in the investigator’s brochure, 
we anticipate the rate of developing at least one of the above specified TRSAEs to be 10% or less. 
Following Geller et al., our stopping rule is determined by a Bayesian approach
23.  The stopping 
boundary for the trial is reached if the Bayesian po sterior probability that the true probability of 
developing one or more of the above specified TRSAEs exceeds this benchmark rate of 10% is at 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 34 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD least 90%.  We take our prior distribution to be a beta distribution with the sum of the two beta 
parameters to be 3, i.e. the parameters of the beta prior distribution are 0.30 and 2.70.  Since we 
have seen in the past that the first few subjects to  be accrued are possibly sicker than the rest of the 
subjects in the sample, we will start safety monitoring when 3 subjects have developed specified 
SAEs.  The following table summarizes the threshold numbers for stopping either group A or B:  
 
Number of Subjects  Stop if the number of subjects who develop any of the number of 
specified TRSAEs reaches: 
≤ 11 3 
12≤ n ≤ 18 4 
19 ≤ n ≤ 25 5 
26 ≤ n ≤ 32   6 
33 ≤ n ≤ 39 7 
 
We investigated the performance of the above stopping rules by a simulation study.  For the stopping rule, we generated a study with 39 independent Bernoulli trials, each had a probability 
p=.1 for having the above TRSAE and q=1-p for not having such TRSAE and compared the 
TRSAE outcomes with the above stopping boundary to determine whether the study was stopped.  
We repeated the simulation 100,000 times and comput ed the proportion of stopped studies (i.e. 
“number of stopped studies”/100,000), which were st opped using the above stopping rule.  
 
The following table summarizes the proportions of stopped studies under a number of scenarios.   
Prob of specified TRSAE  5%  10% 15% 20% 30% 
Proportion of Stopped Studies 2.2% 20.2% 51. 5% 77.4% 98.1%  
Average Number of Subjects 38.4 34.5 27.8 21.0 11.9 
Average Number of Subjects 
Suffering TRSAE 1.93 3.47 4.18 4.18 3.54 
 The DSMB will evaluate all serious adverse events and have all the required information to 
implement the above-defined monitoring plan.  In addition, the DSBM may recommend early study 
termination if other unforeseen adverse events necessitate this decision.
 
 
10.5 Off Study Criteria 
 
10.5.1 Subject choice:   Subjects may withdraw from the study at their request any time.  The risks 
of withdrawing will be discussed, as will alternative treatment options.  Those subjects who choose 
to withdraw will be strongly encouraged to participate in study assessments until he/she initiates 
alternative BO therapy. In this scenario, patients  will be deemed off study-drug, but have the option 
to continue on-study. 
 
 
10.5.2  Principal investigator decision:  
 
Subjects will be taken off study drug during the 18 week period of intervention if they:  
 
x Have disease progression (beginning at week 9) as defined by a 20% or more decline in 
FEV 1 on two successive measurements at least 2 weeks apart   
x Have evidence of an NCI grade IV toxicity related to study drug administration 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 35 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD x Require >25% increase in one or more existing immunosuppressive agents or the addition of 
new systemic immunosuppressive therapies due to worsening symptoms related to BOS 
(sustained for 3 weeks, excluding adjustments ma de for target drug levels) after week 9 (see 
section 6.2.3). 
x Develop worsening performance status, defined by ECOG score ≥ 3 (please see hematology 
supportive care guidelines) 
x Develop disease relapse or a significant non-pulmonary transplant complication in which 
death is likely to occur prior to the conclusion of the 18 week study period 
x Are unable to comply with the study visits or become severely ill and cannot comply with the 
intervention.  
x Are unable to tolerate the 150mg dose of the inhaled CsA 
x Develop severe pulmonary infection that fails to respond to conventional treatment or where 
no effective drug treatment exist s 
x Subject becomes pregnant 
 
Subjects that have stopped study drug administration will be asked to complete the study 
assessments, as off-study drug participants, whenever feasible.  Lung deposition studies and 
pharmacokinetic tests will not be performed in off-study drug participants. Chest CT and 
bronchoscopy will only be performed if clinically indicated.  If off-study drug subjects are unable or unwilling to complete the study assessments, they will be referred back to their primary 
transplant team and will end study participation.  
 
10.5.3 Completion of the study   
 
Upon completion of the week 19 assessment, subjects will have completed study participation and 
be taken off study and referred back to their prim ary transplant team to continue post transplant 
monitoring and care. After Week 19 assessment is completed, subjects with stabilized or improved 
disease will be offered the option of continuing CsA on an extended access protocol . 
 
11.0 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING 
 
11.1  Safety Monitoring   
 
NHLBI DSMB :  The NHLBI Data Safety and Monitoring Board will review the protocol at an 
interval to be determined by the DSMB.  A progre ss report will be forwarded to the DSMB at these 
times and their recommendations will be expeditiously implemented.  The DSMB may recommend early termination of the study for considerations of safety and efficacy. 
 
Safety Monitoring: 
 
Principal Investigator:  Accrual, efficacy and safety data will be monitored by the Principal 
Investigator, Nicole Gormley, MD and Richard Childs, M.D., Medically Responsible Investigator. 
 NIH  IRB .  Prior to implementation of this study, the protocol and the proposed consent and assent 
forms will be reviewed and approved by the prop erly constituted Institutional Review Board (IRB) 
operating according to Title 45 CFR 46.  This committee will also approve all amendments to the 
protocol or informed consent, and conduct continuing annual review so long as the protocol is open 
to accrual or follow up of subjects. 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 36 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD FDA :  An annual progress report, any amendments to the protocol, and any change in the status of 
the protocol will be forwarded to FDA to: 
  June Germain, MS, Regulatory Officer 
Renata Albrecht, MD, Division Director 
Division of Special Pathogen and Transplant Products Central Document Room Center of 
Drug Evaluation and Research, FDA 5901-B Ammendale Road, Beltsville, MD 20705   (w) 301-796-4024 
    
APT Pharmaceuticals, Inc. : A copy of the annual progress report to FDA, any amendments to the 
protocol, and any change in the status of the protocol will be forwarded to  
 
Greg Baigent [gbaigent@aptbio.com] 
APT Pharmaceuticals, Inc 
700 Airport Blvd, Suite 350, Burlingame, California 94010 
Telephone Number                   Fax Number 
 
NIH Radiation Safety Committee (RSC):   NIH Radiation Safety Committee (RSC):   Because the 
technetium 99m silver colloid deposition stud ies are research procedures and because the 
frequency of CT imaging exceeds that which is standard in this subject population, some of the 
radiation exposure is therefore determined as in dicated for research purposes.  The Radiation 
Safety Form 88-23a, which includes dosimetry calculations for the high resolution CT scans and 
lung deposition studies utilizing radio-labeled drugs, was submitted to the Radiation Safety 
Committee for review (c/o Sarah Kindrick, M.D., Clinical Protocol Administrator, NIH Radiation Safety Committee 301-496-2253) for initial and triennial RSC review so long as the protocol 
remains open for subject accrual and intervention. 
 
  SCREEN   On study 
medication      
PROTOCOL TIMEPOINT  Pre-study   Day 7 Day 63 Day 
126   
High resolution chest CT          
Radiolabeled Lung disposition studies            
 
Data Management:   The PI will be responsible for overseeing entry of data into an in-house 
password protected electronic system and ensuring data accuracy, consistency and timeliness.  The 
principal investigator, associate investigators, research nurses and/or a contracted data manager 
will assist with the data management efforts.  Data will be abstracted from Clinical Center progress 
notes as well as from progress notes forwarded from home physicians.  Laboratory data from NIH 
will be imported electronically from CRIS into an in-house clinical trial database.  Laboratory 
values from referring home physicians will be entered into the system. 
 
In order to maintain subject confidentiality , all case report forms, study reports and 
communications relating to the study will identify su bjects by an assigned unique identifier.  Case 
report forms may serve as source data if needed.  All human subjects personally identifiable 
information (PII) as defined in accordance to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability, 
eligibility and consent verification will be recorded.  Primary data obtained during the conduct of the protocol will be kept in secure network drives or in approved alternative sites that comply with 
NIH security standards.  Primary and final analyzed data will have identifiers so that research data 
can be attributed to an individual human subject participant, e.g., a unique code, or minimum PII 
required for subject identification.  All primary and analyzed data will be located on the secure P 
drive. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 37 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD In accordance with local and federal regulations, the Investigator will allow APT Pharmaceuticals, 
Inc. personnel or their designee, access to all per tinent medical records in order to verify the data 
gathered on the case report forms and to audit the data collection process.  The US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) may also request access  to all study records, including source 
documentation for inspection. 
 
End of Study Procedures :  Data will be stored in locked cabinets and in a password protected 
database until it is no longer of scientific value.  Federal law requires that an Investigator maintain 
all study records for the indication under investigat ion for two years following the date a Product 
Licensing Application is approved or, if no application is to be filed or if the application is not 
approved for such indication, until two years after the investigation is discontinued and the FDA is 
notified.  The results will be posted to clinicaltrials.gov. 
 
Loss or Destruction of Data :  Should we become aware that a major breech in our plan to protect 
subject confidentiality and trial data has occurred, the IRB will be notified. 
 
Source Documentation:  Clinical data entered onto the Case Report Form (CRF) may serve as 
source documentation.  
 
Clinical Trial Monitoring Plan:  Monitoring Responsible Party/ Monitor:  An experienced 
independent protocol monitoring group has been co ntracted by the NHLBI.  They will objectively 
audit records for compliance with the protocol. 
 Monitoring will assure the adequate protection of human subjects, safety of subjects involved in 
clinical investigations and the integrity and quality of data.  The monitor/ responsible party for 
monitoring will be trained to perform monitoring activities. 
 
Monitoring may occur prior to the IRB approval of the study (protocol/ site initiation), routine monitoring (during the protocol life cycle), and study termination.  The monitoring activities will 
verify regulatory compliance, NIH & DIR policy compliance, IRB regulatory compliance, subject 
record review, and protocol compliance.  The monitoring activities will be documented and the 
reports will be made available to regulatory personnel. 
 
 
 
 
12. NIH INTRAMURAL IRB AND NHLBI CD REPORTING 
12.1 Expedited Reporting 
Events requiring expedited reporting will be submitted to the IRB per Policy 801 “Reporting Research 
Events”.  
 
12.2 Reports to the IRB at the time of Continuing Review:  
The PI or designee will refer to HRPP Policy 801 “Reporting Research Events” to determine IRB reporting requirements and timelines. 
 
12.3 Reports to the CD: 
The PI or designee will refer to NHLBI DIR guidelines to determine CD reporting requirements and 
timelines. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 38 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD  
 
 
 
12.2 Assessment of Adverse Event Severity and Relationship to Treatment 
 
The AEs will be graded by severity utilizing CTC version 4.0.  A copy of the criteria can be down-
loaded from the CTEP home page at http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting/ctc.html .  The category that 
overall best "fits" the relationship between the adverse event and the study drug should be chosen 
and recorded on the CRF and SAE form, if appropriate. 
 The investigator is responsible for assessing the causal relationship between any events and the 
study treatment.  AEs will be attributed as unrelated, unlikely, possibly, probably, or definitely 
related to study medication or procedures.  Additionally, the investigator is responsible for 
providing appropriate treatment for the event and for adequately following the event until 
resolution.  
 
Relationship Between Treatment and AE 
   
Unrelated  No temporal association to study product.  
An alter nate etiology has been established.  
The event does not follow the known pattern of response to study product.
 
The event does not reappear or worsen with re-challenge.  
Probably not  
related / remote  No temporal association to study product.  
Event could readily be produced by clinical state, environmental or 
other interventions.  
The event does not follow the known pattern of response to study 
product.  
The event does not reappear or worsen with re-challenge.  
Possibly related  Reasonable temporal relationship to study product.  
The event is not readily produced by clinical state, environmental, or 
other interventions.  
The event follows a known pattern of response to the study product or as yet unknown pattern of response.
 
Probably related  There is a reasonable temporal association with the study product.  
The event is not readily produced by clinical state, environmental, or 
other interventions.  
The event follows a known pattern of response to the study product.  
The event decreases with de-challenge.  
Definitely related  There is a reasonable temporal relationship to the study product.  
The event is not readily produced by clinical state, environmental, or other interventions.
 
The event follows a known pattern of response to the study product.  
The event decreases with de-challenge and recurs with re-challenge.  
 
 
 
 
Treatment related SAEs (TRSAEs)  are those attributed as possibly, probably or definitely.  As 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 39 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD detailed in section 9.7 stopping rules, death and any grade IV toxicity considered to be possibly, 
probably or definitely related to CIS will be monitored and considered for early stopping the study 
according to statistically determined criteria. 
 
Hospitalization (overnight admission) for routine s upportive care (platelet or RBC transfusions) or 
admission from the NIH inpatient unit to the NIH ICU for routine monitoring will not be reported as a serious adverse event.  
 
 
APT Pharmaceuticals, Inc. :  A listing of all SAEs will be submitted to APT pharmaceutical 
quarterly.  Safety reports will be reported as detailed in section 12.5. 
 
12.4 IND Safety Reporting to the FDA (IND 109,707) 
 
Because this study will be conducted under an IND, U.S. Government regulations 21CFR, Part 
312.32 require the issuance of an IND Safety Report to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
for all “serious” adverse events that are “unexpected” and for which there is a “reasonable 
possibility that the experience may have been c aused by the drug.”  Such serious events that are 
characterized as fatal or life-threatening must be reported to the FDA within 7 calendar days of the 
sponsor’s initial receipt of the information, whereas non -fatal and non-life threatening events must 
be reported within 7 calendar days.  
 
No expedited IND Safety Report is required if the event is considered to be expected based either on the study drug product label, the underlying  disease states, or the study procedures. 
The Safety report will contain a full written summary detailing relevant aspects of the serious 
adverse events in question.  In each written IND sa fety report, all safety reports previously filed 
with the IND concerning a similar adverse experien ce will be included and the significance of the 
adverse experience in light of the previous, similar reports will be discussed. 
Where applicable, information from relevant hospital case records and autopsy reports will be 
included.  The investigator will always provide an as sessment of causality at the time of the initial 
report as described in ‘Assessment of Causality’.  
 
Follow up information  regarding the subject’s subsequent course will be submitted until the SAE 
has resolved, the subject’s condition stabilizes (in the case of persistent impairment ) or the subject 
dies. 
 
12.5 Sponsor’s Reporting Responsibilities  
 
Serious and unexpected suspected adverse reactions (SUSARs) as defined in 21 CFR 312.32 and 
determined by the sponsor will be reported to FDA as IND Safety Reports.  The Sponsor will also 
submit an IND Annual Report of the progress of the investigation to the FDA as defined in 21 CFR 
312.33.  
 Telephone and facsimile transmission safety reports.   The sponsor shall also notify IRB, DSMB 
and FDA by telephone or by facsimile transmission of any unexpected fatal or life-threatening 
experience associated with the use of the drug  as soon as possible but in no event later than 7 
calendar days after our initial receipt of the information.  
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 40 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Hard copy submission of safety reports:   Each notification will be made as soon as possible and in 
no event later than 7 calendar days after the sponsor's initial receipt of the information. 
 
If an adverse drug experience not initially de termined to be reportable is later determined 
reportable, a written safety report will be submitted as soon as possible, but in no event later than 7 
calendar days after the determination is made. 
 
12.5.1 Report Recipients 
 
Safety reports will be submitted according to the reporting time frame (section 12.5.) to  
 
x NHLBI DSMB 
 
x FDA:  June Germain, MS, Regulatory Officer 
Renata Albrecht, MD, Division Director 
Division of Special Pathogen and Transplant Products Central Document 
Room Center of Drug Evaluation and Research, FDA 
5901-B Ammendale Road Beltsville, MD 20705  (w) 301-796-4024 
 
x APT APT pharmacovigilance Officer 
APT Pharmaceuticals, Inc 700 Airport Blvd, Suite 350, Burlingame, California 94010 
 
12.6 Reporting of pregnancy 
 
Subjects who become pregnant during the study will discontinue the study medication immediately.  The investigator, or his/her designee, will collect pregnancy information on any 
subject who becomes pregnant while participating in  this study and submit this information to APT 
and the IRB within two weeks of learning of a subj ect’s pregnancy.  Information on the status of 
the mother and fetus will be forwarded to APT and the IRB as available.  While pregnancy itself is 
not considered to be an AE or SAE, any pregnancy complication, spontaneous abortion, or elective termination of a pregnancy for medical reasons will be reported to APT in an SAE format.  
Generally, follow-up will be no longer than 6 to 8 weeks following the estimated delivery date and 
will include information on outcome of the pregnancy. 
 
13.0 HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTIONS 
 
13.1 Rationale for Subject Selection 
 
No subjects will be excluded from participation based on gender, race or ethnicity.  The study will 
be open to all subjects who satisfy the inclusion criteria and provide an informed consent to the 
protocol.  
From previous hematopoietic transplant protoc ol recruitment patterns from NHLBI transplant 
recipients, we expect the population may be distributed as follows:  
 
x By gender: 40% females; 60% males 
x By age: ages 11-73, median 38;  7% ages 10 -17; 20% ages 18-30; 28% ages 31-40; 22% 
ages 41-50 and 23% ages 51-73 
x By race: 11% Asian, 8% Black, 44% Hispanic, 37% White 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 41 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD  
The Lung transplant recipients will be referral from the University of Maryland, which according 
to their prior accrual demographics may be distributed as follows:  
x By gender:  45% females; 55% males 
x By age: ages 23-71, median 58 
x By race: 45% Black, 55% White 
 
Recruitment:  Subjects will be recruited from NIH Clinical Center hematopoietic stem cell 
transplant clinics and from the Lung transpla nt center at the University of Maryland. 
 
Competition with other Branch protocols : None.  However, there is an actively accruing 
protocol at the Clinical Center 08-C-0097: A Mu lti-Institutional Prospective Phase II Study of 
Montelukast for the Treatment of Bronchiolitis Obliterans Following Allogeneic Stem Cell 
Transplantation in Children and Adults.  They will refer subjects to our study that have 
completed/failed their protocol.  
 
Reimbursement for protocol participation, travel, food, and lodging  will be consistent with 
NIH guidelines.  In determining reimbursement, the following factors are considered applicable to 
this protocol:  the patients are diagnosed with a rare disease; the patient population is sick; the protocol offers the potential for direct benefit; the protocol regimen is demanding; and in order to 
complete accrual in a reasonable timeframe a geographically dispersed participant population is 
required.  
 
13.2 Participation of Children  
 
This study will be limited to subjects aged 10 or older.  Various study tests and medication administration requires adequate understanding and abil ity to participate in ca re.  As such, pediatric 
subjects 10 years of age or older will be allowed to participate in this study as they are at an age 
where they can cooperate sufficiently and children less than age 10 will be excluded. 
 
13.3 Risks and Discomforts 
 
13.3.1  Related to CIS  
 
CIS is under development for the indication of improved BOS-free survival following lung 
transplantation.  As of November 13, 2009, approxi mately 444 lung transplant recipients have 
received CIS under protocols ACS001, ACS002, ACS004, or CIS001.  In ACS001, the following 
adverse events occurred significantly more ofte n in subjects receiving CIS than in subjects 
receiving placebo: 
 
x Events that occurred in 30 to 50% of subjects receiving CIS: cough, chest pain, back pain, 
increased urinary frequency, pharyngitis, exacerbation of shortness of breath, and lung consolidation. 
 
x Events that occurred in 10 to 29 % of subjects receiving CIS:  cardiac murmur, respiratory tract 
irritation, polyuria, somnolence, hyperlipidem ia, respiratory disorder, and hemoptysis. 
In the studies that were not placebo controlled, or are as yet unblinded, the following adverse 
events were seen: 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 42 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD 1. Events that occurred in greater than 10% of subjects: pyrexia, nausea, diarrhea, dyspnea, 
cough, wheezing, chest pain, pharyngitis, renal impairment, peripheral edema, lung 
transplant rejection, headache, insomnia, and neutropenia. 
2. Events that occurred in 5 to 10% of subjects: Pharyngolaryngeal pain, pleural effusion, 
rhinorrhea, constipation, vomiting, fatigue, chest pain, candidiasis, pseudomonas infection, 
sinusitis, pneumonia, hyperkalemia, leucopenia, anemia, and hypertension. 
 
Although not previously observed, in the current study, one subject did develop a rib fracture 
associated with coughing. 
Unknown side effects:  In addition, as with other clinical studies using experimental medicines and 
in subjects with serious medical conditions, there may be adverse events or side effects that are currently unknown and certain of these unknown risks could be permanent, severe, or life 
threatening.  Subjects will therefore be carefully monitored and instructed to seek medical attention 
in the event of serve adverse events and contact the research team as needed.   
 
During treatment, the study medication should be admi nistered in a private, well-ventilated area to 
minimize the risk of other people being unnecessarily exposed to the drug particles in the air.  
Pregnant women, children, and individuals with asthma or other diseases with significant respiratory symptoms should avoid being in the room during or immediately after treatment. 
 
Cyclosporine, when taken by mouth can cause kidney damage especially if blood levels are high.  
So far, use of CIS has not caused this problem in previous human research studies and should not 
increase this risk since blood levels have been very low 
 
APT Pharmaceuticals remains attentive to safety  throughout all ongoing studies.  Additional 
unexpected safety findings will be provided to investigators upon receipt and evaluation. 
  
13.3.2 Related to albuterol/levalbuterol 
 
Severe allergic reactions (rash; hives; itching; difficulty breathing; tightness in the chest; swelling 
of the mouth, face, lips, or tongue); chest pain; ear pain; fast or irregular heartbeat; new or 
worsened trouble breathing; pounding in the chest; red, swollen, blistered, or peeling skin; severe 
headache or dizziness; unusual hoarseness; wheezing.  Subjects will be instructed to discontinue 
albuterol/levalbuterol use, seek medical attenti on right away, and notify the research teams should 
any severe side effect occur. 
 
The most common side effects include:  Dizziness; headache; nausea; nervousness; sinus 
inflammation; sore or dry throat; tremor; trouble sleeping; vomiting. 
 
13.3.3  Related to Blood Collection  
 
Blood collection my cause some pain or bruising at the site on the arm from which the blood was 
drawn.  There is a small possibility of fainting and infection.  Similarly, there is a small risk of 
bleeding, blockage, or inflammation or infection of  the vessel.  Discomfort does not usually last 
long and permanent damage is extremely rare.  
13.3.4   Related to the pharmacokinetic studies:  Subjects will have blood collected at the 
aforementioned collection times. A brief hospital stay will be required to ensure correct timing of 
blood draws. 
 
13.3.5   Related to Bronchoalveolar Lavage (BAL) 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 43 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD  
Subjects will sign a separate procedure consent for the BAL which will further detail the potential 
risks of this procedure which include:  
 
x Mild discomfort due to coughing.  This can be controlled by topical medication. 
 
x A decrease in the amount of oxygen in the blood.  Subjects will receive additional oxygen 
during the procedure and they will be closely monitored for oxygen levels, heart rate and blood pressure.  The risk of a serious problem occurring is very small (less than 1 out of 
10,000 procedures in published studies). 
 
x A slow or irregular heartbeat occurs (rare). If it does not correct itself, we can treat this 
with medication.  A heart rhythm monitor (elect rocardiograph) will be used throughout the 
procedure.  
 
x Mild bleeding from the nose can occur because the bronchoscope tube is sometimes placed 
through the nose to reach the large airways.  Placing medication and lubricant inside the nose will be done before the procedure to lower the risk of this occurring. 
 
x A sore throat for several hours after the procedure ( Less than 10% of subjects) 
 
x A bad reaction to the numbing medication (lidocaine), rarely.  Side effects can include 
confusion or, very rarely, seizures.  We have never seen this problem in over 1500 
bronchoscopies performed in the Medical Intensive Care Unit at NIH over an 8-year 
period.  This potential problem is minimized by using small, frequent doses of the 
medication.  
  
x Fever has been reported to develop in less than 5% of healthy volunteers six to eight hours 
after the bronchoscopy.  
 
x Infection in the lungs (very low risk) resulting from swallowing saliva into the lung 
airways.  To minimize this risk, subjects do not eat or drink for at least six hours before the 
bronchoscopy.   
 
x Pneumothorax can occur as a result of bronchoscopy, but is a very infrequent complication.  
It has been estimated that the risk of pneumothorax with trans-bronchial biopsy is between 
1-3%. 
 
x Individuals with lung disease may be at grea ter risk of complications from bronchoscopy, 
although bronchoscopies with bronchoalveolar lavage are performed commonly for such 
subjects without any serious complications or effects. 
 
x There are risks associated with the conscious sedation medicine.  These risks will be 
explained to the subjects and they will be consented separately at the time of the procedure.  
 
13.3.6  Related to the Lung Function Tests:   
 
These tests are very safe and side effects are unlikely.  During the test, subjects are asked to breathe 
deeply or rapidly which may occasionally cause brie f lightheadedness or soreness of the chest.  In 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 44 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD extremely rare cases, this may result in the release of a small amount of air from the lung into the 
lung cavity, which would be treated appropriately. 
 
13.3.7  Related to the 6 Minute Walk 
 
Subjects may develop shortness of breath or fatigue.  Participants will be encouraged to walk at a 
pace that is comfortable for them. 
 
13.3.8  Related to the Gene Expression Profiling Studies  
Although genetic information can have implications regarding health, identity, paternity, 
employability and/or insurability for the resear ch participant as well as family members, No such 
relationship has been found for the genes we are testing.    Therefore the nature of the genetic 
testing (gene expression profiling studies) detailed in  the protocol will not put participants at any 
further risk.  
 
13.3.9 Related to Pregnancy and Nursing Mothers   
 The effects of albuterol and/or aerosolized cyclosporine A in solution with propylene glycol on the 
developing human fetus are unknown. For this reason and because it is unknown whether these 
drugs are teratogenic, women of childbearing potential and men must agree to use adequate contraception prior to (hormonal or barrier method of birth control; abstinence) and for the duration 
of study participation.  If a woman becomes pregnant or suspects she is pregnant while on study, 
her treating physician should be informed immediately. Nursing mothers must be willing to 
discontinue nursing. 
 
13.3.10 Related to radiation exposure:  
 
x Related to the high resolution CT:   CT (computed tomography), sometimes called CAT 
scan, uses special x-ray equipment to obtain  image data from different angles around the 
body and then uses computer processing of the information to show a cross-section of body 
tissues and organs. Oral and/or intravenous contrast agents will NOT be used.   
 
x Related to the lung deposition studies:   Radioisotope tracer sulfur colloid will be inhaled 
along with the cyclosporine dissolved in propylene glycol for one treatment session.  This is generally well-tolerated.  Planar and SPECT/CT imaging will be performed to quantify the 
amount of drug deposited in the lungs and assess distribution. 
 
13.4 Risks in relation to benefits    
 13.4.1  For Adult Subjects  
The risks of participating in this trial are limited to side effects of the albuterol/levalbuterol and 
inhaled CsA, and the risks of standard diagnostic procedures (BAL and biopsy, the high resolution 
CT, and pulmonary function tests), the 6 minute walk, the lung deposition study, and the additional 
peripheral blood sample to be used strictly for re search purposes.  Samples for clinical monitoring 
will be collected during sample collection procedur es that are part of their routine post transplant 
care and therefore pose no additional burden or risk.  
The benefits to the subjects could be improvemen t in BO resulting in improved quality of life, 
decreased mortality associated with severe BO (should it develop), and potentially, treatment with 
other more toxic systemic therapies could also be avoided or postponed.  Subjects will also receive 
direct health benefits due to thorough post transplant pulmonary examinations, early diagnosis of 
progression of BO and therefore earlier access to appropriate BO management. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 45 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD  
Therefore, for adult subjects participating on this study, the research involves greater than minimal 
risk to subjects with the prospect of direct benefit (45 CFR 46.102 ). 
 
13.4.2  For Pediatric Subj ects 
 
DHHS w ill conduct or fund research in which the IRB finds that more than minimal risk to 
children is presented by an intervention or proced ure that holds out the prospect of direct benefit 
for the individual subject, only if the IRB finds that: 
 (a)“The risk represents a minor increase over minimal risk” . The risks of participating in this trial 
are limited to the side effects of the albuterol and inhaled CsA, the risks of standard diagnostic 
procedures (BAL and biopsy, the high resolution CT, the pulmonary function tests and the 6 
minute walk), lung deposition studies, and the additional peripheral blood sample to be used 
strictly for research purposes. Samples for clinical monitoring will be collected concurrently with samples that are part of their routine post transplant care.  Only those laboratory tests approved by 
the IRB and involving not greater than minimal risk will be conducted (See Appendix B).  
 
(b) The relation of the anticipated benefit to the risk is  at least as favorable to the subjects as that 
presented by available alternative approaches . The risk associated with the monitoring that will be 
done on this ancillary protocol exceeds only minimally that would be done routinely in post 
transplant subjects who have developed BO.  This  risk is most favorable given that pediatric 
subjects could derive benefit in improvement in BO, resulting in improved quality of life, 
decreased mortality associated with severe BO (should it develop),  and avoidance of treatment 
with other more toxic systemic therapies.  Subjects  will also receive direct health benefits due to 
thorough post transplant pulmonary examinations, early diagnosis of BO progression, and therefore 
earlier access to appropriate BO management.  
 
(c) Adequate provisions are made for soliciting the assent of the children  and permission of their 
parents or guardians, as set forth in 46.408.  An assent is available. 
 
Therefore, the inclusion of children satisfies the cr iteria set forth in 45 Code of Federal Regulations 
46, Subpart D: 46.405 Research involving greater than minimal risk but presenting the prospect of 
direct benefit to the individual subjects. 
 
13.5 Informed Consent Processes and Procedures 
 
The investigational nature and research objectives of  this trial, the procedure and its attendant risks 
and discomforts will be carefully explai ned to the subject and when applicable the subjects’ 
parents.  The potential subject will be educated regarding the nature of the condition, proposed 
intervention, and outcome measures.  Study subjects will be informed that participation is entirely 
voluntary and that withdrawal from the study can be made at any time without penalty of benefits 
to which they may be entitled.  No consenting will be done by outside investigators or at outside 
institutions. 
 
At any time during participation in the protocol, if new information becomes available relating to 
risks, adverse events, or toxicities, this information will be provided orally or in writing to all 
enrolled or prospective subject participants.  Documentation will be provided to the IRB and if 
necessary the informed consent amende d to reflect relevant information. 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 46 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Informed consent of non-English speaking research participants:  We anticipate the enrollment 
of Spanish-speaking research participants into our study. The IRB approved full consent document 
will be translated into that language in accordance with the Clinical MAS Policy M77-2. If there is 
an unexpected enrollment of a research participant for which there is no translated extant IRB 
approved consent document, the principal investigat or and or those authorized to obtain informed 
consent will use the Short Form Oral Consent Process as described in MAS Policy M77-2, 45 CFR 
46.117 ( b) (2), and 21 CFR50.27 (b) (a) . The summary that will be used is the English version of 
the extant IRB approved consent document.  
We request prospective IRB approval of the use of the short form for up to a minimum of 10 
participants in a given language and will notify the IRB at the time of continuing review of the 
frequency of the use of the Short Form.  Should we reach the threshold of 10, we will notify the 
IRB of the need for an additional use of the Short Form and that we will have that consent document translated into the given inherent language.  
 
Minor subjects:   If the patient is a minor, a minor assent will be sought.  Where deemed 
appropriate by the clinician, and the child's parent or guardian, the child will also be included in all 
discussions about the trial and a minor's assent will be obtained.  The parent who signs the consent 
for the minor must be a legally recognized parent or guardian.  The parent or guardian will sign on 
the designated line on the informed consent attesting to the fact that the child had given assent. When the assent is not age appropriate, the study will be explained to the child and the assent will 
be obtained verbally from the child.  Once the minor reaches 18, he/she will be consented for 
continued protocol participati on using the adult consent.  
 
Because this research holds a prospect of direct benefit to the health or well-being of pediatric participants and is available only in the context of the research, the assent of the pediatric 
participant is not a necessary condition for proceeding  with the research.  However, in the case of 
dissent, an independent pediatric care team (social worker and mental health specialist 
(psychologist or psychiatrist) will meet with the minor and his family to re-emphasize the 
importance of treatment on protocol; if the child continues to dissent, an ethics consult will be requested prior to enrollment. 
 
When a pediatric subject reaches age 18, continued participation will require re-consenting of the 
now adult with the standard protocol consent document to ensure legally effective informed 
consent has been obtained. Should sample or data analysis continue following completion of active participation and the subject has reached 18 years of age, we will attempt to contact the subject 
using the last known contact information to obtain consent for continued use of data or samples  
collected during their prior visit. Given the length of time that may have transpired for some of the 
subjects since their last visit for this study, we request waiver of informed consent for those 
individuals who after good faith efforts to contact them, we are unable to contact.  
 
Requirements for Waiver of Consent consistent with 45 CFR 46.116 (d), each of which must be 
addressed in relation to the protocol: 
 
(1) The research involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects; 
a) Analysis of samples and data from this study  involves no additional risks to subjects. 
(2) The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects; 
a) Samples and data will be kept in secure locations in the laboratory of Dr. Young. 
Retention of samples or data does not affect the welfare of subjects. 
(3) The research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration; and 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 47 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD a) Considering the length of time between a minor’s enrollment and their age of majority, 
it is possible that more than a few subjects may be lost to follow up.  A significant 
reduction in the number of samples analyzed could impact the quality of the research. 
(4) Whenever appropriate, the subjects will be provided with additional pertinent information after 
participation. 
a) We only plan to request a waiver of re-consent for those subjects who have been lost to 
follow-up. 
In cases where parents share joint legal custody in making medical decisions of their child (e.g. by 
a custody agreement or court order) both parents must give their parental permissions regardless of 
level of risk of the research. Exceptions may be made if one parent is deceased, becomes 
incompetent or is not reasonably available (e.g. in prison).  
Consenting to Pregnancy Testing in Minors of Childbearing Age:   We will inform the minor 
during the assent process that for safety, we need to do a pregnancy test.  She will also be told that 
if it is positive, we will counsel her and help her tell her parents.  If the minor does not want to 
proceed she will be advised not to sign the assent and her enrollment on this screening protocol will 
end. 
 
13.6 Conflict of Interest 
 
The Principal Investigator assured that each associate investigator listed on the protocol title page 
received a copy of the NIH’s Guide to preventing conflict of interest.  Investigators added 
subsequent to the initial circulation were provided a copy of the document when they were added. No initial or subsequent members of the research team reported a potential conflict of interest.   
 
This protocol has no associated patents, however, outside associate investigator Aldo Iacono, MD 
holds a US patent application A32130-072396.0162 11/11/1999 for Uses of aerosol cyclosporine 
for prevention and treatment of pulmonary Disease.  Dr. Timothy Corcoran has received research 
grant funding from APT to the University of Pittsburg.  To avoid any conflict of interest, Dr Iacono 
and Dr Corcoran will not participate in the consent process nor will they participate in any of the 
endpoint evaluations. 
 
13.7 Technical Transfer Agreements 
 
An MTA with APT Pharamceuticals, Inc was previously signed that allowed for in vitro assays to 
be performed using the cyclosporine in propylene glycol. 
 
A CRADA between APT Pharmaceuticals, Inc has been fully executed.   
14.0 PHARMACEUTICAL 
 14.1 Cyclosporine Inhalation Solution (CIS) 
 
Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties   CIS is a sterile, clear, colorless, preservative-
free solution of cyclosporine (USP) in propylene glycol developed specifically for administration 
by oral inhalation.  The active principle of CI S is a cyclic polypeptide immunosuppressant agent 
consisting of 11 amino acids.  It is produced as a metabolite by the fungus species Beauveria nivea.  
The molecular formula is C 62H111N11O12 and the molecular weight is 1202.63.   
 
Chemical name: The chemical name for cyclosporine is [R-[R*,R*-(E)]]-cyclic(L-alanyl-D-
alanyl-N-methyl-L-leucyl-N-methyl-L-leucyl-N-methyl-L-valyl-3-hydroxy-N,4-dimethyl-L-2-
Version 16 (Amendment N) 48 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD amino-6-octenoyl-L- α-amino-butyryl-N-methylglycyl-N-methyl-L-leucyl-L-valyl-N-methyl-L-
leucyl).  
 
 Chemical Structure  
 
 
 
Supply:  CIS is manufactured and filled into a sterile, single-use clear 6 mL glass vial sealed with a 
sterilized, siliconized light gray bromobutyl rubber stopper secured by a crimped tear-off aluminum 
overseal.  This container closure system provid es protection of the formulation from microbial 
contamination, moisture ingress, and other environmental contaminants during storage.  Each vial 
contains 5.2 mL of solution containing 325 mg cyclosporine.  This vial contains a sufficient amount 
of cyclosporine, USP in propylene glycol, USP to deliver 300 mg in 4.8 mL.  CIS is designed 
specifically for aerosol inhalation via a single use SideStream® disposable nebulizer (Respironics, 
Inc., Murrysville, PA) with the Mobilaire compressor (Invacare, Elyria, OH) at 30 psi.  Previous 
studies have used the AeroTech™ II nebulizer with a high flow compressor such as the Sunrise 
DeVilbiss 8650D set at 40 pounds per square inch (PSI).  At 40 PSI, the average flow rate from the compressors is approximately 12.5 L/min. 
 
Storage : CIS vials should be stored in the upright position at controlled room temperature at 
controlled room temperature, 25ºC (77 qF), excursions permitted to 15 q-30qC (59-86qF).  Do not 
store in the refrigerator or freezer.  CIS vials are single use.  Any remaining CIS in the vial after 
dosing should be discarded. 
 
Drug Product Composition 
 
Component Quality 
Standard Function  Amount per vial Concentration  
(% w/vol) 
Cyclosporine USP Active ingredient 325 mg 62.5% 
Propylene Glycol USP Solvent 5.2 mL - 
 
At a formulation of 62.5 mg/mL, the cyclosporine concentration in CIS is well below the saturation 
solubility of 400 mg/mL in propylene glycol.  Cycl osporine is freely soluble at the manufacturing N
NN
N
NNNNN
N
NOO
O
OO
O
OOO
O
OCH3CH3CH3
CH3
CH3CH3OH
CH3
CH3 CH3CH3
CH3CH3
CH3
CH3CH3
CH3CH3
CH3CH3CH3
CH3CH3
CH3CH3
HH
H
HH
:
:
::
:
::
:
:
Version 16 (Amendment N) 49 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD conditions of 20 - 40ºC and during long-term storage at  30ºC.  Therefore, the risk of crystallization 
during its shelf life is low.  
 
Aerosol Properties :  An in vitro study was performed to assess the aerosol characteristics of CIS in 
the Sidestream® Disposable nebulizer.  The mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) particle 
size was determined by NGI impaction to be 1.9 μm.  The geometric standard deviation (GSD) was 
1.9.  These aerosol particle properties are well suited for both large airway and small airway 
deposition.  
 
Shipping:  The NIH Pharmaceutical Development Services will be responsible for receiving, 
storing, dispensing and accounting for drug product.  The shipping address for APT Pharmaceuticals, Inc supplied investigational agent is: 
 
 National Institutes of Health 
 PHARM DEV SVC, Room 1D35 
 10 Center Drive, MSC 1196, Building 10 
 Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1196 
Shipping Designee Name:  Judith Starling, RPh 
 Shipping Designee Phone No:  (301) 496-1031 
 Shipping Designee FAX No:  (301) 402-3268 
 Shipping Designee e-mail: jstarling@NIH.gov 
 
Accountability Procedures:   Drug accountability records will be maintained for all clinical 
supplies. All empty and partially used vials and cl inical trial supplies will be destroyed locally 
accordi ng to the institution’s standard operating procedures for drug destruction.  The pharmacy 
will maintain detailed documentation of the number and identification of vials, which are 
destroyed, and copies of these documents will be provided to the Sponsor.  Disposition of all 
unused boxes of study drug will be carried out according to instructions provided by the Sponsor at 
the end of the study after drug accountability is performed by the study monitor. 
 
14.2 Albuterol 
 
Physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties: Albuterol is a white or practically white 
powder, freely soluble in water and slightly soluble in alcohol.  It is a relatively selective beta-2  
adrenergic bronchodilator.  The molecular formula is (C 13H21NO 3)2∙H2SO 4 and the molecular 
weight is 576.71. 
Chemical name:  The chemical name for albuterol is α1[(tert-Butylamino)methyl]-4-hydroxy-m-
xylene-α,α′diol sulfate (2:1) (salt).  
 
Chemical Structure:  
 
 
Supply: Albuterol is supplied in unit-dose vials containing albuterol sulfate inhalation solution 
0.083%, 2.5mg/3ml. 
 

Version 16 (Amendment N) 50 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Storage : Albuterol should be protected from light and stored in the pouch until time of use.  It 
should be stored between 2o and 25o C (36o and 77o F).  
Version 16 (Amendment N) 51 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD 15.0 Role of Collaborators 
 
Aldo T. Iacono, M.D., Medical Director, Lung Transplant Program  
Role: Will provide advice regarding administration of the CIS, trial design and clinical 
management of patients who have received a lung transplant.  
Michael Terrin, MD, Professor of Epidemiology and Medicine  
Role: Will provide trial design advice.  
Timothy Corcoran, PhD, Professor of Medicine and Bioengineering, Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine,  
Role: Will provide advice regarding the lung deposition studies. 
The collaborators will not have access to Personally Identifiable Information (PII) in the study. 
 
 
16.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. Trulock EP, Edwards LB, Talyor DO, et al. Regist ry of the International Society for Heart and 
Lung Transplantation: Twenty-third official adu lt lung and heart-lung transplantation report-2006. 
Journal of heart and lung transplantation 2006, 25:880-92 
 
2. Savani, BN et al. Chronic  GVHD and pretransplantation abnormalities in pulmonary function are 
the main determinants predicting worsening pulmonary function in long-term survivors after stem cell transplantation. Biology of Blood and marrow transplantation 2006, 12(12):1261-9.
 
 
3. Afessa B, Litzow M, Tefferi A. Bronchiolitis Obliterans and other late onset pulmonary 
complications in hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplantation 2001, 
28:425-34 
 
4. Bryant D, Obliterative bronchiolitis in haematopoie tic stem cell transplantation:can it be treated? 
European Respiratory Journal 2005, 25:402-04 
 
5. Watkins T, Chien J, Crawford S. Graft versus  host associated pulmonary disease and other 
idiopathic pulmonary complicati ons after hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Seminars in 
respiratory and critical care medicine 2005, 26(5):482-89 
 
6. Estenne M, Hertz M. Bronchiolitis Obliterans after human lung transplantation. American journal 
of respiratory and critical care medicine 2002, 166: 440-44 
 
7. Filipovich et al. National Institutes of Health Consensus Development 
Project on Criteria for Clinical Trials in Chronic Graft-versus-Host Disease: I. Diagnosis and 
Staging Working Group Report. Biology of Blood and Marrow Transplantation 2005; 11:945-955  
 
8. Iacono AT, Johnson BA, Grgurich WF, et al. A randomized trial of inhaled cyclosporine inlung-
transplant recipients. New England journal of medicine 2006, 354(2):141-50   
 
9.    Boehler A, Estenne M. Post-transplant bronchiolitis obliterans. European respiratory journal 2003, 
22:1007-1018. 
 
10. Soubani AO, Uberti JP. Bronchiolitis obliterans following haematopoietic stem cell transplantation.  
European respiratory journal 2007, 29:1007-1019 
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 52 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD 11. Sanchez et al. Long-term follow-up of immunosuppressive treatment for obstructive airways 
disease after allogeneic bone marrow transpla ntation.  Bone Marrow Transplantation 1997; 20: 
403-8 
 
12. Burckart et al. Journal of clinical Pharmacology 1989; 29:860 
 13. Mitruka et al. Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery 1998;115(1): 28-36 
 
14. Dowling et al. Surgery 1990;108(2): 198-204 
 
15. Iacono et al. Aerosolized cyclosporine in lung recipients with refractory chronic rejection. 
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care medicine 1996;153 (4):1451-5 
 
16. Iacono et al. Aerosol cyclosporin therapy in lung transplant recipients with 
bronchiolitis obliterans. European Respiratory Journal 2004;23:384-90 
 
17. Iacono et al. Transplantation 1997 ;64 :263 
 18. Iacono et al. Dose-related reversal of acute lung  rejection by aerosolized cyclosporine. American 
Journal of Repiratory and Critical Care medicine 1997;155 (5):1690-8 
 
19. Keenan et al. Treatment of refractory acute allogr aft rejection with aerosolized cyclosporine in lung 
transplant recipients.
 Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery 1997;113(2):335-40 
 
20 Simon R. Optimal two-stge designs for phase II clinical trials. Controlled Clinical Trials 10:1-10, 
1989. 
 
21. Anhøj et al. Lung deposition of inhaled drugs increases with age.  American Journal of Respiratory 
and Critical Care Medicine 2000;162:1819-22 
 
22. Burckart et al. Lung deposition and pharmacokinetics of cyclosporine after aerosolization in lung 
transplant patients. Pharmaceutical Research 2004: 20(2):252-56 
 
23. Geller NL, Leifer ES, Follmann D. and Carter  SL. Design of Early Trials in Stem Cell 
Transplantation: A Hybrid Frequentist-Bayesian Approach. Advances in Clinical Trials 
Biostatistics.  2003. 
 
24. Rosenfeld S, Follman D. Nunez O, Young NS.  Antithymocyte globulin and cyclosporine for 
severe aplastic anemia: associated between hematologic response and long-term outcome.  JAMA.  2003 Mar 5:289 (9):1130-5) 
 
25. Weigt S, Wallace W, Derhovanessian A, Saggar R, Lynch J, Belperio J. Chronic allograft 
rejection: epidemiology, diagnosis, pathogenesis, and treatment. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 
2010;31:189-207. 
 
26. Gottlieb J, Szangolies J, Koehnlein T, Golpon H, Simon A, Welte T. Long-term azithromycin for 
bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome after lung transplantation. Transplantation 2008;85:36-41. 
 
27. Sánchez J, Torres A, Serrano J, et al. Long-term follow-up of immunosuppressive treatment for 
obstructive airways disease after allogeneic bone ma rrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 
1997;20:403-8. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 53 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD  
28. Dudek A, Mahaseth H. Hematopoietic stem cell transplant-related airflow obstruction. Curr Opin 
Oncol 2006;18:115-9. 
 
29. Knoop C, Estenne M. Acute and chronic rejection after lung transplantation. Semin Respir Crit 
Care Med 2006;27:521-33. 
 
30. van Den Berg JW, Geertsma A, van Der Bij W, et al. Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome 
after lung transplantation and health-related qua lity of life. American journal of respiratory 
and critical care medicine 2000;161(6):1937-1941.  
 
 
  
Version 16 (Amendment N) 54 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD APPENDIX A  MEDWATCH FORM FDA 3500A 
 
http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/HowToReport/DownloadForms/default.htm  
 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 55 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD APPENDIX B  NHLBI HEMATOLOGY BRANCH LABORATORY RESEARCH 
STUDIES 
 
 DESCRIPTION OF LABORATORY STUDY BY BRANCH SECTION Does this test 
pose a greater 
than minimal 
risk to 
pediatric 
subjects per 45 
CFR 46.404? Does this test 
pose a 
greater than 
minimal risk 
to healthy 
pediatric 
donors per 45 
CFR 46.404?  
    
A Stem Cell Allotransplantation Section (Dr. A. John Barrett)    
A.1 Measurement of lymphocyte function and immune responses directed toward 
allogeneic tissues, malignant cells, and infe ctious agents.  Assay of a variety of 
antigens, including standard proliferation, cy totoxicity, and intracellular cytokine  
detection including GVHD predictive markers. Measurement of a ntigen- specific 
responses including employment of tetramers, ELISPOT technique, gene amplification
-based assays, and flow cytometry.  Selection of cells using 
immunomagnetic beads or flow cytometry.  Culture, expansion, and selection of 
cells. Surface marker analysis of PB MC using flow cytometry. Cytokine/chemokine analysis of plasma/serum samples using ELISA and/or Luminex techniques.  No No 
A.2 Generation of cell lines for the study of immune cell interactions with other cells.  
Transformation of B-lymphocytes using Epstein- Barr virus.  Derivation of malignant 
cell lines from patient leuke mic or solid tumor samples. No No 
A.3 Infection of cells and cell lines with reco mbinant genes to ascertain the effects of 
expressed molecules on immune response s and on growth and development. 
Transfection of cell lines with specific mo lecules to study antigen-specific responses. No No 
A.4 Assays of peripheral blood and bone marrow progenitor cells including primitive and 
late erythroid progenitor -derived colonies, myelomonocytic colonies, and primitive 
multi- potential progenitor-derived colonies. No No 
A.5 Injection of human cells into experimental animals to study the immune system and 
the growth of normal and malignant cells under varying conditions. No No 
A.6 Testing of selection methods, cell isolatio n, and cell expansion leading to the 
development of new cell-based therapies re quiring scale-up for clinical application. No No 
A.7 Identification of individual T cell clones  by their T cell receptor sequence. No No 
A.8 Measurement of tumor and tissue specific antigens in cells of subjects and donors by 
mRNA,protein, or peptide expression in cells or fluids. No No 
A.9 Laser capture micro dissection of cells from biopsies for GVHD to determine 
clonotypes. No No 
A.10 DNA and RNA typing of genes that control immune responses in lymphocytes. 
 No No 
A.11 Microassay studies utilizing cellular DNA, cDNA, and RNA for neoplasia and host-
tumor interactions. No No 
    
B Molecular Hematopoiesis  Sect ion  (Dr. Cynthia Dunbar)    
B.1 Flow cytometric analysis of cell surface and cytoplasmic proteins, including cell 
adhesion molecules, putative retroviral receptors, and markers of differentiation, using bone marrow and mobilized peripheral blood cells. No No 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 56 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD B.2 Hematopoietic progenitor-derived colony ascertainment in vitro (as described above), 
and engraftment of immunodeficient mice for detection of human stem cell number 
and function. No No 
B.3 Testing ability of hematopoietic progenitor ce lls to be transduced with retroviral, 
lentiviral, and novel gene transfer vectors in vitro. No No 
B.4 Reprogramming of adult mature cells, including skin fibroblasts and blood cells, into 
induced pluripotent stem cells in vitro. No No 
    
C Cell Biology Section (Dr. Neal Young)    
C.1 Studies of blood and bone marrow he matopoietic progenitor numbers, including 
early and late erythroid pr ogenitors, myelomonocytic progenitors, and multi -potential 
progenitor cells.  In addition, bone marrow may be placed in long- term bone marrow 
culture to assess the function of stroma and stem cells and to assay more primitive progenitors, as well as organelle cult ure.  Whole or selected bone marrow 
populations are cultured short-term for CD34 cell expansion. No No 
C.2 Assays of apoptosis in hematopoietic cells and their progeny, using flow cytometric 
methods such as annexin and caspase -3 staining, propidium  iodide uptake, and 
mitochondrial permeability tests. No No 
C.3 Separation and functional study of cell populations characteristic of paroxysmal 
nocturnal hemoglobinuria, identified by absence of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchored proteins. No No 
C.4 Studies of mutation rates in hematopoietic cells and in buccal mucosa cells, using 
conventional hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase activity functional assays, sequencing of mitochondrial DNA after specific gene amplification, and measurement of GPI-anchored deficien t cells in blood and bone marrow. No No 
C.5 Assays of immune function of T-cells, including intracellular cytokine staining, 
ELISPOT, semiquantitative gene amplification for gamma -interferon, tumor necrosis 
factor, interleukin -2, and other cytokines, and functional assessment in co- culture 
using specific neutralizing monoclonal antibodies.  In addition, peripheral blood 
lymphocytes are subjected to spectratyping  for CDR3 size distribution as well as 
nucleotide sequence of CDR3 peaks obtained. No No 
C.6 Studies of engraftment of human normal and diseased bone marrow and peripheral 
blood in immunodeficient mice in order to determine the presence of hematopoietic repopulating stem cells as well as functional differences among selected populations. No No 
C.7 Flow cytometric analysis of blood and bone marrow for lymphocyte phenotype, 
especially for evidence of activation of ly mphocytes, for markers of apoptosis, and 
for antigens associated with primitive and mature hematopoietic cell populations. No No 
C.8 Flow cytometric analysis of blood and bone marrow for hematopoietic stem cell 
progenitors and CD 34 positive cells. No No 
C.9 Studies of chromosomal instability in myelopdysplastic syndromes including BM 
cell and CD34 cell response to PAS crossl inking and examination of the cytotoxic 
effect of lymphocytes to the abnormal clone of cells. No No 
C.10  Surface Enhanced Laser/Desorption Io nization (SELDI)  time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry (Ciphergen)  (proteomics methodology). No No 
C.11 Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence heterogeneity. No No 
C.12 Measurement of EBV viral load. No No 
C.13 Measurement of EBV LMP-1 via RT-PCR for LMP-1 RNA or flow cytometry for 
LMP-1. No No 
C.14 Outgrowth assay of EBV transformed B cells. No No 
C.15 Quantification of serumchemokines and cytokines (e.g. SDF-1, IL-10, IL-6, CXCR4, 
CXCL12). No No 
C.16 Quantification of EBV cytotoxic T cells (tetramerstaining). No No 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 57 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD C.17 Telomere length measurement by Southern blot, Q-PCR, flow-fish, in situ 
hybridization and STELA No No 
C.18 Telomere repair complex gene mutations by nucleotide sequencing of some or all of 
the following:  DKC1 ,TERC , TERT , SBDS , NOp10 , NHP2.  No No 
C.19 Analysis of  inflammatory markers and/ or bacterial, viral, fungal or protozoal 
elements in plasma or serum using molecular, colorimetric, enzymatic, flow 
cytometric or other assays in subjects receiving immunosuppressive therapy, 
chemotherapy and/or bone marrow transplantation. No No 
C.20 Confocal microscopic imaging of bone marrow. No No 
C.21 Characterization of intracellular signaling pr oteins by cell permeabilization and flow 
cytometry, and quantitative immunoblots. No No 
C.22 Assays for chromosomal aneuploidy by flor escence in situ hybridization (FISH) and 
other molecular techniques. No No 
C.23  Conversion of human dermal fibroblasts into hematopo ietic progenitors using Oct4 
transfection. No No 
    
D Virus Discovery Section (Dr. Neal  Young) THESE ASSAYS WILL NOT BE 
PERFORMED ON SAMPLES FROM  HEALTHY PEDIATRIC DONORS    
D.1 Assays of serum, blood cells, and bone marrow cells for B19 parvovirus and possible 
B19  variants using gene amplification,  cell culture, and hematopoietic colony 
inhibition assays. No N/A 
D.2 Assays of blood, bone marrow, liver, and other tissues for potentially novel viruses, 
using a variety of techniques including RNA and DNA assays, differential display, gene amplification with conserved and random primers, cell culture assays, immunohistochemical methods, and inocculatio n of mice, rabbits, and monkeys, as 
well as antibody measurements. No N/A 
D.3 Assays of blood, bone marrow, and liver for known viruses, including herpesviruses 
such as cytomegalovirus, human herpesviruses 6, 7, and 8, enteric viruses such as A-
6, circiviruses, and parvoviruses, using assays as in (2). No N/A 
D.4 Spectra-typing of blood cells to determine response to known or putative viral 
infections. No N/A 
D.5 HLA typing or subtyping to determine risk factors/determinants for hepatitis-AA 
studies. No N/A 
D.6 Cytotoxic lymphocyte assays with intracellular cytokine measurement for 
determining anti -viral response and lymphocyte cloning to obtain clones with 
specific antiviral activity. No N/A 
    
E Solid Tumor Section (Dr. Richard Childs)    
E.1 Cr51 cytotoxicity assay to evaluating killing of patient tumor cells by patient NK cell 
clones and T-cells. No No 
E.2 ELISA for IL-12  maturity of DC's made from subjects monocytes. No No 
E.3 ELISA for IFN ã to evaluate specificity of CTL clones. No No 
E.4 H thymidine uptake to evaluate prolifera tion potential of antigen specific T-cells. No No 
E.5 PCR of STR to assess chimerism status of ce llular subsets grown in-vitro or retrieved 
from subjects post-transplant. No No 
E.6 Flow sorting of PBL and/or tissue samples to  evaluate chimerism of different subsets. No No 
E.7 Surface marker analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells using flow cytometry. No No 
E.8 cDNA expression arrays to evaluate T-cells expression/gene patterns in subjects with 
GVHD and a GVT effect. No No 
E.9 Geno typing of tumor or tissue samples by high density cDNA arrays. No No 
E.10  VHL mutation analysis on kidney cancer tissue. No No 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 58 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD E.11  Transduction of dendritic and tissue cells wi th tumor antigens using plasmids, viral 
vectors and hybrid fusions. No No 
E.12  Lasar capture microdisection of cells from  tumor biopsies and tissue samples  to 
determine origin (donor vs patient). No No 
E.13  Quantification of polyoma virus BK exposure by serology and PCR in stem cell 
transplant donors and recipients from blood and urine samples. No No 
E.14  Quantification of polyoma virus BK specific T cells in stem cell transplant donors 
and recipients from pe ripheral blood samples. No No 
E.15  Determination of origin of neovasculature endothelial cells in tumor and tissue 
samples obtained from subjects post transplant. No No 
E.16  Quantification of lymphocyte subsets CD 34 progenitors an d endovasculator 
progenitors in G-CSF mobilized peripheral cell allografts. No No 
E.17  Testing for polyoma virus BK latency in CD34  progenitors, B cells and T cells in the 
G-CSF mobilized peripheral cell allografts. No No 
E.18  Determination of etiology of membraneous nephropathy using serum from subjects. No No 
E.19 Serum Proteomic patterns analysis to diagnose complications related to allogeneic 
transplantation. No No 
E.20 Determine cell origin (donor vs patient) of tissue samples using IHC, IF, sorting, and 
FISH. No No 
    
F Lymphoid Malignancies Sect ion (Dr. Adrian Wiestner)    
F.1 Culture of cells from research subjects to investigate molecular disease mechanisms, 
model host tumor interactions, and to test effe ct of drugs on cell survival and cellular 
functions. No No 
F.2 Generation of stable cell lines for the study of hematologic malignancies. No No 
F.3 Modifications of cells using standard expres sion systems or biologic molecules, e.g. 
interfering RNA, to investigate the effect s of candidate genes on cellular functions.   
F.4 Identification and monitoring of B or T cell populations as identified by flow 
cytometry and by their B cell or T cell receptor expression. No No 
F.5 Measurement of gene expression in cells or tissues. Techniques frequently used 
include gene expression profiling on microarrays, quantitative RT -PCR, Western 
blotting, flow cytometry and ELISA assays. No No 
F.6 Analysis of chromosomal abnormalities or mutations in malignant cells and non-
malignant cells including FISH technology and DNA sequencing. No No 
F.7 Assays of immune function of B-cells and T-cells, including intracellular cytokine 
staining, ELISPOT, qua ntitative RT- PCR for cytokines or other immune regulatory 
genes. No No 
F.8 Analysis of antibody specificities in serum and antigen specificity of the B-cell 
receptor on cells. Techniques may include expression of antibodies in phage display 
systems, generation of antibodies in cell cult ure systems and use of such antibodies to 
screen for cognate antigens. No No 
F.9 Transplantation of human cells into mice (xen ograft model) to study disease biology 
and to investigate the effect of experimental therapy. No No 
F.10 Measurements of drug concentrations, bi ologic molecules and disease markers in 
blood, serum, and plasma. No No 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 59 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD APPENDIX C:  DEFINITIONS 
 
ACE inhibitors: Ace inhibitors may increase the nephrotoxicity of cyclosporine; monitor. 
Allopurinol: Allopurinol may increase the levels/effect s of cyclosporine; monitor cyclosporine concentrations. 
Amiodarone: Amiodarone may increase the levels/effects of cyclosporine; monitor cyclosporine concentrations. 
Androgens: Androgens may increase the levels/effects of  cyclosporine; monitor cyclosporine concentration and for 
signs/symptoms of renal and/or hepatic toxicity (seen with danazol, fluoxymesterone, methyltestosterone, 
nandrolone, oxandrolone, oxymetholone, st anozolol, testolactone, and testosterone). 
Antacids: Antacids may decrease the levels/effects of cyclosporine. 
Antibiotics: Concomitant use may potentiate renal dysfunction  (seen with ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, tobramycin, 
vancomycin, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole); in creased cyclosporine concentrations by inhibiting 
cyclosporine metabolism (seen with azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin, and norfloxacin, quinupristin/dalfopristin); may decrease cyclosporine concentrations by inducing cyclosporine metabolism (seen 
with nafcillin, and rifampin); may decrease immuno suppressant effects (seen with ciprofloxacin); CNS 
disturbances, seizures (seen with imip enem); imipenem may increase the levels/effects of cyclosporine (monitor 
for neurotoxicity). 
Anticonvulsants: Anticonvulsants may decrease the levels/e ffects of cyclosporine (s een with carbamazepine, 
oxcarbazepine, phenobarbital, and phenytoi n); monitor cyclosporine concentrations. 
Antifungals: Concomitant use may potentiate renal dysfun ction (seen with amphotericin B, ketoconazole). May 
increase cyclosporine concentrations by inhibiting cyclos porine metabolism (seen with fluconazole, itraconazole, 
ketoconazole, and voriconazole); monitor serum concentrations and renal function.  
Antimalarials: Antimalarials may increase the levels/effec ts of cyclosporine; monitor (seen with chloroquine, 
hydroxychloroquine, primaquine). 
Antineoplastics: Antineoplastics may increase the levels/ef fects of cyclosporine; monit or for renal dysfunction (seen 
with melphalan). Cyclosporine may increase the levels/effects of antineoplastics (seen with doxorubicin, etoposide and etoposide phosphate); consider reducing the dose of etoposide and etopos ide phosphate by 50% 
with concomitant administration. 
Bosentan: Cyclosporine may increase the levels/effects of bosentan. Bosentan may decrease the levels/effects of 
cyclosporine. Concurrent use is contraindicated. 
Bromocriptine: Increases cyclosporine concentr ations by inhibiting cyclosporine metabolism 
Calcium channel blockers (eg, diltiazem, nicardipine, ve rapamil): Calcium channel blockers may increase the 
levels/effects of cyclosporine; monitor cyclosporine concentr ations. Nifedipine has been reported to increase the 
risk of gingival hyperplasia. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 60 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors: Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors  may increase the levels/effects of cyclosporine (seen 
with acetazolamide, dichlorphenamide, methazolamide; ex ceptions are brinzolamide, dorzolamide); monitor. 
Caspofungin: Cyclosporine may increase the levels/eff ects of caspofungin; monitor for hepatotoxicity. 
Colchicine: Colchicine may increase the levels/effects of cyclosporine; monitor for nephrotoxicity. Cyclosporine may 
increase levels/effects of colchicine; monitor for hepatotoxicity and myopathies. 
Corticosteroids: Systemic cor ticosteroids may increase the levels/eff ects of cyclosporine (reported with 
methylprednisolone). Cyclosporine may increase the levels /effects of systemic corticosteroids. Convulsions have 
been reported with high-dose methylprednisolone. 
CYP3A4 inducers: CYP3A4 inducers may decrease the lev els/effects of cyclosporine. Example inducers include 
aminoglutethimide, carbamazepine, nafcillin, nevira pine, oxcarbazepine, phen obarbital, phenytoin, and 
rifamycins. 
CYP3A4 inhibitors: May increase the levels/effects of cy closporine. Example inhibitors  include azole antifungals, 
clarithromycin, diclofenac, doxycycline, erythromycin, imat inib, isoniazid, nefazodone, nicardipine, propofol, 
protease inhibitors, quinidine, telithromycin, and verapamil. 
CYP3A4 substrates: Cyclosporine may increase the levels/ef fects of CYP3A4 substrates. Example substrates include 
benzodiazepines, calcium channel blockers, cyclosporine, mirtazapine, nateglinide, nefazodone, sildenafil (and 
other PDE-5 inhibitors), tacrolimus, and venlafaxine.  Selected benzodiazepines (midazolam and triazolam), 
cisapride, ergot alkaloids, selected HMG-CoA reductase in hibitors (lovastatin and simv astatin), and pimozide are 
generally contraindicated with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors. 
Digoxin: Cyclosporine may increase the levels/effects of  digoxin; severe digitalis toxicity has been observed. 
Estrogen derivatives: Estrog en derivatives may increase the levels/eff ects of cyclosporine; monitor cyclosporine 
concentrations and for signs/symptoms of hepatotoxicity. 
Ezetimibe: Ezetimibe may increase the levels/effects  of cyclosporine. Cyclosporine may increase the 
levels/effects of ezetimibe. 
Griseofulvin: Griseofulvin may decrease the levels/effects of cyclosporine. H
2 blockers: H 2 blockers may increase the levels/effects  of cyclosporine; monitor cyclosporine 
concentrations (seen with cimetidine, famotidine, ranitidine). 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors: Cyclosporine may increase levels/effects of HMG-CoA reductase 
inhibitors, resulting in myalgias, rhabdomyolysis, acute renal failure; dosage adjustments of HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors are recommended. 
Imatinib: May increase cyclosporine serum concentrat ions by inhibiting cyclosporine metabolism; monitor. 
Metoclopramide: Metoclopramide may increa se the levels/effects of cyclosporine. 
Version 16 (Amendment N) 61 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD Methotrexate: May increase cyclosporine concentrations and to xicity. Cyclosporine may increase the levels/effects of 
methotrexate and decreases plasma levels of its metabo lite; monitor closely for signs of methrotrexate toxicity. 
Minoxidil: Cyclosporine may increase the adverse/toxic effects of minoxidil; may lead to severe hypertrichosis. 
NSAIDs: May increase the levels/effects of cyclosporine; concomitant use may potentiate renal dysfunction, 
especially in dehydrated patients (seen with diclofena c, naproxen, sulindac). Cyclosporine may increase 
levels/effects of diclofenac; the lowest pos sible dose of diclofenac should be used 
Octreotide: Octreotide may decrease th e levels/effects of cyclosporine; monitor cyclosporine concentrations. 
Orlistat: Orlistat may decrease the levels/effects of cyclo sporine; orlistat may decrea se the absorption of oral 
cyclosporine formulations. 
Pimecrolimus: Cyclosporine may increase serum  levels/effects of pimecrolimus; monitor. 
Probucol: Probucol may decrease the levels/effects of cyclosporine; monitor. 
Progestins: Progestins may increase the levels/effe cts of cyclosporine; monitor for hepatotoxicity. 
Protease inhibitors: Formal interaction st udies have not been done; protease inhi bitors are known to inhibit CYP3A4 
and may increase the levels/effects of cyclosporine; use caution when using cyclosporine with indinavir, 
nelfinavir, ritonavir, or saquinavir. 
Repaglinide: Cyclosporine may increase levels/effects of repaglinide; monitor. 
Rifamycin derivatives (rifabutin, rifampin, rifapentine): May increase the metabolism, via CYP isoenzymes, of 
cyclosporine. 
Sirolimus: Cyclosporine may increase serum levels/effects of sirolimus. Sirolimus may increase the adverse/toxic 
effects of cyclosporine. Concurrent therapy may increa se the risk of HUS/TTP/TMA. Administer sirolimus 4 
hours after cyclosporine to minimize the increase in sirolimus blood levels. Interaction may also occur with 
concomitant administration of temsirolimus (a pro-drug of sirolimus), 
Sitaxsentan [CAN]: Cyclosporine may increase the levels/effe cts of sitaxsentan; concurrent use is contraindicated. 
Sulfasalazine: Sulfasalazine may decrease the levels/effects of cyclosporine. Sulfinpyrazone: Sulfinpyrazone may decrease the levels/effects of cyclosporine; monitor. 
Ticlopidine: Ticlopidine may decrease the levels/effects of cyclosporine. 
Vaccines: Vaccination may be less effective; avoid use of live vaccines during therapy. 
  
Version 16 (Amendment N) 62 11-H-0068 
July 22, 2019  PI:  Nicole Gormley, MD APPENDIX D:  Schedule of events 
 
1. van Den Berg JW, Geertsma A, van Der Bij W, et al. Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome 
after lung transplantation and health-related quali ty of life. American journal of respiratory and 
critical care medicine 2000;161(6):1937-1941. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 