 
 
 
 
 
 
Title:  Intervention With Vitamin D and Omega -3 Supplements and Incident Heart Failure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NCT #:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date:   December 31, 2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
1. Overview of parent VITAL   
VITAL  is an ongoing and NIH -funded (R01 CA138962) randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled trial using 
a 2x2 factorial design to test the effects of 2,000 IU/d of vitamin D and  1 g/d of EPA/DHA (EPA: DHA ratio of 
1.3:1) supplements in the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and cancer among 2 5,871 men and 
women during 5 years of treatment and follow -up.  
 
Enrollment, eligibility, run -in, and randomization.   For enrollment  into VITAL, 1.2 million ethnically and racially 
diverse people, including health professionals, AARP members, Essence  subscribers, professionals, college -
educated individuals, and Black business professionals, w ere mailed a  detailed description  of VITAL ’s 
objectives , an informed consent form, a brief questionnaire, and a self -addressed, pre -paid envelope for 
returning the forms.  Eligibility criteria for VITAL includ ed (1) age ≥ 50 (men) or ≥ 55 (women); (2) no history of 
cancer (except non -melanoma skin cancer), myocardial infarction , stroke, transient ischemic attack , angina 
pectoris, coronary artery bypass graft, or percutan eous coronary intervention ; (3) no history of safety 
exclusions: kidney stones, renal failure or dialysis, hypercalcemia, hypo - or hyperparathyroidism, severe liver 
disease, sarcoidosis, active chronic tuberculosis, or Wegener’s granulomatosis; ( 4) no a llergy to fish (for 
EPA+DHA); (5 ) no other ser ious illness that would preclude participation; ( 6) consum ption of <800 IU vitamin D 
from all supplemental sources combined;  (7) current intake of <1.2 g/d of calcium  from all supplemen tal 
sources combined ; (8) not taking fish oil supplements ; and ( 9) ability to sign the informed consent form. Table 
1 shows baseline characteristics of VITAL participants.  
A run-in phase was designed to  eliminate poor compliers prior to randomization to increase statistical  power .  
Willing  and eligible participants w ere mailed placebo for vitamin D and EPA/DHA  to assess potential 
compliance and side effects.  After 3 months, a f ollow -up questionnaire w as used to query about continued 
eligibility, willingness, c ompliance, and potential side effects. Non -responders w ere mailed 2nd and 3rd requests.   
 
For randomization  into VITAL, participants are required to be: (i) compliant 
(taking two-thirds or more of the study  pills during run -in); (ii) willing to 
continue; (iii) eligible based upon the above criteria; and (iv) willing to limit 
supplemental vitamin D intake and forego fish oil supplements. 
Randomization is being stratified by 5-year age groups, and in blocks of 8 
individuals, with 2 individuals in each of the  4 treatment combinations. Pilot 
mailings indicate d that 40,000 individuals, including >10,000 minority 
participants, w ere willing and eligible for the run -in, of whom 65% (n = 
~26,000) w ere compliant and remain ed willing and eligible for 
randomization.  
 
Baseline questionnaire a nd food frequency questionnaire  (FFQ) : Each 
VITAL participant completed a  comprehensive baseline questionnaire  to 
collect information on demographics , medical history, medication use, 
vitamin D, fish oil, and other supplement use, lif estyle and clinical risk 
factors, and potential effect modifiers of vitamin D such as skin pigmentation 
and sunlight exposure. A self -administered FFQ was also mailed to 
participants during the run -in. The FFQ has been shown to be an efficient and valid in strument to assess 
individual s’ diet and to derive nutrients . To capture changes in dietary habits over time, a second FFQ will be 
administered to all VITAL participants a t 24 months of follow up. A verage dietary intake of vitamin D, EPA, and 
DHA and other important nutrients will be estimated from the FFQ for proposed analyses.   
Baseline and fol low-up blood collection : Blood collection kits were sent to willing subjects during the run -
in period to collect fasting blood sample s; subjects were asked to record the time of venipuncture and their last 
meal . Collected blood samples are being sent bac k to our laboratory in freezer packs within 24 hours of blood 
collection . Upon re ceipt, we process and aliquot  these specimens into multiple vials that are then kept at -170º 
Celsius in liquid nitrogen. Blood samples are processed within hours of receipt to ensure that samples are 
frozen within 30 -36 hours after venipuncture. In additi on, a random sample of 2,000 individuals will have follow -
up blood drawn after 24 and 48 months of follow -up at the Boston Clinical and Translational Science Center Table  1. Baseline characteristics 
of VITAL cohort (n=25,874)   
Male  50% 
Mean age ( ±SD) -Years  67±7  
Mean  BMI ( ±) - kg/m2 29±6  
Non-Hispanic White  71% 
African Americans  20% 
Age ≥ 65  63% 
≥High school graduate  99% 
Exercise (MET/week)  15 
Any alcohol use  69% 
Aspirin use  45% 
Income <$15,000  6% 
Use of multivitamin  44% 
Current smoker   4% 
History of diabetes  13% 
Prevalent  hypertension   53% 
Current statin use  37% 
(CTSC) to as sess compliance and changing trends in background fortification with vitamin D and marine 
omega -3 fatty acids , as well as to evaluate physiologic changes in selected biomarkers . To date, we have 
collected baseline blood collection 16,361 VITAL participants . 
 
Quality assurance and follow up. Quality assurance testing ensure s that the intervention (vitamin D and 
EPA/DHA) contain s the correct doses and is free of contaminants. At 6 months and at each anniversary date 
of randomization, each participant will rece ive a follow -up questionnaire and a re -supply of study treatments.  
Each annua l follow -up questi onnaire  assess es compliance, use of non-trial vitamin D and fish oil, dietary intake 
of vitamin D and fish, information on interim medication  use, physical acti vity, weight, comorbidity  including HF , 
etc. Data on p otential side effects are being collected and tracked by a Dat a and Safety Monitoring Board. 
Non-respondents receive multiple mailed requests, followed by a t elephone call to collect data. For non -
respo ndents, vital status will be ascertained. To further test compliance, 250 VITA L subjects residing in New 
England will receive unannounced visits to draw bloods to measure plasma vitamin  D and EPA /DHA .  
2. Follow -up and adjudication procedures for HF  (requiring hospitalization) and recurrent HF 
hospitalizations .  
The main method of f ollow -up is mailed questionnaires and review of medical records to confirm study 
endpoints. Participants receive follow -up questionnaires  at 6 months and 1 y ear after randomiza tion and 
annually thereafter.  A new supply of study pills is mailed with each an nual questionnaire.  The questionnaires 
ask about compliance with randomized treatments, use of non -study supplements of vitamin D and marine 
omega -3 fatty acids, development of  major illnesses  including HF , cancer and CVD, and potential side effects 
of the  study agents. Non -responders receive two additional requests by mail and are then telephoned to collect 
study data. At a minimum, vital status is ascertained.  
 
Participants who  report a HF diagnosis are asked to sign a medical release for relevant medical  records. An 
Endpoints Committee of physicians blinded to  treatment assignment ( including Drs. Djousse, Gaziano, and 
Albert) will review the records to confirm or disconfirm th e diagnosis of HF . Death s are confirmed by convincing 
evidence from available s ources, including death certificates, hospital records, autopsy reports, and for deaths  
outside the  hospital, observer accounts.  For deaths reported by family members, the next -of-kin is asked to 
provide medical records and a copy of the death certificate.  If the latter is not provided, a copy is obtained from 
the appropriate state vital records bureau. If records are not available (or if participants are lost to follow -up), 
we search the Nati onal Death Index Plus  to obtain an International  Classification o f Disease -coded cause of 
death based on death -certificate information.  
 
We will use criteria outlined by the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Data Standards  to define HF . This definition requires ALL of the following four elements  
to be met : 
1. Patient’s admission to the hospital with a primary diagnosis of HF  
2. New or worsening symptoms due to HF on presentation including at least ONE  of the follo wing: 
dyspnea, worsening peripheral edema, decreased exercise tolerance, fatigue, and other symptoms 
of worsened end -organ p erfusion or volume overload  
3. At least TWO  physical signs  (including  rapid weight gain, pulmonary rales, increased jugular 
venous pres sures and/or hepatojugular reflu x, peripheral edema, increasing abdominal distension 
or ascites in the absence of primary li ver disease, and S3 gallop) or ONE  physical sign  plus at  
least O NE laboratory criterion  obtained within 24 hours of presentation (in creased B -natriuretic 
peptide , radiologic evidence of pulmonary congestion, and non -invasive or invasive diagnostic 
evidence  of elevated left - or righ t-sided ventricular filling pressure or low cardiac output)  
4. Patient receives initiation or intensification  of HF treatment including at least ONE  of the following 
[(i) significant augmentation in oral diuretic therapy, (ii) intrav enous diuretic, inotrope, or vasodilator 
therapy, and (iii) mechanical or surgical intervention such as mechanical circulatory suppo rt or 
mechanical fluid removal ]. 
The same definition will be used to adjudicate recurrent HF hospitalization s. Once pertinent information has 
been abstracted from the medical records using the data form, t wo physician adjudicator s will review each 
chart in dependently, followed by a joint meeting  of the entire HF Endpoint Committee to discuss cases where 
disagreement exists among the two reviewers. Here, we  will adopt a simple majority vote. Each event will be 
evaluated for presence of HFpEF (EF ≥ 50%) or HFrEF  (EF<50%)  based on ejection fraction  (EF) obtained 
during the index hospitalization . Whenever possible, we will assign the etiol ogy of HF (i.e., valvular, arrh ythmia, 
coronary artery disease, etc).   
 
Linkage to the Centers for Medicare & Me dicaid Services (CMS)  
To supplement the number of self -reported HF from follow -up questionnaires , we will also identify  VITAL 
participants (mean age 67 y) with incident HF by linking our data with the CMS database . We will use HF 
diagnoses (ICD -9 codes 428 ) for such linkage . Costs associated with CMS linkage are covered by the parent 
VITAL trial. Each year, we will obtain Medicare Data Files through ResDAC, a CMS contractor for academic 
researchers.  Although CMS might be more likely to capture older subjec ts (65+ years), women, and white 
participants, we anticipate equal proportion of subjects randomized to either interven tion or corresponding 
placebo given randomization and a large sample size. Hence, the difference between intervention and placebo 
should remain constant.   
 
3. Research Design and Methods  
Measurement of other i mportant variables  
Information on demographics,  anthropometrics, lifestyle factors , family history of coronary artery disease, and 
comorbidity  will be obtained at baseline  and during follow -up via study questionnaires .  
 
Data management and cleani ng 
Our team has developed a sophisticated computer system to create and maintain data.  A computing system 
tracks each participant’s stage and level of participation in VITAL by automatically g enerating letters, 
questionnaires, and phone call reminders. Que stionnaires are being optically scanned using TELEform and 
Alchemy (Cardiff Software) programs, which have been successfully used for our other mail -based clinical 
trials (PHS, WHS). Out -of-range, internally inconsistent, and unclear data are reviewed and corrected as 
necessary. Unscannable forms and name or address changes are double entered  into the system. All data 
undergo additional within -form and across -time checks to verify accuracy. The  VITAL database will be 
maintained on a UNIX server that is back ed up nightly, ensuring at least two current copies at all times.  
 
Data entry is performed using formatted screens with built -in error checking. Each follow -up questionnaire is 
entered by two  different persons. The two generated files are compared using an  interactive verification 
program that allows for immediate correction of any discrepancies. Before being added to the database, the 
data undergo further within -form and across -time verificat ions to assure completeness, accuracy, and 
participant identifica tion number. Any errors in coding or keying are corrected promptly.  
 
Statistical analyses by specific Aim 
Primary Aim  1: Quantify the effects of vit amin  D3 intervention vs. placebo on incide nce rate of HF.  
Hypothesis : Intervention with vi tamin  D3 reduces the incidence rate of HF  among VITAL participants . 
Study design:  Randomized double -blind, placebo -controlled , 2x2 factorial trial of vit amin  D3 and EPA/DHA.  
Study subjects:  Participants inclu ded in the VITAL (n=2 5,871). 
Primary outcome:  Inciden ce of H F hospitalization  
Statistical model:  We will exclude any prevalent HF at baseline  and use  Cox proportional hazards model  to 
estimate effects . Time -to-event will be calculated as the interval betwe en time of randomization and the earliest 
of: 1) HF incidence , 2) death, or  3) end of the study. Analyses of treatment effects will be based on the intent -
to-treat principle. The first analysis will compare baseline characteristics by randomized treatment assignment 
to ensure that balance was achieved by the randomization. Charac teristics to be examined include known risk 
factors for HF, such as age; gender; race/ethnicity; body mass index; smoking; alcohol use; physical activity; 
medical conditions such as  hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, and family history of coronary dis ease; and 
baseline vitamin D and omega -3 fatty acid levels as assessed by FFQ. The large sample size, as well as 
successful balance of known potential confounders, will provide assu rance that unmeasured or unknown 
potential confounders will also be equally  distributed across randomized treatment groups  
 
In this 2x2 factorial design, the primary aim is to compare the main effects of intent -to-treat with vitamin D 3 on 
incidence r ate of HF. We will  use the Cox proportional hazards model to allow for variable follow -up length s 
and will estimate the hazard ratio for vitamin D 3 intervention using indicators for treatment exposure, 
controlling for EPA/DHA intervention, age, and gender. Becau se the cohort will consist of older individuals, 
competing risks due to deaths from other causes will be considered. The primary analysis will estimate the 
cause -specific hazard and the hazard ratio comparing intervention groups for HF by censoring individ uals with 
deaths due to competing ca uses. To estimate the cumulative incidence function, the subdistribution of HF will 
be plotted over time . The alternative Fine and Gray approach  models the effect of treatment on the 
subdistribution hazard or directly on  the cumulative incidence function. While we will consider this and compare 
its fit to the model -free cumulative incidence curves , the proportional hazards approach will be our primary 
analysis. Beyond the primary  analyses, we will examine effect modificat ion by EPA/DHA intervention, baseline 
risk factors, and time.  
 
Statistical power:  We computed statistical power assuming a) 2x2 factorial tr ial of 25,87 1 subjects at risk; b) 
equal and independent treatment allocation; c) mean follow -up of 5 years with mi nimal loss to follow -up; d) 
incidence rate of 8.29 cases per 1,000 person -years (40% of the rate reported in the ARIC  and CHS  studies  
(21/1000 person -years)  in orde r to account for healthy volunteer effect in VITAL) , and e) a non -compliance 
rate of 20%. W e also used 30% [6.19 cases /1,000 person -years] of the rates seen in the ARIC  and CHS  to be 
more conservative. We used a log -rank analysis with a 2 -tailed p -value of 0.05. We have 8 0% po wer to detect 
a 18% reduction in the incidence of HF ( Table 2).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Primary Aim 2:  Effects of EPA/DHA intervention vs. placebo on incidence rate of HF . 
Study design : Randomized, placebo -controlled, dou ble-blind , 2x2 factorial trial of vitamin D and EPA/DHA.  
Hypothesis : Intervention with 1g/d of EPA/DHA supplements vs. placebo reduces the incidence rate of HF. 
Study subjects : A total of 25,871 VITAL particip ants.  
Statistical model : Cox proportional hazar ds model as detailed above for the primary aim.  
To determine whether treatment effects vary over time, we will use time -dependent Cox models to update 
covariates over time (i.e. , dietary EPA/DHA and other nutr ients, anthropometric, comorbidity, and lifestyl e 
factors collected repeatedly during the trial).  
 
Statistical power:  For primary analyses for EPA/DHA, we will have identical statistica l power presented in 
Table 2 above.  
 
Second ary Aim : Effects of vitami n D3 and EPA/DHA on incidence rate of recurrent HF hospitalizations . 
Study design : Randomized, placebo -controlled, double -blind, 2x2 factorial trial of vitamin D 3 and EPA/DHA.  
Hypothesis : Intervention with either vitamin D3 or EPA/DHA reduces the rate of r ecurrent HF hos pitalization.  
Study subjects : All 25,871 VITAL participants.  
Statistical model : We will analyze recurrent HF hospitalizations using the Andersen -Gill model , which allows 
for varying numbers of events per person with different time between events. It can accommodate correlated 
observations within individuals by using robust covariance estimates. This method has been found to produce 
simila r results to Poisson  regression models allowing for over -dispersio n. 
 
Statistical power:  To estimate the statistical power for recurrent HF hospitalization, we assumed a Poisson 
distribu tion with over -dispersion, following Cook et al.  Rates of recurrence were based on those s een in the 
Olmstead County data  with 16.5% recurrent hospitalization rate (0.144 per person -year) . We will have 80% 
power to detect 1 6% reduction in recurrent HF hospitalization (RR=0.8 4) if we assume an incidence rate of 
8.29/1000 person -years and 83% pow er to detect 19% reduction in recurrent HF hospitalization (RR=0.81) 
assuming a HF rate of 6.19/1000 person -years.  We expect 280 recurrent HF hospitalizations with latter rate.  
  
 Table 2. Statistical power (%) to detect vitamin D3 effect on HF incidence     
Observed RR*  0.82 0.81 0.80 0.79 0.78 0.77 0.76 0.75 0.74 0.73 0.70 
True RR†  0.78 0.76 0.75 0.74 0.73 0.71 0.70 0.69 0.68 0.66 0.63 
Power (rate 8.29/1000)  80 84 87 91 93 95 96 98 98 99 >99 
Power (rate 6.19/1000)  67 72 76 81 84 87 90 92 94 96 99 
*Observed RR=intent -to-treat relative risk with 80% compliance;     †True RR=Relative risk under perfect compliance  