 1  
 
 
Project Title : A randomized pilot study evaluating combination DPP4 inhibitor 
sitagliptin plus biguanide metformin compared to metformin 
monotherapy or placebo on glycemic and metabolic abnormalities 
in women with a recent history of gestational diabete s mellitus  
 
 
Principal Investigators : Karen Elkind -Hirsch, M.Sc., PhD  
Martha Paterson, M.D.  
 
. 
 
Address    Woman's Health Research Department  
    Woman’s Metabolic Health Center  
    100 Woman’s Way  
    Baton Rouge, LA  7081 7 
 
 
 
 
 
Trial Registration .     Cli nical trial reg. no. NCT1856907, clinicaltrials.gov  
 
 2 A randomized pilot study evaluating combination dipeptidyl peptidase IV ( DPP4 ) inhibitor sitagliptin 
plus biguanide metformin compared to metformin monotherapy or placebo on glycemic and 
metabolic abno rmalities in women with a recent history of gestational diabetes mellitus  
 
Project Overview/Summary  
 The objective of the present proposal is to compare the clinical, endocrine and 
metabolic effects of therapy with combination  sitagliptin  and metformin to metformin 
monotherapy and placebo in former GDM women with p rediabetic hyperglycemia.   Sitagliptin 
is an  oral dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP -4) inhibitor  whose mechanism of action is to prolong  the 
duration of blood glucagon -like peptide (GLP -1) levels by in hibiting its degradation and thereby 
augment ing insulin secretion This study will serve as a pilot investigation to open perspectives 
for future studies  combining anti -diabetic drugs with different mechanisms of action in women 
with a history of GDM for wh om standard treatment with metformin is less effective . 
 
Primary Objective :  
 To assess the effects of sitagliptin  plus metformin therapy compared to metformin 
monotherapy and placebo on  pancreatic beta cell ( β-cell) compensatory function and 
glycemic  param eters in former GDM  women with p rediabetic hyperglycemia  who are at 
high risk of developing Type 2 diabetes (DM2).  Our findings focus on delineating which 
medication(s) show the best promise for slowing or arresting the β -cell dysfunction and 
increased ri sk of developing diabetes in women with recent GDM.  
 
Secondary Objective(s)  
 To analyze the impact of sitagliptin  + metformin therapy compared to metformin alone 
and placebo in improving select cardiometabolic markers (lipid fractions and blood 
pressure) in  at-risk prior GDM  women with  prediabetic hyperglycemia.  
 
Study Background and Rationale  
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is one of the most frequent metabolic disorders 
occurring during pregnancy that complicates both the course of pregnancy and the de livery, 
and also has significant implications for the future health of the mother.1, 2  Although the  
precise definition of GDM remains unclear, it is widely assumed to be an early manifestation of 
type 2 diabetes (DM2) resulting from insulin resistance and inadequate insulin secretion 
associated with overweight and obesity, and the diabetogenic effects of placental hormones.3-5 
Insulin resistance and beta cell dysfunction are the main pathophysiologica l factors of 
GDM just as they are for diabetes outside of pregnancy.6-7 There may be a finite level of 
pancreatic “beta cell reserve” that is further depleted with recurring GDM. It is possible that 
recurrent episodes of heightened insulin resistance, such  as with recurrent pregnancy, place 
 3 high demands on the pancreas and contribute to an eventual decline in beta cell function that 
leads to type 2 diabetes (DM2) in high -risk individuals.  After an index pregnancy with 
gestational diabetes, GDM recurs in 30 -84% of subsequent pregnancies.8-10  Gestational 
diabetes is also a strong risk factor for the development of DM2 at a later stage of life in 
previous GDM woman.  Among all the risk factors of diabetes mellitus, the experience of 
gestational diabetes is th e strongest one.  The incidence of various forms of diabetes in this 
group balances from 10 to 60% over a period from 2 to 10 years.  Russell et al  11 found that 
36% of GDM women had some deg ree of persistent abnormal glucose tolerance when tested 
at any time postpartum. Recently, Nelson et al 12 found that 8.9% of patients tested 
immediately postpartum had DM2, another 31.3% had other glucose metabolism 
abnormalities; only 55.8% had normal 2 -hour glucose tolerance tests.  
Most, but not all women with a history of GDM have falling β -cell compensation for 
chronic insulin resistance during the first 5 –10 years after the index pregnancy. In this setting, 
two general factors influence the risk of d iabetes.  The first is the level of metabolic 
deterioration that is present during and soon after pregnancy.  In general, women with the 
highest glucose levels ( e.g. impaired glucose or impaired A1C after pregnancy) are closest to 
diabetes and require rela tively little deterioration to “cross the line” to that diagnosis.  They 
are clearly prime targets for aggressive measures to prevent additional deterioration to 
diabetes.  The second general factor that influences diabetes risk is the rate of deterioratio n.  
Rising glucose is a clinical indicator of deterioration. Hyperglycemia ensues when insulin 
secretion fails to compensate for the degree of insulin resistance.  Defects in insulin secretion 
have been reported following a 75 g oral glucose load with a di minished response at 30 and 60 
minutes in previous GDM women of European origin.13 Among pharmacological interventions 
for the non -pregnant population, thiazolidinediones have the largest impact on diabetes risk 
reduction —in the range of 55 –70% compared wi th placebo.14,15  Interventions such as 
metformin or acarbose that primarily lower glucose produce smaller risk reductions (25 –33%) 
and provide less evidence for slowing of rates of progression in general.16,17  However, in the 
DPP,18 metformin had a parti cularly strong effect to reduce diabetes risk or delay its onset in 
women with a history of GDM.  
Whether pharmacological therapy should be prescribed for diabetes prevention is an 
open question given that waiting to add drug therapy until diabetes develops  can arrest β -cell 
decline, albeit at a lower level of β -cell function than when medications are used for 
prevention.19  Studies are needed for optimal postpartum and long -term health of women who 
have had GDM.  Considerable recent evidence suggests that i ncretin -based therapies may be 
useful for the prevention of DM2.  Whereas native GLP -1 has a very short half -life, continuous 
infusion of GLP -1 improves first and second -phase insulin secretion suggesting that early GLP -1 
therapy may preserve ß -cell functi on in subjects with IGT or mild DM2.  Incretin mimetics and 
inhibitors of the protease dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP) -4 use the anti -diabetic properties of the 
 4 incretin hormone, glucagon -like peptide (GLP) -120 hormone to not only augment glucose -
induced insuli n secretion in a highly glucose -dependent manner,21 thus preventing GLP -1 alone 
from provoking hypoglycemia.  Additional beneficial effects of GLP -1 on endocrine pancreatic 
islets are that it 1) supports the synthesis of proinsulin to replenish insulin sto res in β -cells; 2) 
reduces the rate of β -cell apoptosis when islets are incubated in a toxic environment 
(glucotoxicity, lipotoxicity, cytotoxic cytokines); and 3) promotes differentiation of precursor 
cells with the ability to develop into β -cells and prol iferation of β -cell lines, and in whole 
animals (rodent studies), this leads to an increased β -cell mass within a few days or weeks 20,22.  
Furthermore, GLP -1 can lower glucagon concentrations, i.e., induce α -cells to respond again to 
the inhibitory action  of hyperglycemia, while leaving the counterregulatory glucagon responses 
undisturbed, as in the case of hypoglycemia.21,23  Additional activities of GLP -1 are the 
deceleration of gastric emptying, 24 which slows the entry of nutrients into the circulation  after 
meals, a reduction in appetite, and earlier induction of satiety, 25 leading to weight reduction 
with chronic exposure.26  Inhibition of DPP -4 increases the concentration of GLP -1 and may 
potentially delay disease progression in GDM considering the ß-cell function improvement in 
DM2 and ß -cell mass shown to increase in animal models.  This study will examine if 
combination sitagliptin -plus metformin is more effective than metformin alone or placebo in 
improving metabolic parameters, specifically the impact on β -cell function, in at -risk women 
with a recent history of GDM  and prediabetic hyperglycemia . 
 
Rationale  
The diagnosis of GDM identifies young women with abnormalities in pancreatic beta cell 
function that worsens over time, leading to diabetes.  Weight loss and medications that 
mitigate impairments in insulin secretion show the best promise for delaying or preventing 
DM2, the dominant form of diabetes that develops after GDM.  
 
The Primary Aims  of this study are to determine whether administratio n of combination  
sitagliptin  plus metformin will be more effective compared with metformin alone or placebo in: 
 Improving ß-cell compensatory function by enhancing insulin release after an oral 
glucose load and thus improve or delay a decline in glucose to lerance estimated by the 
disposition index defined as the product of insulin action (Matsuda index) and insulin 
secretion (insulinogenic index) derived from the OGTT ( SIOGTT x Δinsulin30 –0 min to 
glucose30 –0 min ). 
 Improving markers of insulin sensitivity a nd secretion after an oral glucose load as 
measured by the Matsuda index and early insulin response adjusted for insulin 
sensitivity ( insulinogenic index /HOMA -IR),  
 Correcting glucose control as evaluated by fasting and 2 hour glucose levels after an 
OGTT.   
 5 Metformin failure in this patient population is associated with ß-cell dysfunction . We propose 
that combination  sitagliptin  plus metformin  treatment will be superior to metformin 
monotherapy or placebo treatment in improving pancreatic ß -cell response re sulting in a 
greater improvement in β-cell compensatory function  which reflects a shift away from impaired 
glucose tolerance and DM2.  
Secondary Aims  
We will further examine whether the addition of sitagliptin  to metformin therapy is 
more beneficial than me tformin alone or placebo in altering the development or progression of 
select cardiometabolic risk factors as measured by changes in:  
 plasma lipid fractions  
 blood pressure  
 anthropometric parameters, including body mass index [ BMI], absolute body weight, 
waist circumference, waist: hip ratio, waist -height ratio  
Direct comparison to metformin monotherapy is not expected to yield significantly differential 
weight loss or reduced central body weight in favor of combination  sitagliptin  plus metformin 
treatment g iven that both metformin and DPP -inhibitors are generally weight neutral.  Given 
the short interval of treatment (12 weeks at full dose), no significant differences between 
placebo treatment and medical intervention on anthropometric measures or body fat 
distribution is anticipated.  
 
Study Design  
Design   
Parallel 3 treatment group, single -blinded prospective, randomized, outpatient drug efficacy 
trial  
Subjects  
Women  who are > 18 years to 42 years of age with a recent history of GDM in the 
previous 12 mon ths (diagnosis of GDM using Carpenter -Coustan criteria according to Fifth 
International Workshop —Conference on Gestational Diabetes Mellitus  in the index pregnancy ), 
meet all inclusion/exclusion  and shown to have postpartum metabolic abnormalities will be 
offered participation in the study.  It is inclusive of only those patients with previous GDM that 
require pharmacological intervention add ed to diet and exercise.  Subjects will be recruited 
using flyers distributed in the obstetric clinics and pathology laboratory associated with 
Woman’s Hospital.  Participants will give written informed consent for participatio n in the IRB -
approved study.   All subjects will undergo a verbal screen, and if they are eligible and sign a 
medical release form, their prenatal records will be obtained to c onfirm their pregnancy 
history.  A formal two hour Oral Glucose Tolerance test ( OGTT ) will be performed usi ng a 75 
gram oral glucose load.   Patients will be eligible for randomization if they have impaired fasting 
glucose (IFG),  impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), or both (IFG/IGT) by OGTT.  
 6   Inclusion Criteria  
 Females 
 18 years to 42 years of age who experienced GDM during recent (within 12 
months) pregnancy  with  prediabetic hyperglycemia determined by an oral glucose 
tolerance test (OGTT) with 75 g glucose postpartum. Study subjects will  be inclusive of 
prior GDM women with impaired fasting glucose (IFG), impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), 
or both (IFG/IGT) postpartum.  
 Written consent for participation in the study  
 
  Exclusion Criteria  
 Cholestasis during the past pregnancy  
 Any hepatic diseases in the past (viral hepatitis, toxic hepatic damage, jaundice of 
unknown etiology)  
 Serum AST and/or ALT level exceeding more than twice normal lab values  
 Presence of hypersensitivity to sitagliptin or other DPP -4 inhibitor  
 Current use of metformin, thiazolidinediones, GLP -1 receptor agonists, DPP -4 inhibitors, 
or weight loss medications (prescription or OTC)  
 Prior use of medication to treat diabetes except gestational diabetes  
 Use of d rugs known to exacerbate glucose tolerance  
 History of diabetes or prior use of medications to treat diabetes except GDM  
 Renal impairment (e.g., serum creatinine levels ≥1.4 mg/dL for women and eGFR less 
than 60 mL/minute/1.73 m2  
 Pregnancy planned during the coming 6 months  
 Currently lactating  
 Patient not willing to use adequate contraception during study period (unless sterilized)  
 
Method  
All study patients will undergo the following clinical, metabolic and laboratory 
evaluations before and during treatme nt.  A full physical examination will be performed 
including measurement of body mass index (BMI), waist and hip circumference (WHR), and vital 
signs (blood pressure, respiration and temperature)  at the initial and final study visit.  The total 
body adipos ity (total fatness), defined as the accumulation of body fat without regard to 
regional distribution, will be expressed as BMI and calculated as weight (kg)/ height (m) 2, 
whereas the waist -to-hip girth ratio (WHR) is a measure of body fat distribution.  H eight will be 
measured to the nearest centimeter and weight measured by a sliding weight balance to the 
nearest 0.1 kg.  Waist circumference will be measured at the minimum circumference between 
the rib cage and iliac crest (in centimeters) and hip circumf erence at the level of the largest 
circumference around the buttocks.  The circumference measurements will be taken in the 
 7 upright position using a 15 -mm width flexible metric tape held close to the body but not tight 
enough to indent the skin.  
All patien ts will randomly be assigned to one of 3 medication treatment groups -– either 
sitagliptin -metformin (50 mg/1000 mg BID), metformin (1000 mg BID) or placebo (1 pill/BID);  all 
subjects will be allocated to one of these 3 groups based on computer -generated ra ndom 
numbers using a block randomization method.  The pharmacy will “single -blind” all the 
treatment arms to the physicians and clinical coordinators by filling prescription containers with 
1 of 3 medications - A) sitagliptin -metformin, B) metformin and  C )placebo and dispensing 
open -label tablets to study patients in blinded coded (A,B,C) bottles.  Oral glucose tolerance 
tests (OGTTs) with glucose (G) and insulin (I) measured at 0, 30, 60, and 120 after glucose load 
to assess diabetes, fasting (FBG) and me an blood glucose (MBG) concentrations, insulin 
resistance and pancreatic ß -cell function will be performed prior to randomization and at 12 -14 
weeks after full study medications are reached.  Mean  blood glucose  (MBG) concentrations will 
be calculated by su mming glucose values obtained at 0,30,60 and 120 minutes during  the OGTT 
and dividing by 4.  Baseline blood samples will also be analyzed for lipid profiles, TSH ,liver 
enzymes  creatinine with eGFR, and quantitative ßhCG levels.  A negative serum pregnancy test 
is a prerequisite for commencing treatment .  .  All patients will meet with the registered 
dietician and receive postpartum lifestyle (diet and exercise) plans. At study completion, all 
medications will be  stopped and subjects will be allowed to conti nue or given a prescription for 
other medications if needed. (See Flow charts 1 & 2)  
Treatment  
Eligible patients will be randomized to one of three treatment groups; either sitagliptin -
metformin (50 mg/1000 mg BID), metformin (1000 mg BID), or placebo. Fo r all patients taking 
metformin only, the initial oral dose will be 1000 mg Q.D. (with dinner) for 2 -3 weeks and then 
increased to an oral dose of 1000 mg BID (breakfast and dinner) to reduce side effects.  Patients 
assigned to combined therapy will be sta rted on oral sitagliptin -metformin (50 mg/1000 mg) 
Q.D. (with dinner) for 2 -3 weeks.  They then will be increased to an oral dose of sitagliptin -
metformin (50 mg/1000 mg) BID (breakfast and dinner).  For placebo, the same regimen for 
other 2 treatments wil l be followed with patients starting with one pill in evening for 2 -3 weeks, 
followed by one pill twice a day.  All patients will receive the same counseling concerning the 
benefits of lifestyle modification through diet and exercise.  The patients will be  also 
encouraged to increase daily exercise (such as walking, using stairs), although this will not be 
formally assessed.  The participants will receive further encouragement to adhere to the regime 
during follow -up phone calls.  Side effects of the treatm ent and reason for any withdrawals 
from the study will be recorded.  (See Figures 1 & 2).   
Assessment of insulin sensitivity and secretion  
Indexes of insulin sensitivity and secretion using the serum glucose and insulin 
concentrations obtained in the fast ing state and during the 2hr OGTT with INS will be computed 
 8 by several measures previously validated in women.  Fasting and glucose -stimulated insulin 
sensitivity will be estimated by homeostasis model assessment of insulin sensitivity (HOMA -IR) 
and by Mat suda's insulin sensitivity index [SI OGTT]. 27,28  Early pancreatic β -cell response will be 
estimated as the insulinogenic index (IGI) derived from the ratio of the increment of insulin to 
that of glucose 30 minutes after a glucose load (insulin 30 min − in sulin 0 min/glucose 30 min − 
glucose 0 min ) corrected for by the relative level of insulin resistance (IGI/HOMA -IR).29  An 
estimation of β -cell compensatory function will be calculated as the index of insulin secretion 
factored by insulin resistance (ΔINS/ ΔPG 30  x Matsuda insulin index) during the OGTT.30 
Collateral Research  
Several other endpoints will be assessed at each study visit.  Baseline blood samples will 
also be  collected for measurement of lipid profiles (cholesterol, HDL and LDL cholesterol, and  
triglycerides), TSH, and liver enzymes (AST/ALT). Dyslipidemia is defined as the presence of at 
least one of the mentioned lipid parameters abnormalities.  
Weight, height, BMI, waist circumference (WC), body fat distribution (waist/hip ratio 
[WHR] and wais t/height ratio (WHtR), and blood pressure (BP) will also be determined .   
The safety criteria will include incidence and intensity of adverse events, withdrawals 
because of adverse events, physical exams, vital signs and laboratory parameters  
 
Concomitant Medications and Therapy   
 None of the patients will be allowed to take medications likely to influence metabolic 
profiles except thyroid supplementation.  The following medications cannot be used 
immediately prior to or concomitant with the treatment thera py;  drugs known to affect 
gastrointestinal motility, lipid lowering agents (statins), other medications known to affect 
carbohydrate metabolism (glucocorticoids, anabolic steroids) or anti -diabetes medications 
(metformin, thiazolidinediones, GLP -1 recepto r agonists, pramlintide; DPP4 inhibitors ) or 
weight reducing agents .  Vitamins and topical medications can continue to be used.  Use of IUD 
and hormonal contraceptives are also permitted.  
 
Safety Measures   
 This protocol and the associated Informed Consent  as well as any addenda or 
amendments, must be reviewed and approved by the Woman’s Hospital Foundation 
Institutional Review Board (WHIRB) review committee prior to the start of the study.  All 
revisions to this Protocol are considered “protocol amendments ” these must be approved in 
advance, in writing, by the WHIRB.  Every patient will have given her written informed consent 
prior to participating in the study.  Prior to participation in this trial, each subject will have an 
opportunity to ask questions an d will sign (and date) a written Informed Consent, which must 
be witnessed.  The signed consent forms will be filed with the investigator's study charts for 
 9 each subject.  Any subject may voluntarily withdraw from the study at any time without 
prejudicing treatment.  
Patients starting all oral therapies  will be advised that they may have minor 
gastrointestinal side effects.  The most common side effects of metformin are diarrhea, nausea 
or vomiting, flatulence, indigestion, abdominal discomfort and rarely, a metallic taste in the 
mouth.  These acute reversible adverse effects occur in 5 –20% of patients treated with 
metformin.  The symptoms are dose related and remit if the dose is reduced, sometimes an 
increase in the dose can later be tolerated.  Taking the drug with or after food, and starting 
therapy with low dosages that may be increased slowly can minimize these.  The dose can then 
be increased slowly at intervals of two weeks.  Lactic acidosis is the biguanide -related adverse 
effect of most concern with an estimated incidence of less than 0.01 to 0.08 cases.  Should a 
patient have lactic acidosis attributable to metformin, the drug can be removed by 
hemodialysis.  Other contraindications to the use of metformin include concurrent liver disease 
and a previ ous history of lactic acidosis.  Oral therapy will also be stopped if the blood lactate 
concentration is substantially increased by any illness.  Oral therapy will be temporarily 
suspended for all major surgical procedures that involve restriction of fluid  intake.  Metformin 
and combined metformin plus DPP4 inhibitors are  classified as United States Food and Drug 
Administration category B drug s (i.e., "no evidence of risk in humans").  This means that, while 
there is no evidence of teratogenesis or adverse fetal effects, insufficient data exist to state that 
harm does not occur.  Metformin does cross the placenta, prompting a cautious approach to its 
use in pregnancy.  There have been several published reports of the use of metformin during 
pregnancy, predom inantly in women with insulin resistance and PCOS.  Some clinicians 
routinely use metformin to treat diabetes in pregnant women.  However, most experts believe 
that if medication is needed to control blood sugar during pregnancy, insulin is the drug of 
choice, not an oral antihyperglycemic agent.  If patients become pregnant during the study, 
metformin will be stopped immediately.  
For safety, all subjects who enter the study are evaluable.  Subjects will be monitored 
for safety by assessment of adverse even ts, physical exams, vital signs and laboratory values.  
Continued patient safety assessment will be carried out and all adverse events documented and 
reported to the WHIRB.  On each visit, compliance with treatment will be checked with 
questions about the side-effects and a subjective evaluation of the tolerability of the 
administered drug; the patients will also asked about incidental missed administrations.  
Adverse Event Procedures     
 An adverse event is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a cl inical study 
subject administered a pharmaceutical product, and which does not necessarily have a causal 
relationship with the treatment.  An adverse event can therefore be any unfavorable or 
unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symp tom, or disease that is 
temporally associated with the use of a pharmaceutical product, whether or not it is considered 
 10 related to that product.  All observed or volunteered adverse events regardless of treatment 
group or suspected causal relationship to s tudy drug will be recorded in the patient’s record.  
Events involving adverse drug reactions, illnesses with onset during the study, or exacerbations 
of pre -existing illnesses will be recorded.  Exacerbation of pre -existing illness may include 
worsening or  increase in severity  of signs or symptoms of the illness, increase in frequency  of 
signs and symptoms of an intermittent illness, or the appearance of a new 
manifestation/complication.   Exacerbation of a pre -existing illness should be considered when a 
patient/subject requires new or additional concomitant drug or non -drug therapy for the 
treatment of that illness during the trial.  Lack of or insufficient clinical response, benefit, 
efficacy, therapeutic effect, or pharmacologic action, will not be record ed as an adverse event.  
The investigator will make the distinction between exacerbation of pre -existing illness and lack 
of therapeutic efficacy.  In addition, clinically significant changes in physical examination 
findings and abnormal objective test fin dings (e.g., laboratory, x -ray, ECG) will also be recorded 
as adverse events.  Any abnormal test result that is determined to be an error does not require 
reporting as an adverse event.   
In order to avoid vague, ambiguous, or colloquial expressions, the a dverse event term 
will be recorded using standard medical terminology rather than the subject’s own words.  
Every attempt will be made to describe the adverse event in terms of a diagnosis.  All related 
signs, symptoms and abnormal test results will be gro uped together as a diagnosis if applicable 
and recorded as a single adverse event.  All adverse events will be evaluated for intensity  and 
causal relationship  with use of the study medication.  For all adverse events, sufficient 
information should be obtai ned by the investigator to determine the causality of the adverse 
event (i.e., study drug or other illness).  Follow -up of the adverse event, after the date of 
therapy discontinuation, is required if the adverse event or its sequelae persist.  Follow -up is  
required until the event or its sequelae resolve or stabilize at a level acceptable to the 
investigator or his/her designated representative.  Clinically significant changes, in the 
judgment of the investigator, in physical examination findings (abnormali ties) will be recorded 
as adverse events.  All subjects who have adverse events, whether or not the adverse events 
are considered associated with the use of the study medication, will be monitored until the 
adverse event resolves, stabilizes, or becomes ch ronic.  The clinical course of the adverse event 
will be followed according to accepted standards of medical practice, even after the end of the 
observation period, until a satisfactory explanation for the adverse event is found or the 
investigator conside rs it medically justifiable to terminate follow -up.  
SERIOUS ADVERSE EVEN TS:  A SERIOUS ADVERSE EV ENT (SAE) IS ANY ADV ERSE DRUG 
EXPERIENCE OCCURRING  AT ANY DOSE THAT:  
1. results in death;  
 11 2. is life -threatening (adverse drug experience that places the pati ent/subject at 
immediate risk of death from the reaction as it occurred, i.e., it does not include a reaction that, 
had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death);  
3. results in inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospita lization;  
4. results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity (defined as a substantial 
disruption of a person’s ability to conduct normal life functions); or  
5. results in congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
6. Important medical events that may n ot result in death, be life -threatening, or require 
hospitalization may be considered serious adverse drug experiences when, based upon 
appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient/subject and may require 
medical or surgical intervention t o prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  
Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment 
in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in 
inpatient hospitali zation, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse  
 The term “severe” is often used to describe the intensity (severity) of a specific event (as 
in mild, moderate, or severe pain); the event itself, however, may be of relatively minor medical 
significance (such as severe headache).  By contrast, the term “serious” is used to describe an 
event based on an event outcome or actions usually associated with events that pose a threat 
to a patient’s life or functioning.  Seriousness (not severity) serves as a guide for defining 
regulatory reporting obligations.  The collection of serious adverse event information will begin 
at the signing of informed consent and continue through 30 days after administration of the 
last dose of study medication.  Regardless  of the above criteria, any additional adverse 
experiences which an investigator considers serious should be immediately reported.  If an SAE 
occurs, the investigator should initiate appropriate support procedures.  
All serious adverse events regardless of treatment group or suspected relationship to 
study drug must be reported to MedWatch in an expedited manner.  The investigator will 
determine expectedness by referring to the most current version of the Investigator’s Brochure 
in conjunction with any spons or-generated IND Safety Reports.  Since the trial is being 
conducted under a physician’s IND, Drs. Paterson and Elkind -Hirsch are responsible for 
submitting all IND Safety Reports to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  The FDA 3500A 
Form with built -in instructions will be downloaded at: 
http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/getforms.htm .  They will also be reported immediately to the 
Woman’s Hospital Foundation Institutional Review Board at (225) 924 -8516  and Woman’s 
Health Research Institute at (225) 231 -5275.  After submitting an expedited MedWatch 3500A 
report to the FDA, a courtesy copy will be sent by fax to NovoNordisk.  NovoNordisk Safety 
personnel may fax a follow -up form to the study site to reque st additional information or 
clarification of information that was included on the FDA 3500A Report.  Queries that address 
medical issues must be signed by a medically qualified (MD, DO) principal or sub -investigator.  
 12 In cases where the investigator lea rns of the SAE after its occurrence and resolution, the time 
and circumstances of the event will be recorded.  The reporting requirements will still be 
followed.  
Any serious adverse event or death will be reported immediately independent of the 
circumstanc es or suspected cause if it occurs or comes to the attention of the investigator at 
any time during the study through the last follow -up visit required by the protocol or 30 days 
after the last administration of study drug, whichever comes later.  Any seri ous adverse event 
occurring at any other time after completion of the study will be promptly reported if a causal 
relationship to study drug is suspected.  The only exception to these reporting requirements are 
serious adverse events that occur during a pr e-randomization/washout run -in period, during 
which placebo alone or no active study drug or no protocol -specified background drug is 
administered.  
Discontinuations  
The reason for a subject discontinuing from the study will be recorded in the patient 
char t.  A discontinuation occurs when an enrolled subject ceases participation in the study, 
regardless of the circumstances, prior to completion of the protocol.  The investigator must 
determine the primary reason for discontinuation.  Withdrawal due to adver se event will be 
distinguished from withdrawal due to insufficient response according to the definition of 
adverse event noted earlier.  The final evaluation required by the protocol will be performed at 
the time of study discontinuation.  The investigator  will record the reason for study 
discontinuation, provide or arrange for appropriate follow -up (if required) for such subjects, 
and document the course of the subject’s condition.  They will also to be reported to Woman’s 
Hospital Foundation Institutional  Review Board at (225) 924 -8516 and Woman’s Health 
Research Institute at (225) 231 -5275.  
 
Statistical Evaluation  
    A priori  sample size analysis was performed using the online calculator provided by the 
Massachusetts General Hospital Mallinckrodt Genera l Clinical Research Center 
(http://hedwig.mgh.harvard.edu/sample_size/size.html ).  The primary outcome is comparison 
in β-cell compensatory function between prior GDM women treated with si tagliptin -metformin, 
metformin or placebo using a Ss/Groups by repeated measures ANOVA in which the effects of 
drug intervention (12 -14 weeks at full dose) between the 3 treatment groups will be analyzed  
Given there were no previous studies utilizing sita gliptin or combination treatment for previous 
GDM women, sample size analysis was based on the assumption that the smallest mean 
difference between treatment groups is 20% with an average SD of 12%;  the sample size with a 
statistical power of 0.80 and two -sided P -value <0.05 is calculated to be 10 for each group. The 
study is designed to recruit 12 patients in each arm to ensure that the number of subjects 
completing the study as derived by the sample size calculation is met.  Data will be analyzed on 
 13 the basis of intention to treat and also on completed treatment parameters where relevant.  
The intent -to-treat population (ITT) is defined as all r andomized subjects who received one oral 
dose of medication starting from the evening of day 1.  The evaluable p opulation is defined as 
all randomized subjects who complete treatment through week 14 - 16 (12 -14 weeks full dose).  
     The primary outcome measure is β-cell compensatory function and secondary outcome 
measures include changes in insulin sensitivity and e arly pancreatic ß -cell response, glycemic 
parameters (fasting blood glucose [FBG] and 2 hour glucose after a 75 -g OGTT), mean blood 
glucose (MBG), anthropometric parameters, blood pressure and lipid profiles.  The normality of 
all variables will be checked  using the Kolmogorov -Smirov test.  When necessary, non -normally 
distributed data will be subjected to logarithmic or square -root transformation to obtain a 
normal distribution before group comparison.  Direct and indirect estimates of insulin 
sensitivity and secretion (HOMA, SI OGTT, IGI/HOMA and ß-cell compensatory ), glycemic 
parameters (FBG, MBG, 2 hour post OGTT glucose level) anthropometric measurements (body 
weight, BMI), fat distribution (WC, WHR and WHtR), BP and lipid profiles will be considered as 
dependent variables.  For all analyses, in which the measures are continuous, data from 
evaluable subjects will be submitted to a repeated -measures general linear model (SS/ Drug 
treatments x repeated measures ANOVA) including the arm of drug treatment as the between -
subjects effect, and the visit (baseline and 16 wks.) as the within -subjects effect.  To evaluate 
the differences in the response to each treatment over visits, the interaction effect will be 
calculated.  Only where a statistically significant interaction effect is found (P 
0.05) will the 
contrast test applied to locate the differences between the 3 medication groups.  Baseline 
comparisons between groups (intent -to treat population) will be made by one -way ANOVAs 
and post hoc comparisons performed with the Bonferroni -Dunn test to analyze the variation 
among the three groups if the ANOVA shows overall baseline differences were significant 
(p<0.05).  Dysglycemia occur rence before and after different treatment will be compared with 
the McNemar test (complex chi square for paired data), which formally tests for a change 
between the observed proportions of k related samples.  Results will be reported as mean +/ - 
S.E.M unl ess otherwise noted.  Calculations will be performed using SPSS for Windows (version 
11.01, SPSS, Inc.; Chicago, Ill).   
 
Additional Information  
Woman’s Hospital is one of the largest, not -for-profit women’s specialty hospitals in the 
United States.  The h ospital‘s most valuable asset is its patient population.  Woman’s statistics 
of over 8 400 births (20 12), 75,000 pap smears, 47,000 mammograms, 300,000 lab tests, and 
13,000 biopsies annually in a centralized location make it ideal for clinical research stu dies in 
women’s health.  The ethnic mix is about 60% Caucasian and 40% African American.  In the 
calendar year of 20 12, 704 patients with gestational diabetes delivered at Woman’s hospital.  
The rate of GDM was 8.4% for the year 20 12. 
 14 The Physician Office Building , which is on the hospital campus, offices approximately 6 5 
private obstetrician -gynecologist offices that actively participate in Woman’s Health Research 
Institute clinical trials and encourage patient participation.  This study will utilize the r esearch 
staff (nurses, physicians, PhD) of the Woman’s Hospital Metabolic Health Clinic and Health 
Research Department for recruitment and patient consenting.  The Woman’s Hospital 
Pathology laboratory facility will be utilized for all metabolic and glucos e tolerance testing.  
Study administrative work (IRB approval and updates) and statistical analyses will be done 
through the Woman’s Health Research Department.  The staff of the Woman’s Metabolic 
Health Clinic will be used for all patient follow -up, medic ation instruction and medical care.  
 
 15 References (in order of citation)  
1. Metzger BE, Buchanan TA, Coustan DR, et al.  Summary and recommendations of the 
Fifth International Workshop —Conference on Gestational Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care  
2007; 30: S251 –S260.  
2. M.M. Engelgau, W.H. Herman, P.S. Smith, R.R. German and R.E. Aubert.  The 
epidemiology of diabetes and pregnancy in the U.S., 1988, Diabetes Care  1995; 18: 1029 –
1033.  
3. Bian X, Gao P, Xiong X, Xu H, Qian M, Liu S.  Risk factors for development of diabe tes 
mellitus in women with a history of gestational diabetes mellitus. Chin Med J (Engl) 
2000;113:759 -762 
4. Damm P. Gestational diabetes mellitus and subsequent development of overt diabetes 
mellitus. Dan Med Bull 1998; 45:495 -509.  
5. Pallardo F, Herranz L, Gar cia-Ingelmo T.  Early postpartum metabolic assessment in 
women with prior gestational diabetes. Diabetes Care 1999; 22:1053 -1058.  
6. Hanna F, Peters JR. Screening for gestational diabetes; past, present and future. Diabet 
Med  2002; 19; 351 –358.  
7. Catalano PM, K irwan JP, Haugel -De Mouzon S, King J.  Gestational diabetes and insulin 
resistance: role in short - and long -term implications for mother and fetus. J Nutr  2003; 
133,1674S –1683S.  
8. Peters RK, Kjos SL, Xiang A et al.   Long term diabetogenic effect of single pr egnancy in 
women with previous gestational diabetes mellitus, Lancet  1996; 347 : 227 –230.  
9. Kim C, Berger DK, Chamany S. Recurrence of gestational diabetes mellitus: a systematic 
review. Diabetes Care 2007; 30: 1314 -1319  
10. Kjos S, Buchanan T, Greenspoon J, Mon toro M, Bernstein G, Mestman J: Gestational  
diabetes  mellitus: the prevalence of glucose intolerance and diabetes  mellitus in the first 
two months postpartum. Am J Obstet Gynecol  1990; 163: 93 –98. 
11. Russell MA, Phipps MG, Olson CL, Welch HG, Carpenter MW.  R ates of postpartum 
glucose testing after gestational diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 2006; 108:1456 -1462  
12. Nelson AL, Hien Le MH, Musherraf Z, et al. Intermediate -term glucose tolerance in 
women with a history of gestational diabetes: natural history and potential associations 
with breastfeeding and contraception. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2008;  198( 6); 699.e1 -699.e8  
13. Dornhorst A, Bailey PC, Anyaoku V, Elkeles RS, Johnston DG 7 Beard RW 1990 
Abnormalities of glucose tolerance following gestational diabetes. Quart J of Med 77, 1219 -
1228  
14. Buchanan T. A. Xiang and R.K. Peters et al.   Preservation of pancreatic beta -cell function 
and prevention of type 2 diabetes by pharmacological treatment of insulin resistance in 
high -risk Hispanic women, Diabetes  2002; 51: 2796 –2803.  
15. Gerstein H., S. Yusuf and J. Bosch et al.   DREAM (Diabetes REduction Assessment with 
ramipril and rosiglitazone Medication) Trial Investigators.  Ef fect of rosiglitazone on the 
frequency of diabetes in patients with impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting 
glucose: a randomized controlled trial.  Lancet  2006; 368: 1096 -1105.  
16. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group:  The Diabetes Prevention Pr ogram: 
Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin.  N 
Engl J Med  2002; 346: 393 –403.  
 16 17. Buchanan TA.  How can we prevent type 2 diabetes?  Diabetes 2007; 56: 1502 –1507.  
18. Ratner RE, Christophi CA, Metzger BE, Dabelea D, Bennett PH, Pi -Sunyer X, Fowler S, 
Kahn SE  Prevention of diabetes in women with a history of gestational diabetes: effects of 
metformin and lifestyle interventions. J Clin Endocrinol Metab  2008;  93: 4774 –4779.  
19. Xiang AH, Peters RK, Kjos SL, Goico J, Ocho a C, Marroquin A, Tan S, Hodis HN, Azen SP, 
Buchanan TA.  Pharmacological treatment of insulin resistance at two different stages in the 
evolution of type 2 diabetes: impact on glucose tolerance and β -cell function. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2004; 89: 2846 –2851.  
20. Drucker DJ, Nauck MA The incretin system: glucagon -like peptide -1 receptor agonists 
and dipeptidyl peptidase -4 inhibitors in type 2 diabetes. Lancet 2006; 368: 1696 – 1705.  
21. Nauck MA, Heimesaat MM, Behle K, Holst JJ, Nauck MS, Ritzel R, Hüfner M, Schmie gel 
WH. Effects of glucagon -like peptide 1 on counterregulatory hormone responses, cognitive 
functions, and insulin secretion during hyperinsulinemic, stepped hypoglycemic clamp 
experiments in healthy volunteers. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002; 87: 1239 – 1246 
22. Brubaker PL, Drucker DJ.  Minireview: glucagon -like peptides regulate cell proliferation 
and apoptosis in the pancreas, gut, and central nervous system. Endocrinology 2004; 145: 
2653 – 2659.  
23. Nauck MA, Heimesaat MM, Ørskov C, Holst JJ, Ebert R, Creutzfeldt  W.  Preserved 
incretin activity of glucagon -like peptide 1 [7 -36 amide] but not of synthetic human gastric 
inhibitory polypeptide in patients with type -2 diabetes mellitus. J Clin Invest 1993; 91: 301 – 
307.  
24. Wettergren A, Schjoldager B, Mortensen PE, Myhre  J, Christiansen J, Holst JJ.  Truncated 
GLP-1 (proglucagon 78 -107-amide) inhibits gastric and pancreatic functions in man. Dig Dis 
Sci 1993; 38: 665 – 673.  
25. Flint A, Raben A, Astrup A, Holst JJ. Glucagon -like peptide -1 promotes satiety and 
suppresses energy  intake in humans. J Clin Invest 1998; 101: 515 – 520 
26. Zander M, Madsbad S, Madsen JL, Holst JJ. Effect of 6 -week course of glucagon -like 
peptide 1 on glycaemic control, insulin sensitivity, and beta -cell function in type 2 diabetes: 
a parallel -group study. Lancet 2002; 359: 824 – 830.  
27. Matthews DR, Hosker JP, Rudenski AS, Naylor BA, Treacher DF, Turner RC. Homeostasis 
model assessment: insulin resistance and beta -cell function from fasting plasma glucose and 
insulin concentrations in man. Diabetologia. 1985;28 (7):412 -419 
28. Matsuda M, DeFronzo RA. Insulin sensitivity indices obtained from oral glucose 
tolerance testing: comparison with the euglycemic insulin clamp. Diabetes Care. 
1999;22(9):1462 -1470  
29. Kosaka K, Kuzuya T, Hagura R, Yoshinaga H. Insulin response to o ral glucose load is 
consistently decreased in established non -insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus: the 
usefulness of decreased early insulin response as a predictor of non -insulin -dependent 
diabetes mellitus. Diabet Med. 1996;13(9 Suppl 6):S109 -119 
30. DeFronzo RA, Tripathy D, Schwenke DC, et al. ACT NOW Study. Pioglitazone for diabetes 
prevention in impaired glucose tolerance. N Engl J Med 2011; 364:1104 -115.  
 
 