Validity of the Electronic Self -Administered Gerocognitive Examination (eSAGE) –  
Smartphone 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
   
1/10/2017  
 
  
Protocol  
 
Validity of the Electronic Self-Administered Gerocognitive Examination 
(eSAGE)  
 
Douglas W. Scharre, MD, Haikady Nagaraja, PhD. , 
Division of Cognitive Neurology, Department of Neurology, The Ohio State University  
1/10/17  
 
Introduction  
      Cognitive impairment is becoming increasingly prevalent in the US. Approximately 4.7 
million Americans currently have Alzheimer’s disease (AD) with an estimated growth to 13.8 
million by 2050.  An additional 3% to 22% of those over 60 years of age are thought to currently 
meet criteria for Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI).  The early de tection of MCI and dementia is 
critical, as studies have shown that early pharmacological intervention may delay the progression 
of AD.  Timely identification will become even more important once disease modification 
treatments are available. Unfortunately, most cognitively impaired patients do not seek early medical attention and physicians may not recognize subtle cognitive deficits during routine office visits . Patients typically present to their doctor 3 to 4 years  after symptoms have begun. 
Furthermore,  even practitioners aware of cognitive complaints may not perform a cognitive 
assessment, make a diagnosis or initiate medical interventions until at a later, more progressed stage of the disease. In fact, more than 40% of patients with mild dementia are n ot detected and 
diagnosed by their primary care physician. Use of sensitive and easily administered cognitive screening instruments is essential in overcoming the many obstacles encountered by physicians for early identification of MCI and dementia.       Online  cognitive screening may provide early detection of cognitive impairment with the 
goals of directing these individuals to their physicians for evaluation and enhancing timely 
identification of pre -dementia research participants.  However, online  screening for cognition has 
been limited  with mixed results .  Although many excellent cognitive screening tests have been 
developed with good sensitivity and specificity for dementia recognition, most require an administrator and most are not available online .  
     The Self -Administered Gerocognitive Examination (SAGE) is a valid and reliable cognitive 
assessment tool used to iden tify both MCI and early dementia . SAGE’s self -administered 
feature, pen and paper format, and four equivalent interchangeable forms a llows it to be given in 
almost any setting, does not require any staff time to administer and makes it practical to rapidly screen large numbers of individuals in the community or in their home . SAGE consists of several 
parts.  There are demographic questions, subjective questions , and objective cognitive testing.  
       In recent years, as more individuals gain access and become comfortable with the Internet,  
they are also accessing medical information online. Online retrieval of medical information  can 
provide critical knowledge  to consumers to improve their health. It may help them better 
understand their medical conditions or symptoms and potentially give them insight into ways to diagnose and treat their medical conditions. This information can be accessed anywhere they live 
in the world. In addition, the re are websites that  now  offer health screenings including cognitive 
screening. The lay public has great interest and concern about their cognition and worry about developing neurodegenerative conditions like Alzheimer’s disease. There are very few screening tests that target MCI. H aving a validated online cognitive screening test may be very helpful for 
individuals  to identify their cognitive issues and have  physician evaluation  earlier than norma lly 
occurs. Individuals  may also want routinely check their cognitive status annually through these 
online methods if validated. Since SAGE is self -administered, it could be an ideal tool to be used 
in a digital format online. The validity of SAGE in paper format had been studied and published 
(Scharre, 2010). W e propose to study the validity of SAGE in a digital format for cognitive 
screening .  
 Study Objectives  
Our objective is to validate SAGE in digital format (eSAGE) as a practical screening tool for detecting MCI and early dementia with a low false positive rate, by performing detailed neuropsychological testing on those individuals that did and did not make errors on e SAGE. We 
hypothesize that eSAGE will correlate well with gold standard neuropsychological testing 
designed to differentiate normal cognition from MCI and early dementia. We also hypothesize that the paper (SAGE) and electronic (eSAGE) versions of SAGE tested in a given individual 
will not show  significan tly different scores and will be correlated to each other to the extent that  
they could be used interchangeably.   
 
Methods and Design    
A.  Subject Selection  
      1.  Inclusion Criteria  
           a. Adult s over 49 years old of either gender  
           b. Vision and hearing sufficient  for compliance with tests  
2.  Exclusion Criteria  
      a. Diagnosis by a physician of moderate or severe dementia   
      b. Intellectual disability  
 
B.  Method  
       Subjects over 49 years of age with sufficien t vision and English literacy will be  recruited 
from a wide variety of community events including senior centers, health fairs, educational talks 
to lay public, independent and assisted living facilities, and free me mory screens as well as from 
ambulatory Geriatric or Memory Disorders Clinic s. The S AGE cognitive screening tool will be  
given to all subjects willing to t ake the test.  
 Participants who complete the SAGE test and me et inclusion and exclusion criteria  will be  
divided into groups based on their i nitial SAGE scores. Each group will be  composed of subjects 
with the same score. Individuals will be  randomly selected from each group and asked to further 
participate in a one-time clinical  evaluation. We will recruit approximately 5 subjects for each 
SAGE score from 1 0 to 22 at screening. Voluntary written informed consent and permission 
from the subject to interview a person  who knows the subject well will be  obtained. This could 
be a family member or a friend.  Questions will be asked about the subject’s cognitive and functioning abilities, known medical problems, and about any abnormal behavioral symptoms the patient may have.  This interview may be telephonic.  All efforts will be made to interview a close subject contact but this  will not be exclus ionary if no contact can be achieved.  
      The subject will be scheduled for one visit to complete the study.  At  that time the patient 
will be administered  the outcome measures listed below, a medical history taken, and physical 
and neurological examinat ions performed including vital signs .  The entire visit will take 
approximately 3 hours. There will be no cost to the patients to be included in this study.  If 
previously unknown significant abnormalities are found on any of these evaluations, the subject  
will be referred back to their primary care physician with a summary of the findings for 
consideration of further work- up with laboratory testing, neuroimaging, or other testing as 
deemed appropriate by their physician.   
C. Outcome Measures  
     Cognitive Measures:  
1. Paper version of SAGE (Scharre, 2010). Subjects will be given one of 4 versions (Forms 
1, 2, 3, or 4) of SAGE.  
2. Digital version of SAGE ( eSAGE ) (exactly the same questions and format as paper 
version except done on a com puter). Subjects will be given the same version (For m 1, 2, 
3, or 4) of SAGE but it will be in  digital format (eSAGE) . 
3. Mini -Mental State Examination (MMSE) (Folstein, 1965)  
4. Montreal Cogni tive Assessment (MoCA) ( Nasreddine , 2005)  
5. Boston Naming Test ( Kaplan, 1983)  
6. Wisconsin Card Sort Task (WCST) (Berg, 1948)  
7. Hopkins Verbal Learning Test (HVLT).  
8. FAS verbal fluency task  (Lezak, 1995)  
9. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale III (WAIS III) L etter-number and block design 
subtests  
 
     Behavioral and Functional Measures:  
1. Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) (Cummings, 1994)  
2. Activities of Daily Living (ADL) (Galasko, 1997; Lawton, 1969)  
 
D.  Outcomes/Results  
     Analysis will consist of comparing the subject’s scores on the SAGE in digital and paper format to their neuropsychologica l test scores using correlational methods.  False positive and 
false negative rates for e SAGE will be determined.   We also want to compare the paper with the 
digital format of SAGE to determine if  these two formats are equivalent to each other. We aim 
for 80% power with a two- tailed test conducted at 5% level of significance.  A test of the null 
hypothesis of the (Spearman) correlation coefficient being 0.86 against the (lower) threshold of 0.75 for significant agreement would require 60 subjects.  With 60 subjects we would have a power of 85%.  S o the proposed sample size of 72 subjects including 20% drop rate would 
provide enough power to validate the e -SAGE forms under the assumed research hypotheses in 
terms of agreement with the paper forms.  
 
Risk -Benefit Analysis  
     The risks to the subjects are very low.  The potential psychological risks would include any 
stress a subject may normally have in having a history, examination, and neuropsychological testing performed.  The seriousness of this risk is very low.  
      The possible benefits of this study to the subject include the potential  of early detection of 
cognitive impairments. The subjects will also be helping to validate a brief screening tool in digital format that may help detect MCI an d early dementia in others.  
 
Informed Consent  
 After subject eligibility for the study has been determined, informed consent will be 
obtained.  If the individual is determined to not have the capacity to consent, assent will be 
obtained from the subject and consent will be obtained by the subject’s  legally authorized 
representative (LAR). Each subject and if required their LAR, shall read and sign the instrument 
of informed consent after having had an opportunity to discuss it with the participating physi cian 
before signing.  The individual signing the informed consent will be informed that the subject can withdraw from the program at any time. Written informed consent is required prior to enrolling in the study.  The signed consent form is kept at the physician’s office. The consent form will be approved by the Institutional Review Board.  It is the responsibility of the investigator to obtain consent and to provide the subject/LAR with a copy of the signed and dated consent form.  
 
References  
1. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR.  ”Mini! -Mental State” A practical method for 
grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiat Res 1975;12:189- 198.  
2. Galasko D, Bennett D, Sano M, et al. An inventory to assess activities of daily living for 
clinical trials in Alzheimer’s disease. The Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study. 
Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1997;11 Suppl 2:S33- 9. 
3. Lawton MP, Brodie EM. Assessment of older people: selfmaintaining and instrumental activities of daily living. Gerontologist. 1969;9:179–186. 
4. Berg EA. (1948). A simple objective technique for measuring flexibility in thinking J. Gen. Psychol. 39: 15- 22. 
5. Heaton RK. The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test Manual. Odessa, Florida: sychological Assessment Resources; 1981.  
6. Kaplan E, Goodglass  H, Weintraub S. Boston Naming Test. Philadelphia: Lea& Febiger; 
1983. 
7. Lezak, Muriel Deutsch (1995). Neuropsychological assessment. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. 
8. Benton AL, Hamsher K. Multilingual Aphasia Examination.Iowa City, Iowa: Unive rsity 
of Iowa Press; 1978.  
9. Benedict RH, Schretlen D, Groninger L, et al. Hopkins Verbal Learning Test —Revised: 
normative data and analysis of interform and test -retest reliability. Clin Neuropsychol. 
1998;12: 43 –55. 
10. Brandt J. The Hopkins Verbal Learning Te st: development of a new memory test with six 
equivalent forms. Clinical Neuropsychol. 1991;5:125–142. 
11. Wechsler D. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale III administration and scoring manual. San Antonio, Texas: The Psychological Corporation; 1997.  
12. Scharre DW,  Chang S -I, Murden RA, et al. Self -administered Gerocognitive Examination 
(SAGE): A brief cognitive assessment instrument for Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and early dementia. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2010;24:64- 71. 
13. Cummings JL, Mega M, Gray K, et al. The Neuropsychiatric Inventory: comprehensive assessment of psychopathology in dementia. Neurology. 1994;44:2308- 2314.  
14. Nasreddine et al. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005;53:695 -699 
 