 1  
 
 
 
 
Fecal Microbiota Transplantation for the Treatment of Obesity: 
An Investigation of the microbial contribution to pathogenesis of 
disease  
 
 
NCT: 02741518  
 
 
 
Version date: 5/16/2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Fecal Microbiota Transplantation  for the Treatment  of Obesity: An Investigation of the  
microbial contribution to pathogenesis of disease  
Version Date : 05/1 6/2018  
 
I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE:  
Obesity is a major health burden affecting over one third of Americans and is associated with 
chronic diseases such as diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) and cancer 1-3. Pharmacologic options and lifestyle modification s, including 
calor ic restriction, exercise, and behavioral modifications have provided only modest weight loss 
benefit 4,5. Surgery, while shown to result in significant weight loss and resolution of co -morbid 
metabolic  illness, is invasive and accompanied by significant morbidity and mortality risk 6. There 
is an urgent need to develop novel treatment strategies targeting the unde rlying pathology 
leading to obesity and obesity -related diseases.  
Associations between the gut microbiota and obesity have been identified. Germ -free mice are 
protected from diet –induced obesity, insulin resistance, and NAFLD when fed western -type 
diets 7. Additionally, both obese humans and mice have been found to have an altered gut flora 
composition compared to lean counterparts 8; specifically, a decrease in the 
Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes  ratio 9,10.  
Potential mechanisms of bacteria mediated weight gain/loss have been linked to short -chain 
fatty acids (SFCAs), which are a known byproduct of intesti nal bacteria and are used as an 
energy source by colonic epithelial cells. Carbohydrates are fermented to SCFAs such as acetate, 
propionate, and butyrate by colonic bacteria, specifically Clostridial clusters IV and XIVa, 
including Eubacterium, Roseburia, Faecalibacterium, and Coprococcus 11. Additionally, SCFAs 
modulate the release of gut hormones from enteroendocrine cells such as glucagon -like peptide 
1 (GLP -1), through binding of SCFAs to the G -protein -coupled receptors GPR41 and GPR43 12-14. 
The main mechanism of action of GLP -1 is to increase glucose -mediated insulin release, delaying 
gastric emptying, and inhibiting glucago n release. GLP -1 agonists have been shown to promote 
satiety 15, leading to weight loss. GLP -1 is secreted within minutes of food intake by L -cells, 
located in the distal ileum and colon. Oral (but not IV) glucose ad ministration causes GLP -1 
secretion 16. Additionally , GLP-1 readily crosses the blood brain barrier where it is though t to 
regulate ingestive behavior in the hypothalamus, which subsequently has direct effects on 
gastric emptying and resultant satiety 15. GLP -1 is secreted 15 to 30 minutes after food intake 
and is there measured at multiple time points post -prandial 17. Additionally, GLP -1 has been 
shown to increase following other weight loss interventions such as gastric bypass, with 
significant changes seen as early as 6 weeks 17.   
This connection has led to attempts at manipulations of the gut microbiome in order to 
modulate this process 18. In a recent trial, obese diabetic patients received a fecal microbiota 
transplantation (FMT) from either lean donors or autologous stool 19. Those in the treatment 
group were noted to have improved peripheral and hepatic insulin sensitivity. FMT involves the 
transfer of donor stool to a recipient. It has become widely accepted as a treatment for 
recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI), with a cumulative cure rate of >90% and minimal 
adverse events 20. These preliminary studies suggest that FMT using lean donor stool may be 
 3 used to treat obesity and its sequela.  We hypothesize that fo r obese patients, induction and 
maintenance FMT utilizing lean donor stool will correct a dysbiosis that has led to a decrease 
in circulating GLP -1 which acts  as a surrogate marker for weight loss.  
 
II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
Specific Aim 1: Assess the safety of FMT in patients with obesity.   
Hypothesis: Induction FMT followed by weekly maintenance  capsule FMT will be safe and well 
tolerated by obese patients .  
Specific Aim 2: Assess GLP -1 as a therapeutic biomarker for clinical response to fecal microbiota 
transplant ation  
Hypothesis : Fecal Microbiota Transplantation will lead to an increase in SCFA which will lead to 
an increase in the metabolic regulator GLP -1.  
Specific Aim 3 : Determine the impact of fecal microbiota transplantation on the intestinal 
microbiome of patients with obesity via 16s ribosomal RNA sequencing.  
Hypothesis : Fecal microbiota transplantation will result in a sustained repopulation of the 
patient’s microbiome that corresponds to the bacteria from the donor stool.  
 
III. Methods and Study  Design  
This is a randomized controlled pilot study to assess the safety and to measure the 
microbiological and clinical impacts of FMT in patients with obesity. We will continue to 
prospectively enroll and screen adult patients until  20 patients have completed al l study visits . 
We anticipate total enrollment to be 50 patients to account for screen fails and dropout s. 
Eligible patients are those who are obese  (BMI of 35 kg/m^2 or greater ). Patients will be 
randomized 1:1 to receive FMT or placebo. The participants will receive either an FMT from a 
lean healthy donor  using 30 induction FMT capsules or placebo  capsules . The participants will 
continue to receive a monthly maintenance dose of 1 2 FMT oral capsule s or placebo at week 4 
and week 8 . Serum for hormone levels will be collected at baseline, weeks 1, 4, 6, 8 and 12 . 
Stool for microbial assessment will be collected at baseline and  weeks 1, 4, 6, 8, 12, 26, and 52 . 
A Food Freq uency Questionnaire will be taken  by the patient at w eek 0. Donor Stool  will be 
obtained from OpenBiome. OpenBiome is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization  that provides 
hospitals with screened, filtered, and frozen material ready for clinical use (See Attachments for 
OpenBiome Quality and Safety  Program as well as donor screening examples).  
Primary Safety Endpoint:  
Safety Endpoints: Number and nature of adverse events at week 1, 6, 12 and 26.  
 
Primary Clinical Endpoint:  
The primary clinical end point  is an increase in the AUC for GLP -1 after a mixed meal test from 
baseline and 12.  
 
Secondary Endpoints:  
 4 • Microbial Endpoints: Recipients fecal microbial diversity at week 6 and 12 compared to 
baseline  
• Clinical Endpoints: Decrease in BMI and waste circumfe rence at week 6 and 12 compared 
to baseline.  
 
 
Trial Treatment:  
The treatment for this trial will be administration of an  induction dose of 30 FMT capsules  ingested 
orally . Treatment will occur after screening . 
 
Subsequent FMT administration will be  maintenance  capsules of frozen FMT material ingested 
orally every 4 weeks (weeks 4 and 8) . All ingestions  will be undertaken in the clinic  under 
supervision . A follow -up phone call will be undertaken 4 hours after each ingestion visit  to screen 
for adverse even ts. At 48 hours and 24 hours prior to and the day of each  capsule dose (regardless 
of group) the patient will take a single dose of 20mg of omeprazole.  
 
Dosage Form  
1. Initial dose - filtered solution of donor stool in 30 gelatin capsules  at Day 0  (16500 µl total 
). 
2. Maintenance dose – twelve  capsules of fecal material taken  every 4 weeks  (550µl of fecal 
material in each size 00 gelatin capsule)  
 
Dosing Regimen  
Single induc tion dose of 30 capsules (16500 µl)  
Monthl y dose of  12 capsules of fecal material (total 6600 µl of fecal material at week 4 and week 
8) 
 
Capsule preparations are delivered to clinical investigators in double containment shipping 
vessels packed with dry ice, as with non -encapsulated placebo preparations. Packa ging is 
labeled with the same information included on non -encapsulated preparations, with the 
addition of a clause instructing clinicians to administer  the material to patients within 90 
minutes of removal from frozen storage.  Patient instructions listed i n Appendix 6.  
 
Packaging  
Encapsulated  fecal material in freezer safe bottles will be  stored in Styrofoam boxes from the 
Microbiome Health Research Institute at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as described in 
their Drug Master File (15543).  
 
 
The Placebo Treatment:  
Those in the placebo arm will undergo procedures as in the active arm. They will be given 30 
placebo capsules at time of induction (Day 0)  and this will be followed by  12 placebo  capsules  each 
month .  
 
 5 Placebo Oral Capsules  
Placebo capsules are prepared to support randomized, placebo -controlled studies of FMT. These 
capsules are prepared according to the specifications described below and utilized in studies as 
indicated by the study IND.  
1. An autoclaved solution consisting of 80% cocoa butter, 20% glycerol and brown food 
coloring, without the addition of human stool, is used as a placebo control.  
2. The autoclaved placebo solution is transferred to a reservoir.  
3. Capsules are generated as outlined in 6 -9 of section V above.  
4. Each capsule  is visually inspected for integrity and contamination of the outer surface.  
Capsules passing inspection are placed into an HDPE plastic bottle for immediate storage at -
80ºC.  
5. Placebos are quarantined until they have passed bioburden testing, as outlined in section XII 
below.  
6. Doses are transferred into the final pharmaceutical bottle packaging. The dosage size 
depends upon the requirements of an individual clinical trial’s specifications. Clinical trial 
specifications vary with the trial protocol, objectiv es, and the indication being targeted.  
 
 
Labeling  
See Drug Master File (15543).  
 
IV. STUDY PROCEDURES  
An outline of the study timeline and measurements is shown in Appendix 1  
 
Overview . This is a randomized controlled pilot study to assess the safety of FMT in obese 
patients. Additionally, the study will measure the microbiological and clinical impacts of FMT in 
patients with obesity. We will continue to prospectively enroll  adult who a re obese (BMI of 35 
kg/m^2 or greater ) after providing written informed consent  until 20 have completed all study 
visits . We anticipate total enrollment to be 50 patients to account for screen fails and dropouts. 
The study participants will be randomized 1:1 to either the treatment arm or the placebo arm. 
The treatment arm will receive an FMT  induction followed  by monthly (weeks 4 and 8)  
maintenance oral capsules for 12 weeks. The placebo group will receive placebo  capsules   at 
the time of their induction  followed by monthly intake of oral placebo capsules for 12 weeks. 
The participants will not receive dietary instruction and  will be asked to continue with their 
regular diet. Information about their dietary habits will be collected  at each study visit . Donor 
Stool and placebo material will be obtained from OpenBiome. OpenBiome, with whom we have 
previously collaborated with, is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization  that provides hospitals with 
screened, filtered, and frozen material ready for clinical use.  
 
A. Recipient Procedures  
Week -2: Screening – potential subjects will undergo the following screening procedures one to 
two weeks prior to FMT to determine if they meet the recipient selection criteria;  
 6 1. Repeat of Medical record review to confirm diagnosis a nd treatment histor y if questions 
remain after initial screen. This will include either review of partner’s available data or data 
provided from home provider  (When applicable)  
2. Symptom assessment (Symptom Diary Card) and physical exam by study physician  
3. Anthropometric measurements: BMI,  Iliac measurements,  waist -to-hip ratio  
4. Baseline blood work to assess for sequela of obesity: insulin, LFTs, CBC , and HgA1C and fasting 
serum lipids and blood glucose  
5. Stool sa mple to exclude current infections (bacterial culture, ova & parasites, Clostridum 
difficule toxin) and a sample for high -throughput 16S rRNA sequencing and metabolomics.  
6. Urine Pregnancy Test for females  of child -bearing age: Women of child -bearing pot ential will 
be counseled by study clinicians that those randomized to the treatment arm will be requested 
to avoid pregnancy by hormonal or barrier methods from randomization for 4 months (duration 
of FMT therapy and one month lag afterwards).  
7. Diet reca ll and question about specific dietary restrictions or preferences. The patients will be 
asked to maintain their standard diets throughout the study.  
8. Baseline levels of g hrelin, Leptin , PYY and adiponectin  will be measured  
9. A mixed meal tolerance test  will also be performed. GLP -1, leptin  and PYY measurements will 
be taken at time 0, 15, 30, 45, and 60 minutes.  
10. Pre FMT screening labs including HIV, Hepatitis B and C and Syphillis  
11. Serum will also be collected for metabolomic  profiling  
12: Test  swallow of an empty capsule  
13. Indirect Calorimetry – see Appendix 7  
14. Patients will be sent home with 9 doses of a proton pump inhibitor to be taken 48 hours 24 
hours prior to and the day of each capsule administration  ( 3 times total) . 
 
Week 0:  (Treatment and Control Arms): Randomization: Eligible patients will be randomized 1:1 
according to a computer -generated randomization list. The randomization will be held centrally 
at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital  Research Pharmacy . The treatment locati on will be 
masked to the patient and investigators performing data analysis. The health care worker 
administering FMT or placebo will not be aware of the treatment being administered. Treatment 
will be administered based on the result of randomization .  
• Food Frequency Questionnaire  
• Stool transplant (or Placebo) via capsule induction   
• A proton pump inhibitor will be taken daily at 48 hours and 24 hours prior to and day of 
capsule consumption.   
 
Week  1: (Treatment and Control Arms):  Follow up and adverse event screening . Additionally:  
• BMI, Iliac measurements , hip to waist ratio  
• Indirect Calorimetry  
• Stool for microbiome analysis and metabolomics  
• CBC, LFTs, FBG, HgA1C, lipids, glucose , metabolomics  
• diet recall  
• Symptom Diary Card and Adverse Event s creening  
Weeks 2 -12: (Treatment and Control Arms ) 
 7 Symptom diary Cards will be filled out weekly  for adverse event monitoring  
 
Week 4, 8 (Treatment and Control Arms):  Monitored Capsule Consumption and  Follow -up study 
visits for assessment of:   
• Ingestion of 12 FMT capsules or inactive placebo.  
• A proton pump inhibitor will be taken daily for the 48 hours 24 hours prior to and day of 
capsule consumption.   
• BMI, Iliac measurements , hip to waist ratio  
• Stool for microbiome analysis and metabol omics  
• CBC, LFTs, FBG,  HgA1C, lipids, glucose, metabolomics  
• diet recall  
• Symptom diary Card and Adverse Event screening  
Weeks 6, 12  : Follow -up study visit s for assessment of:  
• BMI, Iliac measurements,  hip to waist ratio  
• Stool for microbiome analysis  and metabolomics  
• CBC, LFTs, FBG,  HgA1C, lipids, glucose , metabolomics, g hrelin and leptin , PYY and 
adiponectin  
• Mixed meal tolerance test followed by serum for GLP-1, Leptin  and  PYY at time 0, 15, 30, 
45, and 60  
• diet recall  
• Indirect Calorimetry  
• Symptom Diary Card and Adverse Event screening  
Week 26 and 52:  
• Safety assessment  and Symptom Diary Cards  via phone interview by a physician to screen for 
adverse events.  
• Stool sample for microbiome analysis  to be mailed in  
• Ask for the patients current weight  
 
Stool collection instructions are outline d in Appendix 2.  
Patient obligations in the study will end at week 52 however the patient’s medical record may 
be followed prospectively for evaluation of weight loss and weight loss surrogates as well as 
metabolic parameters done for clinical c are through year 5 post -enrollment  as needed . This may 
include review of partner’s available records or records from home provider.  (when applicable)   
 
Stopping Criteria  
Adverse events will be specifically monitored at week 1 , 4, 6, 8, 12, 26, and 52 after FMT by direct 
patient interviews, or by reporting from clinical sites of adverse events at any time in -between. A 
data safety and monitoring board (DSMB, Appendix 5) will review all patient data to ensure optimal 
patient safety and pr ecautions for subjects with obesity treated with FMT. A severity grade for 
adverse events (Appendix 6) and subject symptom diary cards will be  used (Appendix 7). The DSMB 
will meet a minimum of 2 times: after treatment of the first 10 subjects, and after t reatment of all 
20 subjects. Study will be stopped under the following circumstances;  
 8 • Any unexpected serious adverse events occur that the DSMB determines as at least possibly 
related to FMT or detection of new pathogenic intestinal infection in stool samp les in any 
patient treated.  
 
Any subject who develops a serious adverse event that is judge  to be probably, possibly, or definitely 
related to FMT therapy will receive no further FMT treatment. They will remain in the trial only for 
adverse event follow -up.  
 
Accountability Procedures for the Investigational Product  
The location, volume and number of all FMT donor solutions will be maintained in a log by the 
research team. The principal investigator will be responsible for accurate record and tracking of all 
FMT solutions. Logging of FMT solution used for administration will be performed usin g a two -
person process.  
  
Data to be Recorded Directly on the CRFs  
Data will be obtained from patient s directly, and their electronic health record as follows;  
Demographics , age, gender , co-morbidities, medication use, and laboratory values.  
 
Donor Proce dures (OpenBiome):  
Prior to enrollment, donors (age >18), receive informed consent with oversight from MIT’s IRB 
and COUHES. Donors are interviewed by a healthcare professional to determine whether they 
meet the following:  
Clinical Exclusion criteria:  
1. Infectious risk factors:  
a. Known HIV, Hepatitis B or C infections or exposure within previous 12 months  
b. High risk sexual behaviors  
c. Use of illicit drugs  
d. Tattoo or body piercing within previous 6 months  
e. Incarceration or history of incarceration  
f. Known current communicable disease  
g. Risk factors for variant Creutzfeldt -Jakob disease  
h. Travel within previous 3 months to countries where risk of infectious diarrhea is 
elevated  
2. Gastrointestinal and systemic comorbidities:  
a. History of IBD, irr itable bowel syndrome, chronic constipation or chronic diarrhea  
b. History of gastrointestinal malignancy or known polyposis  
c. Antibiotic use within the previous 3 months  
d. Immunosuppressive state or use of immunosuppressive medications  
e. History of maj or gastrointestinal surgery (e.g., gastric bypass)  
f. Metabolic syndrome ; history of NAFLD, hypertension, dyslipidemia, CAD, CHF  
g. Systemic autoimmunity, e.g., multiple sclerosis, connective tissue disease  
h. Atopic diseases including asthma and eczema, eosinophilic disorders of the 
gastrointestinal tract  
i. Chronic pain syndromes, e.g., chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia  
j. Specifically for this study: BMI < 23; waist circumference < 35 inches for women, < 40 
inches for  men; fat mass < 20%; FBG <95 mg/dL; HbA1C<5.7; LDL < 100 mg/dL; TG<100 
mg/dL; HDL> 60 mg/dL; ALT < 20 U/L for women, < 30 U/L for men.  
 9  
Donor Testing  
Prospective donors that do not meet any of the exclusion criteria outlined above will then be 
subjected to a battery of serological and  stool -based assays to determine whether common 
infectious agents are present. All tests will be outsourced to third party .  
Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) certified testing facilities. As a condition for 
participation in this program, donors are  required to submit written authorization for the 
disclosure of the results of these tests to the Microbiome Health Research Institute, in 
compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). We will redact 
all personal identify ing information from each report when we receive it. We will share copies of 
these raw diagnostic reports with our clinical partners. In the event that material from multiple 
donors is provided in a single shipment, results will be provided for all samples  along with a file 
indicating which samples correspond to which donor screens. Documentation will be provided 
for the battery of tests prior to enrollment of a donor and for tests performed at the end of the 
collection window. Positive results for any of t he following assays will be treated as exclusion 
criteria for all materials.  
 
Serologic testing:  
a. HIV antibody, type 1 and 2  
b. Hepatitis A (IgM)  
c. Hepatitis B panel (HBsAg & HBc [IgM])  
d. Hepatitis C (HCV antibody)  
e. Treponema pallidum screening cascade (EIA with reflex to RPR)  
f. Liver function panel  
g. Complete blood count  
h. C-reactive protein assay  
i. HTLV 1 and 2 antibodies  
h. measurement of FBG, HgA1C, ALT, lipid profile if not done previously.  
 
Stool testing:  
a. EIA assay for Clostridium difficile toxins A and B  
b. Culture -based assays for common enteric pathogens (including Salmonella, Shigella, E. coli, 
Campylobacter and Vibrio)  
c. Fecal Giardia antigen EIA  
d. Fecal Cryptosporidium antigen EIA  
e. Ova and parasites exam  
f. Tri -chrome stai n for Isospora  
g. Cyclospora smear test  
h. H. pylori EIA  
f. measurement of SCFA and 16S rRNA microbiome interrogation  
 
Collection Window and Donor Monitoring  
Donors that meet the above criteria are enrolled to provide material for FMT. Donor material is 
collected for up to 60 days following the initial screening. During this collection window donors 
must not violate any of the risk factors identified in Part A above. During a collection window, all 
material is quarantined until the donor has passed a second  battery of serological and stool 
tests as described in Part B above. Material will be released for clinical use only after the donor 
has successfully completed both sets of assays (before and after the collection window).  
 10 In the event that a donor is recr uited to provide additional material beyond an initial 60 -day 
collection window, additional testing will be performed at 60 day intervals. Repeat donors that 
have not been tested within 60 days will be treated as new donors subject to the same 
screenings d escribed in Parts A and B above. This ensures that all donors (even long -term 
participants) are subject to regular health evaluation.  
In the event that the donor passes a loose stool or has other symptoms of disease, donors will 
immediately meet with a hea lthcare professional to evaluate their continued suitability for 
participation in our program. If the clinician determines that the donor is not healthy, the donor 
will be un -enrolled from the program. In the event of such a diagnosis, all material contrib uted 
during the preceding collection window will be destroyed. In addition to this qualitative 
exclusion by clinician’s discretion, we will also treat three or more loose stools passed in a 24 -
hour period as an absolute exclusion criterion, and all materia l from the affected donor’s 
collection window will be destroyed, regardless of clinical evaluation. Although less frequent 
passage of loose stool is not medically indicated as a disease and is common among healthy 
individuals, in the interests of caution w e will also destroy material collected near any loose 
stool movement. All material collected from within 48 hours of two loose stools will be 
destroyed. All material collected from within 24 hours of a single loose stool will similarly be 
destroyed.  
 
Produ ction and Process Controls  
1. The donor deposits stool in a commode, seals the lid, and places the collection container in a 
plastic bag to serve as secondary containment. Donors receive training to ensure that samples 
are not contaminated during the colle ction process.  
2. After passage, the sealed sample collection container is immediately transferred from the 
donor to a qualified technician to process the sample.  
3. Samples are transferred to a UV -sterilized biosafety hood as quickly as possible, not to e xceed 
60 minutes from the time of collection.  
4. Within the biosafety hood, the stool is transferred to a sterile filter bag. The filter bag fits 
around the collection commode entirely, so there is no risk of material escaping during this 
transfer process.  All stool material is added to the same side of the membrane in the filter bag.  
5. An autoclaved dilutant consisting of 12.5% glycerol and a normal saline buffer (0.90% w/v 
NaCl in water) is added to the filter bag.  
6. The sample solution sealed inside the filter bag is then introduced to a homogenizer blender 
for 60 seconds to mix the materials.  
7. Samples are then aliquoted into sterile bottles using sterile, disposable serological pipettes.  
8. The bottles are then capped, sealed and frozen immediately  at -80°C. Any samples not fully 
processed and frozen within 120 minutes of passage will be destroyed.  
9. Samples are sealed with a tamper evident shrink band as an additional level of containment 
and to ensure samples are not contaminated or tampered with  during storage and distribution.  
10. Samples will be delivered to clinicians on dry ice, in double -containment vessels, with 
temperature indicators to ensure that samples have not thawed during transportation.  
11. Production of stool capsules and placebo  
12. Preparation of inactive slurry  
 
V. Subject Selection  and Withdrawal.  
 11 Donors: OpenBiome donors are rigorously assessed and monitored.  
1. Donor candidates  are screened with comprehensive evaluation of medical histories, 
behavioral risks, and current health st atus.  
2. Laboratory Screening: Donor candidates are screened for 20 stool and serological tests 
at a CLIA -certified laboratory. Less than 20% of those screened become qualified donors  
3. Continuous Requalification:  Qualified donors are under medical monitoring t hrough the 
entire donation window and are fully rescreened every 60 days  
4. Quarantine Procedure:  Prior to release, donated material is quarantined for 60 days in 
between two full panel screens at a CLIA certified laboratory. After passing a first 
battery of tests, a donor may donate specimens for a 60 -day window. All material made 
from these specimens is held in quarantine until a second battery of tests is 
administered. The material from this 60 -day window is release only if and when the 
donor passes this se cond battery of tests.  
5. Additional metabolic criteria  for donors : The donor used for this study must 
additionally meet the following inclusion criteria:  
a. BMI <21  kg/m2 or total body fat % < 20%  
b. HDL > 60  mg/dL for women; > 50 for men; LDL< 100 mg/dL; TG< 100  mg/dL  
c. FBG < 95 mg/dL  
d.  waist circumference for  men < 40 inches; women <35 inches  
e. ALT < 20 U/L for women; < 30  U/L for men . 
 
Patients:  
Patient enrollment will be done via two methods : 
1. Patient initiated  communication with investigator via the  clinical trials .gov  website.  (This may 
be E -mail or phone calls depending on patient preference)   
2. Referral of appropriate patients from t he GI or Primary Care clinic at Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital (BWH . All study procedures will take place at Brigham and Women ’s Hospital .  
 
Selection of subjects.  Obese (BMI 35 kg/m^2 or greate r) subjects  who meet the inclusion 
criteria  will be enrolled in the trial, after providing written informed consent. The study 
participants will be randomized 1:1 to either the treatment arm or the placebo arm. The 
treatment arm will receive an FMT capsule induction  followed by  monthly  maintenance oral 
capsules for 12 weeks . The placebo group will receive placebo  capsules  at the time of their  
induction  followed by monthly intake of oral placebo capsules for 12 weeks. The participants 
will not receive dietary instruction and will be asked to continue with their regular diet. 
Informa tion about their dietary habits will be collected.  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
1. Age 18 years o r older  
2. Obesit y defined as a BMI of  35 kg/m^2 or greater  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Triglycerides > 500 mg/dL  
 12 2. Use of antibiotics <8 weeks prior to participation  
3. Use of pr obiotics <4 weeks prior to participation  
4. Alcohol use of greater than 20g/daily or suspicion of alcohol abuse and dependence  
5. Substance abuse, current  
6. LFTS greater then 3x the ULN  
7. Cirrhosis.  
8. DM type 2 that is insulin  dependent,  treated with GLP1 -agonists , or poorly controlled on oral 
medications (HbA1C > 10%)  
9. Use of any weight loss medication or participation in a weight loss study or program such as 
Weight Watchers  in the past 3 months  
10. History of recent weight change (weight loss or weight gain in the two months preceding 
trial enrollment) . This is defined as a gain or loss of 10 or more pounds in the preceding 2 
months.  
11. Patients who are pregnant or breastfeeding  
12. Patients who are unable to give informed consent  
13. Patients who have previously undergone FMT  
14. Patients who have a confirmed active malignancy or cancer  
15. Patients who are immunocompromised  including HIV infection.  
16. Participation in a clinical trial in the preceding 30 days or simultaneously  during this trial  
17. Previous gastric or small intestinal s urgery that alters gut anatomy such as fundoplication, 
gastric resection, gastric bypass, small bowel resection, and ileocectomy  
18. Other comorbidities including: systemic lupus, inflammatory bowel disease, or Chronic 
kidney disease as defined by a GFR <6 0mL/min/1.73m2 44  or rheumatoid arthritis  
19. History of rheumatic heart disease, endocarditis, or valvular disease due to risk of 
bacteremia from colonoscopy  
20. Any condition, based on clinical judgment t hat may make study participation unsafe  
21. History of severe food allergies  (e.g. anaphylaxis or anaphylactoid reaction)  
22. Use of immune modulators including methotrexate, mycophenolate mofetil, tacrolimus, 
cyclosporine, thalidomide, Interleukin -10, or Interleukin -11 or prednisone within the past  2 
months  
23. Treatment with infliximab, adalimumab, certolizumab, natalizumab, vedolizumab or 
thalidomide  within the prior 2 months  
24. Congenital or acquired immunodeficiencies  
25. Patients with allergies to ingredients Generally Recognized As  Safe (GRAS): glycerol, sodium 
chloride, hypromellose, gellan gum, titanium dioxide, cocoa butter  
26. Dysphagia: oropharyngeal, esophageal, functional, neuromuscular (e.g. stroke, multiple 
sclerosis, ALS)  
27. History of aspiration  
28. History of severe gas troparesis  
 
For patients outside of the Partner’s system, medical diagnoses that are identified by the patient 
and relevant to inclusion and exclusion will be confirmed with their treating physician   
 13  
Subject Withdrawal Criteria: Patients – patients will be withdrawn under the following 
circumstances:  
1. Patient withdraws their consent for follow -up visits or contacts.  
2. Patient is unable to successfully perform capsule test swallow.  
3. These above patients will only be followed -up for week 2 adverse event screening, as they 
will not have received FMT. These subjects will be replaced, as they will not be considered 
“treated ” 
 
VI. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
Recruitment Procedures:  
BWH gastroent erologists and Primary Care Physicians,  including attending physicians  and 
fellows, will be informed of the study’s aims and inclusion criteria. These doctors who have 
firsthand knowledge of the patient's medical history must give approval for his/her patient to be 
contacted for research purposes and will inform the principal investigator of patients who meet 
the study criteria and who may be good candidates for the study.  The referring  physician  will 
introduce the study to the potential patient and request the patient’s permission to be 
approached by study staff.   
After the t reating physician has described the research study to the patient and has given 
permission to be contacted, a member of the study staff will be available for any follow -up 
questions. Investigators and study coordinators will reinforce with any potential su bjects that 
participation is voluntary, that they do not have to participate, and the decision not to 
participate will not affect their care now or in the future. The patient will be given a copy of the 
informed consent, and encouraged to discuss the study  with family, friends, their PCP, and/or 
others. Study staff will follow up to see if there are any questions or concerns that have not 
been addressed. These follow -up contacts will reoccur until the patient has either (a) been 
enrolled or (b) turned down participation in the study.  
To minimize the “undue influence” that the principal investigator may have on study subjects, 
Dr. Allegretti’s patients (whom she feels are eligible) will be initially approached by another 
physician or nurse practitioner in the  practice about the study. Subjects will be approached by a 
study staff member (investigators, research assistant or coordinators) when they have given 
their permission to be contacted. They will be given both oral information about the study and 
they will  have the opportunity to ask questions of the study staff at the time of  recruitment.  
Patients will also have an opportunity to discuss participation with their primary physicians, 
including Dr. Allegretti, as well once they have received all study informa tion.   
We will not utilize advertisement material or other informational materials for patients beyond 
the consent form.  Patients will be given as much time as they need to decide.  They will be given 
a copy of the consent form to take home, read, and cons ider, and they will be encouraged to 
discuss participation with family members and health care providers.  
 14 The consent form will be signed that day or at a future visit to the clinic. Once signed, the 
subject will undergo further screening to determine eli gibility. No study related procedures will 
be performed until the informed consent form has been signed.  
If they decide to participate, both study and controls will be asked to maintain their standard 
diet.  
If patients reach out to us via the provided E-mail or phone number located at the 
clinicaltrials .gov  website, we will pre -screen them using questions from the provided E -
mail/phone script. If the patient’s responses do not indicate any exclusion criteria being met, 
then we will  contact their primary  care provider via email or phone call  (with patient 
permission)  to confirm medical  diagnosis . Once  patie nt’s medical  and treatment  history  are 
thoroughly vetted with the primary care physician , we will ask the physician to further discuss 
the study with t he patient  to minimize “undue influence”  and ensure appropriateness for 
participation . When we are given the approval of the physicia n to enroll  the patient in the study , 
we wi ll then schedule the standard screening visit to re -review medical history (incl usion and 
exclusion criteria) and perform informed consent. (See below)  If the patient has no medical 
problems and has no treating physician due to lack of medical problems, the patient will be 
eligible to come in for a screening visit.  
Consent Procedures:  
The treating physician will introduce the study to the potential patient and request the patient’s 
permission to be approached by study staff.  With the treating physician’s  permission, either a 
physician investigator or study coordinator will describe the research study in detail, including 
participation and risks and alternative courses of treatment, and answer any questions or 
concerns that the patient may have.  Patients will be given as much time as they need to 
consider participation before signing the consent form.   
 
In order to avoid coercion, study staff will reinforce that participation is voluntary and that their 
decision will not affect the medical care that they receive now or in the future.  If patients seek 
more time to consider participation, they will be given a copy of the consent form and 
encouraged to discuss the study with family, friends, PCP, or others.  Study staff will follow -up to 
see if any questions  or concerns have not been addressed. A physician investigator will obtain 
informed consent signatures.   
 
VII. Assessment of Safety  
Patient safety monitoring schedule - although there have been no reported serious adverse events 
associated with fecal microbiot a transplantation (FMT) in patients with recurrent ref ractory 
Clostridium difficile, w e will have a special data safety and monitoring board (DSMB) to ensure 
optimal patient safety and precautions for subjects with obesity treated with FMT. Adverse events 
will be specifically monitored at 1,  4, 6, 8, and 12, weeks after FMT by direct patient interviews, or 
by reporting from clinical sites of adverse events at any time in -between.  Adverse events will also 
be assessed via telephone calls at weeks 26 and 52. The DSMB will meet a minimum of 2 times : 
after treatment of the first 1 0 subject s, and after treatment of all 20  subjects. A copy of the DSMB 
charter is located in Appendix 3 .  
 
 15 For this trial, an adverse event (AE) is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or 
clinical investigation patient administered a biologic product; such an occurrence does not 
necessarily have to have a causal relationship with this treatmen t. An AE can be any unfavorable 
and unintended sign, symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal 
product whether or not considered related to the medicinal product. A serious adverse event (SAE) 
is defined as any untoward medical occurrence that results in death, is life threatening, requires 
hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, results in persistent or significant 
disability/incapacity, is a congenital anomaly/birth defect, is an important medical event tha t may 
not be immediately life threatening or result in death or hospitalization but may jeopardize the 
patient or may require intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes previously mentioned. 
Adverse events will be determined by a toxicity gradin g scale (Appendix 4). 
 Patients will be asked to document their symptoms using the symptom diary card  
(Appendix 5 ) as a memory aide. Subjects will be asked to complete a symptom diary card at 
baseline,  prior to FMT , and on the day of treatment to assess their baseline. They will then be asked 
to complete a symptom diary card each day for  1 week  post -FMT and then  once a week thereafter 
for 12 weeks and then during follow -up at weeks 26 and 52.  The symptom diary card w ill help the 
patient monitor and keep track of adverse events  and will be reviewed by the Principal Investigator .   
 In addition  the DSMB may convene additional meetings if necessary to ensure the ongoing 
monitoring and safety of the subjects treated with FMT. The internal DSMB will include the 
following individuals: Dr . Walter Chan ( BWH Gastroentero logy, Chair),  
Dr. Marvin Ryou (Gastroenterology – BWH ) and Dr. Andrew Courtwright ( Pulmonology/Ethics -
BWH) . All events will be reported directly to the DSMB and the Institutional Review Board (IRB) in 
accordance with Harvard University policy: Investigators will promptly report to the  IRB all 
unanticipated problems involving risks to human subjects or others under Title 21 of the Code of 
Federal Regulations (21 CFR) part 56 (Institutional Review Boards), part 312 (Investigational New 
Drug Application), and part 812 (Investigational Dev ice Exemptions).Harvard Medical School policy 
is consistent with guidance set forth by the Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) 
(presented January 15, 2007) http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/AdvEvntGuid.htm and the FDA 
(presented January 14, 2009)  
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM126572.pdf when 
determining what related events require review by the Institutional Review Board. Any serious AEs 
also will be evaluated by the DSMB for review and determination of whether the t rial should 
continue.  
 
All subjects will be followed for an additional six months following the end of their treatment.   
Subjects that did not experience a AEs or SAEs will receive a telephone call to monitor their current 
symptoms and quality of life.  For subjects that did experience a AE or SAE that was found to be 
connected to the FMT treatment, we ask that they return t o our medical center for an exam with 
their gastroenterologist. All treatment and outcome of AEs will be documented on the CRF and 
summarized in the CSR. All AEs will be followed to resolution or stabilization by the study physician.  
 
VIII. Biostatistical Analys is:  
This is an exploratory study as relatively littl e is known about the microbiome  of patients  with 
obesity . Thus, the main  objective of our study is to assess the safety of FMT in obese patients. 
Secondarily we will be able to characterize variability in the microbiome of obese patients  to aid 
 16 in estimating effect sizes for designing larger studies powered to detect associations between 
microbiome data and GLP-1 levels and possible weight loss/BMI . 
 
IX. Risks and Discomforts:  
Fecal  Microbial Therapy:  
 
Known Risks of FMT  
• Altered bowel pattern (diarrhea, constipation)  
• Cramping  
• Belching  
 
Potential Risks of FMT  
• Transmission of pathogenic bacteria, viruses, fungi  
• Transmission of allergens  
• Alteration in intestinal metabolism  
 
Privacy and Confidentiality:  
This study involves the collection of personal health information.  Accidental release of personal 
health information is a risk of participation in this study.  Measures will be taken to protect the 
confidentiality of all subj ects’ information.  These measures include keeping all information 
collected about the subjects’ confidential, keeping information in locked rooms, and having 
physicians who are directly involved with a subject’s clinical care involved in the study.  
Venipu ncture:  Risks of having blood drawn include pain, bruising, or infection.   
 
Pregnancy : The risks to fetuses and women who are pregnant are unknown.  
 
X. Potential Benefits:  
Subjects may not receive any benefits from taking part in this study. However  this research and 
the results of this study may benefit others in the future.  
 
The p otential benefits include:  
• Restoration of fecal diversity  
• Increase in GLP -1 hormones  
• Weight loss  
 
As this is a pilot study, it is difficult to quantify the expected benefits.  
 
XI. Monitoring and Quality Assurance:  
 17 The Principal Investigator, Dr. Jessica Allegretti , will assure the validity and integrity of the data 
and adherence to the IRB -approved proto col.   
Study staff will review completed CRF’s before each visit to ensure completeness of previous 
entries.  Entries that need clarification will be reviewed by the PI, and the subject and/or 
treating gastroenterologist will be consulted if needed.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1:   
 
 
 
 
 
FMT capsule 
induction  and 
Randomization  Ingested every 
month  Week 4   Week 8  
 18  
Appendix 2 . 
Stool collection Instructions  
Important note about sample collection and shipping:  
Collect and ship your stool samples by FedEx according to the Samples Collections Schedule that 
your research coordinator explained to you. Please ship within 24 hours of collection. Please 
contact your research coordinator, Madeline Carrellas  (617)732 -922 3 if you have any 
questions.  
This kit contains the supplies needed for 1 stool sample collection and 1 return shipment.  
 
Part 1 — Preparation for one collection  
1. Each kit contains the following stool 
collection materials (see photo):  
- 1 Blue Bowl + S eat to collect your stool  
- 1 Tube with a screw cap top (a Para -Pak vial). 
This tube has a built -in spoon for scooping and 
contains a liquid that is a preservative solution  
- 1 Pair of gloves for hygienic collection  
- 1 Plastic dropper [optional use]  
2. Wa sh your hands with soap and water, then 
rinse.  
3. Urinate into toilet BEFORE stool collection.  
 
Part 2 — Collection Seat Placement  
1. Lift toilet seat.  
2. Place Blue Bowl and Seat at the back of the toilet bowl for 
collection.  
3. Lower toilet seat and en sure stability of the blue collection bowl.  
4. Deposit stool directly into the blue collection bowl.   
**DO NOT urinate into the blue stool collection bowl**.   

 19 Part 3 — Collecting the Stool Sample  
1. Unscrew and remove the lid of the clean collection 
tube provided.  
2. Using the spoon attached to the lid, scoop one pea -
sized amount of your stool into the tube. Please DO NOT 
provide more stool than the pea -sized amount 
requested.  
For liquid stool the plastic dropper can be used.  Please 
provide ONE dropper  full of material.  
3. Close and tighten the lid firmly.  
4. Shake the closed tube by inverting it a few times t o 
completely immerse the stool sample in the liquid, and 
then tap the bottom of the closed tube on a table top to ensure that the sample is at the bottom 
of the tube.  
5. Dispose of the blue bowl, the seat, and the gloves in the trash. Wash your hands with soap 
and water.  
  

 20 Stool shippi ng Instructions  
Part 4 — Labeling, Packaging and Shipping the Specimen  
1. Each kit contains the following shipping materials:  
- FedEx – UN3373 pack with pre -filled shipping label  
- An easy fold return shipper (cardboard box)  
- A small plastic bag with b iohazard symbol  
- A strip of absorbent material (gray tissue)  
2. Please record the date and the time of the collection ONLY as 
previously explained to you by your research coordinator. DO NOT 
record your name or any personal information.  To protect your 
privacy, this has been replaced with a patient barcode.  
3. Place the tube inside the small plastic bag with biohazard symbol 
on it. Please keep the absorbent material (gray tissue) inside this 
plastic bag.  
4. Seal the plastic bag by rem oving the 
white tab and exposing the adhesive. Firmly 
press flap to completely seal the bag. Place 
this plastic bag, with the vial inside, in the 
small cardboard box and close the box.  
5. Place the cardboard box inside the plastic 
pre-labeled FedEx UN3373 pak.  
6. Follow the instructions below to either schedule a FedEx pickup 
or to drop off the package.  
 
 
  

 21 FedEx Shipping Instructions:  
Biological Samples  
 
 
 
 
 
Instruction for pick -up schedule (preferred option):  
1) Call 1 -800-GO-FEDEX (1 -800-463-3339) to schedule a home pickup within 24 hours of 
collection.  
2) Your call will be answered by an automated system and will give you several options. Follow 
the options and verbally state “schedule a pick up”.  
3) The sy stem will ask you to enter or verbalize your 9 digit account number. The FedEx account 
number is 686124762.  
4) When asked if you want an express or ground delivery, please state “express”.  
5) Depending on what time of day you call, the system may ask if y ou the package is ready for 
pick up now. Please respond “NO” if it is to be picked up the next day. If it needs to be picked up 
that day, please respond “YES”.  
6) You will be asked for your zip code followed by the number of packages, and if any of them 
are over 150 pounds – give the zip code of your home address and state that you have 1 
package that does not weigh over 150 pounds.  
7) You will be required to pr ovide the address where the package will be picked up.  
8) The system will then confirm the pickup time and location. After confirming the pickup is 
scheduled properly, the system will hang up.  
9) At any time during the call you may be directed to a custo mer service representative to 
confirm the details of your pick up.  
 
Instruction for drop -off (alternative option):  
1) Call 1 -800-GO-FEDEX (1 -800-463-3339) to determine the appropriate FedEx dropbox location.  
2) Verify with FedEx that the FedEx location of  your choice can accept UN3373 pack and drop 
the package off within 24 hours of collection.  
 
 
If you have any questions about the stool collection procedures, please do not hesitate to 
contact y our research coordinator at 617 -732 -9223  
 
Thank you for your participation in this study!   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 22  
In-clinic Stool collection Instructions  
 
Each stool collection kit contains:  
- 1 Blue Bowl + Seat to collect your stool.  
- 2 Tubes with a screw cap top (called Para -Pak vial). These tubes have a built -in 
spoon for  scooping:  
1 empty tube, without any liquid (marked by blue dot stickers)  
1 tube containing a preservative solution (no sticker)  
- 1 Pair of gloves  
 
Part 1 - Collection Seat Placement  
1. Lift toilet seat.  
2. Place Blue Bowl and Seat at the back of the to ilet bowl for collection.  
3. Lower toilet seat and ensure stability of the blue collection bowl.  
4. Deposit stool directly into the blue collection bowl.   
**DO NOT urinate into the blue stool collection bowl**.  
 
Part 2 - Collecting the Stool Samples  
1. Collection tube with blue dot sticker (no liquid)  
a. Unscrew and remove the lid of the clean collection tube with blue 
dot sticker.  
b. Using the spoon attached to the lid, scoop one pea -sized amount of 
your stool into the empty tube. Please DO NOT provide more stool than the 
pea-sized requested.  
c. Close and tighten the lid firmly.  
2. Collection tube with preservative solution  
a. Uns crew and remove the lid of the other collection tube (without 
blue sticker).  
b. Using the spoon attached to the lid, scoop one pea -sized amount of 
your stool into the empty tube. Please DO NOT provide more stool than the pea -sized 
requested.  
c. Close and  tighten the lid firmly.   
d. Shake the closed tube by inverting it a few times to completely immerse the stool  
sample in the liquid, and then tap the bottom of the closed tube on a table top to ensure that 
the sample is at the bottom of the tube.  
3. Disp ose of the bowl, the seat, and the gloves in the trash. Wash your hands with soap and 
water.  
4. Return both your collection tubes to the research coordinator.  
 

 23 Appendix 3 . 
Charter, Data and Safety Monitoring Board for   
Fecal Microbiota Transplantation  for the Treatment  of Obesity: An Investigation of the microbial 
contribution to pathogenesis of disease  
 
 
January 2016  
 
1. Introduction  
This Charter is for the Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) for the study “ Fecal Microbiota 
Transplantation  for the Treatment  of Obesity: An Investigation of the microbial contribution 
to pathogenesis of disease .” 
 
 The DSMB will consist of a team of clinical researchers who are unaffiliated with this project.  
These individuals will not be investigators in this study a nd will be experienced in conducting 
and interpreting clinical trials; they will review the efficacy and safety endpoints at the below 
stated time points.  There will be 3 members on the DSMB consisting of at least two 
gastroenterologists and one Ethics  specialist.  The members of the DSMB are:  
 
Dr. Walter Chan ( Gastroen terology – BWH , Chair)  
Dr. Marvin Ryou (Gastroenterology – BWH ) 
Dr. Andrew Courtwright (Pulmonary/Ethics -BWH ) 
 
The Charter is intended to be a living document.  The DSMB may wish to review i t at regular 
intervals to determine whether any changes in procedure are needed.  
 
2. Responsibilities of the DSMB  
 
The DSMB is responsible for safeguarding the interests of study participants, assessing the 
safety and efficacy of study procedures, and for mo nitoring the overall conduct of the study.   
 
The DSMB is an independent group advisory and is required to provide recommendations about 
starting, continuing, and stopping the study.  In addition, the DSMB is asked to make 
recommendations, as appropriate, to the about:  
• Selection, recruitment, and retention of participants  
• Adherence to protocol requirements  
• Completeness, quality, and analysis of measurements  
• Amendments to the study protocol and consent forms  
• Participant safety  
• Notification of and referral f or abnormal findings  
 
 
3.  Scheduling, Timing, and Organization of Meetings  
Data and Safety Monitoring Meetings  
The DSMB will meet a minimum of 2 times:  after treatment of the first 10  subjects, and after 
treat ment of all 20  subjects. In addition  the DSMB may convene additional meetings if necessary 
 24 to ensure the ongoing monitoring and safety of the subjects treated with FMT. Any serious AEs 
also will be evaluated by the DSMB for review and determination of wh ether the trial should 
continue . An ex ample of the DSMB meeting minutes are at the end of this document. The study 
will not proceed at each of these time points until the DSMB gives approval to continue.  
 
Safety Reporting  
In accordance with applicable policies of the BWH/PHRC  Institutional Review Board (IRB), the 
investigator -sponsor will report, to the IRB, any observed or volunteered Unanticipated Problem 
that is determined to be 1) unexpected); 2) related or at least possibly related to study 
participation; and 3) suggests that the research places subjects or others at a risk of unknown 
harm or addition/increased frequency of harms (including physical, psychological, economic, 
legal, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized. Unanticipated problems may be 
adver se events, protocol deviations, noncompliance or other types of problems, but MUST meet 
all of the criteria listed above. Unanticipated problem reports will be submitted to the IRB in 
accordance with the respective IRB procedures.  
Applicable unanticipated  problems will be reported to the IRB as soon as possible and, 
in no event, later than 10 calendar days following the investigator -sponsor’s receipt of the 
respective information.  For Internal Fatal/Life -Threatening Unanticipated Problems, the PI 
should n otify the IRB Chair by phone immediately and consider voluntarily halting subject 
enrollment.  
Follow -up information to reported adverse event will be submitted to the IRB as soon as 
the relevant information is available.  If the results of the investigator ’s follow -up investigation 
show that an adverse event that was initially determined to not require reporting to the IRB 
does, in fact, meet the requirements for reporting; the investigator will report the unanticipated 
problem to the IRB as soon as possibl e, but in no event later than 10 calendar days, after the 
determination was made.  
 
 
4. Grading and Attribution Methods for Adverse Events  
 
 Grading Scale  
0 No adverse event or within normal limits  
1 Mild adverse event – did not require treatment  
2 Moderate adver se event – resolved with treatment  
3 Severe adverse event – resulted in inability to carry on normal activities and 
required professional medical attention  
4 Life threatening or disabling adverse event  
5 Fatal adverse event  
 
Attribution Scale  
Definite:  The adverse event is clearly related to the study drug  
Probable:  The adverse event is likely related to the study drug  
Possible:  The adverse event may be related to the study drug  
Unlikely:  The adverse event is doubtfully related to the study drug  
Unrelated:  The adverse event is clearly not related to the study drug  
 
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Meeting Minutes  
 25  
Date:  
 
Title of Protocol/IRB Number:  
 
Principal Investigator/Designee:   
 
Recommendations:  
 
□ Continue the trial without modification  
 
□ Accrual:  
□ Recommend study be closed because of slow accrual  
□ Continue to monitor study, but consider closure because of slow accrual  
 
□ Recommend study is amended/changed:  
□ For patient safety reasons  
□ Rate of adverse events  
□ Early stopping of inferior therapy  
□ To extend accrual because of an event rate slower than expected  
 
□ Other: _________________________________________________________  
 
Signature/Principal Investigator or Designee:  
 
_______________________________________________  
DSMB  meetings will be held at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital. The purpose of the first 
meeting is to review and discuss this charter and process.  
 
  The DSMB also will review adverse event data, other safety data, quality and completeness of 
study data, and enrollment data at each meeting to ensure proper trial conduct.  At intervals, as 
noted above, the DSMB will also review formal interim analyses of the primary end point.  
 
 
5.  Reports of DSMB Deliberations  
 
• Initial summary:  The Director or designee will review this summary and approve or 
disapprove the recommendation(s), or request additional information.  The 
recommendations will then be sent to the DCC, and the clinical investigators.   
 
• Action plan:  If the DSMB’s  recommendations require significant ch anges or follow -up, 
the BWH  IRB staff will prepare an action plan outlining the steps required to implement 
the recommendations.  
 
• Formal minutes:  The DSMB Chair is responsible within 30 days of the meeting or call to 
present minutes to the IRB.  These min utes are subject to FOIA requests and are 
prepared accordingly to summarize the key points of the discussion and debate, 
requests for additional information, response of the investigators to previous 
 26 recommendations, and the recommendations from the curren t meeting.  These minutes 
will be reviewed by IRB staff, key study personnel before being forwarded to the DSMB 
Chair for final review and approval.  The DSMB Chair may sign the minutes or indicate 
approval electronically via email.  Then, the minutes are sent to the BWH  IRB for 
approval. Subsequently, the minutes are sent back to the IRB and the relevant 
investigators, and included in the materials for the subsequent DSMB meeting to be 
approved by voice vote at that meeting.  Once they have been voted and approved by 
the Board, they are considered Final . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 27 Appendix 4 . 
Toxicity Grading Scale for Adverse Events  
 
         PARAMETER  GRADE 1 MILD  GRADE 2 MODERATE  GRADE 3 SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
 
ESTIMATING SEVERITY GRADE  
Clinical adver se 
event NOT  
identifi ed 
elsewhere in t his 
DAIDS AE  Grading 
Table  Symptoms  causing 
no or minim al 
interference  
with usu al 
social & 
functio nal acti vities Symptoms causing 
greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Symptoms causing 
inability to perform 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Symptoms causing 
inability to perform 
basic self -care 
funct ions OR Medi cal 
or operative 
intervention indicated 
to prev ent perm anent 
impair ment, 
persistent dis ability, 
or death  
SYSTEMIC  
Acute systemic Localized urti caria Localized urti caria 
with Gener alized urticaria  Acute an aphylaxis OR  allergic reaction (wheals) with no 
medi cal 
inter vention 
indicated medi cal inter vention  
indicated OR  Mild 
angioedema with 
no 
medi cal inter vention  
indicated OR Angioedem a with 
medi cal 
inter vention 
indicated OR  
Symptomatic  mild  
bron chospasm Life-threatening 
bron chospasm OR 
laryngeal edema 
Chills Symptoms  causing 
no or minim al 
interference  
with usu al 
social & 
functio nal acti vities Symptoms causing 
greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Symptoms causing 
inability to perform 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  NA 
Fatigue  Symptoms  causing 
no Symptoms causing  Symptoms causing  Incapa citating fatig ue/ 
Malai se or minim al 
interference  with 
usual soci al & 
functio nal 
activities greater th an minimal  
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  inability to perform 
usual 
social &  
funct ional 
activities  malai se symptoms 
caus ing inability to 
perform ba sic self -
care functions  
Fever (nona xillary) 37.7 – 38.6°C 38.7 – 39.3°C 39.4 – 40.5°C > 40. 5°C 
Pain ( indicate 
body site)  
DO NOT  use for  
pain due to  
injection (See 
Injecti on Site 
React ions: 
Injection site pa in) 
See al so 
Headache, 
Arthral gia, and 
Myalgia Pain c ausing no or 
minim al 
interf erence with 
usual social &  
functio nal 
activities Pain c ausing greater 
than mi nimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Pain c ausing inability 
to perform us ual 
social &  functio nal 
activities Disa bling p ain caus ing 
inability to perform 
basic self -care 
funct ions OR 
Hospi talization  (other 
than eme rgency room 
visit) indicated  
 28 PARAMETER  GRADE 1 MILD  GRADE 2 MODERATE  GRADE 3 SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Unin tentional 
weight loss NA 5 – 9% loss in bo dy 
weight from 
baseline 10 – 19% loss in 
body weight from 
baseline ≥ 20% loss in body 
weight from b aseline 
OR Aggres sive 
intervent ion indi cated 
[e.g.,  tube feed ing or 
total  
parenteral  nutr ition 
(TPN)]   
INFECTION  
Infection (a ny 
other than HIV  
infect ion) Localized, no 
systemic 
antimicrob ial 
treatment in dicated 
AND  Symptoms 
caus ing no or 
minim al 
interference  with 
usual soci al & 
functio nal acti vities Systemic  
antimicrob ial 
treatment in dicated 
OR Symptoms  
caus ing gr eater 
than  
minim al interf erence  
with usual social &  
functio nal acti vities Systemic  
antimicrob ial 
treatment in dicated 
AND Symptoms 
causi ng inability to 
perform usu al 
social &  funct ional 
activities OR 
Operati ve 
interv ention (o ther 
than simple incision 
and dra inage) 
indicated Life-threatening 
cons equences  
(e.g.,  septic shock)  
 
INJECTI ON SITE REAC TIONS  
Injecti on site pain 
(pain without 
touch ing) Or  
Tenderness  (pain 
when area is 
touched) Pain/te nderness 
caus ing no or 
minim al limitati on 
of use of 
limb  Pain/te nderness 
limiti ng use  of limb 
OR Pain/te nderness 
caus ing gr eater than 
minim al 
interf erence with 
usual social &  
functio nal acti vities Pain/te nderness 
caus ing inability to 
perform us ual social 
& functio nal 
activities Pain/te nderness 
causi ng inability to 
perform basic self -
care funct ion OR 
Hospi talization  (other 
than eme rgency room 
visit) indi cated for 
man agem ent of 
pain/ten derne ss Injecti on site r eaction ( localized) 
 Adult > 18 years Erythema 
OR 
Indurat ion 
of 5x5 cm – 9x9 cm  
(or 25 cm2 – 81cm2) Erythema OR 
Indurat ion OR 
Edema  
> 9 cm a ny diameter  
(or >  81 cm2) Ulcerat ion OR 
Seco ndary infection  
OR Phlebitis OR 
Sterile abscess OR 
Drainage Necrosis 
(involving dermis 
and d eeper 
tissue)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 29 PARAMETER  GRADE 1 MILD  GRADE 2 
MODERATE  GRADE 3 SEVERE  GRADE 4 
POTENTIALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Pruritis associated 
with injection See 
also Skin: Pruritis 
(itching - no skin 
lesions)  Itching localized to 
injection site AND 
Relieved 
spontaneously or 
with < 48 hours 
treatment  Itching beyond the 
injection site but 
not generalized OR 
Itching localized to 
injection site 
requiring ≥ 48 
hours treatment  Generalized itching 
causing inability to 
perform usual social 
& functional 
activities  NA  
SKIN – DERMATOLOGICAL  
Alopecia  Thinning 
detectable by 
study participant 
(or by caregiver for 
young children and 
disabled adults)  Thinning or patchy 
hair loss detectable 
by health care 
provider  Complete hair loss  NA  
Cutaneous reaction 
– rash  Localized macular 
rash  Diffuse macular, 
maculopapular, or 
morbilliform rash 
OR Target lesions  Diffuse macular, 
maculopapular, or 
morbilliform rash 
with vesicles or 
limited number of 
bullae OR Superficial 
ulcerations of 
mucous membrane 
limited to one site  Extensive or 
generaliz ed bullous 
lesions OR Stevens -
Johnson syndrome 
OR Ulceration of 
mucous membrane 
involving two or 
more distinct 
mucosal sites OR 
Toxic epidermal 
necrolysis (TEN)  
Hyperpigmentation  Slight or localized  Marked or 
generalized  NA  NA  
Hypopigmentation  Slight or localized  Marked or 
generalized  NA  NA  
Pruritis (itching – no 
skin lesions) (See 
also Injection Site 
Reactions: Pruritis 
associated with 
injection)  Itching causing no 
or minimal 
interference with 
usual social & 
functional 
activities  Itching  causing 
greater than 
minimal 
interference with 
usual social & 
functional activities  Itching causing 
inability to perform 
usual social & 
functional activities  NA  
CARDIOVASCULAR  
Cardiac arrhythmia 
(general) (By ECG 
or physical exam)  Asymptomatic 
AND No 
intervention 
indicated  Asymptomatic AND 
Non -urgent 
medical 
intervention 
indicated  Symptomatic, non -
lifethreatening AND 
Non -urgent medical 
intervention 
indicated  Life-threatening 
arrhythmia OR 
Urgent intervention 
indicated  
Cardiac -
ischemia/infarction  NA  NA  Symptomatic 
ischemia (stable Unstable angina OR 
Acute myocar  
 30 angina) OR Testing 
consistent with 
ischemia  
 
 
  
PARAMETER  GRADE 1 MILD  GRADE 2 MODERATE  GRADE 3 SEVERE               GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Hemorrhage 
(signifi cant 
acute bl ood 
loss)  NA Symptomatic  AND 
No transfusion 
indicated  Symptomatic  AND 
Transfusion  of ≤ 2 
units pack ed RBCs 
(for child ren ≤  10 
cc/kg)  indicated Life-threatening 
hypotension OR 
Transfusion  of > 2 
units pack ed RBCs 
(for child ren > 10 
cc/kg)  indicated Hypert ension 
 Adult > 18 years 
(with repeat 
testing at  same 
visit)  140 – 159 
mmHg systolic  
OR 
90 – 99 
mmHg 
diast olic 160 – 179 
mmHg systolic  
OR 
100 – 109 
mmHg diast olic ≥ 180 mm Hg systo lic 
OR 
≥ 110 mmHg diastolic  Life-threatening 
cons equences  (e.g.,  
mali gnant 
hypertensi on) OR 
Hospit alization 
indicated (o ther than 
emer gency room 
visit)  Hypotension NA Symptomatic, 
corrected  with 
oral fluid 
replacement Symptomatic,  IV 
fluids indi cated Shock re quiring use 
of vasop ressors or 
mech anical 
assistance to  
maintain blood 
pressu re Perica rdial effusion  Asympto matic,  
small effusion 
requiring no 
intervention  Asympto matic,  
mode rate or 
larger effusion 
requiring no 
intervention  Effusion  with non-life 
threate ning 
physiologic 
cons equences  OR 
Effusion  with non-
urgent intervention 
indicated  Life-threatening 
cons equences  (e.g.,  
tampo nade) OR 
Urgent intervention 
indicated  Prolonged PR interval  
 Adult > 18 years  PR interval  
0.21 – 0.25 sec PR interval  
> 0.25 sec  Type II 2nd degree 
AV block OR 
Vent ricular  pause > 
3.0 sec  Complete AV  block  
 
  
PARAMETER  GRADE 1 MILD  GRADE 2 MODERATE  GRADE 3 SEVERE             GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Prolonged QTc 
 Adult > 18 years  Asympto matic,  
QTc interv al 0.45 
– 0.47 sec OR 
Increase interv al 
< 0.03 sec abo ve 
baseline Asympto matic,  
QTc interv al 0.48 
– 0.49 sec OR 
Increase in 
interv al 0.03 – 
0.05 sec abo ve 
baseline Asympto matic,  QTc 
interv al ≥ 0.50  sec 
OR Increase in 
interval 
≥ 0.06 sec 
above baseline Life-threatening 
cons equences,  e.g. 
Torsade  de p ointes  or 
other asso ciated 
serious ventricular 
dysrhythmia 
 31 Thrombosis/ embolis
m NA Deep vein 
thrombosis  AND No 
intervention 
indicated (e .g., 
antic oagulation, 
lysis filter,  invasi ve 
proc edure)  Deep vein 
thrombosis  AND 
Intervent ion 
indicated (e .g., 
antic oagulation, 
lysis filter,  invasi ve 
proc edure)  Embolic  event  
(e.g.,  pulmonary 
embolism, life -
threaten ing 
thrombus)  
Vasov agal episode 
(assoc iated  with a 
proc edure  of any 
kind) Present  without 
loss of  
consciousness  Present  with 
transient loss of  
consciousness  NA NA 
Ventricular 
dysfunction 
(con gestive 
heart failu re) NA Asympto matic 
diagnostic f inding 
AND intervention 
indicated  New onset  with 
symptoms  OR 
Worsen ing 
symptomatic 
congestive heart 
failure  Life-threatening 
congestive heart 
failure  
 
GASTROINTESTINAL  
Anor exia Loss of  appetite 
without 
decr eased oral 
intake  Loss of  appetite 
assoc iated  with 
decr eased  oral 
intake without 
signifi cant weight 
loss Loss of  appetite 
assoc iated  with 
signifi cant weight 
loss Life-threatening 
cons equences  OR 
Aggres sive 
intervent ion 
indicated [e.g.,  tube 
feed ing or total 
parenteral  nutr ition 
(TPN)]  Comment: Please note t hat, while the gr ading sca le prov ided for  Unintent ional Weight Loss m ay be used as a 
guideline when grading anorexia, this is not a req uirem ent and sho uld not be used as  a substitute for  clinical 
judgm ent. Ascites  Asympto matic Symptomatic  AND 
Interventi on 
indicat ed (e.g.,  
diuretics  or 
thera peutic 
para centesis)  Symptomatic  
despite 
intervention  Life-
threatening 
cons equences  
 
 
 
PARAMETER   GRADE 1  
MILD  GRADE 2  
MODERATE  GRADE  3 
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENTIALLY LIFE -
THREATENING  
Cholec ystitis  NA  Symptomatic  AND 
Medi cal 
inter vention 
indicated Radiologic, 
endosc opic, or 
operative 
intervent ion indi cated Life-threatening 
cons equences  
(e.g.,  sepsis or 
perforation)  
Const ipation NA  Persistent 
constipati on 
requiring regular 
use 
of dieta ry 
modifi cation
s, 
laxatives, or enemas  Obstipati on with 
man ual evacuation 
indicated Life-threatening 
cons equences  
(e.g.,  obstructi on) 
Diarr hea 
Adult > 18 years  
 Transient  or 
intermittent 
episodes of  
unformed s tools 
OR Increase of ≤  3 
stools over 
baseline per 24 -
hour period Persistent e pisodes 
of unform ed to 
watery stools OR 
Increase of  
4 – 6 stools o ver 
baseline per 24-
hour per iod Bloody diarrhea OR 
Increase of  ≥ 7 
stools per 24 -hour 
period OR IV  fluid 
replacement 
indicated Life-threatening 
cons equences  
(e.g.,  hypotensi ve 
shock)  
 32 Dysphagia- 
Odynophagi
a Symptomatic  but 
able to  eat usu al 
diet Symptoms causing 
alter ed die tary 
intake without 
medic al 
intervention 
indicated  Symptoms causing 
sever ely alter ed 
dieta ry intake  with 
medical intervention 
indicated  Life-threatening 
reduct ion in  oral 
intake 
Mucositis/sto matitis  
(clinical exam ) 
Indicate site 
(e.g., larynx, 
oral) 
See Genit ourinary for 
Vulvo vaginitis  Erythema of  
the mucosa  Patchy 
pseudome mbranes 
or ulce rations  Conf luent 
pseudome mbranes 
or ulcerations OR 
Mucosal bl eeding 
with minor trauma  Tissue  necrosis OR 
Diffuse 
spontaneous 
mucos al bleeding 
OR Life-threatening 
cons equences  (e.g.,  
aspiration, c hoking)  See al so 
Dysphagia- 
Odynophagia and 
Proctitis  Nausea Transient  (< 24 
hours) or 
intermittent  nausea 
with no or m inimal 
interfer ence with 
oral intake  Persistent n ausea 
result ing in 
decreas ed oral 
intake for  24 – 48 
hours  Persistent n ausea 
resulting in minimal 
oral intake for  > 48 
hours  
OR Aggressi ve 
rehydration 
indicated  
(e.g.,  IV fluids)  Life-threatening 
cons equences  
(e.g.,  hypotensi ve 
shock)  
  
PARAMETER   GRADE  1 
MILD  GRADE 2  
MOD ERATE GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Pancr eatitis  NA  Symptomatic  AND 
Hospi talization  not 
indicated (o ther 
than emer gency 
room visit)  Symptomatic  AND 
Hospi talization  
indicated (other than  
emerg ency room 
visit)  Life-threatening 
cons equences  
(e.g.,  circula tory 
failure, 
hemor rhage, 
sepsis)  Proctitis ( funct ional- Rectal discom fort Symptoms causing  Symptoms causing  Life-threatening symptomati c) AND No intervention greater th an minimal  inability to perform 
usual cons equences  (e.g.,  
Also see  indicated interfer ence with 
usual social &  funct ional perforat ion) 
Mucositis/sto matitis    social &  funct ional activities OR Operati ve  
for clinical exam   activities OR Medical  
interv ention 
indicated  interv ention indicated   
Vomiti ng Transient  or 
intermittent 
vomiting with no 
or m inimal 
interfer ence with 
oral intake  Frequ ent episodes 
of vomiting  with no 
or mild 
dehydration Persistent vo miting 
result ing in 
orthostatic  
hypotension OR 
Aggres sive 
rehydration indi cated 
(e.g., IV fluids)  Life-threatening 
cons equences  
(e.g.,  hypotensi ve 
shock)  
 
NEURO LOGIC 
Alteration in  Alterati on cau sing no Alterati on cau sing Alterati on cau sing Beha vior potentially pers onality-behavior or minim al greater th an minimal  inability to perform 
usual harmful to  self or 
others  or in mood (e.g.,  interference  with interfer ence with 
usual social &  funct ional (e.g.,  suicidal and  
agitat ion, a nxiety, usual soci al & social &  funct ional activities  homic idal ideation or  
depression, man ia, functio nal acti vities activities   attempt,  acute  
psychosis)     psychosis) OR Caus ing 
inability to perform 
basic self -care 
funct ions 
 33 Altered M ental 
Status  
For Dement ia, see 
Cognitive and 
behavio ral/att entio
nal distur bance 
(includ ing dem entia 
and 
attention  
deficit 
disorder) Changes causing 
no or minim al 
interference  with 
usual soci al & 
functio nal 
activities Mild le thargy or 
somn olence causing 
greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Confu sion, m emory 
impair ment, lethargy, 
or somn olence 
causing inability to 
perform usu al social 
& funct ional activities  Delirium OR  
obtu ndation, OR coma  
Atax ia Asympto matic 
ataxia detecta ble 
on exam OR 
Minimal a taxia 
caus ing no or 
minim al 
interference  with 
usual soci al & 
functio nal acti vities Symptomatic  
ataxia caus ing 
greater than 
minim al 
interf erence with 
usual social &  
functio nal 
activities Symptomatic  ataxia 
caus ing inability to 
perform us ual social 
& functio nal 
activities Disa bling at axia 
caus ing in ability to 
perform basic self -
care funct ions 
   
PARAMETER   GRADE  1 
MILD   GRADE 2   
MOD ERATE GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Cognitive and 
behavio ral/att entio
nal distur bance 
(includ ing dem entia 
and 
attention  
deficit 
disorder) Disa bility causing 
no or minim al 
interference  with 
usual soci al & 
functio nal 
activities OR 
Speci alized 
resour ces not 
indicated Disa bility causing 
greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities 
OR Spec ialized 
resources on part -
time basis indi cated Disa bility causing 
inability to perform 
usual social &  
funct ional activities 
OR 
Spec ialized 
resources on a full -
time basis indi cated Disa bility causing 
inability to perform 
basic self -care 
funct ions OR 
Institution alization 
indicated 
CNS isc hemia  
(acute)  NA  NA  Transient  
ischemic attack  Cerebral vas cular 
accident (CVA,  
stroke) with 
neurological defi cit Headache Symptoms causing 
no or minim al 
interference  
with usu al 
social & 
functio nal acti vities Symptoms causing 
greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Symptoms causing 
inability to perform 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Symptoms causing 
inability to perform 
basic self -care 
funct ions OR 
Hospi talization  
indicated (other than  
emerg ency room 
visit) OR He adache 
with signifi cant 
impairment of  
alert ness or other 
neurologic fun ction Insomn ia NA  Difficul ty sleeping 
caus ing gr eater 
than minim al 
interf erence with 
usual social &  
functio nal 
activities Difficul ty sleeping 
caus ing inability to 
perform us ual social 
& functio nal 
activities Disa bling in somnia 
caus ing inability to 
perform ba sic self -
care functions  
Neuromusc ul
ar weakness  
(includ ing myopathy 
& 
neuropathy) Asympto matic 
with decr eased 
strength  on exam 
OR Minim al 
muscle  weakness  
caus ing no or 
minim al 
interference  with 
usual soci al & 
functio nal acti vities Muscle  weakness 
caus ing gr eater 
than minim al 
interf erence with 
usual social &  
functio nal 
activities Muscle  weakness 
caus ing inability to 
perform us ual social 
& functio nal 
activities Disa bling mus cle 
weakness ca using 
inability to perform 
basic self -care 
funct ions OR 
Respi ratory muscle 
weakness im pairing 
venti lation   
 34   
PARAMETER   GRADE  1 
MILD  GRADE 2  
MOD ERATE  GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Neurosen sory Asympto matic with Senso ry altera tion or  Senso ry altera tion or  Disa bling sen sory alterat ion (in cluding senso ry alterat ion on  parest hesia causing parest hesia causing alterat ion or 
paresthes ia parest hesia and exam or mi nimal  greater th an minimal  inability to perform 
usual caus ing inability to 
painful neuropathy) parest hesia causing 
no or mi nimal 
interference  with 
usual soci al & 
functio nal 
activities interfer ence with 
usual 
social &  
funct ional 
activities  social &  funct ional 
activities  perform ba sic self -care  
functions  
Seizu re: (new onset ) NA  1 seizu re 2 – 4 seizu res Seizu res of  any kind – Adult ≥ 18 years      which are pr olonged, 
See al so Sei zure:      repetiti ve (e.g.,  status  
(known pre-existing       epilepticus), or difficult  
seizu re diso rder)      to control (e.g.,  
refracto ry epilepsy) 
Seizu re: (known 
pre- existi ng 
seizu re disorder) 
– Adult ≥ 18 years 
For worsening of 
existi ng ep ilepsy 
the gra des sh ould 
be bas ed on an 
increase from 
previ ous level of 
control to  any of 
these levels.  NA  Increas ed fre quency 
of pre-existing 
seizures (non -
repetiti ve) without 
change in sei zure 
character OR 
Infrequ ent break- 
throu gh sei zures  
while on stab le 
medication  
in a pre viously 
contro lled 
seizure diso rder Change in seizure 
character from  
baseline either in 
duration or quali ty 
(e.g.,  severi ty or 
focali ty) Seizu res of  any kind 
which are 
prolonged, 
repetiti ve (e.g.,  
status  epilepticus), 
or difficult to  
control (e.g.,  
refracto ry epilepsy) 
Syncope (not 
assoc iated  with 
a proc edure)  NA  Present  NA  NA 
Vertigo  Vertigo c ausing no 
or minim al 
interf erence with 
usual social &  
functio nal acti vities Vertigo c ausing 
greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Vertigo c ausing 
inability to perform 
usual soc ial 
& function al activities  Disa bling vert igo 
caus ing inability to 
perform ba sic self -
care functions                                                      
 35 PARAMETER  GRADE  1 
MILD  GRADE 2  
MOD ERATE GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING   
 
RESPIRATORY  
Bronc hospasm 
(acute)  FEV1  or peak 
flow redu ced to  
70 – 80% FEV1  or peak fl ow 
50 – 69% FEV1  or peak fl ow 
25 – 49% Cyanosis OR FEV1  
or peak fl ow < 25% 
OR Intubati on 
Dyspnea or re spirato ry distress 
 Adult ≥ 18 years Dyspnea on 
exertion with no 
or m inimal 
interference  with 
usual soci al & 
functio nal 
activities Dyspnea on 
exertion caus ing 
greater than 
minim al 
interf erence with 
usual social &  
functio nal 
activities Dyspnea at  rest 
causing in ability to 
perform usu al social 
& funct ional activities  Respi ratory failure 
with venti latory 
support indi cated 
 
MUS CULOSKELET AL 
Arthral gia 
See al so Arthr itis Joint p ain causing 
no or minim al 
interference  with 
usual soci al & 
functio nal 
activities Joint p ain causing 
greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Joint p ain causing 
inability to perform 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Disa bling joint pa in 
caus ing inability to 
perform ba sic self -
care functions  
Arthritis  
See al so Arthralg ia Stiffness  or joint 
swelling caus ing no  
or minim al 
interf erence with 
usual social &  
functio nal acti vities Stiffness  or joint 
swelling caus ing 
greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Stiffness  or 
joint swelling 
caus ing 
inability to perform 
usual social &  
funct ional 
activities  Disa bling joint 
stiffness  or swelling 
causing inability to 
perform basic self -
care funct ions 
Bone M ineral Loss 
 Adult ≥ 18 years BMD t -score  
-2.5 to  -1.0 BMD t -score <  -2.5 Pathological 
fracture (includ ing 
loss of vertebr al 
height) Patho logic fra cture  
caus ing life -
threate ning 
cons equences   
Myalgia 
(non-injection site) Muscle pain 
causing no or 
minimal 
interference  with 
usual soci al & 
functio nal 
activities Muscle pain c ausing 
greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Muscle pain c ausing 
inability to perform 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Disa bling mus cle 
pain caus ing inability 
to perform ba sic 
self-care functions   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 36 PARAMETER   GRADE  1 
MILD  GRADE 2  
MOD ERATE GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Osteonecro sis NA  Asympto matic with 
radiographic 
findings AND No 
opera tive 
intervention 
indicated  Symptomatic  bone 
pain with 
radiographic find ings 
OR Operati ve 
intervention 
indicated  Disa bling b one pain  
with rad iographic 
findings caus ing 
inability to perform 
basic self -care 
functions   
GENIT OURINARY 
Cervicitis  Symptoms causing 
no Symptoms causing  Symptoms causing  Symptoms causing  (symptoms ) or minim al greater th an minimal  inability to perform 
usual inability to perform 
basic  (For use in st udies interference  with interfer ence with 
usual social &  funct ional self-care funct ions 
evaluating top ical usual soci al & social &  funct ional activities   
study agents) functio nal acti vities activities    
For other cerv icitis see  Infection: Infection  
(any other t han HIV  
infecti on) 
Cervicitis  Minimal cervi cal Mode rate cerv ical Severe cer vical Epith elial disr uption  (clinical exam ) abnorma lities on abnorma lities on abnorma lities on > 75% total surface  
(For use in st udies exam ination exam ination exam ination 
(erythema,  
evaluating top ical (erythema,  (erythema,  mucopurulent   
study agents) mucopurulent  mucopurulent  discharge, or friab ility)  
For other cerv icitis 
see 
Infection: Infection  
(any other t han HIV  
infecti on) discharge, or friab ility) 
OR 
Epithe lial 
disruption  
< 25% of  total 
surface  discharge, or friab ility) 
OR Epithe lial 
disruption of  25 – 
49%  
total surface  OR Epithe lial disrupt ion 
50 – 75% total  surface   
Inter -menstrual  Spotting observed by Inter -menstrual  Inter -menstru al 
bleeding Hemorr hage with life- bleeding (IMB)  partic ipant OR  bleeding not greater 
in greater in du ration or  threate ning 
hypoten sion  Minim al blood durat ion or a mount  amo unt than usual OR Operative  
 obser ved during than us ual menstrual  menstru al cycle intervention indicated  
 clinical or 
colposcopic  cycle   exam ination 
Urina ry tract  NA  Signs or symptoms  of Signs or symptoms  of Obstruction c ausing 
life- obstruction (e.g.,    urinary tract  urinary tract  
obstruction  threate ning 
stone)    obstructi on without  
hydronephrosis 
or ren al 
dysfunct ion with hydronephrosis 
or 
renal dysfunct ion cons equences  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 37 PARAMETER   GRADE  1 
MILD  GRADE 2  
MOD ERATE GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Vulvo vaginitis  
(symptoms ) 
(Use in studies 
evaluating 
topical stu dy 
agents) 
For other 
vulvo vaginitis see 
Infection: 
Infection (a ny 
other t han HIV  
infecti on) Symptoms  causing 
no or minim al 
interference  
with usu al 
social & 
functio nal acti vities Symptoms causing 
greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Symptoms causing 
inability to perform 
usual social &  
funct ional activities  Symptoms causing 
inability to perform 
basic self -care 
funct ions 
Vulvo vaginitis  
(clinical exam ) 
(Use in studies 
evaluating 
topical stu dy 
agents) 
For other 
vulvo vaginitis see 
Infection: 
Infection (a ny 
other t han HIV  
infecti on) Minimal vaginal 
abnorma lities on 
exam ination OR 
Epith elial 
disruption  
< 25% of  total 
surface  Mode rate vag inal 
abnorma lities on 
exam ination OR 
Epith elial disr uption 
of 
25 - 49% tot al surface  Severe v aginal 
abnorma lities on 
exam ination OR 
Epith elial 
disruption  
50 - 75% tot al surface  Vaginal perfor ation 
OR Epith elial 
disruption  
> 75% total surface  
 
OCULAR/VISUAL  
Uveitis  Asympto matic 
but detecta ble on 
exam  Symptomatic  
anterior uveitis OR 
Medical 
intervention 
indicated  Posterior or pan-
uveitis OR Operative 
intervention 
indicated  Disabl ing vis ual loss 
in affected eye(s) 
Visu al cha nges (from  Visu al cha nges Visu al cha nges Visu al cha nges causing  Disabl ing vis ual loss in  baseline) caus ing no or 
minim al 
interference  with 
usual soci al & 
functio nal 
activities caus ing gr eater than  
minim al 
interf erence with 
usual social &  
functio nal 
activities inability to perform 
usual 
social &  
funct ional 
activities  affected eye(s) 
 
END OCRINE/MET ABOLIC  
Abnor mal fat Detecta ble by stu dy Detecta ble on 
physical Disfigu ring OR Obvious  NA accumulation  partic ipant (or  by exam by health care  changes on casual  (e.g.,  back of  neck,  caregiver for young  prov ider visual inspection   breasts, ab domen)  child ren and 
disabled 
adults)    
Diabetes mellitus NA  New onset without 
need to initiate 
medi cation OR 
Modifi cation of 
current medi cations 
to reg ain glu cose 
control  New onset  with 
initiat ion of  
medicat ion indicated 
OR Diabetes 
uncontrol led despite 
treatment 
mod ification  Life-threatening 
cons equences  
(e.g.,  ketoac idosis, 
hyperosmo lar 
non- ketotic 
coma)   
 
 
  
 38 PARAMETER  GRADE  1 
MILD  GRADE 2  
MOD ERATE GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Gynecomastia  Detectable by 
study partic ipant 
or care giver (for  
young child ren and 
disabled ad ults) Detecta ble on 
physical exam by 
health care prov ider Disfigu ring OR 
Obvious on casual 
visual ins pection  NA 
Hypert hyroidism Asympto matic Symptomatic  
causing greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities 
OR Th yroid 
supp ression therapy 
indicated Symptoms causing 
inability to perform 
usual social &  
funct ional activities 
OR Unc ontrol led 
despite treatment 
mod ification  Life-threatening 
cons equences  
(e.g.,  thyroid 
storm)  
Hypothyroidism Asympto matic Symptomatic  
causing greater th an 
minimal 
interfer ence with 
usual social &  
funct ional activities 
OR Th yroid 
replacem ent 
thera py indi cated Symptoms causing 
inability to perform 
usual social &  
funct ional activities 
OR Unc ontrol led 
despite treatment 
mod ification  Life-threatening 
cons equences  
(e.g.,  myxedema 
coma) 
Lipoatro phy 
(e.g.,  fat loss f rom 
the face,  
extremities, 
buttocks)  Detecta ble by 
study partic ipant 
(or by caregiver for 
young child ren and 
disabled ad ults) Detecta ble on 
physical exam by 
health care prov ider Disfigu ring OR 
Obvious on casual 
visual ins pection  NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 39  
LABORA TORY 
PARAMETER  GRADE 1  
MILD  GRADE 2  
MOD ERATE GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
 
HEMA TOLOGY             Standard  International  Units are listed in italics  
Abso lute CD4+  count  
– Adult and Pediatric  
> 13 years 
(HIV NEG ATIVE ONLY)  300 – 400/mm3 
300 – 400/µL 200 – 299/m m3 
200 – 299/µL 100 – 199/mm3 
100 – 199/µL < 100/mm3 
< 100/µL 
Abso lute 
lymphocyte count  
– Adult and Pediatric  
> 13 years 
(HIV NEG ATIVE ONLY)  600 – 650/mm3 
0.600 x 109 – 
0.650 x 109/L 500 – 599/mm3 
0.500 x 109 – 
0.599 x 109/L 350 – 499/mm3 
0.350 x 109 – 
0.499 x 109/L < 350/mm3 
< 0.350 x 1 09/L 
Comment:  Values in chi ldren ≤ 13 years are  not given for  the two pa rameters above because the  absolute counts 
are vari able. Abso lute neutrop hil count (ANC)  
 Adult and Pediatric, 
> 7 da ys 1,000 – 1,300 /mm3 
1.000 x 109 – 
1.300 x 109/L 750 – 999/mm3 
0.750  x 109 – 
0.999 x 109/L 500 – 749/mm3 
0.500  x 109 – 
0.749 x 109/L < 500/mm3 
< 0.500 x  109/L 
Comment:  Parameter ch anged from “Infant,  < 1 day” to “Infant,  ≤1 day” 
Fibrino gen, decreas ed 100 – 200 mg /dL 
1.00 – 2.00 g/L  
OR 
0.75 – 0.99 x LLN 75 – 99 mg /dL 
0.75 – 0.99 g/L  
OR 
0.50 – 0.74 x LLN 50 – 74 mg /dL 
0.50 – 0.74 g/L  
OR 
0.25 – 0.49 x LLN < 50 mg/dL  
< 0.50 g/L  
OR 
< 0.25 x LLN 
OR 
Associated  with 
gross bl eeding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 40  
 
 
LABORA TORY 
PARAMETER  GRADE 1  
MILD  GRADE 2  
MOD ERATE GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE 
THREATENING  
Hem oglobin ( Hgb) 
Comment:  The Hgb v alues in mmol/L ha ve changed because the c onversion factor  used to convert g/dL to  mmol/L 
has been 
changed from 0.155 to  0.6206 (the most  common ly used conver sion fact or). For grading  Hgb res ults o btained by 
an analytic method  with a conver sion fac tor other th an 0.62 06, the resu lt must  be converted to  g/dL using the 
appropriate c onvers ion factor  for that lab. 
 Adult and Pediatric  
≥ 57 da ys 
(HIV  POSITIVE  ONLY) 8.5 – 10.0 g/ dL 
5.24 – 6.23 mmol/L 7.5 – 8.4 g/dL  
4.62–5.23  mmol/L  6.50 – 7.4 g/ dL 
4.03–4.61  mmol/L  < 6.5 g/dL  
< 4.03 mmol/L 
 Adult and Pediatric 
≥ 57 da ys 
(HIV NEG ATIVE 
ONLY)  10.0 – 10.9 g/dL 
6.18 – 6.79 mmol/L 
OR 
Any decr ease 
2.5 – 3.4 g/dL  
1.58 – 2.13 mmol/L 9.0 – 9.9 g/dL  
5.55 - 6.17  mmol/L  
OR 
Any decr ease 
3.5 – 4.4 g/dL  
2.14 – 2.78 mmol/L 7.0 – 8.9 g/dL  
4.34 - 5.54  mmol/L  
OR 
Any decr ease 
≥ 4.5 g/dL  
> 2.79 mmol/L < 7.0 g/dL  
< 4.34 mmol/L 
Comment :  The decr ease is a  decrea se from base line 
Internati onal 
Normali zed Ratio of  
proth romb in time 
(INR)  1.1 – 1.5 x ULN 1.6 – 2.0 x ULN 2.1 – 3.0 x ULN > 3.0 x ULN  
Methem oglobin 5.0 – 10.0% 10.1  – 15.0% 15.1 – 20.0% > 20.0%  
Prothrom bin Time (PT) 1.1 – 1.25  x ULN 1.26 – 1.50 x ULN 1.51 – 3.00 x ULN > 3.00 x ULN 
Partial Throm boplastin  
Time ( PTT) 1.1 – 1.66  x ULN 1.67 – 2.33 x ULN 2.34 – 3.00 x ULN > 3.00 x ULN 
Plate lets, decreas ed 100, 000 – 
124, 999/mm3 
100. 000 x 1 09 – 
124. 999 x 1 09/L 50,0 00 – 
99,9 99/mm3 
50.0 00 x 109 – 
99.9 99 x 109/L 25,0 00 – 
49,9 99/mm3 
25.0 00 x 109 – 
49.9 99 x 109/L < 25,000/mm3 
< 25.000 x 109/L 
WBC,  decrea sed 2,000 – 2,500 /mm3 
2.000 x 109 – 
2.500 x 109/L 1,500 – 1,999 /mm3 
1.500 x 109 – 
1.999 x 109/L 1,000 – 1,499 /mm3 
1.000 x 109 – 
1.499 x 109/L < 1,000/mm3 
< 1.000 x 109/L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 41  
LABORA TORY 
PARAMETER  GRADE 1  
MILD  GRADE 2   
MOD ERATE GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
 
CHEMIS TRIES              Standard  International  Units are listed in italics  
Acido sis NA pH < normal, but ≥ 
7.3 pH < 7.3  without 
life- threate ning 
cons equences  pH < 7.3  with 
life- threate ning 
cons equences  
Album in, ser um, low 3.0 g/dL – < LLN 
30 g/L – < LLN  2.0 – 2.9 g/dL  
20 – 29 g/L < 2.0 g/dL  
< 20 g/L  NA 
Alkal ine P hosphatase  1.25 – 2.5 x ULN† 2.6 – 5.0 x ULN† 5.1 – 10.0  x ULN† > 10.0 x ULN† 
Alkalosis  NA pH > normal, but ≤ 
7.5 pH > 7.5  without 
life- threate ning 
cons equences  pH > 7.5  with 
life- threate ning 
cons equences  
ALT (SGP T) 1.25 – 2.5 x ULN 2.6 – 5.0 x ULN 5.1 – 10.0 x ULN > 10.0 x ULN 
AST (SGOT)  1.25 – 2.5 x ULN 2.6 – 5.0 x ULN 5.1 – 10.0 x ULN > 10.0 x ULN 
Bicar bonate, serum, l ow 16.0 mEq/L – < LLN  
16.0  mmol/L – < LLN 11.0 – 15.9 mEq/L  
11.0 – 15.9 mmol/L 8.0 – 10.9 mE q/L 
8.0 – 10.9  mmol/L  < 8.0 mEq/L  
< 8.0 mmol/L  
Comment:  Some la borator ies will report this value as Bi carbonate (HC O3) and others  as Total Carb on Dioxide 
(CO2). These  are the same tests; values s hould be g raded accord ing to  the ra nges for Bicar bonate as listed 
above.  
Bilirub in (Total)  
 Adult and Pediatric > 
14 days 1.1 – 1.5 x ULN 1.6 – 2.5 x ULN 2.6 – 5.0 x ULN > 5.0 x ULN  
Calcium, serum, high  
 Adult and Pediatric 
≥ 7 days 10.6  – 11.5 mg/dL  
2.65 – 2.88 mm ol/L 11.6  – 12.5 mg/dL  
2.89 – 3.13 m mol/L 12.6  – 13.5 mg/dL  
3.14 – 3.38 mm ol/L > 13.5 mg/dL  
> 3.38 mm ol/L 
Calcium, serum, low  
 Adult and Pediatric 
≥ 7 days 7.8  – 8.4 mg/ dL 
1.95 – 2.10 mm ol/L 7.0  – 7.7 mg/ dL 
1.75 – 1.94 m mol/L 6.1  – 6.9 mg/ dL 
1.53 – 1.74 m mol/L < 6.1 mg/dL  
< 1.53 mm ol/L 
 Comment:  Do not adjust Calcium, serum, l ow or Calcium, serum, hi gh for  albu min 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 42  
LABORA TORY 
PARAMETER   GRADE 1  
MILD   GRADE 2  
MOD ERATE  GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Card iac trop onin I (c TnI) NA  NA  NA  Levels consis tent 
with myocardial 
infarction  or 
unsta ble angina as 
defined by the 
manufactu rer Card iac trop onin T 
(cTnT) NA  NA  NA  ≥ 0.20 
ng/mL OR  
Levels consis tent 
with myocardial 
infarction  or 
unsta ble angina as 
defined by the 
manufactu rer Cholester ol (fasting)  
Adult ≥ 18 years 200 – 239 mg /dL 
5.18 – 6.19 mm ol/L 240 – 300 mg /dL 
6.20 – 7.77 mm ol/L > 300 mg/dL  
> 7.77 mm ol/L NA 
Creat ine Ki nase 3.0 – 5.9 x ULN† 6.0 – 9.9 x ULN† 10.0 – 19.9 x ULN† ≥ 20.0  x UL N† 
Creat inine 1.1 – 1.3 x ULN† 1.4 – 1.8 x ULN† 1.9 – 3.4 x ULN† ≥ 3.5 x ULN† 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 43 LABORA TORY 
PARAMETER  GRADE 1  
MILD  GRADE 2  
MOD ERATE GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Glucose, ser um, high  
 Nonfast ing 116 – 160 mg /dL 
6.44 – 8.88 m mol/L 161 – 250 mg /dL 
8.89 – 13.88  mmol/L 251 – 500 mg /dL 
13.89 – 27.75  
mmol/L > 500 mg/dL  
> 27.75 mmol /L 
 Fasting  110 – 125 mg /dL 
6.11 – 6.94 m mol/L 126 – 250 mg /dL 
6.95 – 13.88 m mol/L 251 – 500 mg /dL 
13.89 – 27.75  
mmol/L > 500 mg/dL  
> 27.75 mmol /L 
Glucose, ser um, low 
 Adult and Pediatric 
≥ 1 month  55 – 64 mg /dL 
3.05 – 3.55 mm ol/L 40 – 54 mg /dL 
2.22 – 3.06 mm ol/L 30 – 39 mg /dL 
1.67 – 2.23 m mol/L < 30 mg/dL  
< 1.67 mm ol/L 
Lactate  ULN - < 2.0 x ULN  
without acidosis ≥ 2.0 x ULN 
without aci dosis Increas ed lact ate 
with pH < 7.3  
without life- 
threate ning 
cons equences  Increas ed lact ate 
with pH < 7.3  with 
life- threate ning 
cons equences   
Comment: Added ULN to  Grade 1 parameter 
LDL c holesterol (fasting)  
 Adult ≥ 18 years 130 – 159 mg /dL 
3.37 – 4.12 m mol/L 160 – 190 mg /dL 
4.13 – 4.90 m mol/L ≥ 190 mg/ dL 
≥ 4.91  mmol/L  NA 
Lipase 1.1 – 1.5 x ULN 1.6 – 3.0 x ULN 3.1 – 5.0 x ULN > 5.0 x ULN 
Magnesium, serum, l ow 1.2  – 1.4 mEq/L  
0.60 – 0.70 mm ol/L 0.9 – 1.1 mEq /L 
0.45 – 0.59 m mol/L 0.6 – 0.8 mEq /L 
0.30 – 0.44 m mol/L < 0.60 mEq/L  
< 0.30 mm ol/L 
Pancr eatic a mylase 1.1 – 1.5 x ULN 1.6 – 2.0 x ULN 2.1 – 5.0 x ULN > 5.0 x ULN 
Phos phate, se rum, low 
 Adult and Pediatric 
> 14 years 2.5 mg/dL – < LLN  
0.81  mmol/L – < LLN  2.0 – 2.4 mg/ dL 
0.65 – 0.80 m mol/L 1.0 – 1.9 mg/ dL 
0.32 – 0.64 m mol/L < 1.00 mg/dL  
< 0.32 mm ol/L 
Potassium, se rum, high  5.6 – 6.0 mEq /L 
5.6 – 6.0 mmo l/L 6.1 – 6.5 mEq /L 
6.1 – 6.5 mmo l/L 6.6 – 7.0 mEq /L 
6.6 – 7.0 mmo l/L > 7.0 mEq/L  
> 7.0 mmol/L  
Potassium, se rum, low 3.0 – 3.4 mEq /L 
3.0 – 3.4 mmo l/L 2.5 – 2.9 mEq /L 
2.5 – 2.9 mmo l/L 2.0 – 2.4 mEq /L 
2.0 – 2.4 mmo l/L < 2.0 mEq/L  
< 2.0 mmol/L  
Sodium, seru m, high  146 – 150 mE q/L 
146 – 150 mmol/L  151 – 154 mE q/L 
151 – 154 mmol/L  155 – 159 mE q/L 
155 – 159 mmol/L  ≥ 160 mEq/L  
≥ 160 mmol/L 
Sodium, seru m, low 130 – 135 mE q/L 
130 – 135 mmol/L  125 – 129 mE q/L 
125 – 129 mmol/L  121 – 124 mE q/L 
121 – 124 mmol/L  ≤ 120 mEq/L  
≤ 120 mmol/L 
Triglycerides (fasting)  NA 500 – 750 mg /dL 
5.65 – 8.48 m mol/L 751 – 1,200 mg/dL  
8.49 – 13.56  mmol/L > 1,200 mg/dL  
> 13.56 mmol /L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 44   
LABORA TORY 
PARAMETER   GRADE 1  
MILD  GRADE 2  
MOD ERATE  GRADE 3  
SEVERE  GRADE 4  
POTENT IALLY LIFE-
THREATENING  
Uric acid  7.5 – 10.0 mg /dL 
0.45 – 0.59 m mol/L 10.1 – 12.0 mg/dL 
0.60 – 0.71 m mol/L 12.1 – 15.0 mg/dL 
0.72 – 0.89 mm ol/L > 15.0 mg/dL  
> 0.89 mm ol/L  
URINALYSIS                 Standard  International  Units are listed in italics  
Hematuria 
(microscopic)  6 – 10 RBC/ HPF > 10 RBC/HPF  Gross,  with or 
without clots OR  
with RBC casts  Transfusion  indicat ed 
Protei nuria, 
random collection  1 +  2 – 3 + 4 +  NA 
Protei nuria, 24 hour c ollect ion 
Adult and Pediatric 
≥ 10 years 200 – 999 mg /24 h 
0.200 – 0.999  g/d 1,000 – 1,999  mg/24 
h 
1.000 – 1.999  g/d 2,000 – 3,500  mg/24 
h 
2.000 – 3.500  g/d > 3,500 mg/24  h 
> 3.500 g/d  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 45 Appendix 5 . 
Fecal Microbiota Transplantation - Record of Side Effects  
 
This diary is one way researchers will get information from you regarding any possible problems 
or side effects in this study.  
 
❖ What you are going to do is simple.   Just keep a record of any unplea sant thing that 
happens to you while you are in the study, before, during, and after we have completed 
the stool transplant.  We even want you to record things that do not seem to be part of 
the stool therapy, at all.  
❖ When do you start?  When do you end?   You will record one entry 1 -week prior and on 
the day of the transplant.  You will then complete one entry per day for the first week 
following the treatment and then once a week thereafter for 12 -weeks.   
❖ What do you look for?  What do you report?   Any sy mptom or problem whether or not 
it may be from the medicine, stool therapy.  This could include: fever, abdominal pain, a 
big belly, lots of gas, diarrhea, nosebleeds, and anything else you know is not quite right.  
❖ What will you do?  In the first 7 days aft er the transplant, you will report some of the 
specific things that have bothered you by checking the boxes in the diary (see below).  You 
can also write any other problems that you may have had during that time.  Additionally, 
you will record your tempera ture once for each day for the first 7 days after the 
transplant, unless you feel hot.  If you feel hot, please take your temperature again.   
Please make sure to record the highest temperature taken that day if you take it more 
than once.  
 
Continue to record any problem up to 6 months after the transplant.  
 
How will you record it?  Like this…  
EVENT  DATE OF 
ONSET  INTENSITY  ACTION 
TAKEN  MEDICATION  DATE 
RESOLVED  
Fever  3/1/12  3 Missed 2 
days of 
school  Tylenol -200mg  3/3/12  
Sore throat  3/5/12  1 None  None  3/6/12  
 
OTHER SYMPTOMS  
Record each symptom at its worst  level for each day.  
For example, a sore throat that starts at ‘Grade 1” but increases to ‘Grade 2’ should be recorded 
as ‘Grade 2”.  
 
Examples of Grades:  
Grade 1 – Mild:  I noticed the symptom.  It did not keep me from doing my normal activities.  
Grade 2 – Moderate: I noticed the symptom and it kept me from doing some of my normal 
activities.  
Grade 3 – Severe: I really noticed the symptom and it kept me from doing activities that I wanted 
or needed to do.  
Grade 4 – Very severe:  The symptom made me unable to perform basic self -care functions such 
as washing myself OR medical or surgical intervention was needed to prevent serious 
consequences.  
 46  
 
Subject ID:___________ __________  
 
Date:____/____/______      Check here is no side effects present:                    
Highest temperature of the day:______oF               Total Number of Stools:__________  
 
Check if 
symptom 
present  Event  Date of 
Onset  Intensity  Action 
taken  Medications  Date 
Resolved  
 
 Fever       
 
 Abdominal Pain/       
 
 Diarrhea       
 
 Nausea/Vomiting       
 
 Blood in Stool       
 
 Other 1       
 
 Other 2       
 
 Other 3       
 
 
Grade 1 – Mild:  I noticed the symptom.  It did not keep me from doing my normal activities.  
Grade 2 – Moderate: I noticed the symptom and it kept me from doing some of my normal 
activities.  
Grade 3 – Severe: I really noticed the symptom and it kept me from doing activiti es that I wanted 
or needed to do.  
Grade 4 – Very severe:  The symptom made me unable to perform basic self -care functions such 
as washing myself OR medical or surgical intervention was needed to prevent serious 
consequences.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 47  
 
Appendix 6 .  
Sensormedics Vmax Encore 29(VIASYS Respiratory Care Inc.,Yorba Linda, CA)  
Indirect Calorimetry Measurements information use in protocols.  
During a metabolic study we are measuring Resting Energy Expenditure (REE) or the 
number of calories being burned at rest per day. Depending on body size, a healthy adult 
may burn from 1000 to 3000 Kcal per day just to maintain normal body functions. 
Traditionally, predicted equations were used to estimate REE based on age, height, and 
weight. Unfortunately these equatio ns do not account for stress factors that could be 
affecting the patient (fever, burns, disease, medications, etc.).  
Indirect Calorimetry calculates heat production by measuring gas exchange; in other words, 
oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production . During resting conditions food sources 
are broken down to produce energy (heat or KCALS). The oxygen consumed and the carbon 
dioxide produced are measured to provide an indirect assessment of caloric expenditure. 
REE provides the total energy expenditure  in 24 hours and is calculated from the gas 
exchange data (VO2, VCO2) collected by the Vmax. The parameter RQ will assist in 
determining subject’s caloric needs. RQ provides information on what the subject is utilizing 
for energy; carbohydrates, fats, or p roteins.  
RQ = VCO2/VO2  
Carbohydrates .90 - 1.00  
Fats .70 - .78 
Proteins .80  
Combination Fats/Carbohydrates .80 - .82 
RQ greater than 1.00 – 1.20 may indicate overfeeding (Lipogenesis)  
RQ less than .70 may indicate underfeeding (Ketogenesis)  
NOTE: Hyperventilation can cause the RQ to exceed 1.00  
 
Testing Procedure:  
Energy expenditure (EE), respiratory quotient (RQ) and substrate utilization will be 
calculated from measurements of oxygen (VO2) and carbon dioxide (VCO2) in inspired and 
expired air .Th e fasted subject (12 hours prior to testing) is placed in a supine position in a 
quiet environment where subject will be undisturbed. Subject is also fully rested and has 
not performed an exercise prior to testing. The Sensormedics Vmax Encore equipment 
 48 (VIASYS Respiratory Care Inc.,Yorba Linda, CA) is use to collect measurements at specified 
study times.  
A clear plastic canopy is placed over the subject head and torso with the pump turned on.  
FECO2 is monitored the pump is adjusted and stabilized within d esired range of 0.75 -0.85.  
Once FECO2 is within range, test will begin and data will be collected for 30 minutes. During 
the study subject should refrain from sleeping.  The goal of the test is to obtain Resting 
Energy Expenditure (REE), therefore the fir st five minutes are not accounted for in final 
analysis, to allow patient to meet a steady state condition.  Once test is completed the 
canopy is removed from subject and pump is turned off.  In order to accurate info on RQ 
substrate utilization for the su bject, a 24 hour Urinary N2 test must be collected prior to 
Vmax test. Data from 24 hour urinary N2 test will be entered into computer to be analyzed 
with results from the Vmax indirect calorimetry test to obtain RQ substrate unitization and 
REE.   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 49  
 
 
 
 
References  
1. Calle EE, Rodriguez C, Walker -Thurmond K  et al.  Overweight, obesity, and mortality from 
cancer in a prospectively studied cohort of U.S. adults. N Engl J Med 2003;348:1625 -38. 
2. Marchesini G, Bugianesi E, Forlani G  et al.  Nonalcoholic fatty liver, steatohepatitis, and the 
metabolic syndrome. Hepatology 2003;37:917 -23. 
3. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK  et al.  Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the United 
States, 2011 -2012. JAMA 2014;311: 806-14. 
4. Wadden TA, Webb VL, Moran CH  et al.  Lifestyle modification for obesity: new developments 
in diet, physical activity, and behavior therapy. Circulation 2012;125:1157 -70. 
5. Li Z, Maglione M, Tu W  et al.  Meta -analysis: pharmacologic treatment of o besity. Ann Intern 
Med 2005;142:532 -46. 
6. Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS) Consortium, Flum DR, Belle SH  et al.  
Perioperative safety in the longitudinal assessment of bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med 
2009;361:445 -54. 
7. Rabot S, Membrez M, Bruneau A  et al.  Germ -free C57BL/6J mice are resistant to high -fat-diet-
induced insulin resistance and have altered cholesterol metabolism. FASEB J 2010;24:4948 -59. 
8. Ley RE, Backhed F, Turnbaugh P  et al.  Obesity alters gut microbial ecology. Proc Natl  Acad Sci 
U S A 2005;102:11070 -5. 
9. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA  et al.  An obesity -associated gut microbiome with 
increased capacity for energy harvest. Nature 2006;444:1027 -31. 
10. Le Chatelier E, Nielsen T, Qin J  et al.  Richness of human gut microb iome correlates with 
metabolic markers. Nature 2013;500:541 -6. 
 50 11. Nicholson JK, Holmes E, Kinross J  et al.  Host -gut microbiota metabolic interactions. Science 
2012;336:1262 -7. 
12. Hoverstad T, Midtvedt T. Short -chain fatty acids in germfree mice and rats.  J Nutr 
1986;116:1772 -6. 
13. Maslowski KM, Vieira AT, Ng A  et al.  Regulation of inflammatory responses by gut microbiota 
and chemoattractant receptor GPR43. Nature 2009;461:1282 -6. 
14. Tremaroli V, Backhed F. Functional interactions between the gut microbi ota and host 
metabolism. Nature 2012;489:242 -9. 
15. Baggio LL, Drucker DJ. Glucagon -like peptide -1 receptors in the brain: controlling food intake 
and body weight. J Clin Invest 2014;124:4223 -6. 
16. Baggio LL, Drucker DJ. Biology of incretins: GLP -1 and GI P. Gastroenterology 2007;132:2131 -
57. 
17. Beckman LM, Beckman TR, Sibley SD  et al.  Changes in gastrointestinal hormones and leptin 
after Roux -en-Y gastric bypass surgery. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2011;35:169 -80. 
18. Vrieze A, Out C, Fuentes S  et al.  Impact of oral vancomycin on gut microbiota, bile acid 
metabolism, and insulin sensitivity. J Hepatol 2014;60:824 -31. 
19. Vrieze A, Van Nood E, Holleman F  et al.  Transfer of intestinal microbiota from lean donors 
increases insulin sensitivity in individuals with metabolic syndrome. Gastroenterology 
2012;143:913,6.e7.  
20. Kelly CR, de Leon L, Jasutkar N. Fecal microbiota transplantation for relapsing Clostridium 
difficile infection in 26 patients: methodology and results. J Clin Gastroenterol 2012;46:145 -9. 
  
 
 51  