 
 
Official Title:  An Assessment of TLR4 and TOPK/PRPK Signaling in Sun 
Damaged Human Skin Acutely Exposed to Solar Simulated 
Light  
NCT number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Type:   Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Date of the 
Document:  02/10/2021  
 
 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 1    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 An Assessment of TLR4 a nd TOPK/PRPK Signaling in  Sun D amaged Human Skin 
Acutely Exposed to Solar Simulated Light  
 
ONGOING PROTOCOL  
 
Principal Investigator:  Clara Curiel, M. D. 
Investigators:  Sherry Chow , Ph.D.  
  Chengcheng Hu, Ph.D.   
  James Warneke, M.D.  
  Delaney Stratton, DNP, Ph.D  
Staff:   Jill Mausert, RN  
  Mary Krutzch  
  Kathylynn Saboda, M.S.  
  Laura Duckett  
  Jeri San Jose  
  Bonita Weible  
  Frances Epstein  
 
1.0 OBJECTIVES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  3 
2.0 BACKGROUND, SIGNIFIC ANCE AND PRELIMINARY  WORK  ................................ ........  4 
3.0 EQUIPMENT INFORMATIO N ................................ ................................ ............................  7 
3.1 SOLAR S IMULATED LIGHT SOURC E ................................ ................................ .............  7 
4.0 SUBJECT ELIGIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 8 
5.0 PRE-STUDY REQUIREMEN TS ................................ ................................ .......................  10 
6.0 TREATMENT PLAN  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  11 
7.0 BIOPSY SAMPLE COLLEC TION, PROCESSING AND  ANALYSES  ..............................  13 
8.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS  ................................ ................................ .................  15 
9.0 EARLY STOPPING  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  15 
10.0  TOXICITY MONITORING  ................................ ................................ ................................  16 
11.0  DATA AND SAFETY MONI TORING ................................ ................................ ................  16 
12.0  ADVERSE EVENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  18 
13.0  CLINIC PERSONNEL  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 21 
14.0  HUMAN SUBJECT S ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 22 
15.0  REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  24 
 
APPENDICES:   
  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 2    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 A ABBREVIATIONS  
 B PHOTOSENSITIZING DRUGS   
 C ASSESSMENT OF PHOTODAMAGE  
 D SCHEDULE OF SUBJECT COMPENSATION  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 3    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 1.0 OBJECTIVES  
 The overall goal of the Skin Cancer  Prevention  Program Project is to employ 
novel technologies and develop new the rapeutic strategies to prevent  intraepithelial 
neoplasias in the skin (i.e. actinic keratosis,  cutaneous  squamous cell carcinoma in situ ). 
Our objectives in pursuit of this goal are to determine clinical, histopatho logic, and 
protein/phosphopr otein signaling  patterns associated  with human skin carcinogenesis 
and to develop safe, highly efficacious  intervention strategies for the prevention of s kin 
cancer.  T he overall hypothesis  of the project is that Toll-like Receptor 4 (TLR4) and 
T-LAK cell -originated protein kinase (TOPK) / p53 -related protein  kinase (PRPK) drive 
important signaling pathw ays, with potential synergism to prevent cutaneous  squamous 
cell carcinoma  (cSCC ), and  that TOPK/RPRK and TLR4 signaling pathway s are 
modulated in the skin by acute exposure to solar simulated light (SSL ).  
 The aim of this study is to assess TLR4 and TOPK/P RPK signaling in sun 
damaged ( SD) human skin acutely  exposed to solar simulated light (SSL). The purpose 
of this aim  is to assess the effect of acute UV exposure on the  signaling  pathways of 
interest in order to validate the acute clinical model prior  to intervention with small 
molecule inhibitors. Acute UV  exposure will be  evaluated in SD skin to determine the 
level of  activation  of the targeted pathways using reverse -phase protein array ( LCM -
RPPA) analysis and immunohistochemistry ( IHC). This  translational aim will 
prospectively analyze TLR4 and TOPK/PRPK  signaling pathways activation by acute 
exposure of human subjects to  SSL at twice  the minimal erythema dose (MED) for each 
subject. We will  evaluate the modulation of key proposed signaling pathways using  
RPPA and IHC in acutely irradiated human skin. We w ill also d etermine the optimal time 
points  for evaluation of biomarker mo dulation.   
 Primary Endpoint:  To assess TLR4 and TOPK signaling pathway activation 
levels pre - and post -SSL exposure in SD skin.  
 Exploratory Endpoint:  To assess the correlation betwe en SD level and the 
magnitude of SSL -induced pathway activ ation .  
 Thirty -six (36) subjects with a broad range of SD on the forearm will be recruited. 
Based on the standardized clinical photodamage scale [1], we will include mild (N=12), 
moderate (N=12), a nd severely (N=12) sun damaged (SD) skin. The level of SD will be 
scored, using a range of 0 -9, where absent SD = 0, mild SD = 1 -3, moderate SD = 4 -6 
and severe SD = 7 -9 (see Appendix C).  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 4    V. 02.10.2021  
 
  We will  irradiate and biopsy the SD forearm skin of each healthy a dult volunteer 
and collect  skin punch biopsies before and after e xposure to SSL for  analysis using 
LCM -RPPA and IHC. The r esults  of this study  will be used  to aid in design of 
pharmacodynamic SSL exposure studies with sm all molecule inhibitors in subsequen t 
studies . 
2.0 BACKGROUND, SIGNIFICANCE AND PRELIMINARY WORK  
 One out of three new cancers is a skin cancer, making skin cancer the most 
common malignancy worldwide.  Approximately 4. 9 million cases of non -melanoma skin 
cancer (NMSC) (basal cell carcinoma [ BCC] and cutaneous squamous cell cancers 
[cSCC]) occur annually . As incidence rates for NMSC continue to rise, there is an  
increasing and substantial impact on morbidity and health care costs that account for 
$8.1 billion/year in skin  cancer treatment with  the majority of these lesions representing 
keratinocytic neoplasms.  
 New technologies increasingly allow for the capacity to individualize therapeutic 
prevention strategies based on gene expression patterns and direct, multiplexed cell 
signaling  profiling .  Target modulations, pathway activation, skin biology alterations, and 
other basic science discoveries will be translated into the clinic.  Increasingly, our 
research group has attempted to dissect solar light -induced signal transduction 
pathways leading  to cSCC with the aim of identifying molecular targets for 
chemopreventive drug development.  Essential to this research approach is a 
requirement to validate molecular targets identified in solar light -induced cSCC 
carcinogenesis and skin biology models.  Strategies to be employed inc lude 
incorporation of advanced R everse-Phase Protein A rray (RPP A) technology for analysis 
of p rotein/phosphoprotein activity  and molecular network analysis, and u se of 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis  from formalin -fixed pa raffin -embedded tissues.  
These technologies will allow us to detect unique targets for the ultimate individualized 
treatment of IENs in the skin.  
2.1 UV Signal Transduction Pathways  
 Ultraviolet radiation (UVR), the major etiologic factor in human skin c ancer, elicits 
a number of biological responses in the skin that include pigmentation, erythema, and 
cell death [2-5]. UVR can be divided by wavelength into UVC (180 -280 nm), UVB (280 -
320 nm), and UVA regions (UVA I, 340 -400 nm; UVA II, 320 - 340 nm), all o f which show 
strong carcinogenic activity with regard to induction  of squamous type tumors in  mouse 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 5    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 skin. UVR is a complete carcinogen in that it acts as both an initiator, presumably by 
causing DNA damage leading to gene mutations, and as a tumor promoter . Because 
UVC is absorbed by the ozone layer, UVA and UVB are considered to be the major 
carcinogenic components of solar radiation with relevance for human skin cancer [6-13]. 
UVA comprises more than 95% of solar UVR and is recognized as a major contribut or to 
carcinogenesis [14-17]. Mechanistically, UVR induces both genotoxic effects such as 
DNA damage and mutations as well as epigenetic events such as induction of gene 
expression. DNA damage is induced directly by UVR absorption in the DNA resulting in 
the induction of cyclo butane pyrimidine dimers  (CPD) , (6-4) pyrimidine dimers, cytosine 
photohydrates and purine photoproducts that can yield specific “signature” mutations (C 
to T and CC to TT) [18,19 ]. Longer wavelengths can indirectly induce DNA single -strand 
breaks and DNA -protein crosslinks through reactive oxygen species [15]. Therapeutic 
prevention agents that demonstrate activity toward these UVR signaling pathways will be 
evaluated in clinical trials.  
2.2  Immunohistochemistry  
 The use of immunohis tochemical biomarkers  permits studies with smaller sample 
size and shorter duration compared to studies that use cancer incidence as an endpoint.  
To be valid, the quantitative degree and pattern of biomarkers should correlate with 
carcinogenic transformat ion or alternatively biomarkers markers may demonstrate the 
effect of a particular agent on a molecular pathway or biochemical processes (i.e. 
arachadonic acid/cyclooxygenase pathways, polyamine synthesis) .  This has been  
demonstrated by the suppression of  polyamine levels in tissue treated with the 
polyamine synthesis inhibitor, alpha -2-(Difluoromethyl) -dl-ornithine , or DFMO  [20,21 ]. 
 In a previous study completed by this group, I HC was performed on samples 
collected at baseline, 5 min, and 1, 5, and 24 h following 2X MED of SSL on SP skin of 
10 subjects; there was a significant increase in pTOPK and pPRPK activity starting as 
early as 5 min post SSL exposure with a sustained expression up to 24 h ( Fig. 1). 
Analysis of TLR4 using the same samples also revea led increased pathway activation 
primarily at 24 h post -SLL exposure .   
 IHC assays will include pTLR4, MyD88, p -p65/NFkB, TAB2, pTOPK, p -PRPK, p -
Erk, pP38, and pP90RSK . IHC assays previously established will also be performed for 
validation of SSL -induced  changes.   
 
 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 6    V. 02.10.2021  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Comparison of p -PRPK and p -TOPK levels on sUV -exposed human skin harvested in a time -
dependent manner.  IHC staining was performed and representative data analyzed (30 photos from 10 
subjects)  for each of the following:  normal human skin without sUV, 5 min post 2 X MED sUV, 1 h post 2 
MED sUV, 5 h post 2 MED sUV and 24 h post 2 MED sUV . Shown is e xpression of phosphorylated (p) -
PRPK ( a) and p -TOPK ( b). Magnification : 400x. Upper panels:  Phosphorylated PRPK, total and p -TOPK 
levels are presented as sum of the integrated optical density (IOD) values. Lower panels:  Representative 
staining (brown color)  is shown . The asterisks (*, **) indicate a significant difference  (p < 0.05 or p < 0.001, 
respectively).  
 
2.3  Mapping of P rotein Signaling Networks  
 Reverse -phase protein array analysis  (RPP A), a novel analysis for multiplexed 
quantitative measurement of multiple signaling proteins from biological specimens  
represents a novel means of measurement of hundreds of proteins, many o f which are 
phosphoproteins , in a single biopsy specimen.  This array technology is a miniaturized 
calibrated dot -blot immun oassay, and with over 90 peer -reviewed publications 
supporting the implementation of this platform (60 from the Petricoin/Liotta lab oratories), 
it represents one of the most widely published protein microarray technologies.  
Moreover, the RPP A platform is now being used within the Petricoin laboratories for 
clinical trial -based applications since it is run as a CAP/CLIA in -house develo ped assay, 
which demonstrates the maturity of the platform.  With the RPP A technology, serial 
dilutions are printed of each sample, control or standard, to maintain sample 

  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 7    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 concentration.  Each spot contains a bait zone measuring only a few hundred microns in 
diameter.  The detection probe can be tagged and signal amplified independently from 
the immobilized analyte protein.  Coupling the detection antibody with highly sensitive 
amplification systems can yield detection sensitivities to fewer than 1,000 to 5 ,000 
molecules per spot with good linearity (correlation coefficient or R2 = 0.990 -0.999) and 
inter-experiment precision (R2= 0.973).  Between run and within run analytical precision 
is between a 3-13% CV (coefficient of variation)  [22]. 
Activation of prot eins by  phosphorylation  of kinase -driven signaling networks 
contains information regarding the disease process as well as potential therapeutic 
targets  [23].  The phosphorylation state of proteins can be detected and assessed using 
specific phospho -specifi c antibodies developed to recognize the phosphorylated isoform 
of the kinase substrates  [23-25].  Each antibody undergoes extensive validat ion for 
specificity prior to RPP A analysis using peptide competition and single band detection 
on Western as well as ligand induction.  Currently, Dr. Petricoin has over 300 extensively 
validated different cell signaling antibodies in his portfol io.  Using RPP A, many  dozens of 
kinase substrates can be quantified and measured simultaneously through multiplexed 
phosphospec ific antibody analyses .  RPPA has demonstrated sensitivity, precision and 
accuracy that enable  the evaluation of signaling networks from  a very small number of 
cells (e.g. procured using laser capture microdissection) from biopsy material .    
3.0 EQUIPMENT  INFORMATION  
3.1 Solar Simulated Light Source  
 A Multip ort UV Solar Simulator Model 600  (Solar Light Co ., Inc., Philadelphia, 
PA) will be used to administer SSL exposure s to the test areas on the skin. The device is 
equipped with six 8mm  liquid light guide s (LLG) , allowing for 6 simultaneously conducted 
exposures .  A large 3x2 endplate places the LLGs several centimeters apart and is 
specifically designed for SPF and photopatch testing .  The dose of emission from each 
LLG can be precisely regulated and the spectrum of emission can be limited to UVA 
(320-390 nm) or UVB +UVA (290 -390 nm) .  For added safety,  the device is equipped 
with a power supply which stabilizes the lamp current .  An operator -controlled  shutter 
and dose control system monitor and control th e delivered dose.   
 An automatic internal igniter minimizes the electromagnetic interference and a 
fan provides cooling that increases lamp life.  The connection to the power supply is a 5 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 8    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 foot cable equipped with a quick disconnect connector.   The operato r can select 
between UVA only  and a combined UVA/UVB spectrum by placement of an optical filter.  
 The source of radiation is a 150 Watt xenon lamp .  The spectral output (indicated 
below) follows the distribution of sunlight from 290 to 390 nm. 
(Source:  Solar Light Company, Inc)  
4.0 SUBJECT ELIGIBILITY  
 4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
• Healthy individuals 18 years of age or older.  
• Individuals with mild, mo derate, or severe photodamage  [1] of the skin on  
the forearms  (also Appendix C)  and Fitzpatrick skin type II or III (21 CFR 
352.72).  
• Females of childbearing potential will need to undergo a pregnan cy test at 
the enrollment visit, after administration of the ICF and  before exposure to 
SSL.  Premenopausal female subjects must use an effective method of 
birth control ( such as oral contraceptives, consistent use of barrier 
contraceptives, IUD, or other proven method of birth control) during study 
participation. For the purposes of this study, a woman will be considered 
postmenopausal if any of the following criteria are met: (1) she has had 
prior bilateral oophorectomy; (2) she is over the age of 60 years; or (3) 
she is under the age of 60 years and has not had a menstrual period in 
12 or more months in the absence of chemotherapy, tamoxifen, 
toremifene, or ovarian suppre ssion.    

  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 9    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 • Individuals who are willing to limit sun exposure to the body during the 
study period and who agree to wear prot ective clothing when they are 
outdoors.  
• Individuals who have the ability to understand and willingness to sign an 
informed consent bef ore initiation of study procedures, after the nature of 
the study is explained to them and they have had the oppo rtunity to  ask 
any questions.  
 4.2 Exclusion C riteria  
• Individuals with any inflammation or irritation of the skin at the test area s, 
or any ski n conditions felt by the study medical provider  to contraindicate 
enrollment.  This includes, but is not limited to, psoriasis or atopic 
dermatitis within the test area s. 
o Test area is defined as the 6 mm areas of skin that is exposed to 
SSL and will be bio psied.  
• Individuals with a history of any  untreated skin cancer , melanocytic 
lesions,  or actinic keratoses in the test area s are ineligible.  History of 
such conditions at a body site other than the test area s is not 
exclusionary if in th e opinion of the  study medical provider  it will not pose 
a risk to the  subject.   
• Individuals who have had invasive cancer, chemotherapy or radiation 
therapy with in five years of study enrollment  
• Individuals who are immunosuppressed by virtue of medication or 
disease.  This includes AIDS patients, subjects taking oral steroids, and 
subjects on immunosuppressants/immunomodulators (cyclosporine, 
chemotherapeutic agents, or biologic therapy), as determined by the 
examining study medical provider . 
• Individuals wi th serious intercu rrent illness including, but not limited to, 
ongoing or active infection, psychiatric illness, or other situations that in 
the opinion of the examining study medical provider  would limit 
compliance or interfere with the study regimen.  
• Individuals who have used ph otosensitizing drugs (see Appendix  for 
examples) within 30 days  of enrollment , or who will be using a 
photosensitizing drug during the time of the study , will not be eligible.  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 10    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 Subjects may be reconsidered for eligibility 30 days af ter the last dose of 
such medications.  
• Individuals who have used any topical medication other than emollients  or 
sunscreen/sunblock  on the test area within 30 days prior to study 
enrollment.  If a study participant requires topical medication to the test 
area during the stu dy, they will be withdrawn from the study.  
• Individuals who have used retinoids, steroids, 5 -fluorouracil, Levulan, 
Vaniqua (eflornithine), Solaraze, or Imiquimod (Aldara®) anywhere on the 
body within 30 days prior to study enrollment.  Su bjects may be 
reconsidered for eligibility 30 days after the last topical treatment with 
such medications.  
• Individuals must not take mega -doses of vitamins.  Mega -doses are 
defined as more than 5 capsules of standard multivitamins daily or more 
than the Tolerable Upper Inta ke Levels of Vitamins , as defined by the 
Institute of Medicine, National Academy of Sciences. Such vitamin 
therapy must be discontinued at least 30 days prior to study entry.  
• Individuals with a history of deliberate natural or artificial  sun exposure  
(tanning) within 30 days of study enrollment  are not eligible.   
• Individuals with Fitzpatrick skin type I are ineligible, as the proposed SSL 
dose could result in a burn of greater than mild severity.  
• Individuals with Fitzpatrick skin type IV , V or VI are inel igible, as they are 
unlikely to exhibit a salient response  in the proposed design.  
• Individuals currently enrolled in or who plan to enroll in a nother  clinical 
trial. There must be a 30 -day period between completing a previous study 
and en rolling in this st udy. 
• Individuals with a known allergy to lidocaine are not eligible.  
• Females who are pregnant or  nursing.  
5.0 PRE-STUDY REQUIREMENTS  
 Pre-study requirements include : 
• Administration of th e screening consent and HIPAA authorization form;   
• Eligibility s creeni ng by a study medical provider , including a skin examination and  a  
  review of the subject’s medical history, concomitant medications , and supplements ; 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 11    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 • Subjects must have mild  (N=1 2), moderate  (N=1 2), or severe  (N=1 2) sun damage  [1] 
of the skin on the for earms  (Appendix C).  
6.0 TREATMENT PLAN  
6.1 Subject Recruitment  
 Thirty-six subjects will be recruited, anticipating that 80% will be fully eligible and 
will complete the study. Clinic staff will be responsible for study participant recruitmen t.  
Male and femal e individuals will be recruited through the dermatology clini c at the 
University of Arizona Cancer Center,  advertisements, community outreach programs, 
and from previous study par ticipants who have agreed to be contacted.  S ubjects will b e 
screened by a medical provider  to verify eligibility before enrollment.   
6.2 Trial Schema  
 Informed consent will be administered to all study participants.  Female 
participants of childbearing potential will undergo a urine pregnancy test prior to SSL 
exposures. If there i s a scheduling issue, a pregnancy test will be repeated if ≥ 7 days 
elapse between MED determination and  the administration of SSL at 2 X MED  for biopsy.   
Each study participant will act as his/her own control .  Areas to be used for baseli ne 
biopsies, MED  (minimal erythema dose)  determination, and study biops y sites will be 
marked on the participant ’s skin with non -permanent surgical marking ink.    
 MED will be determined on the left buttock . After the MED of the subject is 
determined , three biopsy sites wil l be outlined on the left forearm.  Then  SSL at a dose 
of 2X MED  will then be administered at two  of the biopsy sites on the left forearm.   Skin 
punch biopsies  will then be collected  at 1 hour (± 15 minutes) and 24  hours (± 2 hours) 
post-SSL exposure.  In addition, o ne 6mm skin punch biopsy sample will be collected 
from the left forearm  at baseline to serve as an unexposed (SSL) control sampl e. The 
control sample will be collected from a site that is at least 6 cm away from the sites 
expose d to SSL. All of t he biopsy samples  will be collected as close to the exact target 
time as possible.  Photographs will be taken of the left forearm  prior to skin punch 
biopsies.  Study participants will return for suture removal and follow -up from 10 to 16 
days after the final biopsies are collected , and they will be followed for as long as 
necessary if complications occur.  Study participants may have their sutures removed by 
an outside provider per their preference.  
 
 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 12    V. 02.10.2021  
 
  
 
Table 1 Outline  of Trial Schema       (n = 36) 
Screening  Informed Consent Form  and HIPAA authorization form administered ; 
  Skin examin ation  and medical history reviewed by study  provider  
 
Visit 1 *  Urine pregnancy test if necessary ;  
                          SSL exposures administered for ME D determination  to left buttock . 
   
Visit 2   MED visually determi ned   
 
Visit 3*   Photograph of left forearm will be taken;   
             SSL to 2 biopsy sites on left forearm at a dose of 2X MED ;  
  Biops y collected from contro l biopsy site (no SSL) on left forearm;  
  Biopsy collected from 1-hour test site on left forearm.  
 
Visit 4  Photograph of left forearm will be taken;  
             Skin biops y collected from left forearm at 24 hours after SSL exposure  
 
Visit 5**  Sutures removed 10 -16 days after Visit  3 
* When possible , Screening Visit may be combined with Visit 1, and Visit 2 may be combined with Visit 3.   
**Participant may have their sutures removed by an outside provider.  
 
6.3 Determination of MED (Minimal Erythema Dose ) 
 The MED  of each subject  will be determined using a solar simulator (Solar Light 
Co.).  MED is defined as the smallest dose of energy necessary to produce confluent 
erythema with four dis tinct borders at 22 -26 hours post -expo sure.  
 6.3.1 Light Source   
A solar simulator will be used . The emission spe ctrum is from 290 to 390 nm, 
with < 1% ene rgy contributed by wavelengths < 290 nm.  
 6.3.2 Test Site Area  
MED wil l be determined  on the left buttock. The test areas will be delineat ed with 
a template and skin marker.  
 6.3.3 Test Sub -sites 
Each test area will be subdivided into 6 sub -sites (each 1 cm2) corresponding to 
the LLG pattern on the solar simulator.    
 6.3.4 SSL Irradiation  for MED Determination  
The solar simulator will be accurately calibrated prior to each use.  A series of 6 
increa sing SSL radiation  exposures (expressed as mJ/cm2) will be administered 
to the sub -sites on each subject, with LLG 1 emitting the lowest dose of SSL and 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 13    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 LLG 6 emitting the highest dose.   All immediate responses to exposure will be 
recorded.  Following expo sure, the tests si tes will be occluded until evaluation .   
6.3.5 Determination of MED  
After 2 2 - 26 hours the test site s will be eval uated for the site and dos e producing 
the MED as defined above.    
6.3.6 Evaluation of Test S ites  
Evaluation will take plac e under the same c onditions (lighting and position) used 
when the test sites were irradiated.  
 
7.0 BIOPSY SAMPLE COLLECTION, PROCESSING AND ANALYSES  
7.1   Biopsy Procedure  
 One 6mm skin punch biops y from the left forearm  will be obtained at  baseline, at 
a site at least 6 cm  away from SSL exposure,  to serve as  a control sample  (unexposed 
to SSL) . In addition,  one 6mm skin punch biopsy sample  will be obtained  from each 
biopsy site exposed to a single dose  of SSL given at 2X the subject’s  MED .  
 Skin will be d isinfected with an  alcohol preparation, a 30 -gauge needle will be 
used to inject lidocai ne 2% with epinephrine , and  punch biopsies (6mm in diameter and 
0.8mm in depth) followed by suture closu re will be obtained for RPPA and IHC analyses.   
Table 2.  Biopsy  samples to be col lected.  
Bx  Test Site  Collection Timepoint  Initial Processing in Clinic  Analysis  
1 Left forearm  control, 0 SSL  ½ formalin  + ½ snap frozen  Histology/IHC/RPPA  
2 Left forearm  1° post 2xMED of SSL  ½ formalin  + ½ snap frozen  Histology/IHC/RP PA 
3 Left forearm  24° post 2xMED of SSL  ½ formalin  + ½ snap frozen  Histology/IHC/RPPA  
 
7.2 Formalin Fixation and Tissue P reparation  
 Each 6mm skin biopsy will be bisected immediately, with ½ snap frozen  and the 
other ½ placed into 10% formalin.  Fixation  times have been s tandardized to 24 hr in 
formalin.  After 24 hrs samples in formalin will be  transferred to 70% ethanol until 
processing.  Processing and paraffin embedding will be  done weekly or bi -weekly so that 
no samples remain unprocessed for more th an a week.  Additi onally, processing times 
and temperatures have been standardized and a tissue control is processed identically 
to samples with each run.  Once skin samples are paraffin -embedded and mounted in 
blocks they are stored until they are batched  for analyses.  
7.3 Immunohistochemistry (IHC) Assays  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 14    V. 02.10.2021  
 
  Tissue sections at 3 -5 microns will be cut, followed by deparaffinization and 
rehydration.  All tissue sections will be subjected to antigen retrieval using a citrate buffer 
in a Decloaking Chamber Pro (Biocare, Walnut C reek, CA).  Immunohistochemical 
staining will be performed using a Universal Alkaline Phosphatase RED biotin -free, 
multimer -based detection system or a streptavidin -biotin peroxidase system with a DAB 
chromagen and a hematoxylin counterst ain (Ventana Medic al Systems, Tucson, AZ) on 
an automated BenchMark® XT immunostainer (Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, AZ) 
or by hand using an appropriate VECTASTAIN ABC Kit (Vector Laboratories, 
Burlingame, CA) depending on the primary antibody species a nd an alkaline 
phosphatase substrate for detection.  In the case where mouse tissue will be stained 
with mouse primary antibodies, the Mouse on Mouse (M.O.M.™ Vector Laboratories, 
Burlingame, CA) will be used.   Positive controls will be included in each IH C assay and 
negati ve controls will include the omission of the primary antibody with replacement by a 
normal serum from the same species as primary antibody.  Biopsies will be batched for 
all analyses.  
Tissue sections will be measured using ImagePro Plus (Media Cybernetics , Silver 
Springs, MD) software systems and a Leica DMR microscope (Westzlar, Germany), and 
a Sony 3CCD color video camera (Japan).  The percent positive nuclear or cytoplasmic 
area per 40X field w ill be  determined for each biopsy.  A posi tive control slide  for each 
IHC assay will be included  when samples undergo image analysis to assess the daily 
variability of image analysis.  Ten percent of samples will be repeated to assure assay 
reproducibility in a blinded manner as determined by the Biometry Core.  
7.4    Mapping of P rotein Signaling Networks  
 Reverse -Phase Protein A rray Construction:  RPPAs will be constructed generally 
as described previously  (Section 2.3) .  Briefly, lysates will be loaded into 384 -well plates 
and serially diluted in lysis buffer for a  two-point dilutio n curve (neat and 1/4).   The RPP A 
technology has been developed and optimized for performance as a fluorescent -based 
calibrated assay, generally identical in design and analysis to standard ELISA or 
standard clinical imm unoassays. As a ca librated assay, each assay consists of:  
   a. Experimental patient samples printed in triplicate two -spot dilutions (neat and 1:4)  
   b. High, medium, and low controls printed in triplicate two -spot dilutions (neat and 1:4)  
   c. A calibr ator, consisting o f a 6 -10-point curve whereby the analyte of interest is 
decreasing in concentration in the background of a constant protein concentration.  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 15    V. 02.10.2021  
 
  Image Analysis:  The current iteration of the RPPA uses a fluorometric image 
capture processing sys tem (NovaRay, Alph a Innotech) for image acquisition.  The 
system measures the sample’s fluorescence intensity value, subtracts the background, 
normalizes the result to the total protein, and extrapolates the value to the non -
parametrically fit calibration curve to generate a final intensity value.  The median of the 
triplicate values will be reported. Sypro -stained slides will be analyzed with MicroVigene 
image analysis software, version 2.200 (Vigenetech, North Billerica, MA) and Microsoft 
Excel 2000 softw are.  Images will be imported into Microvigene, which performed spot 
finding, local background subtraction, replicate averaging, and total protein normalization 
to produce a single value for each sample at each endpoint.     
8.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
8.1   Sample Size Determination  
 We will examine the TLR4 and TOPK signaling pathways in acute SSL -exposed 
SD human skin. Subjects with evidence of SD will be enrolled (N=36); with 85% 
expected to complete the study (30 evaluable subjects). Primary analysis  will compare 
levels of RPPA analytes in each pathway  as stated above in baseline unexposed 
samples vs. samples collected 1 or 24 h after SSL in SD skin . The power is 93% or 
above when the correlation between the log 2 fold change of any two different analy tes in 
the same pa thway ranges from 0 to 0.4, and the power is 82% if the correlation is 0.6.   
Exploratory analyses will associate the SD score/severity level with analyte activation in 
the SD samples.  Based on these analyses, the mo st appropriate post -SSL time point 
(per pathway) will be selected based on the combination with the largest effect sizes.  
Furthermore, an exploratory systems biology analysis will be conducted  based on these 
analyses, o ne post -SSL time p oint (per pathway)  will be selected for future studies  
based on the combination with the largest effect sizes.  Furthermore, an exploratory 
systems biology analysis will be conducted . 
9.0  EARLY STOPPING  
9.1 Early Stopping for Futility  
Accrual  will be halted after five participants have completed  SSL ex posure . Samples 
will be evaluated for changes in at least two biomarkers.  If no changes are observed i n 
any of the participants,  other biomarkers will al so be assessed.  If no changes in any of 
the biomarkers are observed in any of the participants in a g iven group, accrua l will stop 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 16    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 and the protocol will be re -evaluated to determine if the SSL doses should be adjusted 
or the trial should be stopped.  Assuming that the response rate for any marker is as low 
as 50%, there is only a one in 32 (i.e., approxim ately 0.03) probab ility of seeing five non -
responders, based on the binomial distribution, in a p articular marker.  The prospect of 
failing to see response in any of the markers, assuming that two or more are actually 
valid, is vanishingly small.  Thus, ch oosing a sample si ze of five for initial assessment 
runs very little risk of committing a false negative error.  This initial process will not 
assess succes s, and no inferential statistical analyses  will be conducted.  Only the 
presence or absence of expre ssion will be note d. 
 
10.0 TOXICITY MONITORING  
No drugs or experimental therapies are included in this study and n o toxicities are 
anticipated.  
11.0 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING  
11.1 Identification of the DSMB Obligated for Oversight Responsibilities  
The University of Ariz ona Cancer Center Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) 
will provide ongoing oversight for this trial. This study has been assigned a Low Risk 
level by the DSMB. The DSMB meets monthly to quarterly, depending on the risk level 
of a clinical trial, to eva luate the safety o f the study. A meeting quorum is comprised of 6 
voting members, including the Board Chair. The risk level is based on various trial 
characteristics such as the phase of the study, study endpoints, level of intervention, 
degree of risk, an d the complexity o f the trial.  
11.2 Identification of the Entity Obligated for Routine Monitoring Duties  
Routine study monitoring will be provided by the Quality Assurance/Quality Control 
(QA/AC) Program to ensure that the study is conducted according to protoc ol design and 
regulatory requirements.  
This study will also undergo real -time monitoring by the PI and study team, including 
documentation of any new or ongoing safety issues. For individual participants, adverse 
events will be assessed at each visit by th e study coordinato r who will then report the 
events to the PI at the weekly study staff meeting.  A Study Events Form (CRF) will be 
reviewed and signed by the PI for each subject. Any severe adverse event will be 
reviewed by the PI within 24 hours of repor ting by the subjec t. 
11.3 Monitoring Progress and Data Review Process  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 17    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 Routine monitoring of subject data will be conducted at least quarterly.  
The first routine monitoring visit will include at a minimum:  
• Informed consent – 50% of cases enrolled;  
• Subject eligib ility – 10% of cas es, up to two subjects;  
• Data review – 10% of cases, up to two subjects.  
All subsequent monitoring visits will consist of randomly selected subject cases based 
on current enrollment and include continuing review of previously selected case s, as 
applicable.  
A monitoring visit report and follow -up letter will be completed approximately two weeks 
after the routine monitoring visit; a copy will be maintained in the study file. Th e monitor 
will request additional source documentation, clarificat ion, information, or corrections to 
the CRF and/or regulatory records from the Clinical Research Coordinator (CRC) or 
other applicable staff responsible for the study and resolution of queries/findings. 
Documentation of such a request will be maintained wi th a copy of the m onitor’s visit 
report for follow -up at the next monitoring visit. Electronic records will be available in the 
institutional database or provided by the QA/QC Program staff.  
The Principal Investigator will ensure the accuracy, completeness , legibility and 
timeliness of the data reported in the Case Report Form (CRF), or other acceptable data 
formats. Source documentation supporting the study data should indicate the subject’s 
participation in the trial and should document the dates and deta ils of study proce dures, 
adverse events, and patient status.  
Case report forms, which include the inclusion/exclusion criteria form , adverse event 
forms and serious adverse event forms should be completed via the institution database 
or other acceptable da ta formats. Trials  using paper CRFs will have the data entered 
with a black ball -point pen or typed. Corrections to the forms should not obscure the 
original entry and should be made by striking the incorrect information with a single line. 
Each strike sho uld be accompanied  by the initials of the corrector and the correction 
date. All subject forms and study files will be stored in a secure area limited to 
authorized staff. Routine monitoring of regulatory documents will be conducted at least 
annually.  
11.4 Process to Implement S tudy Closure When Significant Risks or Benefits are 
Identified  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 18    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 The PI will determine if the study at a certain point may need to be closed if significant 
study related risks or benefits are identified. The PI would then follow up with the  DSMB 
and IRB in a  timely manner.  
12.0 ADVERSE EVENT S 
12.1 Evaluation for Adverse E vents  
The safety of all participants enrolled in this study will be monitored throughout the 
study. At baseline a study events form will be completed. Study personnel will review 
study events with the study participant at each visit.  Any reportable adverse experience 
(i.e., greater than baseline level), whether considered study related or not, will be 
recorded in an study events report form, along with the dates of onset, resolution, 
severity and remed ial measures taken.  In all cases, study participants will be followed 
until resolution of the event.  In  addition, patients will be instructed to notify the study 
staff by telephone of any problems that occur between visits and, if neces sary, be 
evaluated  by the Investigator or study staff at an unscheduled interim visit.  
12.2 Adverse Event (AE) D efinitions  
The following definitions of terms guided by the International Conference on 
Harmonization and the US Code of Federal Re gulations apply to  this section:  
• Adverse event  is any untoward medical occurrence in a patient or clinical 
investigation subject that does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the 
study procedures.  
• Serious adverse event  is any adverse event that is fatal or life -threatening, is 
permanently disabling, requires or prolon gs inpatient hospitalization,  is a congenital 
anomaly, is a nonmelanoma skin can cer on the test area but not at more distant 
sites, or overdose.  
• Life-threatening , for the purpose of reporting adver se events, refers to  an event in 
which the patient was, in the view of the initial reporter, at immediate  risk of death 
at the time of the event as it occurred (i.e., it does not include an event that, had it 
occurred in a more serious form, might have cau sed death).  
• Associat ed with the  study procedures  means that there is a reasonable 
possibility that the experience (event) may have been caused by the study 
procedures.  
• Unexpected adverse experience  (event) means any adverse experience (event) 
that is incon sistent with the pro cedures described in this protocol.  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 19    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 12.3 Reporting of Adverse E vents  
The approving Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Ethics Committee (EC) must be notified 
of any fatal, life -threatening and/or serious adverse events, regardless of cause, on a 
timely basis and m ust be apprised of all adverse events by written report on a periodic 
and timely basis, at least annually.  
A written report of all serious adverse events and deaths will be submitted by the 
Investigator to the IRB/EC .  In this report, t he Investigator will  advise whether or not the 
adverse event is judged to be related to the study procedures. All such patients with 
adverse events should be followed clinically and by the appropriate diagnostic 
evaluations.  
All adverse events, regardless of severity, and whe ther or not ascribed to the study 
procedures  will be recorded in the appropriate section of the Case Report Form.  The 
Investigator will follow patients withdrawn from the study due to adverse events until the 
outcome is determined and,  when appropriate, a dditional written reports and 
documentation will be provided.  
12.4 Data Safety and Monitoring Board  
The University of Arizona Cancer Center Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) will 
provide ongoing oversight for this trial. Routine monito ring will be provide d by the Quality 
Assurance/Quality Control (QA/QC) Program to ensure that the investigation is 
conducted according to protocol design and regulatory requirements.  
This trial will also undergo real -time monitoring by the PI and study te am, including 
docume ntation of real -time monitoring of any new or ongoing safety issues.  For 
individual participants, adverse events will be assessed by the principal investigator and 
the study coord inator as the y occur.  
12.5 Classification of Adverse Events b y Severity  
The sever ity of local skin reactions will be classified accordi ng to the criteria below.   For 
systemic effect, the investigator must categorize the severity of each adverse event 
according to the following guidelines:  
 Mild:  Grade 1 NCI CTCAE; or if not found in t he NCI CTCAE table, an adverse 
event that is asymptomatic or barely noticeable to the patient; not interfering with 
patient’s daily activity performance or functioning; generally not requiring alteration or 
cessation of study  procedures ; and/or ordinarily not needing therapeutic intervention.  
 Moderate:   Grade 2 NCI CTCAE; or if not found in the NCI CTCAE table, an 
adverse event of sufficient severity as to possibly make the patient moderately 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 20    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 uncomfortable; possibly influencing the pati ent’s daily activity  performance or 
functioning; generally not impairing the patient ability to continue in the study; and/or 
possibly needing therapeutic intervention.  
 Severe :  Grade 3 NCI CTCAE; or if not found in the NCI CTCAE table, an 
adverse event g enerally causing sev ere discomfort; significantly influencing the patient’s 
daily activity performance or functioning; generally requiring alteration or cessation of 
study procedures;  and/or generally requiring therapeutic intervention.  
 Life-threatening o r disabling:   Grade 4 NCI CTCAE; or if not found in the NCI 
CTCAE table, an adverse event that is considered to be life -threatening; resulting in 
significant disability or incapacity; and/or representing the worst possible occurrence of 
that event.  
 Death related to AE :  Grad e 5 NCI CTCAE to be used only in the unlikely event 
that death is determined to be related to the study procedures.  
12.6 Classification of Adverse Events by Relationship to Study Procedures  
The Investigator will assess the relationship of ea ch adverse event to the study 
procedures  after careful consideration, and according to the following guidelines:  
 NO, NOT RELATED:  This category is applicable to those adverse events that 
are clearly due to extraneous causes (concurrent drugs, environment , etc.) and d o not 
meet the criteria for study procedure  relationship listed under PROBABLY NOT; 
POSSIBLY; PROBABLY; AND YES, RELATED.  
 PROBABLY NOT RELATED:  This category applies to those adverse events 
that are judged to be unlikely to be related to the  study procedures.   An adverse event 
may be considered to be PROBABLY NOT RELATED when it meets at least two (2) of 
the following criteria:  
a)  It does not follow a reasonable temporal sequence from administration of the study 
procedures.  
b)  It could read ily have been produc ed by the patient’s clinical state, environmental or 
toxic factors, or other modes of therapy administered to the patient.  
c)  It does not follow a known or expected response pattern to the study procedures.  
d)  It does not reappear or worsen when the stud y procedures are  re-administered.  
 POSSIBLY RELATED:  This category applies to those adverse events that are 
judged to be perhaps related to the study procedures.   An adverse event may be 
considered POSSIBLY RELATED when it meets at lea st one (1) of the fo llowing criteria:  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 21    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 a)  It follows a reasonable temporal sequence from administration of the study  
procedures.  
b)  It could not readily h ave been produced by the subject ’s clinical state,  toxic or 
environmental,  or other modes of ther apy administered to the subject.  
c)  It follows a known or expected response pattern to the study procedures.  
 PROBABLY RELATED:  This category applies to those adverse events that are 
felt with a high degree of certainty to be related to the study procedures.   An adverse 
event m ay be considered PROBABLY RELATED if it meets at least two (2) of the 
following criteria:  
a) It follows a reasonable temporal sequence from administration of the study 
procedures.  
b)  It could not be reasonably explained by the known ch aracteristics of the  patient’s 
clinical state, environmental or toxic factors, or other modes of therapy administered to 
the patients.  
c)  It disappears or decreases on cessation or reduction in study procedures.   There are 
exceptions when an adverse event  does not disappear upon discontinuation of the 
procedures, yet a relationship clearly exists.  
d)  It follows a known or expected response pattern to the study procedures.  
 YES, RELATED:  This category applies to those adverse events that are 
incontrovert ibly related to stud y procedures.   An adverse event may be assigned to this 
category if it meets at least the first three  (3) of the following criteria:  
a)  It follows reasonable temporal sequence from a dministration of the study procedures.  
b) It could no t be reasonably expl ained by the known characteristics of the  
patient’s clinical state, environmental or toxic factors, or other modes of therapy.  
c)  It disappears or decreases on cessation or reduction in study procedures.   There are 
exceptions when an adverse event does n ot disappear upon discontinuation o f the 
procedures, yet a relationship  clearly exists  
d)  It follows a known or expected response pattern to the study procedures.  
e)  It reappears or worsens when the study procedures are re-administer ed.  
13.0 CLINIC PERSONNE L 
13.1 Recruiting study subjects  
13.2 Scheduling appointments and screening clinics  
13.3 Admin istering informed consent and HIPAA authorization  
13.4 Preparat ion and completion of subject study records  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 22    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 13.5 Motivating and evaluating compliance  to the study proto col 
13.6 Clinical safety monitoring  
13.7 Responding to c urrent and potential subject  requests  and concerns.   
13.8 Assisting study medical providers  with the collection of tissue samples  
13.9 Quality control and assurance of data collection and study procedures  
14.0 HUMAN SUBJECTS  
14.1 Up to 36 healthy vol unteers  will participate in this clinical trial.  Based on the 
distribution of the skin cancer population, subject populations responding to 
recruitment efforts are predominantly Caucasian as the target population  consist s 
primarily of people with moderate  to heavy sun damage.  This study target s individuals 
with Fitzpatrick  skin types II and III.  Every effort will be  made to recruit minority 
subjects , commensurate with study objectives and project goals .   
14.2 In order to protect human sub jects in this study,  we will recruit only women who 
have a negative pregnancy test.   Women who are pregnant or nursing are not eligible 
to participate.  Every attempt will be made to include eligible women and minority 
subjects in these trials.  
14.3 Human Tissu e Samples (HTS) obta ined from these human volunteers will be 
utilized strictly for research purposes.  HTS to be obtained include epidermal tissue 
samples.  The security of HTS will be protected by detailed Standard Operating 
Procedures for processing, sha ring and tracking th e chain of custody of HTS.  
14.4 All information and specimens obtained from these human volunteers will be 
utilized st rictly for research purposes.  Information to be collected includes medical 
history, physical exam, adherence evaluations a nd adverse event mon itoring.   
Information will be treated according to HIPAA regulations .  Study  participants will be 
asked to read and sign a Research Authorization (HIPAA consent form) in order to 
participate in the study.  
14.5 Subjects will be recruited through the dermatology clinic at the Arizona Cancer 
Center, newspaper, advertisements, community outreach programs, and from previous 
study participants who have agreed to be contacted.   
14.6 After the initial eligibility screening, s ubjects will have a detailed discussion of 
the st udy requirements and procedures with the stu dy medical provider  or coordinator .  
All information regarding the study procedures will be provided to the subjects in 
understandable laymen terms on an IRB -approved informed consent form  and a 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 23    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 HIPAA Authorizati on form.  All subjects will receive copies of the signed forms for their 
records.  
14.7 Potential risks from the number or intensity of light exposures  proposed are 
small.  The light exposures  given to determine the MED  may result in  a mild s un-burn, 
and tanned areas approximately the size of a pencil eraser, which will fade over time .  
Side effects associated with the use of subcutaneous lidocaine are rare, particularly 
when given in a site such as the forearm.  Skin biopsies are expected to r esult in 
permanent s cars. These potential effects are clearly o utlined in the informed consent  
and subjects will be  carefully monitored during the study.   Subjects will be identified 
only by subject number in all  communications.  
14.8 The important information t o be obtained in th is study is critical to th e optimal 
design of future skin cancer chemoprevention trials.  The risks to subjects participating 
are well described in the consent form and are reasonable given the study objectives.   
14.9 Subjects will receive f inancial  compensatio n for participation (Appendix D).  
14.10  Subjects may not participate in the study if they are enrolled in any other 
clinical trial using an investigational drug or device.  A waiting period of at least 30 
days must be observed between partici pation in another cl inical trial and enrollment in 
this study.  If a subject chooses to join another clinical trial after they have enrolled in 
this study, they must be dropped from th is study.  
14.11  Subjects must avoid sun exposure to the treatment area s until their study 
particip ation has  been completed and all biopsy sites have healed.  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 24    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 15.0 REFERENCES   
1. McKenzie NE. Development of a photographic scale for consistency and 
guidance in dermatologic assessment of forearm sun damage. Arch Dermatol 
2011 ;147(1):31 -36. doi:10.1001/archderm atol 2010.392.  
2. Epstein JH. Photocarcinogenesis, skin cancer, and aging. J Am Acad Dermatol 
1983;9(4):487 -502.2 
3. IARC. Solar and ultraviolet radiation.  IARC Monograph Evaluating Carcinogenic 
Risks to Humans 1992:55:1 -316. 
4. Ley RD.  Photoreactivation i n humans.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA  1993;90(10):4337.  
5. Setlow RB. The wavelengths in sunlight effective in producing skin cancer: a 
theoretical analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1974;71  (9):3363 -6. 
6. Fitzpatrick T, Sober AJ, Pearson BJ,  Lew R. Cutaneous ca rcinogenic effects of 
sunlight in humans. New York: Plenum Publishing Corp; 1976.  
7. Forbes P, Davis RJ, Urbach F. Experimental ultraviolet carcinogenesis. New 
York: Plenum Publishing Corp; 1976.  
8. Fry R, Ley RD. Ultraviolet radiation -induced skin cancer.  New York: Raven 
Press; 1989.  
9. Matsui MS, Laufer L, Scheide S, DeLeo V. Ultraviolet -B (290 -320 nm) -irradiation 
inhibits epidermal growth -factor binding to mammalian cells. J Invest Dermatol 
1989;92(4):617 -22. 
10. de Gruijl FR. Photoca rcinogenesis: UVA vs  UVB. Methods in Enzymology. 
2000;319:359 -66. 
11. de Laat A, van der Leun JC, de Gruijl FR. Carcinogenesis induced by UVA (365 -
nm) radiation: the dose -time dependence of tumor formation in hairless mice. 
Carcinogenesis 1997;18(5):1013 -20. 
12. Elmets C. Cut aneous photocarcinogenesis. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 1992.  
13. Kelfkens G, de Gruijl FR, van der Leun JC. The influence of ventral UVA 
exposure on subsequent tumorigenesis in mice by UVA or UVB irradiation. 
Carcinogenesis 1992;13(11):2169 -74. 
14. Boutwell RK . The function and mechanism of promoters of carcinogenesis. CRC 
Crit Rev Toxicol 1974;2(4):419 -43. 
15. Danpure HJ, Tyrrell RM. Oxygen -dependence of near UV (365 NM) lethality and 
the interaction of near UV and X -rays in two mammalian c ell lines. Photochem  
Photobiol 1976;23(3):171 -7. 
16. Strickland PT. Photocarcinogenesis by near -ultraviolet (UVA) radiation in Sencar 
mice. J Invest Dermatol 1986;87(2):272 -5. 
17. Willis I, Menter JM, Whyte HJ. The rapid induction of cancers in the hairles s 
mouse utilizing th e principle of photoaugmentation. J Invest Dermatol 
1981;76(5):404 -8. 
18. Tessmann L. Mechanism of UV -reactivation. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 1976.  
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 25    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 19. Brash DE, Rudolph JA, Simon JA, Lin A, McKenna GJ, Baden HP, et al. A role 
for sunlight  in skin cancer: UV -induced p53 mutations in squamous cell 
carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88(22):10124 -8. 
20. Boone CW, Kelloff GJ, Steele VE. Natural history of intraepithelial neoplasia in 
 humans with implications for cancer chemoprevention st rategy. Cancer Resea rch 
 1992;52(7):1651 -9. 
21. Alberts DS, Dorr RT, Einspahr JG, Aickin M, Saboda K, Xu MJ, et al. 
 Chemoprevention of human actinic kerotoses by topical 2 -(difluoromethyl) -dl-
 ornithine. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 2000;9:1281 -1286 . 
22. Rapkiewicz A, Espina V, Zujewski JA, Lebowitz PF, Filie A, Wulfkuhle J, et al. 
 The needle in the haystack: application of breast fine -needle aspirate samples to 
 quantitative protein microarray technology. Cancer 2007;111(3):173 -84. 
23. Petricoin EF , 3rd, Espina V, Ara ujo RP, Midura B, Yeung C, Wan X, et al. 
 Phosphoprotein pathway mapping: Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin activation 
 is negatively associated with childhood rhabdomyosarcoma survival. Cancer Res 
 2007;67(7):3431 -40. 
24. Liotta LA, Es pina V, Mehta AI, Ca lvert V, Rosenblatt K, Geho D, et al. Protein 
 microarrays: meeting analytical challenges for clinical applications. Cancer Cell 2
 003;3(4):317 -25. 
25. Sheehan KM, Gulmann C, Eichler GS, Weinstein JN, Barrett HL, Kay EW, et al. 
 Signal pathway profiling of  epithelial and stromal compartments of colonic 
 carcinoma reveals epithelial -mesenchymal transition. Oncogene 2007.  
26. Fullerton A, Fischer, T, Lahti A, et al. Guidelines for measurement of skin colour 
and erythema.  A report from the  standardization gro up of the european society 
of contact dermatitis.  Contact Dermatitis, 1996 ;35:1 -10. 
27. Takiwaki H.  Measurement of skin color: practical application and theoretical 
considerations. J Med Invest 1998;44:121 -6. 
28. Healy ZR, Dinkova -Kostova AT, Wehage SL, et al. Precise determination of the 
erythema response of human skin to ultraviolet radiation and quantification of 
effects of protectors. Photodermatology, Photoimmunology & Photomedicine, 
2009;25:45 -50. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 26    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 APPENDIX A  
 
LIST OF A BBREVIATIONS  
AEs  adverse e vents  
 
AK  actinic k eratosis  
 
BX  biopsy  
 
CFR  Code of Federal Regulations  
 
CPD  cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers  
 
cSCC  cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma  
 
CTCAE  Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events  
 
DFMO  difluormethylornit hine 
 
DNA  Deoxyribon ucleic acid  is a molecule  that carries the genetic  instructions used in 
 the growth, development, functioning and reproduction  of all known living 
 organisms  and many viruses .  
 
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
 
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
 
IHC or Immunohistochemistry  refers to the process of detecting antigens  (e.g., 
proteins) in cells of a tissue section by exploiting the principle of antibodies  binding 
specifically to antigens. 
 
IRB  Internal Review Board  
 
MED  Minimal Erythema Dose, MED is defined as th e smallest dose of energy 
 necessary to produce confluent erythema with four distinct borders at 22 -26 
 hours post -exposure.  
 
NCI National Cancer Institute  
 
NMSC  non-melanoma skin cancer  
 
p53 Tumor protein p53 , also known as p53, is a protein  that in humans is encoded by 
 the TP53  gene . The p53 protein is crucial in multicellular organisms , where it 
 regulates the cell cycle  and functions as a tumor suppressor , preventing cancer .  
 
PRPK  p53-related protein  kinase  
 
RPPA  Reverse -phase protein array analysis  is a protein array designed as a micro - or 
nano - scaled dot-blot platform that allows measurement of protein expression 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 27    V. 02.10.2021  
 
 levels in  a large number of biological samples simultaneously in a quantitative 
manner.  
 
SCC  squamous cell carcinoma  
SD sun dam aged  
 
SP sun protected  
 
SSL solar simulated light  
 
TLT treatment limiting toxicity  
 
TOPK  T-LAK cell -originated protein kin ase  
 
TLR4  Toll-like R eceptor 4  
 
TUNEL or TdT assay  terminal deoxyribonucleotide transferase   
 
UVR  Ultraviolet rad iation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 28    V. 02.10.2021  
 
  
APPENDIX B  
 
Common Photosensitizing Drugs  
Brand Name  Generic Name  Therapeutic Class  
Cordarone  amiodarone  antiarrhythmic  
Bactrim  trimethoprim  antimicrobial  
Diabinese  chlorpropamide  antidiabetic (oral)  
Vibramycin  doxycycline  antimicrob ial 
Phenergan  promethazine  antihistamine  
Gris-Peg griseofulvin  antimicrobial  
Thorazine  chlorpromazine  Antipsychotic  
Aldoril  hydrochlorothiazide  Diuretic  
Orinase  tolbutamide  antidiabetic  
Additional classes of drugs with photosensit izing potential are:   acne medications, 
antibiotics (esp. tetracyclines and nalidixic acid), antihistamines, phenothiazines, sulfa 
drugs, tricyclic antidepressants, thiazide diuretics, sulfonylureas, quinidine.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 29    V. 02.10.2021  
 
  
 
APPENDIX C  
 
ASSESSMENT  OF PHOTODAMAGE * 
 
CLINICAL SIGN  
 ABSENT           MILD    MODERATE        SEVERE  
 
 
Fine Wrinkling  
Visible creases or folds < 1 
mm* in width and depth         
     0    
    1      2      3        
    4      5      6    
    7      8      9  
 
 
Coarse Wrinkling  
Thickening of skin cau sing 
visible creases or folds > 1 
mm* in width and depth         
     0    
    1      2      3     
    4      5      6        
    7      8      9  
 
 
Abnormal Pigmentation  
Abnormally increased or 
decreased coloration of skin; 
may be localiz ed or diffuse   
     0               
    1      2      3     
    4      5      6   
    7      8      9  
 
 
Global  
Overall assessment of sun 
damage         
    0     
    1      2      3      
    4      5      6       
    7      8      9  
 
*Development of a Photog raphic Scale for Con sistency and Guidance in Dermatologic 
Assessment of Forearm Sun Damage.  McKenzie NE, Saboda KL, Hu C, Curiel -
Lewandrowski C.  Archives of Dermatology, 2011; 147(1):31 -36. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Skin Cancer Prevention Program Project  
IRB # 1907830098   Arizona Cancer Center  
   
 
CONFIDENTIAL  Page 30    V. 02.10.2021  
 
  
APPENDIX D  
 
SCHEDULE OF SUBJECT COMPENSATI ON 
 
Subjects will re ceive financial compensation for their participation in the study.   
 
If a subject discontinues participation for any reason, they will receive a pro -rated 
amount of compensation for the visits they did complete.  
 
The compensation sched ule is as follows:  
Screening         no compensation  
Visit 1    enrollment,  assessment s, SSL for MED determination    $  40 
Visit 2    Determine MED*         $  25 
Visit 3    SSL exposures , collection of control & 5° biopsies*    $110  
Visit 4    Collection of 24° biopsies        $  70 
Visit 5    Suture removal - final visit  **      $  30 
  
Total                                           $275  
 
 
*Visits 2 and 3 may be combined when scheduling allows.  
**Patient may have their sutures removed by another provider, per thei r 
preference.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 