 
RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 
 
Protocol Title:   A randomized, controlled trial after vaginal apex suspension  
comparing force of stream to traditional retrograde fill voiding trial  
Principal Investigator:  Harvey Winkler, MD  
Primary Contact Name:  Marjorie Pilkinton, MD  
Primary Contact Phone:  516-622-5236 
Primary Contact E -mail: mpilkinton@ns hs.edu 
Date Revised:  2/26/16 
IRB Number:   
  
Guidelines for Preparing a Research Protocol  
 Instructions:  
• You do not need to complete this document if you are submitting an Application for 
Exemption  or Application for a Chart Review .   
• Do not use this template if: 
o  Your study involves an FDA regulated product.  In this case, use the Clinical 
Trial Protocol Template. 
o Your study has a protocol from a sponsor or cooperative group.  In this case, use the Protocol Plus .   
o Your study is a registry or repository for data and/or samples,  In this case, use Protocol Template – Registry Studies.  .   
• If a section of this protocol is not applicable, please indicate such. 
• Do not delete any of the text contained within this document. 
• Please make sure to keep an electronic copy of this document.  You will need to us e it, if 
you make modifications in the future.   
• Start by entering study information into the table above, according to these rules: 
o Protocol Title:  Include the full protocol title as listed on the application.  
o Investigator:  include the principal investigator’s name as listed on the application form 
o Date Revised:  Indicate the date at which the protocol was last revised  
o IRB Number:  Indicate the assigned IRB number, when known.  At initial submission, this row will be left blank.   
• Once the table i nformation in entered, proceed to page 2 and complete the rest of the 
form. 
     
 Continue to next page to begin entering information about this study    
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 1 of 25 
 
  
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 2 of 25 
 
1.  PREVIOUS STUDY HISTORY  
 
Has this study ever been reviewed and rejected/disapproved by another IRB prior to 
submission to this IRB? 
 
 No   Yes −  if yes, please explain:  
  
2. BRIEF SUMMARY OF RESEARCH  
• The summary should be written in language intelligible to a moderately educated, non-scientific layperson .  
• It should contain a clear statement of the rationale and hypothesis of your study, a 
concise description of the methodology, with an emphasis on what will happen to the 
subjects, and a discussion of the results.  
• This section should be ½ page 
 
 
It is common to have voiding difficulties after prolapse and incontinence surgeries.  Difficulties 
in voiding are seen in up to 47% of patients after transvaginal prolapse surgery in the 
immediate hours postoperatively6.  Accepted protocols for voiding trials after prolapse and 
incontinence surgeries do not exist. Traditionally , many surgeons measure postvoid residual 
(PVR) urine volume to assess incomplete bladder emptying by retrograde filling of the bladder with a predetermined amount of normal saline or water. The catheter is then removed and the patient is permitted to void into a collection basin. The amount in the basin is subtracted from the filled amount. The need for postoperative catheterization is generally 
based on arbitrarily determined ratios of voided urine to PVR. The force of stream trial 
(FAST) does not prioritize amount voided, but rather the patient’s subjective force of stream. 
Using FAST, a patient uses a VAS scale to quantify her force of stream. If she states that her 
Force of Stream (FOS) is >50% of her baseline prior to surgery, independent of the amount voided, she is discharged without a catheter.  If the FOS is <50%, a PVR is measured via bladder scan. If her PVR is <500cc the patient is discharged home. 
 
No randomized control trials (RCT) have been performed comparing the FAST method to the 
traditional retrograde voiding trial in subjects undergoing vaginal apex prolapse surgery 
despite the promising findings that FAST voiding trials are as reliable and safe as retrograde voiding trials in patients undergoing anti -incontinence surgeries.  Standard in our practice is 
to perform a voiding trial on postopeartive day 1 on all patients after vaginal apical prolapse surgery if they are to be discharged without a catheter. We would like to compare the FAST voiding trial to a traditional retrograde voiding trial with respect to the rate of catheterization 
among those discharged without a catheter within the six -week postoperative period in 
patients undergoing a vaginal apex prolapse surgery.  We hypothesize the FAST voiding trial 
method is not inferior to traditional retrograde voiding trial.  Subjects will complete questionnaires to examine postoperative bladder function, symptom distress and quality of life before and after surgery during their routine postoperative visits.  We anticipate to find no 
difference in rates of catheterization in those discharged without a catheter in the 6- week 
postoperative period, the rate of urinary tract infection, the number of emergency room or 
unplanned office visits for voiding dysfunction or urinary tract infections, or a difference in 
urinary symptom scores using the questionnaires.   
 
 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 3 of 25 
3. INTRODUCTION/BACKGRO UND MATERIAL/PRELIMI NARY STUDIES AND 
SIGNIFICANCE  
• Describe and provide the results of previous work by yourself or others, including 
animal studies, laboratory studies, pilot studies, pre- clinical and/or clinical studies 
involving the compound or device to be studied.  
• Include information as to why you are conducting the study and how the study differs from what has been previously researched, including what the knowledge gaps are. 
• Describe the importance of the knowledge expected to result  
The acceptable amount voided urine during the traditional retrograde voiding trial varies 
among practitioners. In a study by Kleeman et al, the patient was required to void >50% of 
volume filled during retrograde fill for discharge from hospital without an indwelling Foley catheter
7. Pulvino et al, required that the patient void > 2/3 the amount of the volume placed 
during retrograde fill8. The force of stream trial (FAST) does not prioritize amount voided, but 
rather the patient’s subjective force of stream.  
A double- blinded randomized trial was performed to compare retrograde bladder filling versus 
FAST in 108 patients undergoing outpatient midurethral sling surgery10.  Authors defined 
passing the retrograde filling test with voiding at least two- thirds of the instilled amount 
whereas passing the FAST method required the subject to disclose a FOS at least 50% of the baseline regardless of the volume voided.  No differences were found between incidence of catheterization between the two groups (retrograde 25.5%, force of stress 26%; p=0.95) and no differences in urinary symptom and distress scores and pain scores on questionnaires 
given postoperatively.  Importantly, no patients who passed either the FOS or retrograde fill 
tests required catheter reinsertion within 6 weeks postoperatively.  The authors concluded the FAST test is a reliable and safe method of testing for voiding dysfunction after midurethral sling surgery.    
Temporary catheterization does not pose a significant medical risk, but it is perceived as an 
inconvenience, a source of discomfort, and may be distressing for many patients. Elkadry et 
al. evaluated patient perception on surgical outcomes and concluded that 9% of women 
believed postoperative catheterization to be a surgical complication
12.  In addition to the 
distress and incontinence a catheter poses on a patient, resources and time must be spent in teaching proper care of an indwelling Foley catheter by nursing or  housestaff.  
No randomized control trials (RCT) have been performed comparing the FAST method to the 
traditional retrograde voiding trial  in subjects undergoing vaginal apex prolapse surgery 
despite the promising findings that FAST voiding trials are as reliable and safe as retrograde 
voiding trials in patients undergoing anti -incontinence surgeries . 
 
 
4. OBJECTIVE(S)/SPECIFIC  AIMS AND HYPOTH ESES 
• A concise statement of the goal(s) of the current study.  
• The rationale for and specific objectives of the study.  
• The goals and the hypothesis to be tested should be stated. 
 
We would like to  compare the FAST voiding trial to a traditional retrograde voiding trial with 
respect to the rate of catheterization among those discharged without a catheter within the six-week postoperative period in patients undergoing a vaginal apex suspension surgery.  In 
addition we aim to identify the number of patients sent home with a catheter due to failure of 
their respective voiding trial, the rate of reported urinary tract infections, the rate of unexpected or emergent visits for voiding dysfunction or urinary  infections, the time from 
passing the voiding trial to catheterization within the 6- week postoperative period, and the 
degree of urinary symptoms and impact on quality of life in the postoperative period.  
 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 4 of 25 
 
 
5.  RESOURCES AVAILABLE TO CONDUCT THE HUMAN RESEARCH  
• Explain the feasibility of meeting recruitment goals of this project and demonstrate a 
potential for recruiting the required number of suitable subjects within the agreed 
recruitment period  
o How many potential subjects do you have access to? 
• Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the trial are 
adequately informed about the protocol and their trial related duties and functions  
Our division performs approximately 200 vaginal apex suspension surgeries for pelvic organ 
prolapse in a 12-month period.  It is standard of care in our practice that  all patients after 
vaginal apical  prolpase surgery must complete a voiding trial  on postoperative day 1 if they 
are to be discharged without a catheter.   We assess postoperative voiding function using the 
traditional retrograde fill with 300cc saline or water  postoperative day 1 prior to discharge. We 
also require a 2/3 quantity voided for discontinuation of catheter.    The availability of potential 
subjects who meet eligibility criteria for this study is adequate for completion in 12 month 
period.  All co -investigators are fellow s or attending faculty in the division of urogynecology  
who are able to screen and approach subjects for enrollment.  All are well ve rsed in voiding 
trial management and protocol adherence.   
 
 
6.  RECRUITMENT METHODS  
• Describe the source of potential subjects 
• Describe the methods that will be used to identify potential subjects 
• Describe any materials that will be used to recruit subjects.  A copy of any 
advertisements (flyers, radio scripts, etc.) should be submitted along with the 
protocol.  
• If monetary compensation is to be offered, this should be indicated in the protocol  
The study population will be patients of the Urogynecology practice of North well Health 
System who are scheduled for surgery for vaginal apical prolapse with or without concomitant 
midurethral sling, anterior or posterior colporrhaphy .   Patients will be randomized to one of 
two methods of voiding trial.   Randomization will be stratified by site of surgery (Long Island 
Jewish Hospital or North Shore University Hospital) as well as type of surgery (apical vaginal 
prolapse surgery with a sling or apical vaginal prolapse surgery without a sling.  All subjects over 18 years  of age will be screened for eligibility relative to the patient inclusion and 
exclusion criteria. Recruitment for the study will be done via direct contact from our patient population. If a subject is found to be eligible to participate, an approved study investigator will approach her during her scheduled preoperative visit or in the hospital prior to her 
surgery.  No form of advertisement will be used. The recruitment methods used will provide equitable selection of subjects.   No forms of monetary compensation will be provided.   
Patients who are scheduled to have a surgery for vaginal apical prolapse with or without 
midurethral sling and with or without anterior  and/or posterior  colporrhaphy  will be 
approached for study enrollment. Surgical procedures intended for treatment of vaginal apical prolapse are: uterosacral vaginal vault suspension, abdominal sacral colpopexy,  colpocleisis , 
and sacrospinous  ligament fixation.  After informed consent  is obtained, patients will be 
asked to complete the Urinary Distress Inventory ( UDI-6), American Urological Association 
Symptom Score (AUASS) at the time of consent .  The patient will be randomized to the FAST 
or traditional retrograde fill  voiding trial.  
 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 5 of 25 
 
 
7.  ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  
• Describe the characteristics of the subject population, including their anticipated 
number, age, ranges, sex, ethnic background, and health status. Identify the criteria 
for inclusion or exclusion of any subpopulation.  
• Explain the rationale for the involvement of special classes of subjects, such as 
fetuses, pregnant women, children, prisoners or other institutionalized individuals, or 
others who are likely to be vulnerable.   You cannot include these populations in your research, unless you indicate such in the protocol 
• Similarly, detail exclusionary criteria: age limits, special populations (minors, 
pregnant women, decisionally impaired), use of concomitant medications, subjects 
with other diseases, severity of illness,  etc. 
 
All subjects over 18 years of age will be screened for eligibility relative to the patient inclusion 
and exclusion criteria.   Our subject population comprises of women, ages range 18- 95, 
various stages of physical health, who suffer from pelvic organ prolapse.  The subjects have 
chosen, in consultation with their physician, to undergo surgery to correct their pelvic organ prolapse.  It is standard of care in our practice for patients to have a medical evaluation and clearance by their internist prior to surgery to determine if patient is safe to undergo surgery.   Subjects will be excluded if any of the following apply:  
1. Patients who underwent a surgery that requires long term catheterization (i.e fistula repair or urethral diverticulum)  
2. Patients who sustained a cystotomy during surgery as our divisional protocol is to send 
these patients home with a Foley catheter for 5- 14 days without a voiding trial  
3. Patients with baseline urinary retention and the inability to urinate without catheterization  
4. Pregnant women 
 
 
 
8.  NUMBER OF SUBJECTS  
• Indicate the total number of subjects to be accrued locally.  I f applicable, distinguish 
between the number of subjects who are expected to be pre- screened, enrolled 
(consent obtained), randomized and complete the research procedures. 
• If your study includes different cohorts, include the total number of subjects in each 
cohort. 
• If this is multisite study, include total number of subjects across all sites.   
 
The proposed sample size for this one year study is a total of 154 evaluable  subjects (n=77 
randomized to each voiding group).  A subject will be “evaluable” if she gets randomized and 
is able to undergo the voiding trial.  A subject who is not able to undergo the voiding trial is 
considered “not evaluable” and would not be included in the analysis.  
 
  
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 6 of 25 
9.  STUDY TIMELINES  
• Describe the duration of an individuals participation in the study 
• Describe the duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects 
• The estimated date of study completion 
 
This study will be conducted over 12 -month period.  Given our availability of potential 
subjects in our practice, enrollment will be completed in a timely fashion.   
 
 
10.  ENDPOINTS  
• Describe the primary and secondary study endpoints 
• Describe any primary or secondary safety endpoints   
Primary: 
The primary outcome variable of interest is the rate of catheterization within the six -week 
post-operative period following surgical repair of POP, among those discharged without a 
urinary cathet er. 
Secondary : 
1. Proportion of patients discharged with a catheter (this is essentially the proportion of 
patients who failed the voiding trial)  
2. Proportion of patients who reported any UTI within the six -week post -operative 
period. The number of UTIs reported by each patient during that period will also be 
recorded.  
3. Proportion of patients with emergency room visits or unexpected visits to the 
Urogynecology clinic for voiding dysfunction or suspected infection, within the six -
week post -operative period.  The number of ER visits or unexpected clinic visits will 
also be recorded.  
4. Time -to-catheterization post -discharge:  This is the number of days from discharge to 
catheterization (within the 6 -week period post -surgery).  Subjects who are not 
catheterized by the end of the follow -up period will be considered ‘censored’.  
5. Patient satisfaction with postoperative bladder function (measured at baseline, 2-weeks post -op and 6 weeks post -op) using:  
a. American Urological Association Symptom Score (AUASS)  
b. Urinary Distress Inventory (UDI -6) 
 
 
 
11.  RESEARCH PROCEDURES  
• Include a detailed description of all procedures to be performed on the research 
subject and the schedule for each procedure. 
• Include any screening procedures for eligibility and/or baseline diagnostic tests 
• Include procedures being performed to monitor subjects for safety or minimize risks 
• Include information about drug washout periods 
• If drugs or biologics are being administered provide information on dosing and route 
of administration 
• Clearly indicate which procedures are only being conducted for research purposes. 
• If any specimens will be used for this research, explain whether they are being 
collected specifically for research purposes .   
• Describe any source records that will be used to collect data about subjects 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 7 of 25 
• Indicate the data to be collected, including long term follow-up 
 
Patients who are scheduled to have a surgery for vaginal apical prolapse with or without 
midurethral sling an d with or without anterior  and/or posterior  colporrhaphy will be 
approached for study enrollment. Surgical procedures intended for treatment of vaginal apical 
prolapse are: uterosacral vaginal vault suspension, abdominal sacral colpopexy,  colpocleisis, 
and sacrospinous ligament fixation.  Patients will be asked to complete the Urinary Distress 
Inventory ( UDI-6), American Urological Association Symptom Score (AUASS) at the time of 
consent . After informed consent is obtained for participation in our study, the patient will be 
randomized to the FAST or traditional r etrograde fill voiding trial as delineated below.  After 
their surgery, the morning of postoperative day 1, one of these methods to assess voiding dysfunction/urinary retention will be performed.  
 
Retrograde fill voiding trial:   
• Bladder drained using indwelling foley catheter placed in OR at completion of surgery  
• Using the foley tubing the bladder is actively filled with 300cc normal saline or water  
• The catheter tubing is removed  
• The patient is inst ructed to void within 20 minutes  
• The patient will subjectively quantify their FOS via VAS scale. However this information will not be used clinically  
• If the patient has voided >2/3 (>200cc) , she will be discharged without a foley 
• If the patient voids < 2/3 (<200cc) the amount instilled, she will be discharged home with a 
catheter, receive appropriate teaching for at -home maintenance of catheter and 
instructed to return to the office in 2- 7 days in our office for a repeat retrograde voiding 
trial  
• If the patient is unable to void at all, an indwelling foley catheter will be placed and she will follow up in 2 -7 days in our office for a repeat retrograde voiding trial  
 
For the FAST voiding trial the method will be:  
• Bladder drained with indwelling foley catheter that was placed in OR at time of surgery  
• Catheter bag removed and bladder then retrograde filled with 300cc normal saline or water  
• The catheter is deflated and removed  
• Patient is instructed to void within 20 minutes from time of completion of retrograde fill to void. 20 minutes is standard of care for the time alloted for a patient to void. Independent 
of bladder capacity, the average person will feel the urge to void at 150- 200cc and will 
feel fullness and the urge to void at 300cc.  If a patient  does not feel the urge to void after 
20 minutes, she will be discharged home with a catheter secondary to voiding 
dysfunction.  She will receive appropriate teaching for at -home maintenance of catheter 
and instructed to return to the office in 2- 7 days in  our office for a repeat retrograde 
voiding trial  
• The patient will subjectively quantify their FOS via VAS scale. If VAS scale 
≥50 (equalling 
≥50%) then the catheter will remain out and no PVR will be measured  
• If the VAS scale is from 0- 49 (equalling 0- 49%)  
o a PVR will be checked via bladder scan (bladder ultrasound)  
o PVR is <500 the patient will be discharged WITHOUT a catheter  
o PVR is  >500  the patient will be discharged WITH a catheter  
• If the patient is discharge with an indwelling foley catheter, she will follow up in 2-7 days 
in our office for a repeat test with a retrograde voiding trial, which is routine practice in our 
office  
 
Prior to retrograde fill, the bladder is drained by adjusting the foley catheter in situ.  It is important to note that complete drainage of the bladder is not always possible as the catheter 
may become kinked during emptying or blocked from collapsed bladder tissue. After 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 8 of 25 
adequate drainage, 300 cc saline or water is instilled into the bladder during retrograde fill.  
 
In addition, intraoperatively, patients receive >1000cc fluid as well as 125 cc/hr of maintenance fluid.  On average patients will make 50- 100cc of urine an hour. Taking these 
clinical scenarios under consideration is important to understand how the PVR can be higher than the 300cc instilled in the bladder during the FAST method.  
 Under anesthesia the bladder has a capacity ranging from 700- 1000cc. Awake the bladder 
capacity is less, secondary to patient’s urge to urinate secondary to bladder fullness which on average occurs at 300cc.  The FAST voiding trial  method showed that 500cc is an 
acceptable and safe amount in the bladder after midurethral sling placement if the patient 
states her FOS is >50% preoperatively
9.  
 All patients discharged with a Foley catheter will be provided with the hospital’s standard teaching for home care of Foley catheter. All patients will be instructed to notify their physician if they had any postoperative problems, specifically difficult voiding, or signs or 
symptoms of infection. All patients will be scheduled for a follow -up visit with the surgeon at 2 
weeks and at 6 weeks postoperatively.  This is standard in our practice regardless of 
participation in the research study.  At these visits, patients will have another PVR  obtained 
by bladder scan.  The UDI-6 and AUASS  will be re -administered at those visits as well.  
 We will collect information  from their outpatient electronic medical records.  Information 
collected will include  age, race, body mass index, parity, severity of prolapse preopreatively, 
preoperative Urodynamics (UDS) including: cough stress test,  leak point pressures, Urethral 
pressure profiles, presence of detrusor instability, use of antiincontinence medications, 
surgical history, urina lysis and PVR.  
 
 
 
 
12.  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
• Describe how your data will be used to test the hypotheses.  
• State clearly what variables will be tested and what statistical tests will be used.  
• Include sample size calculations.  
• If this is a pilot study, state which variables will be examined for hypothesis 
generation in later studies.  
 
This is a randomized controlled trial in women to compare two methods of voiding after 
undergoing surgical repair for pelvic organ prolapse [POP].  The two methods are: the 
traditional retrograde bladder filling method and the force of stream trial (FAST).  The study is designed as a non- inferiority trial to demonstrate that among patients who are discharged 
without a urinary catheter (because they passed the post -op voiding trial), the rate of 
catheterization within the six -week post -operative period in subjects undergoing the FAST 
voiding trial is not worse than in subjects undergoing the traditional retrograde voiding trial.   
 
Specific Aims:  
1. The primary objective of the study is to compare Traditional voiding trial to FAST voiding trial with respect to the rate of catheterization within the six -week post -
operative period in patients undergoing surgical repair of POP, among those discharged without a urinary catheter.  
2. Secondary objectives include:  
a.  To compare the two voiding methods with respect to the proportion of patients 
dischar ged with a catheter (these are the subjects who fail the voiding trial)  
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 9 of 25 
b. To compare the two voiding methods with respect to the incidence of any UTI 
within the six -week post -operative period  
c. To compare the two voiding methods with respect to the rate of emergency room 
visits or unexpected visits to the clinic within the six -week post -operative period 
for voiding dysfunction or suspected infection (this includes patients who were discharged with or without a urinary catheter)  
d. To compare the two voiding methods with respect to the time- to-catheterization 
post-discharge.  
e. To compare the two voiding methods with respect to patient satisfaction with post-operative bladder function using the American Urological Association 
Symptom Score and the Urinary Distress Inv entory.  
 
Primary Outcome:  
The primary outcome variable of interest is the rate of catheterization within the six -week 
post-operative period following surgical repair of POP, among those discharged without a 
urinary catheter.  (The primary outcome will be the overall rate (regardless of stratification) 
but catheterization rates by surgery type will also be examined.)  
 
Secondary Outcomes  
1. Proportion of patients discharged with a catheter (this is essentially the proportion of 
patients who failed the voiding tr ial) 
2. Proportion of patients who reported any UTI within the six -week post -operative 
period. The number of UTIs reported by each patient during that period will also be recorded.  
3. Proportion of patients with emergency room visits or unexpected visits to the Urogynecology clinic for voiding dysfunction or suspected infection, within the six -
week post -operative period.  The number of ER visits or unexpected clinic visits will 
also be recorded.  
4. Time -to-catheterization post -discharge:  This is the number of days from discharge to 
catheterization (within the 6 -week period post -surgery).  Subjects who are not 
catheterized by the end of the follow -up period will be considered ‘censored’.  
5. Patient satisfaction with postoperative bladder function (measured at baseline, 2-
weeks post -op and 6 weeks post -op) using:  
c. American Urological Association Symptom Score (AUASS)  
d. Urinary Distress Inventory (UDI -6) 
 
 
Randomization: 
Subjects will be randomized in a 1- 1 ratio to either the Traditional voiding trial or the FAST 
voiding trial. Randomization will be stratified by site (North Shore or Long Island Jewish), and 
within each site, by surgical type (apical prolapse surgery without sling or apical prolapse surgery with sling).  
 The Biostatistics Unit at the Feinstein Institute for Medical Research [BU -FIMR] will develop a 
randomization plan using the Biostatistics Randomization Management System [BRMS].  BRMS is a secure, HIPAA -compliant, web- based application that allows investigators to 
randomize subjects into randomized clinical trials (RCTs) using a personal computer with internet access. Randomization notifications are automatically sent to the PI and other authorized personnel. BRMS maintains compliance in RCTs. Details of the randomization procedure will be further developed upon approval of the protocol.   
 
Data Management  
REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture), a secure, web- based application, will be used 
to store data from the trial.  
 
Intention -to-Treat (ITT)  
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 10 of 25 
All subjects will be analyzed according to the intention -to-treat [ITT] principle.  A patient will 
be considered evaluable and will be included in the intention- to-treat analysis if the patient 
was randomized to either voiding trial group and able to undergo the voiding trial after 
surgery.  Analyses that take into account the actual voiding trial received will be carried out 
as a secondary analysis (per protocol [PP] analysis).  
 
Interim Analysis and Early Stopping  
No interim analysis is planned for this study.  
 
Statistical Methods: 
1. For the primary objective:  
The test for non- inferiority will be carried out using a two- tailed 95% confidence 
interval for the difference in the rate of catheterization between the two voiding 
methods, within the six -week post -operative period, δ (δ=rate of catheterization in 
the FA ST voiding trial − rate of catheterization in the Traditional voiding trial).  This 
difference, δ, is the margin of non- inferiority and will be set at 10%.  If the upper 
confidence limit for the difference is < δ (≥δ) then we will conclude that the FAST 
voiding trial is non -inferior (inferior) to the Traditional voiding trial.    
 
The test for non- inferiority will be performed only for the primary outcome variable of 
interest, i.e., catheterization within the six -week  post-operative period among 
subjects who were discharged without needing a urinary catheter.  
   
 The test for non- inferiority will also be performed according to surgery type (the 
 stratification variable).  
 
2. For the secondary objectives:  
a. The chi -square test or Fisher’s exact test, as appropriate, will be used to 
compare the two voiding methods with respect to the proportion of subjects who are sent home with a catheter due to failure of their voiding trial, post -surgery.  
 
b. The chi -square test or Fisher’s exact test, as appropriate, will be used to 
compare the two voiding methods with respect to the proportion of subjects who 
present with any UTI within the six -week post -operative period.  If feasible, the 
incidence of UTIs will be compared between the two voiding methods using the 
Incidence Density Ratio Method, or if feasible, Poisson regression methods.  
 
c. The chi -square test or Fisher’s exact test, as appropriate, will be used to 
compare the two voiding methods with respect to the proportion of subjects wh o 
present to the emergency room or the urogynecology clinic (unexpectedly) due to voiding dysfunction or suspected infection, within the six -week post -operative 
period.  If feasible, the incidence of ER visits or unexpected clinic visits will be compared between the two voiding methods using the Incidence Density Ratio Method, or if feasible, Poisson regression methods.  
 
 
d. The Kaplan- Meier product limit method will be used to estimate time- to-
catheterization post -discharge and the two groups (Traditional Ret rograde vs. 
FAST) will be compared using the log- rank test.  Median time- to-catheterization 
will be estimated along with their corresponding 95% confidence intervals. The feasibility of this analysis will depend on the observed catheterization rates.  
 
e. A mixed models approach to repeated measures analysis of variance (MM-
RMANOVA) will be carried out, separately, for each of the two measures of patient satisfaction with post -operative bladder function (AUASS and UDI -6).  
Each model will examine if the pat terns of change in satisfaction scores across 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 11 of 25 
time (baseline, 2 weeks post -op and 6 weeks post -op) differ between the two 
voiding methods.  The models will include voiding group (Traditional/FAST), 
time (baseline, 2 weeks post -op and 6 weeks post -op) and a group- by-time 
interaction term. Data transformations may be employed if standard model 
assumptions are not met.  If no suitable transformations are found, then 
appropriate non- parametric methods may be used instead.  
 
A secondary analysis using logistic regression, will be carried out for each of the aims 2a, 2b 
and 2c, including explanatory variables such as age, site, and surgery type (sling vs. no sling).  
 
Sample Size Considerations: 
The proposed sample size for this one year study is a total of 154 evaluable subjects (n=77 
randomized to each voiding group).  A subject will be “evaluable” if she gets randomized and is able to undergo the voiding trial.  A subject who is not able to undergo the voiding trial is considered “not evaluable” and would not be included in the analysis.  
 The study will be designed as a non- inferiority trial, where the FAST voiding trial will be 
considered non- inferior to the Traditional voiding trial if the difference in the rate of 
catheterization between the two groups within the six -week post -operative period among 
patients discharged without a catheter is less than δ=10% (i.e. δ =10%, the margin of non-
inferiority).   More formally, if the rates of catheterization during the six -week post -operative 
period are p_F and p_T, respectively for the FAST and Traditional voiding methods, then the 
null (H
O) and alternative hypotheses (H A) are:  
  H O:  d = p_F − p_T ≥ δ  vs.  
  H A:  d = p_F − p_T < δ 
 
Based on the investigators’ clinical experience, it can be reasonably assumed that among those who pass the Traditional retrograde fill voiding trial, the rate of catheterization during the six -week post -operative period is about 5%.  Further assuming that  the rate of 
catheterization among those who pass the FAST voiding trial is the same as in the traditional 
voiding test (i.e. 5% as well), and using a non- inferiority margin, δ, of 10%, then a sample size 
of 59 per group (n=118 total) will yield 80% power to determine that the FAST voiding trial is 
not inferior to the Traditional voiding trial (alpha=0.05).   
 
Based on published manuscripts, about 30% of evaluable patients will fail either voiding trial, that is, approximately 30% in the traditional retrograde fill voiding trial arm will fail the test and similarly, approximately 30% in the FAST voiding trial arm will fail the test.  Therefore, in order to obtain 118 subjects who pass the voiding test (59 per group), we would need to have 
a total of 154 subjects (118 x 1.3=154).  
 
Randomized subjects will fall into three groups:  
1. Subjects with a complication at surgery that would require prolonged 
catheterization immediately postoperative.  
2. Subjects who fail either voiding test and are discharged home with a catheter (expected to be 25 -26% based on pusblished manuscripts)  
3. Subjects passing either trial of void and discharged home without a catheter.  This is the main population of interest that we want to examine to identify what proportion of subjects would end up needing a catheter ultimately in the 6- week postoperative period.  
 
Below is a tabulation of sample size requirements for 80% power, using various assumptions 
for the rates of catheterization during the six -week post -operative period in each of the two 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 12 of 25 
voiding methods, using a 2 -sided alpha level of 0.05, and a non -inferiority margin, δ, of 10%:  
 
 
   
 
 
 Traditional 
Voiding Method  FAST Voiding 
Method  Sample Size  
 Per Method (N)  
0.05 0.07 109 
0.05 0.06 80 
0.05 0.05 59 
0.05 0.04 44 
0.05 0.03 33 
 
  
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 13 of 25 
13.  SPECIMEN BANKING  
• If specimens will be banked for future research, describe where the specimens will be 
stored, how long they will be stored, how they will be accessed and who will have 
access to the specimens  
• List the information that will be stored with each specimen, including how specimens 
are labeled/coded 
• Describe the procedures to release the specimens, including:  the process to request 
release, approvals required for release, who can obtain the specimens, and the 
information to be provided with the specimens.  
 
Not applicable  
 
 
14.  DATA MANAGEMENT AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
• Describe the data and specimens to be sent out or received.  As applicable, describe: 
o What information will be included in that data or associated with the 
specimens?  
o Where and how data and specimens will be stored?  
o How long the data will be stored? 
o Who will have access to the data? 
o Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of data and specimens? 
• Describe the steps that will be taken to secure the data during storage, use and 
transmission. 
 
Data Management  
REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture), a secure, web- based application, will be used 
to store data from the trial.  
 
Confidentiality  
Confidentiality will be maintained by using patient identification numbers instead of names.   
 
Storing Documents in Hard Copy  
Original documents including consent forms that contain subjects’ PHI, as well as 
questionnaires, will be stored in a locked cabinet within the office of Urogynecology, 865 
Northern Blvd., Suite 202, Great Neck, NY 11021. These documents will be kept separately 
from any de- identified research data that will be stored electronically as mentioned below. 
IRB approved investigators will  be the only individuals with access to research data that 
contains PHI.  
 
Storing Documents Electronically  
Any documents that contain subjects’ PHI will be accessible on the Northwell Health  network 
server through a password protected computer document/database. These documents are separated from any de- identified research data files. IRB approved investigators will be the 
only individuals with access to research data that contains PHI. De- identified data research 
files will be stored on the network server .  
 
Storing Documents on Portable Electronic Devices  
No PHI or research data will be stored on any Portable Electronic Devices (e.g., laptops, tablets, flash drives, etc.)  
 
Emailing Data  
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 14 of 25 
Any research data that will be emailed will be de -identified and encr ypted. PHI will not be 
emailed to any commercial email addresses (e.g., gmail, yahoo, hotmail, etc.)  
 
Data Disclosure/Publication  
Any data used in publications and presentations will be presented in an aggregate or de-
identified format. Protected health information (PHI) will not be shared with entities outside of 
Northwell  Health S ystem for purposes of the research.  
 
 
 
 
15.  DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
 
A specific data and safety monitoring plan is only required for greater than minimal risk 
research.  For guidance on creating this plan, please see the  Guidance Document  on the 
HRPP website . 
 Part I – this part should be completed for all studies that require a DSMP.   
Part II – This part should be completed when your study needs a Data and 
Safety Monitoring Board or Committee (DSMB/C) as  part of your Data and 
Safety Monitoring Plan.   
 
Part I:  Elements of the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
•  Indicate who will perform the data and safety monitoring for this study.   
• Justify your choice of monitor, in terms of assessed risk to the research subject’s 
health and well being.  In studies where the monitor is independent of the study staff, 
indicate the individual’s credentials, relationship to the PI, and rationale for selection 
• List the specific items that will be monitored for safety (e.g. adverse events, protocol 
compliance, etc) 
• Indicate the frequency at which accumulated safety and data information (items listed in # above) will be reviewed by the monitor (s) or the DSMB/C.   
• Where applicable, describe rules which will guide interruption or alteration of the 
study design.   
• Where applicable, indicate dose selection procedures that will be used to minimize 
toxicity. 
• Should a temporary or permanent suspension of your study occur, in addition to the 
IRB, indicate to whom will you report the occurrence.    
The PI will monitor data, wi th emphasis on data integrity and patient welfare concerns 
including:  recommendations concerning continuation or conclusion of the study, protection of 
the confidentiality of the trial data and the results of monitoring, review of data and study quality.  Monitoring will occur on a monthly basis. We will have monthly meetings amongst 
the PI and co- investigators  reviewing enrollment and any adverse events.  In addition, we 
have bi -monthly morbidity and mortality rounds that allow us to examine closely any 
unexpected or adverse outcomes.   
Any adverse events, unanticipated problems, and protocol deviations will be reported to the IRB as per Northwell policy.  
 
 
 
Part II:  Data and Safety Monitoring Board or Committee  
 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 15 of 25 
 
•  When appropriate, attach a description of the DSMB.   
• Provide the number of members and area of professional expertise.   
• Provide confirmation that the members of the board are all independent of the study. 
 
Not applicable  
 
 
16. WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS  
• Describe anticipated circumstances under which subjects will be withdrawn from the 
research without their consent 
• Describe procedures for orderly termination 
• Describe procedures that will be followed when subjects withdraw from the research, 
including partial withdrawal from procedures with continued data collection.   
 
Candidates will be excluded from the study if ANY of the following apply:  
1. Patients who underwent a surgery that requires long term catheterization (i.e fistula repair 
or urethral diverticulum)  
2. Patients who sustained a cystotomy during surgery as our divisional protocol is to send 
these patients home with a Foley catheter for 5- 14 days without a voiding trial  
3. Patients with baseline urinary retention and the inability to urinate without catheterization  
 
Listed in the informed consent given to the subject at the time of enrollment are instructions 
explaining how the subject may withdraw.  In addition, at the time of enrollment, during the informed consent, this is described and reviewed with the subject.  Subjects will be instructed 
to mail a letter to the PI stating their desire to withdraw from the study.  
 
 
 
17. RISKS TO SUBJECTS  
• Describe any potential risks and discomforts to the subject (physical, psychological, 
social, legal, or other) and assess their likelihood and seriousness and whether side 
effects are reversible. Where appropriate, describe alternative treatments and procedures that might be advantageous to the subjects.  
• Include risks to others , like sexual partners (if appropriate) 
• Discuss why the risks to subjects are reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits 
and in relation to the importance of the knowledge that may reasonably be expected 
to result.  
• Describe the procedures for protecting against or minimizing any potential risks, 
including risks to confidentiality, and assess their likely effectiveness.   
 
Regardless of participation in this study, prior to d ischarge from the hospital, all participants 
will have a voiding trial performed to assess her bladder function.  Urinary retention is a risk 
for any patient after prolapse or sling surgery.  
 
Both methods we are investigating in this study have been shown to effectively assess postoperative bladder function. Based on the prior study by Tunistky -Bittin et al
10, we do not 
expect any additional risk to the subject depending on what method is used to assess her 
ability to urinate . 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 16 of 25 
 
There is a chance that the subject could be discharged without a catheter when she needs 
one. However, if she passes her voiding trial and is discharged without a catheter, she will be 
counseled on the signs and symptoms of urinary retention prior to discharge from the 
hospital . She will be given our office number and if after hours, a 24 hour emergency line to 
speak with the physician who will direct her to seek care at a local emergency room for 
catheter placement.  This is routine practice and standard of care in our office, even if she 
was not participating in this study.  
 
The risk of infection secondary to temporary placement of a catheter is 6% to 20% in patients 
undergoing prolapse and anti -incontinence surgeries10,13 -17.  Patients will be treated 
accordingly if infection is suspected after placement of catheter or found on routine urinalysis, 
as standard of care would dictate.   
 As in previous studies , patients who had the FAST voiding trial method did not have 
emergent or unexpected visits to the emergency room
9,10. Outside of the risk of urinary 
retention and/or UTI, no additional risks are expected.  
 
Other Risks  
Some of the questions in the questionnaires may seem personal to the participants. They could feel embarrassed or stressed. They  may ask to see the questions before deciding 
whether or not to take part in this study.  
 As in any research study, there is a risk of breach of confidentiality . However, we have a plan 
in plac e to minimize this risk, as detailed in the confidentiality section.  
 
 
  
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 17 of 25 
 
18. RESEARCH RELATED HARM/INJURY  
• Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources that subjects might 
need as a result of anticipated problems that may be known to be associated with the 
research. 
• If the research is greater than minimal risk, explain any medical treatments that are 
available if research -related injury occurs, who will provide it, what will be provided, 
and who will pay for it.   
 
There is a chance that the subject could be discharged without a catheter when she needs 
one. However, if she passes her voiding trial and is discharged without a catheter, she will be 
counseled on the signs and symptoms of urinary retention prior to discharge from the hospital . She will be given our office number and if after hours, a 24 hour emergency line to 
speak with the physician who will direct her to seek care at a local emergency room for 
catheter placement.  This is routine practice and standard of care in our office, even if she 
was not participating in this study.  
All tests and procedures are standard of care and would be required, therefore i ncluded in 
their medical costs regardless of patients choice to participate  
Subjects diagnosed with a urinary tract infection will be given prescriptions for the appropriate 
antibiotics.   
 
 
 
19. POTENTIAL BENEFIT TO  SUBJECTS  
 
• Explain what benefits might be derived from participation in the study, noting in 
particular the benefit over standard treatment (e.g. a once-a-day administration 
instead of four times a day, an oral formulation over an IV administration).  
• Also state if there are no known benefits to subjects, but detail the value of knowledge 
to be gained 
 
This research may not benefit study participants directly. However, knowledge gained from 
this study may help physicians and patients in the future with regard to the best voiding trial 
for postoperative patients after vaginal apex prolapse surgery. We hope that our study results will encourage practi tioners to evaluate their voiding protocols to decrease the catheterization 
rate and the time spent under observation after vaginal apex prolapse surgery.  
 
 
 
20. PROVISIONS TO PROTEC T PRIVACY INTERESTS OF SUBJECTS  
 
• Describe the methods used to identify potential research subjects, obtain consent and 
gather information about subjects to ensure that their privacy is not invaded.  
• In addition consider privacy protections that may be needed due to communications with subjects (such as phone messages or mail).    
During the preoperative counseling visit at the urogynecology offices with either the PI or the 
co-investigators, patients will be identified for enrollment after inclusion and exclusion criteria 
are reviewed.  Informed consent may be obtained at that time  or in the preoperative holding 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 18 of 25 
area in  North Shore or Long Island Jewish Hospitals.  Should a phone call be necessary to 
follow up on a missed appointment, HIPAA rules and regulations will be followed.   No emails 
will be exchanged with subjects regardin g the study.   
 
  
21.  COSTS TO SUBJECTS  
 
• Describe any foreseeable  costs that subjects may incur through participation in the 
research 
• Indicate whether research procedures will be billed to insurance or paid for by the 
research study.   
 
There are no direct costs to patients.  Study related procedures included the trial of void, 
foley catheter, and bladder scan PVR are standard of care in our practice, regardless of 
participation in the research study.   
 
  
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 19 of 25 
22.  PAYMENT TO SUBJECTS  
 
• Describe the amount of payment to subjects, in what form payment will be received 
and the timing of the payments.   
 
No payments will be made to subjects.  
 
 
23.  CONSENT PROCESS  
 
If obtaining consent for this study, describe: 
• Who will be obtaining consent 
• Where consent will be obtained 
• Any waiting period available between informing the prospective participant and 
obtaining consent 
• Steps that will be taken to assure the participants’ understanding 
• Any tools that will be utilized during the consent process 
•   Information about how the consent will be documented in writing.  If using a  standard consent form, indicate such.   
• Procedures for maintaining informed consent.    
After determination of eligibility based on inclusion/exclusion criteria the patient will be 
consented for the study related procedures.  The subject must provide written informed 
consent to participate prior to the conduct of the study specific procedure. Only IRB approved personnel will obtain informed consent from participants. The participan t may 
be consented in the clinic for the department of urogynecology or in the preoperative holding unit prior to her surgery. If a patient is eligible to enroll in the study, the nature and purpose of the study will be explained to the subject with a witness present.  The 
participant will also be informed about the procedures, risks, and voluntary nature of the 
study during the consent discussion.   The subject will be allowed to ask questions 
throughout the counseling process.  The subject will review and sign the written Informed 
Consent Form indicating informed. The participant will be given a copy of the consent form.  
 
 
 
In the state of NY, any participants under the age of 18 are considered children.  If your 
study involves children, additional information should be provided to describe: 
• How parental permission will be obtained 
• From how many parents will parental permission be obtained 
• Whether permission will be obtained from individuals other than parents, and if 
so, who will be allowed to provide permission.  The process used to determine 
these individual’s authority to consent for the child should be provided 
• Whether or not assent will be obtained from the child 
• How will assent be documented 
• Whether child subjects may be expected to attain legal age to consent to the procedures for research prior to the completion of their participation in the research.  If so, describe the process that will be used to obtain their legal 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 20 of 25 
consent to continue participation in the study.  Indicate what will occur if consent 
is not obtained from the now-adult subjects.    
Not applicable  
 
 
If the study involves cognitively impaired adults, additional information should be provided to describe: 
• The process to determine whether an individual is capable of consent 
• Indicate who will make this assessment 
• The plan should indicate that documentation of the determination  and 
assessment will be placed in the medical record, when applicable, in addition to 
the research record.  
• If permission of a legally authorized representative will be obtained, 
o  list the individuals from who permission will be obtained in order of priority 
o Describe the process for assent of subjects; indicate whether assent will be required of all, some or none of the subjects.  If some, which subjects will be required to assent and which will not. 
o If assent will not be obtained from some or all subjects, provide an explanation as to why not 
o Describe whether assent will be documented and the process to document assent 
o Indicate if the subject could regain capacity and at what point you would obtain their consent for continued participation in the study  
Not applicable  
 
 
If the study will enroll non -English speaking subjects: 
• Indicate what language(s) other than English are understood by prospective 
subjects or re presentatives  
• Indicate whether or not consent forms will be translated into a language other than English 
• Describe the process to ensure that the oral and written information provided 
to those subjects will be in that language 
• If non-English speaking subje cts will be excluded, provide a justification for 
doing so  
Our patient population includes English, Spanish, Arabic , Chinese/Mandarin 
languages. Using the available short, generic foreign language consent forms 
available on the IRB website and the translator phone service readily available to all 
investigators, non- English speaking subjects can be approached for enrollment.  The 
potential subject will be offered access to free interpretation services through 
telephone or on- site certified translators.  The subject will have the right to waive the 
interpretation services.  Documentation of the name of the interpreter and the 
interpreter telephone ID number will be written in the medical record and on the 
informed consent form and short form.    
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 21 of 25 
 
 
24.  WAIVER OR ALTERATION OF THE CONSENT PROCE SS        N/A          
 
Complete this section if you are seeking an alteration or complete waiver of the consent   
process. 
• Describe the possible risks of harm to the subjects involved in this study and 
explain why the study involves no more than minimal risk to the subject:   
• Explain why the waiver/ alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of subjects 
• Explain why it is impracticable to conduct this research if informed consent is required   
• If appropriate, explain how the subjects will be provided with additional pertinent 
information after participation.   If not appropriate to do so, explain why.  
 
 
 
Complete this section if you are obtaining informed consent but you are requesting a 
waiver of the documentation of consent (i.e., verbal consent will be obtained). To 
proceed with a waiver based on these criteria, each subject must be asked whether they wish to have documentation linking them to this study.  Only complete subsection 1 OR 
subsection 2.  
 
  SUBSECTION 1   
• Explain how the only record linking the subject to the research would be the consent document. 
• Explain how the principal risk of this study would be the potential harm resulting 
from a breach in the confidentiality 
• Indicate whether or not subjects will be provided with a written stat ement 
regarding the research. 
 
 
 
SUBSECTION 2  
•  Describe the possible risks of harm to the subjects involved in this study and explain why the study involves no more than minimal risk.   
• Confirm that the research only involves procedure for which consent is not 
normally required outside the research context.  
• Indicate whether or not subjects will be provided with a written statement 
regarding the research. 
 
 
 
. 
 
25. WAIVER OF HIPAA AUTHORIZATION      N/A       
 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 22 of 25 
Complete this section if you seek to obtain a full waiver of HIPAA authorization to use 
and/or disclose protected health information.  
• Describe the risks to privacy involved in this study and explain why the study 
involves no more than minimal risk to privacy:   
• Describe your plan to protect identifiers from improper use or disclosure and to destroy them at the earliest time.  
•  Indicate why it is  not possible to seek subjects’ authorization for use or 
disclosure of PHI. 
• Indicate why it is  not possible to conduct this research without use or disclosure 
of the PHI.   
• Indicate if PHI will be disclosed outside NSLIJ Health System, and if so, to whom.   Note:  PHI disclosed outside NSLIJ Health System, without HIPAA authorization 
needs to be tracked. Please see guidance at www.nslij.com/irb
 for information 
about tracking disclosures. 
 
 
 
Complete this section if you seek to obtain a partial waiver of the patient’s 
authorization for screening/recruitment purposes (i.e., the researcher does not have access to patient records as s/he is not part of the covered entity) 
Note: Information collected through a partial waiver for recruitment cannot be shared 
or disclosed to any other person or entity. 
• Describe how data will be collected and used:  
• Indicate why you need the PHI  (e.g.PHI is required to determine eligibility, 
identifiers are necessary to contact the individual to discuss participation, other) 
• Indicate why  the research cannot practicably be conducted without the partial 
waiver (e.g. no access to medical records or contact information of the targeted 
population, no treating clinician to assist in recruitment of the study population, 
other) 
Not applicable  
 
 
26.  VULNERABLE POPULATIO NS: 
 Indicate whether you will include any of these vulnerable populations. If indicated, submit the appropriate appendix to the IRB for review:  
  Children or viable neonate  
  Cognitively impaired  
  Pregnant Women, Fetuses or neonates of uncertain viability or nonviable  
  Prisoners  
  NSLIJ Employees, residents, fellows, etc  
  poor/uninsured  
  Students 
  Minorities  
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 23 of 25 
  Elderly 
  Healthy Controls  
 
If any of these populations are included in the study, describe additional safeguards that will be used to protect their rights and welfare.  
Elderly subjects’ ability to consent will be screened for by the PI or co -investigators.  PI and co -
investigators have numerous conversations with the potential subjects prior to surgical planning, 
preoperativ e consent, and possibly consent for research participation.   The investigators’ 
interactions with the potential subject will allow assessments to be made whether the subject can 
sign informed consent for their surgery.  Should the investigator determine the subject cannot 
sign the informed consent for their surgical procedure due to impaired decision- making ability, the 
subject is not eligible for enrollment due to this impairment as well.   
 
 
27.  MULTI-SITE HUMAN RESEARCH (COORDINATING CENTER) 
 
If this is a  multi-site study where you are the lead investigator, describe the management 
of information (e.g. results, new information, unanticipated problems involving risks to 
subjects or others, or protocol modifications) among sites to protect subjects. 
Not applicable  
 
  
28.  REFERENCES/BIBIOGRAP HY 
 
Provide a reasonable list of references directly related to the study. Any diagrams for new medical devices or brief reprints from journals might also prove useful. 
 
Reference:  
1. Swift S, Woodman P, O'Boyle A, et al. Pelvic Organ Support Study (POSST): the distribution, 
clinical definition, and epidemiologic condition of pelvic organ support defects. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2005;192:795- 806. 
2. Swift SE. The distribution of pelvic organ support in a population of female subjects seen for 
routine gynecologic health care. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:277- 85. 
3. Smith FJ, Holman CD, Moorin RE, Tsokos N. Lifetime risk of undergoing surgery for pelvic organ 
prolapse. Obstet Gynecol 2010;116:1096- 100. 
4. Stav K, Dwyer PL, Rosamilia A, et al. Repeat synthetic mid urethral sling procedure for women 
with recurrent stress urinary incontinence. J Urol 2010;183:241- 6. 
5. Turner LC, Kantartzis K, Shepherd JP. Predictors of postoperative acute urinary retention in 
wom en undergoing minimally invasive sacral colpopexy. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 2015;21:39-
42. 
6. Foster RT, Sr., Borawski KM, South MM, Weidner AC, Webster GD, Amundsen CL. A 
randomized, controlled trial evaluating 2 techniques of postoperative bladder  testing after transvaginal 
surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2007;197:627 e1- 4. 
7. Kleeman S, Goldwasser S, Vassallo B, Karram M. Predicting postoperative voiding efficiency 
after operation for incontinence and prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;187:49- 52. 
8. Pulvino JQ, Duecy EE, Buchsbaum GM, Flynn MK. Comparison of 2 techniques to predict voiding 
efficiency after inpatient urogynecologic surgery. J Urol 2010;184:1408- 12. 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 24 of 25 
9. Ingber MS, Vasavada SP, Moore CK, Rackley RR, Firoozi F, Goldman HB. Force of stream after 
sling therapy: safety and efficacy of rapid discharge care pathway based on subjective patient report. J 
Urol 2011;185:993- 7. 
10. Tunitsky -Bitton E, Murphy A, Barber MD, Goldman HB, Vasavada S, Jelovsek JE. Assessment of 
voiding after sling: a randomized trial of 2 methods of postoperative catheter management after midurethral sling surgery for stress urinary incontinence in women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2015;212:597 e1-9. 
11. Peleg AY, Hooper DC. Hospital -acquired infections due to gram -negative bacteria. N Engl J Med 
2010;362:1804- 13. 
12. Elkadry EA, Kenton KS, FitzGerald MP, Shott S, Brubaker L. Patient -selected goals: a new 
perspective on surgical outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;189:1551- 7; discussion 7- 8. 
13. Sutkin G, Lowder JL, Smith KJ. Prophylactic antibiotics to prevent urinary tract infection during 
clean intermittent self -catheterization (CISC) for management of voiding dysfunction after prolapse and 
incontinence surgery: a decision analysis. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2009;20:933- 8. 
14. Chung CP, Kuehl TJ, Harris SK, et al. Incidence and risk factors of postoperative urinary tract 
infection after uterosacral ligament suspension. Int Urogynecol J 2012;23:947- 50. 
15. Barber MD, Kleeman S, Karram MM, et al. Transobturator tape compared with tension- free 
vaginal tape for the treatment of stress urinary incontinence: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 2008;111:611- 21. 
16. Ward KL, Hilton P, Uk, Ireland TVTTG. Tension- free vaginal tape versus colposuspension for 
primary urodynamic stress incontinence: 5- year follow up. BJOG 2008;115:226- 33. 
17. Liapis A, Bakas P, Creatsas G. Long- term efficacy of tension- free vaginal tape in the 
management of stress urinary incontinence in women: efficacy at 5- and 7- year follow -up. Int Urogynecol 
J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2008;19:1509- 12. 
 
 
 
Version Date:  2/26/16   Page 25 of 25 