 
  
   
 
 
 
Remote Microphone (RM) Technology in  
Children using Bone Conduction Devices:  
A comparative study  
 
 
Version  # 7 
06/11/2021  
 
  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
  
1) Protocol  Title  
Remote  Microphone (RM) Technology in Children using Bone Conduction 
Devices:  A comparative study 
 
2) Objectives*  
• Aim 1: To determine the benefits of remote microphone (RM) technology for 
listening  in classroom  noise  in children  using bone conduction hearing  devices . 
• Aim 2: To determine whether RM wireless audio -streaming accessory results in  
improved listening in noise performance compared to RM digital adaptive in 
children  using bone conduction hearing devices. 
 
3) Background*  
The purpose of this investigation is to evaluate objective outcomes in pediatric bone 
conduction hearing device (often termed “BAHA”) users with and without remote microphone (RM) technology. In this study, two remote microphone technologies will be evaluated  to determine  benefit  in speech  understanding in  noise. 
 
Research shows that intervention with hearing devices alone (i.e. hearing aids, cochlear implants, bone conduction devices) does not alleviate the difficulties children with hearing loss encounter in classroom environments. The effects of noise, distance,  and reverberation  make classroom  listening  particularly  
challenging. Specifically, classrooms often have poor acoustics resulting in negative signal- to-noise ratio (SNR) values (the noise is louder than the speaker of interest). 
Individuals with hearing loss require the speech signal to be 4-18 dB louder than the background noise in order to obtain speech recognition scores similar to individuals with normal hearing (Moore, 1997). Children spend 45-60% of classroom time engaged in listening (Rosenberg et. al, 1999); therefore, it is essential that they have consistent access to all speech sounds to ensure no delays in academic performance,  
speech/l anguage development, or social  interaction  skills.  
 
One of the most common methods of reducing these deleterious effects in children with hearing loss is the use of a personal remote microphone (RM) system. A personal RM system consists of a microphone that is worn by the speaker or teacher and a transmitter that transfers the signal to a receiver that is in the child’s hearing  
device. Studies have demonstrated that RM systems can reduce SNR values, and  
result in improved hearing outcomes (Pittman, et. al, 1999; Hawkins, 1984). While this has been shown in conventional amplification (Anderson & Goldstein, 2004) and cochlear implants (Schafer & Thibodeau, 2006; Wolfe et. al, 2009) to date, there are no studies looking at the benefits of RM technology for pedi atric bone  
conduction hearing device users. 
 
In the past several years, remote microphone technology has evolved. Hearing instrument manufacturers have developed and introduced wireless remote microphone accessories in an effort to make RM technology available at a reduced  
cost and increase access.  These RM  devices transmit  the signal on the globally, 
 
 license- free 2.4 GHz industrial, scientific, and medical radio band. These RM 
devices are commonly referred to as, “ wireless audio -streaming accessories.” In  
addition, there has been an emergence of the use of digital adaptive radio frequency 
(RF)  transmission  to deliver  the signal from  the transmitter  to the radio  receiver.  
When using digital adaptive RF, the transmission switches throughout the 2.4 GHz band on the basis of a communication protocol that is established when the transmitter and receiver are paired. There are studies looking at the benefit of these different type of technologies, yet to date these studies have not been completed in pediatric  bone conduction hearing device users. 
 
In hearing aid users, it has been suggested that digital adaptive RM sys tems  
outperform wireless audio-streaming accessories in moderate to high levels of competing noise. These differences are likely due to the adaptive increase in  
receiver  gain provided by the adaptive system  when  in moderate- to high- level  noise 
resulting in  poor signal to noise ratios (Wolfe, et. al, 2015). These noise levels, 
resulting in negative SNRs, represent many classroom settings that children spend their majority of time. In addition, the currently published studies used fixed SNRs which may not be sensitive to the differences in RM technologies. This is an important question as most bone conduction hearing devices offer wireless audio- streaming accessory at minimal to no cost. Understanding how these technologies differ in performance will provide an improved understanding of cost benefit of these accessories and lead to better  patient centered and personalized care.  
 
This study will evaluate hearing in noise performance of children with hearing loss using bone conduction hearing device(s) with and without RM technology. The specific aim is to obtain objective data on the benefits of 2 different RM  
technologies versus standard of care bone conduction hearing device in children with hearing  loss. We will also make comparisons between  the 2 RM technologies. 
 
4) Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria*  
Inclusion  Criteria:  
English speaking pediatric conduction device users or candidates and will be included for study. We will include pediatric  patients  5 years  of age to 17 years  of 
age who have a conductive or mixed unilateral or bilateral hearing loss with a minimum of a 30 dB air-bone gap. 
 
Normal hearing controls The control group will be limited to adults greater than 
18 years of age with hearing thresholds < 25 dB 500 – 4,000 Hz 
 
 
Exclusion Criteria  
Participants  will not be specifically  excluded  unless they do not meet  the described  
inclusion criteria. The study is limited to English speakers, as speech perception 
measures are only available in English so non-native English speakers do not undergo the standard clinical  protocol. The study is also limited  to children  5 years  
 
 of age and older to ensure adequate language development to complete the 
described  tests of speech  perception  to determine  objective  benefit  with RM 
technology. 
 
5) Number  of Participants*  
We expect to enroll a minimum of 10 participants and a maximum of 30 patients for 
prospective portion of the study. 
 
We expect to review 150 charts for the retrospective portion.  
15 normal hearing controls 
6) Study -Wide  Recruitment  Methods*  
 
Retrospective  
We will perform a retrospective chart review of bone conduction hearing device users or candidates seen in our clinic from January 1, 2010 to October 29th, 2019. Demographic and hearing  data will be collected  retrospectively  including, etiology 
of hearing loss, onset of hearing  loss,  device use history, and audiograms. 
 
Prospective  
We will enroll participants who meet the described inclusion criteria for prospective  
study. We will perform a retrospective chart review of bone conduction hearing device users or candidates seen in our clinic from January 1, 2010 to October 29, 2019. Bone conduction device patients who meet audiometric criteria and their 
guardian/s will b e contacted  by phone or email to collect prospective data.  
Additionally, patients who present to the clinic who are candidates for this study 
will be approached along with their guardian to see if they are interested in taking part of the study. A study te am investigator will inform the potential subject and  
their guardian about all aspects of the experiment. If the subject expresses interest  
in the study, a study team member will be contacted. If possible, on that same day, the member of the study will mak e arrangements for one of the study personnel to 
meet with the subject to review the informed consent. Where applicable, assent will  
be obtained. Otherwise, a research appointment will be made for a future time to meet  with the potential subject and their guardian. 
 
Participants will be told that their participation in the study is voluntary and that they do not need to participate in the study if they choose not to. If they decide to take part and later change their mind, they are free to withdraw from the project at  
any stage. Potential research participants will be informed that participation in the  
study will in no way affect their treatment in the Department of Otolaryngology at the University of Miami. Patients will receive the same treatment by the clinicians  
in the Department of Otolaryngology if they choose not to participate. Appropriate and understandable language will be used with children and assent will be obtained 
using age appropriate language where applicable
. 
 
  
7) Study  Timelines*  
It is anticipated that each subject will participate for 1 -2 visits depending on 
proximity  to the test  site. Each  visit will last approximately 1-2 hours. 
 
8) Study  Endpoints  
Study will be completed when we have data on at least 10 participants but no 
greater  than 30 participants.  Enrollment is expected  to be complete  by 4/8/2020. 
 
9) Procedures  Involved* 
Pediatric conductive or mixed hearing loss patients who are between the ages of 5 and 17 years of age and present to the University of Miami Ear Institute hearing rehabilitation  by bone conduction technology will be enrolled  for study. 
 
Speech  perception  in noise performance will be measured  using sentences  presented  
in noise. Performance  will be evaluated  in the following conditions: 
 
1. Bone conduction device (BAHA)  only 
2. Bone conduction device (BAHA)  + Wireless  Audio- Streaming  Accessory  
(using the Mini Microphone 2+, Cochlear Corporation) 
3. BAHA + Digital Adaptive RM System  (using Roger™, Sonova) 
 
Conditions will be randomized  by subject.  Speech  will be presented  from  the 
front at 0 degrees azimuth and the noise signal will presented from four loudspeakers located at approximately 30 degrees, 135 degrees, 225 degrees, and 330 degrees. 
 
 
The remote microphone will be positioned 6 in. away from the center of the cone of the loudspeaker presenting the sentences at 0 degrees azimuth (American  Academy  of Audiology Remote  Microphone Guidelines, 2008). 
 
All test measures  are non- experimental  and commercially  available.  
 
Bone conduction devices will be programmed according to bone conduction thresholds through the device prior to testing.  
 
Normal  hearing controls 
Hearing loss will be simulated in the normal hearing controls using ear plugs. Speech  perception  in noise performance will be measured  using sentences  presented  
in noise. Performance  will be evaluated  in the following conditions: 
 
1. Unaided  
2. U
nilateral  hearing  aid with contralateral  plug. 
 
 3. Unilateral  hearing aid + Digital Adaptive RM System  (using Roger™, 
Sonova) 
4. BAHA with bilateral plugs 
5. BAHA + Wireless  Audio- Streaming  Accessory  (using  the Mini 
Microphone 2+, Cochlear Corporation) 
6. BAHA + Digital Adaptive RM System  (using Roger™, Sonova) 
 
Speech  will be presented  from  the front at  0 degrees azimuth  and RM will be be 
positioned 6 in. away from the center of the cone of the loudspeaker presenting 
the sentences at 0 degrees azimuth, then spatially separated from the noise. The noise signal will presented from four loudspeakers located at approximately 30 degrees,  135 degrees, 225 degrees, and 330 degrees. 
 
Unilateral hearing aid and BAHA will be programmed to mild gain appropriate for testing in normal hearing controls. 
Demographic and audiometric data will be maintained under a unique identifier code linked to the consented study participant for reference to study outcome data.  
 
10) Data  and Specimen Banking*  
All the previously described data will be stored on the PI’s HIPAA compliant OneDrive provided by the University of Miami. It will be password protected, and unique identifiers used for subject protection. Paper copies of the data and consent form will be stored in a locked file cabinet in room 825 of the clinical research building at the University of Miami Medical Center, located at 1120 NW 14th Street,  8th Floor, Miami FL, 33136. Data will not be distributed, except  in the form  
of peer -reviewed publication or oral presentation and will maintain the 
confidentiality  of the participants.  
 
A HIPAA waiver  has been  requested  for retrospective data. 
 
11) Data  Management* 
All the previously described data will be stored on the PI’s HIPAA compliant OneDrive provided by the University of Miami. It will be password protected, and unique identifiers used for subject protection. Paper copies of the data and consent form will be stored in a locked file cabinet 825 of the clinical research building at the University  of Miami Medical  Center,  located  at 1120 NW 14th Street,  8th Floor, 
Miami FL,  33136. Descriptive statistics  will be used to report  demographic (e.g. 
age and gender) data. Quantitative data will be presented as mean, standard  
deviation (SD) a nd range (minimum and maximum); qualitative data will be  
presented as frequencies and percentages. Comparisons between unaided to aided conditions will be analyzed using parametric or non- parametric measures as  
appropriate. Statistical significance  will be set to p<0.05. 
 
12) Withdrawal of Participants*  
 
 We do not anticipate voluntary or involuntary withdrawal from the study as 
participant data is collected acutely in a single test session. Should a 
participant or their guardian wish to discontinue during the data collection, they will be offered an opportunity to return at another time to complete data collection. Should the participant request to be withdrawn, no further data collection will take place and they will be withdrawn. Collected data will be  
maintained  in the study database.  
 
13) Risks to Participants*  
The risks to the participants will be minimal. At most, a breach of confidentiality  
composes the majority of the risk. We will take extensive measures to protect  
confidentiality  and to ensure data security. 
 
14) Potential  Benefits to  Participants*  
Participating participants may potentially benefit by identifying the need for remote microphone technology in the school and home setting. Additionally, future patients with hearing loss may benefit from the investigation and findings contained within. The data generated from this study will help determine the aided benefit of remote microphone technology in pediatric bone conduction device users. 
 
15) Vulnerable  Populations* 
The study will include children. 
 
16) Setting 
The study will take place in the Department of Otolaryngology at University of  
Miami for pediatric patients seen in the Department of Otolaryngology for bone conduction hearing device servic es. 
 
17) Resources Available  
The PI and Co-investigators are well qualified to perform the described study protocol. We have an established clinic with a long history of evaluation and management of individuals with hearing loss, including those using bone conduction devices. The Department of Otolaryngology has a research team to assist  in management of study procedures. 
 
18) Prior  Approvals  
N/A 
 
19) Recruitment  Methods 
Potential participants will be established patients of the department of  
Otolaryngology. The clinician will speak with the potential subject and guardian about the research study during a routine visit at the Ear Institute  
clinic.  The PI or co-investigator will inform  the potential subject  about all 
 
 aspects of the evaluation process. If the subject and guardian express interest 
in the study, the research coordinator will be contacted. If possible, on that 
same day, the research coordinator will make arrangements for one of the study personnel to meet  with the patient  to review  the informed  consent. 
Otherwise,  an appointment will be made for a future  time to meet  with the 
potential subject.  
Participants will be told that their participation in the study is voluntary and  
that they do not need to participate in the study if they choose not to. If they decide to take part and later change their mind they are free to withdraw  
from the project at any stage. They will be told that they will receive the same treatment by the  clinicians if they  choose not to participate.  
Participants identified by retrospective chart review will be contacted via  
telephone or email  (see attached documents).  
Children over the age of seven will assent participation. We will provide  
information about the study in a language understandable to the participant, answer all questions in terms understandable to the child, use written and verbal explanations, and obtain voluntary agreement to participate. The assent document  
will be written  in language at an  appropriate level of readability.  
Participants  will also be recruited  by flyer  or email  advertisement.  Flyers  
will be posted at the following locations: 
University of Miami at the Clinical Research Building, UHealth Plantation,  
UHealth  Boca,  UHealth  Palm  Beach,  UHealth  Lennar and Miami Children’s 
Hospital Division of Audiology. Participants  will be compensated  $12.50/hour and parking fees will be 
reimbursed. 
 
 A minimum of 10 participants  will be enrolled  for study. We will not enroll more  
than 30 participants for prospective portion of the study. 
 
20) Confidentiality  
To ensure confidentiality of the information shared with the investigative team, all 
information pertaining to a subject will be given a coded number. All data will be stored under this code number and not the subject’s name. Records which link participant s’ identification with their code number will be kept in a locked file on a 
password protected computer that only the PI has access to and stored separately from the subject data. All computer files that include study data will be stored on a computer with  password security and only IRB approved individuals will have 
access to these codes. The investigator and her co -investigators will consider these  
records confidential to the extent permitted by law. Identifiable records and results will not be included in any publication, and collected data will not be used in any other studies without a subject’s  expressed  permission.  
 
21) Provisions  to Protect  the Privacy Interests of Participants  
N/A 
 
22) Consent  Process  
 
Due to COVID 19, we also will be consenting remotely.  When  consenting 
remotely, we will follow the recommendations provided by both University of Miami and the FDA. Potential subjects will be called and/or emailed for recruitment and if agreed to participate, a zoom meeting will be arranged for the consenting 
process; a witness will be present in the call. All steps will be documented in the  
format  attached.  
 
  
The informed consent process will be conducted in English by one of the study 
personnel. Consent will be performed at visit 1 of the study prior to the performance of any study-related activities. The prospective subject will be informed about study expectations as outlined in the IRB approved consent form. The prospective subject will be given a copy of the informed  consent to read and will have  the opportunity 
to ask questions about the study prior to signing the document. The prospective subject can take the document home to review and come back at a later date to ask  
questions and sign the document if he/she decides  to enroll in the study. 
 
It is possible that while  our study is limited  to English  speaking patients,  the parents  
of some patients included may be non-English speakers. Because only a maximum of 30 participants will be enrolled it is anticipated that only a small number of  
participants may be enrolled whose guardians will not understand English. Based  
on population data for Miami-Dade, we expect this to be limited to Spanish speakers. For those participants all required documents will be translated into  
Spanish. Further a native Spanish speaker and certified medical translator will be present  for consent and all test  sessions.  
 
When determining whether a child is capable of assenting, the ages, maturity, and psychological state of the child will be taken into account. The PI will consider the child’s experience and level of understanding, ensure the child is cooperative and agreeable to participation, and ensure the child’s rights are maintained. As with  
adult consents, assent will be conducted in a manner and location that ensures participant privacy, Giving adequate information about the study in a language understandable to the participant, Providing adequate opportunity for the participant to consider all options, Responding to the participant’s questions, Ensuring the participant has understood the information provided, Obtaining the participant’s voluntary agreement to participate, and Continuing to provide information as the participant  or research requires.  
 
23) Process to Document Consent in Writing 
N/A 