 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
  
 
 
 
 
AN OPEN -LABEL PILOT PROSPECTIVE VULVOSCOPY WITH 
PHOTOGRAPHY STUDY OF THE VISIBLE CHANGES IN THE VULVA, 
VESTIBULE AND VAGINA PRE-  AND POST - TWENTY WEEKS OF DAILY 
ADMINISTRATION OF 60 MG OSPEMIFENE IN POST -MENOPAUSAL 
WOMEN WITH DYSPAREUNIA FROM VULVAR VAGINAL ATROPHY  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  
 
 
Irwin Goldstein, MD  
Medical Director  
San Diego Sexual Medicine  
5555 Reservoir Drive, Suite 300  
San Diego, California 92120  
T: 619 -265-8865 F: 619- 265-7696  
 
 Medical Monitor:  
 
 
Irwin Goldstein, MD  
Medical Director  
San Diego Sexual Medicine  
5555 Reservoir Drive, Suite 300  
San Diego, California 92120  
T: 619 -265-8865 F: 619- 265-7696  
 
 
Sponsor Contact:  
 
 
Irwin Goldstein, MD  
Medical Director  
San Diego Sexual Medicine  
5555 Reservoir Drive, Suite 300  
San Diego, California 92120  
T: 619 -265-8865 F: 619- 265-7696  
 
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
  
AN OPEN -LABEL PILOT PROSPECTIVE VULVOSCOPY WITH 
PHOTOGRAPH Y STUDY OF THE VISIBLE CHANGES IN THE VULVA, 
VESTIBULE AND VAGINA PRE-  AND POST - TWENTY WEEKS OF DAILY 
ADMINISRATION OF 60 MG OSPEMIFENE IN POST -MENOPAUSAL WOMEN 
WITH DYSPAREUNIA FROM VULVAR VAGINAL ATROPHY  
 
 
 
SUMMARY  
This study is Investigator initiated research (IIR) supported by a grant and study 
medication from Shionogi . 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Ospemifene is indicated for post -menopausal women diagnosed with vulvar 
vaginal atrophy  (VVA ) and dyspareunia.  While ospemifene clinically significantly 
reduces pain associated with dyspareunia, there has been little prospective 
documentation using vulvoscopy with detailed photography of the visible 
changes to the vulva , vestibule and vaginal region with daily administration of 60 
mg ospemifene in post-menopausal women with VVA and dyspareunia.   This 
study will include a total of 6 prospective photographic sessions of the vulva, 
vestibule and vagina o ver the 20 weeks administration of 60 mg ospemifene in 
the study.  Comparisons will be made of  baseline photography (vulvoscopy 
session 0) with photography at 4 weeks (vulvoscopy session 1), 8 weeks 
(vulvoscopy session 2), 12 weeks (vulvoscopy session 3), 16 weeks (vulvoscopy 
session 4) and 20 weeks (vulvoscopy session 5).  
 
2. TRIAL OBJECTIVE  
The primary objective of this study is to prospectively document , using 
vulvoscopy with detailed photography, the visible changes to the vulva, vestibule 
and vaginal region  in post-menopausal women with dyspareunia taking 60 mg 
daily ospemifene  for twenty weeks at 6 timepoints:  baseline , 4 weeks, 8 weeks, 
12 weeks, 16 weeks and 20 weeks.  
 Secondary objectives include changes in pain as noted on the pain scale 
(appendix 2) and the q- tip test, in the vestibule on visual scale (appendix 3) by 
the clinician and sexual function by subject diary (appendix 4).  
 3. DESCRIPTION OF RESEARCH DESIGN  
 3.1 Overall Study Plan  
This is an unblinded  study to be conducted at a single research center, San 
Diego Sexual Medicine.  Subjects meeting inclusion and exclusion criteria  will 
receive 60 mg ospemifene daily for twenty weeks. After the  informed consent is 
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 signed , a baseline  physical examination , and vulvoscopy with detailed 
photography of the vulva, vestibule and vagina , will be performed .  Physical 
examination and vulvoscopy with detailed photography of the vulva, vestibule 
and vagina, will be repeated  prospectively every 4 weeks for a total of 20  weeks.   
Therefore, physical examination and vulvoscopy with detailed photography of the 
vulva, vestibule and vagina will be performed prospectively at baseline  
(vulvoscopy session 1) , 4 weeks (vulvoscopy session 2) , 8 weeks (vulvoscopy 
session 3) , 12, we eks (vulvoscopy session 4) , 16 weeks (vulvoscopy session 5)  
and 20 weeks  (vulvoscopy session 6)  following daily administration of 60 mg 
ospemifene.  
 
3.2 Study Duration  
Each eligible s ubject  will participate in the study for approximately 20 weeks.  It is 
expected  this single site investigator -initiated research study will be completed 
approximately 8 months following  initial approval by the Independent  Review 
Board.  
 3.3 Independent  Review Board (IRB) Approval  
Prior to conducting any study -related p rocedures, the Principal  Investigator will 
obtain written approval from Aspire  Independent  Review Board for the informed 
consent form, protocol, recruitment materials, and any written information provided to Subject s pertaining to the procedure.   
 3.4 Rationale for Study Design and Subject  Selection  
Currently there have been limited prospective studies using vulvoscopy with 
detailed photography demonstrating  visible changes to the vulva, vestibule and 
vagina following  oral administration of 60 mg ospemifene  in post -menopausal 
women with VVA and dyspareunia .  Informat ion regarding  visible changes to the 
vulva, vestibule and vagina may be very important to the patient and to the health 
care provider to best understand the beneficial effects of ospemi fene and to 
ensure patient compliance with treatment . 
 
This study is being conducted in an unblinded fashion because the primary 
endpoint is a collection of photographs.  All subject s will receive the same active 
drug at the same dosage.  
4. Selection and Withdrawal of Subject s 
The study population will include m enopausal females with vulvar vaginal a trophy 
(VVA) causing dyspareunia.   
 
4.1 Subject  Inclusion Criteria  
All criteria below must be met in order for a Subject  to be eligible for st udy 
participation.  
1. Subject  provides written informed consent and HIPAA authorization before 
any study procedures are conducted;  
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 2. Subject  is female;  
3. Subject  is aged 21-80 years;  
4. Subject  has a body mass index (BMI) < 37 kg/m2 
5. Subject  is menopausal either naturally (at least 12 months amenorrheic) 
or 6 weeks after a bilateral salpingo -oophorec tomy prior to natural 
menopause;  subjects with hysterectomy only must have a serum FSH > 
40 mIU/mL;   
6. Subject has vulvovaginal atrophy with dyspareunia;  
Subject  agrees to comply with the study procedures and visits.  
 
 
4.2 Subject  Exclusion Criteria  
Subject s who meet any of the following criteria shall be excluded:  
 
1. Subject  has a hypersensitivity to any of the ingredients of ospemifene;  
2. Subject has used ospemifene in the past;  
3. Subject has documented or suspected breast cancer, history of heart attack or stroke;   
4. Subject has clinically significant findings on physical examination;  
5. Subject has uncontrolled hypertension;  
6. Subject has any chro nic medical condition or psychologic disorder that the 
Principal  Investigator feels makes her ineligible for the study;  
7. Subject is currently on local or systemic androgen therapy including local 
or systemic testosterone (washout 14 days for local or topical androgen or 
non-depot injection, 1 month for depot, 6 months for pellet ; 
8. Subject is currently on local or systemic estrogen therapy or androgen 
therapy (washout 14 days for vaginal estrogen, 60 da ys for 
oral/transdermal therapy ); 
9. Subject is current ly using a SERM or products that have estrogenic or 
anti-estrogenic effects within last month;  
10. Subject currently using itraconzole, ketoconazole, digitalis or alkaloids 
heparin or strong cytochrome P 450 3A4 inhibitors;  
11. Subject has a history of substance abuse within 12 months prior , or 
consuming > 14 alcoholic drinks per week;  
12. Subject has received an investigational drug within 3 0 days prior to 
signing consent ; 
13. Subject has any condition or exhibits behavior that indicate s to the 
Principal  Investigator that the Subject is unlikely to be compliant with study 
procedures and visits.  
 
4.3 Subject  Withdrawal Criteria  
 
The Principal  Investigator may discontinue a subject ’s participation in the study at 
any time if it is considered in the subject ’s best interest to do so.  Such a decision 
may be precipitated by adverse events, new onset illness, clinically important 
changes in vital signs, physical examinations, or laborat ory tests.  Subject s who 
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 are noncompliant with study procedures and visits may also be withdrawn by the 
Principal  Investigator.   
 Subject s may withdraw from participation in the study at any time for any reason.  
A subject ’s decision to withdraw will not cause the subject  to lose any benefits to 
which she is entitled.  A subject  who withdraws prematurely from the study will 
return to the clinic as soon as possible and before any further ospemifene 
treatment of any kind, to undergo the final visit evaluatio ns. 
 If a subject  prematurely withdraws or is withdrawn from study participation, the 
reason for the withdrawal must be recorded on the case report form (CRF).  Record the primary reason for premature withdrawal according to the following 
categories:  
• Adver se Event :  Subject  experiences an intolerable event, which may or 
may not be related to the study medication;  
• Withdrawn Consent :  Subject  withdraws from study participation for 
personal reasons (exclude adverse experience before indicating this 
category);  
• Concomitant Medication Violation :  Subject  initiates, discontinues, or 
changes dosing regimen of concomitant medication in violation of the protocol, which, in the judgment of the Principal  Investigator, may 
adversely affect evaluation of safety;  
• Lost-to-Follow -up:  Subject  does not return for evaluation and no further 
contact is made by the Subject  after three documented phone or email 
attempts and a final attempt by certified mail.  
• Other :  Any reason that does not fit in the above 4 categories: the reason  
will also be recorded on the CRF.  
 
5. Clinical Procedures  
Clinical procedures throughout the study are described in the sections below, and summarized briefly in Appendix 1. 
 5.1 Informed Consent and HIPAA  
Each potential study Subject  must provide written informed consent and 
authorize release of her protected health information before any study procedure 
is conducted.  
5.1.1  Informed Consent  
An Informed Consent Form (ICF) and California Bill of Rights will be written in accordance with  established criteria of the Aspire  IRB and the appropriate federal 
regulations to describe the study plan, procedures, and risks.  The Aspire  IRB 
must approve the ICF and any ICF amendments or administrative revisions 
before they are used.  
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
  
Potential subject s will be informed of the study plan and schedule and will 
provide written informed consent prior to the initiation of any study -related 
procedures.  Each subject  will be afforded the opportunity to ask any questions 
about the study plan, procedure s, or possible risks.  The date the consent form 
was signed by the subject  and the Principal  Investigator or his designee will be 
documented.  The screening procedures will be performed and recorded on the source documents.  No screening procedures may be in itiated prior to the 
Subject  signing the ICF.  
 
The original, signed ICF will be retained in the Principal  Investigator’s study files.  
A copy of the signed and dated consent form will be given to each potential Subject . 
5.1.2  HIPAA  
In accordance with the H ealth Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) Privacy Rule, the Subject  has the right to determine who has access to 
protected health information.  
 
Potential subject s will provide written authorization for the Principal  Investigator 
to access the subject ’s personal health information (PHI) for the purposes of the 
study.  Personal health information relevant to the study includes medical records 
and the results of tests and procedures.  The subject ’s written authorization a lso 
allows sharing this information with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), other regulatory agencies and the Aspire  IRB.  The Subject  may cancel the 
authorization in writing at any time, but will then be withdrawn from the study.  
 
An authorization fo rm must include the following elements:  
• A description of the information to be used or disclosed;  
• Identification of the persons or class of persons authorized to make the 
disclosure(s);  
• Identification of the persons or class of persons authorized to receive the PHI; 
• A description of the purposes for the uses or disclosures;  
• Expiration date or event triggering expiration;  
• Individual’s signature and date;  
• A statement of the individual’s right to revoke his/her authorization;  
• A statement of consequences to the  individual for refusing to sign the 
authorization;  
• A statement of the potential for the information to be re -disclosed by 
recipients and no longer protected by the Privacy Rule; and  
• If the individual will be denied access to records during the study, a statement that the Subject  agrees to temporarily waive access to records 
during the research.  
 
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 The original, signed HIPAA authorization form will be retained in the Principal  
Investigator’s study files.  A copy of the signed and dated form will be given to 
each potential Subject . 
  
5.2 Subject  Screening (Visit 1)  
Candidates for enrollment will be screened within 28 days prior to enrollment .  
Before initiation of any test procedures, Subject s will be fully informed of the 
study plan, procedures, and risks involved in participating in the study.  Each potential Subject  will be required to read and to indicate her understanding by 
signing and dating the ICF prior to initiation of any screening procedures.  
 
The site will maintain an ongoing screening log of all subject s who provide written 
informed consent.  The screening log will include each Subject ’s initials, date of 
birth, and screening number (assigned sequentially),  including reason for e xclusion 
if the subject  is determined to be ineligible for the study.  If the subject  does not 
have a middle name, a dash will be used instead of that initial (e.g., J- S).  The 
subject  will be identified on source documents by initials and the assigned Subject  
number.  
 Screening procedures will consist of the following:  
• Medical history, including surgical procedures, tobacco, alcohol, and medication use (prescription and non -prescription drugs, nutritional 
supplements, herbals, or investigational drugs) ; 
• Measurement of height (inches) and weight (pounds) in indoor clothing without shoes; recorded to the nearest whole unit;  
• Vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, respirati on rate, and oral temperature);  
• Pain scale ; 
• Urinalysis;  
• Clinical laboratory tests estrad iol, LH, FSH (the same clinical laboratory 
will be used throughout the study):  
• Physical examination including review of systems and breast and gynecologic exam ;  
• Vulvoscopy including detailed photograph(s) of the vulva, vestibule and 
vagina  region and pain scale/Q -tip testing ; 
• Visual scale.  
 The Principal Investigator will review all screening assessments and sign and 
date all reports.  Any clinically significant abnormalities will be indicated by the abbreviation CS on the report.  Results that are not clinically significant will be 
identified as NCS. The Principal  Investigator will review all inclusion and 
exclusion requirements and document the eligibility of each Subject  to participate 
further.  
 
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 5.3 Study Restrictions  
 
The restrictions listed below will be applied from study drug administration 
through s tudy termination.  The Principal  Investigator will determine if a deviation 
from the restrictions warrants Subject  withdrawal from the study.  
 
From screening through completion of the last study procedures, Subject s may 
not do the following:  
• use of any pr escription hormone  (any administration ); 
• change any prescription medication without notifying the Principal  
Investigator;  
• use any over -the-counter products, vitamins or herbal and/or nutritional 
supplements;  
• use any investigational drug or medical device p roducts;  
• use any drugs of abuse.  
 
5.4 Study Day 0 (Visit 2)  
 Subject meeting inclusion and exclusion criteria may enroll any time after 
screening up to 28 days after consent is signed : 
• Measure vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, respiration rate, and oral 
temperature);  
• Assess any change in concomitant me dication since screening visit;  
• Complete pain scale;  
• Vulvoscopy inclu ding detailed photograph(s) of the vulva,  vestibule and 
vagina region and pain scale/Q -tip testing ; 
• Complet e visual scale;  
• Educate subject  as to how study medication is administered  (taken 
each morning) ; 
• Dispense  study medication  (35 tabs) , diaries (10) and lubricant ; 
• Assess adverse events.  
 
 
5.5 Study Days 28 ± 7 , 56 ± 7, 84 ± 7, 112  ± 7 (Visits 3, 4, 5, 6 ) 
 Each Subject  will report to the Principal  Invest igator’s  office on study Days 28, 
56, 84 and 112  ± 7 for the following procedures at each visit : 
• Measure vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, respiration rate, and oral 
temperature);  
• Assess any change in concomitant medication;  
• Complete pain scale;  
• Vulvoscopy including photograph(s) of the vulvar vestibule regi on and 
pain scale/Q -tip testing ; 
• Complete visual scale;  
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 • Collect medication and calculate compliance  (reeducate Subject on 
medication administration  if compliance is <80% or >120% ); 
• Collect diaries;  
• Dispense study medication (35 tabs) , new diaries  and new lubricant ; 
• Assess adverse events.  
 
 
5.6 Study Day 140  ± 7 (Visit 7 ) or Early Termination Visit  
 On Study Day 140 ± 7  each Subject  will report to the Principal  Investigator’s 
office for the following procedures:  
• Measure vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, respiration rate, and oral 
temperature);  
• Assess any change in concomitant medication ;  
• Complete pain scale;  
• Perform p hysical examination including review of systems and breast and 
gynecologic exam;  
• Vulvoscopy including photograph(s) of the vu lva, vestibule and vagina 
region and pain scale/Q -tip testing ; 
• Complete visual scale;  
• Collect medication and calculate compliance;  
• Collect  diaries ; 
• Assess adverse events.  
 
If a Subject  terminates study participation or is withdrawn from the study by the 
Principal  Investigator before visit 7 , the Subject  should return to the Principal  
Investigator's office as soon as possible for the following procedures:  
 
• Measure vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, respiration rate, and oral 
temperature);  
• Assess any change in concomitant medication ;  
• Complete pain scale;  
• Assess any change in concomitant medication since screening visit;  
• Perform p hysical examination includi ng review of systems and breast and 
gynecologic exam;  
• Vulvoscopy including photograph(s) of the vu lva, vestibule and vagina 
region and pain scale/Q -tip testing ; 
• Complete visual scale;  
• Collect medication and calculate compliance;  
• Collect diaries;  
• Assess adverse events.  
 
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 6 Adverse Event Assessment  
 
6.1 Adverse Events  
 An adverse event (AE) is any undesirable sign, symptom, medical condition, or 
laboratory abnormality occurring after the Subject  has taken the first dose of 
study medication, whether the event is considered study medication -related or 
not.  Medical conditions or diseases present before starting study medication are 
only considered adverse events if they worsen after starting study medication.  
The Principal  Investigator will follow all Subject s who experience an adverse 
event until the Subject ’s medical condition returns to normal or until a clinically 
satisfactory resolution is obtained.  
 
Adverse events are classified in several wa ys: as either serious or non -serious, 
and either expected or unexpected.  Serious adverse events (SAEs) include those that result in death, are life threatening, require inpatient hospitalization or 
result in prolongation of an existing hospitalization, re sult in persistent or 
significant disability or incapacity, require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes described above, are congenital anomalies or birth 
defects, or are medically important events or reactions (see Section 7.2) .  Non -
serious adverse events are those adverse events that do not meet the above criteria for serious adverse events.  Expected adverse events are those events 
that have been previously observed and are described in the current prescribing 
information for  the study medication.  Unexpected adverse events are those 
events that are not listed in the prescribing information, or are not consistent with the specificity or severity described in the current prescribing information.  
 Any abnormality that, in the ju dgment of the Principal  Investigator or a physician 
identified on Form FDA 1572, impacts the health, safety, or well -being of the 
study participant such that immediate follow -up (e.g., additional testing or 
treatment intervention) is warranted is considere d a clinically significant 
abnormality.  A determination of clinical significance is independent of whether or 
not the abnormality is considered causally related to the use of the study 
medication.  
 6.2 Serious Adverse Events  
 A SAE is defined by federal r egulation as any AE that results in any of the 
following outcomes:  
1. Death  
2. Life threatening ( Subject  is at risk of death at the time the event 
occurs)  
3. Persistent/significant disability or incapacity (substantial disruption of a person’s ability to conduct no rmal life functions)  
4. Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of an existing hospitalization.  
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 5. Congenital anomaly or birth defect.  
 
Additionally, important medical events that may not result in death, be life 
threatening, or require hospitalization may be considered a SAE when, based 
upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the Subject  and may 
require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in 
this definition.  
 Any SAE occurring in a Subject  after providing informed consent and until 30 
days after completing the study must be reported to the Aspire  IRB.  The 
reporting period may be extended if there is a strong suspicion of a study 
medication reaction.  Reports of overdosage  must be monitored and reported as 
an SAE.  
 
6.3 Adverse Event Reporting  
 All adverse events, whether volunteered by the Subject , discovered during 
general questioning by the Principal  investigator, or detected through a physical 
examination or other means,  will be recorded in the clinic chart (source 
document) and on the Adverse Events CFR.  Each description of an adverse event will include:  
1. Duration: start and stop dates  
2. Expectedness  
3. Severity: events will be classified as either mild (causing no limitatio n 
in normal activities), moderate  (causing some limitation in normal 
activities), or severe  (causing significant limitation in or the inability to 
perform normal activities)  
4. Action taken  
5. Relationship to the study medication:  not related, possibly related,  or 
probably related  
6. Outcome: resolved, continuing requiring no treatment, continuing 
requiring treatment, hospitalization, or death  
 Whenever possible, adverse events causing premature study discontinuation 
should be followed to resolution.  
 All SAEs occu rring during the study and up to 28 days after the Subject  
completes the study (visit on Day 84 or earlier) must be reported to the Aspire  
IRB within 1 week of learning of the event with the exception of death which must 
be reported within 24 hours .  Additionally, the  Principal  investigator must provide 
any other AE notification required by the IRB.  Each SAE is to be recorded on a SAE worksheet along with follow -up records.  Examples of follow -up records may 
include photocopies of hospital records, consult ation reports, autopsy findings, 
laboratory reports, and a summary of the outcome of the reaction.  
 
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 6.4 Risks 
 
The risks to Subjects in this study are those associated with in the pack age insert 
for ospemifene:  hot flashes, vaginal discharge, muscle spasms and increased 
sweating.  Less common but serious side effects include stroke, blood clots and 
cancer of the lining of the uterus.  
 
7. Study Medication and Accountability  
 
The Principal  Investigator is responsible for study medication at the 
investigational site, including storage, accountability, record keeping, and reconciliation.  
 7.1 Study Medication  
 Ospemifene (Osphena
®) 60 mg tablets  will be provided by Shionogi 
Pharmaceuticals, i n sufficient quantity to dose all Subject s. 
 
The ospemifene tablets provided for this study will be taken from commercial 
drug supply.  
 
7.2 Study Medication Blinding  
 This is an open -label (unblinded) study and no blinding of study medication is 
required.  
 
7.3 Study Medication Labeling  
 Each envelope of  medication provided  to each Subject will be marked as to 
subject  (initials and subject number) , visit number and date of dispensing.  
 
7.4 Study Medication Storage  
 Ospemifene will  be stored in a cool, dry place. The study medication shall be 
stored in a securely locked, substantially constructed enclosure to which access is limited.  The Principal  Investigator shall take adequate precautions, including 
locked storage, to prevent th eft or diversion of the study medication, consistent 
with CFR Title 21, part  312.69.  
 7.5 Study Medication Handling  
 Study medication will be shipped to the investigational site after the granting 
agency ( Shionogi Pharmaceuticals) has received the required  study documents 
in accordance with regulatory requirements.  
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
  
All study medication is to be administered in accordance with the protocol and 
only to enrolled Subject s.  Only authorized personnel may supply the study 
medication to each Subject . 
 
7.6 Study M edication Accountability  
 All study medications will be Subject  to inventory upon receipt, and stored in 
accordance with Section  8.4.  Applicable regulatory requirements for this study 
will be enforced by the Principal  Investigator or designated site perso nnel 
through the study.  The Principal  Investigator (or designee) will document the 
date, Subject  identification, and lot number used each time drug is dispensed for 
Subject  use. 
 
Throughout the study, the Principal  Investigator will maintain an accounting  of all 
study medication.  The Principal  Investigator must not destroy any unused study 
medication. The Principal  Investigator will return all unopened study medication 
and a copy of the completed drug disposition form to Shionogi  Pharmaceuticals.  
 
8. Statistical Methods  
 
8.1 Determination of Sample Size  
 The sample size of 10  menopausal Subjects was chosen for this study based on 
this being a pilot study and this sample size will be sufficient to prospectively document visible changes to the vulva, vestibule and vagina in post -menopausal 
women with VVA and  dyspareunia.  There will be a total of 6 photographic 
sessions of the vulva, vestibule and vagina over the 20 weeks of the study.  The 
photograph(s) at baseline (vulvoscopy session 0) will be compare d to 
photographs at 4 weeks (vulvoscopy session 1) , 8 weeks (vulvoscopy session 2) , 
12 weeks (vulvoscopy session 3) , 16 weeks (vulvoscopy session 4)  and 20 
weeks (vulvoscopy session 5).  
 8.2  Photographic  Data  
 Changes to the vulva, vestibule and vagina will be examine d prospective ly by 
comparing photographs of  post-menopausal women with VVA and dyspareunia 
at 4 weeks, 8 weeks, 12 weeks, 16 weeks and 20 weeks while on treatment with 
60 mg ospemifene.  The proportion of subjects with improvement will be tabulated 
by scheduled visit.  
 8.3  Patient Reported Outcomes  
 
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 Mean pain score will be summarized at each scheduled visit. Subjects will also 
be categorized at each visit as having more pain, the same pa in, or less pain 
compared to baseline.  
 
Mean scores will be summarized for each item of the visual scale at each 
scheduled visit. Subjects will also be categorized at each visit as worsened, 
unchanged, or improved compared to baseline for each item of the visual scale 
at each scheduled visit.  
 
For each subject, the proportion of total sexual events with a ‘yes’ response since 
the last scheduled visit will be calculated for each diary question at each 
scheduled visit.  
 8.4   Safety Data  
 Safety data will be summarized for each Subject  enrolled in the study.  
 
9.   Administrative Issues  
 
9.1 Changes to the Protocol  
 Any change or addition to this protocol requires a written protocol amendment 
that must be approved by the Aspire  IRB before implementation.   Only in the 
event of an emergency should a deviation from the protocol occur for an individual Subject .  Such a deviation will be for the Subject  in the emergency 
situation and for that Subject  only. A description of the devia tion from the protocol 
and the reason for it will be recorded in the source documents.  
  
9.2 Monitoring Procedures  
 The Principal  Investigator and site personnel will complete all CRFs in a timely 
manner following completion of each Subject  visit to facili tate documentation of 
study procedures and review of the CRFs.  
 9.3 Access to Data Source/Documentation  
 
The Principal  Investigator will permit representatives of the Aspire IRB and/or the 
FDA (or other regulatory authority) to inspect the facilities and records relevant to 
this study, including Subject  charts, either during the study or after its completion.  
 9.4   Quality Control and Quality Assurance  
 
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 The Principal  Investi gator must provide the documents listed below before drug 
can be shipped and the study initiated:  
• Original Form FDA 1572 completed and signed by the Principal  
Investigator;  
• Current medical license for each physician appearing on Form FDA 1572;  
• Copy of IRB correspondence documenting approving the protocol, 
informed consent form, recruitment materials and any instructions for the 
Subject  regarding the procedure, and any other documents reviewed 
and/or required by the IRB.  
 
9.5 Ethics  
 This study will be condu cted in accordance with current Good Clinical Practice 
(GCP), with the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR Title 21, Parts 50, 54, 56, 312, and 314).  Current GCP is consistent with the ethical principles described in 
the current version of the Declaration of  Helsinki.  
 Requirements for In dependent  Review Board (IRB) review and obtaining 
informed consent are described in Sections 3.3 and 5.1, respectively.  
 
9.6  Case Report Forms, Data Handling, and Recordkeeping  
 The following procedures will be employed related to recording of data:  
• Relevant information determined at each Subject  visit is to be recorded on 
source documents/CRFs.   
• Data recorded on CRFs will be documented in an anonymous fashion with 
the Subject  identified only by her Subject  number and initials.  
• All CRFs are to be completed in a neat, legible manner to ensure accurate communication of data.  A black pen is preferred to ensure clarity of any reproduced copies.  Any change or corrections made on the CRFs must 
be dated and initi aled by the person making the change.  In such cases, 
the best procedure is to cross out the original entry with a single line.  Do not erase, overwrite, or obliterate, by any means, the original entry.  
• CRFs and any data queries should accurately reflect Subject  data records 
(source documents).  
• The completed CRF set for each Subject  is to be reviewed by the Principal 
Investigator for completeness and accuracy.  The Principal Investigator will sign and date the last CRF page to indicate this review was 
performed.  
 
9.7  Retention of Data, Documents, and Study Medication  
 In compliance with CFR Title 21, part 312.57(c), the Principal Investigator will 
retain all study- related materials for at least 2 years after study completion.  
Study -related materials includ e, but are not limited to, medical records (i.e., the 
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 source data), completed case report forms, medication accountability records, 
and reserve samples of investigational medication.  Study medication will be 
stored securely under the storage conditions de scribed in Section 8.4.  
 
10.    References  
 
1. Bachmann GA, Komi JO, Ospemifene Study Group, Ospemifene 
effectively treats vulvaginal atrophy in postmenopausal women; results 
from a pivotel phase 3 study.  Menopause 2010;17:480 -6.  
2. Portman DJ, Bachmann GA, Si mon JA and Ospemifene Study Group, 
Ospemifene, a novel selective estrogen receptor modulator for treating 
dyspareunia associated with postmenopausal vulvar and vaginal atrophy.  
Menopause 2013; 20:623- 30. 
3. Goldstein SR, Bachmann GA, Koninckx PR, Lin VH, Portman DJ, 
Ylikorkala O and Ospemifene Study Group.  Climacteric 2014;17:173 -82. 
4. James A. Simon, MD,1 Vivian H. Lin, MD,2 Cathy Radovich, BS,2 Gloria A. Bachmann, MD,3  and The Ospemifene Study GroupOne -year long -
term safety extension study of  ospemifene for the  treatment of vulvar and 
vaginal atrophy in postmenopausal women with a uterus, Menopause: The 
Journal of The North American Menopause Society, Vol. 20, No. 4, p p. 
418-427. 	  
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 Appendix 1:  Schedule of Study Procedures  
 
Study DAY:  Up to -28 0 28 ± 7 56 ± 7 84 ± 7 112 ± 7 140 ± 7 
 or ET  
Visit 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Procedure         
ICF & HIPAA  X       
I/E Criteria  X X      
Medical history X X      
Physical exam X      X 
Breast/Gyn exam  X      X 
Vital signs X X X X X X X 
Height & weight  X      X 
Concomitant  
Medications X X X X X X X 
Pain scale  X X X X X X X 
Clinical  
laboratory tests2 X      X 
Vulvoscopy with 
photography  X X X X X X X 
Visual Scale  X X X X X X X 
Q-tip test  X X X X X X X 
Dispense study 
drug   X X X X X  
Dispense diaries   X X X X X  
Dispense lubricant   X X X X X  
Collect/reconcile 
medication    X X X X X 
Calculate 
compliance    X X X X X 
Collect diaries    X X X X X 
Collect AE data  X X X X X X X 
ET = early termination  
For detailed study procedures, see Section 5, Clinical Procedures.  
  
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 Appendix 2:  Pain Scale  
 
 
 
      I----------- ---------------------- I-------------------- -------------I --------------------------------- I 
     0         1           2            3    
no pain      mild             moderate       severe  
  
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 Appendix 3:  Visual Scale  
 
 
Observation  
  
0 - none  
1 - mild  
2 - moderate   
3 - severe  
 
Petechiae  
     
 
Pallor  
     
 
Friability 
     
 
Dryness  
     
 
Redness  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Protocol SDSM-2015-02. 4 
April 4 , 2016  
 Appendix 4:  Diary  
 
 
 
Initials ___________  Number ___________  Date _______________________  
  
 
 
Please complete after each sexual event, answering all questions.  
 
 
 
If you experienced dryness before were you less dry?  ☐Yes   ☐ No   ☐ N/A 
 
 
Did you use lubricant during this activity?   ☐Yes   ☐ No    
 
 
Did you experience pain/discomfort during foreplay?  ☐Yes   ☐ No   ☐ N/A 
 
 
Did you experience pain during masturbation?   ☐Yes   ☐ No   ☐ N/A 
 
 
Did you experience pain during oral sex?   ☐Yes   ☐ No   ☐ N/A 
 
 
Did you experience pain during intercourse?   ☐Yes   ☐ No   ☐ N/A 
 
 
Did you stop early because of discomfort?   ☐Yes   ☐ No    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 