IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 1 of 49 IRB-HSR PROTOCOL  
Investigator Agreement  
 
BY SIGNING THIS DOCUMENT, THE INVESTIGATOR CONFIRMS:  
1. I am not currently debarred by the US FDA from involvement in clinical research studies.  
2. I am not involved in any regulatory or misconduct litigation or investiga tion by the FDA.  
3. That if this study involves any funding or resources from an outside source, or if you will be 
sharing data outside of UVA prior to publication that you will contact the Dean’s office regarding the need for a contract and letter of indemni fication.  If it is determined that either a contract or 
letter of indemnification is needed, subjects cannot be enrolled until these documents are complete.  
4. The proposed research project will be conducted by me or under my close supervision.  It will be 
conducted in accordance with the protocol submitted to and approved by the IRB including any 
modifications, amendments or addendums submitted and approved by the IRB throughout the 
life of the protocol.  
5. That no personnel will be allowed to work on this pro tocol until they have completed the IRB -
HSR On -line training and the IRB -HSR has been notified.  
6. That all personnel working on this protocol will follow all IRB -HSR Policies and Procedures as 
stated on the IRB -HSR Website http://www.virginia.edu/vprgs/irb/  and on the School of 
Medicine Clinical Trials Office Website:  http://knowledgelink.healthsystem.virginia.edu/intranet/hes/cto/sops/sop_index.cfm  
7. I will ensure that all those delegated tasks relating to this study, whether explicitly or implicitly, are capable through expertise, training , experience or credentialing to undertake those tasks.   
8. I confirm that the implications of the study have been discussed with all Departments that might be affected by it and have obtained their agreement for the study to take place.  
9. That no subjects will be recruited or entered under the protocol until the Investigator ha s 
received the signed IRB -HSR Approval form stating the protocol is open to enrollment  
10. That any materials used to recruit subjects will be approved by the IRB -HSR prior to use.  
11. That all subjects will sign a copy of the most current consent form that has a non-expired IRB -
HSR approval stamp.  
12. That any modifications of the protocol or consent form will not be initiated without prior written approval from the IRB -HSR, except when necessary to eliminate immediate hazards to the 
subjects.  
13. Any significant findings that become known in the course of the research that might affect the willingness of subjects to enroll or to continue to take part, will be promptly reported to the IRB.   
14. I will report immediately to the IRB any unanticipated problems involving risk to  subjects or to 
others including adverse reactions to biologics, drugs or medical devices.   
15. That any serious deviation from the protocol will be reported promptly to the Board in writing.  
16. That any data breach will be reported to the  IRB, the UVa Corporate Compliance and Privacy Office , UVa Police as applicable.  
17. That the continuation status report for this protocol will be completed and returned within the 
time limit stated on the form.  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 2 of 49 18. That the IRB -HSR office will be notified within 30 days of a change in the Principal Investigator or 
of the closure of this study.  
19. That a new PI will be assigned if the current PI will not be at UVA for an extended period of time.  
If the current PI is leaving UVa permanently, a new PI will be assigned PRIOR to the departu re of 
the current PI.  
20. All study team members will have access to the current protocol and other applicable documents such as the IRB -HSR Application, consent forms and Investigator Brochures.  
21. Signed consent forms and other research records will be retained in a confidential manner.  Records will be kept at least 6 years after completion of the study.  
22. No data/specimens may be taken from UVa without a signed Material Transfer Agreement between OSP/SOM Grants and Contracts Office and the new institution.  Or iginal study files are 
considered institutional records and may not be transferred to another institution. I will notify my department administration regarding where the originals will be kept at UVa.  The material 
transfer agreement will delineate what copies of data, health information and/or specimens 
may be taken outside of UVa.  It will also approve which HIPAA identifiers may be taken outside of UVa with the health information or specimens.  
23. If any member of study team leaves UVa, they are STRONGLY ENC OURAGED to use Exit Checklist 
found on IRB -HSR website at http://www.virginia.edu/provost/facultyexit.pdf. 
 
The IRB reserves the right to terminate this study at any time if, in its opinion, (1) the risks of further 
experimentation are prohibitive, or (2) the above agreement is breached.  
  
Investigators Experience  
INSTRUCTIONS:  
Provide a brief description of the investigators experience in working with this population in the 
clinical and research arena.  
If this study will be done in a foreign country, add their experience working within the foreign 
country.   
Answer/Response:   
Investigators Experience  
Daniel D. Rowley, MSc, RRT -ACCS, RRT -NPS, RPFT, FAARC  is Clinical Coordinator of Respiratory  
Therapy Services and he has been working as an adult critical care respiratory therapist for 23 -years.  
He earned a master degree in respiratory care and is credentialed by the National Board for Respiratory Care as a registered respiratory therapist and adult critical care specialist.  Patient care experience includes delivering and monitoring respiratory care lung expansion therapy effectiveness among adult patients.  He has completed specialized training for adult human subject Electrical Impedance Tomo graphy application and monitoring, as well as formal graduate school education 
and practical experience in adult human subject clinical research design and study coordination related to respiratory care interventions and outcomes analysis.  
 
Daniel Gochenou r, MSc, RRT -ACCS, RRT -NPS, AE -C is a Senior Respiratory Therapist and he has 
been working as an adult critical care respiratory therapist for 4 -years.  He earned a master degree 
in respiratory care and is credentialed by the National Board for Respiratory Care as a registered 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 3 of 49 respiratory therapist and adult critical care specialist.  Patient care experience includes delivering 
and monitoring respiratory care lung expansion therapy effectiveness among adult patients.  He has completed specialized training for adult human subject Electrical Impedance Tomography monitoring, as well as formal graduate school education and practical experience as an active sub -
investigator with adult human subject clinical research.  
 Thomas Malinowski, MSc, RRT, FAARC  is Director  of Respiratory Therapy Services and he has been 
working as a respiratory therapist for over 40 -years.  He earned a master degree in respiratory care 
and is credentialed as a registered respiratory therapist by the National Board for Respiratory Care.  Patient care experience includes delivering and assessing respiratory care lung expansion therapy 
effectiveness among adult patients.  He has formal graduate school education and practical experience in adult human subject clinical research design and study coordination related to respiratory care interventions and outcomes analysis.  
 
Ashley (Charles) Bruce, BSRT, RRT -ACCS  is an adult critical care respiratory therapist with greater 
than 10 years of clinical practice experience.     Kyle Enfield, MD, MSc  is a board certified pulmonologist and assistant professor of medicine at the 
University of Virginia Medical Center.  He also earned a master degree in epidemiology and is the medical center’s assistant epidemiologist.  As an attending pulmonologist, Dr. Enfie ld has 
experience managing pulmonary care for adult patients, which includes lung expansion therapy interventions and assessment of its clinical effectiveness.  Dr. Enfield is an experienced adult human subject clinical researcher in the area of pulmonary medicine with special knowledge of clinical research design, data management, and outcomes analysis.  
 Robert Sawyer, MD  is Professor of Surgery and Public Health Sciences at U. VA Medical Center.  He 
is Chief of Acute Care Surgery and a U.S. board certifie d surgeon with specialty training in adult 
critical care medicine.  Dr. Sawyer has extensive research experience that has resulted in manuscript publications in peer reviewed medical journals.    
 
Signatures  
 
Principal Investigator  
 ____________________________  ____________________________  _______  
Principal Investigator  Principal Investigator  Date  
Signature  Name Printed  
 
 
The Principal Investigator signature is ONLY required if this is a new protocol, a 5 year update or a 
modification changing the Principal  Investigator.  
  
Department Chair  
BY SIGNING THIS DOCUMENT THE DEPARTMENT CHAIR AGREES:  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 4 of 49 1. To work with the investigator and with the board as needed, to maintain compliance with 
this agreement.  
2. That the Principal Investigator is qualified to perform this stu dy. 
3. That the protocol is scientifically relevant and sound.  
 ___________________________  _______________________   _________  
Department Chair or Designee  Department Chair or Designee  Date  
Signature  Name Printed   
 
The person signing as the Department Chair cannot be the Principal Investigator or a sub -
investigator on this protocol.  
The Department Chair or Designee signature is ONLY required if this is a new protocol or a 
modification changing the Principal Investigator.  
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 5 of 49  
Brief Summary/Abstract  
INSTRUCTIONS : 
Provide a very brief summary or abstract of this study (500 words or less).  Include the 
purpose or hypothesis, a brief description of the experiment, and plans for data analysis.   
DO NOT Reference the sponsors protocol here.  
If you plan to deviate from  the Sponsor’s protocol in any way, such as not doing certain sub -
studies, include a description of those deviations in this summary.  
For those studies where data will be analyzed collaboratively by multiple sites doing a similar 
study for which there is no sponsors/common protocol (Collaborative Site Analysis Study) 
include a description of the common scientific goals/procedures/data points.   
Answer/Response:   
Pulmonary function is compromised following upper abdominal surgery.  The incidence of post -
oper ative pulmonary complications following upper abdominal surgery ranges between 17% and 
88%, and it is a common cause of morbidity and mortality.  Physicians order Incentive Spirometry 
(I.S.) and EzPAP® lung expansion therapy following surgery to encourage improved alveolar ventilation and to reduce risks of post -operative pulmonary complications associated with 
inhomogeneous distribution of ventilation during deep breathing inspiratory efforts.  The primary purpose of this study is to determine if there is a difference in regional distribution of ventilation 
when comparing resting tidal ventilation with Incentive Spirometry (I.S.) and EzPAP® lung expansion therapy in healthy adult human subjects.  We are also interested in determining if regional redistribut ion of ventilation is time dependent.  Lung volume areas of interests include ventral, mid-
ventral, mid -dorsal, and dorsal regions.  Our null hypotheses is that there is no difference.   
 
A convenience sampling of study participants will be invited to participate in our descriptive observational study.  Study participants will be randomly allocated to receive I.S. or EzPAP® therapy after informed consent has been obtained.  Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) monitoring will be used to visualize and measure regional distribution of ventilation during lung expansion therapy.  
 
EIT lung monitoring and descriptive data will be presented as number (%), mean (SD), or median (IQR) as appropriate.  To test our primary hypothesis, the difference between continuous level data will be analyzed with one -way multivariate analysis of variance.  This is a proof of concept study that 
will include 30 human subjects.  Statistical significance is set at ≤ 0.0125.  We have created a password protected SPSS file (SPSS v.23; Chicago, IL) that will be used for this study’s data entry codebook and statistical output generator.    
 
Background  
1. Provide the scientific background, rationale and relevance of this pr oject.   
INSTRUCTIONS 
• This should include a referenced systematic evidenced- based review when possible.   
• If this study involves qualitative research explain the major constructs of your study.  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 6 of 49 • Do not state in this section what you plan to do in this study.  This information should 
be entered later under “What will be done in this protocol?”  
• Do not include the bibliography in this section.  
• For studies submitted under the Expedited review criteria, this section need not be 
more than a few pages.  
Answer/Res ponse:   
Pulmonary function is compromised following upper abdominal surgery.  The incidence of post -
operative pulmonary complications following upper abdominal surgery ranges between 17% and 
88%, and it is a common cause of morbidity and mortality.   
 Lung  expansion therapy with I.S. is commonly ordered prophylactically in attempt to improve 
pulmonary function and reduce post- operative pulmonary complications.  However, a recent 
Cochrane Review meta -analysis (do Nascimento, JP et al., 2014) reported no statistically significant 
difference in post- operative clinical complications when comparing Incentive Spirometry to either 
no respiratory treatment (RR 0.59, 95% CI 0.30 – 1.18), or to deep breathing  exercises (RR 0.67, 
95% CI 0.04 – 10.50).  The authors rat ed the GRADE quality of evidence as “Low” and concluded that 
there is no evidence that Incentive Spirometry is effective in preventing post- operative pulmonary 
complications following upper abdominal surgery.  Further research with improved study design is  
necessary to determine if I.S. or other forms of lung expansion therapy (EzPAP®) offers any clinical benefit.      
 
Evaluating the effectiveness of lung expansion therapy relies upon global parameter measures such as pulse oximetry oxygen saturation and/or arterial blood gas measurements, chest wall auscultation, and assessment of sputum expectoration following therapy sessions.  These global parameters do not provide the sensitivity necessary to evaluate regional lung function responses to therapy, as can  be viewed with a chest x -ray or CT image.  These diagnostic images provide a static 
view for regional lung volume assessment.  They also rely upon the use of radiation.  In our study, 
we will use Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) monitoring to measure  regional distribution of 
ventilation during I.S. and EzPAP® lung expansion therapy to better understand how air travels 
through ventral, mid -ventrial, mid -dorsal, and dorsal lung regions and to determine if redistribution 
of lung volume is time dependent.   This non- invasive, non -radioactive/non -radiation producing, 
technology will provide real time quantifiable data that may be used to explore whether there is a difference in preferential regional distribution of ventilation when comparing resting eupneic ventilation to I.S and EzPAP lung expansion therapy  We will also evaluate whether there is a difference in regional distribution of ventilation measured immediately after the third lung expansion therapy breathing sequence and post- lung expansion therapy session baseline 
measurement.   
Hypothesis to be Tested  
INSTRUCTIONS:    
If this study involves biomedical research clearly state the objectives and hypotheses and clearly 
define the primary and any secondary outcome measures.  If this study involves qualitative 
research clearly state your research hypothesis or question.  
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 7 of 49 This section should not include information already included in other sections such as background 
information or information from the procedures section.  
Answer/Response:  
The primary purpose of this study is to determine if there is a significant difference in regional 
distribution of ventilation when comparing eupneic tidal ventilation to Incentive Spirometry (I.S.) and EzPAP® lung expansion therapy in healthy adult human subjects.  Elec trical impedance 
tomography (EIT) will be used to measure regional distribution of ventilation during resting tidal ventilation and during lung expansion therapy.  
 
PRIMARY RESEARCH QUE STION:  
Is there a difference in regional re distribution of ventilation when comparing eupneic tidal 
ventilation during Incentive Spirometry (I.S.) or EzPAP® lung expansion therapy in healthy adult 
human subjects?  
 
Null hypothesis:  There is no difference in regional  redistribution of ventilation when comparing 
eupneic tidal ve ntilation during Incentive Spirometry (I.S.) or EzPAP® lung expansion therapy in 
healthy adult human subjects?  
 
 Alternative hypothesis:  There is a difference in regional redistribution of ventilation when 
comparing eupneic tidal ventilation during Incenti ve Spirometry (I.S.) or EzPAP® lung expansion 
therapy in healthy adult human subjects?  
 SECONDARY RESEARCH Q UESTIONS:  
1. Is there a difference in regional redistribution of ventilation measured immediately after lung expansion therapy when compared to regional distribution of ventilation measured 5 -minutes 
after lung expansion therapy?   
Null hypothesis:  There is no difference in regional redistribution of ventilation measured 
immediately after lung expansion therapy when compared to regional distribution o f ventilation 
measured 5 -minutes after lung expansion therapy?  
 
Alternative hypothesis:  There is no difference in regional redistribution of ventilation measured 
immediately after lung expansion therapy when compared to regional distribution of ventilation  
measured 5 -minutes after lung expansion therapy?  
  
Study Design: Biomedical  
1.  Will controls be used?  
Answer/Response:  Yes. 
 
►IF YES, explain the kind of controls to be used.  
Answer/Response:  Healthy adult human subjects allocated to receive Incentive Spirometry.  
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 8 of 49 2. What is the study design?  
Example:  case series, case control study, cohort study, randomized control study, single -
blind, double -blind, met -analysis, systematic reviews, other.  You may also view the IRB -HSR 
Learning Shot on this topic to help you answer this question.  
(http://www.virginia.edu/vpr/irb/learningshots/Writing_protocol_June09/player.html  
Answer/Response:  Randomized controlled proof of concept descriptive observational study.  
 
3. Does the study involve a placebo?  
Answer/Response:  No 
 
►IF YES, provide a justification for the use of a placebo  
Answer/Response:  
 
Human Participants  
Ages:  _18 – 79 years___  
Sex:  _ Male and Female ___ 
Race:  _All___ 
 Subjects - see below  
INSTRUCTIONS:  For question 1 -4 below insert an exact #.  Ranges or OPEN is no t allowed.  
This # should be the maximum # you expect to need to enroll (i.e. sign consent) If you are 
only collecting specimens the number of participants should equate to the # of specimens 
you need.  If you are collecting only data from a chart review the number should designate 
the number of subjects whose medical records you plan to review.  Age/ Sex/Race criteria 
should designate the demographics of participants from whom you will obtain the 
specimen/data.  
1.  Provide target # of subjects (at all site s) needed to complete protocol. 
INSTRUCTIONS: If this is NOT a database protocol, this number should be the same as the 
number of subjects needed to obtain statistically significant results.    
Answer/Response:  30.  This is a proof of concept study.  No po wer analysis was performed.  
 
2.  Describe expected rate of screen failure/ dropouts/withdrawals from all sites.   
Answer/Response:  No drop out is expected.  
 
3.  How many subjects will be enrolled at all sites?    
INSTRUCTIONS:  This number must be the same  or higher than the # from question # 1 in 
order to account for the # of screen failures, dropouts, withdrawals described in question # 
2.  
Answer/Response:  30 
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 9 of 49 4.  How many subjects will sign a consent form under this UVa protocol?     
INSTRUCTIONS: If the protocol does not have a consent form - the number listed here should 
reflect such things as the number of subjects from whom specimens will be obtained, the 
number of charts to be reviewed etc.  
Answer/Response:  30 
 
5. Provide an estimated time line for the study.  
INSTRUCTIONS: This should include timelines for enrollment (e.g 50 % enrolled in one year, 
100% enrolled in two years), completion of follow -up (if applicable) and completion of data 
analysis.     
Answer/Response:  100% enrollment within three month s. 
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
INSTRUCTIONS:  
• The inclusion and exclusion criteria should be written in bullet format.  
• This item applicable if the study will require consent (verbal or written).        Unless there is a 
scientific reason for not recruitin g a certain type of vulnerable population(e.g. not enrolling 
fetuses, neonates or children in a study regarding Alzheimer’s) list the following vulnerable 
populations under either Inclusion or Exclusion criteria below:  pregnant women, fetuses, 
neonates, c hildren, prisoners, cognitively impaired, educational or economically 
disadvantage, non - English speaking subjects .  
• If you will not enroll subjects who do not speak English because certain procedures cannot 
be carried out if the subject does not speak Eng lish (e.g. a survey is not validated in other 
languages) insert the following as an Inclusion Criteria:  Willingness and ability to comply 
with scheduled visits and study procedures.   
• If this is a collection of only retrospective* specimens or data, the i nclusion criteria must 
include a start and stop date for when specimens/ data will be collected.   
• The stop date must be prior to the version date of this protocol.  
• *Retrospective:  all specimens are in a lab at the time this protocol is approved by the IR B.  
All data exists in medical records or records from previous studies at the time this protocol is 
approved by the IRB.   
1.  List the criteria for inclusion  
Answer/Response:  
• Human subjects 18 – 79 years of age  
• Healthy - not receiving in -patient medical care  
• Documentation of written informed consent  
 
2.  List the criteria for exclusion  
Answer/Response:  
• Less than 18 or greater than 79 years of age  
• Body mass index > 50  
• Excessive chest hair  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 10 of 49 • Inability to obtain written informed consent  
• Inability to follow verbal instructions  
• Pregnancy -self reported  
• Uncontrolled body movements  
• Inability to place EIT electrodes and belt in direct contact with skin where they are projected 
to come into contact  
• Active implants (i.e., cardiac pacemaker, implantable cardioverter-d efibrillator [ICD]), or 
when device compatibility is in doubt.)  
3.  List any restrictions on use of other drugs or treatments . 
Answer/Response:  None  
 
Statistical Considerations  
1. Is stratification/randomization involved?  
Answer/Response:  Yes. 
 
►IF YES, describe the stratification/ randomization scheme. 
INSTRUCTIONS:  
The stratification factors and/or the randomization plan should be identified. If there is no 
randomization component or important patient characteristics that will be used in 
treatment allocation or data analysis, a statement to this effect should be included.  
 
Stratification factors: These are pretreatment patient characteristics which could be 
balanced across treatment arms by design or may be used to determine starting dose or 
treatment allocation.  
 
If randomization is going to be used, the details of the randomization plan should be 
described.  
 
The description should include:  
--the method and timing of randomization  
--the type of randomization scheme that will be used in the study 
--whether or not the randomization masked/blinded/if so, then to whom is it 
masked/blinded 
--who has access to the randomization scheme  
Answer/Response:  Parallel randomized controlled trial  
 
A recruitment email will be will be sent to University of Virginia Medical Center employees who represent the target study population.  A university of Virginia email distribution list will be used to mass email respiratory therapy and nursing staff working in adult ICU and surgical acute care patient wards.  Word of  mouth will also be used to heighten awareness about this 
study.  Adult intensive care fellows will also be invited to participate.    
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 11 of 49  
The target population will be encouraged to notify a study investigator if they are interested in being screened for eligibility to participate in this study.  The study PI and sub-investigators will be responsible for recruitment and enrollment.  
 A computer generated random numbers generator will be used to randomly assign study subjects into an I.S. or EzPAP® lung expansion therapy group after documentation of informed consent has been recorded.  Randomization masking/blinding will not occur in this study.  The lung expansion therapy medical device designs and their respective operational differences are impossible to conceal (See images below).   
Lung Expansion Therapy Devices  
                           
          
  
                             Incentive Spirometer     EzPAP® System  
 
 
►IF YES, who will generate the randomization scheme?  
_____ Sponsor  
_____ UVa Statistician.   Insert  name  Answer/Response:  
_____ UVa Investigational Drug Service (IDS)  
__X__ Other :  Specify    Answer/Response:  Study investigators.  
 
2.  What are the statistical considerations for the protocol?  
The objectives section and the statistical section should correspond, and any objective for which 
analysis is unfeasible should be deleted.  Also, the estimates and non -statistical assumptions of the 
statistical sectio n should be supported by discussion in the background section.  
 
The answer to this question should include:  
--Study Design/Endpoints  
--Recap of study objectives and endpoint definitions. An assessment of how study objectives will be 
assessed by identifying  & defining which endpoints will be used to assess each component of the 
study objectives.  
--The study design should include contingencies for early stopping, interim analyses, stratification 
factors (If applicable), and any characteristics to be incorporated in analyses.  
--The power/precision of the study to address the major study endpoint(s), the assumptions 
involved in the determination of power/precision.  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 12 of 49 --If statistical hypothesis testing is included then specify the null and alternative hypotheses,  the 
test statistic, and the type I and II error rates  
--If precision of an estimate, then provide a definition for precision  
--If other, then specify  
Answer/Response:  
 
The focus of this study is to use electrical impedance tomography (EIT) monitoring to determine if there is a difference in regional distribution of ventilation when comparing Incentive Spirometry (I.S.) to EzPAP® lung expansion therapy.  
Baseline characteristics will be reported as:  
• Sex (M/F): n (%) 
• Age (years): m (SD)  
• Weight (BMI): m (SD) or M (IQR) depending upon normality of data distribution  
• Tobacco History: n (%); Never smoked, Current smoker; Former smoker  
• Respiratory Related Comorbidities: n (%)  
 Baseline and post- lung expansion therapy dependent variable metrics will be reported as  end-
expiratory lung volume impedance (EELI) for each of the following ventilation regions of interest:  
• Ventral (Level of measurement - continuous)  
• Mid-ventral (Level of measurement - continuous)  
• Mid-dorsal (Level of measurement - continuous)  
• Dorsal (Level of  measurement - continuous)  
 3.  Provide a justification for the sample size used in this protocol.   
Include the anticipated accrual rate, the accrual goal for the study, including accrual goals by strata 
if appropriate, adjustments for drop- outs etc. and s tudy duration.  
Answer/Response:  Since this is a proof of concept study, we did not perform a power analysis to 
determine a sample size.  
 4.  What is your plan for primary variable analysis?  
Include a sketch of the analysis to assess primary study objectiv es. 
Answer/Response:   
PRIMARY NULL HYPOTHE SIS:   
There is no difference in regional  distribution of ventilation when comparing Incentive Spirometry 
(I.S.) lung expansion therapy to EzPAP® lung expansion therapy in healthy adult human subjects  
 Alternative hypothesis:  There is a difference in regional distribution of ventilation when comparing 
Incentive Spirometry (I.S.) lung expansion therapy to EzPAP® lung expansion therapy in healthy adult human subjects?  
 
• Independent variable  
- Lung expansion therapy  
1. Incentive Spirometry  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 13 of 49 2. EzPAP®  
 
• Dependent variables  
- Regional distribution of ventilation areas of interest 
1. Ventral end -expiratory lung volume impedance  
2. Mid-ventral end -expiratory lung volume impedance  
3 Mid-dorsal end -expiratory lung volume impedance  
4.  Dorsal end -expiratory lung volume impedance  
 
• Statistical analysis  
- Frequency (n) and percentage (%) will be used to report descriptive categorical level data.    
- Shapiro -Wilk test of normality will be applied to evaluate distribution of continuous level 
data.  Normally distributed data will be presented as mean and standard deviation and 95% confidence interval.  Effect size will be reported as Cohen’s d.    
- Non -normally distributed data will be reported as median and interquartile range. Effect 
size will reported as r .   
- Independent samples t- test will be applied to normally distributed continuous data to 
compare group means, and Mann Whitney -U test will be applied to non -normally 
distributed data.  
- Statistical significance set a P (2 -tailed) ≤ .0125 to reduce risk of Type I error.  
  5.  What is your plan for secondary variable analysis?  
Include the following:  
--A sketch of the analysis to assess secondary study objectives.  
--For phase III studies, the power/precision of the study to address  the secondary objective(s).  
Answer/Response:  Same as above  
 6. Have you been working with a statistician in designing this protocol?  
Answer/Response:  Yes.   
 
IF YES, what is their name?   
Answer/Response:  Mark Smolkin, University of Virginia Sr. Biostatis tician  
 
7.  Will data from multiple sites be combined during analysis?   
Answer/Response:  No 
INSTRUCTIONS:  IF YES, answer the following questions  
 
7(a).  Does the study involve randomization?   
Answer/Response:  
 
IF YES, will randomization be done at each site or among sites?   
Answer/Response:  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 14 of 49 7(b).  Has the sample size calculation considered the variation among sites?  
Answer/Response:  
7(c).  When combining the data from multiple sites to assess the study results, is the effect of 
the treatment to be test ed (or the association to be tested) assumed to be the same across 
sites or vary among sites? What is the modelling strategy?  
Answer/Response:  
7(d). Is there a common protocol used in all sites?  
Answer/Response:  
IF NO, how will differences among sites, su ch as those related to the 
implementation, inclusion criteria, patient characteristics, or other sites 
characteristics, be considered to assess the study results?  
Answer/Response:  
 
Biomedical Research  
 
1.  What will be done in this protocol?    
INSTRUCTION S:  
This should include everything that will be done as part of this protocol. Do not repeat 
information that is included in other sections such as Background or Hypothesis sections.  
This section should include an indication of which research interventions if any offer a 
prospect for direct benefit and which interventions (invasive measurements, collection of 
blood, tissue, data, surveys, etc.) are being done solely to answer a research question and 
generate generalizable knowledge. If the interventions do ne solely for research purposes are 
associated with greater than minimal risk they need to be justified. Describe and justify any 
control and experimental arm and include method, dose, and duration of drug 
administration. Reference any claim of clinical equipoise if applicable.   
 
If you are obtaining specimens or data, provide information regarding the type of 
specimen/data, amount of specimen needed and how the specimen/data will be obtained 
and what analysis will be done with the specimen/data.  
 
Special note for studies with waiver of consent/waiver of documentation of consent:   
Include a statement regarding how subjects will be recruited. For other studies this 
information is captured in Recruitment does not need to be duplicated in this section.  
Answer/ Response:  We will use a convenience sampling scheme to identify potential study 
participants. Documentation of informed consent will be recorded. Electrical Impedance Tomography (Pulmovista 500; Draeger, Lubeck, Germany), which provides non -invasive and 
radiation free monitoring, will be used to monitor and measure regional distribution of ventilation during I.S and EzPAP® lung expansion therapy.  The PulmoVista 500 EIT device has a reported high patient safety profile and poses minimal patient risk.  All study procedures will take place at University of Virginia Medical Center, Second Floor, Pulmonary Diagnostics & Respiratory Therapy Services, Room 2025.  
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 15 of 49 
Procedure set -up and device calibration will occur according to Draeger provided PulmoVista 500 
(Draeg er; Lubeck, Germany) EIT training and operation manual:  
• Study participant preparation  
- Researcher will select an electrode belt and respective patient cable sizes after measuring 
participant’s chest circumference with paper measurement tape placed across the 
midclavicular line at intercostal space 4 - 5.  Electrode belt size will be selected according to 
the following chest circumference measurements:  
 
 
 
 
    
 
- A patient cable of the same electrode belt size will be selected and connected to the 
electrode  belt before connection to study participants.  Researchers will align and snap 
connect the patient cable snaps over the electrode belt studs by aligning respective snaps and studs in ascending numerical order from 1 to 16 (see below).   
     
 
- A light spray of warm tap water will be applied to the electrode surface on the electrode 
belt before it is applied to study participants to optimize conductivity between the skin and electrodes.    
 
• Attaching electrode belt and reference electrode to study partic ipant while they are 
positioned at 45 -degrees sitting in a reclining chair.  
- The electrode belt/cable combination will be attached around the thorax of each study 
participant at the level of the 4
th – 5th intercostal space, unless mammary tissue prevents  this 
site of application.  An alternative application site will be located immediately below the 
mammary tissue if necessary.  Left to right belt orientation will be maintained with color 
coded patient cable ports signifying left and right side (See image ). 
- A researcher will snap the electrode belt closed after verifying proper belt position.  The 
belt’s black electrodes should have close contact with the study participant’s skin at this point.  

IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 16 of 49 
- An adhesive ECG electrode will be place on the study parti cipant’s right upper abdominal 
quadrant and then the patient cable reference electrode snap will be attached to the ECG 
electrode.     
- The patient cable will then be connected to the EIT monitoring device (PulmoVista 500, 
Lubeck, Germany) via a color cod ed trunk cable orientation that aligns with the patient cable 
left and right orientation (See image).   
                                        
                
 
 
   
• EIT device calibration and signal check  
- Researcher will initiate a PulmonVista 500 EIT monitoring device calibration each day prior 
to performing new study participant EELI measurements.  
-  A skin -electrode signal check will be performed to ensure that a minimum of 15 of 16 
electrodes have sufficient contact with the participant’s skin surface and signal quality is 
stable.  Researchers will use the following status display and explanation to determine 
adequacy of electrode contact and signal quality.  
 
        
• M
onitoring sessions and Lung Expansion Therapy procedure  
- Monitoring will be initiated after researcher performs 
PulmoVista 500 EIT device (Draeger; Lubeck, Germany) setup and calibration.  
- Approximate monitoring/measurement duration is 
15-minutes.  
• Lung expansion therapies will occur as follows:  
- Study participants will sit with their back against a reclining chair with backrest adjust to 
45-degrees.  

IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 17 of 49 
- Two study investigators will be present during Incentive Spirometry and monitoring 
session.  One study investigator will assist with EIT interface application and provide instruct 
study participants on how to perform I.S. therapy properly.  A second study investigator will 
perform EIT device set -up and monitoring only.   
 INCENTIVE SPIROMETRY GROUP  
- A study investigator will instruct the study participant to strive for an inspiratory capacity 
volume target as determined by the I.S. device’s predicted volume nomogram table (See below).   
    
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
      Incentive Spirometry procedure  
A study investigator will provide instruction on Incentive Spirometry procedure performance befor e supervised therapy and monitoring begins.   
-  Five minutes of eupneic ventilation EIT 
monitoring will occur before I.S. therapy commences.  
- Study participants will be asked to take 10 
deep breaths through the incentive spirometer’s 
mouthpiece, follow ed by a 60 second pause.  
- The 10 -breath cycle will be repeated three 
times with respiratory therapist coaching.  
- Five minutes of eupneic ventilation EIT 
monitoring will occur following the last I.S. lung 
expansion therapy breath cycle.  - Incentive Spirometry therapy and monitoring 
session will last about 15 minutes (See image).   
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 18 of 49 
 
  
EzPAP® POSITIVE AIRWAY PRESSURE GROUP  
- A study investigator will provide 
instruction on EzPAP® procedure performance before supervised therapy and monitoring begins.  A second study investigator will perform 
EIT device set -up and monitoring only.    
- Five minutes of eupneic ventilation 
EIT monitoring will occur before 
EzPAP® therapy commences.  
- Study participants will be asked to breathe normally through the EzPAP® devic e’s 
mouthpiece for 10 breaths, followed by a 60 second pause.   
- The 10 -breath cycle will be repeated three times with respiratory therapist coaching.  
- Five minutes of eupneic ventilation EIT monitoring will occur following the last EzPAP® lung 
expansion  therapy breath cycle.  
- EzPAP® therapy and monitoring sessions will last about 15 minutes (See image).  
 
 
REGIONAL DISTRIBUTIO N OF VENTILATION MONITORING:  
• PulmoVista monitoring and lung expansion therapy will occur only one time as described 
above.  .   
• The following information will be displayed on the PulmoVista 500 device’s main monitoring 
screen during lung expansion therapy, but study investigator staff administering therapy and study participants will be blinded from information displayed on the screen’s monitor during therapy session in an effort to reduce performance bias:  
   
A: Dynamic imaging showing impedance 
changes in a caudo -cranial image referenced 
to a dynamic basline.  
B:  Tidal image showing EELI during 
inspiration and exhalation of the l ast 
detected breath.  
C: Global impedance waveform showing relative impedance changes across electrode 
plane.  
D: Regional impedance waveforms  
F: Tidal respiratory rate  
G: Global tidal variation displayed as 100%.  
H: Regional tidal variation displayed as a percentage of global tidal variation.   
- Once lung expansion therapy 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 19 of 49 
session has ended, the researcher will detach trunk cables from electrode cables, detach reference 
electrode snap from adhesive ECG electrode, unclamp the electrode belt, and then remove belt from the study subject.  Subject participation in this study is considered complete at this time.     
- Inspect of electrode belt contact area will be performed to assess for evidence of skin irritation or 
bruising.  Study participant will be notified by study investigator at the time of skin assessment if 
significant skin irritation or bruising is present.  Finding will be recorded by study investigator.   
• Displaying changes  
- The following information will be displayed and used to record pre and post lung expansion 
therapy end -expiratory lung impedance changes:  
 A: Reference button  
F: Display change  
G: Differences between status image and reference image.  EELI changes displayed with regional color changes on image.  
 
Deviation from regional ventilat ion 
reference parameter region (Ex: dorsal EELI) :  
H: No change in EELI %  
I: Increased EELI %  
J: Decreased EELI %  
 
• Electrode belt, patient cable, and PulmoVista 500 EIT device (Draeger; Lubeck, Germany) will be removed study participant’s room and returned  to a storage location outside of patient 
care areas.  
• Following each EIT to subject interface disconnect, an alcohol, aldehyde, or quaternary 
ammonium based compound will be soaked on a wipe cloth to disinfect the surfaces of the 
patient cable, electrode b elt, trunk cable, and EIT unit.  
 
2. List the procedures, in bullet form, that will be done for RESEARCH PURPOSES as stipulated in 
this protocol.  
INSTRUCTIONS:  
Examples:  blood tests, EKG, x -rays, surveys, administration of investigational drug/device, 
rand omization to one of two approved drugs  
Do NOT list those procedures which are being ordered for clinical standard of care.  
If ALL procedures are being done for the research study, simply write:  ALL   
Answer/Response:  All 
 3.  Do you confirm that, except for blood draws through a peripheral site, that all invasive procedures will be performed by a licensed health care provider under the supervision of an MD?  
Answer/Response:  N/A, no invasive procedures done for this study.  
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 20 of 49  
 4. Will you be using data/specimens in this study that were collected previously, with the use of a research consent form, from another research study?  
Answer/Response:  No 
 
IF YES, will the data/specimens be used in this study without a new consent from the original donor?  
Answer/Res ponse:   
 
IF YES, explain how the proposed use is consistent with the use planned in this study and submit a copy of the consent form used to collect the data/specimens.  
INSTRUCTIONS:  If you are unable to locate the consent form, you must request a 
Waiver of Consent.  Consult with IRB staff to determine additional sections to be 
added to this protocol.  
Answer/Response:   
 
 
5.  Will any of the procedures listed in item # 2 have the potential to identify an incidental finding? This includes ALL procedures, as sessments and evaluations that are being done for 
RESEARCH PURPOSES that may or may not be considered investigational.  
 
Examples:  MRI/CT/PET/CXR shows possible tumor, Blood collected and analyzed using an 
investigational assay, Blood tests show possibility of leukemia, Surveys which reveal depression/ 
suicidal tendencies.  
Answer/Response:  No 
 
►IF YES,  check one of the following two options:  
_____The examination(s) utilize(s) the same techniques, equipment, etc., that would be 
used if the subject were to have the examination(s) performed for clinical care.  There 
exists the potential for the discovery of clinically significant incidental findings.   
• The PI takes full responsibility for the identification of incidental findings:  
• The PI will inform the subjects verbally of all incidental findings that are of 
clinical significance or are of questionable significance .   
• A follow -up letter describing the finding should be provided to the subject 
with instructions to either show the letter to their PC or if the subject has no 
PCP, the subject should be instructed to make an appointment at UVa or at the Free Clinic .   
 
____This examination(s) utilizes non -standard/investigational, technique, equipment, etc.  It 
is impossible to determine the significance of such r esults, therefore abnormalities will 
not be shared with study participants because the meaning of the exam is not yet 
proven and is of unknown clinical benefit.    
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 21 of 49 6.  Do any of the procedures listed above, under question # 2, utilize any imaging procedure s for 
RESEARCH PURPOSES? 
Examples:  ultrasound, CT scans/ x -rays etc.  
Answer/Response:  Yes. 
 
IF YES, list procedures:  
Answer/Response:   
Non -radiating Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT)  
 
►IF YES,  check one of the following two options:  
 
_____This imaging research examination utilizes the same imaging techniques, equipment, 
scanning sequences that would be used if the subject were to have the imaging 
performed for clinical care.  There exists the potential for the discovery of clinically 
significant incid ental findings.   
►If checked, answer the following:  
 
Will the images be read by a licensed radiologist and the reading placed in the subject’s medical record?   
Answer/Response:   
 
►IF NO:  The PI takes full responsibility for the identification of incidental findings:  
• The PI will have all incidental findings reviewed by a radiologist who will 
advise the PI regarding clinical significance.  
• The PI will inform the subjects verbally of all incidental findings that are of clinical significance or are of questionable significan ce. 
• A follow -up letter describing the finding should be provided t o the subject 
with instructions to either show the letter to their PC or if the subject has no PCP, the subject should be instructed to make an appointment at UVa 
or at the Free Clinic.  
 
__X___This imaging research examination utilizes non -standard/investigational imaging 
modality, techniques, equipment, scanning sequences, etc.  It is impossible to determine the significance of such images, therefore abnormalities will not be shared with the  subject because the meaning of the exam is not yet proven and is of unknown 
clinical benefit.   
 
7. Will you be using viable embryos?  
IF YES, attach approval from UVA ESCRO Committee  
Answer/Response:  No 
 
8. Will you be using embryonic stem cells?  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 22 of 49 IF YES, attach approval from UVA ESCRO Committee  
Answer/Response:  No 
 
9 Are any aspects of the study kept secret from the participants?   
Answer/Response:  No 
 
►IF YES, describe:  
Answer/Response:   
 
10. Is any deception used in the study?     
Answer/Response:  No 
 
 ►IF  YES, describe:  
INSTRUCTIONS:  Describe the deception involved and the debrief procedures.  Attach 
a post -experiment debriefing statement and consent form offering participants the 
option of having data destroyed.  
Answer/Response:   
 
11. If this protocol involves study treatment, explain how a subject will be transitioned from study treatment when they have completed their participation in the study.   
Example:  If the subject will be taking an investigational drug, will they need to be put back on 
an approved dr ug when they have completed the study?  If yes, explain how this will be 
accomplished and who will cover the cost.  If the subject has a device implanted will it be 
removed?  Again - who will cover the cost of the removal?   
Instructions:  Answer NA if this study does not involve a study treatment.   
Answer/Response:  N/A 
 
12. Will your study involve measures (C -SSRS/BID/SCID etc.) used to assess for depression and/or 
suicidality for research purposes?  No 
 
         Answer this question YES if any of the follow ing apply:  
 
1) The protocol has a research purpose to study suicide, suicidal ideation, depression or trauma  
2) The protocol has a research purpose to study traumatic life events that may evoke powerful emotion or induce mood changes in participants;  
3) The protoco l includes assessments  (e.g. Surveys, exams, questionnaires, etc.) that can be 
used to identify depression and/or suicidal ideation (thoughts of suicide, either active or 
passive), plan (the means or mechanism) or intent (the expressed desire and willingne ss to 
act on the plan).  
 
IF YES:  
 
a. Which research staff members are qualified to assess suicidality/depression and will be available to provide care and intervention?  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 23 of 49 Answer/Response:   
b. Include specific guidelines for intervention based on assessment tools a nd rating scales. (i.e. 
based on C -SSRS/BID, SCID score of xxx, subject will be assessed further by the PI for suicide 
risk or referred urgently to an ED, crisis center, or clinic immediately).  
Answer/Response:   
c. Describe a plan to link participants to psyc hological help if needed and include written 
materials listing those resources as an attachment to the protocol.  This plan should include 
details of the planned interventions for differing severities of depression or suicidality, including a plan for how imminent risk of harm will be handled for the study’s targeted 
population. (May include a list of local psychiatry/psychotherapy providers at UVA). Note:  If 
the subject is a patient at UVA Medical Center, you must adhere to Medical Center Policy 0140 Judicial Treatment Order and 0197 Suicide Risk Assessment and Prevention.  
Answer/Response:   
d. Describe a plan to address the situation if a participant is assessed to be a danger to themselves, but refuses treatmen t.  (the plan may include steps to contact 911)  
Note:  If the subject is a patient at UVA Medical Center, you must adhere to you must adhere to Medical Center Policy 0140 Judicial Treatment Order and 0197 Suicide Risk Assessment and Prevention.   
Answer/Response:   
e. Will subjects, who discontinue or are withdrawn secondary to suicidal ideations/depression prior to study completion, be asked to come to the site for an early withdrawal visit as soon as possible?  
Answer/Response:   
 If No , provide outline of plan for follow -up or indicate if follow up is not required.   
 
13. Where will the study procedures be done?  
Check One:  
 ____  UVA medical center facilities ( In patient or outpatient)  
 ____  UVa , but not medic al center facilities: LIST specific location Answer/Response:  
 ___X_  Other  LIST specific location Answer/Response:  University of Virginia Medical Center, 
Second Floor, Pulmonary Diagnostics & Respiratory Therapy Services, Room 2025.  
 
14. If the study inv olves medical risk and study procedures will be done outside of the UVa 
Medical Center what is your plan to protect the subjects in case of a medical emergency?  
Check all applicable options:  
_____ MD, RN,  onsite during procedures  
_____ Individual trained in CPR on site during procedures  
_____ AED and Individual trained to use it onsite  
_____ Call 911  
_X____  Other : Describe Answer/Response:  N/A, no medical risks  
  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 24 of 49 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
This study has been deemed minimal risk.  Because this study poses minimal risk to the subject, 
adverse events will only be collected or recorded if a causal relationship to the study intervention is suspected.   If any adverse event is considered serious and unexpected, the event must be 
reported to the IRB -HSR wi thin 7 days from the time the study team receives knowledge of the 
event.  
 
1.  Definitions  
 
1.1 How will you define adverse events (AE)? 
Do not change this answer  
An adverse event will be considered any undesirable sign, symptom or medical condition considere d related to the intervention . Medical condition/diseases 
present before starting the intervention will be considered adverse events only if they worsen after starting the study and that worsening is considered to be related to the study intervention.  An adverse event is also any undesirable and unintended effect of research occurring in human subjects as a result of the collection of 
identifiable private information under the research
.   
 
1.2 How will you define an unanticipated problem?  
Do not change this a nswer  
An unanticipated problem is any issue that involves increased risk(s)  
to participants or others.  This means issues or problems that cause the subject or 
others to be placed at greater risk than previously identified, even if the subject or others do  not incur actual harm.  For example if a subject’s confidentiality is 
compromised resulting in serious negative social, legal or economic ramifications, an 
unanticipated problem would need to be reported. (e.g serious loss of social status, 
loss of job, i nterpersonal conflict.)     
 
1.3 What are the definitions of a protocol violation and/or noncompliance?  
Do not change this answer  
A protocol violation is defined as any change, deviation, or departure from the study design or procedures of research project th at is NOT approved by the IRB -HSR prior to 
its initiation or implementation .  Protocol violations may be major or minor violations.   
 
Noncompliance can be a protocol violation OR deviation from standard operating 
procedures, Good Clinical Practices (GCPs), federal, state or local regulation s.   
Noncompliance may be serious or continuing  
Additional Information:  see the IRB -HSR website at  
http://www.virginia.edu/vpr/irb/HSR_docs/Forms/Protocol_Violations_%20Enrollment_
Exceptions_Instructions.doc  
 
1.4 What is the definition of a data breach?  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 25 of 49 Do not change this answer  
A data breach is defined in the HITECH Act (43 USC 17932) as an unauthori zed 
acquisition, access, or use of protected health information (PHI) that compromises the 
security or privacy of such information.  
Additional Information  may be found on the IRB -HSR Website: Data Breach  
 
2.  What risks are expected due to the intervention in this protocol?   
INSTRUCTIONS:  
• The risks should be consistent with those in the consent form (if applicable), although 
they should be written in technical terms in the protocol and i n lay terminology in the 
consent form.  
• List the most serious or most frequent risk first  
• Delete last two rows if no additional risks added.   
• Add additional rows to the table below if needed.  
 
Expected Risks related to study 
participation  Pick One  
There is a small risk that breaches 
of privacy and/or confidentiality might occur. The risk of violation 
of subject privacy and confidentiality is minimal due to the requirements of the privacy 
plan in this protocol.  Occurs rarely  
• Skin irritation that 
continue s for greater than 
1-hour after electrode belt 
is removed.  
• Decreased lung volume resulting from patient belt 
surrounding thoracic 
cavity.         Occurs frequently,  
       Occurs infrequently  
X     Occurs rarely  
Violation of subject’s privacy and 
confident iality:  
- Study participant related data 
will be de -identified and assigned 
a unique study identifier (I.D.) in 
ascending order of enrollment.  I.D. range: 1 – 120.  
 
The unique ID will be entered into the PulmoVista 500.  Recorded 
raw data will be transf erred to an Minimized due to the 
requirements of this protocol.  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 26 of 49 encrypted and password 
protected electronic media drive 
(USB drive).  The password will be known only by our U. VA Medical Center EIT research team members. The collected data may be communicated for the purposes of the study, according to info rmed consent and clinical 
trials agreement with Draeger 
Medical.  
 
3.  When will recording and reporting of unanticipated problems/adverse events begin?  
_____After subject signs consent  
 __X___ After subj ect begins study intervention  
 
_____Other Specify    Answer/Response:  
 4.  When will the recording/reporting of unanticipated problems/adverse events end?  
__X___Subject completes participation in the protocol  
 _____End of intervention  
 _____30 days post in tervention  
 _____Subject completes intervention and follow up period of protocol  
 
_____Other: Specify    Answer/Response:  
 
5.  What is your plan for safety monitoring?   
Do not change this answer  
Safety monitoring and aggregate review of adverse events, una nticipated problems, protocol 
violations and any data breach will be performed by the PI and IRB -HSR through 
continuation review at least annually.   
 
6.  What is your plan for reporting a Unanticipated Problem, Protocol Violation or Data Breach?  
Do not c hange this answer  
 
Type of Event  To whom will it 
be reported:  Time Frame for 
Reporting  How reported?  
Unanticipated Problems  that 
are not adverse events or 
protocol violations  
This would include a Data IRB-HSR 
  Within 7 calendar 
days from the t ime 
the study team 
received knowledge Unanticipated Problem report 
form.  
 
http://www.virginia.edu/vprgs/i
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 27 of 49 Breach.   of the event.   rb/HSR_docs/Forms/Re porting_
Requirements -
Unanticipated_Problems.doc  ) 
Protocol 
Violations/Noncompliance  
 (The IRB -HSR only requires 
that MAJOR violation be 
reported, unless otherwise required by your sponsor, if applicable.)  
  IRB-HSR 
  Within 7 calendar 
days from the time the study team 
received knowledge 
of the event.  
 Protocol Violation, 
Noncompliance and Enrollment Exception Reporting Form  
 http://www.virginia.edu/vprgs/irb/hsr_forms.html  
 
Go to 3
rd bulle t from the bottom. 
Data Breach  of Protected 
Health Information  
 The UVa 
Corporate 
Compliance and 
Privacy Office  
 
 
ITC:  if breach 
involves  electronic data  
 
 
  
Police if breach 
includes items that are stolen:  
 
Stolen on UVA 
Grounds  
 OR  
 
Stolen off UVa Grounds - 
contact police department of jurisdiction of last known 
location of PHI  As soon as possible 
and no later than 24 hours from the time 
the incident is 
identified.  
 
As soon as possible 
and no later than 24 hours from the time the incident is 
identified.  
 
 
IMMEDIATELY
.  
 UVa Corporate Compliance and 
Privacy Office - Phone 924 -9741  
 
 
  
ITC:  
Information Security 
Incident Reporting 
procedure ,  
http://www.itc.virginia.ed
u/security/reporting.html  
 
 
   
Police: phone - (434) 924 -7166  
 
Risk/ Benefit Analysis 
1.  What are the potential benefits for the participant as well as benefits which may accrue to 
society in general, as a result of this study?  
Answer/Response:  
While participants will not benefit directly from this study, we anticipate that important information will be gained from our EIT monitoring of regional distribution of ventilation.  Future patients may  
benefit from our study findings as we hope to advance clinical understandings associated with these 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 28 of 49 therapies with use of EIT monitoring.  Our findings also have potential to reduce the use of clinically 
ineffective lung expansion therapy, which has potential for more appropriate utilization of health care resources, benefitting society in general.   
 The potential benefit for study participants will not be realized directly since our aim is to monitor regional distribution of ventilation in response to I.S. or EzPAP® lung expansion therapy.  These therapies are considered to be standards of care in post- operative surgical patients.  Loss of dorsal 
regional lung volume (i.e., atelectasis) is an example of a post -operative pulmonary complication.  
EzPAP® is a lung expansion therapy that is used as an alternative to I.S. lung expansion therapy for 
increasing dorsal regional lung volume (i.e., functional residual capacity) in an effort to prevent or reverse atelectasis.  When expiratory positive airway pressure s of 5, 10, and 15 cmH2O was 
administered to a small group of healthy human subjects, Garrard et al. (Chest, 1978) found a positive pressure of 15 cmH2O was associated with the greatest FRC increase when compared to 
zero pressure and baseline FRC measurements.  We are unable to identify previous research 
describing whether regional redistribution of ventilation is sustained after completing I.S. or EzPAP lung expansion therapy.    2.  Do the anticipated benefits justify asking subjects to undertake the risk s?   
INSTRUCTIONS:  Analyze the risk -benefit ratio and justify your answer.   
Analyze the risk - benefit of interventions offering potential health benefit separately from those 
done solely to answer a research question or generate generalizable knowledge. Clarify risk -benefit 
for direct benefit to individual participant versus benefit to society.  
Answer/Response:  Yes.  There are minimal risks and a potential for societal benefit.  
Bibliography  
INSTRUCTIONS:   Provide a current bibliography supporting the hypothesis, background and 
methodology including references to papers and abstracts that have resulted from previous work by 
the investigator and references to the work of others.  
do Nascimento, JP., Modolo, NS., Andrade, S., Guimaraes, MM., Braz, LG, El Dib, R . Incentive 
spirometry for prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications in upper abdominal 
surgery. Cochrane Database Systematic Reviews, Issue 2, CD006058.  
Draeger. (n.d.). Instructions for use: PulmoVista 500 electrical impedance tomography softw are 
1.1n. Lubeck, Germany:Draeger Medical GmbH.  
Fagevik Olsen, M., Wennberg, E., Johnsson, E., Josefson, K., Lonroth, H., & Lundell, L. (2002). 
Randomized clinical study of the prevention of pulmonary complications after 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 29 of 49 thoracoabdominal resection by two d ifferent breathing techniques.  The British Journal of 
Surgery, 89(10), 1228- 1234. doi:2207 [pii]  
Garrard, C., & Shah, M. (1978). The effects of expiratory positive airway pressure on functional 
residual capacity in normal subjects.  Critical Care Medicine,  6(5), 320 -320-322.  
Hinz, J., Neumann, P., Dudykevych, T., Andersson, L. G., Wrigge, H., Burchardi, H., & Hedenstierna, 
G. (2003). Regional ventilation by electrical impedance tomography: a comparison with 
ventilation scintigraphy in pigs. Chest, 124(1), 314 -322. doi:S0012- 3692(15)36026- 8 [pii]  
Karsten, J., Stueber, T., Voigt, N., Teschner, E., & Heinze, H. (2016). Influence of different electrode 
belt positions on electrical impedance tomography imaging of regional ventilation: a prospective observational study. Critical Care (London, England), 20(1), 3 -015- 1161- 9. 
doi:10.1186/s13054 -015- 1161- 9 [doi] 
Lunardi, A. C., Paisani, D. M., Marques da Silva, C. C., Cano, D. P., Tanaka, C., & Carvalho, C. R. 
(2015). Comparison of Lung Expansion Techniques on Thoracoabdominal Mechanics and Incidence of Pulmonary Complications After Upper Abdominal Surgery: A Randomized and 
Controlled Trial.  Chest, 148(4), 1003- 1010. doi:10.1378/chest.14- 2696 [doi]  
Meier, T., Luepschen, H., Karsten, J., Leibecke, T., Grossherr, M., Gehring, H., & Leonhardt, S. (2008). 
Assessment of regional lung recruitment and derecruitment during a PEEP trial based on 
electrical impedance tomography. Intensive Care Medicine, 34(3), 543 -550. 
doi:10.1007/s00134 -007- 0786- 9 [doi] 
Parke, R. L., Bloch, A.,  & McGuinness, S. P. (2015). Effect of Very -High -Flow Nasal Therapy on Airway 
Pressure and End -Expiratory Lung Impedance in Healthy Volunteers.  Respiratory Care, 60 (10), 
1397 -1403. doi:10.4187/respcare.04028 [doi]  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 30 of 49 Riedel, T., Richards, T., & Schibler, A. (2005). The value of electrical impedance tomography in 
assessing the effect of body position and positive airway pressures on regional lung ventilation 
in spontaneously breathing subjects. Intensive Care Medicine, 31(11), 1522 -1528. 
doi:10.1007/s00134 -005- 2734- x [doi]  
Riera, J., Perez, P., Cortes, J, Roca, O, Masclans, J., &  Rellow J. (2013) Effects of high flow nasal 
cannula and body position on end- expiratory lung volume: A cohort study using electrical 
impedance tomography. Respir Care, 58(4):589 -596. DOI: 10.4187/respcare.02086  
Stankiewicz -Rudnicki, M., Gaszynski, T., & Gaszynski, W. (2015). Assessment of regional ventilation 
in acute respiratory distress syndrome by electrical impedance tomography. Anaesthesiology Intensive Therapy, 47(1), 77 -81. doi: 10.5603/AIT.2015.0007 [doi]  
Teschner, E., & Imhoff M. (n.d.). electrical impedance tomography: the realization of regional 
ventilation monitoring.: Lubeck, Germany.  
Westerdahl, E., Lindmark, B., Eriksson, T., Friberg, O., Hedenstierna, G., & Tenling, A. ( 2005). Deep -
breathing exercises reduce atelectasis and improve pulmonary function after coronary artery bypass surgery.  Chest, 128 (5), 3482- 3488. doi:128/5/3482 [pii]  
APPENDIX:  Support Source  
INSTRUCTIONS:  The support source is any source outside of UVA providing support such as 
supplies/drug/device’s or financial assistance. The entity should NOT be considered a Support 
Source if they are taking on the responsibilities of a sponsor such as monitoring, safety oversight or 
data analysis.   Do not enter a c ompany/ organization as a supply source unless the support has 
been secured.  The IRB -HSR must be notified and the consent form revised if a support source 
changes.  (Example -the NIH or an investigator -initiated study in which the pharmaceutical company 
is providing drug free of charge.)  
1. Describe what will be provided and by whom .   
Answer/Response:   PulmoVista 500 Electrical Impedance Tomography device (Draeger; Lubeck, 
Germany)  
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 31 of 49 2. Do you confirm that you will obtain a contract/ material transfer agreement with the 
provider via the Medical Center Procurement office or Office of Sponsored Programs (OSP)  
ospnoa@virginia.edu ? 
INSTRUCTIONS:  
You should have answered YES to the following question in Protocol Builder:   
--“Do you/will you have a contract with an outside entity to support this protocol?”  
 
Work with Medical Center Procurement on the agreement if the item will be used on a 
patient in the Medical Center.    
Work with OSP on the contract is the item will be used outside of the Medical Center.  
Answer/Response:  Yes 
 
APPENDIX:  Legal/Regulatory  
Recruitment  
The following procedures will be followed:  
• Finders fees will not be paid to an individual as they are not allowed by UVa Policy.  
• All recruitment materials will be  approved by the IRB -HSR prior to use.  They will be 
submitted to the IRB after the IRB -HSR has assigned an IRB -HSR # to the protocol.  
• Only those individuals listed as personnel on this protocol will recruit and or conduct the consenting process with potential subjects.  
 
Retention Incentives  
Any item used by the sponsor/ study team to provide incentive to a subject to remain in the study, 
other than compensation identified in the Payment section, will be submitted to the IRB for review 
prior to use.  The I RB-HSR will provide the study team with a Receipt Acknowledgement for their 
records.  Retention incentive items are such things as water bottles, small tote bags, birthday cards etc.  Cash and gift cards are not allowed as retention incentives.  
 
Clinical Privileges  
The following procedures will be followed:  
• Investigators who are members of the clinical staff at the University of Virginia Medical Center must have the appropriate credentials and been granted clinical privileges to perform 
specific clinical procedures whether those procedures are experimental or standard.   
• The IRB cannot grant clinical privileges.    
• Performing procedures which are outside the scope of the clinical privileges that have been 
granted may result in denial of insurance coverage should claims of negligence or malpractice arise.  
• Personnel on this protocol will have the appropriate credentials and clinical privileges in place before performing any procedures required by this protocol.  
• Contact the Clinical Staff Office - 924-9055 or 924- 8778 for further information.  
 
Sharing of Data/Specimens  
Data and specimens collected under an IRB approved protocol are the property of the University of Virginia.  You must have “permission” to share data/ specimens outside of UVa other than for a 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 32 of 49 gran t application and or publication.  This “permission” may come in the form of a contract with the 
sponsor or a material transfer agreement (MTA) with others.  A contract/ MTA is needed to share 
the data outside of UVa even if the data includes no HIPAA identifiers and no code that could link the data back to a HIPAA identifier.   
• No data will be shared outside of UVa, beyond using data for a grant application and or publication, without a signed contract/MTA approved by the SOM Grants and Contracts office/ OSP or written confirmation that one is not needed.  
• No specimens will be shared outside of UVa without a signed contract/MTA approved by the 
SOM Grants and Contracts office/ OSP or written confirmation that one is not needed.  
 
Prisoners  
If the original prot ocol/ IRB application stated that no prisoners would be enrolled in this study and 
subsequently a subject becomes a prisoner, the study team must notify the IRB immediately.  The 
study team and IRB will need to determine if the subject will remain in the study.  If the subject will remain in the study, the protocol will have to be re -reviewed with the input of a prisoner advocate.  
The prisoner advocate will also have to be involved in the review of future continuations, modifications or any other reporting  such as protocol violations or adverse events.   
 
Prisoner - Individuals are prisoners if they are in any kind of penal institution, such as a prison, jail, or 
juvenile offender facility, and their ability to leave the institution is restricted. Prisoners may be convicted felons, or may be untried persons who are detained pending judicial action, for example, arraignment or trial.  
For additional information see the OHRP website at  
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/populations/index.html  
 
Compensation in Case of Injury  
If a subject requests compensation for an injury, the study team should notify the IRB -HSR (924 -
9634/2439847) the UVa Health System Patient Relations Department (924 -8315).  As a proactive 
courtesy, the study team may also notify UVa Health System Patient Safety and Risk Management (924- 5595).  
 On request, the study team should provide  the Risk Management Office with the following 
information/documents:  
• Subject Name and Medic al Record Number  
• Research medical records  
• Research consent form  
• Adverse event report to IRB  
• Any letter from IRB to OHRP  
 
Subject Complaints  
During a research study, the study team may receive complaints from a subject.  If the study team is 
uncertain how to respond to a complaint, or is unable to resolve it with the subject, the study team may contact the IRB -HSR (924 -9634/243- 9847), the UVa Health System Patient Relations 
Department (924 -8315).  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 33 of 49  
Request for Research Records from Search Warrant or Subpoena  
If the study team receives a request for research records from a search warrant or subpoena, they 
should notify UVa Health Information Services at 924 -5136. It is important to notify them if 
information from the study is protected by a Certificate of Conf identiality.   
APPENDIX:  Unapproved Device Use   
(Unapproved Device being used but not evaluated)  
INSTRUCTIONS:  This section is to provide the IRB with information about the safety of a device that 
is being USED, but not evaluated in this study for safety and efficacy.  The device may have FDA 
approval and is being used for a non- approved indication OR the device may not have FDA approval 
[these are typically known as Research Use Only (RUO) Devices].  Again the RUO Device is only being 
USED and NOT being  evaluated for safety and efficacy in this study. The information below will be 
used by the IRB to make a minimal risk determination regarding this protocol.   
 1. List name of device(s) being used in an unapproved manner in this protocol .    
Per the statute:   Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act Sec 201.h  [21USC321]   
DEVICE:  (h) The term "devic e" (except when used in paragraph (n) of this section and in sections 
301(i), 403(f), 502(c), and 602(c)) means an instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, 
contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related article, including any 
compone nt, part, or accessory, which is — 
(1) recognized in the official National Formulary, or the United States Pharmacopeia, or any 
supplement to them,  
(2) intended for use in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, 
treatment, or prevention of disease, in man or other animals, or  
(3) intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or other animals, and 
which does not achieve its primary intended purposes through chemical action within or on the 
body of man or  other animals and which is not dependent upon being metabolized for the 
achievement of its primary intended purposes.  
Answer/Response:  PulmoVista 500 Electrical Impedance Tomography device (Draeger; Lubeck, 
Germany). This device is not approved by the FDA , however, the device is approved for clinical 
use in Canada, China, and European countries. It is not commercially available for use in the U.S. 
Health System.  
 
2. Do you confirm the device is only being USED and NOT being evaluated in this study?  
Answer/Res ponse:  Yes 
 
3. Is the device a Research Use Only (RUO) device? 
IF YES, submit the manufactures brochure/information regarding the RUO with other 
documents at the time of pre -review.  
IMPORTANT:  The RUO designation is made by the FDA.   
The package insert MUS T stipulate that this is a RUO device.   
Answer/Response:  No 
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 34 of 49 ►If the device is a RUO device, do you agree to use the device according to instructions in 
the manufacturers brochure?  
Answer/Response:  N/A 
 ►If the device is NOT a RUO device, is the device currently approved for any indication?  
Answer/Response:  Yes. Th is device is approved for the indication used in the study in other 
countries but is not approved by the FDA.  
 
►If the device is currently approved list the indication:  
INSTRUCTIONS:   Also submit the Manufacturer’s Brochure  
Answer/Response:  Drägers PulmoVista 500 provides EIT lung monitoring and is used 
in many hospitals all over the globe.  
 
 
►If the device is currently approved, do you confirm that results will not be used in clinical care of the subject (e.g. will not be used for diagnosis or treatment?)  
Answer/Response:  Yes. 
 
4. In how many humans has this device been used previously as it is being used in this study?     
Answer/Response:  Unknown.  However, the device is approved for clinical use in Canada, China, 
and European countries.  There are four Pul moVista EIT device clinical trials registered from 
within the United States on ClinicalTrials.gov;  Two at Boston Children’s Hospital, one at Unity Point in Delaware, a current study being performed by our research group here at the University of Virginia Medical Center.    
 
5. Describe pertinent human data that is available regarding the safety of this device as you are using it in this protocol.  
Answer/Response:  Validation studies and published clinical trials using PulmoVista 500 EIT 
device (Draeger; Lubec k, Germany) for measuring lung volume distribution in mechanically 
ventilated and non -mechanically ventilated human subjects signifies low patient risk.  Examples 
include Victoriano (2004) and Riedel (2005) validation studies that aimed to evaluate EIT detection of lung volume distribution in comparison with CT images.  Related to our study, EIT 
monitoring has good correlation with regional lung volume changes.  
 
6. If this protocol will be used in children, describe any previous use of this device with childre n 
of a similar age range as it is being used in this study.  
Answer/Response:  NA 
 
7. What steps will be taken to minimize risk?  
Answer/Response:  Each study investigator has/will receive PulmoVista 500 EIT device 
(Draeger; Lubeck, Germany) didactic and clinical  simulation training on how to prepare study 
participants for monitoring (i.e., determining electrode belt and cable selection), how to properly calibrate and operate the device, and how interpret, record, and download data to a password encrypted storage drive.  Respiratory Therapy study investigators are content 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 35 of 49 experts with I.S. and EzPAP® training as these are lung expansion therapy standards of practice 
used at the University of Virginia Medical Center.  
 
8. Would you consider the use of this device to be minimal risk?  Why or why not?  
Minimal Risk:  probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research 
are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during 
the performance of routine physical or  psychological examinations or tests.  45CFR46.102  
Answer/Response:  Yes.  The PulmoVista 500 EIT device (Draeger; Lubeck, Germany) is a 
monitoring tool with animal and human subject validation studies reporting good measurement correlation when compared with CT images.  It is non -invasive and non -
radiation producing.   
 
APPENDIX:  Recruitment  
Recruitment includes identifying, review of records to determine eligibility or any contact to 
determine a potential subjects interest in the study.  
 
*The UVa HIPAA covered entity is composed of the  UVa VP Office of Research, the Health System, 
School of Medicine, School of Nursing, Nutrition Services (Morrisons), the Sheila C. Johnson Center, 
the Exercise and Sports Injury Laboratory and the Exercise Physiology Laboratory.   
 
1. How do you plan to identify  potential subjects?  
• To "identify" a potential subject refers to steps you plan to take to determine which 
individuals would qualify to participate in your study. This does NOT include steps to 
actually contact those ind ividuals.  
• If your study involves more than one group of subjects (e.g. controls and cases or 
subjects and caregivers) note below which groups are being identified by the given 
method.  
• Check the methods you plan to utilize:  
 
a.____ Chart Review/ Clinic Schedule Review/ Database Review from a database 
established for health care operations (departmental clinical database) or an 
Improvement Project  (e.g.  Performance Improvement, Practice Improvement, 
Quality Improvement ).   
 If you plan to obtain data from the UVa Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW) please see 
option b below.   
 
DHHS:  Study team requests Waiver of Consent to identify potential subjects.  
 
HIPAA:  Allowed under Preparatory to Research if PHI to be accessed.  
 
IMPORTANT  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 36 of 49 Keep in mind that PHI in the medical record may only be accessed by 
individuals who work under the UVa HIPAA covered entity; which means they 
meet one of the following criteria:  
--a UVa student working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
--a faculty or staff member in a PAID appointment in  the UVA HIPAA Covered 
Entity*  
 
b____  Review of a database that was established to keep data to be used for 
future research such as the CDR, departmental research database or use of data 
from a separate current active research protocol.     
If you plan to obtain data from the UVa Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW) you 
are required to submit your request to the CDR.  The CDR staff will work with the 
EDW to obtain the data you need.   
DHHS:  Study team requests Waiver of Consent to identify potential subject s. 
 
HIPAA:  Allowed under Preparatory to Research if PHI to be accessed.  
 
IMPORTANT  
Keep in mind that PHI in the medical record may only be accessed by 
individuals who work under the UVa HIPAA covered entity; which means they 
who meet one of the following criteria:  
--a UVa student working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
--a faculty  or staff member in a PAID appointment in  the UVA HIPAA Covered 
Entity*  
 
The information from which you are obtaining potential subjects must also 
have an IRB protocol approval.  If this item is checked, enter the IRB # below.  
 
IRB# _ _______________  
If obtaining information from the Clinical Data Repository (CDR) insert IRB # 
10797 
 
c. ____ Patients UVa health care provider supplies the UVa study team with the 
patients contact information without patients’ knowledge.  
 
DHHS:  Study team requests Waiver of Consent to identify potential subjects.  
 
HIPAA:  Allowed under Preparatory to Research if PHI will be shared by the 
health care provider.  
 
IMPORTANT  
Keep in mind that PHI may only be given to individuals who work under the 
UVa HIPAA covered entity; which means they meet one of the following 
criteria:  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 37 of 49 --a UVa student working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
--a faculty or staff member in a PAID appointment in the UVA HIPAA Covere d 
Entity*  
 
d. ____ Patient obtains information about the study from their health care 
provider.  The patient contacts the study team if interested in participating. 
(Health care provider may or may not also be the a member of the study team)  
DHHS:   NA 
HIPAA:   Allowed under Health Care Operations  
 
If this choice is checked, check 3d -INDIRECT CONTACT below.  
 
e. __X__ Potential subjects will not be directly identified. They will respond to 
an advertisement such as a flyer, brochure etc.   
If this choice is checked,  check 3d - INDIRECT CONTACT below.  
DHHS & HIPAA:   NA 
 
f. _____ Potential subjects have previously signed a consent to have their name 
in a registry/database to be contacted for future studies of this type.   
IRB#  of registry/ database:   ________________  
DHHS & HIPAA:  NA  
 
g. __X__ Other : Specify    Answer/Response:  Potential subjects are not patients.  
 
 
If item # a, b or c is checked above and if this protocol involves the use of protected 
health information do you confirm the following to be true?  
• The use or d isclosure is sought solely to review protected health information 
as necessary to prepare the research protocol or other similar preparatory 
purposes.  
• No PHI will be removed from the UVa covered entity.  
• The PHI that the researcher seeks to use or access is  necessary for the 
research purposes.  
Answer/Response:  
 
2. How will potential subjects be contacted?  
To "contact" a potential subjects refers to the initial contact you plan to take to reach a 
potential subject to determine if they would be interested in participating in your study.  
This may include direct contact by such methods as by letter, phone, email or in- person 
or indirect contact such as the use of flyers, radio ads etc.  
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 38 of 49 If your study involves more than one group of subjects (e.g. controls and case s or 
subjects and caregivers) note below which groups are being contacted by the given 
method.    
 
Check the methods below you plan to utilize:  
a.____Direct contact of potential subjects by the study team via letter, phone, 
direct e -mail. Members of study team ARE NOT health care providers of 
patients.  Information will not be collected from psychotherapy notes.  
Note:   Letter, phone, direct email scripts must be approved by IRB 
prior to use.  See IRB-HSR Website  for templates.  
 
DHHS/HIPAA:  Study team requests a Waiver of Consent and Waiver of 
HIPAA Authorization to contact potential subjects.  
 
IMPORTANT:   
Keep in mind that if PHI was collected during the identification phase 
that contac t with potential subjects may only be performed by 
individuals who work under the UVa HIPAA covered entity; which 
means they meet one of the following criteria:  
 a UVa student working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
 a faculty  or staff member in a PAID a ppointment in  the UVA 
HIPAA Covered Entity*  
 
b.____Potential subjects will be approached while at UVa Hospital or Health 
Clinic by a person who is NOT a member of their health care team.  
Information will not be collected from psychotherapy notes.  
DHHS &  HIPAA:  Study team requests a Waiver of Consent and a Waiver of 
HIPAA Authorization to contact potential subjects.  
 
IMPORTANT:   
Keep in mind that contacting individuals in a clinical setting may only be 
performed by individuals who work under the UVa HIPAA covered entity; 
which means they  meet one of the following criteria:  
a UVa student working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
a faculty  or staff member in a PAID appointment in  the UVA HIPAA Covered 
Entity*  
 
You should share the following information  with the potential subject:  
• Your name  
• Who you are:  physician, nurse etc. at the University of Virginia.    
• Why you want to speak with them  
• Ask if you have their permission to explain the study to them  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 39 of 49 • If asked about how you obtained their information use one of the 
following as an option for response.     
o DO NOT USE THIS RESPONSE UNLESS YOU HAVE OBTAINED 
PERMISSION FROM THEIR UVa PHYSICIAN:  Your doctor, Dr. 
insert name wanted you to be aware of this research study and 
gave us permission to contact you.    
o We obtained your information from your medical records at 
UVa.   
o Federal regulations allow the UVa Health System to release 
your information to researchers at UVa, so that we may 
contact you regarding studies you may be interested in 
participating.  We want to assure you that we will keep your 
information confidential.  
• IF THE PERSON SEEMS ANGRY, HESITANT OR UPSET, THANK THEM 
FOR THEIR TIME AND DO NOT ENROLL THEM IN THE STUDY.  YOU MAY 
ALSO REFER THEM TO THE IRB -HSR AT 924 -9634.  
 
c.____Direct contact of potential subjects by the study team by approaching 
in person at UVa or via letter, phone, direct e -mail. Members of study team 
contacting potential subjects ARE health care providers of patients.  
If you are not approaching them in person but using a letter, phone call or 
direct email please note that the letter, phone, direct email scripts must be 
approved by IRB prior to use.   
See IRB-HSR Website  for templates.  
 
DHHS:   Study team requ ests a Waiver of Consent to contact potential 
subjects  
HIPAA:   Allowed under Health Care Operations.  
 
d._X___ Indirect contact (flyer, brochure, TV, broadcast emails, patient 
provided info about the study from their health care provider and either the 
patient contacts study team or gives their healthcare provider permission for 
the study team to contact them.)  
The indirect method used (flyer, brochure, TV, broadcast emails) must be 
approved by the IRB prior to use.    The IRB does not need to review any ty pe 
of script to use when the potential subject responds to the indirect method.   
 
DHHS & HIPAA:   NA 
  
e. __X__  Potential subjects are not patients.  The study does not include 
obtaining subjects health information.   Subjects will be contacted directly 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 40 of 49 via email, phone, letter or presentation in group setting with consent then 
obtained individually in a private setting.  
If you are not approaching them in person but using a letter, phone call or 
direct email please note that the letter, phone, direct email scripts must 
be approved by IRB prior to use.   
See IRB-HSR Website  for templates.  
 
DHHS:  Study team requests a Waiver of Consent to contact potential 
subjects.  
HIPPA:   NA 
 
3. Will any addi tional information be obtained from a potential subject during 
"prescreening"?   
Pre-screening  for IRB purposes is the term used to describe activities PRIOR to obtaining 
Informed Consent and may not include any research procedures.  
  
The activities may involve pre -screening of potential subjects over the telephone or in 
person is generally performed to determine their initial eligibility for, and, interest in a 
study and is a common strategy in the recruitment process.  
Questions appropriate for pre -scree ning address the specific inclusion/exclusion criteria 
for the study and other issues of suitability, for example, an individual's ability to come 
to the research site multiple times.  
It is not appropriate at this point in the process (i.e. prior to obtaining informed 
consent/enrollment) to gather information that is not directly related to assessing 
eligibility and suitability (e.g. obtaining complete medical histories, obtaining blood 
specimens for lab tests).  
An additional telephone script is not required, for this pre -screening process, in addition 
to any scripts required under Recruitment question # 2.   
Answer/Response:  Yes  
 
IF YES, submit any documents that will be used to collect pre -screening information so 
that the IRB may confirm what questions  will be asked.  
NOTE: To comply with HIPAA regulations only the minimum necessary information may 
be collected at this time.  This means that only questions pertaining to the Inclusion and 
Exclusion Criteria may be asked.   
 
IF YES,  
DHHS:    study team requests a Waiver of Documentation of Consent for Pre -screening 
questions.  
 
HIPPA:  
HIPAA does not apply if:  
--no PHI is collected or  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 41 of 49 --if PHI is collected from a potential subject  by an individual from a department that is 
not part of the HIPAA covered entity.  
 
HIPAA does apply if the collection occurs by individuals* who work in a department that 
is part of the HIPAA covered entity.   
 
In this case the collection will be covered under Health Care Operations/  
 
These individuals are those that meet one of the following criteria:  
--a UVa student working in the UVa HIPAA Covered Entity*   
--a faculty  or staff member in a PAID appointment in  the UVA HIPAA Covered Entity*  
 
IF YES, Will any of the questions involve health information?  
Answer/Response:  Yes 
 
IF YES , will you collect HIPAA identifiers with the health information?  
Answer/Response:  No 
 
IF YES, which HIPAA identifiers will be recorded?  
Answer/Response:  
 Do you confirm that health information with HIPAA identifiers will not be shared outside of UVa until  a consent form is signed or only shared in a de -
identified manner?  
Answer/Response:  
 
4. Do you plan to ask the subjects to do anything, other than answering questions, for the 
study prior to signing a consent?  
For example: come to the first visit fasting, stop taking medications that may be an 
exclusion criteria, change diet.  As this is still part of pre -screening one is not allowed to 
gather information that is not directly related to inclusion/exclusion criteria or other 
issues of suitability (e.g. is pe rson able to come to UVa for multiple visits)  
 
NOTE:   
Only those members of the study team with a DEA# (license to prescribe drugs) are 
allowed to determine if a potential subject may be asked/informed to stop taking a drug 
which is an exclusion criteria.    
It is recommended that the potential subject notify their health care provider if they plan 
to stop a prescription drug.   
Answer/Response:  No 
 ►IF YES, explain in detail what you will ask them to do . 
Answer/Response:  
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 42 of 49 Tips to Study Team  
You must docu ment their verbal consent in the study records.  
If a subject is asked to stop taking a drug, document the date and name of the person 
on the study team giving the verbal order to stop medications (again- must be a 
person with a DEA#).  
 
DHHS:  Study team re quests the use of Verbal Consent (Waiver of Documentation of 
Consent) for minimal risk screening procedures.  
 
HIPPA:  
If the individual, obtaining consent, works under the HIPAA Covered Entity this is 
covered under Health Care Operations  
If the individual  obtaining consent does not work under the HIPAA covered entity, 
HIPAA does not apply.  
 
5. How will the consenting process take place with either the prospective subject, the 
subject’s legally authorized representative or parent/legal guardian of a minor ( i f 
applicable)?    
HIPPA:  
If the individual, obtaining consent, works under the HIPAA Covered Entity 
consenting is covered under Health Care Operations.  
 
If the individual obtaining consent does not work under the HIPAA covered entity, 
HIPAA does not apply .  
 
Describe the setting for the consent process.  
If the study is of a sensitive nature and/or includes a reference to a medical condition 
how will you protect the privacy of the potential subject when they are approached 
to participate?  
Who will discuss t he study with the potential subject?  
Where will the consenting process take place?  
How will you assess subject understanding?  
How much time will pass between obtaining written consent and initiation of study 
procedures?   
See Protocol Examples:  Consenting Process  for examples of how to answer this 
question.   
If recruiting minors, specify how parental /guardian consent will be obtained prior to 
approaching the minor.   
Answer/Response:   
After prospective study participant has made contact with a study investigator, they will be pre -screened to determine if they qualify for participation based on 
documented study inclusion/exclusion criteria.  If they qualify,  the study investigator 
will continue with the consent process by providing details about the study without giving emphasis to potential clinical benefits that may be associated with 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 43 of 49 participation.  Since study participants will be randomly allocated to re ceive I.S. or 
EzPAP® therapy, researcher will explain the allocation process.  They will then ask the 
potential study subject to demonstrate understanding of the study through verbal feedback.  They will also be encouraged to ask clarifying questions.        
 
6. Will subjects sign a consent form for any part of the study?  
Answer/Response:  
Yes.  Subjects will be required to sign a consent form before they are enrolled into this study.  
 
7.  Will the study procedures be started the same day the subject is rec ruited for the 
study?  
Answer/Response:  Optional based on participant’s desire and study investigator 
availability to conduct procedure and monitoring on the same day recruitment occurs.  
 ►IF YES, explain in detail why the subject cannot be given more time to make a decision to consent.  
Answer/Response:  Prospective study participants will be granted time to consider 
whether they wish to accept invitation to enroll in this study.  
 ►IF YES, explain in detail what will be done to assure the potential subject has enough time to make an informed decision.  
Answer/Response:  After reviewing the study protocol consent form with potential 
study subject, they will be reminded that they are not require d to make a decision 
about participating in the study at that time.  They will be directed to the primary study investigator’s name and contact information as included in the study consent 
form.  They will be advised to contact the study PI if they should decide to participate 
in the study at a later date.  
 
8.  Is there the potential to recruit economically or educationally disadvantaged subjects, 
or other vulnerable subjects such as students or employees?  
INSTRUCTIONS:  If you will be recruiting patients from the UVa Health System, you 
must answer this question YES as the UVa Health System cares for patients who are 
economically disadvantaged.   
Answer/Response:  Yes 
 IF YES, what protections are in place to protect the rights and welfare of these subjects so that any possible coercion or undue influence is eliminated?   
Answer/Response:  
Study investigators will review the study protocol with prospective participants and 
then ask for them to repeat, in their own words, their understanding of the study 
they are being invited to participate.  Inability to follow verbal instructions is an exclusion criterion for study participation.  Only study investigators will enroll study 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 44 of 49 participants.  This study will require documentation of informed consent before 
study pa rticipation may occur.  Study participants will be assured that 
nonparticipation will not affect routine medical care.  
  
9. Do you need to perform a “dry run” of any procedure outlined in this protocol?    
A “dry run” is a procedure done to validate the system used to obtain results. It 
requires a human “subject” however the results of the dry run are used for system 
validation and not for the actual research.  A common example a “dry run” is the 
validation or qualification MRI scans required by sponsor to ensure the MRI at UVa is 
able to perform the study -required scans.  
• If you are doing a sponsored study that involves an MRI for research, you are 
encouraged to say YES to this question  
• If YES, complete and submit a Consent for a Dry Run Procedure  
• A template  for a Consent for  Dry -Run MRI is located under FORMS on the IRB 
Website  
• IF YES, answer the following questions.  
Answer/Response:  No. 
 
9a. List the “dry run” procedure(s) that must be performed.    
Answer/Response:  
 9b. How many “subjects” will be recruited for “dry run” procedures?    
These  “subjects”  should NOT  be counted  with  your  total  enrollment   figures . 
Answer/Response:  
 9c. Describe the recruitment procedures for those participating in the “dry run” .    
Answer/Response:  
 9d. Will those participating in the “dry run” be compensated?    
IF YES, add the “dry run compensation” as a line item to the payment section of this 
protocol.  
Answer/Response:  
 9e.  Who will pay for the cost of the “dry run” procedure(s)?     
Answer/Response:  
 
10.  Is the study regulated by the Department of Defense (DoD)?  
Answer/Response:  No 
 
If YES, do you confirm the following protections will be in place for military research participants to minimize undue influence?  
Answer/Response:  
 
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 45 of 49 o Officers  are not permitted  to influence  the decision  of their  subordinates.  
o Officers  and senior  non-commissioned  officers  may  not be present  at the time  of 
recruitment.  
o Officers  and senior  non-commissioned  officers  have  a separate  opportunity  to 
participate.  
o When recruitment  involves  a percentage  of a unit,  an independent  
ombudsman  is present.  
 
If YES, do you also confirm that the following procedures will be in place to require  
limitations  on dual  compensation?  
Answer/Response:  
 
o Prohibit  an individual from  receiving  pay of  compensation  for research  
during  duty  hours.  
o An individual  may be compensated  for research  if the participant is involved  in 
the research  when  not on duty.  
o Federal employees  while  on duty  and non- federal persons may be 
compensated  for blood  draws  for research  up to $50 for each  blood  draw.  
o Non- federal  persons  may be compensated  for research  participating  other than 
blood  draws  in a reasonable  amount  as approved  by the IRB according  to local  
prevailing  rates  and the nature  of the  research.  
 
 
Privacy Plan  
The following procedures mu st be followed.  
• The data will be secured per the Data Security Plan of this protocol.  
• Only investigators for this study and clinicians caring for the patient will have access to data.  They will 
each use a unique login ID and password that will keep confi dential.   The password should meet or 
exceed the standards described on the Information Technology Services (ITS) webpage about The 
Importance of Choosing Strong Passwords.  
• Each investigator will sign the University’s Electronic Access Agreement  forward the signed agreement 
to the appropriate department as instructed on the form.  
If you currently have access to clinical data it is likely that you have already signed this form.  You are 
not required to sign it again.  
• UVa University  Data Protection Standards will be followed  
http://www.virginia.edu/informationsecurity/dataprotection.    
• If identifiable data is transferred to any other location such as a desktop, laptop, memory stick, CD 
etc. the researcher must follow the University’s  “Electronic Storage of Highly Sensitive Data  Policy”. 
Additional requirements may be found in the University's Requirements for Securing Electronic 
Devices.   
• If identifiable data is  taken away from the UVa Health System, Medical Center Policy # 0218 will be 
followed.  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 46 of 49 • Data will be securely removed from the server/drive, additional computer(s), and electronic media 
according to the University's Electronic Data Removal Policy .  
• Data will be encrypted or removed if the electronic device is sent outside of UVa for repair according to the University's Electronic Data Removal Policy
. 
• If PHI will be faxed, researchers will follow the Health System Policy # 0194.     
• If PHI will be emailed, researchers will follow the Health System Policy # 0193 and University Data 
Protection Standards  . 
• Data may not be analyzed for any other study without additional IRB approval.  
• If you are using patient information you must follow  Health System Policy  # 0021. 
• Both data o n paper and stored electronically will follow the University's Record Management policy  
and the Commonwealth statute regarding the Destruction of Public Records.  
If you have a  question or concerns about the required security standards contact ISPRO at 
 it-security@virginia.edu  
Summary of Requirements to Comply with UVa Health System, Medical Center and University Policies and Guidance as noted above:  
Highly Sensitive Data is:  
-personal information that can lead to identity theft if exposed or  
-data that reveals an individual’s health condition and/or history of health services use.  
Protected Data (PHI)  a type of Highly Sensitive Data, is data combined with a HIPAA identifier  
Identifiable Data  under HIPAA regulations is considered to be Highly Sensitive Data at UVa.  
A Limited Data Set  (LDS) under HIPAA regulations is considered to be Moderately Sensitive Data at UVa. 
The only HIPA A identifiers associated with data: dates and or postal address information limited to town 
or city, state, and zip code.   
Will not include subjects age if older than 89 or subjects DOB if older than 89.   
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 47 of 49  Highly Sensitive Data  
(Identifiable Health Info per HIPAA )  Moderately Sensitive Data  
(Limited Data Set and De- identified data per 
HIPAA)  
General Issues  General Issues  
Discussions in private  
Do not share with those not on the study team or 
those who do not have a need to know.   
Do not share with those not on the study team or 
those who do not have a need to know  
Password protect  Password protect  
Physically secure (lock) hard copies at all times if not 
directly supervised.  
If not supervised hard copies must have double 
protection (e.g. lock on room OR cabinet AND in building requiring swipe card for entrance).    
 Physically secure (lock) hard copies at all times if 
not directly supervised.   
For electronic documents turn off File Sharing; turn 
on firewalls; use up to date antivirus and 
antispyware; delete data securely.  
 For electronic documents turn off File Sharing; turn 
on firewalls; use up to date antivirus and 
antispyware; delete data securely.  
 
Encrypt  
See Encryption Solutions G uidance   
Files on Health System Network drives are 
automatically encrypted.  If not stored there it is study 
teams responsibility to make sure data are encrypted.   
If device sent out for service or repair, encrypt or 
remove data AND contract fo r repair using a UVa 
Purchase order.  If device sent out for service or repair, encrypt or 
remove data AND contract for repair using a UVa 
Purchase order.  
Store files on a network drive specifically designated 
for storing this type of data, e.g. high- level  security 
server/drives managed by Information Technology 
Services or the “F” and “O” managed by Heath Systems Computing Services.  You may access it via a shortcut icon on your desktop, but you are not allowed to take it off line to a local drive such as the desktop of your computer (e.g. C drive) or to an 
individual  Use Device*.  May access via VPN   
Do not share with sponsor or other outside group 
before consent is obtained or the IRB has granted appropriate approvals and contract/ MTA is in place  Do n ot share with sponsor or other outside group 
before consent is obtained or the IRB has granted appropriate approvals and contract/ MTA is in 
place  
If collected without consent/ HIPAA authorization 
will NOT be allowed to leave UVa HIPAA covered entity unless disclosure is approved by the IRB and 
the disclosure is tracked in EPIC  If collected without consent/ HIPAA authorization 
will NOT be allowed to leave UVa HIPAA covered entity unless disclosure is approved by the IRB and 
an MTA is  in place prior to sharing of data  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 48 of 49  
Highly Sensitive Data  Moderately Sensitive Data  Highly Sensitive Data  
(Identifiable Health Info per HIPAA )  Moderately Sensitive Data  
(Limited Data Set and De- identified data per HIPAA)  
Electronic Data Collection & Sharing  Electronic Data Collection & Sharing  
(e.g. smart phone app, electronic consent using 
tablet etc.)  
MUST consult with ISPRO or Health System Web 
Development Office: 434 -243-6702  
 University Side:    IT-Security@virginia.edu   
 Health System: Web Development Center:    
Individual -Use Device  Individual -Use Device  
Do not save to individual -use device* without 
written approval of your Department AND VP  
or Dean.   If approval obtained, data must be password  
protected and encrypted.   
Do not save an email attachment containing 
HSD to an individual use device  
( e.g. smart phone)   
E Mail  E Mail  
Do not share via email with Outlook Web/ or 
forward email using other email vendors like 
Gmail/ Yahoo   
Do not send via email on smart phone unless 
phone is set up by Health System   
Email may include name, medical record 
number or Social Security number only if sending email to or from a person with * HS in their email address.  
NOTE: VPR & IRB staff do not m eet this criteria!  In addition to sharing LDS, may include initials if 
persons sending and receiving email work within the UVa HIPAA covered entity.**  
FAX FAX 
Verify FAX number before faxing  Verify FAX number before faxing  
Use Fax Cover Sheet with Conf identiality 
Statement  Use Fax Cover Sheet with Confidentiality Statement  
Verify receiving fax machine is in a restricted 
access area  Verify receiving fax machine is in a restricted access 
area  
Verify intended recipient is clearly indicated  Verify intende d recipient is clearly indicated  
Recipient is alerted to the pending transmission 
and is available to pick it up immediately  Recipient is alerted to the pending transmission and 
is available to pick it up immediately  
IRB-HSR # 19661: A descriptive observational pilot study comparing regional distribution of 
ventilation during lung expansion therapy in healthy human subjects  
 
Version Date: 02/13/17 
Page Number: 49 of 49 (Identifiable Health Info Per HIPAA  (Limited Data Set and Deidentified data per HIPAA  
Electronic Data Collection & Sharing  Electronic Data Collection & Sharing  
(e.g. smart phone app, electronic consent using 
tablet etc…)  
MUST consult with ISPRO or Health System  
Web Development Office: 434 -243-6702  
 University Side:    IT -Security@virginia.edu   
 Health System: Web Development Center:   
Contract m ust include required security 
measures.   
May be Stored in Qualtrics  
MAY NOT be stored in places like UVaBOX, UVa 
Collab or QuestionPro  
May also NOT be stored I n non -UVA licensed 
cloud providers, such as Dropbox, Google Drive, 
SkyDrive, Survey Monkey etc. . May be stored in places like UVaBox, UVaCollab, 
Qualtrics  
May NOT be stored in non- UVa licensed cloud 
providers, such as Dropbox, Google Drive, SkyDrive, Survey Monkey, etc.  
LOST OR STOLEN  LOST OR STOLEN  
Must report in accordance with protocol in 
acco rdance with the Information Security 
Incident Reporting Policy  
Any data breach will also be reported to the IRB of record in the report meets the criteria of an 
Unanticipated  Problem  Must report in accordance with protocol/ in accordance 
with the Information Security Incident Reporting Policy . 
 Any data breach will also be reported to the IRB of Record if the report meets the criteria of an 
Unanticipated Problem .   
 
*  Individual Use Device – examples include smart phone, CD, flash (thumb) drive, laptop, C drive of your 
computer,  
**The UVa HIPAA covered entity is composed of the UVa VP Office of Research, the Healt h System, School 
of Medicine, School of Nursing, Nutrition Services (Morrison’s), the Sheila C. Johnson Center, the Exercise 
and Sports Injury Laboratory and the Exercise Physiology Laboratory.   
 
 