Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 1 of 32 
  Clinical Evaluation of a Vascular Venous Anastomotic Connector for  
Minimally Invasive Connection of an Arteriovenous Graft for Hemodialysis  
[InterGraft Study]  
 
INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
IDE # G140221  
 
Investigational Plan Revision History:  
 
Rev 1, October 1 0, 2014 : Initial release, for IDE submission . 
 
Rev 2, January 30 , 2015: Added details of statistical analysis, sample size , electronic data capture . 
 
Rev 3, June 2 , 2015:  Added  independent Medical Monitor ; revised Table 1  to clarif y that Transonics device or similar 
method may be used for graft flow rate evaluation , added lab tests ; added note that AIG may only be used after VIG has first 
been placed;  added Table 2 to summarize study enrollment ; clarified  that pregnancy test is required to confirm subject is not 
pregnant at time of enrollment . 
 
Rev 4, August 31, 2015:  Added note to Inclusion criterion #7 that as required by an IRB, adult individuals who lack capacity 
to consent for themselves will be not be included in the study.  
 
Rev 5, July 27, 2017: Incorporated information provided in Study Operations Memos 1 -8. 
 
Rev 6, November  14, 2018: Incorporated adaptive modification to the study design ; added an independent DSMB , 
incorporated information in Study Operations Memos 9 -13.  NOTE:  Effective with this revision, the InterGraft Arterial 
Anastomotic Connector (AIG) study device will no longer be used in the study. Reference to the AIG in this revision 6 of the 
Investigation Plan refers only to previously enrolled subjects in which an AIG was used.   
 
Rev 7, May 2 9, 2019:   Incorporated study design modifications, including c larification of  the primary analysis population, 
sample size, planned enrollment, and statistical analysis modifications ; revised 2 -week follow up window in Table 1.  
 
Rev 8, July 2 8, 2020: Changed total roll-in subjects from 12 to 15, study sites participating from 20 to 23 and maximum total 
of enrolled subjects (including roll -ins) from 170 to 173.  
 
Sponsored by:  
 
Phraxis, Inc.  
Minneap olis, MN    USA  
 
 
Clinical Trial Registration:  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 2 of 32 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
                                Page  
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS       4   
   
1.0 GENERAL INFORMATION        5   
2.0 INTRODUCTION  and BACKGROUND       6    
3.0 STUDY DEVICE DESCRIPTION        8 
       Indication for Use          8   
4.0 PRIOR  STUDIES          9 
       Bench Testing          9 
       Pre-Clinical Studies                        9  
       Clinical Studies          9   
5.0 STUDY OBJECTIVE         10   
6.0 STUDY DESIGN          11 
7.0 SUBJECT  SELECTION         11 
       Initial Inclusion Criteria         11 
       Final Inclusion Criteria         11 
       Exclusion Criteria          11 
8.0 STUDY ENDPOINTS         12 
Primary Endpoint          12 
Secondary Endpoints         12 
9.0 SUBJECT SCREENING AND INFORMED CONSENT     13  
       Screening and Enrollment         13 
       Baseline Imaging          13 
       Informed Consent          13 
10.0 STUDY PROCEDURE         14  
       Use of Clamps          14 
       Other Treatment Immediately after Deployment of InterGraft Connectors   14 
       Vascular Grafts for Hemodialysis        15 
       Treatment of Ipsilateral Central Venous Stenosis Prior to Enrollment    15 
       Study Device Failure, Def ect, or Suspected Device Problem     15 
       Bailout Procedure          16 
       Assessment of Graft Flow at the end of the Procedure      16 
       Initial Use of the Graft for Hemodialysis       16 
11.0 FOLLOW -UP PROCEDURES AND GRAFT INTERVENTIONS    16 
       Subject Management         16 
       Pharmacologic Regimen         16 
       Follow -up Evaluations         16 
       Telephone follow -up for subjects that miss final (6 month) visit    17 
       Post-procedure Graft Interventions        17 
       Summary of Tests and Procedures        17 
       Final Events          18 
12.0 POTENTIAL RISKS         18 
       Steps to Minimize Risks         19  
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 3 of 32 
 13.0 POTENTIAL BENEFITS         19 
14.0 SUBJECT  WITHDRAWAL FROM THE STUDY      19 
15.0 CRITERIA FOR STUDY TERMINATION       19 
16.0 STUDY DURATION         20 
17.0 TRAINING          20  
       Roll-in Cases          20 
18.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS        20  
       Analysis P opulation         20 
       Choice of Performance Goal        21  
       Hypotheses           21  
       Data Analysis          21 
       Sample Size Justification  and Planned Enrollment      23 
19.0 DATA REPORTING AND PROCESSING       24 
       Data and Collection          24 
       Data Management          24 
20.0 DATA MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE MEASURES   24 
       Sponsor Monitoring         24 
       Medical Monitor          25 
       Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects       25 
       Data and Safety Monitoring Board        26 
21.0 CLINICAL EVENTS         26 
       Clinical Events Committee         28  
22.0 PROTOCOL VIOLATIONS        29 
23.0 REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITIES AND CONSIDERATIONS    29 
       Investigator Responsibilities        29 
       Sponsor Respon sibilities         30 
       Record Retention Policy         30 
24.0 MEASURES TO AVOID BIAS        31  
25.0 PUBLICATION POLICY         31 
26.0 REFERENCES          31 
 
 
Appendix A: Current InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector  Instructions for Use  
Appendix B :  Summary of Literature Search - Patency Performance Goal  
Appendix C:  Case Report Form  
Appendix D:      Sample Informed Consent Form   
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 4 of 32 
 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  
 
AE  Adverse Event  
AIG  Arterial InterGraft Connector  
AV  Arterio venous  
AVG   Arteriovenous graft  
CEC   Clinical Events Committee  
CRF   Case Report Form  
DCC   Data Coordination Center  
DSMB   Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
EDC   Electronic Data Capture  
ESRD   End Stage Renal Disease  
GCP   Good Clinical Practice  
IFU  Instructions for Use  
IRB  Institutional Review Board  
KDOQI   Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (National Kidney Foundation)  
MM  Medical Monitor  
ePTFE   expanded Polytetrafluoroethylene  
UADE   Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect  
VIG  Venous InterGraft Connector  
 
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 5 of 32 
 1.0 GENERAL INFORMATION  
Study Name:  Clinical Evaluation of a Vascular Venous Anastomotic Connector for Minimally Invasive 
Connection of an Arteriovenous Graft for Hemodialysis  [InterGraft Study]  
 
Study Device:  The device evaluated in the study is the InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector  (VIG).   
   
Study Device  
Regulatory Status :  Investigational Device. Limited by Federal (United States) law to investigational use.  
 
Indication for Use:  
(proposed)  The InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector provides a minimally invasive, sutureless 
method for attachment of an arteriovenous graft to a vein in the upper extremity.   The InterGraft ™ 
Venous Anastomotic Connector facilitates creation of the arteriovenous graft connection to a vein 
in support of hemodialysis in subjects with End Stage Renal Disease. The InterGraft ™ Venous 
Anastomotic Connector is used together with conventional suturing of the arterial anastomosis to 
facilitate creation of an arteriovenous graft in support of hemodialysis in subjects with End Stage 
Renal Disease.  
Study Design:   Prospective,  multicenter, non -randomized  design  
 
Subject s:  A total of up to 173 subject s with ESRD who have a planned arteriovenous graft implant 
procedure for hemodialysis access  and who meet the study se lection criteria will be included.    
Lead Principal  
Investigator:   John R. Ross, MD  
   Orangeburg, SC  
   Phone/email: (803)533 -7544/ jrrsurgery@aol.com  
 
Sponsor:   Phraxis, Inc.  
Saint Paul, MN  
   Sponsor representative: Cindy Setum, Ph.D., Director of Clinical Affairs  
   Phone/email: (612) 801 -6730/ csetum@phraxis.com  
 
Data Coordination:  Clinical Development Associates, Inc.  
   Richmond, VA  
   Contact : Suzanne Cowley    Phone/email:  (804) -740-3363/ cowley1@rcn.com  
 
Statistical Analysis:  Richard G. Holcomb, PhD  
   Minnetonka, MN  
   Phone/email: (952)745 -0555/ rgholcomb2@cs.com    
 
Medical Monitor:   Arif Asif , MD  
   Neptune, NJ  
   Arif.Asif@HackensackMeridian.org  
DSMB Chairman:  Anthony Comerota, MD  
   Alexandria , VA  
   Anthony.comerota@Inova.org  
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 6 of 32 
 2.0 INTRODUCTION  and BACKGROUND  
End Stage Renal Disease (ESRD)  is a significant and growing health problem .  In the United States (U .S.), 
571,000 ESRD subject s underw ent treatment in 2009; and since 2000, a 12% increase in the incidence rate of 
ESRD has been observed in subject s ≥ 75 years of age.1  By the year  2020, the number of dialysis subject s is 
expected to reach 774,000, with an annual incidence of more than 160 ,000 new subject s per year.  These subject s 
typically undergo  three  hemodialysis  treatments per week, each lasting 3 -4 hours.  An arteriovenous (AV) 
vascular acces s is needed to remove blood for dialysis filtration and return to the body. The access must provide 
high blood flow volume continuously during treatment. Due to the need for surgical healing and development, the 
access is ideally prepared several weeks or months in advance of anticipated need.  A significant challenge in 
managing ESRD  subject s is providing  access when needed, along with consistent and sustained access.  
 
Vascular access has frequently been referred to as the “Achilles heel” of dialysis because of the high morbidity 
and mortality rates due to infection, thrombosis and ultimate access failure. Of the three types of vascular access: 
fistulas, grafts, and central venous catheters, the type used is influenced by factors such as the expected time 
course of renal failure and the condition of the subject ’s vasculature. While fistulas are considered as the gold 
stand ard, synthetic grafts are also widely used since fistulas cannot always be successfully established.2  The 
failure rate of fistulas to mature and thus be suitable for dialysis may be as high as 60%.3 Many patients  will 
require an AV graft (AVG) access at some point during the disease course.4 The creation of long term dialysis 
access remains a significant challenge, especially in patients  with multiple p rior failed access sites and in the 
elderly.5-7  Indeed, with continued treatment of an increasingly older ESRD population, the increased use of AV Gs 
may also be require d.8,9 
 
Grafts are relatively easy to place sur gically using standard techniques.  Expanded polytetrafluoroethylene 
(ePTFE) is the most common graft materi al.4 Novel self -sealing multilayered ePTFE configurations and other 
graft materials (e.g., polyurethane) have recently been introduced, offering the potential for earlier access.10,11   
Compared with fistulas, AVGs  have a greater incidence of  recurrent stenosis, especially a t the venous 
anastomosis,  and require more salvage interventions to maintain patency for dialysis.4  The pathogenesis of 
venous stenosis is comprised of a cascade of events resulting in endot helial and smooth muscle injury that results 
in intimal hyperplasia and ultimately flow limiting occlusion.12  With the conventional end -to-side venous 
anastomosis, the vessel wall is subjected to turbulen t, nonlinear flow and low shear stress at the toe and heel of 
the anastomosis, sites that correspond to the development of intimal hyperplasia.  As hyperplasia progresses, 
increasing stenosis occurs resulting in  a decrease in blood flow, leading to thrombosis. In addition to these 
hemodynamic factors, the trauma of surgical graft implantation due to relatively large (3 -6cm) incision sites and 
circumferentially sutured anastomoses, contributes to increased healing time and possible complications.  These 
findings point to the need for new devices and techniques to optimize AV G flow dynamics and healing, resulting 
in the reduction of stenosis and other complications.  
Despite planning, a large percentage of patients  present with an urgent need for hemodialysis and lack sufficient 
time to allow a fistula or standard surgical graft to be firmly established.  In such cases, the use of temporary 
venous catheter access is the only option currently available . More than 80% of subject s will begin dialysis with a 
catheter and approximately 28% will use a catheter for permanent access.1 Catheter use even for short periods can 
result in higher rates of infection, thrombosis, morbidity and mortality, compared to patients  who do not start 
dialysis with a catheter.12 Both the Fistula First Initiative and the  KDOQI guidelines have established a goal to 
limit chronic catheter use to less than 10% of dialysis patients .2,13 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 7 of 32 
 While recognizing that a native fistula is the recommended access for hemodialysis, AV Gs remain a frequently 
used access type.  The InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector (VIG) was developed for minimally invasive 
venous anastomosis of a standard hemodialysis graft.   This study will evaluate the safety and performance of the 
VIG for anastomosis of a commercially available, 6 mm diameter, ePTFE hemodialysis graft.  Anastomoses with 
the VIG may potentially  reduce venous vessel trauma,  improve the local vessel wall shear stresses and promote 
laminar flow, thereby improving patency.    
 
The original investigational InterGraft Clinical Study conducted under the approved IDE #G140221 was 
configured as  a pivotal, prospective, multicenter, non -randomized, adaptive design .  The study was intended to 
enroll up to 252 subjects including roll -in subjects, subjects in whom both a VIG and AIG were used, and a small 
VIG sub -study of subjects who did not qualify for treatment with the AIG.  Subject enrollment began on 
November 12, 2015.  The study recruitment rate was slow and attributed primarily to challenges in identifying 
subjects with a suitable artery for using the AIG .  Initial investigator feedback  indicated that the AIG was 
cumbersome to  deploy and would not likely be adopted by clinicians in its current design.   The study was 
subsequently modified to discontinue further study of the AIG and all future  enrolled subjects were to be treated 
using a VIG and sutured arterial anastomosis for AVG  implantation. In accordance with the original 
investigational plan, in July 2018, an  interim analysis was performed after the first 52 subjects receiving treatment 
with the VIG +AIG were enrolled and follow -up was completed.   
 
Investigator feedback, safety data and device performance data (number and type of reported device 
malfunctions) from the first 52 subjects treated with a VIG and AIG (interim analysis population)  were evaluated 
and the results were used to inform the modified study design described in  the previous revision 6 of the 
Investigational Plan .  
 
With this current Investigational Plan, t he study primary analysis population  will now include the following:   
 
• All USA subjects enrolled since June 5, 2018 and treated with the VIG + sutured arterial 
anastomosis  (These subjects were not included in the interim analysis.)  
 
• All USA VIG sub -study subjects enrolled after October 17, 2017  (These subjects were not 
included in the interim analysis.)  
 
Roll-in subjects, subjects who were included in the planned interim analysis  that has previously been completed , 
and other subjects that received an AIG will not be included in the primary analysis population. However, these 
subjects will continue to be followed and evaluated according to the requirements of the current  protocol, which 
are identical to the previous  version  protocol requirements , and these results will also be included in a final study 
report.  
 
The current  study will evaluate  use of the VIG for placement of an AV G. The venous anastomosis will be created 
using the VIG and the arterial anastomosis will be created using standard suturing. The study focuses on subjects 
who have a failed fistula, cannot have a fistula , or are better suited for an AV G, as determined by the physician. 
The graft implant procedural outcomes, the number and type of major adverse events, and patency throug hout a 
six (6) month follow -up period will be evaluated.  The 6 -month patency rate will be compared with a pre -
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 8 of 32 
 specified patency performance goal that is drawn from prior surgical AV G literature and published performance 
standards.10, 14-20 
 
This study will be conducted  in compliance with the Investigational Plan , Investigational Device Exemption 
(IDE) regulations, Good Clinica l Practice  guidelines (GCP) , and other applicable  regulatory requirements.   The 
study Sponsor (Phraxis, Inc.) intends that  the study results  will support a 510(k) marketing clearance for the 
InterGraft Venous Anastomotic Connector.   
 
3.0 STUDY DEVICE DESCRIPTION  
 
The device evaluated in the study is the InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector  (VIG). The VIG is designed 
for transcatheter delivery within a vein and connection to a n AVG  that has been tunneled under the skin in a 
standard manner. The connection  is made via a small skin incision.  
 
The VIG is constructed with a nitinol framework encapsulated with ePTFE in the midsection and uncoated at the 
ends ( Figure 1 ). The VIG is delivered and deployed within the target ve in using a customized transcatheter 
delivery system. The VIG is a flexible, flar ed, self -expanding endoprosthesis designed for coaxial placement in 
peripheral veins up to 10 mm in diameter. The distal flared end is configured as a nitinol scaffold with anchoring 
barbs that extend into the vein wall. The ‘graft end’ of the VIG is configured as a stent -like framework for 
anchorin g within the  ePTFE  graft.  The materials used  in constructing the  VIG are all medical -grade with well -
established biocompatibility profiles.  
 
The VIG is supplied pre -mounted within a customized transcatheter  delivery system  for over -the-wire delivery 
via a n 11F vascular sheath. The VIG is intended as a permanent implant. The delivery system is a sterile, single 
use, disposable item.  A detailed description of the VIG and  delivery system is provided in the Instructions for 
Use ( Appendix A ). 
Indication  for Use  
The InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic Connector provides a minimally invasive, sutureless method for 
attachment of an arteriovenous graft to a vein in the upper extremity.   The InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic 
Connector facilitates creation of the arteriovenous graft connection to a vein in support of hemodialysis in patients 
with End Stage Renal Disease. The InterGraft ™ Venous Anastomotic  Connector is intended to be used together 
with conventional suturing of the arterial anastomosis to facilitate creation of an arteriovenous graft in support of 
hemodialysis in patients with End Stage Renal Disease.  
 
Figure 1 - InterGraft Venous  Anastomotic Connector  (VIG). Note barbs that anchor VIG within the vein  (arrows ).  
 
 
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 9 of 32 
 4.0 PRIOR STUDIES  
 
Both the VIG and an arterial InterGraft Connector (AIG) were evaluated i n the prior testing  and studies described 
below.  The findings from the prior testing are also applicable to use of the VIG  only.  The AIG will not be used in 
the current study . 
 
Bench Testing    
Bench testing of the VIG confirmed the structural integrity of the device, adequacy of resistance to compressive 
forces and radial forces, adequacy of bond strengths, kink and migration resistance, and verification of critical 
dimensions.  Where applicable, testing was  conducted using commercial 6mm ePTFE grafts (C.R. Bard, Inc., 
Murray Hill, NJ) that were selected due to their current widespread clinical use.  
 
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)  modeling of the VIG used together with AIG was performed , based on a 6 
mm graft connecting artery and vein.21 This modeling demonstrated resulting graft flows of approximately 1 
L/min when the AV pressure d ifference was approximately 100 mm Hg.  With  graft flow rates ranging from 980 -
1100 ml/min, the maximum wall shear ranged from 265Pa - 180Pa, and thus below the threshold to cause 
mechanical hemolysis (800Pa), or that thought to stimulate hyperplasia.21   These  findings confirmed the 
acceptability  of the InterGraft design  for clinical evaluation .  
Pre-Clinical Studies  
Simulated use testing  was performed  for verification  of the VIG deployment procedure . The VIG performed 
adequately for intended use with respect to the ability to access, deploy and withdraw.  
 
Acute animal studies evaluated the deliverability of the VIG, the ability to complete an AV circuit using PTFE 
grafts, and near-term graft patency  following initial placeme nt of grafts using a VIG and AIG .22 Testing was 
performed using a femoral ar tery/vein canine model .  These studies provided ev idence of safety and acceptable 
performance of  the VIG. 
 
Clinical Studies  
First-in-Human Study  
A first -in-human clinical evaluation of the  InterGraft Venous and Arterial Connectors  was perform ed.23   The 
InterGraft Connectors were successfully used in 9/9 subjects for connection of an AV G in the upp er arm: 5 
subjects received both the VIG and the AIG, and 4 subjects received the VIG for the venous anastomosis and a 
standard sutured arterial anastomosis.  InterGraft ™ delivery and deployment success was obtained in all cases. 
All AVGs were patent at the end of the procedure.  
AIG Adverse events occurred during the procedure in 3 subjects: (i) In one case, a successfully deployed AIG was 
inadvertently nicked with a surgical tool during closure of the incision site. This resulted in a hole in the ePTFE 
coating on the AIG, creating a blood leak path that could not be repaired. The AIG was removed and a sutured 
arterial anastomosis was prepared at the same arteriotomy site.  There were no further sequelae. (ii) In another 
case, an acute graft occlusion occurred during the graft impl ant procedure.  Angiographic examination showed 
that the tunneled graft had been positioned in a manner that caused a graft kink. Aspiration thrombectomy via a 
guide catheter was performed, the graft was re -positioned to relieve the kink, and graft flow was immediately 
restored. There were no further sequelae. (iii) In another case, persistent bleeding at the AIG arteriotomy site 
occurred and was attributed to an incomplete seal around the arteriotomy site.  The cause was not determined but 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 10 of 32 
 could have been due to vessel wall damage during deployment, a coating defect on the AIG, or a mal -positioned 
AIG.  The bleeding was remedied by placement of a single suture at the leak site, and there were no further 
sequelae.  
There were no procedural adverse events related to the VIG.  
All subjects were discharged within one day after the pr ocedure with patent grafts. Grafts were used for 
hemodialysis within 17 days, on average, and temporary venous catheters were removed.  Subjects were followed 
to six months. Three subjects exited the study early for reasons unrelated to the InterGraft devices. The remaining 
6 subjects had patent grafts. It was concluded that the InterGraft connectors can safely and successfully be used 
for AVG anastomoses.  An additional adverse event occurred in one subject after discharge: the subject had 
peritonitis and required abdominal surgery (not related to the study device). The subject developed a hospital -
acquired infection and the graft subsequently became infected and was removed. Of the 8 remaining 
subjects/grafts, 7 were confirmed to be patent at one month following the implant procedure (primary patency). In 
the remaining subject, the one month follow -up has not yet been performed.  
 
Investigator Feedback Collected During Enrollment of the F irst 52 S ubjects in the I DE G140221 Clinical Study  
As originally designed, the  IDE G140221 clinical stu dy inclu ded both an arterial InterGraft Connector  (AIG)  and 
a venous InterGraft connector  (VIG) . Investigator feedback collected during enrollment of the first 52 subjects 
indicated the following:  
 
• A high level surgical/interventional skill was needed for AIG delivery and deployment ; 
• Identifying subjects with a target artery suitable for using the AIG was a key obstacle to enrollment ;  
• The anatomic requirements needed for proper positioning of the AIG relative to the artery orientation, to 
avoid kinks and untoward stresses to the implanted device  were also obstacles to enrollment;  
• Investigators  noted  that while the AIG can work, the current design/procedure is complex and not ready 
for widespread adoption ;  
• Several investigators appear ed to have become disinterested in the study  due to the above noted 
challenges , as evidenced by a very slow recruitment rate.  
 
Based on  this investigator f eedback , Phraxis determined that the AIG in the present configuration with a relatively 
complex delivery and deployment procedure, is excessively challenging to use, and that even if cleared -to-market, 
the AIG would likely not be readily adopted by clinicians . Thus, Phraxis concluded that the AIG is not ready for 
commercial introduction and Phraxis decided  to stop further study of the AIG.  On August 9, 2018, investigators 
were notified to stop further study of the AIG, and to continue follow -up to 6 months in subjects that had 
previously received an AIG, in accordance with the investigational plan.  
 
5.0 STUDY OBJECTIVE  
 
The objective of the current study is to demonstrate that the 6 -month cumulative patency of AVGs connected wit h 
the InterGraft ™ VIG connector  is similar to that of AVGs  connected using standard sutured anastomoses.   
 
 
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 11 of 32 
 6.0 STUDY DESIGN  
 
This is a multicenter, prospective, non -randomized design study.  All enrolled  subjects will receive the VIG 
device  and will have a standard sutured arterial anastomosis.   The study allows  for a maximum enrollment of 
173 subjects, including a provision for 12 subjects lost to follow -up and up to 15 roll-in cases.  Data from r oll-in 
subjects  will not be  included in the primary analysis but will be analyzed separately.  
 
The study  include s up to 23 participating clinical centers. Study site investigators will be physicians skilled in 
AVG placement and interventional techniques. Study data will be collected up to the point at which each subject 
has completed the 6 -month endpoint  or experienced a terminal study endpoint .  
 
7.0 SUBJECT SELECTION  
 
The following inclusion and exclusion criteria must be met for enrollment in the study:  
Initial Inclusio n Criteria (All must be answered YES for study eligibility.)  
1. Subject is ≥ 18 years of age.  
2. Subject requires the creation of a vascular access graft for hemodialysis, secondary to a diagnosis of End   
Stage Renal Disease.  
3. Subject is able to have the vascul ar access graft placed in an upper extremity.  
4. Baseline imaging shows suitable vascular anatomy/ vesse l size for the InterGraft ™ Venous Connector 
and an artery at least 3.5 mm in diameter  that is suitable for creating the arterial anastomosis.  
5. Subject has a reasonable expectation of remaining on hemodialysis for at least 6 months.   
6. Subject or his/her legal guardian understands the study and is willing and able to comply with the dialysis 
schedule and follow -up requirements.  
7. Subject or his/her legal guardian provides written informed consent.   NOTE: In accordance with the 
requirements of some Institutional Review Boards  (IRB) , where applicable, only those subjects with 
capacity to consent for themselves will be included. Thus, where required by the IRB, adult individuals 
who lack capacity to consent for themselves will be excluded from the study.  
Final Inclusion Criterion to be applied at the time of surgery (Must be answered YES for enrollment into the 
study .) 
 
8. Physician’s examination at time of surgery shows no significant vessel lesions, calcification(s), anatomic 
structures or abnormalities that may limit ability to safely deploy the InterGraft ™ Venous Connector  or 
create a sutured arterial anastomosis.  
Exclusion Criteria (All must be answered NO for study eligibility.)  
1. Subject  has a documented and unsuccessfully treated ipsilat eral central venous stenosis as determined by 
imaging . 
2. Subject currently has a known or suspected bacterial, fungal, or HIV  infection.   NOTE: Subjects  with 
hepatitis B or C may be included in the study.  
3. Subject has a known hypercoagulable or bleeding disorder or requires treatment with warfarin or heparin.  
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 12 of 32 
 NOTE: The intent of this criterion is to exclude patients with high risk for bleeding or clotting 
complications.  As such, patients who are taking oral anticoagulants (blood thinners) including, but not 
limited to, Xarelto® (rivaroxaban) or Eliquis® (apixaban) should also be excluded from the study.  
Patients may receive anticoagulation therapy any time after the study AV graft implant procedure, at their 
physician’s discretion. This should be driven by an indication unrelated to the vascular access.  
4. Subject  has had a previous instance of Heparin Induced Thrombocytopenia type 2 (HIT -2) or has known 
sensitivity to heparin.  
5. Subject has co -morbid conditions that may limit their ability to comply with study and follow -up 
requirements.  
6. Subject  has had >2 previous arteriovenous accesses in treatment arm.  
7. Subject is currently taking Aggrenox®.  
8. Subje ct needs  or is scheduled for any major surgery  within 30 days of the study procedure.  
9. Subject  is currently taking maintenance immunosuppressant medication such as rapamycin, 
mycophenolate or mycophenolic acid, prednisone  (>10 mg), cyclosporine, tacrolimus or 
cyclophosphamide.  
10. Life expectancy is less than 12 months.  
11. Subject  is pregnant.   NOTE: A negative urine pregnancy test within 24 hours of the study procedure is  
required in all female subjects  with reproductive capacity .  
12. Subject is a poor compliance risk (i.e. history of IV or oral drug abuse).  
13. Subject is enrolled in another dialysis or vascular investigational study.  
 
8.0 STUDY ENDPOINTS  
Primary Endpoint  
The primary endpoint is cumulative patency at 6 months, defined as the p ercentage of subjects free from loss of 
access of the study graft for hemodialysis, assessed at 6 months.   
  
Secondary Endpoints  
Secondary endpoints for the study include:  
1. Acute device success, defined as AV graft flow at the end of the procedure  as determined by palpable graft 
thrill and /or audible bruit, without significant bleeding or emergent surgery . 
Primary Unassist ed Patency at 6 Months, defined as the percentage of sub jects free from the first occurrence  
of either access thrombosis or an access p rocedure performed to maintain access patency.  
2. Time to First Cannulation , defined as the time from initial access placem ent to the first graft cannulation . 
3. Number  and type  of interventions required to maintain secondary patency  
4. Number and type of  serious adverse events (SAEs)  through 6 months .  SAEs include the following : death, 
emergent surgery, infection requiring treatment (e.g., prolonged or intravenous antibiotic therapy), significant 
bleeding (defined as bleeding requiring treatment) , and pseudoaneurysm.    
 
Expected interventions for restoration of patency will be documented and reported separately, are reflecte d in the 
evaluation of cumulative  patency, and will not be tabulated again as SAEs.  
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 13 of 32 
 Endpoints will be evaluated acutely (at the time of implant), at time of any AVG intervention , at two weeks, and 
monthly through 6 months for all subjects.  The study AV G patency evaluation starts immediately after the index 
procedure is completed (e.g., subject  leaves the surgery suite).  This means that once the AV G is created, patency 
evaluation begins.  The occurrence of acute thrombus  and treatment thereof during the index  procedure while the 
vascular access is being created does not trigger the loss of primary patency.  
 
9.0 SUBJECT SCREENING AND INFORMED CONSENT  
 
Screening  and Enrollment  
All subject s referred for AVG implant should be screened for study eligibility.  A me mber of the Research Team 
will evaluate the subject  for eligibility. If all initial inclusion criteria are met and no exclusion criteria are present, 
a member of the Research Team should inform the subject  about the study’s purpose and should obtain written 
informed consent.  
 
Final e nrollment  eligibility  is determined at the time of surgery, after the physician has confirmed the final 
inclusion criterion is m et.  Enrolled subjects will be assigned a unique study subject identification number. Each 
study site will maintain screening and enrollment logs to record all subjects who were screened and all subjects 
who were enrolled.  Reason for screen failures will be recorded.  Screening log data will not be included in the 
primary database but will be reviewed during study monitoring . 
 
No clinical site  may contribute  more than 25% of the total enrollment  (excluding roll -in subjects) .       
Baseline I maging  
Angiographic or ultrasonic imaging  of the target limb  vasculature  is routinely performed as part of determining 
the optimal AV access plan  for a subject . As part of subject  screening, baseline imaging should be reviewed to 
determine whether the subject  meets the following criteria  (as determined by the physician)  for use of the  VIG:   
• General : Flow rate must be adequate for the creation of dialysis access, as previously mapped with 
ultrasound or angiography  
• Vein inner diameter at planned anastomosis site is 4 -7 mm  in luminal diameter  
• Artery inner diameter at planned anastomosis site is at least 3.5 mm in luminal diameter   
Informed C onsent  
A me mber of the Research Team will  approach the subject  to obtain written informed consent. The background of 
the study and the benefits and risks of procedures and the study should be explained to the subject .  The subject  
(or their legal representative , if applicable ) must sign the consent form prior to initiation of study procedures. The 
consent form must have been previously approved by the study site’s IRB.  Failure to provide consent renders the 
subject  ineligible for the study.  Subjects will be given a copy of the signed informed consent document. The 
signed informed consent will be retained with the study records at the site.  It is the responsibility of the 
Investigator to assure that informed consent is obtained from each subject in accordance with the guidelines of the 
IRB and all applicable regulatory guidelines.  
 
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 14 of 32 
 10.0 STUDY  PROCEDURE  
 
The procedure will be performed in accordance with the Instructions for Use  (IFU)  provided with the study device  
(Appendix A ).   A commercially available 6mm diameter synthetic graft will be used. Such grafts may include 
conventional ePTFE grafts or grafts designed for early cannulation (within 24 -48 hours). The study procedure will 
be performed in an operating room that has fluoroscopic imaging capability for guiding placement of the VIG.  
The anesthesia regimen will be determine d at the physician’s discretion;  there are no study -specific anesthesia 
requirements. A regional nerve block is typically performed for placement of an AV G.  Standard, r outine 
hemodynamic monitoring will be performed to assess cardiovascular status throughout the procedure . Heparin 
anticoagulation may be provided at the physician’s discretion.  
 
Small skin incisions will be made for tunneling the graft under the skin in a standard manner.   The VIG device  is 
provided pre -loaded within a customized catheter -based delivery system for over -the-wire delivery.  The VIG is 
inserted through  an introducer sheath placed in the target vein  so that th e ‘vessel end’ of the  VIG is  deployed 
within the ve in, and the ‘graft end’ extend s out of the ve in for connection to the graft.  Delivery and deployment 
will be performed under fluoroscopic guidance. The VIG will be deployed first, connected t o the AV G, then  the 
graft  and VIG  will be flushed and clamped. The arterial anastomosis will then be created using a standard suturing 
method.  
 
NOTE: Although not expected, in the event that connection of the venous graft segment  using the VIG is 
attempted but not able to be completed, the venous anastomosis should be completed using standard suturing. 
Such situations will be considered as a procedure failure.  
 
Following e stablishment of the AV circuit, the skin incisions will be sutured clo sed using standard techniques. 
The subject  will be moved to a recovery area for monitoring  prior to  discharge. It is anticipated that most subjects 
will be discharged the same day or within 24 hours following the AVG  implant procedure.  
Use of C lamps  
To avoid mechanical damage or disruption to the  AVG or VIG, surgical clamps  or other tools with teeth or other 
sharp features  should not be used during the AVG  implant procedure .  An  atraumatic or guarded (e.g ., rubber) 
clamp should be used for clamping the AVG , as needed .  Do not clamp or manipulate the VIG with surgical tools. 
Use only gentle pinching with the fingers to hold the VIG and to control hemostasis.  
 
Othe r Treatment Immediately after D eployment  of the VIG  
It is anticipated that no other interventional treatments will be required during the implant procedure.  At the 
venous anastomotic site, no further treatment should be provided if the luminal diameter is > 90% of the adjacent 
normal vessel , based on operator’s assessment .  If the luminal diameter is <90%, balloon angioplasty may be 
performed  as follows:  
 
After deployment, the nitinol -reinforced VIG may be smoothed and more fully seated against the vessel wall by 
inflating an angioplasty balloon. Balloon treatment should be performed according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions , by a physician skilled in peripheral vascular interventional techniques . The balloon diameter used 
should be equal to that of the VIG diameter and should be no larger than 6mm when used to treat the VIG 
segment that is within the  AVG . The balloon should be inflated within the VIG alo ng the entire length.   Multiple 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 15 of 32 
 inflations may be needed. To avoid possible displacement of the VIG, the physician should assure that the balloon 
is fully deflated prior to carefully removing the balloon.  
 
Vascular G raft for Hemodialysis   
Vascular grafts that meet the following requirements, as determined by the physician, may be used:  commercially 
available, straight (not -tapered), 6 mm inner diameter  ePTFE grafts.   Adequate graft length  and trimming  must be 
carefully determined  to facilitate optimal positioning after the venous and arterial graft anastomoses have been 
completed . The graft should never be too short.  
 
Treatment of Ipsilateral Central Venous Stenosis Prior to Enrollment  
Ipsilateral c entral venous stenosis is a study exclusion.   However, a patient with central venous stenosis may be 
considered for the study following successful treatment of the stenosis.  Central stenosis angioplasty may be 
performed first, then immediately followed with the study  procedure.   The patient may be enrolled if, as assessed 
by the investigator, the central stenosis has <30% residual stenosis, which is the KDOQI threshold for successful 
intervention.  The patient should not be enrolled if the residual stenosis is >= 30% or if the investigator 
determines that the treatment could impact the ability to assess the study endpoints  (e.g., acute device  success, 
graft patency, safety).  
Study Device Failure, Defect, or Suspected Device Problem  
Device malfunction is defined as any occurrence in which the study device does not perform as intended, when 
used or attempted to be used in a study procedure .  As described in the device  Instructions for Use (IFU) , a visual 
examination of the VIG should be performed at the time of opening the packaging  and prior to use in a subject .   
Defective devices (obvious or suspected) should not be used.  A replacement  VIG should be obtained and the 
study procedure continued.  A device accountability log will be used to account for all used and opened/unused 
devices in this study.    
 
If a VIG defect or malfunction is discovered/su spected any time prior to vascular deployment, the VIG should not 
be used .  A replacement device/component should be used and the study procedure continued.  A Device 
Malfunction  form must be completed for all device malfunctions, failures or suspected failures, and the defective 
product identification should be recorded on the device accountability log .  Whenever possible, a 
defective/suspected defected VIG should be return ed to the Sponsor for evaluation.  
 
The Device Malfunction form (eCRF) should be used to report and provide details of situations in which the VIG 
does not perform as intended. Failure of the VIG to perform as intended may be potentially be due to a variety of 
reasons, including defect or suspected defect in the device itself or the delivery system; operator error; anatomic 
issues; or other reasons. If use of the VIG  is attempted but ultimately the device is not able to be used, a Device 
Malfunction eCRF should be submitted to report the surrounding details.   
 
NOTE: Device Malfunctions should  reported on the Device Malfunction eCRF within 24 hours of discovery .  24-
hour reporting of device malfunctions will assist with Sponsor ’s efforts to assess whether any SAEs associated 
with a device malfunction may also have occurred.   
 
 
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 16 of 32 
 Bailout P rocedure  
Bailout procedures are not anticipated, but could potentially be required if, for example, the  VIG does not deploy 
correctly,  does not seal correctly,  is not deployed at an acceptable location , or if there are any major vascular 
events.   In such cases, the subject  should be referred for surgical intervention.  No attempt should be made to 
remove an improperly deployed VIG  using percutaneous methods.  
 
Assessment of Graft Flow at the End of the Study Procedure  
An AV G placed using the VIG and a sutured arterial anastomosis  typically has a pulse and/or thrill which is easily 
palpable over the skin or directly in the AVG prior to closure of the surgical incisions.  Thus, the AVG  flow 
assessment is similar that used for standard sutured AVGs. An optimal method to confirm AVG patency at the 
end of the implant procedure is to feel a thrill near the arterial anastomosis  or confirm a Doppler signal.   
Ascultation u sing a sterile or covered stethoscope is also acceptable.   At the physician’s discretion and as 
warranted, a final angiogram may  also be performed to verify patency of the graft . 
 
Initial Use of the Study Graft for Hemodialysis  
Initial hemodialysis cannulation of AVGs  placed with the VIG should be performed in accordance with the graft 
manufacturer’s Instructions for Use.   After needle withdrawal, use gentle, non -occlusive digital pressure to 
compress the cannulation site until hemostasis is achieved. The VIG should NOT be directly cannulated.   In 
accordance with standard practice, once placed, AVGs should be used for hemodialysis access as soon as deemed 
appropriate by the nephrologist and/or operator. For standard ePTFE AVGs, the time from placement to first 
cannulation is typically after two weeks.  Early cannulation AVGs can be used within one week after placement. 
Every effort should be made to minimize infection risk by removing central catheters as soon as possible.   
 
 
11.0 FOLLOW -UP PROCEDURES AND GRAFT INTERVENTIONS  
 
Subject  Management  
Prior to discharge, the study investigator  or their designee  should insure th at the subject  understands the 
postoperative  care requirements , as determined by the physician , and the required fol low-up schedule.  T he two-
week  visit should be scheduled.  
 
It is recommended that investigators follow the Fistula First  Guidelines  for vascular access monitoring   
(http://esrdnetwork18.org/pdfs/QI%20 -%20FF%20Tools/FFTool_VAMPFlowChrt.pdf   or current).  
 
Pharmacologic Regimen  
There are n o study -specific pharmacologic requirements.  The need for intraoperative and postoperative 
anticoagulation therapy should be  based on subject  history  and m aintained a s deemed appropriate  by the 
physician .  Anticoagulation /anti-platelet  therapy will be recorded on the  case report form  (CRF). 
 
Follow -up E valuation s 
Subject s will be followed  at two weeks and monthly thereafter  through six months  to assess AVG patency and  
complications.  Measurement of access flow rate is part of standard care. Data from routine AV access flow 
monitoring performed as part of usual care , as available,  will also be collected.    
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 17 of 32 
 Graft ultrasound evaluation should be performed at the 3 month and 6 month follow -up visits and the results 
recorded on the CRF.  
 
NOTE: For reference and in accordance with standard care, baseline flow measurements are typically assessed 
during 2 dialysis sessions 2  weeks apart; and monthly measurements will be performed thereafter.    An access 
flow rate < 500 mL/min or a drop in access flow rate of 25% from baseline should trigger an angiographic 
evaluation of the AVG  and possible intervention.  
 
Telephone follow -up for subjects that miss the final (6 month) follow -up visit  
If a study subject  misses or is unavailable/unwilling to return for the final 6 month f ollow -up visit, telephone 
follow -up with the subject  or thei r dialysis center should be attempted  to determine the patency status of the AVG  
at 6 months  (the primary study endpoint), and to gather as much additional  information as possible in order to 
complete the 6 month follow up and study completion  eCRFs.  Telephone follow -up with subjects  should be done 
only if the subject  is unwilling or unable to come in.   If the subject  cannot be reached, then the dialysis center 
should be contacted  (if allowed)  in order to determine AVG  patency at 6 months . If it is not possible to reach the 
subject  by phone or to contact the dialysis center, then the subject  will be considered as lost -to-follow up.    
Post-procedure Graft Interventions  
As per standard care following the AVG implant  procedure , AVG interventions should be avoided  within the first 
7 days  following the index AVG  implant procedure .  As warranted and determined by the physician, standard 
balloon angioplasty and thrombectomy procedures may be  performed within the AVG , VIG,  and adjacent native 
artery and vein. Mechanical thrombectomy devices that use spinning, rotating or other movable parts should NOT 
be used in the study, as this may result in entanglement or other damage to the VIG. The balloon diameter used 
should be equal to that of the VIG diameter and should be no larger than 6mm when used to treat the VIG 
segment that is within the  AVG . 
 
Summary of Tests and Procedures  
The required schedule for subject  treatment and follow -up evaluation is shown in Table 1 .   
 
Table 1 : Schedule of Subject  Treatment and Evaluation  
Timeframe (window)  Test/Procedure  
Pre-procedure (within 30 days)  Baseline imaging of target AV G site (performed as part of 
standard care)  
Baseline labs: Hgb, Hct, WBC, platelets  
Pre-procedure (within 24 hours)  Urine pregnancy test for female subjects with reproductive 
potential  
Immediately following end of AVG  implant procedure 
(before leaving surgery suite)  Confirmation of AV G flow ( e.g., palpable thrill, audible bruit .  
At the physician’s discretion and if warranted, an a ngiogram 
may also be performed to confirm patency.  
Post- procedure (within 48 hours)  Post procedure labs: Hgb, Hct  
At discharge  Confirmation of AV G flow (palpable thrill, audible bruit)  
2 weeks following the procedure (14 +4/-7 days)  Clinical follow - up with AVG evaluation (includes collection of 
information regarding any subsequent hospitalization, AEs, 
AVG interventions)  
30, 60, 90, 120, 150,180 days following the procedure (± 
14 days)  Clinical follow - up with AVG evaluation (includes collection of 
information regarding any subsequent hospitalization, AEs, 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 18 of 32 
 AVG interventions)  
 
AVG flow rate evaluation (ultrasound or similar) is performed 
at the 90 -day and 180 -day follow -up visits.  
 
Final Events  
The following final events will justify cessation of study follow -up: death, AVG  abandonment, lost to follow up  
(at least 3 attempts to contact the subject should be made and documented) , or completion of study follow -up.   
 
12.0 POTENTIAL RISKS   
 
Potential adverse events that may occur and/or require treatment with use of the VIG include but are not limited 
to: 
• allergic reaction to device materials or procedure medications  
• anastomotic disruption or tearing  
• aneurysm  
• artery tear or rupture  
• bleeding  
• bruising  
• contrast dye reaction  
• death  
• device breakage  
• dissection or ‘tissue flap’ in blood ve ssels in which the VIG has been inserted  
• embolism  
• hematoma  
• infection  
• inflammation  
• kinking/compression of t he AV G and/or VIG device  
• migration or misplacement of VIG device  
• occlusion  
• pseudoaneurysm  in the AVG , VIG device , or adjacent native blood vessels  
• seroma  
• stenosis  of the AV G 
• swelling of implanted arm  
• thrombosis  of the AV G 
• vessel spasm  
 
Many of the potential adverse events listed above are similar to those that can occur during and after AVG  
placement using standard surgical techni ques. Potential risks of a standard surgical procedure to implant a n AVG  
for hemodialysis include but are not limited to the following:  
• failure of sutures  
• bleeding immediately after the procedure  
• infection  
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 19 of 32 
 • possible need for re -operation  
 
The VIG will be used together with a st andard 6mm AVG  for hemodialysis that is sold and packaged separately. 
Potential adverse events that may occur with use of the AVG  are described in the  Instructions for Use packaged 
with the AVG . 
Pregnant subjects are excluded from the study. In females of reproductive capacity , a pregnancy test must be 
performed prior to the procedure.  This is to ensure that a fetus is not irradiated.  Other potential risks to a fetus 
related to the study procedure are unknown.  
There are no unique blood tests required for the study; however, results of standard blood tests performed to 
evaluate general health status at baseline, during the study procedure and during study follow -up will be included 
with the study data.  Risks of having blood drawn include infection (rare) and bleeding (rare).  
Steps to Minimize Risk  
The following steps will be taken to minimize potential risks:  
• Rigorous technical training will be provided to physician investigators that will perform the study 
proce dures.  
• On-site monitoring w ill occur during the first procedure at each site . On- site monitors will include a 
clinical representative  of the sponsor. On-site monitors may also attend additional procedures throughout 
the co urse of the study.  
• The study procedure will be performed in a surgical suite with radiologic imaging capabilities. In the 
event that the study  procedure is unable to be performed (not expected), the patient will be able to receive 
traditional surgical graft implantation.           
 
13.0 POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Potentia l clinical benefit(s) for the VIG  are unknown at this time.  Anastomoses with the VIG may potentially 
reduce venous vessel trauma, improve the local vessel wall shear stresses and promote laminar flow, thereby 
improving patency.  
 
14.0 SUBJECT  WITHDRAWAL FROM THE STUDY  
 
Subjects  may withdraw consent from the study at any time.   Study data collected prior to withdrawal will be 
analyzed and included with the final study results.   The investigator may withdraw the Subject  from the study at 
any time if assessed to be in the best interest of the subject .  
15.0 CRITERIA FOR STUDY TERMINATION  
 
The study  may be terminated at any time  for reasons of safety, based on a recommendation by the IRB , the study 
DSMB, or based on other considerations by the Sponsor.  S erious, device -related or possibly related adverse 
events  that are unexpected in either frequency or type may prompt a review by  the principal investigator , DSMB, 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 20 of 32 
 Medical Monitor and /or Sponsor, and may lead to consider ation of  stopping the study. Such a review and 
discussion will be documented and included with the study records.  
 
16.0 STUDY DURATION  
 
Enrollment is expected to occur over a  24-month per iod.  The  6-month follow -up and 2 -month period of data 
analysis and regulatory submission preparation  is anticipated to be completed by Q 2 of 202 1. 
 
17.0 TRAINING  
 
The training of appropriate clinical site personnel will be the responsibility of Phraxis Clinical Department or 
their designees [ e.g. Data Coordinating Center (DCC)  staff] .  To assure uniform data collection and protocol 
compliance,  trainers  will present a form al educational session to  review the Investigational Plan, techniques for 
the identification of eligible subject s, instructions on data collection, follow -up schedules and regulatory 
requirements.  Ongoing detailed email and telephone feedback regarding completion of CRFs will be provided by 
the DCC and through site monitoring to be performed by Phraxis representatives  or their designee . 
 
Prior to enrollment start, technical training on use of the study devices  will be provided by a Sponsor  
representative, who may also attend/observe the roll -in cases.  As part of the tec hnical training, physician 
operators will also perform ‘test deployments’ of the study devices  using a simulated -use model.   
 
Roll-in Cases  
Roll-in cases will be performed at each study site in order to confirm proper training and use of the study device  
and confirm comprehension of the study protocol.  “Roll -in” subjects will be identified as such before enrollment 
and treated according to the same protocol  and 6 month follow -up duration  as used in the main study.  Data from 
roll-in cases will be recorded using the same CRF as the main study.   The number of roll -in cases per each site 
investigator  will be determined by the Sponsor, in collaboration with the primary  investigator  at each site .  No 
more than 1 -2 roll-in cases per investigator  are anticipated. The clinical experience and procedural data from roll -
in cases will be reviewed by the Sponsor , in collaboration with each site investigator.  Upon successful 
completion of the roll -in case requirements, as determined by the Sponsor , sites will be permitted to begin 
enrollment in the main study. Clinical data from roll -in cases will not be included in the primary study analysis  
but will be analyzed and provided in a separate clinical report at the end of the study.   Data from roll -in cases will 
be included in the final safety analysis for the study.  
 
18.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS   
 
Analysis population  
The primary analysis population will include all subjects enrolled since June 5, 2018 and treated with the VIG + 
sutured arterial anastomosis, and also all VIG sub -study subjects enrolled after October 17, 2017.  Such subjects 
who meet the enrollment criteria and in whom use of the VIG is attempted will be included in the intention -to-
treat primary analysis population.    
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 21 of 32 
 Data from roll -in subjects  or from subjects included in the interim analysis population  will not be included in the  
primary  study analyse s but these data  will be analyzed and summarized separately.  This includes subjects who 
previously received an AIG.   
Choice of Performance Goal  
Based on a review of the literature , prior studies of  AVGs cleared for commercial distribution, and on 
observations from the first 52 enrolled subjects that received an AIG+VIG (e.g., the interim analysis population) , 
the observed cumulative patency rate at 6 months for standard A VG implants ranged from 65% to 98% 
(Append ix B).    Based on the proposed sample size for the current study (see below) and an expected cu mulative 
patency rate of 8 4.6% for AVGs placed using the VIG , the exact, lower two -sided 95% confidence bound for 
cumulative patency is est imated to be 79.9% .  A comparison  to a target Performance Goal (PG) of 75% has been 
chosen for the evaluation.   
 
Hypotheses  
The primary study endpoint of the cumulative patency rate at 6 months will be eva luated  in the following testable 
hypotheses:  
H0:   (Cumulative Patency Rate) 6 Months   ≤  PG 
H1:   (Cumulative Patency Rate) 6 Months   >  PG  
where, PG = Performance Goal, here equal to 75%.  
There are no formal hypotheses associated with the evaluation of secondary endpoints.  
Data Analysis  
General Statistical Considerations  
a. Descriptive stati stics will be used to summarize subject baseline and outcome data collected during the study.  
Continuous variables will be summarized using means, standard deviations, medians, interquartile ranges, 
minimums and maximums.  Categorical variables will be summarized in frequency distributions.  
b. Statistical analyses will be performed by validated software (e.g., SAS, SPSS, or Cytel Software)  
c. Copies of databases used to prepare clinical report summaries will be archived to enable any statistical 
analyses performed to be replicated.  
d. A full data listing will be prepared, including an electronic version in a standard computer -accessible format 
(e.g., SAS) at the completion of the study.  Listings of data represented on the CRF will be provided for all 
key baseline, demographic and outcome variables to facilitate further investigation of tabulated values and to 
allow for clinical review of safety variables.  
A one -sided p -value of 0.025 will be considered evidence of statistical significance for the primary study 
endpoint.  
Primary Endpoint  
Cumulative patency at 6 months will be evaluated using the estimated patency from a Kaplan Meier survival 
analysis.  The test statistic will take the following form:  
 Z-test statistic =     (P - 0.75) / SE (P)  
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 22 of 32 
 Where, (P) represents the Kaplan Meier estimate of cumulative patency at 6 months, and the standard error SE (P) 
is estimated using the method of Peto et al ( 1977 ). 24 
Subjects who withdrawn for reasons other than loss of cumulative patency will be included in the analysis up until 
the time of withdrawal, and be considered censored in the analysis, according to usual convention, after 
withdrawal.  
Secondary Endpoints  
The following secondary endpoints will be evaluated in the study, but there are no formal hypotheses that are 
tested or associated significance levels assigned to results.    Nominal confidence intervals may be calculated in 
summarizing clinical results for secondary endpoints but not for purposes of product labeling.   
1. Acute device success will be summarized by the success rate and associated 95% confidence interval.  
2. Primary Unassisted Patency at 6 Months will be summarized by the patency rate and associated 95% 
confidence interval.  
3. Time -to-First-Cannulation will be summarized by the median time and frequency distribution . 
4. Number and type of interventions required to maintain secondary patency will be summarized by the 
frequency distributions of numbers and types of interventions . 
5. Number and type of serious adverse events (SAEs) will be summarized by frequency distributions of the 
numbers and types of SAEs, the subject rates of SAEs by type, and the proportion of subjects with at least 
one SAE.  
Additional Safety Data  
In addition to summarizing and reporting SAEs (Secondary Endpoint 5), the number and type of non -serious 
adverse events (AEs) will be summarized by frequency distributions of the numbers and types of AEs and the 
subject rates of AEs by type.  
Gender Analysis  
Cumulative patency rates between genders will be compared by gender using a log rank test statistic to compare 
their respective Kaplan -Meier survival curves.   The heterogeneity of cumulative patency rates will also be 
examined using the test statistic used for the primary endpoint analysis.   Gender specific summary statistics will 
also be provided for study primary and secondary endpoints.  
 
Pooling of Sites  
Cumulative patency rates will be compared between study sites using a Chi -square test to evaluate the association 
between rates and sites.   A p -value of 0.15 or less w ill be considered evidence of a possible site interaction, 
requiring a further evaluation of subject baseline factors to determine if site differences can b e explained by these 
factors.   
 
 
 
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 23 of 32 
 Sample Size Justification  and Planned Enrollment  
Sample size adjustment recommendations from the  planned  interim analysis subject data have been considered in 
determining the sample size for the current study. The required sample size for the study was estimated using the 
following assumptions:  
• Test basis:   Kaplan -Meier estimate of cumulative patency rate at 6 months, with exact binomial estimation 
for purposes of sample size  
• Type I error (alpha):   0.025 (one -sided)  
• Statistical power:  80%  
• Performance Goal (PG):  75%  
• Expected cumulative patency for InterGraft at 6 months:   8 4.6%. 
 
Based on the above assumptions, a total of 1 46 evaluable subjects w ill be req uired to compare observed 
cumulative patency  to a PG of 75%.   With an expected loss -to-follow -up rate of 8% over 6 months  (e.g., 12 
subjects) , a total of 1 58 evaluable subjects w ill be enrolled  into the main study , defined as primary analysis 
population of 146 subjects plus allowance for 12 subjects lost -to-follow up .   Planned minimum and maximum 
enrollment under the current investigational plan  is summarized in Table 2 .  
Table 2: Planned Enrollment in  the Current Investigational Plan  
Study  Group  Minimum enrollment  Maximum enrollment  
Roll-in 0 15 
Primary analysis    146 146 
Allowance for subjects lost -to- follow up  12 12 
TOTAL  158 173 
 
Planned enrollment under the entire study conducted under IDE G140221 is summarized in Table 3 . This 
includes all subjects previously enrolled under the approved IDE G140221.  
 
Table 3: Summary of Planned Enrollment under IDE G140221 , as of May 22, 2019  
Study Group  Maximum enrollment                                
(or actual enrollment if known)  
 Roll-in subjects enrolled prior to May 22, 2019 (includes USA + 
Mexico Sites)  25 (actual enrollment)  
Current Investigational Plan: Roll -in subjects  up to 15 
Current Investigational Plan: subjects previous enrolled and to be 
included under the current investigational plan  30 (actual enrollment)  
Current investigational plan:  new subjects remaining to be 
enrolled after May 22, 2019 ( Primary analysis + allowance for 
lost-to-follow up  128 
Previously enrolled subjects that received VIG+ AIG (includes 
USA + Mexico sites, does not include roll -in cases)  68 (actual enrollment)  
Previously enrolled subjects in VIG sub -study that are not 
included under the current Investigational Pla n, but were included 
in the interim analysis)  7 (actual enrollment)  
TOTAL  273 
 
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 24 of 32 
 19.0 DATA REPORTING AND  PROCESSING  
 
Data Collection  
Primary data collection  based on source documented medical records will be performed by study coordinators or 
other designated research staff at each site. Electronic data capture  (EDC)  will be used .  The EDC system(s) used 
will be compliant with FDA requirements.   Site training  on EDC data recording will be provided by the Data 
Coordinating Center (DCC).   All EDC training will be documented in the Investigator site file. Throughout the 
study, a help desk at the DCC will be available for any questions that arise from the sites concerning EDC.  
 
Notification of subject enrollment must be provided to the Sponsor within 24 hours. The enrollment notification 
may be made by email to the Sponsor  or by entry of an enrollment form into the EDC within 24 hours of 
enrollment.  
 
The following guidance is provided regarding entry of CRF data into the EDC:  
• Pre-procedure (b aseline ) Imaging , Inclusion/Exclusion, Index Procedure, and Discharge information 
should be submitted within 2  days of enrollment.  
• Follow -up For ms should be submitted within 2  days of the follow -up visit.   
 
A complete copy of eCRF data to be collected  is provided in Appendix C . 
 
For any deaths that may occur throughout the study duration, efforts should be made to obtain a copy of the death 
certificate and autopsy report, as applicable.  
 
Data Management  
The DCC will use a validated clinical data management system consisting of a relational database and a web 
application to capture the study data through single -pass data entry.  Automated edit checks for missing, 
discrepant, and out of range data will be programmed into the data entry forms, and manual edits will be 
conducted by the DCC Managers on an ongoing basis. The Sponsor will provide a list of edit checks to the DCC.   
 
Any data discrepancies identified during data monitoring will be communicated to study sites for resolution or 
justification. Once all discrepancies and queries have been resolved, the site principal investigator  will confirm 
the data accuracy with his/her signature on a Verification CRF.  Once the study is completed, all data have been 
entered into the clinical database, and all discrepancies have been resolved, an audit will be conducted to verify 
that all requirements for database  lock have been met.  After data base lock, the DCC will export the data into SAS 
datasets and provide them to the project statistician.  
 
CRF submission status will be track ed by the Sponsor and DCC.   
 
 
20.0 DATA MONITORIN G AND QUALITY ASSURANCE MEASURES  
 
Sponsor Monitoring  
Study site monitoring will be performed by Sponsor personnel or Sponsor designees (e.g. contract monitors). On -
site monitoring will be performed to ensure that the study is conducted in compliance with applicable regulations 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 25 of 32 
 and with the study protocol. A pre -investigation visit will be made to each new study site to orient the staff to the 
study device and procedures, the study protocol, applicable regulations and requirements, study administration 
expectations. The prospective site will be evaluated to ensure that it has an adequate pa tient base and can provide 
sufficient staff and documentation support for proper study conduct.   
 
No sites may receive shipment of study devices until the following documents are received by the sponsor:  
• Written IRB approval for conduct of the study  
• IRB approval of a consent form  
• Signed Investigator Letter of Agreement  
• Executed Study Agreement  
• Copies of Investigator’s CV and medical license  
• Financial Disclosure  
 
Clinical  sites will be regularly monitored for timeliness and accuracy of  data submitted to the DCC.  Any evident 
patterns of noncompliance with respect to the protocol, data accuracy, maintenance of source documentation, or 
timeliness will be cause for the site to be put on probation. If correction actions are not made, the site will be 
asked to withdraw from the study.  
 
Medical Monitor  
An independent  study medical monitor (MM) will be designated. The MM will be a qualified physician that is not 
a study investigator. The MM has the responsibility to review and evaluate information relevant to the study 
device safety throughout the development and implementation of the protocol. This oversight includes reviewing 
safety information and providing applicable recommendations to the sponsor. More specifically, the MM will:  
• Evaluate all SAEs and review safety reports. SAEs will be evaluated immediately upon report of 
occurrence.  
• Evaluate all UADEs at the time of occurrence.  
• Advise the Sponsor (IDE holder)  
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects  (UADE)  
Federal law requires that the FDA be notified immediately of all Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects (UADE).   
Investigational device exemption (IDE) regulations define an UADE as “any serious adverse effect on health or 
safety or any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, or 
death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational plan or 
application (including a supplementary plan or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated 
with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects” (21 CFR 812.3(s).”  
 
The UADE review and notification process will be as follows:  
 
(i) The study site will submit an Adverse Event (AE) report, indicating that the AE is serious  and 
related or possibly related  to the study device.  Study sites must  report all SAEs (including 
UADEs) to the Sponsor within 24 hours of discovery.  If additional supporting information 
regarding the SAE is requested after the initial 24 -hour report, the information will be promptly 
sent to the Sponsor, when available, via email.  
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 26 of 32 
 (ii) The Sponsor will immediately conduct an evaluation and prepare a UADE report.  The Sponsor 
will consult with the Medical Monitor (MM) as part of the UADE evaluation process, and the 
MM will review the UADE report and applicable information for clarity and completeness. The 
sponsor and MM may contact the site, as needed, for additional information and clarification.  
(iii) The Sponsor will report the results of the UADE evaluation to FDA, all reviewing IRBs, and 
participating investigators within 10 working days after the Sponsor first receives notice of the 
UADE (§§ 812.46(b), 812.150(b)(1).  
NOTE:   Not all SAEs may bear a relation to the study device or procedure, and it is partly the responsibility of the 
MM to confirm that any claims of connectivity are reasonable and that all serious events are properly reported, 
regardless of causation.  
In summary, the MM will collaborate wi th the Sponsor on safety oversight  to meet human subjects’ safety 
standards as defined by applicable Federal regulations, International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) Good 
Clinical Practice Guidelines (GCP).  
Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
An independent DSMB  is established and h as responsibility  for safeguarding the interests of study 
participants, assessing the safety and efficacy of study procedures, and for monitoring the overall 
conduct of the study.  The DSMB is an independent group advisory to the Sponsor, and is required to 
provide recommendations about starting, continuing, and stopping the study. In addition, the DSMB is 
asked to make recommendations, as appropriate, to the Sponsor about:  
• Efficacy of the study intervention  
• Benefit/risk ratio of procedures and participant burden  
• Selection, recruitment, and retention of participants  
• Adherence to protocol requirements  
• Completeness, quality, and analysis of measurements  
• Amendments to the study protocol and consent forms  
• Performance of individual centers and core labs  
• Participant safety, and  
• Notification of and referral for abnormal findings  
Details of DSMB operations  are defined in the DSMB Charter document.  
21.0 CLINICAL EVENTS   
Adverse Event (AE)  is defined as any undesirable sign, symptom or medical or psychological condition  
even if the event is not considered to be related or possibly related to the study device or study  
procedure/intervention.  Medical condition/diseases present before starting the study will be considered  
adverse events only if they worsen after starting study treatment. An adverse event is also any undesirable and 
unintended effect of research occurring in human subjects as a result of the collection of identifiable private 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 27 of 32 
 information under the research. Adverse events also include any problems associated with the use of a study 
device that adversely affects the rights, safety or welfare of subjects.  
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  is defined as any undesirable sign, symptom, or medical condition which  
is fatal, is life -threatening, requires or prolongs in -patient hospitalization, results in persistent or significant 
disability/incapacity, constitutes a congenital anomaly or birth defect, is medically significant and which the 
investigator regards as serious based on appropriate medical judgment. An important medical event is any AE that 
may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require hospitalization but may be considered an SAE when, based 
upon appropriate medical judgment, it may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the definitions of SAEs.  
 
Unanticipated Adverse Event (UAE)  is defined as any event or experience that meets all three criteria  below:  
• Is unexpected in terms of nature, severity or frequency, given the research procedures that are described 
in the protocol -related documents AND in the characteristics of the subject population being studied  
• Related or possibly related to participation in research. This means that there is a reasonable possibility 
that the incident may have been caused by the procedures involved in the research study.  
• The incident suggests that the research placed the patient or others at greater risk of harm than was 
previously known or recognized OR results in actual harm to the patient or others  
 
The occurrence of AEs, including S AEs and UAEs, will be monitored throughout the study duration.  Adverse 
event information will be collected and reported on designated AE forms, assessed and classified by the principal 
investigator as serious/not serious. The investigator will also determine the relatedness of the AE to the study 
device and study procedure according to the following definitions:  
 
o Related (AE is clearly related to the device/procedure);  
o Possibly related (AE may be related to the device/procedure);  
o Unrelated (AE is clearly not related to the device/procedure).  
 
Procedure -related AEs are AEs that occur during the time interval from when the subject  enters and leaves the 
surgical treatment suite for the index procedure (e.g., AV G implant procedure).  Thus, the procedure includes use 
of the study device, as well as any treatments or procedures that are applied before or after the study device (eg, 
anesthesia, suturing of incision sites after AVG is completed), while the subject  is in the surgical suite.  
Device -related AEs are AEs related or possibly related to the study device  or to the study device procedure which 
includes delivery, deployment, and attachment of the study device  to the AV G.  
Device -related events that occur during the study procedure are also procedure -related events.  
 
Procedure -related events may not necessarily be related to the study device; for example, a procedure event such 
as an anesthesia reaction would not be related to the study device.    
 
Device -related events may also occur after the study procedure, for example, fracture of metal strut in the VIG. 
 
For situations in which a study subject  has a serious adverse event (SAE) that results in abandonment of the study 
AV access site, the subject  should be followed to the next follow -up visit after the study AVG  is abandoned. This 
is done in order to collect general information about the subject ’s health status after the AVG  is abandoned.   
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 28 of 32 
 After that visit, the  subject can then be formally withdrawn from the study.    This means that the date that AVG  
patency is lost and the date of study withdrawal are not necessarily the same date.  
 
Reporting and Review of  Serious  Adverse Events.  SAEs must  be reported to the Sponsor within 24 hours of 
discovery , and to national and local regulatory authorities, in accordance with national and local policies and 
procedures.  In addition, all unanticipated adverse device effects  (UADE)  will be evaluated at the time of 
discovery  and reported to the Sponsor within 24 hours.   SAEs are reported by email or telephone call, using a 
designated SAE reporting form provided by the Sponsor.  
 
A final determination as to whether an SAE meets the requirements for expedited reporting to the FDA and 
participating IRBs will be made by the study medical monitor and/or Sponsor.  
 
Reporting Deaths.  
Data regarding a subject  death should be recorded on the AE/SAE eCRF as follows:  
If the outcome of an AE is reported as FATAL, then the STOP DATE of the AE should be date of the death.  The 
AE with the fatal outcome will generally be the ‘cause of death’ as stated in source documents. The AE causing 
the death should be recorded on the eCRF either by selecting from the checklist of specified AEs OR by selecting 
"Other" and then specifying the AE causing the death.  
 
If a death is discovered during follow -up and there is no information available regarding the AE(s) leading to the 
death outcome, please complete the AE/SAE eCRF, and mark as “other” for AE type.  Record ‘fatal’ for the 
outcome. The START DATE and STOP DATE recorded should be the same date, eg the date of death.  In the 
“Event Summary” section, provide the date of death.  Complete as much information as possible on this eCRF.   
 
For all deaths, a copy of source document information (e.g., death record, hospital admiss ion and discharge 
summary, etc) should be provided, if available.  Deaths should be reported to the Sponsor within 24 hours of 
discovery, along with any available source documents describing the death, as available. Additional Source 
document information regarding the death, as may be requested by the study Clinical Events Committee  or 
DSMB , should be provided as soon as it becomes available.  
 
Clinical Events Committee  
A Clinical Events Committee (CEC) will provide medical review of SAEs, UAEs, and any deaths that may occur 
throughout the study.  The CEC will be comprised of the Medical Monitor,  and the Sponsor’s Chief Science  
Officer,  Chief Technology Officer and  Director of Clinical Affairs.  Details of CEC operations  are defined in a 
CEC Charter document.  
 
The principal investigator/institution will permit study -related monitoring, audits of IRB/Ethics committee 
reviews, and regulatory inspections by providing direct access to source data and documents. On -site data 
monitoring will be performed by Sponsor’s study monito rs.  Any data discrepancies will be resolved and 
documented by  a standardized data query process.  
 
 
 
 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 29 of 32 
 22.0 PROTOCOL VIOLATIONS  
 
Protocol Violation  is defined as any change, deviation, or departure from the study design or procedures of the 
research project that is not approved by the IRB and study sponsor prior to its initiation or implementation, OR 
deviation from standard operating procedures, Good Clinical Practices (GCPs), national or local regulations. 
Protocol violations may or may not be under the control of the research team or hospital staff.  
 
Major Protocol Violations  
All major protocol violations must be reported to the IRB, as applicable and in accordance with local IRB policy, 
AND to the study sponsor, immediately upon discovering them, and no later than seven (7) calendar days from 
the time the study team receives knowledge of the event . 
 
A major violation is a protocol violation that meets the following criteria:  
• Represent a serious or continuing failure on the part of the study team to comply with the protocol, 
standard operating procedures, GCPs, federal, state or local regulations;  
• Impacts subject  safety or substantially alter risks to subject s. May or may not result in actual harm 
(clinical, emotional, social, financial, etc);  
• Significantly damages the completeness, accuracy and reliability of the data collected for the study;  
• Is under control of the investigator/research team/hospital staff . 
 
Any evident patterns of noncompliance with the protocol requirements  will be cause for the site to be put on 
probation for a period of 1 month. If corrective  actions are not made, the site will be asked to withdraw from the 
study.  
 
A log of all protocol deviations should be maintained in the study regulatory binder.  
 
23.0 REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITIES AND CONSIDERATIONS  
 
The responsibili ties described in this section are required by Federal law and regulation (21 CFR 812, 
Investigation Device Exemptions; 21CFR 50, Protection of Human Subjects; 21 CFR 56, Institutional Review 
Boards).  
 
Investigator R esponsibilities  
The study site investigator  is responsible for ensuring that the study is conducted according to all signed 
agreements, the study protocol, and applicable FDA regulations.  These responsibilities are listed below.  In 
addition, each investigator must complete and sign the Investigator’s Letter of Agreement provided by the 
Sponsor.  
• IRB approval. The investigator must submit the study protocol to his/her IRB and obtain their written 
approval before being allowed to participate in the study. The investigator is also responsible for fulfilling 
any conditions of approval imposed by the IRB.  
• Informed consent. Part of the IRB approval will include approval of Informed Consent text specific to the 
study.  The investigator must administer the approved informed consent text to each prospective study 
subject , and obtain the subject ’s signature on the text, prior to study enrollment.  A sample Informed 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 30 of 32 
 Consent form  is incl uded in  Appendix D . This may be modified to suit the requirements of the individual 
site. 
• Study coordinator.  To assure proper execution of the protocol, site investigators must identify a study 
coordinator for the site. Working under the authority of the investigator, the coordinator will assure that 
study requirements are fulfilled, and will be the key contact person  at the site for all aspects of study 
administration.  
• Records.  Site investigators must maintain accurate, complete, and current records relating to the conduct 
of the study.  Such records include: key study related correspondence (e.g., correspondence with IRB, 
DCC, sponsor, study monitors); study device accountability records; subject  case history information 
(CRFs, consent form, AE records).  
• The study site principal investigator has overall responsibility for supervision of the use of the  study  
device. The study investigator shall permit the device to be used only with subjects under his/her 
supervision.   
• Reporting requirements. The investigator is responsible for reporting any unanticipated adverse device 
effects, SAEs, protocol violations, withdrawal of IRB approval, and other required reports (progress 
report and final report) a ccording to the FDA guidelines and ICH GCP guidelines.  
Sponsor Responsibilities  
Phraxis, Inc. is the manufacturer of the VIG study device , the Sponsor of the study, and the IDE holder.  The 
Sponsor’s responsibilities include:  
• Ensure that the study is conducted according to the signed study s ite clinical agreement, investigational 
plan and protocol, ICH GCP guidelines, and all applicable regulatory regulations.  
• Provide study devices to participating study sites  
• Provide study device training to investigators and study site staff  
• Select the Principal investigator, site investigators, study sites and other study consultants (e.g. DCC) who 
participate in the study  
• Provide financial support to study sites and consultants per individual Agreements  
• Establish regulatory standards per federal regulations for clinical study sites and other study participants, 
and perform regular site monitoring to assure compliance with them.  
• Perform site monitoring of clinical data at study sites  
 
The Sponsor ( Phraxis ) retains ownership of all clinical data generated in the study and controls the use of the data 
for purposes of regulatory submission to the US and other governments.  
 
Supply of Study Devices  
VIG devices will be provided to each study site per the terms of a Study Agreement betwee n Phraxis, Inc. and the 
site. At  the cessation of the study, all unused study devices will be dispositioned per the agreements between the 
site and Phraxis, Inc.  
 
Record Retention P olicy  
Study documents should be retained for at least two years after the last approval of a marketing application, and 
until there are no pending or contemplated marketing applications; OR at least two years have elapsed since the 
formal discontinuation of clinical development of the investigational product.  The Sponsor will inform in writing 
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 31 of 32 
 when study documents are no longer needed.  Study sites should not destroy any study records without first 
confirming with the sponsor.  
  
24.0 MEASURES TO AVOID BIAS  
 
Measures that will be used to avoid bias include:  
• Use of independent medical monitor and DSMB  
• Use of independent statistician  
• Objective criteria for endpoint determination  
•  Intention -to-treat primary analysis  
 
25.0 PUBLICATION POLICY  
 
The publication of results from any single center experience within the study is strongly discouraged until one 
year following the study’s termination, in order to allow for preparation and publication of the multicenter results.  
 
26.0 REFERENCES  
 
1. U.S. Renal Data System. USRDS 20 11 Annual Data Report: Volume 2. Atlas of End Stage Renal Disease 
in the United States. Bethesda, MD, National Institutes of Health, National Institutes of Diabetes, and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases; 20 11 
 
2. www.fistulafirst.org/AboutAVFistulaFirst  
 
3. Dember LM, Beck GJ, Allon M, et al. Effect of Clo pidogrel on early failure of ar teriovenous fistulas for 
hemodialysis: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2008; 299:2164 -2171  
 
4. Akoh JA. Prosthetic arteriovenous grafts for hemodialysis. J Vasc Access  2009;  10:137 -147  
 
5. Roy-Chaudhury P, Kelly BS, Zhang, et al. Hemodialysis vascular access dysfunction: From 
pathophysiology to novel therapies. Blood Purif 2003; 21:91 -110 
 
6. Lee T, Roy -Chaudhury P. Advances and new frontiers in the pathophysiology of venous neointimal 
hyperplasia and dialysis access stenosis. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis  2009; 16:329 -338 
 
7. Lok CE, Allon M, Moist L, et al. Risk equation determining unsuccessful cannulation events and failure 
to maturation in arteriovenous fistulas (REDUCE FTM 1). J Am Soc Nephrol  2006; 17:3204 -3212  
 
8. Lee HW, Allon M. When should a subject  receive an arteriovenous graft rather than a fistula? Semin Dial  
2013; 26:6 -10 
 
9. Shingarev R, Maya ID, Barker -Finkel J, Allon M. Arteriovenous graft placement in predialysis subject s: 
A potential catheter sparing strategy. J Kidney Dis  2011; 58:243 -247 
 
10. Glickman MH, Stokes GK, Ross JR, et al. Multicenter evaluation of a polyurethaneurea vascular access 
graft as compared with the expanded polytetrafluoroethylene vascular access graft in hemodialysi s 
applications. J Vasc Surg 200; 34:465 -473  
Investigational Plan / Rev 8  CONFIDENTIAL  Phraxis, Inc.  
  Page 32 of 32 
  
11. Hudson P. Early cannulation of vascular access sites for dialysis. Dialysis and Transp l 1996;  8:523 -526  
 
12. Roy-Chaudhury P, Sukhatme VP, Cheung AK. Hemodialysis vascular access dysfunction: A cellular and 
molecular viewpoint. J Am Soc Nephrol  2006;  17:1112 -1127  
 
13. NKF -KDOQI Clinical Practice Guidelines for Vascular Access: Update 2000. Part VI. Potential Quality 
of Care Standards, Guideline 30: Goals of Access Placement - Use of Catheters for Chronic Dialysis  
 
14. Dixon BS, Beck GJ, Va squez MA et al. Effect of dipyridamole plus aspirin on hemodialysis graft 
patency. NEJM  2009;  360:2191 -2201  
 
15. Miller PE, Carlton D, Deierhoi MH et al.  Natural history of arteriovenous grafts in hemodialysis 
subject s. Am J Kidney Dis  2000; 36: 68 -74 
 
16. Cinat ME, Hopkins J, SE Wilson. A prospective evaluation of PTFE graft patency and surveillance 
techniques in hemodialysis access. Ann Vasc Surg  1999;  13:191 -198 
 
17. Hurlbert SN, Mattos MA, Henretta JP et al. Long -term patency rates, complications and cost effectiveness 
of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)  grafts for hemodialysis access: a prospective study that compares 
Impra versus Gore -tex grafts. Cardiovas Surg  1998; 6: 652-656 
 
18. Bartlett ST, Schweitzer EJ, Roberts JE et al.  Early experience with a new ePTFE vascular prosthesis for 
hemodialysis. Am J Surg  1995;  170:118 -122 
 
19. Hodges TC, Fillinger MF, Zwollak RM et al. Longitudinal analysis of dialysis access methods. J Vasc 
Surg  1997; 26: 1009 -1019.  
 
20. Evaluation of the GORE® ACUSEAL Vascular Graft for Hemodialysis Access . ClinicalTrials.gov 
identif ier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Results provided at: http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]    
 
21. Data on file with Phraxis, Inc.  
 
22. Yevzlin AS, Setum CM, Kallok MJ, Valliant A. Percutaneous AVG creation in a canine model. 
Presented at the 2013 American Society of Diagnostic and Interventional Nephrology 9th Annual 
Scientific Meeting.  
 
23. Ebner, A, Ross JR, Setum CM, Kallok, MJ, Yevzlin AS. Transcatheter Anastomosis Connector  System 
for Vascular Access Graft Placement: Results from a First -in-Human Pilot Study. J Vasc Access  2016; 
17:111 -117. 
 
24. Peto R , Pike MC, Armitage P et al. Design and Analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials Requiring 
Prolonged Observation of each Patient.  British J of Cancer  1977; 35:1 -39 
 
25. Cui, L, Hung, HM, and Wang, SJ.  Modification of Sample Size in Group Sequential Clinical Trials.  
Biometrics  1999; 55: 853 -857 
 