COVER PAGE  
 
 
Study Title:  Addressing Health Disparities in Childhood Obesity, One Summer at a Time  
Clinical Trials R egistration  Number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date of document: April 15, 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol  
 
Background  
Childhood obesity is one of the most urgent health challenges of our time. Obesity rates of Native American and Hispanic child ren 
are far higher than national averages, placing these children at high risk for early mortality, cardiovascular and metabolic conditions 
including diabetes, depression and overall poor quality of life.1-3 By the 5th grade, approximately 50% of Hispanic and Native children 
are already overweight, and Native children have type 2 diabetes rates 9 times higher than non -Hispanic Whites.4 In our area, 
obesity rates are highly concentrated: most obese and overweight children are enrolled in 4 of the 10 elementary schools, whi ch 
include primarily underserved Hispanic and Native American children.  
 
Recent research has further demonstrated th at the ‘obesity gap’ facing minority students is largely due to summer weight gain.5-9 
Based on local data, it was confirmed that children in our school district were  much more likely to worsen their weight -related health 
status during the summer than duri ng the schoolyear. However, statewide, only 22% of children participate in summer activities, 
despite 65% of parents expressing interest.10 Finally, ages 7 to 11 have been found in national data to see a sharp increase in 
obesity rates.11 Indeed, locally  in 2015, approximately 20% of 7 year -olds are overweight or obese, but 35% of 11-year olds . Thus, 
we know which populations are at highest risk, at what developmental age changes occur most rapidly (ages 7 -11) and that 
interventions are most needed  in the summer, but that this need is not being met.  
 
A modest amount of research has evaluated summer programming, but almost none among Native Americans/Hispanics. In the 
early 2000s , the CDC developed a ‘Summer Scorecard’ intervention,12 a partnership with local businesses to provide children with a 
‘scorecard’ of subsidized or free local activities. The VSS has not been tested among Hispanic and Native American children. 
Therefore, this study assess ed the effectiveness of the VSS among children ages 5-13 in the 4 highest risk schools in the Flagstaff 
area. Outcomes include d body composition (BMI)  percentile score, reported physical activity  and self -efficacy using survey 
instruments previously developed and tested by the CDC.  
 
VERB Summer Scorecard  Program Description: In 2001, the CDC launched VERB It’s What You Do!, a 5 -year year national 
social marketing campaign to increase awareness, improve attitudes, and increase physical activity among 9 -13 year olds (“tweens”). 
The campaign was deve loped after extensive formative research, grounded in a logic model that shows a pathway to chronic disease 
reduction,45 and tested in 3 follow -ups using a nationally representative sample .13-16 The campaign was coordinated with local 
vendors who provided opportunities to be active. In 2004, the VERB Summer Scorecard (VSS) intervention was developed in 2004. 
The VSS consists of a ‘scorecard’ including 24 squares, each representing an activity of at least one hour (see Appendix A fo r our 
local version). In c ollaboration with community partners, children were provided with free or discounted opportunities for a variety of 
activities. When children attend either an activity at a participating facility or supervised activity at home for a minimum of 60 minutes, 
they receive d either a stamp from the community partner or a parent’s signature on one of the squares.  
 
 
Activities:  
Each participating child was provided with a scorecard including 24 activities  (see Appendix A) . Children received 12 free passes to 
utilize local facilities including a local aquatic center, a thletic club  (including gym, indoor/outdoor swimming pool, basketball  and 
racquetball courts etc.), climbing gym, ice skating rink and activity center (including bouncy houses, lase r tag etc.) and classes 
offered by a local health program. Other activities could be done on their own and included hiking local trials, going to par ks and 
could be signed off by a parent. Children were instructed to return the card at the end of the summe r and receive an incentive prize 
for returning the card.  
 
Measures:  
Demographic variables . Child’s age (in years), sex (male or female), ethnicity (American Indian/Alaskan Native, Hispanic, White, 
Black/African American, Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander or  Two or more), grade level and school membership were collected by the 
school district. Height and weight were collected at each school during the school day by a community outreach coordinator tr ained 
in research quality measurements, supported by the sch ool nurse and volunteers. Children were asked to take shoes and jackets off 
and items out of their pockets. Height to the nearest quarter inch was measured twice with a Charder HM200P Portstad Portable  
Stadiometer. Weight was measured to the nearest 0.1 po unds with a Health O Meter 752KL Heavy Duty Remote Display Digital 
Scale. Children’s first weight status was considered their baseline, with ≤5th BMI percentile for their age and sex considere d 
underweight, 5th to 85th percentile healthy weight, ≥85th percentile overweight and ≥95th percentile as having obesity  
 
Behavioral constructs. Health behavior constructs (13 questions) aligned with Social Cognitive Theory w ere assessed. Key 
constructs include self -efficacy (“I think I can be physically active even if  it is hot or cold outside.”), social norms (example: “My 
friends think that doing physical activity is fun”), and access or barriers to participation in physical activity and summer programs 
(“There are lots of places near where I live where I can do phys ical activities”).  
 
Reported activity and sedentary behaviors. A total of 8 questions ask about participation in the VERB program, types of activity in 
the past 7 days and participation in other summer programs. The  number of activities reported were coun ted and compared before 
and after the intervention.   
 
Recruitment:  
Children were recruited directly at each schoo l by research staff in collaboration with school physical education or health and 
wellness instructors. Recruitment occurred by providing flyers and tables at school events and drop -off/pick up. Parents were 
provided with a consent form and children with an assent form  explaining the risks and benefits . English and Spanish versions were 
available. Upon completion of both  forms, par ticipants were measured and surveyed (see measurements below).   
 
Sample Size calculations: The estimated sample size needed to have sufficient power to detect a moderate effect size (using a 
Cohen’s d of 0.3 as the reference) is 240  children, or 120 per arm. Based on our preliminary data, for each acad emic year, the 
average BMI change ranges from 0.35 to 0.55 units, with a standard deviation that varies across ethnic groups and years from 0.80 
to 1.0 0. An example of an effect between  two groups or time points that would match a Cohen’s d of 0. 3 would be one group  in which 
the children on average increases their BMI by 0.5 units, and another group where participants increase their BMI by 0. 2 units  (0.3 
unit difference), with standard d eviations of 1.0. These effects (BMI difference of 0.3kgm2) are just above the mean weighted effect 
size reported in the most comprehensive and recent meta -analysis on childhood obesity studies of 0.30kg/m.9,10 With a two -tailed 
test and alpha level o f 0.05, a sample size of 80  children per arm (a retention rate of 67%) would result in an associated statistical 
power≥ 80% to detect intervention effects between arms from one time point to the next. W ith very similar parameters and sample 
sizes, prior researc h has indicated that based on simulation studies,17 these parameters d emonstrated excellent power (≥80 %) in 
detecting the se size differences . 
 
Institutional Review Board:  
All protocol activities were approved by the Institutional Review Board of Northern Arizona University  (protocol # 1193689)  and the 
Flagstaff Unified School District. Parental consent forms and children assent were attained for each participant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References:  
1. Pan L, McGuire LC, Blanck HM, May -Murriel  AL, Grummer -Strawn LM. Racial/Ethnic Differences in Obesity Trends Among 
Young Low -Income Children. Am J Prev Med. 2015;48(5):570 -574.  
2. Rossen LM, Schoendorf KC. Measuring health disparities: trends in racial− ethnic and socioeconomic disparities in obesi ty 
among 2 -to 18 -year old youth in the United States, 2001 –2010. Ann Epidemiol . 2012; 22(10):698 -704.  
3. Caballero B, Clay T, Davis SM, Ethelbah B, Holy Rock B, Lohman T, Norman J, Story M, Stone EJ, Stephenson L, Stevens J. 
Pathways: a school -based, randomi zed controlled trial for the prevention of obesity in American Indian schoolchildren. Am J Clin 
Nutr. 2003;78(5):1030 -1038.  
4. US Department of Health and Human Services. Diabetes in American Indians and Alaskan Natives Facts at a Glance, 2012. 
Available at:  https://www.ihs.gov/MedicalPrograms/Diabetes/HomeDocs/Resources/FactSheets/Fact_sheet_AIAN_508c.pdf  
5. von Hippel PT, Powell B, Downey DB, Rowland NJ. The effect of school on overweight in childhood: gain in body mass index 
during the school year and during  summer vacation. Am J Public Health. 2007; 97, 696–702.  
6. Baranowski T, O’Connor T, Johnston C, Hughes S, Moreno J, Chen TA, et al. School year versus summer differences in child 
weight gain: a narrative review. Child Obes . 2014;10(1):18 -24.  
7. Franckle R, Adl er R, Davison K. Accelerated weight gain among children during summer versus school year and related 
racial/ethnic disparities: a systematic review. Prev Chronic Dis. 2014;11:E101.  
8. Mahoney JL. Adolescent summer care arrangement and risk for obesity the fo llowing school  year. J Adolesc. 2011; 34(4), 737-49.  
9. Beets MW. Does Summertime Weight Gain Undermine Youth Obesity Prevention Efforts? Active Living Research (ALR) 
Research Brief. May 2015. Available at: http://activelivingresearch.org/does -summertime -weight -gain-undermine -youth -obesity -
prevention -efforts   
10. Afterschool Alliance. America After  3pm. Special Report on Summer: Missed Opportunities, Unmet Demand. DC: 2010.  
11. Cunningham SA, Kramer MR, Narayan KV. Incidence of childhood obesity in the United States. NEJM. 2014;370(5):403 -411. 
12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. VERB it’s what y ou do! Accessed January 21st 2018: 
https://www.cdc.gov/youthcampaign/index.htm   
13. Price SM, Huhman M, Potter, LD. Influencing the parents of children aged 9 –13 years: Findings from the VERB™ campai gn. Am 
J Prev Med. 2008;34(6S): S267 -S274.  
14. Debate RD, Baldwin JA, Thompson Z, Nickelson J, Alfonso ML, Bryant CA, et al. VERB Summer scorecard: Findings from a 
multi -level community -based physical activity intervention for tweens. Am J Community Psych . 2009;44(3): 363 -373.  
15. Alfonso ML, McDermott RJ, Thompson Z et al. Vigorous Physical Activity Among Tweens, VERB Summer Scorecard Program, 
Lexington, Kentucky, 2004 -2007. Prev Chron Dis. 2011 Sep; 8(5): A104.  
16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  Designing a successful VERB Scorecard campaign in your community. 
https://cdc.thehcn.net/promisepractice/index/view?pid=401  
17. Robinson TR, Matheson D, Desai M, Wilson DM, Weintraub DL , Haskell WL, McClain A, McClure S, Banda JA, Sanders LM, 
Haydel KF, Killen JD. Family, community and clinic collaboration to treat overweight and obese children: Stanford GOALS —A 
randomized controlled trial of a three -year, multi -component, multi -level, m ulti-setting intervention. Contemporary Clinical Trials.  
2013; 36:421 –435. 
Appendix A: Scorecard  
 
   