04/18 /2016   V.4 Pulmonary Clearance Devices in ALS  Utilization of Pulmonary Clearance Devices in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis  
Background:  
ALS:  
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive degenerative neuromuscular disease with no known 
cause or cure. ALS causes weakness in many muscles in the body, including the muscles involved in 
respiration and swallowing. Weakness in these muscles ca n cause respiratory problems, making 
breathing more difficult. Respiratory problems are among the most serious symptoms of ALS and should 
not be ignored. Shortness of breath may be the first respiratory symptom that  some patients 
experience. Patients may n otice shortness of breath when engaged in vigorous physical activities like 
running, exercising, walking long distances, or climbing stairs. They may also have difficulty breathing at 
night which can interfere with sleep and cause fatigue or morning headac hes. Patients often find 
themselves  waking frequently throughout the night. Difficulty breathing at night occurs when the chest 
muscles relax too much to assist with breathing during the dreaming phase of sleep.  
Problems with swallowing can also interfere with breathing. When the swallowing muscles are 
weakened, food and saliva are more easily inhaled (aspirated) into the windpipe which leads to choking. 
Aspiration of food or saliva can also introduce bacteria into the lungs, increasing the risk of respirat ory 
infection and pneumonia.  
High Frequency Chest Compression Devices (HFCC):  
Disease conditions, such as cystic fibrosis (CF), chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis, and immotile cilia 
syndrome, can lead to abnormal airway clearance which is a source of inc reased sputum production, 
often purulent or tenacious.   The underlying pathology of the decline in mucociliary clearance varies 
with the given disease.   Chest physical therapy (CPT), which is also referred to as percussion and 
postural drainage (P/PD), is the standard treatment program that attempts to compensate for abnormal 
airway clearance.  By improving the clearance of lung secretions, which may often be tenacious, 
complications of infection, atelectasis, and hyperinflation are reduced, and the decline  in respiratory 
function is slowed in these types of diseases.   Depending on the severity of the disease and any 
presence of infection, CPT sessions can be from 1 -3 times per day for 20 -30 minutes.   A physical 
therapist or another trained adult in the home , typically a parent if the affected individual is a child, may 
administer CPT.  The need for regular therapy can be particularly burdensome for adolescents or adults 
who wish to lead independent lifestyles.   CPT is time consuming and requires the assistan ce of a skilled 
caregiver.  
Different types of airway clearance techniques and devices have been developed in an attempt to 
address the problem of convenience and compliance with CPT.  Airway clearance techniques or systems 
have been most often associated a nd studied in the treatment of CF.  Of these techniques, daily P/PD 
and HFCC devices, such as the Vest™ Airway Clearance System  and Incourage Airway Clearance System , 
04/18 /2016   V.4 Pulmonary Clearance Devices in ALS  are passive techniques that do not require the participation of the affected person.   Although there have 
been a range of studies on these alternatives, there remains a lack of scientific evidence to support any 
secretion clearance technique over another.    
HFCC devices have shown improved lung function and sputum clearance in many who are afflicted with 
CF with few adverse effects.  However, the therapy has not been shown to be superior to conventional 
CPT in short -term studies, and its impact on long -term  prognosis is unknown.   In addition, it is not clear 
from the clinical studies which subjects would derive the most benefit from this therapy, or at what time 
during the course of the disease HFCC should be initiated.  Interpretations of the data derived f rom the 
clinical trials of HFCC for CF are complicated by issues in study design, small sample sizes, inadequate 
length of follow -up, heterogeneity of study subjects, and lack of control for confounding variables, such 
as concurrent treatment, disease seve rity, respiratory functions variability, and age.   Moreover, there 
remain questions of the validity and reliability of outcomes measures, such as sputum weight and 
respiratory function indexes for the determination of therapeutic efficacy.  
The FDA cleared the original Vest Airway clearance system in 1998.   The currently approved indications 
are "To promote airway clearance or improve bronchial drainage by enhancing mobilization of bronchial 
secretions where external manipulation of the thorax is the physici an's choice of treatment.  The 
indications typically follow the Clinical Practice Guideline published by the American Association for 
Respiratory Care (AARC) in 1991.  In addition, the device is also indicated for the purpose of collecting 
mucus for diagno stic evaluation."   Several earlier versions included the THAIRapy®Vest System and the 
ABI Vest®Airway Clearance System, amongst others (Advanced Respiratory, Inc. St. Paul, MN). A similar 
device, the Medpulse Respiratory Vest System (Electromed, Inc., Minn etonka, MN) also obtained FDA 
clearance through the 510(k) approval process (1999), and others have also been cleared by the FDA.  In 
2007, a similar device, the FREQUENCER™ (DYMEDSO, Inc., Boisbriand, Quebec Canada) obtained FDA 
clearance as substantially  equivalent to the THAIRapy device.   It produces sound wave stimulation to 
oscillate and loosen mucous secretions in the chest.  
Cough Assist:  
Normal clearance of airways rests on three (3) basic components: a patent airway, mucociliary 
clearance, and an adequate cough. Patients with spinal cord injuries or a variety of neuromuscular 
diseases or chest wall deformities may have impaired cough responses, which may lead to respiratory 
failure during respiratory tract infections due to the inability to clear t he profuse respiratory secretions. 
Chest wall deformities may include kyphosis, scoliosis, or lordosis, while neuromuscular diseases include 
muscular dystrophy, poliomyelitis, spinal muscle atrophy, myasthenia gravis, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, or cere bral palsy. The great majority of neuromuscular disease morbidity and mortality is 
related to respiratory muscle weakness, and the vast majority of episodes of respiratory failure occur 
during otherwise benign episodes of respiratory tract infections. Ches t infections may result in repeated 
episodes of pneumonia, repeated hospitalizations, and finally, in tracheostomy with mechanical 
ventilation.  The normal cough consists of 4 stages: 1) A precough inspiration to about 85% of total lung 
capacity; 2) Followe d by closure of the glottis; 3) Development of thoracoabdominal pressure sufficient 
04/18 /2016   V.4 Pulmonary Clearance Devices in ALS  to generate an explosive decompression of the chest at glottic opening; and 4) Opening of the glottis 
with exsufflation. The peak cough expiratory force typically exceeds 5 L/sec, with total expiratory volume 
of about 2.3L. In general, an impaired ability to cough has been defined as a peak cough expiratory flow 
of less than 2 -3L per second.  A variety of techniques have been developed to enhance each of these 
stages. For exam ple, manually assisted coughing is designed to enhance exsufflation and consists of 
abdominal pressure delivered by a caregiver timed with the glottic opening. Manual assisted coughing 
may be offered to patients with a peak cough expiratory flow of less th an 5L/ sec, but is less effective in 
the presence of scoliosis or obesity or after meals. Glossopharyngeal breathing is a technique to 
increase inspiratory flow and is commonly used in patients with a decreased vital capacity due to 
inspiratory muscle para lysis. This breathing technique involves the use of the tongue and pharyngeal 
muscles to add to an inspiratory effort by projecting (gulping) boluses of air past the glottis.  Mechanical 
insufflation -exsufflation is designed to deliver alternative cycles of  positive and negative pressure. One 
such device, the CoughAssist, is a portable electric device which utilizes a blower and valve to alternately 
apply a positive and then a negative pressure to a patient’s airway in order to assist the patient in 
clearing  retained broncho pulmonary  secretions. Air is delivered to and from the patient via a breathing  
circuit incorporating a flexible tube, a bacterial filter and either a facemask, a mouthpiece or an adapter 
to a tracheostomy or endotracheal tube. Physicians,  respiratory therapists, nurses, and trained family 
members may administer this therapy. Mechanical insufflation (MI -E) has been used in a variety of 
patient populations as an adjunct to noninvasive  ventilation using intermittent  positive pulmonary 
ventila tion (IPPV) delivered nasally or orally. For example, many patients with neuromuscular disease or 
chest wall deformities with progressive ventilator failure will use noninvasive IPPV either nocturnally or 
throughout the day, depending on such parameters as  vital capacity and oxygenation levels. Patients 
managed at home with noninvasive IPPV may monitor oxygen desaturation levels. A sudden decrease in 
oxygen desaturation may prompt the use of MI -E to eliminate the presumed offending mucus plug. 
Advocates of MI-E state that even patients requiring 24 hour IPPV can be managed noninvasively for 
prolonged periods of time without hospitalization using this technique. In patients with tracheostomies, 
MI-E has been used as an alternative or complement to suctioning.  In addition, it is suggested that MI -E 
is more comfortable to the patient than suctioning. MI -E may either be offered on a temporary basis in 
patients with noninvasive IPPV who are suffering from a respiratory tract illness, or may be used on a 
more chron ic basis in an attempt to avoid the option of invasive tracheostomy and suctioning . 
 
Objectives:  
Primary Aim  
The primary objective of this pilot study is to d etermine the  potential clinical effect of airway clearance 
devices  in patients with ALS  over a per iod of 180 days (25.7  weeks ). 
Secondary Aim  
04/18 /2016   V.4 Pulmonary Clearance Devices in ALS  The secondary aim is to d etermine  the potential effectiveness of HFCC as a stand -alone airway clearance 
therapy as compared to HFCC in conjunction with a Cough Assist Device  over a period of 180 days (25.7 
weeks) .   
Study Design:  
This 180 day (25.7 weeks) pilot study is designed to evaluate the effectiveness of airway clearance 
devices in adults with ALS. Subje cts will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to one of two treatment groups: 
treatment with an HCFF device  alone or treatment with both an HFCC device and a cough assist device.  
This outpatient study includes a screening/baseline visit followed by a 180 day (25.7 weeks) treatment 
period with three scheduled clinic visits ( day 30 , day 90 , day 180 ). Pulmonary a ssessments and ALS 
outcome measures will be collected at each visit in addition to quality of life assessments and device 
usage  diaries . 
Informed consent will be obtained from all subjects prior to any study procedures, including screening 
and baseline ass essments. Institutional standard of care for ALS will be maintained for each subject.  
 Study Population :   
Inclusion criteria   
1. Suspected, possible, p robable, Probable (Lab -Supported), or Definite ALS according to El Escorial 
Criteria   
2. Males and females age  18 and above   
3. Novel to airway clearance device use  
4. Forced vital capacity ≤ 75% of predicted  
 
Exclusion criteria   
1. Any contraindication for pulmonary ventilation  or perfusion  scan including allergy to 
radioisotopes   
2. Any contraindication for use of a pulmona ry clearance device   
a. Susceptibility to pneumothorax   
b. Recent (within 30 days) barotrauma   
c. Unstable head or neck injury   
d. Active hemorrhage with hemodynamic instability  
Sample size  
20 male and female subjects aged 18 and older will be randomized into one of two treatment groups in 
a 1:1 randomization ratio (10 subjects per group).  
Intervention   
04/18 /2016   V.4 Pulmonary Clearance Devices in ALS  After completing the screening and baseline assessments subjects will be randomized.  
Treatment group A –Subjects randomized to group A will be fitted for and issued a HFCC device for 
home use. Subjects will be instructed to use the HFCC device 2 -3 times per day for 15 -30 minutes each. 
Subjects will be in structed to keep a device usage, con comitant medication, and adverse event diary.  
Treatment group B  – Subjects randomized to group B will be fitted for and issued a HFCC device and will 
also be issued a cough assist device. Subjects will be instructed in the use of both devices.  The HFCC 
device should be utilized 2 -3 times per day for 15 -30 minutes each followed by session s with the cough 
assist  until secretions have been cleared . Subjects will be instructed to keep a device usage, concomitant 
medication, and adverse event diary.  
Outcome Me asures  
Pulmonary Function Testing - Spirometry is the most common of the pulmonary function tests and 
measures lung function, specifically the measurement of the amount (volume) and/or speed (flow) of air 
that can be inhaled and exhaled.  
FVC – Forced Vita l Capacity: the determination of the vital capacity from a maximally forced 
expiratory effort  
 FEV-1 – Volume of air that has been exhaled at the end of the first second of forced expiration  
MIP/MEP – Maximum Inspiratory Pressure/Maximum Expiratory Pressur e: MIP is the pressure 
generated during maximal inspiratory effort against a closed system. MEP is the pressure 
generated during maximal expiratory effort against a closed system  
Diffusion  capacity – measures the transfer of gas from the air in the lung to  the lung blood 
vessels.  
Chest X -Ray – a projection radiograph of the chest used to diagnose conditions affecting the chest  
Lung Ventilation Scan  – a nuclear scanning test commonly used to detect abnormalities in air flow. A 
radioactive tracer gas or mist is inhaled into the lungs. Pictures from the scan indicate areas of the lungs 
that are not receiving enough air or that retain too much air. Areas of the lung that retain too much air 
are brighter spots on the film and areas not receiving enough air are da rk. 
Lung Perfusion Scan — a nuclear scanning test commonly used to detect abnormalities in blood flows. A 
radioactive tracer is injected into a vein. Pictures from the scan indicate areas of the lungs that are not 
receiving enough blood or that retain too m uch blood. Areas of the lung that retain too much blood are 
brighter spots on the film and areas not receiving enough blood are dark.  
McGill Single item quality of life question – Assess the improvement of/ rate of deterioration of the 
subject’s quality of life.  
Follow -up Schedule  
04/18 /2016   V.4 Pulmonary Clearance Devices in ALS  All subjects regardless of treatment group will undergo the following:  
Screening/Baseline  (all procedures to be completed within + 7 days of screening/baseline visit)  
Informed consent  
Physical/Pulmonary Examination  
Medical history review / Demographics  
Vital signs  
Pulmonary Function Testing  
 FVC 
 FEV-1 
 MIP/MEP  
 Diffusion capacity  
Chest X -ray 
Lung Ventilation Scan  
Lung Perfusion Scan  
McGill single item QOL question  
Adverse event review  
Concomitant medication review  
Post use s urvey  
Review usage diary  
Randomization  
 
Equipment Delivery and Instruction visit – After subject has been randomized, the appropriate 
equipment will be ordered and delivered to the patient’s home. Equipment representatives will instruct 
subjects in appropr iate use of the equipment.  
 
Visit 1 (30 days  ±7 days  after baseline - all procedures to be completed within this window ) 
Vital signs  
Pulmonary Function Testing  
 FVC 
 FEV-1 
 MIP/MEP  
 Diffusion capacity  
Chest X -ray 
Lung Ventilation Scan  
Lung Perfusion Scan  
McGill single item QOL question  
Adverse event review  
Concomitant medication review  
Diary usage review  
Post use survey  
04/18 /2016   V.4 Pulmonary Clearance Devices in ALS   
Visit 2 (90 days ±7 days after baseline - all procedures to be completed within this window ) 
Vital signs  
Pulmonary Function Testing  
 FVC 
 FEV-1 
 MIP/MEP  
 Diffusion capacity  
Chest X -ray 
Lung Ventilation Scan  
Lung Perfusion Scan  
McGill single item QOL question  
Adverse event review  
Concomitant medication review  
Diary usage review  
Post use survey  
 
Visit 3 (180 days  ±7 days  after baseline - all procedures to be completed within this window )/Early 
Termination  
Physical/Pulmonary examination  
Vital signs  
Pulmonary Function Testing  
 FVC 
 FEV-1 
 MIP/MEP  
 Diffusion capacity  
Chest X -ray 
Lung Ventilation Scan  
Lung Perfusion Scan  
McGill single item QOL q uestion  
Adverse event review  
Concomitant medication review  
Diary usage review  
Post use survey  
Risks:  
As with any electronic device, there is a rare risk for both t he vest and cough assist of  electrocution, fire, 
personal injury or equipment damage. Howeve r, these risks are minimized when following all 
instructions in the user manual s. 
Data Analysis  
04/18 /2016   V.4 Pulmonary Clearance Devices in ALS  Changes in Pulmonary function testing results , lung ventilation scan results , and lung perfusion scan 
results  will be compared across the two treatment groups for each time point. Changes from baseline 
measurements to the study endpoint will also be analyzed. Descriptive statistics will be utilized for 
analysis of adverse events and quality of life assessments.  
Stopping Rules  
All research activities are completely voluntary. Subjects  may discontinue their participation in the study 
at any time. The Investigator may stop a subject’s participation secondary to safety issues, intolerance of 
the airway clearance devic es, and/or noncompliance with study protocol includ ing airway clearance 
device usage.  
Study Organization:   
Cedars Sinai Medical Center  
127 South San Vicente Blvd.  
LA, CA 90048  
Investigators  
Principle Investigator:  Ashraf Elsayegh MD  
Co-Investigators:  Robert Baloh, MD PhD  
   Richard Lewis, MD  
Abirami Muthukumaran, MD  
   Peggy Allred, PT DPT  
Collaborating Departments  Pulmonary Medicine  
     Nuclear Medicine  
Sponsor :  
RespirTech  
2896 Centre Pointe Drive  
St. Paul, MN 55113 800 -793-1261  
 
 