Version 12.22.21 
 1  
 
A Determination of Efficacy and Therapeutic Benefits of Blood Floor Restriction Training in an Adolescent Population  
IRB# 19-168 
Clinical Trial# NCT 0428 5879   
December 2 2, 2021  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Adam Weaver, PT, DPT      
DEPARTMENT: Sports Physical Therapy  
INSTITUTION: Connecticut Children’s  
PHONE: (860)284 -0246  
EMAIL: aweaver@connecticutchildrens.org  
 
         
CO-INVESTIGATOR: Allison Crepeau, MD  CO-INVESTIGATOR :  Dylan Roman , PT, DPT  
DEPARTMENT: Elite Sports Medicin e DEPARTMENT:  Sports Physical Therapy   
INSTITUTION: Connecticut Children’s  INSTITUTION:  Connecticut Children’s  
PHONE: (860) 837 -9212  PHONE: (860)284 -0246  
Email : acrepeau@connecticutchildrens.org  EMAIL: droman@connecticutchildrens.org  
  
CO-INVESTIGATOR: Art  Fredericks, MS, PT  CO-INVESTIGATOR: Nick Giampetruzzi, MS, PT   
DEPARTMENT:  Sports Physical Therapy  DEPARTMENT: Sports Physical Therapy   
INSTITUTION: Connecticut Children’s  INSTITUTION: Connecticut Children’s   
PHONE: (860)284 -0246  PHONE: (860)284 -0246  
EMA IL: afredericks@connecticutchildrens.org  EMAIL: ngiampetruzzi@connecticutchildrens.org  
  
CO-INVESTIGATOR: Adel Lolic, BS, MS  CO-INVESTIGATOR: Jennifer Prue  
DEPARTMENT: Sports Physical Therapy  DEPARTMENT:  Sports Physical Therapy  
INSTITUTION: Connecticut Children’s  INSTITUTION: Connecticut Children’s   
PHONE: (860)284 -0246  PHONE: (860)284 -0246  
EMAIL:  alolic01@connecticutchildrens.org  EMAIL : jprue@connecticutchildrens.org  
  
 
CO- INVESTIGATOR:  Mike Rieger, CSCS   
DEPARTMENT: Sports Physical Therapy  
INSTITUTION : Connecticut Children’s  
PHONE: (860) 284 -0246  
EMAIL: mrieger@connecticutchildrens.org  
   
STUDY COORDINATOR:  Adam Weaver, PT, DPT  
DEPARTMENT:  Sports Physical Therapy   
INSTITUTION:  Connecticut Children’s   
PHONE: (860)284 -0246  
EMAIL: aweaver@connecticutchildrens.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 12.22.21 
 2  
 
  
 
IS THIS A STUDENT OR TRAINEE PROJECT?       _ x__ NO         ___ YES  
   
                      
IF YES, INDICATE LEVEL:   ___ Medical/Dental Student  
      ___ Resident  
      ___ Fellow  
      ___ Undergraduate  
      ___ Other (specify ________________________)      
 
 
IF YES, HAS FACULTY ADVISOR REVIEWED THE PROTOCOL?      ___ NO       ___ YES  
                 
 
Note:  Student researchers are required to attend the Scientific Review Committee meeting when  
           their protocol is discussed.                                                                                                                                                                               
 
  
Version 12.22.21 
 3  Contents   
Introduction   
Purpose of Research, Specific Aims and Hypotheses  
Background   
Previo us Work or Preliminary Studies  
Methods  
 Target population  
 Inclusion Criteria  
 Exclusion Criteria  
 Identification, recruitment, consent and retention of subjects   
 Screening procedures  
Sample size justification  
Accrual and Expected Duration of Accrual  
Materials and Methods  
 Setting  
 Pre-testing  
 Roles and responsibilities  
Administrative Organization  
Data Collection and Management  
Data Analysis  
Human Subjects Protection and Ethical Conduct of Study  
 Risks and Benefits of Study  
Use of Study Results  
Budget  
Budget Justification  
Appendices    
References Cited   
Version 12.22.21 
 4 Introduction  
 
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury is a very common injury for adolescents and young adults  with over 
200,000 ACL injuries repo rted in the United States each year  [1].  The standard treatment  for this injury 
includes ACL reconstruction surgery and physical therapy.  Rehabilitation of this surgery requires that adequate 
quadriceps rehabilitation is important for full return functio n and activity.  The role of quadriceps strength 
recovery after ACL reconstruction  has been well studied and is associated with return to play times, knee 
kinematics and patient reported outcomes  [2].  Paterno et al . reported that patients with greater fear on Tampa 
Scale of Kinesiophobia (TSK -11) were six times more likely to have a quadriceps LSI of less than 90% 
supporting the role of adequate quadriceps strength in reduction of risk of sustaining a contralateral A CL injury 
or re-injury  [3]. Ithurburn additionally reported that athletes who demonstrated quadriceps strength asymmetry 
at time of return to sport (RTS) were likely to demonstrate lower knee related function  [4].  
 
Background  
Exercise training with blood  flow restriction (BFR) is a technique increasingly used in physical therapy and 
rehabilitation settings as an alternative to heavy load resistance exercise, and has increased in popularity in 
clinical and healthy populations over the last two decades.   E xercise is completed in conjunction with a surgical 
grade pneumatic cuff or tourniquet.  Evidence has suggested that BFR assists with muscle hypertrophy, as well 
lower extremity and upper extremity strength in several populations including athletes, post-operation 
rehabilitation [ 5], and the elderly [ 6]. The clinical value of this technique has been posed to allow increased 
muscle adaptation and hypertrophy under low loads and intensity that could heretofore only be accomplished 
with impact activities  and more intense training protocols.  This is very attractive in a population of early post -
operative patients who are not able to engage in this level of activity.  
 Following ACL reconstruction patients have demonstrated persistent quadriceps strength d eficits during 
and after rehabilitation.  Despite there being special attention paid to restoring quadriceps and hamstring 
strength to pre -operative levels, there is a need for additional intervention. The utilization of BFR in conjunction 
with current reh abilitation standards of care has shown potential  [7]. A meta -analysis completed in 2017 
comparing  BFR training on  musculoskeletal  rehabilitation  versus traditional low load training,  and reported that 
low load BFR training to be more effective in helping patients regain strength than traditional low load strength 
training  [7]. In a 2018 review of BFR during ACL rehabilitation the authors state the use of BFR as a safe 
alternative to heavy loads reducing  the risk of damage to the graft, cartilage, and meniscus  [8]. Current AC SM 
guidelines for resistance training recommend 70% of a single maximum repetition (RM) to elicit strength and 
hypertrophy adaptations  [9].  BFR provides an alternative to heavy load resistance training due to the light loads 
prescribed to help reduce mechanical stress on the post -operative knee.  
 Connecticut Children’s Sports Physical Therapy and Elite Sports Medicine have a long relationship of 
working collectively with the managemen t of patients with ACL tears both surgically and with rehabilitation 
post-surgically.  The current standard of care  for the rehabilitation of ACL injuries  includes several 
interventions and the process can last up to 12 months.   The early phases of rehabil itation include the use of 
therapeutic exercise, manual therapy and modalities to help reduce pain, normalize range of motion and gait.  In 
the later phases, a progressive lower extremity strengthening program is completed, in addition to plyometric 
and ju mp training.   Finally, Standardized strength assessments at 3 months’ post -operative, and return to sport 
test between 6 and 9 months  are used to help physical therapists and surgeons in clinical decision making for 
progression with function al and recreat ional activities.   Since early 2019, BFR training has been implemented 
consistently for post -operative patients at Connecticut Children’s Sports Physical Therapy  that have undergone 
ACL reconstruction, as well as patellar and shoulder stabilization procedures .    
 While there are a number studies that have reported on the use of BFR in the adult population 
[14], there is limited information about the use of BFR in  the adolescent population.  This study aims to 
Version 12.22.21 
 5 evaluate the use of BFR training in conjunction with traditional ACL reconstruction rehabilitation in 
adolescents.   
 
Previous Work  
 
Until recently, previous studies have examined the use of BFR with respect to muscular strength, 
endurance and hypertrophy.  With the rise in popularity of BFR, there has been increased attention to overall 
safety issues of training with BFR. The potential risks to the cardiovascular system that have been considered 
are increased  blood pressure responses, thrombol ytic events and damage to the vascular system [10].Despite 
these concerns, there have been several extensive reviews published demonstrating that the side effects are 
minimal [10, 11, 12], and that training with BFR and w hen compared with traditional methods shows no greater 
risk [13].   Additionally, a  closer look at the literature has demonstrated that the use of BFR has shown 
significant strength adaptations in multiple patient populations:  
 
 A 2017 study showed a 2 -fold improvement in extension and flexion strength with the use of 
BFR in patients after knee arthroscopy [1 5].  
 
 Patients with patellofemoral pain had greater improvements in knee extension strength following 
the use of BFR training [1 4]. 
 
 A 2003 study demonstrated improved quadriceps strength with BFR training in patients after 
ACL reconstruction [1 6].  
 
 
 Greater improvements in thigh  circumference as opposed to a standard group [17]. 
 
Research Question:  
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the addi tion of BFR -based exercise to traditional methods of physical 
therapy .  Does the use of BFR -based exercise improve  strength, hypertrophy, functional and patient reported 
outcomes  after ACL Reconstruction in the adolescent population ?   
Purpose of the Research, Specific Aims and Hypotheses  
 
The purpose of this study is to determine the safety and efficacy regarding the addition of BFR -based exercise 
to traditional methods of physical therapy in the adolescent, post -surgical population.   
 
Primary aims:  
 
1. To determine the relationship between adjunct BFR training during post -surgical rehabilitation and 
isometric and isokinetic  lower extremity strength measures  (HUMAC isokinetic dynamometer) .  
a. We hypothesize that there will be a positive association between  BFR training and isometric 
and isokinetic lower extremity  strength  
2. To determine the impact of adding BFR training during post -surgical rehabilitation on functional 
outcomes.  
a. We hypothesize that BFR training will improve scores on lower extremity function al tests 
when compared to a control group.  
Version 12.22.21 
 6 Secondary aim:  
1. To determine the impact of adding BFR training during post -surgical rehabilitation on patient 
reported outcomes.  
a. We hypothesize that BFR training will show greater patient reported outcome  scores on the 
post-op when compared to a control group.  
2. To determine the impact of adding BFR training during post -surgical rehabilitation on hypertrophy 
and mid -thigh circumference.  
a. We hypothesize that BFR training will demonstrate significant increased  mid-thigh 
circumference over measured time points.   
3. To determine and record patient tolerance and reported side effects and to BFR training during post -
surgical rehabilitation.  
a. We hypothesize that patient tolerance to BFR will be consistent with previousl y published 
literature.  
Study Design  
The planned pilot study is a prospective study to compare the use of exercises augmented with BFR with 
quantitative measurements of strength and patient reported outcomes. A total of 33 youth and adolescent 
patients und ergoing a surgical procedure for ACL reconstruction at Connecticut Children’s Elite Sports 
Medicine and completing physical therapy at Connecticut Children’s Sports Physical Therapy will be recruited 
for this study. Additionally, 14 patients will be recruited that do not participate at Connecticut Children’s Sports 
Physical Therapy and do not receive BFR training as prospective controls.  Should we be unable to obtain 20 
prospective controls, a  review of data from 20 previous patients, matched for age , sex, BMI and surgical 
procedure that completed physical therapy at Connecticut Children’s Sports Physical Therapy will be used as a 
comparison.    
Target Population  
The target population for this study consists of  patients  post ACL Reconstruction  whom have been 
treated  and followed  by Elite Sports Medicine  at Connecticut Children’s  and completed physical therapy at 
Connecticut Children’s Sports Physical Therapy .  The inclusion and exclusion criteria will be the same for both 
the study and control groups.   
Study Group Inclusion criteria : 
 Patients between the age of 12 and 18 years  at the time of surgery.  
 Post–primary ACL reconstruction  
 Orthopaedic  surgical intervention (including all additional procedures at the knee) completed by 
one of the Elite Sports Medicine physicians.  
 Patient completed postoperative rehabilitation following standard protocols  
 No contraindications to performing BFR , as outli ned in the Owens  Recovery [18] Science 2018 
Personal Blood Flow Restriction manual.  
Version 12.22.21 
 7 Prospective Control Inclusion Criteria:  
 Patients between the age of 12 and 18 years  at the time of surgery.  
 Post–primary ACL reconstruction  
 Orthopaedic surgical intervent ion (including all additional procedures at the knee) completed by 
one of the Elite Sports Medicine physicians.  
 Patient completed postoperative rehabilitation following standard protocols  
 Patient did NOT use BFR training during their rehabilitation  
 Patien t did NOT complete physical therapy at Connecticut Children’s Sports Physical Therapy.  
Exclusion criteria  for study group and prospective controls :  
a. Specific exclusions  
 Patients older than 18 and younger than 12  at the time of surgery  
 Any additional diagno ses or deformity not related to knee injury that could affect knee strength  
 Additional lower extremity injury at time of knee injury (e.g., ankle injury) requiring treatment  
Previous surgical intervention on the knee (ipsilateral and contralateral)  
Patient s with weight bearing restrictions for greater than two weeks after surgery due to concomitant pathology 
such as meniscal root/radial repair, chondral pathology, or multi -ligament pathology . Generic exclusion: 
“Subjects not meeting all inclusion criteria.”  
The exclusion of age is to ensure that the study population is old enough to complete  testing on the HUMAC 
isokinetic dynamometer and young enough to be treated by one of our Elite Sports Medicine physicians . 
The secondary diagnosis and previous knee injury exclusion s are to limit the influence of other diagnoses or 
injuries on measured knee strength , as well as provide a more homogeneous group for comparison to past data.  
Identification, recruitment, consent and retention of subjects   
 
Patient Screening and Determination of Eligibility  
 
Pre-Screening  
All potential patients undergoing ACL reconstruction at Elite Sports Medicine will be approached for 
participation for this study.  Patients scheduled to undergo ACL reconstruction will be screened by the 
individuals listed on this protocol using our pre -screening documentation form.  All patients undergoing ACL 
reconstruction undergo a pre -operative appointment.   
 
Identification and Recruitment:   
Once identified as a potential candidate, the study purpose and protocol will be explained and a brief summary  
of the study will be provided at the conclusion of the pre -operative appointment.  Patients must meet all the 
requirements of inclusion and exclusion criteria to be eligible for consent.  
 
   
Version 12.22.21 
 8 Consent :  Consent will take place at the pre -operative visit.  T he patient/parent will be given a detailed 
description of the purpose and methodology for this study.  They will have the opportunity to read the consent 
forms and ask any questions they may have about the research.  If they agree to participate, they will  be asked 
to sign the consent form and a copy will be provided.  
 
If patients agree to enroll, all demographics and information listed in the protocol will be stored in a data 
collection sheet that is listed in the attachments.  This sheet will be used to record all pertinent information for 
all active participants on the study and stored in a secure folder on the G drive.   
.  
 
Retention:   Eligible patients  will be required to be seen for a minimum of 90% of patient visits to be included in 
this study.  
 
Retrospective control : Patients that will be used as part of the retrospective control will be collected using a 
billing run with CPT codes related to ACL reconstruction from January 2017 - January 2019.  
 
Patient Reported Outcomes :     
1) 4 P atient reported  outcome measures will be collected at 5 time points listed below:  
  a) Pre -operative visit  
  b) 3 months post -operative  
  c) Return to sport testing  
  d) 12 month follow up  
  e) 2 year follow -up over phone or email  
 2) Outcome measures completed:  
  a) International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC)  
  b) Anterior Cruciate Return to Sport after Injury (ACL -RSI)  
  c) Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS)  
  d) Marx Activity Rating Scale (MARX)  
Functional Outcome Definitions/Data Points Collected  
1. Demographic information will be collected  and outcome measures will include the following:  
 
a. Age  
b. Medical record number  
c. Date of ACL surgery and related surgeries  
d. Sex  
e. Graft Type  
f. Surgeon  
g. Sport  
h. Level of competition in sport  
i. Weight and Height  
j. BMI  
k. Weigh t bearing precautions (weeks)  
l. Limb length (cm): ASIS to superior medial malleolus  
m. Tegner Scal e 
2. Opened or closed Physis  (or skeletal maturity)  
Version 12.22.21 
 9 3. Data will be collected at five different time points during the rehabilitation process.  The current 
standard of care incl udes a pre -operative visit, a 3 -month assessment visit, and a return to sport visit 
between 6 -9 months post -operative, and a 1 year follow up . Additionally, we will collect data a 2 year 
phone/email follow up to record patient outcomes .  These assessments are completed in conjunction 
with the surgeon’s follow up visit.  The physical therapist completing the assessment will record the 
outcomes in a secure Excel data collection form.(or Access data base )  
4.  
A) Pre-operative visit  
 
a. Isometric knee extension at 60 degrees on involved and involved side.  
i. Quadriceps deficit= 100 - (Knee extension peak torque involved/knee extension peak 
torque uninvolved)  
b. Isometric knee flexion at 60 degrees on involved and uni nvolved side  
i. Hamstring Deficit= 100 - (Knee flexion peak torque involved/knee flexion peak torque  
uninvolved)  
c. Isometric hip extension at 60 degrees on involved and uninvolved side  
i. Hip extension d eficit= 100 - (Hip extension  peak torque involved/ hip extension  peak 
torque  uninvolved)  
d. Quad hypertrophy will be measured by thigh circumference measurement.  
i. Measured at 10cm above the superior pole of the patella  bilaterally  
B) 3 month evaluation:  
e. Isometric knee extension at 60 degrees on involved and involved side.  
i. Quadriceps deficit= 100 - (Knee extension  peak torque involved/knee extension peak 
torque uninvolved)  
f. Isometric knee flexion at 60 degrees on involved and uninvolved side  
i. Hamstring Deficit= 100 - (Knee flexion peak torque involved/knee flexion peak torque  
uninvolved)  
g. Isometric hip extension at 60 degrees on involved and uninvolved side  
i. Hip extension d eficit= 100 - (Hip extension  peak torque involved/ hip extension  peak 
torque  uninvolved ) 
h. Quad hypertrophy will be measured by thigh circumference measurement.  
i. Measured at 10cm above the superior pole of the patella  bilaterally . 
Version 12.22.21 
 10 i. Y Balance Test (all measures taken bilaterally)  
i. 3 trials anterior reach involved and uninvolved (cm)  
ii. 3 trials post eromedial reach involved and uninvolved (cm)  
iii. 3 trials posterolateral reach involved and uninvolved (cm)  
iv. Anterior reach difference= Max anterior reach involved – Max anterior reach uninvolved  
v. Posteromedial reach difference= Max posteromedial reach involved - Max posterior reach  
uninvolved  
vi. Posterolateral reach difference= Max posterolateral reach involved -Max posterolateral  
reach uninvolved.  
vii. Involved and Uninvolved Composite score= (Max anterior reach+ Max posteromedial 
reach +  
max posterolateral reach)/(3*Lim b Length) *100.  
j. 8” Anterior Stepdown Test (measures taken bilaterally)  
i. Involved repetitions= Max repetitions in 1 minute.  
ii. Uninvolved repetitions= Max repetitions in 1 minute.  
k. Elevated single leg bridge test completed with a 12” box  (all measures taken bilaterally)  
i. Involved repetitions= Max repetitions in 1 minute.  
ii. Uninvolved repetitions= Max repetitions in 1 minute.  
l. Half kneeling dorsiflexion  distance  (all measures taken bilaterally)  
i. Half kneeling difference = half kneeling involved - half kneeling non involved  
5. Return to sport testing:  
a. Isometric knee extension at 60 degrees on involved and involved side.  
i. Quadriceps deficit= 100 - (Knee extension peak torque involved/knee extension pea k 
torque uninvolved)  
b. Isometric knee flexion at 60 degrees on involved and uninvolved side  
i. Hamstring Deficit= 100 - (Knee flexion peak torque involved/knee flexion peak torque  
uninvolved)  
c. Isokinetic knee extension at 300 deg/ sec, 180 deg/sec, and 60 deg/ se c 
i. Quadriceps deficit= 100 - (Knee extension peak torque involved/knee extension peak 
torque uninvolved)  
Version 12.22.21 
 11 d. Isokinetic knee flexion 300 deg/ sec, 180 deg/sec, and 60 deg/ sec  
i. Hamstring Deficit= 100 - (Knee flexion peak torque involved/knee flexion peak torque  
uninvolved)  
e. Isometric hip extension at 60 degrees on involved and uninvolved side  
i. Hip extension deficit = 100 – (hip extension peak torque involved/ hip extension peak 
torque uninvolved)  
f. Quad hypertrophy will be measured by thigh circumference measurement.   
i. Measured at 10cm above the superior pole of the patella  bilaterally  
g. Anterior reach test  (all measures taken bilaterally)  
i. 3 trials anterior reach involved and uninvolved (cm)  
ii. Anterior reach difference= Max anterior reach involved – Max anterior reach unin volved  
h. Single leg heel raise testing  (all measures taken bilaterally)  
i. Maximum number of repetitions completed to maximum height at pace of 60 beats per 
second  
ii. Heel raise difference = heel raise involved – heel raise non involved  
i. 8” Anterior Stepdown Test (measures taken bilaterally)  
i. Involved repetitions= Max repetitions in 1 minute.  
ii. Uninvolved repetitions= Max repetitions in 1 minute.  
j. Half kneeling dorsiflexion  (all measures taken bilaterally)  
i. Half kneeling difference = half kneeling involved - half kneeling non involved  
k. Single leg hop for difference (all measures taken bilaterally)  
i. Single leg hop difference = maximum  involved distance – maximum non - involved 
distance  
l. Timed hop for distance  (all measures taken bilaterally)  
i. Timed hop difference = time  involved – time non involved  
m. Single leg triple hop for distance  (all measures taken bilaterally)  
i. Single leg triple hop difference = maximum involved distance – maximum non -involved 
distance  
n. Cross over hop for distance  (all measures taken bilaterally)  
Version 12.22.21 
 12 o. Cross over hop difference = maximum involved distance – maximum non -involved 
distance  
6. 12-month  testing  
Tegner Activity Scale  
7. Prospective control: All prospective controls will follow the ACL reconstruction protocol at an outside 
facility.  These patients will complete outcome measures, and standardized strength assessments 
consistent with the standard current standard of care listed above.  The same data points will be 
collected.  
8. Retrospective controls:  Outcome measures (RSI, IKDC) and the results of stan dardized 3 and 6mo + 
assessment results will be collected.  
9. All data points listed above for all three groups will be stored in a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet on the G 
drive.  
 
Study Design/Procedures:  
 
 The current standard of care for patients undergoing ACL reconstruction at Connecticut Children’s and 
Elite Sports Medicine involves initiation of physical therapy approximately 2 -5 days after surgery.   All patients 
undergoing ACL reconstruction follow the surgeon’s  ACL rehabilitation protocol .  Each participant will be 
evaluated by one of the sport physical therapists during their initial evaluation as part of the current standard of 
care for all new patients.  Patient reported outcomes and strength measu rements will be conducted according to 
the surgeon’s protocol for ACL reconstruction patients.  The current rehabilitation protocol includes a 
standardized assessment at 3 months post -operative and 6 -9 months post -operative.  These assessments help 
determi ne progression to the next phase of rehabilitation.  
 
In addition to the standard ACL protocol, patients in this  study  will utilize the Owen Recovery Science exercise 
protocol for BFR  [18]. The following guidelines will be followed concerning exercise progr ession , occlusion 
pressure  and difficulties with volume achievement. To  determine the appropriate resistance  for each exercise , 
the patient’s  1 repetition maximum (1RM) will be at tained using a repetition test [1 9]. This test will use a 
previously validated algorithm to determine the 1RM based on the weight used to perfo rm a 7 -10 repetition test 
[20]. Patient will perform the exercise with a weight they can comfortably lift for several  repetitions. Based on 
the weight or resistance  used, and the pat ient’s perceived exertion a 1RM will be estimated using the modified 
OMNI -RES scale. The starting load for each exercise will be 20 -30% of their  1RM, or bodyweight resistance 
will be used when loading is not feasible.  
 
Load progression of exercises will be  based on the patient’s ability to complete the prescribed number of 
repetitions. If the patient successful ly completes all 75 repetitions, they will have  their 1 RM reassessed in 1-3 
session to increase the load.  
 
If the patient completes between 60 -74 re petitions, they will continue with the prescribed training and increase 
the rest periods between sets 3 and 4, to 45 seconds. They then will continue with the prescribed weight until 
the patient can complete 75 repetitions for 1 to 3 sessions.  
 
If the pat ient completes between 45 - 59 repetition s, they will continue with the prescribed weight, but will 
extend the rest period between all sets to 45 seconds. This exercise prescription will be followed until the 
patient can complete all 75 repetitions. After w hich the rest periods will be reduced to 30 seconds. Once the 
Version 12.22.21 
 13 patient can complete all 75 repetitions with 30 second break between sets for 1 -3 session, they then would have 
their 1RM reassessed.  
 
If the patient completes less than 44 repetitions, the load  will be reduced by approximately 10% until the patient 
can complete 75 repetitions in the prescribed manor. After the patient has successfully complete 1 -3 sessions, 
they will have their 1RM reassessed using the previously described repetition test.  
 
 
Proposed Protocol  
Phase 1 - Weeks 1 to 2  
 Quad Set: 10 second on, 10 second rest at 10 0% occlusion x10’ 
o  progress to isometrics at the edge of the table 60 degrees as clinically appropriate  
 Side Lying Hip Abduction, 30/15/15/15, at 80% occlusion  
 Hip Extension from prone 30/15/15/15,  at 80% occlusion  
 Re-check load at the start of each Phase, to determine 1 RM ( 7-10RM test on leg press)  
 Total BFR time approximately 24 minutes per session,  with 2 sessions per week  
 
Phase 2 - Weeks 3 to 4  
 Replace Quad Set with Long Arc Quad  (90-30deg), 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
 Replace Hip Extension with Leg Press (shuttle), 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
 Hip Abduction, 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
 Total BFR time approximately 24 minutes per session with  2 sessions per week  
 
Phase 3 - Weeks 5 to 6  
 Long Arc Quad (90-30deg), 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
 Leg Press (shuttle), 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
 Replace Hip Abduction with Bilateral Hip Bridge, 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
 Total BFR time approximately 24 minutes per session,  with 2 sessions per week  
 
Phase 4 - Weeks 7 to 8  
  Leg Press (shuttle), 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
  Replace Long Arc Quad with Step Up 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
  Bilateral Hip Bridge, 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
 Total BFR time approximately 24 minutes per session,  with 2 sessions per week  
 
Phase 5 - Weeks 9 to 12  
 Replace Bilateral Hip Bridge with Medial Step Down , 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
 Replace Step up with Split Squat , 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
 Leg Press (shuttle), 30/15/15/15 at 80% occlusion  
 Total BFR time approximately 24 minutes per session,  with 2 sessions per week  
 
Phase 6 - Weeks 11 to 12  
 Progressively load exercises from phase 5  
Total BFR time approximately 24 minutes per session,  with 2 sessions per week  
a. At the conclusion of each exercise  completed listed in the proposed protocol above, the following will 
be recorded:  
Version 12.22.21 
 14 i) patient rating of perceived exertion (RPE) will be recorded in the exercise flow sheet.   
ii) Ability or inability to complete the exercise session  
 
b. At the conclusion of each treatment session any side effect, as previously described by Brandner et 
al, 2018, will be recorded in the patient chart.   
Sample Size Justification  
 It is our intention to use all possible patients meeting the i nclusion criteria  in this study . According to 
the most recent clinical data available, approximately 100 patients per year receive care  for ACL knee  injury  
and 25 to 50 patients per year receive physical therapy  at Elite Sports Medicine following ACL reconstruction.  
.  
Accrual and Expected Duration of Accrual    
Once approved, we expect that this study can be accomplished within two to three  years . The open 
period for this study will be between January  1, 20 20 and Decembe r 1, 20 23. 
Data Analysis:  
The endpoint of this study is when data is collected and analyzed from 20 patients who have completed a one 
year follow up from date of surgery.   
Data  will be collected on all patients who meet the inclusion criteria for this study and have agreed to 
participate through the consenting process.  Descriptive statistics will be completed to help gain an overall 
understanding of the data for  the effect of BFR training on lower extremity strength, mid -thigh circumference 
and outcome measures.  T -tests between strength and outcome variables for the BFR and non -BFR group to test 
if there are differences between the two groups.   Correlation tests will be used to determine association between 
lower extremity strength  and BFR training .  Corrections will be made for multiple comparisons.   
We will be entering into a Data Use Agreement with University of Connecticut (UCONN) for assistance with 
data analysis and interpretation as well as statistical analysis. All data sharing procedures will be in accordance 
with Connec ticut Children’s policy. All data will be de -identified prior to sharing to assure patient’s 
confidentiality. The UCONN collaborator is not engaged in human subject research (no access to identifiers) 
and will obtain an independent determination from the U CONN IRB.  
 
Study Limitations:  
There are several l imitations anticipated with this study that will impact its power and external validity. These 
limitations include an inherent sampling bias with our recruitment  strategy, lack of patient or participant 
blinding,  and small sample size.  
Attempts will be made to reduce any potential bias by having standardized educational scripts regarding BFR 
training that each treating therapist will read to subjects prior to the ir first BFR session.  
Subjects in our study will likely come from the same surgeon  and t he same type of ACL  graft (QT). This could 
be a potential limitation in the generalizability of our results to other surgeons and graft types.  
 
  
Version 12.22.21 
 15 Administrative Organization  
Roles and responsibilities :   
Adam Weaver, PT, DPT : Will serve as the study’s co -primary investigator  and study coordinator . Adam will 
provide primary support for the SRC and IRB study protocol development and submission . He will review the 
required databases and pull the relevant data required to complete this study.  He will also aid in data 
interpretation and manuscript preparation.  
Allison Crepeau, MD : Will serve as the study’s co -investigator.  She will help with data  interpretation and 
manuscript preparation.  
Arthur Fredericks, MS, PT:  Will serve as the study’s co -investigator.  He will provide  
support in development of SRC and IRB documents (review of literature).  He will help with data collection   
He will provide an orthopaedic perspective to data interpretation and ultimately utilization of the results in the 
clinical setting.  
Nicholas Giampetruzzi , MS, PT:  Will serve as the study’s co -investigator.  He will be essential for data 
interpretation and utilization of results.   
Dylan Roman, PT, DPT : Will serve as the study’s co -investigator.  He will provide an orthopaedic  
perspective to data interpretation and ultimately utilization of the results in the clinical setting. He will provide  
support in development of SRC and IRB documents (review of literature).  
Adel Lolic, MS, EP -C: Will serve as the study’s co -investigator. Adel with help the physical therapists with 
data collection as needed during subject tests as well as organizing tabulated results. Adel is an exercise 
technologist at Connecticut Children’s Sports Physical Therapy.  He will provide support in development of 
SRC and IRB documents, and assist wi th patient recruitment.  
Jennifer Prue,  ATC , LAT, MEd : Will serve as the study’s co -investigator. She will help the physical therapists 
with data collection as needed during subject tests as well as organizing tabulated results. She will provide 
support in development of SRC and IRB documents, assist wi th patient recruitment and consenting.  
Mike Rieger,  BS, CSCS : Will serve as the study’s co -investigator. He will help the physical therapists with data 
collection as needed during subject tests as well as orga nizing tabulated results. He assist wi th patient 
recruitment and consenting.  
Data Collection and Management    
a. Data collection forms: All data will be entered into a Microsoft Excel database to facilitate data  
analysis.  
b. Data collection software: Data collection software will include Microsoft Excel to organize data.  
Statistics will be run using Microsoft Excel.  
c. All outcome measures will be completed and stored in a secure online database: Microsoft Excel spreadsheet 
on G drive .   
d. Adam Weaver will  oversee data management. The data will be collected by investigators, and it will  
be stored in a secured folder on the G drive.  The spreadsheet will only be accessible to those individuals 
included in this study.   
e. Information will be reviewed prior t o de-identification to insure there are no errors with  
transcription.  
Version 12.22.21 
 16 f. Data quality assurance: Data that is collected will be manually verified to ensure that no information  
has been entered into Excel incorrectly. Additionally, we will randomly check 10% of data in the Excel data  
base for accuracy after initial entry to insure accurac y. 
CCMC Department of Research  
g. Record retention and confidentiality will be dictated by the current procedures in place here at  
Connecticut Children’s. All information wi ll be stored in a private office and on a  
single password protected computer. No access to information is possible from an outside source.  
Human Subjects  Protections and Ethical Conduct of the Study  
Patient confidentiality statement   
Strict measures will be required for respecting and maintaining patient confidentiality. Application for IRB 
approval is currently being created for submission, and once IRB evaluation has occurred we will make any 
changes required to ensure HIPPA compliance. Collection of a p atient identifier including medical record 
numbers and the patients name is necessary to ensure comprehensive inclusion of eligible subjects and accurate 
linking of data from different data sets. The database used for the study will be password protected  and stored in 
a secure folder on the G drive .  Once we have collected all the data, the data set will be frozen for analysis. At 
this time , we will completely de -identify all subjects. Medical record numbers as well as the patient’s names 
will be removed an d patients will be referred to by study number only.  De-identification will take place once we 
have collected all data . In the event that further time is needed prior to de -identification of the data set, we will 
request a continuation through the IRB at t he time of annual review of the protocol. We expect that these 
measures will minimize any risk to confidentiality very effectively, and that any unavoidable residual risk will 
be balanced generously by the potential benefit  to society of the knowledge that  will be obtained through this 
research.  
Financial :  There are no financial burdens for the subjects.  There are no extra costs due to travel to extra 
appointments or therapy sessions as the subjects will follow standard of care protocols for timing and qua ntity 
of physical therapy and follow -up appointments with their surgeon.  Again, the nature of this study will produce 
no cost to Elite Sports Medicine  and Connecticut Children’s Sports Physical Therapy , and we have specific 
time set aside to accomplish ou r research objectives.  
Benefits :  The results of this study would benefit surgeons, rehabilitation specialists, and of course future 
patients and their families by possibly providing a method of determining the patient’s progress at an earlier 
stage and a llow for early interventions to improve the patient’s outcome.  
Use of results of study  
The results of this study would provide the Elite Sports Medicine  surgeons here at Connecticut Children’s  
information to determine the effectiveness and application of the use of BFR in conjunction with exercise . The 
results of this research would also provide a basis for a future study to determine how the application of BFR 
with exercise  following surgery can improve patient outcomes.  
Study  budget   
 There is no budget for this study. All study personnel will be taking salary in kind for this project.  
Budget Justification  
N/A 
Version 12.22.21 
 17 Appendices  (as needed)  
 Please see attached excel file.  
References Cited   
 
[1] Hewett, T.E, S.J. Shultz, and L.Y. Griffin, Understanding and Preventing Noncontact ACL Injuries. 2007,  
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics Publishers  
 
[2] Welling, W., Benjaminse, A., Seil, R., Lemmink, K., Zaffagnini, S., & Gokeler, A. (2018). Low rates of patients 
meeting return to sport criteria 9 months after anterior  cruciate ligament reconstruction: A prospective longitudinal study. 
Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy, 26(12), 3636 -3644.  
 
[3] Paterno , M.V., Rauh , M.J., & Schmitt , L.C., Incidence of second ACL injuries 2 years after primary ACL  
reconstructi on and return to sport. Am J Sports Med 2014, 42:1567 -73 
 
[4] Ithurburn, M., Altenburger, P., Thomas, A., Hewett, R., Paterno, S., & Schmitt, T. (2018). Young athletes after ACL 
reconstruction with quadriceps strength asymmetry at the time of return -to-sport demonstrate decreased knee function 
1 year later. Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy, 26(2), 426 -433. 
 
[5] Takarada, Y., Takazawa, H., & Ishii, N. (2000). Applications of vascular occlusions diminish disuse atrophy of knee 
extensor muscles.  Medicine and science in sports and exercise , 32(12), 2035 -2039.  
[6] Fry, C. S., Glynn, E. L., Drummond, M. J., Timmerman, K. L., Fujita, S., Abe, T., & Rasmussen, B. B. (2010). Blood 
flow restriction exercise stimulates mTORC1 signaling a nd muscle protein synthesis in older men.  Journal of applied 
physiology , 108(5), 1199 -1209.  
[7] Hughes, L., Paton, B., Rosenblatt, B., Gissane, C., & Patterson, S. D. (2017). Blood flow restriction training in clinical 
musculoskeletal rehabilitation: a sys tematic review and meta -analysis.  Br J Sports Med , 51(13), 1003 -1011.  
[9] Hughes, L., Rosenblatt, B., Paton, B., & Patterson, S. D. (2018). Blood flow restriction training in rehabilitation 
following anterior cruciate ligament reconstructive surgery: A review.  Techniques in Orthopaedics , 33(2), 106 -113. 
[9] Pescatello LS, Arena  R, Riebe D, Thompson PD. ACSM's guidelines for exercise testing and prescription. (9th ed., pp. 
169-171). Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014.  
[10] Brandner, C. R., May, A. K., Clarkson, M. J., & Warmington, S. A. (2018 ). Reported side -effects and safety 
considerations for the use of blood flow restriction during exercise in practice and research.  Techniques in 
Orthopaedics , 33(2), 114 -121. 
[11] Nakajima, T., Kurano, M., Iida, H., Takano, H., Oonuma, H., Morita, T., & Nagata, T. (2006). Use and safety of 
KAATSU training: results of a national survey.  International Journal of KAATSU Training Research , 2(1), 5 -13. 
[12] Yasuda, T., Meguro, M., Sato, Y., & Nakajima, T. (2017). Use and safety of KAATSU training: Results of a  national 
survey in 2016.  International Journal of KAATSU Training Research , 13(1), 1 -9. 
[13] Loenneke, J. P., Wilson, J. M., Wilson, G. J., Pujol, T. J., & Bemben, M. G. (2011). Potential safety issues with 
blood flow restriction training. Scandinavian jo urnal of medicine & science in sports, 21(4), 510 -518. 
 
[14] Giles, L., Webster, K., Mcclelland, J., & Cook, J. (2017). Quadriceps strengthening with and without blood flow 
restriction in the treatment of patellofemoral pain: A double -blind randomised tria l. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 
51(23), 1688 -1694.  
 
Version 12.22.21 
 18 [15] Tennent, D. J., Hylden, C. M., Johnson, A. E., Burns, T. C., Wilken, J. M., & Owens, J. G. (2017). Blood flow 
restriction training after knee arthroscopy: a randomized controlled pilot study. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine, 27(3), 
245-252. 
 
[16] Ohta, H., Kurosawa, H., Ikeda, H., Iwase, Y., Satou , N., & Nakamura, S. (2003). Low -load resistance muscular 
training with moderate restriction of blood flow after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Acta Orthopaedica 
Scandinavica, 74(1), 62 -68. 
 
[17] Yasuda, T., Loenneke J.P., Thiebaud R.S., Abe T.  (2012) Effects of Blood Flow Restricted Low -Intensity Concentric 
or Eccentric Training on Muscle Size and Strength. PLOS ONE 7(12): e52843. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0052843  
[18] Owens, J. (2016). Blood Flow Restriction Rehabilitation: 2016 Man ual (pp. 30 -33). San Antonio, TX: Owens 
Recovery Science, Inc.  
 
[19] Robertson, R. J., Goss, F. L., Andreacci, J. L., Dube, J. J., Rutkowski, J. J., Frazee, K. M., & Snee, B. M. (2005). 
Validation of the Children’s OMNI -Resistance Exercise Scale of perceiv ed exertion.  Medicine & Science in Sports & 
Exercise , 37(5), 819 -826 
 
[20] Eston, R., & Evans, H. J. (2009). The validity of submaximal ratings of perceived exertion to predict one repetition 
maximum.  Journal of sports science & medicine , 8(4), 567 –573. 