Protocol Template Page 1 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 w COMIRB Protocol  
COLORADO MULTIPLE INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD  
CAMPUS BOX F -490    TELEPHONE:  303 -724-1055  Fax:  303 -724-0990   
 
 
Protocol #:  16-1404  
Project Title:  Skeletal muscle diacylglycerol and sphingolipids – impact of localization and 
species on  insulin resistance in humans  
    
Principal Investigator:   Bryan C. Bergman, PhD  
Version Date:  06/14 /19        
 
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims: The accumulation of muscle lipids are thought to promote insulin 
resistance and type 2 diabetes. While initially this was associated with triglycerides, bioactive lipids 
such as diacylglycerol (DAG) and sphingolipids have emerged as important mediators of insulin 
resistance. Recent data indicate these lipids are located in mixed membrane fractions, however, the exact membranes are unknown. This limited understanding of where DAG and sphingolipids promote 
insulin resistance is limiting our ability to prevent and treat lipid -induced insulin resistance. We 
developed a technique to isolate specific muscle membranes from human biopsies, and found DAG and sphingolipids accumulate in the sarcolemma and mitochondrial/ER in obese people with and 
without type 2 diabetes. DAG and sphingolipids are assumed to decrease insulin sensitivity in the 
sarcolemma, by activating protein kinase C (PKC) and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), respectively. 
The influence of DAG and sphingolipids on the function and signaling of the mitochondria and ER, which also regulate insulin sensitivity, is not known. There is a critical need  to address these gaps in 
knowledge, as altering the cellular distribution of muscle lipids has the potential to ultimately prevent 
and treat insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes.  
 
Our long-term goal  is to identify novel therapeutic targets to combat muscle insulin resistance and type 2 
diabetes, filling a need not met by current therapies. The overall objective for this project is to determine 
the impact of changes in subcellular DAG and sphingolipid species on cell signaling and metabolic function, before and after insulin sensitizing lifestyle interventions. Our central hypothesis  is that DAG 
and sphingolipids in muscle promote insulin resistance via mechanisms that are unique to location, type of lipid, and species. This hypothesis is based on extensive preliminary data (see Research Strategy  – 
Approach), showing insulin resistance is related to sarcolemmal and mitochondrial/ER accumulation of 
specific DAG and sphingolipids. Our pilot studies revealed changes in specific localized species after 
an insulin sensitizing lifestyle intervention, and that DAG and sphingolipids alter mitochondrial function in vitro. We propose to measure skeletal muscle DAG and sphingolipid isomers, species, localization, 
and de novo synthesis before and after diet -induced weight loss or exercise training interventions in 
obese men and women. Comparing the two interventions will uncover differences in lipid localization, 
cellular signaling, and mechanisms for improvements in insulin sensitivity. Insulin sensitivity will be 
measured using hyperinsulinemic/euglycemic clamps, muscle lipids using LC/MS, and mitochondrial 
function using an Oroboros respirometer. The rationale  underlying the proposed research is that 
elucidating changes in localized DAG and sphingolipids predicting insulin sensitivit y will reveal specific 
localized lipids to target in therapeutics to prevent or treat type 2 diabetes.  
 
To attain our overall objective, we propose three specific aims:  
1.  Identify the influence of sarcolemmal DAG and sphingolipids on cell signaling and i nsulin 
sensitivity before and after insulin sensitizing lifestyle interventions.  
Strong preliminary data shape our working hypothesis  that sarcolemmal 1,2- disaturated DAG and C18:0 
ceramide species will decrease after insulin sensitizing lifestyle interventions, leading to less PKC and 
PP2A activation, and enhanced insulin signaling.  
2.  Determine the impact of mitochondrial/ER DAG and sphingolipids on mitochondrial 
function and ER stress in vivo, before and after insulin sensitizing lifestyle intervention s. 
We hypothesize, again based on preliminary data, that mitochondrial/ER sphingolipids will decrease, yet 
DAG will increase after insulin sensitizing lifestyle interventions, and each will associate with increased 
Protocol Template Page 2 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 insulin sensitivity. Changes in sphingolipids will relate to increased mitochondrial function, less ER 
stress, ROS, and acyl -carnitine formation, while changes in DAG will associate with increased 
mitochondrial content and dynamics.  
3.  Identify the effect of exogenous DAG and sphingolipids on mitochondrial function in vitro, 
before and after insulin sensitizing lifestyle interventions.  
Our working hypothesis  is that DAG and sphingolipids will reduce mitochondrial respiration and increase 
ROS and acyl -carnitine content, yet the response to DAG will be attenuated after endurance exercise 
training.  
 
II. Background and Significance :  
Significance – The intracellular accumulation of DAG and sphingolipids are potential mechanism 
explaining skeletal muscle insulin resistance in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. DAG and 
sphingolipids are greater in insulin resistant humans and animal models (1-9), and increase after high fat 
feeding and lipid infusions that acutely induce insulin resistance (7-9). However, the response of DAG 
and sphingolipids to insulin sensitizing interventions is variable (10-17), and there are paradoxical studies 
in the literature dissociating DAG and sphingolipid content from insulin sensitivity (9; 18; 19). These 
conflicting reports highlight that the current understanding of how and where DAG and sphingolipids induce insulin resistance is incomplete. A weakness of the above studies is analyzing whole muscle 
concentrations. Recent studies showed that DAG in membranes related to insulin resistance, which is 
also assumed for sphingolipids (20-23). However, a weakness of these studies is that all membranes 
were analyzed together and the exact membranes containing lipids promoting insulin resistance are 
unknown. Sub- membrane localization is important, as a recent study revealed DAG and ceramide in only 
certain membrane fractions promoted hepatic insulin resistance in mice (24). There are no studies in 
humans examining what membranes harbor lipids promoting insulin resistance, despite calls in the literature for clarity on this issue (25). Failure to identify bioactive lipid localization related to insulin 
resistance will prevent understanding how these lipids influence cellular signaling and metabolic function, 
and limit our ability to intervene in lipid- induced insulin resistance.  
The proposed studies will advance the field by identifying which subcellular membrane compartments of DAG and sphingolipids promote insulin resistance, and how these localized lipid species impact cell signaling and organelle function. These novel contributions will be significant because they will reveal the 
key species and locations of DAG and sphingolipids, as well as mechanisms explaining accumulation that could be modified by insulin sensitizing therapeutic interventions . Identifying specific localized DAG and 
sphingolipids species contributing to muscle insulin resistance will drive the field of lipid- induced insulin 
resistance forward in several ways. First, it will lay the foundation for more focused prevention and treatment therapies targeted to the localized species that promote insulin resistance. Second, these 
results will direct strategies to decrease localized DAG and sphingolipid content by identifying the extent to which de novo synthesis explains membrane accumulation. Third, this project will change the way pharmaceuticals are screened to reduce DAG and sphingolipids by focusing on changes in specific 
species and locations. This approach is expected to reveal novel therapeutic compounds that cannot be 
identifie d by focusing on whole cell content.  Together, these advances will address an unmet clinical 
need to improve muscle insulin sensitivity, and reveal novel treatment and prevention strategies for 
diabetes.  
 
 
III. Preliminary Studies/Progress Report:   
Preliminary Studies   
We can fractionate muscle into multiple membrane compartments. We are 
uniquely suited for this project because we spent 3 years developing a method to 
separate frozen human skeletal muscle into fractions enriched in sarcolemma, mitochondri a/ER, nuclear, and cytosolic compartments (Figure 1). This technique 
is a substantial advance, as the most recent studies only separate cytosol from mixed membranes, which cannot discriminate specific organelles 
containing lipids promoting insulin resistance. Lipids are then extracted 
from these fractions and analyzed using our lipidomic platform.  
  

Protocol Template Page 3 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Sarcolemmal 1,2 -Disaturated DAG species relate 
to insulin resistance. The sum of all sarcolemmal di -
saturated 1,2 -DAG species were significantly greater 
in T2 D compared to lean volunteers (Figure 2A), and 
was inversely related to insulin sensitivity (Figure 2B). 
Notably, 1,3- disaturated DAG content was not 
different between groups revealing isomer specificity. 
We previously showed that membrane di -saturated 
DAG  content predicted PKC activation and insulin 
resistance (26). These data agree and suggest that 
sarcolemmal DAG containing saturated acyl side 
chains represent membrane accumulation of DAG 
that is particularly negative for insulin sensitivity.  
  
PKC ε activity is increased in obesity and T2D.  We 
measured the membrane/cytosol ratio of PKCε , which is commonly used as a 
surrogate for PKC activity. We found significantly greater PKC ε activation in obese 
and T2D subjects compared to lean controls (Figure 3), with no significant 
differences found for PKC βII, δ, and θ isoforms. These data are consistent with 
greater PKC activation from sarcolemmal DAG accumulation.  
 
Sarcolemmal C18:0 ceramide accumulates in insulin resistance. Of the 9 
sarcolemmal ceramide species measured, only C18:0 ceramide was significantly 
greater in T2D compared to lean (Figure 4A), and was inversely related to the rate 
of glucose disappearance during an insulin clamp (Figure 4B). In a pilot study sarcolemmal C18:0 ceramide decreased by 21% after a combined weight loss and exercise training intervention. These data parallel 
a recent publication by our lab showing C18:0 muscle ceramides significantly related to insulin resistance in a different cohort (27). C18:0 ceramide antagonizes an 
inhibitor of PP2A, resulting in increased PP2A activity (28). Comb ined, these data suggest that sarcolemmal 
C18:0 ceramide may promote insulin resistance, and 
due to the location may explain the canonical 
pathways of ceramide induced insulin resistance, including activation of PP2A activity, and inhibition of 
AKT phosphorylation in response to insulin.  
 Mitochondrial/ER ceramide accumulates in insulin 
resistance. Mitochondrial ceramide content was 
greater in T2D compared to lean individuals, which is 
largely explained by C22:0 and C24:0 species (Figure 
7A). Total ceramide content was inversely related to insulin sensitivity (Figure 7B). These data are consistent with the hypothesis 
that mitochondrial ceramides promote insulin resistance.   
 
Mitochondrial/ER ceramides decrease after insulin sensitizing lifestyle 
intervention - Pilot data for a combined weight loss/exercise training 
intervention show decreased whole cell ceramide content, as shown before 
(11; 15)  (Figure 8). However, the decrease in whole cell ceramide content 
comes only from a decrease in mitochondrial/ER ceramide. These data point 
to an important role of mitochondrial/ER ceramides on insulin sensitivity in vivo.  
  Mitochondrial/ER DAG accumulates in lean insulin sensitive 
individuals. Preliminary data show mitochondrial/ER 1,2 - and 1,3- DAG were 
Figure 2 .  Sarcolemmal di -saturated DAG content by group 
(A), and by insulin sensitivity (B) in lean, obese, and type 2 
diabetics. Values are means +/- SEM. #= significantly 
different than lean, p<0.05. 
A 
 B 
Figure 4 . Sarcolemmal C18:0 ceramide content by group (A), 
and by insulin sensitivity (B) in lean, obese, and type 2 diabetics. Values are means +/ - SEM. #= significantly 
different than lean, p< 0.05. 
A 
 B 
Figure 3. PKC ε activation in 
lean, obese, and type 2 
diabetics. Values are means 
+/- SEM. #= significantly 
different than lean, p<0.05. 
 

Protocol Template Page 4 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 higher in lean individuals compared to obese 
or type 2 diabetic volunteers (Figure 9), with 
the greater DAG content distributed over most species. These data are 
counterintuitive, but may reflect the greater 
content of mitochondria in lean individuals compared to obese volunteers with and 
without diabetes, and/or increased 
mitochondrial fission/fusion (29; 30) .  
  
Mitochondrial/ER DAG increase after 
weight loss and exercise training.  
Preliminary data from a weight loss and exercise training intervention show an increase in mitochondrial/ER 1,2- DAG after 
the intervention (Figure 10).  These data are consistent with some  reports in the literature where DAG concentration was increased i n 
endurance trained athletes (13). These data 
agree with Figure 9 and suggest mitochondrial/ER DAG accumulation may be 
a previously unrecognized adaptation to 
exercise training and/or weight loss.  
 
Insulin resista nt muscle accumulates long 
chain acyl -carnitines and shows oxidative 
stress. Basal acyl -carnitines revealed 
accu mulation of many long chain acyl -CoA’s 
in type 2 diabetics including C18:0, C18:2- OH, and 
C20:4, which are thought to promote insulin resistance  (Figure 11A). A significantly decreased 
GSH/GSSG ratio in type 2 diabetes individuals compared to lean volunteers suggest a more 
oxidized state, consistent with increased oxidative stress in insulin resistance (Figure 11B).  
 DAG and ceramide decrease mi tochondrial 
function. We administered 1,2 -DAG, ceramide, 
dihydroceramide, and vehicle controls to isolated rat mitochondria in vitro to evaluate the impact on mitochondrial respiration using pyruvate and malate 
as substrates. DAG and ceramide decreased state 
3 respiration, with no changes observed with dihydroceramide administration (Figure 12A and B). 
State 4 respiration did not change for 1,2-DAG and 
dihydroceramide, but increased significantly with increasing doses of ceramide. Both 1,2- DAG and 
ceramide decreased ADP/O ratios (Figure 13A and 
B), while dihydroceramide had no effect. These data indicate 1,2- DAG and ceramide reduced 
mitochondrial respiration and coupling, and are consistent with accumulation of mitochondrial lipids 
altering mitochondrial fun ction.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
Protocol Template Page 5 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
  
IV. Research  Methods 
 
A.  Outcome  Measure (s):   
Primary outcomes:  
Aim 1: Change in insulin sensitivity, change in sarcolemmal Di -C18:0 DAG and C18:0 ceramide, 
change in PKCepsilon and PP2A activity  
Aim 2: Change in insulin sensitivity, change in mitochondrial/ER total DAG and ceramide content, 
change in state 3 mitochondrial respiration, change in GSH/GSSG, change in C18:0, C18:2 -OH, and 
C20:4 acylcarnitines, change in GRP78  
Aim 3: C hange in mitochondrial state 3 and state 4  respiration in resp onse to DAG and ceramide 
before and after lifestyle interventions  
 Secondary outcomes: Changes in other localized lipids and intracellular responses will be exploratory 
in nature.  In addition, we will collect subjective and objective information about sleep and an exploratory 
analysis.  
 
B. Description of Population to be Enrolled:   
Obese men and women (BMI 30- 40 kg/m
2) will be recruited for this study who are between 30- 50 
years of age and sedentary (<2 hours/week of planned physical activity). Individuals with normal glucose tolerance (NGT) , pre-diabetes, and newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes  will be enrolled.  Normal 
glucose tolerance is defined as a HbA1c of < 5.7%, pre -diabetes as a HbA1c of 5.7- 6.4%, and type 2 
diabetes as a HbA1c of ≥6.5% (31). Oral contraceptive use is allowed as long as women don’t 
change their use, or lack thereof, during the course of the study. Exclusion criteria include: regular exercise more than 2 hours/week, medications that could affect glucose, lipid metabolism, thyroid 
disease, a history of lung disease, pregnancy, active cigarette smoking and severe plasma lipid 
disorders.  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
BMI: 30 -40 kg/m
2 
Age: 30- 50 years  
Planned physical activity: <2 hrs/week  
Glucose tolerance: NGT, pre-diabetes , and Type 2 diabetes  
Normal glucose tolerance (NGT) is defined as HbA1c of <5.7% , pre-diabetes as HbA1c of 5.7-
6.4%, and type 2 diabetes as HbA1c of ≥6.5%  (31). 
Oral contraceptive use:  Yes or No as long as there is no change during the study  
Medications: not taking TZD’s, insulin  
Thyroid status: TSH between 0.5- 5.0 mU/L  
Pregnancy status: Not pregnant  
Nonsmoker  (tobacco and any form of marijuana  use) 
Fasting TG <400mg/dl  
FSH < 20 IU/L  
 
C. Study Design and Research Methods   
Ninety -two individuals (30 -50 years old) will be 
screened to recr uit sixty -nine obese men and women 
into the study. In dividuals with and without pre -
diabetes will be recruited to achieve a range of starting 
insulin sensitivities without confounding effects of medications used to treat type 2 diabetes. Volunteers 
will undergo an insulin clamp before and after block 
randomization by sex and pre -diabetes strata equally 
across intervention groups, into a three month intervention consisting of: 1) endurance exercise training without weight loss, 2) diet -induced weight loss, 
or 3) delayed intervention control (Figure 5). The three month intervention will result in significant gains in fitness, weight loss, and improvements in insulin sensitivity, but is short enough to maximize retention. 
 

Protocol Template Page 6 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 Exercise training and weight loss will  differentially change DAG and sphingolipid content (11), revealing 
distinct changes in lipid localization, cellular signaling, metabolic function, and improvements in insulin 
sensitivity. We are expecting a 25% dropout rate, and are powered to complete testing on 17 individuals per group (51 total individuals). Subjects will be tested 48 hours after the last exercise bout to minimize 
acute exercise effects on insulin sensitivity. Women will be pre- menopausal and tested during the 
follicular phase (days 1 -10) of the menstrual cycle to control for effects on insulin sensitivity.  
 Preliminary screening- Subjects will arrive after an overnight fast to the outpatient Clinical Translational 
Research Center (CTRC), and a fasting blood sample will be taken for a standard lipid panel, f asting 
glucose, TSH, and HbA1c. Women will take a pregnancy test. A physician will perform a history and physical, and subjects will fill out a dietary questionnaire,  the NIH Dietary History Questionnaire II 
(DHQII), and the IPAQ physical activity questionnaire (33). 
 
Strength and Exercise testing , body composition, maximal mitochon drial respiration, and MRI –
Eligible subjects will undergo a Kin-Kom isokinetic dynamometer quadriceps strength test, Balke treadmill 
test to measure maximal work capacity (VO
2max) (34), a DEXA scan to determine body composition, a 
non-invasive test of maximal mitochondrial respiration, and MRI scan to measure leg muscle and fat 
mass, and liver fat content .  During the maximal mitochondrial respiration test, volunteers will  lie down on 
a table, and we will have a near infrared spectrometer measurement unit strapped to their leg. This unit 
uses a laser to measure the oxygen levels in the muscle. A blood pressure cuff will be wrapped around 
their upper thigh. To start the test, we will ask volunteers  to make a muscle contraction for 20 seconds, 
after which we will intermittently inflate and deflate the blood pressure cuff every 5- 10 seconds over a 5 
minute period. This test will then be repeated. The total time for this test is 30 minutes.  
 
Dietary monitoring – We will provide food for all volunteers for 3 days prior to each insulin clamp study. 
The diet will be designed to replicate their typical diet.   An estimate of habitual fat consumption will be 
obtained from red blood cell phospholipid composition (35; 36), and the DHQII. Saturated fat intake will be used to determine if there is a relationship to DAG and sphingolipid saturation between individuals.  
 
Sleep  monitoring – Subjects will wear small wrist activity and ligh t exposure recorder (Actiwatch, Mini 
Mitter, Bend, OR)  throughout the study . The Actiwatch  is a small and light device about the size of a 
watch that  uses accelerometer -derived information  to estimate  sleep  and wake times. It should not be 
worn swimming or in the shower .  
 Insulin clamp study  - Subjects will spend the night on the inpatient CTRC to ensure compliance with the 
overnight fast. During the overnight stay we will administer standardized sleep questionnaires that ask 
about subjective sleep quality, sleep latency, number of awakenings, sleep duration, factors that may have disturbed sleep and a sleepiness rating. We will use Compumedics Inc Siesta digital sleep 
recorders to assess polysomnographic ( PSG ) data. Data will be stored and sampled at a rate of 256 
samples per second per channel with a 12- bit A- D board. High and low pass digital filters for 
electroencephalogram (EEG) and electroocculogram (EOG) will be set at 0.25 and 35 Hz. Monopolar 
EEGs -International 10- 20 system using current guidelines (F3xM2, C3xM2, F4xM2, C4xM1, and O2xM1 
O1xM2). Sleep will be scored according to standard guidelines. Impedances below 5 kohms will be 
obtained. Sleep data will be scored to describe how the treatments influence sleep.  Oronasal thermal 
sensor, nasal pressure, pulse oximiter, thorasic and abdominal plethysmography, ECG, and bilateral bipolar anterior tibialis electromyogram (EMG) recordings will be used to measure sleep disturbances 
(Apnea Hypopnea Index (AHI), Periodic Leg Movements (PLM)).  
 The following morning, an antecubital catheter will be placed in one arm for infusions, and another placed in a distal hand vein in the contra -lateral arm for blood draws using the heated hand vein technique (37). 
After 30 minutes of rest, a baseline blood sample will be taken for metabolic substrates, hormones, and cytokines. Thereafter, a primed (0.03mg/kg), constant infusion (0.04mg/kg/min) of [6,6-
2H2]glucose and 
[U-13C]glucose, as well as a constant infusion (0.03µmol/kg/min) of [U-13C]palmitate will begin.  The 
glucose and palmitate stable isotope infusions will continue through the end of the study and will be used to determine hepatic glucose production, peripheral glucose disposal, and muscle de novo DAG and 
sphingolipid synthesis. After 2 hours of infusion, a percutaneous needle biopsy will be taken midway 
Protocol Template Page 7 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 between the greater trochanter of the femur and patella. Then a standard 3 hour  
hyperinsulinemic/euglycemic clamp will follow as described by DeFronzo with insulin infused at 40 
mU/m2/min, and glucose clamped at 90mg/dl with a variable dextrose infusion (38). Dextrose infused to 
maintain euglycemia will be “spiked” with [6,6-2H2]glucose to minimize changes in isotopic enrichment. 
Blood will be sampled every 5 minutes to determine glucose concentration and the dextrose infusion adjusted as necessary. A second muscle biopsy will be taken from the contra- lateral limb 1 hour into the 
insulin clamp to measure insulin -stimulated insulin signaling.  Blood samples will be taken over the final 
30 minutes  for substrate, hormone, and cytokine analyses. Isotopically measured glucose rate of 
disappearance will be measured during the last 30 minutes of the 3 hour clamp, normalized to plasma insulin concentration, and used as a measure of whole body insulin sen sitivity (39).  
  Muscle biopsy – Subcellular fractionation will be performed as described in Figure 1. 
Diacylglycerol (1,2 - and 1,3- isomers), sphingolipids (dihydroceramide, ceramide, glucosylce ramide, 
lactosylceramide, sphingosine, sphingosine-1- phosphate, sphingomyelin), triacylglycerol, phosphatidic 
acid, and long chain acyl -CoA species will be analyzed by Dr. Kathleen Harrison using the lipidomics 
platform in our laboratory. Subcellular fractions are fortified with internal standards (ISs), lipid extracted, 
and analyzed by an Agilent 1100 HPLC connected to an API 2000 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (40). The 1,3- and 1,2- DAG isomers are separated chromatographically using a Hilic 2.1 micron, 
3x100mm column. Concentration is determined by comparing ratios of unknowns to odd chain or deuterated internal standards.  Incorporation of [U -
13C]glucose into DAG glycerol,  and [U -13C] palmitate 
into the sphingolipid backbone will be used to estimate de novo synthesis of DAG and sphingolipids (41; 
42). Western blot analysis will quantify PKC translocation of  θ, ε, βII, and δ isoforms  in basal biopsies, as 
well as insulin signaling in basal and insulin stimulated biopsies including AKTser473 /total, IRS-1Tyr612/total, 
and AS160Thr642/total using standard techniques (43).  AKTThr34 phosphorylation will be used to estimate 
PKC ζ activation by ceramide. PP2A activity will be measured using manufacturer instructions (Ser/Thr 
Phosphatase Assay Kit 1, Billerica, MA) . 
 
After the baseline clamp, subjects will be randomized into one of three interventions for three months:  
 
  1. Endurance exercise training - Participants will 
undergo supervised endurance exercise training administered by the Nutrition Obesity Research Center (NORC) Energy Balance Core (see attached letter of 
support from Dr. Kohrt) using well -established methods 
(44-48). Participants will perform supervised exercise 
4x/week as well as exercise 1x/week on their own. Each 60 
min session will include a short warm -up, 40 to 50 min of 
endurance exercise, and a cool -down. The exercise 
program will consist primarily of brisk walking or jogging, and will be supplemented with rowing, stepping, or elliptical exercise. The initial exercise prescription will be 30 minutes 
at 65% of maximal HR. During the first 2 weeks of training, 
exercise duration and intensity will be gradually increased to 45 min at 80 to 85% of maximal HR. This exercise training program resulted in a 9% increase in 
VO
2max in our pilot study (Figure 6A). Participants will be weighed weekly, and will be instructed to 
consume more food to prevent weight loss during this intervention. Maximal exercise testing will be 
performed half way through the intervention, and exercise prescriptions updated every 2 weeks.  
 
2. Diet -Induced Weight loss - The wei ght loss program will be administered by the Clinical Core of the 
NORC (see attached letter of support from Dr. Bessesen). Participants will receive a low calorie diet 
consisting of 4- 5 servings of vegetables per day and 4- 5 meal replacements (Health Nutrition Technology 
Inc., Carmel California). No other food intake will be allowed.  To reduce the risk of gallstone formation 
subjects will consume 2 teaspoons (10g) per day of vegetable oil.  This diet will provide 890 kcal/d, 75 g 
of protein, 15 g fat and 110 g of carbohydrate and 100% of the DRI of all vitamins, minerals and 
micronutrients. This meal replacement program was used in our pilot study with an average 9% weight 
loss and 62% increase in insulin sensitivity in in 12 weeks (Figures 6B and 6C). Subjects will be weighed 
 
 
  
  
Protocol Template Page 8 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 weekly and will meet bi -weekly in group sessions to receive nutritional/behavioral counseling.  After the 3-
month intervention, subjects will transition to their normal diet for 2 weeks of weight maintenance, 
supervised by research dieticians with extensive experience helping subjects maintain a weight -reduced 
state.  
 3. Delayed intervention control – This group of individuals will serve as our free -living control group, 
and ensure none of the changes observed in the diet -induced weight  loss or exercise training 
interventions are due to receipt of health information, exercise testing, or contact with investigators. After finishing the study, they can choose to undergo the weight loss, exercise training, or combination intervention.  
 After finishing the intervention, participants will repeat the maximal exercise testing, MRI scan, DEXA 
measurement of body composition, sleep recording and the insulin clamp study after 2 weeks of weight stability on their typical diet.  
 
Muscle biopsy specimens from specific aims 1 and 2 will be used for this aim. Fresh muscle biopsies samples will be permeabilized for mitochondrial respiration studies, as well as homogenized for mitochondrial respiratory chain complex activity. Measurements shown in Table 2A  will be performed 
with and without the addition of increasing doses of specific 1,2- and 1,3- DAG and sphingolipid 
species, as shown in Table 2B, before and after each intervention.  Ceramide and dihydroceramide 
will be administered as an equal mix of C18:0, C24:0, and C24:1 species, while 1,2- and 1,3 -DAG will 
be an equal mix of Di -C18:0, C16:0/C18:0, and C16:0/C18:1 species. In addition to vehicle controls, 
we will also administer triolein to ensure responses observed are not due to a general effect of lipids on mitochondrial function.   
   Mitochondrial Respiration - All experimental 
measurements of oxygen consumption will be determined 
by a high- resolution respirometry Oxygraph- 2K 
(OROBOROS Instruments, Innsbruck, Austria, see 
attached letter of support from Dr. MacLean). 
Measurements will be performed at 37 °C and respiration 
rates expressed in nmolO2·min−1 ·mg·dry wt−1. 
Respiration will be normalized to vehicle control, since 
basal respiration rates will vary based on training status and quality of musc le fibers from the biopsy. Permeabilization will be carried out directly 
in an oxygraph chamber with saponin (20 μg/mL) for 5 min before starting the measurements as previously described (49). To evaluate the in viv o 
condition, mitochondrial respiration in permeabilized muscle will be 
determined with glutamate + malate (GM), octanoyl carnitine + 
malate(OM), and succinate as respiratory substrates (Table 2A). In the presence of either GM or OM, respiration is initiated with a saturating 
concentration of ADP (2 mM) and the Vmax of maximal ADP -stimulated 
respiration rate or state 3 respiration rate is determined. To evaluate the 
influence of DAG and sphingolipids on mitochondrial respiration, 
sphingolipids in isopropyl al cohol (1ul in 2ml respiration buffer), DAG in 
ethanol (1ul in 2ml respiration buffer), or vehicle controls are then added  
serially to measure affects of low, medium, and high lipid content.  The 
intactness of mitochondrial membranes will then be validated by 
cytochrome c tests for each experiment. Only samples passing this quality test will be used further.  Oligomycin is then given to measure mitochondrial 
proton leak. FCCP will then be titrated to uncouple the mitochondria and a maximal rate of the electr on transport system rate determined.  Antimycin A 
(10 μM) is then added to determine the rate of residual oxygen consumption (Rox).  Respiration rates are then corrected for Rox. 
Respiration kinetics of GM and OM will also be determined by adding ADP 

Protocol Template Page 9 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 cumul atively and the maximum rates of respiration (Vmax) and values for apparent KmADP 
determined using Michelis -Menton kinetics.   
Mitochondrial Complex Activity – Respiratory chain enzyme activity for complexes I, II, II+III, III, IV, 
and citrate synthase will be assayed from muscle homogenates as previously described, modified for 
96 well plate format (50). Respiratory chain activity assays will be performed with addition of DAG 
and sphingolipids as shown in Table 2B to parallel mitochondrial respiration studies.  
GSH/GSSG and acyl -carnitines – These will be measured as described in specific aim 2.  
  
 
D.   Description, Risks and Justification of Procedures and Data Collection Tools:  
  
Potential Risks  
Radiation exposure.  The DEXA measurement involves a very low dose of radiation 
(approximately 0.03mRem total equivalent dose per measurement) which is less than 1% of the radiation received from a chest x -ray.  There is no known risk from receiving this dose of radiation.  
 IV risks.   A hollow needle/plastic tube will be placed for obtaining blood samples or giving fluids.  
This will be left in for 5 -8 hours.  When the needle goes in the vein it may hurt for a short time, and 
there may be discomfort from having the hollow needle/plastic tube in the subjects’ arm.  There is a 1/10 chance a small bruise forming in the area, 1/100 chance of a clot forming in the vein, and 1/1000 chance of infection or significant blood loss. A total of ~250ml of blood will be taken from the subjec ts 
during the study in aims 1 and 2.  This is approximately 5% of total blood volume and is not associated with a risk of anemia.  
 
Venipuncture.  Subjects will feel pain when the needle goes into the vein. Approximately 5% of 
people may faint, feel nauseous  or dizzy.  Not uncommonly a bruise may form at the puncture site.  
 Muscle strength testing.  Subjects may feel muscular discomfort during the muscle strength test. 
They may have sore muscles the day after the test.  
 Risk of maximal mitochondrial respirati on test . You will experience frequent tightening of the blood 
pressure cuff on your leg, which may be uncomfortable.  
 
Risks of sleep recording. Measurement of the electrocardiogram (ECG -heart tracing) may cause 
some skin irritation from the sensors. Measurement of the electroencephalogram (EEG -brain wave 
activity), Electroocculogram (EOG -eye movement activity) Electromyogram (EMG -muscle activity on 
the chin and legs), nasal -oral air thermister (breathing in and out of the nose & mouth), and 
respiratory bands placed over the chest and abdomen, may cause some minor discomfort and/or skin 
irritation due to the paste used to attach the sensors.  In addition, the paste used to hold sensors to 
the scalp may leave a flaky residue for several days. The physiological recording device is electrically isolated and complies with hospital standards for electrical safety.  
 
MRI. Subjects may feel claustrophobic during the MRI. They may also experience flashing light in 
their eyes, and temporary warmth and reddening of the skin. 
 Insulin clamp . The hyperinsulinemic/euglycemic clamp carries a 1 in 10 risk for symptoms of 
hypoglycemia (neuroglycopenic or autonomic), and less than 1 in 10,000 of serious sequellae of 
hypoglycemia such as seizure, coma or death.  
 
Muscle biopsies.  Muscle biopsies are frequently uncomfortable and result is a bruise over the 
site.  Risks of bleeding, infection, damage to nerves or vessels is ~1 in 100 or less. There may be discomfort following the biopsies after the anesthetic wears off. The CTRC will provide pain relievers 
to minimize potential discomfort.  
 
Weight loss.  During the weight loss phase, subjects could experience one or more of the 
following: bowel changes, cold sensation, and menstrual irregularities.   During the weight loss phase, 
Protocol Template Page 10 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 subjects could experience one or more of the following: dizziness or lightheadedness, fatigue, dry 
skin, and some temporary hair loss.   Not everyone will have these side effects. Eating high fat foods 
while on the low calorie diet has additional risk of triggering an acute gallbladder attack. Some 
research studies have found that during a low calorie diet, there is an increased risk of gallstone 
formation or gallbladder disease.  
 
Exercise testing and training.  During the exercise testing and training subjects may experience a 
fall, as well as discomforts such as pain in muscles or joints. During the exercise testing and training subjects may feel dizzy or faint as well as experience irregular heartbeats. During the exercise testing and training subjects may experience a stroke or heart attack. The risk of death during or immediately 
after an exercise test is less than 1 in 10,000. The risk of a heart attack during or immediately after an 
exercise test is less than 4 in 10,000. The risk of a problem that would require hospitalization, such as 
chest pain, is less than 2 in 1000.  
 
Risks of losing confidentiality. Violation of privacy and loss of confidentiality are both risks to 
which research participants are exposed.  The possibility of these risks increases when pr otected 
health information is collected.  
 
Alternative treatments.  We see no psychological, social, or legal risks beyond those of 
participation in health- related research. There are no alternative methods available that would permit 
the collection of the required information for this research study.  
 
ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS 
a. Recruitment and informed consent  
A member of the investigative team will obtain informed consent and HIPAA authorization in 
tandem.  Subjects will have a copy of the C OMIRB -approved consent form sent to them my mail or 
email for their review prior to meeting with a team member.  Potential subjects will talk with  a team 
member for a full explanation of the study logistics, rationale, risks and benefits, and also to ask/a nswer questions. Informed consent will be obtained at the start of the preliminary screening visit.  
This will be done in a private, quiet, and unhurried environment. Volunteers will be asked to explain 
the consent form in their own words to ensure understanding of the study and what is expected of 
them.  No tests or procedures will be performed prior to the subject signing the informed consent. 
Only volunteers capable of providing informed consent may participate in this research.  Informed 
consent will be obtained by a member of the research team who has been through COMIRB 101 and 
102 training (from our local institutional review board). Subjects will receive a copy of their signed 
consent.   
 
b. Protection against risk  
Every attempt will be made to minimi ze the risks involved to patients in this study. Subjects 
privacy, autonomy and confidentiality will be protected with redundant IRB & HIPAA -compliant 
measures.  Subjects may withdraw from the study at any time.  Only state -of-the-art techniques will 
be used in a NIH -funded, JCAHO accredited CTRC facility.  CTRC personnel are exquisitely trained, 
and emergency equipment is easily accessible on- site.  Universal precautions will be taken to protect 
everyone involved with subject testing.  Sterile technique is invoked where appropriate.  All infusion 
are prepared and stored by a licensed pharmacist and tested for sterility and pyrogenicity. We will 
also have an independent safety officer who will evaluate subject risk annually. Taken together, these 
measures have proven successful in the minimization of risk to subjects. Protected and de -identified 
information will be kept on password- protected computer systems with hard copies in locked filing 
cabinets in locked offices.  
 
    
E.   Potential Scientific Problems:    
We have extensive experience recruiting individuals across the metabolic spectrum (51-55), as well 
as performing insulin clamps (39; 51; 56; 57), and muscle biopsies (26; 43; 51; 53; 58- 61) and therefore 
no problems are expected with the proposed studies. An alternative approach to our proposal would be to use a combined exercise and weight loss intervention, which may have more dramatic results compared 
Protocol Template Page 11 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 to exercise or weight loss only interventions. If we find minimal changes in insulin sensitivity with either 
intervention used in isolation, we will move to a combined intervention. Different degrees of success with 
the interventions are important to provide a spread in the data for changes in localized lipids and insulin sensitivity. An alternative approach would be to provide food for subjects to consume prior to both insulin 
clamps. We excluded this design because of the possibility of changing muscle lipid species and 
localiza tion with changing dietary patterns. If individuals cannot maintain their weight within 2kg of starting 
weight in the exercise only intervention, they will be removed from the study. Our focus in this proposal is 
on DAG and sphingolipids, however, we will also measure changes in triglyceride, long chain acyl -CoA, 
and phosphatidic acid to determine other lipids related to changes in insulin sensitivity and/or cellular 
signaling.  If there are no changes in PKC, we will evaluate changes in non -PKC DAG targets such as 
PKD and RasGRP1/4 to determine if these less studied DAG targets relate to insulin resistance.  
 
Our typical muscle biopsy yield after removal of extra- muscular lipid, is approximately 160mg wet weight,  
and the tissue required for the assays in this project is 135mg wet weight, allowing all assays to be performed 
on the majority of biopsies. If muscle yield is limiting, we will prioritize analysis in the following order: 
subcellular fractionation (50mg) >western blot (15mg) >mitochondrial respiration (25mg) >PP2A activity 
(10mg) >PKC activity (35mg). We will also evaluate changes in other mitochondrial/ER lipids related to 
changes in mitochondrial function. In addition to those lipids listed under aim 1, we will also measure 
cardiolipin content as well as composition.  
 
 
F.   Data Analysis Plan:   
Aim 1: Our statistical methods are rigorous with an a priori  statistical analysis plan to test our hypothesis 
in an unbiased manner, and power analysis based on our own preliminary data. Prior to analysis, data will be analyzed for normality, and any non- normally distributed variables will be log- transformed for use in 
analytic models. Correlations between the change in sarcolemmal DAG and sphingolipid species and the 
change in insulin sensitivity will be performed using Pearson’s correlation coefficients in the entire study group (n=51). Then, data comparing changes in sarcolemmal DAG and sphingolipid species to changes 
in insulin sensitivity before and after the intervention will be analyzed using a one -way Analysis of 
Variance (ANOVA) to examine overall differences between the intervention groups, and using Tukey’s 
procedure to make pair -wise comparisons (e.g control vs. exercise, control vs. diet only) while adju sting 
for multiple comparisons. Changes in individual DAG and ceramide species will be examined using the Benjamini Hochberg procedure to limit false discoveries (62), and then Principal Component Analysis 
(PCA) will be used to examine groups of DAG and ceramide species (13). Analyses will be conducted 
using SAS statistical soft ware ver. 9.4 (Cary, NC). The power analysis is based on changes in 
sarcolemmal lipids assuming there will be no significant changes in the control intervention. With an 
overall n of 51, we will have 92% power to detect a Pearson correlation coefficient si milar to our 
preliminary data (Figure 2B, r= -0.45), and 80% power to detect a correlation coefficient as small as -0.38.  
Pilot data showed sarcolemmal C18:0 ceramide decreased 0.041 ng/ug protein with a SD of .02 after the combined intervention. With an n of 17/group we will have 84.6% power to measure a similar change in sarcolemmal DAG and sphingolipids for individual group comparisons using the Tukey procedure. The 
type 1 error rate (alpha) will be set at 5% for all comparisons.  
 
Aim 2: Our statistical  methods are rigorous with an a priori  statistical analysis plan to test our hypothesis 
in an unbiased manner, and power analysis based on our own preliminary data. Data will be analyzed for 
normality, and any non- normally distributed variables will be log- transformed for use in analytic models. 
Correlations between the change in mitochondrial/ER DAG and sphingolipid species and the change in 
insulin sensitivity, mitochondrial respiration, ROS production, acyl -carnitine species, and ER stress will be 
perfor med using Pearson’s correlations coefficient in the overall study group.  Data comparing changes in 
mitochondrial/ER DAG and sphingolipid species to changes in insulin sensitivity and parameters of mitochondrial respiration between groups before and after the intervention will be analyzed using a one-
way ANOVA (SAS statistical software ver. 9.4, Cary, NC). If overall differences are observed by group 
then individual group comparisons will be made using Tukey’s procedure, which corrects for family -wise 
error rates.  Changes in individual DAG and ceramide species will be examined using the Benjamini 
Hochberg procedure to limit false discoveries, and changes in groups of DAG and ceramide species will be examined using PCA as described in Aim #1. Our power analysis is based on our preliminary data for 
Protocol Template Page 12 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 the change in mitochondrial ceramide and DAG species after the pilot intervention shown in Figures 8 
and 10, and assuming there will be no significant changes in the control intervention. With an overall n of 
51, we will have 99% power to detect a Pearson correlation coefficient as large as that observed in our preliminary data (Figure 7B, r= -0.44), and we will have 80% power to detect a correlation coefficient as 
small as - 0.38.  With an n of 17/group, we will have 95% power to measure a similar change in 
mitochondrial DAG and sphingolipids as we have observed in our pilot data after the weight loss or exercise interventions using pairwise comparisons in ANOVA models using the Tukey procedure.  The 
type 1 error rate (alpha) will be set at 5% for all comparisons.  
 
Data analysis plan for secondary data points regarding sleep component of the study:  
Sleep duration and markers of sleep quality will be obtained from Actiwatch recordings and scored using the provided Actiware Software. Data are collected from one week preceding the baseline clamp study 
visit and again from  one week preceding the post -intervention clamp study visit. Actigraphy data will be 
averaged across 7 days to create average sleep duration and sleep quality scores for each participant 
before and after intervention. We will then examine the relationship between changes in sleep variables 
and changes in insulin sensitivity assessed by the clamp study.  
 
 G.  Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:   
Achievement of  these aims will yield the following expected outcomes : 1) sarcolemmal 1,2-
disaturated DAG and C18:0 ceramide promote insulin resistance through PKC and PP2A activation; 2) mitochondrial/ER sphingolipids correlate with mitochondrial function, ER stress, RO S, acyl -carnitine 
content, and insulin resistance; 3) DAG and sphingolipids reduce mitochondrial function and increase 
ROS and acyl -carnitine generation in vitro consistent with a cause and effect relationship. These 
outcomes will be clinically significant  by identifying signaling pathways and mechanisms of accumulation 
of specific localized DAG and ceramide species which can ultimately be targeted for the prevention and treatment of diabetes.  
 
 
 H. References:  
 
 
 
1. Adams JM, 2nd, Pratipanawatr T, Berria R, Wang E, DeFronzo RA, Sullards MC, Mandarino LJ: Ceramide content is increased in skeletal muscle from obese insulin- resistant humans. Diabetes 
2004;53:25- 31 
2. Turinsky J, O'Sullivan DM, Bayly BP: 1,2 -Diacylglycerol and ceramide level s in insulin -resistant tissues 
of the rat in vivo. J Biol Chem 1990;265:16880-16885 
3. Moro C, Galgani JE, Luu L, Pasarica M, Mairal A, Bajpeyi S, Schmitz G, Langin D, Liebisch G, Smith 
SR: Influence of gender, obesity, and muscle lipase activity on intramyocellular lipids in sedentary individuals. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009;94:3440-3447 
4. Straczkowski M, Kowalska I, Baranowski M, Nikolajuk A, Otziomek E, Zabielski P, Adamska A, 
Blachnio A, Gorski J, Gorska M: Increased skeletal muscle ceramide level in men at risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 2007;50:2366- 2373  
5. Avignon A, Yamada K, Zhou X, Spencer B, Cardona O, Saba- Siddique S, Galloway L, Standaert ML, 
Farese RV: Chronic activation of protein kinase C in soleus muscles and other tissues  of insulin- resistant 
type II diabetic Goto -Kakizaki (GK), obese/aged, and obese/Zucker rats. A mechanism for inhibiting 
glycogen synthesis. Diabetes 1996;45:1396- 1404  
6. Schmitz -Peiffer C, Oakes ND, Browne CL, Kraegen EW, Biden TJ: Reversal of chronic alterations of 
skeletal muscle protein kinase C from fat -fed rats by BRL -49653. Am J Physiol 1997;273:E915- 921 
7. Schmitz -Peiffer C, Browne CL, Oakes ND, Watkinson A, Chisholm DJ, Kraegen EW, Biden TJ: 
Alterations in the expression and cellular localization of protein kinase C isozymes epsilon and theta are 
associated with insulin resistance in skeletal muscle of the high-fat- fed rat. Diabetes 1997;46:169-178 
8. Griffin ME, Marcucci MJ, Cline GW, Bell K, Barucci N, Lee D, Goodyear LJ, Kraegen EW, White MF, 
Shulman GI: Free fatty acid- induced insulin resistance is associated with activation of protein kinase C 
theta and alterations in the insulin signaling cascade. Diabetes 1999;48:1270- 1274 
Protocol Template Page 13 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 9. Itani SI, Ruderman NB, Schmieder F, Boden G: Lipid-induced insulin resistance in human muscle is 
associated with changes in diacylglycerol, protein kinase C, and IkappaB -alpha. Diabetes 2002;51:2005-
2011  
10. Bruce CR, Thrush AB, Mertz VA, Bezaire V, Chabowski A, Heigenhauser GJ, Dyck DJ: Endurance training in obese humans improves glucose tolerance and mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation and alters 
muscle lipid content. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2006;291:E99-E107 11. Dube JJ, Amati F, Toledo FG, Stefanovic- Racic M, Rossi A, Coen P, Goodpaster BH: Effects of 
weight loss and exercise on insulin resistance, and intramyocellular triacylglycerol, diacylglycerol and ceramide. Diabetologia 2011;54:1147- 1156  
12. Coen PM, Dube JJ, Amati F, Stefanovic -Racic M, Ferrell RE, Toledo FG, Goodpaster BH: Insulin 
resistance is associated with higher intramyocellular triglycerides in type I but not type II myocytes concomitant with higher ceramide content. Diabetes 2010;59:80- 88 
13. Amati F, Dube JJ, Alvarez -Carnero E, Edreira MM, Chomentowski P, Coen PM, Switzer GE, Bickel 
PE, Stefanovic -Racic M, Toledo FG, Goodpaster BH: Skeletal muscle triglycerides, diacylglycerols, and 
ceramides in insulin resistance: another paradox in endurance- trained athletes? Diabetes 2011;60:2588-
2597  
14. Coen PM, Menshikova EV, Distefano G, Zheng D, Tanner CJ, Standley RA, Helbling NL, Dubis GS, Ritov VB, Xie H, Desimone ME, Smith SR, Stefanovic -Racic M, Toledo FG, Houmard JA, Goodpaster BH: 
Exercise and Weight Loss Improve Muscle Mitochondrial Respiration, Lipid Partitioning, and Insulin Sensitivity After Gastric Bypass Surgery. Diabetes 2015;64:3737- 3750  
15. Dube JJ, Amati F, Stefanovic -Racic M, Toledo FG, Sauers SE, Goodpaster BH: Exercise- induced 
alterations in intramyocellular lipids and insulin resistance: the athlete's paradox revisited. Am J Physiol Endocrin ol Metab 2008;294:E882- 888 
16. Devries MC, Samjoo IA, Hamadeh MJ, McCready C, Raha S, Watt MJ, Steinberg GR, Tarnopolsky 
MA: Endurance training modulates intramyocellular lipid compartmentalization and morphology in skeletal 
muscle of lean and obese women.  J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:4852 -4862  
17. Helge JW, Dobrzyn A, Saltin B, Gorski J: Exercise and training effects on ceramide metabolism in 
human skeletal muscle. Experimental physiology 2004;89:119- 127 
18. Hoy AJ, Brandon AE, Turner N, Watt MJ, Bruce CR, Cooney GJ, Kraegen EW: Lipid and insulin 
infusion -induced skeletal muscle insulin resistance is likely due to metabolic feedback and not changes in 
IRS-1, Akt, or AS160 phosphorylation. American journal of physiology Endocrinology and metabolism 
2009;2 97:E67 -75 
19. Frangioudakis G, Ye JM, Cooney GJ: Both saturated and n -6 polyunsaturated fat diets reduce 
phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate- 1 and protein kinase B in muscle during the initial stages of 
in vivo insulin stimulation. Endocrinology 2005;146:5596- 5603  
20. Jocken JW, Goossens GH, Boon H, Mason RR, Essers Y, Havekes B, Watt MJ, van Loon LJ, Blaak 
EE: Insulin -mediated suppression of lipolysis in adipose tissue and skeletal muscle of obese type 2 
diabetic men and men with normal glucose t olerance. Diabetologia 2013;56:2255 -2265  
21. Szendroedi J, Yoshimura T, Phielix E, Koliaki C, Marcucci M, Zhang D, Jelenik T, Muller J, Herder C, Nowotny P, Shulman GI, Roden M: Role of diacylglycerol activation of PKCtheta in lipid- induced muscle 
insulin resistance in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014;111:9597- 9602  
22. Nowotny B, Zahiragic L, Krog D, Nowotny PJ, Herder C, Carstensen M, Yoshimura T, Szendroedi J, Phielix E, Schadewaldt P, Schloot NC, Shulman GI, Roden M: Mechanisms underlying the onset of oral lipid-induced skeletal muscle insulin resistance in humans. Diabetes 2013;62:2240- 2248  
23. Hannun YA, Obeid LM: Many ceramides. The Journal of biological chemistry 2011;286:27855- 27862 
24. Cantley JL, Yoshimura T, Camporez JP, Zhang D, Jornayvaz FR, Kumashiro N, Guebre- Egziabher F, 
Jurczak MJ, Kahn M, Guigni BA, Serr J, Hankin J, Murphy RC, Cline GW, Bhanot S, Manchem VP, 
Brown JM, Samuel VT, Shulman GI: CGI -58 knockdown sequesters diacylglycerols in lipid droplets/ER -
preventing diacylglycerol -media ted hepatic insulin resistance. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America 2013;110:1869- 1874  
25. Coen PM, Goodpaster BH: Role of intramyocelluar lipids in human health. Trends in endocrinology 
and metabolism: TEM 2012; 23:391 -398 
26. Bergman BC, Hunerdosse DM, Kerege A, Playdon MC, Perreault L: Localisation and composition of skeletal muscle diacylglycerol predicts insulin resistance in humans. Diabetologia 2012;55:1140- 1150  
Protocol Template Page 14 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 27. Bergman BC, Brozinick JT, Strauss A, Bacon  S, Kerege A, Bui HH, Sanders P, Siddall P, Wei T, 
Thomas MK, Kuo MS, Perreault L: Muscle sphingolipids during rest and exercise: a C18:0 signature for 
insulin resistance in humans. Diabetologia 2016;  
28. Mukhopadhyay A, Saddoughi SA, Song P, Sultan I, Ponnusamy S, Senkal CE, Snook CF, Arnold HK, 
Sears RC, Hannun YA, Ogretmen B: Direct interaction between the inhibitor 2 and ceramide via 
sphingolipid- protein binding is involved in the regulation of protein phosphatase 2A activity and signaling. 
FASEB J 2009 ;23:751 -763 
29. Carrasco S, Merida I: Diacylglycerol, when simplicity becomes complex. Trends Biochem Sci 2007;32:27- 36 
30. Domart MC, Hobday TM, Peddie CJ, Chung GH, Wang A, Yeh K, Jethwa N, Zhang Q, Wakelam MJ, 
Woscholski R, Byrne RD, Collinson LM, Poccia DL, Larijani B: Acute manipulation of diacylglycerol 
reveals roles in nuclear envelope assembly & endoplasmic reticulum morphology. PLoS One 
2012;7:e51150 
31. Diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 2012;35 Suppl 1:S64- 71 
32. Matsuda M, DeFronzo RA: Insulin sensitivity indices obtained from oral glucose tolerance testing: 
comparison with the euglycemic insulin clamp. Diabetes Care 1999;22:1462 -1470  
33. Craig CL, Marshall AL, Sjostrom M, Bauman AE, Booth ML, Ainsworth BE, Pratt M, Ekelund U, Yngve 
A, Sallis JF, Oja P: International physical activity questionnaire: 12 -country reliability and validity. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc 2003;35:1381 -1395  
34. Pescatello LS, American College of Sports Medicine.: ACSM's guidelines for exercise testing and 
prescription . Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins Health, 2014  
35. Hodson L, Skeaff CM, Fielding BA: Fatty acid composition of adipose tissue and blood in humans and its use as a biomarker of dietary intake. Prog Lipid Res 2008; 47:348- 380 
36. Romon M, Nuttens MC, Theret N, Delbart C, Lecerf JM, Fruchart JC, Salomez JL: Comparison 
between fat intake assessed by a 3 -day food record and phospholipid fatty acid composition of red blood 
cells: results from the Monitoring of Cardiovascular Disease- Lille Study. Metabolism 1995;44:1139-1145  
37. McGuire EA, Helderman JH, Tobin JD, Andres R, Berman M: Effects of arterial versus venous sampling on analysis of glucose kinetics in man. J Appl Physiol 1976;41:565- 573 
38. DeFronzo RA, Tobin JD, Andres R: Glucose clamp technique: a method for quantifying insulin 
secretion and resistance. Am J Physiol 1979;237:E214-223 
39. Bergman BC, Cornier MA, Horton TJ, Bessesen D: Effects Of Fasting On Insulin Action And Glucose 
Kinetics In Lean And Obese Men And Women. Am J Physiol 2007;293:E1103- 1111  
40. Bielawski J, Szulc ZM, Hannun YA, Bielawska A: Simultaneous quantitative analysis of bioactive sphingolipids by high- performance liquid chromatography -tandem mass spectrometry. Methods 
2006;39:82- 91 
41. Xia P, Inoguchi T, Kern TS, Engerman RL, Oates PJ, King GL: Characterization of the mechanism for the chronic activation of diacylglycerol -protein kinase C pathway in diabetes and hypergalactosemia. 
Diabetes 1994;43:1122- 1129 
42. Craven PA, Davidson CM, DeRubertis FR: Increase in diacylglycerol mass in isolated glomeruli by glucose from de novo synthesis of glycerolipids. Diabetes 1990;39:667- 674 
43. Bergman BC, Perreault L, Hunerdosse D, Kerege A, Playdon M, Samek AM, Eckel RH: Novel and 
reversible mechanisms of smoking -induced insulin resistance in humans. Diabetes 2012;61:3156- 3166  
44. Gozansky WS, Van Pelt RE, Jankowski CM, Schwartz RS, Kohrt WM: Protection of bone mass by 
estrogens and raloxifene during exercise- induced weight Loss. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and 
metabolism 2005;90:52- 59 
45. Kirwan JP, Kohrt WM, Wojta DM, Bourey RE, Holloszy JO: Endurance exercise training reduces glucose- stimulated insulin levels in 60 - to 70- year-old men and women. J Gerontol 1993;48:M84-90 
46. Kohrt WM, Barry DW , Van Pelt RE, Jankowski CM, Wolfe P, Schwartz RS: Timing of ibuprofen use 
and bone mineral density adaptations to exercise training. J Bone Miner Res 2010;25:1415- 1422 
47. Kohrt WM, Malley MT, Coggan AR, Spina RJ, Ogawa T, Ehsani AA, Bourey RE, Martin WH,  3rd, 
Holloszy JO: Effects of gender, age, and fitness level on response of VO2max to training in 60 -71 yr olds. 
J Appl Physiol (1985) 1991;71:2004 -2011  
48. Schenkman M, Hall DA, Baron AE, Schwartz RS, Mettler P, Kohrt WM: Exercise for people in early - 
or mid-stage Parkinson disease: a 16- month randomized controlled trial. Phys Ther 2012;92:1395 -1410  
49. Kuznetsov AV, Veksler V, Gellerich FN, Saks V, Margreiter R, Kunz WS: Analysis of mitochondrial 
function in situ in permeabilized muscle fibers, tissues and cells. Nature protocols 2008;3:965- 976 
Protocol Template Page 15 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11 
 50. Spinazzi M, Casarin A, Pertegato V, Salviati L, Angelini C: Assessment of mitochondrial respiratory 
chain enzymatic activities on tissues and cultured cells. Nature protocols 2012;7:1235- 1246  
51. Perreault L, Bergman BC, Hunerdosse DM, Eckel RH: Altered intramuscular lipid metabolism relates 
to diminished insulin action in men, but not women, in progression to diabetes. Obesity (Silver Spring) 
2010;18:2093 -2100  
52. Perreault L, Bergman BC, Hunerdosse DM, Howard DJ, Eckel RH: Fenofibrate administration does 
not affect muscle triglyceride concentration or insulin sensitivity in humans. Metabolism 2011;60:1107 -
1114  
53. Perreault L, Bergman BC, Hunerdosse DM, Playdon MC, Eckel RH: Inflexibility in intramuscular trigly ceride fractional synthesis distinguishes prediabetes from obesity in humans. Obesity (Silver Spring) 
2010;18:1524 -1531  
54. Perreault L, Bergman BC, Playdon MC, Dalla Man C, Cobelli C, Eckel RH: Impaired fasting glucose 
with or without impaired glucose tolerance: progressive or parallel states of prediabetes? Am J Physiol 
Endocrinol Metab 2008;295:E428- 435 
55. Perreault L, Man CD, Hunerdosse DM, Cobelli C, Bergman BC: Incretin action maintains insulin 
secretion, but not hepatic insulin action, in people with impaired fasting glucose. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 
2010;90:87- 94 
56. Bergman BC, Howard D, Schauer IE, Maahs DM, Snell -Bergeon JK, Clement TW, Eckel RH, 
Perreault L, Rewers M: The importance of palmitoleic acid to adipocyte insulin resistance and whole- body 
insulin sensitivity in type 1 diabetes. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism 2013;98:E40 -
50 
57. Bergman BC, Howard D, Schauer IE, Maahs DM, Snell -Bergeon JK, Eckel RH, Perreault L, Rewers 
M: Features of hepatic and skeletal muscle insulin resistance unique to type 1 diabetes. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism 2012;97:1663 -1672  
58. Bergman BC, Cornier MA, Horton TJ, Bessesen DH, Eckel RH: Skeletal Muscle Munc18c and Syntaxin 4 in Human Obesity. Nutr Metab (Lond) 2008;5:21 59. Bergman BC, Perreault L, Hunerdosse DM, Koehler MC, Samek AM, Eckel RH: Intramuscular lipid 
metabolism in the insulin resistance of smoking. Diabetes 2009;58:2220 -2227  
60. Bergman BC, Perreault L, Hunerdosse DM, Koehler MC, Samek AM, Eckel RH: Increa sed 
intramuscular lipid synthesis and low saturation relate to insulin sensitivity in endurance -trained athletes. 
J Appl Physiol 2010;108:1134- 1141  
61. Perreault L, Bergman BC, Hunerdosse DM, Playdon MC, Eckel RH: Inflexibility in intramuscular triglycerid e fractional synthesis distinguishes prediabetes from obesity in humans. Obesity 2010;18:1524-
1531  
62. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y: Controlling the false discovery rate: A practial and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistial Society Series B (Methodological) 1995;57:289 -300 
 