             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stewardship Prompts to Improve Antibiotic Selection for Pneumonia : 
The INSPIRE Randomized Clinical Trial  
NCT# : 03697070  
 
7/3/2018 
             
 
INSPIRE  (INtelligent  Stewardship Prompts  to Improve  Real-time Empiric  Antibiotic Selection for 
Patients  with Pneumonia ): The INSPIRE -ASP Pneumonia Trial  Protocol  
 
A. Background and Goals  
 
A.1.1 Overuse of Antibiotics in the United States 
Close to forty percent of patients admitted to U.S. hospitals receive an antibiotic to treat 
an active infection, with over half of these antibiotics used to treat just two conditions, 
pneumonia and urinary tract infection (UTI).1 In treating these infections, the Center s for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has found that antibiotic prescribing could be improved 
in 35- 40% of patients.2 This is critical, as there is a growing thr eat of antibiotic -resistant bacteria 
which  now infect ~2 million people per year in U.S. hos pitals and communities as well as at the 
global level.3-5 Concerns about resistance are an important driver of extended- spectrum 
antibiotic prescribing, which in turn promotes further resistance.6,7 
Rising antibiotic resistance and the slow development of novel antibiotics have fueled 
national calls to improve antibiotic choices by frontline physicians.8-13 There is a 2020 target to 
reduce “inappropriate” antibiotic prescribing in hospitals by 20%, as discus sed in the 2014 
“National Strategy for Combating Antibiotic -Resistant Bacteria” released by the White House.12 
While physicians agree that antibiotics are overprescribed, most fail to recognize areas for self -
improvement.14,15 Therefore, hospitals have been charged with developing antimicrobial 
stewards hip programs which provide ongoing education and feedback to physicians and ensure 
accountability in prescribing.10,16 To improve the success of these efforts, it is critical to develop 
evidence about best pr actices for improving judicious antibiotic presc ribing. Evidence, 
engagement, and education are required to build a culture where it is accepted that rationale 
antibiotic prescribing is every physician’s responsibility.21 
A.1.2 Multidrug- Resistant Organism s as Drivers of Empiric Extended -Spectrum Inpati ent 
Antibiotic Use  
 There are many facets of inappropriate antibiotic prescribing, including prescribing 
antibiotics when they are not indicated, starting unnecessari ly broad empiric antibiotics for a 
patient ’s condition, selecting the wrong dose or durati on, and failing to re- evaluate the choices 
that have been made. Empiric therapy refers to the selection of an antibiotic prior to knowledge 
regarding the specific pathogen. We focus here on improving the empi ric selection of antibiotics 
for hospitalized pati ents that have an appropriate indication.  
When selecting initial antibiotics for common community -acquired conditions that cause 
admission, such as pneumonia and ur inary tract infection (UTI), physicians vary widely in their 
adherence to national guideli nes.18-20 This is often due to misperceptions that multidrug -resistant 
organisms (MDROs) are more common than they actually are, or beliefs that extended-
spectrum antibiotics are more effective in curing infections than standard- spectrum choices, 
even for pa thogens sensitive to standard- spectrum agents.21 Often, such perceptions are based 
on studies on critically ill patients and those with infections caused by methici llin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA ), Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and extended -spectrum  beta-
lactamase producing (ESBL) Enterobacteriaceae.22-28 
In 2005, the American Thoracic Society and the Infectious Diseases Society of America 
classified patients with recent healthcare exposure as having a higher risk of MDROs as the 
infecting pathogen in pneumonia. National guidelines recommended giving empiric extended -
spectrum antibiotics to address this potential risk.29-32 Not surprisingly, the use of extended-
spectrum antibiotics has increased.34 Despi te guideline recommendations to consider the loc al 
prevalence of MDROs, there has been little guidance on how best to assess local MDRO 
prevalence.  
A.1.3 Knowledge Gaps for Judicious Empiric Antibiotic Prescribing  
             
 
 In understanding the appropriateness of e mpiric antibiotic selection, it is important to 
note that the criterion of recent healthcare exposure is a poor predictor of having an infection 
due to an MDRO.35,36 In fact, use of empiric extended- spectrum antibi otics has not been 
associated with differences in mortality in several single or small mul ticenter studies.35-38 
Furthermore, even when empiric antibiotics are found to be discordant with pathogen antibiotic susceptibilities, transient use of discordant therapy followed by correction to appropriat e therapy 
has not been found to have negative outc omes in single- center studies of non- critically ill 
patients.
39,40 Thus, several antibiotic stewardship experts have advocated  reserving extended-
spectrum antibiot ic therapy for patients with culture- proven resistance, except in critically ill 
patients or in hospitals with a high local incidence of MDRO infections.41 This position may be 
further justified by the fact that extended- spectrum therapy, often involving more than one drug, 
has been associated wit h a higher risk of Clostridium difficile  infecti ons and increased risk of 
colonization or subsequent infection with MDROs.42-44 An additional reason to initiate standard -
spectrum therapy is that prescribers rarely modify antibiotic regimens, even after cul tures reveal 
susceptible strains.45 
To reduce the overuse of extended -spectrum antibiotics as empiric therapy for 
pneumonia, hospitals have utilized both labor -intensive auditing with feedback and education, 
as well as point -of-care interventions aimed at changing prescribing practices.43, 46 -49 
Neverthel ess, successful interventions to improve antibiotic prescribing in hospitals have been 
called “the missing care bundle,”50 highlighting the fact that we lack certai nty and generalizability 
in understanding which strategies best effect change in prescribi ng behavior.  
A.1.4 Incorporating Local Evidence into Decision- Making  
Knowledge of local and hospital  prevalence of MDROs can be an important 
consideration when determining whether to empirically use extended -spectrum agents. This 
information is commonly obta ined through antibiograms from the clinical microbiology laboratory 
which note the proportion of each pathogen that tested resistant to common antibiotics in the 
recent past. The intent of these local antibiograms are to assist physicians in their choice of 
empiric antibiotics,51 and to influence hospital guidelines for appropriate antibiotic prescribing.52-
55 Nevertheless, antibiograms are difficult to use when the pathogen is unknown since 
physicians have to extrapolate the probability that the infection is due to a particular pathogen. 
As mentioned above, physicians are expected to use local antibiogram data from their microbiology laboratory to determine the risk of an MDRO infection in a given patient.
51-54,92 Yet, 
these data are not presented in a mann er helpful to clinical decision- making.93 For example, 
national data shows that over 50% of S. aureus  are resistant to methicillin (MRSA), and 22% of 
E. coli and 30% of P. aeruginosa are resistant to fluoroquinolones.94 
These data may be misinterpreted as the probability that a patient has an MDRO 
infection. However, when accounting for the likelihood that a patient is infected with these 
pathogens, the risk of MDRO infection drops substantially. In two recent studies of patients 
presenting from the communi ty with pneumonia, there was a 2.5- 4.6% risk of MRSA, a 1.0- 1.9% 
risk of Gram -negative Enterobacteriaceae , and a 0.7- 1.2% risk of P. aeruginosa resistant to 
standard -spectrum antibiotics.26,94- 95   
Instead of providing the MDRO risk by pathogen, physicians  would be better served by 
alerts providing the local probabilities of resistance for specific types of infections. Though precision medicine tools in antibiotic st ewardship are lacking, there is evidence t hat precision 
medicine approaches can substantially improve patient care.
56-59 This involves reformulating a 
hospitals’ antibiogram data into disease- specific probabilities of MDRO infection to facilitate 
appropriate prescribing.  
A.1.5 Identifying Best Str ategies for Ensuring Judicious Antibiotic Choices  
Best strategies for ensuring appropriate antibiotic prescribing have not been evaluated in 
clinical trials. Most evidence is based upon single center publications w hich are subject to 
unique hospital prescr ibing culture and beliefs. Much has been described about inpatient 
             
 
antimicrobial stewardship programs and the use of various electronic alerts and labor intensive 
physician feedback to influence and correct inappropriate prescribing.46-49, 60- 65,-52, 68- 72  
Furthermore, antibiotic use and choice is highly  variable among prescribers, particularly in 
community hospital settings and prescribing behavior is often difficult to change with conventional methods.
73-75 
A.1.6 Definition of Standard- Spectrum and Extended- Spectrum Antibiotics  
National guidelines rec ommend selection of either a fluoroquinolone such as 
levofloxacin, or a 3rd generation cephalosporin such as ceftriaxone as empiric therapy for 
patients presenting from home or clinic and meeting criteria for  hospitalization due to 
pneumonia.18-20 There is  growing evidence that fluoroquinolones are associated with serious 
adverse drug reactions and an increased risk of C. difficile colitis.99-101 The Food and Drug 
Admi nistration (FDA) has also issued a warning  (May, 2016) against the routine use of 
fluoroquin olones for acute bacterial exac erbation of chronic bronchitis.102 There is increased 
national attention to decrease the overall use of fluoroquinolones.  
 
A1.7 Adverse Effects of Inappropriate Antibiotic Use  
 Inappropriate use of antibiotics, particularly extended- spectrum antibiotics have been 
shown to increase a patient’s risk for future MDRO, length of stay, risk for C. difficile  colitis, 
healthcare costs, and mortality.99,103 Data are emerging that there  is time to await definitive 
culture data to i nform antibiotic treatment and that a delay in antibiotics targeting resistant 
organisms is not necessarily harmful and may improve outcomes.103-105    
  
 
B. INSPIRE -ASP Pneumonia Trial Study Design & Population  
 
B.1.1 INSPIRE -ASP Pneumonia Trial Study Design & Population  
The INSPIRE -ASP Pneumonia Trial is  a two -arm cluster -randomized trial in HCA 
hospitals comparing routine empiric antibiotic prescribing for patients admitted with pneumonia  
to prescribing infor med by point -of-care precision medicine computeriz ed physician order entry 
(CPOE ) smart prompt  for adult patients admitted to general medical or surgical floors . The unit 
of randomization will be the hospital . The trial will begin with a six -month phase- in period  from 
October 1, 2018- March 31, 2019, followed by  a 15-month trial interv ention period between April 
1, 2019 -June 30, 2020 . For analysis purposes, the cohort will be defined as adult patients with a 
primary or secondary claims code indicating pneumonia that is present on admission, did not 
transfer  directly from the ED to ICU, and is treated with an antibiotic within the first 3 days of 
hospitalization. A  baseline period between April 1, 2017- September 30, 2018 will be utilized for 
comparison with the inter vention period at each hospital. Per guidance from the Office for 
Human R esearch Protections (OHRP) , prisoners will not be included in this t rial. Prescribers 
and antibiotic stewardship teams in intervention facilities will be trained (e.g., coaching calls, 
usual communication channels (email, flye rs)) that prisoners should be excluded from the t rial 
(i.e., the CPOE smart prompt should not be acted upon for these individuals). D ata for any 
prisoners that may be inadvertently included in study dataset s will be removed prior to analyses  
using claims d ata as well as admission/discharge/transfer codes indicating ‘Court/Law 
Enforcement’ . 
 
 B.1.2 HCA Healthcare  Infrastructure for the INSPIRE -ASP Intervention Arm  
HCA Healthcare currently requires physicians to provide an indication when an antibiotic 
is ord ered (see Appendix B for example CPOE indication screens ). For facilities assigned to 
the intervention arm of the INSPIRE -ASP Pneumonia Trial,  an INSPIRE CPOE smart prompt 
will be triggered when physicians  prescribe an extended- spectrum (ES, Table 1) for a  
             
 
pneumonia indication i n the first three days of a hospital stay. This CPOE smart prompt  will 
provide clinicians with a patient -specific estimate of the likelihood that the pneumonia is due to 
the associated target pathogens (e.g. MRSA, Pseudomonas, ESBL, or CRE, Table 1). The 
smart prompt will also provide guidance for  appropriate empiric antibiotic options per trial 
protocol and hospital policy .   
For example, if an anti -MRSA antibiotic is being ordered  for pneumonia, the clinician will 
receive a prompt during the ordering process providing the probability that the patient has 
pneumonia due to  MRSA . Recommendations for  using standard -spectrum antibiotics (e.g. 
ceftriaxone) will be made when the probability of a given MDRO is lower than a given threshold 
(e.g., <10%). Thi s thres hold used in the trial will be finalized after evaluation of the prevalence 
of MDROs, and after discussion with the INSPIRE -ASP Steering Committee.  Similarly, if an ES 
antibiotic is se lected that targets a resistant Gram -negative Enterobacteriaceae or 
Pseu domonas aeruginosa, the ordering physician will receive information on the probability that 
the patient is likely to grow such organisms. The smart prompt will account for personal 
attributes of the patient as well as local resistance  patterns. Hospitals randomized to routine 
care will continue their baseline stewardship activities, principally involving  a decision support 
tool known as Rx VigiLanz Therapeutic Advisor,  which has been ad opted by  all HCA hospitals. 
This tool alerts stewardship teams of possible opportunities for intervention, based on 
microbiology results. Intervention hospitals will also continue these activities.  
The study population is defined at the hospital level, where the intervention will be 
adopted as part of a hospital -wide antibiotic stewardship quality improvement initiative targeting 
non-ICU adult patients admitted  with pneumonia. Hospitals eligibility criteria are ou tlined in 
Section B.1.3.  
 
Table 1: INSPIRE Pneumonia Trial Extended -Spectrum Antibiotics  
Path ogen -Directed 
Antibiotic Category  Extended -Spectrum Antibiotics Targeted in  
INSPIRE Pneumonia CPOE Prompts  
Anti-MRSA  Ceftaroline, Daptomycina, Linezolidb, Vancomycinc 
Anti-VRE Daptomycin, Linezolidb 
Antipseudomonal  Aztreonam, Cefepime, Ceftazidime, Pip eracillin/Tazobactam  
Anti-ESBL  Ertapenem, Meropenem, Imipenem , Ceftolozane/Tazobactam  
Anti-CRE  Ceftazidime/Avibactam, Colistin, Imipenem/Relebactam, Meropen em/Vaborbactam,  
Polymixin B, Tigecycline  
aDapto mycin not an accepted pneumonia treatment but incl uded in trial analysis in case ordered.  
bBoth oral and intravenous (IV) formulations.  
cIV formulation only.  
Abbreviations: CPOE  – Computerized Provider  Order Entry, MRSA – Methicillin -Resistant Staphylococc us 
aureus, ESBL  – Extended -Spectrum Beta -Lactamase  Producing Enterobacterales including  Acinetobacter  and 
Pseudomonas species with multidrug-resistance to antipseudomonal antibiotics but can be treated with  a 
carbapenem or ceftolozane/tazobactam , CRE  – Carbapenem -Resistant Enterobacterales, including Carbapenem - 
Resistant Acinetobacter  and Pseudomonas  specie s
 
  
6 
 
 B.1.3 Recruitment and Eligibility Criteria  
Hospitals are eligible to participate if they serve a dult patients with pneumonia, are affiliated with the 
HCA Healthcare and have had MEDITECH as their el ectronic health record system for at least one year.  
Target recruitment is a minimum of 40 participating facilities.  
Recruitment will be similar to our p revious HCA Healthcare trials. First, we will provide webinars 
through HCA  Healthcare’s webhosting sys tem to introduce the trial and call for participation. Second,  a call for 
participation will be made by corporate leadership through pharmacy and antibiot ic stewardship communication 
channels. Third, our HCA Healthcare  co-investigators, who are system -wide leaders of antibiotic stewardship, 
quality, and infection prevention, will provide direct -to-hospital endorsement for the trial. Recruitment 
announcement s will utilize usual corporate and local hospital  HCA Healthcare communication channels and 
will be directed at hospital leadership as well as pharmacy and antimicr obial stewardship/infectious diseases 
leaders. Participation will be confirmed by a signed l etter of participation from the individual hospitals’ CEOs.  
For each hospital participant  indicating i nterest , enrollment criteria will be assessed by administering 
two electronic survey s. First, a contact survey will be distributed. Second, a facility sur vey will be distributed to 
confirm eligibility criteria and obtain information on hospital characteris tics and antibiotic stewardship program 
activities .  As done in our previous HCA  Healthcare trials , surveys will be administered through HCA  
Healthcare usual survey channels and results will be compiled and r eturned to investigators in a database 
format.  
 
B.1.4 Centralized IRB  
 Centralized IRB coordination will occur through the Harvard Pilgrim Health Care (HPHC) IRB . HCA  
Healthcare corporate regulatory affairs  and risk management  liaison  will facilitate delegation of IRB 
governance from each participating hospital and ensure human subjects training through HCA - Healthcare 
approved programs.   We submit that t his intervention of a qual ity improvement strategy for antibiotic 
stewardship meets national regulatory standards  for waiver of informed consent under the O ffice of Human 
Research Protections (OHRP) criteria 45 CFR 46.116(d), 117(c) (2) and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
CFR 56.109(c) (1).(38) since 1) trial activities meet minimal risk criteria, 2) the trial randomizes hospitals, not 
patients,  to a q uality improvement strategy,  3) the intervention is not designed to supplant physician judgment, 
but rather provide relevant infor mation to prescribing physicians who will be educated to choose the treatment 
they deem most clinically appropriate for indivi dual patients, and 4) all assigned activities will be performed 
according to usual  hospital quality improvement procedures. We wil l also collect attestations from hospital 
antibiotic stewardship programs stat ing that they will continue routine antibiotic s tewardship efforts.   
 B.1.5 Randomization  
While this study represents a large cluster -randomized trial of hospitals, simple r andomization of 
hospitals will not ensure balance of key variables by chance alone, and without care could even result in very 
unequal numbers of hospitals in each arm. Achieving balance on key features of the randomization units (in 
this case, hospitals) is a critical task in cluster -randomized trials, but little literature on it exist s. Unlike 
individually -randomized trials, inform ation about the clusters is  often known in advance, but the number of 
clusters to be randomized can be relatively small. The existence of a priori data can mitigate the small 
numbers and help to obtain adequate balance through stratification or other methods. One attractive approach 
is to establish tuplets —matched sets (pairs, for a two- arm trial) –  in which one member of each tuplet is 
assigned to each arm. Schemes for constructing tuplets need not be guided by theory. A formal approach 
would be to calculate the Mahalanobis distance between hospitals across all key variables and choose the set 
of tuplets with the minimum average distance. In this approach, we could standardize the variables, and then 
multiply by values calibrated to reflect any difference i n the importance of balancing them. Other approaches 
are more ad hoc, such as prioritizing broad classes of balance on a key v ariable and making pairs within these 
strata based on lower -priority variables. However, there is no “best” method of tuplet const ruction, only sets 
that com e closer to meeting the varied needs of each trial.  
We will establish the pairs under several plausible tuplet -construction schemes, and use graphical 
methods to compare all possible realizations for balance between the arms und er each scheme. For example, 
 
  
7 
 
 if two variables were to be balanced, we would tentatively divide the sample into two groups under a tuplet 
construction scheme and then generate a scatterplot showing the between- arm absolute value of the mean 
difference for o ne variable on the x -axis and the second on the y -axis for each possible result of the 
randomization. We would then divide the groups again under the same scheme, and find another point on the 
scatterplot. Repeating many times would show the typical and di stribution of balance under a scheme. 
Comparing the resulting scatterplots from each tuplet -construction scheme can reveal the relative risks of 
imbalance and benefits for balance accruing to each randomizati on scheme, in a practical sense. One tuplet 
construction method may result in generally close balance on one key characteristic and very variable balance 
on the other, while a competing scheme has good median balance on both characteristics, but where each  has 
a long tail implying a few bad- luck assignm ents with poor balance.  
We hope to consider balance on more than two factors, and for assessing the impact on balance in this 
case,  we will use a parallel coordinates plot, a multivariate plot method. After determining key variables where 
balance across t he arms would be highly desirable, we will plot the mean difference between the arms for all 
key variables for each  potential realized randomization.  
We will focus on balancing the baseline outcome values in participating hospitals  and certain key 
factor s that may be associated with pneumonia such as  facility pneumonia admission volume, local prevalence 
of antibiotic resistance in pneumonia patients, length- of-stay, ICU transfers, and facility case mix of pat ients  
with pneumonia.  Hospitals that share anti biotic stewardship personnel will be treated as a single hospital unit 
since the intervention will be overseen by local antibiotic stewardship teams.  
 
B.1.6 Baseline Period Activities  
 The baseline period will  be a 18 month  period from April 1, 2017 -  Septe mber 30, 2018 , prior to the 
phase in and will share a similar month distribution as the intervention period. This period will provide baseline 
outcome data for both arms (see Analysis Section B.1.10). In addi tion to recruitment and randomization, 
preparatory activities for Phase- In and Intervention Periods will also begin. The corporate HCA  Healthcare 
Information Technology (IT) team will develop the CPOE smart prompt template which will include creation of 
smart prompt algorithms, automated compliance reports, and centralized beta testing. CPOE smart prompts 
will use MDRO infection risk estimates developed in a separate retrospective cohort  study . Educational 
materials and training modules will be developed as  described below.  
 
B.1.7 Phase -In Period Activi ties 
There will be a six month Phase- In period prior to the intervention period. This Phase- In period will be 
from October  1, 2018- March 31, 2019 and is necessary for three  key reasons. First, since the inter vention will 
occur as a quality improvement init iative to be adopted at the hospital level, hospital study champions will need 
time to garner relevant comm ittee approvals and support from key hospital stakeholders. For some hospitals, 
this may require in -person presentation and s upport from investigator s to affirm the protocol for evidence-
based empiric antibiotic recommendations based on local probabilities  of the various MDROs from evidence 
developed in Aim 1  above. Second, we anticipate that physician behavior change will require time for feedback 
and response. Third, the implementation of the CPOE smart prompt requires both corporate and local IT 
department efforts. This will require time to accurately implement and ensure sufficient validation and refinement for proper function at each participating intervention arm hospital.  
During this period, educational material s will be distributed to study champions  at each participating 
intervention hospital (Table 2). In addition, study site champions at intervention facilities will participate in 
coaching cal ls monthly during the Phase- In period, ultimately transitioning to every other month calls when 
implementa tion and feedback stabilizes. Special coaching calls will also occur at least quarterly for both arms 
and involve best practice stewardship recommendations from national guidelines and experts. All coaching 
calls will be led by trial investigators with act ive attendance and support by HCA Healthcare leadershi p. 
Coaching calls will involve a shared PowerPoi nt slide set followed by a question and answer s ession. All 
coaching calls will be recorded and placed on arm -specific INSPIRE -ASP Pneumonia Trial sites o n the HCA 
Healthcare intranet for continued access by designated participants in each arm. Participant s will be highly 
encouraged to share concerns and solutions with one another.  
 
  
8 
 
  
Table 2. INSPIRE -ASP Pneumonia  Trial Educational Binder and Distributed M aterial  
Topic  Description  
1. Trial Summary  Goals and investigative team  
2. Frequently Asked 
Questions  Answe rs to common questions about the trial or 
protoc ol.   
3. Roles and 
Responsibilities  Description of expected roles and responsibilities of 
pharmacy and phys ician antibiotic stewardship 
champions  
4. Talking Points  Talking points for common physician  and pharmac ist 
questions about the trial or protocol  
5. Commi ttee Protocol or 
Policy Proposal  Descri ption of CPOE smart prompt antibiotic 
stewardship initiative for c ommittee approval submission 
to adopt as hospital protocol or policy  
6. Kick-Off PowerPoint  PowerPoint s lides used in the kick -off webinar  
7. Physician Education 
Power Point  
Presentations  Description of, and basis for, guidance on appropriate 
antibiotic use for pneumonia, definition of extended-
spectrum antibiotic groups, the INSPIRE -ASP MDRO 
risk estimate and smart prompt, and compliance 
feedback reports.  
8. Feedback  Process for study champions t o feedback compliance 
reports to physicians  
 
 
B.1.8 Intervention Phase Activities  
The automated point -of-care precision medicine CPOE smart prompts will be implemented at each 
facility randomized to the intervention arm.  Automated compliance feedback reports detailing prescriber 
response to CPOE prompt recommendations will be generated on a rolling 3 -month  basis  (or sooner if 
available) , including reasons for continuing with extended spectrum antibiotic prescribing.   Pharmacy/physician 
study champions will provide feedback to prescri bers that show common and consistent deviation from CPOE 
smart prompt recommendations.  
We will have a dedicated study email and toll -free number for study questions.  Hospitals that are n ot 
represented on coaching calls will receive an email from core staf f asking for their responses to polling 
questions and directing them to the recorded link of the coaching call.  
For both study arms, study site champions will be required to confirm that a) no new hospital initiatives 
have been planned or implemented.  If a site reports a new hospital antibiotic stewardship intervention that may represent a direct conflict with the INSPIRE -ASP Pneumonia trial, they will be asked to report the initiative 
to the trial Steering Committee for determination of trial conflict. Hospitals that implement interventions that 
conflict with the trial will be given the options of either not pursuing the conflicting intervention or dropping from 
the trial.   
 
B.1.9 INSPIR E-ASP Pneumonia Trial Outcomes 
The goal of this trial is to reduce unnecessary physician prescribing of empiric extended -spectrum 
antibiotics  (Table 8) . Trial outcomes evaluating intervention effectiveness ar e outlined in Table 3 and will be 
applied to the study population of adult patients who have an ICD -10 claims code indicating pneumonia is 
present on admission, who received any antibiotic within 3 days of admission, and who were  admitted to a 
non-ICU loca tion. For admissions initially on a non- ICU floo r and transferred to the ICU, analysis will include 
only admis sion day s on the non- ICU floor within 3 days of admission.   
The primary trial outcome is defined as the summed number of different extended spectr um antibiotics 
received each day, measured repeatedly over the first three days of an admission and divided by  the number 
of days of the admission within the empiric period.  An empiric day is a day within the first three days of an 
admission. We define thi s outcome as an Extended- Spectrum Days Of Therapy (ES- DOT) per empiric day.   
Days of therapy (DOT) is specific  to each extended- spectrum antibiotic, where any dose is considered one 
day’s worth of therapy. The ES antibiotics are then aggregated to obtain t he total ES DOT. For e xample , if a 
patient is st arted on vancomycin and cefepime for 1 day, this will count as  2 ES DOT for that day. Multiple 
 
  
9 
 
 doses of the same antibiotic received on the same day are only counted as one day of therapy  for that 
extended sp ectrum antibiotic . This outcome will include  antibiotic s in Table 1.  
 
Table 3: Primary and Secondary INSPI RE-ASP Pneumonia Trial Outcomes  
Outcome  Metric  
Primary Trial Outcome  
Extended-Spectrum Days Of Antibacterial 
Therapy (ES-DOT) per Empiric D ay The summ ed number of different extended -spectrum antibacterials  
received each empiric  day, measured repeatedly ov er the first three 
days of an admission and divided by the number of  empiric  days of 
the admission.  An empiric day is a day within the first three days of 
an admission .1 
Secondary Trial Outcomes  
Vancomycin Days of Antibacte rial Therapy  
per Empiric Day  The summed number  of days of Vancomycin received each empiric 
day per at -risk-day (first 3 days of admission)1 
Antipseudomonal Antibiotic Days Of 
Therapy (ES-DOT) per Empiric D ay The summ ed number  of different antipseudomonal  antibacterials  
received each empiric day, measured repeatedly over the first three 
days of an admission and divided by the number of  empiric  days of 
the admission.  An empiric day  is a day within the first three days of 
an admi ssion .1,2 
1E.g., if a patient  is admitted for 2 days, ES -DOT will be calculated for 2 days and divided by 2 empiric days; conversely if a patient is 
admitted for 4 days, only the first 3 days will be evaluat ed.  
2Does not include aminoglycosides or fluoroquinolones.  
 
Safety outcomes planned for the primary manus cript are shown in Table 4. Safety outcomes will be analyzed 
separately from the main effectiveness outcomes of the trial (see Primary Statistical Analysis section below).  
 
Table 4: Other Pre -Speci fied Outcomes  – Safety Trial Outcomes  
Safety Trial Outcom es (other pre -specified outcomes)  
Antibacterial Escalations  [Safety Outcome]  Days from start of standard -spectrum antibacterial until switch to 
exten ded-spectrum antibacterial during hospital stay   
ICU Transfers [Safety Outcome]  Days from start of hosp italization until ICU transfer within hospital 
stay   
Length -of-stay [Safety Outcome]  Days from hospital admission to discharge  
 
 
B.1.10 Analysis  
The primary trial outcome is defined as the summed number of different extended spectrum antibiotics 
received each day, measured repeatedly over the first  three days of an admission and divided by the number 
of days of the admission within the empiric period.  An empiric day is a day within the first three days of an 
admission. We define this outcome as an Extended- Spectrum Days Of Therapy (ES -DOT) per empir ic day. For 
clarity the calculation is as follows: we define a DOT for a particular ES antibiotic as a  day in which any number 
of doses of that antibioti c is given. Different ES antibiotics are summed across the empiric days for each 
patient admission, then divided by the empiric days for that patient -admission to determine each admission’s 
DOT per at -risk da y. If an admission is less than 3 days, only the number of days the patient is admitted will 
contribute to the numerator and denominator. Antibiotics giv en during an associated emergency department 
visit on the date of hospital admission are counted tow ard the ES -DOT of the first hospital day.  
The main trial results will be based upon as -randomized, unadjusted analyses of admission- level ES -
DOT per empir ic day.  We define ES -DOT per empiric day at the individual admission level so that we can 
perform analys es on individuals.   
The trial will be assessed among the cohort of adult admissions who have an ICD -10 claims code 
indicating pneumonia is present on ad mission, who received any antibiotic within 3 days of admission, and who 
were admitted to a non -ICU loc ation. For admissions initially on a non -ICU flo or and transferred to the ICU, 
analysis will include only admission days on the non- ICU floor within 3 days of admission.  
 
  
10 
 
 The trial periods are defined as follows: (1) Baseline –  April 1, 2017 –  September 30, 2018 (18 months); 
(2) Phase- in – October 1, 2018 – March 31, 2019 (6 months); (3) Intervention – April 1, 2019 –  June 30, 2020 
(15 months).  
The unit  of analysis will be individual admissions. Individuals can contribute more than one admission. The 
analy tic model will be a generalized linear mixed eff ects model for differences in differences, with random 
effects accounting for correlation within cluster,  period- varying random effects to allow for differences between 
hospitals from baseline to follow -up, and admission- level random effects to account for  correlation within 
person and hospital.  Analyses of the baseline data, performed before randomization, found no evidence of 
overdispersion in a Poisson model, and so we plan to use that model for analysis of outcomes.  The model can 
be expressed as follo ws: 
 
where y_ijph is the ES -DOT per at -risk day for patient i for admission j in period p at hospital h, and A_ijph=1 if 
hospital h is in the intervention arm and 0 if not, and T_ijph=1 if p is the intervent ion period and 0 if baseline 
period. The random effects b_0h and b_1h allow for different baseline mean admission- level ES -DOT per at -
risk day for each hospital and each hospital per period, respectively, while g_j allows different admissions to have diffe rent mean ES -DOT per at -risk day across multiple admis sions. Equivalently, they allow for correlation 
within hospital at different levels at baseline and at follow -up. 
The assessment of trial success will be determined by the significance of the arm by per iod interaction 
term β_3, w hich assesses whether  the log relative rate of the outcome due to being in the intervention arm in 
the intervention period is different from 0. The exponentiated parameter estimate for β_3 is the estimated 
relative rate of ES -DOT  per at -risk day due to the intervention, relati ve to the baseline period. For example, if 
β_3  had a negative value and a p- value <0.05, we would conclude that the pat ient-specific CPOE smart 
prompts generated a benefit over routine care. Exponentiating t he parameter value would provides an estimate 
of the relative reduction due to the intervention in the expected ES -DOT per at -risk day.  
The primary trial analysis will use an as -randomized unadjusted model with two- tailed significance set 
at alpha = 0.05.  Secondary outcomes also will be assessed using an as -randomized unadjusted model with 
adjustment for multiple comparisons with two- tailed significance set at alpha = 0.025 for the two secondary 
outcomes. Subsequent analyses of the primary and secondary ou tcomes will include both as -treated and 
adjusted  models. Adjusted models will account for individual characteristics such as age, gender, 
comorbidities, and prior history of MDROs as well as hospital characteristics such as hospital antibiotic 
resistance. We will also account for randomization unit  and for seasonality. These analyses will be reported as 
point estimates with confidence intervals without p- value. The reason for including these analyses is to provide 
additional information related to the trial  outcomes for readers to assess the effects of potential confounders. 
The reason to not include them in a formal multiple comparisons adjustment is because these analys es are 
non-independent evaluations relative to the as -randomized unadjusted analyses.  
Safety outcomes noted in the below table will be assessed in the most conservative manner to identify 
potential safety issues. This is required because a reduction in ES -DOT might be achieved only by incorrectly 
withholding ES antibiotics when they were really needed. Each safety outcome will be evaluated for non -
inferiority using an as -randomized unadjusted model with a one -tailed significance set at alpha = 0.05.  
Analy ses planned for these assessments are proportional hazards models with random effects (t o account for 
hospital effects). These models ar e sometimes called frailty or shared frailty models. Because these are safety 
outcomes, we do not intend to make adjustm ents for multiple comparisons in testing them, further increasing 
conservatism.  
All anal yses will be performed using current versions of  SAS (Version 9.4, as of writing, SAS Institute, 
Cary NC) and/or R (Version 4.0, as of writing).   
 
B.1.11 Powe r Size/Sample Size Calculations  
Power assessment proceeded as follows, using a Monte Carlo approac h. We used available data to 
define a baseline period of 10/1/2015 -12/31/2016 in a bootstrap procedure. Individuals were selected with 
replacement from within  each hospital, once to represent baseline data and separately to represent 
 
  
11 
 
 intervention period da ta. In the randomization portion of the Monte Carlo approach, we ordered the hospitals 
by “size”, meaning the number of admissions with pneumonia. Then,  within strata of 6 hospitals, we orde red by 
ES-DOT per at -risk day. Then we took pairs of hospitals wit h adjacent ES -DOT per at -risk day and assigned 
one member of the pair to one arm. To do this, a single pseudo- random number uniformly distributed between 
0 and 1 was generated for each pair.  If it was less than 0.5, the arbitrary “first” member of the pai r was 
assigned to Routine Care and the other to Intervention.  If it was greater than or equal to 0.5, then the 
assignments were reversed. The remaining unpai red hospital of the 59 units wer e assigned as the “first” 
member of a pair with no match. (Three s ets of hospitals each shared a stewardship progr am and these 
hospitals were treated as a single hospital within the routine.)  
If an admission was in th e intervention arm in the intervention period, then their ES -DOT per at -risk day 
was reduced by a propor tion, given below. The reduction of ES -DOT per a t-risk day was selected with a lower 
bound determined by the investigators as the hoped- for effect of th e inte rvention with minimal clinical 
significance, and the impact in the Monte Carlo calculation on a pe r-admission basis was to reduce the days of 
therapy proportionately between this number and 1, on a uniform distribution. In other words, if the effect of the  
intervention was to multiply doses by as little as .9, each person would have their doses multipl ied by between 
.9 and 1. Then an integer value o f doses would be chosen as described above.  
We are interested in determining whether the patient -specifi c CPOE  intervention reduces ES -DOT per  
at-risk day by at least 12.5% relative to usual care. Using the m ethod above, we have 97% power (CI 91- 99%) 
to de tect this effect. Table 5 below shows the calculated power and confidence intervals for the primary and 
secondary outcomes to be evaluated in our primary manuscript.  
 
Table 5. Power Calculation –  Primary and  Secondary Outcomes  
Primary Trial Outcome  Power (CI), %  
Extended -Spectrum Antibacterial Days Of Therapy 
(ES-DOT) per Empiric D ay 97 (91-99) 
Secondary Trial Outcomes   
Vancomycin Days of Therapy  per Empiric Day  92 (85 -96) 
Antipseudomonal Antibiotic Days Of Therapy (ES -
DOT) per Empiric D ay 84 (77 -91) 
 
 
  
References Cited  
1. Magill SS, Edwards JR, Beldavs ZG, Dumyati G, Janelle SJ, Kainer MA, Lynfield R, Nadl e J, N euhauser 
MM, Ray SM, Richards K, Rodriguez R, Thompson DL, Fridkin SK; Emerging Infections Progr am 
Healthcare- Associated Infections and Antimicr obial Use Prevalence Survey Team. Prevalence of 
antimicrobial use in US acute care hospitals, May -Septembe r 2011 . JAMA  2014;312(14):1438 -46. 
2. Fridkin S, Baggs S, Fagan R, Magill S, Pollack LA, Malpiedi P, Slay ton R, Khader K, Rubin MA, Jones M, 
Samore MH, D umyati G, Dodds -Ashley E, Meek J, Yousey -Hindes K, Jernigan J, Shehab N, Herrera R, 
McDonald CL, Schneider  A, Sr inivasan A; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Vital signs: 
improving antibiotic use among hospitalized patients. MMWR Morb Morta l Wkly Rep  2014;63:194- 200. 
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Antibiotic Resistance Threats in t he Uni ted States, 2013. 
Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/pdf/ar -threats -2013 -508.pdf. A ccessed on May 19, 2015.  
4. Marston HD, Dixon DM, K nisely JM, Palmore TN, Fauci AS. Antimicrobial Resistance. JAMA. Sep 20 
2016;316(11):1193 -1204.  
5. Arcilla MS , van Hattem JM, Haverkate MR, et al. Import and spread of extended- spectrum beta- lactamase-
producing Enterobacteriaceae by international travellers ( COMBAT study): a prospective, multicentre 
cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. Oct 14 2016.  
6. Harbarth S, Samore MH. A ntimicrobial resistance determinants and future control. Emerg Infect Dis  
2005;11(6):794 -801. 
7. Abbo L, Sinkowitz -CochranR, Smith L, Ariza -Heredia  E, Gomez -Marin O, Srinivasan A, Hooton TM. 
Faculty and resident attitudes, perceptions, and knowledge about ant imicrobial use and resistance. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol  2011;32:714 -8. 
 
  
12 
 
 8. Boucher HW, Talbot G H, Bradley JS, Edwards JE, Gilbert D, Rice LB, S cheld M, Spellberg B, Bartlett J. 
Bad bugs, no drugs: No ESKAPE! An updated from the Infectious Diseases S ociety  of America. Clin Infect 
Dis 2009;48:1 -12. 
9. Boucher HW, Talbot GH, Benjamin DK Jr, Bradley J, Gui dos RJ, Jones RN, Murray BE, Bonomo RA, 
Gilbert D. 10 x '20 Progress --development of new  drugs  active against gram -negative bacilli: an update 
from the In fectio us Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis  2013;56:1685- 94. 
10. Centers for Disease Control and  Prevention. Get Smart for Healthcare. Available at: 
http://www.cdc.gov/getsmart/healthcare/. Accessed May 8, 2015.  
11. Executive Office of the Presidents, Pr esident’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. Report to 
the President on Combating Antibiot ic Resistance. Available at: 
https://www.whiteho use.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_carb_report_sept2014.pdf. 
Accessed on May 8, 2015.  
12. The W hite House. National Strategy for Combating Antibiotic -Resistant Bacteria. Available at: 
https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/car b_national_strategy.pdf. Accessed on May 19, 2015.  
13. Baggs J, Fridkin SK, Pollack LA, Srinivasan A, Jernigan JA. E stimating National Trends in Inpatient 
Antibiotic Use Among US Hospitals From 2006 to 2012. JAMA  Intern Med. Nov 1 2016;176(11):1639- 1648.  
14. Giblin TB, Sinkowitz -Cochran RL, Harris PL, Jacobs S, Liberatore K, Palfreyman MA, Harrison EI, Cardo 
DM; CDC Campaign to Prevent Antimicrobial Resistance Team. Clinicians’ perceptions of the problem of 
antimicrobial resistance in healthcare facilities. Arch In tern Med 2004;164:1662- 8. 
15. Szymczak JE, Feemster KA, Zaoutis TE, Gerber JS. Pediatrician perceptions of an outpat ient antimicrobial 
stewardship intervention. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol  2014;35(Suppl 3):S69- 78. 
16. Barlam TF, Cosgrove SE, Abbo LM, et al. Impl ementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program: Guidelines by 
the Infectious Diseases Society of America and t he Soc iety for Healthcare Epidemiology of America. Clin 
Infect Dis. May 15 2016;62(10):e51- 77. 
17. Provonost P, Berenholtz SM, Needham DM. Translating evi dence into practice: a model for large scale 
knowledge translation. BMJ  2008;337:a1714.  
18. Mandell LA, Wunder ink RG , Anzueto A, Bartlett JG, Campbell GD, Dean NC, Dowell SF, File TM Jr, 
Musher DM, Niederman MS, Torres A, Whitney CG. Infectious Diseases Societ y of America/American 
Thoracic Society Consensus Guidelines on the Management of Community -Acquired Pneumonia in Adults. 
Clin Infect Dis  2007;44:S27- 72. 
19. Gupta K, Hooton TM, Naber KG, Wullt B, Colgan R, Miller  LG, Moran GJ, Nicolle LE, Raz R, Schaeffer AJ, 
Soper DE. International Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Treatment of Acute Uncomplicated Cystitis and 
Pyelo nephritis in Women: A 2010 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the European 
Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.  Clin Infect Dis  2011;52:e103- 20. 
20. Mazzulli T. Diagnosis and management of simple and complicated urinary  tract infections (UTIs). Can J 
Urol 2012;19 Suppl 1:42 -8. 
21. Sanchez GV, Roberts RM, Albert AP, Johnson DD, Hicks LA. Effects of knowledge, attitudes, and 
practices of primary care providers on antibiotic selection, United States. Emerg Infect Dis  2014;20:2041- 7. 
22. Kollef MH, Sherman G, Ward S, Fraser VJ. Inadequate antimicrobial treatment of infections: a ris k factor 
for hospital mortality among critically  ill patients. Chest  1999;115:462 -74. 
23. Schramm GE, Johnson JA, Doherty JA, Micek ST, Kollef MH. Methicillin- resis tant Staphylococcus aureus  
sterile -site infection: the importance of appropriate initial antimic robial treatment. Crit Care Med  2006; 34: 
2069- 74. 
24. Micek ST, Lloyd AE, Ritchie DJ, Reichley RM, Fraser VJ, Kollef MH. Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
bloodstream i nfecti on: importance of appropriate initial antimicrobial treatment. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother  2005; 49:1306- 11. 
25. Kang CI, Kim SH, Park WB, Lee KD, Ki m HB, Kim EC, Oh MD, Choe KW. Bloodstream infections caused 
by antibiotic -resistant gram -negative bacilli:  risk factors for mortality and impact of inappropriate initial 
antimicrobial therapy on outcome. Anti microb Agents Chemother  2005 ;49:760- 6. 
26. Self WH, Wunderink RG, Williams DJ, et al. Staphylococcus aureus Community -acquired Pneumonia: 
Prevalence, Clinical  Characteristics, and Outcomes. Clin Infect Dis. Aug 1 2016;63(3):300- 309. 
 
  
13 
 
 27. Cilloniz C, Gabarrus A, Fer rer M, et al. Community -Acquired Pneumonia Due t o Multidrug - and Non -
Multidrug- Resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Chest. Aug 2016;150(2):415- 425. 
28. Ishida T,  Ito A, Washio Y, et al. Risk factors for drug- resistant pathogens in immunocompetent patients with 
pneumonia: Evaluation of PES pathogens. J Infect C hemother. Oct 8 2016.  
29. American Thoracic Society; Infectious Diseases Society of America. Guidelines for the management of 
adults with hospital -acquired, ventilator -associated, and healthcare- associated pneumonia. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med  2005;171:388- 416. 
30. Kollef MH, Shorr A, Tabak YP, Gupta V, Liu LZ, Johannes RS . Epidemiology and outcomes of health- care-
asso ciated pneumonia: results from a large US database of culture -positive pneumonia. Chest  
2005;128:3854 -62. 
31. Ewig S, Welte T, Chastre J, Torres A . Rethin king the concepts of community -acquired and health -care-
associated pneumonia. Lancet Infect Dis  2010;10:279 -87. 
32. Kalil AC, Metersky ML, Klompas M, et al. Management of Adults With Hospital -acquired and Ventilator -
associated Pneumonia: 2016 Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America 
and the American Thoracic Society. Clin Infect Dis. Sep 1 2016;63(5):e61 -e111.  
33. Park KH, Oh WS, Kim ES, Park SW, Hur JA, Kim YK, Moon C, Lee JH, Lee CS, Kim BN. Factors 
associated with ciprofloxacin - and cefotaxime -resistant  Escherichia coli in women with acute pyelonephritis 
in the emergency department.  Int J Infect Dis  2014;23:8 -13. 
34. Huttner B, Jones M, Huttner A, Rubin M, Samore MH. Antibiotic prescrip tion practices for pneumonia, skin 
and soft tiss ue infections and urinary tract infections throughout the US Veterans Affairs system. J 
Antimicrob Chemother  2013;68:2393 -9. 
35. Chalmers JD, Rother C, Salih W, Ewig S. Healthcare- associated pneumonia does not ac curately identify 
potentially resistant pathogens: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Clin Infect Dis  2014;58:330- 9. 
36. Grenier C, Pepin J, Nault V, Naul t V, H owson J, Fournier X, Poirier MS, Cabana J, Craig C, Beaudoin M, 
Valiquette L. Impact of guideline -consistent therapy on outcome of patients with healthcare -associated and 
community -acquired pneumonia. J Antimicrob Chemother  2011;66:1617 -24. 
37. Attridge RT, Fr ei CR, Restrepo MI, Lawson KA, Ryan L, Pugh MJ, Anzueto A, Mortensen EM. Guideline-
concordant th erapy and outcomes in healthcare -associated pneu monia. Eur Respir J  2011;38:878- 87. 
38. Troitino AX, Porhomayon J, and El -Solh AA. Guideline- concordant antimi crobial therapy for healthcare-
associated pneumonia: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Lung 2013; 191:229 -37. 
39. Lee SS, Kim Y, and Chung DR. Impact of  discordant empirical therapy on outcome of community -acquired 
bacteremic acute pyelonephritis. J Infect  2011; 62:159- 164. 
40. Jeon JH , Kim K, Han WD , Song SH, Park KU, Rhee JE, Song KH, Park WB, Kim ES, Park SW , Kim NJ, 
Oh MD, Kim HB . Empirical use of ciprof loxacin for acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis caused by 
Escherichia coli  in communities where the prevale nce of  fluoroquinolone resistance is high. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother  2012;56:3043- 6. 
41. Webb BJ, Dascom b K, Stenehjem E, Dean N. Predicting risk of drug -resistant organisms in pneumonia: 
Moving beyond the HCAP model. Respir Med  2015;109:1 -10. 
42. Stevens V, Dum yati G , Fine LS, Fisher SG, van Wijngaarden E. Cumulative antibiotic exposures over time 
and the risk of Clostridium difficile  infection. Clin Infect Dis  2011;53:42 -8. 
43. Davey P, Brown E, Charani E, Fenelon L, Gould IM, Holmes A, Ramsay CR, Wiffen PJ, Wilcox  M. 
Interventions to improve antibiotic prescribing practices for hospital inpatients. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2013;4:CD003543.  
44. Brown K, Valenta K,  Fishman D, Simor A, Daneman N. Hospital ward antibiotic prescribing and the risks of 
Clostridium difficile  infection. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:626 -33. 
45. Braykov NP, Morgan DJ, Schweizer ML, Uslan DZ, Kelesidis  T, Weisenberg SA, Johannsson B, Young H, 
Cantey  J, Srinivasan A, Perencevich E, Septimus E , Laxminarayan R. Assessment of 
empirical  antibiotic  therapy optimisa tion in six  hospitals: an observational cohort study. Lancet Infect 
Dis 2014;14:1220 -7. 
 
  
14 
 
 46. Fowler S , Webber A, Cooper BS, Phimister A, Price K, Car ter Y, Kibbler CC, Simpson AJ, Stone SP. 
Successful use of feedback to improve antibiotic prescribing and reduce  Clostridium difficile  infection: a 
controlled interrupted time series. J Antimicrob Chemother  2007;59:990 -5. 
47. Charani E, Kyratsis Y, Lawson W, W ickens H, Brannigan ET, Moore LS, Holmes AH. An analysis of the 
development and implementation of a smartphone application for the delivery of antimicrobial prescribing 
policy: lessons learnt. Antimicrob Chem other  2013;68:960 -7. 
48. Chandy SJ, Naik GS, Charles  R, Jeyaseelan V, Naumova EN, Thomas K, Lundborg CS. The impact of 
policy guidelines on hospital antibioti c use over a decade: a segmented time series analysis. PLoS ONE 
2014;9:e92206.  
49. Hamilton KW, Gerber JS,  Moehring R, Anderson DJ, Calderwood MS , Han JH,  Mehta JM, Pollack LA, 
ZaoutisT, Srinivasan A, Camins BC, Schwartz DN, Lautenbach E; Centers for Disease C ontrol  and 
Prevention Epicenters Program. Point -of-prescription intervention to improve antibiotic stewardship. Clin 
Infect Dis  2015;60:1252- 8. 
50. Cooke FJ and Holmes AH. The missing care bundle: antibiotic prescribing in hospitals. Int J Antimicrob 
Agents  2007;30: 25-9. 
51. Rodriquez -Maresca M, Sorlozano A, Grau M, Rodriquez -Castano R, Ruiz -Valverde A, Gutierrez -
Fernandez J. Implementation of a computerized decision support system to improve the appropriateness of 
antibiotic therapy using local microbiologic data.  Biome d Res Int  2014;2014:395434.  
52. Deuster S, Roten I, Muehlebach S. Implementation of treatment guidel ines to support judicious use of 
antibiotic ther apy. J Clin Pharm Ther  2010;35:71- 8. 
53. Pogue JM, Alaniz C, Carver PL, Pleva M, Newton D, DePestel DD. Role of unit -specific combination 
antibiograms for improving selection of appropriate empiric therapy for gr am-negative pneumonia. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2011;32:289 -92. 
54. Rabs N, Wieczorkiewicz SM, Costello M, Zamfirova I. Development of a urinary -specific  antib iogram for 
Gram negative isolates: impact of patient risk factors on susceptibility. Am J Infect  Control  2014;42:393-
400. 
55. Karam G, Chastre J, Wi lcox MH, Vincent JL. Antibiotic strategies in the era of multidrug resistance. Crit 
Care. Jun 22 2016;20(1):136.  
56. Auffray C, Caulfield T, Griffin JL, Khoury MJ, Lupski JR, Schwab M. From genomic medicine to pr ecision 
medicine: highlights of 2015. Genome Med. Jan 29 2016;8(1):12.  
57. Chambers DA, Feero WG, Khoury MJ. Convergence of Implementation Science, Precision Medici ne, and 
the Learning Health Care System: A New Model for Biomedical Research. JAMA. May 10 
2016; 315(18):1941 -1942.  
58. Khoury MJ, Galea S. Will Prec ision Medicine Improve Population Health? JAMA. Oct 4 2016;316(13):1357 -
1358.  
59. Khoury MJ, Iademarco MF, Ril ey WT.  Precision Public Health for the Era of Precision Medicine. Am J Prev 
Med. Mar 2016;50(3):398- 401. 
60. Buising KL, Thursky KA, Robertson MB, Black J F, Street AC, Richards MJ, Brown GV. Electronic antibiotic 
stewardship— reduced consumption of broad -spectr um ant ibiotics using a computerized antimicrobial 
approval system in a hospital setting. J Antimicrob Chemother  2008;62:608 -16. 
61. Rimawi RH, Mazer MA, S iraj DS, Gooch M, Cook PP. Impact of regular collaboration between infectious 
diseases and critical care practit ioners on antimicrobial utilization and patient outcome. Crit Care Med  
2013;41:2099 -107. 
62. Boyles TH, Whitelaw A, Bamford C. Moodley M, Bonorchis K, Morris V. Rawoot N, Naicker V, Lusakiewicz 
I, Black J, Stead D, Lesosky M, Raubenheimer P, Dlamini S, M endels on M. Antibiotic stewardship ward 
rounds and a dedicated prescription chart reduce antibiotic consumption and pharmacy costs without 
affecting  inpatient mortality or re- admission rates. PLoS One  2013;8:e79747.  
63. Schulz L, Osterby K, Fox B. The use of best p ractice alerts with the development of an antimicrobial 
stewardship navigator to promote antibiotic de -escalation in the electronic medical reco rd. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol  2013;34:1259- 65. 
 
  
15 
 
 64. Lee TC, Frenette C, Jayaraman D, Green L, Pilote L. Ant ibiotic self -stewardship: trainee- led structured 
antibiotic time- outs to improve antimicrobial use. Ann Intern Med 2014;161(10 Suppl):S53- 8. 
65. Lesprit P , de Pontfarcy A, Esposito -Farese M, Ferrand H, Mainardi JL, Lafauri M, Parize P, Rioux C, 
Tubach F, Lucet  JC. P ostprescription review improves in- hospital antibiotic use: a multicenter randomized 
controlled trial. Clin Microbiol Infect  2015;21:180.e1- 7 
66. Platt R . Predictors of response to therapy for infections caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Rev Infect 
Dis 1984;6 Suppl 3:S759 -68. 
67. Huang SS, Platt R . Risk of methicillin -resistant Staphylococcus aureus  infectio n after previous infection or 
colonization. Clin Infect Dis  2003;36:281 -5. 
68. Shojania KG, Yokoe D, Platt R , Fiskio J, Ma'luf N, Bates DW. Reducing vancomyci n use utilizing a 
computer guideline: results of a randomized controlled trial. J Am Med Inform Assoc  1998;5:554- 62. 
69. Zanetti G, Flanagan HL Jr, Cohn LH, Giardina R, Platt R . Improvement of intraoperative prohylaxis in 
prolonged cardiac surgery by automated  alerts in the operating room. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol  
2003;24:13 -6. 
70. Simon SR, Smith DH, Feldste in AC, Perrin N, Yang X, Zhou Y, Platt R , Soumer ai SB. Computerized 
prescribing alerts and group academic detailing to reduce the use of potentially inappropriate medications 
in older people. J Am Geriatr Soc  2006;54:963 -8. 
71. Smith DH, Perrin N, Feldstein A,  Yang X, Kuang D, Simon SR, Sittig DF, Platt R , Soumerai SB. The 
impact of prescribing safety alerts for elderly persons in an electronic medical record: an int errupted time 
series evaluation. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:1098- 104. 
72. Langford BJ, Seah J, Chan A,  Downing M, Johnstone J, Matukas LM. Antimicrobi al Stewardship in the 
Microbiology Laboratory: Impact of Selective Susceptibility Reporting on Ciprofloxac in Utilization and 
Susceptibility of Gram -Negative Isolates to Ciprofloxacin in a Hospital Setting. J Clin Microbiol. Sep 
2016;54(9):2343 -2347.  
73. Stenehjem E, Hersh AL, Sheng X, et al. Antibiotic Use in Small Community Hospitals. Clin Infect Dis. Nov 
15 2016;63(10):1273- 1280.  
74. Goldstein EJ, Goff DA, Reeve W, et al. Approaches to Modifying the Behavior of Clinicians Who Are 
Noncompliant With Antimicrobial S tewardship Program Guidelines. Clin Infect Dis. Aug 15 2016;63(4):532-
538. 
75. Emanuel EJ, Ubel PA, Kessler JB , et a l. Using Behavioral Economics to Design Physician Incentives That 
Deliver High -Value Care. Ann I ntern Med. Jan 19 2016;164(2):114 -119. 
76. Madaras -Kelly KJ, Remington RE, Fan VS, Sloan KL. Predicting antibiotic resistance to community -
acquired pneumonia antibi otics in culture -positive patients with healthcare -associated pneumonia. J Hosp 
Med. Mar 2012;7( 3):195 -202. 
77. Goodman KE, Lessler J, Cosgrove SE, et  al. A Clinical Decision Tree to Predict Whether a Bacteremic 
Patient Is Infected With an Extended -Spect rum be ta-Lactamase- Producing Organism. Clin Infect Dis. Oct 1 
2016;63(7):896 -903. 
78. Anesi JA, Lautenbach  E, Nachamkin I, et al. Clinical and Molecular C haracterization of Community -Onset 
Urinary Tract Infections Due to Extended -Spectrum Cephalosporin- Resista nt Ent erobacteriaceae. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol. Sep 28 2016:1- 7. 
79. Jacobson KL, Cohen SH, Inciardi  JF, et al. The relationship between antecedent an tibiotic use and 
resistance to extended- spectrum cephalosporins in group I beta -lactamase -producing organisms.  Clin 
Infect Dis. Nov 1995;21(5):1107 -1113.  
80. Aliberti S, Reyes LF, Faverio P, et al. Global initi ative for meticillin -resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
pneumonia (GLIMP): an international, observational cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. Sep 1 2016.  
81. Hudepohl NJ , Cunha CB, Mermel LA. Antibiotic Prescribing for Urinary Tract Infections in the Emergency 
Department Based on Local Antibiotic Resistance Patt erns: Implications for Antimicrobial Stewardship. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. Mar 2016;37(3):359- 360. 
82. Jacobs DM, Kuper K, Septimus E , Arafat R, Garey KW. Assessment of Antimicrobial Stewardship 
Activities in a Large Metropolitan Area. J Pharm Pract  2014 (Epub ahead of print).  
 
  
16 
 
 83. Septimus EJ, Kuper K. Clinical Challenges in Addressing Antimicrobial Resistance i n the 21st Century. Cl 
Pharm and Therap 2009; 86:336- 339. 
84. Septimus E , Owens R.  Need and Potential of Antimicrobial Stewardship in Community Hospitals . Clin 
Infect Dis  2011;53:S8- S14. 
85. Fishman N, Patterson J, Saiman L, Srinivasan A, Trivedi KK, van Schoonev eld T,  Lynfield R, Gerding D, 
Septimus E, Schwartz D, Daum R, Eglund JA, Harrison CJ, Bradley JS, Newl and J. Policy statement on 
antimicrobial stewardship by the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA), the Infectious 
Diseases Society of Amer ica (I DSA), and the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society  (PIDS). Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol  2012; 33:322- 7. 
86. Moody J, Cosgrove SE, Olmsted R, Septi mus E, Aureden K, Oriola S, Patel GW, Trivedi KK. Antimicrobial 
stewardship: a collaborative partnership between infection preventionists and healthcare epidemiologists. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol  2012;33: 328-30. 
87. Septimus EJ.  Antimicrobial Stewardship—Q ualitative and Quantitative Outcomes: The Role of 
Measurement. Curr Infect Dis Rep  2014;16:433- 438. 
88. Calder wood M S. Role of the Hospital Epidemiologist in Supporting Antimicrobial Stewardship. In: 
Mylonakis E,  Rice L, Drusano G, eds. Antimicrobial Stewardship : Principles and Practices.  2015 (in press).  
89. McKinnell J, Miller LG, Eells S, Cui E, Huang SS . A Systema tic Literature Review and Meta- analysis of 
Factors Associated with MRSA Colonization at Time of Hospit al or ICU Admission. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemi ol 2013;34:1077 -86. 
90. Datta R, Shah A, Huang SS , Cui E, Nguyen V, Welbourne S, Quan K, Thrupp L. High nasal burden  of 
methicillin -resistant Staphylococcus aureus  increases risk for invasive disease. J Clin Micr obiol  
2014;52:312 -4. 
91. Datta R, Kleinman K , Rifas -Shiman S, Placzek H, Lankiewicz J, Platt R , Huang SS.  Confounding by 
indication affects antimicrobial risk  facto rs for methicillin -resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) but not 
vancomycin -resistant enterococ ci (VRE) acquisition. Antibio Resist Infect Cont rol 2014;3:19.  
92. Pakyz AL. The utility of hospital antibiograms as tools for guiding empiric therapy and tracking resistance. 
Insights from the Society of Infectious Diseases Pharmacists. Pharmacotherapy  2007;27:1306 -12. 
93. Perla RJ and Belliveau PP. Antibiogra m-derived radial decision trees: An innovative approach to 
susceptibility data display. Am J Infect Dis  2005;1:1 24-7. 
94. The Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics & Policy. Resistance Map. Available at: 
http://www.cddep.org/projects/resistance_map/resistance_overview_0. Accessed on May 24, 2015.  
95. Falcone M, Russo A, Gianella M, Cangemi R, Scarpellini MG, Bertazzoni G, Alarcon JM, Taliani G, 
Palange P, Farcomeni A, Vestri A, Bouza E, Violi F, Venditti M. Individualizing risk of multidrug -resistant 
pathogens in co mmunity -onset pneumonia. PLoS One  2015;10:e0119528.  
96. Self WH, Wunderink RG, Williams DJ, Barrett TW, Baughman A H, Grijalva CG. Comparison of clinical 
prediction models for resistant bacteria in community -onset pneumonia. Acad Emerg Med 2015;22(6):730-
40. 
97. Elixhauser A, Steiner C. Harris DR, Coffey RM. Comorbidity measures for use with administrative data. 
Med Care  1998;36:8 -27. 
98. Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project. Comorbidity Software, Version 3.7. Available at: https://www.hcup-
us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftwar e/comorbidity/comorbidity.jsp#overview. Accessed on May 27, 2015.  
99. Cosgrove SE. The relationship between an timicr obial resistance and patient outcomes: mortality, length of 
hospital stay, and health care costs . Clin Infect Dis. Jan 15 2006;42 Suppl 2:S82- 89. 
100. Pepin J, Saheb N, Coulombe MA, et al. Emergence of fluoroquinolones as the predominant risk factor 
for C lostridium difficile -associated diarrhea: a cohort study during an epidemic in Quebec. Clin Infect Dis . 
Nov 01 2005;41(9):1254 -1260.  
101. Dhalla IA, Mamdani MM, Simor AE, Kopp A, Rochon PA, Juurlink DN. Are broad -spectrum 
fluoroquinolones more likely to cause C lostri dium difficile -associated disease? Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. Sep 2006;50(9):3216- 3219.  
 
  
17 
 
 102. FDA Dr ug Safety Communication: FDA advises restricting fluoroquinolone antibiotic use for certain 
uncomplicated infections; warns about disabling side effects t hat ca n occur together . May 12, 2016. U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/ Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM500591.pdf . 
103. Kang CI, Kim SH,  Park WB, et al. Bloodstream infections due to extended- spectrum beta- lactamase -
producing Escherichia coli  and K lebsiella pneumoniae: risk factors for mortality and treatment outcome, 
with special emphasis on antimicrobial therapy. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. Dec 2004;48(12):4574-
4581.  
104. Queen MA, Myers AL, Hall M, et al. Comparative effectiveness of empiric antibiot ics for community -
acquired pneumonia. Pediatrics. Jan 2014;133(1):e23- 29. 
105. Postma DF, van Werkhoven CH, van Elden LJ, et al. Antibiotic treatment s trategies for community -
acquired pneumonia in adults. N Engl J Med. Apr 2 2015;372(14):1312- 1323.  
 