Protocol Abstract Page
Zevalin/BEAM/Rituximab vs BEAM/Rituximab with or without Rituximab Maintenance in Autologous Stem  Cell 
Transplantation for Diffuse Large  B-Cell Lymphomas 
2006-1018
Core  Protocol Information
Short Title: Zevalin/BEAM/Rituximab vs BEAM/Rituximab with or without Rituximab in 
Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation
Study Chairman:  Issa F. Khouri
Department: Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy
Phone: 713-792-8750
Unit: 423
Full Title: Zevalin/BEAM/Rituximab vs BEAM/Rituximab with or without Rituximab 
Maintenance in Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation for Diffuse Large B-
Cell Lymphomas 
Protocol Phase: Phase II
Version Status: Activated -- Closed to new patient entry as of 10/27/2017
Version: 18
Document Status: Final
Abstract
Objectives:
Primary Objective:
1.To compare the efficacy [2-year  progression-free survival  (PFS) rates] of Zevalin-BEAM (BCNU, etoposide, cytarabine, 
melphalan)-R (Rituximab) and BEAM-R in patients with diffuse  large B-cell  Lymphoma (DLBCL)  undergoing  autologous  
stem-cell transplantation.
Secondary Objectives:
1.To assess the association between maintenance  Rituximab after  transplantation and PFS.
2.To assess the association between PET status, International Prognostic Index (IPI),  Rituximab levels after transplantation, 
and PFS.
Rationale: (Be as concise as possible)
High-dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation  (ASCT) has  the potential to cure  about 30 -  40% of 
patients with DLBCL who relapse or progress  after initial therapy. The worst  outcome was seen among patients with positive PET 
(+) scans, high International Prognostic Index (IPI),  who did not receive rituximab with their transplant. (PFS,  17%; P < 0.001). 
Innovative studies are needed to improve outcome in  these patients.
Emerging data from our institution demonstrate  that the addition of the anti-CD20, Zevalin, given  at the fixed dose of 0.4 mCi/Kg  to 
the standard  conditioning of BEAM can induce a 2-year overall and disease-free survival  rates of 92% and 83%, respectively.  
There was no difference in outcome  between PET(+)  or PET(-) patients. Similarly, non-myeloablative stem  cell transplantation has 
been shown  to have equally successful  results  in both categories of patients. Overall  survival for  all patients was 88%.The risk of 
relapse in PET(+) or (-) disease was not significant (P=0.15).  In addition, recent studies are suggesting that maintenance  treatment  
with rituximab  may improve  the outcome  in b-cell lymphoma.
In this study, we propose to stratify  patients with DLBCL  in chemosensitive relapse according to their IPI, and their PET status at 
transplant (see Appendix H). Patients  who are PET (+) at transplant and have  high IPI of > 2 would receive  an allogeneic non-
myeloablative SCT if they have a matched  sibling  donor. All others  will be randomized  to receive one of 2 conditioning  regimens in  
preparation for ASCT  regimens: BEAM-Rituximab vs. Zevalin-BEAM-Rituximab. Patients who are not progressing at approximately  
one month, after ASCT,  will have a second randomization  to receive or not,  maintenance rituximab for 18 months.
Eligibility: (List All Criteria)
Inclusion:
1) Relapsed CD20-positive B-cell diffuse large cell lymphoma (demonstrated in lymph  nodes or bone marrow), chemosensitive (at least PR).
2) Age: up to 18-70 years of age.
3) Prestudy performance status of 0, 1, or 2 according  to the WHO.
4) No anti-cancer therapy started within  three weeks, prior to study initiation,  and fully recovered from all toxicities  associated  with prior surgery, radiation  
treatments, chemotherapy,  or immunotherapy.  No prior rituximab within  three weeks of starting therapy.
5) If patients  had prior radiation, this should  have  not involved more  than 25% of the bone marrow.
6) Acceptable hematologic status  within  two weeks prior to patient registration, including: Absolute  neutrophil count ({segmented  neutrophils + bands} x 
total WBC) > 1,500/mm³ and platelet counts > 80,000/mm³
7) IRB -approved  signed informed consent.
8) Patients determined to have <10% bone marrow  involvement with lymphoma  within 60 days  before study entry as defined by bone  marrow aspirates 
and biopsies.
9) Female patients included must not be pregnant  or lactating.
10) Patients should  have  at least  4-6 x 10^6 CD34+/kg peripheral stem  cells collected. Around 1-2 million cells will beheld as back up.
11) Voluntary signed,  written  IRB-approved  informed  consent before performance of any study-related procedure  not part of normal medical care,  with the 
understanding that consent may be withdrawn by the subject at any time without prejudice  to future  medical care.
12) Men and women of reproductive potential must  agree to follow  accepted birth control  methods for the duration of the study. Female subject is either  
post-menopausal or surgically  sterilized or willing to use an acceptable  method of birth control  (i.e., a hormonal  contraceptive, intra-uterine device, diaphragm 
with spermicide,  condom with spermicide,  or abstinence) for the duration of the study. Male subject agrees  to use an acceptable method for contraception for 
the duration of the study.
Exclusion:
1) Failed stem cell collection of >/= 4x10^6CD34+/kg.
2) Prior radioimmunotherapy.
3) Presence of active CNS lymphoma.
4) Patients with abnormal liver function:  total bilirubin > 1.5 mg/dl.
5) Patients with abnormal renal  function:  serum creatinine > 1.6 mg/dl.
6) Serious nonmalignant disease or infection which, in the opinion of the investigator and/or the sponsor, would  compromise other  protocol  objectives.
7) Corrected DLCO  < 50% and FEV subscript 1 or FVC < 50% predicted.
8) Cardiac EF < 50% by 2-D Echogram.
9) Prior radiation to lungs.
10) Abnormal  cytogenetics  predictive of secondary cancers,  such as -5,-7.
11) Pregnant (Positive Beta HCG test in a woman  with child bearing potential defined as not post-menopausal for 12 months  or no previous  surgical  
sterilization) or currently breast-feeding. Pregnancy testing is not required for post-menopausal or surgically sterilized women.
12) Patients with other malignancies diagnosed within 2 years prior to Study entry (except skin squamous or basal  cell carcinoma).
13) Active  uncontrolled bacterial, viral fungal infections.
14) Major  surgical procedure or significant traumatic injury within 4 weeks prior to Study entry.
15) Serious, non-healing wound, ulcer,  or bone  fracture.
16) History of abdominal  fistula, gastrointestinal perforation or intra-abdominal abscess within  3 months prior to Study entry.
17) History of Stroke within 6 months.
18) Myocardial infarction  within the past 6 months prior to Study  Day 1, or has New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III or IV heart failure or 
arrythmias, unstable angina, uncontrolled congestive heart failure or arrythmias, or electrocardiographic evidence of acute ischemia or active conduction  
system abnormalities.  Prior to study entry,  any ECG abnormality at screening must be documented by investigator as not medically relevant.
19) Uncontrolled  chronic diarrhea.
20) Serious medical or psychiatric  illness likely to interfere with participation  in this clinical study.
Is there an age limit?  Yes
Why?  Provide scientific justification:
There is little experience with the use of Zevalin in patients  <18 years of age.
The risk of autologous transplantation in patients older  than age 65 is unknown.  A separate study is addressing  this issue.
Disease Group:
Lymphoma
Treatment Agents/Devices/Interventions:
Carmustine, Cytarabine, Etoposide, Melphalan,  Rituximab, Zevalin
Proposed Treatment/Study Plan:
Treatment Plan
Study Schema
   PET Status   
IPI        Sibling HLA Compatible                      
(PET (+), IPI > 2)   
    No Sibling   Z BEAM  -  R   
BEAM  -  R     R maintenance 
375 mg/m2 q3 mos   
  
X 18 months   
No maintenance     NST 
                          (NST = Non-myeloblative allogeneic transplant)
This is a randomized Phase  II study comparing  the standard treatment,  BEAM + rituximab to Zevalin (0.4 mCI/Kg)+ BEAM + 
rituximab as preparative regimen  for autologous stem cell transplantation in patients with advanced  DLBCL expressing 
CD20.  Patients will be stratified by their PET status at the initiation of stem cell collection {PET(+) vs PET(-)},  as well as by their  
IPI (0 vs >1). 
If the PET(+) and IPI >2 patients  have  a sibling donor, those  patients will receive an allogeneic transplant and will not be included in 
the study.  All other patients will be receiving ASCT and will be  randomized  to receive either  Zevalin-BEAM-rituximab or BEAM-
rituximab alone. Patients  will then be assessed  at 25-35  days post transplant.  Those  who are  in CR, PR or  have stable disease  will 
then be randomized to receive maintenance rituximab, one dose (375 mg/m²) at 3, 6, 9, 12, 15 and 18 months  post ASCT  vs 
observation. Rituximab levels will be measured  at these  time intervals in all patients. 
Statistical Considerations:
Patients will be randomized equally to receive  either the standard treatment, BEAM + rituximab or the experimental  treatment  
Zevalin + BEAM+ rituximab. The randomization will be stratified by the prognostic factor PET status and IPI. At day 30 after the 
beginning of treatment, response status will be assessed. Patients  who achieve a complete or partial response or have stable 
disease will then be randomized to either receive maintenance rituximab or the standard of  care, observation.
The primary objective of the trial is to examine  the effect of  treatment on the 2-year progression- free  survival (PFS) rates.  For that 
purpose, we will use a Cox proportional hazards model.
Interim Monitoring
This study  will be monitored for both efficacy and safety during the first 30 days of treatment. However, we will not monitor for our 
primary efficacy outcome measure of 2-year  PFS because nearly the entire patient  population will have been enrolled by the time 
the first patients reach 2 years of follow-up. Instead we will include interim monitoring for the response rate at day 30 where 
response is defined  as above  (i.e. complete  or partial response, or stable disease). Each arm will be monitored separately 
according to the following rules; the arms will not be compared to each other while the study is ongoing. For this trial we desire the 
response rate to be at least 75% and if this level of response is not seen, we will terminate the trial early.
The safety monitoring rule will monitor  for treatment related mortality (TRM) during  the 1st  30 days. If there  is a high probability that 
the TRM  rate is greater than 10% in either arm we will terminate the trial early. The method  of Thall, Simon, and Estey Thall PF, 
Simon R, and Estey EH. "New statistical strategy for monitoring safety  and efficacy in single-arm clinical trials", Journal of Clinical  
Oncology, 14(1):296-303 (1996). will be employed to perform  the interim monitoring.
We will not include a safety monitoring rule for the rituximab randomization, as the regimen being used is lower  than a standard  
safe regimen and numerous trials and publications have confirmed  the safe use of rituximab.
When monitoring both the 30-day response rate and the 30-day  TRM rate, each a binary outcome, there  are four  possible 
elementary outcomes. These are 1 = [response,  TRM], 2 = [no response, TRM], 3 = [response,  no TRM], 4 = [no response,  no 
TRM]. We denote the corresponding standard  outcome probability vector  by qS, and the probability  vector with the experimental 
treatment by qE. For the response  rate distribution, we assume a marginal  Beta (75, 25) prior on qS, which in  particular has mean 
30-day response rate of 75%.  We assume  a marginal Beta (1.5, 0.5) prior on qE for response,  which has  the same prior  rates but 
carries little prior information.
For the TRM  rate distribution,  we assume  a marginal Beta (10, 90) prior on qS,  which in particular  has mean TRM rate  of 10%. 
Hence, we assume a marginal Beta (0.2, 1.8) prior on qE for the TRM rate, which has the same prior rates but carries little prior 
information.
The maximum sample size for each arm will be 25, which  will ensure  that if, for example 20/25 (80%) patients  are observed to have 
a response, then the posterior 95% credible  interval for the probability of the 30-day  response rate, based on the marginal beta  
(1.5, 0.5) prior assumed,  will run from 68% to 89%. The minimal  sample size  will be 10  in each arm.
The following decision criteria will be applied to each arm after each  cohort of 5 patients has been  evaluated, up  to the 25th patient 
accrued. Targeting a 75% response rate at day 30 and allowing a 10% TRM rate by day 30, the trial will be stopped early according 
to the following two monitoring rules:
1) 30-day response rate
Pr[qS(Response rate) > qE (Response rate) | data] > 0.95
That is, if at any time during the trial we determine that we have greater than a 95% chance  of showing that the average 30-day  
response rate in the experimental  treatment group is lower than what would be desired  on the standard of care (i.e. 75%) we will 
stop the study.  Stopping boundaries corresponding to this probability criterion are  to terminate the  trial if
(# of responses at day 30)  / (# patients evaluated)  <
4/10,  7/15, 11/20,  or 14/25.
Or 2) TRM rate
Pr[qS(TRM)  < qE (TRM) | data]  > 0.925
That is, if at any time during the study we determine that there is more than a 92.5%  chance that  the average TRM rate at  day 30 in 
the experimental  treatment group is more than would be expected on  the standard of care  (i.e. 10%) we will stop the study. 
Stopping boundaries corresponding to this probability criterion  are to terminate  the trial if
(# of patients with  TRM by day 30)  / (# patients evaluated) >
4/10, 4/15, 5/20, or 6/25.
If we see 3 TRMs in the first 10 patients, we will suspend  accrual  and wait for  patient number 10 to be evaluated for TRM  in the 30-
day window.
Table of operating characteristics:
Where Will Participants Be Enrolled:
Only at MDACC
Is this an NCI-Cancer Therapy Evaluation Protocol  (CTEP)? No
Is this an NCI-Division  of Cancer Prevention  Protocol (DCP)? No
Estimated Accrual:
Total Accrual  at MDACC: 50
Estimated monthly accrual at MDACC: 1
Accrual Comments:
Estimated accrual  time to be completed in 3½ - 4 years.
Do you expect your target population to include  non-english speaking  
participants?Yes
Please select  expected languages of non-English speaking participants.   (Select all that apply)
Expected languages of non-English speaking participants:
Spanish
Location of Treatment:
This protocol  is performed  on an Inpatient  AND  Outpatient basis.
Length of Stay: What  is the length & frequency of hospitalization?
Stay in hospital 3-4 weeks.
Return Visits: How often must participants  come to MDACC?
Every 3 months for the first year, then every  6 months.
Home Care: Specify what, if any, treatment  may be given at home.
Maintenance Rituximab (dose  #5)
Name of Person at MDACC  Responsible  for Data Management:  Celina Ledesma
Prior protocol at M. D. Anderson:
Has the Principal Investigator ever had a clinical  or behavioral protocol  at MDACC that accrued patients?
Yes
Data Monitoring Committee:
Is treatment assignment randomized? Yes
Is this a blinded or double-blinded study? No
Does this Protocol need  data safety monitoring? Yes
Provide the name of the data safety monitoring  board (DSMB) monitoring this protocol:
MDACC DMC
Does this protocol have a schedule for interim and final analysis? Yes
Please describe:
The safety  monitoring rule will monitor for treatment related mortality (TRM) during the 1st 30 days.  If there is a high probability that the TRM rate is greater 
than 10% in either arm we will terminate the trial early.  The method of Thall, Simon,  and Estey  Thall PF, Simon R, and Estey EH.  "New statistical strategy for 
monitoring safety and efficacy in single-arm  clinical trials",  Journal of Clinical  Oncology,  14(1):296-303  (1996). will be employed to perform the interim  
monitoring.  
We will not include  a safety monitoring rule for the Rituximab randomization,  as the regimen being  used is lower than a standard safe regimen and numerous 
trials and publications have confirmed  the safe use of Rituximab.  
Radiation Safety:
Does this study involve the administration of radioisotopes or a radioisotope labeled 
agent?Yes
Does this protocol include the administration  of a radioactive compound (or drug) to 
a patient intended to obtain basic information regarding metabolism (including 
kinetics, distribution, and localization)  of the drug or regarding human  physiology, 
pathophysiology, or biochemistry,  but not intended  for immediate therapeutic,  
diagnostic, or similar purposes  or to determine the safety  and effectiveness  of the 
drug in humans for such purposes (i.e. to carry out a clinical trial)?No
Is the radioactive compound (or drug) FDA approved and/or commercially available? Yes
Investigational New Drugs:
Does this protocol require an IND? No
Please confirm  that the protocol meets  all criteria for exemption according to 21CFR  312.2(b), noted below:
(b)Exemptions. (1) The clinical investigation of a drug product that is lawfully marketed in the United States is exempt from the requirements  of this part if all 
the following apply:
(i)The investigation is not intended to be reported  to FDA as a well-controlled study in support of a new indication for use nor intended to be used to 
support any other  significant change in the labeling  for the drug;
(ii)If the drug that is undergoing  investigation  is lawfully  marketed as a prescription drug product,  the investigation  is not intended to support a significant 
change in the advertising for the product;
(iii)The investigation does  not involve  a route of administration or dosage  level or use in a patient population or other factor that significantly  increases 
the risks (or decreases the acceptability of the risks) associated with the use of the drug product;
(iv)The investigation is conducted in compliance with the requirements  for institutional review set forth in part 56 and with the requirements for informed 
consent set forth in part 50; and
(v)The investigation is conducted in compliance with the requirements  of 312.7.
Rationale for Exemption:
Please include a detailed rationale as to why this drug should be considered  exempt from FDA IND regulations,  including any available  references  to the prior 
use of the regimen  or drug combination in human subjects.
Zevalin has been approved by the FDA for treatment of relapsed lymphoma. The drug and the other chemotherapy agents are commercially  available.  We 
have conducted a prior Phase II trial with Zevalin  for autologous transplants. Results have been published.  
If this protocol includes an FDA Approved Therapy, please list the disease,  dose and route of administration:
Approved  UseProposed in this 
Protocol
Disease: Lymphoma Lymphoma
Dose: .4 mCI/kg .4 mCI/kg
Route  of 
Administration: IV IV
Investigational Device:
Is the Investigational Device approved by the FDA? N/A
Is the Investigational Device being used in the manner approved by the FDA? N/A
Has the Investigational  Device been modified in a manner  not approved  by the 
FDA?N/A
Name of Device:
Manufacturer:
What is the FDA Status  of the Investigational Device? Not Marketed.
Is the study being conducted  under  an Investigational Device Exemption (IDE)? No
IDE Holder:
IDE Number:
Risk Assessment:
Please answer the following  questions regarding the Investigational Device.
Intended as an implant? No
Purported or represented to be for use supporting or sustaining human life? No
For use of substantial  importance in diagnosing,  curing, mitigating,  or treating  
disease, or otherwise  preventing impairment  of human health?No
You may attach  sponsor  documentation of the risk assessment: 
Will participant  be charged for the Investigational Device? No
Sponsorship and Support Information:
Does the Study have a Sponsor or Supporter? No
Is this Protocol listed on any Federal Grant or Foundation Funding Application? No
Biosafety:
Does this study involve the use of Recombinant DNA  Technology? No
Does this study involve the use of organisms that are infectious to humans? No
Does this study involve stem  cells? No
Technology Commercialization:
Does this study include  any agents or devices manufactured or produced at MD 
Anderson Cancer Center?No
Laboratory Tests:
Where will laboratory tests  be performed on patient materials?  (Please select all that apply)
Division of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine CLIA Certified Laboratory
Manufacturing:
Will you manufacture in full or in part (split  manufacturing) a drug or biological product 
at the M. D. Anderson Cancer  Center for the proposed  clinical study?No