Impacts of Warning Labels on Ultra -Processed Foods  
Hypotheses and Analytic Plan  
NCT # [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Version Date: 4/16/24    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hypotheses  
The overall purpose of this study is to identify the impacts of an ultraprocessed (UPF) health warning 
label and UPF identity warning label compared to a control label (i.e., a barcode).  The UPF health 
warning will include a text statement about the health  harms associated with UPF intake. The UPF 
identity warning will include a text statement that the food or drink is ultraprocessed.   
 
Primary Outcomes  
The primary outcome  of this study is correct identification of a product as ultraprocessed.  
We hypothesize that:  
1. Compared to the control (barcode label), the UPF health warning label and the UPF identity 
warning label will lead to increased ability to identify a product as ultraprocessed.  
2. Compared to the UPF health warning label, the UPF identity warning label will lead to increased 
ability to identify a product as ultraprocessed.  
Secondary Outcomes  
The secondary outcomes are perceived healthfulness of ultraprocessed products, intentions to purchase 
ultraprocessed products, and perceived message effectiveness of the randomly assigned label.  
We hypothesize that, compared to the control label, the UPF health warning and UPF identity warning 
label will lead to:  
 
1. Lower perceptions of healthfulness of an ultraprocessed product.   
2. Lower intentions to purchase an ultraprocessed product.  
3. Greater perceived message effectiveness  
 
We also hypothesize that the UPF health warning label will lead to lower perceptions of healthfulness, 
lower intentions to purchase, and greater perceived message effectiveness compared to the UPF identity 
warning.  
 
Analytic Plan  
We will use a two -sided critical alpha of 0.05 to conduct all statistical tests. We will use complete case 
analysis to handle any missing data.  We will descriptively report unadjusted means  (and standard 
deviations)  or percentages for the primary and secondary outcomes.   For all outcomes assessed 
between -subjects onl y, we will assess whether the outcomes vary by study arm using regression models 
(linear for continuous outcomes and logistic for dichotomous outcomes). For outcomes with multiple 
measurements for each person (e.g. the task in which participants viewed a s eries of products), we will fit 
mixed effects linear regression models for continuous outcomes (e.g., perceptions of healthfulness) and a 
mixed effects logistic regression model for binary outcomes (i.e., identification of products as 
ultraprocessed), trea ting the intercept as random to account for repeated measures. These models will 
include indicator variables for the labeling arm (excluding the barcode as the referent) and for product 
category. For each outcome, we will conduct pairwise comparisons betwe en each label type. We also 
plan to report the impact of label type on the primary and secondary outcomes in stratified models by 
product type (exploratory).  
We will also explore whether there is moderation by socio -demographic characteristics, including 
educational attainment and English proficiency. To assess whether  the effect of the label type on the 
primary outcome differs by education or English proficien cy, we will test for an interaction of label type 
with education level and English proficiency (specified as binary variables in separate models) and use a 
Wald chunk test to determine the statistical significance of the joint interaction. We will use post estimation 
commands to predict and compare means by label type and each potential moderator.   
 
Outliers and exclusions  
We will exclude participants who complete the survey implausibly quickly (defined as <1/3 of the median 
completion time). We will exclude participants who complete less than 90% of the survey.  
We will also look for straight -lining behavior (responding to all the questions the same way, not truthfully 
but to complete the survey more quickly), but we expect most straight -liners, if there are any, to be 
excluded as fast responders. Finally, we will  exclude participants with responses (sessions) overlapping 
in time and drop all but the first response for the remaining participants if they attempted or submitted 
multiple responses.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 