O0958 -M 
Treatment of Emotional Prosodic Disorders in 
Parkinson's Disease  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
August 11, 2014  
Statistical Analysis Plan
Power analysis A sample power analysis using G*power (Erdfelder et al., 1996), and using an 
effect size from this treatment protocol in stroke with an alpha level of .05, power of .80, 1 
group, indicated that we needed to recruit at least 24 participants to detect a small to medium 
effect size. As mentioned above, there is currently no data on means or standard deviations for 
these treatments within a Parkinson’s disease population.
We propose to recruit  approximately 24 participants for during the span of the CDA1 to serve as  
pilot data for treatment feasibility, treatment effect, and test-retest reliability for the primary 
outcome measure. Of this 24, we expect approximately half to receive treatment and half to 
participate only in test-retest reliability testing. The resulting data will be used for a power 
analysis based on means and standard deviations in PD to provide the number of subjects we 
will need to treat in subsequent studies.
Primary outcome measure - determine treatment effect size by comparing changes in acoustic 
variability. Affective sentence production. A list of 96 semantically neutral sentences of between 
five to seven words, spoken in one of four emotional tones of voice (24 each of happy, sad, 
angry and fear), presented in randomized order, will be administered before initiating treatment, 
after treatment is commenced, and at one month post treatment commencement. All sentences 
will be rated acoustically and perceptually. Repeated measures ANOVAS (or nonparametric 
equivalents) will be used to compare on the primary measure of acoustic variability: (a) pitch of 
frequency variability, and (b) intensity or loudness. If measurement time is a significant predictor  
of Fo range at a .05 Type I error level, we will use Tukey’s method for pairwise comparisons to 
maintain the Type I error at .05 while performing post-hoc t-tests to determine which time point 
means are significantly different. As a secondary manner of analyzing this data if acoustic 
measures do seem not seem to have adequately captured any change, the prosodic expression  
outcome measure will also be perceptually rated offline by three trained judges who will rate the 
type of prosody and the intensity of emotional expression (0-5). The blinded judges for these 
and subsequent evaluations will be trained in evaluating the prosody of emotionally intoned 
sentences. Training for these judges will include familiarization with the descriptions of features 
for each emotion with respect to changes in pitch, loudness, and rate. Both intra- and inter-
judge reliability will be calculated for these blinded judges.
Secondary outcome. Performance on identification, discrimination, and naming of facial and 
prosodic expressions of emotion.  These will be assessed using the FAB before and right after 
treatment. Paired samples t-tests were used to compare performance on standardized tasks of 
affect recognition before and immediately following treatment.
Intra- and Inter-Judge Reliability.  To evaluate intra-judge (test-retest) reliability, we will calculate 
mean and standard deviation of differences in the three perceptual outcome measures between 
the first and the second administration. Furthermore, we will calculate an intraclass correlation 
coefficient (ICC) estimate as well as a 95% confidence interval for ICC. In addition, ICC and 
related 95% confidence interval will also be calculated for inter-judge reliability at the first and 
the second administration, separately