Title : Improving ADHD Teen Driving  
NCT# : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document date : 9/20/22  
This supplement to the manuscript entitled “ Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention  in Teens 
with A DHD ” contains the following  items:  
 
1. Original  grant with original protocol and original statistical plan  (Note: The grant that was 
submitted and funded by NIH reflects our original protocol and original statistical plan ) 
2. Final protocol  
3. Final statistical analysis plan  (Note: This document summarizes the statistical analytic plan for 
the set of analyses presented in the manuscript submi tted for publication ) 
4. Summary of changes to statistical analysis  
5. Summary of changes to protocol  
 
2. SPECIFIC AIMS 
Operating a motor vehicle requires a complex set of skills, the most important of which is the ability to 
continuously visually attend to the roadway. The vast majority of motor vehicle crashes (MVCs) involve 
momentary visual inattention immediately before MVC14. In particular, glances away from the roadway that 
endure for more than 1.6-2.0 secs significantly increases risk for MVCs13, 14, 16, 17.  
Experienced drivers rarely exhibit extended glanc es away from the roadway. However, young, 
inexperienced drivers frequently glance away from the roadway for longer than 2.0 secs6, 21. This tendency 
towards extended glances away from the roadway contribut es to the significantly higher risk of MVCs among 
teen drivers. Indeed, MVCs are the leading cause of death among teens22 and despite the fact that they 
represent only 7.3% of all licensed drivers, teens account for 14% of all MVC-related deaths23. 
The 8% of teens with Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)24 pose an even greater driving risk1-3, 
25 - an ADHD diagnosis doubles the risk for being repeatedly (>2) involved in MVCs3. Driving simulator studies 
with adults26 and our own research with teens27 has shown that patients with ADHD exhibit greater variability in 
their speed and lane position than individuals without ADHD. We have also demonstrated that teens with 
ADHD have 3-times more extended glances away fr om the roadway compared to teens without ADHD28 (see 
Preliminary Data 5.a.2). Moreover, frequency of ext ended glances away from the roadway mediates the 
relationship between ADHD diagnostic status and poor simulator driving28 (see Preliminary Data 5.a.3).  
Though other factors (e.g., impulsivity, driving while intoxicated) may contribute to ADHD-related driving 
deficits, our findings and the existing literature3 suggest that diversion of visual attention from the roadway for 
extended durations is a key mechanism in ADHD-related driving deficits and is an appropriate intervention 
target. Hence, there is a clear need for targeted interventions to address the unique driving-related 
deficits in teens with ADHD29, 30. A driving intervention targeting extended eye glances has been developed 
for typical teen drivers. The PC-based FOcu sed Concentration and Attention Learning (FOCAL7, 18, 19) 
intervention provides teens with an operational understanding of the dangers of extended glances and trains teens to limit the length of their glances away from t he roadway. In randomized clinical trials, the intervention 
significantly reduces the number of extended glanc es away from the roadway among teen drivers
18, 19 (see 
Preliminary Data in Section 5.a.5).  
Implementing the FOCAL intervention with teens with ADHD likely requires modification, as patients with 
ADHD often fail to generalize learned behavior to real-world situations31, 32. We thus propose an enhanced 
FOCAL intervention (FOCAL+) that integrates repeated training of the FOCAL-learned skills in a driving 
simulator with immediate feedback on extended glance behavior. Our preliminary data demonstrates that a 
single session of the FOCAL+ intervention model subs tantially reduces extended glances away from the 
roadway among teens with ADHD (see Section 5.a.4). 
The goal of the proposed research is to empirically test the efficacy of the FOCAL+ intervention at 
improving visual attention and driving performance in teens with ADHD. Specifically, we will conduct a 
randomized controlled trial using 136 teens diagnosed with ADHD. Teens will be randomized to receive the 
FOCAL+ intervention or a sham intervention. At baseline, and 1-, 4-, 8-, and 12-months post-randomization, 
we will assess extended eye glances and driving performance outcomes in order to evaluate the breadth, magnitude, and persistence of intervention effects.  
The specific aims of this study are as follows:  
Aim #1: Examine short- and long-term efficacy of FOCAL+ intervention on decreasing rates of extended 
glances away from the roadway among teens with ADHD;  
Aim #2: Examine short- and long-term efficacy of FOCAL+ intervention on impr oving driving performance 
(e.g., weaving, MVCs) among teens with ADHD;  
Aim #3: Examine how many FOCAL+ training sessions are required to normalize extended glances away 
from the roadway among teens with ADHD.  
Aim #4: Explore potential moderators of intervention efficacy.  
 
The public health impact of improving the driving behav ior of teens with ADHD cannot be overstated. In 
2010, seven teens died every day from MVCs33. The 2-fold increased risk of MVCs among the 8% of U.S. 
teens with ADHD3 contributes to these rates and begs for a targeted intervention that can ameliorate driving-
related deficits in this high-risk group. Indeed, normalization of ADHD driving through intervention would translate into a reduction of 28,200 MVCs and as many as 27,950 MVC-related injuries and 250-related deaths per year here in the U.S.  
 
  
Specific Aims                                                                                                 Page 105 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

3. SIGNIFICANCE 
3.a Driving requires persistent visual attention to the roadway 
Driving an automobile is largely a visual task that requires persistent (i.e., ~80-90% of the time) visual 
attention to the roadway34, 35. Orienting visual attention away from the roadway has been singled out as the 
primary cause of most MVCs4, 36, 37. Yet all drivers divert their visual attention from the roadway at times to 
perform both driving-related (e.g., checking speedomete r) as well as non-driving related tasks (e.g., adjusting 
radio). In order to perform secondary tasks with out impairing driving performance, drivers engage in 
“timesharing.” Timesharing refers to a set of frequent and rapid eye movements (i.e., saccades) towards the secondary task and back to the roadway that are repeated until a task is completed
38, 39  
Multiple studies have demonstrated that the critical component of timesharing is to limit the duration of 
each glance away from the roadway to less than 1.6 - 2 secs,13-17, 38, 40 which translates to approximately 160 
feet of distance if driving 55 mph. Glances away fr om the roadway of > 2 secs lead to 3.6 times more lane 
departures41 and are responsible for 86% of all MVCs42.  
3.b Teen driving 
While experienced drivers rarely exhibit extended glances away from the roadway, inexperienced teen 
drivers frequently glance away from the roadway for > 2 secs while driving5-7. Teen drivers are also more likely 
to use distracting technologies (e.g., cell phones) while driving43, 44 and are less effective at timesharing6. 
Accordingly, a recent national study examining in-vehicle event recordings of 1,691 teen MVCs found that 6 
out of 10 teen MVCs are related to visual distraction from the roadway8. Given the effects of driver 
inexperience, propensity towards more extended glanc es away from the roadway, a willingness to use 
distracting technologies while driving, and being less effective at timesharing, perhaps it is not surprising that 
though teens only represent 7% of all drivers, they account for 14% of all MVC-related deaths23. While there 
have been major public health efforts to address teens’ driving impairments (e.g ., intensive education, 
graduated licensing, restrictions on driving with peers) , the effectiveness of these efforts has been limited as 
evidenced by the fact that MVCs continue to be the leading cause of death  among 16-18 year-olds22. 
Importantly, the most effective of these efforts (i.e., graduated licensing45) does not address individual factors 
that increase MVC risk46. 
3.c ADHD is an especially high-risk group 
Teen drivers who meet diagnostic criteria for ADHD in adolescence have considerably higher risk of 
adverse driving outcomes47, 48. In a recent large, naturalistic driving study, drivers meeting diagnostic criteria for 
ADHD were 2.2 times more likely to have multiple collisions as drivers without ADHD3. Teens with ADHD 
receive twice as many traffic violations, are more likely to report receiving fines and points on their license and 
more likely to require remedial driving classes due to their violations than teens without ADHD1, 2, 25, 48-50. Teens 
with ADHD also report significantly higher rates of MVC than their peers48. During driving simulation, teens with 
ADHD exhibit greater variability in their speed26, 27 and lane position27 indicating poor vehicle control (See 
Preliminary Data 5.a.1).  
To address ADHD-related driving deficits, we must better understand the mechanism contributing to 
higher accident risk among individuals with ADHD29, 51. When asked, individuals with ADHD who have been in 
a MVC cite inattention as the most frequent reason for MVC involvement52. In fact, inattention was cited twice 
as frequently as any other reason (e.g., alcohol us e, road conditions, speeding) for causing their MVC52. 
Accordingly, recordings of in-vehicle episodes of visual inattention were the most frequent event immediately preceding collisions among drivers with ADHD
9, and our own data indicate that teens with ADHD exhibit more 
extended glances away from the roadway than teens without ADHD28 (see Preliminary Data 5.a.2). Moreover, 
the number of extended glances away from the roadway mediated ADHD-related deficits in maintenance of a 
steady lateral lane position while driving, especially during engagement in a secondary task28 (i.e., texting; See 
Preliminary Data 5.a.3). Extended glances away from the roadway accounts for 32.5% of the variance in standard deviation in lateral position (SDLP) – an indicator of weaving and highly correlated with risk of a real-world traffic accident
20, 53 Moreover, accounting for extended glances in the relationship between ADHD status 
and driving performance makes the path between ADHD status and driving performance non-significant. 
Though other factors (e.g., impulsivity, drunk driving, fati gue) contribute to ADHD-related driving deficits, our 
findings and the existing literature3 suggest that diversion of visual attention from the roadway for extended 
durations when performing secondary tasks significantly contributes to ADHD-related driving deficits and is an 
appropriate intervention target.  3.d Need for driving interventions targeting teens with ADHD 
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 106 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

There have been multiple calls for the development and testi ng of driving interventions that target teens at 
the highest risk for MVCs29, 30 with increased recognition that some subgroups require additional strategies 
over and above strategies used for typical teens (e.g., graduated driver licensing)29. Given the incremental risk 
of an ADHD diagnosis on driving outcomes, especially  among teen drivers, there is a clear and urgent need for 
driving interventions for teens with ADHD54. While ADHD medications, especially  stimulants, are effective at 
remediating ADHD-related driving impairments54-56, medications are only effective when they are taken and 
during the period of pharmacological effect. Yet teens present with distinct temporal patterns in driving and 
MVCs that both peak during after-school late afternoons and evenings8, 10-12 when stimulant medication effects 
are waning57, 58. The few non-pharmacological interventions t hat have been evaluated for resolving ADHD-
related driving deficits target teen-parent interaction and hazard detection54, 59. Recent reviews of this ADHD 
driving intervention literature have emphasized that future development of driving interventions for teens with 
ADHD must be tailored to address the mechanisms contributing to ADHD driving deficits29, 30, 54. To date, no 
driving intervention studies for ADHD drivers have targeted visual attention while driving, which according to 
our data (see Preliminary Studies) is a key mec hanism in driving deficits among teens with ADHD28.  
3.e Parallels between ADHD driving deficits and ADHD neurocognitive deficits 
The apparent inability of teens with ADHD to periodically look away from the roadway for extended periods 
has distinct parallels to at least a couple documented ADHD-related neurocognitive deficits. First, one of the most consistent neurocognitive deficits observed in  patients with ADHD at all stages of development and 
across many tasks (including attention tasks) is intra-individual performance variability (most often measured 
using SD of reaction times or RTs)
60. While overall RTs of patients with ADHD on a cognitive task are 
comparable to those of typically-developing individuals, it  is clear that periodically within the RT stream, 
patients with ADHD will exhibit intermittent instances of long RTs61-63. These are commonly interpreted as 
attention lapses60 and have shown to correlate with rates of off-task behavior during academic tasks64. The 
neurocognitive parallel with periodic extended glances away from the roadway are these periodic long RTs or attentional lapses that are observed among patients with ADHD on attentional tasks. 
A second potential ADHD-related neurocognitive deficit  related to extended glances away from the 
roadway is an impaired sense of time. In particular,  patients with ADHD have difficulty reproducing time 
durations
65-71, for time periods as short as 2 secs72. Moreover, the inability to accurately reproduce a time 
duration becomes more impaired in the presence of distraction65. The parallel between extended glances and 
time reproduction is that teens with ADHD may be unaware (or lose track) of the amount of time spent looking 
away from the roadway while driving. 
3.f Attention mitigation driving interventions (the FOCAL intervention) 
Donald Fisher, Ph.D., co-Investigator on this pr oject, and his colleagues at the University of 
Massachusetts Amherst Human Performance Lab have devel oped a driving intervention for teen drivers that 
focuses on improving visual attention to the roadway. It is a skills-training intervention  based on the 
assumption that performing secondary tasks in a safe m anner while driving (i.e., without taking one’s eyes off 
the road for extended periods) is a skill that requires training. FOcused Concentration and Attention Learning 
(FOCAL7, 18, 19) is a single-session computerized intervention t hat provides teen drivers with an understanding 
of the dangers of long glances away from the forward roadw ay and specifically trains teen drivers to limit their 
glances away from the roadway to ≤ 2 secs. See description of FOCAL intervention in Section 5.d.1.  
The FOCAL training program has been tested in multiple  randomized clinical trials using typical teen 
drivers18, 19 (See Preliminary Results 5.a.4). At immediate post-test,  teens in the FOCAL intervention engaged 
in fewer extended eye glances ( ≥2 secs) than teens who received sham intervention (i.e., learning rules of the 
road)18}. Further, during assessment on actual roadways, teens trained with FOCAL had extended glances in 
49.9% of secondary task scenarios compared to 60.0% of the time for teens receiving no training19. In the 
latest evaluation of FOCAL, which involved parents in the training to help reinforce teen learnings during supervised driving, significant intervention effects on teens’ glance behaviors were the strongest at 4 months 
post-training
18 (see Preliminary Data 5.a.4). 
3.g Rationale for enhanced FOCAL intervention (FOCAL+) 
While FOCAL has been effective for decreasing the durati on of visual glances away from the roadway in 
typical teens, teens with ADHD present additional cha llenges that likely require adaptation of the FOCAL 
intervention in order to be effective. In particular, ch ildren with ADHD trained with skill-building interventions 
(e.g., social skills training) have consistently failed to  generalize learned behaviors to actual behaviors outside 
of training31. For these reasons, Barkley32 suggests that if skill building programs are to succeed, they must be 
instituted at critical points of performance in the natural ecology of the patient with ADHD. Further, patients with 
ADHD are able to adapt their behavior best when provided with immediate feedback on performance73. In 
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 107 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

order to ensure that the skills learned during FOCAL generalize to actual roadway behavior, we have adapted 
the FOCAL intervention to include additional training during simulated driving with immediate feedback about glance behaviors. We anticipate that combining FOCAL tr aining with ecologically-valid training in the driving 
simulator will help teens with ADHD to generalize their new ly learned visual attention skills to actual driving. 
Indeed, a recent review of the ADHD driving literatur e concludes that a multimodal approach incorporating a 
driving simulator and including parental involvement will li kely be most effective at improving driving outcomes 
among teens with ADHD
54.  
Finally, it is likely that teens with ADHD will need more than one training session to learn and generalize 
these skills. Indeed, our preliminary data suggest that though a single FOCAL+ session reduces extended 
glances away from the roadway in teens with ADHD, t hey continue to exhibit a significant number of extended 
glances away from the roadway (see Section 5.a.5). Thus, additional training is desirable. The exact number of 
sessions needed to normalize ADHD teen’s visual attention while driving is an important empirical question the proposed intervention is uniquely designed to answer. In determining a schedule for repeated training, we could either mass the practice (extend the length of the training sessions) or distribute trainings over time. The 
literature suggests that training works best when distributed over time  
74. Moreover, it is important with skill 
training to over-train so that performance becomes as automatic as possible  75. Given the logistical constraints 
of repeated training, we decided that training should be undertaken four times, with a week between training sessions. See 5.d.2 for a more detailed description of the FOCAL+ intervention. 3.h Impact 
The impact of this intervention on teens with ADHD as well as on the general public cannot be overstated. 
ADHD has many associated functional impairments (e.g., poor academic achievement, social deficits, lower 
self-esteem, familial distress, etc.); however, no ADHD-related impairment has greater potential health consequences than those related to poor driving. Driving def icits in teens with ADHD can lead to serious injury 
and possibly death for teens with ADHD, passengers in their cars, and all who share the roadway with them. Hence, there is a clear patient-level and public heal th need to develop interventions that improve ADHD-
related driving impairments. As noted in a recent edi torial on teenage driving, “a challenge for this emerging 
field is to identify the ‘sweet spots’ that balance the intervention’s reach to the optimal population with program 
cost, timing, and acceptability” (p.703)
30. By targeting teens with ADHD, we are targeting one of the highest 
risk groups of drivers on the road. Giv en an ADHD prevalence of 8% among teens24, the proposed intervention 
has relevance to approximately 1 million teens with ADHD nationwide. Were our intervention to normalize 
ADHD driving and be disseminated to all teens with ADHD, the potential impact on rates of MVCs and injuries 
and lives lost due to MVCs could be substantial (i.e., a reduction of 28,200 MVCs, 27,950 MVC-related injuries and 250-related deaths per year). 
 
4. INNOVATION 
The proposed line of research is highly innovative for mult iple reasons. First, this study directly targets a 
mechanism – visual attention – that directly contributes  to driving risk in ADHD teens. Currently, there are no 
driving interventions that focus on ADHD-related driving skills deficits despite the concerns of parents of teens with ADHD relative to their teens driving
76. Families, and society, desperately need interventions that can 
remediate driving risks for inexperienced, high-risk (i.e., ADHD) drivers. 
Second, the intervention employs state-of-the-art  driving simulator and eye-tracking technology that allow 
training of a complex skill in a safe environment. We feel this is the only safe method for training teens with 
ADHD how to drive safely in the real world. Such simu lation methods are used in the aircraft industry to train 
pilots to safely fly aircraft. Moreover, when testing for short- and long-te rm intervention efficacy, we will employ 
both driving simulation and road tests, also with integrat ed eye-tracking, to objectively assess visual attention 
and driving performance during performance of secondary tasks.  We will also use an innovative in-car camera 
system (i.e. DriveCam) to gather ecologically-va lid data about real-world visual behavior and driving 
performance pre- and post-intervention. DriveCam technology has been used to elucidate ADHD-related 
driving deficits including higher rates of MVCs, high g-force events, and inattentive/distracted behavior while driving among adults with ADHD compared to adults without ADHD 
77. 
Finally, by conducting multiple sessions of FOCAL+ training, we will be able to determine how many 
training sessions are necessary for teens with ADHD to learn the trained skill (i.e., reducing the number of 
extended glances away from the roadway to the leve l observed among experienced drivers). Determining the 
length of intervention required will impact implementation in real world settings. 5. RESEARCH STRATEGY 
5.a. Preliminary Studies 
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 108 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

5.a.1 Teen drivers with ADHD have worse driving performance in a driving simulator27  
A total of 61 teens (ADHD = 28, Control = 33) 
aged 16-17 with a valid driver’s license completed a 
simulated drive. Each participant drove for three 10-
minute periods. During each period, participants were either engaged in cell phone conversation, text messaging, or no distraction. Driving performance was assessed by measuring average speed, standard deviation (SD) in speed, and SD in lateral 
position for each condition. Across all conditions 
teens with ADHD exhibited worse driving behavior as evidenced by greater variability in speed (p<.05) and lane position (p<.01) than teens without ADHD. See Figure 1 for depiction of differences in SD of lateral 
position across ADHD and control groups and across 
conditions. Covarying parent- or self-ratings of 
Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) did not alter the statistical significance of these effects.  This study clearly 
demonstrates ADHD-related driving deficits and suggests th at ADHD is a serious risk to driving performance. 
Moreover, these preliminary data demonstrate our ability to  use a driving simulator to collect data on driving 
performance. 
5.a.2 Teen drivers with ADHD have increased numbers of extended visual glances away from the 
roadway during simulated driving
28 
We videotaped and behaviorally coded teens’ glances while performing a secondary task (i.e., texting) 
during simulated driving. Teens with ADHD had significant ly more glances away from the roadway lasting ≥2 
secs than teens without ADHD (p<.01).See Figure 2. Covarying ratings of ODD did not change this result. 
5.a.3 ADHD- and texting-related deficits mediated by extended glances28 
We tested whether visual inattention mediated the relationship between 
ADHD and poor driving. We found that the number of extended glances (>2 
secs) away from the roadway mediat ed ADHD-related deficits in maintenance 
of a SDLP while driving during distraction (indirect effect beta=.10, SE=.07, 
p<.05). Notably, when accounting for extended eye glances as a mediator, the 
effect of ADHD on SDLP was non-significant (beta=.30, SE=.15, p>.05) suggesting that extended eye glances fully mediate the relationship between ADHD and driving problems. Covarying ODD did not change this result.  
5.a.4 Efficacy of FOCAL intervention among non-ADHD teens
18, 19  
Using a post-test only experimental design, 37 typical teen drivers (aged 
16 and 17) were randomly assigned to FOCAL (n = 19) or a sham (n=18) 
intervention consisting of Rules of the Road  training. FOCAL consisted of 
the computerized intervention descri bed in Section 5.d.1. Driver eye 
glance behavior during a road test was recorded using a portable lightweight eye-tracker installed in a car. Only 19.5% of glances of teens 
trained using FOCAL exceeded 2 secs compared to 28.8% of glances among those in the sham group [i.e., a 
30% reduction; F(1,35)=4.57, p<.05]. Teens were also tested in a driving simulator where a 50% reduction in the percentage of glances over a 2-sec threshold was observed among those who received FOCAL training 
compared to the sham intervention (t
38=3.30, p<.005). 
In a separate study18, 40 typical teens (aged 16-18) were randomly assigned to FOCAL or sham 
intervention. We demonstrated that the effect of training not only persists out to a 4-month follow-up 
assessment of visual attention during driving (FOCAL % of extended glances =19% vs. sham=29%, t 38 = 2.48, 
p<.05) but are even stronger than immediate post-interv ention assessment. In fact, the eye glance behavior of 
FOCAL-trained teens at 4-months post-intervention was not  significantly different than rates of their parents 
(i.e., experienced drivers; percent of glances ≥2 secs for FOCAL trained teens = 19% vs. percent of glances ≥2 
secs for experienced drivers = 11%).  
5.a.5 Preliminary evidence of FOCAL+ efficacy in teens with ADHD 
Twelve teens with ADHD (ages 16-17) participated in  a preliminary randomized controlled trial examining 
the relative effectiveness of the FOCAL interventi on compared to the enhanced FOCAL+ intervention (see 
Section 3.d.2). The FOCAL+ intervention consisted of FOCAL training followed by a training session in the 
Figure 1: Group differences  in lateral position across No Distraction,  
Conversation,  and Texting conditions  
Figure 2: Mean number of extended  visual glances 
away from the roadway for teens with and without 
ADHD while texting during a simulated  drive. 
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 109 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

Figure 3: Mean number of extended  visual glances away from 
the roadway across the two intervention  groups before and 
after training.  driving simulator. The enhanced FOCAL+ simulator training included a 10-minute driving simulation training 
during which an eye tracker monitored eye movements and provided the teen with immediate feedback (i.e., 
an auditory alarm) when visual glances away from t he roadway exceeded 2 secs. To control for exposure to 
the driving simulator, teens randomly assigned to the non-enhanced FOCAL also had a 10-minute driving 
simulator session with eye tracking, however no feedback was provided regarding eye glances. All teens completed two 5-minute drives in the driving simulator before training (pre) and again immediately after training (post). The pre- and post-simulated drives consisted of  driving along suburban roads with 4 “toll booth” events 
during which an on-screen alert notified the driver of a toll amount and teens were required to find and pay the 
correct amount by selecting identically-shaped coins fr om a container and paying the experimenter. Figure 3 
illustrates the moderate decrease (pre-post effect size Cohen’s d =.64) in the number of extended (>2 sec) 
glances away from the roadway among teens ra ndomly assigned to the FOCAL intervention and the 
substantial decrease (pre-post effect size Cohen’s d = 1.19) in the number of extended glances away from the roadway among teens randomly assigned to the FOCAL+  intervention. These data demonstrate 1) the 
excessive number of extended glances away from the roadway (i.e., approx imately 2.5 extended glances away 
from the roadway per minute) among teens with ADHD at  baseline; 2) the relative efficacy of the two 
interventions at exacting change on the ey e glance behavior of adolescents with ADHD; and 3) that teens with 
ADHD are still exhibiting extended glances away from t he roadway after a single FOCAL+ training session.  
5.a.6 Experience with sample retention The PI (Epstein) was the site coordinator (and later co-
Investigator) for the Multimodal Treatment Study of Children 
with ADHD (MTA)
78 at the Duke site. The retention rate for 
MTA participants at the Duke site at the 14-month assessment point was 97.9%. In addition, here at the Center for ADHD, the research team has conducted several NIH-funded ADHD treatment studies that have required retention 
of the study sample for 12 months. For example, in our most 
recent CCHMC-based ADHD treatment study (R34MH095911), the retention rate at 12 months was 94%. 
5.b Overview of proposed research 
Licensed teen drivers (aged 16-19) with ADHD (n=136) 
will be phenotyped and then randomly assigned to either (1) the computerized FOCAL driving intervention 
including visual attention training in a driving simulator (FOCAL+) over the course of 4 weeks, or (2) sham intervention using rules of the road taught over the course of 4 weekly sessions. At 1-, 4-, 8- and 12-months 
post-randomization, teens’ driving skills will be assessed using a driving simulator and a road test.  In addition, 
the car most often driven by the teen will be outfitted with  a DriveCam video event monitoring system to collect 
information about actual driving performance in real road conditions over the course of one year post-training. 
Finally, we will collect driving records covering the ent ire period of the study to assess the impact of the 
interventions on real-world driving outcomes such as MVCs and citations. Analyses will focus on comparing 
driver visual attention and driving performance outcomes in the intervention vs. the sham intervention groups in 
an effort to determine whether the FOCAL+ training is superior to sham intervention for teens with ADHD. 
Consistent with findings from a longitudinal examination of FOCAL in neurotypical teens
18. we expect 
nonlinearity in the response to this intervention with strongest effects occurring at follow-up .  In order to test 
the short- and long-term effects of FOCAL+ compared to sham intervention  we plan 4 follow-up assessments 
including an immediate post-intervention assessment (1-m onth) and 3 long-term follow-up assessments (4-, 8- 
and 12-months). Finally, exploratory analyses will exami ne whether any baseline driver characteristics (e.g., 
gender, psychiatric comorbidity) moderate treatment outcomes. 
5.c. Participants 
136 teens (aged 16-19) with ADHD will be recruited to participate in the study. An ADHD diagnosis will be 
based on the Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children-Present and 
Lifetime Version (K-SADS79) interview with parent and adolescent.  
Most of our ADHD research participants will be current or past patients at the Center for ADHD at 
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC). Approximately 900 patients with ADHD are seen at 
our Center each year. We have over 2000 patients in our patient registry who have agreed to be contacted to 
participate in future research studies. 812 former patient s within our patient registry will be in the 16-19 year 
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 110 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

old age range during the course of this study. We foresee that we will be able to successfully recruit the 
majority of our sample using our Center’s registry.  
5.c.1 Inclusion criteria 
1) Aged 16-19. Rationale : This age range represents the period of greatest driving risk80. 
2) Teens in ADHD group will meet DSM ADHD criteria fo r ADHD-Predominantly Inattentive Presentation or 
ADHD-Combined Presentation based on the K-SADS interview. Rationale : Inattentiveness - elevated in 
both of these ADHD subgroups - confers driving risk in teen drivers81.  
3) Possess a valid driver’s license and regularly spend at least 3 hours per week engaged in unsupervised 
driving. Rationale : Must be legal for participant to drive i ndependently since driving risk among teen drivers 
is greatest in absence of adult supervision80. Further, there is a need to collect ample DriveCam outcome 
data during unsupervised driving conditions to test for intervention effects. Other driving studies have used 
similar inclusion criteria for number of hours of independent driving82. 
4) IQ ≥80 as measured by the Wechsler Abbreviated Intelligence Scale-II (WASI-II)83. Rationale : Teens with 
cognitive challenges may not be able to understand intervention instructions.  
5) Parent willing to participate. Rationale : Teens will be asked to refrain from taking medication on days of 
driving assessment (i.e., driving simulation). Since driving to our facility for testing without taking medication may put the teen at risk, a parent will need to agree to drive the teen to these visits. Parents will also be participating in the intervention (see Section 5.d.1). 
5.c.2 Exclusion criteria: 
1) On ADHD medication that cannot be washed out on assessment days. Rationale : Since we desire to test 
teens off medication on the assessment days, only medi cations with a half-life <12 hours can be allowed. 
2) Drug or alcohol dependence. Rationale : Teens meeting criteria for drug or alcohol dependence according 
to K-SADS interview likely require more intensive and other interventions.  
3) On psychotropic or neuroleptic medications. Rationale : These psychotropic medications often impact 
patient attention. Also, these medications cannot be titrated down quickly.  
4) Require eye glasses (contacts acceptable) for drivi ng (corrective vision restriction on driver’s license). 
Rationale:  The eye tracking equipment that will be used during driving simulation and the road test to 
measure eye glances cannot be used if the participant is wearing glasses. 
5.d Description of FOCAL+ and Sham Intervention Groups 
5.d.1 FOCAL+ Intervention 
Initially, and then once a week for the next 4 weeks after the initial training, teens with ADHD randomized 
to the FOCAL+ intervention will participate in FOCAL+ training sessions (total of 5 sessions).  FOCAL training 
begins with the Attention Maintenance Assessment Program (AMAP). AMAP is a computerized program 
designed to assess visual attention. During AMAP, the computer screen is split horizontally in order to simulate distracted driving. Participants can either view a winds hield-view video of driving in the top portion of the 
screen (primary task) or view a map on the bottom portion of the screen (secondary task). Participants toggle 
between views by pressing the spacebar on the keyboard. Only the top or bottom view is visible at any one 
time with the non-selected portion of the screen blacked out. Although blacked out when viewing the map, the video of the drive continues to progress in real ti me while the map is being viewed. During AMAP, the 
participant is given three street names. By toggling between the views of the top and bottom halves of the display, they are asked to identify street signs in the driving video (top portion) while concurrently determining 
whether the street names exist on the map (bottom portion). 
After AMAP, feedback and training begin in four separate phases. (1) Participants learn to appreciate how 
long they looked away from the driving scenario during AMAP by viewing their own AMAP performance. During 
this viewing the top portion of the screen (simulated video dr ive) is blacked out for as long as the participant 
viewed the map during the AMAP testing. For example, if the teen diverted his attention to the map for 3.8 secs 
during the initial driving task, the screen is blacked out for the same 3.8 secs during video playback. (2) In a 
subsequent feedback period, the AMAP video is played back again with a blacked out screen during times the 
teen was looking away. In addition, a timer is added to the screen to show the teen how long they looked away during each instance. (3) Next, teens are again asked to watch a 3-minute driving video while performing the map search (just as in AMAP). However, during these tria ls, teens are instructed to initially limit their glances 
towards the map to ≤3 secs. They learn to limit their glance durations to the threshold duration in two steps. In 
the first set of trials, the map is displayed for exactly the threshold duration. In the next set of trials, teens 
control the duration of the map display during 3-minut e drives. They receive an auditory warning when their 
glance away from the roadway to the map extend s beyond 3 secs. The participant repeats the task until no 
glances exceed 3 secs for the duration of the 3-minute drive up to a maximum or 3 extra 3-minute drives. (4) In 
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 111 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

the last phase, the same two steps are repeated in this fourth phase as were repeated in Phase 3 but with a 2-
sec threshold. Due to concerns that teens with ADHD might have decreased ability to generalize the visual 
glance skills they learn during FOCAL training to actual driving conditions31, 32, we have enhanced the FOCAL 
intervention to specifically train generalization to a driving environment. Immediately following each FOCAL 
training session, teens will enter the driving si mulator equipped with eye tracking technology. They will 
complete two 5-minute drives. During the drives, approxim ately once per minute, the driver will be alerted with 
an auditory tone that they need to search for the letter “A” within a 32x32 array of letters on the screen located within a computer monitor situated within a virtual dashboard. They will need to indicate whether the A was present or absent with a button press. They will be gi ven 20 secs to complete the search. During the FOCAL+ 
drive, the eye tracker will monitor eye glances and t eens will be provided with real time immediate auditory 
feedback when a visual glance away from the roadway exceeds 2 secs. Specifically, an auditory alarm will 
sound when the glance duration exceeds 2 secs and will continue to sound until visual gaze returns to the roadway. All teens will complete two 5-minute drives under these conditions. However, if a teen is still demonstrating any glances away from the roadway that are ≥2 secs, they will complete additional 5-minute 
drives under the same conditions until they succeed in having no ≥2 secs glances during the 5-minute drive up 
to a maximum of 3 extra 5-minute drives. Each training session lasts approximately 1.5 hours. 
During the initial training session, as teens are completing the FOCAL+ training, parents will complete the 
FOCAL training in a separate room so that they can learn the skills being taught to the teen and can thereafter provide feedback to the teen regarding extended vi sual glances during supervised driving.  
5.d.3 Sham intervention: Similar to teens randomized to the FOCAL+ intervention, teens with ADHD 
randomized to the sham intervention will engage in sham training initially and then once a week for the next 4 
weeks after the initial training (total of 5 sessions).  The first hour of each training session will consist of 
computer-based training about the rules of the road. Teens will learn about traffic codes, laws, and rules of the road. In order to control for the extra time that teens assigned to FOCAL+ will spend in the driving simulator during FOCAL+ training, teens in the sham interventi on will also drive in the driving simulator after each 
training session for a comparable length of time (i.e., two 5-minute sessions). This time in the driving simulator 
will be contextualized as a time for them to practice the rules of the road they learned during training. Importantly, teens in the sham intervention group will NOT receive any feedback regarding their eye gaze 
during simulated driving. Parents will  also participate in the PC-based rules of the road training separately from 
the teen. This is the same sham intervention used in t he preliminary study assessing long-term efficacy of the 
FOCAL intervention (see Section 5.a.4).  
5.e Measures 
Study measures (See Table 1 on following page) include those needed for (1) establishing inclusion 
criteria (IN); (2) assessing intervention outcomes (O); (3) measuring potential moderators of treatment outcome 
(M); (4) potential covariates (C); and (5) evaluating sa tisfaction and perceived effectiveness of the intervention 
(S). Note that some measures may serve more t han one purpose. Since stimulant medications can impact 
driving performance, we will request that participants re frain from taking stimulant medications on the day of 
the assessment. 
5.e.1 Description of measures 
Vanderbilt ADHD Parent and Teacher Rating Scales
84: This DSM-based checklist allows parents and teachers 
to each rate the teen on each of the 18 ADHD core symptoms. Parents and teachers also rate the teen on a 
variety of domains of functional impairment. 
Conners-3 Self-Report85: This self-report checklist allows adole scents to rate themselves on ADHD core 
symptoms  as well as their perceptions of their own learning problems, aggression, family relations, etc.  
Estimates of Driving Ability Questionnaire86: Individuals with ADHD overestimate their abilities in a variety of 
contexts (e.g., social, academic87), a phenomenon known as positive illusory bias. Teens will be taught the 
concept of percentiles and then be asked to provide a percentile ranking of their driving ability. After completing 
the driving simulator assessment at baseline, participants will also be asked to percentile rank their driving 
performance in the simulator. Discrepancy scores will be created by comparing individual’s perceived percentile ranking to actual driving performance percentile rankings based on the performance of neurotypical controls available through the University of Massachusetts Amherst Human Performance Laboratory. Discrepancy scores indicate positive illusory bias of driving ability in teens and will be used to assess whether 
positive illusory bias moderates intervention outcomes. 
Go/No-Go task: The Go/No-go task consists of 300 stimuli which appear on the computer screen, one at a 
time, each for approximately 500 milliseconds. The inter-stimulus interval will be 3 secs. The task will last for 12 minutes. Participants are instructed to press the response pad for every stimulus except for the target 
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 112 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

stimulus (e.g., the letter “X”). The event rate, or percentage of trials when non-target stimuli (e.g., other letters) 
appear, will be 90%. Reaction time will be measured from t he point at which a target stimulus appears on the 
screen until the response pad is depressed. The primary outcome measure on this task will be the ex-
Gaussian indicator of RT skew, tau. Tau is a robust estimator of intra-individual variability (IIV)63, 88, 89 and will 
be tested as a moderator of treatment outcomes. Temporal reproduction task
90: Twenty presentations of a visual stimulus (i.e., a light bulb) appear on a 
computer screen for ½, 1, 2, 3, or 4 secs. At the end of  each presentation, the participant is asked to reproduce 
the duration of stimulus presentation by holding down the spacebar for the same duration as the stimulus was presented. Absolute discrepancy scores are computed by co mparing estimations of the interval to the actual 
stimulus duration. These discrepancy scores will be tested as a moderator of treatment outcomes. 
Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function: (BRIEF)
91: There are separate parent- and self-report 
versions of this questionnaire which assess executive functioning in teens. Scale scores include various aspects of executive functioning (e.g., Inhibit, Emotional Control, Working Memory, and Monitor). Baseline 
scores on executive functioning will be evaluated as potential moderators of treatment response.  
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI)
92: The PSQI is a self-rated questionnaire which assesses sleep quality 
and disturbances. Several aspects of sleep are assessed by this scale including sleep latency, duration, sleep disturbances, use of sleeping medication, and subjective sleep quality. We will evaluate sleep quality and quantity as a potential covariate in our outcome analyses. Services Use in Children and Adolescents-Parent Interview (SCA-PI); Service Barriers and Attitudes
93: This 
brief structured interview conducted with the parent captures adolescent services use across mental health, primary care, school, and community settings. Medication use data acquired from this interview will be entered 
as a covariate into our statistical modeling. Consumer satisfaction questionnaire: Teens and parents will complete a consumer satisfaction questionnaire 
asking them about their own opinions of the intervention. Questions will focus on the following domains: 1) appreciation of intervention format including length, setting, computer interface, etc.; 2) perceptions of whether 
they felt that the intervention might help them dr ive better; and 3) whether they would recommend this 
intervention to other teens. Driving simulation ( primary outcome measure ): In addition to testing at baseline and each of the major 
assessment points, a driving simulation assessment will also occur for participants in both intervention groups 
immediately preceding each of the weekly training sessions. This will allow an examination of the number of 
weekly training sessions that are needed to reduce ext ended glances away from the roadway to levels seen 
among experienced drivers. Note that in order to r educe overlap between the FOCAL+ simulator training and 
simulator assessments, the driving scenarios will differ across these two situations.  
To assess driving performance, participants will complete a simulated drive in a driving simulator with an 
integrated eye-tracking system (see Facilities and Resources page). Participants will complete a 5-minute practice drive consisting of a highway drive with both straight and curving road sections with other vehicles 
present. After acclimating to the driving simulator, participants will complete two 15-minute drives. During each 
drive, the participant will engage in one secondary task per minute for a total of 28 secondary tasks. The secondary task will consist of searching for correct change akin to finding correct change for a toll booth. The driver will be alerted by an on-screen sign identifyi ng the amount of change needed. Drivers will search 
through a fixed container with identically shaped coins, though with different amounts written on each coin, for 
the correct change amount. Throughout the drive, a variety of situations known to increase the risk for MVCs 
(e.g., poor weather, car unexpectedly pulling out in front of driver) will occur intermittently.  
Eye gaze, driving speed and lateral position will be sampled continuously. Using ISO 15007-2
94 and SAE 
J-239695 criteria which standardize definitions and metri cs related to the measurement of driver visual 
behavior, we will identify eye glances away from the r oadway. Eye gaze data will be summarized by calculating 
the number of extended ( ≥2 secs) glances away from the roadway , which will be our primary outcome for 
visual behavior during driving.  
Using driving simulator data, we will calculate number of MVCs, average speed, SD speed, and SDLP. 
Note that SDLP has high test-retest validity (r=.80) as it does not differ across AM or PM driving nor does it 
differ significantly as a function of traffic or weather53. Importantly, SDLP is sensitive to treatment effects53. 
Lane position variability is highly correlated with leaving one’s lane of traffic96, and leaving one’s lane 
significantly increases risk for MVCs8. Some studies have shown correlations as high as .96-.99 between 
SDLP and the risk of having a traffic accident20. In our own data we found that SDLP in the driving simulator 
correlated .38 (p<.05) with self-reported MVC among ADHD teens.  Hence, SDLP is a critical driving 
performance outcome97 and will be our primary driving performanc e outcome. Simulated driving performance 
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 113 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

explains over two-thirds of the variability in actual on-road driving98 suggesting that driving simulation is a valid 
method for assessing driving performance. Road Test (secondary outcome measure): We have contracted with a local driving school (see letter in 
Appendix) to use their instrumented vehicle and Cert ified Driver Rehabilitation Specialists (CDRS). The 
instrumented vehicle has a “student driver” sign on top of the vehicle and is outfitted with dual foot pedal 
brakes. A CDRS has completed comprehensive training and education programs in order to plan, develop, 
coordinate and implement driver rehabilitation se rvices for individuals with disabilities. The CDRS  will be 
seated in the passenger seat and will intervene with braking if necessary. The teen will be seated in the driver’s seat and will be instructed by the CDRS to trav erse a fixed 10-mile set course consisting of urban and 
suburban environments. At five points during the drive, the teen will be prompted by the instructor to engage in 
a variety of safety-critical tasks (e.g., turning on window defroster; see Protection of Human Subjects 6.a). 
The vehicle also has a “Five-Camera Mobile Lab” system  (termed iHERE) that digitally records the views 
to the front, left and right of the vehicle using three roof-mounted cameras and the view of the two front tires 
using two cameras mounted on the side mirrors. The outputs of all five cameras are run into a video 
multiplexor that combines and time-stamps the video signals into one split screen image. This combined signal 
is then recorded on digital videotape using a MiniDV video recorder. The system is entirely mobile and is 
configured to be installed in any vehicle within minutes using high-powered magnets (see Facilities). The 
indicator of driving performance is the number of l ane crossing events excluding purposeful lane changes (e.g., 
changing to the right-hand lane to make a right turn). We will use standard operating procedures for conducting 
the measurement of SDLP using data gathered from the road test as described by Verster & Roth (2011)  53. 
Importantly, these procedures have been applied in psychopharmacological research for over 30 years53. In 
addition, the number of lane crossings will be divided by the number of miles (i.e., 10 miles) to arrive at an 
indicator of number of lane crossings as an additional indicator of driving performance on the on-road test. 
In addition, the teen will wear Tobii eye-tracking glasse s while driving during the road test in order to 
measure eye movements. The Tobii glasses consist of binocular eye tracking sensors and are outfitted with a 
scene camera and audio recording capabilities. The resulting interleaved video is stored on the same on-board 
digital video recorder that will store the iHERE video. Labstreaminglayer software (Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience) will unify the separate video streams and will time-synchronize and time-stamp the multiple streams into a single video file. Also, t he Tobii software will convert the Tobii eye-tracking data into 
a separate digital video file which can be played back wi th a view of the driving scene (as seen through the 
driver’s point of view) with the driver’s gaze repres ented by crosshairs superimposed on the video. Similar to 
the driving simulator eye gaze data, we will use ISO 15007-2
94 and SAE J-239695 criteria to identify extended 
(≥2 secs) glances away from the roadway and will us e the total number of these extended glances as an 
indicator of eye gaze activity during the road test drive. Note that this road test was developed by co-I Fisher 
and has demonstrated sensitivity to FOCAL intervention effects19. 
DriveCam event recording (secondary outcome meas ure): The DriveCam device is an event-triggered palm 
sized pair of cameras that are mounted to the rear view mirror of the participant’s car. The device has a 
forward-road facing camera and another camera that faces the driver. Both cameras continuously record but only save to memory when a built-in accelerometer exceeds a set g force threshold. When the accelerometer detects a motion that exceeds this threshold, the device automatically records the 10 secs before and 10 secs after the triggered event. The external research division at  DriveCam has agreed to work with us, as they have 
with other research groups
99, to lower the g-force threshold for this study in order that we can obtain snippets 
surrounding extreme g-force incidents (i.e., swerving or hard braking resulting in a g-force of .6 or higher) as well as routine driving events such as making a turn or changing lanes (i.e., events that produce g-forces in the 
range of .4-.5). The DriveCam will be installed at the time of training and will remain in the car for 1 year.  
All video is time- and date-stamped and transferred to our servers daily through wireless communication. 
The DriveCam technology will also be programmed to record the onset and offset of driving. In addition, global 
positioning capability within DriveCam will allow tracking of  miles driven for each drive. Using this information, 
we will be able to determine how many hours and miles the car was driven by the teen. We will also be able to determine from this video whether other people (e.g., parents, other adults, or friends) were present in the car during each driving episode. We will al so use an established coding system
8 to record general background 
(e.g., time of day) and environmental (e.g., weather, road type) variables surrounding the MVC. 
Any g-force event that exceeds .6 g-force will be coded using three primary codings: 1) incidents (i.e., a 
threshold exceedance in which the driver’s action, either intentional or unintentional, was responsible for a safety-relevant event), 2) crashes (i.e., collision with another vehicle or object), and 3) near-crashes (i.e., an 
evasive maneuver performed to avoid a MVC). Video reco rdings of the driver will be coded for whether an 
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 114 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

extended glance away from the roadway  preceded the event, along with the length of the glance away from the 
roadway and the temporal proximity of that glance to  the actual event. Also, since most incidents will be 
preceded by an extended glance away fr om the roadway, incident-related video recordings will not provide an 
adequate sample for examining typical eye glance behavior. Hence, we will also collect and code an additional 
60 randomly-selected 20-second clips from low threshold events.  
The primary outcomes we will obtain from these data will include the number of incidents, crashes, and 
near-crashes per hour driven. Also, we will be able to determine the number of incidents preceded by ≥ 2 sec 
glance away from roadway per hour driven as well as a general number of extended glances away from the 
roadway from the random clips. 
 In addition, since we will NOT be asking teens to te rminate medication during th is naturalistic assessment 
of driving, we will need to record information about ADHD medication use including medication type and 
dosage. Families will be queried about ADHD medication pr escriptions at each clinic assessment using the 
SCA-PI interview (see above). Further, families will use a medication event m onitoring system (MEMSCAPTM) 
over the course of the year to electronically  track date and time of medication administration. 
Review of driving records: Participants’ driving reco rds from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles dating back from 
licensure and extending until 1-year post randomization will  be obtained. We will record the number and type of 
traffic violations, incidents of driving while intoxi cated, license suspensions and revocations, and MVCs.  
Table 1: Schedule of measures  
 Post-Randomization 
Measure  Done 
By Purpose Time to 
complete Screening/ 
Baseline   4-week 
training  1-, 4- 8-, and 12 month 
assessments 
K-SADS A,P IN,M 90 m X     
VAPRS P,T M 5 m X     
Conners-3 Self-Report A M 5 m X     
WASI-II A IN,M 30 m X     
Driving Ability Quest. A M 10 m X     
Temporal Reproduction  A M 15 m X     
Go/No-go task A M 30 m X     
BRIEF A, P M 10 m X     
PSQI A M,C 10 m X  X X X 
SCA-PI P C 20 m X  X X X 
Driving Simulator A M,O 30 m X WEEKLY X X X 
Road Test A M,O 20 m X 1st SESSION X X X 
DriveCam A M,O N/A X CONTINUOUS 
Driving Records N/A O N/A X                                                                 X
Consumer Satisfaction  A S 5 m   X X X 
Notes: A=Adolescent; P=Parent; T=Teacher; IN=inclusion measure; M=moderator measure; 
C=covariate measure; O=outcome measure; S=Satisfaction measure  
Note about driving measures: Four different driving outcomes will be utilized for assessing driving 
performance. There are trade-offs for each measure in term s of its use during training (e.g., raising concerns 
about training to the task), whether the driving env ironment can be controlled (e.g., assigning distracting 
secondary tasks), whether eye glance behavior can be m easured during driving, and each tasks ecological 
validity. These trade-offs are outlined in Table 2. No single measure is ideal. However, by including all four measures, we feel that we are comprehensively asse ssing driver’s visual behavior and driving performance. 
Table 2: Driving measure trade-offs 
 Not used during 
training Can control 
environment Able to measure 
eye glances  Ecologically valid 
Simulator  X X  
Road test X X X  
DriveCam X  X X 
Driving records X   X 
5.f Analyses 
5.f.1 Missing Data:  Although every effort will be made to avoid having missing data when a teen 
withdraws from the study or a data point is missed, missing data due to attrition is common in longitudinal studies. However, as noted in Section 5.a.6, we have demonstrated high rates (>90%) of retention in other 
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 115 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

ADHD treatment studies. That said, if a participant drops from the study, we will replace that participant with a 
new participant in order that we are adequately powered to test our study hypotheses. Moreover, we will utilize 
maximum likelihood estimation to address data assumed missing at random. A missing data attrition analysis 
will be performed using SAS PROC MI to identify potentia ls for non-random or systematic attrition (MNAR) 
related to key independent and dependent variables. In cases of MNAR missing data, selection and pattern mixture models will be used to appropriately address non-random attrition.  
5.f.2 Analyses 
5.f.2.a Analytic Plan to Address Aims 1 & 2 
Aim #1 : Examine short- and long-term efficacy of FO CAL+ intervention on decreasing rates of extended 
glances away from the roadway among teens with ADHD 
Hypothesis #1 : Teens with ADHD assigned to the FOCAL+ inte rvention will evidence fewer extended glances 
away from roadway immediately following initial trai ning, and 1-, 4-, 8- and 12-months post randomization 
compared to teens with ADHD assigned to the sham intervention. 
Aim #2 : Examine short- and long-term efficacy of FOCA L+ intervention on improving driving performance 
among teens with ADHD 
Hypothesis #2 : Teens with ADHD in FOCAL+ will exhibit more improvements in driving performance 
immediately following initial training, and 1-, 4-, 8- and 12-months post randomization than teens with ADHD in the sham intervention group. 
The hypotheses listed above will use the same statistical modeling. For each analysis, every randomized 
teen will be kept in the analyses (i.e., intent-to-treat approach). Mixed factorial ANCOVAs will be used to analyze the data. The two independent variables in the analyses will be Intervention (FOCAL+ vs. Sham Intervention) and Time (immediately after initial training, and 1-, 4-, 8- and 12-months post- randomization). Months of driving experience will be covaried. To test Hypotheses 1, the primary dependent variable will be the number of extended (>2 sec) glances away from the roadway during driving simulation. Secondary analyses 
testing Hypotheses 1 will focus on other visual attention outcomes across the intervention groups including 
number of extended glances away from the roadway during the road test.  
To test Hypotheses 2, the primary dependent variable will be SDLP during driving simulation. Secondary 
outcomes for Hypotheses 2 include 1) number of MVCs and reaction time to unexpected events during driving simulation, 2) number of lane crossings and proportion of time out of lane during the road test, 3) number of incidents, near-crashes, and crashes per hour during DriveCam monitoring; and 4) rates of MVCs from teen’s 
driving records. When examining DriveCam outcomes, we will add a time-varying covariate indicating 
medication use to account for the effects of medications on driving outcomes. 
For each statistical model, the term of interest is the main effect of Intervention. A significant main effect of 
Intervention would indicate that the FOCAL+ intervention significantly impacted eye glance and driving outcomes. A significant Intervention effect will be followed up with post-hoc comparisons to determine the direction and locus of the effect, including whether intervention effects were maintained at 4-, 8-and 12-months 
post-training. Though we expect intervention effects to be strongest immediately following training (1-month), 
we predict that FOCAL+ will be more effective than the sham intervention for ADHD teens at each time point.  
5.f.2.a.1 Power Analyses for Testing Hypotheses 1 & 2:
 Effect size estimates from our preliminary data 
(Section 5.a.5) suggest a single FOCAL+ training session improves extended eye glances among teens with ADHD with an effect size (Cohen’s d) of 1.19. Since this ef fect size will surely diminish over the course of the 
1-year of assessments, we used a conservative effect si ze estimate of .6 to power our research hypotheses. 
Monte Carlo simulation power analyses were performed under the following assumptions: (a) FOCAL+ effect size of .6, (b) effect size of .10 for our sham intervention, and (c) inclusion of months of driving experience as a covariate. Power analysis with these assumptions indicate that sample sizes of N = 41 per group will result in power > .80 to detect a significant main effect of Group indicating that the FOCAL+ intervention results in 
significantly fewer extended glances compared to the sham group at all post-baseline time points. We’ve 
powered our study with a larger sample size in order to detect potential moderators of treatment response (see 
Section 5.f.2.c below). Using the proposed sample size of 68 participants per group will provide use with 99% 
power to detect treatment effects.  
While data has been collected examining the efficacy of the FOCAL+ intervention on extended eye 
glances, the efficacy of the FOCAL+ intervention on dr iver performance has not been addressed. However, we 
assume a comparable intervention effect for FOCAL+ on driving outcomes based on the following pieces of 
evidence. Since the Pearson correlation between extended eye glances and collision events in the driving 
simulator is .7442, we will assume that the effect size for intervention effects on driving outcomes will be 
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 116 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

comparable to what has been found for extended glances and that we will have >90% power to detect 
intervention effects on driving performance outcomes as well.  
Aim #3:  Examine how many FOCAL+ training sessions are required to normalize extended glances away 
from the roadway among teens with ADHD.  
5.f.2.b Analytic Plan to Address Aim #3: The initial FOCAL+ training session as well as the 4 weekly 
FOCAL+ training sessions will be preceded by a 30-minute driving assessment composed of driving simulation and eye tracking. Each of these assessments will yield t he number of >2 sec glances away from the roadway 
during the 30-minute simulated drive. With a goal of negating 2 sec glances away from the roadway to a frequency similar to that exhibited by experienced drivers (based on the performance of experienced drivers 
available through the University of Massachusetts Amherst Human Performance Laboratory), we will be able to 
determine for what percentage of teen drivers with ADHD th e initial training is sufficient to achieve this 
criterion. Similarly, the percentage of drivers who are able to negate 2 sec glances away from the roadway can be determined for each of the weekly training sessions with the explicit goal of determining the number of training sessions required to reach this goal among teens with ADHD. 
Finally, we will be able to examine whether intervent ion-related improvements mediates the effects of 
training on driving performance outcomes. Specifically, for participants assigned to FOCAL+ training, we will have data regarding improvement in extended eye glances  during weekly driving simulation. To examine 
whether improvement in extended eye glances during tr aining mediates intervention effects on glance- and 
driving outcomes, we will compute indirect effects by  multiplying the beta coefficient for the relationship 
between intervention and improvement in extended glances away from the roadway and the beta coefficient for 
the relationship between improvement in  extended glances and driving outcomes
100. Confidence intervals for 
these indirect effects will be estimated using bootstrapping (SAS PROC PROCESS).  
Aim #4:  Explore potential moderators of intervention efficacy.  
5.f.2.c Analytic Plan to Address Aim #4 : While we have a lengthy list of possible variables that may 
moderate intervention response, we have identified base line rate of extended glances  away from the roadway, 
intra-individual variability (IIV) in RTs, temporal reproduction task scores as the most likely moderators of 
intervention response. We have selected baseline rate of extended glances away from the roadway, IIV, and 
temporal reproduction task scores as potential moderators because we feel that teens with high rates of extended glances, poor temporal reproduction, and/or high levels of IIV at baseline may be more responsive to the proposed interventions because the FOCAL+ intervention targets the likely mechanism behind these teens’ 
poor driving behavior. ADHD symptom severity as rated by parent and teen will also be explored as potential 
moderators as some have reported that each additional ADHD symptom increases the risk for collisions by 16-
17%
3. Finally, psychiatric comorbidities such as ODD and CD will be explored as moderators since some have 
suggested, though our data do not support, that ODD/CD comorbidity accounts for a sizable portion of ADHD-
related driving deficits1. Moderation will be explored using regression models including the main effect of 
intervention group, the main effect of the moderator variable (e.g., IIV), and the Intervention x Moderator 
variable interaction predicting the primary outcome measures (e.g., SDLP). The proposed sample size 
provides 80% power to detect the statistical signific ance of the Intervention x Moderator interaction term . 
5.f.2.d Teen Satisfaction with intervention : Teen satisfaction will be analyzed descriptively and by 
comparing satisfaction across groups. It is expected that the overall satisfaction scores for the FOCAL+ will be 
higher than those observed for the sham intervention group. 
5.g Alternative designs considered 
 5.g.1 Inclusion of non-ADHD teens:  We considered this modification but since FOCAL has already 
been established as an effective intervention approach for non-ADHD teens7, 18, 19, we decided that the focus of 
this research should be to assess a driving intervention that targets a high-risk group (i.e., ADHD teens). Investigators have called for driving interventions that  focus on remediating driving risk in high-risk drivers
30.  
5.g.2 Inclusion of FOCAL-only intervention arm:  Our preliminary data suggest that the FOCAL 
intervention alone is less effectiv e than the enhanced FOCAL+ intervention for teens with ADHD. While it 
would be interesting to determine whether the simpler FOCAL only intervention might work for teens with ADHD, the first step in developing this intervention s hould include the intervention approach that is likely to be 
maximally effective (i.e., FOCAL+) in teens with ADHD. Moreover, the costs of including a third intervention 
arm (i.e., FOCAL only) as well as including non-ADHD t eens (see Section 5.g.1) would limit our ability to 
conduct the comprehensive multi-method, multiple time point (i.e., 1-, 4-, 8-, and 12-months post-
randomization) assessment of treatment effects we now propose in this application. Also, it would limit our ability to power our test of treatment moderation (see Section 5.f.2.c ).  
Research Strategy                                                                                             Page 117 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

6. PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS 
 
6.a Risks to Human Subjects 
Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics, and Design 
Over the 5 year study period, we will recruit 136 teens with ADHD  between the ages of 16-19 years and 
one of their parents to participate. Most research participants will be current or past patients at the Center for 
ADHD at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center  (CCHMC). Approximately 900 patients with ADHD are 
seen at our Center each year. We have over 2000 pat ients in our patient registry who have agreed to be 
contacted to participate in future research studies. 812 former patients within our patient registry will be in the 16-19 year old age range during the course of this study. In  particular, a describing the study will be sent out to 
past patients and research participants at the Center for ADHD who indicated they were interested in being 
informed about future research studies. We also plan to recruit from the community using flyers. Finally, the study will be advertised on the CCHMC social media page using IRB approved web and flyer text. We foresee 
that we will be able to successfully recruit the majori ty of our ADHD sample using our Center’s registry. 
However, we are also prepared to recruit participants through referrals from other specialty clinics within CCHMC (e.g., Teen Health Clinic).  
We are focusing on 16-19 year olds as this population is especially vulnerable to involvement in MVCs
22. 
Participants must currently meet diagnostic criteria for DSM-5 ADHD based on parent and self-report using a semi-structured interview. Given the high comorbidity rate of other mental health conditions with ADHD
101, 
participants will not be excluded based on the presence of comorbidity, with the exception of the presence of a condition that could impact the individual’s ability to  understand the intervention such as a developmental 
disorder or if they are taking a psychotropic medi cation that cannot be titrated down quickly and easily and 
might have some impact on driving performance. See inclusion/exclusion criteria below. 
 
Inclusion criteria 
1) Aged 16-19. Rationale : This age range represents the period of greatest driving risk
80. 
2) Teens in ADHD group will meet DSM ADHD criteria for ADHD-Predominantly Inattentive Presentation 
or ADHD-Combined Presentation based on the K-SADS interview. Rationale : Inattentiveness - 
elevated in both of these ADHD subgroups - confers driving risk in teen drivers81.  
3) Possess a valid driver’s license and regularly spend at least 3 hours per week engaged in unsupervised 
driving. Rationale : Must be legal for participant to driv e independently since driving risk among teen 
drivers is greatest in absence of adult supervision80. Further, there is a need to collect ample DriveCam 
outcome data during unsupervised driving conditions to  test for intervention effects. Other driving 
studies have used similar inclusion criteria for number of hours of independent driving82 
4) IQ ≥80 as measured by the Wechsler Abbreviated Intelligence Scale-II (WASI-II)83. Rationale : Teens 
with cognitive challenges may not be able to understand intervention instructions.  
5) Parent willing to participate. Rationale : Teens will be asked to refrain from taking medication on days of 
driving assessment (i.e., driving simulation). Since driving to our facility for testing without taking 
medication may put the teen at risk, a parent will need to agree to drive the teen to these visits. Parents will also be participating in the intervention (see Section 5.d.1). 
Exclusion criteria:  
1) On ADHD medication that cannot be washed out on assessment days. Rationale : Since we desire to 
test teens off medication on the assessment days, only medications with a half-life <12 hours can be 
allowed. 
2) Drug or alcohol dependence. Rationale : Teens meeting criteria for drug or alcohol dependence 
according to K-SADS interview likely require more intensive and other interventions.  
3) On psychotropic or neuroleptic medications. Rationale : These psychotropic medications often impact 
patient attention. Also, these medications cannot be titrated down quickly.  
4) Require eye glasses (contacts acceptable) for drivi ng (corrective vision restriction on driver’s license). 
Rationale:  The eye tracking equipment that will be used during driving simulation and the road test to 
measure eye glances cannot be used if the participant is wearing glasses.  
At the initial evaluation, the Principal Investigator or designee will provide parents and potential participants 
a thorough verbal explanation of the study. The written c onsent form will be reviewed with families to ensure 
their understanding of the protocol and their rights and responsibilities. In addition, an assent form will be 
Protection of Human Subjects                                                                                  Page 118 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

reviewed with teens under the age of 18. The parent and participant will understand that refusal to participate 
will not influence their ability to receive treatment at CCHMC and that they are free to withdraw at any time. After signing the consent and assent form, parents will be given a copy of the signed consent/assent forms to 
take home with them. Parents who consent to participate will then be interviewed and complete rating scales 
while the teen is administered the initial assessment batte ry (diagnostic interview, IQ testing, etc.). Teens will 
also complete a simulated driving assessment and a road test. Teens meeting inclusion criteria will then be randomized to either the FOCAL+ or the sham intervention group.  
The two intervention arms will be equal in sample size. Hypothesis testing will require 68 participants in 
each arm (see Power Analyses, Section 5.f.2.a.1 ). Randomization will be stratified by gender and months of 
driving experience to ensure that there is equal r epresentation of gender and months of driving experience 
across groups.  
Teen participants and their parent will participate in an initial training and then 4 subsequent weekly 
trainings. At each of the 4 subsequent weekly training sessions, they will first complete a simulated driving assessment and then engage in a session of either FOCAL+ or the sham intervention training. 
At the final training session 1-month post-randomization and then again at 4-, 8- and 12-months post-  
randomization, they will again complete the simulat ed driving assessment and road test. In addition, teens’ 
naturalistic driving will be assessed using an in-car DriveC am monitoring system for a full year or their entire 
tenure in the study.   
Participant Retention 
We will gain IRB approval to implement the following retention strategies; (1) establishing trust, rapport 
and pride in participation by creating a study logo depicting “Driving Teens” which will be included on all measures and correspondence with families, (2) stress confidentiality with participants, (3) assess detailed information regarding names, addresses, and phone number s of people who might know where the family is 
living in case they lose contact with the study, (4) adequate incentives that increase by $10 for each follow-up 
visit, (5) study refrigerator magnets and other materials with reminders to call the toll-free number if they move 
or change phone numbers, (6) interim phone contact in between sessions to acquire demographic updates and to provide reminders of upcoming study visits, (7) frequent mailings of birthday cards and holiday cards, and (8) address tracing software via Accruint®, a subsidiary of NexisLexis, to use demographic information to search for families whose phone numbers become obsolete. 
 
Sources of Materials 
Research data for all participants will be obtained from parent, teacher and self-rated behavioral rating 
scales, in depth parent and self-report interviews about the teen’s behavior and functional status, and a comprehensive battery of cognitive and neuropsychol ogical assessments administered directly to the 
participating teens. Driving will be assessed via driving simulator, a road test, recordings collected using an in-
car video recorder (DriveCam) which will be installed in the identified “teen car,” and official driving records 
obtained from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles. All data will be entered into an electronic database for storage and analysis. Information will be entered into computers by  participant number, not name, in order to protect 
the identity of the participants and their parents. No personal identifying information will be used in conjunction with the electronic form of the generated data. The database will be accessible by password only by project 
personnel.  
 
Potential Risks 
The Institutional Review Board of CCHMC will be res ponsible for monitoring risks to human participants 
and assessment of ethical issues related to this study , and will an approved consent form and protocol prior to 
initiation of the study.   
Psychological / cognitive assessments:  The assessments are time consuming and may bring up sensitive 
emotional issues when families are asked about thei r teen’s behavior and past life experiences. One potential 
risk for participants and their parents include fear or emba rrassment resulting from clinical interviews or 
psychological testing. Most questions and measures used in the study are standard for medical or 
psychological evaluations and therefore have minimal risk associated with them. These questions may address 
issues of family psychiatric history, parental rela tionships, and family substance abuse. Participants and 
parents are free not to answer any questions to which they object. Also teens with ADHD may experience frustration when completing cognitive and neuropsychological tasks if the testing lasts longer than their 
Protection of Human Subjects                                                                                  Page 119 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

attention span or if they are being asked to complete items that are challenging for them. Our evaluators have 
clinical expertise in evaluating teens with ADHD and if t eens are exhibiting fatigue or frustration, families will be 
given the option of stopping the assessments and returning at another time to complete them.  
 
Driving simulator assessment : The simulator tasks may elicit a mild stress response. When participants are 
instructed to engage in a secondary task, drivers may experiences feelings of annoyance, and participants may experience minor muscle fatigue due to the length of driving time. There is a slight risk that participants may experience nausea from the simulator. In order to limit motion sickness from the simulator, there will be a fan providing air flow in the simulator room, and all participants will be provided with a SeaBand which is worn 
around the subject’s wrist and uses acupressure to reduce nausea and motion sickness. Also, we have limited 
driving sessions to 5-minute lengths with breaks in bet ween in order to reduce risks of motion sickness. To 
date, implementation of these safeguards has resulted in no cases of motion sickness during driving simulation with over 135 participants to date.  
Road test : We have contracted with Bick’s Driving School (see letter of support) to administer the road test to 
our research participants. The safety of our participants is of upmost importance and we will take several precautions to limit risks while driving on real roads dur ing the road test. First, we have invested in eye tracking 
googles that participant’s will wear while driving that do not interfere with the driver’s vision. Second, we have partnered with a local professional driving school with  over 40 years of experience in providing behind-the-
wheel instruction to teens and other high-risk drivers. Bi ck’s Driving School specializes in training high risk 
drivers and will supply Certified Driver Rehabilitati on Specialists (CDRS) to accompany the research 
participants during the road test. Bick’s Driving School has committed to providing us with one CDRS who will 
serve as the road test instructor/evaluator for all of the study participants. The CDRS will use Bick’s Driving 
School’s specially-equipped instrumented vehicle with la test in adaptive equipment including dual brakes. The 
CDRS will provide participants with road directions and will a sk the driver to perform a variety of safety-related 
driving tasks (e.g., turning on the defroster). The CDRS  will have ready access to a redundant braking system 
in order to be able to intervene if necessary. The road test will be a 10 mile set course consisting of city and suburb environments but no high speed environments (e.g., highways). The driver’s task will be to follow the 
route defined while complying with all local traffic rules, including posted speed restrictions. In order to avoid commuter traffic, the road tests will be scheduled in the mid- to late morning or during the early afternoon. 
Because Bick’s Driving School will be providing the vehi cles and driving instructors (i.e., CDRS), Bick’s Driving 
School will be liable for any motor vehicle incidents that occur during the road test.  
Medication wash-out:  Teen participants who take medication for ADHD will be asked to refrain from taking their 
medication on the days of simulator/road test driving assessments. Parents will be informed of the risks 
associated with this (i.e., driving safety, school perform ance, job performance, etc.). In order to limit the risk 
associated with a medication washout, both the teen and parent will be advised verbally and in writing that the 
teen is not to drive to the study appointments, and mu st be driven by the parent. Participants are free to 
resume medication immediately following the study visits.  Confidentiality:  The potential for a breach in confidentiality always exists, specifically with the written research 
data and study databases. However, information that is obtained will be stored in locked file drawers in locked 
offices and data will have identifying information removed to prevent loss of confidentiality. All data will be 
coded by participant ID only. Data linking participants’ names and their identification numbers for the study will 
be kept in a locked cabinet. Participant identities will only be known to the investigators and study staff. Binders with identifying information (e.g., consent forms) will be maintained separately from the evaluation, assessment and outcome data. 
 
6.b Adequacy of Protection Against Risks 
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent 
Teens and parents who have seen the recruitment flyers and are interested in learning more about the 
study will be asked to contact the clinical research c oordinator who will explain to them the purpose of the 
study and what is involved in participation. Teens calling in response to advertisements will participate a screening over the phone with IRB approved study staff. Those meeting initial phone screening criteria (age, at least 4 symptoms of DSM-5 inattention endorsed at a clinically significant level on symptom screener, and 
Protection of Human Subjects                                                                                  Page 120 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

licensure status) will be invited to attend an appointment with the PI or designee along with their parent, where 
the study will be explained in more detail, including risks and benefits of participation, and written parental consent and verbal teen assent will be obtained. No assessment procedures will occur until after parental 
consent and teen assent are obtained. For teens w ho are 18-19 years of age, consent will be obtained from 
both the teen and the parent.   Protections Against Risk 
Minimizing risk of breach of confidentiality:  Study procedures have been designed to protect the privacy and 
confidentiality of the research participants. Throughout the study, all data, including that collected during the 
screening and recruitment phase will only be identified by a unique identification number and participant code 
using letters and numbers to protect against invasion of privacy. The data will be blinded correspondingly in all data analyses. Only authorized staff will have access to parti cipant information. All study information containing 
identifying information will be stored separately from the st udy data and will be stored in a locked filing cabinet.  
Families will be informed that their confidentiality will be maintained with regard to video recorded driving 
behaviors during the road test. We will obtain a federal Certificate of Confidentiality in order to protect video 
recorded driving information collected during the road test  and during DriveCam monitoring. All teen drivers will 
be consented in order to be protected by the Certificate of Confidentiality. Moreover, parents will be told that we will not be disclosing any information collected about the teen during the video recorded driving, including illegal behavior, with parents. Families will be explicitly told that video recordings collected using an in-car 
video recorder (DriveCam) will be collected on anyone driv ing the identified “teen car”. Moreover, a sign will be 
hung in each car so that anyone who drives the car or is a passenger in the car is aware that they will be video 
recorded
102, 103. However, research staff will immediately destroy all video in which the teen participant is not 
the driver. Further, families will be informed that all video recordings will be destroyed immediately after the 
study period. The plan for maintaining confidentiality of driving video recordings was derived in collaboration with our institutional IRB.  
A similar policy will be used in regard to self-reported substance use reported by the teen. Again, we will 
inform families at the outset that any information about  teen substance use will not be reported to the parents. 
The Certificate of Confidentiality will protect this information from getting released upon subpoena. We feel that non-disclosure of teen substance use to parents is needed in order to get unbiased reports of substance use. 
All data will be entered into an electronic database for storage and analysis. Information will be entered 
into computers by participant number, not name, in order  to protect the identity of the participants and their 
parents. No personal identifying information will be used in conjunction with the electronic form of the generated data. The database will be accessible by password only by project personnel. Research papers will be based on analyses of group data with no identifying information about any participant used in these reports.   Minimizing risk of medication wash-out:  As previously described, parents will be instructed verbally and in 
writing during the consent process to drive their teen to  the appointment as driving without medication could be 
dangerous. In addition, the study coordinator will make a reminder phone call prior to the driving assessment. During this time the coordinator will remind parents and teens that parents are to drive un-medicated teens to their appointment. 
  
Disclosure of Abuse: We are very familiar with the assessment, management, and reporting of child 
maltreatment as this is considered part of standard clinical care in pediatric psychology and psychiatry. These 
incidents are common during clinical trials, and we have standards for both managing and reporting these incidents 
 
Disclosure of Suicidality: We are also very familiar with the assessment and management of suicidality. 
Specifically, prior to any clinical interview, confident iality is discussed with the participant and family during the 
consent process. This includes state guidelines for reporting suicidality. If suicidality is disclosed during the interview, the interviewer will conduct a thorough suici de assessment assessing for the following: 1) specificity 
of the suicide plan, 2) means to execute the plan and 3) lethality of plan. This is immediately reported to the PI who will make the ultimate decision regarding next steps. In all cases, the teen’s parent will be informed of the 
teens’ risk and a safety contract will be completed in writing with both the teen and parent. Further, the parent 
will be counseled on safety precautions within the home. If the teen is unwilling to contract, then CCHMC hospital protocol will be followed. Specifically, the fa mily will be referred to the Psychiatry Department at 
CCHMC for an assessment for in-patient psychiatric hospitalization.  
Protection of Human Subjects                                                                                  Page 121 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

 
Adverse events:  If participants experience any adverse events,  investigators will follow-up participants and 
provide treatment until the event has subsided. Investigators will be available 24-hours via pager. 
 
Education in Protection of Human Subjects. All personnel will participate in training on protecting the rights and 
welfare of human participants in research. Personnel will all complete an online tutorial and satisfactorily 
complete an electronically-administered examination test ing knowledge and application of the ethical principles 
and Federal regulations protecting human participants in  research as described in the Belmont Report and 
Title 45 Code of Federal Regulations Part 46.  
 
6.c Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Human Subjects and Others 
Potential benefits to individual participants and their families include improved visual attention during 
driving and potentially improved driving performance for th ose assigned to the FOCAL+ group. Participants will 
also receive a diagnostic evaluation as a part of t heir participation in the study. Study assessments and 
treatment will be administered free of charge. Moreov er, the information gained from this study has the 
potential to directly impact the treatment of  all teen drivers including those with ADHD.  
Participants will be compensated for their time completing assessments. In order to increase participant 
retention, the amount of compensation will increase ac ross study visits. Specifically, compensation for the 
baseline visit will equal $40, $50 for the 1-month visit, $60 for the 4-month visit, and $70 for the 1-year visit. 
Teachers will be compensated $10 for completing baseline questionnaires. 
 
6.d Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained 
We believe that the benefits of the project greatly outweigh any risk involved. The results of this study are 
likely to result in an enriched understanding of the driv ing of teens with ADHD. This study will provide 
information about the efficacy of a non-pharmacological driving-focused intervention for teens with ADHD. If 
the intervention is efficacious in improving driving behav ior of teens with ADHD, this intervention could be used 
in driver’s education courses.   
6.e Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
The PI will continuously evaluate the project’s perfor mance, safety, treatment fidelity, and need to stop. 
Performance will be monitored by ex amining subject recruitment, comparison with targeted recruitment 
retention, protocol adherence, and quality of data collection procedures. This will primarily be accomplished in weekly staff meetings attended by the PI. Any deviation in achieving recruitment targets will be reported to the 
NIMH program officer. In order to assure intervention fi delity, the PI will randomly attend training sessions. In 
order to assure the accuracy of data entry, all data will be verified by double entering all data into our Microsoft Access database. Inaccuracies will be addressed by double-checking the report forms. If inaccuracies cannot 
be resolved by checking the source forms, we will review  that patient’s chart again at the next data collection 
visit in order to resolve the query.  
Should any adverse event occur, we have establis hed a set of protocols and procedures to manage the 
handling/reporting of such events. Adverse event monito ring will occur at each assessment visit. Participants 
will be asked if they have had any adverse experiences  since the last visit. Adverse events leading to 
discontinuation will be documented. All serious ad verse events (SAEs) will be reported to the CCHMC 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) according to the regulations set forth by this IRB, as well as to the NIMH. All staff will be trained to identify adverse events and on pr ocedures for handling them (e.g., reporting of child 
abuse, suicidality, HIPPA training, human subjects training, etc.).  
The PI, Dr. Epstein, is ultimately responsible for ensuring the safety of participants enrolled in the 
protocol. Following baseline evaluation, Dr. Epstein will be ultimately responsible for making the decision for 
particular participants to continue or discontinue in the protocol.  
 
6.f ClinicalTrials.gov Requirements 
 
This clinical trial will be registered with ClinicalTrials.gov. 
 
  
 
Protection of Human Subjects                                                                                  Page 122 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES 
 
The primary subjects for this research study are teens of both male and female gender with ADHD between 
the ages of 16-19 years inclusive. Parents / primary car egivers of the teen enrolled in the study will also 
participate by accompanying their children to the study  visits, completing parent interviews and behavioral 
rating scales at baseline and throughout the study. We expect to have a higher rate of males than females in our study since ADHD occurs at higher rates in males than in females with approximately a 3:1 ratio. It should 
be noted that since parents will be participating, and our experience in previous clinical trials is that the parent who most often participates in the intervention is the mother, we will likely have a larger proportion of adult 
women participating in the study than men. 
 
The ethnic make-up of the proposed sample will roughly mirror that of the Greater Cincinnati and Northern 
Kentucky metropolitan area; 81% White, 15% African American, 2% Asian American, and 2% Hispanic. The 
racial composition of our clinical population is similar to these rates. Also, another recently completed NIH-
funded research study (n=151) in our Center for A DHD that used similar recruitment methods produced the 
following rates: 75% White, 17% African American, 1% American Indian, and 2% Hispanic
63. In the event that 
minority rates do not emulate local distributions and thos e achieved in previous rese arch, we will respond by 
focusing our recruitment efforts on local urban high sc hools, which are attended primarily by minorities. 
 
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
    
 
   
Women & Minorities Inclusion                                                                                  Page 123 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

OMB Number: 0925-0002
Tracking Number: GRANT11953910 Funding Opportunity Number: PA-13-302 . Received Date: 2015-07-02T13:16:59.000-04:00Planned Enrollment Report
This report format should NOT be used for collecting data from study participants.
Study Title: Improving ADHD Teen Driving by Targeting Visual Inattention to the Roadway
Domestic/Foreign: Domestic
Comments:
Racial CategoriesEthnic Categories  
Not Hispanic or Latino
Female MaleHispanic or Latino
Female MaleTotal
American Indian/Alaska Native 0 0 0 0 0
Asian 1 2 0 0 3
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander 0 0 0 0 0
Black or African American 5 15 0 0 20
White 26 82 1 1 110
More than One Race 1 1 0 1 3
Total 33 100 1 2 136
Study 1 of 1
                                                                                                              Page 124 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

INCLUSION OF CHILDREN 
 
Our study population includes children 16-19 years old with ADHD (plus their parents / caregivers). We are 
focusing on 16-19 year olds as this population is especially  vulnerable to involvement in motor vehicle crashes 
(MVC)22. The knowledge gained from this research will prov ide evidence of an intervention that could improve 
the driving safety of teens with ADHD who are at incr eased risk for adverse driving outcomes; therefore, it is 
essential that our study population include children.   
 
    
 
    
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
    
 
   
Inclusion Of Children                                                                                         Page 125 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

REFERENCES 
 
1. Vaa T. ADHD and relative risk of accidents in road traffic: a meta-analysis. Accid Anal Prev. 
2014;62:415-425. 
2. Narad ME, Garner AA, Antonini TN, Kingery KM, Tamm L, Calhoun HR, Epstein JN. Negative 
consequences of poor driving outcomes report ed by adolescents with and without ADHD. J Atten 
Disord. 2015; online preprint. 
3. Aduen PA, Kofler MJ, Cox DJ, Sarver DE, Lunsford E. Motor vehicle driving in high incidence 
psychiatric disability: Comparison of drivers with ADHD, depression, and no known psychopathology. J 
Psychiatr Res. 2015;64:59-66. 
4. Beanland V, Fitzharris M, Young KL, Lenne MG. Driver inattention and driver distraction in serious 
casualty crashes: data from the Australian National Crash In-depth Study. Accid Anal Prev. 2013;54:99-
107. 
5. Chan E, Pradhan AK, Knodler MA, Pollatsek A, Fisher DL. Empirical evaluation oon a driving simulator 
of the effect of distractions inside and outside th e vehicle on drivers' eye behaviors. Paper presented at: 
Proceedings of the 87th Transportation Research Board Annual Meeting, 2008; Washington,  D.C. 
6. Wikman A, Nieminen T, Summala H. Driving expe rience and time-sharing during in-ar tasks on roads of 
different width. Ergonomics. 1998;41:358-372. 
7. Pradhan A, Masserang KM, Divekar G, Reagan I, Thomas FD, Blomberg R, Pollatsek A, Fisher D. 
Attention maintenance in novice drivers: Assessment and training. Proceedings of the Fifth 
International Driving Symposium on Human Factors in Driver Assessment, Training, and Vehicle 
Design. 2009:349-355. 
8. Carney C, McGehee DV, Harland K, Weiss M, Raby M.  Using Naturalistic Driving Data to Assess the 
Prevalence of Environmental Factors and Driver Behaviors in Teen Driver Crashes. Washington, DC: AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety; 2015. 
9. Cox DJ, Davis M, Mikami AY, Singh H, Merkel  RL, Burket R. Long-acting methylphenidate reduces 
collision rates of young adult drivers with a ttention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol. 2012;32:225-230. 
10. Hellinga LA, McCartt AT, Mandavilli S. Temporal pattern s of crashes of 16-to 17-year-old drivers in 
Fairfax County, Virginia. Traffic Inj Prev. 2007;8:377-381. 
11. US Department of Transportation. National Household Travel Survey.  Washington, D.C. 2001. 
12. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Fatality Analysis Reporting System.  http://www-
fars.nhtsa.dot.gov/ . 
13. Horrey WJ, Wickens CD, Consalus KP. Modeling driver s' visual attention allocation while interacting 
with in-vehicle technologies. J Exp Psychol Appl. 2006;12:67-78. 
14. Klauer SG, Dingus TA, Neale VL, Sudweeks JD, Ramsey DJ. The impact of driver inattention on near-
crash/crash risk: An analysis using the 100-car naturalistic driving study data.  Washington, DC 2006. 
15. Green P. Where do drivers look while driving (and for how long)? In: Dewar RE, Olson PL, eds. Human 
factors in traffic safety . Tucson, AZ: Lawyers and Judges Publishing; 1999:77-110. 
16. Liang Y, Lee JD, Yekhshatyan L. How dangerous is looking away from the road? Algorithms predict 
crash risk from glance patterns in naturalistic driving. Hum Factors. 2012;54:1104-1116. 
17. Liang Y, Lee JD, Horrey WJ. A Looming Crisis: The distribution of off-road glance duration in moments 
leading up to crashes/near-crashes in naturalis tic driving. Proc Hum Fact Ergon Soc Annu Meet . 
2014;58:2102-2106. 
18. Fisher DL, Thomas FD, Pradhan AK, Pollatsek A, Blomberg RD, Reagan I. Development and 
evaluation of a PC-based attention maintenace training program.  Washington, DC 2010. 
19. Pradhan AK, Divekar G, Masserang K, Romoser M, Zafian T, Blomberg RD, Thomas FD, Reagan I, 
Knodler M, Pollatsek A, Fisher DL. The effects of focused attention training on the duration of novice 
drivers' glances inside the vehicle. Ergonomics. 2011;54:917-931. 
20. Owens K, Ramaekers JG. Drugs, driving, and model s to measure driving impairment. In: Verster JC, 
ed. Drugs, Driving, and Traffic Safety . Basel, Switzerland: Birkhauser Verlag AG; 2009:43-58. 
21. Chan E, Pradhan AK, Pollatsek A, Knodler MA, Fisher DL. Are driving simulators effective tools for 
evaluating novice drivers' hazard anticipation,  speed management, and attention maintenance skills? 
Transp Res Part F Traffic Psychol Behav. 2010;13:343-353. 
References Cited                                                                                              Page 126 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

22. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Health Resources and Services Administration, 
Maternal and Child Health Bureau. Child Health USA 2011.  Rockville, Maryland: U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services; 2011. 
23. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). Saving teenage lives: The case for graduated 
driver licensing. In: Administration NHTSA, ed. Washington, D.C. 
24. Willcutt EG. The prevalence of DSM-IV attention-defic it/hyperactivity disorder: a meta-analytic review. 
Neurotherapeutics. 2012;9:490-499. 
25. Jerome L, Segal A, Habinski L. What we know about ADHD and driving risk: a literature review, meta-
analysis and critique. J Can Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2006;15:105-125. 
26. Reimer B, Mehler B, D'Ambrosio LA, Fried R. The impact of distractions on young adult drivers with 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Accid Anal Prev. 2010;42:842-851. 
27. Narad ME, Garner AA, Brassell AA, Saxby D, Antonini TN, O'Brien KM, Tamm L, Matthews G, Epstein 
JN. The impact of distraction on the driving perfo rmance of adolescents with and without Attention 
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167:933-938. 
28. Kingery KM, Narad M, Garner AA, Antonini TN, Tamm L, Epstein JN. Extended visual glances away 
from the roadway are associated with ADHD- and texting-related driving performance deficits in 
adolescents. J Abnorm Child Psychol. 2014;online. 
29. Winston FK, McDonald CC, McGehee DV. Are we doing enough to prevent the perfect storm?: Novice 
drivers, ADHD, and distracted driving. JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167:892-894. 
30. Peek-Asa C, McGehee DV, Ebel BE. Increasing safe teenaged driving: time to integrate the growing 
evidence base. JAMA Pediatr. 2014;168:703-704. 
31. Abikoff H. ADHD psychosocial treatments: generalization reconsidered. J Atten Disord. 2009;13:207-
210. 
32. Barkley RA. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, self-regulation, and time: toward a more 
comprehensive theory. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 1997;18:271-279. 
33. Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Teen Drivers: Fact Sheet.  Atlanta, GA 2012. 
34. Carter C, Laya O. Drivers' visual search in a field situation and in a driving simulator. In: Gale AG, 
Brown ID, Haslegrove CM, Taylor SP, eds. Vision in Vehicles VII . Amsterdam: Elsevier; 1998:21-31. 
35. Hughes PK, Cole BL. The effect of attentional de mand in eye movement behaviour when driving. Paper 
presented at: Vision in Vehicles II. Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Vision in 
Vehicles, 1988; Nottingham, U.K. 
36. Neyens DM, Boyle LN. The influence of driver dist raction on the severity of injuries sustained by 
teenage drivers and their passengers. Accid Anal Prev. 2008;40:254-259. 
37. Lee YC, Lee JD, Boyle LN. Visual attention in driving: the effects of cognitive load and visual disruption. 
Hum Factors. 2007;49:721-733. 
38. Wierwille WW. Visual and manual demands of in-care controls and displays. In: Peacock B, Karwowski 
W, eds. Automotive Ergonomics . Abingdon, UK: Taylor and Francis; 1993. 
39. Sodhi M, Reimer B, Cohen JL, Vastenburg E, K aars R, Kirschenbaum S. On-road driver eye movement 
tracking using head-mounted devices. ETRA '09 Proceedings for the 2002 symposium on eye tracking 
research and applications. 2002:61-68. 
40. Rockwell TH. Spare visual capacity in driving-revisited. In: Gale AG, ed. Vision in Vehicles II . 
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers; 1988:317-324. 
41. Green P. Visual and task demands of driver information systems.  Ann Arbor, MI 1999. 
42. Horrey WJ, Wickens CD. In-vehicle glance duration: Distributions, tails, and model of crash risk. Transp 
Res Rec. 2007;2018:22-28. 
43. Olsen ECB, Lerner N, Perel M, Simons-Morton BG. In-car electronic device use among teen drivers. 
Transportation Research Board Meeting . Washington, D.C.; 2005. 
44. Klauer SG, Guo F, Simons-Morton BG, Ouimet MC , Lee SE, Dingus TA. Distracted driving and risk of 
road crashes among novice and experienced drivers. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:54-59. 
45. Shope JT. Graduated driver licensing: review of evaluation results since 2002. J Safety Res. 
2007;38:165-175. 
46. Ferguson SA. Other high-risk factors for young drivers - How graduated licensing does, doesn't, or 
could address them. J Safety Res. 2003;34:71-77. 
47. Stavrinos D, Garner AA, Franklin CA, Johnson HD, Welburn SC, Griffin R, Underhill AT, Fine PR. 
Distracted driving in teens with and without attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Pediatr Nurs. 2015. 
References Cited                                                                                              Page 127 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

48. Thompson AL, Molina BS, Pelham W, Jr., Gnagy EM. Risky driving in adolescents and young adults 
with childhood ADHD. J Pediatr Psychol. 2007;32:745-759. 
49. Barkley RA, Guevremont DC, A nastopoulos AD, DuPaul GJ, Shelton TL. Driving-related risks and 
outcomes of attention deficit hyperactivity disor der in adolescents and young adults: a 3- to 5-year 
follow-up survey. Pediatrics. 1993;92:212-218. 
50. Barkley RA, Murphy KR, Kwasnik D. Motor vehi cle driving competencies and risks in teens and young 
adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics. 1996;98:1089-1095. 
51. Reimer B, D'Ambrosio LA, Coughlin JF, Fried R,  Biederman J. Task-induced fatigue and collisions in 
adult drivers with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Traffic Inj Prev. 2007;8:290-299. 
52. Barkley RA, Murphy KR, DuPaul GI, Bush T. Drivi ng in young adults with attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder: knowledge, performance, adverse outcomes, and the role of executive functioning. J Int 
Neuropsychol Soc. 2002;8:655-672. 
53. Verster JC, Roth T. Standard operation procedures for conducting the on-the-road driving test, and 
measurement of the standard deviation of lateral position (SDLP). Int J Gen Med. 2011;4:359-371. 
54. Classen S, Monahan M. Evidence-based review on interventions and determinants of driving 
performance in teens with attention deficit hyperac tivity disorder or autism spectrum disorder. Traffic Inj 
Prev. 2013;14:188-193. 
55. Barkley RA, Cox D. A review of driving risks and impairments associated with attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder and the effects of stimulant medication on driving performance. J Safety 
Res. 2007;38:113-128. 
56. Cox DJ, Humphrey JW, Merkel RL, Penberthy JK , Kovatchev B. Controlled-release methylphenidate 
improves attention during on-road driving by adolescent s with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J 
Am Board Fam Pract. 2004;17:235-239. 
57. Cox DJ, Moore M, Burket R, Merkel RL, Mikami AY, Kovatchev B. Rebound effects with long-acting 
amphetamine or methylphenidate stimulant medica tion preparations among adolescent male drivers 
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2008;18:1-10. 
58. Kimko HC, Cross JT, Abernethy DR. Pharmacokinetics and clinical effectiveness of methylphenidate. 
Clin Pharmacokinet. 1999;37:457-470. 
59. Bruce C, Unsworth C, Tay R. A systematic review of the effectiveness of behavioural interaventions for 
improving driving outcomes in novic e drivers with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Br J 
Occup Ther. 2014;77:348-357. 
60. Tamm L, Narad ME, Antonini TN, O'Brien KM, Ha wk LW, Epstein JN. Reaction time variability in 
ADHD: a review. Neurotherapeutics. 2012;9:500-508. 
61. Hervey AS, Epstein JN, Curry JF, Tonev S, Arnold LE, Conners CK, Hinshaw SP, Swanson JM, 
Hechtman L. Reaction time distribution analysis  of neuropsychological performance in an ADHD 
sample. Child Neuropsychol. 2006;12:125-140. 
62. Castellanos FX, Sonuga-Barke EJ, Scheres A, Di Martino A, Hyde C, Walters JR. Varieties of attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder-related intra-individual variability. Biol Psychiatry. 2005;57:1416-1423. 
63. Epstein JN, Langberg JM, Rosen PJ, Graham A, Narad ME, Antonini TN, Brinkman WB, Froehlich T, 
Simon JO, Altaye M. Evidence for higher reaction time variability for children with ADHD on a range of 
cognitive tasks including reward and event rate manipulations. Neuropsychology. 2011;25:427-441. 
64. Antonini TN, Narad ME, Langberg JM, Epstein JN. Behavioral correlates of reaction time variability in 
children with and without ADHD. Neuropsychology. 2013;27:201-209. 
65. Barkley RA, Koplowicz S, Anderson T, McMurray MB. Sense of time in children with ADHD:  Effects of 
duration, distraction, adn stimulant medication. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 1997;3:359-369. 
66. Barkley RA, Murphy KR, Bush T. Time perception and reproduction in young adults with attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychology. 2001;15:351-360. 
67. Barkley RA, Edwards G, Laneri M, Fletcher K, Metevia L. Executive functioning, temporal discounting, 
and sense of time in adolescents with attention de ficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and oppositional 
defiant disorder (ODD). J Abnorm Child Psychol. 2001;29:541-556. 
68. Bauermeister JJ, Barkley RA, Martinez JV, Cumba E, Ramirez RR, Reina G, Matos M, Salas CC. Time 
estimation and performance on reproduction tasks in subtypes of children with attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder. J Clinical Child Adolesc Psychol. 2005;34:151-162. 
69. Dooling-Liftin J. Time perception in children with ADHD. ADHD Report. 1997;5:13-16. 
70. Meaux JB, Chelonis JJ. Time perception diffe rences in children with and without ADHD. J Pediatr 
Health Care. 2003;17:64-71. 
References Cited                                                                                              Page 128 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

71. Smith A, Taylor E, Rogers JW, Newman S, Rubia K, Smith A, Taylor E, Rogers JW, Newman S, Rubia 
K. Evidence for a pure time perception deficit in children with ADHD. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 
2002;43:529-542. 
72. Barkley RA, Edwards G, Laneri M, Fletcher K, Metevia L. Executive functioning, temporal discounting, 
and sense of time in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and oppositional defiant disorder. J Abnorm Child Psychol. 2001;29:541-556. 
73. Sagvolden T, Aase H, Zeiner P, Berger D. Altered reinforcement mechanisms in attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Behav Brain Res. 1998;94:61-71. 
74. Donovan JJ, Radosevich DJ. A meta-analytic review of  the distribution of practice effect: Now you see 
it, now you don't. J Appl Psychol. 1999;84:795-805. 
75. Fadde PJ. Training Complex Psychomotor Perform ance Skills: A Part-Task Approach. In: Foshay 
KHSR, ed. Handbook of training and improving workplace performance. Volume 1: Instructional design 
and training delivery . San Francisco, CA Pfeiffer; 2010. 
76. Hansen DL, Hansen EH. Caught in a balancing act: parents' dilemmas regarding their ADHD child's 
treatment with stimulant medication. Qual Health Res. 2006;16:1267-1285. 
77. Merkel RL, Jr., Nichols JQ, Fellers JC, Hidalgo P,  Martinez LA, Putziger I, Burket RC, Cox DJ. 
Comparison of on-road driving between young adults with and without ADHD. J Atten Disord. 2013. 
78. MTA Cooperative Group. A 14-month randomized clinical trial of treatment strategies for attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1999;56:1073-1086. 
79. Kaufman J, Birmaher B, Brent D, Rao U, Flynn C, Moreci P, Williamson D, Ryan N. Schedule for 
Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age Children-Present and Lifetime Version (K-SADS-PL): initial reliability and validity data. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1997;36:980-988. 
80. Williams AF. Teenage drivers: patterns of risk. J Safety Res. 2003;34:5-15. 
81. Garner AA, Gentry A, Welburn SC, Fine PR, Franklin CA, Stavrinos D. Symptom dimensions of 
disruptive behavior disorders in adolescent drivers. J Atten Disord. 2014;18:496-503. 
82. Nichols JQVA. Human factors and driving behaviors differentiating high risk and low risk drivers with 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Charlottesville, VA: Psychology, University of Virginia; 2012. 
83. Wechsler D. Wechsler Abbreviated Intelligence Scale: Administration Manual . San Antonio, TX: The 
Psychological Corporation; 1999. 
84. Wolraich ML, Lambert W, Doffing MA, Bickman L, Simmons T, Worley K. Psychometric properties of 
the Vanderbilt ADHD diagnostic parent rating scale in a referred population. J Pediatr Psychol. 
2003;28:559-567. 
85. Conners CK. Conners Rating Scales - 3rd Edition Manual. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Multi-Health 
Systems Inc.; 2008. 
86. Knouse LE, Bagwell CL, Barkley RA, Murphy KR. A ccuracy of self-evaluation in adults with ADHD: 
evidence from a driving study. J Atten Disord. 2005;8:221-234. 
87. Hoza B, Gerdes AC, Hinshaw SP, Arnold LE, Pe lham WE, Jr., Molina BS, Abikoff HB, Epstein JN, 
Greenhill LL, Hechtman L, Odbert C, Swanson JM, Wigal T. Self-perceptions of competence in children with ADHD and comparison children. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2004;72:382-391. 
88. Hervey A, Epstein JN, Curry JF, Tonev S, Arnold LE, Conners CK, Hinshaw SP, Swanson JM, 
Hechtman L. Reaction time distribution analysis  of neuropsychological performance in an ADHD 
sample. Child Neuropsychol. 2006;12:125-140. 
89. Leth-Steensen C, Elbaz ZK, Douglas VI. Mean response times, variability, and skew in the responding 
of ADHD children: a response time distributional approach. Acta Psychol. 
2000;104:167-190. 
90. Time perception application  [computer program]. Version: Universi ty of Massachusetts Medical Center: 
Chesapeake Technology; 1998. 
91. Gioia GA, Isquith PK, Guy SC, Kenworthy L. Behavior rating inventory of executive function . Odessa: 
Psychological Assessment Resources; 2000. 
92. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Monk TH, Berm an SR, Kupfer DJ. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: a 
new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res. 1989;28:193-213. 
93. Jensen PS, Hoagwood K, Arnold LE, Odbert C. The Services Use for Children and Adolescents - 
Parent Interview . Rockville, MD: NIMH; 1995. 
94. International Organization for Standardization. Road v ehicles -- Measurement of driver visual behaviour 
with respect to transport information and control systems Part 2: Equipment and procedures.  Vol 
ISO/TS 15007-2:2001; 2014. 
References Cited                                                                                              Page 129 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

95. Safety and Human Factors Standards Steering Comm ittee. Definitions and Experimental Measures 
Related to the Specification of Driver Vi sual Behavior Using Video Based Techniques. SAE 
International; 2000. 
96. Verwey WB, Zaidel DM. Predicting drowsiness accedents from personal attributes, eye blinks, and 
ongoing driving behavior. Pers Individ Dif. 2000;28:123-142. 
97. Smith MRH, Witt GJ, Bakowski DL, LeBlanc D, Lee JD. Adapting collision warning to real-time 
estimates of driver distraction. In: Regan MA, Lee JD, Young KL, eds. Driver distraction: Theory, 
effects, and mitigation . West Sussex, UK: Wiley; 2009. 
98. Lee HC. The validity of a driving simulator to meas ure on-road driving performance of older drivers. 
Transportation Eng Aust. 2003;8:89-100. 
99. Foss RD, Goodwin AH. Distracted driver behaviors and distracting conditions among adolescent 
drivers: findings from a naturalistic driving study. J Adolesc Health. 2014;54:S50-60. 
100. Hayes AF. PROCESS: A versatile computational tool  for observed variable mediation, moderation, and 
conditional process modeling.  http://www.afhayes.com/public/process2012.pdf . 
101. Ostrander R, Herman K, Sikorski J, Mascendaro P, Lambert S. Patterns of psychopathology in children 
with ADHD: a latent profile analysis. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. 2008;37:833-847. 
102. McGehee DV, Raby M, Carney C, Lee JD, Reyes ML. Extending parental mentoring using an event-
triggered video intervention in rural teen drivers. J Safety Res. 2007;38:215-227. 
103. Schatz NK, Fabiano GA, Morris KL, Shucard JM, Leo BA, Bieniek C. Parenting behaviors during risky 
driving by teens with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Behav Ther. 2014;45:168-176. 
 
 
References Cited                                                                                              Page 130 
Contact PD/PI: Epstein, Jeffery N

Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 1 of 37 
  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention  in Teens with A DHD  
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
Principal Investigator  
Jeffery N. Epstein, PhD  
 
Study Statistician  
James Peugh, PhD  
 
 
 
Supported By:  
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Development  
Project Number: 5R01HD084430  
 
 
September 20, 2022  
 
  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 2 of 37 
 1 SAP Signatures  
I give my approval for the attached SAP entitled “Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in 
Teens with ADHD ” dated September  20, 2022  
 
Statistician : 
Name: James Peugh, PhD  
 
Signature:      _____________________   
 
Date:        ___                                          
 
 
Principal Investigator  
Name: Jeffery  N. Epstein, PhD  
 
Signature:              ___                                    
 
Date:                      ___                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 3 of 37 
 2 Table of Contents  
Contents  
A Randomized Controlled Trial to Reduce Motor Vehicle Crash Risk in Teens with ADHD Improving 
ADHD Teen Driving Study  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................   
1 SAP Signatures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  2 
2 Table of Contents  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  3 
3 Abbreviation s and Definitions ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  5 
4 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 5 
4.1 Preface  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 5 
4.2 Scope of the analyses  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  6 
5 Study Objectives and Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 6 
5.1 Study Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  6 
5.2 Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  6 
6 Study Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  8 
6.1 General Study Design and Plan  ................................ ................................ ...............................  8 
6.2 Inclusion -Exclusion Criteria and General Study Population  ................................ ..................  13 
6.3 Randomization and Blinding  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 15 
6.4 Study Assessments  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  16 
7 Sample Size ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 17 
8 General Analysis Considerations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 17 
8.1 Timing of Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  17 
8.2 Analysis Populations  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  18 
8.2.1  Full Analysis Population  ................................ ................................ ................................  18 
8.2.2  Per Protocol Population  ................................ ................................ ................................  18 
8.2.3  Safety Population  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  18 
8.3 Covariates and Subgroups  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 18 
8.3.1  Multi -center Studies  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 19 
8.4 Missing Data  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  19 
8.5 Interim Analyses and Data Monitoring  ................................ ................................ .................  21 
8.5.1  Purpose of Interim Analyses  ................................ ................................ .........................  21 
8.5.2  Planned Schedule of Interim Analyses  ................................ ................................ ..........  21 
8.5.3 Stopping Rules  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  21 
8.5.4 Analysis Methods to Minimize Bias  ................................ ................................ ..............  21 
8.5.5 Adjustment of Confidence Intervals and p -values  ................................ ........................  21 
8.5.6 Interim Analysis for Sample Size Adjustment  ................................ ...............................  21 
8.5.7 Practical Measures to Minimize Bias  ................................ ................................ ............  22 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 4 of 37 
 8.5.8 Documentation of Interim Analyses  ................................ ................................ .............  22 
8.6 Multiple Testing  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  22 
9 Summary of Study Data  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  22 
9.1 Subject Disposition  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  22 
9.2 Derived variables  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  24 
9.3 Protocol Deviations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  24 
9.4 Demographic and Baseline Variables ................................ ................................ ....................  24 
9.5 Concurrent Illnesses and Medical Conditions  ................................ ................................ .......  25 
9.6 Treatment Compliance  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  26 
10 Efficacy Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  26 
10.1  Primary Efficacy Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  26 
10.2  Secondary Efficacy Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 26 
11 Safety Analyses  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  26 
11.1 Adverse Events  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  27 
11.2 Deaths, Serious Adverse Events and other Significant Adverse Events  ................................  29 
    11.3      Prior and Concurrent Medications…………………………………………………………………………………… 30 
12 Reporting Conventions  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  30 
13 Quality Assurance of Statistical Programming  ................................ ................................ ..........  30 
14 Summary of Changes to the Protocol and/or SAP  ................................ ................................ .... 30 
14.1     Aims Changes  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  30 
14.2      Outcomes Changes  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  30 
14.3     Statistical Changes ………………………………………………………………………………………………………… …31 
14. 4     Protocol Changes…………………………………………………………………… …………………………………. …… 34 
15 References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  36 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 5 of 37 
 3 Abbreviations and Definitions  
 
AE Adverse Event  
ADHD  Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder  
AMAP  Attention Maintenance Assessment Program  
CCHMC  Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center  
CD Conduct Disorder  
CNS Crashes and near crashes  
Co-I Co-Investigator  
CRF Case Report Form  
DSM -5 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders -Fifth Edition  
FOCAL  FOcused Concentration and Attention Learning  
FOCAL+  Enhanced FOcused Concentration and 
Attention Learning  
GEE Generalized Estimating Equations  
GPS Global Positioning System  
GTSSSS  Georgia Tech Simulator Sickness Screening 
Survey  
IQ Intelligence Quotient  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
K-BIT Kaufman Brief Intelligence Tests -2 
K-SADS -PL Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and 
Schizophrenia for School -Age Children -Present 
and Lifetime Version  
MVC  Motor Vehicle Crash  
NICHD  National Institutes of Child Health and Human 
Development  
ODD  Oppositional  Defiant Disorder  
PI Primary Investigator  
RCT Randomized Control Trial  
SAE Serious Adverse Event  
SAP Statistical Analysis Plan  
SSI-AOD  Simple Screening Instrument for Alcohol and 
Other Drugs  
SSQ Simulator Sickness Questionnaire  
ST Secondary Task  
VAPRS  Vanderbilt ADHD Parent Rating Scales  
 
4 Introduction  
4.1 Preface  
Glances away from the roadway, especially those longer than 2 seconds, significantly increase one’s 
risk for a motor vehicle crash (MVC). Teen drivers evidence far more extended glances away from 
the roadway than experienced drivers. Further, teens with a diagnosis of Attention 
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) emit 3 -times more extended glances (defined as > 2 seconds) 
away from the roadway than neurotypical  teens.  Driving deficits , such as difficulty maintaining lane 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 6 of 37 
 position,  observed among teen dri vers with ADHD are mediated by elevations in the number of 
extended glances away from the roadway. Hence, there is a clear need for interventions, particularly 
one that targets extended glances away from the roadway, to address the driving deficits of teen s 
with ADHD. The randomized controlled trial (RCT) described in this Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP)  will 
test the efficacy of an enhanced  FOcused Concentration and Attention Learning (FOCAL) 
intervention  (FOCAL+) , which targets reducing the number of exte nded glances away from the 
roadway, among teens with ADHD. The public health impact of improving the driving behavior of 
teens with ADHD cannot be overstated.  MVCs are the leading cause of death among teens.  The 2 - 
to 3-fold increased risk of MVCs among teens with ADHD significantly contributes to these figures.  
By targeting teens with ADHD, we are targeting one of the highest risk groups of drivers on the road. 
Were our interventions to normalize driving among teens with ADHD, the potential impact on ra tes 
of MVC injuries and deaths would be substantial.  
4.2 Scope of the analyses  
This SAP describes the planned analyses for the Improving ADHD Teen Driving study (National 
Institutes of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) grant #  5R01HD084430 ). These ana lyses 
will empirically test the eff ectiveness  of the FOCAL+ intervention  in comparison to a sham placebo 
intervention  at reducing the frequency of extended eye glances  and driving performance  during 
simulated driving  and real -world driving outcomes capture d by in -car technology.  
 
The planned analyses identified in this SAP will be submitted at the study completion  as part of the 
Final Study Report and future manuscripts.  
5 Study Objectives and Endpoints  
5.1 Study Objectives  
The goal of the proposed research is to  empirically test the eff ectiveness  of the FOCAL+ intervention 
in comparison to a sham intervention at improving visual attention and driving performance in teens 
with ADHD.  Specifically, we will conduct a randomized controlled trial using 152 teens diagnosed  
with ADHD. Teens will be randomized to receive 5 training sessions of the  FOCAL+ intervention or a 
sham intervention. 1 -month and 6 - months post -training , teens’ driving skills , including frequency of 
extended eye glances, will be assessed during  driving simulation .  In addition, at the conclusion of 
training , a DriveCam camera system in their car will record naturalistic driving. The DriveCam will 
remain  in their car until 12 -months post -training.  Finally, we will acquire the teen’s driving reco rds 
for the period they are in the study.  
 
Primary Objective: W e will examine the eff ectiveness  of the FOCAL+ intervention versus sham 
intervention at decreasing rates of extended glances away from the roadway and improving driving 
performance among teens  with ADHD  at 1-month post -training, and 6 -months post -training.  
 
Secondary Objective: We will ex amine the effectiveness  of the FOCAL+ intervention versus sham 
intervention in decreasing rates of extended glances away from the roadway, frequency of driving 
events, crashes, and crashes/near crashes as measured by in -car technology (DriveCam)  during the  
12-months post -training . 
5.2 Endpoints  
Primary Endpoint  
Two primary endpoints will be used to compare the immediate eff ectiveness  of interventions at 1 -
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 7 of 37 
 month and 6 -months after the last training session. The driving simulator will be integrated with an 
eye tracking system and gyrosc ope. After acclimating to the driving simulator, participants will 
complete two 15 -minute drives. The following are the two primary endpoints assessed during 
driving simulation:  
 
 1) Number of Extended Glances Away from Roadway during Driving Simulation: D uring the 
two 15 -minute drives, the participant will engage in one secondary task per minute for a 
total of 28 secondary tasks. The secondary task , each lasting 20 secs, will consist of searching 
for streets on a simulated GPS map. Using visual mapping fro m the Tobii eyetracking, a 
forward roadway gaze area will be  defined. Tobii analyses software ( Tobii Glasses 2, Tobii 
Pro, Reston, VA ) will determine  for each 20 msec epoch whether the visual gaze was off the 
forward roadway, and the number of ≥2 secs glan ces during secondary task periods will be  
computed  at 1-month and 6 -months post - training .  
 
 2) Standard Deviation of Lateral Position during Driving Simulation: The standard deviation 
of lateral lane position will be  computed using lane position recorded  every 17 msecs for the 
secondary task periods at 1-month and 6 -months post -training . Lane position variability is 
highly correlated with MVCs  (Owens & Ramaekers, 2009) .  
 
Every effort will be made to ensure that participants attend all 5 training sessions . However, should 
participants fail to complete all training sessions, the last completed training session will be used as 
the start of the post -training period.  
 
Secondary Endpoint  
Two secondary endpoints will use DriveCam event -triggered device (Model#: DC3; Lytx, Inc.). This 
data will be used to compare the long -term (12 -months post the final training session) effectiveness 
of the interventions in a naturalistic setting.   
 
The DriveCam device has two integrated cameras. One facing the forward roadway; th e other facing 
the driver. If the built -in accelerometer detects a ≥.6 forward or lateral g -force event, the device 
records the 8 secs before and 4 secs after the triggered event. Four events will be  randomly selected 
for coding if a teen had >4 events in a week . Trained coders will code  the onset and offset of visual 
glances away from the roadway  such that a count of extended eye glances ( >2 seconds) will be 
obtained. Additionally, coders will record  whether the event captured a crash (i.e., contact betwee n 
the vehicle and another object) or near crash (i.e., an evasive maneuver performed to avoid a MVC).   
The two secondary endpoints that will be used from the DriveCam video events will be as follows:  
 
1) Events that Included an Extended Eye Glance:  During the 5 -seconds preceding the event 
until the 1 -second after the g -force event, if a glance away from the roadway was ≥2 
seconds, the event w ill be  identified as having a long glance.  Events that d o not include a 
glance away from the roadway ≥2 seco nds during the 5 -seconds preceding the event until 
the 1 -second after the g -force event w ill be  identified as not having a long glance.  
 
2) Events that Included C rashes and Near Crashes:  Coders will make a determination after 
viewing each event whether t he event included or did not include a crash or near -crash.  
Crashes and near  crashes (CNC) will be combined due to low crash rates and near -crashes 
are an established surrogate for crashes (Guo,  Klauer, Hankey, & Dingus,  2010).  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 8 of 37 
 6 Study Methods  
6.1 General Study  Design and Plan  
Recruitment  
We will target our study advertisements to parents of teen drivers with ADHD or attention problems. 
It is not required that participants have an existing diagnosis of ADHD as the research team will 
conduct a comprehensive ADHD assessment. Most of our research participants will be current or 
past patients at the Center for ADHD at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC). We 
will also  identify patients with an ADHD diagnosis who have indicated interest in being infor med 
about future research studies who have been seen at CCHMC (outside of the Center for ADHD) to 
whom a letter will be mailed to advertise more broadly as needed. This letter will be sent along with 
a postcard indicating whether they would “not wish to be  contacted about the study” or “wish to be 
contacted at a future date”. Families not returning the postcards will be called by research staff to 
share more about the study and invite participation. The study will be advertised on the CCHMC 
social media pag e using IRB (Institutional Review Board) approved web and flyer text.  
 
We will also  recruit from the community including distributing flyers (see advertisement text) to 
local schools, driving schools, the Department of Motor Vehicles, local physicians, and  through 
advertising (e.g., flyers, CCHMC outlook emails). Additionally, the study will be advertised through 
brief IRB approved audio clips and digital flyers on local radio stations as well as internet radio 
services (e.g., Pandora). We also plan on usin g multiple online participant recruitment services 
(Truventis, Fusion Media), to promote our research study on social community pages such as 
Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and Pinterest and through search engines such as Google, Bing, and 
Yahoo. Truventis and Fusion Media will create recruitment materials including a study flyer and a 
brief video. These recruitment materials will direct potential participants to either a study website 
created by Truventis or to a REDCap e -screener page where potential parti cipants will be directed to 
provide contact information so that study staff may contact the participants to inform them about 
the study. Finally, we will recruit participants through the SONA system (psychology subject pool).  
Participants recruited using this approach will complete screening measures online via Qualtrics 
survey software in a single session lasting approximately 15 minutes. These subjects will be enrolled 
at University of Cincinnati , Xavier, or Northern Kentucky University  as undergraduates . Students in 
Psychology courses visit the SONA website to see descriptions of all experiments currently being 
offered. Once they find an experiment that interests them, they will follow a link that provides 
directions for completing the study via Qualtric s. Once participants follow the link to the study on 
Qualtrics, they will also be required to read the recruitment statement. After completing the survey, 
participants will automatically receive course credit in SONA for their participation. The survey 
questions will be those currently asked during the phone screening process for participants recruited 
using alternative methods (i.e., questions regarding ADHD symptoms, driving history and habits, and 
motion sickness) and will also incorporate the driving hi story questionnaire. We foresee that we will 
be able to successfully recruit the majority of our sample using our Center’s registry.  Additionally, we 
will using radio, social media, and print advertisements . 
 
Screening  
Interested families will be screened over the phone for inclusionary and exclusionary criteria (See 
Inclusion -Exclusion Criteria and General Study Population section) including a screening of ADHD 
symptoms using a behavioral rating scale (ADHD Vanderbilt R ating Scale -Parent Report). This 
screening is expected to take no longer than 15 minutes. Families meeting screening eligibility 
criteria will attend an eligibility  study visit at the Center for ADHD at CCHMC where they will be 
consented and assented, and parents and teens  will complete a structured interview with a graduate 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 9 of 37 
 student, post -doctoral fellow, or psychologists. In addition, the teen  will be administered an 
abbreviated intelligence measure, and complete self -report measures assessing ADHD symptom s. 
Finally, the teens  will complete some drives in the driving simulator. If participants are taking 
stimulant medication at the time of assessment, then they will be instructed to not take the 
medication the day of their initial visit  (See 11.1 Adverse Ev ents for safety procedures regarding 
medication wash -out). We will ask that the teen be off their medication because we are interested 
in assessing teens’ driving abilities off medication, given that most teens drive in the mornings and 
evenings when ADHD medication may not have yet taken effect or may be wearing off. Moreover, it 
is common practice for teens not to take medication on weekends or during summer when school is 
out. For safety reasons, parents of children with ADHD who are not taking medicatio n on the day of 
their assessments will be required to drive their child to and from these visits. Lastly, although it 
would be ideal for the teen to be off medication for their first visit and should reduce participant 
burden, we can work with the family t o schedule multiple appointments as necessary (i.e., some 
families may opt to not have their teen refrain from taking medication at the initial visit and may opt 
for two initial visits; only the latter simulator visit being off medication).  
 
Eligibility As sessment  
Each potential participant will undergo a complete comprehensive assessment. The assessments are 
intended to establish a clinical research diagnosis of ADHD. Participants must meet full DSM -5 
(Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders -Fifth Edition) (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013) criteria for ADHD as determined by a semi -structured interview  (Kiddie Schedule 
for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School -Age Children -Present and Lifetime Version; K -
SADS -PL) ( Kaufma n, Birmaher, Brent et al. , 1997 ). Both  the parent and teen  will be administered the 
Behavior Disorders —ADHD, O ppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) , Conduct Disorder (CD )—section of 
the interview, in addition t o a review of anxiety and mood disorders. Reliability and validity for this 
measure are good to excellent, and the interview takes about 60 minutes to complete. Teens  can 
have comorbid diagnoses as long as ADHD is their primary diagnosis. Participants will  be recruited 
and ascertained by trained personnel at the CCHMC ADHD Program. The assessment visit is 
expected to take approximately 4 hours.  
 
If during  the evaluation, suicidal ideation or more serious psychopathology is uncovered, the patient 
will immedi ately be referred to an appropriate mental health provider or emergency room facility  
(See 11.2 Adverse Events for safety procedures for more information about psychological/cognitive 
assessments) . Further, any participants who do not meet study criteria w ill be referred to 
appropriate referrals within CCHMC or within the community depending on patient preference and 
physician availability.  
 
Interventions  
This is a randomized clinical trial testing the superiority of the FOCAL+ intervention over the sham 
control intervention. The sham control intervention is an active control and is described below in 
greater detail . All teens who take ADHD stimulant medication will be instructed to refrain from 
taking ADHD medication for all intervention sessions and post -intervention assessment visits . 
Parents of these teens were instructed to drive their teen to the visits.  
FOCAL+ Intervention: Initially, and then once a week for the next training sessions after the 
initial training, teens with ADHD randomized to the FOCAL+ intervention will participate in FOCAL+ 
training sessions (total of 5 sessions). FOCAL training begins with th e Attention Maintenance 
Assessment Program (AMAP). AMAP is a computerized desk -top program designed to assess visual 
attention. During AMAP, the computer screen is split horizontally in order to simulate distracted 
driving. Participants can either view a w indshield -view video of driving in the top portion of the 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 10 of 37 
 screen (primary task) or view a map on the bottom portion of the screen (secondary task). 
Participants toggle between views by pressing the spacebar on the keyboard. Only the top or bottom 
view is v isible at any one time with the non -selected portion of the screen blacked out. Although 
blacked out when viewing the map, the video of the drive continues to progress in real time while 
the map is being viewed. During AMAP, the participant is given three street names. By toggling 
between the views of the top and bottom halves of the display, they are asked to identify street 
signs in the driving video (top portion) while concurrently determining whether the street names 
exist on the map (bottom portion).  
After AMAP, feedback and training includes  five separate steps . (1) Participants learn to 
appreciate how long they looked away from the driving scenario during AMAP by viewing their own 
AMAP performance. During this viewing the top portion of the screen (si mulated video drive) is 
blacked out for as long as the participant viewed the map during the AMAP testing. For example, if 
the teen diverted his attention to the map for 3.8 secs during the initial driving task, the screen is 
blacked out for the same 3.8 s ecs during video playback. (2) In a subsequent feedback period, the 
AMAP video is played back again with a blacked -out screen during times the teen was looking away. 
In addition, a timer is added to the screen to show the teen how long they looked away dur ing each 
instance. (3) Next,  the video is  re-played again with a timer during blacked -out sections to 
demonstrate the length of long -glances . (4) Next, a new drive is played with the same street name 
search task; however, a warning tone sounds when glances  at the map are >3 secs. Participants 
repeat the drive until all long -glances at the map <3 secs. Finally, (5) Step 4 is repeated with a 2 sec 
threshold.   
Due to concerns that teens with ADHD might have decreased ability to generalize the visual 
glance skills they learn during FOCAL training to actual driving conditions , we have enhanced the 
FOCAL intervention to specifically train generalization to a driving environment  (Abikoff, 2009; 
Barkley, 1997) . Immediately following each FOCAL training session, t eens will enter the driving 
simulator equipped with eye tracking technology. They will complete two 5 -minute drives. During 
the drives, approximately once per minute, the driver will be alerted with an auditory tone and a 
visual cue indicating that they ne ed to search for a symbol within a 6x6 array of symbols on the 
screen located within a computer monitor situated within a virtual dashboard. They will need to 
inform the research assistant of how many times the target symbol appears in the stimulus array. 
They will be given 20 secs to complete  the search. During the FOCAL+ drive, the eye tracker will 
monitor eye glances and teens will be provided with real time immediate auditory feedback when a 
visual glance away from the roadway exceeds 2 secs. Specifically, an auditory alarm will sound when 
the glance duration exceeds 2 secs and will continue to sound until visual gaze returns to the 
roadway. All teens will complete two 5 -minute drives under these conditions. However, if a teen is 
still demonstrating any glances away from the roadway that are  ≥2 secs or <50% accuracy in 
responses, they will complete additional 5 -minute drives under the same conditions until they 
succeed in having no ≥2 secs glances and having > 50% accuracy in responses during the 5 -minute 
drive up to a maximum of 3 extra 5 -minute drives. Each training session lasts approximately 1.5 
hours.  
During the initial training session, as teens are completing the FOCAL+ training, parents will 
complete the FOCAL training in a separate room so that they can learn the skills being taught t o the 
teen and can thereafter provide feedback to the teen regarding extended visual glances during 
supervised driving. Parents will also be given a short 5 -minute refresher at the fifth and final training 
session.  
Sham intervention:  Like teens randomized to the FOCAL+ intervention, teens with ADHD 
randomized to the sham intervention will engage in sham training initially and then once a week for 
the next 4 training sessions after the initial training (total of 5 sessions). The first hour of each 
training s ession will consist of computer -based training about the rules of the road  based on an 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 11 of 37 
 abbreviated established driver training curriculum from the American Driver & Traffic Safety 
Education Association (ADTSEA) . Teens will learn about traffic codes, laws, and rules of the road. To 
control for the extra time that teens assigned to FOCAL+ will spend in the driving simulator during 
FOCAL+ training, teens in the sham intervention will also drive in the driving simulator after each 
training session for a compara ble length  of time (i.e., two 5 -minute sessions). This time in the driving 
simulator will be contextualized as a time for them to practice the rules of the road they learned 
during training. Importantly, teens in the sham intervention group will NOT receiv e any feedback 
regarding their eye gaze during simulated driving. The number of additional 5 -minute drives beyond 
the initial two 5 -minute drives will be kept equal across groups by yoking each control participant to 
an intervention participant. The number  of training drives completed by controls was determined by 
matching each control to a FOCAL+ participant ensuring equal numbers of training drives across 
groups. Parents will also participate in the training by receiving materials on the information their  
teen learned at their initial and fifth training visits.   
 
Post Intervention Assessment s 
At 1-month post -training and 6 - months post -training, teens’ driving skills  and frequency of 
extended eye glances  will be assessed using a driving simulator. In addition, we will install a 
DriveCam camera system in the car that the teen most often drives  and leave this in their car until 
12-months post -training.  Finally, we will acquire the teen’s driving records fo r the period they are in 
the study .  
 
Below is a study flow -chart.  
 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 12 of 37 
  
Study Timeline  
The project will take place over a 5 -year time -period.  Years 01 -04 of the study will be used to  
(1) recruit, phenotype, and consent teens with ADHD and their families,  
(2) randomize participants to treatment  groups,  
(3) conduct FOCAL+, and sham intervention trainings  (5-sessions, 1 week  apart) ,  
(4) co nduct  driving simulation  assessments at baseline, 1 -, and 6 -months  post -training,  
(5) collect information about medicati on use at baseline, 6 -months, and 12 -months post -
training , 
(6) install and collect driving data using DriveCam cameras ,  
(7) collect driving records , 
(8) conduct data entry  and coding .   
Since we forecast that recruitment will take 4 years to complete, we expect that some post -
intervention data collection will continue into Year 05.  However, most of Year 05 will be devoted to 
data cleaning, analyses, and preparation of study findings for publication and disseminatio n. 
 

Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 13 of 37 
 6.2 Inclusion -Exclusion Criteria and Gene ral Study Population  
Inclusion Criteria  
Participants for the study must meet all the following criteria:  
a. Consent:  The family must provide signature of informed consent by parents or legal 
guardians. Eighteen -year -old adolescents must provide their own consent.  
b. Assent:  Adolescents under the age of 18 must provide a signature indicating assent to 
participate in the study  
c. Aged 16 -19.  
d. Teens in ADHD group will meet DSM ADHD criteria for ADHD -Predominantly Inattentive 
Pres entation or ADHD -Combined Presentation based on the K -SADS interview. For 
research purposes, we will utilize criteria specified in the DSM -5 for older adolescents 
(i.e., a teen will qualify for an ADHD diagnosis with 5 or more inattentive and/or 5 or 
more hyperactive impulsive symptoms with related impairment across multiple settings) 
for all teens.  
e. Possess a valid driver’s license and regularly spend at least 3 hours per week engaged in 
unsupervised driving. Rationale : Must be legal for participant to drive independently 
since driving risk among teen drivers is greatest in absence of adult supervision  
(Williams, 2003) . Further, there is a need to collect ample DriveCam outcome data 
during unsupervised driving conditions to test for intervention effects.  Other driving 
studies have used similar inclusion criteria for number of hours of independent driving  
(Nichols, 2012) . 
f. Participant has an IQ  (Intelligence Quotient)  > 80 on at least one standard score or 
composite score as determined by the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test —2nd edition. 
Rational e: Teens with cognitive challenges may not be able to understand intervention 
instructions.  
g. Parent willing to participate. Rationale : Teens will be asked to refrain from taking 
medication on days of driving assessment (i.e., driving simulation). Since dri ving to our 
facility for testing without taking medication may put the teen at risk, a parent will need 
to agree to drive the teen to these visits. Parents will also be participating in the 
intervention.  
h. Participants are permitted to be on medication excep t for  those participants taking 
medication prescribed to manage ADHD symptoms that cannot be washed out on days 
they use the simulator, and neuroleptic medications. For participants taking stimulant 
medications for their ADHD, they will not take that medic ation on the days they 
complete simulator tasks.  
i. Successful calibration on eye tracker: All participants must receive ≥80% of data 
captured during Georgia Tech Simulator Sickness Survey 2 -minute pre -test drive.   
 
Exclusion Criteria:   
Participants will be excluded from the study if they meet any of the following criteria:  
a. Understanding level: The participant and parent cannot understand or follow 
instructions given in the study as determined by study staff discretion at primary visit.  
b. On neuroleptic medications or medications for ADHD that cannot be washed out on 
assessment days.  
c. Risk for alcohol or drug abuse. Rationale : Teens engaging in significant abuse behaviors 
as assessed using the Simple Screening Instrument for Alcohol and Oth er Drugs (SSI -
AOD) (Winters & Zenilman, 1994) likely require more intensive and other interventions. 
Participants with a score of 4 of higher on the SSI -AOD will be excluded from the study.  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 14 of 37 
 d. Cannot see the secondary task stimuli without the use of glasses (contacts acceptable). 
Rationale:  The eye tracking equipment that will be used during driving simulation to 
measure eye glances cannot be used if the participant is wearing glasses  
j. Risk for m otion sickness in driving simulator: During phone screening, participants will 
be asked a series of questions on the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire that are designed 
to measure propensity for motion sickness.  If the participant indicates that they “Near ly 
Always” get motion sickness in at least 4 of the situations, they will be excluded from the 
study.  In addition, at the baseline visit, each participant will complete the Georgia Tech 
Simulator Sickness Screening Survey (GTSSSS)  (Gable & Walker, 2013) .  After they 
complete the survey, they will complete a 2-minute  practice drive in the driving 
simulator.  After the practice drive, they will complete the GTSSSS a second time.  If any 
single rating on the post -drive survey is greater than or equal to 5 mor e than pre -drive 
survey, or if any three of the ratings on the post -drive survey are above a 3 as compared 
to the pre -drive survey, the participant will be excluded . 
e. Participants must not have a history of moderate to severe head trauma, neurological 
disor der, or any other organic disorder that could possibly affect brain function.  
Moderate to severe head trauma will be defined as having lost consciousness for over 
30 minutes or having multiple instances of traumatic brain injury irrespective of severity. 
Participants who have had head trauma that are not excluded from the study will be 
required to wait 30 days after their head trauma before participating in the study, in 
order to allow sufficient time to pass that negative sequelae do not develop.  
 
Measure s used referenced above for establishing inclusion/exclusion criteria are listed below : 
1) Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ)  (Kennedy, Lane, Berbaum, & Lilienthal, 1993) : The 
SSQ has been used extensively in studies of simulator sickness. The SSQ asks how often the 
person experiences feelings of nausea, headaches, or dizziness in a series of situations using 
a 4-point  Likert scale (0=never; 3=Nearly Always).  Situations in clude automobile driving, 
amusement rides, air travel, ship travel, computer usage, and simulators.  If the parent 
responds that the teen “nearly always” gets nauseous/headaches/dizziness in 4 or more 
situations, the teen will be excluded from the study.  
2) Demographic Questionnaire:  A laboratory developed questionnaire assessing for covariates 
such as sex and age will be completed by participants. In addition, the questionnaire 
enquires about the family psychiatric history. The purpose of this questionnaire i s to obtain 
information for inclusionary/exclusionary criteria and relevant covariates.   
3) Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School -Age Children -Present 
and Lifetime Version  (K-SADS -PL; Kaufman, et al, 1997): The KSADS is a semi -structured 
diagnostic interview and  has been used in a number of clinical and epidemiological studies 
of child psychiatric disorders. This measure consists of 82 screening items, and 5 diagnostic 
supplements, and can generate  32 DSM -5 diagnoses. Both parent  and adolescent will be 
administered the Behavior Disorders (ADHD, ODD, CD) section of the interview, in addition 
to a review of anxiety and mood disorders. Reliability and validity for this measure are good 
to excellent, and the interview takes about 60 m inutes to complete.  
4) Vanderbilt ADHD Parent Rating Scales (VAPRS)  (Wolraich, Lambert, Doffing, Bickman, 
Simmons, & Worley, 2003) : This DSM -based checklist allows parents to rate the teen on 
each of the 18 ADHD core symptoms. Parents also rate the teen on a variety of domains of 
functional impairment. Internal consistency and reliability are excellent (Wolraich et al., 
2003) .    
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 15 of 37 
 5) Georgia Tech Simulator Sickness Screening Survey (GTSSSS)  (Gable & Walker, 2013) : 
Participants complete the GTSSSS prior to driving in the simulator. The participant drives 
through the scenario as they would in a regular vehicle, observing all traffic laws. F ollowing 
completion of the driving scenario participants return to the post -drive survey.  
6) Simple Screening Instrument for Alcohol and Other Drugs (SSI -AOD)  is a 16 -item screening 
instrument including yes/no questions about the respondent’s experience with alcohol and 
other drugs in the past 6 months  (Winters & Zenilman, 1994) . It covers drug use, 
preoccupation and loss of control, adverse consequences, problem recognition, and 
tolerance and withdrawal. This questionnaire will be administered during the in -person visits 
at Baseline and 6 -months. In addition, this questionnaire will be sent as a REDCap survey for 
teens to complete at the 12 -month time point.  
7) Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test -2 (K-BIT; Kaufman & Kaufman, 2004) : The K -BIT is a 
culturally -sensitive  standardized assessment that estimates verbal and non -verbal and 
overall intelligence. This test has good reliability and validity and will be administered to 
assess each child’s intelligence and rule out possible intellectual disability.  
8) Driving History Questionnaire (Laboratory Developed) : The Driving History Questionnaire is a 
brief laboratory developed questionnaire assessing relevant driving history such as date of 
licensure . This questionnaire will be administered during the in -person visits at Baseline and 
6-months. In addition, this questionnaire will be sent as a REDCap survey for teens to 
complete at the 12 -month time point.  
6.3 Randomization and Blinding  
Randomization will be done according to a 1:1 ratio. The randomization scheme will be  done using 
blocks of 10 so that for every 10 participants, 5 will be  randomized to each group. A data manager 
(John Simon, MA) will generate  the allocation sequence using the Microsoft Excel random number 
function.  At study outset, each assignment for the full  sample will be  placed in sequentially 
numbered sealed envelopes. When participants show up for the initial training visit, the 
randomization envelope for that participant will be  opened at which time the participant’s 
randomized group will be  revealed to the individual conducting the participant’s training . 
 
Participants will know  which intervention they are assigned to (FOCAL+ or sham intervention) but 
will be  blind as to which intervention was the active intervention  (FOCAL+) . Research assistants who 
implement the intervention  will not be blind to participant randomization ; however, research 
assistants who code  the DriveCam data (onset and off set of eye glance duration and crashes/near 
crashes) will be  blind to participant randomization.  
 
  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 16 of 37 
 6.4 Study Assess ments  
Frequency and Timing of Relevant Assessments : 
 
 Baseline/Randomization  1-month follow -up 
assessment  6-month follow -up 
assessment  12-month 
follow -up 
Diagnostic and 
Clinical 
Assessment  X    
Driving 
Simulation 
Assessment   X (2 runs)  X (2 runs)   
DriveCam 
Recording  X (Installation)    CONTIN UOUS  
Driving Records   
                                                  CONTIN UOUS                                         
Adverse event 
monitoring    
   CONTIN UOUS  
 
 
Analysis Time Windows : 
 
Visit (target day)  Lower bound (days)  Upper bound (days)  
Baseline /Diagnostic and 
Clinical Assessment  (-7) -14 -7 
Randomization/ Training 1 (0)  N/A N/A 
Training 2 (7)  4 10 
Training 3 ( 14) 11 17 
Training 4 ( 21) 18 24 
Training 5 ( 28) 25 31 
Month 1 (30  post -training 5 ) 30 45 
Month 6 (180  post -training 5 ) 180 195 
Month 12  (360  post -training 5 ) Not in person  Not in person  
 
Study Variables:  
Primary Endpoint Variables Collected During Secondary Task (ST) Performance Portion of Driving 
Simulation:  
1) Extended eye glances : This variable will be a frequency count of the number of ≥2 secs 
glances . Extended eye glances of interest are those occurring during the ST portions of the 
drive. The range for this variable could range from 0 to 100.  
 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 17 of 37 
 2) Standard Deviation of L ane Position (SLDP):  Standard deviation of lane position will be 
calculated during the ST portions of the drive. An average of 0 indicates that an individual 
maintained consistent lane position. The range for this variable is from 0 to 3 
 
Secondary Endpoin t Variables Collected using DriveCam:  
1) Extended eye glances:  As has been done in previous research, the  number of >2 sec eye 
glances away from the roadway occurring between -5 secs before to 1 sec after the event 
causing a .6 g -force will be calculated  (Dingus, Klauer, Neale et al., 2006) . For each event 
video, we will code the onset and offset of glances away from the roadway. Based on the 
onset and offset times, we will calculate whether the video clip contains a continuous eye 
glance away from the ro adway that lasts for 2 -seconds or longer  between -5 secs before to 1 
sec after the event . It is possible that s ome participants will not contribute any data at all to 
this outcome variable  due to not experiencing any .6 g -force events during the 12 -month 
observation. The lower end of the range for this variable for participants who do experience 
at least 1 .6 g -force event during the observation period is 0. There is no upper limit to this 
variable.  
 
2) Crashes and near crashes (CNC):  Like the extended eye  glance endpoint, this variable is 
only calculated when participants experience a g -force event > .6. Coders will record  whether 
the event captured a crash (i.e., contact between the vehicle and another object) or near 
crash (i.e., an evasive maneuver perf ormed to avoid a MVC).   Some participants may not 
contribute data  due to not having any events . These participants will not be included in 
analyses. The lower end of the range for this variable, for participants who do experience at 
least 1 .6 g -force even t during the observation period is 0. There is no upper limit to this 
variable.  
7 Sample Size  
Our initial protocol proposed to randomize 136 participants; however, this randomization goal did 
not account for attrition at the 1 - and 6 -month driving simulations —the source of our primary 
endpoints.  When we reached a sample size of 136, we estimated h ow many additional participants 
would be required to achieve 136 participants with completed driving simulation data at 1 - and 6 -
months post -training. The calculation suggested  that we need ed to recruit a randomized sample size 
of 152 to achieve 136 participants with 1 - and 6 -month simulator outcomes (primary endpoints).  
(See Section 16  for date of this protocol change ). 
8 General Analysis Considerations  
8.1 Timing of Analyses  
● The final analyses of the driving simulation data wil l be performed after the final randomized 
participant has completed their 6 -month driving simulation assessment.  
● The final analyses of the DriveCam data will be performed after both a) all events from all 
participants have been recorded and b) all events f rom all participants have been coded and 
resolved for any discrepancies.  
● The final analysis will be performed on datasets compiled by John Simon, MA after having 
been documented as having been cleaned and finalized.  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 18 of 37 
 8.2 Analysis Populations  
8.2.1 Full Analysis Popul ation (or Intention to Treat or Modified Intention to Treat)  
● All subject who were randomized . 
● Driving simulation outcomes: All participants will have baseline driving simulation.  Missing 
driving simulation data at the 1 -month and 6 -month timepoints will b e assumed to be 
missing at random and handl ed using multiple imputation . 
● Demographic characteristics: All participants who are randomized will be included in the 
report of demographic characteristics of the sample.  
8.2.2 Per Protocol Population  
 
● DriveCam outcom es: All participants who produce any DriveCam events during the period 
beginning at post -training through 1 -year post -training.  For any participants with missing 
DriveCam ‘long -glance’ data, data will be assumed to be missing at random and handled 
using m ultiple imputation.  
8.2.3 Safety Population  
All subjects who have a DriveCam installed in their car will be monitored for safety as described in 
8.5 Interim Analyses . 
8.3 Covariates and Subgroups  
For all analyses : 
 Driving experience: Defined as baseline date minus the date that the teen received their 
graduated or full unrestricted license. Computed in months . 
Specific to driving simulation analyses:  
 Driving runs:  Included in order to be able to include primary out comes from the two driving 
runs conducted at the baseline, 1 -month post -training assessment, and the 6 -month post -
training assessment. Generalized estimating equation  (GEE)  analyses allowed driving 
simulation data from the two “runs” nested within each of the three “drive types” nested 
within each participant to be modeled as correlated response variable data, but main or 
interaction effects for “runs” were not of theoretical interest.  
Specific to DriveCam analyses:  
 To account for variability in the length  of time the DriveCam camera was installed in each 
participants’ automobile during the 1 -year post -training period was included  as a covariate  
in addition to months of driving experience as detailed above . 
Supplemental Analyses (Requested by New England Journal of Medicine reviewers, editor, and/or 
statistical expert)  
 Moderation Effects —These analyses are post -hoc; thus, effects (adjusted mean difference 
or relative risk and 95% CI) will be reported rather than significance testing. Note that the 
widths o f confidence intervals are not adjusted for multiple comparisons and no definite 
conclusions can be drawn from these results . 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 19 of 37 
 o Medication status dichotomized based on whether the teen reported taking ADHD 
medication at any point during the 12 -months of natu ralistic driving.  
 COVID -19 Sensitivity Analysis  
o For 56 (FOCAL+: n=29 teens; Control: n=27 teens) of the 152 participants, their 1 -
year of naturalistic driving included days beyond March 15, 2020 when COVID 
restrictions were put into place. We will conduct a sensitivity analyses of our 
naturalistic driving results by re -running our primary and secondary analyses but 
including only the 96 teens (FOCAL+ n=47; Control n=49) whose 1 -year of 
naturalistic driving ended prior to COVID restrictions.  
8.3.1 Multi -center  Studies 
Participants for this study will be recruited from a single site: Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical 
Center.  
8.4 Missing Data  
 
Although every effort will be undertaken to eliminate missing data, driving simulator and DriveCam 
equipment failures could occur , and the possibility exists that participants may not complete follow 
up assessments even after prompting from the research team . Missing data will be assumed to be 
minim al (< 15%),  missing at random (MAR), and  consistent with Intent -to-Treat analyse s handled via 
multiple imputation in all primary outcomes analyses  (see below for multiple imputation models 
description) .  
  
Primary Analyses  
Two different types of multiple imputation models, data analysis model -based imputation, 
and fully -conditional specification imputation (Enders, 2010; Graham, 2012; Muthén & 
Muthén, 1998 -2017, p. 576), were used to handle primary analysis missing data beca use the 
two primary outcomes were measured on two different scales. Missing data for standard -
deviation of lane -position, a continuous response variable, was handled using model based 
imputation assuming a normal distribution. Specifically, a model in whic h specific driving 
simulator “runs” (level 1) nested within drive types over time (level 2) across participants 
(level 3) formed the foundation of the missing data imputation model. A binary indicator of 
the specific driving simulator “run” was the sole le vel 1 predictor of standard -deviation of 
lane -position (“DV”), and that effect was allowed to vary across driving types at level 2 (i.e., 
slope variance; “RUN1VAR”). Binary indicators of 1 -month (“DriveType_1”) and 6 -month 
(“DriveType_2”) predicted both st andard -deviation of lane -position (“DV”) and the variation 
in the effect of specific “run” as a predictor of standard -deviation of lane -position 
(“RUN1VAR”) at level 2, and all four of those predictive effects (shown as “Dr1_DV”, 
“Dr2_DV”, “Dr1_Run1”, “Dr2 _Run1”) were allowed to vary across participants at level 3. 
Randomization (“TxGroup”) was entered as a level 3 predictor of all 5 sources of variance 
(“Run1Var”, “Dr1_DV”, “Dr2_DV”, “Dr1_Run1”, “Dr2_Run1”). Driving experience, a level 3 
covariate, was inc luded in the model as a predictor of standard -deviation of lane -position 
(“DV”) variance across participants. The standard -deviation of lane -position multiple 
imputation model is represented graphically in the figure below.  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 20 of 37 
   
Missing data for long -glances, a Poisson -distributed count response variable, could not be 
imputed with the same 3 -level model used to impute missing standard -deviation of lane -position 
data. Currently, there is no statistical analysis software package cap able of imputing missing 3 -level 
count response variable data. In fact, only Mplus (version 8.8) is capable imputing missing multilevel 
count data, but only under two conditions: 1.) the imputation model can have no more than two 
levels, and 2.) missing co unt of long -glances data can only be imputed with a fully conditional 
specification (or HA:) model. As such, the multiple imputation model used to handle missing long -
glance data is different from the imputation model used to handle missing standard -devia tion of 
lane -position data in two ways: 1.) a 2 -level imputation model, where long -glances variation in 
driving “runs” nested within post -baseline “drive types” constituted the level 1 model, and long -
glances variation across participants constituted the l evel 2 model, and 2.) all available analysis 
variable information (i.e., means, variances [where applicable], and covariances [where applicable]) 
at both levels was used to impute missing long -glances data.   
M = 100 imputed datasets were generated for all  multiple imputation models. Imputed  
standard -deviation of lane -position and long -glances primary outcomes data were analyzed using 
generalized estimating equations (GEE) allowing response variable data non -independence from 
“runs” nested within “drive ty pes” across participants to be modeled. Specifically, the standard -
deviation of lane -position GEE model was specified using a normal distribution assumption with an 
identity link function. The GEE for long -glances, a count variable, was modeled specifying a Poisson 
distribution and a natural logarithmic link function. All primary and secondary GEE analyses of 
imputed data pooled the estimates based on Rubin’s rules, and all standard errors were computed 
based on the average standard errors across imputation s and the parameter estimate variation 
across imputations (Rubin, 1987; Schafer, 1997).  
Secondary Analyses  
The two outcomes for the secondary analyses, off -road glances and crash/near crash were both 
measured on a binary scale. S ome participants did not h ave any events either due to the DriveCam 
not being installed in their car or they did not have any events. Such missing data was not imputed, 
and we conducted non intent -to-treat analysis using those participants with event data.  There was 
no missing dat a for the ‘crash/near crash’ secondary outcome across events for those with a 
DriveCam installed. The GEE analysis for the ‘crash/near crash’ outcome was performed using all 

Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 21 of 37 
 participants with DriveCam event data available. However, long glance data was mis sing for some 
events due to unforeseen circumstances (e.g., DriveCam view obstruction or participant driver was 
wearing sunglasses).  Missing data for the ‘long -glance’ outcome was imputed using GEE model -
based imputation. Specifically, a logistic link fun ction was used within a missing data imputation 
model that allowed the effect of random assignment to predict the presence (=1) or absence (=0) of 
long -glances nested within participants while controlling for months of driving experience and days 
DriveCam was operational in vehicle.  
 
8.5 Interim Analyses and Data Monitoring  
8.5.1 Purpose of Interim Analyses  
The only planned interim analysis involves safety monitoring of DriveCam incident data.  We will 
designate a researcher  (Stephen Becker, PhD)  independent of the present study who will be 
unblinded to treatment randomization. This researcher will examine the monthly report for events 
where trigger type = shock [indicative of a collision] and review those clips.  Clips containing a crash 
will be recorded and frequencies by treatment group will be examined. The purpose of these interim 
safety analyses is to ensure that the FOCAL+ training is not associated with a greater proportion of 
crashes.  If so, we will terminate the study.  
8.5.2 Planned Schedule o f Interim Analyses  
The safety monitoring will occur monthly  when we receive the event reports from Lytx.  
8.5.3 Stopping Rules  
Should participants in the FOCAL+ group experience disproportionately greater numbers of crashes, 
the independent researcher will inform  the PI to determine whether the study will need to end 
early.  
8.5.4 Analysis Methods to Minimize Bias  
Generalized estimating equations allow s data from driving simulation “runs” (2) within each of the 
three drive “types” (baseline, 1 -month, & 6 -month) for all p articipants to be modeled as correlated 
responses in analyses even though none of the potential effects for “runs” are of theoretical 
interest. Risk ratio effect sizes for secondary DriveCam response variables with 95% confidence 
intervals will be computed  based on GEE analysis results.  
8.5.5  Adjustment of Confidence Intervals and p -values  
Because we have  two primary endpoints (number of extended glances away from the roadway  and 
SDLP  during driving simulation) that are collected at 2 primary endpoints (1 -month post -training and 
6-months post -training), we have  4 statistical tests for our primary hypotheses. In order to control 
for potential Type 1 error, we will use a Bonferroni -corrected alpha of .0125 for testing stat istical 
significance.  
 
Confidence intervals for relative risk ratios effect sizes for the secondary DriveCam data analyses will 
be obtained based on GEE analysis results . Note that the widths of confidence intervals are not 
adjusted for multiple compariso ns and no definite conclusions can be drawn from these results . 
8.5.6 Interim Analysis for Sample Size Adjustment  
Our initial protocol included a plan to  randomize 136 participants; however, this randomization goal 
did not account for attrition at the 1 - and 6 -month driving simulations —the source of our primary 
endpoints.   We were unsure what our level of attrition would be, especially since our sample 
population was teens with ADHD who can have difficulty following through on commitments.  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 22 of 37 
 Hence, our plan was to  assess attrition when we reached our sample size of 136 to determine how 
many additional participants we would  need to recruit in order to account for attrition.  When we 
reached our sample size of 136, our calculation s suggested that we needed to over -recruit to a 
randomized sample size of 152 to achieve 136 participants with 1 - and 6 -month simulator outcomes 
(primary endpoints) (See 16 Summary of Changes to the Protocol and/or SAP ).  
8.5.7 Practical Measures to Minimize Bias  
To minimize bias, all investigators  will remain blinded to participant random assignment until all 
study measures are completed. The only interim analysis that will be performed concerns safety 
monitoring to ensure that the FOCAL+ intervention does not result in higher rates of crashes  (see 
section 8.5.1) . The person that will view these interim analyses is not a study investigator.  
8.5.8 Documentation of Interim Analyses  
Monthly, the designated safety reviewer will receive two tables for interim safety monitoring 
analyses: one summarizing the num ber of MVC  for each randomized group for that month and a 
second table summarizing the number of cumulative MVCs for each randomized group. Within each 
table we will specify the number of events with a shock value (i.e., indicative of a MVC ). See the 
templ ates below:  
 
Current Month :  November 2021  
Number of Motor Vehicle Accidents for Each Randomized Group  
 FOCAL+ (intervention)  Sham C ontrol  
Number of motor vehicle accidents    
 
Cumulative  
Number of Motor Vehicle Accidents for Each Randomized Group  
 FOCAL+ (intervention)  Sham C ontrol  
Number of motor vehicle accidents    
 
8.6 Multiple Testing  
See Section 8.4.5 for statistical adjustments for multiple testing.  
 
9  Summary of Study Data  
All continuous variables will be summarized using the following descriptive statistics: mean, standard 
deviation, median, maximum and minimum. The frequency and percentages of observed levels will 
be reported for all categorical measures. In general, all d ata will be listed, sorted by intervention 
group  and subject, and when appropriate by visit number within subject. All summary tables will be 
structured with a column for each treatment in the order ( Full Sample, FOCAL+ , Sham Control ) and 
will be annotated  with the total population size relevant to that table/treatment, including any 
missing observations.  
9.5 Subject Disposition  
Operational definitions used to establish how many subjects reached the various stages of the trial 
are listed below:  
 
1) Number Screened : Screening for the study will be defined as any contact between an 
interested individual who queries  about the study and is screened for potential eligibility as 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 23 of 37 
 described in 6.1 Recruitment. We will track the number of individuals who are screened for 
the study . 
2) Consent: Consent will occur during the first study visit (also known as Baseline/Diagnostic 
and Clinical Assessment).  
3) Number Eligible: Of those who consented to the study, the number who met all eligibility 
criteria and who showed up for the init ial training visit (when randomization occurred).  
4) Randomized: Randomization will occur at the second study visi t. A sealed envelope will 
contain the participant’s randomization  
5) Completed intervention/training visits 1 -5: Participants will be considered to  have 
completed the intervention/training visit if they complete at least  1 training.   
6) Completed study 1-month post -training follow -up: Participants will be considered to have 
completed the 1-month post -training follow -up visit if they complete at least on e of the two 
assessment drives.  
7) Completed study 6-month post -training follow -up: Participants will be considered to have 
completed the 6-month post -training follow -up visit if they complete at least one of the two 
assessment drives.  
8) Completed DriveCam  follow-up: Participants will be considered to have completed the 
DriveCam follow -up if we are able to obtain DriveCam data within the previously specified 
analysis time window (See 6.4 Study Assessments section).  
 
We will track  many subjects reached the variou s stages of the trial, how many dropped out and for 
what reasons (death, treatment failure, withdrew consent).   
 
Resolving multiple or ambiguous visit dates  
 
Research assistants will be trained to keep detailed logs of each study visit noting any deviations in 
the study visit protocol (e.g., visit rescheduled because teen took their stimulant medication). If 
there is any ambiguity arising from multiple sources of visit date,  we will examine research visit logs 
to understand the reason for multiple visits. Using this information, we will decide which visit data to 
use in final analyses . 
 
 
  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 24 of 37 
 Skeleton CONSORT flow diagram  
 
 
9.6 Derived variables  
 
 Participant Age : (moderator  for supplemental analyses). Age will be  measured in years 
(using decimals; range 16.00 -19.99)  and will be  calculated by subtracting the participant’s 
date of baseline visit from their date of birth  
 Stimulant medication status : dichotomized based  on whether the teen reported taking 
ADHD medication at any point during the 12 -months of naturalistic driving.  
9.7 Protocol Deviations  
All protocol deviations will be documented in accordance with IRB requirements in a ‘Protocol 
Deviation Log’. We will evalua te the deviation log at the end of the study and determine if any of the 
deviations require statistical consideration or adjustment.  
9.8 Demographic and Baseline Variables  
The data set will be summarized by treatment groups with respect to important confounder s. The 
distributions of categorical variables will be tabulated by treatment group and overall. Continuous 
variables will be summarized as mean, median, and standard deviation by treatment group and for 
the overall sample.  
 Age in years  
 Age at licensure  
 State of licensure  
 Gender  
 Race  
 Ethnicity (Latino/a; Not Latino/a; Unknown)  

Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 25 of 37 
  Maternal /Paternal  education  (highest level)  
 Family income  
 License Type (Graduated driver’s license; full unrestricted license)  
 Driving experience (calculated as months since licensed)  
 Full Scale IQ  
 Number on stimulant medication  at baseline  
 Number on stimulant medication during 1 -year of post -training driving  
 VAPRS  scores (Inattention, Hyperactivity/Impulsivity, and Total Score)  
 K-SADS  ODD diagnosis  
 K-SADS Anxiety Disorder diagnosis  
 K-SADS Mood Disorder diagnosis  
9.9 Concurrent Illnesses and Medical Conditions  
Relevant concurrent illnesses, medical conditions, and mental health diagnoses will be assessed as 
part of the screening and/or the Baseline /Diagnostic and Clinical Assessment. Rele vant concurrent 
illnesses, medical conditions and mental health diagnoses are below along with the methods for 
assessing them:  
 
Exclusionary concurrent illnesses, medical conditions, and mental health diagnoses:  
 
Concurrent Illness/Medical Condition/Mental  
Health Diagnosis  Time Point 
Assessed  Method of Assessment  
High -Risk Substance Use  Baseline  Simple Screening Instrument for Alcohol 
and Other Drugs (SSI -AOD)  score > 4 
History of moderate to severe head trauma  Screening  Self-report of having lost consciousness 
for over 30 minutes or having multiple 
instances of traumatic brain injury 
irrespective of severity  
 
Non -exclusionary concurrent illnesses, medical conditions, and mental health diagnoses:  
 
Concurrent Illness/Medical Condition/Mental 
Health Diagnosis  Time Point 
Assessed  Method of Assessment  
Comorbid mental health diagnosis (e.g., 
oppositional defiant disorder)  Baseline  Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders 
and Schizophrenia for School -Age 
Children -Present and Lifetime Version (K -
SADS -PL)—semi -structured interview with 
parent and teen  
History of head trauma not meeting criteria for 
moderate to severe head trauma  Screening  Self-report of head trauma that did not 
meet criteria for moderate to severe.  
Participants will be required to wait 30 
days after their head trauma before 
participating in the study, to allow 
sufficient time to pass that negative 
sequela do not develop.  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 26 of 37 
  
9.10 Treatment Compliance  
The number of treatment sessions attended will be used to assess treatment compliance.  
10 Efficacy  Analyses  
10.5 Primary Efficacy Analysis  
Generalized estimating equations (GEE) will be used to analyze the two primary endpoint driving 
simulator outcome measures: standard deviation of lane position and number of long off -road 
glances.  Missing data will be ha ndled as discussed above (8.4 Missing Data).  GEE with an 
independent correlation structure and accounting for clustering  within participants  will be  
conducted for each outcome. Group (FOCAL+ vs. Sham Control ), driving timepoint (baseline, 1 -
month post -training, 6 -months post -training), and the two relevant interaction terms: 1) Group x 
Timepoint (baseline vs. 1 -month) and 2) Group x Timepoint (baseline vs 6 -month) terms w ill be  
tested .  Standard deviation of lane position will be  analyzed as a continuous va riable assuming a 
normal distribution  with a identity  link function  and an independent  correlation matrix. Prior 
sensitivity analyses showed number of long off -road glances could be analyzed assuming a Poisson 
distribution with a natural logarithmic link function. Adjusted mean differences for between -group 
comparisons of standard deviation of lane position (a continuous variable) will be reported  by 
specifying a ‘multiple group’ option allowing for the two outcome measures to be predicted by 
months of driving experience separately for the two treatment groups in the same analysis. The 
result ing intercepts for the outcomes are, by definition, covariate adjusted means . Exponentiated 
incidence rate ratio for count of long glances during driving simulation  will be  computed and 
reported . Note that we will report the exponentiated incidence rate ra tio rather than adjusted mean 
difference for count of long glances because this is the statistic we have seen used for comparing 
two group counts ( Zou, 2004). Confidence intervals for both adjusted mean difference and 
exponentiated incidence rate ratios wi ll be computed.  
10.6 Secondary Efficacy Analyses  
All analyses of secondary endpoint DriveCam data will be analyzed using GEE. GEE analyses assuming 
a Poisson  distribution and natural logarithmic  link function will be  used to analyze individual 
DriveCam events per participant (random effect) and assess the relative risk of each dichotomous 
outcome (i.e., presence/absence of long -glance, crash/near crash per event). For these secondary 
analyses, relative risk ratios wit h 95% confidence intervals will be  computed rather than testing 
statistical significance  (Zou, 2004) . Note that the widths of confidence intervals will not be adjusted 
for multiple comparisons and no definite conclusions can be drawn from these results . 
11 Safety Analyses  
The PI (Epstein) will be responsible for detecting, documenting, and reporting events that meet the 
definition of an Adverse Event (AE) or Serious Adverse Event (SAE). Safety data will be tracked and 
reported as required by Clinical trials.gov . Three tables summarizing adverse events will be created : 
● All-Cause Mortality: A table of all deaths due to any cause, with number and frequency of 
such events in each arm/group of the clinical study.  
 
● Serious Adverse Events: A table of all serious advers e events  with number and frequency of 
such events in each arm/group of the clinical study.  See Serious Adverse Events definition 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 27 of 37 
 below.  
 
● Other (Not Including Serious) Adverse Events: A table of events within any arm of the clinical 
study  with number and frequency of such events in each arm/group of the clinical study.  See 
Adverse Events definition below . 
 
These events will be analyzed and reported for All Randomized Study Participants and by treatment 
group at the end of the study period. The only SAE tha t will be analyzed in the interim is  events with 
a shock value (i.e., indicating a collision)  as recorded by DriveCam technology (See 8.5 Interim 
Analyses for more information).  
11.5 Adverse Events  
 
Anticipated  AE and possible precautions and responses to thes e events  include:  
1) Discomfort caused by completion of survey questions.  Most questions and measures used 
in the study are standard for medical or psychological evaluations and therefore have 
minimal risk associated with them. These questions may address iss ues of family psychiatric 
history, parental relationships, significant depression/self -harm, and family substance abuse. 
Participants and parents are free not to answer any questions to which they object. Also,  
teens with ADHD may experience frustration wh en completing cognitive and 
neuropsychological tasks if the testing lasts longer than their attention span or if they are 
being asked to complete items that are challenging for them. Our evaluators have clinical 
expertise in evaluating teens with ADHD and if teens are exhibiting fatigue or frustration, 
families will be given the option of stopping the assessments and returning at another time 
to complete them.  
2) Identification of high -risk substance use.  If a 16- or 17 -year -old is excluded because of their 
score on the SSI -AOD indicating that they are at risk for substance abuse, we will follow 
these steps:  
1. A clinician will meet with the 16- or 17 -year -old child and provide them with 
resources for substance use assessment and treatment in the community so that 
they may seek help. We will give the teen the opportunity to insert the information 
into their phone or have the information emailed to their private  email in order that 
this remains private health information. The family will be informed that the 
research staff has determined that the teen does not meet our inclusion/exclusion 
criteria with no specifics about which criteria were not fulfilled.  
2. Furt her, the SSI -AOD will be checked to see if the 16- or 17 -year -old responded 
affirmatively to critical items on the SSI -AOD reflecting that the teen's substance use 
may be putting him/her or others at risk for significant harm ("been injured after 
drinking or using", "been arrested or had other legal problems (such as driving while 
intoxicated)", or "When drinking or using drugs, are you more likely to do something 
you wouldn’t normally do, such as break rules, break law, sell things that are 
important to yo u, or have unprotected sex with someone?"). If so, a clinician will 
meet with the 16- or 17 -year -old to further interview the teen about these items 
and make a clinical determination if the child is at risk of significant harm to self or 
others. If so, the  parents of the minor will be notified of the issue and the family will 
be given resources for substance use assessment and treatment in the community.  
3. The SSI -AOD substance use measure will also be collected at the 6 -month 
assessment point.  If the tee n has a score of 4 or more indicating “Moderate to high 
substance use and possible need for further assessment”, a clinician will meet with 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 28 of 37 
 the 16- or 17 -year -old child and provide them with resources for substance use 
assessment and treatment in the commu nity so that they may seek help. We will 
give the teen the opportunity to insert the information into their phone or have the 
information emailed to their private email in order that this remains private health 
information.  
 
At the 12 -month timepoint, we w ill again collect the SSI -AOD but since there is no in -clinic 
visit, the SSI -AOD will be collected via REDCap survey.  The REDCap survey will be 
programmed so that if the teen has a score of 4 or more indicating “Moderate to high 
substance use and possible  need for further assessment”, the teen will be presented with 
text indicating that they have scored in the problematic range and providing them with 
resources for substance use assessment and treatment in the community so that they may 
seek help.  
3) Simulato r sickness including nausea and headache.  The simulator tasks may elicit a mild 
stress response. When participants are instructed to engage in a secondary task, drivers may 
experience  feelings of annoyance, and participants may experience minor muscle fati gue 
due to the length of driving time. There is a slight risk that participants may experience 
nausea from the simulator. In order to limit motion sickness from the simulator, there will 
be a fan providing air flow in the simulator room, and all participan ts will be provided with a 
SeaBand which is worn around the subject’s wrist and uses acupressure to reduce nausea 
and motion sickness. Also, we have limited training driving sessions to 5 -minute lengths with 
breaks in between in order to reduce risks of mo tion sickness.  
4) Negative impact of medication wash -out on teen driving . Teen participants who take 
medication for ADHD will be asked to refrain from taking their medication on the days of 
simulator driving assessments. Parents will be informed of the risks  associated with this (i.e., 
driving safety, school performance, job performance, etc.). In order to limit the risk 
associated with a medication washout, both the teen and parent will be advised verbally and 
in writing that the teen is not to drive to the study appointments and  must be driven by the 
parent. In addition, the study coordinator will make a reminder phone call prior to the 
driving assessment. During this call, the coordinator will remind parents and teens that 
parents are to drive un -medicated teens to their appointment. Participants are free to 
resume medication immediately following the study visits.  
5) Breach of confidentiality.  The potential for a breach in confidentiality always exists, 
specifically with the written research data and study dat abases. Study procedures have been 
designed to protect the privacy and confidentiality of the research participants. Throughout 
the study, all data, including that collected during the screening and recruitment phase will 
only be identified by a unique ide ntification number and participant code using letters and 
numbers to protect against invasion of privacy. The data will be blinded correspondingly in 
all data analyses. Only authorized staff will have access to participant information. All study 
informatio n containing identifying information will be stored separately from the study data 
and will be stored in a locked filing cabinet. Binders with identifying information (e.g., 
consent forms) will be maintained separately from the evaluation, assessment and o utcome 
data. All data will be entered into an electronic database for storage and analysis. 
Information will be entered into computers by participant number, not name, in order to 
protect the identity of the participants and their parents. No personal iden tifying 
information will be used in conjunction with the electronic form of the generated data. The 
database will be accessible by password only by project personnel. Research papers will be 
based on analyses of group data with no identifying information a bout any participant used 
in these reports. For students who complete the Qualtrics Survey via the SONA system, all 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 29 of 37 
 electronic data will be kept on password -protected computers and protected by a firewall. 
Only the researchers will have access to the data.  
6) Incriminating DriveCam recordings.  Driving will be assessed using an in -car video recorder 
(DriveCam) which will be installed in the identified “teen car.”  There is a risk that the video 
recordings could capture video that could be used to incriminate th e driver of the car and/or 
another driver in terms of driving behavior or other illegal behavior. We have obtained a 
federal Certificate of Confidentiality in order to protect video recorded driving information 
collected with DriveCam monitoring. All teen drivers will be consented in order to be 
protected by the Certificate of Confidentiality. Moreover, parents will be told during consent 
that we will not be sharing the recorded video footage with anyone. If the teen or parent(s) 
later request to view the f ootage (e.g., following a driving incident or MVC ), the study staff 
will review the footage and provide the family with a summary of incident -related 
information visible in the recorded footage (e.g., number of passengers present, driver 
engagement in anot her task, etc.). If the family further presses to view the driving footage, 
the PI will contact the family to discuss Certificate of Confidentiality stipulations prior to 
releasing any footage information. Additionally, families will be explicitly told tha t video 
recordings collected using an in -car video recorder (DriveCam) will be collected on anyone 
driving the identified “teen car”. Moreover, an information card will be provided each family 
to keep in the car so that anyone who drives the car or is a pa ssenger in the car is aware that 
they will be video recorded. However, research staff will immediately destroy all video in 
which the teen participant is not the driver. Further, families will be informed that all video 
recordings will be destroyed immedia tely after the study period.  
7) MVC involvement.  Please see 8.5 Interim Analyses for information regarding safety 
monitoring.  
 
Unanticipated AE: An adverse event whose nature, severity or frequency is inconsistent with the 
underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the subject, and is not identified in the informed 
consent document.  
11.6 Deaths, Serious Adverse Events and other Significant Adverse Events  
A serious adverse event (SAE) is defined as any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: 
results in d eath, is life threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization, results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity or is a congenital 
anomaly/birth defect . 
 
Expected SAE and responses to these events inclu de: 
1) Disclosure of intent to self -harm or harm others  and/or disclosure of child abuse . Teens 
will also be questioned about depression/self -harm on the K -SADS -PL interview. Consistent 
with procedures established in several ongoing studies at the Center for ADHD, we will 
follow a formal process to identify, document, and manage risky behaviors. All K-SADS -PL 
interviewers will be responsible for identifying and reporting whether the teen is 
experiencing suicidal ideation or is currently being abused/neglected.  If any risk is identified 
during the K-SADS -PL interview, the interviewer will page the PI or other co -Is to discuss the 
situation and determine what additional information is necessary to ascertain risk and 
engage in safety planning, including considering hospitalization, CPS reporting, etc. Teens 
will be notified at the beginning of the interview (and in the assent form) that anything they 
discuss during the interview will be kept confidential except if they report any behaviors that 
place themselves at risk; in those cases, their parents will be info rmed on the day of the 
interview and will be part of safety planning. A critical items checklist will be completed 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 30 of 37 
 immediately after the interview.   Any safety plans will be documented on the critical items 
checklist.  
11.7 Prior and Concurrent Medications  
A medication interview conducted with the teen and parent that captures current prescribed 
medication usage and past prescribed medication usage for attention, learning, emotional, or 
behavioral difficulties since driving. This questionnaire will be administe red during the in -person 
visits at Baseline and 6 -months.  In addition, this questionnaire will be sent as a REDCap survey for 
teens to complete at the 12 -month time point .  
 
The summary statistics for who was taking stimulant medication at baseline and du ring the 1 -year of 
naturalistic driving  for the whole sample and separately for each intervention will be produced.  
12 Reporting Conventions  
P-values ≥0.001 will be reported to 3 decimal places; p -values less than 0.001 will be reported as 
“<0.001”.  
13  Quality Assurance of Statistical Programming  
All primary analyses w ill be  performed in SPSS (version 27) and SAS (version 9.4) using the 
generalized linear model function. All secondary analyses will be performed using Mplus (version 
8.8) and SAS (version  9.4) on a Windows operating system.  All analyses w ill be  performed by James 
Peugh, Ph.D.  All analyses code and results will be double -checked by Jeff Epstein, Ph.D.  
14 Summary of Changes to the Protocol and/or SAP  
The changes from the protocol -specified definitions of aims, outcomes and statistical analytic 
approaches are outlined below. Changes to the study procedures are  also included here. These 
changes reflect 1) budget cuts that impacted our study design and 2)  advances in our knowledge and 
experience with research methods in recruiting adolescents with ADHD, driving, and human factors.  
 
14.5 Aims Changes  
None.  
 
14.6 Outcomes Changes  
5/9/2016  
1) No longer collecting and coding randomly selected clips from low threshold event s 
collected from DriveCam technology . Initially, we were informed that the DriveCam would 
have a “canary” feature that would randomly record events irrespective of the g -force 
thresholds.  These events would allow us to assess eye -glance behavior that was not tied to 
g-force events.  The “canary” feature did not work with the DriveCams we purchased.  
Hence, we set the threshold for g -force events at a lower level (i.e., >.45 g -force) than the 
planned >.6 g -force threshold that would be used for defining eve nts. However, this lower 
threshold began to produce so many events among our randomized participants that our 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 31 of 37 
 servers could not keep up with the number of videos produced.  M oreover, the coding 
demand was too great and unmanageable. It was decided by the r esearch team on 3/26/19 
to modify the g -force thresholds back to >.6 g -force and to only save and code those events.  
6/1/2016  
1) We received our notice of grant award for grant #R01HD084430. The proposed budget was 
cut by approximately 17%.  We need ed to modify the scope of some of the proposed work 
to accommodate the 17% budget reduction.  The following outcomes and assessment 
changes were approved by our NICHD program officer:  
a. Due to the reductions in effort to the investigators and staff and to redu ce subject 
payment costs, we reduced the number of outcome assessments we had originally 
proposed.  The original application proposed collection of baseline, 1 -month, 4 -
month, 8 -month, and 1 -year post -randomization assessments.  We now propose to 
conduct in-person assessments at baseline, 1 -month, and 6 -month post -training .   
b. We also made changes to the types of assessments we will include in the study. We 
will no longer include a road -test assessment. Excluding the road test still allows us 
to assess drivi ng performance using our remaining three driving measures.  That is, 
use of driving simulation, DriveCam monitoring , and driving records will allow us to 
assess teen’s driving behavior. Hence, we feel that even in the absence of the road 
test, we will cont inue to possess the scope of driving assessment necessary to detect 
between -group differences on driving outcomes.   
c. Due to the cost, the  MEMSCap Medication Event Monitoring System  was dropped 
from the study protocol. We replaced daily monitoring of ADHD me dication use 
using self-reported measure of medication administered at baseline and each 
follow -up visit.  
10/30/2019  
1)  Increase in sample size based on attrition for 6 -month driving simulator visit. Our initial 
protocol proposed to randomize 136 participants; however, this randomization goal was 
based on successfully collected data from  136 at the  1- and 6 -month driving simulations —
the source of our primary endpoints.  When  we reached 136 recruited  participants , we have 
estimated a new attrition rate based on data collected thus far. This calculation suggests 
that we need to over -recruit to a randomized sample size of 152 to achieve 136 participants 
with 1 - and 6 -month simulator outcomes (primary endpo ints).   
 
1/11/21  
1) BMV records no longer an outcome of interest.  Once all BMV records were collected, we 
examined  the frequency of BMV -reported MVCs .  We also compared these rates to the 
frequency of behaviorally coded MVCs captured by DriveCam technology .  The frequency of 
MVCs according to BMV records was 19 total MVCs across the entire sample over the course 
of 1-year of driving.  According to DriveCam codings of collisions, there were >100 crashes 
across the entire sample over the course of 1 -year of d riving.  Thus, the  research team 
decided that BMV crashes were not an accurate outcome measure and therefore it would 
no longer be used as an outcome measure.  
14.7 Statistical Changes  
6/1/2016  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 32 of 37 
 1) Changes were made to the protocol to reduce the budget with one havin g implications for 
the statistical analysis (See Protocol Changes 6/1/2016). Specifically,  the MEMSCap 
Medication Event Monitoring System would have allowed us to continuously track daily use 
of medications during the study period. This measurement of medi cation was being replaced 
with an administration of self -reported measure of medication use. This measure asks about 
medication use over the 6 months rather than daily use. Thus, we cannot meaningfully 
include medication status as a time -varying covariate in analyses as originally intended.  
12/1/2016  
1) Changes were made to the protocol to address subject burden which caused us to 
reconsider the statistical approach (See Protocol Changes 12/1/2016).   In particular, rather 
than having a single 30 -minute run of driving simulator data, we had two 15 -minute 
runs.   We made a decision to compute driving simulation outcomes for each run and then 
include run in the model.   Hence, run would be nested within assessment time point 
(baseline, 1 -month, & 6 -month) and would create a double repeated measure (i.e., 2 driving 
“runs” nested within 3 repeated measurements).   Generalized linear equations (GEE) handle 
double repeated measure data better than the originally proposed ANCOVA analysis.   In 
addition, GEE models a) provid e a more stringent test of significance; b) are more amenable 
to analyzing binary and count outcomes; c) and use a long database format which allows us 
flexibility in handling  missing data.  Hence, we modified our statistical approach to use GEE 
rather than  ANCOVA models.  
 
Further, statistical models for examining intervention effects on DriveCam outcomes were 
modified to allow us to use multilevel mixed longitudinal linear models. Specifically, each 
participant will have repeated measures response variable data collected ov er time (i.e., 
level 1), and within each participant, these responses are not independent but correlated. 
However, the interest is between -participant variation (level 2) as explained by random 
assignment. This means within -participant (level-1) variation is not of interest to answering 
the treatment effect research question, but such variation must be either modeled or 
controlled appropriately to avoid Type -1 inferential errors. To do so, participant will be 
declared as the level 2 clustering variable, and  specific commands in Mplus (‘ Type = 
Complex’) will be used to: 1) estimate the intra -class correlation (ICC), which quantifies the 
non-independence of response variable data, 2) compute the design effect (= C -1 * ICC), 
which is the multiplier needed to b e applied to standard error estimates to avoid Type -1 
errors, and 3) test the effect of randomization on binary indicators of crash/near -crashes 
(1=yes, 0=no) and presence of 2 -second off -road glances (1=yes, 0=no). Further, it is well -
known that analytic techniques such as ‘Type=Complex;’ will only accurately correct 
parameter estimate standard errors if the number of clusters at level 2 is greater than 20. By 
declaring participant as the level 2 clustering unit, and N (or, in this case, C), which is more 
than sufficient to accurately correct standard errors to obtain an accurate treatment effect 
estimate.  
 
06/23/2022  
The following statistical changes were made based on New England Journal of Medicine reviewer, 
statistical expert, and editor feedback.  
1)  Changes to primary analyses.  
a. Reporting adjusted mean differences for Standard Deviation of Lane Position . Reviewers 
noted that we should report adjusted mean differences  rather than raw mean differences  
for standard deviation of lane position at 1-month and 6 -months post -training .  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 33 of 37 
 b. Reporting exponentiated incidence rate ratio for comparing group differences in eye 
glance data. We now report exponentiated incidence risk ratio for count of long glances 
during driving simulation.  We computed an exponentiated incidence rate ratio which is the 
appropriate statistic for comparing two counts .   
c. Change in correction for type I error. We initially proposed to use false discovery rate  to 
control for type I error. However, the statistical expert revie wer indicated that Bonferroni 
corrected alpha is more a more appropriate  type I error control in confirmatory studies of a 
small number of pre -specified hypotheses. Accordingly, we used a Bonferroni corrected 
alpha threshold of 0.0125 for assessing statist ical significance of the four  primary outcome 
measures at 1 -month and 6 -months.  
d. Change in covariate . Rather than use years since licensure as a covariate, we  now use 
months of driving experience instead of years of experience in all our analyses . 
e. Change in handling of missing data . Multiple imputation was used (See 8.4 Missing Data 
for more details) to handle missing data rather than maximum likelihood estimation.  
2) Addition of  supplemental analyses.  
 a. Sensitivity analysis of naturalistic driving results including only teens whose 1 -year of 
naturalistic driving ended prior to COVID restrictions. Of the 152 participants,  56 (FOCAL+: 
n=29 teens; Sham Control : n=27 teens)  participants had a portion of  their  1-year of 
naturalistic driving that included  days beyond March 15, 2020 , when COVID restrictions 
were put into place.  We conducted a sensitivity analysis of our naturalistic driving results 
including only the 96 teens (FOCAL+ n=47; Sham Control  n=49) whos e 1-year of naturalistic 
driving ended prior to COVID restrictions.   
b. Moderator analyses . We ran a moderator analysis examining age and medication status 
as moderator s of FOCAL+ training effects. For the driving simulation outcomes, we examined 
whether the improvements from baseline to 1 -month post -training and baseline to 6 -
months post -training were moderated by baseline age or medication status. We ran GEE 
models like those conducted for the prim ary analyses as described in 10.1 Primary Analysis , 
however we inserted the moderator variable in the model, analyzed a fully factorially 
crossed 4 -way interaction model, but assessed the significance of the relevant 3 -way 
interactions (Group x Drive Timep oint: baseline vs. 1 -month; baseline vs. 6 -months x 
[Moderator Variable]).  For DriveCam outcomes, we examined whether group differences on 
long glances and crash/near -crashes were moderated by baseline age or medication status.  
We ran multi -level general ized linear mixed models with a logit link function similar to those 
conducted for the secondary analyses as reported in the manuscript, however we inserted 
the moderator variable in the model and assessed the significance of the 2 -way interaction 
between Group x [Moderator Variable].  
  
08/15/2022  
The following statistical changes were made based on New England Journal of Medicine statistical 
expert and editor feedback.  
1) Supplemental  analyses were trimmed to analyses for which we could provide a strong 
rationale. Specifically, we will only report moderation analysis of the medication on training 
outcomes  and COVID -19 sensitivity analyses.  
a. Medication Moderation .  For the driving simulation outcomes, we examined whether the 
improvements from baseline to 1 -month post -training and baseline to 6 -months post -training 
were moderated by medication status. These analyses were not intent -to-treat since only the 
140 teens fo r whom we had information about medication status during the 1 year of follow -up 
were included in these analyses. Adjusted mean differences for standard -deviation of lane -
position and natural logarithmic incident rate ratios for count of long glances were computed 
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 34 of 37 
 using multiple group analysis methods. Specifically, conditional on months of driving experience, 
training group difference statistics were computed separately across binary medication status.  
For DriveCam outcomes, relative risk statistics for bi nary indicators of long glances and 
crash/near crash were computed conditional on both months of driving experience and days of 
DriveCam installation. Specifically, relative risk statistics were computed separately across binary 
medication status  
b. COVID -19 Sensitivity.  For 56 (FOCAL+: n=29 teens; Control: n=27 teens) of the 152 
participants, their 1 -year of naturalistic driving included  days beyond March 15, 2020 when 
COVID restrictions were put into place. We conducted a sensitivity analyses of our natur alistic 
driving results by re -running our primary and secondary analyses but including only the 96 teens 
(FOCAL+ n=47; Control n=49) whose 1 -year of naturalistic driving ended prior to COVID 
restrictions.   
 
14.8 Protocol Changes  
12/1/2016  
1) While creating the driving simulation protocols and piloting with our staff, we realized that 
having  participants complete a continuous 30 -minute simulated drive for the simulated 
assessment drives completed at baseline, 1 -month, and 6 -month time  points was too long 
and migh t increase risk of motion sickness in our participants.  Hence, we made a decision to 
break the 30 -minute assessment drive into 2 15 -minute drives with a short break between 
the drives.  
3/09/2017  
1) Modifying recruitment procedures to also include recruitment  from the SONA system (the 
psychology research participation system).  Plan is to allow students to do initial screening 
via SONA for course credit (15 minutes) and, for those that appear to qualify, to provide 
additional information regarding the study an d ask them if they are interested in being 
contacted regarding participation in the larger study.  
3/21/2017  
1) Revised recruitment language to indicate that recruitment will be broader than the ADHD 
registry and will include a more general query of  hospital e lectronic medical records.  
10/16/2017  
1) Added section regarding protocol -specific definition of adverse events for this study within 
“Potential risks, discomforts, inconveniences, and precautions” section.  
11/27/2017  
1) Added a section about  using the company  Truventis  for recruitment  in “Research Participant 
Recruitment.”  
3/23/2018  
1) Added Fusi on Media to be used as a recruitment service.  
2) Added that a REDCap e -screener will be used when recruiting through recruitment services.  
3) Clarified how participants and thei r parents will sign for consent/assent in the “Obtaining 
Informed Consent”.  
4) Clarified requirements for successfully completing training drives in “Description of 
Intervention Groups and Control Group” and “Study Measures”.  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 35 of 37 
 5) Changed DriveCam g -force threshold to accurately reflect current study procedures.  
6) Clarified what DriveCam footage is able to be shared with participant families in order to 
maintain the Certificate of Confidentiality.  
10/10/2018  
1) Letters sent from the Ce nter for ADHD may include an opt out option such that families sent 
letters will send in a post -card opting out from further contact or opting to be contacted on 
a future date.  
2) Modified protocol language to state that the 5 trainings will be completed in 5 sessions 
scheduled approximately 1 week apart rather than within 5 consecutive weeks to reflect our 
efforts to better accommodate participant schedules.  
3/19/2020  
1) Revised protocol to state data safety and monitoring procedures related to coding DriveCam 
videos remotely during the period of COVID -19 restrictions.  
11/17/2020  
1) Edited the protocol to indicate that the DriveCam may stay in teens ’ car beyond one year. 
This is to account for the fact that some teens have not yet scheduled a de -installation visit,  
and that we postponed scheduling both install and de -install visits during the shelter in place 
order related to the COVID pandemic.  
Study Documentation Changes  
1/23/2017  
1) Added risks related to the DriveCam installation/de -installation to study risks port ion of 
consent/assent forms due to previous participant experiencing these risks in the study.  
2) Added that the DriveCam contains a GPS but that we would not access these data on the 
consent/assent form.  
2/28/2017  
1) Revised Teen Driving History Questionnaire  to reflect accurate licensure requirements.  
2) Revised compensation in flyer text, recruitment letter, and web text.  
3) Revised recruitment contact form to include field stating that the teen would be willing to 
come off medication for days of visits, as stat ed in the protocol.   
4) Revised recruitment phone script to include new compensation amount and include 
question to clarify that the teen would need to come off their medication for days of visits, 
as stated in the protocol.  
5) Revised Clinic Recruitment Letter  to include additional study opportunity.  
3/09/2017  
1) Revised adult consent and parent permission form to clarify the section “ WHAT IF WE LEARN 
NEW INFORMATION DURING THE RESEARCH?” with reasons a participant might be excluded 
from the study.  
2) Added materials  related to Qualitrics survey (recruitment description, recruitment 
statement, survey questions, and debriefing script).  
3) Modified recruitment script and phone contact form to include questions regarding 
traumatic brain injury.  
3/21/2017  
1) Uploaded a general recruitment letter for use with EPIC query.  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 36 of 37 
 3/23/2018  
1) Consent form change: Removed “Your child’s medical problem remains unchanged or 
becomes worse” from the “What If We Learn New Information During the Research” section 
as it is not applicable to the stud y. 
2) Parental permission form change: Removed “Your child’s medical problem remains 
unchanged or becomes worse” from the “What If We Learn New Information During the 
Research” section as it is not applicable to the study.  
8/08/2018  
1) Added a statement in “Faci lities” about sharing data with co -investigators at institutions 
other than CCHMC to be consistent with the language in our consent forms.   
10/10/2018  
1) Modified recruitment letter to include a postcard with delayed communication or opt -out 
options.  
 
Smartform Changes  
1/23/2017  
1) Edited the second field of recruitment in the Plan of Informed Consent, Assent, and Parental 
Permission tab to include that we will be using recruitment services. Participants will be able 
to find information about our study thr ough search engines (e.g., Google, Bing, and Yahoo) 
and social community pages (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest).  
2/28/2017  
1) Edited the second field of recruitment in the Plan of Informed Consent, Assent, and Parental 
Permission tab to include that we will be using other media platforms (e.g., Radio and/or 
Television) for recruitment. Any information that is presented in these advertisements will 
be IRB approved. If changes to previously IRB approved scripts are needed, we will re -submit 
all changes pri or to posting.  
Recruitment Materials  
11/27/2017  
1) Due to recent lull in recruitment numbers, we plan to use Truventis, a recruitment service 
that recruits through social media platforms. For this, Truventis has created recruitment 
materials to display on the se platforms.  
 
3/12/2019  
1) Added radio ad campaign as a recruitment method in protocol.  
2) Added digital flyer to be used with internet radio ad (e.g., Pandora).  
15  References  
Abikoff , H. (2009 ). ADHD psychosocial treatments: generalization reconsidered. Journa l of Attention 
Disorders , 13(3), 207-210.  
American Psychiatric Association. (2013).  Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders  (5th 
ed.). https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890 425596  
Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD  
SAP: Trial of Training to Reduce Driver Inattention in Teens with ADHD                                             September 20, 2022   
Page 37 of 37 
 Barkley , R.A. (1997).  Attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder, self -regulation, and time: toward a 
more comprehensive theory. Journal of Developmental Behavioral Pediatrics , 18(4), 271-279.  
Dingus, T.A., Klauer, S.G., Neale, V.L., Peterson, A. Lee, S.E., Sudweeks, J.,...Knipling, R.R. (2006). The 
100-Car Naturalistic Driving Study, Phase II --Results of the 100 -Car Field Experiment. (Report No. 
DOT HS 810 593). National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). 
https://www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.gov/files/100carmain.pdf  
Enders, C. K. (2010).  Applied missing data analysis . New York: Guilford Press.  
Gable, T. M., & Walker, B. N. (2013).  Georgia tech simulator sickness screening protocol . Georgia 
Institute of Technology.   
Guo, F., Klauer , S.G., Hankey , J.M., & Dingus , T.A. (2010).  Near crashes as crash surrogate for 
naturalistic driving studies. Transportation Research Record , 2147 , 66-74. 
Kaufman , J., Birmaher , B., Brent , D., et al.  (1997).  Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia 
for School -Age Children -Present and Lifetime Version (K -SADS -PL): initial reliability and validity data. 
Journal of Americ an Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry , 36, 980-8. 
Kaufman, A. S., & Kaufman, N. L. (2004 ). Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test  (2nd ed.). Circle Pines, MN: 
American Guidance Service.  
Kennedy, R. S., Lane, N. E., Berbaum, K. S., & Lilienthal, M. G. (1993) . Simulator sickness 
questionnaire: An enhanced method for quantifying simulator sickness.  The International Journal of 
Aviation Psychology , 3(3), 203 -220.  
Muthén, L.K. and Muthén, B.O. (1998 -2017). Mplus User’s Guide. (8th ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Muthén 
& Muthén  
Nichols, J. Q. V. A. (2012). Human factors and driving behaviors differentiating high risk and low risk 
drivers with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder [dissertation].  Charlottesville, VA: University of 
Virginia .  
Owens , K. & Ramaekers , J.G. (2009 ). Drugs, driving, and models to measure driving impairment. In: 
Verster JC, ed. Drugs, Driving, and Traffic Safety . Basel, Switzerland: Birkhauser Verlag AG:43 -58 
Wolraich ML, Lambert W, Doffing MA, Bickman L, Simmons T,  & Worley K.  (2003).  Psychometr ic 
properties of the Vanderbilt ADHD diagnostic parent rating scale in a referred population. Journal of  
Pediatr ic Psychol ogy, 28(8), 559-567.  
Williams , A.F. (2003).  Teenage drivers: patterns of risk. Journal of Safety Research , 34(1), 5-15. 
Winters, K.  & Zenilman, J. (1994). Simple screening instrument for outreach for alcohol and other 
drug abuse and infectious diseases (Vol. 11, Publication No. (SMA) 02 -3683). Rockville, MD: Center 
for Substance Abuse Treatment: US Department of Health and Human Service s (SAMHSA).  
 
Zou G. A modified Poisson regression approach to prospective studies with binary data. American 
Journal of Epidemiology . 2004;159(7):702 -6) 