High School SUCCESS: Vocational Soft Skills Program for Transition- Age ASD Youth 
NIH_NOA_5R34MH111491  
6/15/21  
STUDY PROTOCOL  WITH SAP  
 
RESEARCH AIMS:  
By utilizing research- community partnership methods, we have worked in collaboration with the 
community through our part nership of researchers, providers , educators  and consumers ( Active 
Collaborative Hub for I ndividuals with ASD to E nhance Vocation and Education-  ACHI EVE) to 
develop a cognitive training intervention for  adults that adapted evidenced -based interventions 
for schizophrenia and traumatic brain injury . The original SUCCESS program was designed for 
adults within supported employment community programs. This  proposal capitalizes on this 
existing work, using the already established and highly productive ACHIEVE group and current 
resources , to adapt the SU CCESS curriculum for HS /transition programs.  
AIM:  With our ACHIEVE partners , develop the High School Supported, Comprehensive 
Cognitive Enhancement and Social Skills (SUCCE SS) pr ogram to fit the needs of 
transition -age youth with ASD within the community educational system.  
  a. Standardize the High School SUCCESS program by developing a facilitator manual, 
student workbook and corresponding support person materials . 
  b. Develop a training protocol that can be individualized and implemented within the HS 
educational  system to provide initial training and ongoing coaching for educators  to reach and 
sustain intervention fidelity.  
AIM:  Conduct a pilot study to examine the feasibility, acceptability, and implementation 
procedures (recruitment, randomization, retent ion & training strategies) of TAY 
SUCCESS and to obtain estimates of effects  to support a future large -scale effectiveness 
trial.  
 a. Examine intervention feasibility, acceptability, satisfaction, and sustainability.  
  b. Examine preliminary individual outcomes ( executive functioning and social cognitive 
skill development ). 
 
Research Design  
Through a randomized clinical trial (RCT ) thirty-two eligible TAY with ASD involved i n High 
School (HS) diploma track (n= 2 ) or Transition P rogram  (TP) (n= 2) participate d and received 
TAY SUC CESS  (intervention group, INT)  (n=16) or usual care programming (UC ) only (n= 16). 
Due to possible meaningful differences across these programs  it was  necessary to pilot test in 
both program types.  Randomization took place at the school site level. A total of 4  school sites 
participat ed: 2 HS diploma  (1 randomized to UC and 1 to INT)  and 2 Transiti on (1 randomized 
to UC and 1  to INT) with  8 students e nrolled in each group totaling 32 students (and parents) . 
Staff and eligible students at each school  site were recruited to participate. Both groups  
received  all other ty pical supports offered at the school  by school staff. The INT group receive d 
the TAY SUCCESS curriculum weekly, following the manualized program. Sessions w ere 
delivered sequentially but individualized to allow for  review and repeating any  content  as 
needed for comprehension.  
Participants  
Parent/caregivers  were consented as participants and provided  permission for students < 18 
years or for those adults with a conservatorship in place. Child s tudent assent (<18 yrs) and 
adult  student  consent (≥18 yrs) w as obtained.  Student enrollment will continue until 5 students 
per site participate.  Inclusion/exclusion Criteria : Students w ere English speaking (1 5-22 years)  
with ASD diagnoses that have at least 1 year remaining in the school  program . (A standardized 
ASD diagnostic assessment conducted at baseline (ADOS -2) confirm ed ASD). Students were 
intellectually abl e with assessed and reported cognitive abi lity (≥ 7 5 IQ score  in more than one 
subtest assessed by WASI ) and ability to read. Student /parents w ere compensated $100 per 
famil y. 
 
Statistical Analyses Plan  
To examine the intervention effect for each measure between the intervention group and the 
control group and to control for variations at initial performances of two groups, we conducted 
the analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) by controlling for baseline scores. For the ANCOVA, the 
data met assumptions of homogeneity of regression and equality of error variances. Because 
this study assessed the potential value of the intervention with a small community sample, the 
Type I error rate was not adjusted for the numb er of comparisons and was kept at p < .05 level 
for each comparison. Effect size for the ANCOVA was assessed by partial η2 in which medium 
(>.06) and large (>.14) effects were considered clinically meaningful. Furthermore, in each 
condition group, within- group effect sizes (Cohen’s d) were calculated for all scores using the 
paired- sample t -test. 