VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
1 Title: Clin
ical safety and efficacy of pharmacogenetics in Veteran care  
Principal Investigator: Jason L. Vassy 
(1)Rationale
(a) Statement of the Problem.
There i s
 great hope that precision medicine will improve patien t outcomes in a variety of clinical settings. In 
particular, pha rmacogenetics may be one  of the first areas wher e genomic information finds widespread clinical 
utility. The goal of phar macogenetics is to improve the risk-be nefit ratio of pharmacotherapy. That is, many 
believe that using genotype t o tailor drug cho ice and dose will  improve efficacy and mini mize adverse effects. 
In fact, large health networks such as the Mayo Clinic and Geis inger Health System are already implementing 
pharmacogenetic testing and presc ription decision support in th eir electronic healt h records (EHRs) for patient 
care. The VA currently uses pharmacogenetic testing in a limite d number of specialize d clinical settings. It 
unknown how the int roduction of pharm acogenetic testing for a m edication used commonly across VA might 
impact clinical outcomes within the health system. 
(b) Hypotheses or Key Question.
This randomized-con trolled 
trial (RCT), also refe rred to as the  Integrating Pharmacogenetics In Clinical Care 
(I-PICC) Study, will determine th e impact of the  clinical integ ration of testing for a well-characterized 
pharmacogenetic association: the SLCO1B1  rs4149056 variant a ssociated with simvastatin-induced muscle 
damage (myopathy). Specifically, it  will determine the impact o f SLCO1B1 testing on safe and e ffective statin 
prescribing, the occ urrence of simvastatin-related myopathy, an d patient low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 
cholesterol levels.  
(c) Specific Objectives.
This RCT  ha
s two primary aims: 
Aim 1 (Drug safety): To determine the impact of SLCO1B1  pharmacogenetic testing on concordance with 
pharmacogenetic guidelines for saf e simvastatin prescribing and  on the incidence of statin-related myopathy in 
VA (drug safety). 
Hypothesis 1: After one year, compared to Veterans not receivin g SLCO1B1  pharmacogenetic testing (PGx), 
Veterans receiving pha rmacogenetic testing (PGx+) will be more likely to meet pharmacogenetics-guided 
simvastatin dosing guidelines and will have lower incidence of statin-related myopathy. 
Aim 2 (Cardiovascular disease , CVD, prevention): To determine t he impact of SLCO1B1  pharmacogenetic 
testing on LDL cholesterol levels and concordance with CVD prevention guidelines. 
Hypothesis 2: Afte r one year, PGx+ and PGx- Veterans will not d iffer in mean LDL cholesterol levels or in 
the proportion meeting American College of C ardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) 
guidelines for CVD prevention. 
(2)Background and SignificanceJanuary 28, 2019
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
2 
  (a)  Background. 
 
i. Statins and CVD prevention:  CVD is the leading cause of deat h, impaired qual ity of life, an d increased 
medical costs in the United States 1,2, and Veterans may have even great er CVD risk burde n than the g eneral 
population 3,4. Epidemiologic studies have shown a direct relationship between LDL cholesterol levels and CVD 
risk 5,6, and the LDL-loweri ng HMG-CoA reductase i nhibitor medications (statins) have an established role in 
the primary and secondary prevention of CVD events and mortality 7,8. As a result, they are widely 
recommended for m any patient populations . In 2013, the ACC/AHA endorsed guidelines t hat recommended 
prescribing statins of specific intensities (moderate or high) for 4 patient population: 1) Clinical CVD (acute 
coronary syndromes, myoca rdial infarction, stab le angina, coron ary or other arterial revascularization, stroke, 
transient isch emic attack, or peripheral arterial disease); 2) Age ≥21 and LDL ≥190 mg/dL; 3)  Age 40-75 with 
diabetes and LDL 70-189 mg/DL; and 4) Age 40-75 without diabetes but 10-year CVD risk ≥7.5% 9. For this 
last category, the ACC/AHA recommends t hat CVD risk be estimate d by pooled cohort equations based on five 
population-based cohorts of African -American and white men and women. 
 ii. Statins and adverse events:  Despite the importance of s tatins  for CVD preve ntion, poor adhe rence to statin 
therapy remains high among pat ients, including Veterans 10-14, and is associated with increased mortality 15,16. 
Reasons for statin non-adherence in clude their side effects 12,16. Rhabdomyolysis is an exceedingly rare but 
potentially life-threa tening muscle injury 17 that occurs in 1 in 10,000 patients taking statins 18-20. This risk is 
greater with certain statins and increases with dose 21; accordingly, the FDA recommends against the initiation 
of treatment with 80 mg of simvastatin daily 20. More commonly, patients on statins experience milder non-
specific muscle pains. These subjective symptoms are experience d by 5-20% of patients taking statins 11,22, 
although RCT data sugge st they do not occur wit h statins more t han with placebo 23. Indeed, many patients who 
have previously discontinued statins due to side effects can likely be safely restarted on statin therapy without 
recurrence of muscle pains 11,24. Although no univers ally accepted classification scheme exists , statin-related 
myopathy can be organ ized into 3 classes: 1) mild: muscle pains  (myalgias) without creatine kinase (CK) 
elevation; 2) moderate: myalgia s with mild CK  eleva tion (<10x t he upper limit  of normal, ULN); and 3) severe: 
myalgias with CK≥10x ULN 21,25. Severe myopathy includes rhabdomyolysis. 
 iii. Statin myopathy pha rmacogenetics:  A patient’s risk of statin myopathy is increased by certain factors 
including type a nd dose of statin, advanced age, and interactio ns with other drugs s uch as amiodarone, 
cimetidine, clarithromycin, and azole anti-fungal medications 26. Patient genotype also m ediates some of this 
risk. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) in the  SEARCH tria l identified a robust association between a 
common genetic variant (rs4149056) in the SLCO1B1 gene and simvastatin-related myopathy, an outcome 
encompassing “definite myopathy” (muscle symptoms with CK level s >10x ULN) and “incipient myopathy” 
(CK level both >3x ULN and >5x the baseline level and an alanin e aminotransferase  (ALT) level >1.7x the 
baseline value without an eleva ted ALT level alone at any other  visit, irrespective of presence or absence of 
muscle symptoms) 27. The SLCO1B1 gene, a member of the OATP/SL CO superfamily of tr ansmembrane 
transporters, encodes the liv er-specific OAT1B1 transporter tha t regulates statin uptake from the blood into 
hepatocytes 28,29. In the SEARCH trial, myopathy occurred among 98 in 6031 patie nts taking simvastatin 80 mg 
over a mean of 6 years. The rs4149056 variant in SLCO1B1 is a well characterized functional non-synonymous 
valineÆ alanine change at position 174, a ssociated with statin metaboli sm. SEARCH found that each copy of 
the C allele in rs4149056 in SLCO1B1  increased the risk of myopathy by a factor of 4.5 (95% CI 2.6, 7.7); CC 
homozygotes had a 16.9-fold (95% CI, 4.7 to 61.1)  increased risk 27. This association was replicated in the 
independent Heart Protection S tudy, which had randomized patients to placebo vs. simvastatin 40 mg 27. Further 
replication among patients in the Go-DARTS Study also found that the functional rs4149056 variant was 
associated with the milder phenot ype of statin intolerance, a c omposite endpoint of mus cle and liver laboratory 
abnormalities and a change in statin therapy (a different statin, a lower dose, or discontinuation) 30. The 
association between the C al lele in rs4149056 a nd myopathy appe ars strongest for simvastatin, may or may not 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
3 
 be present with at orvastatin, and probably doe s not occur with pravastatin 20,31-33 . In the open-label STRENGTH 
study, which randomized patients t o receive atorvastatin, simva statin, or pravastatin, the rs4149056 variant was 
associated with the composite endpoint of premat ure statin disc ontinuation, myalgias, or CK level >3x ULN; in 
stratified analyses, this association was only significant amon g patients taking simvastatin 34. The rs4149056 C 
allele is comm on. A 2010 review reported a minor allele frequen cy (MAF) of 15-20% in individuals with 
European ancestry, 1-4% in African-Americans, and 6-19% in Asians 35. The MAF of rs4149056 C is 9% in the 
1000 Genomes cohort a nd ranges from 3% (Afr icans) to 21% (Finni sh) in the populations indexed in the Exome 
Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) brow ser, consisting of genotypes from 60,706 individuals 36. Other genetic 
loci have been postulated to be a ssociated with statin myopathy , including variants in the CYP2D6, CYP3A4 , 
CYP3A4 , ABCB , and ABCG2 genes and the mitochondrial gene GATM 37. However, a recent review found 
inconsistent evidence between variants in these genes and statin-related myopathy, finding that only the 
rs4149056 variant in SLCO1B1 had a strong and consistent a ssociation with the condition, par ticularly for 
simvastatin 37.  
 
iv. Clinical imp lementat ion of SLCO1B1 genotyping:  Some large health s ystems are incorporating SLCO1B1  
pharmacogenetics into patient care and clinical decision suppor t in their EHRs, including members of the 
Electronic Medical Records and Genomics (eMERGE) Network 20,38-40  like Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Geisinger Health System, and the Mayo Clinic. Since 200 9, the Clinical Pharmacogenetics 
Implementation Consortium (CPIC), a joint initiative between the Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase (PharmGKB) and the Pharmacogenomics Research Network (PGRN), has published guidelines for the use and management of specific PGx tes ts in clinical care. In 2014, CPI C published updated recommendations for 
simvastatin prescribing when a patient’s genotype at SLCO1B1  rs4149056 is known
20,33. In particular, these 
guidelines recommend against  simvastatin 40 mg or 80 mg for pat ients carrying at least one copy of the C 
allele. Given the inconsistent evidence for the association bet ween SLCO1B1 and myopathy from statins other 
than simvastatin a nd for the asso ciation between statin myopathy and genetic loci other than SLCO1B1 
rs4149056, CPIC limits its recommendations only to simvastatin and the rs4149056 genotype. Several Clinical 
Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)-certified laboratories across the country, including Boston Heart Diagnostics in Framingham, MA, offe r clinical-grade polymerase chain-reaction (PCR) assays for the 
SLCO1B1  rs4149056 genotype. However, there is currently equipoise as to whether the use of such testing 
improves patient outcomes in a health system.   (b)  Significance.  
 Despite the growi ng implemen tation of SLCO1B1  rs4149056 genotyping i n health systems across the United 
States, none of these centers is using a RCT design to evaluate  the impact of SLCO1B1 testing on clinical 
outcomes. This study will use a ra ndomized design to determine the impact on important patient outcomes, 
including statin prescribing, LD L cholesterol, and statin-relat ed myopathy. In addition, by enrolling statin-naïve 
patients at the clinical moment when t heir providers order a ch olesterol panel, this trial will capture a moment 
of clinical decision-making when SLCO1B1  rs4149056 genotype might be most clinically relevant. 
  (c)  Relevance to Veterans Health.  
 CVD is the leading cause of mor tality among Veterans, and stati ns have an established role in CVD risk 
reduction. Still, many Veterans cannot tolerate statins because  of muscle-related adverse effects, which can be 
partially explain ed by genetic fact ors. Pharmacogenetic testing  may help guide safer but  equally effective statin 
use in the care of V eterans, but this possi bility remains theor etical, absent empiric RCT data. This research will 
contribute evidence for VHA as it weighs whether to incorporate  pharmacogenetic testi ng for statin myopathy, 
and genome sequencing more  broadly, into patient care. 
 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
4 
  (3)  Work Proposed 
 Total subjects expected to enroll: 408 
 
(a)  Timeline.  
  
July 2016 –  Dec 2018: Patient recruitment and enrollment at 163 patients/y ear 
Jan 2018 – Mar 2020: 12-month outcome data collection from EHR and patien t surveys 
Apr 2020 –  Dec 2020: Data analysis and pre sentation/public ation of res ults 
 
Total patients expected to enroll: 408 
Total providers expected to enroll: 70 
 
(b) Trial overview and aims (I-PICC Study):  This study is an RCT of immediate SLCO1B1 genotype reporting 
vs. delayed reporting in Primary Care and Women’s Health  in the VA Boston Healthcare  System, designed to 
determine the impact of SLCO1B1 testing on patient outcomes after one year. In keeping with oth er trials across 
VA that capitalize on its learning health systems, this trial p resents minimal burden to providers and patients 
through its integrati on into routine clinical care. Providers w ill give informed consent for their own participation 
by sign ing an informed consent form within a fa ke patient’s electronic  medical record in the Computerized 
Patient Record System  (CPRS) or by signing a  paper copy of the informed consent form. Once a provider 
enrolls, the study staff will mail an informed consent letter t o his/her eligible statin-naïve patients, describing 
the study and giving the patients the option to call the study staff to consent to study participation. If a patient 
does not call the study staff within 10 days of the letter bein g sent out, the s tudy staff may call the patient to ask 
if he/she has any questions about the study and whether he/she consents to participati ng. A patient is not 
enrolled, however, unless and until the patient’s provider signs a laboratory order for SLCO1B1 testing for that 
patient. Enrolled patients will  be randomized t o have their pro vider receive their SLCO1B1  results immediately 
(PGx+) vs. at the end of the 12-month observation period (PGx-) . The SLCO1B1 results will be delivered to the 
ordering provider as a  view alert in the Computerized Patient R ecord System (CPRS). T his 12-month period 
without SLCO1B1 results models current standard of care (that is, the absence of genotype informa tion in statin 
prescribing). One year after enrollment, the study staff will q uery VA clinical and pha rmacy data for the 
outcomes of interest: myopathy and concordance with CPIC simvas tatin guidelines (drug safety) and LDL 
levels and concordance with ACC/AHA s tatin guidelines (CVD preventi on). The study staff will also ca ll each 
enrolled patient for a brief telephone survey. Each of these steps in the study protocol is described in greater 
detail in the Procedures section below.  
 
The trial has two primary aims:  1. Drug safety: To determine the impact of SLCO1B1  PGx testing on concordance with pharmacogenetic 
guidelines for safe s imvastatin prescribi ng and on the incidenc e of statin-related myopathy in VA.   
Hypothesis: After one year, compared to Veterans not receiving SLCO1B1  PGx testing (PGx-), Veterans 
receiving pharmacogenetic testi ng (PGx+) will be more likely to  meet CPIC simvastatin guidelines and 
will have lower incidence  of statin-related myopathy. 
 
2. CVD prevention: To d etermine the impact of SLCO1B1  pharmacogenetic testing on LDL c holesterol levels 
and concordance with CVD prevention guidelines. 
Hypothesis: After one year, PG x+ and PGx- Veterans will not dif fer in mean LDL cholesterol levels or 
in the proportion m eeting 2013 ACC/ AHA guidelines for CVD prevention. 
 
(c) Procedures:  
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
5 
  
i. Provider eligibility, c onsent, and enrollment: All providers in Primary Care and Women’s Health at VA 
Boston will be eligible to particip ate. Providers w ill be educa ted about the study through presentations at staff 
meetings and through e-mails and individual  outreach. After the se educational materials have been presented 
and distributed, an email will be  sent to providers  instructing  them how to give informed consent if they would 
like to participate in the study (see attached Initial Provider Recruitment email). Providers have two options for how to give informed consent: through CPRS or on a paper-based form. A ‘testpatient’ view alert from a fake 
patient’s CPRS record w ill be sent to each e ligible provider  by a member of the study team. This ‘testpatient’ 
view alert will accomp any a progress note containing the text o f the provider informed consent (see attached). 
By signing this ‘testpatient’ note, the provider is agreeing to enroll in the study as a research subject and allow the study team to contact his/her eligible patients. Study staf f will print a paper copy of the provider CPRS 
consent note to store  in the research re cords of the enrolled p roviders. For providers who would prefer to sign 
an informed consent form outside  of CPRS, the re cruitment email  from the study staff will also include the 
informed consent form as a pdf document, which the provider may  print, sign, and return to the study staff by 
intercampus mail. If a provider does not sign the CPRS order or return a paper copy of the informed consent form within a week, t he study staff may s end a follo w-up email (see attached Follow-up Provider Recruitment 
email), reminding them about the  opportunity to en roll in the s tudy by signing t he CPRS alert or returning a 
signed paper copy of the informed consent form. Provider consent will be tracked by study staff in a secured 
data file that includes all eligible providers at VA Boston. If  and when a pro vider consents to pa rticipate, the 
study staff will log that he/she is “C ONSENTED” and the date and method of consent (CPRS or paper copy). 
Providers who expressly notify the staff that they are not interested in participating will be designated as 
“OPTOUT ” in this file. All other providers will remain designated as “ ELIGIBLE” in the file. Only 
CONSENTED providers w ill be considered enrolled in the study, and only the patients of consented providers 
will be eligib le for patient enrol lment. After enrolling in thi s study, a provider may un enroll at any time by 
contacting the Principal Investigator or study coordinator by p hone and request that they no longer receive 
orders to enroll eligible patients. These providers will be designated as “UNENROLLED” in the p rovider file.  
 For this RCT, study staff will e nroll up to 70 tot al providers from Primary Care and W omen’s Health at VA 
Boston. 
 
ii. Patient eligibility: The patient eligibility criteria enric h the study population for patients who would likely 
benefit from a statin now or in the near future but are not cur rently prescribed a statin. Patients will be eligible 
to be considered for enrollment if they 1) are aged 40-75 years; 2) have no history of statin use; 3) have received VA care for a t least the pri or 6 months;  4) are a pati ent of an enrolled provider, and 5) meet at least 
ONE of the following criteria:  a. Have CVD (determined from ICD codes) 
b. Have diabetes c. Have an LDL cholesterol value ≥190 mg/dL 
d. Have a 10-year CVD risk of ≥7.5%, calculated with the ACC/AHA 2013 pooled risk equations 
 At the study’s baseline and then as needed during the enrollmen t period, the st udy team will perfor m a database 
query to identify all patients at VA Boston meeting the above e ligibility criteria. The resulting list of eligible 
patients will be stored as a da tabase on an encrypted VINCI server. To increase th e enrollment  of female 
participants, non-Veteran fem ale patients, such as spouses of V eterans, who receive VA primary care services 
and who meet the above eligibility  criteria are eligible to par ticipate.  
 
iii. Patient consent: As providers  consent to participate in th e study, the study staff will send out informed 
consent letters to their potentially eligible patients at VA Bo ston, giving the patients the opportunity to opt in to 
study participation. This patient informed consent letter (incl uded with this submission)  will describe the study 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
6 
 in detail, including SLCO1B1 testing and its interpretation, benefits an d risks to the patie nt, confidentiality, and 
data security. In response to t his letter, patients will call a  member of the study team to ask questions about the 
study, opt in to participation, or decline participation (see Patient Opt-in Phone Script included with this 
submission). If a patien t declines participat ion, their name wi ll be remove d from the list of elig ible patients for 
potential enrollment. If a patien t opts in to participation, th eir name will be added to the list of consented 
patients. If a pa tient does not call th e study staff, the study  staff may call the patient to confirm that they 
received the informed consent letter and to a sk whether they wo uld like to opt in or out of study participation 
(see Patient Outreach Phone Script included with this submissio n). Patients may w ithdraw their consent at any 
time by calling the study staff a t the phone number listed on t heir mailed informed consent letter. Patient 
consent does not constitute patient enrollment; consented patie nts can only be enrolled in t he study if their 
provider then chooses to sign an order for SLCO1B1 testing for them, as descri bed below. Patient consent will 
be tracked by s tudy staff and will incl ude logging the date opt -in letters are mailed and when phone consent is 
obtained. If an enrol led provider wants to refer a pa tient directly to the study staff for rec ruitment, he/she may 
do so by contacting the study staff (by phone or by encrypted e mail) and providing th e patient’s name and last 4 
SSN. The eligibility of any refe rred patient will be verified i n CPRS, and the st udy staff will contact the patient 
to obtain informed consent. 
 
iv. Patient enrollment and randomization: Although patient consent occurs  at the study’s baseline, patien t 
enrollment occurs in relative real-time thereafter, to take adv antage of eligible clinical blood samples as they are 
ordered during routine clinical care. Each night during the enr ollment period, an informatics-ba sed algorithm 
will perform a database  query to identify any eligible patients  who have electronic orders for any testing in an 
EDTA tube (e.g. a complete blood count, CBC, or a hemoglobin A1c) at the VA in the prior 3 days (generally 
the day prior, but  up to 3 days to account for weeke nds). The next day, a memb er of the study staff will review 
this list of eligible patients with eligi ble lab orders and wil l cross-reference it against the list of consented 
patients, making note of any non-consented patients to not include in study enrollment. For any eligible, 
consented patient, t he study staff will create an order for SLCO1B1 testing in CPRS, to be forwarded to the 
patient’s provider for signature. The provider’s signature of the lab order enrolls the patient in the study, 
provided the blood sample is adequate for SLCO1B1 genotyping. If the provider discontinues the order or does 
not sign the order within the timeframe that the laboratory sav es clinical samples (generally about 7 days), the 
patient will not be enrolled. If  needed, the study staff can ca p the number of eligible patients that a given 
provider will be present ed per week, to mini mize the number of CPRS view alerts and reduce provider burden. 
The study staff will randomize enrolled patients to the PGx+ vs . PGx- groups. If a consented patient tells the 
study staff that he/she is par ticularly interested in having th e SLCO1B1 test ordered, the study staff may convey 
this information to the patient’s provider by encrypted email and create a lab order for the provider to 
considering signing. This option would not be routinely suggested by study staff. 
 A total of 408 pa tients will be enrolled in this RCT.  
 
v. Laboratory testing and reportin g: Once an eligible blood sam ple is collected and the provider has signed the 
SLCO1B1 order, study staff will contact th e VA laboratory to ensure tha t the sample is adequate for SLCO1B1 
genotyping. If it is, the patient will be enrolled in the study , the study staff wil l randomize the patient to the 
PGx+ vs. PGx- group, and the staff w ill notify the VA laborator y to send the patient’s clinical blood sample for 
SLCO1B1  testing. The VA Boston laborat ory will use standard clinical w orkflow to send out labeled, identified 
samples, using a common carrier  delivery service and chain of c ustody, to process and send these samples to 
Boston Heart Diagnostics (BHD) in Framingham, MA, for SLCO1B1 rs4149056 genotyping. The Boston Heart 
Diagnostics laboratory will st ore all blood samples received fr om the VA laboratory in a freezer. After a blood 
sample is tested and the result is reported back to the VA Bost on laboratory, Boston Hear t Diagnostics will 
destroy the sample, generally within 7 days and not to exceed 6 0 days. No research data  will be sent outside of 
the VA. All samples (PGx+ and PGx-) will be genotyped only for rs4149056 in SLCO1B1 using the BHD 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
7 
 CLIA-certified and CAP-accredited PCR assay. BHD will return SLCO1B1 results for both arms to study staff 
using secure fax. Study staff will store these results in a dat a file on a secure VINCI server. Using encrypted VA 
email, study staff will send each SLCO1B1 result to the VA clinical labora tory staff t o be reported in CP RS 
according to the patient’s random assignment (PGx+ vs. PGx -). Results for patients randomized to the PGx+ 
arm (immediate reporting) will  be distributed to VA clinical la boratory staff for immedi ate posting to CPRS. 
Results for patients randomized to t he PGx- arm  (delayed report ing) will be distributed to VA clinical 
laboratory staff for pos ting to CPRS aft er the patient has comp leted (or de clines to complete) the 12-month 
phone survey descri bed below. If the patient cannot be reached for the 12-month phone survey after at least 3 
attempts, the results will be distributed to the VA clinical la boratory staff for posting in CPRS, no later than 15 
months from the patient’s date of enrollment . Each SLCO1B1 genotype result will appear a s a view alert for the 
ordering provider. The PI or member of the study team may also send the provider an encrypted email alerting 
them that the results have been reported. The CPRS results scre en will include the following information: 
 
SLCO1B1 genotype T/T or T/C or C/C 
  
Transporter Function Normal, Decreased, or Poor Function 
  
Simvastatin myopathy risk T/T – Typical 
T/C - Increased 
C/C – Markedly increased 
 
Interpretation 
  T/T – Individuals with the T/T genotype have normal ability to metabolize 
statins. Standard stati n dosing, if indicate d, is recommended.  
 
T/C – Individuals with the T/C genotype have decreased ability to me tabolize 
statins  and have a 4-fold increased risk of simvastatin-related myopat hy. 
Simvastatin at a dose of ≤20 m g or an alternate stat in, if indicated, is 
recommended . 
 
C/C – Individuals with the C/C genotype have markedly decreased abil ity to 
metabolize statins and have a 17 -fold increased risk of simvastatin-related 
myopathy . Simvastatin at a dose of ≤20 mg or an alternate statin, if indicated, is 
recommended. 
 
vi. Observation peri od and outcomes: Providers will act on the SLCO1B1 results according to their judgment, as 
they would in routine clinical car e. Such actions might include  sending a patient letter, calling the patient, 
scheduling a follow-up appointmen t, and/or discu ssing therapeut ic options with the patient, including lifestyle 
modification a nd/or pharmacotherapy. Th e study intervention pro tocol ends at the point when the study staff 
deliver the SLCO1B1 results to the provider, but providers have a SLCO1B1  lab results letter template available 
to them in CPRS that they may edit and use if they see fit (see attached “Vassy 2993 CPRS Patient Results 
Letter Template”).  Twelve months after enrollment, the study staff will query the  Corporate Data Warehouse 
(CDW) for study outcomes, including statin prescriptions, labor atory values (e.g., LDL cholesterol), and 
documentation of statin side effects.  
 
vii. End-of-study survey and results letters: Twelve months after a patient’s enrollment date, study staff wi ll call 
the patient to administer a brief, 3-minute telephone survey ab out medications, side effects, and recall of genetic 
test results (see attached “ Vassy 2993 I-PICC 12-month survey ”). After this surve y, patients in both arms 
(PGx+ and PGx-) will be mailed a letter with their study results (see attache d “Vassy 2993 I-PICC 12-month 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
8 
 letter”). A copy of this letter will also be sent by encrypted email to the patient’s provider. Patients may decline 
to complete the phone  survey and still rece ive their study resu lts. For patients not responsive to initial outreach, 
study staff will attempt to admin ister the 12-month end-of-stud y survey up to and no later than 15 months from 
the patient’s initial date of enrollment. Pharmacogenetic test results for the PGx- arm will be reported to 
patients, providers, and CP RS only after a patie nt’s completion or affirmed decline of this survey. If a patient 
has not responded t o 12-month end-of-study survey attempts for a period of 3 months (or 15 months from his or 
her initial enrollment date), st udy staff will dist ribute a 12- month letter (see attached “Vassy 2993 I -PICC 12-
month letter”) to the patient and report results to  his or her provider and CPRS (PGx-). After the 12-month 
observation period is complete for the last enrolled patient, a n “order check” will be  programmed in the Boston 
instance of CPRS. Similar to a drug allergy alert, this order c heck will trigger a pop-up alert window if any 
provider at VA Bost on orders simvastati n on one of the  approxim ately 80 pat ients anticipated to have at least 
one copy of the C risk all ele. Providers may ove rride this aler t if they wish. 
  
(d) Data collection:  Using the procedures de scribed above , the following data will b e collected during the study. 
 
i. Provider characteristics: Dem ographic informa tion about part icipati ng providers will be  obtained from the 
provider data files at VA Boston.  
ii. Patient eligibility: The following data will be collected f rom the CDW to determine the list of eligible 
patients to whom a patient informe d consent letter may be maile d:  
 
1. Providers (to determine whether pa tients sees an eligible, enro lled provider) 
2. Date of birth (to determine age) 
3. Prior and current medication prescr iptions (to determine histor y of statin use and treatment for 
hypertension) 
4. TIU notes (to perform text search to confirm absence of prior s tatin treatment) 
5. ICD codes and prob lem list (to determine hi story of CVD and dia betes) 
6. Laboratory results, race, smoking history, and blood pressure (to calculate 10-year CVD risk by 
ACC/AHA equ ations) 
7. Dates of VA encounters (to determin e whether patient has receiv ed VA care for ≥6 months) 
 
iii. Patient enrollment: The s tudy staff will perform nightly d ata queries of the EHR data systems to determine 
which eligible, consented patients  have had an eligible lab ord er in the prior 1-3 days (a whole-blood sample, 
such as CBC or hemoglobin A1c). 
 
iv. SLCO1B1 results: The study staff will receive SLCO1B1 results from Boston Heart  Diagnostics through 
secure fax. Using e ncrypted email, st udy staff will send SLCO1B1 results to the VA laboratory immediately 
(PGx+) or as early as 12 months, but no later than 15 months (p ending 12-month end-of-study survey 
completion) after a patient’s e nrollment (PGx-) to be reported in CPRS.   
 v. Outcomes from VINCI/CDW: For e ach enrolled patient and a coh ort of matched unenrolled control patients, 
the study staff will obtain the following data from the CDW during the 12 months before and 12 months after enrollment:   
1. Outpatient and inpati ent encounters: s tation/clin ic, date, provider 
2. ICD codes and prob lem list and associated dates 
3. Pharmacy data: all medications, doses, and dates of prescriptions, fills, renewals, and refills 
4. Medication allergies: medicat ion, reaction, date,  and provider 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
9 
 5. All laboratory values and dates, in cluding LDL cholesterol, cre atinine kinase (CK) values, and liver 
enzymes 
6. All TIU notes 
7.  Data on healthcare costs from economic datasets, such as the H ealth Economics Resource Center 
(HERC) cost datasets and Manag erial Cost Accounting (MCA) datas ets. 
 
vi. Outcomes from 12-month survey: Study staff will administer a telephone survey to enrolled patients to 
collect the following data: 
 
1. Use of and side effects from statin  and other cholesterol-lower ing medications in the prior 12 months 
2. Brief adaptation of be liefs about medications questionnaire 
3. Recall of ge netic test results 
 (e) Statistical analysis 
 
Safety: Our primary safety outcome will be concordance with CPI C guidelines for safe simvastatin use 12 
months after enrollment. For CP IC concordance, we will compare each enrolled patient’s SLCO1B1 genotype 
and statin type and dose at the e nd of the 12-month observation  period to the CPIC guidelines for safe 
simvastatin prescribing:  T/T genotype: Standard simvastatin prescribing C/T or C/C genotype: A void 40 mg simvastatin; consider 20 mg si mvastatin or alternate statin 
 We will consider potentially unsaf e simvastatin dosing to inclu de 80 mg daily for any per son and 40 mg daily 
for any person with a  CT or CC genotype. We w ill consider all o ther combinations potentially safe, including 
no simvastatin prescription or use of a statin other than simva statin. This will generate  a 2-level safety outcome 
(potentially safe vs. potentially unsafe simvastatin prescripti on) for each par ticipant. The secondary safety 
outcome will be one-year incid ence of statin myopathy, determin ed primarily by c hart review of all 408 patients 
but also by the NLP algorithm under development in IRB #2953 (“Clinical Sa fety & Efficacy of 
Pharmacogenetics in Veteran Care”).   
 CVD prevention: Our primary ou tcome for appropri ate CVD prevent ion will be LDL levels 12 months after 
enrollment. The secondary outcome  for CVD prevention will be co ncordance at 12 months with ACC/AHA 
guidelines for statin use in CVD preve ntion, which recommend st atins of specific intensi ties (moderate or high) 
for distinct patien t populations (see Table) 9. Using patient characteristics a nd prescription data, we will generate 
a 2-level CVD prevention outcome (concordant vs. non-concordant) for each participant, a measure of whether the Veteran’s statin prescription is adequate for his/her level of CVD risk. 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 High-Intensity Moderate-Intensity Low-Intensity
Atorvastatin 40-80 mg Atorvasta tin 10-20 mg Simvastatin 10 mg
Rosuvastatin 20-40 mg Rosuvastatin 5-10 mg Pravastatin 10-20 mg
Simvastatin 80 mg* Simvastatin 20-40 mg Lovastatin 20 mg
Pravastatin 40-80 mg Fluvastatin 20-40 mg
Lovastatin 40 mg Pitavastatin 1 mg
Fluvastatin XL 80 mg
Fluvastatin 40 mg bid
Pitavastatin 2-4 mg
Recommended For: Recommended For:
1. Clinical CVD, age ≤ 75 y
2. LDL ≥ 190mg/dL
3a. Diabetes, age 40-75 y, 
10-y CVD risk ≥7.5% 3b. Diabetes, age 40-75 y, 
10-y CVD risk <7.5%
4. 10-y CVD risk ≥7.5% , 
age 40-75 y
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
10 
 Analysis plan:  For the primary safety outcome, we will use generalized estimat ing equations with a logit link 
function, accounting for clustering by provider, to test the nu ll hypothesis that th e proportion of patients whose 
prescriptions meet  CPIC guidelines on the 365 th day after enrollment, p, does not differ between the PGx+ and 
PGx- arms (superiority design). Stated formally: H 0: p1=p2; Ha: p1≠p2, where p 1 is the proportion meeting CPIC 
guidelines in t he PGx+ group and p 2 is the proportion meeting CPIC guidelines i n the PGx- group, as  assessed 
one year after enrol lment. The primary CVD  prevention outcome i s change in LDL, wdefined as the baseline 
LDL level subtracted from the most recent LDL value prior to or on the 365 th day after the baseline LDL. We 
will use generalized estimati ng equations with an identity link  function, accounting for clustering by physician, 
to test the null hypothesis that w will be greater in the PGx- arm than in the PGx- arm by 6% one year after 
enrollment (non-inferiority design). We will also perform gener alized estimating equations with a logit link 
function, accounting for clustering by ordering physician, to t est the between-group differences for the 
secondary outcomes of ACC/AHA c oncordance and proportion with s tatin-related myopathy after 12 months. 
 Understanding the financial impact of SLCO1B1 testing is a critical e lement for unde rstanding its 
clinical utility. Similar to D r. Vassy’s prior w ork in the MedS eq Project trial of genome sequencing 52, we will 
also undertake a cost analysis alongside the I-PICC Study rando mized controlled tri al, using guidelines 
published by the Interna tional Society for Pha rmacoeconomics an d Outcomes Research and the Second Panel 
on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine 53,54. Briefly, to unders tand the impact of SLCO1B1 testing on 
follow-up healthcare co sts, we will assess costs over the 12 mo nths following enrol lment for I-P ICC Study 
patient-participants . We will use a microcosting approach 55 to estimate the costs of SLCO1B1 testing itself and 
will use cost data from the HE RC and MCA datasets to determine patient-level healthcare costs in the 12 
months after enrollment. We will use multivariable linear regre ssion to compare arithmetic mean costs between 
the 2 randomization arms, as recommended 53. 
 
Power calculation: With 408 pat ients for the RC T, we have 80% p ower at a 2- sided α=0.05  to detect a 
difference of at least 15% (superiority design) in our primary safety outcome: the proportions meeting CPIC 
guidelines in the 2 arms. This s ample size assumes a design eff ect of 1.36 to acc ount for cluster ing by phys ician 
(cluster size  of 10 patien ts/physician and a n intracluster corr elation of 0.04) 56 and assumes that concordance 
with CPIC guidelines in the PGx - arm ranges from 60-100% (or, e quivalently, 0-40%) 57. For our primary CVD 
prevention outcome, change in LDL, w, a sample size of 408 patients gives >80% power to state that the upper 
limit of a 1-sided 95% confidence interval excludes a differenc e of >6% favoring the PGx- arm (non-inferiority 
design), assuming a common standard deviation of win the two main arms of 20% and a design effect of 1.36 58.  
 
Proportion meeting CPIC guidelines in PGx- 
arm 50% 60% 70% 80% 85% 
Sample size (total in both arms) 334 300 236 146 90 
Sample size after design effect of 1.36 455 408 321 199 122 
Sample size calculations primary safety outcome. Data are total  sample sizes requi red for 80% power a t a 2-
sided α=0.05 to detect a difference of at least 15%  in the concordance with CPIC guidelines between the PGx+ 
and PGx- arms. 
 
(f) Potential limitations 
 
i. Low enrollment due to fewer eli gible patients than expected or eligible patients w ho do not consent: If 
necessary, it will be straightforward to take advantage of the Clinical Trials Network to expand this trial 
beyond VA Boston to other primary care sites within VISN 1, an integrated system of 8 medical centers and 
35 outpatient clinics across Ne w England, emp loying 316 primary  care practitioners and treating >240,000 
patients annually at 2.5 mil lion outp atient visits. 
ii. Few cases of statin i nitiation: Our choices of outcomes (concordance with CPIC and ACC/AHA guidelines 
and LDL cholesterol levels) do not require the majority of patients to be initiated on statins during the 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
11 
 observation period to achieve important results. However, we ha ve chosen the patient eligibility criteria to 
enrich the popula tion for V eterans who are lik ely to benefit fr om statin therapy according to current 
guidelines. 
iii. Logistical difficulties in sample send-out to the BHD laborator y and delivery of SLCO1B1 results to 
providers: An alternative plan would be to send our samples for genotyping at the CLIA-certified and CAP-
accredited Partners Laboratory for Mo lecular Medicine, under th e directorship of Dr. Heidi Rehm, a 
collaborator with Dr. Vassy on the MedSeq Project. 
 
(h)  Human Studies Section:  
 
 (1)  Risk to Subjects 
 
(a) Human Subjects  Involvement and Cha racteristics   
 
i. Providers: We will recruit all interested providers in Primary Care or Women’s Health  at VA Boston to 
participate in the study, regardless of age, gender, or years of experience. 
 
ii. Patients: Patients will be eligible to enroll in this trial  if they 1) are aged 40-75 years; 2) have no history of 
statin use; 3) have received VA care for a t least th e prior 6 m onths; 4) are a patient of an enrolled provider, and 
5) meet at least ONE of the following criteria:  a. Have CVD (determined by ICD codes) 
b. Have diabetes 
c. Have an LDL cholesterol value ≥190 mg/dL 
d. Have a 10-year CVD risk of ≥7.5%, calculated with the ACC/AHA pooled risk equations 
 
We have chosen these eligibility criteria to enrich the study p opulation with establishe d primary care patients 
whose providers may initiate statin therapy in the next year. T he study sample will likely reflect the overall 
composition of the VA patient  population, although we will incl ude the Women’s Health clinic at the VA to 
increase the represe ntation of women. Additionally, non-Veteran  patients who meet the above eligibility criteria 
will also be elig ible, for the purpose of i ncreasi ng female enr ollment. Elderly patients up to age 75 will be 
eligible to participate. Pregna nt women, chil dren, prisoners, a nd institutionalized indi viduals will not be 
included in the study.    (b)  Sources of Materials 
 Demographic informati on about the participat ing providers will be obtained from the provi der data files at VA 
Boston. We will collect patient data from e xisting VA Boston cl inical information systems: CPRS and the VA 
pharmacy data. Data will include patient demographics, medical conditions, CVD risk factors, prescriptions, 
laboratory values including LDL cholesterol levels, and TIU not es. SLCO1B1 genotype will be obtained from 
PCR testing performed on existing patient blood samples obtaine d as a part of routine clinical care (i.e., CBC or 
hemoglobin A1c testi ng). A 12-month tele phone survey will colle ct data about patient medi cations, side effects, 
and recall of genetic test results. Study staff will enter patients’ ve rbal responses  into a study database behind 
the VA firewall.   
 (c)  Potential Risks   
 
i. Risks to providers: VA providers are considered a vulnerable  population. The risks to  providers participating 
in this study are minimal. These  include the ri sk of malpractic e litigation if a provide r is perceived to have 
inappropriately under-dosed a statin and a  patient goes on to have a CVD event; if the physician’s statin 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
12 
 prescribing practices are  thought to have resu lted in statin-re lated myopathy. These risks are not dissimilar to 
those of current standard of care around statin use, CVD preven tion, and the manag ement of here ditary 
conditions. Drs. Jacqueline Spencer and Megan Gerber, Directors  and Primary & Ambulatory Care and 
Women’s Health, respectively, have endorsed the design of the trial of statin phar macogenetics testing as 
presenting minimal  burden to providers (see attached letter of support). There is also a risk of breach of data 
privacy; however, thi s study will not be c ollecting protected h ealth information from providers as research 
subjects. For the trial of stati n pharmacogenetics testing, provider informed consent w ill be document ed in the 
medical records of fake patients in CPRS, accessible only to st udy staff, and a paper copy of the CPRS consent 
note will be printed, labeled a nd stored in the research record s of the enrolled provi ders. Provide rs who prefer to 
mail signed informe d consent documents to t he study team will h ave their consent forms labeled and securely 
stored in their research records. All provider consent document s will be filed in a locked cabinet located at the 
Jamaica Plain Campus of VA Bost on, Building 9, Room 425C, acces sible only to study staff.  
 
ii. Risks to patients:  This trial of statin pharmacogen etics testing poses minimal ris k to patients. The potential 
risks are that providers may be more reluctant to start appropr iate statin the rapy for pat ients with elevated CVD 
risk and/or patients may be more reluctant to adhere to prescri bed statin therapy. Howe ver, in routine clinical 
care, there is alr eady much variation in provider behavior arou nd statin prescribing a nd patient behavior around 
medication adherenc e. Thus, this study poses risks not dissimil ar to those of current standard of care around 
statin use and CVD preven tion. There is no physic al risk to enrolled patients as a  patient’s enrollment into the  
study occurs after a blood draw has been performed as part of c linical care. Participation will incur no costs for 
patients and will have no effect on patients’ clin ical care or healthcare ben efits. The risk of breach of data 
privacy will be minimized using the data security measures desc ribed below.  
 
 (2)  Adequacy of Protection from Risks 
 
(a) Recruitment and Informed Consent   
 
i. Providers: Providers will be  educated about this study by th e study staff (principal investigator, project 
manager, and/or research assistant) through presentations at VA  Boston Primary Care and Women’s Health 
staff meetings and t hrough individual  e-mail outreach. Informat ional presentations and flyers (see attached) will 
include a descri ption of the asso ciation between SLCO1B1  genotype and sim vastatin-related myopathy and the 
CPIC guidelines for s imvastatin prescribing according to SLCO1B1 genotype. These materials will also briefly 
describe the st udy protocol, inc luding study w orkflow and patient enrollment. After these  educational materials 
have been presented a nd distributed, an email will be sent to providers instructing th em how to give informed 
consent if they woul d like to participate in the study (see att ached Initial Provider Recruitment email). Providers 
have two options for how to give informed consent: through CPRS or on a paper-based form. A ‘testpatient’ view alert from a fake patient’s CPRS record will be sent to  each eligible provider. This ‘testpatient’ view alert 
will accompany a progre ss note containing the text of the provi der informe d consent (see attached), which will 
contain the elements of informed  consent and detail the study p rocedures. By signing this ‘testpatient’ note, the 
provider is agreeing to enroll in the study as a research subje ct and allow the  study team to contact his/her 
eligible patients. This approa ch for obtaining inform ed consent  from providers was adop ted from the  Diuretic 
Comparison Project (DCP) (CSP #597) study protocol that has bee n approved by the VA Central IRB. For 
providers who would prefer to sign an informed consent form out side of CPRS, the recruitment email from the 
study staff will also include the  informed consent form as a pd f document, which the provider may print, sign, 
and return to the study staff by intercampus mail. If a provide r does not sign the CPRS order or return a paper 
copy of the informed consent form within a week, the study staf f may send a follow-up email (see attached 
Follow-up Provider Recruitment em ail), reminding th em about the  opportunity to enroll in the study by signing 
the CPRS alert or returning a signed paper c opy of the informed  consent form. Provider consent will be tracked 
by study staff i n a secured data file th at includes all eligibl e providers at VA Boston. If and when a provider 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
13 
 consents to participate, the study staff will log that he/she i s “CONSENTED” and the date and method of 
consent (CPRS or paper copy). Providers who expressly notify th e staff that they are not interested in 
participating will be designated as “ OPTOUT ” in this file. All other providers will remain designated as 
“ELIGIBLE” in the file. Only CONSENTED providers w ill be considered enrolled in the study, and only the 
patients of consented providers will be eligib le for p atient en rollment. After enrolling in this study, a provider 
may unenroll at any time  by contacting the Pri ncipal Investigat or or study coordinator by phone and request that 
they no longer receive orders to enroll eligible patients. Thes e providers will  be designated as 
“UNENROLLED” in t he provider file.   
ii. Patients: As providers consen t to participate in the study,  the study staff will send out informed consent 
letters to their potentially elig ible patients at VA Boston, gi ving the patients the opportunity to opt in to study 
participation. This patient inform ed consent letter (included w ith this submission) will describe t he study in 
detail, including SLCO1B1 testing and its interpretation, benefits and risks to the patie nt, confidentiality, and 
data security. In response to t his letter, patients will call t he study coordinator to ask questions about the study, 
opt out of participation, or op t in to participation (see Patie nt Opt-in Phone Script included with this 
submission). If a patient opts out of participation, their name  will be removed from the list of eligible patients 
for potential enro llment. If a pa tient opts in to participation , their name will be added to the list of consented 
patients. If a pa tient does not call th e study staff, the study  staff may call the patient to confirm that they 
received the informed consent le tter and to ask whe ther they would like to opt in or out of study participation 
(see Patient Outreach Phone Scrip t included with this submissio n). Patients may w ithdraw their consent at any 
time by calling the study staff. Patien t consent does not const itute patient enrollment; consented patients can 
only be enrolled in the study if their provider then chooses to sign an order for SLCO1B1 testing for them. 
Patient consent will be track ed by study staff and will include  logging the date opt-in letters are mailed and 
when phone consent is obtained. If an enrolled provider wants to refer a patient directly to the study staff for 
recruitment, he/she may do so by contacting the study staff (by  phone or by encrypted email) and providing the 
patient’s name and last 4 SSN. The eligibility of any referred pat ient will be verified in CPRS, and the study 
staff will contact the patien t to obtain infor med consent. 
Patient consent occurs at the study’s baseline, but patient enrollment occurs in relative real -time thereafter, to 
take advantage of elig ible clinical blood samples as they are o rdered during routine clinical care. Each night 
during the enrollment period, an informatics-based algorithm will perform a database query to identify any 
eligible patients who with ele ctronic orders  for any testing in  an EDTA tube (e.g. a complete blood count, CBC, 
or a hemoglobin A1c) at the VA in the prior 3 days (generally the day prior, but up to 3 days to account for 
weekends). The next  day, a member of the study staff will revie w this list of eligible pati ents who have eligible 
lab orders and will cross-reference it against the list of cons ented patients, making no te of any non-consented 
patients to not include in st udy enrollment. For any eligible, consented patient, the study staff will create an 
order for SLCO1B1 testing i n CPRS, to be forwarded to the patient’s provider for signature . The provider’s 
signature of the lab order enrolls the patient in the study, provided the sample is adequate for SLCO1B1 testing. 
If the provider has not signed the order, the study staff may c ontact the provider by encrypt ed e-mail, asking 
him/her to consider signing t he order if dee med appropriate. If  the provider discontinues the order or does not 
sign the order within the timeframe that the laboratory saves c linical samples (generally about 7 days), the 
patien t will no
t be enrolled. If a  consented patient tells the study staff that he/she is particularly interested in 
having the SLCO1B1 test ordered, the study staff may convey this information to the patient’s provider by 
encrypted email and create a lab order for the provider to considering signing. This option would not be routinely suggested by study staff.  Given the opt-in mechanism of obtaining informed patient consent and the 
fact that only a fraction of consented patients will ultimately  be enrolled in the study, we are requesting a waiver 
of the requirement t o document informed pa tient consent (see at tached memo). 
 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
14 
 At the end of the st udy (12 months af ter enrollment), study sta ff will call each enrolle d patient for a brief 
telephone survey, first obtaining  verbal consent to do so (see attached “Vassy 2993 I-PICC 12- month survey”) . 
Attempts to administer the 12-m onth end-of-s tudy surve y to enro lled patients will not e xceed 15 mont hs from 
their initial dates of enrollment.   
 
(b) Protection Against Risk: The ri sks to particip ating providers a nd patients are min imal and not dissimilar 
from routine clinical care, where t here is already much variati on in provider behavior around statin 
prescribing and patien t behavior around medic ation adherence. T he misinterpretation and misuse of 
SLCO1B1 genotype results will be minimized through the clear, concise, and evidence-based test 
interpretation and reco mmendati on provided with e ach genotype r esult.  
 
i. Adverse events: An adverse event (AE) will be defined as any unanticipated or unintended medical 
occurrence or worsening of a sign or symptom (including an abnormal laboratory finding) or disease in a study 
subject, which does not necessaril y have a causal  relationship with the study cond ition, procedure (s) or study 
agent(s), that occurs after the informed consent is obtained. P re-existing conditions or i llnesses which are 
expected to exacerbate or worsen are not considered adverse eve nts and will be accounte d for in the subject’s 
medical history. A serious adverse event (SAE) will be defined as an AE resulting in one of the following 
outcomes: death during the 12 months after enrollment, life thr eatening event (defined as an event that places a 
participant at immed iate ris k of death), inpatien t hospitalizat ion, and any ot her condition which, i n the judgment 
of the investigat or, represents a signif icant hazard, such as a n important medical event that does not result in 
one of the above outcomes. An event may be considered an SAE when it jeopardizes the participant or requires medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above. AEs may be observed by the study 
staff or volunteered by VA providers and patients. All AEs or S AEs will be assessed for relationship to the 
study research procedures, to determine whether study participation was likely to have caused the AE/SAE. 
AEs related to study participation that are reported to researc h personnel will be recorded on an AE form in an 
electronic database. All deaths  and study-related AEs will be r eported to the IRB in keeping with VA protocols. 
 
ii. Data security: Ri sk of breach of confi dentiality will be mi nimized through the appropriate management and 
security of clin ical data per VA and HI PAA protocols for use of re search data. Patient protected healt h 
information (PHI) will  be delinked from t he final analytic dataset; no provider PHI will be  collected or stored. 
All data will be retained within the VA. Data will be securely transmitted using VA approved methods. We will 
use FIPS 140-2 validated encryp tion. Patient and provider data files (source and analytic) will be stored behind 
the VA firewall, on a  drive created by VIN CI specifically to ho use the data for this research project. A copy of 
patient mailing data only will be downloaded out side of VINCI i n a VA secured, study specific SharePoint site, 
and behind the VA  firewall where strict permissions will be set  to limit viewing to IRB approve d study 
personnel.  This will be done to allow for the use of the Microsoft mail merge software so patient letters and 
address labels can be created and printed in batches, increasing patient enrollment numbers to meet the study’s grant time table. Patient ma iling data will be in the form of C SV files and may include identifying variables for 
both patients and providers. Var iables for pa tients/providers m ay include: ID , full name, title, institution 
code/ID, gender, maili ng address and any associated flags (i.e.  temporary address), patien t-provider relationship 
information, or other similar variables that are required to be able to send mail or that are named in the IRB-approved patient letter template. The use of the mail merge system can be completed w ithin the secure 
SharePoint environment. Only s tudy personnel credentialed and a pproved by the IRB and VA Research & 
Development committees will ha ve access to st udy data in both t he VINCI and SharePoint environments. 
Software to be used in this study, including SQL Server Managem ent Studio and R, is already in place on 
VINCI servers, a nd no additional licenses will be required. Onc e study team members ar e no longer a part of 
the research team, their ac cess to data and re search materials will be terminated in bot h VINCI and VA secured 
SharePoint. No outside r can have access t o any of these files. Since the data used will be aggregate, they cannot 
be used to uni quely identify any patien t. We will not allow 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
15 
 any unauthorized access to our servers or our datasets. No PHI (scrambled SSNs or dates) w ill be released to the 
public, nor will they be published in any medical journal. Mobile devices will not be used for data collection or 
management. Suspected informati on security and privacy incident s will be reported within one hour to the 
Information Security and Privacy Offi cers and Research Administ ration. Data will be ke pt indefinitely or until 
the law allows their destruction in accordance with the VA Reco rd Control Schedule. Elect ronic records will be 
destroyed, when allowed, in a manner in which they cannot be re trieved. 
 A research data repository will be  created from the trial data.  The data repository will  be housed in data files on 
a secure VINCI s erver, password-pro tected and accessible  only to IRB-approv ed personnel. Data will  be 
securely transmitte d using VA approve d methods. We will use FIP S 140-2 validated encryp tion. The da ta in the 
repository will not in clude identifiers except for the study ID . A data file linking t he study ID to patient 
identifiers (e.g. Social Security number) will be stored in a s eparate locati on on a secure VINCI s erver, enabling 
investigators to access the data repository but not the ID linker file unless they also have IRB-approved access 
to do so. This data repository wil l allow IRB-approved investig ators, both inside and outside VA, to analyze de-
identified genome sequence data . Interested investigators will need to obtain IRB approval and complete a 
Combined Data Use-Data Transfer Agreement. The principal invest igator or another mem ber of the study team 
will keep the names and contact information of ind ividuals appr oved to access th e data repository in a data file, 
along with the dates that approved access expi res. The data fil e linking patient identifiers (e.g. SSN) to the study 
ID will be provided to investigators only with IRB approval to do so. 
  (3)  Potential Benefit of the Proposed Research to the Subject and O thers.    
 
The benefits to provi ders and patients participating in this st udy include the potential for them to engage with 
each other in therapeutic conver sations about the risks and ben efits of statin therapy. Learning a patient’s  
SLCO1B1 genotype may help physicians a nd patients reduce the risk of st atin myopathy, and patients may be 
more adherent to therapy they feel is personalized to them. Soc iety will also benefit from the knowledge to be 
learned about the impact of introducing SLCO1B1 testing into clinical care. These  potential benefits outweigh 
the minimal potential risks to providers and patient  
 
 (4)  Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained.    
 
There is an increa sing eagerness among scien tists, clinicians, patients, and health systems to introduce 
pharmacogenetic information, including SLCO1B1 genotype
 , into clinical care. However, it is unknown how 
this will impact clinical out comes. This study w ill evaluate th e impact that SLCO1B1 genotype testing has on 
statin use, LDL cholesterol l evels, and risk of statin myopathy  within a health system while posing no more than 
minimal harm to the  providers and patients in that system. 
  (5)  Resources  
 
 ( a )  Research Space : 
 Enrolled patient s’ blood samples will be sent for SLCO1B1 genotyping to the Boston Heart Diagnostics 
laboratory in Fr amingham, MA.  
 
 (b) Other Research Resources:  
 
The research will be  conducted in VA Boston research space in t he Section of General Internal Medicine and 
the Massachusetts Veterans Ep idemiology Res earch a nd Informat ion Center (MAVERIC), equipped with 
computers networked to the VA intranet for access to VINCI serv ers. 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
16 
  
(i) Publications from Last Funding Period (as applicable) : N/A 
 
(j) Literature Citations (as applicable) . 
 
1. Martin SS, Blumenthal RS. Concepts and Controversies: The 2013  American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Asso ciation Risk Assessment and Cholesterol Trea tment Guidelines. Ann. 
Intern. Med. Jan 28 2014. 
2. Kochanek K, Xu J, Murphy S, Mini ño A, Kung H . Deaths: final da ta for 2009. National Vital Statistics 
Report. 2011;60(3). 
3. Kazis LE, Ren XS, Lee A, et al. H ealth status in VA patients: results from the Veterans Health Study. 
Am. J. Med. Qual. Jan-Feb 1999;14(1):28-38. 
4. Agha Z, Lofgren RP, VanRuiswyk JV, Layde PM. Are patients at V eterans Affairs medical centers 
sicker? A comp arative analys is of health status and medical res ource use. Arch. Intern. Med. Nov 27 
2000;160(21):3252-3257. 
5. Wilson PW, D'Agostino RB, Levy D, Belanger AM, Silbershatz H, Kannel WB. Pre diction of coronary 
heart disease using risk factor categories. Circulation. May 12 1998;97(18):1837-1847. 
6. National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Third Report of the National Cholesterol Education Program 
(NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Tre atment of Hi gh Blood Cholesterol in Adults 
(Adult Treatment Panel III).  National Institutes of H ealth; Septembe r 2002 2002. NIH Public ation 
Number 02-5215. 
7. Mills EJ, Rachlis B, Wu P, Dever eaux PJ, Arora P, P erri D. Pri mary prevention of cardiovascular 
mortality and events with statin treatments: a network meta-ana lysis involving more than 65,000 
patients. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. Nov 25 2008;52(22):1769-1781. 
8. Baigent C, Keech A, Kearney PM, et al. Efficacy and safety of cholesterol-lowering treatment: 
prospective meta-analysis of da ta from 90,056 partici pants in 14 randomised trials of statins. Lancet. Oct 
8 2005;366(9493):1267-1278. 
9. Stone NJ, Robinson J, Lichten stein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/ AHA Guid eline on the Treatment of Blood 
Cholesterol to Reduce Atherosclero tic Cardiovascular Risk in Ad ults: A Report of the American College 
of Cardiology/American Heart Asso ciation Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. Nov 12 
2013. 
10. Ho PM, Magid DJ, S hetterly SM, et al. Medication nonadherence is associated with a broad range of 
adverse outcomes in patients w ith coronary artery disease. Am. Heart J. Apr 2008;155(4):772-779. 
11. Zhang H, Plutzky J, Skentzos S, et al. Discontinuation of statins in routine care settings: a cohort study. 
Ann. Intern. Med. Apr 2 2013;158(7):526-534. 
12. Ne
wby LK, LaPointe NM, Chen AY, et al. Long-term adherence to evidence-based secondary 
prevention therapies in coronary artery disease. Circulation. Jan 17 2006;113(2):203-212. 
13. Ellis JJ, Erickson SR, Stevens on JG, Bernstein SJ, Stiles RA, Fendrick AM. Suboptimal statin adherence 
and discontinuati on in primary and sec ondary prevention populat ions. J. Gen. Intern. Med. Jun 
2004;19(6):638-645. 
14. Watanabe JH , Bounthavong M, Chen T, Ney JP. Asso ciation of Polypharmacy a nd Statin New-User 
Adherence in a Veterans Healt h Administration Population A Retr ospective Cohort Study. Ann. 
Pharmacother. 2013;47(10):1253-1259. 
15. Shalev V, Chodick G, Silber H, Kokia E, Jan J, Heymann AD. Continuation of statin treatment and all-
cause mortality: a population-based cohort study. Arch. Intern. Med. Feb 9 2009;169(3):260-268. 
16. Rasmussen JN, Chong A, Alter DA . Relationship between adherenc e to evidence-based 
pharmacotherapy and long-term mort ality after acute myocardial infarction. JAMA. Jan 10 
2007;297(2):177-186. 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
17 
 17. Silva MA, Swanson AC, Gandhi PJ, Tataronis GR. Statin-related adverse events: a meta-analysis. Clin. 
Ther. Jan 2006;28(1):26-35. 
18. Law M, Rudnicka AR. Statin saf ety: a systematic review. Am. J. Cardiol. Apr 17 2006;97(8A):52C-
60C. 
19. Armitage J. The safety of sta tins in clinical practice. Lancet. Nov 24 2007;370(9601):1781-1790. 
20. Wilke RA, Ramsey LB, J ohnson SG, et al. The clinical pharmacog enomics implementation consortium: 
CPIC guideline for SLCO 1B1 and simvastatin -induced myopathy. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. Jul 
2012;92(1):112-117. 
21. Thompson PD, Clarkson PM, Rosen son RS. An ass essment of statin  safety by muscle experts. Am. J. 
Cardiol. Apr 17 2006;97(8A):69C-76C. 
22. Buettner C, Davis RB, Leveille SG, Mittleman MA, Mukamal KJ. Prevalence of musculoskeletal pain 
and statin use. J. Gen. Intern. Med. Aug 2008;23(8):1182-1186. 
23. Kashani A, Phillips CO, Foody JM, et al. Risks associated with  statin therapy: a systematic overview of 
randomized clinical trials. Circulation. Dec 19 2006;114(25):2788-2797. 
24. Joy TR, Monjed A, Zou GY, Hegele RA, McDonald CG, Mahon JL. N- of-1 (single-pa tient) trials for 
statin-related myalgia. Ann. Intern. Med. 2014;160(5):301-310. 
25. Tompkins R, Schwartzbard A, Gia nos E, Fisher E, Weintraub H. A  current approach to statin 
intolerance. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. Apr 11 2014. 
26. Ahmad Z. Statin intolerance. Am. J. Cardiol. May 15 2014;113(10):1765-1771. 
27. Link E, Parish S, Armitage J, et al. SLCO1B1 variants and stat in-induced myopathy--a genomewide 
study. N. Engl. J. Med. Aug 21 2008;359(8):789-799. 
28. Hagenbuch B, Meier PJ. Organic an ion transporti ng polypeptides  of the OATP/ SLC21 family: 
phylogenetic classification as OATP/ SLCO superfamily, new nome nclature and molecular/functional 
properties. Pflugers Arch. Feb 2004;447(5):653-665. 
29. Konig J, Seithel A, G radhand U, Fromm MF. Pharmacogenomics of human OATP transporters. Naunyn 
Schmiedebergs Arch. Pharmacol. Mar 2006;372(6):432-443. 
30. Donnelly LA, Doney AS, Tavendale R, et al. Common nonsynonymou s substitutions in SLCO1B1 
predispose to statin intolerance in routinely treated individuals with type 2 diabetes: a go-DARTS study. 
Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. Feb 2011;89(2):210-216. 
31. Puccetti L, Ciani F , Auteri A. Genetic involvement in statins induced myopa thy. Preliminary data from 
an observational case-control study. Athero sclerosis. Jul 2010;211(1):28-29. 
32. Brunham LR, Lansberg PJ, Zhang L, et al. Differential effect of the rs4149056 variant in SLCO1B1 on 
myopathy associated with simv astatin and atorvastatin. Pharmacogenomics J. Jun 2012;12(3):233-237. 
33. Ramsey LB, Johnson SG, Caudle KE, et al. The Clinical Pharmaco genetics Implementation Consortium 
(CPIC) guideline  for SLCO1B1 and simvastatin -induced m yopathy: 2014 update. Clin. Pharmacol. 
Ther. Jun 11 2014. 
34. Voora D, Shah SH, Spasojevic I, et al. The SLCO1B1*5 genetic variant is associated with statin-
induced side effects. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. Oct 20 2009;54(17):1609-1616. 
35. Oshiro C, Mangravite L, Klei n T, Altman R. Pha rmGKB very impor tant pharmacogene: SLCO1B1. 
Pharmacogenet. Genomics. Mar 2010;20(3):211-216. 
36. Exome Aggregation Consortium. ExAC Browser Beta. 2015; http://exac.broadinstitute.org . Accessed 
February 20, 2015, 2015. 
37. Canestaro WJ, Austin MA, Thummel KE. Genetic factors affecting  statin concentrations and subsequent 
myopathy: a HuGENet systematic review. Genet. Med. Nov 2014;16(11):810-819. 
38. Whirl-Carrillo M, McD onagh EM, Hebert JM, et al. Pharmacogenom ics knowledge for personalized 
medicine. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. Oct 2012;92(4):414-417. 
39. Bielinski SJ, Olson JE, Pathak J , et al. Preemptive genotyping for personalized medicine: design of the 
right drug, right  dose, right time-using g enomic data to indivi dualize treatment protocol. Mayo Clin. 
Proc. Jan 2014;89(1):25-33. 
VA Boston Healthcare System – Request to Conduct Research Protocol 
18 
 40. Karnes JH, Van Driest S, Bow ton EA, et al. Using systems appro aches to address ch allenges  for clinical 
implementation of pharmacogenomics. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol. Med. Mar-Apr 2014;6(2):125-
135. 
41. Grant RW, O'Brien KE, Waxler JL, et al. Personalized genetic r isk counseling to motivate diabetes 
prevention: a randomized trial. Diabetes Care. Jan 2013;36(1):13-19. 
42. Vassy JL, O'Brien KE, Waxler JL, et al. Impact of literacy and  numeracy on motivation for behavior 
change after diabetes genetic risk testing. Med. Decis. Making. Jul-Aug 2012;32(4):606-615. 
43. Vassy JL, McLaughlin HM, MacRae CA, et al. A One-Page Summary Report of Genome Sequencing 
for the Healthy Adult. Public health genomics. Jan 21 2015. 
44. Fiore LD, Brophy M, Ferguson RE, et al. A point-of-care clinic al trial comparing ins ulin administered 
using a sliding scale versus a weight-based regimen. Clin. Trials. Apr 2011;8(2):183-195. 
45. D'Avolio L, Ferguson R, Goryachev S, et al. Implementation of the Department of Veterans Affairs' first 
point-of-care clinical trial. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. June 1, 2012 2012;19(e1):e170-e176. 
46. U.S. Department of Veterans A ffairs Office of Research and Dev elopment. Point of Care Research 
(POC-R). 2015; http://www.research.va.gov/services/csrd/point-of-care.cfm . Accessed February 23, 
2015, 2015. 
47. Weir CR, Butler J, Thrae n I, et al. Veterans H ealthcare Admini stration providers' attitudes and 
perceptions regarding pragmatic trials embedded at the point of  care. Clin. Trials. Mar 20 2014. 
48. Vassy JL, Shrader P , Yang Q, et al. Genetic associations with metabolic syndrome and its quantitative 
traits by race/ethnicity in the United States. Metab. Syndr. Relat. Disord. Dec 2011;9(6):475-482. 
49. Vassy JL, Durant NH, Kabagambe EK, et al. A genotype risk scor e predicts type 2 diabetes from young 
adulthood: the CARDIA study. Diabetologia. Oct 2012;55(10):2604-2612. 
50. Vassy JL, Hivert MF, Porneala  B, et al. Polygenic type 2 diabe tes prediction at the limit of common 
variant detection. Diabetes. Feb 11 2014. 
51. Vassy JL, Mahapatra PD, Meigs JB, et al. Genotype predicts typ e 2 diabetes in a dulthood in a 
multiracial adolescent population. Pediatrics. November 2012 2012;130(5):e1235-1242. 
52. Christensen KD, Vass y JL, Phillips KA, et al. Short-term costs of integrating whole-genome sequencing 
into primary care and cardiology settings: a pilot randomized t rial. Genet Med. 2018. 
53. Ramsey SD, Willke RJ, Glick H, et al. Cost-effectiveness analys is alongside clinical trials II-An ISPOR 
Good Research Practices Task Force report. Value Health. 2015;18(2):161-172. 
54. Sanders GD, Neumann PJ, Bas u A, et al. Recommendations for Cond uct, Methodological Practices, and 
Reporting of Cost-effectiveness Analyses: Second Panel on Cost- Effectiveness in Health and Medicine. 
JAMA. 2016;316(10):1093-1103. 
55. Frick KD. Microcosting quant ity data collection methods. Med Care. 2009;47(7 Suppl 1):S76-81.  
56. Glynn RJ, Brookhart MA, Stedman M, Avorn J, Solomon DH. Design of cluster-randomized trials of 
quality improvement in terventions aimed a t medical care provide rs. Med. Care. Oct 2007;45(10 Supl 
2):S38-43. 
57. Pocock SJ. Clinical Trials: A Practical Approach.  New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1983. 
58. Julious SA. Sample sizes for clinical trials with normal data.  Stat. Med. Jun 30 2004;23(12):1921-1986. 
 
 