 
  
Effects of Task -Specific Step Training on Reactive Balance  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Study P rotocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
March 24, 2025  
Suzie Lee  
[Date]  
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 1 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  INSTRUCTIONS:  
● Use this “TEMPLATE PROTOCOL (HRP- 503)” to prepare a study protocol 
outlining your research plan.  
● Depending on the nature of your study, some major sections might not be 
applicable to your research. If so, simply  mark as “N/A.” For example, a simple 
survey might have many sections with “N/A.”  For subsections  (e.g., 1.x or 8.x ) 
you can mark as “N/A” if you are certain that the subsection is not applicable . 
● Once the IRB/HRPP approves your submission, your  latest approved version of 
the protocol  will be stored  in the IRB Protocol Management  online system .  
● If your research plan changes and you need to modify the protocol, please submit 
an amendment to Protocol  Management with the requested modifications. 
Download your current  protocol from Protocol Management and indicate  the 
changes /revisions  using the t rack c hanges  feature in order  to make review of the 
modifications easier to follow. If you are unable to use  track changes , please 
create a new paragraph wherever you need to make a change, and indicate 
“Amendment: Date” before making a change to any section. Protocol management will store the  older versions  of your protocol  if the  IRB or HRPP 
staff need to compare them during the review.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Include the full protocol title .  
 Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses  
       of balance  
 
PROTOCOL NUMBER:   
Include the number assigned in P rotocol M anagement  (verify this has been added 
before submitting protocol to HRPP ).  
 
 21-1072 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
Full Name  and Degrees : Michael L. Madigan, PhD  
Department : Industrial and Systems Engineering 
Telephone Number : 231- 3543 
Email Address : mlm@vt.edu  
 FUNDING:  
 
Sponsor (s): None  
 Funded already or in the proposal phase?:  N/A 
Is Virginia Tech the primary awardee or the coordinating center of this grant or 
contract? If not, list the primary institution : N/A  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 2 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019   
 VERSION NUMBER/DATE:   
Include the version number and date of this protocol. Versions should start at 1.0. 
 Version 1.0  December 14, 2021 Version 2.0  April 28, 2022 Version 3.0  May 18, 2022 Version 4.0  July 3, 2022 
Version 5.0  October 3, 2022 
 
REVISION HISTORY:  
Use this table to keep track of changes. Add more rows as needed.  
 
Revision 
# Version Date  Brief Summary of Changes  
(i.e., the different sections)  Consent 
Change?  
1 April 28, 2022  Changes to Research Protocol and Informed 
Consent form requested by HRPP.  yes 
2 May 18, 2022  Changes to Research Protocol and Informed 
Consent form requested by HRPP.  yes 
3 July 3, 2022  Changes to Research Protocol and Informed 
Consent form requested by HRPP.  yes 
4 October 3 , 
2022  Clarified in section 19.3 how de -identified data 
will be shared with external collaborators . no 
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 3 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  Table of Contents  
1.0 Study Summary  4 
2.0 Objectives  5 
3.0 Background  5 
4.0 Study Endpoints  8 
5.0 Study Design and Sta tistical Analysis Plan  9 
6.0 Setting  10 
7.0 Study Intervention(s)/Investigational Agent(s)  12 
8.0 Procedures Involved  16 
9.0 Data and Specimen Long Term Storage and Use  22 
10.0  Sharing of Results with Subjects  24 
11.0  Study Timelines  24 
12.0  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  24 
13.0  Vulnerable Populations  27 
14.0  Number of Subjects  28 
15.0  Recruitment Methods  29 
16.0  Withdrawal of Subjects  30 
17.0  Risks to Subjects  31 
18.0  Potential Benefits to Subjects  34 
19.0  Data Management and Confidentiality  34 
20.0  Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  36 
21.0  Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  38 
22.0  Compensation for Research Related Injury  38 
23.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  39 
24.0  Conse nt Process  39 
25.0  Process to Document Consent in Writing 43 
26.0  Resources Available  44 
27.0  Multi- Site Re search  45 
 
  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 4 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  1.0 Study Summary  
 
Study Title  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing 
responses to losses of balance  
Study Design  A three -group posttest -only design.  
Primary Objective  To validate the use of wearable sensors for capturing 
responses to losses of balance (LOBs).  During laboratory 
testing, w e will use both wearable sensors and a laboratory-
based optoelectronic motion c apture system to measure 
responses to LOBs after laboratory- induced trips  and slips .  
During real -world testing, we will use wearable sensors to 
measure responses to LOBs after any naturally -occur ring 
trips or slips  during the real -world daily lives of par ticipants.  
Participants for this primary objective are referred to as 
"non -balance training participants."  
Secondary 
Objective(s)  Responses to LOB measured during both laboratory testing 
and real -world testing will be used to compare between three 
types  of balance training. Participants for this secondary 
objective are referred to as "balance training participants."  
Study Population  Adults age 65-80 
Sample Size  60 total including 30 non-balance training participants and 
30 balance training participants .   
Research 
Intervention(s)/ Investigational Agent(s)  Data will be obtained using 1) a laboratory -based 
optoelectronic motion capture system  to measure responses 
to LOBs (i.e. body movements ) after  laboratory -induced 
trips and slips, 2) wearable sensors  to measure responses to 
LOBs after laboratory -induced and any naturally -occurring 
real-world trips and  slips , 3) a wearable voice recorder  to 
describe any real -world trips  or slips . 
 
For balance training participants , each participants will 
complete one of three different research interventions:  non-
treadmill training (NT); treadmill training (TT); or  strength 
training (ST) .  All interventions will be  performed two times 
per week for three  weeks.   In this document, balance training 
participants will be referred to as NT participants, TT participants, or ST participants (depending upon which 
intervention they complete).  
Study Duration for 
Individual 
Participants  The study duration for ind ividual participants will be 5 -7 
weeks, not including screening. 
Acronyms and 
Definitions  LOB - Loss of balance  
PBT -  perturbation balance training  
NT -  Non -treadmill training  
TT - Treadmill training  
ST - Strength and balance training  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 5 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019   
 
2.0 Objectives  
2.1 Describe the purpose, specific aims, or objectives  of this study : 
 
The primary objective is to validate the use of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses of balance (LOBs).  During laboratory testing, we will use wearable sensors and a laboratory- based optoelectronic motion capture system t o simultaneously 
measure responses to LOBs after  laboratory- induced trips and slips.  During real -world 
testing, we will use wearable sensors to measure responses to LOBs after any naturally -
occurring trips or slips during the real -world daily lives of participants.  
The secondary objective of this study is to compare the effects of three balance training 
exercises on responses to LOBs measured in the laboratory and in the real -world during 
daily life.   
 
2.2 State the hypotheses to be tested :  
 
Hypotheses for our primary objective  that will involve non -balance training participants : 
 Hypothesis 1: LOB response measures obtained from the wearable sensors  after lab -
induced trips and slips will exhibit statistical agreement with the same measures obtained simultaneously from a laborat ory-based optoelectronic motion capture system. 
 Hypothesis 2: Real -world LOB responses will show greater variety than laboratory-
induced LOB responses.  
Hypotheses for our secondary objective  that will involve balance training participants : 
 Hypothesis 3: N T and TT  participants will exhibit improved LOB  responses after lab -
induced trips and slips compared to ST  participants.  
Hypothesis 4: NT and TT participants will exhibit statistically -equivalent LOB  
responses after lab -induced trips  and slips . 
Hypothesis 5: NT and TT participants will exhibit improved LOB responses after any 
naturally -occurring real -world trips  and slips . 
 
3.0 Background  
3.1 Summarize the relevant prior research on  this topic and gaps in current 
knowledge within the field of study : 
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 6 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  Falls are the leading cause of injuries among older adults. An estimated 60% of falls 
among community- dwelling  older adults are due to LOBs induced by tripping or slipping 
[Berg 1997] . Laboratory studies have shown that these falls generally result from an age-
related decline in balance recovery ability after an LOB [ Pavel 2007; van Dieen 2005]. 
However, technical  challenges with capturin g the kinematics of these events outside the 
lab has resulted in at least two knowledge gaps that limit progress in fall prevention 
research. F irst, there is a need to validate the use of wearable sensors (that can be used 
outside the lab in the real -world ) by comparing their measurements with a gold- standard 
laboratory system.  Second, it is unclear if gait and t ripping/slipping events differ 
meaningfully between the laboratory and real -world. Laboratory trips and slips are  
contrived, highly- controlled, and often not unexpected, and likely result in more 
stereotypical LOB responses.  Real -world trips and slips are typically unexpected, have 
more variable etiology and environmental  contributions, and as a result likely elicit more 
variable LOB responses.  Acco rdingly, there is a critical need to evaluate the use of 
wearable sensors to capture responses to LOBs both in the laboratory and in the real -
world. 
 Multiple studies report a reduction in real -world fall risk after perturbation -balance 
training (PBT)  [Rosenblatt 2013; Grabiner 2012; Bhatt 2012] .  These studies  speculate 
that this reduction in fall risk is due to improved responses to LOBs . An LOB is defined 
as an event when the postural control of the body that resists gravity (balance) is 
momentarily lost, and is then followed by either successful recovery of balance without a fall, or a fall.   To our knowledge, no studies have shown a direct training effect of 
PBT on responses to real -world LOBs. Until a real -world effect is demonstrated, PBT 
studies reporting a reduction in falls may be confounded by concomitant changes such as in activity intensity, safe/risky behavior, and the daily living environment rather than true PBT -induced improvements in balance.  
Accordingly, evaluating responses to real -world LOBs and their context (i.e. the 
circumstances surrounding the LOB) are critical in evaluating the effectiveness of PBT. Prior studies have been limited to participant recall to obtain information on fall context despite well -documented inaccuracies in sel f-reporting [ Perry 2012; Zecevic 2006] . 
Rather, we propose to track body movements during responses to real -world LOBs and 
their context using wearable sensors and voice recorders .  
The study proposed in this IRB application will compare two types of PBT ( NT and 
TT) to an alternative training (ST) among adults age 65- 80.  This study may link 
training -induced improvements to improvements in real -world LOB responses, a truly 
novel and innovative link that has previously not been possible.  
 
Berg, W.P., H.M. Al essio, E.M. Mills, and C. Tong, Circumstances and consequences of 
falls in  independent community- dwelling older adults. Age Ageing, 1997. 26(4): p. 261-
8. 
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 7 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  Rosenblatt, N.J., J. Marone , and M.D. Grabiner, Preventing trip- related falls by 
community -dwelling adults: a prospective study. J Am Geriatr Soc, 2013. 61(9): p. 1629-
31. 
 Grabiner, M.D., M.L. Bareither, S. Gatts, J. Marone, and K.L. Troy, Task- specific 
training reduces trip- related fall risk in women. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 2012. 44(12): p. 
2410- 4. 
 Bhatt, T., F. Yang, and Y.C. Pai, Learning to resist gait -slip falls: long -term retention in 
community -dwelling older adults. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 2012. 93: p. 557- 564. 
 Pavol , M.J. and Y.C. Pai, Deficient limb support is a major contributor to age differences 
in falling. J  Biomech, 2007. 40(6): p. 1318- 25. 
 Perry, L., D. Kendrick, R. Morris, S. Dinan, T. Masud, D. Skelton, S. Iliffe, and T. ProAct65+ Study, Completion and return of fall diaries varies with participants' level of education, first language, and baseline fall risk. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci, 2012. 67(2): p. 210- 4. 
 van Dieen, J.H., M. Pijnappels, and M.F. Bobbert, Age -related intrinsic limitations in 
preventing a trip  and regaining balance after a trip. Safety Science, 2005. 43: p. 437- 453. 
Zecevic, A.A., A.W. Salmoni, M. Speechley, and A.A. Vandervoort, Defining a fall and reasons for falling: comparisons among the views of seniors, health care providers, and the research literature. Gerontologist, 2006. 46(3): p. 367- 76. 
 
3.2 Describe any relevant preliminary data:  
 
Preliminary data on PBT from our group is cited below.  In short, these data show PBT improved LOB responses after lab -induced trips and slips.  
 
In Bieryla et al. (2007), we showed beneficial effects of TT on laboratory- induced trips.  
In Allin et al. (2019), we showed beneficial effects of sl ip training on laboratory-
induced slips.  I n Allin et al. (2020), we showed beneficial effects of TT on laboratory-
induced trips and slips.   Bieryla KA, Madigan ML, Nussbaum MA. Practicing recovery from a simulated trip 
improves recovery kinematics after an actual trip. Gait & Posture, 2007, 26(2), 208-213. 
Allin LJ, Nussbaum MA, Madigan ML. Two novel slip training methods improve the 
likelihood of recovering balance and avoiding a fall after a laboratory- induced slip. 
Journal of Applied Biomechanics (2019) 35(1): 37- 43. 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 8 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  Allin LJ, Brolinson PG, Beach BM, Kim S, Nussbaum MA, Roberto KA, Madigan ML. 
Perturbation- based balance training targeting both slip-  and trip- induced falls among 
older adults: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Geriatrics (2020) 20:205.   
 
 
3.3 Based on the existing literature, provide the scientific or scholarly rationale for and significance of your research and how will it add to existing knowledge : 
 
This study will address two major knowledge gaps in the literature.   
First, there is a need to validate the use of wearable sensors (that can be used to capture 
responses to LOBs in the real -world) to measure responses to LOBs with simultaneous 
measures obtained from gold- standard laborat ory-based equipment.   
Second , PBT studies aiming to reduce the risk falls have almost exclusively used 
specialized treadmills to apply perturbations during training.  While this type of training has shown beneficial effects on responses to laboratory- induced LOBs , the cost of these 
specialized treadmills may present a barrier to widespread adoption of this training by some individuals or organizations.  This study will evaluate an alternative PBT not requiring a specialized treadmill that would allevia te cost as a barrier to its use, and 
measure the effects of this training on responses to LOBs after both laboratory- induced 
trips and slips, and naturally- occurring trips and slips.   
 
4.0 Study Endpoints  
4.1 Describe the primary and secondary study  endpoints. See links below for 
discussion of study endpoints and how they may differ from study objectives. These are most common in clinical trials but are sometimes applicable to other types of biomedical  research , as well as social, 
behavioral, or educational research. See link below for a discussion.  
https://docs.google.com/docume nt/d/1Wocz7K7a0hCQJPPO_khh5l1
SQQjhGDDGHzcOPRHR5Tw/edit?usp=sharing   
 
Study endpoints for all participants will include:  
1) measurements of body movements during responses to LOBs  after lab -induced 
trips and slips  
2) two or three weeks of using wearable sensors to measure body movements during responses to LOBs after naturally- occurring trips  and slips  during daily life  
3) during the two or three  weeks of using wearable sensors, participant s will also 
use a digital voice recorder t o record a description of the context of each real -
world LOB . Specifically, participants will be asked to make a short recording 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 9 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  after each LOB to describe (1) what they were doing at the time (e.g., “I was 
walking across my living room”), (2) how they los t their balance (e.g., “I tripped 
over my dog”), (3) why they lost their balance (e.g., “my dog ran in front of me to bark at the mailman”), and (4) the results of LOB (e.g., “I fell, or did not fall, as a result”).   
 
4.2 Describe any primary or secondary sa fety endpoints. These should be 
included for all studies that are greater  than minimal risk . (Minimal risk: 
The probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research that are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.) : 
 
No safety endpoint  is included while using wearable sensors in the real -world during 
daily life because the use of the wearable sensors does not increase risk above that 
normally experienced during every day life.  
 During balance training (among balance training participant s), safety endpoints will 
include number of times the spotter is needed to provide support to the participant during training, and the number of times the participant is fully supported by the harness during measurements of responses to lab -induced LOBs.  
  
 
 
5.0 Study Design and Statistical Analysis Plan  
5.1 Describe the basic study design/approach (e.g., qualitative study using five 
focus groups of first year students to describe assimilation into the university community;  randomized controlled trial of a be havioral change 
intervention to increase  dietary  intake of whole grains ; pre- post -test 
evaluation of new pedagogical techniques to improve adult literacy) : 
 
For our primary objective, a one -group repeated -measures design will be used to validate 
the use of wearable sensors to capture responses to LOBs.  Subjects will use w earable 
sensors for three weeks to capture responses to naturally- occurring trips and slips during 
daily life.  Subjects will th en complete a laboratory session to captur e lab-induced LOB 
responses simultaneously from the wearable sensors and a gold- standard optoelectronic 
motion capture system.    For our secondary objective, a  three-group posttest -only design will be used t o compare 
the effects of three balance training exercises on  responses to LOBs after laboratory-
induced trips and slips , and two weeks of naturally -occurring real -world trips  and slips .  
Subjects will first complete three weeks of their assigned training.  Subje cts will then 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 10 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  complete a laboratory session to capture lab -induced LOB responses simultaneously from 
the wearable sensors and a gold -standard optoelectronic motion capture system.  Subjects 
will then use wearable sensors for t wo weeks to capture responses to naturally -occurring 
trips and slips during daily life. 
 
 
5.2 Describe corresponding data analysis plan/approach (e.g., content analysis of focus group transcripts ; descriptive analysis followed by linear 
regression modeling;  nonparametric analysis of pre - and post -test 
measures) :
 
 
Hypothesis 1: LOB response measures obtained from the wearable sensors  after lab -
induced trips and slips will exhibit statistical agree ment with the same measures 
simultaneously obtained from a gold- standard laboratory- based motion capture system. 
  
To address Hypothesis 1, a  Bland -Altman analysis will be used to  evaluate level of 
agreement between the two systems. This approach will reveal any measurement bias  
between the two systems, and provide bounds for these differences.  
 Hypothesis 2: Real -world LOB responses will show greater variety than laboratory-
induced LOB responses.  To address Hypothesis 2, a repeated -measures ANOVA (wit h a random effect for 
subject) will first be  used to compare means of key kinematic measures of LOB 
responses between environments (real -world vs  lab). Second, we will compare statistical 
variability by examining the model residuals between real -world and lab environments 
using hypothesis testing (essentially Levene’s test) and interval estimation to quantify potential  differences in variability.  
 Hypothesis 3: N T and TT  participants will exhibit improved LOB  responses after lab -
induced trips and slips comp ared to ST  participants.   
 To address H ypothesis  3, response variables will be compared between NT , TT, and ST  
participants using a one -way ANOVA with group as the independent variable and 
covariates included as needed. A significant effect of group will be followed by post -hoc 
analysis using Dunnett’s test to determine whether NT, TT, or both differ from ST .  
 Hypothesis 4: NT and TT participants will exhibit statistically -equivalent LOB  responses 
after lab -induced trips  and slips . 
 To address Hypothesis 4,  agreement of response variables between NT and TT 
participants will be evaluated using statistical equivalence test.   A comparison between the three balance training exercises on LOB responses after any 
naturally -occurring real -world trips will be done qualitatively and thus not have an 
explicit hypotheses to be tested. 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 11 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019   
 
6.0 Setting  
6.1 Describe the sites or locations where your research team will conduct the 
research.  Consider each of the items listed below:  
● Identify where your research team will identify and recruit potential subjects.  
● Identify where the team will perform the research procedures.  
● Describe t he composition and involvement of any community 
advisory board(s).  
● For research conducted in other locations, describe:  
o Site-specific regulations or customs affecting the research at 
those locations. 
o Local scientific and ethical review structure at those locations.  
Examples include work in other cultures or ethnic groups (within or outside of the U.S.)  and work with churches. The 
HRPP will provide additional guidance for international research.  
 
 All p articipants will be recruited from the Virginia Tech , NRV, and Roanoke Valley  
communities . 
 Sessions involving laboratory- induced trips and slips for all participants will take place in 
our research lab on the VT campus (556 Whittemore Hall).  Also during this session, the investigators will train the participants on the use of the wearable sensors and voice recorders.  
 Balance training sessions  for balance training participants , including a ll three types of 
balance training , will be performed in our r esearch lab on the VT campus (556 
Whittemore Hall)  or our research lab leased by VT in the University City Boulevard 
Mall.  
 When the two or three weeks of using wearable sensors is complete, the investigators will meet up with the participant to retrieve the sensors from the participant.  This meeting will take place either in our research lab on the VT campus or in the University City Boulevard Mall.   Other interactions between the investigator and each participant will occur over the phone to provide any troubleshooting or address any issues with wearable sensor use.  At least two telephone calls will be made (one at the end of the first day of sensor use and one at the end of the third day of sensor use), with additional calls up to daily calls possible as needed.  
 
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 12 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  7.0 Study Intervention(s)/Investigational Agent(s)  
7.1 Describe the study interventions (including behavioral interventions) and/or 
investigational agents (e.g., drugs or  devices ) to be used in this study .  Consider 
each of the items listed below:   
● Drug/Device Handling: If the research involves drugs or devices, 
describe your plans to store, handle, and administer the drugs or devices so that they will be used only on subjects , and only by 
authorized investigators. 
● Describe whether any of the following will be used: microwaves, X -
rays, DEXA scans, general anesthesia, or sedation 
● If control of the drugs or devices used in this protocol will be 
accomplished by following an establi shed, approved organizational 
SOP (e.g., Research Pharmacy SOP for the Control of Investigational Drugs, etc.), please reference the SOP in this section. 
  
Study Investigational Agents  
 The wearable sensors will be commercially -available inertial measurement units 
(https://apdm.com/wearable -sensors/) are the size of a matchbox and are specifically 
designed for wearing to measure body movements.  They come with specialized straps to secure then on the body where desire d.  Three sensors will be worn by each participant 
including one on the top of each shoe using small pouches that are secured to the shoes using the shoe laces, and one sensor on the sternum using a light -weight shoulder harness 
worn under clothes.   
 
The portable voice recorder ( Sansa Clip Zip MP3 player ) is a commercially -available 
device.   
 These sensors are self -contained , do not require any wires for connectivity, and will be 
used in a manner consistent with their approved use.  The laboratory -based equipment used to measure responses to LOBs will be an 
optoelectronic motion capture system.  This system includes 13 cameras and a CPU unit for data collection.  Reflective markers (approximately 1 cm in diameter) are placed on the participant at selec ted anatomical locations to measure body movements and 
responses to LOBs.  
 No microwaves, X -rays, DEXA scans, general anesthesia, or sedation will be used as a 
part of the intervention.  However, DEXA scans will be used as a part of screening participants.  
  Study Interventions  
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 13 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  To address our s econdary objective , balance training  participant s will be assigned to 
one of t hree balance training exercises/interventions including TT, NT, and ST.  No 
drugs are used in this study.  Each training session for TT, N T, and ST will be one -on-
one with the investigator, approximately 30- 45 minutes in duration, and two sessions 
will be completed each week for three weeks.  A description of each session of each 
type of training follows.  
 
Each TT session will involve  a trip  training protocol with a specialized treadmill 
(Aviles et al., 2019). TT perturbations will be induced while participants are standing on a modified treadmill (Freemotion 800, Freemotion Fitness, Logan, UT). The treadmill belt will then be accelerated pos teriorly, varying in speed from 0.5 to 2.4 
mph, to induce a forward LOB within about 40 msec. Participants will be instructed to react naturally and try to establish a stable gait after perturbations and an initial step over an obstacle. The treadmill belt  speed will be maintained until one of two 
conditions are met: (1) participant established a stable gait for several strides, or (2) participant received substantial support from a fall protection harness or spotter(s) standing next to him/her. Based upon the performance of participants, the treadmill speed will progressively be increased during each session to continue challenge participants and to maintain variability over the course of training. Perturbations in the reverse belt direction (i.e., 0.5 mph anteriorly) will also be included intermittently to reduce anticipation. A slender, lightweight rectangular foam block ( 7.5 cm  x 7.5 cm 
cross section) will be placed within 3 -7 cm in front of the toes before each trial  to elicit 
a step over an obstacle, similar to that needed during an actual trip. Given the suddenness of these perturbations, participant s will wear a fall protection harnes s 
supported by an overhead gantry to protect knee or hand from contact with the 
treadmill in the event of an unsuccessful attempt to recover balance. Each TT session will involve exposure to up to 40 treadmill perturbations with a rest break after every 10 perturbations.   
 Each NT session will involve four phases of voluntary/volitional stepping exercises . Each 
session will begin with a three -minute warm- up of walking on a treadmill and light 
stretching. Phase 1 – Rapid Stepping will involve volitional ste pping exercises from 
bilateral standing where a participant will start to fall forward and then take quick steps to recover balance. This exercise will be performed first without tripping obstacle, and then with a slender, lightweight rectangular foam bloc k (7.5 cm x 7.5 cm cross section) placed 
in front of the toes before stepping. Phase 2 – Trunk Control will involve similar stepping exercises as Phase 1, but with explicit instructions and emphasis on arresting trunk motion and controlling trunk posture t o be vertical at touchdown of the first recovery 
step.  Phase 3 – Lean Release will involve similar exercises as Phases 1 and 2, but with 
the addition of an “unexpected” forward LOB. The participant will lean slightly forward while being supported by a tra iner with their hands on the participant’s shoulders and 
arms fully extended in front of the participant. Without warning, the trainer will release the participant, and the participant will take recovery steps to recover balance. Phase 4 – Simulated Trip w ill self -induce a slow -motion trip and practice stepping over the obstacle 
and continue walking. The participant will stand 15 -30 cm  away from the tripping 
obstacle, swing their foot forward to purposefully trip on the obstacle, then elevate the 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 14 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  obstructed foot over the obstacle to recover balance, and continue walking. We will 
encourage participant s to tak e a long initial recovery step and control trunk posture to be 
vertical at touchdown of the first recovery step. To prevent a fall in the event of an unsuccessful balance recovery  during any of the four phases of NT , the investigator and 
spotter will be nearby to provide support if needed.  The investigator will also 
demonstrate each phase before asking the participant  to complete them, and if necessary 
assistance will be provided during initial attempts  by the participant .  Each NT session 
will be individualized to each participant’s capability and rate of improvement  to 
continuously challenge the participant  while not asking them to overexert themselves .  
 
Each ST session will involve general balance and strength exercises adapted from the 
Otago Exercise Program (Campbell et al., 1997). Otago has shown its effectiveness in reducing fall risk in community- dwelling older adults, and thus it is chosen among m any 
other general exercise interventions to increase the level of evidence for demonstrating efficacy. In addition, similar to NT or TT, it can be performed individually. Each ST session will involve strength and balance exercises with varying ankle weight s or 
difficulty of the balance exercises (e.g., holding onto a wall or no support), which will be progressively increased based upon the performance of participants.  Strength exercises will include controlled squatting, lunges, knee bends, hip extensions, leg side raises, and toe raises.  Resistance will be provided with ankle weights.  Balance exercises will involve standing with feet side -by-side at decreasing distance, standing with one foot in 
front of the other, and standing on one foot.  Difficulty w ill progress by increasing angle 
weights and increasing difficulty of standing position (e.g. feet side by side and moving them closer together, one foot in front of the other and increasing the distance between them, and asking subjects to move their body while in these challenging feet positions).  
The progression of difficulty will be based on the investigators perception of the improving ability of the participant.  
 Aviles, J., Allin, L. J., Alexander, N. B., Van Mullekom, J., Nussbaum, M. A., & Madigan , M. L. (2019). Comparison of treadmill trip- like training versus tai chi to 
improve reactive balance among independent older adult residents of senior housing: a pilot controlled trial. The Journals of Gerontology: Series A, 74(9), 1497- 1503. 
 Campbell, A. J., Robertson, M. C., Gardner, M. M., Norton, R. N., Tilyard, M. W., & Buchner, D. M. (1997). Randomised controlled trial of a general practice programme of home based exercise to prevent falls in elderly women. B MJ, 315(7115), 1065- 1069. 
  
7.2 List the name of all drugs  (including any vitamins, supplements, herbs, or 
nicotine ) to be used in the study.  Indicate  whether  they have FDA 
approval, and list any limitations for their use :  
 
N/A 
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 15 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  7.3 List all devices, how they will be used, their purpose in the study, and if 
they will be used in a manner consistent with their approved uses. If they will be used in ways that are not yet FDA approved, indicate whether they need  an IDE or a determination that they are exempt from the IDE 
Determination. If a determination of significant risk or non- significant risk 
is needed for any of the devices, include the researcher’s recommendation for each of those devices :  
 
Commercially -available inertial measurement units (https://apdm.com/wearable -sensors/) 
are the size of a matchbox and are specifically designed for wearing to measure body movements.  They come with specialized straps to secure then on the body where desire d.  
Three sensors will be worn by each participant including one on the top of each shoe using small pouches that are secured to the shoes using the shoe laces, and one sensor on the sternum using a light -weight shoulder harness worn under clothes.   
 The portable voice recorder ( Sansa Clip Zip MP3 player ) is a  commercially -available 
device.   
 The above  sensors are self -contained , do not require any wires for connectivity, and will 
be used in a manner consistent with their approved use.  All participants will be used these devices, and will be provided detailed instructions on the use of the sensors.  None of these devices alter behavior in any way and thus do not increase risk beyond that during daily life.  None of these sensors using any ki nd of 
radiation. 
 The laboratory -based equipment used to measure responses to LOBs will be an 
optoelectronic motion capture system.  This system includes 13 cameras and a CPU unit for data collection.  Reflective markers (approximately 1 cm in diameter) ar e placed on 
the participant at selected anatomical locations to measure body movements and responses to LOBs.  
 
 
7.4 If the drug is investigational (has an IND) or the device has an IDE or a 
claim of abbreviated IDE (non- significant risk device), include the 
following information:  
● Identify the holder of the IND/IDE/ abbreviated IDE. 
● Explain procedures followed to comply with sponsor requirements for FDA regulated research for the following:  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 16 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019   Applicable to:  
FDA Regulation  IND Studies  IDE studies  Abbreviated 
IDE studies  
21 CFR 11  X X  
21 CFR 54  X X  
21 CFR 210  X   
21 CFR 211  X   
21 CFR 312  X   
21 CFR 812   X X 
21 CFR 820   X  
 
 
N/A 
 
     
8.0 Procedures Involved  
8.1 Describe and explain the study design:  
 
For our primary objective, a one -group repeated -measures design will be used to validate 
the use of wearable sensors to capture responses to LOBs.  Non -balance training 
participants  will use wearable sensors for three weeks to capture responses to naturall y-
occurring trips and slips during daily life.  Subjects will then complete a laboratory session to capture lab -induced LOB responses simultaneously from the wearable sensors 
and a gold- standard optoelectronic motion capture system.   
 For our secondary objective, a t hree-group posttest -only design will be used t o compare 
the effects of three balance training exercises on  responses to LOBs after laboratory-
induced trips and slips, and two weeks of naturally- occurring real -world trips and slips .  
Balance training participants  will first complete three weeks of their assigned training.  
Subjects will then complete a laboratory session to capture lab -induced LOB responses 
simultaneously from the wearable sensors and a gold- standard optoelectronic motion 
capture system.  Subjects will then use wearable sensors for two weeks to capture responses to naturally- occurring trips and slips during daily life. 
 
 
8.2 Provide a description of:  
● All research procedures being performed  
● If the study has more than one procedure, session, and/or subject population, descri be each procedure, session, and/or  study 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 17 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  population separately. For complex studies, you are encouraged to 
include a figure or chart. 
  
Recruitment and Informed Consent  
- Interested participants will respond to our recruitment strategies and contact the 
investigators. - The investigators will telephone interested participants and follow the telephone script 
included in the application to first screen participants for inclusion criteria .  If participants 
satisfy the inclusion criteria, the investigator will continue the telephone conversation and administer the health questionnaire described in an attachment to this application.  De -
identified information from this health questionnaire will then be reviewed by a health professional with specialist training for the geriatric population.  This specialist will be a board certified physician or board certified specialist in geriatric physical therapy.  
- If the participant passes the health q uestionnaire, then a DEXA assessment for 
osteoporosis will take place.  This assessment will be based upon a DEXA scan performed for this study, or DEXA scan completed within the last year.  
- If a DEXA scan is performed for this study, the scan will take p lace in the Human 
Integrative Physiology Lab, led by Dr. Kevin Davy.  Dr. Davy does not have a role in the current work, but his lab will be providing this service to the PI for a fee.  The Human Integrative Physiology Lab is in the Garvin Innovation Building in the CRC (1872 Pratt Drive, Suite 1575).  A member from the research team involved in this IRB application will meet the subject at this location to provide a lead.  Trained staff in this lab will conduct the scan.   
- If the participant passes the D EXA scan, she/he will have completed our screening 
process.   
- A copy of the informed consent form will be delivered to the participant, and the first 
visit will be scheduled (at least 24 hours after delivery of the informed consent form.  
- The investigat or will meet the participant in our r esearch lab.  The investigator will 
confirm the inclusion criteria and ask if they have any questions about the informed consent form.  All questions will be answered.  If the participant still wants to participate, they will sign the informed consent form, and be provided a copy for them to keep.  
 
Group Assignment and Training 
- Participant s will be randomly assigned to be either a non- balance training participant or 
a balance- training participant.  Balance training participants will then be assigned to 
either TT, NT, or ST .   
- If the participant is assigned to  balance training, this training will be completed twice a 
week for three weeks.   Each training session will be approximately 45 minutes  in 
duration.  The details of each type of training is described in detail in section 7.1. - NT, TT, and ST will all be customized to participants' capabilities, and training 
difficulty will pr ogressively increased based on participants' capabilities.  For NT, 
difficulty will be increased by 1) adding the obstacle to training during all four phases, 2) 
leaning the participant farther forward during Phase 3, and asking subjects to walk faster 
during Phase 4.  For TT, difficulty will be increased by increasing the maximum speed of 
the treadmill perturbations.  For ST, difficulty will be increased by using heavier ankle 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 18 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  weights and using more challenging balance postures.  The progression of difficulty will 
be based on the investigators perception of the improving ability of the participant.    - If the participant is assigned no training, then no such training will be performed.  
- All participants will then complete the two types of LOB response mea surements 
described below.  
 
Measure LOB responses in the laboratory:  
- Each participant  will complete a lab session to assess their response to an LOB after 
lab-induced trips and slips .  This session will take place in our research lab on the VT 
campus (556 Whittemore Hall).  During these sessions , participants will wear a safety 
harness supported overhead to prevent impact with the floor in the event of an 
unsuccessful balance recovery.  First, the appropriate size will be selected from a range of sizes we have in the lab.  Second, the investigator will assist the participant in donning the harness, securing all straps and connections, and inspecting and confirming the overall fit.  The PI (Madigan) has extensive experience with the harnesses, and will trai n 
the student investigators in their use.   - Participants will also wear reflective markers so researchers can measure their 
movements with a laboratory motion capture system.  As we have done for years, these markers will be affixed to clothing and skin at selected anatomical landmarks using double -sided tape.  Youngjae Lee will place markers on participants.  Markers will be 
place bilaterally on the shoes at the toes and heels, ankles, knees, hips, shoulders, elbows, wrists, and on a headband worn around the head.     - Participants will first complete a minimum of 10 walking trials along a 12 -meter -long 
walkway at a self -selected  speed. Instructions will be to “walk as if you have somewhere 
to go, and if tripped or slipped, recover your  balance and conti nue walking.” All 
participants will wear the same model of rubber -soled shoes and a safety  harness affixed 
to a ceiling -mounted track that spans the length of the walkway. After initial walking 
trials, trips  and slips will be induced during randomly- selected trials with walking trials 
and rest breaks interspersed.  As in our prior work, trips will be induced using a tripping obstacle that is initially  concealed and level with the walkway. Upon proper placement of 
the foot relative to the obst acle while walking,  the obstacle will be activated and quickly 
rise and result in a trip shortly after mid -swing. In an effort to add variety to the LOB 
responses, three trip obstacle heights from prior tripping studies will be used including 5, 7.5, and 10 cm.  Slips will be induced using the same methods and distraction efforts as in our preliminary studies. While the participant is facing away from the walkway and 
distracted, a contaminant or slipping hazard applied over a 0.9 × 0.9 m targeted section of  
the walkway to induce an  unexpected slip at heel strike during the next trial. In an effort 
to add variety to the LOB responses, three  different contaminants or slipping hazards will 
be used including vegetable oil, soapy water, and a  carpet mat on a poli shed vinyl floor.   
 Measure naturally -occurring LOB responses in the r eal-world : 
- Participant s will be briefed on how to wear and use the wearable sensors, and the 
investigator will give the sensors to the participant s for them to wear over the subsequent 
three weeks (no balance training participants) or t wo weeks (TT, NT, and ST 
participants) during their daily lives.  Participant s will be asked to wear the sensors for at 
least 10 hours a day.   
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 19 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  - The wearable sensors will be worn at the locations descri bed in 7.3 above, and require 
no input from the participant .  The voice recorder will be worn on the wrist like a watch .  
Participant s will be asked, if they experience any kind of loss of balance, to describe to 
the voice recorder 1) what they were doing when they lost their balance (e.g. carrying 
groceries in from the car), why they lost their balance  (e.g. did not see a stick in the 
sidewalk),  and how they responded (e.g. recovered balance by taking steps or grabbing a 
railing).  - The investigator will telephone the participant  at the end of the first day of sensor use 
and help troubleshoot any issues.  This will also telephone the participant at the end of the third day of sensor use to help troubleshoot any issues.  If necessary, telephone calls will b e made at the end of every day for additional support. 
- After the participant  has worn the sensors for two or three weeks , another meeting will 
be scheduled so the participant  can return the sensors to the investigators.  
 
 
8.3 Describe:  
● Procedures or safeguards intended to reduce the probability and 
magnitude of risks . (For e xample: Reducing the risk of injury in a 
virtual reality study either by having the subjects sit during the study or by providing an obstacle -free space for walking. ) 
● Be sure to describe a ll drugs and devices used in the research, when 
they will be administered or used, and their purpose.  
● Methods used to collect data about subjects. Please upload all data 
collection forms to Protocol Management. Som e common e xamples 
are: 
● Screening questionnaires  
● Survey(s) , including online surveys  
● Demographic questionnaire(s)  
● Interview guide(s) , e.g., questions or pool of questions for semi -
structured interviews  
● Focus group guide(s)  
● Other document s used to collect data  
 
 
Safeguards intended to reduce the risk of adverse outcomes include:  
a) using our medical screening process to exclude individuals at an increased risk of 
adverse outcome during training or laboratory testing;  b) having subjects complete warm -up exercises of walking on a treadmill and stretching 
prior to balance training a nd testing;  
c) the balance training used here was designed to be completed by adults 65- 80 years;  
d) the balance training is tailored to each participant's capabilities;  e) rest breaks will be provided as needed by the participant  
f) the same balance testing methodology employed here has been used in several of our prior studies without adverse outcome;  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 20 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  g) an investigator and a spotter will be nearby participants to provide balance assistance, 
if necessary during balance training; and  
h) participants w ill wear a safety harness to prevent a fall to the floor during balance 
testing. The PI (who has extensive experience using the harnesses) will train the relevant study team member(s) in selecting the proper size safety harness, appropriately tightening 
all safety harness straps and connections, and setting the proper length of the lanyard that 
connects the harness to the overhead support.  The harnesses we will be using are rated 
for individuals up to 310 lb, and we will limit our recruitment to individual s up to 250 lb. 
 No safeguards will be used during the two or three weeks of wearable sensor use since this phase of the study does not involve risk greater than that experienced during daily 
life. 
   All devices used in this study (lab- based motion capture system, wearable sensors , and 
voice recorders)  will be used in the same manner as their approved use.  Also, the use of 
these sensors  does not influence behavior and therefore does not affect risk.  
 
 
8.4 What data will you collect during the study and how you will  obtain them ? 
Please i nclude descriptions of electronic data collection, database 
matching, and app- based data collection:  
 
Participant  anthropometric and demographic information will be collected and recorded 
in a computer file on a password- protected and VT -managed computer.  In this file, 
participant s will only be identified by a numeric code, and not personally- identifiable 
informatio n will be recorded.  
Data collected during the laboratory testing session will include body motion during trip and slip LOB responses  obtained simultaneously from two systems .  The first 
system is the wearable sensors  (https://apdm.com/wearable -sensors/)  with individual 
sensors worn on each foot and one on the sternum using a shoulder strap under the clothing.  The second system is the lab -based opt oelectronic motion capture system 
(Qualisys, Inc) and reflective markers  (small balls approximately 1 cm in diameter) 
placed at specific locations on the body.  Data from these systems  will be recorded as a 
computer file on a password- protected and VT -managed computer.  In these files, 
participant s will only be identified by a  numeric code, and not personally- identifiable 
information will be recorded. 
Video recordings and photographs of participant s during perturbations will be obtained to 
assist with data analysis and for possible use in presentations.  Participant s will need to 
provide permission, on the Informed Consent Form , for us to use these in presentations.  
These videos and photos will be kept on a password- protected and VT -managed 
computer.  
Data from the wearable sensors during real -world LOB response tracking will be  
automatically stored onboard the sensors themselves until downloaded by the study 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 21 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  team when returned to the study team  after the two  or three week data collection .  
Participant s will be asked to charge the sensors nightly, and will be given the charger 
and detailed instructions and training on how to do that from the study team. When 
downloaded by the study team, the data file is in the form of a de -identified Excel file 
that is ready for analysis , and these files will be kept on a password- protected and V T-
managed computer.   
Data will be collected by the voice recorder by having participant s press a record button 
on it, having participant s speak into the recorder the information requested by the study 
team, and then pressing a button to stop.  These recordings include a time/date stamp, 
and will be downloaded for analysis by the study team w hen returned to the study team.  
These files will be kept on a password- protected and VT -managed computer. 
 
8.5 Who will transcribe or code audio and/or video recordings?:  
 
Youngjae Lee will transcribe voice recordings.  No other transcriptions will be performed.   
 
8.6 Include a description of any deception to be used in the study. Include justification for the use of deception ( why the deception is necessary ), 
describe the debriefing process, and describe how the study meets all  the 
following criteria  for  alteration of consent  (deception is considered an 
alteration of informed consent) : 
• The research involves no more th an minimal risk to the subjects  
• The alteration will not adversely affect the rights  and welfare of the 
subjects  
• The research could not practicably be car ried out without the 
alteration /deception  
• (Optional  but encouraged in most cases ) Subjects will be provided with 
additional pertinent information after participation (i.e., debriefing f or 
studies involving deception)   
  Incomplete disclosure will be used in that we will not describe some details of parts of the laboratory session  for balance testing .  In particular, we will not 
disclose 1) whether participants will be slipped or tripped; 2) when during their multiple walk s along our laboratory walkway they will be slipped or tripped; and 
3) exactly how we will cause them to slip or trip.  
 
 This is necessary so that our testing involves unexpected slips and trips.  
  At the end of the laboratory session that involves exposi ng participants to slipping 
and tripping, we will provide a debriefing by reading the attached debriefing script.    
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 22 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019   
8.7 If the study involves  long -term follow -up (once all research related 
procedures are complete), describe what data will be collected during the 
follow up period and when it will occur :  
 
The study does not involve long- term follow -up. 
     
9.0 Data and Specimen Long Term Storage and Use  
9.1 If you will store data or specimens for future use, describe where you will 
store the data or specimens, how long they will be stored, and how and by 
whom the data or specimens will be accessed : 
 
We will store data for the foreseeable future. Computer files will be kept on password-secured and managed Virginia Tech computer systems, while any paperwork will be kept locked in a restricted access office. The data access will be controlled by the PI, and access will be restrict ed to the research personnel.  
 
9.2 For specimens, list the data to be stored or associated with each specimen : 
 
N/A 
 
9.3 Describe the procedures to release data or specimens  outside of the 
research team , including the process to request a release, approvals 
required for release, who can obtain data or specimens, and what data will be provided with specimens : 
 
Data will be made available to other researchers, with requests made via direct communication (email or phone). De -identified data files will be shared in response to 
other investigators direct request. Other researchers seeking access to the data associated with this research must seek their own separate IRB/HRPP approval/determination prior to accessing the data.  
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 23 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  9.4 Describe the identifiers to be included with stored data or specimens, as 
well as any key or  code that could be used to make them identifiable. 
Describe where the code will be stored, who will have access to it, and when it will be destroyed : 
 
Identifiers will be a number ranging from 1 to the total number of participant s enrolled. 
The key to m ake them identifiable will be kept in a separate computer file on a 
password- secured and managed Virginia Tech computer system. Only the study 
investigators will have access to the code. It will be destroyed 1 year after the completion of the project because at that time there will be no reason to need to contact study participants. 
9.5 Please select the identifiers you will obtain  (whether directly from 
participants or from another source) , including but not limited to:  
 
☒ Name  
☐ Geographical subdivisions smaller than a state, including street address, 
city, county, precinct, zip code, and equivalent geocodes (note, the initial 
three digits of a zip code  are not considered identifiable)  
☐ Elements of dates (except year) for da tes directly related to an individual, 
including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of death, and single year of age  over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) 
indicative of such age  (note,  such ages and elements may be aggregated 
into a single category of age 90 +) 
☒ Phone numbers  
☐ Fax numbers  
☒ Electronic mail addresses (e -mail)  
☐ Social Security numbers  
☐ Medical record numbers  
☐ Health plan beneficiary numbers  
☐ Account numbers  
☐ Certificate/license numbers  
☐ Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers  
☐ Device identifiers and serial numbers  
☐ Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)  
☐ Internet protocol (IP) address numbers  
☒ Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints (audio recording)  
☒ Full face photographic images and any comparable images  (including 
video recording)  
☐ Student record number or identification  number   
☐ User name for online or computer accounts  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 24 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  ☒ Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code (note this 
does not mean the unique code assigned by the investigator to code the 
data) : Age    
 
10.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
10.1 Describe whether you will share results (study results or individual subject 
results, such as results of investigational diagnostic tests, genetic tests, or 
incidental findings) with subjects or others (e.g., the subject’s primary care physician). If so, describe how  you w ill share  the results and include this 
information as part of the consent document. Upload materials you  will use 
to explain the results  to subjects : 
 
Results will not be shared with participant s. 
 
11.0 Study Timelines  
11.1 Describe:  
● The duration of an individual subject’s participation in the study  (for 
example, 1 hour, 2- 4 weeks, 3 -5 years) . 
● The amount of time expected to enroll all study subjects ( weeks, 
months, years, etc .) 
● The amount of time expected  for the investigators to complete this 
study  including primary data analyses . 
 
Duration of participant's participation: about 7 weeks  
Time expected to enroll all study participants: 18 months  
Amount of time expected for investigators to complete study: 24 months  
 
12.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
12.1 Describe how  you will screen  individuals for eligibility.  When will 
screening occur and what procedures will you use ? Upload any screening 
scripts or surveys to Protocol Management :  
 
Screening will involve four phases .  Participants will only proceed to the next phase if 
they pass preceding phases.  The below Inclusion/Exclusion criteria apply to both non-balance training participants and balance training participants.  
 Phase 1  
Inclusion criteria will be screened over the phone by an investigator (YL):  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 25 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  1. How old are you?  [must be 65- 80 to be eligible]  
2. Are you willing to wear 3 small watch -sized sensors daily for two or three  weeks 
(one on each foot and one on the chest)  [must be yes to be eligible]  
3.  Have you had a lower limb amputation?  [must be no to be eligible]  
4. Do you weigh over 250 pounds?  [must be no to be eligible]  
5.  Administer the Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status  [must score 25 or higher 
to be eligible]  
 
Phase 2  
If the prospective participant passes phase 1, then the investigator will administer a health questionnaire during the same phone conversation.  A copy of this health questionnaire is included with this application.   No responses on this questionnaire will automatically 
make a participant ineligible.  Rather, all responses to this questionnaire will be reviewed holistically by the health care specialist.  No personally- identifiable information will be 
colle cted with this questionnaire.  While it is rare for an individual age 65 -80 to become 
pregnant, we will still include a question within the health questionnaire to ascertain pregnancy status.    Phase 3  
The results of each health questionnaire will be revi ewed by a health care specialist 
certified for clinical treatment of the geriatric population.  No personally- identifiable 
information will be collected with this questionnaire.  Th e health care specialist will then 
either:  1) accept the prospective subje ct for the next step of screening (see below);  
2)  decline the prospective subject for participation;  
3)  telephone the prospective subject for further evaluation and subsequent 
adjudication.  If this occurs, personally- identifiable information may be col lected directly 
by the interviewer.   
 Phase 4  
Osteoporosis Screening  
The pros pective participant must not have c linical osteoporosis as indicated by bone 
mineral density of the lumbar vertebra and proximal femur of  t < −2. 5 obtained from 
Dual Energy X -ray Absorptiometry (DEXA) . This assessment will be based upon a 
DEXA scan performed for this study, or DEXA scan completed within the last year.   
 Participant must pass all four phases to be eligible to participate.  
 
12.2 Describe the eligibility criteria that define who will be included and who will be  excluded from enrollment for  each p rocedure of your  study. 
Include any ge ographic criteria (e.g., Virginia Tech undergraduate 
students, a national sample of adults with engi neering degrees, minors 
aged 8- 12 in the New River Valley, university faculty in Virginia and 
Paris, France) : 
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 26 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  Phase 1 -  Inclusion criteria screened over the phone:  
1. How old are you?  [must be 65- 80 to be eligible]  
2. Are you willing to use wear 3 smal l watch -sized sensors daily for two weeks (one 
on each foot and one on the chest)  [must be yes to be eligible]  
3.  Have you had a lower limb amputation?  [must be no to be eligible]  
4. Do you weigh over 250 pounds?  [must be no to be eligible]  
5.  Administer the Folstein Mini- Mental Status Exam [must score 25 or higher to be 
eligible]  
 
Phase 2 -  Health questionnaire (see attached to this application)  
 Phase 3 -  Review of health questionnaire by health professional.   
 Phase 4 -  Osteoporosis screening.  The pros pective participant  must not have c linical 
osteoporosis as indicated by bone mineral density of the lumbar vertebra and proximal femur of  t < −2. 5 obtained from Dual Energy X -ray Absorptiometry (DEXA) . This 
assessment wi ll be based upon a DEXA scan to be scheduled for this study, or one they 
have had completed within the last year.  
 
 
 
12.3 Indicate specifically whether you will include or exclude each of the 
following special populations: (You may not include members of the se 
populations as subjects in your research unless you indicate them in the description of your subject population.)  
● Minors , as defined by state law where the study is performed 
(infants, children, teenagers)  
● Pregnant women (can be included in minimal risk studies by mentioning in section 13.1)  
● Prisoners (including all incarcerated individuals)  
● Adults not capable to consent on their own behalf  
 
 
Minors will be excluded  
Pregnant women will be excluded based upon self report.  
Prisoners will be excluded Adults not capable to consent on their own behalf will be excluded  
    
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 27 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019   
 
13.0 Vulnerable Populations  
13.1 If the research involves individuals who are vulnerable to coercion or 
undue influence, please describe additional safeguards you will include to protect their rights and welfare. Consider the applicable items listed below:  
● If the research involves Virginia Tech students, indicate whether these are students of any of the investigator s. If so, describe whether 
the activities will take place during class time as part of the curriculu m and the steps  you will  take to reduce the possibility that 
student s feel obliged  to participate in order to improve their course 
grade. The HRPP can provide further guidance as needed. Describe whether you will request access to student records (e.g., SAT, GPA, GRE scores).  
● If the research involves employees of Virginia Tech or the research sponsor, describe steps you will take to ensure that the employees are freely participating and describe how their data will be protected from inspection by their  supervisors.  
● If the research involves Virginia Tech NCAA athletes, you must obtain approval from the athletic department.  
● For research involving Montgomery County Public Schools, you must obtain county approval (after obtaining contingent Virginia Tech approval). Other locales have different requirements ; please 
check on these and describe here.  Approval is typically granted by 
the superintendent, principal, and classroom teacher (in that order). Approval by an individual teacher is insufficient. School approval, in 
the form of a letter or a memorandum should be uploaded as a supporting document . 
● If the research involves pregnant women, review “CHECKLIST: Pregnant Women (HRP -412)” to ensure that you have provided 
sufficient information  in this protocol . 
● If the research involves prisoners, review “CHECKLIST: Prisoners (HRP -415)” to ensure that you have provided sufficient information 
in this protocol.  
● If the research involves persons who have not attained the legal age for consent to treatments or procedures involved in the research (minors ), review the “CHECKLIST: Minors  (HRP -416)” to ensure 
that you have provided sufficient information in this protocol. 
● If the research involves cognitively impaired adults, review “CHECKLIST: Cognitively Impaired Adults (HRP -417)” to ensure 
that you have provided sufficient information in this protocol. 
 
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 28 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  Employees of Virginia Tech may be included.  If so, it will be emphasized that their 
participation is entirely voluntary .   
 
No other vulnerable populations listed above will be included.  
 
 
 14.0 Number of Subjects  
14.1 Indicate the total number of subjects to be enrolled and how this number 
was determined (e.g., sample size calculation [show], number of available subjects in a finite pool, number of tests funding award would allow) :  
 
60 participant s will be enrolled.  This number is based upon a formal sample size 
analysis  described here:  
30 non- balance training participants will be recruited for our primary objective.  Given 
that this objective is for validation, no formal effect sizes could be determined.  Rather, we estimated 30 participants for this objective to  be a reasonable number based upon 
our available resources and the number of expected LOBs estimated from prior work [Handelzalts et al. 2020].  
30 balance training participants will be recruited for our secondary objective  and be 
based upon Hypothesis 3 : NT and TT participant s will exhibit improved LOB responses 
after lab -induced trips and slips compared to ST  participant s.   
 The sample size was determined using data from lab -induced trips among community-
dwelling older adults aged 65 years or older (Pavol  et al., 2001). The effect size index 
(i.e., Cohen’s 𝑑𝑑 = 1.45) was determined using the difference in mean trunk angle  from 
vertical at the time of  recovery foot ground contact between fallers and non -fallers 
(17.4°) and the combined standard deviation (12°). The difference in means was considered the minimal clinically important difference based on the anchor -based method 
(Rai et al., 2015). Using G*Power (Faul et al., 2007) for an independent t -test with 80% 
power and a one -sided Type I error (or alpha) of 5%, a sample size of seven participants 
per group is needed. In an effort to be conservative and account for any participants 
withdrawing from the study, 10 participants per balance training group (TT,NT,ST) will 
be recruited.  
 Handelzalts , S., N.B. Alexander, N. Mastruserio, L.V. Nyquist, D.M. Strasburg, and L.V. 
Ojeda. Detection of Real -World Trips in At -Fall Risk Community Dwelling Older Adults 
Using Wearable Sensors. Front Med, 2020. 7: p. 514. 
 
14.2 If this is a multi- site study, indicate the number of subjects to be enrolled 
at this site and the total to be enrolled from all sites : 
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 29 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  Not a multi- site study.  
 
14.3 If applicable, indicate the  number of potential subjects you expect to 
screen  for enrollme nt, and the number of subjects you will need to 
complete the research procedures : 
 
N/A 
 
14.4 If the study has more than one procedure, indicate the total number of 
subjects to undergo each procedure separately : 
 
30 participants will be assigned to be non- balance training  participants  
30 participants will be assigned to be balance training  participants , with 10 completing 
each of the three types of training under investigation (TT, NT, ST).  
Other than these differences in balance training, all other testing will be the same for all participants.  
 
15.0 Recruitment Methods  
15.1 Describe when, where, and how you will recruit potential subjects : 
 
All p articipants will be recruited from the Virginia Tech, NRV, and Roanoke Valley 
communities.  
All p articipant s will be recruited using participant  lists from the VT Center for 
Gerontology, email listservs to VT and the VT Life Long Learning Institute , emailing 
advertisements to senior centers and senior living communities, newspaper advertisements , word -of-mouth, and visits to local community organizations . 
 
15.2 Describe the source of subjects  (for example, clinic patients with specific 
conditions, students in the library, community members at a gathering, or members of a local gym) : 
 
University or community members  
 
15.3 Describe the methods that you will use to identify potential subjects : 
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 30 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  Please see question 15.1. 
 
15.4 Describe materials that you will be use to recruit subjects. Attach copies 
of these documents with this  protocol in Protocol Management and be 
sure to include  the IRB protocol number on each document .  
● For flyers, attach the final copy of printed flyers.  
● For Virginia Tech News, Facebook postings and ads, newspaper ads, websites, MTurk/SONA/online survey systems , etc., attach the final 
wording and graphics to be used.  
● For e mail recruitments, please include the subject line.  
● For advertisements meant for  audio broadcast, please  submit the 
wording of the advertisement prior to taping ( to avoid having to re -
record with approved language) and submit the final recorded version for IRB review before use.   
● Describe any compensation to subjects. Separate compensation into  
appropriate categories, such as: reimbursement for expenses, time and effort, and additional incentives for study participation.  For each category, specify the amount (including any pro- rated amount), schedule, 
and method of payment.  
 
Flyers are included with this application.  This same language will be used in recruitment emails  (subject line = Research volunteers needed) and newspaper advertisements . 
 
Compensation is provided for time and effort.  P articipants will be compensated $1 0 for 
each balance training session, $20 for each balance testing session, and $50/ week of 
wearing  the sensors.  For participants traveling to Blacksburg from at least 25 miles 
away, an extra $10 per session will be provided to offset high gasoline prices.  Payment will be provided weekly . 
 
If a participants withdraws from the study early, then they wi ll be paid $10 /hour for time 
completed, and $50 per week completed of wearing the sensors  (as long as they 
completed at least one half of the week prior to withdrawing) . 
 
All payments will be made in the form of cash.  
 
 
 16.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
16.1 Describe circumstances under which you anticipate  subjects could be 
withdrawn from the research without their consent : 
 
Participants can be withdrawn if they fail to follow the investigator instructions during 
sessions or miss scheduled sessions.  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 31 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019   
16.2 If applicable, describe any procedures for orderly termination ( e.g., 
discontinuation of a study drug or debriefing after a behavioral 
intervention) : 
 
N/A 
 
16.3 Describe procedures that you will follow  when subjects withdraw from the 
research, including partial withdrawal from procedures with continued data collection (e.g., participant declines to continue with regular blood draws, but continues with periodic behavioral questionnaires) : 
 
All sessions and data collections will be terminated when a participant withdraws from the study.  Partial withdraw will not be accommodated , meaning that participants 
cannot withdraw from some of the procedures but remain involved in others .   
 
 
17.0 Risks to Subjects  
17.1 List the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or 
inconveniences to the subjects related the subjects’ participation in the research. Include for the IRB’s consideration a description of the probability, magnitude, duration, and re versibility of the risks. Consider 
physical, psychological, social, legal, privacy, and economic risks. Do not indicate  “No risk” or “N /A.” Instead, for studies with very low risk (e.g., 
anonymous online questionnaire on a mundane topic) indicate  “The 
investigators are not aware of any risks from participation in this study.” or “No more than risks than are found in everyday life.”  The example 
consent form presents a tabular method for risk information , which you 
can also use here . Common risk types include : 
● Physical (e.g., potential for pain, discomfort, infection)  
● Psychological (e.g., potential for stress, discomfort, and/or embarrassment)  
● Social (e.g., potential for discrimination or stigmatization and disruption of personal and family relationships)  
● Legal (e.g., potential for disclosure of illegal activity, negligence)  
● Privacy (e.g., potential for personal information being accessed, used, or disclosed without the subjects’ knowledge or consent, breach of confidentiality/security)  
● Economic (e.g., potential for individuals to lose access to economic services, employment, insurability)  
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 32 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  There are potential risks for participant s in the proposed work.  
1. During a DEXA scan, participants will be exposed radiation.  The amount of radiation 
is less than 2 days' exposure to natural background radiation (NBR). By comparison, a chest X -ray uses the equivalent of about 3 days' exposure to NBR, and a flight fro m UK 
to USA is equivalent to approximately a week's exposure to NBR  
(
https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/dexa -
scan/#:~:tex t=The%20amount%20of%20radiation%20used,a%20week's%20exposure%2
0to%20NBR  ). 
 2. During balance training or testing, there is a risk of  muscle strains, joint strains, other 
soft tissue injury, or broken bones.  The risk of these outcomes is considered low gi ven 
our safety measures described in 17.2.  3. During balance training or testing, there is a risk of participants overexerting themselves.  This risk is considered low given our safety measures described in 17.2.  4. During balance testing, the physical r isk of skin irritation and bacterial exposure 
related to the reflective markers, lab -provided rubber soled shoes and clothing, as well as 
the safety harness , are very low  (but not zero) .  We are not aware of a single incident of 
this in the PI's  20 years o f conducting human subjects research . 
 5. After balance training or testing, there is the potential for participant s to experience 
musc le or joint soreness.  This risk is no different than participation in physical exercise, 
and is mitigated by the safety measures described in 17.2.  6. During the two- weeks of using wearable sensors, there is no more risk than is found in 
everyday life for losses of balance or falls because these sensors do not affect balance or fall risk.  
 7. In the event the wearable sensors are lost, stolen, or damaged during the course of the research, participants will not be held financially responsible for their replacement . 
 
 
17.2  Indicate the measures you will use to minimize risks and monitor subjects for safety. (e.g., asking a subject at regular intervals to rate how they are feeling from 1 to 10, or to slowly crouch in order to check their balance.)  
 
To minimize the risks de scribed above in 17.1, the following safety measures will be 
used:  
 a) using our medical screening process to exclude individuals at an increased risk of injury;   
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 33 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  b) having subjects complete warm -up exercises prior to balance training and testing 
includi ng walking on a treadmill and stretching;  
 
c) the balance training used here was designed to be completed by adults 65- 80 years;  
 
d) the balance training is tailored to each participant's capabilities;  
 
e) rest breaks will be provided as needed by the participant  
 f) the same balance testing methodology employed here has been used in several of our 
prior studies without adverse outc ome;  
 g) an investigator and a spotter will be nearby participants to provide balance assistance, if necessary during balance training; and  
 h) participants will wear a safety harness to prevent a fall to the floor during balance testing.  The PI (who has  extensive experience using the harnesses) will train the relevant 
study team member(s) in selecting the proper size safety harness, appropriately tightening all safety harness straps and connections, and setting the proper length of the lanyard that conne cts the harness to the overhead support.  The harnesses we will be using are rated 
for individuals up to 310 lb, and we will limit our recruitment to individuals up to 250 lb.  i) several measures will be taken to minimize the risk of skin irritation or ba cterial 
exposure related to the reflective markers, lab -provided rubber soled shoes and clothing, 
as well as the safety harness, are very low (but not zero).   These measures will include: a) 
using disinfecting wipes after each participant's testing, b) rem oval of adhesive material 
after each participant's testing, and c) using tape specifically designed to use on human skin.  j) to minimize the exposure to radiation during DEXA scans, we will only use qualified study personnel  to perform the scanning, and inform participants of the radiation 
exposure prior to scanning. 
 
17.3 If applicable, indicate which procedures might have risks to the subjects 
that are currently unforeseeable. This will be rare, and usually applicable when testing a new drug or device or a new use of an existing drug or device:  
 
N/A 
 
17.4 If applicable, indicate which procedures might have risks to an embryo or fetus should the subject be or become pregnant : 
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 34 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  N/A 
 
17.5 If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects (e.g., collection 
of sensitive health data that might affect sexual partners if disclosed, mandatory reporting of abuse, DNA testing that mi ght affect family 
members or relationships) : 
 
N/A 
 
18.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects  
18.1 Describe the potential benefits that individual subjects might experience from participating in the research. Include the probability, magnitude, and duration of the potential benefits , as this will be useful to the IRB’s 
risk:benefit analysis . Do not include benefits to society or others. Do not 
list monetary or non- monetary compensation for par ticipation, as this is 
not a benefit  These should be included in section 2 or 3 of this document : 
 
Participants who receive a DEXA scan will benefit from receiving this test at no cost.  It can detect osteoporosis. 
Balance training p articipant s may benef it from balance training by improving their 
balance.  However, this has not been formally evaluated at this time.   
 
18.2 If applicable, specify that there are no anticipated direct benefit s for 
participants :  
 
N/A 
 
 
  
 
19.0 Data Management and Confidentiality  
19.1 Describe procedures that  you will use for quality control  to ensure validity  
of collected data:  
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 35 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  We have extensive experience implementing similar procedures and training in prior 
studies, and will leverage that experience during the planning and execution of this study.  We will also adequately  pilot test the protocols described here prior to enrolling any 
participants, including sufficient  practice to ensure we are thorough and consistent with 
our procedures.  
 
 
19.2 Describe any exist ing data or biospecimens you will obtain as part of this 
study. Include :  
● Variables or samples to be obtained  
● Source  of the data or specimens  
● Your authorization to access or receive the data or biospecimens  
● Whether the data or biospecimens are publicly available  
● Whether the  data or specimens  you receive will  contain identifiers  
 
Participants who have had a DEXA scan within the last year will be asked to obtain a 
copy of the scan results from their physician.  In particular, we will review the bone mineral density of the lumbar vertebra and proximal femur.  This must not be t < −2.5, which is an indication of clinical osteoporosis.  
 
19.3 Describe the steps that you will take to handle and secure study data 
during data collection, storage, use, and transmission.  Include information about training of study staff, authorization of access, password protection, encryption, physical controls, certificates of confidentiality, separation of identifiers and data, etc.:  
 
Any paper -based records will be kept in our restricted -access research lab or the PI's 
office,  and only be  accessible to personnel involved in the study. 
 Data computer files will be de -identified (will only use participant  numbers) and be 
maintained on password- protected computers/networks or students investigator's personal 
computers.  If the lat ter, it will be required that that they meet Virginia Tech security 
requirements for low risk data described here: https://security.vt.edu/resources.html
 . 
Personally -identifiable data (name, email, an d phone number for corresponding with 
participants) will only be stored on password- protected computers managed and secured 
by Virginia Tech.   
 
De-identified data to be used for Phase 2 of the screening process and data analysis will 
be shared with external collaborators using a VT Google Drive with access limited to 
recipients.  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 36 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  For DEXA scanning, the study team will use pseudonyms (subject numbers) rather than 
identifiable information.  The results from this test will be a hard -copy print out 
provided to the investigator.  These data will not be transmitted via email.  
 
19.4 For multi- site studies , describe how data or specimens will be handled 
and secured for each site  (e.g., central or disseminated data storage, data 
coordinating center ): 
 
N/A 
 
19.5 Describe the plan for data disposition following the conclusion of the study (e.g., long term maintenance of data, data destruction methods) .  
● What information will be included in the long term storage of data or specimens?  
● How long will the data or specimens be stored?  
● Where and how data or specimens will be stored?  
● Who will have access to the data or specimens  during long term 
storage ? 
● Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of the data or specimens?  
● How will data or specimens be shared or tr ansported? 
● When and how will personal identifiers be destroyed? 
 
 
We will keep data for the foreseeable future for potential use in subsequent studies, 
presentations, and pilot data for proposals. Paper -based records will be kept in a 
secured location only accessible to the principal investigator. Computer -based files will 
be password protected and only ava ilable to personnel involved in the study. Personal 
identifiers will be destroyed one year after the completion of the study by deleting these files and ensuring they are completely removed from paper -based records and the 
computer.  
 
 
20.0 Provisions to Prote ct the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
20.1 Describe the steps that you will take to protect subjects’ privacy interests. 
“Privacy interest” refers to a person’s desire to place limits on with whom they interact or to whom they provide personal information (e.g., collecting the minimal amount of private information required to complete the study, protecting the data once it is obtained) :  
 
Personal data over the phone will only be obtained for scheduling purposes, and will not be shared with anyone outside of the research group. All other data will be collected 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 37 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  in a private r oom for performing research interventions. Interviews and data collection 
will only be administered by research personnel involved in the project.  
 
Participants will also be provided access to a nearby restroom to change into 
appropriate attire for their b alance testing session.  
 
20.2 Describe steps that you will take  to make subjects feel at ease with the 
research situation in terms of the questions being asked and the procedures being performed. “At ease” does not refer to physical discomfort, but the sense of intrusiveness a subject might experience in response to questions, examinations, and procedures (e.g., use of a same gender investigator to place sensors on the torso , a private changing area 
if clothing must be changed, sensitivity when discussing  pregnancy test ing 
with subjects , making it clear on surveys tha t participants  can discontinue 
at any time, not asking questions about private or sensitive issues unless necessary for the research ): 
 
We will make it clear that participant s can discontinue their participation without 
penalty. We will ask participant s how they are doing and feeling throughout testing, 
and give plenty of encouragement.  We will keep them well -informed throughout each 
session so they are aware of what is going on and what to expect.  
When possible, s ensors will be fit and applied by a member of the study team that is the 
same sex  as the participant.  
We will also develop an illustrated step -by-step instructional packet on the wearable 
sensors usage for participan ts to use at home.  
 
20.3 Describe how you plan to access existing sources of information about the subjects (e.g., medical records, grades) and how you will protect participant privacy through the data security plan:  
 
If a participant opts to use the results of a DEXA scan they had within the last 12 months, rather than having a new scan performed for this study, will be asked to obtain a copy of this prior scan from their physician.  
 
20.4 Describe any required reporting that might  occur as a result of your 
research questions, study populations, and data collection methods. Examples for Virginia and Virginia Tech include:  
• Any suspicions (e.g., circumstantial, disclosed) of child abuse (physical, 
emotional, sexual ) and neglect  
• Sexual discrimination and/or sexual violence that involves a student  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 38 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  • Disclosure or signs of intention to harm one self (i.e., suicidal ideation 
and/or plan)  
• Disclosure or signs of  desire to harm others (i.e., homicidal ideation 
and/or plan)  
• Suspected abuse, neglect or exploitation of vulnerable adults (e.g., 
individuals with a disability, elderly persons ) 
  
N/A 
  
 
21.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
Safety monitoring is required  when research involves greater than m inimal r isk 
and is sometimes appropriate for other studies . 
21.1 Describe:  
● The plan to periodically evaluate the data collected regarding both harms and benefits to determine whether subjects remain safe  (e.g., periodic reporting to the IRB , establishing a data monitoring 
committee , reporting data monitoring committee findings t o the IRB 
and the sponsor ). 
● What data you will review, including safety data, unexpected  events, 
and data that show the ability to produce the intended results . 
● How the safety information will be collected (e.g., with case report forms, at study visits, by  telephone calls with subjects ). 
● The frequency of data collection, including when safety data collection starts.  
● Who will review the safety data and with what frequency . 
● The statistical tests for analyzing the safety data to determine whether harm is occurring. 
● Any conditions that will trigger an immediate suspension of the 
research (e.g., a serious adverse event).  
 
 The only potential safety -related concerns will occur during the experimental sessions 
and balance training sessions with the participant s.  We will use the strategies described 
above to minimize these risks, and keep in constant communication with the par ticipant 
during experimental sessions regarding testing protocol and any potential risk. 
  
 
22.0 Compensation for Research  Related Injury  
22.1 If the research involves more than m inimal r isk to subjects, describe the 
available compensation in the event of research -related injury, if any : 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 39 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019   
There are no available funds available for research -related injuries. This will be made 
clear to participant s on the informed consent form.  
 
22.2 Provide a copy of contract language, if any, relevant to compensation for 
research -related injury. At Virginia Tech, this is most common for 
sponsored research:  
 
   
 
23.0 Economic Burden to Subjects  
23.1 Describe any costs that subjects might be responsible for because of 
participation in the research, including any uncompensated costs for items such as transportation, missed work, and childcare : 
 
Potential economic burdens include: transportation, missed work, and childcare.  
 
24.0 Consent Process  
24.1 Indicate the process by which you will obtain consent  for study 
participation. Please upload all consent, parental permission, and assent forms, documents, and scripts reference d in this section to Protocol 
Management.  
Describe the following:
 
● Where the consent process will take place  (e.g., clinic waiting area, 
classroom, online)  
● The time  interval between  sharing the consent information with the 
prospective subject and obtaining consent . For lab, interview, and 
focus group studies, t he Virginia Tech IRB prefers that subjects have 
at least 24 hours to review the consent form and study information 
before the appointment  where consent will be obtained. For simple 
online survey studies, you can typically present the consent information immediately before subjects begin participation.  
● If applicable, process es to ensure ongoing consent or assent (e.g., 
for multiple sessions; for research in which a minor will turn 18 during the study; for longitudinal research with minors who will later be asked to provide or affirm their assent ). 
● Please revi ew “SOP: Informed Consent Process for Research (HRP -
090)” for recommended procedure. Describe your process, being sure to include:  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 40 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  o The name and role of all study personnel who will be trained 
and certified by the PI to conduct  the consent process  
o The time that will be de voted to the consent discussion 
o Steps that you will take  to minimize the possibility  of coercion 
or undue influence  
o Steps that you will take  to gauge or ensure the subjects’ 
understanding 
 
Upon contacting the investigators, the study protocol will be explained to participant s via 
telephone. This will allow participant s to ask questions pertaining to the study.  During 
this telephone conversation, we will ensure comprehension by asking participants if they 
understand everything we've sa id about the study.  We will also ask for verbal consent 
from all participants to continue with the protocol, and document this verbal consent on the consent form.  
 Participants will then be screened using the 4 -phase process described elsewhere in this 
application.  If/when the participant passes this screening process, they will be provided 
the informed consent form (via email or physical mail) , and a date and time for their first 
session will be scheduled.  Participants will be provided at least 24 hours  to review the 
informed consent form prior to their first session.  Written consent will take place either prior to their DEXA scan (if they are required to complete one because they do not have one over the last year) or at the start of the first session  (if no new DEXA is required) . Either way, and upon arrival to meeting location , 
the participant  will be given a paper copy of the informed consent to look over and will 
be asked if they have any questions about the form prior to signing. As much time as necessary will be dedicated to the consent process. We will make sure participants  
understand the ir participation is entirely voluntary. We will ensure participants 
understand throughout the consent process by recruiting English- speaking adults, asking 
them if they have any questions, and if they understand the consent form.  
 Youngjae Lee  will be obt aining cons ent from participants .  
 
Because our procedures involve several visits to the lab for some participations, we will 
ask subjects weekly how they are doing with the study and procedures, and answer any questions they might have.  If necessary, we will remind them that their participation is 
entirely voluntary.  
 
Non-English Speaking Subjects  
● Indicate what language(s) other than English are understood by 
prospective subjects or representatives.  
● If non- English speakers will be recruited , describe the process  you 
will use  to ensure that the oral and/or written consent information 
provided will be in a language that they understand.  
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 41 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● If you translate consent forms and study materials , please provide a 
certified translation of the form as well as the certification 
document.  
● Indicate the spoken language that study  personnel obtaining consent  
will use . Describe how you will assess fluency of personnel obtaining 
consent  to ensure that the translation is accurate. 
 
 
Non-English speaking participant s will not be recruited  
  
Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process (consent will not be obtained, 
required information will not be disclosed, or the research involves deception)  
● Review the “CHECKLIST: Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process (HRP -410)” to ensure you have provided sufficient information for 
the IRB to make these determinations (i.e., that it meets the criteria for a waiver or alteration of the consent process).  
 
N/A 
  
Subjects who are not yet adults (minors: infants, children, teenagers)  
● Describe the criteria that you will use  to determine  legal age for 
consent to treatments or procedures involved in the research under 
the applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the research will be conducted (e.g., in Virginia, individuals under the age of 18 years).  
o For research conducted in Virginia , review “SOP: Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Minors, and Guardians (HRP -
013)” to determine which individuals in the state meet the definition of “minor.”  
o For research conducted outside of the state, please describe the legal requirements for the definition of “minor.”   
● Describe the process for obtaining parental permission.  o Permission from o ne parent  is acceptable for  studies  that 
involve no greater than minimal risk OR involve greate r than 
minimal risk but present  the prospect of direct benefit to the 
minor  subject . 
o Permission from both parents is required in all other cases ( unless one parent is deceased, unknown, 
incompetent, or not reasonably available, or when only one parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the minor ).
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 42 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● Describe whether you will obtain permission from individuals other 
than parents or Legally Authorized Representatives , and if so, who 
will be allowed to provide permission. Describe the process you will 
use to determine these individuals’ authority to consent to the  
minor’s general medical care.  
● Indicate whether you will obtain assent from all, some, or none of the minor s. If you will obtain assent from some minors, indicate 
which minors will be required to assent. Consider  chronological age 
and intellectual capacity  when determining who will be required to 
provide assent (e.g., infants are unable to assent. However, teenagers are likely able to read and sign an assent form ). 
● When assent of minors is obtained, describe whether and how you will document  it.  Will minors  sign an assent form or give verbal 
assent? 
● Attach parental permission and minor assent forms or scripts i n 
Protocol Management.  
 
 
Only participant s 65- 80 years old will be eligible for this study. 
  
Adults  Unable to Consent  
● Describe the process you will use to determine whether an individual adult is capable of consent. 
● List the individuals from whom  you will obtain permission in order 
of priority (e.g., durable power of attorney for health care, court appointed guardian for health care decisions, spouse, and non-minor child). o For research conducted in the Virginia , review “SOP: Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Mi nors, and Guardians (HRP -
013)” to determine which individuals in the state meet the definition of “legally authorized representative.”  
o For research conducted outside of Virginia , please describe 
the legal requirements for obtaining permission from a legall y 
authorized representative in the state where the research will occur.  
● Describe the process for assent of the subjects.  
o Indicate whether y ou will require assent from  all, some, or 
none of the subjects. If some, indicate which subjects will be required to assent and which will not.  
o If you will not obtain assent from some or all subjects, please provide justification for not obtaining assent . 
o Describe whether and how yo u will document assent.  
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 43 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  Only university or community- dwelling adults of sound mind will be recruited. 
 
25.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing  
25.1 Consult “SOP: Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -091)” for 
recommended procedures , and describe whether and how consent of the 
subject will be documented in writing:  
 
We will require written consent from each participant  prior to testing.  
 
 
25.2 If the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and 
involves no procedures for which written documentation of consent is normally required outside of the research context, you can request that the IRB waive the requirement to obtain wri tten documentation of consent 
(e.g., consent to participate is indicated by pressing a button for an online questionnaire – after the consent information is presented and before the questionnaire begins) : 
 
Considering that a verbal consent process will be used for the phone screening, we would like to request a waiver of written documentation of the consent process.  For this waiver, 
we are expected to explain how the two criteria below have been met.   
 1. The research presents no more than mini mal risk of harm to subjects.  
 The screening process that will be completed before obtaining written documentation (a questionnaire completed over the phone) presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects.  I f we need to complete a DEXA scan on any subjects, we will obtain written 
consent from these subjects prior to this scan.   
2. The research involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required 
outside of the research context.  
The research  procedures we plan to complete prior to written consent (a questionnaire 
completed over the phone) do not normally require written consent outside of the 
research context.  
 
 
25.3 If you will document consent in writing, attach a consent document with 
places for signatures. If you will obtain consent, but not document consent in writing, please attach the consent script or text. Review “CHECKLIST: 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 44 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  Waiver of Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -411)” to ensure that 
you have provided sufficient information. You should use “TEMPLATE 
CONSENT DOCUMENT (HRP -502)”to create the consent document or 
script : 
 
See attached.  
   
26.0 Resources Available  
26.1 Describe the resources available to conduct the research. For example, as appropriate:  
● Describe t he PI’s availability to supervise the research.  
● Justify the feasibility of recruiting the required number of suitable subjects within the agreed recruitment period. For example, how many potential subjects do you have access to? What percentage of those potential subjects do you need to recruit? 
● Describe the time that you will devote to conducting and completing the research.  
● Describe your facilities.  
● Describe the availability of medical o r psychological resources that 
subjects might need as a result of an anticipated or unanticipated consequence of participation in the research.  
● Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the research are adequately informed about the protocol, the research procedures, and their duties and functions (e.g., training plans, detailed study notebooks). 
 
The PI (Madigan) will have adequate availability to supervise this research, and dedicate 
the require d amount of time to this project. 
 The PI will ensure all persons assisting with the research are adequately informed and 
trained regarding the protocol and duties.  In particular, the PI will observe multiple pilot 
training sessions, take written notes and provide verbal feedback during these sessions, 
and debrief students with his notes after the pilot session is complete.  This will be repeated until the PI is confident in the competence level of the student(s).  
 Training and testing sessions will take place in the Virginia T ech Occupational 
Ergonomics and Biomechanics Lab. This lab is well -equipped with high- precision 
measurement tools and safety equipment used to assess gait, including all the equipment required for the current study. All personnel using laboratory equipment will be t rained 
on how to use t he equipment prior to testing.  
 
21-1072  Validation and application of wearable sensors for capturing responses to losses 
of balance  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 45 of 45 Revised: March  5, 2019  27.0 Multi -Site Research  
Contact the HRPP for multi- site research (i nvolving multiple institutions) and 
the details required for this section  will be provided. Otherwise , indi cate N/A. 
 
N/A 