	Does	Propranolol	Attenuate	Inflammatory	Responses	to	a	Psychological	Stressor?				[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]		10/12/2016			
Beta-Blockers	&	Stress	Study	Protocol			Complete	Title:	The	effects	of	propranolol	on	psychological	and	physiological	responses	to	acute	stress		Short	Title:	Beta-Blockers	and	Stress	Study		Drug	or	Device	Name(s):	Propranolol		Sponsor:	Dr.	Muscatell	UNC	laboratory	start-up	funds	Protocol	Date:	9/26/2016	Amendment	1	Date:	10/12/16											Study	Principal	Investigator:		Keely	A.	Muscatell,	Ph.D.	Assistant	Professor	Department	of	Psychology	&	Neuroscience	328	Davie	Hall	235	East	Cameron	Street	Chapel	Hill	NC	27599	Phone	919-843-9113	email:	kmuscatell@unc.edu																				
PROTOCOL	TITLE:		Beta-Blockers	and	Stress					Lead	Investigator:	Keely	A.	Muscatell,	Ph.D		University	of	North	Carolina	at	Chapel	Hill	Protocol	Version	2	Version	Date:	October	12,	2016		I	confirm	that	I	have	read	this	protocol	and	understand	it.				Principal	Investigator	Name:			Keely	Muscatell					Date:						October	12,	2016							
TABLE	OF	CONTENTS	Table	of	Contents	.......................................................................................................................	3	Abbreviations	and	Definitions	of	Terms	.....................................................................................	4	Protocol	Synopsis	........................................................................................................................	5	1	BACKGROUND		AND	RATIONALE	........................................................................................................................	8	2	STUDY	OBJECTIVES	...........................................................................................................................................	10	3	INVESTIGATIONAL	PLAN	...................................................................................................................................	10	4	STUDY	PROCEDURES	.........................................................................................................................................	12	5	STUDY	EVALUATIONS	AND	MEASUREMENTS	..................................................................................................	14	6	STATISTICAL	CONSIDERATIONS	........................................................................................................................	16	7	STUDY	INTERVENTION	(DEVICE	OR	OTHER	INTERVENTION)	...........................................................................	17	8	STUDY	INTERVENTION	ADMINISTRATION	........................................................................................................	18	9	SAFETY	MANAGEMENT	....................................................................................................................................	18	10		DATA	COLLECTION	AND	MANAGEMENT	..........................................................................................................	18	11	RECRUITMENT	STRATEGY	.................................................................................................................................	19	12	CONSENT	PROCESS	...........................................................................................................................................	19	13	PUBLICATION	....................................................................................................................................................	19	14	REFERENCES	......................................................................................................................................................	19		               
  ABBREVIATIONS	AND	DEFINITIONS	OF	TERMS					Abbreviation	Definition	SNS	Sympathetic	nervous	system;	part	of	the	autonomic	nervous	system	that	is	engaged	during	physiological	arousal	CTRC	Clinical	and	Translational	Research	Center;	center	at	UNC-CH	that	provides	investigators	with	research	support	services,	including	on-location	nursing	services	utilized	in	the	present	study	TSST	Trier	Social	Stress	Task;	a	commonly-used,	acute,	laboratory	stress	paradigm	for	inducing	physiological	and	psychological	stress	in	participants	IDS	Investigational	Drug	Services	MLM	Multilevel	Modeling	PEP	Pre-Ejection	Period;	a	measure	of	sympathetic	nervous	system	activation	derived	from	electrocardiogram	and	impedance	cardiography.	RSA	Respiratory	Sinus	Arrhythmia;	a	measure	of	parasympathetic	nervous	system	activation	derived	from	electrocardiogram.																									           					
		PROTOCOL	SYNOPSIS	LIMIT	SYNOPSIS	to	no	more	than	2	-	3	pages.	The	synopsis	should	provide	an	overview	of	the	study.		Keep	brief	and	use	bullet	points.	Study	Title	Beta	Blockers	and	Stress	Funder	Dr.	Muscatell’s	laboratory	start-up	funds	provided	by	UNC-CH	Clinical	Phase	Phase	IV	Study	Rationale	This	randomized,	double-blind,	placebo-controlled	study	of	propranolol	will	shed	important	light	on	how	sympathetic	nervous	system	(SNS)	activation	influences	psychological	and	inflammatory	responses	to	acute	stress.	Results	from	this	study	will	inform	both	the	basic	science	literature	that	is	attempting	to	map	the	physiological	mechanisms	by	which	psychological	stress	may	lead	to	poor	mental	and	physical	health,	and	may	also	ultimately	have	therapeutic	relevance	for	individuals	who	are	experiencing	high	levels	of	stress	that	is	putting	their	health	at	risk.	Utilizing	a	psychopharmacological	approach	allows	for	the	circumvention	of	many	of	the	challenges	of	conducting	this	research	in	human	populations,	and	will	allow	for	conclusions	regarding	causality,	given	that	SNS	activation	will	be	experimentally	manipulated,	rather	than	relying	on	correlational	measures	of	SNS	activity	that	are	difficult	to	assess	and	are	not	appropriate	for	asking	if	SNS	activity	causes	changes	in	psychology	and	biology.	Study	Objective(s)	Primary	Objective	1.	To	determine	if	blocking	beta-adrenergic	receptors	with	the	drug	propranolol	will	attenuate	inflammatory	responses	(i.e.,	interleukin-6;	IL-6)	to	an	acute,	laboratory	stressor.	Secondary	Objective	1.	To	examine	if	blocking	beta-adrenergic	receptors	with	the	drug	propranolol	will	attenuate	cortisol	responses	to	an	acute,	laboratory	stressor.	Secondary	Objective	2.	To	examine	if	blocking	beta-adrenergic	receptors	with	the	drug	propranolol	will	attenuate	salivary	alpha	amylase	responses	to	an	acute,	laboratory	stressor.	Secondary	Objective	3.	To	evaluate	if	blocking	beta-adrenergic	receptors	with	the	drug	propranolol	will	attenuate	sympathetic	nervous	system	responses	(i.e.,	pre-ejection	period;	PEP)	to	an	acute,	laboratory	stressor.	Secondary	Objective	4.	To	examine	if	blocking	beta-adrenergic	receptors	with	the	drug	propranolol	will	change	parasympathetic	nervous	system	responses	(i.e.,	respiratory	sinus	arrhythmia;	RSA)	to	an	acute,	laboratory	stressor.	Secondary	Objective	5.	To	examine	if	blocking	beta-adrenergic	receptors	with	the	drug	propranolol	changes	self-reported	affective		responses	(i.e.,	negative	affect)	to	an	acute	laboratory	stressor.	Test	Article(s)	Propranolol	(FDA	approved)	
(If	Applicable)	Study	Design		This	is	a	randomized,	double	blind,	placebo-controlled	study	of	the	effects	of	propranolol	on	psychological	and	physiological	responses	to	stress.	It	will	consist	of	a	telephone	screening,	an	initial	in-person	session	when	consent	will	be	obtained,	and	a	subsequent	longer,	intervention	session.		Subject	Population	key	criteria	for	Inclusion	and	Exclusion:	Inclusion	Criteria	1. 	Healthy	individuals	from	the	UNC-Chapel	Hill	community	2. 	Ages	18-25.		3. Fluent	in	English	(spoken	and	written)		4. In	good	overall	health.	Exclusion	Criteria	1)	Presence	or	history	of	chronic	physical	illness	(especially	disorders	with	an	inflammatory	component,	such	as	rheumatoid	arthritis,	asthma,	allergies,	or	issues	that	can	affect	the	heart,	including	low-blood	pressure	or	other	heart	conditions)	2)	Presence	or	history	of	psychiatric	illness	(depression,	anxiety)	3)	Any	current	prescription	medication	use	4)	Currently	pregnant	or	planning	to	become	pregnant	(self-reported)	5)	Engagement	in	a	number	of	health-compromising	behaviors	that	may	affect	levels	of	pro-inflammatory	cytokines,	including	cigarette	smoking,	excessive	caffeine	intake	and	sleep	disturbance	(e.g.,	working	night	shifts)	6)	Body	Mass	Index	(BMI)	greater	than	30,	given	that	adiposity	is	known	to	relate	to	baseline	levels	of	inflammation;		7)	Anxiety	about	or	previous	history	of	problems	with	blood	draws	(e.g.,	fainting)	8)	Any	reported	heart	conditions	Number	Of	Subjects			95	(45	per	condition;	we	will	run	5	“extra”	subjects	in	the	case	of	data	loss)	Study	Duration	Each	subject’s	participation	will	last	5-6	hours.		The	entire	study	is	expected	to	last	1-2	years.		Study	Phases	Screening	Study	Treatment	Follow-Up				(1)	Screening:	screening	for	eligibility	will	occur	via	telephone	interview,	and	consent	will	be	obtained	in-person	during	a	first	study	session.		(2)	Intervention:	study	intervention/experimental	treatment	will	occur	during	a	second	study	session.	Participants	will	be	randomly	assigned	to	take	either	a	single,	40	mg	dose	of	propranolol,	or	a	placebo,	and	will	go	through	a	standardized	psychological	stress	task.	Blood	draws	and	saliva	samples	will	be	taken	throughout,	and	will	be	assayed	for	inflammation	and	hormones,	respectively.	(3)	Follow-Up:	n/a	Efficacy	Evaluations	This	does	not	apply,	as	this	is	not	a	true	interventional	trial.	These	are	healthy	participants.	
Safety	Evaluations	The	safety	of	the	participants	will	be	ensured	by	trained	research	staff	and	nurses	from	the	UNC	Clinical	and	Translational	Research	Center	(CTRC),	who	will	be	on-hand	for	the	intervention	sessions,	with	the	supervision	of	the	PI.	The	co-investigating	physician	(Samantha	Meltzer-Brody)	will	be	on-call	during	all	sessions,	and	the	investigational	drug	service	at	UNC	is	available	for	consultation.	A	single	does	of	propranolol	is	expected	to	be	very	well-tolerated	in	this	young,	healthy	population.	Statistical	And	Analytic	Plan	To	address	our	primary	aim,	we	will	conduct	multilevel	model	(MLM)	analyses	examining	levels	of	inflammation,	with	time	(baseline,	pre-stress,	30-,	60-,	90-min	post-stress)	as	a	within-subjects	factor	and	condition	(propranolol	vs.	placebo)	as	a	between-subjects	factor.	We	hypothesize	that	individuals	in	the	placebo	condition	will	show	an	increase	in	levels	of	the	inflammatory	marker	IL-6	from	pre-	to	post-stress,	while	those	in	the	propranolol	condition	will	show	significantly	lower	levels	of	inflammation	over	time	compared	to	the	placebo	condition	(i.e.,	no	stress-related	increase	in	inflammatory	markers).	We	will	also	conduct	similar	multilevel	modelling	analyses	on	our	other	secondary	endpoints	(i.e.,	cortisol,	salivary	alpha	amylase,	PEP,	RSA,	negative	affect).	DATA	AND	SAFETY	MONITORING	PLAN	The	PI	and	the	project	coordinator	will	be	responsible	for	data	quality	management	and	ongoing	assessment	of	safety.	All	data	collected	for	the	study	will	be	stored	on	secure,	password-protected	servers	maintained	by	the	Department	of	Psychology	and	Neuroscience	(or	on	secure,	password-protected	computers	in	the	laboratory.	Safety	monitoring	will	be	provided	by	the	PI	and	the	study	physician,	together	with	nurses	from	the	UNC	CTRC	and	the	study	coordinator.				
1	BACKGROUND	AND	RATIONALE	1.1 Introduction		Psychological	stress	is	implicated	in	the	onset	and	progression	of	many	common	and	costly	chronic	diseases,	including	cardiovascular	disease,	chronic	pain	conditions,	and	major	depressive	disorder	(Cohen	et	al.,	2007;	Kendler	et	al.,	1999;	Steptoe	and	Kivimäki,	2012).	An	emerging	body	of	evidence	suggests	that	inflammation,	indexed	via	levels	of	pro-inflammatory	cytokines	and	reactive	proteins,	may	be	a	key	biological	mechanism	by	which	stress	affects	health	(Baker	et	al.,	2012;	Miller	et	al.,	2009;	Slavich	et	al.,	2010).	Indeed,	psychological	stressors	can	induce	increases	in	inflammation	(Slavich	and	Irwin,	2014;	Kiecolt-Glaser	et	al.,	2003;	Rohleder,	2014;	Steptoe	et	al.,	2007),	and	greater	levels	of	inflammation	may	contribute	to	the	development	of	disease	(Capuron	and	Miller,	2004;	Choy	and	Panayi,	2001;	DellaGiola	and	Hannestad,	2010;	Raison	and	Miller,	2013;	The	Emerging	Risk	Factors	Collaboration,	2010).	Despite	this	growing	literature	linking	stress,	inflammation,	and	poor	health,	little	is	known	about	the	precise	physiological	mechanisms	linking	psychological	stress	and	increases	in	inflammation.	One	hypothesized	mechanism	that	may	translate	psychological	stress	into	increases	in	levels	of	inflammation	is	activation	of	the	sympathetic	nervous	system	(SNS).	The	SNS	is	part	of	the	autonomic	nervous	system	and	is	primarily	indexed	by	release	of	the	catecholamines	epinephrine	(adrenaline)	and	norepinephrine	(noradrenaline).	Prior	research	in	non-human	animal	models	has	shown	that	stress-induced	SNS	activation	leads	to	increases	in	levels	of	pro-inflammatory	cytokines	inflammation	(Bierhaus	et	al.,	2003;	DeRijk	et	al.,	1994;	Kop	et	al.,	2008;	van	Gool	et	al.,	1990),	while	pharmacologically	blocking	sympathetic	activation	attenuates	the	inflammatory	response	to	stress	(Bierhaus	et	al.,	2003).	However,	no	known	human	studies	to	date	have	examined	the	relationship	between	psychological	stress,	SNS	activation,	and	inflammation.	The	present	study	is	designed	to	address	this	major	gap	in	our	knowledge	of	the	physiological	mechanisms	that	may	link	stress	and	disease.	A	potential	reason	for	the	lack	of	human	research	linking	stress,	SNS	activation,	and	inflammation	is	that	SNS	activity	is	difficult	to	measure.	Indeed,	adrenaline	and	noradrenaline	are	released	into	the	bloodstream	very	rapidly	during	a	stressor,	making	their	kinetics	difficult	to	capture	during	typical	laboratory-based	stress	paradigms.	Indirect	measures	of	SNS	activity	may	be	acquired	using	psychophysiological	approaches	that	involve	peripheral	measures	of	electrical	activity	and	efficiency	of	the	heart;	however,	these	methods	provide	only	indirect	indicators	of	SNS	activity,	making	them	subject	to	criticism	in	the	psychoneuroimmunology	community.	To	circumvent	these	issues	with	assessment	of	SNS	activity,	the	present	study	will	employ	a	psychopharmacological	approach	to	experimentally	block	SNS	activity	using	the	drug	propranolol.	Propranolol	is	a	beta-blocker	medication	that	is	very	commonly	prescribed	by	physicians	in	the	United	States	for	the	treatment	of	hypertension,	given	that	it	blocked	adrenergic	receptors	that	lead	to	relaxation	of	the	cardiac	muscle	and	smooth	muscle	tissue.	Interestingly,	propranolol	is	also	sometimes	prescribed	to	individuals	who	have	performance	anxiety	(i.e.,	public	speaking	anxiety),	as	reducing	SNS	activity	(i.e.,	eliminating	the	increased	heart	rate,	blood	pressure,	sweaty	palms,	etc.,	that	typically	accompany	anxiety-provoking	situations)	has	been	anecdotally	observed	to	decrease	perceptions	of	stress	during	these	situations.	Psychological	scientists	have	recently	become	more	interested	in	the	role	SNS	activity	may	play	in	the	formation	and	reconsolidation	of	fear	memories,	and	a	number	of	studies	have	now	used	propranolol	to	investigate	if	blocking	SNS	activity	may	help	treat	individuals	with	Post-Traumatic	Stress	Disorder	(PTSD;	Pitman	et	al.,	2002;	Vaiva	et	al.,	2003).	However,	only	one	known	study	to	date	has	investigated	if	propranolol	reduces	stress-induced	immune	system	activation	(Benschop	et	al.,	1994),	and	this	(now	dated)	study	did	not	specifically	explore	if	propranolol	reduces	inflammatory	responses	to	stress.	Furthermore,	no	known	studies	have	examined	if	blocking	SNS	activity	with	propranolol	changes	individuals’	appraisals	of	the	stressful	situation,	or	their	affective	responses	to	stress.	Results	from	this	study	will	complement	and	extend	the	existing	work	on	how	SNS	activity	affects	fear	memories	and	stress	by	focusing	on	how	propranolol	affects	inflammatory	and	psychological	responses	to	a	stressor.	
In	addition	to	these	primary	goals	of	the	present	study,	we	will	also	explore	the	role	of	SNS	activation	in	a	number	of	additional	tasks	that	are	hypothesized	to	be	affected	by	sympathetic	arousal.	More	specifically,	we	will	examine	if	exposure	to	propranolol	eliminates	implicit	biases	toward	out-group	members	(in	this	case,	African	Americans),	given	that	a	very	large	literature	suggests	that	many	White	Americans	hold	implicit	biases	against	African	Americans	(Witenberk	et	al.,	1997;	Nosek	et	al.,	2002).	While	it	has	been	hypothesized	that	sympathetic	arousal	based	on	cultural	stereotypes	associating	African	Americans	with	negativity	may	be	leading	to	these	implicit	biases,	no	known	studies	have	investigated	this	issue.	We	will	also	explore	of	SNS	activation	is	critical	for	empathy,	or	our	ability	to	understand	the	emotional	states	of	others,	for	avoiding	risky	decisions,	and	for	moral	judgments.	Thus,	this	study	will	also	answer	a	number	of	important,	unanswered	questions	in	social	psychology	regarding	the	role	that	sympathetic	arousal	plays	in	some	of	our	most	fundamental	psychological	processes.	In	sum,	this	randomized,	double-blind,	placebo-controlled	study	of	propranolol	will	shed	important	light	on	how	SNS	activation	influences	our	psychological	and	inflammatory	responses	to	stress.	Results	from	this	study	will	inform	both	the	basic	science	literature	that	is	attempting	to	map	the	physiological	mechanisms	by	which	psychological	stress	may	lead	to	poor	mental	and	physical	health,	and	may	also	ultimately	have	therapeutic	relevance	for	individuals	who	are	experiencing	high	levels	of	stress	that	is	putting	their	health	at	risk.	By	utilizing	psychopharmacological	approaches,	we	will	circumvent	many	of	the	challenges	of	conducting	this	research	in	human	populations,	and	we	will	also	be	in	a	place	to	draw	strong	conclusions	regarding	causality,	given	that	we	will	have	experimentally	manipulated	SNS	activation,	rather	than	relying	on	correlational	measures	of	SNS	activity	that	are	difficult	to	assess	and	are	not	appropriate	for	asking	if	SNS	activity	causes	changes	in	psychology	and	biology.	1.2 Name	and	Description	of	Investigational	Product	or	Intervention		This	study	entails	a	one-time,	40	mg	dose	of	short-acting	propranolol	to	assess	its	immediate/short-term	effects	on	inflammation,	stress	hormones,	autonomic	physiology,	and	psychological	responses	to	an	acute	stressor.	Propranolol	is	typically	prescribed	to	treat	hypertension	and	other	heart-related	conditions,	but	it	sometimes	used	to	treat	performance	anxiety.	The	participants	enrolled	in	this	study	are	medication-naïve,	thus	the	administration	of	propranolol	departs	from	the	participant’s	routine	clinical	care.				1.3 Non-Clinical	and	Clinical	Study	Findings	Propranolol	blocks	the	effects	of	epinephrine	and	norepinephrine	by	competitively	binding	to	both	β1-	and	β2-adrenergic	receptors	in	both	the	peripheral	and	central	nervous	system.	It	was	originally	used	to	treat	hypertension,	approved	by	the	FDA	in	1965.	Since	then	it	has	been	FDA-approved	for	a	variety	of	other	indications,	including	migraine	prevention,	and	essential	tremor.	It	is	even	approved	for	certain	pediatric	conditions.	Propranolol	is	one	of	the	historically	most	commonly-used	prescription	medications,	and	it	is	generally	viewed	as	a	safe,	nontoxic	medication	in	the	daily	dosage	range	of	up	to	640	mg,	divided	into	2-4	doses	per	day.	The	40mg	dose	to	be	given	here	is	expected	to	be	well-tolerated,	with	the	most	adverse	side	effect	anticipated	being	the	possibility	of	allergic	reaction.	Propranolol	rarely	causes	side	effects,	including:	hypotension,	insomnia,	fatigue,	light-headedness,	nausea,	brochospasm,	dizziness,	headache,	hyperglycemia,	and	muscle	weakness.	Each	of	these	side	effects	is	uncommon	at	the	low,	single	dosage	being	utilized	in	these	studies.	Moreover,	these	side	effects	are	not	only	rare,	but	also	quite	mild	and	rarely	prolonged	(i.e.	<	1-2	hours)	when	they	do	occur.	If	any	of	these	side	effects	do	occur,	the	subjects	will	be	given	a	comfortable	place	to	lie	down	until	the	symptoms	pass,	and	will	be	monitored	by	the	CTRC	nurse	and	the	project	coordinator.		Studies	of	the	pharmacokinetics	of	propranolol	suggest	that	peak	plasma	concentrations	following	a	40	mg	dose	occur	1-2	hours	after	administration;	as	such,	we	will	have	participants	rest	quietly	for	1	hour	following	administration	of	the	medication	before	the	start	the	stress	task.	Plasma	half-life	of	propranolol	is	3-6	hours,	and	as	such,	we	will	examine	our	more	exploratory	aims	at	the	end	of	the	session,	which	is	still	within	the	half-life	of	the	drug.	The	study	MD	will	be	on-call	during	all	intervention	sessions	to	assess	any	side	effects	and	prescribe	appropriate	management	as	needed,	and	a	CTRC	nurse	will	be	present	throughout	the	majority	of	study	procedures.	Given	that	we	do	not	anticipate	any	serious	side	effects	to	occur	and	that	there	is	currently	no	data	
to	suggest	that	an	acute	dose	of	propranolol	leads	to	serious	side	effects	in	healthy	populations,	we	believe	the	facilities	at	Howell	Hall	are	sufficient	to	manage	the	mild,	transient	side	effects	that	may	occur	in	response	to	taking	propranolol.		1.4	Relevant	Literature	and	Data		See	Section	1.1	(Introduction)	above	and	references	at	the	conclusion	of	this	proposal	for	a	literature	review	and	references.		2 STUDY	OBJECTIVE		The	purpose	of	this	study	is	to	determine	if	SNS	activation	is	a	key	physiological	mechanism	linking	psychological	stress	and	inflammation.	Thus,	we	will	experimentally-block	SNS	activation	using	propranolol,	a	beta-blocker,	and	examine	if	exposure	to	propranolol	attenuates	inflammatory	responses	to	a	psychological	stressor.	2.1.	Primary	Objective	Primary	Objective	1.	To	examine	if	blocking	sympathetic	nervous	system	activity	via	the	beta-blocker	propranolol	will	attenuate	inflammatory	responses	to	stress.	2.2	Secondary	Objectives	Secondary	Objective	1.	To	examine	if	blocking	beta-adrenergic	receptors	with	the	drug	propranolol	will	attenuate	cortisol	responses	to	an	acute,	laboratory	stressor.	Secondary	Objective	2.	To	examine	if	blocking	beta-adrenergic	receptors	with	the	drug	propranolol	will	attenuate	salivary	alpha	amylase	responses	to	an	acute,	laboratory	stressor.	Secondary	Objective	3.	To	evaluate	if	blocking	beta-adrenergic	receptors	with	the	drug	propranolol	will	attenuate	sympathetic	nervous	system	responses	(i.e.,	pre-ejection	period;	PEP)	to	an	acute,	laboratory	stressor.	Secondary	Objective	4.	To	examine	if	blocking	beta-adrenergic	receptors	with	the	drug	propranolol	will	change	parasympathetic	nervous	system	responses	(i.e.,	respiratory	sinus	arrhythmia;	RSA)	to	an	acute,	laboratory	stressor.	Secondary	Objective	5.	To	examine	if	blocking	beta-adrenergic	receptors	with	the	drug	propranolol	changes	self-reported	psychological	responses	(i.e.,	negative	affect)	to	an	acute	laboratory	stressor.	3 INVESTIGATIONAL	PLAN	(brief	overview)	3.1 Study	Design	This	is	a	double	blind,	randomized,	placebo-controlled	trial	of	the	effects	of	propranolol	on	inflammatory	responses	to	psychological	stress	in	healthy	participants.	We	will	use	a	between-subjects	manipulation,	given	that	repeated	exposures	to	the	stress	task	may	lead	to	habituation	in	both	psychological	and	physiological	responses,	introducing	a	potential	confound	in	order-effects.	It	consists	of	three	stages:	1)	telephone	screening	2)	in-person	Session	I	and	3)	in	person	Session	II.	Telephone	screening.	The	telephone	screening	will	be	conducted	by	trained	research	assistants	in	the	Carolina	Social	Neuroscience	and	Health	Laboratory,	under	the	supervision	of	the	PI.	Inclusion	and	exclusion	criteria	will	be	assessed,	and	study	procedures	will	be	described.	If	participants	meet	inclusion	criteria	and	are	interested	in	participants,	they	will	scheduled	for	Session	I.	Study	Session	I.	Session	I	will	last	approximately	30-60	minutes.	Participants	will	enter	the	lab	in	Howell	Hall	at	UNC-Chapel	Hill,	meet	the	research	assistant	who	is	running	the	session,	and	read	through	the	consent	form.	Once	participants	have	been	given	a	chance	to	ask	any	questions	about	the	consent	form	and	it	is	clear	that	they	understand	the	protocol	and	are	comfortable	with	proceeding,	they	will	sign	a	copy	of	the	General	Consent	Form.	Next,	subjects	are	informed	in	greater	detail	about	the	procedure	for	a	heartbeat	detection	task	as	a	measure	of	their	interoceptive	or	inner	bodily	awareness.	Task	descriptions,	instructions,	and	an	opportunity	to	ask	questions	will	be	provided	to	each	participant.	The	heartbeat	detection	task	will	take	about	20	minutes	to	complete,	and	will	be	administered	by	trained	research	assistants.	Following	completion	of	the	
heartbeat	detection	task,	the	experimenter	will	reiterate	to	the	participant	the	general	purpose	of	Session	II	and	remind	participants	of	their	scheduled	date	for	Session	II.		Study	Session	II.	Session	II	will	last	approximately	5	hours	and	will	take	place	in	the	emotion	induction	laboratory	in	Howell	Hall	at	UNC-CH.	When	the	participant	arrives	for	the	session,	they	will	meet	the	lab	manager	and	the	nurse	supplied	by	CTRC.	The	lab	manager	will	give	the	participant	a	chance	to	review	the	consent	form	the	signed	during	Session	I,	and	will	then	remind	the	participant	of	the	protocol	and	tasks	in	Session	II.	Once	the	participant	understands	the	protocol	and	is	comfortable	with	proceeding,	the	nurse	will	insert	a	catheter	into	the	participant’s	non-dominant	forearm,	which	will	be	used	to	draw	all	the	blood	samples.		Over	the	course	of	the	five	hours,	there	will	be	five	blood	draws,	four	saliva	samples,	and	a	series	of	questionnaires.	The	participants	will	also	complete	the	Trier	Social	Stress	Task	during.	For	this,	the	participant	will	give	a	short	speech	(10	minutes)	while	they	are	evaluated	by	trained	research	assistants.	Participants	will	also	complete	a	number	of	computerized	tasks	designed	to	assess	our	secondary	aims.	Participants	will	be	fully	debriefed	at	the	end	of	the	study.		3.2 Allocation	to	Treatment	Groups	and	Blinding		The	UNC	Investigational	Drug	Service	(IDS)	will	randomly	assign	patients	to	the	experimental	group	(propranolol)	or	the	placebo	group.	The	randomizer	will	be	instructed	that	groups	should	be	matched	on	age,	gender,	and	racial	composition,	and	will	thus	be	informed	of	the	participant’s	demographic	information	in	advance	of	randomization.	Research	staff	who	have	direct	contact	with	the	participant	will	be	blind	to	the	condition	of	the	participant.	The	psychiatrist	who	is	monitoring	safety	and	possible	adverse	events	while	the	participants	are	on	propranolol	or	placebo	will	be	unblinded	during	the	study	and	therefore	able	to	identify	which	pill	was	taken	if	there	are	any	significant	adverse	effects	felt	by	the	participant	after	taking	the	pill.	The	psychiatrist	will	not	have	direct	contact	with	participants	during	the	experimental	visits	unless	the	participant	is	experiencing	adverse	side-effects.	Thus,	no	study	team	member	who	interacts	with	participants	on	the	propranolol/placebo	Session	II	visit	will	know	whether	a	participant	is	on	placebo	or	propranolol.	After	data	collection	for	the	study	is	completed,	the	pharmacist	who	made	order	assignments	will	reveal	which	group	participants	were	in	(propranolol	vs.	placebo)	so	appropriate	analyses	can	be	conducted.	3.3 Study	Duration,	Enrollment	and	Number	of	Subjects	The	study	is	expected	to	be	active	for	1-2	years,	while	we	enroll	95	subjects	(45	in	the	placebo	condition,	45	in	the	propranolol	condition;	with	some	potential	for	data	loss).	Each	subject’s	participation	will	last	approximately	seven	hours	over	the	course	of	approximately	two	weeks.	They	will	complete	a	telephone	screening	for	eligibility	(~15-20	minutes),	an	in-person	session	finalizing	eligibility,	consent	and	completing	a	measure	of	interoceptive	sensitivity	(~30-60	minutes),	and	the	intervention	session,	which	will	involve	taking	the	study	medication,	blood	draws,	saliva	samples,	the	psychological	stress	task,	and	computerized	tasks	and	questionnaires	(~5	hours).	We	expect	approximately	1	week	to	pass	between	Session	I	and	Session	II.	3.4 Study	Population	Participants	in	this	study	will	be	healthy,	undergraduate	students	from	the	UNC-	Chapel	Hill	community,	between	the	ages	of	18-25	who	are	fluent	in	English	(spoken	and	written)	and	in	good	overall	health.	Exclusion	Criteria	1)	presence	or	history	of	chronic	physical	illness	(especially	disorders	with	an	inflammatory	component,	such	as	rheumatoid	arthritis,	asthma,	allergies,	or	issues	that	can	affect	the	heart,	including	low-blood	pressure	or	other	heart	conditions)	2)	presence	or	history	of	psychiatric	illness	(depression,	anxiety)	3)	any	current	prescription	medication	use	4)	currently	pregnant	or	planning	to	become	pregnant;		5)	engagement	in	a	number	of	health-compromising	behaviors	that	may	affect	levels	of	pro-inflammatory	cytokines,	including	cigarette	smoking,	excessive	caffeine	intake	and	sleep	disturbance	(e.g.,	working	night	shifts);		
6)	body	mass	index	(BMI)	greater	than	30,	given	that	adiposity	is	known	to	relate	to	baseline	levels	of	inflammation;		7)	anxiety	about	or	previous	history	of	problems	with	blood	draws	(e.g.,	fainting)	8)	any	reported	heart	conditions		4 STUDY	PROCEDURES	(what	will	be	done)	4.1	Screening	Procedures	and	Baseline	Visit	Prospective	participants	who	email	the	Social	Neuroscience	and	Health	Lab	regarding	participation	will	first	be	screened	via	telephone	by	the	lab	manager	or	other	trained	research	assistant	in	the	lab	to	ensure	they	meet	eligibility	requirements.	Eligible	participants	will	then	be	scheduled	for	Session	I.	Participants	who	endorse	one	or	more	exclusionary	criteria	will	be	notified	that	they	are	not	eligible	for	the	present	study,	but	will	be	encouraged	to	keep	an	eye	out	for	flyers	and	announcements	regarding	other	research	projects	in	our	lab	if	they	are	interested	in	participating	in	other	studies.	See	attached	telephone	screening	script	for	more	information.	Session	I	will	last	approximately	30-60	minutes.	Participants	will	enter	the	lab,	meet	the	research	assistant	who	is	running	the	session,	and	read	through	the	consent	form.	Once	participants	have	been	given	a	chance	to	ask	any	questions	about	the	consent	form	and	it	is	clear	that	they	understand	the	protocol	and	are	comfortable	with	proceeding,	they	will	sign	a	copy	of	the	General	Consent	Form.	They	will	then	follow	the	experimenter	to	a	private	testing	room	in	our	lab	in	Howell	Hall,	where	our	psychophysiological	equipment	for	the	heartbeat	detection	task	is	located	(Howell	119).	There,	subjects	are	informed	in	greater	detail	about	the	procedure	for	the	heartbeat	detection	task	as	a	measure	of	their	interoceptive	or	inner	bodily	awareness	and	also	the	conceptual	knowledge	questionnaires.	Task	descriptions,	instructions,	and	an	opportunity	to	ask	questions	will	be	provided	to	each	participant.	The	heartbeat	detection	task	will	take	about	20	minutes	to	complete,	and	will	be	administered	by	trained	research	assistants.	Following	completion	of	the	heartbeat	detection	task,	the	experimenter	will	reiterate	to	the	participant	the	general	purpose	of	Session	II	and	remind	participants	of	their	scheduled	date	for	Session	II.	Participants	are	told	that	they	do	not	have	to	complete	Session	II	if	they	do	not	wish,	and	that	they	will	still	receive	$20	for	Session	I.	Those	participants	who	do	not	wish	to	continue	the	study	will	be	paid	and	dismissed.	Participants	who	ARE	continuing	with	Session	II	will	be	reminded	to	get	a	good	night’s	sleep	before	the	next	session,	to	not	exercise	or	use	over-the-counter	medication	the	morning	of	the	session,	and	to	not	intake	any	caffeine	in	the	two	hours	before	the	beginning	of	the	session.	These	instructions	are	given	because	sleep,	exercise,	anti-inflammatory	use	and	caffeine	intake	are	all	known	to	impact	levels	of	inflammation.	Participants	will	also	be	asked	to	eat	a	satisfying	meal	and	to	be	well-hydrated	before	coming	to	the	lab	for	Session	II,	to	lessen	the	likelihood	of	fainting	during	blood	draws	or	fatigue	during	the	session.	4.1 Intervention/Treatment	procedures	(by	visits)		Session	II	(the	intervention/treatment	visit)	will	last	approximately	5	hours	and	will	take	place	in	the	emotion	induction	laboratory	in	Howell	Hall	at	UNC-CH.	When	the	participant	arrives	for	the	session,	they	will	meet	the	lab	manager	and	the	nurse	supplied	by	CTRC.	The	lab	manager	will	give	the	participant	a	chance	to	review	the	consent	form	the	signed	during	Session	I,	and	will	then	remind	the	participant	of	the	protocol	and	tasks	in	Session	II.	Once	the	participant	understands	the	protocol	and	is	comfortable	with	proceeding,	the	nurse	will	insert	a	catheter	into	the	participant’s	non-dominant	forearm,	which	will	be	used	to	draw	all	the	blood	samples.	We	use	the	catheter	method	so	that	participants	do	not	have	to	be	stuck	with	needles	multiple	times	throughout	the	experiment.	Once	the	catheter	is	placed,	the	participant	will	be	given	at	least	45	minutes	to	acclimate	to	the	catheter,	during	which	time	they	will	be	prepared	for	psychophysiological	data	collection.	We	are	collecting	Heart	Rate,	Respiratory	Sinus	Arrhythmia,	Cardiac	Impedance,	and	Blood	Pressure	measures	from	participants	throughout	the	session	and,	which	will	allow	us	to	get	a	good	index	of	participants'	autonomic	nervous	system	responses	to	the	stress	task,	and	will	provide	a	biological	“manipulation	check”	to	ensure	that	the	propranolol	has	had	the	intended	effect	(it	should	lower	heart	rate	and	blood	pressure).	Again,	as	with	
Session	1,	female	research	assistants	will	be	assigned	to	female	participants,	while	both	male	and	female	research	assistants	will	be	assigned	to	male	participants,	in	an	effort	to	reduce	participant	discomfort	with	the	procedure	of	attaching	the	sensors.	Once	sensors	have	been	attached,	we	will	collect	5	minutes	of	baseline	data	while	the	participant	just	rests	and	relaxes.	Upon	completion	of	the	baseline	psychophysiological	measures,	participants	will	complete	trait	questionnaire	measures	while	they	continue	to	acclimate	to	the	catheter	and	the	laboratory	environment.	Once	45	minutes	has	passed	(around	1:15	PM),	the	nurse	will	draw	the	first	(baseline)	blood	sample,	and	participants	will	be	asked	to	provide	the	first	(baseline)	saliva	sample.	Next,	the	oral	tablet	of	propranolol	or	placebo	will	be	administered	to	the	participant	by	the	nurse.	Participants	will	continue	completing	trait	questionnaires	and	once	finished,	they	will	be	given	neutral	reading	material	(magazines)	to	read	while	drug	activation	takes	place.	One	hour	after	administration	of	the	medication	(or	placebo),	the	nurse	will	draw	a	second	blood	sample,	and	participants	will	be	asked	to	provide	a	second	saliva	sample.	We	will	also	collect	another	5	minutes	of	psychophysiological	data.	Next,	the	Trier	Social	Stress	Task	(TSST;	Kirschbaum,	Pirkem,	&	Hellhammer)	procedures	will	be	explained	to	participants.	The	TSST	is	a	commonly-used	acute	stress	test	to	measure	psychological	and	biological	responses	to	stress	in	the	laboratory.	In	this	task,	participants	will	be	asked	to	prepare	for	and	give	a	10-minute	speech	and	complete	a	difficult	mental	arithmetic	task	as	they	are	evaluated	by	trained	interviewers.	The	nature	of	the	task	is	stressful	and	participants	may	experience	varying	levels	of	stress,	anxiety,	and	possibly	embarrassment.	The	consent	form	at	the	beginning	of	the	study	describes	that	they	will	take	part	in	a	“role	play”	during	a	cognitive	performance	task	(see	Consent	Form).	We	describe	the	task	in	this	vague	way	in	the	initial	consent	because	we	want	to	ensure	that	the	baseline	physiology	data	is	clean	and	not	impacted	by	participants'	anticipatory	stress	about	the	upcoming	task.	Additionally,	prior	to	the	participant's	participation	in	the	TSST,	participants	will	informed	in	greater	detail	about	the	procedure	for	TSST,	and	they	will	be	asked	if	they	would	like	to	continue.	If	they	do	continue,	but	wish	to	stop	at	any	time,	they	will	be	reminded	that	they	can.	After	being	informed	of	the	procedures	and	confirming	participants	would	like	to	continue,	the	experimenter	will	introduce	two	more	researchers	who	will	act	as	the	interviewers	/	judges.	Participants	will	have	2	minutes	to	prepare	for	the	speech,	in	which	they	will	be	asked	to	answer	why	they	are	the	perfect	candidate	for	their	dream	job.	Participants	will	then	give	a	10	minute	speech	in	front	of	the	two	interviewers	and	a	video	camera.	After	the	10	minute	speech,	participants	will	complete	a	verbal	math	task	for	5	minutes.	While	participants	are	completing	the	tasks,	interviewers	will	remain	neutral	(give	neither	positive	nor	negative	feedback).	The	experimenter	leading	Session	II	will	also	be	present	throughout,	to	help	with	timing	the	tasks,	etc.	Following	completion	of	the	TSST	procedures,	participants	will	complete	a	second	round	of	questionnaires	to	measure	their	affective	responses,	somatic	responses,	and	interpersonal	appraisals	during	and	after	the	TSST.	Fifteen	minutes	after	termination	of	the	TSST,	a	third	saliva	sample	will	be	taken,	and	30	minutes	after	the	termination	of	the	TSST,	a	fourth	(and	final)	saliva	sample,	and	third	blood	sample,	will	be	taken.	Additional	blood	samples	will	be	taken	60	minutes	(sample	#4)	and	90	minutes	(sample	#5)	following	termination	of	the	TSST.	In	between	blood	samplings,	participants	will	be	given	neutral	reading	material.	Following	collection	of	the	final	blood	sample,	the	nurse	will	remove	the	catheter	and	check	the	participant’s	vital	signs.	The	nurse	will	then	be	dismissed	back	to	the	CTRC.	For	the	remaining	60	minutes	of	the	session,	participants	will	complete	four	computerized	tasks	designed	to	measure	other	psychological	processes	(besides	stress)	thought	to	be	influenced	by	sympathetic	nervous	system	activation.		A	list	of	tasks	and	questionnaires	is	included	below.		In	addition,	at	the	completion	of	the	study,	participants	will	be	fully	debriefed.	Contact	information	for	the	PI,	Study	Physician,	and	IRB	is	provided	on	the	consent	form	and	debriefing	form	(which	participants	can	keep)	if	they	wish	to	address	any	concerns	they	had.	4.2 Follow-up	procedures		
There	will	be	no	scheduled	follow-up;	however,	participants	will	be	given	the	contact	information	of	the	PI	and	study	physician	and	instructed	to	contact	us	if	they	experience	any	side	effects	or	discomfort	following	the	study.		4.3 Subject	Completion/	Withdrawal	procedures	If	a	participant	wishes	to	discontinue	their	participation	in	the	study	before	it	ends,	they	will	receive	$25	for	each	hour	that	they	participated.	Upon	completion	of	the	study,	they	will	receive	$125.			5. STUDY	EVALUATIONS	AND	MEASUREMENTS	(how	measurements	will	be	made)			Details	of	Heartbeat	Detection	Task:	We	will	use	the	well-validated	Heartbeat	Detection	Task	(Barrett	et	al.,	2004;	Kleckner	et	al.,	2016)	to	provide	an	index	of	participants’	interoceptive	sensitivity	(i.e.,	how	aware	they	are	of	physiological	changes	in	the	body).	To	do	so,	we	will	first	prepare	the	participant	for	psychophysiology	data	collection.	Participants	are	given	the	chance	to	go	to	the	restroom	if	need	be	and	get	comfortable	before	we	attach	the	sensors.	Female	research	assistants	will	be	assigned	to	female	participants,	while	both	male	and	female	research	assistants	will	be	assigned	to	male	participants,	in	an	effort	to	reduce	participant	discomfort	with	the	procedure	of	attaching	the	sensors.	Only	three	sensors	will	be	attached	for	this	task	as	is	standard	for	basic	EKG	measurement.	One	sensor	will	go	on	the	participant’s	right	collarbone,	and	two	more	sensors	right	below	their	ribs.	Once	sensors	have	been	attached,	we	will	collect	5	minutes	of	baseline	data	while	the	participant	sits	and	relaxes.	This	baseline	is	important	for	us	to	help	generate	participant-specific	trials	for	the	heartbeat	detection	task	itself.	Next,	participants	will	either	complete	the	heartbeat	detection	task	or	our	questionnaire	measures	of	conceptual	knowledge.	These	two	tasks	are	counterbalanced	because	we	suspect	that	the	activation	of	interoceptive	concept	knowledge	could	temporarily	elevate	interoceptive	sensitivity--and	likewise,	interoceptive	sensitivity	could	activate	interoceptive	concept	knowledge.	Therefore,	counterbalancing	each	task	should	help	reduce	order	effects.	For	the	heartbeat	detection	task,	we	use	MATLAB	to	automatically	generate	a	person-specific	heartbeat	task	based	on	their	baseline	cardiac	data.	Participants	put	on	headphones	and	follow	the	on-screen	instructions	provided	to	them.	They	are	instructed	to	listen	for	a	series	of	3	beeps	in	their	headphones	then	must	indicate	on	the	computer	whether	these	beeps	occurred	between	their	current	heartbeats	or	during	their	current	heartbeat.	Participants	also	rate	how	confident	they	are	in	their	response.	Participants	have	2	practice	trials	with	the	research	assistant	to	ensure	they	understand	the	task,	and	then	complete	the	60	target	trials	on	their	own	in	the	private,	quiet	lab	room.	Accuracy	is	computed	by	comparing	participant's	hits	and	misses,	and	determining	if	they	were	accurate	above	chance.		After	both	the	heartbeat	detection	and	conceptual	knowledge	tasks	are	done,	the	experimenter	will	help	the	participant	remove	the	psychophysiology	sensors.	The	sensors	must	stay	on	across	both	tasks	since	they	are	counterbalanced	and	we	wish	to	keep	all	psychological	factors	as	equal	as	possible.		Details	of	the	Trier	Social	Stress	Task	(TSST).	The	TSST	is	a	commonly-used	acute	stress	test	to	measure	psychological	and	biological	responses	to	stress	in	the	laboratory.	In	this	task,	participants	will	be	asked	to	prepare	for	and	give	a	10-minute	speech	and	complete	a	difficult	mental	arithmetic	task	as	they	are	evaluated	by	trained	interviewers.	The	nature	of	the	task	is	stressful	and	participants	may	experience	varying	levels	of	stress,	anxiety,	and	possibly	embarrassment.	The	consent	form	at	the	beginning	of	the	study	describes	that	they	will	take	part	in	a	“role	play”	during	a	cognitive	performance	task.	We	describe	the	task	in	this	vague	way	in	the	initial	consent	because	we	want	to	ensure	that	the	baseline	physiology	data	is	clean	and	not	impacted	by	participants'	anticipatory	stress	about	the	upcoming	task.	Additionally,	prior	to	the	participant's	participation	in	the	TSST,	participants	will	be	informed	in	greater	detail	about	the	procedure	for	TSST,	and	they	will	be	asked	if	they	would	like	to	continue.	If	they	do	continue,	but	wish	to	stop	at	any	time,	they	will	be	reminded	that	they	can.	After	being	informed	of	the	procedures	and	confirming	participants	would	like	to	continue,	the	experimenter	will	introduce	two	more	research	assistants	who	will	act	as	the	interviewers/judges.	Participants	will	have	2	minutes	to	prepare	for	the	speech,	in	which	they	will	be	asked	to	answer	why	they	are	the	perfect	candidate	for	their	dream	job.	Participants	will	then	give	a	10-minute	speech	in	front	of	the	two	interviewers	
and	a	video	camera.	After	the	10-minute	speech,	participants	will	complete	a	verbal	math	task	for	5	minutes.	While	participants	are	completing	the	tasks,	interviewers	will	remain	neutral	(give	neither	positive	nor	negative	feedback).	The	experimenter	leading	Session	II	will	also	be	present	throughout,	to	help	with	timing	the	tasks,	etc.	Biomarker	Information:	Saliva	Samples.	We	will	take	4	saliva	samples	during	the	study	via	the	passive	drool	method.	Passive	drool	is	a	saliva	collection	method	for	collecting	whole	saliva.	Passive	drool	is	considered	by	many	researchers	to	be	the	gold	standard	when	collecting	saliva	samples	for	biological	testing,	because	it	provides	the	purest	sample	possible	and	allows	researchers	to	“biobank”	samples	for	testing.	Participants	allow	saliva	to	pool	in	mouth,	then,	with	head	tilted	forward,	gently	force	saliva	through	a	small	straw	and	into	the	vial.	Participants	will	be	aided	by	trained	research	assistants	wearing	rubber	gloves.	About	2ml	of	saliva	will	be	collected	at	each	sampling	time.	Saliva	samples	will	be	assayed	for	levels	of	the	stress	hormone,	cortisol,	as	well	as	another	HPA	axis	byproducts	including	ACTH	and	testosterone.	Blood	Samples.	We	will	draw	10	mL	of	blood	into	vacutainer	EDTA	tubes	at	each	time	point,	which	will	be	stored	on	ice	for	the	duration	of	the	study,	and	then	centrifuged	to	isolate	plasma	and	stored	in	1	mL	aliquots	in	cryovials	in	a	-80	degree	freezer	until	the	study	is	complete.	Samples	will	then	be	assayed	for	levels	of	pro-inflammatory	cytokines	(i.e.,	interleukin-6,	tumor	necrosis	factor	alpha,	interleukin-1)	using	multiplex	bead-based	assays.	Psychophysiology.	We	will	collect	electrocardiogram	and	impedance	cardiography	data	from	participants	to	examine	how	propranolol	and	exposure	to	the	TSST	influence	autonomic	physiology.	Questionnaires	(for	exploratory	moderator	analyese):		Demographics.	We	ask	participants'	age,	gender,	race/ethnicity,	weight/height	(to	calculate	BMI),	perceived	SES,	and	also	about	participants'	comfort	with	giving	speeches	/	being	the	center	of	attention.	Health	Behavioral	Questionnaire	(Muscatell,	2016).	This	asks	a	series	of	questions	to	make	sure	that	participants	followed	instructions	prior	to	the	session	and	are	still	eligible	to	participate.	It	includes	items	“Which	medications	have	you	taken	in	the	last	48	hours?”		UCLA	Loneliness	Scale:	(Russell,	D.,	Peplau,	L.A.,	and	Ferguson,	M.L	1978)	This	is	a	commonly	used,	10	item,	measure	of	loneliness.		The	PHQ-9:	(Spitzer,	1999)	This	a	multipurpose,	validated	instrument	for	screening,	diagnosing,	monitoring	and	measuring	the	severity	of	depression.	Perceived	Stress	Scale:	(Cohen,	1994)	This	is	a	widely	used	psychological	instrument	for	measuring	the	perception	of	stress;	i.e	the	degree	to	which	situations	in	one’s	life	are	appraised	as	stressful.	Social	Provisions	Scale	(Cutrona,	C.	E.	and	Russell,	D.,	1987).	This	examines	the	degree	to	which	respondent’s	social	relationships	provide	various	dimensions	of	social	support.	Fear	of	Evaluation	Scale	(Leary	1983).	This	is	a	is	a	30-item,	self-rated	scale	used	to	measure	social	anxiety.		State-Trait	Anxiety	Inventory	(Spielberger	1983)	this	inventory	has	40	self-report	items	pertaining	to	anxiety	affect.		The	MacArthur	Scale	of	Subjective	Social	Status:	(Adler,	1984)	This	is	a	commonly	used	measure	subjective	social	status.		In	an	easy	pictorial	format,	it	presents	a	"social	ladder"	and	asks	individuals	to	place	an	"X"	on	the	rung	on	which	they	feel	they	stand.	There	are	two	versions	of	the	ladder,	one	linked	to	traditional	SES	indicators	and	the	second	linked	to	standing	in	one's	community,	in	this	case	UNC.	We	will	give	them	both.	It	is	useful	to	be	able	to	make	comparisons	between	objective	and	subjective	SES.	Parent	SES:	This	is	a	six	item	questionnaire	to	assess	the	socioeconomic	status	of	the	participant	and	their	family.	It	will	be	used	to	make	comparisons	between	objective	and	subjective	SES.		PANAS-circumplex	questionnaire.	Participants	rate	which	emotions	they	felt	during	the	TSST	and	also	how	they	are	feeling	currently.	Participants	rate	how	intensely	they	felt	those	emotions	using	a	Likert	
scale.	Additionally,	participants	report	how	clear	their	emotions	were	during	the	TSST.	This	is	our	measure	of	discrete	emotion,	perceived	emotional	intensity,	and	perceived	emotional	clarity.		Somatic	Sensations	questionnaire.	Participants	rate	which	somatic	sensations	they	felt	during	the	TSST	and	also	rate	how	clearly	/	distinctly	they	experienced	those	bodily	changes.	Participants	use	Likert	scales	for	their	ratings.	We	will	also	assess	the	participants’	feelings	about	the	interviewers	using	standardized	measures.	Challenge	threat	appraisals:	Blascovich,	J.	&	Mendes,	W.	B.	(2000).		This	questionnaire	taps	into	the	degree	to	which	the	participant	views	new	experiences	as	a	potential	challenge	or	threat.			6. STATISTICAL	CONSIDERATION				Dr.	Muscatell	and	her	trainees	will	be	responsible	for	statistical	computations	and	data	analysis.	She	will	consult	with	colleagues	in	the	Quantitative	Psychology	area	of	the	Department	of	Psychology	and	Neuroscience	as	needed.	All	hypothesis	tests	will	be	evaluated	using	95%	confidence	intervals,	corresponding	to	a	p	value	or	.05.	Only	tests	that	indicate	a	p	value	of	.05	or	less	will	be	considered	statistically	significant;	tests	above	this	p	value	will	not	be	interpreted.	6.1	Primary	Endpoint-	Statistical	Methods	Primary	Objective	1.	To	examine	if	blocking	sympathetic	nervous	system	activity	via	the	beta-blocker	propranolol	will	attenuate	inflammatory	responses	to	stress.	Analysis	Plan.	To	address	this	aim,	we	will	first	examine	if	there	was	a	change	in	inflammation	simply	as	an	effect	of	taking	the	propranolol	(before	stress	induction).	As	such,	we	will	conduct	a	multilevel	model	(MLM)	examining	levels	of	inflammation	(IL-6),	with	time	(BL	vs.	pre-TSST)	as	a	within-subjects	factor	and	condition	(propranolol	vs.	placebo)	as	a	between-subjects	factor.	If	the	result	of	this	test	shows	a	significant	interaction,	then	we	will	only	include	the	pre-TSST	time	point	in	subsequent	models.	If	non-significant,	we	will	use	both	baseline	time	points	in	subsequent	analyses.	Next,	we	will	conduct	an	MLM	examining	levels	of	inflammation,	with	time	(BL	and/or	pre-TSST,	30-,	60-,	90-min	post-TSST)	as	a	within-subjects	factor	and	condition	(propranolol	vs.	placebo)	as	a	between-subjects	factor.	We	hypothesize	that	individuals	in	the	placebo	condition	will	show	an	increase	in	levels	of	inflammatory	markers	from	pre-	to	post-TSST,	while	those	in	the	propranolol	condition	will	show	significantly	lower	levels	of	inflammation	over	time	compared	to	the	placebo	condition	(i.e.,	no	stress-related	increase	in	inflammatory	markers).	All	outcomes	will	first	be	examined	using	histogram	and	scatterplot	for	assumptions	of	normality	and	homoscedasticity.	Any	variables	that	need	to	be	log-transformed	(e.g.,	cortisol,	sAA,	IL-6)	will	be	before	analyses	are	run.	Across	all	models,	we	will	evaluate	if	we	need	to	control	for	sex,	BMI,	and	objective	SES.		Prior	to	analyses,	we	will	also	examine	each	outcome	for	outliers	existing	+/-	3	SDs	from	the	mean	within	each	time	point	within	each	condition.	Outliers	are	excluded	only	within	the	time	point	where	they	were	problematic	but	retained	elsewhere	to	reduce	data	loss.				All	data	will	be	analyzed	in	R	using	the	lme4	package.	As	time	points	are	nested	within	individuals,	we	take	a	multilevel	modelling	approach	with	the	inclusion	of	a	random	intercept	to	model	individual	differences	in	each	outcome.		6.2	Secondary	Endpoints-	Statistical	Methods	Analysis	Plan.	To	address	secondary	objectives,	we	will	follow	the	identical	procedure	outlined	above,	but	will	swap	in	the	relevant	outcome	as	the	dependent	variable	(i.e.,	cortisol,	salivary	alpha	amylase,	PEP,	RSA,	psychological	responses).	We	will	first	examine	if	there	was	a	change	in	the	outcome	simply	as	an	effect	of	taking	the	propranolol	(before	stress	induction).	As	such,	we	will	conduct	a	multilevel	model	(MLM)	examining	levels	of	the	outcome,	with	time	(BL	vs.	pre-TSST)	as	a	within-subjects	factor	and	condition	(propranolol	vs.	placebo)	as	a	between-subjects	factor.	If	the	result	of	this	test	shows	a	significant	interaction,	then	we	will	only	include	the	pre-TSST	time	point	in	subsequent	models.	If	non-significant,	we	will	use	both	baseline	time	points	in	subsequent	analyses.	Next,	we	will	conduct	an	MLM	examining	levels	
of	each	relevant	outcome,	with	time	(BL	and/or	pre-TSST,	post-TSST	time-points)	as	a	within-subjects	factor	and	condition	(propranolol	vs.	placebo)	as	a	between-subjects	factor.		6.4 Sample	Size	and	Power	We	are	planning	to	enroll	45	participants	per	condition	in	our	study,	for	a	total	of	90	participants.	The	sample	size	was	selected	based	on	a	thorough	literature	review	of	prior	studies	that	have	examined	the	effects	of	propranolol	on	psychological	tasks	in	healthy	participants	(similar	to	those	in	the	present	study)	revealed	the	average	sample	size	of	each	condition	to	be	21	participants	(22	in	the	propranolol	condition,	21	in	the	placebo	condition).	Thus,	by	randomizing	45	participants	to	each	condition,	we	are	sufficiently	powered	to	achieve	our	aims.	We	have	included	more	participants	than	prior	work	in	this	area	because	we	are	interested	in	examining	moderators	of	our	main	effects	of	interest,	and	such	analyses	require	greater	sample	size	to	be	sufficiently-powered.	We	also	considered	availability	of	possible	eligible	participants	when	making	this	decision;	we	do	not	anticipate	significant	difficulty	in	finding	participants	who	meet	our	inclusion/exclusion	criteria,	given	that	they	are	relatively	open	and	should	be	relatively	prevalent	in	our	target	recruitment	population	(i.e.,	primarily	healthy,	undergraduate	students).	Finally,	we	also	considered	practical	constraints	in	terms	of	funds	and	time	available	to	complete	the	study.	As	the	project	will	be	funded	off	of	Dr.	Muscatell’s	laboratory	start-up	funds,	we	do	not	currently	have	grant	funds	to	enroll	additional	participants.	We	are	also	hoping	to	complete	the	project	within	one	year	so	that	we	can	use	the	data	generated	by	the	project	as	preliminary	data	for	a	grant	to	be	submitted	to	NIH	to	run	a	similar	study	including	a	neuroimaging	(fMRI)	component.		7. STUDY	INTERVENTION	(drug,	device	or	other	intervention	details)	Description.	Propranolol	blocks	the	effect	of	epinephrine	and	norepinephrine	by	competitively	binding	to	on	both	β1-	and	β2-adrenergic	receptors	in	both	the	peripheral	and	central	nervous	system.	It	was	originally	used	to	treat	hypertension,	approved	by	the	FDA	in	1965.	Since	then	it	has	been	FDA	approved	for	a	variety	of	other	indications,	including	migraine	prevention,	and	essential	tremor.	It	is	even	approved	for	certain	pediatric	conditions.	Propranolol	is	one	of	the	historically	most	commonly-used	prescription	medications,	and	it	is	generally	viewed	as	a	safe,	nontoxic	medication	in	the	daily	dosage	range	of	up	to	640	mg,	divided	into	2-4	doses	per	day.		Receipt/Storage.	The	project	manager	will	pick	up	the	medication	at	IDS	the	day	prior	to	the	participants	second	session.	All	medication	tablets	will	be	stored	in	a	room	temperature	locked	cabinet	in	the	Muscatell	Lab	in	Howell	Hall	at	UNC.	Only	the	project	coordinator	and	the	PI	will	have	a	key	for	this	cabinet.		Packaging/Labeling.	Medication	will	be	packaged	and	labeled	in	accordance	with	IDS	protocol.		Dosing.	Each	participant	will	receive	40mg	of	propranolol,	or	a	tablet	of	equivalent	size	of	a	placebo.		Treatment	compliance	and	Adherence.	This	is	a	one-time	dosage,	so	not	applicable.		Drug	Return/Destruction.	If	a	participant	does	not	show	up	for	their	appointment,	we	will	return	the	drug	to	IDS	and	they	will	destroy	it	in	accordance	with	their	protocol.		8. STUDY	INTERVENTION	ADMINISTRATION	(if	applicable)		This	is	a	double	blind,	randomized	clinical	trial.	IDS	will	randomly	assign	patients	to	the	experimental	group	(propranolol)	or	the	placebo	group.	Research	staff	who	have	direct	contact	with	the	participant	will	be	blind	to	the	condition	of	the	participant.	The	psychiatrist	who	is	monitoring	safety	and	possible	adverse	events	while	the	participants	are	on	propranolol	or	placebo	will	be	unblinded	during	the	study	and	therefore	able	to	identify	which	pill	was	taken	if	there	are	any	significant	adverse	effects	felt	by	the	participant	after	taking	the	pill.	The	psychiatrist	will	not	have	direct	contact	with	participants	during	the	experimental	visits	unless	the	participant	is	experiencing	adverse	side-effects.	Thus,	no	study	team	member	who	interacts	with	participants	on	the	propranolol/placebo	Session	II	visit	will	know	whether	a	participant	is	on	placebo	or	propranolol.	After	data	collection	for	the	study	is	completed,	the	pharmacist	who	made	order	assignments	will	reveal	which	group	participants	were	in	(propranolol	vs.	placebo)	so	appropriate	analyses	can	be	conducted.			
9. SAFETY	MANAGEMENT	The	40mg	dose	of	propranolol	to	be	given	in	this	study	is	expected	to	be	well-tolerated	in	this	young,	healthy	population.	The	greatest	risk	to	participants	taking	this	medication	is	allergic	reaction,	and	we	will	assess	all	medication	allergies	prior	to	study	enrollment.	Propranolol	rarely	causes	side	effects,	including:	hypotension,	insomnia,	fatigue,	light-headedness,	nausea,	brochospasm,	dizziness,	headache,	hyperglycemia,	and	muscle	weakness.	Each	of	these	side	effects	is	uncommon	at	the	low,	single	dosage	being	utilized	in	these	studies.	Moreover,	these	side	effects	are	not	only	rare,	but	also	quite	mild	and	rarely	prolonged	(i.e.	<	1-2	hours)	when	they	do	occur.	If	any	of	these	side	effects	do	occur,	the	subjects	will	be	given	a	comfortable	place	to	lie	down	until	the	symptoms	pass,	and	will	be	monitored	closely	by	the	nurses	and	research	staff.		The	study	MD	will	be	on-call	to	assess	any	side	effects	and	prescribe	appropriate	management	as	needed,	and	a	CTRC	nurse	will	be	present	throughout	the	majority	of	study	procedures.	Given	that	we	do	not	anticipate	any	serious	side	effects	to	occur	and	that	there	is	currently	no	data	to	suggest	that	an	acute	dose	of	propranolol	leads	to	serious	side	effects	in	healthy	populations,	we	believe	the	facilities	at	Howell	Hall	are	sufficient	to	manage	the	milder,	transient	side	effects	that	may	occur	in	response	to	taking	propranolol.		The	MD	who	is	monitoring	safety	and	possible	adverse	events	while	the	participants	are	on	propranolol	or	placebo	will	be	un-blinded	during	the	study	and	therefore	able	to	identify	which	pill	was	taken	if	there	are	any	significant	adverse	effects	felt	by	the	participant	after	taking	the	pill.	The	psychiatrist	will	not	have	direct	contact	with	participants	during	the	experimental	visits	unless	the	participant	is	experiencing	adverse	side-effects.	Although	they	are	not	anticipated,	any	adverse	events	will	be	immediately	reported	to	the	UNC	IRB.		10. DATA	COLLECTION	AND	MANAGMENT		The	study	coordinator,	Emma	Armstrong-Carter,	will	be	responsible	for	data	management,	with	supervision	from	the	PI.	Data	entry	will	be	captured	and	managed	using	the	REDCap	software	provided	by	the	NC	TraCS	Institute,	which	is	HIPPA	compliant	and	provides	a	state-of-the-art	system	for	data	entry	and	management,	especially	for	a	study	such	as	that	proposed	in	the	present	protocol	that	includes	measures	of	multiple	endpoints.	All	Information	and	data	collected	for	the	purpose	of	this	research	study	will	be	kept	confidential	as	required	by	law.	Telephone	numbers	and	e-mail	addresses	will	be	used	for	scheduling	study	sessions.	These	identifiers	will	be	stored	separately	from	any	data.	All	copies	of	test	records	and	results	will	be	kept	in	computer	files	that	require	a	password	to	open.	All	information	will	be	accessible	only	to	authorized	personnel.	Codes	will	be	used	on	all	data	sheets	in	place	of	names.	No	subjects	will	be	identified	in	any	report	or	publication	about	this	study.	A	single	file	will	link	the	identifying	information	to	participant’s	subject	ID	code	and	that	will	only	be	stored	on	the	Lab	Manager’s	computer	and	it	will	be	password	protected.	Only	the	Lab	Manager	and	the	PI	will	have	access	to	the	password	for	this	file.	Data	quality	will	be	ensured	with	precise	documentation	throughout	Session	II.	Specifically,	both	the	CTRC	nurses	and	the	study	coordinator	will	have	“flow	sheets”	created	by	the	PI	that	specify	when	samples	should	be	taken,	when	the	medication	should	be	administered,	and	when	the	questionnaires	and	computer	tasks	should	take	place.	The	study	coordinator	and	nurse	will	document	the	precise	time	that	samples	are	taken	during	the	session,	recording	reasons	for	any	deviation	from	the	planned	timing	on	the	flow	sheet.	They	will	also	record	when	tasks	and	questionnaires	are	administered,	and	any	other	details	relevant	to	the	session.	Following	the	session,	all	timing	information	and	details	about	the	session	will	be	transferred	to	REDCAp	and	linked	to	the	rest	of	the	participant’s	data.	Questionnaire	measures	will	be	administered	in	REDCap,	and	while	participants	can	elect	to	skip	any	question	they	do	not	feel	comfortable	answering,	a	prompt	will	appear	on	screen	notifying	participants	if	they	have	skipped	a	question,	to	ensure	that	they	have	intentionally	not	answered	the	question	rather	than	accidentally	leaving	it	blank.		11. RECRUITMENT	STRATEGY	Participants	will	be	recruited	through	posting	of	IRB-approved	flyers	around	UNC	and	the	neighboring	areas	(Franklin	Street,	Carrboro,	etc.),	announcements	made	in	classes	at	UNC,	and	email	list-serves	at	UNC.	All	
recruitment-related	materials	will	be	approved	by	the	IRB,	including	flyers,	e-mails,	and	announcements	scripts.	We	do	not	anticipate	having	any	difficulty	recruiting	the	projected	number	of	subjects	identified.		12. CONSENT	PROCESS	All	subjects	will	participate	in	the	informed	consent	process.	Participants	will	be	familiarized	with	the	protocol	by	the	PI	or	qualified	study	personnel,	including	its	risks	and	benefits,	and	informed	consent	will	be	documented	according	to	the	regulations	governing	human	subject	research	at	the	University	of	North	Carolina,	Chapel	Hill,	which	meet	the	standards	of	the	NIH.		Upon	arrival	to	participate	in	Session	I,	participants	will	read	and	have	explained	to	them	the	informed	consent	document.	Informed	consent	is	obtained	in	a	comfortable,	private	area	in	Howell	Hall	designed	for	this	purpose.	Participants’	questions	about	the	protocol	will	be	thoroughly	answered	prior	to	obtaining	consent,	with	no	time	limit	to	this	procedure.	Upon	consent,	the	subject	is	free	to	withdraw	that	consent	at	any	time,	which	will	be	emphasized	to	the	subject.	Consent	will	be	obtained	by	approved	study	staff.		13. PLANS	FOR	PUBLICATION	We	plan	to	submit	the	results	from	this	study	to	peer-reviewed	psychology	and	neuroscience	journals.			14. REFERENCES:		1.	Barrett,	L.	F.	(2004).	Feelings	or	Words?	Understanding	the	Content	in	Self-Report	Ratings	of	Experienced	Emotion.	Journal	of	Personality	and	Social	Psychology,	87(2),	266-281.	2. Baker	DG,	Nievergelt	CM,	O’Connor	DT.	Biomarkers	of	PTSD:	neuropeptides	and	immune	signaling.	Neuropharmocology.	2012;62:663–673.	3. Benschop	et	al.,	(1994)	Effects	of	Beta-Adrenergic	Blockade	on	Immunologic	and	Cardiovascular	Changes	Induced	by	Mental	Stress.	Circulation,	89,	762-769.		4. Bierhaus	A,	Wolf	J,	Andrassy	M,	Rohleder	N,	Humpert	PM,	Petrov	D,	Ferstl	R,	von	Eynatten	M,	Wendt	T,	Rudofsky	G,	Joswig	M,	Morcos	M,	Schwaninger	M,	McEwen	B,	Kirschbaum	C,	Nawroth	PP.	A	mechanism	converting	psychosocial	stress	into	mononuclear	cell	activation.	Proc	Natl	Acad	Sci	USA.	2003;100:1920–1925.	5. Capuron	L,	Miller	AH.	Cytokines	and	psychopathology:	lessons	from	interferon-a.	Biol	Psychiatry.2004;56:819–824.	6. Schein,	C,	Ritter,	RS	&	Gray,	K	Harm	mediates	the	disgust-immorality	link.	Emotion.	In	press.	7. Choy	EHS,	Panayi	GS.	Mechanisms	of	disease:	cytokine	pathways	and	joint	inflammation	in	rheumatoid	arthritis.	N	Engl	J	Med.	2001;344:907–916.		8. Cohen	S,	Janicki-Deverts	D,	Miller	GE.	Psychological	stress	and	disease.	JAMA.	2007;298:1685–1687.	9. DellaGiola	N,	Hannestad	J.	A	critical	review	of	human	endotoxin	administration	as	an	experimental	paradigm	of	depression.	Neurosci	Biobehav	Rev.	2010;34:130–143.	9. DeRijk	RH,	Boelen	A,	Tilders	FJH,	Berkenbosch	F.	Induction	of	plasma	interleukin-6	by	circulating	adrenaline	in	the	rat.	Psychoneuroendocrinology.	1994;19:155–163.	10. Kendler	KS,	Karkowski	LM,	Prescott	CA.	Causal	relationship	between	stressful	life	events	and	the	onset	of	major	depression.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	1999;156:837–841.	11. Kiecolt-Glaser	JK,	Preacher	KJ,	MacCallum	RC,	Atkinson	C,	Malarkey	WB,	Glaser	R.	Chronic	stress	and	age-related	increases	in	pro-inflammatory	cytokine	IL-6.	Proc	Natl	Acad	Sci	USA.2003;100:9090–9095.	12. Kirschbaum,	C.,	Prussner,	J.	C.,	Stone,	A.	A.,	Federenko,	I.,	Gaab,	J.,	Lintz,	D.,	...	&	Hellhammer,	D.	H.	(1995).	Persistent	high	cortisol	responses	to	repeated	psychological	stress	in	a	subpopulation	of	healthy	men.	Psychosomatic	medicine,	57(5),	468-474.	13. Kop	WJ,	Weissman	NJ,	Zhu	J,	Bonsall	RW,	Doyle	M,	Stretch	MR,	Glaes	SB,	Krantz	DS,	Gottdiener	JS,	Tracy	RP.	Effects	of	acute	mental	stress	and	exercise	on	inflammatory	markers	in	patients	with	coronary	artery	disease	and	healthy	controls.	Am	J	Cardiol.	2008;101:767–773.	
14. McInnis,	C.	M.,	Wang,	D.,	Gianferante,	D.,	Hanlin,	L.,	Chen,	X.,	Thoma,	M.	V.,	&	Rohleder,	N.	(2015).	Response	and	habituation	of	pro-and	anti-inflammatory	gene	expression	to	repeated	acute	stress.	Brain,	behavior,	and	immunity,	46,	237-248.	15. Miller	GE,	Chen	E,	Cole	SW.	Health	psychology:	developing	biologically	plausible	models	linking	the	social	world	and	physical	health.	Annu	Rev	Psychol.	2009;60:501–524.		16. Nosek,	B.	A.,	Banaji,	M.,	&	Greenwald,	A.	G.	(2002).	Harvesting	implicit	group	attitudes	and	beliefs	from	a	demonstration	web	site.	Group	Dynamics:	Theory,	Research,	and	Practice,	6(1),	101-115.		17. Pitman,	Roger	K.,	Kathy	M.	Sanders,	Randall	M.	Zusman,	Anna	R.	Healy,	Farah	Cheema,	Natasha	B.	Lasko,	Larry	Cahill,	and	Scott	P.	Orr.	"Pilot	Study	of	Secondary	Prevention	of	Posttraumatic	Stress	Disorder	with	Propranolol."	Biological	Psychiatry	51.2	(2002):	189-92.		18. Raison	CL,	Miller	AH.	The	evolutionary	significance	of	depression	in	Pathogen	Host	Defense	(PATHOS-D)	Mol	Psychiatry.	2013;18:15–37.		19. Rohleder	N.	Stimulation	of	systemic	low-grade	inflammation	by	psychosocial	stress.	Psychosom	Med.	2014;76:181–189.	20. Steptoe	A,	Kivimäki	M.	Stress	and	cardiovascular	disease.	Nat	Rev	Cardiol.	2012;9:360–370.	21. Slavich	GM,	Irwin	MR.	From	stress	to	inflammation	and	major	depressive	disorder:	a	social	signal	transduction	theory	of	depression.	Psychol	Bull.	2014;140:774–815.	22. Slavich	GM,	Way	BM,	Eisenberger	NI,	Taylor	SE.	Neural	sensitivity	to	social	rejection	is	associated	with	inflammatory	responses	to	social	stress.	Proc	Natl	Acad	Sci	USA.	2010;107:14817–14822.	23. Spitzer	R.,	Kroenke,	K.,	Williams,	J.	(1999).	Validation	and	utility	of	a	self-report	Version	of	PRIME-MD:	the	PHQ	Primary	Care	Study.	Journal	of	the	American	Medical	Association,	282,	1737-1744.	24. Steptoe	A,	Hamer	M,	Chida	Y.	The	effects	of	acute	psychological	stress	on	circulating	inflammatory	factors	in	humans:	a	review	and	meta-analysis.	Brain	Behav	Immun.	2007;21:901–912.	25. The	Emerging	Risk	Factors	Collaboration.	C-reactive	protein	concentration	and	risk	of	coronary	heart	disease,	stroke,	and	mortality:	an	individual	participant	meta-analysis.	Lancet.	2010;375:132–140.	26. Vaiva,	Guillaume,	François	Ducrocq,	Karine	Jezequel,	Benoit	Averland,	Philippe	Lestavel,	Alain	Brunet,	and	Charles	R.	Marmar.	"Immediate	Treatment	with	Propranolol	Decreases	Posttraumatic	Stress	Disorder	Two	Months	after	Trauma."	Biological	Psychiatry	54.9	(2003):	947-49.		27. van	Gool	J,	van	Vugt	H,	Helle	M,	Aarden	LA.	The	relation	among	stress,	adrenalin,	interleukin-6	and	acute	phase	proteins	in	the	rat.	Clin	Immunol	Immunopathol.	1990;57:200–210.	28. Wittenbrink,	B.,	Judd,	C.	M.,	&	Park,	B.	(1997).	Evidence	for	racial	prejudice	at	the	implicit	level	and	its	relationship	with	questionnaire	measures.	Journal	of	Personality	and	Social	Psychology,	72(2),	262-274.				