1 
  
            
Fixed dose for Fixed Carbohydrat es vs. Variable Dosing for Vari able Carbohydrates: A Study of 
Rapid-Acting Mealtime Insulin i n Children and Adolescents with Newly Diagnosed Type 1 Diabetes 
Mellitus 
 
Date: October 16, 2019. 
 
NCT # [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
     
 
                        
2 
 1. TITLE PAGE 
Fixed dose for Fixed Carbohydrates v s. Variable Dosing for Vari able Carbohydrates: A Study of Rapid-
Acting Mealtime Insulin in Childre n and Adolescents with Newly Diagnosed Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus. 
 Eric I. Felner, MD, MS * Jacqueline V. Reyes Diaz, MD ** Courtney McCracken, PhD*** 
(*) Professor of Pediatrics, D ivision of Pediatric Endocrinolog y, Emory University. 
(**) Fellow, Pediatric Endoc rinology, Emory University. 
(***) Pediatric Biostatistics Cor e, Department of Pediatrics, E mory University  
Version Date: October 16, 2019. 
 
2. EXTERNAL COLLABORATERS 
Not applicable 
 
3. ABSTRACT 
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) i s a challenging medical disord er, especially in child ren and adolescents. In 
order to prevent the chronic com plications of hyperglycemia, th e maintenance of near- normal glycemic control 
must be balanced with minimizin g hypoglycemia [1].  Prior to th e 21
st century, most individuals were treated 
with consistent carbohydrate inta ke and relatively set, or fixe d doses of insulin [2].  Over nearly the past twenty 
years, with the availability of multiple rapid-acting and basal  insulin analog preparations, individuals with 
diabetes have had the ability t o utilize a variable carbohydrat e and insulin regimen. These diabetics have the 
ability to eat as much or as li ttle amount of food he/she desir es, assuming he/she delivers an appropriate amount 
of rapid-acting insulin to cover the amount of carbohydrates. T he insulin-to-carbohydrate ratio (ICR) is 
determined through trial-and-error as well as experience [3].  In addition to the use of the ICR, the management 
of diabetes for most children a nd adolescents requires consiste nt parental involvement and supervision [4].  
Although children and adolescents with T1DM have much more free dom with the amount of food 
(carbohydrates) they eat while using an ICR at mealtime, the di fficulty in determining the amount of insulin 
needed, how and when to adjust the ICR, the difficulty with und erstanding the basics of managing T1DM, and 
the adaptation to a new lifestyle with T1DM may be more complic ated than utilizing a simple plan that includes 
a fixed amount of insulin and fixed number of carbohydrates, at  least for the first few months after diagnosis.  
As complicated as it is for ch ildren, adolescents, and their ca regivers to learn how to manage T1DM after being 
discharged home in usually < 48 hours after diagnosis, a more s implified insulin regimen at mealtime may 
provide the family of and the child or adolescent with newly di agnosed T1DM with less stress and anxiety 
while still maintaining ade quate glycemic control.  
 Although many pediatric endocrinol ogists provide an ICR plan fo r their newly diagnosed patients with T1DM, 
fixed dosing and other forms of i nsulin delivery are available.  The objective of this investigator-initiated, 
prospective proposal is to deter mine if children and adolescent s with T1DM have improved glycemic control 
and, their families experience le ss anxiety with a fixed insuli n and carbohydrate regimen compared to those 
using an ICR and variable carbohydrate intake.   4. BACKGROUND 
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) i s an autoimmune disorder chara cterized by a severe deficiency or absence 
of endogenous insulin, resulting in chronic hyperglycemia. The achievement of optimal glucose control is 
facilitated by intensive insulin  treatment [5]. The current rec ommendations are based on the basal bolus 
3 
 paradigm, with subcutaneous long- acting insulin or continuous s ubcutaneous infusion of  rapid-acting insulin 
to cover basal requirements and with rapid-acting insulin to pr event or correct glucose excursions. Home blood 
glucose monitoring has been the m ainstay for glucose monitoring  for more than 30 years. It provides 
information about an individual’s glucose level and allows indi viduals to make adjustme nts as needed to help 
them manage their gly cemic control [6].  
Despite advances in medical treatment and technology, nutrition al therapy continues to be the cornerstone of 
diabetes management [7]. Carbohydr ates are a major determinant of postprandial blood glucose. Carbohydrate 
counting is a meal planning approach that focuses on carbohydra tes as the primary nutrient affecting 
postprandial glycemic response. Advanced carbohydrate counting allows adjustment of t he prandial insulin 
dose for actual carbohydrate inta ke for diabetics using intensi ve insulin therapy. According to the Bell and 
Shimin meta-analysis, carbohydrate counting significantly reduc ed HbA1c concentration in adults [8,9]. 
Tascini et al reported that carbohydrate counting had a positiv e effect in children and adolescents with T1DM, 
by reducing hypoglycemic events and improving quality of life [ 5]. These studies, however, did not compare 
different types and amount of i nsulin for variable carbohydrate  intake.  
 Fixed mealtime carbohydrate with  a fixed mealtime  insulin dose is a simplified regimen that provides a set 
amount of insulin for a set am ount of carbohydrates and ensures  that each dose and each meal is consistent. A 
set amount of carbohydrate is assigned in grams or portions and  patients choose differ ent carbohydrate servings 
to equal the target amount. This method is easy to use and may be appropriate for patients who are new to 
taking insulin in that it may improve compliance, glycemic cont rol, and anxiety. 
Shortly after diagnosis of T1DM, many children and adolescents not uncommonly experience a honeymoon 
period [10]. It occurs because t here is a sufficient amount of residual B-cell mass that enables some of these 
individuals to secrete some endoge nous insulin. As a result, in  order to prevent hypoglycemia, these individuals 
may be managed with less exogenou s insulin over a short period of time [11]. This vari ability makes less 
accurate HbA1C concentration as a gold standard for assessing g lucose control in the first 6-12 months after 
diagnosis [12,13]. 
Glycemic variability (GV) obtai ned from multiple blood glucose levels (up to 6 – 10 times/day) provides a 
good correlation for an individual’ s glycemic control and predi ctor of chronic diabetic c omplications [3]. The 
GV refers to swings in blood glucos e levels and captures blood glucose oscillations that occur throughout the 
day, including hypoglycemic periods , postprandial increases, as  well as blood glucose fl uctuations t hat occur 
at the same time on different days [14]. The proposed target ra nge of 70–180 mg/ dl is considered acceptable 
for clinical practice, as it has been observed that if 50% of t he self-monitoring of blood glucose readings are 
in this range, the A1C would be ~7% [12,13].  Shapiro et al, re ported that teens and parents show some 
similarities in the facets comprising distress, including negat ive emotions about diabetes and the demanding 
diabetes regimen [15]. Simplified insulin treatments will remar kably help to maintain a dherence and to prevent 
deterioration in glycemic control.   
4 
  
 
5. APPROACH –RESEARCH METHODS 
 A. STUDY DESIGN 
Two - Arm, Randomized, Clinic al trial (See Figure 1) 
 This proposal is designed to compa re children and adolescents w ith newly diagnosed T1DM 
using a fixed insulin dose for f ixed carbohydrate mealtime regi men (FIXED group) to children 
and adolescents with newly diagnosed T1DM using an ICR with var iable carbohydrate intake 
(ICR group) mealtime r egimen and determine:  
 
1) Specific Aim 1 
Determine the feasibility for a subsequent clinical trial invol ving rapid acting insulin dosing for 
a fixed dose for fixed carbohydrat es (FIXED group) vs ICR with variable carbohydrate intake 
(ICR group) in order to determine the capacity for  recruitment,  caregiver consent to random 
assignment and completion of st udy measures, average session at tendance, caregiver treatment 
adherence, and post-treatment satisfaction.  
 
2) Specific Aims 2 
a) Determine if the caregivers of diabetics using a fixed insulin for fixed carbohydrate regimen 
(FIXED group) experience less anxi ety than the caregivers of th ose using an ICR with variable 
carbohydrate intake regimen (ICR gr oup) at 1- and 4-months post -randomization.  
 
b) Determine if diabetics utilizing a fixed insulin for fixed carb ohydrate regimen (FIXED group) 
have decreased glycemic variability  (GV) than those using an IC R with variable carbohydrate 
intake regimen (ICR group) at 1 - and 4-months post-randomizatio n.  
 
We hypothesize that we will recrui t and consent enough patients  in order to perform a future, 
larger trial where caregivers of children and adolescents with newly diagnosed T1DM using a 
fixed insulin for fixed carbohydrate mealtime regimen (FIXED gr oup) will experience less 
anxiety and their diabetic child ren will experience less GV tha n children and adolescents with 
newly diagnosed T1DM who use an  ICR with variable carbohydrate intake at mealtime (ICR 
group). If this proves to be true, less anxiety may encourage m ore compliance and better 
glycemic control.   For the purposes of this study the following definitions will b e used: 
 BMI:  Weight (kg)/ Height (m2).  
Glycemic variability: Blood glucose oscillations tha t occur throughout the day. The glycemic range 
on target is between 80 – 180 mg/dl.  
Insulin dose adjustment: Titra tion of insulin over time to impr ove glycemic control.  
Parental stress: Stress associ ated to caring for a child with d iabetes.   
Insulin to carbohydrate ratio (I CR): Number of carbohydrates th at 1 unit of rapid-a cting insulin 
covers.  
Basal insulin: Insulin that c ontrols blood sugar consistently f or 24 hours.  
Rapid-acting insulin: Mealtime insulin. Typically has onset in 10 - 15 minutes, peaks at 45 – 60 
5 
  
 
  
 Figure 1: Study design and hypothesis. 
 
3) Methods 
 a) Recruitment & Consent 
Subjects with newly diagnosed T1DM will be evaluated by authori zed study personnel 
under a HIPAA waiver to determine potential eligibility. The su bjects will be contacted 
by the research study team while in the hospital during his or her initial diagnosis to 
explore his/her interest in th e study and to confirm eligibilit y. The informed 
consent/assent documents will be signed at the time of the init ial contact. 
 
b) Initial Visit (at CHOA-Egleston) 
Recruitment of the 20 to 40 pediatric subjects will take place at the Children’s 
Healthcare of Atlanta at Egles ton, when they are hospitalized w ith the diagnosis of new 
onset T1DM.  Enrolled participants will be interviewed in order to collect d emographic information. 
The subjects will be randomized t o either the FIXED group or th e ICR group according 
to a computer-generated random s ampling table. The subject and his/her caregivers will 
receive diabetes education while in the hospital in standard fa shion. The subject and 
his/her caregivers will receive glucose monitoring education an d training prior to 
hospital discharge. The subject a nd his/her caregivers will als o receive a paper log to 
record the blood sugars, numbe r of carbohydrates consumed, and insulin administered 
at each meal throughout the day.  Prior to discharge, all subject s will receive a regimen that in cludes a: 1) Meal-time 
insulin and carbohydrate regimen (# of units of insulin, # of c arbohydrates, and/or ICR); 

6 
 2) Evening dose of Glargine; 3) Hyperglycemia correction regime n for blood glucose 
levels > 199 mg/dL; and 4) Hypoglycemia treatment regimen for b lood glucose levels 
< 70 mg/dL and/or  symptomatic. 
 
c) After Hospital Discharge  and Between Clinic Visits 
 As per standard diabetes care, caregivers will report all blood  glucose levels every day 
(to the study investigators) unt i l  t h e  s u b j e c t ’ s  i n i t i a l  c l i n i c  v i s i t  4 - 6  w e e k s  a f t e r  
diagnosis. All insulin adjustment s will be made by the study in vestigators.  
After the subject’s first clinic visit, caregivers will contact  the study investigators once 
a week to report blood glucose levels and the investigators wil l make adjustments as 
needed.  
 
d) Diabetes Clinic Visits 
 All the diabetes clinic visits will occur at the Center for Adv anced Pediatrics (CAP), 
approximately three miles from CHOA-Egleston Hospital. Subjects  will attend clinic 
with one or more of the investig ators approximately 1 and 4 mon ths after enrollment.
 
At each clinic visit, subjects and their caregivers will answer  standard diabetes 
questions, undergo a physical ex amination, and ob jective data ( vital signs, glucose meter 
(GM) data, insulin dosing, and carbohydrate intake) will be col lected by the study 
personnel. 
  B.  STUDY POPULATION  
The plan is to enroll from 20 to 40 children and adolescent sub jects with newly-diagnosed 
T1DM. Twenty will be randomized to the FIXED group and twenty w ill be randomized to the 
ICR group.  The subjects will be selected from children and ado lescents admitted to CHOA-
Egleston with a diagnosis of new-onset Diabetes Mellitus. Parti cipation in this study will be 
determined by a set of inclu sion/exclusion criteria.  
 
1) Inclusion Criteria 
For enrollment in the study, subjects must: (1) Have Confirmed diagnosis of T1DM based on 
the most recent ADA criteria [16]; (2) Be 8 - 14 years of age; (3) Begin monitoring with a 
glucose monitor prior to discharge from the hospital; and (4) H ave the ability to understand and 
be willing to adhere to the st udy protocol. (5) English or Span ish speakers.  
 2) Exclusion criteria 
For enrollment in the study, subjects may not: (1) Have a clini cally significant major organ 
system disease (i.e., hypertensi on, hyperlipidemia, or obesity) ; (2) Be on glucocorticoid 
therapy; (3) Have Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus; (4) Have Polycystic  Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS); 
( 5 )  H a v e  a  B M I  >  8 5
th %ile; (6) Have Acanthosis Nigri cans; (7) Have any form of rena l 
impairment; (8) Have Cystic Fibrosis; (9) Have Glucocorticoid-,  Chemotherapeutic-, or any 
other Medication-induced form of  Diabetes; (10) Be using any ba sal insulin other than Glargine 
insulin; (11) Have cognitive impa irment (> 2 grades behind age- appropriate grade in school); 
(12) Be in Foster Care; (13) Have any history of DFCS involveme nt; and (14) If female, be 
pregnant or breast-feeding.  
7 
  
C.  DATA MANAGEMENT  
All data, including patient demo graphics, history, and laborato ry tests will be collected on 
standardized forms and entered in to an electronic database, RED Cap. REDCap is a HIPPA-
compliant, web-based, data capturing tool used in over 130 coun tries. Features include user-
specific credentials, data-loggi ng, longitudinal data modeling and more.  Enrolled patients will 
be assigned a study ID. Subjects will only be identified in RED Cap by their study ID. The 
patient’s name, MRN and study ID will be kept in a secure file in a double lock in a filing 
c a b i n e t  u n d e r  D r .  F e l n e r ’ s  s u p e r v i s i o n  i n  t h e  E m o r y  C h i l d r e n ’ s  Center. Records will be 
maintained for 10 years as r equired for IRB studies. 
 
D. OUTCOME MEASURES 
 
1) Primary Outcome Measures 
 
The primary goal of this study is  to determine the feasibility of a subsequent clinical trial of 
rapid acting insulin dosing for fixed carbohydrates (FIXED grou p) vs ICR with variable 
carbohydrate intake (ICR group). In doing so, we will examine o ur ability to recruit and consent 
patients (>70% consent rate), s tudy retention (>90% retention),  completion of study visits 
(average session attendance ≥ 90% ), study measures (≥ 90% measu re completion), caregiver 
treatment adherence, and post-tr eatment satisf action (≥ 90%), 
 
2) Secondary Outcomes Measures 
 
Secondary outcome measures will i nclude caregiver anxiety and g lycemic variability. Each of 
these measures are described below.   One secondary outcome measure is caregiver anxiety. This will b e assessed by a parental stress 
scale [17]. The caregiver will fi ll out the questionnaire at in itial enrollment (prior to hospital 
discharge) and at each clinic follow-up throughout the study. W e will use the Spanish adaptation 
of parental stress scale (PSS) [ 18] for Spanish population if n ecessary. 
 We clarify in the survey that the  questions are to be answered in terms of how the caregiver-
child relationship exists since the diagnosis of diabetes melli tus. 
The scales are shown in Annex 1 and 2  
 Glycemic variability (GV) is another secondary outcome measure.  The GV will be calculated 
in all subjects through the use of a glucose monitor (GM) data classification scale. Subjects will 
be considered to have appropriate GV if their blood glucose lev el is in the range of 80 mg/dL – 
180 mg/dL (Group C).  
 The GV classification is as follows: 
Group A: < 50 mg/dl. Group B: 50 – 79 mg/dl Group C: 80 – 180 mg/dl  Group D: 181 – 350 mg/dl Group E: > 350 mg/dl 
8 
  
Safety is the last secondary outcome measure. The safety measur ed that will be compared in 
both groups include death, risk o f life threatening event (i.e. , severe hypoglycemia associated 
with seizure or altered mental status), hospitalization for dia betes complication (diabetic 
ketoacidosis or hypoglycemia), a nd risk of disability or perman ent damage.  
 
E. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 Randomization Randomization will be performed by study statistician using ran dom-permuted blocks of size 2 
and 4. Randomization assignments will be placed in sealed, opaq ue envelopes to be stored. 
Study investigators will not be bl inded to treatment assignment .  
 Sample Size A goal of 20 patients  is necessary for thi s study, but we will reach up to 40 par ticipants in case 
there is any withdraw after c onsented and random ized. While the  overall goal of the study is to 
demonstrate feasibility of a s ubsequent randomized controlled t rial, limited efficacy testing will 
be performed. Given a sample si ze of 20 participants (10/grp), we will have greater than 90% 
power to detect a minimum standardized mean difference of 1.25 (i.e., approximately a 1.25 
standard deviation difference) between groups. Effect sizes wil l be calculated for all study 
measures of interest and be used in future power calculations.  On average, there are ~25 new 
type I/II diabetics diagnosed at Egleston hospital each month. Assuming an eligibility rate of 
40%, 10 patients would be eligible to participate each month. B ased on this, we are confident 
in our capacity to recruit 20 to 40 participants during the stu dy period with the goal of having 
20 participants to complete the study.   
Statistical Analysis 
Demographic characteristics will  be summarized for both groups using means and standard 
deviations, medians and quartil es, or counts and percentages, a s appropriate based on 
distribution. T-tests, Wilcoxon ra nk sums, and/or Chi squared t ests will be used to assess 
differences between the two groups.  Primary Aims: Measures of feasibility (consent, retention, enga gement, satisfaction, etc.), will 
be summarized overall a nd by group, when applicable.  
 Secondary Aim 1: Parental stress scale The parental stress scale will be scored per the instrument’s i nstructions. The total scores for 
the treatment groups will be com pared in a cross-sectional fash ion using t-tests or Wilcoxon 
rank sums tests as appropriate based on the distribution of sco res. Changes in parental distress 
over-time will be evaluated using two-way repeated measures ana lysis of variance models. 
Models will include the main eff ect of treatment assignment, ti me (baseline, 1 month, 4 
months), and the treatment X tim e interaction. The interaction term will serve as the primary 
statistical test for aim 2. Summary statistics, statistical sig nificance, and effect sizes will be 
reported by group at each time point  of interest, when applicab le.  
   
9 
 Secondary Aim 2: Glycemic variability 
Glycemic variability will be ex amined both as a continuous vari able and a categorical variable 
using the ranges defined in sect ion D. Time series analysis wil l be used to examine daily 
measures of blood glucose (obtai ned from patient diary’s) durin g the study peri od. Variability 
will be measured as the probability of acute change (PAC), usin g methods described by Jahng 
et al. (2008). Acute changes will be adjusted for time between readings. In addition, first-order 
autocorrelations and/or mean-square successive difference will be used to examine variation in 
readings as described by Janhg. Mu ltilevel modeling will be use d to test between-group 
differences in variability.  Secondary Aim 3: Safety  Adverse event of interest and serious adverse events (see sect ion D) will be summarized overall 
and by treatment group. For partic ipants experiencing more than  1 episode of a specific event 
(e.g., severe hypoglycemia), the maximum grade and severity wil l be recorded. Chi-square tests 
will be used to compare the frequ ency of events between the two  cohorts.  
 
Given the exploratory nature o f these secondar y outcomes, we wi ll calculate effe ct sizes based 
on the adjusted means and standa rd deviations or differences in  proportions, when appropriate. 
 All analyses will be conduc ted using SAS v9.4 (Cary, NC).  
 
F.  ANTICIPATED RESULTS 
 
This research will be feasible to develop a successful larger c linical trial. Due to the fixed 
regimen seeming to be less complicated, because there are less calculations to make than in 
those using the ICR group, we ant icipate that parental anxiety will be decreased in the FIXED 
group. This will encourage more blood glucose monitoring and tr eatment compliance. 
Therefore, we anticipate GV t o be decreased for the FIXED group .  
 
G. LIMITATIONS
   
The major limitations of this st udy are related to caregiver’s self-completion questionnaire and 
ability to contact study personne l frequently during the study period in order to report blood 
glucose levels and implement the insulin adjustments. More than  likely, multiple insulin 
regimens should work, but the i dea behind this study is that th e fixed regimen m ay be easier to 
implement.  
10 
  
 
Figure 2: Proposed protocol. 
 6. DATA COLLECTION FOR FUTURE RESEARCH 
Records will be maintained for  10 years as required IRB studies . 
 7. COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION 
Not applicable  
 8. PARTICIPATION SELECTION 
Study subjects will be selected from the cohort of pediatric pa tients with newly diagnosed of type 1 diabetes 
mellitus hospitalized at Children’s Health of Atlanta and follo wed at diabetes clinic in the Center for 
Advanced Pediatrics Georgia. Parents will consent and subjects will assent for the subject to enroll in the 
research study. 
 9. INFORMED CONSENT 
During hospitalization for newly diagnosed of type 1 diabetes m ellitus. The study will be initially 
discussed, parents and participants will be provided with a HIP AA compliance form and consent/assent 
form. 
 10. INCIDENTAL FINDINGS 
Not applicable 
  

11 
 11. COMPENSATION FOR TIME & EFFORT 
No monetary compensation will be provided to participants. Part icipants will not be charged for any of the 
research activities. 
 12. DATA & SAFETY MONITORING PLAN (DSMP) 
There will not be an independently constituted data safety and monitoring board for this protocol because 
it does not involve an e xperimental intervention. Instead, this  study will have a data safety and monitoring 
plan (DSMP). This plan includes examination of consent rates, a ttrition, and safety related data. The plan 
will be generated by the study statistician in conjunction with  the PIs of the study. Presentation of data will 
be presented in a blinded fashi on with treatments de-identified . The first DSMP will be reviewed after 12 
patients enroll in the study, th en subsequently every 6 months of the study. There are no plans for an interim 
analysis as this i s a pilot study. 
 All relevant adverse events related with diabetes will be docum ented and reviewed by the principal 
investigator. These will be enumerated and reported according t o IRB policies. Any serious adverse events 
will be reported within 24 hours to the IRB. They will be revie wed by all investigators and a disposition 
determined before proceeding with further enrollment. There are  no additional laboratory evaluations 
outside of the routine care for  patients with diab etes mellitus . 
 The procedures associated with t his research trial are associat ed with minimal risk. 
 13. POTENTIAL BENEFITS 
Participation in this study offers appropriate plans that are w ell-established and have been utilized to help 
children and adolescents with T1DM maintain appropriate glycemi c control. Although the research may 
not benefit the subject initially and directly, the results of the study could lead to develop bigger clinical 
trial to demonstrate alterations of current management options for children and adolescents with newly-
diagnosed T1DM.  
 14. ADVERSE EVENTS & RISKS 
There are minimal risks associated with GM. A GM is a self-moni toring of blood sugars via finger-stick 
that help making treatment decisi ons about diabetes. There is a  small possibility that the measurements 
may not be accurate. We will consider these factors that affect  meter accuracy and the steps to resolve or 
prevent the problems like test st rip problems (Be sure the stri ps are meant for the meter), keeping the 
glucose meter and test strips at extreme temperatures (Keep glu cose meter at room temperature), improper 
test strip coding, problems inserting the test strip in the mon itor or not enough blood applied to test strip 
(recommend a generous dr op of blood to test strip). 
 Regarding capillary sampling by finger-stick with a lancet, can  carry a small risk of the following: 
infection, bleeding, pain or loca l skin irritations including r edness, swelling, bruising, itching, scarring or 
skin discoloration. 
 15. CONFIDENTIALITY 
The study will comply with HIPAA guidelines regarding confident iality of participant data.  Privacy will 
be assured during the consent and study procedures.  During the  consent process, potential subjects and 
their parents will be allowed time to review the informed conse nt document and ask a member of the 
research team all their questions regarding the research study.  All questionnaires will be labeled with a 
12 
 study ID. Data, including paper c opies of participant data, ori ginal signed consent and HIPAA documents, 
completed questionnaires, and all source documents, will be sto red in a medical building with card-coded 
access inside a locked cabinet. Data stored on the computer wil l be encrypted and password protected. A 
separate file will be kept on an encrypted and password protect ed computer that will contain participant 
identifiers linking names and contact information to the study for purpose of follow up in this clinical trial. 
This information will not be enter ed into the computer system f or study data. At completion of study, all 
participants’ identifiable information will be stored at Access  Data Management System for a period of 10 
years. After 10 years, all information will be destroyed. When papers are published regarding this study 
and data obtained, only composit e data will be used, and each s ubject’s identity will be strictly protected. 
 
Although IRB policies to  protect confidential ity of study infor mation will be followed,  it is possible that a 
breach could occur. The following steps will be taken to limit that possibility: 1) Sou rce documents for the 
study will be stored either in th e CHOA HER (Epic) or as hard c opies in locked filing cabinets in a locked 
office at Center for Advanced Pediatrics, 2) All subjects will be assigned a study number and all study 
records will bear only that num ber for identification. The key for identifying individual subjects will only 
be available to study personnel.   
16. REFERENCES 
1. Shimin Fu, Linjun Li, Shuhua Deng, Liping Zan, Zhiping Liu. Eff ectiveness of adva nced carbohydrate 
counting in type 1 diabetes mellitus: systematic review and met a-analysis.Sci. Rep.6,37067; doi: 
10.1038/srep37067 (2016). 
2. Jiansong ao, MSC; Heather R. Gilbertson, PHD, ADVAPD; Robyn Gra y, CDE; et al. Improving the 
Estimation of Mealtime Insulin Dose in Adults with Type 1 Diabe tes. The Normal Insulin Demand for 
Dose Adjustment (NIDDA) st udy. Diabetes Care 2011. 34(10):2146- 2151.  
3. American Diabetes Association. 13. Children and adolescents: St andards of Medical Care in 
Diabetes—2019. Diabetes Care 2019;42(Suppl. 1):S148–S16 
4. Laffel  LMB, Vangsness  L, Connell  A, Goebel-Fabbri  A, Butler   D, Anderson  BJ. Impact of 
ambulatory, family-focused teamwo rk intervention on glycemic co ntrol in youth with type 1 diabetes. J 
Pediatr 2003;142:409–416 
5. Giorgia Tascini, Maria Giulia Berioli, Laura Cerquiglini, Elisa  Santi, Giulia Mancini, Francesco 
Rogari, Giada Toni, Susanna Esposito. Carbohydrate Counting in Children and Adolescents with Type 
1 Diabetes. Nutrients . 2018 Jan; 10(1): 109. 
6. Leann Olansky MD; Laurence Kenne dy MD. Finger-stick Glucose Mon itoring. Diabetes Care. 2010; 
33(4):948-949. 
7. Smart C.E., Aslander-van de Vliet E., Waldron S. ISPAD Clinical  Practice Consensus Guidelines 2009 
Compendium: Nutritional manageme nt in children an d adolescents with diabetes. Pediatr. 
Diabetes. 2009;10:100–117.  
8. Shimin Fu, Linjun Li, Shuhua deng, Liping Zan, Zhiping Liu. Eff ectiveness of adva nced carbohydrate 
counting in Type 1 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and m eta-analysis. Scientific reports, 14 
November 2016, Vol.6, pp.37067  
9. Bell, K. J., Barclay, A. W., Petocz, P., Colagiuri, S. & Brand- Miller, J. C. Efficacy of carbohydrate 
counting in type 1 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analy sis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2(2), 
133–140 (2014). 
10. Sperling, Mark MD. Pediatric  Endocrinology. Fourth Edition. 201 4. 878-879. 
11. Sarafoglou,K; Hoffmann, G; Roth, K. Pediatric Endocrinology and  Inborn Errors of Metabolism. 
Second Edition. 2017. p 310 - 326.  
13 
 12. Vigersky RA, McMahon C. The Rela tionship of Hemoglobin A1C to T ime-in-Range in Patients 
with Diabetes. Diabetes T echnol Ther. 2019; 21(2):81-85. 
13. Alarcon-Casas Wright, L; Hirsch, Irl. Metrics Beyond Hemoglobin A1C in Diabetes Management: 
Time in Range, Hypoglycemia, and Other Parameters. Diabetes Tec hnology & Therapautics. 2017; 
19(2).  
14. Sunghwan Suh, Jae Hyeon Kim. Glycemic Variability: How Do We Me asure It and Why Is It 
Important?. Diabetes Me tab J. 2015; 39(4): 273-282. 
15. Shapiro, Jenna B; Vesco, Anthony T ; Weil, Lindsey E G ; Evans,  Meredyth A ; Hood, Korey K ; 
Weissberg-Benchell, Jill. Psychomet ric Properties of the proble m Areas in Diabetes: Teen and Parent 
of Teen Versions. Journal of  pediatric psychology, 01 2018, Vol .43(5),pp.561-571  
16. American Diabetes Association. 2. Classification and diagnosis of diabetes: Standards of Medical Care 
in Diabetes—2019. Diabetes Ca re 2019;42(Suppl. 1):S13–S28 
17. Berry, JD, & Jones, W,H. The Pare ntal Stress Scale : initial ps ychometric evidence. Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships  1995; 12 (3):p. 463-4 72. https://doi .org/10.1177/0265407595123009 
18. Oronoz, Beatriz; Alonso- Arbiol, Itziar; et al. A Spanish Adapta tion of the Parental Stress Scale 
Psicothema. 2007; 19 (4): 687 -692. ISSN: 0214-9915   
 
 
 
                            
14 
 Annex 1: Parental Stress Scale and Scoring.  
  
Parental Stress Scale  
The following statements describe feelings and perceptions abou t the experience of being a parent with a child 
with new onset type 1 diabetes mellitus. Think of each of the i tems in terms of how you r relationship with your 
child typically is in the setting of recently diagnosis of diab etes mellitus. Please indicate the degree to which 
you agree or disagree with the f ollowing items by placing the a ppropriate number in t he space provided. 
1 = Strongly disagree 2 = Disagr ee 3 = Undecide d 4 = Agree 5 = Strongly agree  
1 I am happ
y in m y role as a parent 
2 There is little or nothin g I wouldn't do for m y child(ren) if it was necessar y. 
3 Carin g for m y child(ren) sometimes ta kes more time and ener gy than I have to give.  
4 I sometimes worry whether I  am doing enough for my child(ren) .  
5 I feel close to m y child(ren).  
6 I enjoy spending time with my child(ren).   
7 M y child(ren) is an important  source of affection for me. 
8 Havin g child(ren) gives me a more certain and optim istic view for the future.  
9 The ma jor source of stress in m y life is m y child(ren). 
10 Havin g child(ren) leaves little time and flexibilit y in m y life. 
11 Havin g child(ren) has been a financial burden. 
12 . It is difficult to balance  different responsibilities beca use of m y child(ren).  
13 The behavior of m y child(ren) is often embarrassin g or stressful to me. 
14 If I had it to do over a gain, I mi ght decide not to have child(ren). 
15 I feel overwhelmed b y the responsibilit y of bein g a parent.
16 Havin g child(ren) has meant havin g too few choices and too l ittle control over m y life. 
17 I am satisfied as a parent 
18 I find m y child(ren) en joyable 
Scoring: 
To compute the parental stress score, items 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 1 7, and 18 should be reverse scored as follows: 
(1=5) (2=4) (3=3) (4=2) (5=1). The item scores are then summed.  
Scoring the tool: 
We want a low score to signify a  low level of stress, and a hig h score to signify a hi gh level of stress 
 Overall possible scores on th e scale range from 18 – 90. 
 The higher the score , the highe r the measured level of Parenta l stress 
Use a simple table to show the  before and after results to evid ence whether an intervention has had a positive 
effect.  
 Comparison of individuals before  / after or longitudinal overal l Parental Stress Scale scores. 
 The comparison of before and afte r mean average scores for grou ps (parents/care givers accessing the 
particular intervention/group se ssions, service or provision). 
 
15 
 Annex 2: Spanish version of Paren tal Stress Scale and Scoring.  
 
 
Escala de Estres Parental 
 
Las siguientes oraciones describe n sentimients y percepciones a cerca de como un padre/madre/cuidador se 
siente cuidando a un nino que ha sido diagnosticado con diabete s mellitus recienteme nte.  Responder cada 
pregunta pensando en como es la relacion entre su nino(a) con u sted desde el diagnostico de diabetes mellitus.  
Indicar el grado de acuerdo o desacuerdo en cada una de las sig uientes preguntas y coloque el numero 
apropiado en el espa cio correspondiente.  
1 = Totalmente en desacuerdo  
2 = Desacuerdo  3 = Indeciso  4 = De acuerdo  5 = Totalmente de acuerdo  
  
1 Me siento feliz en mi papel como padre/madre
2 No hay nada o casi nada que no hari a por mi hijo/a si fuera n ecesario  
3 Atender a mi hi jo/a a veces me quita mas tiempo y ener gia de la que ten go.
4 A veces me preocupa el hecho de si estoy hacienda lo suficien te por mi hijo/a  
5 Me siento mu y cercano/a a mi hi jo/a 
6 Disfruto pasando tiempo con mi hijo/a   
7 Mi hi jo/a es una fuente impor tante de afecto para mi 
8 Tener un hi jo/a me da una vision mas certera y optimista para el future
9 La ma yor fuente de estres en mi vida es mi hi jo/a
10 Tener un hi jo/a de ja poco tiempo y flexibilidad en mi vida.
11 Tener un hi jo/a ha supuesto una car ga financier a
12 Me resulta dificil equilibrar  diferentes responsabilidades d ebido a mi hi jo/a 
13 El comportamiento de mi hi jo/a menudo me resulta i ncomodo o estresante
14 Si tuviera que hacerlo de N uevo, podria decider no tener un hijo/a 
15 Me siento abrumado/a por la r esponsabilidad de ser padre/mad re  
16 Me siento satisfecho/a como padre/madre 
17 Disfruto de mi hi jo/a  
Scoring: 
Participants will be asked t o rate each one on a 1-to-5 Likert- type response scale ranging from 1 (strongly 
disagree [ totalmente en desacuerdo ]) to 5 (strongly agree [ totalmente de acuerdo ]). The items appeared in 
the same order as in the English- language PSS (except for the e liminated item 16 in the English version.). 
The total score was obtaine d by summing up the value for each i tem (reversed items are 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 16, 
and 17). A higher score indicates a  higher level of parental st ress. 
 