CLINICAL PROTOCOL  
CTIX -BRI- 205 
Phase 2, Multi-center, Randomized, Double -blind, Placebo -controlled Study to 
Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety of Brilacidin Oral Rinse Administered Daily for 
7 Weeks in Attenuating Oral Mucositis in Patients with Head and Neck Cancer 
Receiving Concurrent Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy  
Document
 type: Clinical Protocol - Amended 
Version number:  1.9  
Version date:  23 August 2017 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT  
The information provided in this document is strictly confidential.             
This information may not be used, published or disclosed without prior written approval from 
Innovation Pharmaceuticals Inc. (formerly Cellceutix Corporation)  
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Innovation Pharmaceuticals Inc.  Confidential  
Protocol, Version 1.9   Page S1   
CTIX-B RI-205 
PROTOCOL  SYNOPSIS  
Name of Sponsor/Company: Innovation Pharmaceuticals Inc. (formerly C ellceutix 
Corporation)  
Name of Finished Product : Brilacidin  Solution, 50 mg/ml (free base)  
Name of Active Ingredient : Brilacidi n tetrahydrochloride  
Title of Study:  
Phase 2, Multi-center, Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-controlled Study to Evaluate 
the Efficacy and Safety of Brilaci din Oral Rinse Administered Daily for 7 Weeks in 
Attenuating Oral Mucositis in Patients with Head and Neck Cancer Receiving Concurrent Chemotherapy and Radiotherapy  
Study Centers:  
Approximately 20 sites in the United States will participate in the study  
Number of Subjects Planned:  
Approximately 60 subjects with head and neck cancer receiving concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy 
Study Duration per subject: 
Approximately 17 weeks  
Phase of Development: 2 
Primary Objective(s): 
•To evaluate the efficacy of topically applied brilacidin administered three times daily
by oral rinse for approximately 7 weeks (treatment week is defined as a 7 -day period,
irrespective of the day of the week that the 7 -day period begins) compared to placebo
in reducing the incidence of severe OM ( defined as grade 3 or 4 on the WHO Oral
Mucositis scale, WHO Grade ≥ 3) in subject s with head and neck cancer (HNC)
receiving concomitant chemoradiation therapy (CRT).
•To evaluate the safety and tolerability of topically applied brilacidin administeredthree times daily by oral rinse for approximately 7 weeks (treatment week is defined
as a 7 -day period, irrespective of the day of the week that the 7-day period begins).
Innovation Pharmaceuticals Inc.  Confidential  
Protocol, Version 1.9   Page S2   
CTIX-B RI-205 
Secondary Objectives: 
•To evaluate the efficacy of topically applied brilacidin in reducing the duration of
severe OM (WHO Grade ≥ 3) in subjects with HNC receiving concomitant
chemoradiation therapy.
•To evaluate the efficacy of topically applied brilacidin in  delaying  the onset of severe
OM (WHO Grade ≥3)  in subjects with HNC receiving concomitant chemoradiation
therapy.
Design and Methodology: 
The study is a Phase 2, randomized (1:1 ratio), double-blind, placebo-controlled, 2- arm 
trial to be conducted in patients receiving chemoradiation for the treatment of squamous 
cell carcinoma of the oral cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx, or supraglottic larynx. Patients with this diagnosis whose anticipated treatment includes chemoradiation therapy (CRT) and who consent to participate will enter a screening period of up to 45 days prior to the anticipated initiation of CRT. If eligible, subjects will be rand omized to one of the 
two blinded study treatments and will enter the treatment phase of the study (approximately 11 weeks in duration).  
For entry into the study, e ligible patients will have recently -diagnosed (in the previous 6 
months), pathologically-confirmed, non- metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the oral 
cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx, or supraglottic larynx. Tumor staging for eligibility, 
using AJCC Tumor Staging Guidelines, or as determined by institutional tumor board review may be determined from scans (CT, PET, and/or MRI) obtained within 120 days prior to consent for screening. Scan interpretation should follow Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) Version 1.1 criteria (Appendix E).  
Patients must be scheduled to receive a continuous course of intensity-modulated radiation 
therapy (IMRT) with a minimum cumulative dose of 55 Gray (Gy) and maxi mum 
cumulative dose of 72 Gy over approximately 7 weeks (treatment week is defined as a 7-day period, irrespective of the day of the week that the 7-day period begins). Planned radiation treatment fields must include at least two oral sites (buccal mucosa,  floor of 
mouth, ventral/lateral tongue, soft palate). The treatment plan must include chemotherapy with cisplatin administered in standard weekly (30 -40 mg/m
2) or approximately every 21 
days (80-100 mg/m2) regimens. No other chemotherapy is allowed during radiotherapy 
unless intolerance to cisplatin is demonstrated during study participation. In this case, with medical monitor approval, carboplatin may be substituted. 
Eligible subjects will be randomized to receive one of the following study drug regimens 
during participation in the study (1:1 ratio):  
Arm A: Placebo (WFI) [oral rinse  tid] 
Arm B: Brilacidin 3 mg/mL in WFI [oral rinse  tid] 
The study drug will be administered as an oral rinse three times dail y (approximately 6 
hours between oral rinses) beginning on the first day of radiotherapy and continuing each 
day (including weekends) until the completion of the course of chemoradiation. The 
Innovation Pharmaceuticals Inc.  Confidential  
Protocol, Version 1.9   Page S3   
CTIX-B RI-205 
subject will be instructed to use the study oral rinse three tim es each day with 
approximately 6 hours between each use, whenever possible. Subjects will be instructed to 
perform the oral rinse for 1 -minute and spit out the rinse after each use, avoiding 
swallowing any of the rinse .  The first use of oral rinse on the first day of study drug 
treatment must be witnessed by a member of the study staff. Subjects will be told not to eat, brush their teeth, chew gum, or suck on hard candy, cough drops, etc., for at least 10 minutes before each oral rinse. A subject should rinse his/her mouth with plain water prior to administering the oral rinse.  Subjects will be told not to eat, drink, brush their teeth, 
chew gum, or suck on hard candy, cough drops, etc., for 30 minutes following each use of the oral rinse.  Subjects who use allowed non- study oral rinse(s) (i.e., Gelclair®, saline 
solutions) during the study period should ensure that the study oral rinse is used at least 60 minutes after use of a non-study oral rinse and that a non-study oral rinse is not used 
until at least 60 minutes after use of the study rinse.  
Note: Although chemoradiation is complete (i.e. the end of radiation therapy ( ERT) visit 
has occurred), subjects are to complete the full 7 days of study drug for Week 7. 
The treatment phase of the study will inclu de: (1) the period of RT treatment with 
concomitant chemotherapy and (2) all assessments occurring after the last dose of RT, 
through and including a Week 4 Post-RT follow- up visit (the EOS visit).  
•During the CRT treatment period, subjects will be assesse d twice weekly for the
presence and severity of OM by trained evaluators using the WHO grading scale forOM. Subjects will complete a daily study diary (including weekend days). The diarycontains Question 2 of the Oral Mucositis Daily Questionnaire (OMDQ) , a record of
daily analgesic use for mouth and/or throat pain, a record of the study drug oral rinsesperformed each day, and the subject’s assessment of mouth sensations.  The diary willbe reviewed by a member of the study staff each day during the first week (at least 5days) of study treatment to ensure that the subject is appropriately completing thediary. If subject diary completion is satisfactory, then the diary will be reviewed atleast once weekly during the remainder of the study. At weekly int ervals (on the same
day of each week), subjects will complete the FACT-H&N instrument to recordquality of life responses.
•Single samples (venous blood) for assessment of brilacidin plasma concentrations will
be obtained from each subject at weekly intervals during the CRT treatment period.
These blood samples may be obtained at the time of the venipuncture for clinicallaboratory tests as specified by the protocol.
•For those subjects who have consented to gene analysis, samples of venous blood willbe obtained at baseline, during week 3, and on the last day of radiation.
•All subjects will be evaluated at 1 week after RT completion (or withdrawal from thestudy) for assessment of the presence and severity of OM and other safetyassessments. Subjects having an WHO OM Grade  ≥2 at this post- treatment visit will
return to the clinic at weekly intervals until mucositis resolves to WHO OM Grade <2;
subjects having a WHO OM Grade ≤1 may be followed by weekly phone call instead.
During the post -RT period, subjects will continue to complete the daily study diary
Innovation Pharmaceuticals Inc.  Confidential  
Protocol, Version 1.9   Page S4    
CTIX-B RI-205 
that contains Question 2 of the OMDQ as well as recording analgesic use and subjects 
will complete the FACT -H&N QOL instrument weekly until 4 weeks (± 2 days) post-
RT. In most instances the last study related visit, the End of Study (EOS) visit, will be 
at Week 4 post- RT. 
Patient E ligibility: 
•Patients with recently diagnosed (within previous 6 months), pathologically-
confirmed, non- metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity, oropharynx,
hypopharynx, or supraglottic larynx.
•Patients scheduled to receive a continuous course of IMRT over approximately 7weeks (treatment week is defined as a 7 -day period, irrespective of the day of the
week that the 7 -day perio d begins) with a minimum cumulative dose of 55 Gray (Gy)
and maximum cumulative dose of 72 Gy. ( IMRT is typically administered as 35
separate radiation treatments ).
•Planned radiation treatment fields must include at least two oral sites (buccal mucosa,floor of mouth, ventral/lateral tongue, soft palate). The treatment plan must include
chemotherapy with cisplatin administered in either a standard weekly (30- 40 mg/m
2)
or approximately every 21 days (80-100mg/m2) regimen. No other chemotherapy is
allowed during radiotherapy unless intolerance to cisplatin is demonstrated. In thiscase, with medical monitor approval, carboplatin may be substituted.
Inclusion Criteria: 
1. Willing and able to read, understand, and sign an informed consent form (ICF) for the
study approved by the Investigator’s local or a central Institutional Review Board(IRB) or Independent Ethics Committee (IEC) prior to the initiation of any study -
related procedures.
2. Males or females aged ≥18 years on day of consent.
3.Have recently -diagnosed (within previous 6 months pathologically-confirmed, non-
metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx, orsupraglottic larynx. The treatment planned will utilize CRT therapy as first line non -
surgical treatment. Scans (CT,  PET, and/or MRI) obtained within 120 days prior to
consent for screening can be used to determine the patient’s eligibility.
Note: Post-surgical subjects may be enrolled provided any head/neck surgical sites
(including sites of dental extractions) are suf ficiently healed.
4. Have a plan to receive a continuous course of conventional external beam irradiation
delivered by intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) as single daily fractions of2.0 Gy to 2.2 Gy with a cumulative radiation dose ≥55 Gy and ≤72 Gy. Plannedradiation treatment fields must include at least two oral sites (buccal mucosa, floor ofmouth, ventral/lateral tongue, soft palate)
Note : The independent RTQA consultant must confirm that the planned radiation
treatment meets the protocol criteria.
Innovation Pharmaceuticals Inc.  Confidential  
Protocol, Version 1.9   Page S5   
CTIX-B RI-205 
5.Have a plan to receive a standard cisplatin chemotherapy regimen administered weekly
(30-40 mg/m2) or approximately every 21 days (80-100 mg/m2)
6. Have an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status of 0, 1, or
2. However, potential subjects with an ECOG Performance Status of 3 may be enrolled
provided their condition does not preclude performing the actions required by studyparticipation (e.g. opening medication bottles, swishing the oral rinse and spitting out,completing or participating in completion of daily diaries and FACT- H&N forms).
7.Have adequate hematopoietic, hepatic, and renal function at screening :
a.Hematopoietic function
i.Hemoglobin ≥ 9 g/dL
ii.Absolute neutrophil counts (ANC) ≥ 1.5 x 10
3/uL
iii.Platelet count ≥ 100 x 103/uL
b.Hepatic function
i. Total bilirubin ≤ 1.5 times the upper limit of normal (ULN)
ii.Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) ≤ 2.0times the ULN
c.Renal function
i. Either a serum creatinine concentration within the site laboratory’ s normal
limits or a calculated creatinine clearance > 60 mL/min
8. Urine or serum pregnancy test: negative for female patients of childbearing potential. If
pregnancy test is performed more than 10 days prior to the start of radiotherapy, thetest must be re peated prior to Day 1.
9.Female subjects with reproductive potential must agree to use reliable means ofcontraception (e.g., abstinence, double barrier method, oral/implantable/transdermalcontraception, Depo-provera, intrauterine device, or physical barrier) throughout studyparticipation and for 90 days after the last use of study oral rinse.
A female is considered of reproductive potential unless she is premenarchal, without a
uterus and/or both ovaries, or has had a bilateral tubal ligation, has undergone theEssure procedure with confirmation of tubal blockage, or is postmenopausal. Femalesidentified as postmenopausal for less than 2 years must have serum FollicleStimulating Hormone (FSH) of 40 mIU/mL or greater at the Screening visit to beconsidered postmenopausal.
Exclusion Criteria : 
1.Has tumor(s) of the lips, sinuses, salivary glands, nasopharynx, glottic larynx, subglotticlarynx, or unknown primary tumor
2.Has metastatic disease (M1) Stage IV C
3. Has had prior radiation to the head and neck for any reason/condition
4.Plan to be treated with cetuximab (Erbitux ®) and not cisplatin as the component of
chemoradiation
Innovation Pharmaceuticals Inc.  Confidential  
Protocol, Version 1.9   Page S6   
CTIX-B RI-205 
5.Planned use of cisplatin as induction chemotherapy.
6.Has a history of other malignant tumors within the last 5 years, except non -melano ma
skin cancer or in situ cervical carcinoma curatively excised
7.Has had a major surgical procedure, other than for HNC, or significant traumatic injury
within 4 weeks prior to the initiation of RT; anticipation of need for major surgicalprocedure during the course of the study
8.Will have incompletely healed sites of dental extractions on first day of chemoradiationtreatment
9.Has a 12 -lead ECG obtained at screening visit which shows medically significant
abnormality(ies) (e.g. left bundle branch block, frequent premature ventricular
contractions, QTc interval prolongation > 450 msec for males and > 470 msec for
females)
10.Has untreated hypertension or has hypertension under treatment meeting one of the
following definitions:
a.Age ≥ 60 years: SBP ≥ 150 mmHg and/or DBP ≥ 90 mmHg
b. Age < 60 y
ears: SBP ≥ 140 mmHg and/or DBP ≥ 90 mmHg
c.All ages with diabetes: SBP ≥ 140 mmHg and/or DBP ≥ 90 mmHg
NOTE: Medical therapy for untreated hypertension may be initiat ed or existing 
treatment for hypertension may be optimized during the Screening Phase if clinically 
indicated. Blood pressures will then be reassessed before Day 1 to confirm eligibility.  
Blood pressure criteria need to be met at screening and/ or prior to dosing on Day 1. 
11.Has active infectious disease undergoing systemic treatment, excluding oral candidiasis
12.Has oral mucositis (of any severity) prior to initiation of radiotherapy
13.Has a diagnosis of an immunosuppressive illness or a condition requiring chronic
immunosuppression
14.Has known seropositivity for HIV or hepatitis C antibody, or known to be hepatitis B
surface antigen positive (testing for these serologic markers is not required for
enrollment in this protocol)
15. Use of any investigational agent within 30 days of randomization
16. Is pregnant or breastfeeding
17.Has known allergies or intolerance to brilacidin, cisplatin, or carboplatin
18. Has inability to give informed consent or comply with study requirements
19.Has any other condition or prior therapy that in the opinion of the Investigator would
make the patient unsuitable for the study and/or unable to comply with requirements forfollow-up visits.
20.Is unwilling or unable to agree to swish and spit the study oral rinse three times per dayduring the study period
Innovation Pharmaceuticals Inc.  Confidential  
Protocol, Version 1.9   Page S7   
CTIX-B RI-205 
Test Product, Dose, and Mode of Administration: 
Brilacidin (45 mg/ 15mL WFI) oral rinse tid, or placebo (15mL WF I) oral rinse tid  
Efficacy and Safety Endpoints:  
Primary Efficacy Endpoint 
Incidence of severe OM  (WHO Grade ≥3) experienced during radiation therapy by  subjects 
with HNC receiving concomitant chemoradiation therapy  and a cumulative radiation dose 
of at least 55 Gy . 
Secondary Efficacy Endpoints 
•Duration of severe OM (WHO Grade ≥3) , from initial WHO Grade ≥3 during radiation
therapy to the first WHO Grade 2 or lower OM assessment during/after radiation
therapy .
•Duration 
of severe OM (WHO Grade ≥3) , from initial WHO Grade ≥3 during radiation
therapy to the last WHO Grade ≥3 assessment during/after radiation therapy .
•Time t
o onset of severe OM (WHO Grade ≥3).
•Incidence of severe OM (WHO Grade ≥3) by cumulative IMRT .
Safety
 Endpoints  
The safety and tolerability of treatment with  brilacidin will be assessed through incidence, 
severity  and type of adverse events, including serious adverse events, and changes in 
clinical laboratory parameters , blood pressure, heart rate, ECOG, and body weight. 
Systemic Exposure/Pharmacokinetic Endpoints  
Brilacidin systemic exposure will be estimated from plasma sample concentrations ; 
samples  will be obtained from each randomized subject at weekly intervals d uring the CRT 
treatment period.  
Data Analysis: 
Efficacy Analyses 
Full details of the statistical methodology for summary and analyses of the data collected 
in this study will be prepared separately from this protocol in a S tatistical Analysis Plan 
(SAP).  
The primary efficacy objective is to evaluate brilacidin compared to placebo in reducing 
the incidence of severe OM (defined as grade 3 or 4 on the WHO Oral Mucositis scale, WHO Grade ≥3) in subjects with HNC  receiving concomitant chemoradiation therapy and 
a cumulative radiation dose of at least 55 Gy . For this comparison the Fishers Exact Test 
will be used. 
Time to onset of severe OM (WHO Grade ≥3) will be assessed using the log rank test. Both 
a scale of days, and a scale of cumulative radiation dose delivered (Gy) will be used for the 
Innovation Pharmaceuticals Inc.  Confidential  
Protocol, Version 1.9   Page S8   
CTIX-B RI-205 
Kaplan -Meie r analysis. The log rank test will be used to compare treatment groups at time 
of onset of severe OM. Time to onset of ulcerative OM (WHO Grade ≥2) will be explored 
similarly.  
Duration of severe OM (WHO Grade ≥3) is evaluated two different ways: (1) Initia l instance 
duration of severe OM is defined as the number of days from initial WHO Grade ≥3 during 
radiation therapy until the first WHO Grade 2 or lower OM Grade occurs; (2) Overall duration of severe OM is defined as the number of days from initial WHO G rade ≥3 during 
radiation therapy to the last WHO Grade ≥3 assessment during/after radiation therapy. If any subject does not experience severe OM, his/her duration will be set to 0. Subjects who experience severe OM but do not resolve to WHO Grade 2 or low er will be censored at the 
last study visit. The effect of treatment on the duration of severe OM will be assessed using a log rank statistic. Analyses will be done using 
both a scale of days, and a scale of 
cumulative radiation dose delivered (Gy). 
Safety  Analysis 
All safety data, demographic and baseline characteristics will be summarized descriptively through appropriate data tabulations, descriptive statistics, and categorical summaries. 
Changes in blood pressure, heart rate, and hematology and clinical chemistry parameters 
from baseline to the end of the study will be summarized. Treatment- emergent changes from 
values within normal range to abnormal values in clinical laboratory parameter s will be 
identified by means of summary and shift tables . ECOG and body weight changes from 
baseline to the end of the study will also be summarized.  
Interim Analysis  
Ad-hoc interim analyses may be conducted to support decision making concerning the 
current clinical study, the Sponsor's clinical development projects in general or in case of any safety concerns. Such analyses may be unblinded, and the details  will be documented 
in the SAP. 
Sample Size  
The proportion of subjects experiencing  severe OM (WHO Grade ≥ 3) after a total 
cumulative  radiation dose of at least 55 Gy  (and no more than 72 Gy)  is unknown but 
expected to be approximately 75% for the placebo oral rinse  treatment group , and the 
assumption f or the active Brilacidin oral rinse treatment group  is estimated to reduce to 
approximately 35- 40%. Based on these assumptions, a sample size of 23 -30 subjects per 
treatment group is appropriate to detect the specified difference with at least 80% power . 