PROTOCOL TITLE:   Compre hensive dynamic movement assess ment for 
concussion management   
 
   
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:   Charlotte Yates  PT, PhD, PCS  
Arkansas Children’s Hospital  
1 Children’s Way  
Little Rock, AR 72205  
Email: cyates@uca.edu  & yatescc@archildrens.org  
 
   
CO-INVESTIGATOR :        Leah Lowe   DPT, PhD  
Department  of Physical Therapy  
University of Central Arkansas  
201 Donaghey Avenue  
Conway, AR 72035  
Email: Llowe@uca.edu  
 
   
CO-INVESTIGATOR :        Keith Williams , PhD, MPH  
Department of Biostatistics  
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
4301 West Markham Street, Slot 512 -5 
Little Rock, AR 72205  
Email: williamsdavidk@uams.edu  
 
 
   
ADVISOR :        Mary Aitken , MD  
Department of Pediatrics  
Arkansas Children’s Hospital  
1 Children’s Way  
Little Rock, AR 72205  
Email: aitkenmarye@uams.edu  
 
   
MEDICAL MONITOR:    Michael Israel, MD  
Department of Pediatrics  
Arkansas Children’s Hospital  
1 Children’s Way  
Little Rock, AR 72205  
Email:  MPIsrael@uams.edu  
 
 
   
LOCATION s  OF STUDY  
  Central Arkansas Area High Schools  &  
ACH Concussion Clinic  
 
  
Title:  Compre hensive dynamic movement assess ment for concussion management   
PI: Charlotte Yates, Sponsor: NIH Program award through the Center for Translational Neuroscience, UAMS  
 
Protocol Version  #10 Date :3/5/2018  2 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 SECTIONS   PAGE  
    
I. List of Abbreviations   3 
    
I. Protocol Summary   4 
    
III. Background and Rationale   4 
    
IV. Hypotheses   5 
    
    
    
V. Trial Design   5 
    
VI. Study Population   6 
    
VII. Investigational Plan   6 
    
VIII. Outcome  Assessments   7 
    
    
    
IX. Data Handling and Recordkeeping   7 
    
X. Data Safety and Monitoring Plan   8 
    
XI. Statistical Plan   8 
    
XII. Study Registration and Publication   9 
    
XIII. References   9 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
  
Title:  Compre hensive dynamic movement assess ment for concussion management   
PI: Charlotte Yates, Sponsor: NIH Program award through the Center for Translational Neuroscience, UAMS  
 
Protocol Version  #10 Date :3/5/2018  3 
 I.  LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
ACH  
COD  
IAGT  
ImPACT  
                                                              Arkansas Children’s Hospital  
Change of Direction  
Illinois agility test  
Immediate Post -Concussion Assessment and Cognitive Testing  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
  
SEBT  Star Excursion Balance test  
PVT Psychomotor Vigilance Task  
RTP Return to Play  
UAMS  University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences  
 
  
Title:  Compre hensive dynamic movement assess ment for concussion management   
PI: Charlotte Yates, Sponsor: NIH Program award through the Center for Translational Neuroscience, UAMS  
 
Protocol Version  #10 Date :3/5/2018  4 
 II.  PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
Previous work in the area of concussion management has focused heavily on neuro -cognitive  testing. 
In addition to routine n euro-cognitive testing through Immediate Post -Concussion Assessment and 
Cognitive Testing  (ImPACT),t he first year of the  pilot study  establish ed normative data for  a 
comprehensive battery of clincial assessment through the utilization of functional movement and dynam ic 
postural control assessments. Year one of the assessments was focused on  the m ale high school football 
player  (who is at increased risk for concussion) . Year one of the pilot study collected initial data on 10 -12th 
grade football players  in three area high schools  to begin to determine the stability of ImPACT testing in 
youth athletes in light of ongoing neurodevelopment in this population.  In addition, year one implement ed 
additional  tools focused on assessment of dynamic balance, reaction time, and agility . This battery of t ests 
will provide clinicians with invaluable information to guide both rehabilitation of and return to play  (RTP) 
decisions for  concussed high school athletes . Year one of the pilot began to track those athletes who 
sustain ed a concussion and assess ed increased r isks for musculoskeletal injury . This more global 
appro ach will signficantly enhance predictions of subsequent concussions and musculoskeletal injuries that 
have been shown to occur in concussed collegiate and professional athletes and that we belie ve are also 
occurring in our high school athletes.  
Year two  and three  of the pilot study will expand data collection from year one to  include  1) concussed  
high school patients  (male and female high school athletes)  presenting to clinic at Arkansas Children’s 
Hospital (ACH) ,(n=50)  2)  9th grade  male  athletes  (a younger population than was tested in year one) (n=90)  
and 9th-12th grade female  athletes participating in soccer (an at risk and under -represented group in the 
concussion literature), (n=85)  and 3) continue to use injury tracking software to document concussion and 
musculoskeletal injury as they occur in high school  male and female athletes.  
  
III.  BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
Sport -related concussion is a pervasive problem in varsity and collegiate athletics. The Center for Disease 
Control reports an estimated 1.6 to 3.8 million concussions related to sports and recreational activities 
annually in the United States, concluding that sport concussion has reached an epidemic level.1-5 Of that  
number, an estimated 50,000 -300,000 concussions are sustained by high school athletes each year.6-10 
This number likely under -represents the actual injury rate since many concussive injuries that are mildly 
symptomatic are not diagnosed.7 Prevention of co ncussion is essential for the safety of youth 
athletes.  Immediate Post -Concussion Assessment and Cognitive Testing (ImPACT) has been utilized to 
establish baseline neuro -cognitive abilities and to provide data for return to play decisions after concussion.  
The frequency of ImPACT administration (biennial or annually), however, has been called into question in 
the young, neuro -developmentally immature athlete.11 Additionally, while it provides valuable information, 
ImPACT is not a comprehensive measure of th e numerous, dynamic requirements for safe athletic play. 
There is currently no definitive, comprehensive battery of tests known to identify increased risk for 
concussion in youth athletes.  Moreover, collegiate and professional athletes have been shown to b e at an 
increased risk for subsequent musculoskeletal injury following concussion as far as one year out. Previous 
authors suggest that continued deficits in neuro -motor control may be implicated, though current 
concussion management does not sensitively m easure dynamic movement and control.12-14 This 
connection between concussion and subsequent musculoskeletal injury rate has not been studied in the 
high school population and represents a major gap in our knowledge of identification of risk and injury 
prevention in this population.  
    
Significance  
 
The overall goal for year two of this pilot  study (May 2017 -April 2018)  is three -fold. We will , 1) 
implement the battery of tests constructed in year one  that are sensitive to neuro -motor control (i.e. 
balance, reaction time, and agility ) in concussed  high school patients  presenting to clinic at Arkansas 
Children’s Hospital (ACH), 2) examine  the frequency of current neurocognitive measures in 9th grade  male  
athletes  (a younger population than was tested in year o ne) ,9th-12th grade female  athletes participating in 
Title:  Compre hensive dynamic movement assess ment for concussion management   
PI: Charlotte Yates, Sponsor: NIH Program award through the Center for Translational Neuroscience, UAMS  
 
Protocol Version  #10 Date :3/5/2018  5 
 soccer (an at risk and under -represented group in the concussion literature) , and annual assessment of 
athletes participating in football for a consecutive year , and 3 ) use injury tracking software to do cument 
concussion and musculoskeletal injury as they occur in high school  male and female athletes.  
 
Achievement of this pilot work will provide essential data that will considerably advance our ability to 
identify youth athletes at risk for serious injury  including concussion and subsequent musculoskeletal 
injury. We anticipate that completion of these innovative studies will not only enhance our knowledge of the 
relationship between concussion and subsequent musculoskeletal injury, but that also implement ation of 
these clinically applicable tests will allow us to more accurately define the impairments that are factors for 
increased injury risk.  
 
 
 
 
IV.  HYPOTHESES   
 
Our central hypothesis  is that, like collegiate and professional athletes, high school athletes who sustain a 
concussion are at an increased risk for future  concussions or subsequent  musculoskeletal injury. However, 
unlike the adult athletes whose cognitive function is mature, annual assessment of cognition (ImPACT) in 
youth athletes, whose cognition is developing over time, may be insufficient as a baseline measure, and so, we 
plan to test the youth athletes tri -annually to determine how stable ImPACT testing is in this populat ion. 
 
V.  TRIAL DESIGN   
 Experi ment 1. Concussed  (sports related)  adolescent males  and females  (n=50) ages 14 -18-years -
old presenting to the ACH concussion clinic,  will complete our battery of functional tests constructed during 
year one. The battery includes  the Star Excursion Balance Test (SEBT), a divided attention gait task, the 
Psychomotor Vigilance Task (PVT), and the Illinois Change of Direction (COD) Illinois agility test (IAGT).  The 
SEBT is an established, reliable outcome measure of  dynamic postural stability through measurement of 
lower extremity reach distance.15-Our study can utilize a force plate during SEBT testing to allow the 
investigators to sensitively measure center of mass in all planes. To test gait , balance , control and adaptatio n 
of gait strategy which have  each  been shown to be impaired in concussed individuals acutely and chr onically, 
athletes will walk at a self-selected speed on the GAITRite® portable gait analysis walkway for three undivided 
attention trials and three divide d attention trials  during which a cognitive task will be imposed.18-25The GaitRite® 
will calculate spatio -temporal parameters during gait and has been used in the concussion literature.24,26  The 
PVT is a reliable and valid measurement of simple reaction ti me to an auditory cue. The outcome measure will 
be the mean reaction time.28-30 The COD IAGT is a valid and reliable protocol to assess agility in male team 
athletes.31-32This test yields a completion time in seconds. These tests will be administered by li censed 
physical therapists, assisted by students from both the  Doctorate of Physical Therapy  (DPT) and PhD physical 
therapy programs at UCA. The total testing time per ath lete will not exceed 1 .5 hours. All athletes will be asked 
to complete  between 1 -3 functional tests with  a maximum of 4 functional tests  (the SEBT, IGAT, and divided 
attention gait task ), in addition to the  standard static B alance Error Scoring System (BESS) test .  The tests can 
be administered (1 -2 additional times) for fol low-up, if Dr. Israel or the PT have made a clinical decision that 
the athlete is not prepared for return to play.  
Experiment 2. Qualified athletic trainers  or Physical Therapists , with  oversight  by Dr. Israel will administer the 
ImPACT . The ImPACT  is a widely used neurocognitive testing component of the standard three -prong 
approach to concussion management which also includes symptom inventories and static balance 
assessment.33 The computerized test evaluates concentration, attention, memory, visu al motor speed, and 
reaction time. High sensitivity and specificity for concussion using the ImPACT has been shown.34-37 The test 
also has been shown to be a valid and reliable measure in the high school and collegiate populations.34-40 
Composite scores fo r each of the non -injured athletes will be stratified by age to examine changes across the 
Title:  Compre hensive dynamic movement assess ment for concussion management   
PI: Charlotte Yates, Sponsor: NIH Program award through the Center for Translational Neuroscience, UAMS  
 
Protocol Version  #10 Date :3/5/2018  6 
 three assessments. Hunt and Ferrara have shown significant change in baseline assessments between 9th 
grade and 11th and 12th grade age groups driven by 9th grade te st scores indicating that biennial testing for 
young adolescents may not be sufficient.8The current recommendation for this younger age group is annual 
testing, though recent studies call for the investigation of even more frequent testing11, thus  year one testing 
was test  pre-season, post -season and prior to the end of the school year for 10th -12 th   grade athletes .  
ImPACT testing will not exceed 1 hour.   In year two  and three , it is essential that we collect ImPACT  data on 
9th grade male football athletes. The female gender has also been identified as a population at increased risk 
for concussion .15-16 In year two  and three , we will  expand ImPACT testing  to include female soccer (the second 
most concussive sport) players in 9th-12th grades.  Composite scores for each of the non -injured athletes will be 
stratified by age  and gender  to examine changes across the three assessments.  ImPACT testing will not 
exceed 1 hour and will be completed at the computer lab of the athlete’s schoo l or in the ACH concussion 
clinic.  
Experiment 3. Athletic trainers will use the established injury tracking system or Athletic Trainer System® injury 
tracking software mobile application to record incidence of injury, both musculoskeletal and concussive , during 
all practice and game play. Injuries acquired outside of the athletic and school setting will also be documented  
through athlete questionnaire.  Retrospective injury data for the previous school year were obtained through 
athlete questionnaire and r eview of current charting system to control for confounding variables. To accurately 
document injury and care -received, medical records may be obtained through ACH Adolescent Sports 
Medicine and Rehabilitation departments, and the ACH emergency department.   
 
VI. STUDY POPULATION  
A. Accrual of Research Subjects  
Healthy athletes who have completed pre -participation examinations by physicians  (on file at their 
respective school)  will be enrolled  following parental consent  at the area schools.  Concussed athletes 
who are identified as meeting the criteria will be identified by Dr .Israel  through the ACH concussion clinic  
and enrolled following parental consent.    
B.  Inclusion criteria  (for area school athletes)_  
 Healthy athletes who are participating in football  or soccer  programs at their high schools  
 Age 14 -18 
 Male  football player or female soccer player  
 Written, informed consent.  
 
 
Inclusion criteria (for ACH concussion clinic athletes)  
 Previously healthy athlete part icipating in high school sports who suffered a concussion  
 Able to participate in functional testing and/or ImPACT computerized testing per Dr. Israel  
 Written, informed consent  
 
C.  Exclusion criteria (for area schools)  
 Athletes who have not completed pre-participation physicals   
 Any condition the investigator determines will put the subject at ris k if participating in the study  
 
Exclusion criteria (for athletes in concussion clinic)  
 Athletes who suffered additional injuries beyond the concussion that would prohibit 
participation in functional testing and/or ImPACT  computerized testing per Dr. Israel  
 Any additional condition the investigator determines will put the subject at risk if 
participating in the study  
D. Withdraw al 
Title:  Compre hensive dynamic movement assess ment for concussion management   
PI: Charlotte Yates, Sponsor: NIH Program award through the Center for Translational Neuroscience, UAMS  
 
Protocol Version  #10 Date :3/5/2018  7 
 Subjects may be withdrawn from the study by the investigator at any time  if the investigator believes for 
any reason that continuing in the study is not in the best interest of the subject. The parent or legal 
guardian may revoke consent at any time and the subject will be withdrawn from the study.  The subject 
can choose to wi thdraw from the study at any time.  Data collected up to the point of withdrawal will be 
used in the analysis unless forbidden by the parent or le gal guardian.  
 
 
VII. INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
VII.1  Randomization Procedures :  The order of  functional movement testing will be  randomized for 
each athlete enrolled.   
VII.2  Consent Process :  Athletes  in area schools  will be screened using the inclusion and exclusion 
criteria noted above .  Athletes  in area schools  will have an educational session on concussion injury  
provided by the coach or the research team. The study will be explained during a designated time 
determined by the coach of the team .  The parents of eligible athletes  will then receive a written detai led 
description of the study procedures  distributed with the participation for high school sports packet.   The 
consent process will be initiated prior to any scheduled  testin g so that parents have enough time for 
determining the risks and benefits of the p roposed study and have related discussions with study 
personnel.  Study personnel will be available by phone for consultation and available at the end of the 
educational session for further discussion.   
 
The investigators are requesting a waiver of the verbal consent process to the parent  for healthy athletes 
participating in the area school . The investigators will have verbal communication with the athlete  at the 
team meeting or another time as allowed , written communication to the parent  through a informational 
sheet that will be sent home following the team meeting , and will be available to the subjects/family for 
phone consultation.  The packet will be returned by the subject or mailed to the study group.  The study has 
met the required waiver elements as outlined in IRB protocol 15.3.  By having the athlete sign the consent 
form, the investigators are requesting a waiver for the requirement that a participant who turns 18 during 
the duration of the study be re -consented . The study will attempt to include  wards of the state using the 
approved process in policy 17.1.  
    The information will be given in language understandable to the reader.  All questions regarding 
participation will be answered.  No coercion or undue influence will be used in the consent process.  No 
research related procedures will be performed prior to obtaining informed consent.  All signatures and 
dates will be obtained.  Once a signed consent is obtained the participant becomes eligible for the study.   
A copy of the signed consent wi ll be mailed home to the participant  or delivered to the athlete at their 
school . A copy of the consent will be maintained in a locked cabinet of the PI. After written consent has 
been obtained from the parents, the athlete’s functional testing assignment will be randomized  by the 
investigator.    
 
 Dr. Israel will screen athletes in the concussion clinic using the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The 
study will be explained to the athlete and parent by a study investigator . 
The parent(s) of the eligible athlete and the athlete will receive a detailed description  of the  study 
procedures.  The consent process will be init iated prior to any functional testing  so that the parent(s) will 
have enough time for determining the risks and benefits of the proposed st udy and have related 
discussions with study personnel.  
 The investigators  will conduct the consent discussion and will be prepared to devote approximately 30 
minutes (longer if needed) to the discussion.  The consent process will take place in a quiet and private 
room in a location that is convenient for the person authorized to give informed consent.  The person 
obtaining consent will thoroughly explain each element of the protocol and outline the risks a nd benefits,  
and follow -up requirements of the study .  The information will be given in language understandable to the 
reader.  Participation privacy will be maintained.  All questions regarding participation will be answered.  No 
Title:  Compre hensive dynamic movement assess ment for concussion management   
PI: Charlotte Yates, Sponsor: NIH Program award through the Center for Translational Neuroscience, UAMS  
 
Protocol Version  #10 Date :3/5/2018  8 
 coercion or undue influence will be used in the consent process.  No research  related procedures will be 
performed prior to obtaining informed consent.  All signatures and dates will be obtained.  Once a signed 
consent is obtained the participant becomes eligible for the study.  A copy of the signed consent will be 
given to the par ent or legal guardian.  A copy of the consent will be entered into Medical Records.  
If the athlete is participating in functional testing , the investigator will randomize the order of  the 
functional  tests . 
 
     
 
VIII.  OUTCOME  ASSESSMENTS  
 ImPACT  neuro -cognitive testing, SEBT, PVT, COD IAGT, divided attention gait task,  as well as  
incidence of musculoskeletal and concussion injur ies will be  used to assess neuro -cognition, functional 
movement, and injury occurrence in these athletes.  In the event t hat a subject has a significant decrease in 
neuro -cognition on the repeat of the ImPACT testing  (If the ImPACT software identifies a reliable change score 
that shows a decline in  two or more of the subtests , or greater symptoms (of concussion) at retest ve rses 
baseline ), our monitoring physician  will examine the testing data and the study physician  (Dr. Israel ) will 
directly contact the  parent with a recommended course of action.   
  
IX.  COMPENSATION  
 Participants  from area schools  will be remunerated $6 0 for completing the entire study protocol  and 
pro-rated $15 for the first two testing session and $30 for the final session.  Subjects enrolled from ACH clinic 
will be compensated $30 per visit and can include 2 follow -up visits for a total of $90.   
X.  DAT A SAFETY AND MONITORING PLAN  
Before the study begins, approval of the UAMS/ACHRI IRB will be obtained. All IRB policies and 
procedures will be followed with regard to initial approval, continuing review, protocol and consent 
modifications, and adverse even t reporting. In addition, all relevant policies and procedures of the National 
Institutes of Health will be observed. The PI will carefully monitor study procedures to protect the safety of 
research subjects, the quality of the data , and the integrity of t he study.  All study subject material will be 
assigned a unique identifying code or number.  The key to the code will be kept in a locked file in the 
principal investiga tor’s office.  Only the PI  will have access to the code and information that identifies  the 
subject in this study.  The risk level associated with this study is estimated to be minimal.  Data will be 
published in aggregate form. No individual subjects will be identified.  The data will be de -identified after 
analysis and included in the long term database without identifiers.  The data will be destroyed per ACH 
document destruction policy.  
 
Risks   
The risk level associated with this study is estimated to be minimal. A licensed physical therapists or Dr. 
Israel will be onsite during all clinical functional testing. The neuro-cognitive testing will be supervised by a 
co-investigator or the athletic trainer assigned to the school.  
 
Benefits  
This study is seeking to determine the stability of neuro -cognitive testing  for developing athletes. This study 
is also seeking  to determine normative data on dynamic movement testing in the high school athlete  
collected in year one as a comparison for scores obtained in the concussed athletes to more accurately 
identify remaining deficits that could place these athletes at risk with return to activity or play . The subjects 
will receive concussion education as p art of the study.  
 
Title:  Compre hensive dynamic movement assess ment for concussion management   
PI: Charlotte Yates, Sponsor: NIH Program award through the Center for Translational Neuroscience, UAMS  
 
Protocol Version  #10 Date :3/5/2018  9 
  
XI. STATISTICAL PLAN  
All data will be analyzed by the  investigators. Dr. Keith Williams, a co -investigator in the Biostatistical 
Department will oversee the analysis.  
  Data Analyses :   
Experiment 1 :  Comparisons will be made for each concussed athlete ’s measurement on the 4 functional 
tests with baseline data collected in healthy athletes during year one of our study . Additionally, 
comparisons will be made between our battery of dynamic tests and the static BESS for the concussed 
athle tes. For the returning uninjured subjects from year one, we will again examine  them individually and 
as a cohort including important covariates (age, position played , and history of concussion) and trends of 
the means will be assessed.  
Experiment 2:  Indiv idual athlete neurocognitive assessment will be observed over time to determine if 
scores remain within expected norms or change over time.  Athlete assessment will be examined as a 
cohort including important covariates (age, position played and history of  concussion) and trends of the 
means will be assessed.  Data will be analyzed using a repeated measure model. Post hoc comparisons 
will be performed using the Bonferroni adjustment .  
Experiment 3 : Continued documentation of  concussion and injury rates (during and beyond football 
season)  and in expanded populations  will provid e a more robust data set on which a regression analysis 
may be run to examine predictive factors to move toward the goal of ascertaining the incidence o f 
musculoskeletal injury after concussion in the high school population.  
 
XII.  STUDY REGISTRATION AND PUBLICATION  
Data obtained during the course of this st udy may be used in publications and  presentations .  The study is 
registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov . 
XIII.  REFERENCES  
1. Langlois JA, Rutland -Brown W, Wald MM. The epidemiology and impact of traumatic brain injury: a 
brief overview. J Head Trauma Rehabil.  2006;21:375 -378. 
2. Giza CC, Kutcher JS, Ashwal  S. et al. Summary of evidence -based guideline update: evaluation and 
management of concussion in sports. Neurology. 2013;80:2250 -2257.  
3. Halstead ME, Walter KD; Council on sports medicine and fitness. American Academy of Pediatrics. 
Clinical report —sport re lated concussion in children and adolescents. Pediatrics.  2010;126(3):597 -615. 
4. Scorza, KA. Raleigh MA, O’Connor FG. Current concepts in concussion: evaluation and management. 
Am Fam Physician. 2012;85(2):123 -132. 
5. Faul M, Xu L, Wald M, Coronado V. Traumatic  brain injury in the United States: emergency department 
visits, hospitalizations, and deaths, 2002 -2006. Atlan ta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. National Center for Injury Prevention and Control.  
6. Guskiewicz KM, Weaver NL, Padua DA, Garre tt WE Jr. Epidemiology of concussion in collegiate and 
high school football players. Am J Sports Med. 2000;28(5):643 -650. 
7. McCrea M. Hammeke T. Olsen G, Leo P, Guskiewicz K. Unreported concussion in high school football 
players: implication for prevention. Clin J Sport Med. 2004;14(1):13 -17. 
8. Hunt TN, Ferrera MS. Age -related differences in neuropsychological testing among high school 
athletes. J Athl Train. 2009;44(4):405 -409. 
9. Gessel LM, Fields SK, Collins CL, Dick RW, Comstock RD. Concussions among United St ates high 
school and collegiate athletes. J Athl Train. 2007;42(4):495 -503. 
10. De Beaumont L, Lassonde M, Leclerc S, Theoret H. Long -term and cumulative effects of sports 
concussion on motor cortex inhibition. Neurosurgery. 2007;61:329 -337. 
Title:  Compre hensive dynamic movement assess ment for concussion management   
PI: Charlotte Yates, Sponsor: NIH Program award through the Center for Translational Neuroscience, UAMS  
 
Protocol Version  #10 Date :3/5/2018  10 
 11. Vernau BT, Grady M F, Goodman A, et al. Oculomotor and neurocognitive assessment of youth ice 
hockey players: baseline associations and observations after concussion. Dev Neuropsychol. 
2015;40(1):7 -11. 
12. Lynall RC, Mauntel TC, Padua DA, Mihalik JP. Acute lower extremity injury  rates increase following 
concussion in college athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2015;47(12):2487 -2492.  
13. Nordstrom A, Nordstrom P. Ekstrand J. Sports -related concussion increases the risk of subsequent 
injury by about 50% in elite male football players. Br J Sports Med. 2014;48(19):1447 -1450.  
14. Pietrosimone B, Golightly YM, Mihalik JP, Guskiewicz KM. Concussion frequency associates with 
musculoskeletal injury in retired NFL players. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2015; 47(11): 2366 -2372.  
15. Hegedus E, McDonough SM, et al. Clinician -friendly lower extremity physical performance tests in 
athletes: a systematic review of measurement properties and correlation with injury. Part -2 the tests for 
the hip, thigh, foot, and ankle including the star excursion balance test. Br J Sport s Med. 2015;49:649 -
656. 
16. Plisky PJ, Rauh MJ, et al. Star excursion balance test as a predictor of lower extremity injury in high 
school basketball players. J Orthop Sports Phy Ther. 2006;36(12):911 -919. 
17. Gribble PA, Hertel J, Plisky P. Using the stare excurs ion balance test to assess dynamic postural -
control deficits and outcomes in lower extremity injury: a literature and systematic review. J Athl Train. 
2012;47(3):339 -357.  
18. Parker TM, Osternig LR, Lee HJ, van Donkelaar  P, Chou LS. The effect of divided attention on gait 
stability following concussion. Clin Biomech.  2005;20:389 -395. 
19. Parker TM, Osternig LR, van Donkelaar P, Chou LS. Gait stability following concussion. Med Sci Sport 
Exer. 2006;38(6):1032 -1040.  
20. Howell DR, Osternig LR, Chou LS. Dual -task effect on gait balance control in adolescents with 
concussion. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2013;94:1513 -1520.  
21. Howell DR, Osternig LR, Chou LS. Adolescents demonstrate greater gait balance control deficits after 
concussion than yo ung adults. Am J Sport Med. 2014;43(3):625 -632. 
22. Howell DR, Osternig LR, Koester MC, Chou LS. The effect of cognitive task complexity on gait stability 
in adolescents following concussion. Exp Brain Res. 2014;232: 1773 -1782.  
23. Catena RD, van Donkelaar P, Chou  LS. Altered balance control following concussion is better detected 
with an attention test during gait. Gait Posture. 2007;25:406 -411. 
24. Martini DN, Sabin MJ, DePesa SA, et al. The chronic effects of concussion on gait. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil. 2011;92:585 -590. 
25. Catena RD, van Donkelaar, Chou LS. Cognitive task effects on gait stability following concussion. Exp 
Brain Res. 2007;176:23 -31. 
26. Buckley TA, Munkasy BA, Tapia -Lovier TG, Wikstrom EA. Altered gait termination strategies following a 
concussion. Gait Postu re. 2013;38(3):549 -551. 
27. Howell D, Osternig L, Chou LS. Monitoring recovery of gait balance control following concussion using 
and accelerometer. J Biomech. 2015;48:3364 -3368.  
28. Parasuraman R. The psychobiology of sustained attention. In: Warm JS, ed. Sustained attention and 
human performance. Chichester: Joh Wiley; 1984:61 -101. 
29. Posner MI. The psychobiology of attention. In: Gazzaniga M, Blakemore C, eds. Handbook of 
Psychobiology. New York: Academic Press; 19785:441 -480. 
30. Sturm W. Longoni F, Fimm B,  et al. Network for auditory intrinsic alertness: a PET study.     
Neuropsychologia. 2004;42:563 -568 
31.  Hachana Y, Chaabene H, Nabli MA, Attia A, Moualhi J, Farhat N, Elloumi M. Test -retest reliability, 
criterion -related validity, and minimal detectable change of the Illinois agility test in male team sport 
athletes. J Strength Cond Res. 2013;17(10):2752 -2759.    
32. Raya MA, Gailey RS, Gaunaurd IA, et al. Comparison of three agility tests with male servicemembers: 
Edgren side step test, T -test, and Illino is agility test. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2013;50(7):951 -960. 
33. Nakayama Y, Covassin T, Schatz P, Nogle S, Kovan J. Examination of the test -retest reliability of a 
computerized neurocognitive test battery.  Am J Sport Med.  2014;42(8):2000 -2005.  
Title:  Compre hensive dynamic movement assess ment for concussion management   
PI: Charlotte Yates, Sponsor: NIH Program award through the Center for Translational Neuroscience, UAMS  
 
Protocol Version  #10 Date :3/5/2018  11 
 34. Schatz P, P ardini J, Lovell M, Collins M, Podell K. Sensitivity and specificity of the ImPACT test battery 
for concussion in athletes. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2006;21:91 -99. 
35.Schatz P, Sandel N. Sensitivity and specificity of the online version of ImPACT in high sc hool and 
collegiate athletes. Am J Sports Med. 2013;41(2)321 -326. 
36. Broglio S, Macciocchi S, Ferrera M. Sensitivity of the concussion assessment battery. 
Neurosurgery. 2007;60(6)1050 -1058  
37. Maerlender A, Flashman L, Kessler A, et al. Discriminant constr uct validity of ImPACT: a comparison 
study. Clin Neuropsychol. 2013;27(2):290 -299. 
38. Merlender A, Flashman L, Kessler A, et al. Examination of the construct validity of ImPACT 
computerized test, traditional, and experimental neuropsychological measures. Clin Neuropsychol. 
2010;24(8):13091325  
39. Elbin RJ, Schatz P, Cavassin T. One -year test -retest reliability of the online version of ImPACT in high 
school athletes. Am J Sports Med. 2011;39(11):2319 -2324.  
40. Schatz P. Long -term test -retest reliability of  baselin e cognitive assessments using ImPACT. Am J 
Sports Med. 2010;38(1)47 -53. 