1 
 
Guanfacine for  PONV and  Pain  
After  Sinus Surgery  
Version: March 10, 2016  
NCT #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Principal I nvestigator:  Stephen Harvey, MD  
Assistant Professor  
Department of Anesthesiology  
 Vanderbilt University Medical Center  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Anesthesiology  
Vanderbilt University  Medical Center  
 
 
 
2 
 
Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
 
Abstract  
 
1.0 Background  
 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
 
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
 
5.0 Study Procedures  
 
6.0 Risks of Investigational Agents (side effects)  
 
7.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants or 
Others  
 
8.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
 
10.0 Follow -up  
 
11.0 Record Retention  
 
12.0 References  
 
13.0 Testing Regimens  
 
14.0 Data Dictionary  
 
15.0 Patient Data Sheet  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
STUDY SCHEMA  
PRE-OP SURGERY  EMERGE  PACU  
Consent  Tot GA  time     Extubate  Max n VRS  
Demo graphics  #pressors     Transport  PONV T x 
Study Drug/placebo    Max pVAS  
   Total ME  
   PACU LOS  
 
After meeting I/ O criteria p re-operatively, patients will hear a brief description of the study (guanfacine for PONV) . 
If they are interested, potential participants will be given a consent to read and ask questions. After all their questions 
have been answered, they will sign the consent if they wish to participate. Study drug will be administered with a few 
sips water.  IV pre -med should consist of no more than 2  mg midazolam.  
 
Total time under general anesthesia (induction to extubation) will be recorded along with the number of times pressors  
are administered .  No non -depolarizing muscle relaxant will be administered to avoid the need for reversal agents and 
the associated confounding factor.  
 
In PACU, the maximum nausea score (nVRS ) 0-10 will be recorded , where 0 = none and 10 = maximum,  along with 
the number of times an anti -emetic i s required .  Maximum pain score (VAS) along with morphine equivalents will  
also be recorded.  PACU length of stay (LOS) will also be recorded . PACU times may be obtained from the PACU 
records.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Abstract  
Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) and post -op pain are the most common problems after 
all types of surgery  and the two major factors delaying post -anesthesia care unit (P ACU) discharge .  
PONV has an incidence of 20 -30% if untreated . Pain after surgery is commonly treated with 
narcotics  which can potentiate PONV, further delaying PACU  discharge.  In multiple studies, 
alpha -2 agonists such as clonidine and dexmedetomidine reduce both the incidence of PONV and 
post-op pain, as well as requirements for postoperative analgesics. These actions are mediat ed via 
central alpha -2A receptors (A2 AR). Of the A2 AR agonists, guanfacine (GF) , though a weak 
antihypertensive agent,  has the highest  selectivity  for the A2AR, but  to date is untested  for its 
potential to treat either PONV or post -op pain. In this double blind, placebo -controlled study, we 
will evaluate ora l guanfacine versus placebo in  patients undergoing sinus surgery  for its potential 
to reduce PONV and pain in the PACU.  
 
Background  
Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV)  and pain  are the most common causes of Post 
Anesthesia Care Unit ( PACU ) discharge  delay , with untreated PONV occuring in 20 -30% of post -
surgical patients.  1  In addition to the immediate discomfort, p atien ts who suffer with these 
symptom s may develop  malad aptive behavioral changes. Furthermore, managing PONV and pain  
increases PACU staffing  requirements  and the direct cost of care.  
Because  of the published efficacy of alpha -2 agonists  in reducing  PONV and pain , 
anesthesiologists at Vanderbilt University Medical Center  commonly employ oral, generic off -
label guanfacine (GF) pre-operatively with a perceived reduction in these symptoms .  
1.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
In efforts to i mprove the postoperative course  of their patients, anesthesiologists have admin istered 
several medications with mixed results. Pr opofol, ketamine, lidocaine,  and opioids  have been 
shown to have varying  effects in reducing (and sometimes increasing) PONV and pain  in the 
PACU. Over the last few years , alpha -2 adrenergic receptor (A2 -AR) agonists have  gained 
popularity as effective agents for reducing these symptoms .  By more selectively targeting the 
A2AR, Dexmed etomidine (DEX) reduces PONV, pain and anxiety with greater hemodynamic 
stability , but at significantly greater cost.  Guanfac ine (GF) is the oldest A2 -AR agonist  in clinical 
use in this class  and the least expensive (10 ₵/mg). Also, GF is  the most highly selective for the 
5 
 
alpha -2A receptor subtype 2 and the least sedating. 3 GFs effects on PONV and pain are unstudied, 
but it has been used orally for more than 35 years for hypertension, and more than 20 years for 
managing ADHD . 4  
2.1  PONV  
In preventing PONV, 5 the mechanism of the A2 -AR agonists is not perfectly clear , though both 
CL and DEX have vagolytic , anti-dysrhythmic effects 6 as well as concomitant anti -sialagogue 
and airway drying acti ons. These effects likely  arise from brainstem actions at A2 -AR in the do rsal 
motor nucleus of the vagus, the area postrema, and the nucleus tractus solitarius.  7 
2.2    Pain  
Both CL and DEX are well studied  for pain management, with actions on br ainstem and spinal 
dorsal horn A2 -AR. Mechanisms 2 include a reduction of central sensitization and upregulation of 
NO synthase. 8 Furthermore, as a result of the presen ce and similarity of mu opioid and A2 -AR 
(both Gi/o GPCRs) in locus coeruleus, cross reactivity of the natural ligands at these receptors in 
LC likely confers (via GIRK channels) the A2-AR descending central analgesic effects. 9 
2.4       Previous Studies   
Zhao , et al., 18 recently studied 90 patients, 30/group, undergoing thyroidectomy and receiving  
intraoperativ e infusions of either 0.4 or 0.8 mcg/kg/hr DEX  vs placebo . The DEX groups  had ~1-
3-fold lower pain scores  (VAS: 0.4 group: 1.50+/ -0.52; 0.8 Group: 0.80+/ -0.63 vs. Placebo 2.50+/ -
0.52)  in the PACU , as well as a substantially lower incidence of PON V (0.4 Group: 3.3%; 0.8 
Group: 0%; Placebo: 13.3% ). In a systematic r eview and meta -analysis of 30 studies of 
perioperative A2-AR agonist use  (aggregate 1,792 pts, 933 receiving DEX or clonidine) , 
Blaudszun et  al. validated the use of alpha -2 agonists in the reduction of postoperative pain (and 
reduced opioid requirements ) and PON V at one hour, without prolonging PACU times.  19 
Tufanogullari et al . also showed that dexmedetomidine reduced total morphine equivalents as well 
as nausea based on an 11 -point verbal rating scale (VRS).  
The effectiveness of  GF in reducing Post -op pain and  PONV has never been studied . However,  
since GF is t he most selective A2-AR agonist in clinical use, w e believe the reduction of  
postoperative pain and PONV  seen with clonidine and dexmedetomidine can be reproduced (and 
potentially  surpassed) with GF .  
 
6 
 
 
2.5       Hypothesis   
As a primary endpoint, w e hypothesize that patients undergoing  a standardized general anesthetic 
for sinus surgery and are  randomized t o receive GF  vs Placebo  will have 20-30% lower PONV  
scores  in PACU , as measured by the 10-point nausea scale  (nVRS) previously used in other 
studies . Secondarily, we  hypothesize that patients receiving GF will have  less pain as measured by 
visual/verbal analog (VAS) scores  and total morphine equivalents (ME) administ ered in PACU  
than patients receiving p lacebo , without  significant hemodynamic instability . 
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
3.1  Inclusion Criteria  
 VUMC patients undergoing sinus surgery in MCE OR . 
 Adults aged 18 and older  
 
3.2   Exclusion Criteria  
 Patients who do not meet t he inclusion criteria  
 Inability to read and freely consent  
 Patients who take alpha -2 agonists routinely (guanfacine, clonidine , tizanidine )  
 Patients undergoing sinus surgery planned for greater than 3 hours  
 Patients  with signific ant pre-existing pain, on chronic pain (opioid, methadone) 
therapy, severe fibromyalgia or other pre-existing pain  condition  in any body part   
 Patients with p re-op nausea/vomiting  at baseline . 
 Pregnant or lactating women.  
 
4.0 Enrollment  
Patients identified as candidates by primary criteria (above inclusion/exclusion listing) will be 
interviewed immediately prior to surgery to determine suitability and patient willingness to 
participate in the study. After receiving complete information an d a description of the study, 
patients accessioned will give written consent. On pre -op administration,  Pt. Name, MRN  and 
Study Drug Envelop e Number ( SDE# ) will be logged into the Study Database in REDCap and 
reported directly to IPS with a completed Study Drug Administration Sheet, either by hand or by 
FAX .  
 
7 
 
 
5.0      Study Procedures   
5.1 Statistical Analysis and Power  
The effect of guanfacine administration on pain and nausea scores will be assessed using 
proportional odds logistic regression. The odds of greater pain or nausea associated with 
guanfacine administration will be summarized using the odds ratio and Wald -type 95% 
confidence interval and Wald test against the null hypothesis of no effect (odds ratio equal to 
one).  
 
The study design and t esting procedure were simulated to study the statistical power. The 
distribution of pain and nausea scores in the placebo and guanfacine groups were assumed to 
have the distributions illustrated in the figure below, which correspond to a difference in mean  
score of 1.5 points, or an (ordinal) odds ratio of 0.25. Taking this as the minimum detectable 
effect, 80 randomized subjects are needed to achieve 90% power.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

8 
 
 
5.2 RANDOMIZATION  
Subjects will be randomized to one of TWO GROUPS: Group A : Forty (40 ) patients will receive 
GF 1 mg orally; OR, Group B : Forty (40 ) patients will receive a similar appearing placebo 
(containing no drug) from numbered study drug envelopes (SDE) prepared by Vanderbilt’s 
Investigational Pharmacy Service (IPS) which will indep endently randomize the drug envelopes 
and maintain the Master Drug Study Log.  
 
5.3 POWER ANALYSIS  
5.4      STUDY METHODS  
 5.41 PRE -OP 
  a. Consent ; Demographics; 25 
b. NO PRE -OP ADJUNCTS   
Ketamine, gabapentin, acetaminophen, droperidol, promethazine, haloperidol, other 
buterophenones or phenothiazines  will not  be administered .  
 5.42      ANESTHESIA MANAGEMENT   
The general anesthetic administered will be standardized as follows:  
a. Premedication : Midazolam 0 - 2 mg IV  
b. Induction: Fentanyl: 0.5 -2 mcg/kg; Lidocaine: 1 -2 mg/kg; Propofol: 1 -
3 mg/kg; SUX: 0.5 -1.5 mg /kg  
c. Maintenance:  with inhalational agent and hydromorphone.  
d. Emergence : Hydromorphone in 0.25 mg increments as deemed  
appropriate by anesthesia t eam and a standardized dose of o ndanse tron 
(4 mg) in keeping with routine practice.  
5.43 PACU : Hydromorphone for pain and ondansetron for PONV per 
standardized order set wi ll be administered and documented. IV fluids and oxygen may be 
continued as long as deemed useful by the PACU and Study staff.  
5.5      POST -OP: 
A. PONV  will be quantified by the maximum nVRS .   
B. PAIN  will be evaluated by the maximum Verb al Analog Scale (VAS = 
0 – 10: See Fig. 6). 
C. PACU LOS  will be the duration of PACU Len gth of Stay 
9 
 
 
5.6      DATA COLLECTION  (See Data Sheet and Data Dictionary)  
A. STANDARD ANESTHESIA PRE -OP ASSESSMENT  
B. ANESTHESIA RECORD COPY   
C. COPY OF SIGNED PATIENT CONSENT FOR STUDY  
D. PATIENT DATA SHEET , (PDS) including Transition Times:  
1. Planned Surgical Procedure, Duration  
2. Demographics (age, height, weight, etc.)  
3. Nausea score (nVRS ) and rescue  Tx in PACU  
4. Pain Scores (VAS)  and Tx  in PACU  
5. PACU LOS   
5.7      STUDY CONDUCT:  
5.71  PRE -OP: After soliciting interest and enrolling, written consent  will be 
obtained and basic patient data and pre -op assessments  (Apfel Score  Fig 2 ) performed . 
Patients will receive GF or placebo orally from  a numbered envelope prepared by the IPS 
in a blinded manner. P atien ts will then undergo a standardized general a nesthetic as 
described above . At the conclusion of the  sinus procedure , patient s will  be extubated  as per 
routine  management  and assessed immedia tely with:   
 
5.72  In PACU , assess the following endpoints : 
A. Max Nausea score (nVRS)  
B. PONV Treatment(s)  
C. VAS  (Fig 6) : Assess Pain score  (Verbal Analog Scale rated 1 -10) at 10 
and 60 min  after PACU  arrival  
D. Pain TX: Total Narcotic requirement in  PACU  (Tallied in Morphine 
Equivalents  for PACU stay ) 
E. PACU LOS  
 
6.0      RISKS   
Both PONV and post -op pain are expected risks after surgery. The risk of the use of G F include 
modest hypotension and sedation.  Coincident to the study,  patient s will be undergoing sinus 
10 
 
surgery, but there will be no med ical procedures performed on  patient s as part of the study. To 
protect the patient’s confidentiality, only a limited data set will be created. The PI will check the 
data for completeness after it’ s been collected/ extracted /collated  and verify that all subject 
identifiers except those listed in the limited data set are destroyed once the study is concluded. All 
data will be stored on a password -protected  server in a locked area of the VUMC Departmen t of 
Anesthesiology.  This data will only be accessible by the PI and KSP.  
 
7.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or Others  
Adverse events  will be monitored throughout the study.  These may include any occurrence within 
the study setting  (surgery  itself or the conduct of the anesthetic ), such as unexplained changes in 
vital signs, unexpected surgical complications, prolonged PACU stay, etc. Protocol deviations  will 
be reported separ ately per VHRPP guidelines. The PI of this study will report adverse events to 
the IRB per V HRPP  reporting guidelines.  
 
8.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
8.1 Withdrawal . After Study Drug administration, this study involves only assessment for 
nausea and vomiting ( nVRS)  and pain (VAS)  in the surgical setting of sinus surgery . After patients 
have been enrolled and consented , it is not anticipated that patients will voluntarily withdraw. 
Nevertheless, p atients are free to withdraw at any time, simply by tell ing one of the study 
physicians/managers. However, after enrollment and initial pre -op study assessment, patients may  
withdraw up to the point of anesthetic induction  and surgical procedure, and thereafter , may only 
withdraw when fully awake and alert in P ACU.  
 
8.2 Discontinuation.  This study is designed as intention -to-treat, so once subjects have 
taken the Study Drug, they will be followed per protocol through completion, or up to any time 
they choose to withdraw or an y unspecified Adverse Event that wou ld halt  normal data collection. 
In either event, data obtained to that point in the protocol would be included in the total dataset, 
with reporting of the withdrawal or AE as noted above.   
 
 
 
11 
 
9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
All reasonable efforts will be made to keep a patient’s protected health information (PHI) private 
and confidential.  Patients will be assigned a code to replace names.  There will be limited access 
to medical records and a limited data set  created .  Federal privacy guidelines will be f ollowed 
when using or sharing any protected health information.  
Data will be stored in secured areas on password protected Vanderbilt PCs conforming to the latest 
Vanderbilt IS security policies. Computer databases will be maintained on pas sword protected  
Vanderbilt PCs.  REDCap (see below) servers are housed in a local data center at Vanderbilt, and 
all web -based information transmission is encrypted. REDCap was developed specifically around 
HIPAA -Security guidelines and is recommended to Vanderbilt resear chers by both our Privacy 
Office and Institutional Review Board. All study staff have completed employee education 
regarding patient confidentiality and have completed Human Subjects protection education (CITI 
course) as specified by the V HRPP . 
10.0 Follow -up  
The Perioperative Clinical Research Institute (PCRI) will retain research Records for a period of 
six (6) years after the submission of the final report and closeout procedures on the research project 
for which the Research Records were prepared. Paper cop ies of the research records and/or 
research consent will be held in a secure access area determined by of the Department of 
Anesthesia (PCRI) for 6 years. Any research data that is put in the participants medical record will 
be kept for an unknown length o f time.   
 
11.0  Record Retention  & Data Management   
The retention of the original Research Records will be the responsibility of the Principal 
Investigator on behalf of PCRI, but at all times shall remain the property of PCRI, unless otherwise 
specified by law , regulation or agreement.  The Vanderbilt University Office of Research  will be 
used as a central location for data processing and management. Vanderbilt University, with 
collaboration from a consortium  of ins titutional partners, has developed a software toolset and 
workflow methodology for electronic collection and management of research and clinical trial 
data. REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a secure, web -based application that is 
12 
 
flexible enoug h to be used for a variety of types of research. REDCap provides an intuitive user 
interface that streamlines project development and improves data entry through real -time 
validation rules (with automated data type and range checks). REDCap also provides e asy data 
manipulation (with audit trails for reporting, monitoring and querying patient records) and an 
automated export mechanism to common statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R/S -Plus). In 
addition to traditional data capture functionality, all data collection projects rely on a thorough, 
study -specific data dictionary, defined by all members of the research team in an iterative, self -
documenting process. This iterative development and testing process results in a well -planned and 
individualized data collection strategy.  
 
12.0 References  
1. Dolin SJ, Cashman JN, Bland JM. Effectiveness of acute postoperative pain management: I. 
Evidence from published data. Br J Anaesth. 2002;89(3):409 -423. 
2. Luttinger D, Ferrari R, Perrone MH, Haubrich DR. Pharmacological analysis of alpha -2 
adrenergic mechanisms in nociception and ataxia. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1985;232(3):883 -889. 
3. Yamadera H, Ferber G, Matejcek M, Pokorny R. Electroencephalographic and psy chometric 
assessment of the CNS effects of single doses of guanfacine hydrochloride (Estulic) and clonidine 
(Catapres). Neuropsychobiology. 1985;14(2):97 -107. 
4. Connor DF, Arnsten AF, Pearson GS, Greco GF. Guanfacine extended release for the treatment 
of attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents. Expert Opin 
Pharmacother. 2014;15(11):1601 -1610.  
5. Massad IM, Mohsen WA, Basha AS, Al -Zaben KR, Al -Mustafa MM, Alghanem SM. A balanced 
anesthesia with dexmedetomidine decreases postoper ative nausea and vomiting after laparoscopic 
surgery. Saudi Med J. 2009;30(12):1537 -1541.    
6. Kamibayashi T, Hayashi Y, Mammoto T, Yamatodani A, Sumikawa K, Yoshiya I. Role of the 
vagus nerve in the antidysrhythmic effect of dexmedetomidine on halothane/e pinephrine 
dysrhythmias in dogs. Anesthesiology. 1995;83(5):992 -999. 
7. Unnerstall JR, Kopajtic TA, Kuhar MJ. Distribution of alpha 2 agonist binding sites in the rat and 
human central nervous system: analysis of some functional, anatomic correlates of the  
pharmacologic effects of clonidine and related adrenergic agents. Brain Res. 1984;319(1):69 -101. 
8. Giovannoni MP, Ghelardini C, Vergelli C, Dal Piaz V. Alpha2 -agonists as analgesic agents. Med 
Res Rev. 2009;29(2):339 -368. 
9. Aghajanian GK, Wang YY. Commo n alpha 2 - and opiate effector mechanisms in the locus 
coeruleus: intracellular studies in brain slices. Neuropharmacology. 1987;26(7B):793 -799. 
10. Ittermann T, Volzke H, Baumeister SE, Appel K, Grabe HJ. Diagnosed thyroid disorders are 
associated with de pression and anxiety. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2015.  
11. Baser E, Togrul C, Ozgu E, Esercan A, Caglar M, Gungor T. Effect of pre -procedural state -trait 
anxiety on pain perception and discomfort in women undergoing colposcopy for cervical 
cytolog ical abnormalities. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(7):4053 -4056.  
12. Benarroch EE. The locus ceruleus norepinephrine system: functional organization and potential 
clinical significance. Neurology. 2009;73(20):1699 -1704.  
13. Goldman -Rakic PS. Cellular bas is of working memory. Neuron. 1995;14(3):477 -485. 
14. Wang M, Gamo NJ, Yang Y, et al. Neuronal basis of age -related working memory decline. 
Nature. 2011;476(7359):210 -213. 
13 
 
15. Goldman -Rakic PS. Circuitry of the frontal association cortex and its relevance to dementia. Arch 
Gerontol Geriatr. 1987;6(3):299 -309. 
16. Hunt RD, Arnsten AF, Asbell MD. An open trial of guanfacine in the treatment of attention -
deficit hyperactivity disor der. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1995;34(1):50 -54. 
17. Arnsten AF, Jin LE. Guanfacine for the treatment of cognitive disorders: a century of discoveries 
at Yale. Yale J Biol Med. 2012;85(1):45 -58. 
18. Zhao X, Tong D, Long B, Wu X. [Effects of diffe rent doses of dexmedetomidine on the recovery 
quality from general anesthesia undergoing thyroidectomy]. Zhonghua Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi 
Xue. 2014;26(4):239 -243. 
19. Blaudszun G, Lysakowski C, Elia N, Tramer MR. Effect of perioperative systemic alpha2 
agonists on postoperative morphine consumption and pain intensity: systematic review and meta -
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Anesthesiology. 2012;116(6):1312 -1322. 
20. Lin TF, Yeh YC, Lin FS, et al. Effect of combining dexmedetomidine and morphine for 
intravenous patient -controlled analgesia. Br J Anaesth. 2009;102(1):117 -122. 
21. Gurbet A, Basagan -Mogol E, Turker G, Ugun F, Kaya FN, Ozcan B. Intraoperative infu sion of 
dexmedetomidine reduces perioperative analgesic requirements. Can J Anaesth. 2006;53(7):646 -
652. 
22. Ozkose Z, Demir FS, Pampal K, Yardim S. Hemodynamic and anesthetic advantages of 
dexmedetomidine, an alpha 2 -agonist, for surgery in prone position . Tohoku J Exp Med. 
2006;210(2):153 -160. 
23. Tufanogullari B, White PF, Peixoto MP, et al. Dexmedetomidine infusion during laparoscopic 
bariatric surgery: the effect on recovery outcome variables. Anesth Analg. 2008;106(6):1741 -
1748.  
24. Stroup WW. General ized Linear Mixed Models: Modern Concepts, Methods and Applications.  
Chapman & Hall/CRC Press; 2013.  
25. Rago R, Forfori F, Materazzi G, et al. Evaluation of a preoperative pain score in response to 
pressure as a marker of postoperative pain and drugs cons umption in surgical thyroidectomy. Clin 
J Pain. 2012;28(5):382 -386. 
26. Hicks JA, Jenkins JG. The measurement of preoperative anxiety. J R Soc Med. 1988;81(9):517 -
519. 
27. Charlson ME, Charlson RE, Peterson JC, Marinopoulos SS, Briggs WM, Hollenberg JP. Th e 
Charlson comorbidity index is adapted to predict costs of chronic disease in primary care patients. 
J Clin Epidemiol. 2008;61(12):1234 -1240.  
28. Apfel CC, Laara E, Koivuranta M, Greim CA, Roewer N. A simplified risk score for predicting 
postoperative nau sea and vomiting: conclusions from cross -validations between two centers. 
Anesthesiology. 1999;91(3):693 -700. 
29. Aubrun F, Langeron O, Quesnel C, Coriat P, Riou B. Relationships between measurement of pain 
using visual analog score and morphine requiremen ts during postoperative intravenous morphine 
titration. Anesthesiology. 2003;98(6):1415 -1421.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
13.0 Testing Regimens  
 
Fig 3 . Verbal/ Visual  Analog Pain Sc ore (VAS)  29:  
NO PAIN ---------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------- WORST PAIN  
    0------- 1------- 2------- 3------- 4------- 5------- 6------- 7------- 8------- 9------- 10 
  At 10, 30, and 60 min  after PACU arrival ask patient  to verbally score their pain on this scale . 
 
 
 
Data Dictionary - 
1. Patient Data Sheet , (PDS) will include all data collected on each individual:  
A. Planned Surgical Procedure  (all sinus surgeries not greater than 3 hours )  
B. Demographics : Data identifying characteristics of each patient, including  
Age, Gender, Height, Weight, MRN, etc.)  
2. POST -OP: 
A. Anesthetic  Duration  – Difference between  induction and extubation recorded in the 
Anesthesia Record; PACU Entry Time  
B. PONV  will be quantified by a Nausea Verbal Reporting Scale (nVRS), 0 -10 
C. PAIN  will be evaluated by Verbal A nalog S cale (VAS = 0 – 10). (See Fig. 3 )  
D. PACU LOS   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 