PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL 
 
Version: March 8, 2017 
 
 1 Title: Pharmacologically improving the pharyngeal muscle activity during sleep: implications for the novel 
treatment of  obstructive sleep apnea.  
Principal Investigator:  David Andrew Wellman, MD, PhD 
 
I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by repetitive collapse or ‘obstruction’ of the pharyngeal 
airway during sleep. Over the last decade, and particularly in the last few years, research has shown that a 
number of pathogenic factors, or traits, c ontribute to the development of OSA  (1-4).  These include: 1) an 
anatomically small, collapsible upper airway; 2) an oversensitive respiratory control system leading to 
ventilatory overshoots and undershoots, i.e., instability; 3) a loss of pharyngeal musc le tone or 
responsiveness during sleep; and 4) a low respiratory arousal threshold, i.e., premature arousal to respiratory 
stimuli. 
 
Despite our improved understanding of the pathogenesis of OSA, it has not led to improved therapy.  
Continuous positive air way pressure (CPAP) is still the only viable treatment for most patients, and it is 
usually effective because it mechanically splints the upper the airway open.  The problem, however, is that 
many patients cannot use CPAP because they find it intolerable.  This represents a significant health 
concern, as OSA is known to cause a number of adverse cardiovascular   (5-12), neurocognitive (13) , and 
daytime functioning  (14) consequences.  
 
One possible approach to finding alternative treatments for OSA is to conti nue searching for a single drug 
or agent that, like CPAP, has a large enough effect size to override the various causes of OSA.  This approach has proven difficult, and while we hold out hope for such a drug, in the meantime we have adopted another (possibly equally effective) tactic, which is to target the relevant upstream mechanisms or 
individual traits with one or more drugs in an individual patient .  The rationale for this approach is that 
non-CPAP therapies have tended to have small effect sizes and p roven, by themselves, marginally effective 
at fully correcting OSA in many patients.  Another reason stems from the manner in which most major medical disorders are treated.  Rarely is a single drug used to treat, for example, congestive heart failure, 
hypertension, asthma, etc., unless the condition is mild.  In our view, a similar approach should be taken 
for managing OSA.  
 
Regardless of whether single or multidrug therapy is ultimately used, the search for alternative treatments 
has been lacking a very i mportant ingredient – a drug to stimulate the pharyngeal muscles . While a host of 
oral devices and surgeries have been developed to address the anatomical predisposition to collapse, and our group has made significant headway in dealing with ventilatory control sensitivity  (15, 16) , drugs that 
activate the pharyngeal muscles are needed. Interestingly, new research in animals has improved our 
understanding of the state -dependent neurotransmitters involved in pharyngeal muscle activation during 
sleep. Importantly, the loss of noradrenergic activity is now thought to play the key role in the sleep-related 
hypotonia of pharyngeal muscles.  
 
Chan and colleagues (17)  showed in rats that the noradrenergic antagonist terazosin substantially reduced 
genioglossus (a m ajor muscle of the upper airway) activity (EMGGG) during wakefulness and produced 
REM -like atonia during NREM sleep, illustrating the importance of noradrenergic mechanisms. Other 
studies (18, 19)  also support the notion that progressive withdrawal of nora drenergic tone, from 
wakefulness to NREM and REM sleep, is the major mechanism causing sleep -related pharyngeal 
hypotonia. While noradrenergic withdrawal is thought to be the main cause of pharyngeal hypotonia in 
NREM sleep, there are additional mechanisms that cause further reduction in REM sleep.  Chan and 
colleagues (17) failed to reverse REM atonia with alpha-1 receptor agonists applied to the hypoglossal 
PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL 
 
Version: March 8, 2017 
 
 2 nucleus, suggesting that another, possibly inhibitory, mechanism is at work. Horner and colleagues have 
identified this inhibitory process as muscarinic by demonstrating restoration of EMGGG activity during 
REM sleep with the muscarinic antagonist scopolamine (20, 21) .  More recently, these researchers found 
that the multiple state -dependent adrenergic, serotonergic and muscarinic systems produce suppression  of 
EMG GG activity during sleep via a convergent ionic mechanism: increased potassium conductance.  
Blockade of potassium channels has been shown in m ice to be capable of reactivating the pharyngeal 
musculature throughout sleep (22) . 
 
 
However, due to the only recent identification of this process, there has not yet been an attempt to stimulate 
the pharyngeal muscles with noradrenergic drugs in sleeping  humans.  Now, more than ever, the stage has 
been set for stimulating the pharyngeal muscles across both NREM and REM sleep.  
 II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
To determine the effect of noradrenergic,  antimuscarinic and potassium channel blocker  drugs on 
pharyngeal muscle activity during sleep. We hypothesize that existing drugs with these neurotransmitter profiles could (partially) restore pharyngeal muscle activity in humans during sleep.   
 
Specifically, we will test this hypothesis by assessi ng;  
The effect of the combination of atomoxetine (a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor) plus fesoterodine (a 
newer, extended -release antimuscarinic drug)  on OSA severity  (DAW1033 B2). Fesoterodine is an 
extended -release antimuscarinic with less reported side effects compared to oxybutynin. Fesoterodine could 
be a good candidate for a long-term therapy in subjects with OSA and the data collected in this pilot study 
will help to design a long -term clinical trial to test th e efficacy of this association for the treatment of OSA.  
1.  
 
III. SUBJECT SELECTION  
We will recruit a group of subjects with OSA. These subjects will be recruited from the community and be between 21 -65 years old. The purpose of studying patients with OSA is to determine what effect this drugs 
will have on improving the patient’s OSA severity.  
 
a) Obstructive Sleep Apnea Patients (n= 15 ): Patients with OSA will be recruited from our clinical 
sleep laboratory at Brigham and Women’s Hospital , as well as from our existing database of OSA 
patients . These individuals will be otherwise healthy (except for well -controlled  hypertension ; 
defined as systolic blood pressure < 140 mmHg and diastolic < 90 mmHg ) with no active medical 
problems and on no medication that could af fect respiration or muscle control. All will be 21 -65 
years of age. Both men and women will have an apnea-hypopnea index (AHI)  >15 events/hr during 
supine NREM sleep. These individuals will be recruited to encompass a large range of AHI ’s (from 
10 to >60/hour).   
 
Exclusion criteria:  
− Any medical condition other than well controlled hypertension, GERD, hyperlipidemia . 
− Any medication known to influence breathing, sleep/arousal or muscle physiology.  
− Claustrophobia . 
− Inability to sleep supine . 
− Allergy to lidocain e, Oxymetazoline HCl, d esipramine, atomoxetine /oxybutynin , dalfampridi ne, 
pseudoephedrine HCl, diphenhydramine . 
PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL 
 
Version: March 8, 2017 
 
 3 − Benign prostatic hyperplasia or urinary retention, which can be exacerbated by antimuscarinics . 
− Individuals with underlying cardiac disease, such as arrhythmias.  
− Individuals taking psychiatric medications, such as Tricyclic antidepressants, or any of the studied 
medications for medical care.  
− History of seizures  
− History of m oderate or severe renal impai rment  
− For women: Pregnancy.  
 Equal number of males and females will be recruited , recognizing that OSA is a more prevalent condition 
in men . We will consider all applicants regardless of sex, race, color, creed, or national origin.  
 
IV. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
 
Subjects will be recruited through email, telephone, newspaper, and or bulletin advertisements. Men and 
women with OSA will be recruited from a pool of patients being newly diagnosed with OSA and currently 
followed in our outpatient clinic or by advertisement in the sleep disorders clinic. Only patients who have 
stated in the initial clinical questionnaire that they are interested in hearing about research studies will be 
contacted by phone. Should the subject be interested in the study, they can call the study physician or 
coordinator to inquire about study participation. We will also recruit from our existing database of research 
participants.  
 
Subjects who respond will be given a thorough review of the risks, discomforts, potential benefits to the study and their expe cted involvement  using a prepared script approved by our Institutional Review Board.  
Subjects will be given a copy of the informed consent and allowed a minimum of 24 hours to review the information and make a decision on study participation.  During this time, the subject will have the 
opportunity to discuss the research with his/her primary care physician or clinician. The study investigators 
will be available to answer any questions should any arise. Informed consent will be obtained by the 
Principal Inve stigator or an experienced co -investigator prior to participation in the study. The opportunity 
to talk to a licensed MD (who is readily available at the time of consent, and available overnight at the hospital) will be offered in each case. Subjects will have more than 24 hours to consider participating in the 
study. Any consent issues / problems will be reported to the PHRC in real time rather than waiting to report 
at the time of Continuing Review  
  
Inclusion and exclusion criteria will be carefully assessed prior to enrollment. Assuming subjects meet the 
inclusion criteria, they will begin the protocol by scheduling their overnight studies in the 
clinical/physiology laboratories. Subjects will be informed that they may withdraw from the study at any 
point, with  no impact on their ongoing care. We have not previously had difficulty enrolling participants 
into similar studies performed in our laboratory.  
 If the data collected will be considered insufficient by the PI or by the co -investigators, the subject  will be 
asked to repeat the whole study or a part of it without signing a new informed consent form.  
  
V. STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
Protocol:  
PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL 
 
Version: March 8, 2017 
 
 4 Two overnight sleep studies will be performed approximately 1 week apart: a placebo night and a 
atomoxetine -plus -fesoterodine  (DAW1033B2) night, in double -blinded randomized control design. For 
each night, the s ubjects will arrive at the sleep laboratory at approximately 7:00pm. A physician will 
perform  a comprehensive physical and medical history.  The placebo or ato moxetine -plus -fesoterodine 
(80+4mg)  will be administered 30 minutes before lights out.  
 
Measurements and equipment :  
Subjects will be instrumented with standard pol ysomnography (PSG)  recording sensors. Sleep stage and 
arousals will be measured with electrodes pasted on to the scalp, face, chin and chest (EEG, EOG, EKG, 
chin EMG). Paste -on EMG electrodes will be placed over the anterior tibialis muscle to detect leg 
movements. Respirat ory effort belts will be placed around the chest and abdomen to measure breathing 
movements. Oxygen saturation will be measured continuously with a pulse oximetry probe placed on either 
the fingertip or earlobe. Snoring will be detected with a small microp hone positioned over the suprasternal 
notch. Body position will be recorded with a sensor taped to the thoracic belt. Each of these devices is 
standard for diagnostic PSG and should not be uncomfortable.  
 
Data analysis : 
Apnea, hypopneas, sleep stages and arousals from  sleep will be scored by a registered technician blinded 
to the treatment allocation. Hypopneas will be defined as a 30% reduction of the amplitude of the nasal 
pressure signal associated with an arousal from sleep or a 3% desaturation.  
 
 
Reim bursement  
Subjects will receive $1 00/night for participation in each overnight study  (TOTAL  = $200 for each 
PART of the study ). Reimbursement for parking expenses will be provided.  
If the subjects will repeat a part or the entire protocol because of insuf ficient data collection, they will 
be reimbursed $100 for any extra night.  
  
VI. BIOSTATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
 
Subjects will be  prospectively enrolled until 1 2 had completed both study nights. Sample size was chosen 
to facilitate detection of a clinically -important  50±5 5% reduction in AHI. Calculations were based on 
previous studies conducted in our laboratory . To account for a ~2 0% failure rate approximately 1 5 patients 
will be enrolled  in the study .  
In order to reduce the influence of potential outlier, data will be expressed as median [interquartile range] 
and data on placebo vs DAW1033B2  will be compared using Wilcoxon test. A p value < 0.05 will be 
considered as statistically significant.  
 
VII. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS  
 
We believe that the risks associated with partici pation in this study are minimal. All study procedures have 
been conducted in our laboratory without serious incident. Anticipated risks and discomforts are listed 
below:  
 1. The equipment used for assessing sleep (paste on electrodes) is standard and poses no risk. The 
electrodes may be mildly uncomfortable and could cause some sleep interruption. Thus subjects may 
feel somewhat tired the day following this study.  
PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL 
 
Version: March 8, 2017 
 
 5  
2. Atomoxetine : Side effects include alopecia, dry mouth, tiredness, irritability, nausea, decreased 
appetite, constipation, dizziness, sweating, dysuria, sexual problems, decreased libido, urinary retention 
or hesitancy, increased obsessive behavior, weight changes, sl owed growth in children, palpitations, 
increases in heart rate and blood pressure.   
 
3. Fesoterodine: the most common side effects of fesoterodine 4 mg extended release in previous 
clinical trials  were dry mouth and constipation. Less frequent side effects w ere abdominal pain, 
dry eyes, dyspepsia and urinary retention.    
 
 
VIII.  POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 Although it is unlikely that there will be any direct physical benefit to the subjects from participating in this 
study, we will make known to each subject, if requested , some of the information we have gathered from 
this physiologic testing. This study provides a unique opportunity to gain insight into the specific 
mechanisms by which these novel drugs may improve upper airway muscle function. The results may, in 
the fut ure, lead to improved strategies for the treatment of sleep apnea. However, if previously unknown 
abnormalities of sleep and breathing are encountered, this information will be passed onto the subject. Results can be forwarded to the primary care physician  or clinician at the request of the subject.  
  
IX. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
We will follow the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan included as an attachment. As this study is 
a physiological investigation and not clinical trial, a formal Data and Safety Monitoring Board will 
not be implemented. The PI will be responsible for monitoring safety and quality assurance. 
Additionally, the ongoing results, problems, and limitations of the study will be presented on a regular basis to the investigators in the Division of Sleep Medicine. Any adverse events will be 
promptly reported to the Human Research Committee for review according to HRC guidelines.  
 
Adequacy of Protection Against Risks 
 
All of our laboratory personnel involved in the research of human subje cts have completed the required 
institutional program for education in the protection of human research participants and their confidentiality.   The institutional educational program consists of the review of regulatory and 
informational documents pertaining to human-subject research, passing a test demonstrating knowledge of 
the ethical principles and regulations governing human-subject research and signing a statement of 
commitment to the protection of human subjects.   
 
All electronic data will be store d on secure computers under password protection with no access allowed 
to individuals outside of our research team.  All paper data will be stored under lock and key with access 
only given to the study staff.                        
 
Protection Against Risk s 
 
PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL 
 
Version: March 8, 2017 
 
 6 We believe that all possible safeguards are in place to minimize the risk.  However, several steps will be 
taken to insure patient comfort and safety.  We will work with our IRB to come up with a safety 
monitoring plan to minimize risk and discomfort.  This will include: 
• Reporting any complications of our studies immediately to the IRB.  
• Appoint a safety officer ( David  Andrew Wellman , MD) who will work with our physicians and 
technicians to maximize safety and comfort.  
• Our study coordinator will call each subject 2 -3 weeks after the study to determine if any 
problems resulted from the study.  
 
The study coordinator will meet with the safety officer and PI monthly (and as needed) to go over any complaints or problems. The safety officer will call the patien ts with problems directly to verify important 
issues.  If problems are identified, the protocol will be adjusted as needed.  Based on conversations with 
the NIH and the NHLBI policy ( http://www.nh lbi.nih.gov/funding/ethics.htm
), we will not require a formal 
data safety monitoring board. However, we do have a thorough data safety monitoring plan whereby our 
safety officer will review all adverse events in order to classify them as serious adverse ev ents, minor 
adverse events, and whether they are anticipated or unanticipated, and study related or unrelated as per our IRB rules and the NHLBI policy. The medical monitor will be an academic physician with considerable 
experience in clinical research but  not involved in our research program or a co-investigator in any of our 
studies (Dr. David White) .  The medical monitor will strictly adhere to the following definitions: 
 
Definitions  
Definitions are per January 2007 OHRP  Guidance on Reviewing and Reporting Unanticipated Problems 
Involving Risks to Subjects or Others and Adverse Events, OHRP Guidance,   
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/AdvEvntGuid.htm   
Adverse Event (AE) :  any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a human subject, including 
any abnormal sign (for example, abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, 
temporally associated with the subject’s participation in the research, whether or not consider ed related 
to the subject’s participation in the research.  
  
Serious adverse event (SAE):   any adverse event that:   
• Results in death  
• Is life threatening, or places the subject at immediate risk of death from the event as it occurred  
• Requires or prolongs hospitalization  
• Causes persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
• Results in congenital anomalies or birth defects  
• Is another condition which investigators judge to represent significant hazards  
 
Unanticipated Problem (UP):  any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all of the following 
criteria:   
• unexpected, in terms of nature, severity, or frequency, given the research procedures that are 
described in the protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -approved research pr otocol and 
informed consent document; and the characteristics of the subject population being studied;  
• related or possibly related to participation in the research, in this guidance document, possibly 
related means there is a reasonable possibility that t he incident, experience, or outcome may have 
been caused by the procedures involved in the research;  
PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL 
 
Version: March 8, 2017 
 
 7 • suggests that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of harm (including physical, 
psychological, economic, or social harm) than was prev iously known or recognized.  
 
Adverse Events (FDA) versus Unanticipated Problems (OHRP)   
• All adverse events are not necessarily unanticipated problems  
• All unanticipated problems are not necessarily adverse events  
• Some events may be both  
 
  
PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL 
 
Version: March 8, 2017 
 
 8 X. REFERENCES  
 
1. Eckert DJ, White DP, Jordan AS, Malhotra A, Wellman A. Defining phenotypic causes of 
obstructive sleep apnea. Identification of novel therapeutic targets. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2013;188:996 -1004.  
2. Wellman A, Eckert DJ, Jordan AS, Edwards BA, Passagl ia CL, Jackson AC, Gautam S, Owens 
RL, Malhotra A, White DP. A method for measuring and modeling the physiological traits causing 
obstructive sleep apnea. J Appl Physiol 2011;110:1627-1637.  
3. Wellman A, Edwards BA, Sands SA, Owens RL, Nemati S, Butler JP,  Passaglia CL, Jackson AC, 
Malhotra A, White DP. A simplified method for determining phenotypic traits in patients with obstructive 
sleep apnea. J Appl Physiol 2013.  
4. Younes M. Contributions of upper airway mechanics and control mechanisms to severity of  
obstructive apnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003;168:645-658.  
5. Somers VK, Dyken ME, Clary MP, Abboud FM. Sympathetic neural mechanisms in obstructive 
sleep apnea. J Clin Invest 1995;96:1897- 1904.  
6. Nieto FJ, Young TB, Lind BK, Shahar E, Samet JM, Redline S, D'Agostino RB, Newman AB, 
Lebowitz MD, Pickering TG. Association of sleep -disordered breathing, sleep apnea, and hypertension in 
a large community -based study. Sleep heart health study. Jama 2000;283:1829-1836.  
7. Brooks D, Horner RL, Kozar LF, Rend er-Teixeira CL, Phillipson EA. Obstructive sleep apnea as 
a cause of systemic hypertension. Evidence from a canine model. J Clin Invest 1997;99:106-109.  
8. Peppard PE, Young T, Palta M, Skatrud J. Prospective study of the association between sleep -
disorder ed breathing and hypertension. The New England journal of medicine 2000;342:1378 -1384.  
9. Hung J, Whitford EG, Parsons RW, Hillman DR. Association of sleep apnoea with myocardial 
infarction in men. Lancet 1990;336:261 -264.  
10. Wessendorf TE, Teschler H, Wang YM, Konietzko N, Thilmann AF. Sleep -disordered breathing 
among patients with first-ever stroke. J Neurol 2000;247:41-47.  
11. Hoffstein V. Blood pressure, snoring, obesity, and nocturnal hypoxaemia. Lancet 1994;344:643-
645. 
12. Shahar E, Whitney CW, Redline S, Lee ET, Newman AB, Nieto FJ, O'Connor GT, Boland LL, 
Schwartz JE, Samet JM. Sleep -disordered breathing and cardiovascular disease: Cross-sectional results of 
the sleep heart health study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;163:19-25.  
13. Redline S, Stra uss ME, Adams N, Winters M, Roebuck T, Spry K, Rosenberg C, Adams K. 
Neuropsychological function in mild sleep-disordered breathing. Sleep 1997;20:160-167.  
14. Findley LJ, Unverzagt ME, Suratt PM. Automobile accidents involving patients with obstructive 
sleep apnea. Am Rev Respir Dis 1988;138:337- 340. 
15. Edwards BA, Sands SA, Eckert DJ, White DP, Butler JP, Owens RL, Malhotra A, Wellman A. 
Acetazolamide improves loop gain but not the other physiological traits causing obstructive sleep apnoea. 
J Physiol 2012;590:1199-1211.  
16. Wellman A, Malhotra A, Jordan AS, Stevenson KE, Gautam S, White DP. Effect of oxygen in 
obstructive sleep apnea: Role of loop gain. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2008;162:144-151.  
17. Chan E, Steenland HW, Liu H, Horner RL. Endogenous excitatory drive modulating respiratory 
muscle activity across sleep -wake states. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006;174:1264-1273.  
18. Lai YY, Kodama T, Siegel JM. Changes in monoamine release in the ventral horn and hypoglossal 
nucleus linked to pontine inhibition of muscle tone: An in vivo microdialysis study. J Neurosci 
2001;21:7384 -7391.  
19. Fenik VB, Davies RO, Kubin L. Rem sleep -like atonia of hypoglossal (xii) motoneurons is caused 
by loss of noradrener gic and serotonergic inputs. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;172:1322- 1330.  
PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL 
 
Version: March 8, 2017 
 
 9 20. Grace KP, Hughes SW, Shahabi S, Horner RL. K+ channel modulation causes genioglossus 
inhibition in rem sleep and is a strategy for reactivation. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2013;18 8:277-288.  
21. Grace KP, Hughes SW, Horner RL. Identification of the mechanism mediating genioglossus 
muscle suppression in rem sleep. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013;187:311-319.  
22. Grace KP, Hughes SW, Horner RL.  Identification of a p harmacological target for g enioglossus 
reactivation  throughout sleep. Sleep  2014;37(1):41-50.  
23. Jordan AS, White DP, Lo YL, Wellman A, Eckert DJ, Yim -Yeh S, Eikermann M, Smith SA, 
Stevenson KE, Malhotra A. Airway dilator muscle activity and lung volume during stable breathi ng in 
obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep 2009;32:361-368.  
24. Jordan AS, White DP, Owens RL, Eckert DJ, Rahangdale S, Yim -Yeh S, Malhotra A. The effect 
of increased genioglossus activity and end -expiratory lung volume on pharyngeal collapse. J Appl Physiol 
(1985) 2010;109:469-475.  
25. Stanchina ML, Malhotra A, Fogel RB, Ayas N, Edwards JK, Schory K, White DP. Genioglossus 
muscle responsiveness to chemical and mechanical stimuli during non -rapid eye movement sleep. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2002;165:945- 949. 
 
 
 
  