STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 SYNOPSIS 4
2 INTRODUCTION 7
2.1 BACKGROUND AND R ATIONALE 7
2.2 BENEFITS AND RISKS TO S UBJECTS 7
3 OBJECTIVES AND ENDPO INTS 8
3.1 PRIMARY ENDPOINT 9
3.2 SECONDARY ENDPOINTS 9
3.3 OTHER EFFICACY ENDPOINTS 9
3.4 SAFETY ENDPOINTS 10
3.5 PHARMACOKINETIC /PHARMACODYNAMIC ENDPOINTS 10
4 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN 11
4.1 OVERALL STUDY DESIGN AND PLAN 11
4.2 DISCUSSION OF STUDY DESIGN 14
5 STUDY ACTIVITIES 15
5.1 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 15
5.2 PROHIBITED MEDICATIONS AND T HERAPY 16
5.3 PRIOR AND CONCOMITANT T HERAPY 17
5.4 WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS AND DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY 17
5.5 FOLLOW -UP FOR SUBJECT DISCONTINUATION OF STUDY DRUG OR FROM S TUDY 18
5.6 STUDY DRUG 18
5.7 RANDOMIZATION/D RUG ASSIGNMENT 19
5.8 PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS 20
6 SAFETY CONSIDERATION S 20
6.1 COMPLAINTS AND ADVERSE EVENTS 20
6.2 OTHER SAFETY DATA COLLECTION 23
7 STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATION OF SAMPLE SIZE 24
7.1 STATISTICAL AND ANALYTICAL PLANS 24
Page 2 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.2 DEFINITION FOR ANALYSIS POPULATIONS 24
7.3 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR EFFICACY 24
7.4 STATISTICAL ANALYSES FOR SAFETY 25
8 ETHICS 25
8.1 INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD 25
8.2 ETHICAL CONDUCT OF THE S TUDY 25
8.3 SUBJECT CONFIDENTIALITY 25
9 SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM CO MPLETION 25
10 DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE 25
11 COMPLETION OF THE ST UDY 26
12 REFERENCES 26
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. STUDY SCHEMATIC 13
LIST OF APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS 27
APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR 29
APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES 30
APPENDIX D. ACTIVITY SCHEDULE 31
APPENDIX E. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES 37
APPENDIX F. OPERATIONS MANUAL 38
Page 3 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie. Proportion of subjects with suppression of the physical 
signs of puberty (breast development in females; 
testicular volume or genital development in males) at 
each scheduled assessment using modified Tanner 
staging.
 Incremental growth rate (cm/year) at eac h scheduled 
assessment.
 Ratio of change from Baseline in bone age/change from 
Baseline in chronological age at each scheduled 
assessment.
 Other efficacy endpoints:
 Peak stimulated LH concentrations at each scheduled 
assessment.
 Number and percentage of sub jects who fail suppression 
of peak stimulated LH per primary endpoint analysis at 
each scheduled assessment.
 Number and percentage of female subjects with 
menstrual bleeding.
 Change from Baseline in basal and peak stimulated LH 
and FSH, as well as basal an d stimulated estradiol (for 
females) and testosterone (for males), to each scheduled 
assessment.
 Ratio and change from Baseline in the ratio of bone age 
to chronological age at each scheduled assessment.
 Regression or no progression in pubic hair in both f emales 
and males.
 Change from Baseline in uterine length, uterine volume, 
and ovarian volume to each scheduled assessment.
 Number and percentage of subjects with endometrial 
stripe presence by baseline endometrial stripe presence 
status (yes/no) at each scheduled assessment.
 Change from Baseline in testicular length (cm), penile 
length (cm), and penile width (cm) by physical 
examination, and in testicular volume by Prader beads to 
each scheduled assessment.
 Change from Baseline in BMI standardized score to each 
scheduled assessment.
 Change from Baseline in height standardized score to 
each scheduled assessment.
 PedsQL and PROMIS questionnaires at each scheduled 
assessment.
 Safety evaluations are adverse event monitoring, physical 
examinations, vital sign mea surements, LA 45 mg injection site 
reactions, hormonal flare and acute- on-chronic (AOC) 
response, and clinical laboratory testing.
Page 5 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2INTRODUCTION
2.1 Background and Rationale
Why This Study is Being Conducted
Central precocious puberty (CPP) is an orphan disease that affects the pediatric population.  
Gonadotropin -releasing hormone agonists (GnRHa) are the treatment of choice for CPP.  The goal of 
therapy is to suppre ss pituitary gonadotropins (luteinizing hormone [LH] and follicle -stimulating 
hormone [FSH]) and peripheral sex steroids (estradiol and testosterone) and to arrest premature 
progression of secondary sexual characteristics.  Children with CPP may require ex tended therapy (up to 
10 years) to achieve continuous hormonal suppression until they reach an age at which the patient, 
family, and practitioner agree that puberty should resume.
Leuprolide acetate (LA) is a GnRHa that is approved in the United States (US ) and other countries for the 
treatment of children with CPP.  It is marketed as Lupron Depot -PED® in the US.  Lupron Depot is also 
approved in the US and other countries for the treatment of prostate cancer, endometriosis, and uterine 
leiomyomata.  Lupron Depot -PED is available in 1 -month formulations (7.5, 11.25, and 15 mg) and 
3-month formulations (11.25 and 30 mg) for the treatment of children with CPP in the US.
The Lupron Depot 45 mg 6 -month dose is approved for the treatment of adults with prostate c ancer; 
this is the same formulation that is being investigated for use for treatment of CPP and contains the 
same active ingredient as the 1 -and 3 -month formulations of Lupron Depot -PED in a prefilled dual 
chamber syringe.
The currently approved Lupron De pot-PED regimens for CPP require 4 to 12 injections per year.  The 
need for frequent injections can cause distress for both the child and the parents (or legal guardians) 
and may require absences from school for the child and absences from work for parents (or legal 
guardians).  While longer -acting GnRHa treatments (implants) are available, these treatments require 
general anesthesia to surgically place and remove.  Development of a longer -acting depot formulation 
for children with CPP would reduce the numb er of injections and provide more treatment options for 
health care providers; a longer -acting formulation may also reduce the number of occurrences of 
injection site pain, which is the most commonly reported adverse event related to treatment of children 
with CPP with Lupron Depot -PED (see Section 2.2).  LA 45 mg 6 -month has not been studied in children 
with CPP.
2.2 Benefits and Risks to Subjects
The b enefits of treatment with LA for children with CPP are well documented:  improvements in the 
signs and symptoms of CPP, suppression of pubertal gonadotropin and/or sex steroid levels, halting the 
progression and/or promoting the regression of Tanner stages, and slowing or halting of epiphyseal 
closures that may lead to an increase in final adult height.1
The overall safety of Lupron Depot -PED 11.25 mg 3 -month and 30 mg 3 -month is well characterized, 
with approximately  doses having been administered to pediatric patients worldwide, 
representing approximately  patient -years of exposure.  In ad dition, Lupron Depot -PED 11.25 mg 
Page 7 of 85 

STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3-month and 30 mg 3 -month were evaluated in a study in children with CPP (Study L -CP07 -167)2and in a 
36-month extension study (Study L -CP07 -177).3  The safety profile of LA 45 mg 6 -month in c hildren with 
CPP is expected to be similar to that of the approved Lupron Depot -PED formulations for the treatment 
of CPP with similar hormonal changes (initial flare effect with corresponding LH/estradiol/testosterone 
elevations followed by a rapid declin e to prepubertal levels).
Since LA 45 mg 6 -month is administered as an intramuscular injection, injection site pain following 
dosing is a potential safety risk.  Injection site pain following Lupron Depot dosing was the most 
commonly reported adverse event in children with CPP in Study L -CP07 -167 (Lupron Depot -PED 11.25 
and 30 mg 3 -month formulations); injection site pain was also a commonly reported adverse event in 
adults with prostate cancer in a 6 -month study of the 45 mg formulation (Study L -PC07 -169).  Injection 
site pain occurred in 26% of pediatric subjects in the 30 mg group and 19% of pediatric subjects in the 
11.25 mg group in Study L -CP07 -167.  Injection site pain occurred in 18% of adult subjects with prostate 
cancer in the 45 mg 6 -month study ( Study L -PC07 -169).
All adverse events of injection site pain in pediatric subjects were mild to moderate in intensity in the 
11.25 mg 3 -month and 30 mg 3 -month groups in Study L -CP07 -167, with the exception of a severe 
adverse event of injection site pain in 1 subject in the 30 mg group.  Similarly, in Study L -CP07 -177 (an 
extension of Study L -CP07 -167), only 1 severe event of injection site pain was reported (1 subject in the 
11.25 mg group).  No increase in incidence over time or worsening in intensity was apparent.
See the current package inserts for a more comprehensive listing of known and potential safety risks 
and benefits.
3OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS
Objectives and Hypotheses
Primary
To assess the safety and efficacy of LA 45 mg 6 -month depot formulatio n for the treatment of CPP in 
children who are either naïve to treatment with a GnRHa or who have been previously treated with a 
GnRHa.
The hypotheses corresponding to the primary objective are that treatment of children with CPP with LA 
45 mg 6 -month is well tolerated and effectively maintains continuous hormonal suppression following 
administration.  Administration of 1 intramuscular dose of LA 45 mg 6 -month provides sufficient 
leuprolide serum concentrations to achieve suppression of LH (determined by pe ak stimulated LH 
< 4mIU/mL) at Week 24 in children with CPP.
Secondary
To evaluate the pharmacokinetic profile and pharmacodynamics of leuprolide following intramuscular 
administration of the LA 45 mg 6 -month depot formulation in subjects with CPP.
Page 8 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.1 Primar y Endpoint
The primary efficacy endpoint is the proportion of subjects with suppression of GnRHa -stimulated LH 
(<4 mIU/mL) at Week 24 after the first dose of study drug but before the Week 24 dose.
3.2 Secondary Endpoints
Secondary endpoints:
Proportion of su bjects with suppression of GnRHa -stimulated LH (< 4 mIU/mL) at Weeks 12, 2 0, 
44, and 48.
Proportion of female subjects with suppression of basal estradiol to < 20 pg/mL at Weeks 12, 20, 
24, 44, and 48.
Proportion of male subjects with suppression of testos terone to < 30 ng/dL at Weeks 12, 20, 24, 
44, and 48.
Proportion of subjects with maintenance of suppression of GnRHa -stimulated LH (< 4 mIU/mL) 
at Weeks 72, 96, 120, and 144.
Proportion of female subjects with maintenance of suppression of basal estradiol to < 20 pg/mL 
at Weeks 72, 96, 120, and 144.
Proportion of male subjects with maintenance of suppression of testosterone to < 30 ng/dL at 
Weeks 72, 96, 120, and 144.
Proportion of subjects with suppression of the physical signs of puberty (breast developm ent in 
females; testicular volume or genital development in males) at each scheduled assessment using 
modified Tanner staging.4,5
Incremental growth rate (cm/year) at each scheduled assessment.
Ratio of change from Baseline in bone age/change from Baseline in chronological age at each 
scheduled assessment.
3.3 Other Efficacy Endpoints
Other efficacy endpoints:
Peak stimulated LH concentrations at each scheduled assessment.
Number and percentage of subjects who fail suppression of peak stimulated LH per primary 
endpoint analysis at each scheduled assessment.
Number and percentage of female subjects with menstrual bleeding.
Change from Baseline in basal and peak stimulated LH and FSH, as well as basal and stimulated 
estradiol (for females) and testosterone (for males), to each scheduled assessment.
Ratio and change from Baseline in the ratio of bone age to chronological age at each scheduled 
assessment.
Page 9 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Regression or no progression in pubic hair in both females and males.
Change from Baseline in uterine length, uterine volume, and ovarian volume to each scheduled 
assessment.
Number and percentage of subjects with endometrial stripe presence by baseline endometrial 
stripe presence status (yes/no) at each scheduled assessment.
Change from Baseline in testicular length (cm), penile length (cm), and penile width (cm) by 
physical examination, and in testicular volume by Prader beads to each scheduled assessment.
Change from Baseline in body mass index (BMI) standardized score to each scheduled 
assessment.
Change from Baseline in height standardized score to each scheduled assessment.
Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL) and Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement 
Information System (PROMIS) questionnaires at each scheduled assessment.
3.4 Safety Endpoints
Adverse events, physical examinations, vital sign measurements, LA 45 mg injection site reactions, 
hormonal flare and acute -on-chronic (AOC) response, and clinical laboratory test results will be assessed 
throughout the study.
3.5 Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Endpoints
The pharmacokinetics of leuprolide will be evaluated using population phar macokinetic analysis.  
Furthermore, the relationship between leuprolide pharmacokinetics and clinical response 
(pharmacodynamics of leuprolide measured as LH, testosterone [males], and estradiol [females]) in 
children with CPP will be examined.
The objecti ves of this population pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic analysis are as follows:
To estimate the mean pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic (LH, testosterone [males], and 
estradiol [females]) parameters in a population of pediatric subjects with CPP.
To inves tigate and identify fixed effect sources of variability (covariates) that may influence the 
pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics of leuprolide.
To estimate the magnitude of inter -individual variability of the parameters.
To measure the random residual variabi lity.
Serum leuprolide and gonadotropin/sex hormone concentrations will be modeled using an appropriate 
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic model to describe factors that influence leuprolide 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic response in children with CPP.
Other parameters, including parameters that describe leuprolide absorption characteristics, may be 
estimated if useful in the analysis.
Page 10 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.4INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN
4.1 Overall Study Design and Plan
Study M16 -904 is a Phase 3, open -label, multicenter study that will be conducted in 2 parts (Parts 1 and 
2) at approximately 20 sites (US and Puerto Rico).  The safety, efficacy, pharmacokinetics, and 
pharmacodynamics of the LA 45 mg formulation administer ed with a 6 -month dosing interval in children 
with CPP will be evaluated.  Approximately 40 subjects who were previously treated with GnRHa 
therapy (minimum of 15 previously treated subjects) or who are naïve to previous GnRHa treatment 
(minimum of 15 naïv e subjects) will be enrolled in the study.  See Section 5for information regarding 
eligibility criteria.
LH and sex steroid suppression and pubert al symptom progression will be assessed.  Efficacy endpoints 
are based on hormonal suppression.  Stabilization or regression of signs of puberty and effects on bone 
age and growth rate will be evaluated.
The total duration of the study (Parts 1 and 2) will be 160 weeks as follows:
Part 1:  52 weeks (4 -week screening period + 48 -week treatment period)
Part 2:  108 weeks (additional 96 -week treatment period + 12 -week follow -up period)
The Screening Period may be extended in certain circumstances (e.g., pendi ng laboratory test results) 
following consultation with the sponsor .
Part 1:   The safety, efficacy, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of the LA 45 mg 6 -month dose 
will be evaluated in subjects with CPP from Baseline to Week 48.  In all subjects, blood samples for 
efficacy assessments (analysis of LH, FSH, testosterone concentrations [males], and estradiol 
concentrations [females]) will be collected at Baseline and at Weeks 1, 4, 12, 20, 24, 44, and 48 after 
dosing.  In the first subjects who are enroll ed (20 subjects total, with at least 8 naïve and 8 previously 
treated), concentrations of leuprolide will be measured at each study visit following administration of LA 
45 mg 6 -month to characterize the leuprolide concentration- time profile, rate of absorp tion, and 
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic relationship of leuprolide and LH.  Investigative sites will be notified 
when the pharmacokinetic subset has been fulfilled.
Leuprolide and appropriate measures of efficacy (LH, FSH, estradiol in females, testoster one in males) 
will be monitored upon data availability to evaluate the appropriateness of the 24 -week dosing interval 
for the 6 -month formulation for CPP.
Part 2:   Following completion of Part 1 assessments, subjects will continue to Part 2 of the study 
(extension period) to evaluate long -term administration of LA 45 mg 6 -month (up to 24 months).  Study 
visits during the extension period will start at Week 48 and continue once every 24 weeks for 96 weeks 
(24 months) until the subject discontinues treatment of LA 45 mg 6 -month or withdraws from the study.  
Subjects will be assessed for continued maintenance of LH suppression and safety throughout this 
extension period.
Page 11 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Note:  Week 48 is the end of Part 1 and also the start of Part 2.  See Appendix D of the protocol and 
Section 2 of the Operations Manual for details.
Some of the study visits and visit activities (including but not limited to clinical labo ratory tests and 
concomitant medication assessment) may be conducted in a non-hospital/clinic environment (e.g., the 
subject 's home) by qualified individuals at the request of the Investigator and with the agreement of 
AbbVie , the subject, and subject 's parent or legal guardian .
If a subject cannot come to the site because of an unforeseen circumstance (e.g., the COVID -19 
pandemic), study visits may be conducted virtually by site staff (e.g., by phone or video) or by a qualified 
home healthcare nurse in a n on-hospital/clinic environment (e.g., the subject 's home) at the request of 
the investigator and with the agreement of the subject 's parent or legal guardian.  AbbVie should be 
notified if this occurs.
Details of the study procedures are located in the Ope rations Manual ( Appendix F ).
A schematic of the study is shown in Figure 1.
Page 12 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Figure 1. Study Schematic
Children with CPP (N = ~40)
AOC = acute -on-chronic; CPP = central precocious puberty; E2 = estradiol; T = testosterone ; FSH = follicle -stimulating hormone; IM = intramuscular; LH = luteinizing hormone; 
PK/PD = pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
a. At the beginning of Part 2, half of the subjects will be randomly selected for AOC biochemical assessments 48 hours after the injection of study drug at Weeks 48, 72, 96, 
and 120.
b. For subjects randomly selected for AOC biochemical assessments 48 hours after the injection of study drug at Weeks 48, 72, 96, and 120, a single telephone a ssessment will 
take place 7 days following the injection of study drug.  For subjects not selected for the AOC biochemical assessments, a telephone assessment will take place 1 day and 7 days 
following the injection of study drug at Weeks 48, 72, 96, and 120.
Notes: The Screening Period may be extended in certain circumstances (e.g., pending laboratory test results) following consultation with the sponsor.  Week 0 = Day 1 (Baseline).  
See Operations Manual ( Appendix F ) for details of the study schematic.
Page 13 of 85 
    
      
    
             
              
  
  
     
     
    
             
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Rescreening
Subjects who initially fail screening may be permitted to rescreen following re -consent.  Sites must 
contact the AbbVie Therapeutic Area Medical Director (TA MD) to confirm whether subjects should or 
should not be rescreened.  The subject must meet all eligibility criteria at the time of rescreening to 
qualify for the study.  There is no minimum period of time a subject must wait to rescreen.
Laboratory assessments will not need to be repeated for subjects in rescreening if the time between 
screening and rescreening is less than 28 days; however, laboratory assessments will need to be 
repeated at Baseline if the time between laboratory assessments during previous Screening and 
Baseline is greater than 28 days.
4.2 Discussion of Study Design
Choice of Control Group
For ethical reasons, this study does not have a placebo control group, as intervention in this patient 
population is essential, and treatment should start immediately to maximize possible benefits of GnRHa 
treatment.  Also, for ethical reaso ns, this study does not have an active control group, as differences in 
dosing frequencies would require sham injections.
Appropriateness of Measurements
Standard statistical, clinical, and laboratory procedures will be used in this study.  All efficacy 
measurements in this study are standard for assessing disease activity in subjects with CPP.  All clinical 
and laboratory procedures in this study are standard and generally accepted.6
Suitability of Subject Population
Both treatment -naïve subjects and those who were previously treated with a G nRHa were selected for 
this study, as both populations may benefit from the proposed extended dosing interval either as initial 
therapy or maintenance therapy, respectively.
Selection of Doses in the Study
The LA 45 mg 6 -month dose in this study was chosen to extend the dosing interval to reduce the 
number of injections.  The formulation chosen for this study is the same as the approved Lupron Depot 
45 mg 6 -month dose for prostate cancer and contains 45 mg of LA in a prefilled dual chamber syringe.  
LA is t he same active ingredient as in the approved Lupron Depot -PED 11.25 mg 3 -month and 30 mg 
3-month CPP formulations.  The injection volume for the 45 mg 6 -month dose is also the same as that in 
the approved 11.25 mg 3 -month and 30 mg 3 -month CPP formulations .  The same prefilled, dual 
chamber syringes and needles are used for the 3 -month and 6 -month formulations.
The average monthly dose of LA with a 45 mg 6 -month dose is expected to be 7.5 mg because of the 
sustained release characteristics of the 45 -mg form ulation.  This is consistent with that of the lower 
dose, shorter -duration formulations.  This monthly exposure to leuprolide is identical to the lowest 
Lupron Depot -PED dose that is approved in the US (7.5 mg 1 -month formulation) and is half that of the 
highest approved Lupron Depot -PED dose (15 mg 1 -month formulation).
Page 14 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5STUDY ACTIVITIES
5.1 Eligibility Criteria
Subjects must meet all of the following criteria to be included in the study.  Anything other than a 
positive response to the questions below will resu lt in exclusion from the study.
Consent
1.Parent or legal guardian has voluntarily signed and dated an informed consent form, 
approved by an institutional review board (IRB), after the nature of the study has been 
explained and the subject and the subject's parent or legal guardian has had the opportunity to 
ask questions.  The informed consent must be signed before any study -specific procedures are 
performed or before any concomitant medication is discontinued for the purpose of the study. 
Pediatric subjects will be included in all discussions in order to obtain verbal and/or written 
assent.
Disease Activity
2.Children with a diagnosis of CPP, either treatment -naïve or previously treated with a GnRHa.
3.Chronological age at the appearance of pubertal changes < 8 years in females and < 9 years in 
males at Day 1 of the study.
Demographic and Laboratory Assessments
4.Bone age advancement over chronological age at least 1 year at time of CPP diagnosis or 
first GnRHa therapy.
5.Bone age < 13 years for females and < 14 years for males.
6.In general good health with no uncontrolled, clinically significant disease that could interfere 
with bone maturation or mask the objectives of this protocol as assessed by the investigator.
7.No abnormal laboratory value that suggests a clinically significant underlying disease or 
condition that may prevent the subject from entering the study.
8.Willing and able to comply with procedures required in this protocol.
9.No diagnosis of short stature, i.e., more than 2.25 SD below the mean height for age (growth 
chart assessment).
Subject History
10.No diagnosis of incomplete precocious puberty, peripheral precocious puberty; evidence of 
any abnormal pituitary, hypothalamic, adrenal, thyroid, and gonadal function other than 
premature secretion of gonadotropins not adequately controlled; no unstable i ntracranial 
tumors (unresponsive to treatment/expanding) except hamartoma.
Page 15 of 85 
          
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.11.No concomitant medical condition that, in the opinion of the investigator, may expose a 
subject to an unacceptable level of safety risk or that affects subject complianc e.
12.No history of clinically significant medical conditions or any other reason that the 
investigator determines would interfere with the subject's participation in this study or would 
make the subject an unsuitable candidate to receive study dr ug.
13.No history of an allergic reaction or significant sensitivity to constituents of the study drug 
(and its excipients) and/or other products in the same class.
Pregnancy
14.A negative serum pregnancy test for female subjects ≥ 10 ye ars of age at Screening and 
negative urine pregnancy test on Day 1 prior to study drug administration.  For female subjects 
<10 years of age, pregnancy tests may be performed at Screening and on Day 1 at the discretion 
of the principal investigator.
Conc omitant Medications
15.Must have discontinued therapy with medroxyprogesterone acetate, growth hormone, 
insulin- like growth factor -1 (IGF -1), or estrogen or testosterone preparations at least 5 half -lives 
or 4 weeks prior to Screening, whichever i s longer.
16.Must not have been treated with any investigational drug within 30 days or 5 half -lives of 
the drug (whichever is longer) prior to Screening or is currently enrolled in another clinical 
study.
Additional Criteria for Subjects Naïve to GnRHa treatment
17.Females 2 –8 years of age, inclusive, or males 2 –9 years, inclusive, on Day 1.
18.Pretreatment pubertal response to GnRHa stimulation test (LH ≥ 6 mIU/mL) at Screening.
19.Breast pubertal staging (modifie d Tanner) of at least 2 in females; testicular volume of at 
least 4 cc in males at Screening.
Additional Criteria for Subjects Previously Treated with a GnRHa
20.Females 2 –10 years of age, inclusive, or males 2 –11 years of age, inclusive, on Day 1.
21.Must have been on GnRHa therapy for at least 6 months prior to Day 1.
22.Should have documented maintenance of LH suppression as evidenced by peak stimulated 
LH < 4 mIU/mL at Screening.
5.2 Prohibited Medications and Therapy
All other investigational drugs are prohibited during the study.
Page 16 of 85 
              
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Any medications with a known positive or negative effect on either growth or the assessment of sex 
steroids will not be permitted for use during the study.  Examples are as follows:
GnRH agonists other than study drug*
GnRH antagonists
High dose corticosteroids (e.g., doses greater than hydrocortisone 5 mg/m2body surface 
area/day)
Growth hormone
IGF-1
Testosterone
Estrogen
*The GnRH agonist required to perform the stimulation test is allowed dur ing the study (see Operations 
Manual Section 3. 15).
5.3 Prior and Concomitant Therapy
Any medication or vaccine (including over -the-counter or prescription medicines, vitamins, and/or 
herbal supplements) that the subject is receiving within 30 days prior to Sc reening, at the time of 
enrollment, and during the study must be recorded through the 12 -week follow -up phone call.
All medications used to treat the subject's CPP in the last 12 months prior to Screening, including all 
GnRHa medications, will be recorded in the appropriate electronic case report form (eCRF).
Any questions regarding concomitant or prior therapy should be raised to the AbbVie emergency 
contact (TA MD).  Information regarding potential drug interactions with LA is located in the Lupron 
Depot package insert.
5.4 Withdrawal of Subjects and Discontinuation of Study
Study subjects and/or their parent or legal guardian have the right to prematurely withdraw from the 
study at any time.
The investigator may discontinue any subject's participation for any reason, including an adverse event, 
safety concerns, or failure to comply with the protocol.
Subjects will be withdrawn from the study immediately if any one of the following occurs:
Clinically significant abnormal laboratory results or adverse events, which rule out continuation 
of study drug, as determined by the Investigator or the AbbVie TA MD.
The subject requests withdrawal from the study.
It is in the subject's best medical interest.
Page 17 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Eligibility criteria violation was noted after the subject started study drug and continuation of 
study drug would place the subject at risk.
Introduction of prohibited medications or dosages and continuation of study drug would place 
the subject at risk.
An adverse event occurs that the investigator feels is detrimental to the subject.
The subject requires treatment with another drug that will interfere with evaluation of the 
investigational product.
Subject is significantly noncompliant with study procedures, which would put the subject at risk 
for continued participation in the trial.
Subject demonstrates severe allergic reaction to the investigational product.
Subject is pregnant.
Subject is not adequately suppressed on therapy as evidenced by peak stimulated LH level of 
≥ 4mIU/mL at or after Week 24 and subject has an accelerated progression of pubertal 
symptoms any time after Week 24, specifically > 1 -stage progression in breast or genitalia (not 
pubic hair) from the last visit as assessed by the same individual, if possible .
For subjects to be considered lost to follow -up, reasonable attempts must be made to obtain 
information on the subject's final status.  At a minimum, 2 phone calls must be made and 1 certified 
letter must be sent and documented in the subject's source documentation.
AbbVie may termina te this study prematurely, either in its entirety or at any site.  The investigator may 
also stop the study at his/her site if he/she has safety concerns.  If AbbVie terminates the study for 
safety reasons, AbbVie will promptly notify the investigator.
5.5 Follow-Up for Subject Discontinuation of Study Drug or from Study
To minimize missing data, subjects who prematurely discontinue study drug treatment should continue 
to be followed for all regularly scheduled visits, unless subjects and their parent or legal guardian have 
decided to discontinue study participation entirely (withdrawal of informed consent).  Subjects and their 
parent or legal guardian should be advised on the continued scientific importance of their data even if 
they discontinue treatment with study drug early.
If a subject prematurely discontinues study participation (withdrawal of informed consent), the 
procedures outlined for the Premature Discontinuation visit should be completed as soon as possible, 
preferably within 2 weeks.  In addition, if the subject and parent or legal guardian is willing, a 12 -week 
follow -up phone call after the last visit may be completed to ensure all treatment -emergent adverse 
events/serious adverse event (SAE) have been resolved.
5.6 Study Drug
LA 45 mg 6 -month drug pr oduct, manufactured by Takeda Pharmaceuticals for AbbVie, will be injected 
intramuscularly beginning on Day 1, and will be administered by study site staff under the supervision of 
Page 18 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.the principal investigator or designee.  In unforeseen circumstances (e.g., the COVID -19pandemic ), the 
study drug injection may be administered by a home healthcare nurse at the subject 'shome.  Details are 
provided in Operations Manual Section 3.19.
LA 45 mg 6 -month drug product will be provided by AbbVie in quantities sufficie nt to accommodate the 
study design.  Each kit will be labeled per local requirements, and this label must remain affixed to the 
kit.  Upon receipt, study drug should be stored at controlled room temperature (15° to 25°C/59° to 77°F) 
and kept in a secure lo cation.  Each kit will contain a unique kit number.  This kit number is assigned to a 
subject via interactive response technology (IRT) and encodes the appropriate study drug to be 
administered at the subject's corresponding study visit.  The site staff wi ll complete the blank space on 
the label with the subject number before administering the study drug.  Study drug will only be used for 
the conduct of this study.
AbbVie will provide instructions for drug preparation (refer to Section 7.3 of the Operations Manual).
AbbVie, the sponsor of this study, will source the generic LA aqueous solution for the GnRHa stimulation 
test and provide it to participating sites.  The generic LA aqueous solution will either be from a 
US-registered source or an ex -US registere d source (an investigative product comparable with the 
US-registered material).  If a label is mandated by local agencies, a label may be applied.  There may be 
times when the sponsor is unable to provide the generic LA aqueous solution.  Under these 
circu mstances, participating sites have the option to obtain this product through an external licensed 
pharmacy or wholesaler or from local site supplies.  In unforeseen circumstances (e.g., the COVID -19
pandemic ), the GnRHa stimulation test may be performed bya home healthcare nurse at the subject 's 
home.  Details are provided in the Operations Manual Section 3.1 5.
5.7 Randomization/Drug Assignment
All subjects in this study will receive the same treatment; therefore, subjects will not be randomized.
All subjects will be assigned a unique identification number by the IRT at the screening visit.  For 
subjects who rescreen, the screening number assigned by the IRT at the initial screening visit should be 
used.  Enrollment will be limited by previous treatment status to ensure that a minimum of 15 subjects 
are treatment naïve and that a minimum of 15 subjects are previously treated with a GnRHa.
At Baseline, the IRT will assign 20 subjects to the pharmacokinetic subset.  The first subjects enrolled in 
the study will au tomatically be assigned to the pharmacokinetic subset for collection of blood samples 
for the quantification of leuprolide concentration, with a minimum of 8 subjects naïve to GnRHa 
treatment (maximum of 12 subjects) and a minimum of 8 subjects who have be en previously treated 
with a GnRHa (maximum of 12 subjects).
At the beginning of Part 2, using the IRT system, half of the subjects will be randomly selected to have 
AOC biochemical assessment 48 hours after the injection of study drug at Weeks 48, 72, 96, and 120.  
Randomization will be stratified based on previous GnRHa treatment status (treatment -naïve or 
previous treated with a GnRHa).  The randomization schedule will be generated and kept by the 
statistics department at AbbVie and a copy will be forwarded to the IRT provider.
Page 19 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.5.8 Protocol Deviations
AbbVie does not allow intentional/prospective deviations from the protocol except when necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to study subjects.  The investigator is responsible for comp lying with all 
protocol requirements, written instructions, and applicable laws regarding protocol deviations.  If a 
protocol deviation occurs (or is identified), the investigator is responsible for notifying the independent 
review board (IRB), regulatory authorities (as applicable), and AbbVie.
6SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
6.1 Complaints and Adverse Events
Complaints
A complaint is any written, electronic, or oral communication that alleges deficiencies related to the 
physical characteristics, identity, quality, puri ty, potency, durability, reliability, safety, effectiveness, or 
performance of a product/device.  Complaints associated with any component of this investigational 
product must be reported to AbbVie.
Product Complaint
A product complaint is any complaint related to the biologic or drug component of the product or to the 
medical device component(s).
For a product this may include, but is not limited to, damaged/broken product or packaging, product 
appearance whose color/markings do not match the labeling, l abeling discrepancies/inadequacies in the 
labeling/instructions (e.g., printing illegible), missing components/product, device not working properly, 
or packaging issues.
Product complaints concerning the investigational product and/or device must be report ed to AbbVie 
within 24 hours of the study site's knowledge of the event.  Product complaints occurring during the 
study will be followed up to a satisfactory conclusion.
Medical Complaints/Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events
An adverse event is defin ed as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject or clinical investigation 
subject administered a pharmaceutical product and which does not necessarily have a causal 
relationship with this treatment.  An adverse event, therefore, can be any unfavorable a nd unintended 
sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use 
of a medicinal (investigational) product , whether or not the event is considered causally related to the 
use of the product.
Any worsening of a pre -existing condition or illness is considered an adverse event.  Worsening in 
severity of a reported adverse event should be reported as a new adverse event.  Laboratory 
abnormalities and changes in vital signs are considered to be adverse events o nly if they result in 
discontinuation from the study, necessitate therapeutic medical intervention, and/or if the investigator 
considers them to be adverse events.
Page 20 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Investigators will monitor each subject for clinical and laboratory evidence of adverse even ts on a 
routine basis throughout the study.  All adverse events will be followed to a satisfactory conclusion.
An elective surgery/procedure scheduled to occur during a study will not be considered an adverse 
event if the surgery/procedure is being perform ed for a pre -existing condition and the 
surgery/procedure was pre-planned prior study entry .  However , if the pre -existing condition 
deteriorates unexpectedly during the study (e.g., surgery performed earlier than planned), then the 
deterioration of the co ndition for which the elective surgery/procedure is being done will be considered 
an adverse event.
If an adverse event, whether associated with study drug or not, meets any of the following criteria, it is 
to be reported to AbbVie clinical pharmacovigilan ceor contract research organization (as appropriate) 
as an SAE within 24 hours after the site becomes aware of the SAE (refer to Section 4.2 of the 
Operations Manual for reporting details and contact information) :
Death of Subject An event that results in the death of a subject.
Life-Threatening An event that, in the opinion of the investigator, would have 
resulted in immediate fatality if medical intervention had not been 
taken.  This does not include an event that would have been fatal if it 
had occurre d in a more severe form.
Hospitalization or 
Prolongation of 
HospitalizationAn event that results in an admission to the hospital for any length 
of time or prolongs the subject's hospital stay.  This does not include 
an emergency room visit or admission t o an outpatient facility.
Congenital Anomaly An anomaly detected at or after birth, or any anomaly that results in 
fetal loss.
Persistent or Significant 
Disability/IncapacityAn event that results in a condition that substantially interferes with 
the activities of daily living of a study subject.  Disability is not 
intended to include experiences of relatively minor medical 
significance such as headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, influenza, 
and accidental trauma (e.g., sprained ankle).
Page 21 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Important Med ical Event 
Requiring Medical or Surgical 
Intervention to Prevent 
Serious OutcomeAn important medical event that may not be immediately life -
threatening or result in death or hospitalization, but based on 
medical judgment may jeopardize the subject and may require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent any of the outcomes 
listed above (i.e., death of subject, life threatening, hospitalization, 
prolongation of hospitalization, congenital anomaly, or persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity).  Add itionally, any elective or 
spontaneous abortion or stillbirth is considered an important 
medical event.  Examples of such events include allergic 
bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room 
or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in 
inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or 
drug abuse.
All adverse events reported from the time of study drug administration until 12 weeks after the end of 
the effect of study drug (24 weeks after the date o f the last administration of study drug) will be 
collected, whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the subject.  In addition, all SAEs and study
procedure -related nonserious adverse events will be collected from the time the subject's parent or 
legal guardian signs the study -specific informed consent until study drug administration .
AbbVie will be responsible for Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions (SUSAR) reporting for 
the Investigational Medicinal Product in accordance with global and local regulations.
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study to identify any of special interest that may 
indicate a trend or risk to subjects.
Adverse Events of Special Interest
The following adverse events of special interest must be captured:
Bone fracture/ osteoporosis/osteopenia
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Neuropsychiatric events
Seizure/convulsion
Injection site reaction*
Hypersensitivity reaction
*All injection site reactions, whether associated with study drug administration or with the stimulation 
test, must be captured as adverse events.  Any injection site reaction that reaches seriousness criteria as 
stated above will be captured as an SAE and rep orted as described.
Adverse Event Severity and Relationship to Study Drug
The investigator will use the following definitions to rate the severity of each adverse event:
Page 22 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Mild:   The adverse event is transient and easily tolerated by the subject.
Moderate:   The adverse event causes the subject discomfort and interrupts the subject's usual activities.
Severe:   The adverse event causes considerable interference with the subject's usual activities and may 
be incapacitating or life -threatening.
The investigator w ill use the following definitions to assess the relationship of the adverse event to the 
use of study drug:
Reasonable Possibility:   After consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic plausibility, 
clinical judgment, and potential alter native causes, there is sufficient evidence (information) to suggest 
a causal relationship.
No Reasonable Possibility:   After consideration of factors including timing of the event, biologic 
plausibility, clinical judgment, and potential alternative causes , there is insufficient evidence 
(information) to suggest a causal relationship.
Pregnancy
While not an adverse event, pregnancy in a study subject must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours
after the site becomes aware of the pregnancy.  Subjects who beco me pregnant during the study must 
be discontinued (Section 5.4).  If a pregnancy occurs in a study subject, information regarding the 
pregnancy and the outcome will be collected.
The pregnancy outcome of an elective or spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, or congenital anomaly is 
considered an SAE and must be reported to AbbVie within 24 hours after the site becomes aware of the 
event.
6.2 Other Safety Data Collection
Disease -Related Events
Abnormal laboratory, diagnostic procedural, or physical examination findings related to the disease 
under study will not be captured as an adverse event, unless the investigator deemed appropriate.  
Findings such as progre ssion of pubertal staging are not considered to be adverse events but should be 
recorded in the subject's source documents and appropriate eCRF.
Drug -Related Events
LA is known to cause gonadotropins and sex steroids to temporarily rise above baseline leve ls because 
of the stimulatory effects of the drug within the first several weeks following initial administration.  
Therefore, an increase in clinical signs and symptoms, such as menses or spotting in females and 
behavioral changes in males, may occur at t his time.  These events should be recorded in the subject's 
source documents and appropriate eCRF. 
The investigator will assess the subject for any LA- related symptoms at office visits or during parent or 
legal guardian phone calls that occur after each i njection of study drug , whether expected or 
Page 23 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.unexpected; any worsening of pre -existing conditions (such as rapid progression of CPP symptoms) will 
be reviewed to determine whether they should be reported as adverse events.
7STATISTICAL METHODS & DETERMINATIO N OF SAMPLE SIZE
7.1 Statistical and Analytical Plans
Complete and specific details of the statistical analysis will be described and fully documented in the 
Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP).  The SAP will be finalized prior to the database lock.  The statistic al 
analyses will be performed using SAS (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, North Carolina, USA).
At the end of Part 1, an analysis of the primary, secondary, and other efficacy variables that were 
collected during Part 1 of the study, along with demographic and safety variables, will be performed 
after the last subject completes the Week 48 assessment.  These analyses will only include data 
collected during Part 1 and will not include data collected during Part 2 or during the Follow -Up Period.  
The database will be versioned for an interim soft lock and any discrepant data will be clarified before 
the versioning.  AbbVie will perform the analyses.
At the end of Part 2, an analysis of the appropriate efficacy and safety variables will be performed after 
the last s ubject completes the study.
7.2 Definition for Analysis Populations
The Full Analysis Set (FAS) consists of all subjects who received at least 1 dose of study drug.  The FAS 
will be used for all efficacy and baseline analyses.
The Safety Analysis Set consists of all subjects who received at least 1 dose of study drug.
7.3 Statistical Analyses for Efficacy
Primary Analysis
The primary efficacy endpoint is the proportion of subjects with suppression of GnRHa -stimulated LH 
(<4 mIU/mL) at Week 24 after the first dose of study drug but before the Week 24 dose.  95% 
confidence interval based on the binomial distribution (Clopper -Pearson exact method) will be provided 
for the primary efficacy endpoint.
Additional details on the primary and other efficacy analyses are prov ided in the SAP.
Sample Size Estimation
No formal sample size calculation was performed.  Based on previous studies and historical precedent 
that was used for registration (N = ~40), 40 subjects are sufficient to support the safety and efficacy for 
this cl ass of compounds in this patient population.  The planned sample size of 40 subjects will provide 
an observed response rate (of suppression of peak stimulated LH) that is within 16.7% of the true 
response rate with 95% confidence.
Page 24 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.4 Statistical Analyses for Safety
Analysis of safety will be detailed in the SAP.
8ETHICS
8.1 Institutional Review Board
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all subject materials will be 
submitted to the IRB for review and approval.  Approval of both the pr otocol and the informed consent 
form(s) must be obtained before any subject is enrolled.  Any amendment to the protocol will require 
review and approval by the IRB before the changes are implemented to the study.  In addition, all 
changes to the consent fo rm(s) will be IRB approved.
8.2 Ethical Conduct of the Study
The study will be conducted in accordance with the protocol, Operations Manual, International Council 
for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) guidelines, 
applicable regulations and guidelines governing clinical study conduct, and the ethical principles that 
have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  Responsibilities of the investigator are specified in 
Appendix B .
8.3 Subject Confidentiality
To protect subjects' confidentiality, all subjects and their associated samples will be assigned numerical 
study identifiers or "codes."  No identifiable information will be provided to AbbVie.
9SOURCE DOCUMENTS AND CASE REPORT FORM 
COMPLETION
The investigator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the 
data reported.  All source documents should be attributable, legible, contemporaneous, original, 
accurate, and complete to ensure accurate interpretation of data.  Clinical site monitoring is conducted 
to ensure that the rights and well -being of human subjects are protected, that the reported trial data 
are accurat e, complete, and verifiable, and that the conduct of the trial is in compliance with the 
currently approved protocol, ICH Good Clinical Practice (GCP), and applicable local regulatory 
requirement(s).
10DATA QUALITY ASSURANCE
AbbVie will ensure that the clinical trial is conducted with a quality management system that will define 
quality tolerance limits to ensure human subject protection and reliability of study results.  Data will be 
Page 25 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.generated, documented, and reported in compliance with the protocol, ICH GC P, and applicable 
regulatory requirements.
11 COMPLETION OF THE STUDY
The end -of-study is defined as the date of the last subject's last visit or the actual date of follow -up 
contact, whichever is later.
12REFERENCES
1.Badaru A, Wilson DM, Bachrach LK, et al. Sequential comparisons of one -month and three -month 
depot leuprolide regimens in central precocious puberty. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2006;91(5):1862 -7.
2.Lee PA, Klein K, Mauras N, et al. Efficacy and safety of leuprolide acetate 3 -month depot 11.25 
milligrams or 30 milligrams for the treatment of central precocious puberty. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2012;97(5):1572 -80.
3.Lee PA, Klein K, Mauras N, et al. 36 -month treatment experience of two doses of leuprolide acetate 
3-month depot for children with central precocious puberty. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2014;99(9):3153 -9.
4.Brown RT. Adolescent growth and development. In: Holland- Hall C, Brown RT, editors. Adolescent 
Medicine Secrets. Philidephia, PA: Hanley & Belfus; 2002. p. 21 -8.
5.Travers S, Slover R. Disorders of Puberty. In: MTM, editor. Endocrine Secrets. 4th ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: 2005. p. 354 -67.
6.Carel JC, Eugster EA, Rogol A, et al. Consensus statement on the use of gonadotropin -releasing 
hormone analogs in children. Pediatr ics. 2009;123(4):e752 -62.
Page 26 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX A. STUDY SPECIFIC ABBRE VIATIONS AND TERMS
Abbreviation Definition
ACTH adrenocorticotropic hormone
AOC acute -on-chronic
ATEMS AbbVie Temperature Excursion Management System
Beta -hCG beta human chorionic gonadotropin
BMI body mass index
CAH congenital adrenal hyperplasia
CDSM clinical drug supply management
COVID -19 Corona virus disease 2019
CPP central precocious puberty
CRO contract research organization
CT computed axial tomography
DFP direct- from -patient
DHEA dehydroepiandrosterone
DTP direct- to-patient
eCRF electronic case report form
FAS full analysis set
FSH follicle -stimulating hormone
GCP Good Clinical Practice
GnRH gonadotropin -releasing hormone
GnRHa gonadotropin -releasing hormone agonist
ICH International Council for Harmonisation o f Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for 
Human Use
IGF-1 insulin -like growth factor -1 
IM intramuscular
IRB Institutional Review Board
IRT Interactive response technology
LA leuprolide acetate
LH luteinizing hormone
MedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
PedsQL Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory
Page 27 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.PRO patient -reported outcome
PROMIS Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System
PT preferred term
SAE serious adverse event
SAP statistical analysis plan
SOC system organ class
SUSAR Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions
TA MD AbbVie therapeutic area medical director
US United States
Page 28 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX B. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATOR
Protocol M16 -904:  A Phase 3, Multicenter, Open -Label, Two -Part Study to Evaluate the Safety, Efficacy, 
Pharmacokinetics, and Pharmacodynamics of Leuprolide Acetate 45 mg 6 -Month Depot Formulation in 
Children with Central Precocious Puberty (CPP)
Protocol Date:  0 5August 2020
Clinical research studies sponsored by AbbVie are subject to the International Council for Harmonisation 
of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and 
local regulations and guidelines governing the study at the site location.  In signing the Investigator 
Agreement, the investigator is agreeing to the following:
1.Conducting the study in accordance with ICH GCP, the applicable regulatory requirements, 
current protocol and operations ma nual, and making changes to a protocol only after notifying 
AbbVie and the appropriate Institutional Review Board (IRB)/Independent Ethics Committee 
(IEC), except when necessary to protect the subject from immediate harm.
1.Personally conducting or supervisi ng the described investigation(s).
2.Informing all subjects, or persons used as controls, that the drugs are being used for 
investigational purposes and complying with the requirements relating to informed consent and 
ethics committees (e.g., IEC or IRB) rev iew and approval of the protocol and its amendments.
3.Reporting complaints that occur in the course of the investigation(s) to AbbVie.
4.Reading the information in the approved full US Prescribing Information/safety material 
provided, including the instructio ns for use and the potential risks and side effects of the 
investigational product(s).
5.Informing all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of the study about 
their obligations in meeting the above commitments.
6.Maintaining adequate and accurate records of the conduct of the study, making those records 
available for inspection by representatives of AbbVie and/or the appropriate regulatory agency, 
and retaining all study -related documents until notification from AbbVie.
7.Maintaining rec ords demonstrating that an ethics committee reviewed and approved the initial 
clinical protocol and all of its amendments.
8.Reporting promptly, all changes in the research activity and all unanticipated problems involving 
risks to human subjects or others, to the appropriate individuals (e.g., coordinating investigator, 
institution director) and/or directly to the ethics committees and AbbVie.
9.Providing direct access to source data documents for study -related monitoring, audits, IEC/IRB 
review, and regulator y inspection(s).
Signature of Principal Investigator Date
Name of Principal Investigator (printed or typed)
Page 29 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROTOCOL SIG NATORIES
Name Title Functional Area
Executive Medical Director General Medicine Clinical Development
Senior Director Statistics Therapeutic Area Head
Medical Director General Medicine Clinical Development
Principal Medical Writer Medical Writing
Program Lead I Clinical Program Development
Director Clinical Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Director Data and Statistical Sciences
Page 30 of 85 

STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX E. PROTOCOL SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Previous Protocol Version
Protocol Date
Version 1.0 08 December 2017
Version 2.0 27 June 2018
The purpose of this amendment is primarily to provide alternative study procedures related to subject 
safety in response to the COVID -19 pandemic.  Other administrative revisions and clarifications, as well 
as template update and typographical corrections were made throughout the protocol.
Alternative study procedures related to subject safety in response to the COV ID-19 pandemic were 
added to the following sections:
Protocol
Section 4.1
Section 5.6
Operations Manual
Section 2
Section 3.8
Section 3.13
Section 3.14
Section 3.15
Section 3.19
Section 3.20
Section 4.2
Section 6.1
Section 6.4
Page 37 of 85 
STUDY M16 -904  |  Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.APPENDIX F. OPERATIONS MANUAL
Page 38 of 85 
p. 2 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.1CONTACTS
Sponsor/Emergency 
Medical Contact 
Therapeutic Area 
Medical Director MD
AbbVie Inc.
1 North Waukegan Road 
North Chicago, IL 60064Office:
Mobile:
Fax:
EMERGENCY 24 -hour Number:   
+1 973 -784-6402
Email:
Safety Concerns Metabolic Safety Team 
AbbVie Inc.
Dept. R48S , Bldg. AP51 -3
1 North Waukegan Road
North Chicago, IL 6 0064Phone: +1 847 -935-7577
Email:
GPRD_SafetyManagement_Hormones @abbvie.com
SAE Reporting outside 
of RAVEPharmacovigilance Fax: +1 847 -938-0660
Email: PPDINDPharmacovigilance @abbvie.com
Protocol Deviations
AbbVie Inc.
Study Management Associate 
III
1 North Waukegan Road 
North Chicago, IL 60064
OR
AbbVie Inc.
Study Project Manager II
1 North Waukegan Road
North Chicago, IL 60064Office:
Mobile: 
Email:
Office:
Mobile:
Fax:
Email:
Certified Clinical 
LaboratoryCovance CLS
8211 SciCor Drive
Indianapolis, IN 46214Phone: +1 866 -762-6209
Bioanalytical 
LaboratoryBioanalysis
AbbVie Inc.
Dept. R46W, Building AP13A
Room 2326
1 North Waukegan Road
North Chicago, IL 60064
inVentiv/Syneos Health, Inc.
2500 rue Einstein
Quebec (Quebec), Canada
G1P 0A2Phone: +1 847 -936-1382
Fax: +1 847 -938-9898
Phone: +1 418 -527-4000
Fax: +1 418 -527-3456
Page 40 of 85 

p. 3 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Bone Age Imaging PAREXEL International, LLC
195 West Street
Waltham, MA 02451Phone: +1 978 -313-3900
Page 41 of 85 
p. 4 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 CONTACTS 2
2 PROTOCOL ACTIVITIES BY VISIT 6
2.1 INDIVIDUAL TREATMENT PERIOD VISIT ACTIVITIES (SCREENING AND PART1) 7
2.2 INDIVIDUAL TREATMENT PERIOD V ISIT ACTIVITIES (PART 2) 12
2.3 INDIVIDUAL POSTTREATMENT PERIOD V ISIT ACTIVITIES 18
3 STUDY PROCEDURES 18
3.1 SUBJECT INFORMATION AND INFORMED CONSENT AND A SSENT 18
3.2 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 19
3.3 MEDICAL AND CPP HISTORY 19
3.4 FAMILY HISTORY 20
3.5 MENSTRUAL HISTORY 20
3.6 ADVERSE EVENT ASSESSMENT 20
3.7 PRIOR AND CONCOMITANT M EDICATIONS 20
3.8 PATIENT -REPORTED OUTCOMES 20
3.9 COMPLETE AND BRIEF PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 21
3.10 PUBERTAL STAGING M ODIFIED T ANNER 21
3.11 HEIGHT AND WEIGHT 22
3.12 VITAL SIGNS 22
3.13 CLINICAL LABORATORY TESTS 22
3.14 PHARMACOKINETIC BLOOD COLLECTION FOR L EUPROLIDE CONCENTRATION 24
3.15 GNRHA STIMULATION TEST AND BLOOD COLLECTION FOR G ONADOTROPIN AND SEX STEROID CONCENTRATIONS 25
3.16 ADRENAL STEROIDS 27
3.17 ACTH STIMULATION TEST 27
3.18 BETA-HCG(MALE SUBJECTS ) 28
3.19 ADMINISTRATION OF STUDY DRUG 28
3.20 LA45MG INJECTION SITE REACTION ASSESSMENT 29
3.21 HORMONAL FLARE AND A CUTE -ON-CHRONIC RESPONS E ASSESSMENT 29
3.22 MENSTRUAL BLEEDING CALENDAR (FEMALE SUBJECTS ) 30
3.23 BONE AGE RADIOGRAPH 30
Page 42 of 85 
p. 5 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.24 BRAIN MAGNETIC R ESONANCE IMAGING OR COMPUTED AXIAL TOMOGRAPHY SCAN 31
3.25 ADRENAL (ALL SUBJECTS )AND TESTICULAR (MALE SUBJECTS ) ULTRASOUND 31
3.26 TRANSDERMAL PELVIC ULTRASOUND (UTERINE AND OVARIAN VOLUME )(FEMALE SUBJECTS ) 32
3.27 SUBJECT WITHDRAWAL FROM S TUDY 32
4 SAFETY MANUAL 32
4.1 METHODS AND T IMING OF SAFETY A SSESSMENT 32
4.2 REPORTING ADVERSE EVENTS AND INTERCURRENT ILLNESSE S 33
5 COUNTRY -SPECIFIC REQ UIREMENTS 34
5.1 SUSAR REPORTING 34
5.2 TREATMENT AFTER END OF STUDY 34
6 STUDY DRUG 34
6.1 TREATMENTS ADMINISTERED 34
6.2 PACKAGING AND LABELING 35
6.3 METHOD OF A SSIGNING SUBJECTS TO T REATMENT GROUPS 36
6.4 SELECTION AND TIMING OF DOSE FOR EACH S UBJECT 36
7 APPENDICES 37
7.1 PUBERTAL STAGES WORKSHEET MALE 37
7.2 PUBERTAL STAGES WORKSHEET FEMALE 38
7.3 DOSE PREPARATION FOR LEUPROLIDE ACETATE 45MG FORMULATION 39
7.4 LEUPROLIDE ACETATE 45MG INJECTION SITE ASSESSMENT FORM 43
7.5 HORMONAL FLARE AND ACUTE -ON-CHRONIC RESPONSE FORM 44
7.6 MENSTRUAL BLEEDING CALENDAR 45
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1. PHARMACOKINETIC BLOO D COLLECTION FOR LEU PROLIDE 25
TABLE 2. GNRHA STIMULATION TE ST AND BLOOD COLLECT ION FOR GONADOTROPINS AND SEX STEROIDS 26
Page 43 of 85 
p. 6 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.2PROT OCOL ACTIVITIES BY VISIT
A list of activities performed during each visit, organized by visit, is presented in this section.  
Unscheduled visits may occur at any time as deemed appropriate by the investigator.
Activities are grouped by category (Interview, Exam, etc.).  Further information about each activity is 
provided in Section 3.
If a subject cannot come to the site because of an unforeseen circumstance (e.g., the COVID -19 
pandemic), study visits may be conducted virtually by site staff (e.g., by phone or video) or b y a qualified 
home healthcare nurse in a non -hospital/clinic environment (e.g., the subject 's home) at the request of 
the investigator and with the agreement of the subject 's parent or legal guardian.  AbbVie should be 
notified if this occurs , and the resp ective COVID -19 electronic case report forms ( eCRFs) should be 
completed if applicable.  Any visits conducted virtually or partially should be recorded as such on the 
respective COVID -19 eCRFs if applicable.
Page 44 of 85 
p. 19 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Rules and regulations for the consent or assent process of minors differ among countries with 
participating principal investigators.  The investigato r is responsible for ensuring compliance with all 
applicable rules.  In general, a subject who is a minor should be informed within the limits of his/her 
understanding and with age -appropriate words.  When deemed necessary by the IRB, the documented 
assent for subjects who are minors must be obtained.
Where assent is required, the investigator or his/her representative will explain the nature of the study 
to the subject and the subject's parent/legal guardian and answer all questions regarding this study.  
Subjects will be included in all discussions in order to obtain verbal or written assent.  Prior to any study -
specific screening procedures being performed on the subject, the informed consent statement will be 
reviewed and signed and dated by the subject's parent/legal guardian, the person who administered the 
informed consent, and any other signatories according to local requirements.  Additionally, in keeping 
with each institution's IRB requirements, an informed assent form may also be obtained by each s ubject 
prior to any study -related procedures being performed.  A copy of the informed consent form and the 
assent form will be given to the subject and the subject's parent/legal guardian, and the original will be 
placed in the subject's medical record.  I f a subject becomes of legal age during the course of the study, 
the consent procedure needs to be repeated.
3.2 Eligibility Criteria
Eligibility criteria will be assessed at Screening and on Day 1 (Baseline).
The results of certain retrospective procedures that were performed prior to informed consent that are 
considered standard of care and/or part of establishing a diagnosis of CPP, and that are used to establish 
eligibility for this study, may be used if the procedure was performed within the specified retrospective 
windows, as allowed by the protocol (see Section 3.15 , Section 3.16 , Section 3.18 , and Sections 3.23
through 3.26 ).  Any results from prior procedures or blood tests that were used to establish eligibility 
must be available in the subject's source file; if not available in the subject's source file, the required 
test/proc edure will be repeated and results reviewed prior to the subject receiving the first injection of 
study drug.
3.3 Medical and CPP History
Medical History
A complete medical history will be taken at Screening.  The subject's medical history will be updated at 
the Day 1 visit.  This updated medical history will serve as the Baseline for clinical assessment.  Medical 
history will include the subject's race, ethnicity, sex, and full date of birth; and a review of all major 
organ systems, including any history of ca ncer, diabetes mellitus, gastrointestinal, cardiac, neurologic 
(including any trauma to the central nervous system), pulmonary, immunodeficiency, hepatic, renal, 
endocrine, or other systems.  The disease and condition will be captured, as well as date of o nset and 
whether the disease/condition is ongoing.
CPP History
Medical history will also focus on the subject's history of CPP and will record the date of any sign of 
puberty first noticed, and the date first visit seen by a physician for CPP.  The diagnos tic test(s) 
Page 57 of 85 
p. 20 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.performed, the results, and progression of symptoms of CPP will be recorded.  Whether the subject is 
naïve to gonadotropin- releasing hormone agonist (GnRHa) treatment or previously treated with a 
GnRHa, and any prior GnRHa medications used in t he treatment of CPP will also be recorded.  A 
historical height (at least 6 months prior to Screening) is needed, and if available, historical information 
on subject's annual growth (height and date of height measurement) will be collected.
3.4 Family History
Family history:  parental actual height and age of puberty onset will be collected for both the birth 
mother and biological father, when available.  It is recommended that the actual heights of both parents 
be measured in triplicate, if possible, at the site by the study staff using stadiometry equipment.  
Otherwise measurements of actual height as reported will be captured.
3.5 Menst rual History
A history of menstrual periods (female sub jects) , including date of first occurrence (menarche) will be 
collected.  Refer to Section 3.22 for the menstrual bleeding calendar .
3.6 Adverse Event Ass essment
Please refer to Section 4.1.
3.7 Prior and Concomitant Medications
Prior and concomitant medications will be assessed at the time points specified in Section 2.
3.8 Patient -Reported Outcomes
The subject's parent or legal guardian will complete the patient -reported outcome (PRO) instruments.  
The subject's parent or legal guardian should be instructed to follow the instructions provided with the 
instruments and to provide the best possible response to each item.  The instrument that corresponds 
to the age at which the subject entered the study will be used throughout the study.
Site personnel shall not provide interpretation or assistance to subject or subject's parent or legal 
guardian other than encouragement to complete the tasks.  Site personnel may read the questionnaires 
to the subject's parent or legal guardian who is function ally unable to read the instruments.  Site 
personnel will encourage completion of the instruments at all specified visits (see Section 2) and will 
ensure that a resp onse is entered for all items.
Ifa subject cannot come to the site because of unforeseen circumstances (e.g. ,the COVID -19 
pandemic), patient -reported outcome entries may be administered by site staff over the phone and 
responses collected on paper (sourc e) and transcribed into electronic data capture (EDC) or entered by 
site staff directly into an electronic collection system.  AbbVie should be notified if this occurs .
Page 58 of 85 
p. 21 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Two different PRO instruments will be used: Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory™ (PedsQ L™) (all subjects) 
and Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Peer Relationships 
(subjects 5 years of age and older):
Ages 2 – 4 years:
PedsQL Parent Report for Toddlers (2 –4 years).
Ages 5 – 7 years:
PedsQL Parent Report for Y oung Child (5 –7 years).
PROMIS Peer Relationships Guardian Proxy Format.
Ages 8 –12 years:
PedsQL Parent Report for Child (8 –12 years).
PROMIS Peer Relationships Guardian Proxy format.
The information will be collected at Baseline and at Weeks 12, 24, 48, 72, 96, 120, and 144.  This 
information will also be collected at the Discontinuation Visit if the subject discontinues the study 
prematurely. 
3.9 Complete and Brief Physical Examinations
A complete or brief physical examination will be performed at the study visits specified in Section 2.  Any 
significant physical examination findings after the first injection of study drug will be recorded as 
adverse events.  All findings, whether related to an adverse event or part of each subject's medical 
history, will be captured on the appropriate eCRF page.
At any time, the investigator can perform a symptom -directed physical examination, as deemed 
necessary.
3.10 Pubertal Staging Modified Tanne r
Pubertal staging will be assessed in all subjects using modified Tanner staging as described below.  All 
data will be captured in the source documentation and entered into t he appropriate eCRF.
Breast:   (Female subjects) Breast development will be assessed for Stages 1 through 5.
Pubic Hair:   (All subjects) Pubic hair will be assessed for Stages 1 through 5.
Genitalia:   (Male subjects) Development of external genitalia will be assessed for Stages 1 through 5.  
Measurements to assess changes in testes and penile size will be captured and will include testicular 
length (centimeters) and volume (milliliters) measured via orchidometer (Prader beads) and penile 
length and width (ce ntimeters).
The same individual, if possible, will rate pubertal staging for all subjects and for male subjects measure 
penile length and width and testicular length and volume at each designated study visit.  Pubertal stage 
Page 59 of 85 
p. 22 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.will be rated according to Sect ion 7.1and Section 7.2, "Pubertal Stages Worksheet Male" and "Pubertal
Stages Worksheet Female."
Progression of CPP -related symptoms are not to be documented in the adverse event eCRF but should 
be documented in Pubertal Staging eCRFs ( for male or female subjects as applicable ).  Refer to 
Section 6.2 of the Protocol "Disease -Related Events" and Section 3.21 "Hormonal Flare and Acute -on-
Chronic Response Assessment."
3.11 Height and Weight
Height and weight will be measured at the time points specified in Section 2.
AbbVie will calculate growth rate (centimeter/year), both prior to treatment in the study and during the 
study.  Two measurements of height at least 6 months apart are needed for the baseline calculation.  
Thus, a historical height that was obtained at least 6 months prior to Screening will be recorded along 
with the date of measurement.  Height should be measured in triplicat e using standard stadiometer 
equipment, such as Harpenden stadiomete r or recumbent length table.  Height should be measured 
using the same measurement tools, and if possible, the same study staff member should be conducting 
the measurements at each study visit.  Height will be recorded in the source documentation and 
captu red in the eCRFs.
3.12 Vital Signs
Vital sign determinations of systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate, body temperature (rectal, 
oral, aural, or axillary), and respiratory rate will be obtained at the visits specified in Section 2.
3.13 Clinical Laboratory Tests
A certified laboratory will be used to process and provide results for the clinical laboratory tests.  
Laboratory reference ranges will be obtained prior to the initiation of the study.
Instructions for the collection, processing, and shipping of these samples will be provided by the central 
laboratory listed in Section 1.
If a subject cannot visit the site because of unforeseen circumstances (e.g., the COVID -19 pandemic), 
samples may be collected by a home healthcare service and sent to the central laboratory. If the central 
laboratory cannot be used to test samples because of unforeseen circumstances (e.g., the COVID -19 
pandemic), samples may be collected and tested at a local laboratory. AbbVie should be notified if any 
of those situations occur.
If a laboratory test value is outside the reference range and the investigator considers the laboratory 
test result to be clinically significant, the investigator will:
repeat the test to verify the out -of-range value;
follow the out -of-range value to a satisfactory clinical resolution; or
Page 60 of 85 
p. 23 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.discontinue the subject from the study or require the subject to receive treatment; in this case, 
the laboratory result will be recorded as an adverse event.
Clinical Laboratory Tests
Hematology Clinical Chemistry Chorionic Gonadotropin, Human, β -hCG 
CBC:  RBC count and WBC count 
Hematocrit
Hemoglobin
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
MCHC
Mean corpuscular volume
Neutrophils
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Eosinophils
Basophils
Platelet countAlbumin
Alkaline phosphatase
Alanine aminotransferase
Aspartate aminotransferase
Sodium
Potassium
Bicarbonate
Chloride
Calcium
Creatinine
Glucose
Lactate dehydrogenase
Magnesium
Phosphorus
Total bilirubin
Direct bilirubin
Indirect bilirubin
Total protein
Uric acidQuantitative β- hCG (male subjects)
Adrenal Steroids
CAH pediatric panel:
    androstenedione, cortisol,
    DHEA, 17 OH -progesterone,
    total testosterone 
If initial screening results of CAH panel
    are inconclusive as per investigator 's
    judgment, CAH panel may be repeated
    prior to and following an ACTH
    stimulation test. 
Urine Gonadotropins and Sex Steroids
Macroscopic chemical analysis:
    color & clarity, specific
    gravity, pH, protein, glucose,
    ketones, bilirubin,
    urobilinogen, blood, nitrite,
    leukocyte esterase
Urinalysis, microscopic (if
    macroscopic analysis is
    abnormal)Basal and GnRHa -stimulated
LH
FSH
E2 (females)
T (males)
ACTH = adrenocorticotropic hormone; β-hCG = beta human chorionic gonadotropin; CBC = complete blood count; 
CAH = congenital adrenal hyperpl asia; DHEA = dehydroepiandrosterone; E2 = estradiol; FSH = follicle-stimulating hormone; LH = 
luteinizing hormone; MCHC = mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; RBC = red blood cell; T = testosterone ; WBC = white 
blood cell
Pregnancy Tests
For female subjects ≥ 10 years of age, a serum pregnancy test will be performed at the central 
laboratory at Screening and a urine pregnancy test will be performed at the site on Day 1.  For female 
subjects < 10 years of age, pregnancy tests may be performed at the i nvestigator's discretion.  The 
pregnancy test must be negative before the first dose of study drug can be administered.  Additional 
urine pregnancy tests may be performed at the discretion of the principal investigator.
Urinalysis
Urinalysis will be comple ted at all required visits.  Specified abnormal macroscopic urinalyses defined as 
leukocytes, nitrite, protein, ketones, or blood greater than negative, or glucose greater than normal will 
be followed up with a microscopic analysis at the central laborator y.
Page 61 of 85 
p. 24 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.14 Pharmacokinetic Blood Collection for Leuprolide Concentration
Blood samples will be collected in a subset of 20 subjects for leuprolide analysis to coincide with the 
GnRHa stimulation test time points when possible.  Investigative sites will be notified when the 
pharmacokinetic subset has been fulfilled.  Blood samples will be collected at the time points indicated 
in Section 2.
On Day 1, blood samples will be collected immediately prior to (0 minutes) and 30 (±5)minutes and 
60(±5)minutes after the leuprolide acetate (LA) 45 mg intramuscular injection.  At Weeks 1, 4, 12, 20, 
24 (t ime of second injection of study drug ), 44, and 48 (time of third injection of study drug for subjects 
who continue to Part 2), subjects who are in the pharmacokinetic subset will return to the clinic for 
blood collection for leuprolide concentration.  At visits where there is a GnRHa stimulation test, blood 
should be collected prior to the GnRHa stimulation test.  At Week 24 and Week 48 (for subjects who 
continue to Part 2), the stimulation test is performed prior to the LA 45 mg injection.  Blood draw for
pharmacokinetics should only be performed at the premature discontinuation visit if the subject 
discontinues at any time during Part 1 .  For Part 1 of the study, 10 blood samples will be collected across 
study visits for the quantitation of serum leuproli de concentrations (see Table 1).
For each pharmacokinetic sample, a whole blood sample will be collected for serum leuprolide 
determination.  Blood sa mples will be collected as close as possible to the specified times indicated in 
Table 1.  The pharmacokinetic samples should be collected at the same time as the samples are 
collected for serum testosterone, estradiol, luteinizing hormone (LH), and follicle -stimulating hormone 
(FSH), when applicable.  In each sample, leuprolide concentration will be determined with a validated 
method under the supervision of AbbVie.  Refer to the Laboratory Manual for sample collection and 
shipment instructions.
If a subject who is participating in the pharmacokinetic subset cannot come to the site because of
unforeseen circumstances (e.g., the COVID -19 pandemic), the pharmacokinetic sample scollection may 
be performed by a home healthcare nurse at the subject 's home. AbbVie should be notified if this 
occurs.
Page 62 of 85 
p. 25 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table 1. Pharmacokinetic Blo od Collection for Leuprolide
Day 1 
1stLA 45 mg 
Injection Week 1Weeks 4 –20 
(Each Visit)Week 24 
2ndLA 45 mg 
InjectionWeeks 44, 48, and 
Premature 
Discontinuationa,b
Time Relative to: Study drug
Injection (no 
stimulation test)No reference point 
(no stimulation 
test)Stimulation Test Stimulation Test Stimulation Test
0 minutes 
(immediately 
before) Leuprolide Leuprolide Leuprolide Leuprolide Leuprolide
30 (± 5)minutes 
afterLeuprolide -- -- -- --
60 (± 5)minutes 
afterLeuprolide -- -- -- --
LA = leuprolide acetate
a. Subjects who continue to Part 2 will receive their third LA 45 mg injection at Week 48.
b. A pharmacokinetic sample will also be collected for subjects who discontinue prematurely before Week 48.
Notes: The LA 45 mg injection must be administered after the last blood collection for the stimulation test. 
3.15 GnRHa Stimulation Test and Blood Collection for Gonadotropin 
and Sex Steroid Concentrations
Blood samples for hormones and GnRHa stimulation tests will be conducted at the time points indicated 
in Section 2.  GnRHa stimulation tests will be performed using an LA aqueous formulation at 20 µg/k g 
subcutaneous injection at the weeks indicated in Table2.  Injection site reactions to stimulation test 
should be documented in appropriate eCRF.
Page 63 of 85 
p. 26 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Table2. GnRHa Stimulation Test and Blood Collection for Gonadotropins and Sex 
Steroids
Timing ScreeningDay 1 
1stLA 45 mg 
InjectionWeek 1Weeks 4 –
20 
(Each Visit)Week 24 
2ndLA 
45mg 
InjectionWeeks 24, 
48, 72, 96, 
120a,bWeeks 44, 48, 
72, 96, 120, 144, 
and Premature 
Discontinuation
Time 
Relative to:Stimulation 
TestStudy drug
injection 
(no 
stimulation 
test)No 
reference 
point (no 
stimulation 
test)Stimulation 
TestStimulation 
TestStudy 
drug
injectionStimulation Test
0 minutes 
(immediately 
before)LH, FSH,
E2, TLH, FSH,
E2, TLH, FSH, 
E2, TLH, FSH,
E2, TLH, FSH,
E2, T-- LH, FSH,
E2, T
30 (± 5)
minutes 
afterLH, FSH LH, FSH -- LH, FSH LH, FSH -- LH, FSH
60 (± 5)
minutes 
afterLH, FSH,
E2, TLH, FSH,
E2, T-- LH, FSH,
E2, TLH, FSH,
E2, T-- LH, FSH,
E2, T
48 hours 
after-- -- -- -- -- LH, FSH, 
E2, T--
AOC = acute -on-chronic ; E2 = estradiol; FSH = follicle -stimulating hormone; GnRHa = gonadotropin -releasing hormone agonist ; 
LA = leuprolide acetate ; LH = luteinizing hormone; T = testosterone
a. LH, FSH, E2, T must be obtained for AOC biochemical assessment.
b. Blood collection 48 hours after the injection of study drug at Weeks 48, 72, 96, and 120 applies only to those subjects who 
are randomly selected fo r AOC biochemical assessment.
Note: For visits with a stimulation test and a study drug injection, the study drug injection must be administered after the 
last blood collection for the stimulation test.
The GnRHa stimulation tests will be performed and bl ood samples will be collected for gonadotropins 
(LH, FSH) and sex steroids (estradiol in female subjects and testosterone in male subjects) as shown in 
Table2.  For samples that will be collected in reference to either the stimulation test or the LA 45 mg 
6-month injection; the 0 minute samples are to be drawn immediately prior to their reference points.  It 
is recommended that the stimulation test be p erformed preferably in the morning and as close to the 
same time at each visit as possible.
Subjects naïve to GnRHa treatment will not need to repeat a screening stimulation test if a stimulation 
test was performed within 1 month prior to the screening visit and a diagnosis of CPP was established.  
The agent (GnRHa) and dose used for the stimulation test, the test result, and the date performed will 
be captured in the source documentation and in the appropriate eCRF.  Note:  even when the Screening 
stimulat ion test is not required, a screening LH, FSH, testosterone (male) or estradiol (female) sample is 
still required.
Subjects previously treated with a GnRHa will have a stimulation test during Screening to demonstrate 
adequate LH suppression (LH < 4 mIU/mL) prior to receiving their first dose of study drug (LA 45 mg 
6-month).
Page 64 of 85 
p. 27 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Dates and times of sample collection for these tests will be recorded in the source documentation and in 
the eCRFs.
During Screening, blood samples for LH, FSH, testosterone (in male su bjects) or estradiol (in female 
subjects) will be collected and measured using a clinical laboratory test at the central laboratory 
identified in Section 3.13 to assess eligibility.
From Day 1 and onward, blood samples for LH and FSH (4 mL, which includes the blood volume for 
leuprolide) will be collected and shipped according to the instructions in the laboratory manual for the 
determination of LH an d FSH following a validated method under the supervision of the sponsor, 
AbbVie.
From Day 1 and onward, 3-mL blood samples for testosterone (in male subjects ) or estradiol ( in female 
subjects ) will be collected and shipped according to the instructions in the laboratory manual for the 
determination of testosterone and estradiol following a validated method under the supervision of the 
sponsor, AbbVie .
At Week 24 (and Weeks 48, 72, 96, and 120 for subjects who continue to Part 2), the LA 45 mg study 
drug injection must be administered after the last blood collection (60 minutes) for the stimulation test.  
If the Week 24 (and Weeks 48, 72, 96, and 120 for subjects who continue to Part 2) stimulation test 
results indicate inadequate peak LH suppression ( ≥ 4mIU/mL), the subject may be asked to return to the 
clinic to be evaluated for signs/symptoms of puberty progression.  If this occurs, the visit will be 
documented as an unscheduled visit.   Unscheduled blood samples for basal or stimulated LH, FSH, 
testost erone (in male subjects) ,or estradiol (in female subjects) may be collected according to the 
investigator' s clinical judgment at any time throughout the study and sent to the central laboratory for 
analysis and resulting.
If a subject cannot come to the s ite because of unforeseen circumstances (e.g., the COVID -19 
pandemic), the GnRHa stimulation test and required gonadotropins and sex steroids blood samples 
collection may be performed by a home healthcare nurse at the subject 's home. AbbVie should be 
notified if this occurs .  Refer to the Laboratory Manual for sample collection instructions.
3.16 Adrenal Steroid s
Adrenal steroid testing for all subjects to rule out congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) will be 
performed at Screening, if not previously performed .  If previously performed, the date and test result 
must be available in the source documentation.  If the results are not available in the source 
documentation, the test must be repeated to establish eligibility.  This testing (pediatric CAH panel) will 
include androstenedione, cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), 17 OH -progesterone, and 
testosterone.
3.17 ACTH Stimulation Test
The ACTH stimulation test is not required if CAH and adrenal disorders have been ruled out as per 
investigator' s evaluation and r esults of previous or basal adrenal steroid testing.   If the screening CAH 
panel results are inconclusive as per investigator 's judgment , subjects should have the 
Page 65 of 85 
p. 28 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test performed during the Screening period and prior 
to study drug administration.  The ACTH stimulation test procedure will be conducted per standard of 
care.  Two blood samples, 0 minutes and 60 minutes after the intravenous injection of commercially 
available corticotropin, will be collected and se nt to central laboratory for analysis of androstenedione, 
cortisol, DHEA, 17 -OH-progesterone, and testosteron e levels.
3.18 Beta -hCG (Male Subjects)
Beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β -hCG) levels to rule out a chorionic gonadotropin -secreting tumor 
will be performed for male subjects at Screening, unless performed prior to Screening.  If previously 
performed, the date and test result must be available in the source documentation, or the assessment 
must be repeated to establish eligibility.
3.19 Administration of Study Drug
Study drug will be administered to subjects beginning at Baseline (Day 1) and at the time points 
specified in Section 2as follows:
Part 1:   LA 45 mg 6 -month, given as a single intramuscular injection.  The first injection will be 
administered on Day 1, and the second injection will be administered at Week 24.
For subjects who were previously treated with GnRHa therapy, the first injection of study drug sho uld be 
administered at the end of the previous GnRHa treatment cycle.
Part 2:   LA 45 mg 6 -month, given as a single intramuscular injection at 24 -week intervals (up to 
24months) starting at Week 48 until Week 120.
Study site staff will administer all injections of LA 45 mg 6 -month.  Each injection of study drug should be 
administered in the gluteal area, anterior thigh, or deltoid.  Injection sites should be alternated to 
minimize injection site reactions.
If a subj ect cannot come to the site because of unforeseen circumstances (e.g., the COVID -19 
pandemic), the injection of study drug may be administered by a home healthcare nurse at the subject 's 
home.  AbbVie should be notified if this occurs.
Refer to Section 7.3for dose preparation instructions.
Depending on local regulations, provisioning of study drug and generic LA for stimulation test for 
direct -to-patient (DTP) and d irect -from-patient (DFP) transfer because of unforeseen circumstances 
(e.g., the COVID -19 pandemic )will be available upon request.  AbbVie should be notified if this occurs .  
Sites canuseMarken , a third -party vendor with which AbbVie has an agreement, f ordrug shipment in 
these circumstances or sites may use alocal courier .
Sites will be responsible for meeting IRB reporting requirements and submitting the booking form 
(which will be provided) to the local IRB (as applicable).
Page 66 of 85 
p. 29 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.The investigator must disc uss the DTP process with the subject 's parent or legal guardian :
Obtain consent to provide delivery information to Marken and/or local courier and record this in 
source documentation .
Obtain and review results of required safety procedures as applicable before registering subject 
dispensation of study drug in interactive response technology (IRT).
Confirm that the subject ’s parent or legal guardian will be available to accept delivery.
The site will fol low-up with the subject 's parent or legal guardian after shipment is received.
Sites will be required to retain documentation of the shipment for investigational product accountability 
and monitoring.
3.20 LA 45 mg Injection Site Reaction Assessment
Study sit e staff ( or home healthcare nurse if applicable ) will assess the injection site on the day of the LA 
45 mg injection prior to the subject leaving the investigative site.  The time of the assessment (post 
injection) as well as a description of the injection site will be recorded in the source documentation and 
entered into the appropriate eCRF.  At the Day 1 visit, the site will discuss with the parent or legal 
guardian how to assess the injection site and when a call to the investigative site is needed for clinical 
assessment.  Additionally, the site will phone the parent or legal guardian or there will be an on -site visit 
(or a home healthcare visit if applicable) at the time points specified in Section 2to obtain a description 
of the injection site.  Refer to Section 7.4for a sample of the Leuprolide Acetate 45 mg Injection Site 
Assessment Form.  If required, the subject may be asked to come in to the clinic for an assessment, 
based on investigator discretion.  A description of the injection site will be recorded in the source 
documentation and in the appropriate eCRF.  All inj ection site reactions will be captured as adverse 
events.  Any injection site reaction that reaches serious criteria as stated in Section 6.1 of the protocol 
will be captured as a serious adverse event (SAE) and reported as described in the protocol.
If a subject cannot come to the site because of unforeseen circumstances (e.g., the COVID -19 
pandemic), and the injection of study drug was administered by a home healthcare nurse at the 
subject 's home, the injection site reaction assessment may be conducted by the home healthcare nurse.  
AbbVie should be notified if this occurs.
3.21 Hormonal Flare and Acute- on-Chronic Response Assessment
Blood samples for AOC biochemical assessment of basal hormones (FSH, LH, and estradiol in females or 
testosterone in males) will be collected as follows:
Part 1:   Week 1 and 48 hours after the second injection of LA 45 mg 6 -month at Week 24 in all subjects 
enrolled.
Part 2:   48hours after the injection of LA 45 mg 6 -month at Weeks 48, 72, 96, and 120 in those subjects 
who are rand omly selected for AOC biochemical assessment.  Subjects will be randomly assigned to the 
AOC subgroup at Week 48 when the visit is registered in IRT.
Page 67 of 85 
p. 30 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Following each injection of LA 45 mg 6 -month, the sites ( or home healthcare nurse if applicable) will 
assess clinical signs and symptoms of hormonal flare and AOC response to an increase in sex steroids 
(e.g., breast tenderness and vaginal discharge in female subjects; frequent or prolonged erections, age -
inappropriate behavior that may be sexual in nature in male subjects; or in both female and male 
subjects, exacerbation or acceleration of pubertal symptoms, substantial mood swings, or new 
symptoms).  Sites (or home healthcare nurse if applicable) will assess for any events on the day of each 
study drug injection before the subject leaves the site.  Sites will call the parent or legal guardian after 
each study drug injection at the time points specified in Section 2.
The site will record reported events in the source documentation and on the appropriate eCRF.
If unusual or unexpected clinical effects are reported during the phone call, or are spontaneously 
reported by the parent or legal guardian, subjects may be asked to return to the clinic at the 
investigator's discretion, and have a blood sample collected for AOC biochemical assessment of basal 
hormone levels (LH, FSH, and estradiol in females or testosterone in males).  If this occurs, the visit will 
be docu mented as an Unscheduled Visit.  Refer to Section 7.5for a sample of the Hormonal Flare and 
Acute -on-Chronic Hormonal Response form.
When assessing these events, refer to Section 6.1 of the protocol.
3.22 Menstrual Bleeding Calendar (Female Subjects)
Information on menses will be collected as part of medical history for female subjects.  Female subjects 
and/or their parent or legal guardian will be asked to record any menses that occurs from the time of 
signing the consent and assent form, through the end of study participation on a menstrual bleeding 
calendar.  The site will train the subject (if deemed appropriate) and/or the parent or legal guardian on 
how to complete the menstrual bleeding calendar.  The calendar will be distributed at the Screening visit 
and will be reviewed by the site at each subsequent study visit.  Refer to Section 7.6.
The subject and/or parent or legal guardian will record only days with menstrual spotting or bleeding.  
All menstrual bleeding calendar entries must be captured in the appropriate eCRF.
3.23 Bone Age Radiograph
Bone age hand and wrist radiographs will be performed to assess bone maturation at Screening, unless 
performed within 3 months prior to Screening, and at the time points specified in Section 2.  These 
radiographs will be performed at a facility specified by the study investigator and will be sent to an 
imaging vendor for Fels bone age measurement using the BoneXpert automated system.  If a previous 
bone age radiograph is available from within 3 months prior to Screening and the radiograph meets the 
technical requirements of the imaging vendor, that radiograph may be used, and no additional bone age 
radiographs will be performed during the Screening Period.  The bone ag e results will be used to assess 
subject eligibility.
Page 68 of 85 
p. 31 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.24 Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging or Computed Axial 
Tomography Scan
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed axial tomography (CT) high resolution scan of the brain 
(including pituitary and hypothala mus), to rule out intracranial tumor will be performed at Screening, 
unless previously performed prior to the start of Screening (provided nothing has changed in the 
subject's medical history to warrant a repeat test).  The MRI or high resolution CT scan o f the brain for a 
subject who had this test done prior to Screening can be repeated at Screening as warranted based on 
the investigator's opinion.
The date the MRI or CT scan was performed should be available in the source documentation and will be 
documen ted in the eCRFs, including the presence or absence of tumor and type, if present.  If the results 
of a previously performed MRI or CT scan are not available in the source documentation, the test must 
be repeated to establish eligibility.
Results of prior diagnostic tests used to establish eligibility should be recorded in the source 
documentation and entered into the appropriate eCRF.
3.25 Adrenal (All Subjects) and Testicular (Male Subjects) Ultrasound
An adrenal (all subjects) and testicular (male subjects) u ltrasound will be performed at Screening unless 
performed prior to Screening.  All ultrasounds should be performed by a trained ultrasonographer at a 
facility determined by the principal investigator.  In addition, if the investigator has ruled out adrenal or 
testicular steroid secreting tumors based on previously conducted laboratory testing, the adrenal or 
testicular ultrasound testing to rule out such hormone secreting tumors is not required.  Results of prior 
diagnostic tests should be recorded in sourc e documentation and eCRF.  If the results and all of the 
required variables listed below of a previously performed adrenal and testicular ultrasound are not 
available in the source documentation, the ultrasound must be repeated to establish eligibility.
Testicular Ultrasound ( Male Subjects)
If hormone levels or testicular consistency or symmetry suggests a testicular tumor, an ultrasound of the 
testes, if not done previously to rule out steroid -secreting tumors, will be performed.  Testes ultrasound 
variables to be evaluated will include volume, by measuring the length, width, and depth, and presence 
or absence of abnormality, and characterization (location, size) of the abnormality, if present.
Adrenal Gland Ultrasound ( All Subjects)
An ultrasound of the adrenal gland may need to be performed if not done previously to rule out steroid -
secreting tumors of the adrenal glands based on hormone levels.  Adrenal ultrasound variables to be 
evaluated will include presence or absence of abnormality and charact erization (location, size) of the 
abnormality, if present.
All results of prior diagnostic ultrasounds and tests used to establish eligibility should be recorded in 
source documentation and eCRF.
Page 69 of 85 
p. 32 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.3.26 Transdermal Pelvic Ultrasound (Uterine and Ovarian Volume) 
(Female Subjects)
A transdermal pelvic ultrasound ( to assess uterine and ovarian volume) for female subjects will be 
performed at Screening (unless performed prior to the start of Screening) and at other time points as 
specified in Section 2.  A trained ultrasonographer should perform all ultrasounds (location determined 
by the principal investigator) .  Results of prior diagnostic ultrasounds and tests should be record ed in 
source documentation and eCRF.  If the results and all of the required variables listed below of a 
previously performed ultrasound are not available in the source documentation, the ultrasound must be 
repeated to establish eligibility. The following transdermal pelvic ultrasound variables wi ll be evaluated : 
ovarian and uterine volume by measuring the length, width and depth, presence of an endometrial 
stripe and thickness (double -layer in millimeters ) if visible, presence or absence of abnormality, a nd 
characterization (including location, size) of the abnormality, if present.
3.27 Subject Withdrawal from Study
All attempts must be made to determine the date of the last study drug dose and the primary reason for 
discontinuation of study drug or study parti cipation.  The information will be recorded on the 
appropriate eCRF page; however, these procedures should not interfere with the initiation of any new 
treatments or therapeutic modalities that the investigator feels are necessary to treat the subject's 
condition.  Following discontinuation of study drug, the subject will be treated in accordance with the 
investigator's best clinical judgment, irrespective of whether the subject or the subject's parent or legal 
guardian decides to continue participation in the study.
4SAFETY MANUAL
4.1 Methods and Timing of Safety Assessment
All SAEs and study procedure -related nonserious adverse events , will be collected from the time the 
subject's parent or legal guardian signed the study -specific informed consent until study d rug 
administration.
All adverse events and SAEs will be collected whether solicited or spontaneously reported by the subject 
and/or parent or legal guardian from the time of study drug administration through the end of the last 
dosing interval (24 weeks) a nd the 12 -week Follow -up Period.
All adverse events of special interest (bone fractures /osteoporosis/osteopenia , slipped capital femoral 
epiphysis, neuropsychiatric events, and seizure/convulsion, injection site reaction [associated with study 
drug administration or stimulation test], hypersensitivity reaction) will be collected and captured.  See 
Protocol Section 6.1, "Adverse Events of Special Interest."
Page 70 of 85 
p. 34 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.COVID -19 Pandemic -Related Reporting
Supplemental study case report forms should be completed in the event of COVID -19 related 
missed/virtual visits, study drug interruptions or discontinuations, or adverse events (including capture 
of specific signs/symptoms of infection and testing results).
COVID -19 infections should be captured as adverse events.  If the event meets the criteria for a nSAE, 
then follow the SAE reporting directions per the protocol and above.  The following COVID -19 related 
supplemental eCRFs should be completed:
COVID -19 Supplemental Signs/Symptoms
COVID -19 Status Form
If a subject has a confirmed or suspected COVID -19 infection and study drug was interrupted, the 
investigator should contact the sponsor emergency medical contact listed above before reintroducing 
study drug .
5COUNTRY- SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
5.1 SUSAR REPORTING
AbbVie will be responsible for SUSAR reporting for the IMP in accordance with global and local 
guidelines, and the United States Package Insert (USPI) will serve as the Reference Safety Information 
(RSI).  The RSI in effect at the start of a Product Safety Update Report (PSUR) reportin g period serves as 
the RSI during the reporting period.  For follow -up reports, the RSI in place at the time of occurrence of 
the "suspected" Serious Adverse Reaction will be used to assess expectedness.
5.2 Treatment After End of Study
Subjects will continue study treatment throughout the study for a period of up to 144 weeks or until 
premature discontinuation of study drug.  At the subject's last visit, the investigator will discuss the 
appropriate subsequent treatment with the subject's parent or legal guard ian.  LA is commercially 
available; AbbVie will not provide LA or any other therapy once the subject's participation is concluded.
6STUDY DRUG
6.1 Treatments Administered
Study drug (LA 45 mg 6 -month) will be administered at the visits listed in Section 2.  LA 45 mg 6 -month 
drug product will be injected intramuscularly once every 24 weeks.  Each injection should be 
administered in a different anatomical site to minimize in jection site reactions.
LA 45 mg 6 -month drug product will be provided by AbbVie as a pre -filled dual chamber syringe 
containing sterile lyophilized microspheres, which when mixed with diluent, become a suspension 
Page 72 of 85 
p. 35 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.intended for intramuscular injections to b e given once every 24 weeks.  The front chamber of the LA 
formulation pre -filled dual chamber syringe contains LA (45 mg), and the second chamber contains 
diluent.  Study drug must be prepared as described in the instructions for drug preparation (refer to
Section 7.3).
Study drug must not be administered without contacting the IRT system.  Study drug may only be 
administered to subjects enrolled in the study through the IRT system.  If a subject cannot come to the 
site because of unforeseen circumstances (e.g., the COVID -19 pandemic ), the site may contact the IRT 
for kit assignment.  Study drug can then be dispensed as described in Section 3.19 .
At the end of the Treatment Period or at the Premature Discontinuation Visit, the site will contact the 
IRT system to provide visit date information.
The GnRHa stimulation test will be conducted using generic LA aqueous solution.  For the stimulation 
test, 20 µg/kg of generic LA aqueous solution will be administered subcutaneously.  Generic LA aqueous 
solution will be supplied to the sites for the purpose of conducting the stimulation test.  Each site will be 
responsible for maintaining drug accountability records, including product description, manufacturer, lot 
numbers, and administration to subjects.  Sites should use their standard of care practice for 
preparation of the injection s ite and injection of generic LA aqueous solution.  If a subject cannot come 
to the site because of unforeseen circumstances (e.g., the COVID -19 pandemic), the GnRHa stimulation 
test may be performed by a home healthcare nurse at the subject' s home.
There m ay be times when the sponsor is unable to provide the generic LA aqueous solution.  Under 
these circumstances, the participating sites have the option to obtain this product through an external 
licensed pharmacy or wholesaler or from local site supplies.
AbbVie will not supply drug other than the study drug LA 45 mg 6 -month depot formulation and the 
generic LA aqueous solution for the stimulation test.
6.2 Packaging and Labeling
Study drug will be supplied as open -label LA 45 mg unit dose syringes.  Each kit wi ll contain 1 pre-filled 
dual chamber syringe for injection.
Each kit will be labeled as required per country requirements.  The label must remain affixed to the kit.  
The site staff will complete the blank space on the label with the subject number before administering 
study drug.
Storage and Disposition of Study Drug
LA45 mg 6 -month must be stored at controlled room temperature (15° to 25°C/59° to 77°F).  The 
investigational product is for investigational use only and is to be used only within the context of this 
study.  The study drug supplied for this study must be ma intained under adequate security and stored 
under the conditions specified on the label until administered.  Unused study drug should be destroyed 
on site as appropriate or returned to AbbVie in accordance with local regulatory requirements and 
AbbVie requ irements.
Page 73 of 85 
p. 36 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Generic LA aqueous solution for the stimulation test should be stored per the US -approved commercial 
label or the clinical study label.
Temperature excursions must be reported to AbbVie immediately.  Sites should use the AbbVie 
Temperature Excurs ion Management System (ATEMS) module via IRT for reporting temperature 
excursions for study drug (LA 45 mg 6 month), or if not accessible, fax or email copies of the Storage 
Temperature Excursion Reporting Form indicating the extent of the excursion (time, duration of the 
temperature excursion, minimum/maximum values and study drugs affected) to AbbVie Clinical Drug 
Supply Management (CDSM).  In case of a temperature excursion, study drug should be quarantined and 
not administered until AbbVie CDSM or ATEMS deems the medication as acceptable.  For reporting 
temperature excursions for generic LA aqueous solution, fax or email copies of the Storage Temperature 
Excursion Reporting Form to AbbVie CDSM.  In case of a temperature excursion, generic LA should be 
quarantined and not administered until AbbVie CDSM deems the product as acceptable.
6.3 Method of Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups
This is an open -label, nonrandomized, single -arm study.  All subjects will receive the same dosage of LA 
(45 mg intramuscular every 24 weeks) for the duration of the study.
At the Screening Visit, all subjects will be assigned a unique subject number through the use of the IRT.  
For subjects who do not meet the study selection criteria, site personnel must contact the IRT system
and identify the subject as a screen failure.
Subjects who are enrolled will retain their subject number assigned at the Screening Visit throughout 
the study.  Upon receipt of study drug, the site will acknowledge receipt in the IRT system.
Contact inform ation and user guidelines for IRT use will be provided to each site.
6.4 Selection and Timing of Dose for Each Subject
All subjects who are enrolled in the study will receive the same dose of LA (45 mg) administered 
intramuscularly once every 24 weeks.  Study drug will be administered by site staff at scheduled study 
visits.  If a subject cannot come to the site because of unforeseen circumstances (e.g., the COVID -19 
pandemic), the study drug injection may be administered by a home healthcare nurse at the subje ct’s 
home. AbbVie should be notified if this occurs.
See Section 7.3and Section 7.4for study drug injection preparation instructions and injection site 
assessment instructions, respectively .
Page 74 of 85 
p. 37 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7Appendices
7.1 PUBERTAL STAGES WORKSHEET MALE
Subject Number:___________ Visit Date ____________
Height (in triplicate) 1._______cm 2._______cm 3._______cm Weight _______kg
Height Mode of Collection: ☐Stadiometer ☐Harpenden ☐Other, please specify ______________
Sources:
1. Brown RT.  Adolescent growth and development.  In:  Holland-Hall C, Brown RT, eds.  Adolescent Medicin e Secrets.  
Philadelphia, PA:  Hanley & Belfus Inc; 2002:21-8.
2. Travers SH, Slover RH.  Disorders of Puberty.  In:  MT M, ed.  Endocrine Secrets.  4thed.  Philadelphia, Pa; 2005:354 -67.
Testicular volume commen ts/observations:
Notes:
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
_______________ _______________
______________________________
______________________________Prepubertal No pubic hair
Testicular length <2.5 cm
Sparse growth of slightly 
curly pubic hair, mainly at 
base of penis
Testes >2.5 cm in longest 
diameter; scrotum thinning 
and reddening
Thicker, curlier hair spread 
to  mons pubis 
Growth of penis in wid h and 
length; further growth of 
testes
Adult -type hair that does not 
yet  spread to medial 
surface of thighs
Penis further enlarged; 
testes larger, with darker 
scrotal skin color
Adult -type hai r spread to 
medial surface of thighs
Genitalia adult in size and 
shapePubic hair comments/observations:
Notes:
_____ _________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
_____________ _________________
General comments/observations:
Notes:
______________________________
__________________________ ____
Page 75 of 85 
     
 
  
 
  
p. 38 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.2 PUBERTAL STAGES WORKSHEET FEMALE
Subject Number:____________ Visit Date ____________
Height (in triplicate) 1._______cm 2._______cm 3._______cm Weight _______kg
Height Mode of Collection: ☐Stadiometer ☐Harpenden ☐Other, please specify ______________
Sources:
1. Brown RT.  Adolescent growth and developmen t.  In:  Holland -Hall C, Brown RT, eds.  Adolescent Medicine Secrets.  
Philadelphia, PA:  Hanley & Belfus Inc; 2002:21-8.
2. Travers SH, Slover RH.  Disorders of Puberty.  In:  MT M, ed.  Endocrine Secrets.  4th ed.  Philadelphia, Pa; 2005:354 -67.
3. Bonat S, Pathomvanich A, Keil MF, Field AE, Yanovski JA.  Self -assessment of pubertal stage in overweight children.  
Pediatrics.  2002;110(4):743 -7.
Breast development 
comments/observations:
Notes:
____________________ __________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________Prepubertal: No pubic hair
Elevation of papilla only
No palpable glandular tissue
Sparse growth of long, straight 
or slightly curly, minim ally 
pigmented hair, mainly of labia
Palpable breast bud that does 
not extend beyond the areola; 
enlargement of areola
Considerably darker and 
coarser hair spreading over 
mons pubis
Further enlargement of breast 
and ar eola, with no separation 
of contours; palpable breast 
extends beyond the areola
Thick, adult -type hair that 
does not yet spread to medial 
surface of thighs
Projection of areola and 
papilla to form secondary 
mound above level of breast
Hair adult in type and 
distributed in classic inverse 
triangle
Adult contour breast with 
projection of papilla onlyPubic hair comments/observations:
Notes:
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
General comments/o bservations:
Notes:
______________________________
______________________________
Page 76 of 85 
     
 
 
 
 
p. 39of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16 -904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.3 DOSE PREPARATION FOR LEUPROLIDE ACETATE 45 MG 
FORMULATION
Reconstitution and Administration for Injection of LU PRON DEPOT
Reconstitute and administer the lyophilized microspheres as a single intramuscular 
injection.
Inject the suspension immediately or discard if not used within two hours, because LUPRON 
DEPOT does not contain a preservative.
1.Visually inspect the L UPRON DEPOT powder.  DO NOT USE the syringe if clumping or caking is 
evident.  A thin layer of powder on the wall of the syringe is considered normal prior to mixing 
with the diluent.  The diluent should appear clear and colorless.
2.To prepare for injection , screw the white plunger into the end stopper until the stopper begins 
to turn (see Figure 1 and Figure 2).
Figure 1
Figure 2
3.Hold the syringe UPRIGHT.  Release the diluent by SLOWLY PUSHING (6 to 8 seconds) the 
plunger until the first middle stopper is at the blue line in the middle of the barrel (see Figure 3).
Page 77 of 85 
  
    
 
    
  
   
p. 40of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16 -904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.Figure 3
4.Keep the syringe UPRIGHT.  Mix the microspheres (powder) thoroughly by gently shaking the 
syringe until the powder forms a uniform suspension.  The suspension will appear milky.  If the 
powder adheres to the stopper or caking/clumping is present, tap the syringe with your finger to 
disperse.  DO NOT USE if any of the powder has not gone into suspension (see Figure 4).
Figure 4
5.Keep the syringe UPRIGHT.  With the opposite hand pull the needle cap upward without 
twisting.
6.Keep the syringe UPRIGHT.  Advance the plunger to expel the air from the syringe.  Now the 
syringe is ready for injection.
Page 78 of 85 
p. 41of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16 -904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.After cleaning the injection site with an alcohol swab, administer the intramuscular inj ection by 
inserting the needle at a 90 degree angle into the gluteal area, anterior thigh, or deltoid; 
injection sites should be alternated (see Figure 5).
Figure 5
NOTE:  If a blood vessel is accidentally penetrated, aspirated blood will be visible just below the 
luer lock (see Figure 6) and can be seen through the transparent LuproLoc® safety device.  If 
blood is present, remove the needle immediately.  Do not inject the medication.
Figure 6
8.Inject the entire contents of the syringe intramuscularly.
9.Withdraw the needle.  Once the syringe has been withdrawn, immediately activate the 
LuproLoc® safety device by pushing the arrow on the lock upward towards the needle tip with 
Page 79 of 85 
 
p. 42of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16 -904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.the thumb or finger, as illustrated, until the needle cover of the safety device over the needle is 
fully extended and a CLICK is heard or felt (see Figure 7).
Figure 7
10.Dispose of the syringe according to local regulations/procedures.
Reference:  LUPRON DEPOT Package Insert, March 2019 .
Page 80 of 85 
 
p. 44 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.5 HORMONAL FLARE AND ACUTE- ON-CHRONIC RESPONSE FORM
Phone Call Assessment  
On-site Assessment  
Home health care nurse assessment  
Subject Number:  
Date:  
Time:  
1. Since receiving the leuprolide acetate (45 mg) injection, is your child exhibiting any behavior that is different 
than their usual behavior?         Yes      No
If yes, please describe:
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
____ _____________________________________________________________
2. Is your child exhibiting any physical symptoms that are different than usual? 
  Yes   No
If yes, please describe:
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
3. Do the symptoms require a follow -up phone call?    Yes   No
4. Should the child come in to the office for an assessment/additional a ssessment? 
  Yes   No
Comments:  
Initials of person/parent spoken to:  __________________
Signature of person completing form: ____________________  Date:  _____/______/_____
Printed name of person completing form:  ________________________________
Page 82 of 85 
p. 45 of 45
OPERATIONS MANUAL FOR CLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL M16- 904 Version 3.0
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
No use or disclosure outside AbbVie is permitted without prior written authorization from AbbVie.7.6 MENSTRUAL BLEEDING CALENDAR
Subject Number:  _________
Date Calendar Given to Subject/Parent or L egal Guardian:  ___________________
Instructions:
Circle the dates when vaginal bleeding requires protection GREATER than a panty shield.
Mark "S" on the dates when spotting occurs that DOES NOT require protection greater than a 
panty shield.
Place no mark s on the calendar on the dates when there's no bleeding or spotting.
Initial this page (person who completes the calendar).
See Example Calendar Below:
November 2017
Initials and date:  ________________
Page 83 of 85 
       
   
       
        
       
     