R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  1 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fatty Acid Desaturase Activity, Fish Oil, and Colorectal 
Cancer Prevention  
 
NCT# 01661764  
 
Harvey J. Murff, M.D., M.P.H.  
Associate Professor of Medicine  
Institute for Medicine and Public Health  
Vanderbilt Epidemiology Center  
2525 West End Avenue, Suite 600  
Nashville, TN 37203 -1738  
(o) 615 936 -8319  
(f) 615 936 -8291  
Harvey.j.murff@vanderbilt.edu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  2 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012  
 
Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
6.0 Study Procedures  
7.0 Risks of Investigational Agents/Devices (side effects)  
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants or 
Others  
9.0 Study Withdr awal/Discontinuation  
10.0  Statistical Considerations  
11.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
12.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
13.0  Literature Cited  
 
Appendices  
Appendix A  Study Procedure Calendar  
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  3 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 Arachidonic Acid  
PGE 2 COX -2 
15-PGDH  
Increases β-catenin transcriptional activity/  
Anti-apoptotic/  
Promotes growth through cyclin D1/  
Promotes angiogenesis through VEGF  
 1.0 Background  
 
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the fourth most common cancer and the second leading cause of cancer -related 
death in the United States. (1)  Despite advances in our understanding of the molecular biology of CRC, little 
progress has been made in improving survival rates for individuals diagnosed in advanced stages. (2)  Thus, 
early identification and prevention are important strategies to reduce CRC mortality. (3) 
 
Chronic Inflammation and Colorectal Cancer  
While inflammation is a necessary physiological response to 
infecti on and tissue injury, mounting evidence has implicated 
chronic inflammation as an initiator and promotor of 
carcinogenesis. (4)  Multiple inflammatory conditions are 
associated with increased cancer risk, and chronic infections 
can predispose individuals to  cancer.  Indeed, a recent cohort 
study including over 10,000 individuals found C -reactive protein 
(CRP), an acute -phase reactant and biomarker of inflammation, 
to be associated with an increase hazard for cancer of any type 
(1.3; 95% CI 1.0 -1.6) with a pa rticularly strong association for 
CRC (HR = 1.9; 0.8 -4.6).(5) 
 
Chronic inflammation can contribute to cancer via several  mechanisms including inappropriate gene 
expression; epigenetic alterations; enhanced cell proliferation; and resistance to apoptosis. (6)  One link 
between cancer and  inflammation involves cyclooxygenase -2, (COX -2) the inducible form of cyclooxygenase, 
which is overexpressed in multiple malignancies. (7)  In the COX pathway, arachidonic acid  (ARA ) is released 
from cellular membranes and then enzymatically converted into various bioactive lipid molecules including 
prostaglandins.  These molecules then exert their cellular functions through binding to cell surface receptors of 
the seven transmembran e G-coupled rhodopsin -types.  Production of prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2) in particular, 
may promote carcinogenesis through stimulating cellular proliferation, inhibiting apoptosis, promoting 
angiogenesis, and/or enhancing invasiveness. (8)  (Figure 1)  Animal mo dels of CRC have demonstrated the 
connection between tumor formation and ARA with a positive correlation between increasing tissue levels of 
ARA and increased PGE 2 production with increased PGE 2 production being associated with tumor number. (9-
12)  Up-regulation of COX -2 occurs in 50% of colon adenomas and 85% of colon cancers and is considered a 
key and early oncogenic event in colorectal carcinogenesis. (13) However, while COX -2 is upregulated, 15-
hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase  (15-PGDH ), which is the normal physiological antagonist of COX -2 
and inactivates PGE 2,(14) is often down regulated and is considered a tumor -suppressor gene. (15-16)   
 
Chronic inflammation and 
Obesity/Adipokines/Insulin Resistance  
 
Obesity and overweight are strong risk 
factors for CRC. (17)  Potential 
mechanisms behind this association are 
beginning to be elucidated, beginning 
with the identification of adipose tissue as 
an active endocrine organ that releases a 
wide variety  of biologically active 
molecules. (18-19)  Many of these 
adipokines, such as leptin  and 
adiponectin,  are related to glucose homeostasis, 
insulin sensitivity, and energy balance. (20-21)  Obesity is associated with increased levels of leptin and 
decreased le vels of adiponectin and reduced insulin sensitivity. (22-24)  Insulin activates the PI3K/Akt signal 
transduction pathway which increases cell proliferation and cell survival. (27) Adiponectin has insulin -Obesity/Dysfunctional  
Adipose Tissue  
↑ Leptin ↓ Adiponectin  ↑ Insulin/Insulin 
Resistance  
PI3-K/Akt System/mTOR  Ras/Raf MAPK System  AMPK/P21/P53 System  
Cell Proliferation  Cell Survival  Figure 1: Eicosanoid production and CRC  risk 
Figure 2: Dysfunctional adipose tissue and CRC risk  
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  4 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 sensitizing effects and may have anti -carcinogenic ef fects through the activation of the AMP -activated protein 
kinase (AMPK) system which upregulates the tumor suppressor genes p53 and p21. (25-27)  (Figure 2) 
Conversely, leptin is mitogenic and inhibits apoptosis, likely through the Ras/Raf/ mitogen -activate d-protein -
kinase (MAPK) system. (27-29)  The association between insulin levels and CRC has been well described (30-
36) and epidemiological evidence is beginning to emerge suggesting that increased leptin levels (37) and 
decreased adiponectin levels may be ri sk factors for colorectal neoplasms although this association has not 
been consistent across studies. (37-40) 
 
Chemoprevention of Colorectal Cancer with Fish Oil  
Eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) is converted to eicosanoids through the same enzymatic pathways as A RA but 
produces series -3 prostanoids  that have less inflammatory actions due to lower receptor affinities when 
compared to ARA derived series -2 prostanoids. (41-42) In Sprague -Dawley rats, PGE 3 is increased with fish oil 
supplementation and has pro -apoptoti c effect. (43)  Similar pro -apoptotic effects of EPA derived PGE 3 have 
also been reported in human lung cancer A549 cells. (44)  Several studies have demonstrated that increased 
consumption of marine fatty fish results in an increased phospholipid membrane proportion of EPA and a 
concomitant decreased in ARA and ARA -derived eicosanoids. (45-47)  Other potential mechanisms beyond fi sh 
oils effect on inflammatory eicosanoids that might contribute to its chemopreventive actions includes 
downregulation of protein kinase CbII and decreased intracellular Ras levels. (48-51)  
 
Animal models of CRC can involve chemically induced tumors, canc er cell lines transplants, and transgenenic 
animals.  With regards to chemically induced tumors a meta -analysis of 14 studies of F344 or Sprague -Dawley 
rats found a consistently protective effect of fish oil modeled as either percent of total fat or estima ted fat 
calories. (52)  In transplant models, fish oil inhibits the growth of transplanted CT -26 colon tumor lines. (53) 
Several small, randomized controlled trials have been performed to investigate the effect of n -3 PUFAs on 
colorectal neoplasms with most studies finding fish oil reduces cell proliferation and promote apoptosis.  (54-
60)  While most of these studies have used surrogate endpoints, such as rectal epithelial cell proliferation or 
apoptosis, a recent 6 -month RCT study found that EPA supplementa tion (2 g per day) reduced rectal polyp 
number and size in individuals with familial adenomatous polyposis. (61)  Taken together these studies strongly 
support the CRC chemopreventive potential of fish oil.  
 
Eicosanoid Synthesis and the Importance of the n -6 to n -3 PUFA ratio  
We hypothesize that diets with a high ratio of ARA/ [EPA + DHA] result in a pro -inflammatory milieu and that 
these pro -inflammatory effects might contribute to colon carcinogenesis .  This hypothesis is supported by 
animal models of CRC,  which have investigated dietary ratios of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and 
tumor burden.  In the ApcMin/+ mouse model of colon carcinogenesis, mice fed EPA and ARA simultaneously 
had similar tissue levels of ARA and intestinal tumor growth compared  to mice feed ARA without EPA. (11)  
Boudreau et al. investigated the effect of fish oil consumption on the production of ARA derived eicosanoids on 
Sprague -Dawley rates fed at a constant ratio of n -3 to n -6 PUFAs. (62) As the investigators increased the 
absolute dose of n -3 PUFAs, they also increased the dose of n -6 PUFAs to maintain a fixed ratio.  There was 
no apparent dose effect of n -3 PUFAs on ARA -derived eicosanoids under the conditions of a fixed ratio of n -3 
to n-6. Thus, the investigators concluded  that the ratio of n -3 to n -6 PUFA must be taken into account when 
investigating dietary interventions of n -3 PUFAs.  
 
One of the most compelling animal models supporting the benefits of modulating the ARA to EPA + DHA ratio 
is the FAT-1 transgenic mouse.  These mice have been engineered to carry the fat-1 gene from C. elegans 
and are able to convert n -6 PUFAs to n -3 PUFAs in vivo, a function all mammals are unable to perform. (63)  
Subsequently, FAT-1 mice preferentially convert dietary n -6 PUFAs to n -3 PUFAs.  Gravaghi et al. compare 
FAT-1 transgenic mice to wild type mice in the DSS -induced experimental colitis model. (64)  Both groups of 
mice were fed the same n -6 PUFA rich diet.  FAT-1 mice had a significant attenuation of colonic infla mmation 
along with lower colonic cell ratios of n -6 to n -3 PUFA and a significant decrease in PGE 2 production and COX -
2 expression.  
 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  5 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012  
FADS 1 α-linole nic acid  
 
18:2n -6 
EPA 
20:4n -6 
PGE 3 Stearidonic  acid  
 
18:2n -6 Eicosatrienoic  acid  
 
18:2n -6 
COX 2  γ-linolenic acid  
 
18:2n -6 DGLA   
 
18:2n -6 FADS 2 Linoleic acid  
 
18:2n -6 
Arachidonic acid  
20:4n -6 
PGE 2  Very limited controlled trials have investigated the impact of varying amounts of PUFAs and CRC risk.  Bartram 
et al. randomized 12 volunteers to either fish oil supplementation (4.4 g n -3 fatty acids/day) versus placebo and 
found no differences in proliferation indexes after 30 days. (65)  This study was designed to determine the 
effects of fish oil supplementation in sub jects eating a controlled high fat diet (50% of energy).  The null results 
of this study contrasted with an earlier study by Bartram where volunteers maintained their usual dietary fat 
intake (30% of total energy). (59)  Comparing the results of these two t rials, Bartram et al., concluded that the 
ratio of n -3 to n -6 PUFAs likely plays an important mediating role in fish oils anti -proliferative effects. (65)   
 
Taken together these animal and human studies strongly emphasize the important of the ratio of n -6 PUFAs to 
n-3 PUFAs on modulating inflammation and eicosanoid production in the colon.  However while dietary 
manipulation can result in changes in tissue levels of n -6 and n -3 PUFAs, genetic factors may also play a key 
role in determining this ratio.  
 
Gene tic Determinants of Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid Levels  
PUFA are chains of 18 to 22 carbon atoms that contain two or more sequential double bonds.  In the Western 
diet, linoleic acid (18:2n -6) accounts for almost 89% of total PUFA energy intake. (66)  Linolei c acid (LA) is 
metabolized to ARA (20:4n -6) through a series of desaturation and elongation reactions.  The first step in this 
metabolic pathway is fatty acid desaturase  2 (FADS2 ) that converts LA to γ -linolenic acid [GLA] (18:3n -
6).(67)  GLA is elongated to dihomo -γ-linolenic acid [DHLA] (20:3n -6) and then desaturated by fatty acid 
desaturase 1  (FADS1 ) to ARA.  Both the genes for FADS2  and FADS1  are localized in chromosome 11 
(11q12 -q13.1) as a cluster. (68) While EPA can be produced in vivo from α-linolenic acid through this same 
pathway, in humans, this process is extremely inefficient and most tissue level EPA derives directly from 
dietary consumption of fatty fish. (69-71)  
 
Evidence that genetic factors could play an important role in tissu e levels of PUFA comes from several 
sources.  In a study of 80 families conducted in kibbutz settlements in Israel the heritability estimated for red 
blood cell (RBC) phospholipid membrane concentrations were 0.53 ± 0.11 for ARA, 0.56 ± 0.11 for EPA, and f  
0.71 ± 0.08 for DHA, suggesting a strong genetic component influencing tissue levels of long chain PUFAs (72).  
Similarly, genomic studies have established that variants in FADS1  strongly influence RBC membrane and 
plasma levels of ARA. (73)   Three recent genome -wide association studies (GWAS) found a strong association 
between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in FADS  and plasma and RBC phospholipid PUFA levels 
(74-76)  with 18 to 28% of the additive variance in tissue ARA levels explained by FADS  genotypes. (77-78)  
Tanaka et al. in a GWAS study investigating genetic factors associated with plasma and RBC PUFA levels 
found a strong association between the rs174537 SNP in FADS1  and ARA levels. (74)  In this study, 
participants in the InCHIANTI study with the GG genotype had higher plasma concentrations of ARA and this 
level decreased with increasing copy of the T allele (8.76% for GG, 7.39% for GT, 6.35% for TT, P-value 
<0.0001).  This finding was replicated in the GOLDN cohort with a similar statisti cally significant decrease in 
ARA concentration. (74)  This SNP is included within haplotype blocks for two prior studies that found strong 
associations between FADS1  gene variation and tissue levels of ARA. (77-78) Thus the results of familial 
aggregation s tudies, haplotype studies, and GWAS studies have all supported that genetic variants in FADS1 
are important determinates of tissue levels of ARA and have led some investigators to call for the “ inclusion of 
FADS genotypes as well as diet and lifestyle fact ors in future 
randomized control trials addressing biological effects of PUFAs..”.  
(79)  
 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
 
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer and the 
second most frequent cause of cancer related mortality in the United 
States.  Animal and human studies have suggested that the marine -
derived n -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), eicosapentanoic 
acid (EPA) and docosahexanoic acid (DHA),  have cancer 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  6 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 inhibitory properties while conversely, n -6 PUFAs such as arachidonic acid ( ARA) may promote 
tumorigenesis.  The mechanism behind these opposing effects is likely due to differences in the biological 
activity of their eicosanoids end products and their effects on chronic inflammation.  Prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2) 
is a pro -inflammatory eicosanoid that is aberrantly produced in both colorectal adenomas and cancer and is 
derived from ARA via the cyclo -oxygenase pathway.  EPA is converted through the same pathway into 
prostaglandin E 3, which has 4 to 7 - fold less pros taglandin E receptor affinity,  is less inflammatory, and may 
even be pro -apoptotic compared to PGE 2.  As such, it may be the ratio of ARA to EPA and DHA rather than 
the absolute levels of marine -derived n -3 PUFAs that contribute most towards their antiprol iferative and pro -
apoptotic effects.   
 
The ratio of ARA to EPA + DHA can be manipulated through fish oil supplementation, however; genetic factors 
may play a key role on determining this ratio .  Recent genome -wide association and haplotype studies have 
demonstrated that up to 28% of the additive variance in tissue levels of ARA is explained by variants in a single 
gene, fatty acid desaturase 1  (FADS1 ).  FADS1  is the rate -limiting enzyme in the conversion of linoleic acid 
(LA), the most commonly consumed PU FA, to ARA, and homozygotes for the T allele (population frequency of 
13%, HapMap –CEU) in rs174537  have lower fatty acid desaturase activity and subsequently lower tissue 
levels of ARA.  While EPA can be produced in vivo from α-linolenic acid, in humans, this process is extremely 
inefficient and most tissue level EPA derives directly from dietary consumption of fatty fish.  Thus, high activity 
of FAD1  and subsequently increased tissue levels of ARA may offset some of the potential benefits of dietary 
supplementation with fish oil.  To date, no previously published studies have investigated how genetic variants 
that influence fatty acid desaturase activ ity might modify the beneficial effects of fish oil supplementation.  
 
Our hypothesis is that the individuals with genetically determined lower activity of FADS1 will derive greater 
benefit from fish oil supplementation than individuals with higher FADS1 ac tivity because of lower tissue levels 
of ARA and subsequently a more favorable ARA to EPA + DHA ratio.   To test this hypothesis we will recruit 
150 participants with recently identified adenomatous polyps and conduct a 6 -month double blind 3 X 2 
factorial randomized controlled trial.  Our first factor will be the rs174537 genotype (GG, GT, and TT) in the 
FADS1  gene and our second factor will be fish oil supplementation (fish oil versus placebo).  Our primary study 
outcome will be the change from baseline in  rectal epithelial cell proliferation as measured by Ki -67 labeling 
and rectal crypt apoptosis as measured by TUNEL.  Secondary endpoints will include rectal epithelial cell 
expression of COX -2 and 15 -PGDH, rectal cell production of PGE 2 and PGE 3, rectal c ell fatty acid 
concentrations, as well as, changes from baseline in biomarkers of inflammation (C -reactive protein), 
adipokines (leptin, adiponectin), and markers of insulin sensitivity (HOMA -IR).   
 
Our Specific Aims for this research proposal are:   
 
1) to determine the efficacy of fish oil supplements on rectal epithelial cell proliferation indexes and markers of 
rectal crypt apoptosis; and,  
 
2) to determine the effect of genetically determined fatty acid desaturase activity on fish oil supplementation f or 
markers of colorectal cancer risk.   
   
Our long -term objectives are to determine genetic factors that might influence the efficacy of fish oil 
supplementation in order to conduct a more definitive adenoma recurrence trial using marine -derived n -3 
PUFAs .  We anticipate that fish oil will have anti -neoplastic effect and individuals with low FADS1  activity will 
have a greater response compared to individuals with high FADS1 activity.  Our study will be the first to 
investigate the nutrigenomics of fish oil  supplementation in colorectal cancer chemoprevention and may have 
implications beyond cancer prevention as fish oil is being actively investigated for its anti -inflammatory effects 
in cardiovascular and psychiatric diseases as well as diabetes mellitus an d the metabolic syndrome.  
 
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  7 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 Please see above for relevant description of animal studies and previous human studies.  
 
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1) ≥ 40 and < 80 years of age  
2) History of 1 or more  adenomatous polyps  
3) Consent to be contacted for future studies  
4) Participants with known genotype for rs174535 in FADS1  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1) Previously resected colorectal cancer  
2) Congestive heart failure  
3) Current metabolic or life -threatening disease  
4) Currentl y taking fish oil supplements  
5) Allergic to fish products  
6) Diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease  
7) Diagnosis of any cancer (except non -melanoma skin cancer)  
8) Diagnosis of cirrhosis  
9) Diagnosis of kidney disease requiring dialysis  
10) Pregnant or breast feeding  
11) Previous partial of total colectomy  
12) Inability to come to Vanderbilt GRCR for research procedures  
 
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
 
Recruitment and Retention  
We will identify eligible participants  based on the inclusion criteria by reviewing study data and medical record 
data collected in the TCPS.  Participants still eligible after record review will be mailed an introductory letter 
inviting them to participate.   One week after the letter is mailed; a trained interviewer from the SR SR will call 
the potential participants to provide more detailed information about the study, answer questions about the 
study, and to see if they may be interested in participating.   At that time  if the participant appears interested 
verbal consent will b e obtained and the SRSR interviewer will administer the baseline survey and the first 48 
hour dietary recall interview.  At the end of the first 48 -hour dietary recall interview , an appointment will be 
made with the participant for the baseline in -person v isit.  After this initial visit ,informed consent is obtained .  At 
the baseline visit, we will re -genotype rs174535 to confirm the accuracy of our imputation process.  This 
strategy will allow us to efficiently and accurately identify appropriate candidates  for our study.  
 
Eligible subjects will present to the Vanderbilt General Clinical Research Center (GCRC) for the initial visit and 
baseline study procedures.  Participants who are eligible for the study and provide written consent for 
enrollment will have  blood obtained;  an adipose tissue biopsy performed, and undergoes the baseline rectal 
mucosal biopsy procedure.  Treatment assignment will be obtained from the Vanderbilt Investigational 
Pharmacy by a coordinator.  The first dose of the study medication w ill be given to patients at the initial visit 
and the date and time recorded.  This date and time will be considered the time of randomization.   
 
Randomization  
Randomization will be performed according to a permuted block randomization scheme stratified o n the three 
genotypes.  Randomization will proceed within these three strata with a block size of balancing interval, varying 
randomly according to the outcome of a computer generated random number.  This ensures that the 
cumulative proportion of assignmen ts to each treatment will be balanced after each block of assignments has 
been made.  
 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  8 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 Side Effect  
Drop Out  TCPS adenoma cases  
Introduction Letter  
1/3 GG, 1/3 GT, 1/3 TT  
Enrollment  
50 Cases with  
GG Genotype  50 Cases with  
GT Genotype  50 Cases with  
TT Genotype  
Two 24 Hour Recall Dietary Assessments  
(1 Weekday, 1 Weekend)  
Randomization  
Baseline Collection of Rectal Biopsy  
Blood and Adipose tissue  
 24 Hour Recall Dietary Assessments  
(Week 8)  Fish Oil Supplementation  
25 with GG  
25 with GT  
25 with TT  Placebo  
25 with GG  
25 with GT  
25 with TT  
 24 Hour Recall Dietary Assessments  
(Week 16)   Midpoint Collection of Blood  
(Week 12)  
 End: 24 Hour Recall Dietary Assessment  
Collection of Rectal Biopsy and Blood  6.0 Study Procedures  
 
Data Collection  
Because outside dietary exposure to both n -6 and n -3 PUFAs could possibly confound the effect of fish oil 
supplementation we will perfo rm a total of three  48-hour dietary recall studies for each  participant over the 
course of the study.  At enrollment, we will conduct the initial  48-hour dietary assessments. (93-94)  In addition 
we will conduct one 48-hour dietary recall at week 12 and at week 24.  We will use data collected from these 
48-hour dietary assessments along with standard food composition tables to calculate dietary exposure to 
PUFAs.  We have chosen to use 48-hour dietary recalls as opposed to food frequency questionnaire s as 48-
hour dietary recalls are considered the most accurate survey based method of determining food exposure. (95)  
We will determine adherence to study drug at each in -person visit during the study.  Medication and medication 
changes will be recorded at these visits.    Adherence to fish oil will also be determined through RBC 
phospholipid membrane fatty acid analysis performed at month 3 and month 6.  Prior studies have confirmed 
that this measure is a valid method to determine compliance with fish oil s upplementation and have 
documented increased levels of erythrocyte phospholipid membrane concentrations of EPA in subjects 
randomized to fish oil supplements. (96-100)  In addition, to determine whether fish oil supplementation also 
influences fatty acid m embrane concentration at our target tissue, we will determine the change in rectal 
epithelial cell phospholipid membrane fatty acid concentration.  
 
Fish oil Capsules  
Participants allocated to fish oil supplementation will be instructed to 
take three Lovaz a® capsules each containing 465 mg of EPA and 
375 mg DHA daily; this will provide a total daily dose of 1395 mg 
EPA plus 1125 mg DHA for a total daily dose of fish oil of 2.5 grams.  
Patients will take one tablet three times a day with meals.  The 
rational e for this dose is that it has successfully lowered indexes of 
rectal mucosal proliferation in previously trials and is well tolerated 
without any reported adverse effects .(54, 56)  Prior studies have 
demonstrated that 2.5 mg of fish oil daily is able to de crease the 
rectal epithelial cell ratio of ARA to EPA + DHA by 49 to 57%. (54, 
56)  Lovaza® capsules are the only FDA approved preparation of 
fish oil, and as such, the quality of the drug is monitored and 
assured.  Pharmacological grade fish oil capsules h ave the 
advantage of providing high concentrations of PUFAs, low levels of 
contaminants, such as mercury, and almost no fish odor.   
 
Placebo Capsules  
We will use oleic acid as our placebo.  The reason for the use of 
oleic acid is several -fold.  First, ole ic acid (olive oil) capsules have a 
similar texture, size, color, and consistency to fish oil capsules.  
More importantly, oleic acid does not undergo conversion to an 
eicosanoid or any other metabolically active product.  This is 
opposed to corn oil, whic h has also been used as a placebo in fish 
oil studies but is primarily linoleic acid and could subsequently 
increase tissue levels of ARA and confound the results of our study.  
Oleic acid has been used as a placebo in several prior studies of 
fish oil sup plementation and is well tolerated. (54-56)   
 
Assessment Visits  
Patients will attend the GCRC clinic at the baseline ( initial visit ), after 3 months of study treatment ( mid-point 
visit), and after 6 months of study treatment ( end visit ).  The study coordin ator will contact participants every 
4 weeks over the course of the study to encourage adherence to the study protocol.  At the 3 -month and 6 -Figure 3: Study Flow Diagram  
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  9 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 month visits, compliance with treatment will be monitored by capsule count and measurement of RBC 
phospholipid fat ty acid concentrations.  Adverse events will be recorded at these visits.   
 
Primary Endpoint and its Determination  
The primary outcome of interest is rectal epithelial cell proliferation, as measured by Ki67 (mib -1) labeling and 
apoptosis as measured by TUNEL (TdT -mediated dUTP Nick -End Labeling).  At the initial visit and the end 
visit, eight  mucosal biopsies will be taken 30 cm from the anal margin with 2.4 mm disposable biopsy forceps 
(Cook Medical, Charlotte, NC).   Biopsies will be taken from normal appearing mucosa.  Four biopsies will be 
formalin -fixed and paraffin embedded and processing will begin within 1 hour of collection.  Four additional 
biopsies will be snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -70˚C until analysis of mucosal fatty acids.  Rectal 
biopsies offer numerous advantages to sigmoid colonic biopsies as no bowel preparation is required and no 
analgesia or sedation is required.   
 
Serial section s of 5  µm thick will be prepared from the rectal tissue.  The sections will be placed sequentially 
on positive -charged slides and numbered from 1 up to 26.  The sections numbered 1, 11, and 21 will be used 
for H&E staining.  For each biomarker, we will stain three sections spaced 50 µm apart to avoid double 
counting of crypts in biopsy specimens.  Thus, for example, sections 2, 12, and 22 may be used for one 
biomarker but adjoining sections (e.g. 2 -4) may not be used for the same biomarker.  We will collect multiple 
biopsies and prepare multiple sections for quality control or to repeat assays in case of failure.  Since we 
produce tissue sections that are 34 mi crons thick, literally hundreds of sections could be prepared from any 
tissue block that is 2.4 mm thick.  If there is remaining tissue, the block face will be re -sealed with paraffin to 
prevent degradation of tissue components through oxidation. Sections will also be coated with a thin layer of 
paraffin.  All blocks and slides will be stored in a vacuum chamber at 4°C in a cold room for long -term storage.  
 
Expression of Ki -67 in colon epithelial cells will be detected following the standard IHC protocol of  EnVision™+ 
System, HRP (DAKO).  After deparaffinization of the tissue slides, antigen retrieval is performed by heating the 
slides with a pressure cooker in the optimized buffer solutions: Retrievagen A pH6.5 (BD Pharmingen) for Ki -
67 and using the primar y antibodies of mouse monoclonal anti -Ki-67(BD Biosciences Pharmingen). The 
TUNEL  assay is conducted to measure apoptosis of colon epithelium using DeadEnd Colorimetric TUNEL 
System (Promega) .  After all fields of each sample are measured, the final immunoreaction indices are 
generated automatically by setting algorithms as ‘‘total positive area / total nuclear area.  Apoptotic activity is 
also scored using standard  morphologic criteria applied to H&E stained sections . Briefly, a total of 24 to 30 
longitudinal crypts at three section levels are scored per biopsy. The cells are considered apoptotic if the 
shrinkage of the cell from its neighbors, chrom atin condensation and nuclear fragmentation (karyorrhexis) are 
presented.  Cells manifesting these criteria are included in apoptosis scores only when observed in isolated, 
single cells not associated with an inflammatory response. The number of apoptotic cells for each crypt is 
combined to calculate a mean apoptosis score per crypt for each specimen  
 
All biomarkers will be scored using imaging analysis.  We use a system composed of an Olympus BX40 
microscope, a Retiga FAST 1394 color digital camera and Bio Quant NOVA Prime imaging software (BioQuant, 
Nashville, TN).  The video images are captured using a 10X objective lens under a constant state of exposure 
control.  Approximately 24 -30 well -oriented longitudinal crypts at three section levels per biopsy spe cimen are 
quantified.  The distribution of positive cells in the upper, middle, and basal zones is evaluated separately by a 
zonal quantitative analysis procedure established in our lab.  When each field is measured, region of interest 
tools are used to ex clude blank, folding, hemorrhage, necrosis, poorly stained, and stromal areas, whereas 
threshold tools are used to precisely define and measure total epithelial area, total nuclear area, positively 
stained area, and average gray density.  After all fields of each sample are measured, the final immunoreaction 
indices are generated automatically by setting algorithms as ‘‘total positive area / total nuclear area’’ for nuclear 
staining markers.   
 
Rationale for Using Ki -67 and TUNEL as a Primary Endpoint  
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  10 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 The r ationale for using cell proliferation and apoptosis labeling indexes is five -fold.  First, there is an 
association between proliferation and apoptosis indexes and colorectal adenomas and cancer. (101-106)  
Second, intra -observer correlations of blinded reco unts are reported at 0.80 or greater suggesting good 
reproducibility for Ki -67 labeling. (107)  Third, for TUNEL, the balance between crypt proliferation and apoptosis 
is important in colorectal cancer tumorigenesis and TUNEL methodology to date has been the  most employed 
biomarker of colon crypt apoptosis. (108-109)  Fourth, proliferation, and apoptosis indexes have been 
commonly used in prior studies investigating fish oils versus placebo.  Finally, the use of proliferation and 
apoptosis indexes allows for a  smaller sample size and shorter duration of study than using an outcome such 
as adenoma recurrence.  (107)   This will allow a more efficient experiment to test our hypotheses that fish oil 
will reduce markers associated with an increase risk of colorectal cancer before performing the more resource 
intense trial using adenoma recurrence as an outcome.  
 
Samples and Laboratory Measurements  
At the initial visit, mid -point visit, and end visit participants will be asked to provide 10 ml venous blood for 
measurements of erythrocyte phospholipids fatty acid content, to determine our secondary biomarker 
endpoints, and to provide plasma and serum that will be stored.  Over the entire course of the study this will 
result in the collection o f 30 ml of blood.  At the initial visit, subjects will undergo an adipose tissue biopsy of 
the upper buttock to obtain approximately 20 mg of adipose tissue for fatty acid analysis.  Adipose tissue 
reflects dietary exposure to fatty acids over a period of 2-3 years and is considered the best biomarker of long 
term dietary fatty acid exposure .(110)   Survey studies have found that research volunteers consider this 
procedure no more or less uncomfortable when compared to venipuncture.(134)  
 
Secondary Endpoints - Immunohistochemistry:  
The rationale for including the secondary outcome measurements of COX -2 and 15 -PGDH is several fold.  Our 
secondary markers includes expression levels of two growth factors that are often aberrantly expressed in the 
early s tages of CRC and are important factors in the production of eicosanoids. (111)   COX -2 converts ARA to 
PGE 2 and 15 -PGDH is the key enzyme responsible for the biological inactivation of these eicosanoids. (112)   
Thus, aberrantly production of PGE 2 could be rel ated to over -expression of COX -2 or inactivation of 15 -PGDH 
and indeed both of these findings have been described as important contributors toward colorectal 
carcinogenesis. (111)   Expression of COX -2 and 15 -PGDH in rectal epithelial cells will be detected following the 
standard IHC protocol of EnVision™+ System, HRP (DAKO).  After deparaffinization of the tissue slides, 
antigen retrieval is performed by heating the slides with a pressure cooker in the optimized buffer solutions: R -
buffer A for COX -2 and Tri s-glycine for 15 -PGDH, The primary antibodies of mouse monoclonal anti -COX -2 
and rabbit polyclonal anti -HPGD are applied with proper work dilutions.  After all fields of each sample are 
measured, the final immunoreaction indices are generated automatically  by setting algorithms as ‘‘total positive 
area / total epithelial area X average density’’ for cytoplasmic/membranous staining markers (COX -2, 15 -
PGDH).  
 
Determination of Erythrocyte and Rectal Cell Phospholipid Membrane Fatty Acid Analysis  
Lipids will be  extracted using the method of Folch -Lees. (113)  Fatty acid methyl esters are identified by 
comparing the retention times to those of known standards.  Inclusion of the internal standard, dipentadecanoyl  
phosphatidylcholine (C15:0), permits quantitation of phospholipid amount in the sample. The lowest level of 
detection for individuals’ fatty acids is less than 0.5% of the total profile.  In our laboratory, the inter -assay 
coefficient of variation (CV) is  1.1% and the intra -assay CV is 1.2% for measuring the mass of erythrocyte 
phospholipids.  The variation for the percent fatty acid is less than 1%  
 
Determination of C -reactive protein:  
The rationale for including measures of CRP into the study design is t wo-fold.  First, CRP is a well -known and 
validated biomarker of systemic inflammation, which has been associated with an increased risk for many 
cancers.  (5, 114)   Second, prior literature has suggested that fish oil supplementation may affect the 
producti on of CRP however; this finding has not been entirely consistent and may be modified by genetic 
factors.  (114-116) Plasma samples will be transported from the GCRC Core Laboratory.  CRP measurements 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  11 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 were performed using the High Sensitivity C -Reactive Pro tein Reagent (Pointe Scientific, Inc, Canton, MI) by 
means of latex particle enhanced immunoturbidimetric assay (ITA).  The minimal detectable concentration of 
CRP is 0.1 mg/L.  The coefficients of variation are 1.99 to 5.74% for within day samples and 1.2 3 to 6.97% for 
day-to-day sampling.  
 
Determination of Adipokines  
The rationale for determining the effect of fish oil supplementations on adipokines is two -fold.  First, emerging 
evidence has suggested that these adipose -derived hormones may be an importan t factor linking obesity with 
CRC risk.  (19, 27, 37 -38, 117 -118)  As such, we plan to determine baseline levels of these factors in 
individuals at increased risk for CRC and determine if levels of these factors can be manipulated through fish 
oil supplemen tation.  Second, although not entirely consistent, several studies have suggested that fish oil 
supplementation may reduce leptin levels while increasing adiponectin levels and thus reduce obesity -related 
chronic inflammation. (119-126)  Measurement of adipokines levels will be performed in the Vanderbilt 
Hormone Assay and Analytical Services Core, which has over 30 years experience in measuring circulating 
levels of hormones.  Leptin and adiponectin will be assayed via radioimmunoassay (R IA) using a double 
antibody procedure.  Final analysis is accomplished by quantifying the bound radioactive counts with a 
Packard Gamma counter connected to a computerized data reduction station.  
 
Determination of Insulin Sensitivity:  
The rationale for in cluding the homeostasis model assessment -insulin resistance (HOMA -IR) within our study 
design is that the HOMA -IR is strongly correlated to euglycemic clamp estimates of insulin sensitivity in 
individuals with normal glucose tolerance, individuals with imp aired glucose tolerance and individuals with 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus. (91, 127 -128)  The HOMA -IR independently predicts the development of diabetes.  
(129-130) Diabetes mellitus and elevated insulin levels are well -described risk factors for colorectal can cer 
(131)  and knowledge as to whether FADS1  activity might modify the effect of fish oil on glucose homeostasis 
could be relevant towards both prevention of colorectal cancer and metabolic diseases.  We will calculate 
HOMA -IR using a method described by Ma tthews et al. (91)  The HOMA -IR derives an estimate of insulin 
sensitivity from the mathematical modeling of fasting plasma glucose and insulin concentrations. The formula 
is [fasting glucose*fasting insulin]/22.5.  Plasma glucose will be determined based o n the Hexokinase method 
measuring the absorbance of NADPH spectrophotometrically and measures on the Hitachi 911 analyzer using 
Roche Diagnostics regents (Indianapolis, IN).  Plasma insulin level will be determined by radioimmunoassay 
(RAI) using a double antibody procedure.  Both plasma glucose and plasma insulin determination will be 
performed in the GCRC Core Laboratory that has extensive experience in determining plasma glucose and 
insulin levels for research studies.  
  
Data management and quality contr ol 
The Vanderbilt GCRC Informatics Core will be used as a central location for data processing and analysis.  
Vanderbilt University has developed software tools and workflow methodology for electronic collection and 
management of research study data.  (132)   REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a secure, web -
based application that provides an intuitive interface for users to enter validated data remotely (with automated 
data type and range checks), data manipulation audit trails and reporting, and an  export mechanism for end -of-
study export of data to common statistical packages.   
 
 
7.0 Risks  
 
Potential Risks  
The potential risk to the subjects related to the drawing of venous blood, adipose tissue biopsy, the biopsy 
procedure for rectal tissue, and the use of fish oil supplements.   
 
Sampling of venous blood  includes risk such as bruising, bleeding, and infecti on.  These complications are 
uncommon and phlebotomy is a routine part of general clinical care.  
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  12 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012  
Adipose tissue biopsies  are associated with several risks.  We will obtain a subcutaneous adipose biopsy from 
the upper buttock with a 16 -gauge needle and dis posable syringe.  These procedures have been successfully 
used in multiple nutritional epidemiological studies as well as clinical trials, are well tolerated and do not require 
local anesthetics.  These procedures do not require any specialized equipment a nd can be performed with 
standard 10 -ml vacutainer tube and butterfly needle.  Survey studies have found that research volunteers 
consider this procedure to be no more or less uncomfortable compared to venipuncture. (134)   The risks 
associated with this pro cedure are similar to those of venipuncture and include bruising, bleeding and infection.   
 
Rectal mucosal biopsies  are associated with several potential risks.  There is a risk of patient discomfort 
associated with the insertion of the anoscope.  However , this discomfort is generally mild, such that when 
anoscopy is utilized in clinical care, for example visualizing internal hemorrhoids, sedation and analgesia is not 
required. In addition, no bowel preparation is needed reducing the risk of abdominal disc omfort associated with 
cathartic agents.  Infection and bleeding are also potential risk associated with rectal biopsy procedures.  
Infection however should be uncommon as all equipment, including the anoscope, obturator and surgical 
forceps are sterile an d disposable so there is no risk of contamination between subjects.  Bleeding is 
minimized by the shallow depth of the biopsy and small circumference of the biopsy.  When bleeding does 
occur with the procedure it is generally well controlled through the ap plication of gentle pressure or silver 
nitrate.  
 
Omega -3 fatty acids  have been part of the human diet for millennia and have uncommon and generally trivial 
side effects.  In 1997 the Food and Drug Administration rules that an intake of up to 3 g/day of mar ine omega -3 
fatty acids are Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS) (135)   (http://www.epa.gov/fedrgstr/EPA -
IMPACT/2002/February/Day -26/i4327.htm ). This ruling specifically co nsidered the possible effects of fish oil on 
bleeding time, glycemic control, and LDL cholesterol.  Fish oil supplements have been used in several large 
randomized controlled studies of cardiac patients. (136)  In some trials doses as high as 12 g/d for dura tions of 
2 years have been well tolerated. (137)   The most common side effect of fish oil is a fishy after -taste which is 
less of a problem with pharmaceutical grade supplements.  Minor gastrointestinal symptoms occur in 5 percent 
of patients. (135)  Fish oi l has been approved by the FDA for treatment of hypertriglyceridemia.  
 
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants or 
Others  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
Adverse event (AE) grading and attribution scale  
For the purposes of this study and adverse event is defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a subject, 
not necessarily having a causal relationship with the study.  A serious adverse event (SAE) is any untoward 
medical occurrence that a) results in d eath, b) is life -threatening, c) requires inpatient hospitalization or 
prolongation of existing hospitalization, d) results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or e) is a 
congenital anomaly/birth defect.  AE’s are graded as Mild (no limitat ion of usual activities), Moderate (some 
limitation) or Severe (inability to carry out usual activities) and attributes according to the relationship to the 
study drug and/or procedure as Not related, Unlikely, Possible, Probable, or Definite.   
 
Plan for unanticipated AE reporting  
SAEs and unanticipated AEs will be reported immediately by telephone to the Vanderbilt University IRB, the 
Nashville VA IRB, the GCRC and the DSMB.  An Adverse Event Report form will be completes and returned to 
the VU and VA IRB , GCRC, and DSMB within 5 working days.  
 
Plan for annual reporting of AEs  
Annual reports are submitted to the VU and VA IRBs and will contain a) the number of adverse events and an 
explanation of how each event was handled, b) the number of complaints and how each complaint was 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  13 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 handled, c) the number of subject withdrawals and an explanation of why the subject withdrew or was 
withdrawn, and d) the number of protocol violations and how each was handled.  
 
Plan for safety review  
Patients will be monitored by both a study physician and a nurse during rectal biopsy procedures.  Subjects will 
be monitored for 1 hour after the procedure is complete within the GCRC to ensure to immediate adverse 
events and will be contacted by the Research Assistant over the next 2 4 hours to assess for pain or any other 
symptoms which might be possible post -procedure complications.  
 
9.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
Participants may be withdrawn from the study if they are not able to provide blood, urine or rectal samples, or 
they are not able to take their supplements as instructed.  
 
If the intervention proves clearly harmful, the study will be stopped ahead of schedule.   Furthermore, a single 
life-threatening condition related to the intervention, or a single life -threatening even t from biospecimen 
collection, would cause consideration for study termination.    Moderate complications occurring in more than 
one subject from any protocol would likewise cause consideration for study termination.  
 
10.0  Statistical Considerations  
 
General Approach  
Patients will be followed for a maximum of 6 months and will complete the study on the last day of treatment 
after rectal mucosal biopsy.  The following categories of patients may fail to complete follow -up: (1) patients 
who discontinue the study before 6 months due to adverse events or other reasons not related to the endpoint 
will be considered withdrawals, (2) patients who are observed at least once during follow -up but die or do not 
return for subsequent visit or do not return for scheduled vis its, (3) patients who die before a scheduled visit or 
do not return for any scheduled visits.   
 
Approach to Specific Aim 2  
Hypothesis  
Specific Aim 2 will test the hypothesis that genetically -determined fatty acid desaturase activity will modify the 
effect  of fish oil supplementation on biomarkers of colorectal cancer risk  
 
General Approach for Specific Aims 2  
The 150 patients enrolled in Specific Aim 1 will provide data for Specific Aims 2.  Thus, the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria, recruitment and retenti on, randomization, study design, data collection, intervention, determination of 
the end points, and assessment visits have been described in Specific Aim 1.   
 
Statistical Analysis: Specific Aim 1 and Aim 2  
General approach  
The study is a double -blinded 3  X 2 factorial randomized controlled trial where patients will be randomized to 
the fish oil intervention and placebo group within each genotype group.  The primary outcomes are rectal 
epithelial cell proliferation measured by Ki -67 labeling and rectal cry pt apoptosis measured by TUNEL.  The 
main secondary outcome variables will include: rectal mucosal expression of COX -2 and 15 -PGDH , production 
of PGE 2 and PGE 3, rectal mucosal tissue levels of fatty acids, and changes in biomarkers of inflammation (C -
react ive protein), adipokines (leptin, adiponectin), and markers of insulin sensitivity.   
 
In Aim 1, the primary analysis will compare baseline and 6 -month Ki -67 proliferative indexes and TUNEL 
labeling indexes in participants allocated to fish oil supplements  compared to those allocated to placebo.  In 
Aim 2, the primary analysis will compare baseline to 6 -month Ki -67 proliferation indexes and TUNEL labeling 
indexes in participants in FADS1  genotypes (GG, GT, and TT) allocated to fish oil supplements.  The 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  14 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 secondary analysis will follow a similar plan as the primary outcome with the secondary outcomes of rectal 
mucosal tissue expression of COX -2 and 15 -PGDH and the rectal epithelial cell production of PGE 2 and PGE 3, 
serum levels of C -reactive protein, leptin, a diponectin, and HOMA -IR scores.  
 
Statistical analysis plan  
Linear regression models will be used to test whether there are differences in the primary outcomes between 
the fish oil intervention group and placebo group (Aim 1) as well as the interaction between the two groups and 
FADS1  genotypes (Aim 2) after contro lling for the baseline measurement for each outcome and potential 
confounding factors.  For Aim 2, we will also test differences in the primary outcomes among the genotypes 
within the fish oil intervention group.  For our secondary analyses, a similar regr ession modeling approach will 
be employed to test differences in all the outcomes among comparison groups described above.  The potential 
confounders included in the models will be polyp type, size, and location for primary adenoma as well as body 
mass ind ex, age, total energy intake, intakes of other nutrients (average of four 24 -hour recalls), and baseline 
PUFA levels derived from adipose tissue fatty acid biomarkers.  
 
Descriptive statistics, including means, standard deviation, and ranges for continuous variables, as well as 
percents and frequencies for categorical variables, will be presented.  Standard graphing and screening 
techniques will be used to detect outliers and to ensure data accuracy.  Distributions of continuous outcomes 
will be assessed for  normality.  If normality is violated, an appropriate data transformation will be employed. 
Hypotheses will be tested at the level of α=0.05. This data analysis plan will be carried out using statistical 
software SAS® (Cary, North Carolina) or statistical package R ( R Development Core Team, 2008 ).  
 
Sample size estimation and power analysis   
Our sample size estimates are derived using previously described clinical trial information using similar primary 
outcomes and doses of fish oil supplements.  Courtney et al found a change in the mean level of Ki67 labeling 
of -5.86 (SD ± 8.8) for individuals allocated to fish oil supplements (n=14) and 3.62 (SD  8.0) for the placebo 
group (n=14). (57, 60)   With a sample size of 22 per group for each genotype would provi de at least 90% of 
power to detect 1 SD (8.4) difference in ΔKi67 between the two groups within each genotype with type I error 
rate = 5%.  Assuming approximately 10% of drop -out rate, the total of 150 patients (25 patients per group per 
genotype  2 group s  3 genotypes = 150) would provide excellent power to detect a clinically significant 
difference between the intervention and placebo groups.  
 
11.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
 
Confidentiality and ethical considerations will be addressed as follows.  All identifying documents, data and 
specimens collected as a result of this study will be retained by the investigator.  Access to this material will be 
available only to the research investigator and his staff.  Paper (hard) copies of study documents will be kept in 
a locked file cabinet.  Electronic copies of documents will be stored in a password protected database on a 
secured server.  If results of this study are to be published, only code numbers will be used for identification.  
Participants will not be identified by name.  
 
12.0  Follow -up and Record Retention  
 
Hard copies of all records will be stored in locked filing cabinets located in locked office space. Electronic 
databases are located in restricted access folders within the Vanderbilt University Medical Center computer 
network. Access to database is restricted by password or permission -based access. All identifying information 
will be removed and/or deleted from the participant records at 30 years following the conclusion of the 
investigation.  Biological samples are coded and retained in a locked location with access limited to specific 
study personnel. DNA extracted will be stored for 30 years. After this period DNA samples will be destroyed.  
 
13.0  Literature Cited:  
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  15 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012  
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Hao Y, Xu J, Thun MJ. Cancer statistics, 2009. CA Cancer J Clin. 2009 Jul -
Aug;59(4):225 -49. 
2. Krause WF, DuBois RN. The molecular basis for prevention of colorectal cancer. Clin Colorectal 
Cancer. 2001 May;1(1):47 -54. 
3. Wilson SJ, L. Coussens, C. Hanna, K., editor. Cancer and the Enviroment: Gene -Enviromental 
Interactions. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press; 2002.  
4. Kundu JK, Surh YJ. Inflammation: gearing the journey to cancer. Mutat Res. 2008 Jul -Aug;659(1 -2):15 -
30. 
5. Allin KH, Bojesen SE, Nordestgaard BG. Baseline C -Reactive Protein Is Associated With Incident 
Cancer and Survival in Patients With Cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Mar 16.  
6. Coussens LM, Werb Z. Inflammation and cancer. Nature. 2002 Dec 19 -26;420(6917):860 -7. 
7. Wang MT, Honn KV, Nie D. Cyclooxygen ases, prostanoids, and tumor progression. Cancer Metastasis 
Rev. 2007 Dec;26(3 -4):525 -34. 
8. Wang D, Dubois RN. Prostaglandins and cancer. Gut. 2006 Jan;55(1):115 -22. 
9. Hansen -Petrik MB, McEntee MF, Jull B, Shi H, Zemel MB, Whelan J. Prostaglandin E(2) pr otects 
intestinal tumors from nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory drug -induced regression in Apc(Min/+) mice. Cancer Res. 
2002 Jan 15;62(2):403 -8. 
10. Kawamori T, Uchiya N, Sugimura T, Wakabayashi K. Enhancement of colon carcinogenesis by 
prostaglandin E2 administration. Carcinogenesis. 2003 May;24(5):985 -90. 
11. Petrik MB, McEntee MF, Chiu CH, Whelan J. Antagonism of arachidonic acid is linked to the 
antitumorigenic effect of dietary eicosapentaenoic acid in Apc(Min/+) mice. J Nutr. 2000 May;130(5):1153 -8. 
12. Petrik MB, McEntee MF, Johnson BT, Obukowicz MG, Whelan J. Highly unsaturated (n -3) fatty acids, 
but not alpha -linolenic, conjugated linoleic or gamma -linolenic acids, reduce tumorigenesis in Apc(Min/+) mice. 
J Nutr. 2000 Oct;130(10):2434 -43. 
13. Gupt a RA, Dubois RN. Colorectal cancer prevention and treatment by inhibition of cyclooxygenase -2. 
Nat Rev Cancer. 2001 Oct;1(1):11 -21. 
14. Tai HH, Ensor CM, Tong M, Zhou H, Yan F. Prostaglandin catabolizing enzymes. Prostaglandins Other 
Lipid Mediat. 2002 Aug ;68-69:483 -93. 
15. Yan M, Rerko RM, Platzer P, Dawson D, Willis J, Tong M, et al. 15 -Hydroxyprostaglandin 
dehydrogenase, a COX -2 oncogene antagonist, is a TGF -beta-induced suppressor of human gastrointestinal 
cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Dec 14; 101(50):17468 -73. 
16. Myung SJ, Rerko RM, Yan M, Platzer P, Guda K, Dotson A, et al. 15 -Hydroxyprostaglandin 
dehydrogenase is an in vivo suppressor of colon tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Aug 
8;103(32):12098 -102. 
17. Calle EE, Kaaks R. Overw eight, obesity and cancer: epidemiological evidence and proposed 
mechanisms. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004 Aug;4(8):579 -91. 
18. Fasshauer M, Paschke R. Regulation of adipocytokines and insulin resistance. Diabetologia. 2003 
Dec;46(12):1594 -603. 
19. van Kruijsdijk R C, van der Wall E, Visseren FL. Obesity and cancer: the role of dysfunctional adipose 
tissue. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Oct;18(10):2569 -78. 
20. Yamauchi T, Kamon J, Waki H, Terauchi Y, Kubota N, Hara K, et al. The fat -derived hormone 
adiponect in reverses insulin resistance associated with both lipoatrophy and obesity. Nat Med. 2001 
Aug;7(8):941 -6. 
21. Munzberg H, Myers MG, Jr. Molecular and anatomical determinants of central leptin resistance. Nat 
Neurosci. 2005 May;8(5):566 -70. 
22. Arita Y, Ki hara S, Ouchi N, Takahashi M, Maeda K, Miyagawa J, et al. Paradoxical decrease of an 
adipose -specific protein, adiponectin, in obesity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 2;257(1):79 -83. 
23. Bruce WR, Giacca A, Medline A. Possible mechanisms relating die t and risk of colon cancer. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2000 Dec;9(12):1271 -9. 
24. Kissebah AH, Vydelingum N, Murray R, Evans DJ, Hartz AJ, Kalkhoff RK, et al. Relation of body fat 
distribution to metabolic complications of obesity. J Clin Endocrinol  Metab. 1982 Feb;54(2):254 -60. 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  16 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 25. Igata M, Motoshima H, Tsuruzoe K, Kojima K, Matsumura T, Kondo T, et al. Adenosine 
monophosphate -activated protein kinase suppresses vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation through the 
inhibition of cell cycle progressi on. Circ Res. 2005 Oct 14;97(8):837 -44. 
26. Barb D, Williams CJ, Neuwirth AK, Mantzoros CS. Adiponectin in relation to malignancies: a review of 
existing basic research and clinical evidence. Am J Clin Nutr. 2007 Sep;86(3):s858 -66. 
27. Huang XF, Chen JZ. O besity, the PI3K/Akt signal pathway and colon cancer. Obes Rev. 2009 
Nov;10(6):610 -6. 
28. Hoda MR, Keely SJ, Bertelsen LS, Junger WG, Dharmasena D, Barrett KE. Leptin acts as a mitogenic 
and antiapoptotic factor for colonic cancer cells. Br J Surg. 2007 Ma r;94(3):346 -54. 
29. Jaffe T, Schwartz B. Leptin promotes motility and invasiveness in human colon cancer cells by 
activating multiple signal -transduction pathways. Int J Cancer. 2008 Dec 1;123(11):2543 -56. 
30. Gunter MJ, Leitzmann MF. Obesity and colorecta l cancer: epidemiology, mechanisms and candidate 
genes. J Nutr Biochem. 2006 Mar;17(3):145 -56. 
31. Nilsen TI, Vatten LJ. Prospective study of colorectal cancer risk and physical activity, diabetes, blood 
glucose and BMI: exploring the hyperinsulinaemia hypothesis. Br J Cancer. 2001 Feb 2;84(3):417 -22. 
32. Platz EA, Hankinson SE, Rifai N, Colditz GA, Speizer FE, Giovannucci E. Glycosylated hemoglobin and 
risk of colorectal cancer and adenoma (United States). Cancer Causes Control. 1999 Oct;10(5):379 -86. 
33. Saydah SH, Platz EA, Rifai N, Pollak MN, Brancati FL, Helzlsouer KJ. Association of markers of insulin 
and glucose control with subsequent colorectal cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2003 
May;12(5):412 -8. 
34. Keku TO, Lund PK, Galanko J, S immons JG, Woosley JT, Sandler RS. Insulin resistance, apoptosis, 
and colorectal adenoma risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005 Sep;14(9):2076 -81. 
35. Giovannucci E. Insulin, insulin -like growth factors and colon cancer: a review of the evidence. J N utr. 
2001 Nov;131(11 Suppl):3109S -20S. 
36. Schoen RE, Weissfeld JL, Kuller LH, Thaete FL, Evans RW, Hayes RB, et al. Insulin -like growth factor -I 
and insulin are associated with the presence and advancement of adenomatous polyps. Gastroenterology. 
2005 Aug ;129(2):464 -75. 
37. Yamaji T, Iwasaki M, Sasazuki S, Tsugane S. Interaction between adiponectin and leptin influences the 
risk of colorectal adenoma. Cancer Res. 2010 Jul 1;70(13):5430 -7. 
38. Wei EK, Giovannucci E, Fuchs CS, Willett WC, Mantzoros CS. Low p lasma adiponectin levels and risk 
of colorectal cancer in men: a prospective study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005 Nov 16;97(22):1688 -94. 
39. Lukanova A, Soderberg S, Kaaks R, Jellum E, Stattin P. Serum adiponectin is not associated with risk 
of colorectal cance r. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2006 Feb;15(2):401 -2. 
40. Stocks T, Lukanova A, Johansson M, Rinaldi S, Palmqvist R, Hallmans G, et al. Components of the 
metabolic syndrome and colorectal cancer risk; a prospective study. Int J Obes (Lond). 2008 Feb;3 2(2):304 -14. 
41. Calder PC. Dietary modification of inflammation with lipids. Proc Nutr Soc. 2002 Aug;61(3):345 -58. 
42. Wada M, DeLong CJ, Hong YH, Rieke CJ, Song I, Sidhu RS, et al. Enzymes and receptors of 
prostaglandin pathways with arachidonic acid -derived versus eicosapentaenoic acid -derived substrates and 
products. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 3;282(31):22254 -66. 
43. Vanamala J, Glagolenko A, Yang P, Carroll RJ, Murphy ME, Newman RA, et al. Dietary fish oil and 
pectin enhance colonocyte apoptosis in part thr ough suppression of PPARdelta/PGE2 and elevation of PGE3. 
Carcinogenesis. 2008 Apr;29(4):790 -6. 
44. Yang P, Chan D, Felix E, Cartwright C, Menter DG, Madden T, et al. Formation and antiproliferative 
effect of prostaglandin E(3) from eicosapentaenoic acid i n human lung cancer cells. J Lipid Res. 2004 
Jun;45(6):1030 -9. 
45. Chilton FH, Patel M, Fonteh AN, Hubbard WC, Triggiani M. Dietary n -3 fatty acid effects on neutrophil 
lipid composition and mediator production. Influence of duration and dosage. J Clin Inv est. 1993 
Jan;91(1):115 -22. 
46. Gibney MJ, Hunter B. The effects of short - and long -term supplementation with fish oil on the 
incorporation of n -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids into cells of the immune system in healthy volunteers. Eur J 
Clin Nutr. 1993 Apr; 47(4):255 -9. 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  17 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 47. Healy DA, Wallace FA, Miles EA, Calder PC, Newsholm P. Effect of low -to-moderate amounts of 
dietary fish oil on neutrophil lipid composition and function. Lipids. 2000 Jul;35(7):763 -8. 
48. Jiang YH, Lupton JR, Chang WC, Jolly CA, Aukema HM , Chapkin RS. Dietary fat and fiber differentially 
alter intracellular second messengers during tumor development in rat colon. Carcinogenesis. 1996 
Jun;17(6):1227 -33. 
49. Davidson LA, Brown RE, Chang WC, Morris JS, Wang N, Carroll RJ, et al. Morphodensito metric 
analysis of protein kinase C beta(II) expression in rat colon: modulation by diet and relation to in situ cell 
proliferation and apoptosis. Carcinogenesis. 2000 Aug;21(8):1513 -9. 
50. Davidson LA, Lupton JR, Jiang YH, Chapkin RS. Carcinogen and dieta ry lipid regulate ras expression 
and localization in rat colon without affecting farnesylation kinetics. Carcinogenesis. 1999 May;20(5):785 -91. 
51. Collett ED, Davidson LA, Fan YY, Lupton JR, Chapkin RS. n -6 and n -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids 
differential ly modulate oncogenic Ras activation in colonocytes. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2001 
May;280(5):C1066 -75. 
52. Zhao LP, Kushi LH, Klein RD, Prentice RL. Quantitative review of studies of dietary fat and rat colon 
carcinoma. Nutr Cancer. 1991;15(3 -4):169 -77. 
53. Cannizzo F, Jr., Broitman SA. Postpromotional effects of dietary marine or safflower oils on large bowel 
or pulmonary implants of CT -26 in mice. Cancer Res. 1989 Aug 1;49(15):4289 -94. 
54. Anti M, Armelao F, Marra G, Percesepe A, Bartoli GM, Palozza P,  et al. Effects of different doses of fish 
oil on rectal cell proliferation in patients with sporadic colonic adenomas. Gastroenterology. 1994 
Dec;107(6):1709 -18. 
55. Anti M, Marra G, Armelao F, Bartoli GM, Ficarelli R, Percesepe A, et al. Effect of omega -3 fatty acids 
on rectal mucosal cell proliferation in subjects at risk for colon cancer. Gastroenterology. 1992 Sep;103(3):883 -
91. 
56. Bartoli GM, Palozza P, Marra G, Armelao F, Franceschelli P, Luberto C, et al. n -3 PUFA and alpha -
tocopherol control of tu mor cell proliferation. Mol Aspects Med. 1993;14(3):247 -52. 
57. Courtney ED, Matthews S, Finlayson C, Di Pierro D, Belluzzi A, Roda E, et al. Eicosapentaenoic acid 
(EPA) reduces crypt cell proliferation and increases apoptosis in normal colonic mucosa in s ubjects with a 
history of colorectal adenomas. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2007 Jul;22(7):765 -76. 
58. Huang YC, Jessup JM, Forse RA, Flickner S, Pleskow D, Anastopoulos HT, et al. n -3 fatty acids 
decrease colonic epithelial cell proliferation in high -risk bowel mucosa. Lipids. 1996 Mar;31 Suppl:S313 -7. 
59. Bartram HP, Gostner A, Scheppach W, Reddy BS, Rao CV, Dusel G, et al. Effects of fish oil on rectal 
cell proliferation, mucosal fatty acids, and prostaglandin E2 release in healthy subjects. Gastroenterology. 
1993 Nov;105(5):1317 -22. 
60. Cheng J, Ogawa K, Kuriki K, Yokoyama Y, Kamiya T, Seno K, et al. Increased intake of n -3 
polyunsaturated fatty acids elevates the level of apoptosis in the normal sigmoid colon of patients 
polypectomized for adenomas/tumors. Ca ncer Lett. 2003 Apr 10;193(1):17 -24. 
61. West NJ, Clark SK, Phillips RK, Hutchinson JM, Leicester RJ, Belluzzi A, et al. Eicosapentaenoic acid 
reduces rectal polyp number and size in familial adenomatous polyposis. Gut. 2010 Jul;59(7):918 -25. 
62. Boudreau MD, Chanmugam PS, Hart SB, Lee SH, Hwang DH. Lack of dose response by dietary n -3 
fatty acids at a constant ratio of n -3 to n -6 fatty acids in suppressing eicosanoid biosynthesis from arachidonic 
acid. Am J Clin Nutr. 1991 Jul;54(1):111 -7. 
63. Kang JX, Wan g J, Wu L, Kang ZB. Transgenic mice: fat -1 mice convert n -6 to n -3 fatty acids. Nature. 
2004 Feb 5;427(6974):504.  
64. Gravaghi C, La Perle KM, Ogrodwski P, Kang JX, Quimby F, Lipkin M, et al. Cox -2 expression, PGE(2) 
and cytokines production are inhibited by endogenously synthesized n -3 PUFAs in inflamed colon of fat -1 
mice. J Nutr Biochem. 2010 Jul 22.  
65. Bartram HP, Gostner A, Reddy BS, Rao CV, Scheppach W, Dusel G, et al. Missing anti -proliferative 
effect of fish oil on rectal epithelium in healthy volu nteers consuming a high -fat diet: potential role of the n -3:n-6 
fatty acid ratio. Eur J Cancer Prev. 1995 Jun;4(3):231 -7. 
66. Kris-Etherton PM, Taylor DS, Yu -Poth S, Huth P, Moriarty K, Fishell V, et al. Polyunsaturated fatty 
acids in the food chain in the  United States. Am J Clin Nutr. 2000 Jan;71(1 Suppl):179S -88S. 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  18 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 67. Nakamura MT, Nara TY. Structure, function, and dietary regulation of delta6, delta5, and delta9 
desaturases. Annu Rev Nutr. 2004;24:345 -76. 
68. Marquardt A, Stohr H, White K, Weber BH. cDNA  cloning, genomic structure, and chromosomal 
localization of three members of the human fatty acid desaturase family. Genomics. 2000 Jun 1;66(2):175 -83. 
69. Burdge G. Alpha -linolenic acid metabolism in men and women: nutritional and biological implications . 
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2004 Mar;7(2):137 -44. 
70. Arterburn LM, Hall EB, Oken H. Distribution, interconversion, and dose response of n -3 fatty acids in 
humans. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006 Jun;83(6 Suppl):1467S -76S. 
71. Plourde M, Cunnane SC. Extremely l imited synthesis of long chain polyunsaturates in adults: 
implications for their dietary essentiality and use as supplements. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2007 
Aug;32(4):619 -34. 
72. Lemaitre RN, Siscovick DS, Berry EM, Kark JD, Friedlander Y. Familial aggregat ion of red blood cell 
membrane fatty acid composition: the Kibbutzim Family Study. Metabolism. 2008 May;57(5):662 -8. 
73. Malerba G, Schaeffer L, Xumerle L, Klopp N, Trabetti E, Biscuola M, et al. SNPs of the FADS gene 
cluster are associated with polyunsatu rated fatty acids in a cohort of patients with cardiovascular disease. 
Lipids. 2008 Apr;43(4):289 -99. 
74. Tanaka T, Shen J, Abecasis GR, Kisialiou A, Ordovas JM, Guralnik JM, et al. Genome -wide 
association study of plasma polyunsaturated fatty acids in the  InCHIANTI Study. PLoS Genet. 2009 
Jan;5(1):e1000338.  
75. Gieger C, Geistlinger L, Altmaier E, Hrabe de Angelis M, Kronenberg F, Meitinger T, et al. Genetics 
meets metabolomics: a genome -wide association study of metabolite profiles in human serum. PLoS Ge net. 
2008 Nov;4(11):e1000282.  
76. Illig T, Gieger C, Zhai G, Romisch -Margl W, Wang -Sattler R, Prehn C, et al. A genome -wide 
perspective of genetic variation in human metabolism. Nat Genet. 2010 Feb;42(2):137 -41. 
77. Rzehak P, Heinrich J, Klopp N, Schaeffer  L, Hoff S, Wolfram G, et al. Evidence for an association 
between genetic variants of the fatty acid desaturase 1 fatty acid desaturase 2 ( FADS1 FADS2) gene cluster 
and the fatty acid composition of erythrocyte membranes. Br J Nutr. 2009 Jan;101(1):20 -6. 
78. Schaeffer L, Gohlke H, Muller M, Heid IM, Palmer LJ, Kompauer I, et al. Common genetic variants of 
the FADS1 FADS2 gene cluster and their reconstructed haplotypes are associated with the fatty acid 
composition in phospholipids. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Jun 1;15(11):1745 -56. 
79. Lattka E, Illig T, Heinrich J, Koletzko B. Do FADS genotypes enhance our knowledge about fatty acid 
related phenotypes? Clin Nutr. 2010 Jun;29(3):277 -87. 
80. Bougnoux P, Giraudeau B, Couet C. Diet, cancer, and the lipidome. Cancer Epi demiol Biomarkers 
Prev. 2006 Mar;15(3):416 -21. 
81. Aulchenko YS, Ripatti S, Lindqvist I, Boomsma D, Heid IM, Pramstaller PP, et al. Loci influencing lipid 
levels and coronary heart disease risk in 16 European population cohorts. Nat Genet. 2009 Jan;41(1):4 7-55. 
82. Sabatti C, Service SK, Hartikainen AL, Pouta A, Ripatti S, Brodsky J, et al. Genome -wide association 
analysis of metabolic traits in a birth cohort from a founder population. Nat Genet. 2009 Jan;41(1):35 -46. 
83. Kathiresan S, Willer CJ, Peloso GM , Demissie S, Musunuru K, Schadt EE, et al. Common variants at 
30 loci contribute to polygenic dyslipidemia. Nat Genet. 2009 Jan;41(1):56 -65. 
84. Dupuis J, Langenberg C, Prokopenko I, Saxena R, Soranzo N, Jackson AU, et al. New genetic loci 
implicated in f asting glucose homeostasis and their impact on type 2 diabetes risk. Nat Genet. 2010 
Feb;42(2):105 -16. 
85. Zabaneh D, Balding DJ. A genome -wide association study of the metabolic syndrome in Indian Asian 
men. PLoS ONE. 2010;5(8).  
86. Shin A, Shrubsole MJ, Ness RM, Wu H, Sinha R, Smalley WE, et al. Meat and meat -mutagen intake, 
doneness preference and the risk of colorectal polyps: the Tennessee Colorectal Polyp Study. Int J Cancer. 
2007 Jul 1;121(1):136 -42. 
87. Murff HJ, Shrubsole MJ, Smalley WE, Wu H, Shyr  Y, Ness RM, et al. The interaction of age and 
hormone replacement therapy on colon adenoma risk. Cancer Detect Prev. 2007;31(2):161 -5. 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  19 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 88. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.  Medicare program; Changes to the hospital outpatient 
prospective paymen t system and calendar year 2004 payment rates; final rule. CFR42. CMS -1471 -FC, 410 -
419. 2004.  National Archives and Records Administration.  
89. Cai H, Yang G, Xiang YB, Hebert JR, Liu DK, Zheng W, et al. Sources of variation in nutrient intakes 
among men in Shanghai, China. Public Health Nutr. 2005 Dec;8(8):1293 -9. 
90. Jurj AL, Wen W, Xiang YB, Matthews CE, Liu D, Zheng W, et al. Reproducibility and validity of the 
Shanghai Men's Health Study physical activity questionnaire. Am J Epidemiol. 2007 May 15;165 (10):1124 -33. 
91. Matthews DR, Hosker JP, Rudenski AS, Naylor BA, Treacher DF, Turner RC. Homeostasis model 
assessment: insulin resistance and beta -cell function from fasting plasma glucose and insulin concentrations in 
man. Diabetologia. 1985 Jul;28(7):41 2-9. 
92. Murphey LJ, Williams MK, Sanchez SC, Byrne LM, Csiki I, Oates JA, et al. Quantification of the major 
urinary metabolite of PGE2 by a liquid chromatographic/mass spectrometric assay: determination of 
cyclooxygenase -specific PGE2 synthesis in health y humans and those with lung cancer. Analytical 
biochemistry. 2004 Nov 15;334(2):266 -75. 
93. Tarasuk V, Beaton GH. Day -to-day variation in energy and nutrient intake: evidence of individuality in 
eating behaviour? Appetite. 1992 Feb;18(1):43 -54. 
94. Maisey  S, Loughridge J, Southon S, Fulcher R. Variation in food group and nutrient intake with day of 
the week in an elderly population. Br J Nutr. 1995 Mar;73(3):359 -73. 
95. Willett W. Nutritional epidemiology. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 1998.  
96. Prisco D, Filippini M, Francalanci I, Paniccia R, Gensini GF, Abbate K, et al. Effect of n -3 
polyunsaturated fatty acid intake on phospholipid fatty acid composition in plasma and erythrocytes. Am J Clin 
Nutr. 1996 Jun;63(6):925 -32. 
97. Cartwright IJ, P ockley AG, Galloway JH, Greaves M, Preston FE. The effects of dietary omega -3 
polyunsaturated fatty acids on erythrocyte membrane phospholipids, erythrocyte deformability and blood 
viscosity in healthy volunteers. Atherosclerosis. 1985 Jun;55(3):267 -81. 
98. Popp -Snijders C, Schouten JA, de Jong AP, van der Veen EA. Effect of dietary cod -liver oil on the lipid 
composition of human erythrocyte membranes. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 1984 Feb;44(1):39 -46. 
99. Cao J, Schwichtenberg KA, Hanson NQ, Tsai MY. Incorpo ration and clearance of omega -3 fatty acids 
in erythrocyte membranes and plasma phospholipids. Clin Chem. 2006 Dec;52(12):2265 -72. 
100. Fekete K, Marosvolgyi T, Jakobik V, Decsi T. Methods of assessment of n -3 long -chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acid status i n humans: a systematic review. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Jun;89(6):2070S -84S. 
101. Ponz de Leon M, Roncucci L, Di Donato P, Tassi L, Smerieri O, Amorico MG, et al. Pattern of epithelial 
cell proliferation in colorectal mucosa of normal subjects and of patients with adenomatous polyps or cancer of 
the large bowel. Cancer Res. 1988 Jul 15;48(14):4121 -6. 
102. Welberg JW, de Vries EG, Hardonk MJ, Mulder NH, Harms G, Grond J, et al. Proliferation rate of 
colonic mucosa in normal subjects and patients with colonic neo plasms: a refined immunohistochemical 
method. J Clin Pathol. 1990 Jun;43(6):453 -6. 
103. Wilson RG, Smith AN, Bird CC. Immunohistochemical detection of abnormal cell proliferation in colonic 
mucosa of subjects with polyps. J Clin Pathol. 1990 Sep;43(9):744 -7. 
104. Risio M, Lipkin M, Candelaresi G, Bertone A, Coverlizza S, Rossini FP. Correlations between rectal 
mucosa cell proliferation and the clinical and pathological features of nonfamilial neoplasia of the large 
intestine. Cancer Res. 1991 Apr 1;51(7):19 17-21. 
105. Anti M, Marra G, Armelao F, Percesepe A, Ficarelli R, Ricciuto GM, et al. Rectal epithelial cell 
proliferation patterns as predictors of adenomatous colorectal polyp recurrence. Gut. 1993 Apr;34(4):525 -30. 
106. Gerdes H, Gillin JS, Zimbalist E,  Urmacher C, Lipkin M, Winawer SJ. Expansion of the epithelial cell 
proliferative compartment and frequency of adenomatous polyps in the colon correlate with the strength of 
family history of colorectal cancer. Cancer Res. 1993 Jan 15;53(2):279 -82. 
107. Einspahr JG, Alberts DS, Gapstur SM, Bostick RM, Emerson SS, Gerner EW. Surrogate end -point 
biomarkers as measures of colon cancer risk and their use in cancer chemoprevention trials. Cancer Epidemiol 
Biomarkers Prev. 1997 Jan;6(1):37 -48. 
108. West NJ, Court ney ED, Poullis AP, Leicester RJ. Apoptosis in the colonic crypt, colorectal adenomata, 
and manipulation by chemoprevention. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Jun;18(6):1680 -7. 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  20 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 109. Koornstra JJ, de Jong S, Hollema H, de Vries EG, Kleibeuker JH. Chang es in apoptosis during the 
development of colorectal cancer: a systematic review of the literature. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2003 
Jan;45(1):37 -53. 
110. Arab L. Biomarkers of fat and fatty acid intake. J Nutr. 2003 Mar;133 Suppl 3:925S -32S. 
111. Markowitz SD , Bertagnolli MM. Molecular origins of cancer: Molecular basis of colorectal cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 2009 Dec 17;361(25):2449 -60. 
112. Mann JR, Backlund MG, DuBois RN. Mechanisms of disease: Inflammatory mediators and cancer 
prevention. Nat Clin Pract Oncol.  2005 Apr;2(4):202 -10. 
113. Folch J, Lees M, Sloane Stanley GH. A simple method for the isolation and purification of total lipides 
from animal tissues. J Biol Chem. 1957 May;226(1):497 -509. 
114. Heikkila K, Harris R, Lowe G, Rumley A, Yarnell J, Gallacher  J, et al. Associations of circulating C -
reactive protein and interleukin -6 with cancer risk: findings from two prospective cohorts and a meta -analysis. 
Cancer Causes Control. 2009 Feb;20(1):15 -26. 
115. Farzaneh -Far R, Harris WS, Garg S, Na B, Whooley MA. Inverse association of erythrocyte n -3 fatty 
acid levels with inflammatory biomarkers in patients with stable coronary artery disease: The Heart and Soul 
Study. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Aug;205(2):538 -43. 
116. Kalogeropoulos N, Panagiotakos DB, Pitsavos C, Ch rysohoou C, Rousinou G, Toutouza M, et al. 
Unsaturated fatty acids are inversely associated and n -6/n-3 ratios are positively related to inflammation and 
coagulation markers in plasma of apparently healthy adults. Clin Chim Acta. 2010 Apr 2;411(7 -8):584 -91. 
117. Erarslan E, Turkay C, Koktener A, Koca C, Uz B, Bavbek N. Association of visceral fat accumulation 
and adiponectin levels with colorectal neoplasia. Dig Dis Sci. 2009 Apr;54(4):862 -8. 
118. Kumor A, Daniel P, Pietruczuk M, Malecka -Panas E. Serum lept in, adiponectin, and resistin 
concentration in colorectal adenoma and carcinoma (CC) patients. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2009 Mar;24(3):275 -81. 
119. Guebre -Egziabher F, Rabasa -Lhoret R, Bonnet F, Bastard JP, Desage M, Skilton MR, et al. Nutritional 
interventio n to reduce the n -6/n-3 fatty acid ratio increases adiponectin concentration and fatty acid oxidation in 
healthy subjects. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2008 Nov;62(11):1287 -93. 
120. Selenscig D, Rossi A, Chicco A, Lombardo YB. Increased leptin storage with altered lep tin secretion 
from adipocytes of rats with sucrose -induced dyslipidemia and insulin resistance: effect of dietary fish oil. 
Metabolism. 2010 Jun;59(6):787 -95. 
121. Rasmussen JG, Christensen JH, Schmidt EB. Adiponectin and marine n -3 fatty acids in patients  
referred for coronary angiography. Int J Cardiol. 2009 Jun 26;135(2):248 -50. 
122. Banga A, Unal R, Tripathi P, Pokrovskaya I, Owens RJ, Kern PA, et al. Adiponectin translation is 
increased by the PPARgamma agonists pioglitazone and omega -3 fatty acids. Am  J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 
2009 Mar;296(3):E480 -9. 
123. Higuchi T, Shirai N, Saito M, Suzuki H, Kagawa Y. Levels of plasma insulin, leptin and adiponectin, and 
activities of key enzymes in carbohydrate metabolism in skeletal muscle and liver in fasted IC R mice fed 
dietary n -3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. J Nutr Biochem. 2008 Sep;19(9):577 -86. 
124. Kratz M, Swarbrick MM, Callahan HS, Matthys CC, Havel PJ, Weigle DS. Effect of dietary n -3 
polyunsaturated fatty acids on plasma total and high -molecular -weight  adiponectin concentrations in 
overweight to moderately obese men and women. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008 Feb;87(2):347 -53. 
125. Perez -Matute P, Perez -Echarri N, Martinez JA, Marti A, Moreno -Aliaga MJ. Eicosapentaenoic acid 
actions on adiposity and insulin resista nce in control and high -fat-fed rats: role of apoptosis, adiponectin and 
tumour necrosis factor -alpha. Br J Nutr. 2007 Feb;97(2):389 -98. 
126. Rossi AS, Lombardo YB, Lacorte JM, Chicco AG, Rouault C, Slama G, et al. Dietary fish oil positively 
regulates pla sma leptin and adiponectin levels in sucrose -fed, insulin -resistant rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr 
Comp Physiol. 2005 Aug;289(2):R486 -R94.  
127. Hermans MP, Levy JC, Morris RJ, Turner RC. Comparison of insulin sensitivity tests across a range of 
glucose to lerance from normal to diabetes. Diabetologia. 1999 Jun;42(6):678 -87. 
128. Sarafidis PA, Lasaridis AN, Nilsson PM, Pikilidou MI, Stafilas PC, Kanaki A, et al. Validity and 
reproducibility of HOMA -IR, 1/HOMA -IR, QUICKI and McAuley's indices in patients with  hypertension and type 
II diabetes. J Hum Hypertens. 2007 Sep;21(9):709 -16. 
R01CA160938 (Murff, PI)    
 
Protocol Version  #: V1. 2  21 
Protocol Date: 09/04/2012 129. Song Y, Manson JE, Tinker L, Howard BV, Kuller LH, Nathan L, et al. Insulin sensitivity and insulin 
secretion determined by homeostasis model assessment and risk of diabetes i n a multiethnic cohort of women: 
the Women's Health Initiative Observational Study. Diabetes Care. 2007 Jul;30(7):1747 -52. 
130. Huan Y, Falkner B. Insulin resistance predicts future deterioration of glucose tolerance in nondiabetic 
young African Americans.  Metabolism. 2009 May;58(5):689 -95. 
131. Giovannucci E, Harlan DM, Archer MC, Bergenstal RM, Gapstur SM, Habel LA, et al. Diabetes and 
cancer: a consensus report. CA Cancer J Clin. 2010 Jul -Aug;60(4):207 -21. 
132. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Go nzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture 
(REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational research 
informatics support. J Biomed Inform. 2009 Apr;42(2):377 -81. 
133. Levine JS, Ahnen DJ. Clinical practice.  Adenomatous polyps of the colon. N Engl J Med. 2006 Dec 
14;355(24):2551 -7. 
134. Beynen AC, Katan MB. Rapid sampling and long -term storage of subcutaneous adipose -tissue biopsies 
for determination of fatty acid composition. Am J Clin Nutr. 1985 Aug;42(2):3 17-22. 
135. Kris-Etherton PM, Harris WS, Appel LJ. Fish consumption, fish oil, omega -3 fatty acids, and 
cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 2002 Nov 19;106(21):2747 -57. 
136. Mozaffarian D. Low -fat diet and cardiovascular disease. JAMA. 2006 Jul 19;296(3): 279-80; author reply 
80-1. 
137. Sacks FM, Stone PH, Gibson CM, Silverman DI, Rosner B, Pasternak RC. Controlled trial of fish oil for 
regression of human coronary atherosclerosis. HARP Research Group. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995 
Jun;25(7):1492 -8. 
 
 
Appendix A  Study Procedure Calendar  
 
Table D summarizes proposed research tasks during a 5-year study plan.   
 
 Timeline   Year 1  Year 2  Year 3 Year 4  Year 5  
Study 
Phase  Task  3 6 9 1
2 1
5 1
8 2
1 2
4 2
7 3
0 3
3 3
6 3
9 4
2 4
5 4
8 5
1 5
4 5
7 6
0 
Run-In Refine proposal -PI                     
Maintain IRB status -PI                     
Order supplies -Core                      
Order Medication                      
Patient 
Recruitment  Pre-recruitment                      
Begin clinical recruitment                      
Assessment visits                      
Biomarker analysis                      
DSMB meetings                      
Statistical 
Analysis  Prepare analytical 
database                      
Analysis                      
Manuscripts  Anticipate 3 or more -PI                     
Archival  Archive datasets                      