   
1 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020  Protocol Title: GO2 PEEP Study : The Use of a Bidirectional Oxygenation Valve in 
the Prevention and Management of Postoperative Atelectasis  
 
Protocol Short Title: GO2 PEEP Study  
 
Protocol version 5.0, dated November 20, 2020  
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Principal Investigator :     Jeffrey S. Miller, MD  
Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery  
Emory University School of Medicine  
Emory Saint Joseph’s Hospital  
 Sponsor :   PEEP Medical, LLC 
 
 
Protocol Author :  Sean G. Boutros, M.D.  
Houston Plastic Craniofacial and Sinus Surgery  
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
2 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020  Study Objective  
The objective of this pilot study is to determine the feasibility and safety  of a bidirectional oxygenation 
mouthpiece  compared to incentive spirometry in the prevention and manageme nt of postoperative 
atelectasis.  
 
Hypothesis:  
We hypothesize that the bidirectional oxygenation mouthpiece is a safe and effective respiratory  therapy, 
will reduce or prevent postoperative  atelectasis, improve oxygenation  (PaO2) , improve pulmonary 
function tests, and reduce postoperative pulmonary complications in cardiac surgical patients  compared 
to conventional incentive spirometry therapy . 
 
Background and Significance  
Postoperative pulmonary complications (PPCs) are the princ ipal cause of morbidity, mortality and 
prolonged hospitalizations in surgical patients,  1-3 which results in a 50% increase in healthcare costs 
compared to postoperative cardiac complications . 4-5 This is especially evident following cardiovascular 
surgery .  Pneumonia, unplanned re -intubation and prolonged postoperative mechanical ventilation (>48 
hours) remain the most concerning adverse events , with a reported incidence between 2 -5%. 4-5 One of 
the most common PPCs is atelectasis , resulting in dyspnea, tachypnea and hypoxemia .  A number of 
identified risk factors associated with the development of PPCs are listed in Table 1. 6-14 
 
Postoperative atelectasis  is a predictable consequence  of anesthesi a, surgical trauma, and pain associated 
with breathing.15 This often results in hypoxemia and  pulmonary complications . Methods aimed at 
increasing lung volume  and treating atelectasis, commonly known as postoperative physiotherapy , play 
an important  role in preventing PPCs. These methods include cough and deep breathing, continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP), postural drainage , incentive spirometry  and positive end expiratory 
pressure (PEEP) .  
 
Introduced by Bartlett  et a l 2,16 over 40 years ago, incentive spirometry has served as a convenient 
approach for the postoperative patient to sustain maximal inflations and encourage deep breathing. Minschaert and colleagues found faster recoveries of tidal volumes following conventional protocols of 
incentive spirometry when compared to conventional physical therapy . 
17 
 
Although incentive spirometry is used common ly by post -operative  patients, evidence fails to support its 
benefit.  18-23   One systematic review stated, “ Presently , the evidence does not support the use of incentive 
spirometry for decreasing the incidence of PPCs.”  19 Another  meta -analysi s found no evidence of benefit 
from incentive spirometry  after coronary artery bypass surgery . 22 In addition, a  recent study on the 
financial impact of incentive spirometry demonstrated that for the 9.7 million inpatient surgeries 
performed annually in the United States, the total annual cost of implementing postoperative incentive spirometry is estimated to be $1.04 billion.
24 Mos t importantly , incentive spirometry  is not the ideal 
treatment for atelectasis  or hypoxemia .  Incentive spirometry does not provide PEEP .  
 
PEEP is a well-known pulmonary physiologic principle.  There are on average 600 million alveoli in the lung. Each alveolus has surfactant to resist the natural propensity for these small air sacs to collapse during exhalation . Despite this surfactant, some alveoli will collapse and not be available for gas exchange.  This 
atelectasis results in a ventilation/perfusion mismatch where alveolar units are perfused but not 
adequately ventilated. This is  referred to as shunting and results in hypoxemia (decreased PaO2).  
   
3 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020 Atelectasis, shunting, and hypoxemia are very common complicati ons of surgery and result in significant 
morbidity and mortality in surgical patients.    PEEP decreases the propensity for the alveoli to collapse by in creasing the air pressure in the lungs.  This 
residual pressure in the lungs at the end of exhalation decreas es shunting and allows for more complete 
gas exchange and improved oxygenation.  In patients, PEEP is on e of the safest ways to increase PaO2 and 
is used on almost all modern ventilator settings.    We have developed a simple, comfortable, and straightforward si licone-injected, bidirectional 
oxygenation mouthpiece that effectively delivers PEEP with ever y breath (image 1).  The purpose of this 
pilot study is to demonstrate the safety and feasibility of the  bidirectional oxygenation mouthpiece in 
cardiac surgical patients, compare this novel device to convent ional incentive spirometry, and identify any 
potential benefits to respiratory dynamics.  
 
Image 1. Bidirectional oxygenation mouthpiece 
 
 
Initial testing using the bidirectional oxygenation mouthpiece on healthy subjects has been encouraging.  
Crouse et al. studied nine subjects during exercise and reporte d that the “Wearable Positive End-
Expiratory Pressure Valve Increases Aerobic Capacity and Perfor mance.”
 25   Subjects were assigned  at 
r a n d o m  t o  t h e  n o v e l  b i d i r e c t i o n a l  o x y g e n a t i o n  m o u t h p i e c e ,  a  s t a ndard oxygenation mouthpiece, or 
nothing at all.  Subjects wearing the bidirectional oxygenation  mouthpiece showed an improvement in 
VO2 max of 6.1% compared to the standard mouthpiece and 4.0% co mpared to no mouthpiece.  The 
endurance test showed an improvement of 6.5% compared to the st andard mouthpiece and 6.0% 
compared to no mouthpiece.  All results had p-values < 0.05.  N o adverse events were reported during 
the testing.  Furthermore, the consumer version of this device,  which is being used by athletes during 
vigorous exercise, has sold over 2000 units to date with no rep orted adverse events.  
 
Research Design and Methods 
Design 
This pilot study will utilize a si ngle center, prospective, ran domized controlled study design. 
  

   
4 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020  Target Study Population 
Patients undergoing coronary  bypass and /or valve replacement will be evaluated for study eligibility , and 
will be preoperatively selected according to the below criteria: 
 
Inclusion Criteria 
1. Undergoing CABG and/or valve replacement surgery  
2. Able to provide written informed consent  
3. Maintenance of an arterial line postoperatively  
 
Exclusion Criteri a 
1. Active smoking, within  three  months of surgery  
2. FEV1 <75% predicted  
3. Relative risk to develop pulmonary barotrauma  as evident by history of pneumothorax or 
emphysema  
4. Unable or unwilling to provide informed consent , cognitive impairment   
 
Study Endpoints  
Primary Endpoint  
1. Pa02 level at 1, 6, 12 and 24 hours post -extubation.   
 Secondary Endpoints  
1. Atelectasis on CXR (Atelectasis Severity Score) immediately post -op and on postoperative days 1 -
4 
2. Oxygen requirement 1, 6, 12 and 24 hours post -extubation and daily each morning 
3. CO
2 level  at 1, 6, 12 and 24 hours post -extubation  
4. FEV1  and FVC measurements  pre-op and on postoperative day 3  
5. Resp iratory  rate 1 , 6, 12 and 24 hours post -extubation  then daily  each morning 
6. Peak body temperature  every 24 hours (as a marker of atelectasis)  
 
Study  Procedures  
After an eligible patient has provided written informed consent , he/she will be randomly assigned to one 
of two study cohorts : incentive spirometer (Control Arm)  or Bidirectional Oxygenation Valve (G02 
Mouthpiece ). 
 Permuted block randomization will be employed to ensure balance between groups when the number of 
recruited patients reaches a multiple of the block size. All patients will undergo additional postoperative 
respiratory therapy, including: deep breathing exe rcises, directed cough, early mobilization and  optimal 
analgesia per routine care . Mouthpiece s for each study arm will be provided to a patient throughout the 
hospitalization .  
 Both cohorts will use the assigned device following similar protocols:  
1. Proper  positioning of the patient in bed.  
2. Proper positioning of the incentive spirometer or Go2 mouthpiece . 
3. A breath cycle will consist of 10 breaths every hour while awake. See instructions in Appendix A.  
4. The research assistant will provide adequate training for both devices and will supervise their use.  
   
5 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020  Arterial blood gases (ABGs)  will be collected on 2L/NC  (x 5 min) at 1, 6, 12 and 24 post -extubation  (+/- 1 
hour) . Pt. will be asked to use assigned device (incentive spirometer or GO2 mouthpiece) before each  ABG 
is collected.  Blood samples will be tested locally at the Emory  St. Joseph’s Hospital  Laboratory .  
 
A chest radiograph will be obtained immediately post -op and daily on post -op days 1 -4 to assess the 
presence of atelectasis  using the atelectasis severity score. X -rays will be read by a single radiologist in a 
blinded fashion.  
 
Respiratory rate  will be measured  1, 6, 12 an d 24 hours post -extubation  then daily each morning .  
 Body temperatu re will be measured  per nursing routine  (as a marker of atelectasis). Temperature max 
will be recorded  each 24 hours .  
 
Schedule of Assessments  
                                    
Study Procedures  Baseline  
(up to 30 days 
before surgery)  Post -Op POD 1  POD2  POD3  POD4  
Consent  X      
Pulmonary function 
test (PFT)  X    X2  
Randomization  X      
Treatment: breathing 
exercises with 
mouthpieces   X X X X X 
Arterial blood gas 
(ABGs)    X1 X1   
Chest x -ray with 
Atelectasis Severity 
Score  X X X X X X 
RR and body temp   X X X X X 
Peak Body Temp    X X X X 
Adverse Events   X X X X X 
Use of Device 
Questionnaire       X3 
1ABGs 1, 6, 12 and 24 post extubation.  
2Peformed for research purposes only  
 3Can be done from POD4 up until discharge from hospital  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
As a pilot study, our goal is to examine the feasibility and safety of conducting this pilot study o n a larger 
scale. We evaluate the feasibility of recruitment, retention, assessment and implementation of the proposed interventions. We wish to identify any potential flaws in the study design and potential challenges in the subsequent large -scale study. Moreover, the pilot data will give us a first impression of 
the variability and effect sizes of Pa02  in the patient population of interest and thus assist in the sample 
   
6 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020  size and power calculation of the subsequent larger study. Finally, the data tha t we collect from this pilot 
will help identify modifications needed in the planning and design of the subsequent study.  
 
We will also assess safety of the new mouthpiece with close monitoring of patient symptoms, physical 
exam, PaO2, PCO2, CXR results, v ital signs, and temperature.  At the conclusion of the study, w e will 
attempt to assess between -group differences, but given that low power is characteristic of pilot studies, 
statistical significance is not the focus of the analysis. However, we plan to provide statistical summaries 
that would be useful in the subsequent study and to other researcher s, such as number of patients 
screened per month, number of patients enrolled per month, proportion of screen eligible who enrolled, lost-to-follow rate, study  costs.  
 We will also summarize patient characteristics at baseline and during follow -up using mean ± standard 
deviation (or median and interquartile range, as appropriate) for quantitative  variables and frequency 
(percentage) for categorical variables. S ummary s tatistics on Pa02  will be reported at each measurement 
occasion for each group . We will also attempt to fit a mixed effects model to examine between -group 
differences in Pa02 at each study visit. An error covariance structure most appropriate to th e data will be 
chosen. Every effort will be made to ensure complete follow -up, and to handle missed visits, missingness 
at random will be assumed. Finally, a qualitative review will also be provided, and this will include, among 
others, an evaluation of th e representativeness of the patient volunteers, a discussion on how to refine 
the data collection tools, how to improve the database, how to track patients better as well how to improve implementation of the proposed intervention.   
 
Sample Size and Accrual  
The sample size  for this pilot study  will include 20 patients undergoing coronary bypass and /or valve 
replacement surger y, however, we anticipate that approximately 40 patients may be consented to 
account for patients that may be ineligible, screen fail, or withdraw from study . This is the number of 
anticipated eligible patients that may be recruited over a period of 2 months. This number is deemed 
sufficient to demonstrate the feasibility and safety  of the bidirectional oxygenation mouthpiece . 
 
General Design Limitations  
Possible pitfalls may include unsupervised use of the assigned mouthpiece or unexpected non- pulmonary 
complications secondary to the surgery which may affect the results of the analysis. Also , subjects opting 
out of the study may  represent a potential drawback, secondary to pain or fatigue, or evidence of 
hyperventilation and/or respiratory alkalosis.  
 
Protection of Human Subjects  
Institutional Review Board (IRB) Review and Informed Consent  
Screening and enrollment will not begin  until the Emory University IRB has approved the study protocol 
and informed consent form.  
 
A physician investigator or study team designee(s) will obtain the informed consent document and verify 
the date of consent document is within the IRB approval period.  
 
A physician -investigator or study team member designee(s) will begin the informed consent process 
with the subject ≥24 hours in advance of surgery and/or study procedures when possible. This will allow the subject sufficient opportunity to consider whether  or not to participate in a study. The informed 
consent process may begin either in -person with the patient or by telephone.  
   
7 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020   
The person obtaining informed consent will meet the subject in a private area to present the consent document to the subject, provide a description of the study purpose, procedures, risks/benefits, alternative treatment options, and follow -up schedule. The subject will be given adequate time to fully 
understand the study, including risks and benefits and study -required follow up visi ts, and time to ask 
questions.  
 If the subject volunteers to participate in a study, he/she must verbalize understanding of the consent before he/she signs. The person obtaining informed consent will obtain all required signatures on the informed consent and HIPAA documents. The subject’s consent will be obtained before any research related procedures are performed.  
 e-Consent  
The consent process begins when a patient is screened, identified and verified as eligible for study  
participation. During the Zoom  teleconference call, a member from the study team will discuss the  
consent form in its entirety with the potential participant. The patient will be offered ample time to  
discuss the consent form with family and or friends, and have questions answered. In DocuSign,  
potential subjects have the ability to review the consent document as freely as they would if they  
were consenting in person. They also have the opportunity to exit the document without signing.  
 The process for obtaining e -consent is outlined be low:  
1. First, the IRB approved, stamped consent forms are added to an envelope in DocuSign.  
2. Recipients (subject/coordinators) are then added to the envelope and signature and initial  
fields are assigned to them on the IRB approved consent form.  
3. The consent is then sent to the patient via email.  
4. Once the consent document is completed by all parties, a signed copy is forwarded to the  
subject via email. The completed document is also saved on the research team’s secure,  
internal shared drive.  
 
Subject Confidentiality  
Subject confidentiality will be guaranteed by storing all data collected in a password -protected database 
with no associated PHI or patient identifier information included. Patients in this database will only be identified via a unique study ID number. This study ID number will link the electronic data set of each patient to their PHI that will be stored separately in the research study binder.  
 Subject Safety  Subject safety is of utmost importance throughout this study. The use of oxygenation devices  such as the 
incentive spirometer has not been associated with pulmonary complications  or other adverse events . 
Nonetheless, patients with history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or those at risk of developing barotrauma will be excluded from this study.  
 
Adverse Events  
Patients will be assessed for the following adverse events:  
1. Hypoxia (O2 saturation <85% ) 
2. CO rise 20% over baseline   
3. Increasing O2 requiremen t (non -rebreather mask, biflow, BIPAP requirement ) 
4. Reintubation  
   
8 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020  5. Pneumothorax  
 
All serious adverse events will be assessed and reported per the Emory IRB Policies and Procedures.  
 
Data Collection and Monitoring  
Study data will be collected from the patient’s electronic medical records and from the local Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons  (STS)  clin ical outcomes database. All information will be entered in  a de -identified 
fashion into a password protected Microsoft E xcel spreadsheet created for the study.  All study data will 
be coded using indirect identifiers consisting of a unique numeric study ID code linked to each study participant’s name to enable verification of study data against source dat a, as needed.  
 Study data, including Protected Health Information (PHI), will be obtained with the patient’s direct authorization through the consent form in accordance with HIPAA policy. PHI will be obtained via  patient 
medical records  and the STS database as noted above . Permission for use or evaluation of PHI will be 
limited to the principal investigator, and research study staff. The PHI will be a part of the clinic record and patient study binder. The binders  will be kept in a secure location when not being used by the research 
staff. The PHI collected will be used by the PI and research staff for study tracking purposes, to link and confirm study data with the information located in the patient’s clinical record, and if patient safety 
necessitates, to communicate relevant findings with the patient’s healthcare providers. The PHI will be 
destroyed using the  institution’s official recycling system once the study is completed. The PI and staff will 
maintain the r ecords of the study including all correspondence, the study protocol with any/all 
amendments, all correspondence with and approval from the Emory  IRB, and signed informed consent 
forms in the Regulatory Binder. All these materials, along with individual patient files, data collection forms and source data will be stored and maintained, along with a record of the location of storage, for up to 1 year after the completion of the study.  Records will be destroyed using the official institutional recycling syst em. 
 
Data Management  
Upon study completion the final data set will be provided to Sponsor and stored within the secure server in the Houston Plastic Craniofacial and Sinus Surgery office (9230 Katy Freeway, Houston, TX 77055). All non-identifiable patient data collected will b e stored on  a password encrypted Microsoft Excel  document 
on the same server. No information will be transmitted electronically outside of the server nor will any data be stored off of the server on any portable type media storage device. All study participant PHI and personal contact information will be securely stored in  a study binder at Emory Saint Joseph’s research 
office.  
 
A data safety monitoring plan is not necessary for this minimal risk study.  
 
Facilities  
The surgical procedure and postoperative care will take place at Emory S aint Joseph’s Hospital, Atlanta, 
Georgia.   
Funding Source  
Funding for the study will be provided by PEEP  Medical , LLC. Bidirectional oxygenation mouthpiece s will 
be provided by the Sponsor . Incentive spirometer s will be provided by the hospital  as part of the routine 
postoperative respiratory therapy .  
  
   
9 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020  Appendix A  
Instructions for Patients Assigned to the Incentive Spirometer  
 
Thank you for participating in the GO2 PEEP research study.  You have been assigned to the study group 
using the incentive spirometer.  
1. To use the incentive spirometer, sit up as far as you can in bed and hold the incentive 
spirometer  
2. Take a deep breath in and then blow out all the way through your mouth with pursed lips.  
3. Put the mouthpiece in your mouth.  Seal your lips tightly around it.  
4. Breathe in slowly through your mouth as deep as possible.   The blue disc will rise toward the 
top of the column.  
5. Keep the blue indicator on the right side between the arrows.   
6. Open your mouth and then breathe out, allowing the blue disc to fall to the bottom of the column.   
7. Rest for a few seconds and repeat steps above at least 10 times every hour while you are awake.  If you feel dizzy, slow your breathing down.   
8. Move the arrow on the left side of the spirometer to show the highest number you reached.  
9. After each set of 10 deep breaths, practice coughing to be sure your lungs are clear.  You may 
use the device addi tionally if desired.   
10. Place a pillow firmly against incision area to ease any discomfort while coughing.  
 
Practice this 4 -6 times each day before your surgery.  
 If there are any issues or problems contact Dr. Jeffery Miller or the research coordinator at 678 -843-
6092 as soon as possible.  
 
 
  

   
10 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020 Instructions for Patients Assigned to the Bidirectional Oxygena tion Mouthpiece 
 
Thank you for participating in the GO2 PEEP research study.  You have been assigned to the study grou p 
using the bidirectional oxygenation mouthpiece.   
1.To use mouth piece, place the device inside the mouth, loosely biting down on the bite plate.  
Allow your lips to surround the lip flange.   
 
2.Breathe in as deeply as you can in a steady manner.  Exhale thr ough the device as completely 
and forcibly as possible. 
 
3.Repeat the process, breathing a s deeply as possible and exhalin g for 2.5 minutes, rest for 10 
minutes and then repeat another 2.5 minutes.  Complete this eve ry hour while awake.   
 
4.After using mouth piece each hour, practice coughing to be sure  your lungs are clear.  You may 
use the device additionally if desired.    
5.Place a pillow firmly against incision area to ease any discomf ort while coughing. 
 
Practice this 4-6 times each day before your surgery. If there are any issues or pro blems contact Dr. Jeffery Miller or the research coordinator at 678-843-
6092 as soon as possible.  

 
  

   
11 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020  Table 1  
 
 
Table 1. Risk Factors for PPCs  
 
Preoperative  Postoperative  
Age > 50  Type of surgery*  
Congestive heart failure  Neuromuscular blocking agents  
Cigarette and/or alcohol abuse  Perioperative blood transfusions  
COPD  Operative time longer than 3 hours  
Corticosteroids use  General anesthesia  
 Emergency surgery  
  
*Thoracic, upper abdominal, head and neck, neurosurgery, open aortic resection  
  
   
12 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020  References  
 
1. Lawrence VA, Dhanda R, Hilsenbeck SG, et al . Risk of pulmonary complications after elective 
abdominal surgery. Chest 1996; 110(3):744- 750 
2. Bartlett RH, Brennan ML, Gazzaniga AB, et al . Studies on the pathogenesis and prevention of 
postoperative pulmonary complications. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1973;137(6):925 -933.  
3. Lawrence VA, Hilsenbeck SG, Mulrow CD, et al . Incidence and hospital stay for cardi ac and 
pulmonary complications after abdominal surgery. J Gen Intern Med 1995;10(12):671 - 678 
4. Smetana GW. Postoperative pulmonary complications: an update on risk assessment and 
reduction. Cleve Clin J Med 2009;76(Suppl 4):S60 -S65.  
5. Dimick JB, Chen SL, Tah eri PA, et al . Hospital costs associated with surgical complications: a report 
from the private -sector National Surgical Quality Improvement Program. J Am Coll Surg 
2004;199(4):531- 537.  
6. Johnson RG, Arozullah AM, Neumayer L, et al . Multivariable predictors of postoperative 
respiratory failure after general and vascular surgery: results from the patient safety in surgery study. J Am Coll Surg 2007;204(6):1188 - 1198.  
7. Qaseem A, Snow V, Fitterman N, et al . Risk assessment for and strategies to reduce perioperat ive 
pulmonary complications for patients undergoing noncardiothoracic surgery: a guideline from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 2006;144(8):575 -580.  
8. Smetana GW, Lawrence VA, Cornell JE; American College of Physicians. Preoperative pulmo nary 
risk stratification for noncardiothoracic surgery: systematic review for the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 2006;144(8):581- 595.  
9. Brueckmann B, Villa- Uribe JL, Bateman BT, et al . Development and validation of a score for 
prediction of postoperative respiratory complications. Anesthesiology 2013;118(6):1276 -1285.  
10. Lawrence VA, Cornell JE, Smetana GW; American College of Physicians. Strategies to reduce postoperative pulmonary complications after noncardiothoracic surgery: systematic revi ew for 
the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 2006;144(8):596 -608.  
11. Licker M, Diaper J, Villiger Y, et al . Impact of intraoperative lung -protective interventions in 
patients undergoing lung cancer surgery. Crit Care 2009;13(2): R41.  
12. Arozullah AM, Daley J, Henderson WG, Khuri SF. Multifactorial risk index for predicting postoperative respiratory failure in men after major noncardiac surgery. The National Veterans Administration Surgical Quality Improvement Program. Ann Surg 2000;232(3): 242 -253.  
13. Hwang D, Shakir N, Limann B, et al . Association of sleep -disordered breathing with postoperative 
complications. Chest 2008;133(10):1128 -1134.  
14. Fernandez- Perez ER, Sprung J, Afessa B, et al . Intraoperative ventilator settings and acute lung 
injury after elective surgery: a nested case control study. Thorax 2009;64(2):121 -127.  
15. Saski N, Meyer MJ, Eikermann M. Postoperative respiratory muscle dysfunction. Anesthesiology 2013;118(4):961- 978.  
16. Bartlett RH, Gazzaniga AB, Geraghty TR. Respiratory maneuvers to prev ent postoperative 
pulmonary complications. A critical review. JAMA 1973;224(7):1017 -1021.  
17. Minschaert M, Vincent JL, Ros AM, Kahn RJ. Influence of incentive spirometry on pulmonary 
volumes after laparotomy. Acta Anaesthesiol Belg 1982;33(3):203 -209.  
18. Agostini P, Calvert R, Subramanian H, Naidu B. Is incentive spirometry effective following 
thoracic surgery? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2008;7(2):297 -300.  
19. Overend TJ, Anderson CM, Lucy SD, Bhatia C, Jonsson BI, Timmermans C. The effect of incentive spirometr y on postoperative pulmonary complications: a systematic review. Chest 2001;120(3): 
971-978.  
   
13 | Page  
Protocol v. 5.0, 11/20/2020  20. Pasquina P, Tramer MR, Walder B. Prophylactic respiratory physiotherapy after cardiac surgery: 
systematic review. BMJ 2003; 327(7428):1379.  
21. Pasquina P, Tramer MR , Granier JM, Walder B. Respiratory physiotherapy to prevent pulmonary 
complications after abdominal surgery: a systematic review. Chest 2006 Dec;130(6):1887 -1899.  
22. Freitas ER, Soares BG, Cardoso JR, Atallah A´ N. Incentive spirometry for preventing pulmon ary 
complications after coronary artery bypass graft. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;(9):CD004466.  
23. Guimaraes MM, El Dib R, Smith AF, Matos D. Incentive spirometry for prevention of postoperative pulmonary complications in upper abdominal surgery. Cochrane  Database Syst 
Rev 2009;(3):CD006058.  
24. Eltorai AE, Baird GL, Pangborn J, Eltorai AS, Antoci V, Paquette K, Connors K, Barbaria J, Smeals KJ, Riley B, Patel SA, Agarwai S, Healey TT, Ventetuolo CE, Sellke FW, Daniels AH. Financial 
impact of incentive spirometry.  Journal of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing.  2018. 
25. Crouse SF, Lytle JR, Martin SE, Green JS, Moreno M, McCulloch P, Boutros S, Benton W, Lambert BS.  Wearable positive end -expiratory pressure valve increases aerobic capacity and 
performance.  Poster presentation.  Applied Exercise Science Lab.  2018.   
 