Case  4318     Page 1    Version date: 5/8/2020 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STUDY NUMBER:  CASE 4318   
 
ClinicalTrials.gov NCT #:  03768856  
 
Version Date: 5/8/2020 
 
STUDY TITLE:  Feasibility Study of Temporal ly Feathered Radiation Therapy (TFRT) 
for Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma: Means of Toxicity Reduction  
    
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR :  Shlomo Koyfman, MD 
    Department of Radiation Oncology 
    Cleveland Clinic    
10201 Carnegie Ave, Desk CA-5 0  
Cleveland, OH 44195 
    
      
 
  
Co-INVESTIGATOR:  Jacob Scott, MD, DPhil 
Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology 
Research 
Desk NE-6 
Cleveland Clinic 
9500 Euclid Avenue 
Cleveland, OH 44195 
 
 
 
        
 
Peng Qi, PhD 
    Department of Radiation Oncology 
    Cleveland Clinic    
10201 Carnegie Ave, Desk CA-5 0  
Cleveland, OH 44195 
    
 

Case  4318     Page 2    Version date: 5/8/2020 
  
Jeremy Donaghue, MS 
Department of Radiation Oncology 
Cleveland Clinic – Fairview Hospital 
18200 Lorain Ave 
Cleveland, OH 44111 
 
 
     
Neil Woody 
    Department of Radiation Oncology 
    Cleveland Clinic    
10201 Carnegie Ave, Desk CA-5 0  
Cleveland, OH 44195 
     
     
 
Eric Murray, CMD  
Department of Radiation Oncology 
    Cleveland Clinic    
10201 Carnegie Ave, Desk CA-5 0  
Cleveland, OH 44195 
     
     
 
    Shireen Parsai, MD 
    Department of Radiation Oncology 
    Cleveland Clinic    
    10201 Carnegie Ave, Desk CA-50   
    Cleveland, OH 44195 
         
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATISTICIAN:   Chandana Reddy,   
Cleveland Clinic    
10201 Carnegie Ave, Desk CA -50  
Cleveland, OH 44195 
     
     
 

Case  4318     Page 3    Version date:  5/8/2020  
  
 
SPONSOR:     Case Comprehensive Cancer Center      
   
SUPPORT/FUNDING :  Research Program Committees  Grant  
 
 
Case  4318     Page 4    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 SUMMARY OF CHANGES  
 
Protocol 
Date  Section  Change  
10/10/18  6.5.1  Target Volumes updated to include extra CTV_and PTV_6300  
 6.8 Compliance criteria table updated to include PTV_6300  
 11.0 List of Patient Reported Outcomes Questionnaires updated  
 Appendix 
III Treatment subplan updated from days Mo n-Fri to treatments A -E 
12/7/18  Title 
Page  Clinicaltrials.gov NCT number added  
 Title 
Page  Protocol date updated  
 Title 
Page  Shireen Parsai changed from Study Coordinator to Co -Investigator  
 Title 
Page  Study Coordinator last name and email change  
 4.1.1 “Oral cavity” removed from eligibility criteria  
 6.6.2  Clarification of treatment plan documents required in Mosaiq  
 9.2 “Height” removed from required assessments in study calendar  
 Appendix 
II “Missed fractions should NOT be added to th e end of the  treatment 
schedule”  removed  
12/28/18  Footer   Version date change to reflect previous amendment  
4/10/19  Title 
Page  Study coordinator name and contact info changed.  
4/10/19  7.1.3  Clarification on AE’s that are to be reported in the database.  
5/8/20 Title 
Page , 
7.3.1  PI changed from Dr. Joshi to Dr. Koyfman , additional study staff 
updated  
Case  4318     Page 5    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 STUDY SCHEMA  
 
x 
 
Case  4318     Page 6    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Protocol Number/Title  CASE4318  Feasibility Study of Temporally Feathered 
Radiation Therapy (TFRT) for Head and Neck Squamous 
Cell Carcinoma: Means of Toxicity Reduction  
Study Phase  Feasibility  
Brief Background/Rational e 
 
 
 Intensity‐modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) has allowed 
for optimization of three ‐dimensional spatial radiation dose 
distributions permitting target coverage while reducing 
normal tissue toxicity. However, acute and late 
radiation‐induced normal tissue toxicity is a major 
contributor to patients’ quality of life and often a 
dose‐limiting factor in the definitive treatment of cancer 
with radiation therapy. We pr opose the next logical step in 
the evolution of IMRT incorporates  canonical 
radiobiological principles, optimizing the temporal 
dimension through which radiation therapy is delivered to 
further reduce radiation ‐induced toxicity by increased t ime 
for normal  tissue recovery . This new  technique of radiation 
planning and delivery is termed Temporally Feathered 
Radiation Therapy (TFRT). TFRT has been previously 
modeled in silico and has demonstrated potential to reduce 
normal tissue toxicity . Given that TFRT is dependent on 
normal tissue recovery, a dynamic normal tissue 
complication probability (NTCP) model is used to ascertain 
the potential benefits of TFRT as compared to conventional 
IMRT planning. In this study, we will examine the 
feasibility of generating a nd delivering TFRT plans in the 
modern clinical workflow . Importantly, the radiation dose 
to the target volume is not altered and therefore this 
technique of radiation planning only examines techniques 
to reduce toxicity. All radiation prescription doses u sed in 
this study are determined as per current standards of care.  
Primary Objective  Primary Endpoints   
Feasibility of TFRT planning and deliver y defined as 
patient start ing radiation within 15 days of CT simulation . 
Secondary Objective (s) Secondary End points  
(1) Estimate  acute  grade 3 -5 toxicity (within 90 
days after RT)   
(2) Patient -reported outcomes of toxicity during and 
after TFRT . 
(3) Compliance with plan delivery  
Exploratory Objective(s)  Exploratory Endpoints (s ) 
 Compare doses to organs at ris k delivered by  
TFRT compared to conventional IMRT plans  on a 
per patient basis  
Case  4318     Page 7    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 Correlative  Objective (s) 
 Correlative  Endpoint(s)  
N/A 
Sample Size  5 patients  
Patients age >18 years , male and female   
Disease sites/Conditions  
with ICD 10 codes  C01 Base of Tongue  
C05 Palat e (soft)  
C09 Tonsil  
C10 Oropharynx  
C10 Epiglottis  
C11 Nasopharynx  
C11 Pharyngeal Wall  
C12-C13 Hypopharynx  
C13 AE Fold  
C14 Pharynx (NOS)  
C32 True Vocal Cord  
C32 Glottis  
C32 Larynx  
C32 Supraglottic  
C44 Squamous Cell Cancer  
Interventions  Temporally Feathered  Radiation Therapy (TFRT)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
Case  4318     Page 8    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 ABBREVIATIONS  
 
 
 
 CCCC  Case Comprehensive Cancer Center  
CRF  Case Report Form  
DCRU  Dahm ’s Clinical Research Unit  
DSTC  Data Safety  and Toxicity  Committee  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
PRMC  Protocol Review and Monitoring Committee  
SOC  Standard of Care  
CCF  Cleveland Clinic Foundation  
UH University Hospitals  
TFRT  Temporally Feathered Radiation Therapy  
IMRT  Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy  
OAR  Organ At Risk  
dS Standard fr actional dose  
dL Low fractional dose  
dH High fractional dose  
NTCP  Normal tissue complication probability  
Case  4318     Page 9    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1.0  INTRODUCTION   
1.1 Background  
1.2  Description of  Temporally Feathered Radiation Therapy  
1.3  Rationale   
 
2.0 OBJECTI VES  
2.1 Primary Objective   
2.2  Secondary Objective(s)  
2.3 Exploratory Objectives(s)  
2.4 Correlative Objective(s)  
 
3.0 STUDY DESIGN  
3.1 Study design  
3.2 Number of Subjects  
3.3 Replacement of Subjects  
3.4 Expected Duration of Treatment and Subject Participa tion  
 
4.0  SUBJECT  SELECTION  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
4.2  Exclusion Criteria  
4.3 Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
 
5.0 REGISTRATION  
  
6.0  TREATMENT PLAN  
6.1 Treatment Regimen Overview   
6.2  Dose Specifications  
6.3 Technical Factors  
6.4 Localization, Si mulation, Immobilization  
6.5 Target Volumes  
6.6 Treatment Planning, Assessment, and Delivery  
 
7.0 ADVERSE EVENTS AND POTENTIAL RISKS  
7.1 Definitions  
7.2 Serious Adverse Event Report Form  
7.2 Reporting Procedures for Serious Adverse Event  
7.3 Serious Adver se Events and OnCore®    
7.4 Data Safety Toxicity Committee  
7.5 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
8.0 EXPLORATORY/CORRELATIVE   
8.1  Dosimetric Comparison  
 
9.0 STUDY PARAMETERS AND CALENDAR  
Case  4318     Page 10    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 9.1 Study Parameters  
9.2 Calendar  
 
10.0 RECORDS TO BE KEPT/REGULATOR Y CONSIDERATIONS  
10.1 Data Reporting  
10.2 Regulatory Considerations  
  
11.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
REFERENCES   
  
APPENDICES   
  
 APPENDIX 1  
 Karnofsky Performance Status Criteria  
 
 APPENDIX 2  
Therapist Treatment Delivery Timeout  
 
 APPENDIX 3  
Safety Su mmary Tables for Treatment Plan Documentation  
 
APPENDIX 4  
Patient Reported Outcome Questionnaires  
 
APPENDIX 5  
Radiation Oncology SAE Report Form  
 
 
 
Case  4318     Page 11    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 1.0 Introduction  
 
1.1 Background of Study Disease   
 
In 2017, the incidence of new cases of head and malign ancies, including the oral cavity 
and pharynx was estimated to be about 1.7 million with about 600,000 deaths  
worldwide .1 These  cancers  have been historically treated with a surgical approac h; 
however given the morb idity of surgery , the standard has shifted to definitive non -
surgical organ sparing approaches including radiotherapy with  or without concurrent 
chemotherapy .2 Conventional techniques of radiotherapy and chemotherapy resulted in 
high rates of late effects, such as dysphagia, radionecrosis, and xerostomia. With the 
advancement of radiotherapy techniques through the years , specifically the adoption of 
intensity -modulated radiotherapy (IMRT)  coupled with image guidance, the practi tioner 
now has greater control over the physical distribution  of dose over the target volume and 
nearby surrounding structures. This has led to decreased late toxicity rates. In a recent 
study of patient s receiving definitive radiotherapy with or without chemo therapy for 
HPV -related oropharynx cancer, the cumulative incidence of severe late  toxicity at 2 -
years after completing treatment was 2.3% , whereas 42% of patients experienced grade 3 
or higher acute toxicity .2 The most common grade 3 or greater acute toxicity was 
dysphagia (24%), followed by mucositis (17%), and dermatitis (8%). For those who 
required feeding tube placement, the median dura tion of acute feeding tube use was 1.7 
months. Of the patients followed greater than one year without local failure, 24% 
experienced grade 2 xerostomia.  Notably, in historic trials, higher rates of toxicity have 
also been recorded with concurrent chemother apy and radiotherapy.3-7 Quality of life also 
declines following therapy. Though most patients recover global quality of life by 12 
months, deterioration in physical functioning, fatigue, xerostomia, and sticky sali va 
persist beyond 12 months in head and neck cancer survivors.8,9 In this study we aim to 
further decrease acute and late toxicities associated with radiotherapy. We  examine a new 
technique termed temporally feather ed radiation therapy  (TFRT) , through which the dose 
delivered to the target volume remains unchanged while the fractional dose delivered to 
the surrounding organs at risk is altered .  
 
 The biologic basis of dose and fractionation arises from the four pill ars of 
radiobiology : (i) repair of sub -lethal damage, (ii) reassortment of cells within the cell 
cycle, (iii) repopulation, and (iv) reoxygenation.10 Recovery from radiation -induced  
toxicity  is primarily dependent on s ub-lethal damage repair and repopulation . For this 
reason, fractionated radiotherapy still predominates in the clinic. As a low fractional dose 
of radiation is delivered daily, consistent insult is delivered to tumor cells while allowing 
time for normal tissue recovery between fractions. Despite this, as discussed above, 
toxicity still manifests mid-way or toward the end of most treatment courses  acutely and 
late toxicities remain dose -limiting. Attention has been turned to techniques to widen the 
therapeutic ratio between tumor control probability (TCP) and normal tissue complication 
probability  (NTCP) . This had been achieved previously by pharmaceu ticals such as 
radiosenstizers and radioprotectants, until the advent of intensity modulated radiation 
therapy (IMRT), which now is one of the greatest contributors to reduced toxicity  
associated with radiotherapy .2,11,12 The implementation of IMRT into clinical practice 
Case  4318     Page 12    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 took nearly 50 years from when Dr. Birkhoff solved the inverse problem of IMRT in the 
1940s, until Dr. Brahme illustrated the IMRT principles in 1988, and ultimately when the 
Peacock planning system was used to treat the first patient with IMRT in the mid -
1990s.13-17 
 As an extension of IMRT, other researchers namely Dr. Unkelbach have 
examined the role of altering both the fractional dose delivered to the targ et as well as the 
organs at risk  to continue to widen the therapeutic ratio .18-22 Temporally feathered 
radiation therapy takes a different approach to reducing toxicity, without altering target 
volume coverage or do sing. Temporally feathered radiation therapy optimizes not only 
the physical distributions of dose, but also the time through which radiation therapy is 
delivered with the goal of allowing increased time for normal tissue recovery between 
fractional doses.  Preclinical data demonstrating the potential benefit of TFRT are 
discussed below (section 1.2.1).23  
 
1.2  Temporally Feathered Radiation Therapy  
 
1.2.1   Preclinical Data   
 
Temporally feath ered radiation therapy is designed for targets within close proximity to 
multiple organs at risk. The foundation of this planning technique is the rotation of 
radiation dose to the nearby organs at risk on a daily basis, and hence the term 
“feathering”. Ra diation dose feathering is a technique that has been long used for creating 
a uniform  distribution of dose across radiation field junctions  at which hot or cold spots 
may occur. In TFRT planning, the physical dose is deliberately feathered  among the 
neighb oring organs at risk unevenly. Temporally feathered radiation plan s are  composed 
of 5 isocurative subplans  which are scheduled to be delivered once per week as illustrated 
in Figure 1. Each of these subplans delivers a therapeutic dose of radiation therapy  to the 
target, however one organ at risk is chosen to be deprioritized per subplan and therefore 
receive a slightly higher fractional dose (d H) as compared to the standard fractional dose 
(dS) delivered by conventional planning. dH is defined as a measure  of dose distributed 
over a deprioritized organ. The following is true: d H > d S > d L. Resultantly, each OAR 
which received a slightly higher fractional dose once weekly, followed by  slightly lower 
fractional dose the remaining four fractions of that week  as reflected in the other four 
subplans . The hypothesis is that if d H is delivered to an organ at risk once weekly 
followed by four d L (lower fractional dose) , there is increased time for normal tissue 
recover y. 
 
 
Case  4318     Page 13    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of Te mporally Feathered Radiation Therapy.  
The target volume ( black pentagon ) is surrounded by 5 organs at risk ( circles ). Five 
individual radiation plans are created for each day of the week whereby a  higher 
fractional dose, d H, is delivered to the OAR of int erest (grey) and the remaining four 
OARs receive a lower fractional dose, d L.  
 
 In silico  simulations , TFRT demonstrated potential for reduced normal tissue 
toxicity compared to conventionally planned IMRT as demonstrated in Figure 2.23 The 
sequencing of high and low fractional doses delivered to OARs by TFRT plans suggested 
increased normal tissue recovery, and hence less overall radiation -induced toxicity 
compared to conventionally planned  IMRT. The simulations were conducted using the 
following  dynamic normal tissue complication probability model  (equation 1)  which 
accounts for normal tissue recovery in response to radiation therapy.23  
 
                                                          (1) 
 
The organ -specific parameter µ > 0 represents the recovery rate of radiation -induced 
damage. N(t) < N(0) represents the level of normal tissue damage by radiotherapy,  
considering that normal tissue at homeostasis with a 1% turnover rate would be denoted 
as N(0) = 0.99. Small values of N(t) relate to severe damage. The effect of radiation is 
included by the loss term δ(ti ) RT(d) N(t)(1 -N(t))  where δ(ti) is a characteri stic function 
equal to 1 at the time of irradiation ti, and zero in other case.  The magnitude of toxicity 
reduction by TFRT planning was found to depend on corresponding standard fractional 
dose of IMRT and organ -specific recovery rate of sub -lethal radiat ion-induced damage.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case  4318     Page 14    Version date:  5/8/2020  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 . Comparison of conventionally fractionated IMRT and TFRT with res pect 
to the standard fractional dose (d s) and organ -specific recovery rate (µ).  (a) Overall 
potential benefit (OBP TF) and (b) maximum pot ential benefit (MAX TF) of TFRT over 
conventional planned IMRT. (I -III) Top panels represent the single cases marked  by stars 
in (a). The x - and y -axes represent ∆L = d S − d L and ∆H = d H − d S, respectively . Bottom 
panels show time -evolution of OAR toxicity included by the IMRT and TFRT plans 
corresponding to the location marked by diamonds in the top panels.  
 
Further dosimetric evaluations were conducted with IMRT head and neck cases 
that were replanned with TFRT technique. As illustrated in figure 3, the T FRT plans were 
achievable while maintaining the dose delivered the planning target volume.  
Case  4318     Page 15    Version date:  5/8/2020  
  
 
Figure 3. Proof of principle of Temporally Feathered Radiation Therapy. Panel A 
illustrates changes in OAR toxicity and NTCP over time for varying OAR recovery  rates. 
Panel B demonstrates a dose volume histogram for the target in a TFRT plan ( red) 
compared to conventionally planned IMRT ( black ). Panel C demonstrates axial images of 
a head and neck plan with superimposed isodose lines for conventionally planned I MRT, 
a TFRT plan with d H delivered to the OAR, and a TFRT plan with d L delivered to the 
OAR ( left to right ).   
 
 
1.2.2  Clinical Data  
 
There are no available clinical research data to date on temporally feathered radiation 
therapy .  
 
1.3 Rationale  
 
Given p rior preclinical  data suggesting the potential for reduced normal tissue toxicity 
with TFRT, we will now evaluate the feasibility of treatment  planning and delivery in 
current clinic al workflow . Subsequent studies will be powered for toxicity outcomes. 
Patients with head and neck malignancies were chosen, as the current standard of care 
requires conventionally  fractionated radiation therapy over 7 weeks. Due to the anatomy 
Case  4318     Page 16    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 of the region, the target volume often is surrounded by multiple organs at risk. Ther efore, 
head and neck malignancies are a prime example in which temporally feathered radiation 
therapy may decrease normal tissue toxicity.  
 
2.0  Objectives  
2.1 Primary Objective  
 
To determine f easibility of TFRT planning and delivery  for head and neck 
squamo us cell carcinoma  defined as  patient start ing radiation within 15 days of 
simulation.  
 
2.2 Secondary Objective(s)  
 
(1) Estimate grade 3 -5 acute t oxicity (within 90 days after RT)   
(2) Patient -reported outcomes  (PRO)  of toxicity during and after TFRT . 
(3) Compliance with p lan delivery  
 
3.0 Study Design  
 
3.1  Study design including dose escalation / cohorts  
 
This study is planned as a single arm feasibility trial to demonstrate clinical delivery of 
TFRT plans. Five patients will be accrued as a single cohort.  
 
3.2 Number of  Subjects  
 
Five patients will be enrolled in this trial.  
 
3.3 Replacement of Subjects  
 
Subjects who come off of study for reasons unrelated to treatment course may  be 
replaced.   
 
3.4  Expected Duration of Treatment and Subject Participation  
 
Treatment wil l last  for a duration of 7 weeks and patients will be followed for a total of 3 
months following treatment completion.  
 
4.0 Subject Selection  
Each of the criteria in the sections  that follow must be met in order for a subject  to be 
considered eligible for  this study.  Eligibility criteria  must be met to confirm a subject ’s 
eligibility.   
 
4.1 Inclusion Criteria   
Subject s must meet all of the following inclusion criteria to be eligible for enrollment:  
 
Case  4318     Page 17    Version date:  5/8/2020  
  4.1.1 Subjects must have histologically or cytologically  confirmed squamous cell 
carcinoma arising from a primary head and neck site (oropharynx, larynx/ 
hypopharynx, nasopharynx).  TX-4, NX -3, MX -0 stages are permitted .  
 
 4.1.2 Subjects must be eligible for definitive radiation therapy  (70Gy in 35 
fractions)  with or without chemotherapy.    
 4.1.3 Age ≥18 years.   
 
 4.1.4  Karnofsky Performance status ≥80 [See Appendix 1].  
 
 4.1.5 Subjects must have the ability to understand and the willingness to sign a 
written informed consent document.  
 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
The presence of any of the following will ex clude a subject  from study enrollment.  
 
  4.2.1 Subject s receiving any other investigational agents.   
 
 4.2.2 Postoperative radio therapy is not permitted.  
 
 4.2.3 History of prior head and neck radiation therapy.  
 
 4.2.4 Subject s with uncontrolled inter -curre nt illness including, but not limited to 
ongoing or active infection, symptomatic congestive heart failure, unstable 
angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia, or psychiatric illness/social situations that 
would limit compliance with study requirements.  
 
 4.2.5 Pregnant or breastfeeding women are excluded from this study because 
radiation therapy  has the potential for teratogenic or abortifacient effects. 
Because there is an unknown, but potential risk for adverse events in nursing 
infants secondary to treatment of the mother with radiation therapy , breastfeeding 
should be discontinued if the mother is treated with radiation therapy . These 
potential risks may also apply to other agents used in this study.   
 
 4.2.6 The patient cannot have distant metastatic disease (or M1 disease by AJCC 
8th edition).  
 
 
4.3 Inclusion of Women and  Minorities   
Men, women  and members of all races and ethnic groups are eligible for this trial.  
 
5.0 Registration  
All subjects who have been consented are to be registered in the OnCore® Data base. For 
those subjects who are consented, but not enrolled, the reason for exclusion must be 
recorded.  
 
Case  4318     Page 18    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 All subjects will be registered through Cleveland Clinic and will be provided a study 
number by contacting the study coordinator listed on the cover p age.  
 
 
 
6.0  Radiation Treatment Plan  
 
6.1 Radiation Treatment Regimen Overview  
Protocol treatment must begin within 15 days after simulation .  
 
Patients will receive temporally feathered radiation therapy as part of their definitive 
course of radiation t herapy with indications as per standard of care  for patients with head 
and neck malignancies.  
 
No investigational agents or investigational therapies may be administered with the intent 
to treat the subject's  malignancy.  
 
6.2 Dose Specifications  
 
6.2.1 Dose Fractionation  
Patients must be eligible to receive 70 Gy in 35 fractions  to the primary target  
(PTV_7000)  and to receive 56 Gy in 35 fractions  to the elective volume  (PTV_5600 ). 
The doses are prescribed at the edge of the PTV. Treatment  will be delivere d once daily 
from Monday  to Friday  over 7 weeks . Missed treatments can be compensated for by 
treating on the Saturday or Sunday of that week, or adding to the end of treatment.  
 
6.3 Technical Factors  
 
6.3.1  Treatment Planning and Delivery   
The IMRT plan c an be delivered with step -and-shoot, sliding window, or 
volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) techniques on a linear 
accelerator with equipped with multileaf collimator (MLC).  Any MV 
photon beam energ ies will be allowed.    
 
6.3.2  Image Guidance for IGRT  
Daily image guidance should be achieved using kilovoltage (KV) cone -
beam CT (CBCT) images . 
 
6.4 Localization, Simulation, and Immobilization  
 
6.4.1  Patient s must have an immobilization device (Aquaplast mask) at the time 
of CT simulation . It is strongly en couraged that the immobilization device 
should limit motion in the head and neck region as well as the shoulders. 
Bite blocks may be used for maintaining tongue position.  
 
Case  4318     Page 19    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 6.4.2  IV contrast  should be used with the treatment planning CT unless the 
patient h as a contraindication . The treatment planning CT will be acquired  
in the treatment position with the immobilization device. CT s lice 
thickness should be ≤ 0.3 cm . 
 
6.5 Target Volumes  
 
 6.5.1  Definition of Target Volumes  
In addition to the planning CT, additional imaging (e.g. PET/CT, MRI) 
can be fused with the planning CT to guide target delineation . Standard 
volume  definitions  were borrowed from co nsensu s from RTOG 1016 
protocol  
 
Gross Tumor  Volume (GTV):  The GTV represents the clinical or 
radiographic areas grossly involved with tumor and will be designated as 
GTV_7000. Involved n odes must be included in the GTV and are defined 
as those greater than 1 c m in short axis , nodes with central necrosis or 
those with PET avidity deemed to be positive .  
Clinical Target Volume (CTV):  The CTV represents the area at risk for 
microscopic disease spread , respecting natural barriers of disease spread. 
Two CTVs must  be created . CTV_7000 will encompass possible local 
subclinical infiltration at the primary site. CTV_7000 is created by a 0.25 -
0.5 cm expansion of GTV_7000. CTV_5600 will encompass  the clinically 
uninvolved nodal regions considered to be at high risk for mic roscopic 
spread. An optional CTV_6300 may be designated at the physician’s 
discretion in regions felt to be at especially high risk for recurrence.  
 
Planning Target Volumes (PTV):  The PTV represents the volume to which 
radiation dose will be prescribed, d elivered, and evaluated. The PTV 
accounts for interfraction set -up variability. Two PTVs will be generated. 
A PTV_7000 will be created from the CTV_7000 and a PTV_5600 will be 
created from the CTV_5600. An option PTV_6300 may also be 
designated as above. The PTV is created by an isotropic expansion of 
0.25cm-0.5 cm on the CTV. The PTV should not extend beyond  the skin 
surface. If the skin is considered to be at high risk, bolus material should  
be placed over this portion of the PTV . 
 
6.5.2  Definition of No rmal Tissues/ Organs at Risk (OARs) : All normal tissues 
are evaluated  as the regions not overlapping with the PTV  and are 
summarized in Table 1 . 
Spinal cord:  The cranial border of the spinal cord is at the craniocervical 
junction  (the top of C1 vertebral b ody). The inferior border is at 
approximately T3 -T4 (i .e., just below the lowest slice that has PTV on it).  
A Planning Risk Volume (PRV) of the cord should  be created by 
expanding the cord with a uniform margin of 5 mm.   
 
Case  4318     Page 20    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 Brainstem: The cranial border of the brainstem is approximately at the 
level of the top of the posterior clinoid. The inferior border is at the 
craniocervical junction. The brainstem and spinal cord are contiguous 
structures. A PRV of 3 mm should be delineated around the brainstem also 
as a separate structure.  
 
Lips and Oral Cavity:  Delineation of lips is self -explanatory. The oral 
cavity is delineated as the anterior ½ -2/3 of the oral tongue/ floor of 
mouth, buccal mucosa, and palate.  
 
Parotid Glands:  Each parotid gland is drawn as  an individual structure 
based  on CT anatomy. The superficial and deep lobes should be included.  
 
Submandibular Glands:  Each submandibular gland is drawn as an 
individual structure based on CT anatomy.  
 
OARpharynx:  This structure encompasses the posterior phary ngeal wall 
and adjacent constrictor muscles, extending cranially from the level of the 
pterygoid plates to the level of the esophagus.  
 
Esophagus:  The cervical esophagus is defined on CT anatomy.  The 
superior border is at the bottom of the pharynx (cricoph aryngeal inlet) and 
the inferior border is at the thoracic inlet.  
 
Supraglottis:  The supraglottis is drawn separate from the larynx , cranially 
including the epiglottis. This structure is contiguous with the glottic larynx  
caudally . 
 
Larynx:  The larynx onl y encompasses the glottic  larynx.  
 
Glottic/Supraglottic Laryn x (GSL):  The GSL includes a fusion of the 
supraglottic larynx and the glottic larynx.   
 
Table 1:  Normal Tissues/Organs at Risk to be Delineated  
 
OAR Standard Name  Description  
SPINAL_CORD  Spinal  cord 
SPINAL_CORD_PRV5  Planning risk volume of 5 mm around spinal 
cord  
BRAINSTEM  Brainstem  
BRAINSTEM_PRV3  Planning risk volume of 3 mm around 
brainstem  
LIPS  Lips 
ORAL_CAVITY  Oral cavity  
PAROTID_R  Right parotid gland  
PAROTID_R_PTV  Right parotid glan d, nonoverlapping with PTV  
Case  4318     Page 21    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 PAROTID_L  Left parotid gland  
PAROTID_L_PTV  Left parotid gland, nonoverlapping with PTV  
SUBMANDIBULAR_R  Right submandibular gland  
SUBMANDIBULAR_L  Left submandibular gland  
OAR_PHARYNX  OAR pharynx  
OAR_PHARYNX_PTV  OAR pharynx, nonoverlapping with PTV  
ESOPHAGUS  Esophagus  
SUPRAGLOTTIS  Supraglottis  
LARYNX  Glottic larynx  
GSL  Supraglottic and glottic larynx  
 
6.5.3  In cases of anatomical changes ( i.e. due to weight loss), an adaptive  replan 
is permitted with repeat  CT simulation  at the discretion of the treating 
physician  in order to recreate an immobilization mask and adjust the 
planning volumes.   
6.5.4  Any OAR involved by tumor will not need to be deliberately avoided.  
However, they should still be contoured.  
 
6.6 Treatment P lanning, Assessment and Delivery  
 
6.6.1  Planning Temporally Feathered Radiation Therapy:  The treating physician 
will designate  up to 5 organs at risk (OARs) to be feathered  based on 
proximity to target , prior to treatment planning . As shown in Figure 1, 5 
subplans  (designated as plan A, plan B, plan C, plan D, and plan E)  will 
be generated, with each deprioritizing  one of the 5 OARs . The plans are 
considered to be isocurative  based on  meet ing standard guidelines for 
PTV coverage as described in 6.2.2.  
 For each of these  subplans , a single OAR is deprioritized such 
that it receives a higher dose (d H) while the remaining 4 OARs 
receive a lower dose (d L) than the standard fractional dose (d S) 
delivered in a conventional IMRT plan.  
 The daily dose delivered to th e PTV is still 2 Gy.  
 The OARs  that may be feathered include, but are not limited 
to, the following: oral cavity, each submandibular gland, each 
parotid gland, OARpharynx,  supraglottis, larynx, and 
esophagus.  
 A standard IMRT plan must also be generated. If  the patient 
cannot be started on the TFRT plan within 15 days of 
simluation , the standard  IMRT plan should be delivered 
instead.  
 Note : If the patient’s start date for radiation therapy is delayed 
for medical reasons (eg dental extractions) not related to  the 
timing of TFRT planning, TFRT planning can still be 
continued as planned. Delays in radiation start date must be 
designated whether directly attributable to TFRT planning. 
Case  4318     Page 22    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 Refer to appendix III on correct procedures for resumption of 
treatment schedul e after a missed fraction.  
 
6.6.2  Assessing Temporally Feathered Radiation Therapy:  The treatment plan 
documents signed by the physician will be stored in Mosaiq. The 
treatment plan documents must include the treatment fields, the isodose 
lines, and DVH c omposite plan (labeled  as COMPOSITE ). Appendix III 
lists all of the components necessary in the approved treatment plan 
document.  
 
Each subplan must be assessed individually in addition to the composite 
plan.  
1. Assessment of the composite plan : The composit e plan and DVH must 
be generated from the cumulative dose delivered by each of the 5 
temporally feathered subplans . The composite plan must meet the 
compliance criteria as in 6.8.  
2. Assessment of each subplan : dH is defined as a measure of dose 
distributed o ver a deprioritized organ. The max point dose for d H must 
comply with:0.03 cc of the deprioritized organ cannot exceed >10% of 
the prescription dose. The dose delivered to each PTV must meet the 
compliance criteria as in 6.8.  
 
6.6.3  Delivery of Temporally Feathered Radiation Therapy:  The patient should 
start radiation  treatment  within 15 days of CT simulation . If the patient is 
unable to be started on TFRT treatment plan  within 15 days of the date of 
CT simulation , the patient must start radiation therapy  using the standard 
IMRT  plan previously created  (and not TFRT plan)  so as not to delay 
treatment schedule .  
 
The treatment plan can be started on any day of the week, as long as at 
least 2 consecutive fractions are delivered before the weekend.  
 
Specific I MRT QA should be performed for each subplan  to ensure plan 
integrity.   
  
 Two therapists must be present for the delivery of TFRT. The therapists  
should continue with standard time out procedures with an additional 
verification that the correct subplan is  selected for treatment according to 
the day of the week as in Appendix II. It is strongly encouraged t hat the 
attending physician or physicist to be present at the first 5 fractions of 
TFRT  delivery . 
 
6.7 Doses to critical structures  for the composite pla n 
All dose constraints to critical structures include the volume of the critical 
structure outside of the planning target volume. Standard dose constraints were 
adapted from RTOG 1016 protocol ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  
Case  4318     Page 23    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 Spinal cord:  0.03 cc of the PRV should not excee d ≥50 Gy. 0.03 cc of the 
spinal cord  should not exceed ≥45 Gy.  
 
Brainstem : 0.03 cc of the brainstem should not exceed 60 Gy. 0 .03 cc of 
the PRV  brainst em should not exceed  63 Gy.  
 
Lips:  Reduce dose as much as possible , with goal of  mean dose <20 Gy.  
 
Oral Cavity: Reduce dose as much as possible, with goal of mean dose 
<30 Gy for the uninvolved oral cavity. Hot spots >60 Gy should be 
avoided as possible within  the uninvolved oral cavity.  
 
Parotid Glands:  Each parotid gland should be optimized separately, with a 
goal of mean dose <26 Gy.  
 
Contralateral Submandibular Glands:  If contralateral nodal level IB is not 
targeted, goal is to reduce mean contralateral submandibular to <39 Gy.  
 
OARpharynx:  Reduce the dose as much as possible with goal mean dose 
<45 Gy . 
 
Esophagus:  Reduce the dose as much as possible, with goal mean dose 
<30 Gy.  
 
Supraglottis:  Reduce the dose as much as possible, with goal mean dose 
<45 Gy.  
 
Larynx:  Reduce the dose as much as possible, with goal mean dose <45 
Gy. 
 
GSL :  Reduce the dose as much as possible, with goal mean dose <45 Gy.  
 
6.8 Compliance Criteria  
Treatment breaks and reasons must be indicated in the treatment record. Treatment 
breaks should not exceed 5 consecutive treatment days or 10 days total.  
 
 Per Protocol  Variation  
Acceptable  Deviation  
Unacceptable  
Total RT dose to 
PTV _7000  (to 95% 
of the PTV)  70 Gy  None  none  
Minimum dose 
(“cold spot” within 
PTV_7000, not 
including portion 
near (<8 mm skin) 66.5 Gy (equals 
95% prescribed 
dose) <66.5 but >63 Gy  ≤63 Gy  
Case  4318     Page 24    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 defined for a point 
that is 0.03 cc in 
size 
Maximum dose 
(“hot spot” >1 cc) 
within PTV_7000  ≤77 Gy  >77 Gy but ≤82 Gy  >82 Gy  
    
Total RT dose to 
PTV _5600  (to 95% 
of the PTV)  56 Gy  ≥45 but <56 Gy  <45 Gy  
Total RT dose to 
PTV _6300  (to 95% 
of the PTV)  63 Gy  
 
Required when 
applicable  ≥52 but < 63 Gy  <52 Gy  
Total RT dose to 
spinal cord PRV 
(0.03 cc)  ≤50 Gy  ≥50 Gy but ≤52 Gy  >52 Gy  
 
6.9 Radiation Therapy Adverse Even t Reporting  
Adverse event reporting will occur according to section 7. 
 
6.10 General Concomitant Medications and Supportive Care Gu idelines  
 
Subjects should receive full supportive care, including transfusions of blood and blood 
products, cytokines, antibiotics, antiemetics, etc when appropriate.  
 
6.11 Criteria for Removal from Study  
In the absence of treatment delays due to adverse e vents, treatment will continue until 
completion  of treatment or one of the following criteria applies:  
 
• Disease progression,  
 
• Inter-current illness that prevents further administration of treatment,  
 
• The investigator considers it, for safety reasons,  to be in the best interest of the subject .  
 
• Subject  decision to withdraw from treatment (partial consent) or from the study (full 
consent),  
 
• Pregnancy during the course of the study for a child -bearing participant  
 
 
 
6.12 Duration of Follow Up  
Subjec ts will be followed for toxicity for 3 months after treatment has been completed/ 
discontinued  or until death, whichever occurs first.  
Case  4318     Page 25    Version date:  5/8/2020  
  
 
7.0 Adverse Events and Potential Risks  
 
Note:  Only serious adverse events as defined above will be reported. Standard hea d and 
neck radiotherapy engenders significant acute toxicity and may be associated with grade 
3-5 acute toxicity.  These may be associated with pain, dysphagia, mucositis, weight loss, 
feeding tube use, narcotic use, hospitalizations, dehydration, infectio ns, dermatitis, 
laryngeal edema.  These are routine expected side effects from radiation and should not 
be affected by the method of planning used in this study.  
 
7.1 Definitions   
 
7.1.1 Adverse Event   
An adverse event  (AE) is any unfavorable or unintend ed event, physical or 
psychological, associated with a research study, which causes harm or injury to a 
research participant as a result of the participant’s involvement in a research study. The 
event can include abnormal laboratory findings, symptoms, or disease associated with the 
research study. The event does not necessarily have to have a causal relationship with the 
research, any risk associated with the research, the research intervention, or the research 
assessments.  
 
Adverse events may be the resu lt of the interventions and interactions used in the 
research; the collection of identifiable private information in the research; an underlying 
disease, disorder, or condition of the subject; and/or other circumstances unrelated to the 
research or any und erlying disease, disorder, or condition of the subject.  
 
7.1.2   Serious Adverse Events  
A serious adverse event (SAE)  is any adverse experience occurring at any dose that 
results in any of the following outcomes:  
 Results in death .  
 Is a life-threatening  adverse experience. The term life -threatening in the 
definition of serious refers to an adverse event in which the subject was at risk 
of death at the time of the event.  It does not refer to an adverse event which 
hypothetically might have caused death i f it were more severe .  
 Requires inpatient  hospitalization or prolongation of existing 
hospitalization .  Any adverse event leading to hospitalization or prolongation 
of hospitalization will be considered as Serious, UNLESS at least one of the 
following exp ectations is met:  
o The admission results in a hospital stay of less than 24 hours OR  
o The admission is pre -planned ( e.g., elective or scheduled surgery 
arranged prior to the start of the study) OR  
o The admission is not associated with an adverse event (e.g., social 
hospitalization for purposes of respite care.  
Case  4318     Page 26    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 However it should be noted that invasive treatment during any hospitalization 
may fulfill the criteria of “medically important” and as such may be reportable as 
a serious adverse event dependant on clini cal judgment.  In addition where local 
regulatory authorities specifically require a more stringent definition, the local 
regulation takes precedent.  
 Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity .  The definition of 
disability is a substantia l disruption of a person’s ability to conduct normal 
life’s functions.  
 Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect .  
 Is an important medical event .  Important medical events that may not result 
death, be life -threatening, or require hospitalization may be conside red a 
serious adverse experience when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, 
they may jeopardize the subject  and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  Examples 
of such medical events incl ude allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive 
treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood disease or disorders, or 
convulsions that do not result in inpatient  hospitalization, or the development 
of drug dependency or drug abuse . The development of a n ew cancer is 
always considered an important medical event.  
 
7.1.3 Adverse Event Evaluation  
The investigator  or designee is responsible for ensuring that all adverse events  (both 
serious and non -serious)  observed by the clinical team  or reported by the sub ject which 
occur after the subject has signed the informed consent are fully recorded in  the subject’s 
medical records . Source documentation must be available to support all adverse events.   
 
For the purposes of data collection, only non-serious adverse ev ents that are possibly, 
probably or definitely related to protocol treatment will be reported in the database. 
Serious adverse events of any attribution will be reported in the database.  
 
A laboratory test abnormality considered clinically relevant  (e.g., causing the subject to 
withdraw from the study, requiring treatment or causing apparent clinical manifestations, 
result in a delay or dose modification of study treatment, or judged relevant by the 
investigator),  should be reported as an adverse event.   
 
The investigator or sub -investigator (treating physician if applicable) will provide the 
following for all adverse events  (both serious and non -serious) : 
 Event term (as per CTCAE)  
 Description of the event  
 Date of onset and resolution  
 Expectedness of the t oxicity  
 Grade of toxicity  
 Attribution of relatedness to the treatment - (this must be assigned by an 
investigator, sub -investigator, or treating physician)  
 Action taken as a result of the event , including but not limited to; no changes, 
Case  4318     Page 27    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 dose interrupted, re duced, discontinued, etc. or action taken with regard to the 
event  
 Outcome of event  
 
Descriptions and grading scales  found in the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events (CTCAE) version  4.0 will be utilized for AE  reporting.  
 
An expected advers e event  is an event previously known or anticipated to result from 
participation in the research study or any underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the 
subject. The event is usually listed in the Investigator Brochure, consent form or research 
protocol.  
 
An unexpected adverse event is an adverse event not previously known or anticipated to 
result from the research study or any underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the 
subject.  
 
Attribution  is the relationship between an adverse event or se rious adverse event and the 
prescribed course of radiotherapy .  Attribution will be assigned as follows:  
 
 Definite – The AE is clearly related  to the prescribed course of radiotherapy . 
 Probable – The AE is likely related  to the prescribe course of radiothe rapy. 
 Possible – The AE may be related  to the prescribed course of radiotherapy . 
 Unlikely – The AE is doubtfully related  to the prescribed course of 
radiotherapy . 
 Unrelated – The AE is clearly NOT  related  to the prescribed course of 
radiotherapy . 
 
There is  no attrition allowed for the prescribed course of radiotherapy depending on 
response to therapy.  
 
7.2  SAE Report Form  
 
SAE’s related to radiation therapy only will be recorded into OnCore and reported to IRB 
according to local IRB policies and procedure s.  
 
SAEs related to agent therapy will be recorded on the Radiation Oncology SAE Report  
Form [Appendix V].  
 
7.3  Reporting Procedures for Serious Adverse Events  
For the purposes of safety reporting, all adverse events will be reported that occur from 
the day of registration  through 90 days after the completion of the prescribed course of  
therapy . Adverse events, both serious and non -serious, and deaths that occur during  this 
period will be recorded in the source documents. All SAEs should be monitored unt il 
they are resolved or are clearly determined to be due to a subject ’s stable or chronic 
condition or intercurrent illness(es).  Related AEs will be followed until resolution to 
baseline or grade 1  or stabilization.  
Case  4318     Page 28    Version date:  5/8/2020  
  
7.3.1 SAE  Reporting Requirements  
 Parti cipating investigators  (all sites)  must report all serious adverse events to the 
Lead Site Principal Investigator ( e.g. Sponsor -Investigator) within 24 hours  of 
discovery or notification of the event. The participating investigator must also 
provide follow -up information on the SAE until final resolution.   
o Lead Site PI: Shlomo Koyfman, koyfmas@ccf.org  Fax: 216 -445-1068. 
Protocol coordinator can be contacted if applicable.  
 The Lead Site  Principal Investigator will review the SAE and report the event to 
IRB as applicable.  
 It is the Principal Investigator’s  responsibility to ensure that ALL serious adverse 
events that occur on the study are reported to the Data Safety Toxicity Committe e. 
 
Institutional Review Board Reporting Requirements : 
 Investigative sites w ill report adverse events to their respective IRB according to 
the local IRB’s policies and procedures in reporting adverse events.  
 
7.4  SAEs and OnCore  
 All SAEs will be entered into OnCore.   
 A copy of th e SAE form(s) submitted to the sponsor -investigat or is also uploaded 
into Oncore . 
 
7.5  Data Safety and Toxicity Committee  
It is the responsibility of each site PI to ensure that ALL SAEs occurring on this trial 
(internal or external) are reported to the Case Comprehensive Cancer Center’s Data and 
Safety  Toxicity Committee. This submission is simultaneous with their submission to the 
sponsor and/or other regulatory bodies.   
 
The sponsor -investigator is responsible for submitting an annual report to the DSTC as 
per CCCC Data and Safety Monitoring Plan.  
  
7.6 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  (DSMP)  
This protocol will adhere to the policies of the Case Comprehensive Cancer Center Data 
and Safety Monitoring Plan in accordance with NCI guidelines.  
 
8.0 EXPLORATORY  ENDPOINTS  
 
8.1 Dosimetric Comparison of TFRT an d Conventional IMRT  
Dosimetric parameters including the mean dose, maximum dose, and minimum dose to 
the organs at risk will be analyzed among the subplans, composite TFRT plan, and 
conventional IMRT plan.  
 
8.1.1 Background  
Using the dynamic NTCP model, the greatest difference between d H and d L theoretically 
will create the biggest reduction in normal tissue complication probability. To further 
Case  4318     Page 29    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 understand the appropriate prioritization parameters dosimetric endpoints will be 
compared.  
 
8.1.2   Rationale for Analysis  
The dosimetric parameters will be reported in a descriptive pattern to detail the planning 
parameters used to optimize temporally feathered radiation therapy plans.  
 
 
9.0  STUDY PARAMETERS AND CALENDAR  
 
9.1 Study Parameters  
 
9.1.1 Screening Evaluation  
Evaluations including that needed to establish diagnosis, will be used to determine the 
eligibility of each subject for study inclusion. All evaluations must be completed < 40 
days prior to administration of protocol therapy.  
 
9.1.2 Treatment Period  
Patients will be evaluated in consultation, at which time information will be gathered 
regarding trial eligibility. Subsequently , patients  will undergo CT simulation, initiation of 
radiation delivery,  and weekly on -treatment visits . Follow -up visits  will occur 2 weeks, 4 
weeks, and 3 months post completion of treatment.  At the indicated  visits below , toxicity 
will be assessed by way of CTCAE criteria and  patient -reported quality of life 
questionnaires .  
 
9.2 Calendar   
At the scheduled visits below th e patients will undergo evaluation of toxicity with 
physician -assigned grade as per CTCAE V4 as well as patient reported outcome 
measures using EORTC QLQ -C30, EORTC QLQ -HN35  and Xerostomia Questionnaire 
(XQ)  as demonstrated in Appendix IV.  
A visit window of +/- 4 days is allowed for  the visits while the patient is undergoing 
treatment. A visit window of +/ - 7 days is allowed for the visits 2 and 4 weeks after 
completing treatment. A visit window of +/ - 28 days is allowed for the 3 month post -
treatment.  
 
Study Days  Wk 1  of RT  
(+/- 4 days)  Wk 4  of RT  
(+/- 4 days)  Wk 7 of RT  
(+/- 4 days)  2 Wks post -
RT 
 (+/- 7 days)  4 wks post 
RT 
(+/- 7 days)  3 mos post  
RT 
(+/- 28 days)  
REQUIRED 
ASSESSMENTS        
Weight  X X X X X X 
Vitals ( blood 
pressure, pulse, 
respiratory  rate, 
and temperature)  X X X X X X 
Physical 
Examination  X X X X X X 
Adverse Event 
Assessment  X X X X X X 
PRO Assessment  X X X X X X 
Case  4318     Page 30    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 Karnofsky PS  X X X X X X 
 
10.0 DATA REPORTING / REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Adverse event lists, guidelines, and instr uctions for AE reporting can be found in Section 
7.0 (Adverse Events: List and Reporting Requirements).  
 
10.1 Data Reporting  
The Overture  Database will be utilized, as required by the Case Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, to provide data collection for both a ccrual entry and trial data management.  
Overture is a Clinical Trials Management System housed on secure servers maintained at 
Case Western Reserve University.  Access to data through Overture  is restricted by user 
accounts and assigned roles.  Once logged i nto the Overture  system with a user ID and 
password, Overture  defines roles for each user which limits access to appropriate data. 
User information and password can be obtained by contacting the Overture  Administrator 
at OnCore -registration@case.edu.  
 
Over ture is designed with the capability for study setup, activation, tracking, reporting, 
data monitoring and review, and eligibility verification.  This study will utilize electronic 
Case Report Form completion in the Overture  database.  A calendar of events a nd 
required forms are available in Overture  
 
10.2 Regulatory Considerations  
The study will be conducted in compliance with ICH guidelines and with all applicable 
federal (including 21 CFR parts 56 & 50 ), state or local laws.  
10.2.1 Written Informed consent  
Provision of written informed consent  must be obtained prior to any study -related 
procedures.  The Principal Investigator will ensure that the subject is given full and 
adequate oral and written information about the nature, purpose, possible risks and 
benefits of the study as well as the subject’s financial responsibility.  Subjects must also 
be notified that they are free to discontinue from the study at any time.  The subject 
should be given the opportunity to ask questions and be allowed time to consider the 
information provided.  
The original, signed written Informed Consent Form must be kept with the Research 
Chart in conformance with the institution’s standard operating procedures. A copy of the 
signed written Informed Consent Form must be given to the subject.  Additionally, 
documentation of the consenting process should be located in the research chart.  
10.2.2 Subject Data Protection  
In accordance with the Health Information Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), a 
subject must sign an authorizatio n to release medical information to the sponsor and/or 
allow the sponsor, a regulatory authority, or Institutional Review Board access to 
subject’s medical information that includes all hospital records relevant to the study, 
including subjects’ medical hi story.   
Case  4318     Page 31    Version date:  5/8/2020  
  
10.2.3  Retention of records  
The Principal Investigator of The Case Comprehensive Cancer Center supervises the 
retention of all documentation of adverse events, records of study drug receipt and 
dispensation, and all IRB correspondence for as long  as needed to comply with  local,  
national and international regulations. No records will be destroyed until the Principal 
Investigator confirms destruction is permitted.  
 
10.2.4  Audits and inspections  
Authorized representatives of the sponsor, a regulat ory authority, an Independent Ethics 
Committee (IEC) or an Institutional Review Board (IRB) may visit the  site to perform 
audits or inspections, including source data verification.  The purpose of an audit or 
inspection is to systematically and independentl y examine all study -related activities and 
documents to determine whether these activities were conducted, and data were recorded, 
analysed, and accurately reported according to the protocol, Good Clinical Practice 
(GCP), guidelines of the International Co nference on Harmonization (ICH), and any 
applicable regulatory requirements.   For multi -center studies, participating sites must 
inform the sponsor -investigator of pending audits.  
 
11.0  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
This study is designed as a feasibility study, with the goal of accruing 5  patients  over the 
course of one year from trial opening . The primary objective is to determine the 
feasibility of TFRT planning and delivery in a modern clinical workflow. Feasibility is 
defined as a patient start ing radiotherapy within 15 days of simulation. The TFRT 
technique will be deemed feasible if 3/5 patients meet the above criteria.  
 
Descriptive statistics will be applied . Secondary endpoints include estimates of (1) acute 
grade 3 -5 toxicity as per CTCAE version 4, (2) estimates of patient -reported outcomes 
during and after TFRT delivery using  EORTC QLQ -H&N35, EORTC QLQ -C30, and 
Xerostomia Questionnaire (XO)  and (3) compliance with plan delivery.  
 
The patient -reported outcomes (PROs) from the above  questionnaires  will be collected at 
week 1 (baseline), week 4, and week 7 of treatment, as well as  2 weeks, 4 weeks, and  3 
months post completion of treatment radiation.  Descriptive associations  between PROs 
and CTCAE toxicity criteria will be reported.  
Case  4318     Page 32    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 REFERENCES  
1. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer Statistics, 2017. CA: a cancer journal for 
clinicians. 2017;67(1):7 -30. 
2. Ward MC, Ross RB, Koyfman SA, et al. Modern image -guided intensity -
modulated radiotherapy for oropharynx cancer and severe late toxic effects: 
implications for clinical trial design. JAMA Otolaryngology –Head & Neck 
Surgery. 2016;142(12):1164 -1170.  
3. Adelstein DJ, Li Y, Adams GL, et al. An intergroup phase III comparison of 
standard radiation therapy and two schedules of concu rrent chemoradiotherapy in 
patients with unresectable squamous cell head and neck cancer. Journal of 
clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 
2003;21(1):92 -98. 
4. Calais G, Alfonsi M, Bardet E, et al. Randomized tr ial of radiation therapy versus 
concomitant chemotherapy and radiation therapy for advanced -stage oropharynx 
carcinoma. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1999;91(24):2081 -2086.  
5. Bourhis J, Sire C, Graff P, et al. Concomitant chemoradiotherapy ver sus 
acceleration of radiotherapy with or without concomitant chemotherapy in locally 
advanced head and neck carcinoma (GORTEC 99 -02): an open -label phase 3 
randomised trial. The Lancet Oncology. 2012;13(2):145 -153. 
6. Brizel DM, Albers ME, Fisher SR, et al . Hyperfractionated irradiation with or 
without concurrent chemotherapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer. The 
New England journal of medicine. 1998;338(25):1798 -1804.  
7. Nguyen -Tan PF, Zhang Q, Ang KK, et al. Randomized phase III trial to test 
accelerated versus standard fractionation in combination with concurrent cisplatin 
for head and neck carcinomas in the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 0129 
trial: long -term report of efficacy and toxicity. Journal of clinical oncology : 
official journal of t he American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2014;32(34):3858 -
3866.  
8. So W, Chan R, Chan D, Hughes B, Choi K, Chan C. Quality -of-life among head 
and neck cancer survivors at one year after treatment –a systematic review. 
European journal of cancer. 2012;48(15 ):2391 -2408.  
9. Nutting CM, Morden JP, Harrington KJ, et al. Parotid -sparing intensity modulated 
versus conventional radiotherapy in head and neck cancer (PARSPORT): a phase 
3 multicentre randomised controlled trial. The lancet oncology. 2011;12(2):127 -
136. 
10. Hall EJ GA. Radiobiology for the Radiologist.  Philadelphia, PA: Lipincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2006.  
11. Eisbruch A, Harris J, Garden AS, et al. Multi -institutional trial of accelerated 
hypofractionated intensity -modulated radiation therapy for early -stage 
oropharyngeal cancer (RTOG 00 -22). International journal of radiation oncology, 
biology, physics. 2010;76(5):1333 -1338.  
12. Dirix P, Nuyts S. Evidence -based organ -sparing radiotherapy in head and neck 
cancer. The Lancet Oncology. 2010;11(1):85 -91. 
13. Birkhoff G. On drawings composed of uniform straight lines. J Math Pures Appl. 
1940;19:221 -236. 
Case  4318     Page 33    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 14. Bortfeld T, Burkelbach J, Boesecke R, Schlegel W. Methods of image 
reconstruction from projections applied to conformation radiotherapy. Physics in 
medici ne and biology. 1990;35(10):1423 -1434.  
15. Bortfeld TR, Kahler DL, Waldron TJ, Boyer AL. X -ray field compensation with 
multileaf collimators. International journal of radiation oncology, biology, 
physics. 1994;28(3):723 -730. 
16. Brahme A. Optimization of s tationary and moving beam radiation therapy 
techniques. Radiotherapy and oncology : journal of the European Society for 
Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology. 1988;12(2):129 -140. 
17. Carol MP. Peacock™: A system for planning and rotational delivery of 
intensi ty‐modulated fields. International Journal of Imaging Systems and 
Technology. 1995;6(1):56 -61. 
18. Unkelbach J, Bussiere MR, Chapman PH, Loeffler JS, Shih HA. Spatiotemporal 
Fractionation Schemes for Irradiating Large Cerebral Arteriovenous 
Malformations. International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics. 
2016;95(3):1067 -1074.  
19. Gaddy MR, Yildiz S, Unkelbach J, Papp D. Optimization of spatiotemporally 
fractionated radiotherapy treatments with bounds on the achievable benefit. 
Physics in medicine  and biology. 2018;63(1):015036.  
20. Unkelbach J, Bangert M, De Amorim Bernstein K, Andratschke N, Guckenberger 
M. Optimization of combined proton -photon treatments. Radiotherapy and 
oncology : journal of the European Society for Therapeutic Radiology and 
Oncology. 2018.  
21. Unkelbach J, Papp D, Gaddy MR, Andratschke N, Hong T, Guckenberger M. 
Spatiotemporal fractionation schemes for liver stereotactic body radiotherapy. 
Radiotherapy and oncology : journal of the European Society for Therapeutic 
Radiology a nd Oncology. 2017;125(2):357 -364. 
22. Unkelbach J, Papp D. The emergence of nonuniform spatiotemporal fractionation 
schemes within the standard BED model. Medical physics. 2015;42(5):2234 -
2241.  
23. López Alfonso JC, Parsai S, Joshi N, et al. Temporally fea thered intensity 
modulated radiation therapy: a planning technique to reduce normal tissue 
toxicity. Medical physics. 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case  4318     Page 34    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 Page Intentionally Blank  
 
 
 
 
 
Case  4318     Page 35    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 APPENDIX I  
 
KARNOFSKY PERFORMANCE STATUS CRITERIA  
 
 
Percent  Description  
 
100 
 Normal,  no complaints, no 
evidence of disease.  
 
90 Able to carry on normal 
activity; minor signs or 
symptoms of disease.  
 
80 Normal activity with effort; 
some signs or symptoms of 
disease.  
 
70 Cares for self, unable to carry 
on normal activity or to do 
active work.  
 
60 Requires occasional assistance, 
but is able to care for most of 
his/her needs.  
 
50 Requires considerable 
assistance and frequent 
medical care.  
 
40 
 Disabled, requires special care 
and assistance.  
 
30 
 Severely disabled, 
hospitalization indic ated.  
Death not imminent.  
 
20 Very sick, hospitalization 
indicated. Death not imminent.  
 
10 Moribund, fatal processes 
progressing rapidly.  
0 Dead  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case  4318     Page 36    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 APPENDIX I I 
 
Therapist Treatment Delivery Timeout  
 
 
Two therapists must be present for the tr eatment timeout.  
 
1. Current practices of verifying patient and treatment site must occur.  
 
2. The treatment navigator in Mosaiq must be used to confirm the 
treatment plan  fraction  delivered the day before  and determine the 
next appropriate fraction . Fractions will be delivered in a pattern of 
Plan A – Plan B – Plan C – Plan D – Plan E.  For example, if plan B 
was delivered the day prior  (i.e. on a Wednesday)  then plan  C must be 
delivered next for the next fraction (i.e. Thursday).  In this example, 
Plan D would b e delivered on Friday and Plan E would be delivered 
on Monday.  
 In the event the patient misses a planned treatment fraction, the 
therapist  must notify Eric Murray, CMD, Peng Qi, PhD, and 
Shlomo Koyfman , MD. The determination can then be made in 
how to upda te the patient data in Mosaiq. Treatments should be 
resumed as soon as possible. The patient should resume therapy 
following the same pattern previously used A -B-C-D-E. Two 
fractions can never be delivered in the same day.  
 No overrides are allowed to occu r without the presence of a 
physicist.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX I II 
Case  4318     Page 37    Version date:  5/8/2020  
  
Safety S ummary Tables for Treatment Plan Documentation  
 
The following table s must be completed and printed in the treatment plan.  
 
Treatment 
Subplan  Fractional 
dose 
deprioritized 
OAR (d H), a 
(cGy)  Fractional 
dose 
deprioritized 
OAR (d H), b 
(cGy)  Fractional 
dose 
deprioritized 
OAR (d H), c 
(cGy)  Fractional 
dose 
deprioritized 
OAR (d H), d 
(cGy)  Fractional 
dose 
deprioritized 
OAR (d H), e 
(cGy)  PTV_7000 
coverage 
(%) PTV_5600 
coverage 
(%) 
A         
B         
C         
D         
E         
 
Treatment 
Subplan  Diff in dose 
between TFRT 
subplan and 
conventional 
IMRT plan for 
deprioritized 
OAR, a (cGy)  Diff in dose 
between TFRT 
subplan and 
conventional 
IMRT plan for 
deprioritized 
OAR, b (cGy)  Diff in dose 
between TFRT 
subplan and 
conventional 
IMRT plan for 
deprioritized 
OAR, c (cGy)  Diff in dose 
between TFRT 
subplan and 
conventional 
IMRT plan for 
deprioritized 
OAR, d (cGy)  Diff in dose 
between TFRT 
subplan and 
conventional 
IMRT plan for 
deprioritize d 
OAR, e (cGy)  
A       
B       
C       
D       
E       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX IV  
 
Case  4318     Page 38    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 Patient Reported Outcome Questionnaires  
(clickable files)  
 
Case  4318     Page 39    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 
 
  
 
 
Case  4318     Page 40    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 
 
  
 
Case  4318     Page 41    Version date:  5/8/2020  
  
APPENDIX V  
 
Radiation Oncology SAE Report Form  
 
 
 
Event Date: ___________  Event End Date: ___________   Initial Report Date: ___________  
 
Follow Up Report Date: __________________  
 
 
Death Date: ______________   
 
 
Event:  ____________       Grade: _____  
 
Start of treatment date: _/__/__     End of treatment date:  __/__/__  
 
Date of most recent treatment:  __/__/__  
 
Radiation Intervention  
 
 Type of Radiation:  
 
 Total Dose (to date):  
 
 Date of last treatment:  
 
 Schedule:  
  Number of fractions:  
  Number of elapsed days:  
 
 Action taken with Radiation     
 
Event Narrative:  
______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________ ____________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________  
 
Treating Physician Comments:  
__________________________________________________________________ _____________________
_______________________________________________________________________________________ 
Study Number (PRMC):  
 
ID Number:   
Patient Initials : __________  
Case  4318     Page 42    Version date:  5/8/2020  
 _______________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________  
 
 
PI Comments:  
___________________ ____________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________________
______________ _________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________________  
 
Protoco l Attribution :  
 
 Not related  
 Not likely related  
 Possibly related  
 Probably related  
 Definitely related  
 
Relationship to Radiation:     
 
 Not related       
 Not likely related      
 Possibly related      
 Probably related      
 Definitely related      
 
If event is unrelated or unlikely related, please state what event is likely related to ( disease, etc):  
_______________________________________________________________________________________  
  
Expected:    Yes  No 
 
 
Outcome:  
 
 Resolved completely     
 Resolved with sequelae    
 Not yet recovered     
 Fatal  
 Unknown  
 
 
 
Investigator Signature : _________________________________________       Date: ________________  
 
 
 
Nurse Signature:      _________________________________________ ___         Date: ________________  
   