PECARN Electronic Medical Record Registry
(PECARN Medical Record Registry)
PECARN Protocol Number 036
Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Emergency Medical Services for Children (EMSC)
Maternal and Child Health Bureau
Health Resources and Services Administration
Protocol Version 1.00
Version Date: September 9, 2016
Printing Date: September 9, 2016
Copyright c
2016. University of Utah School of Medicine on behalf of the Principal
Investigator, Elizabeth R. Alpern, MD, MSCE and the Pediatric Emergency Care Applied
Research Network (PECARN). All rights reserved.
This protocol is PECARN Protocol Number 036, and has been authored by Elizabeth
R. Alpern, MD, MSCE, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, for
implementation with the PECARN investigators.
The PECARN Research Node Centers are Nationwide Children's Hospital, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Columbia University, University of California at
Davis Medical Center, University of Arizona Health Sciences Center, and Children's
National Medical Center, and are supported by Cooperative Agreements U03-MC28844,
U03-MC22684, U03-MC00007, U03-MC00001, U03-MC28845, and U03-MC00006 from
the Emergency Medical Services for Children (EMSC) Program, Maternal and Child
Health Bureau, Health Resources and Services Administration.
This document was prepared by the PECARN Data Coordinating Center (DCC)
located at the University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah. The document
was written and typeset using LATEX 2". The DCC at the University of Utah is supported
by Cooperative Agreement U03-MC00008 from the Emergency Medical Services for
Children (EMSC) Program, Maternal and Child Health Bureau, Health Resources and
Services Administration.
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 3 of 32
PROTOCOL TITLE:
PECARN Electronic Medical Record Registry
Short Title: PECARN Medical Record Registry
PECARN Protocol Number: 036
Lead Investigator and Author:
Elizabeth R. Alpern, MD, MSCE
Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago
Protocol Version: 1.00
Version Date: September 9, 2016
I conrm that I have read this protocol, I understand it, and I will conduct the study
according to the protocol. I will also work consistently with the ethical principles that have
their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki and will adhere to the Ethical and Regulatory
Considerations as stated. I conrm that if I or any of my sta are members of the Insti-
tutional Review Board, we will abstain from voting on this protocol, its future renewals,
and its future amendments.
Principal Investigator Name:
Principal Investigator Signature:
Date:
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 4 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY BLANK.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 5 of 32
Contents
1 Study Summary 7
1.1 Study Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2 Background 8
3 Study Population 9
4 Study Procedures 10
4.1 Data Domains of Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.2 Adding Hospitals to Registry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4.3 Database Extraction and Submission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.4 De-identication Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.4.1 General Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4.2 Eectiveness of Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.5 Report Card Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5 Statistical Analyses 16
6 Data Management 19
6.1 Data Coordinating Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.2 Data Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6.3 Data Security and Condentiality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6.4 Data Sharing Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
7 Protection of Human Subjects 23
7.1 Institutional Review Board Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
7.1.1 Expedited IRB Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
7.2 Waiver of Informed Consent and Assent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
7.3 Waiver of Written Authorization for HIPAA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
7.4 Risks to Human Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
7.4.1 Research Participants and Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
7.4.2 Sources of Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
7.4.3 Potential Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
7.5 Adequacy of Protection Against Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7.5.1 Protection Against Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7.5.2 Human Subjects Protection Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7.6 Potential Benet of Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 6 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
7.7 Importance of Knowledge to be Gained . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
8 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 28
9 Inclusion of Women and Minorities 28
10 Inclusion of Children 28
11 Access to and Retention of Records 29
Bibliography 29
List of Tables
1 Summary of PECARN Registry as of April 2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
List of Figures
1 Hospital level tabular data from performance report card. . . . . . . . . . 16
2 Clinician specic tabular data from performance report card. . . . . . . . 17
3 Hospital level graphic display from performance report card. . . . . . . . 18
4 Clinician specic graphic display from performance report card. . . . . . 18
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 7 of 32
1 Study Summary
The Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network (PECARN) began collecting
data for the PECARN Core Data Project (PCDP) in 2002, using administrative data from
all PECARN hospitals. This project now has nearly 15 million visit records in it. However,
the PCDP does not include clinically important data about processes and outcomes of
care, changes in clinical status, physiologic measures of severity of illness, laboratory data,
or narrative reports. These types of clinical data, while important for improving the care
of children in our emergency departments, previously have been prohibitively expensive
to extract from the (largely paper based) medical record on a large scale.
In 2011, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) funded a grant
to create a medical record registry by extracting data from electronic health records
(EHR) at four PECARN hospitals and their aliates (R01HS020270). Technology was
developed to extract data for all pediatric emergency department (ED) visits, accomplish
substantial deidentication of the extract prior to transmission to the Data Coordinating
Center (DCC), and produce a data warehouse registry to use for quality improvement
and research. At the present time, this medical record registry includes 1.9 million visits
with over 800,000 dierent patients, and performance report cards are provided to all
participating providers on a monthly basis.
This protocol (PECARN Protocol Number 36) continues the registry as the \PECARN
Electronic Medical Record Registry (PECARN Medical Record Registry)" and will replace
PECARN Protocol Number 30, entitled \Improving the Quality of Pediatric Emergency
Care Using an Electronic Medical Record Registry and Clinician Feedback (PECARN
Emergency Care Registry)". All data from the PECARN Emergency Care Registry will
be incorporated into the PECARN Medical Record Registry.
1.1 Study Objectives
This study has the following objectives:
Objective 1. Continue the PECARN electronic medical record registry for pediatric
patients by merging electronic health record (EHR) clinical data from participating
hospital emergency departments (ED) for quality improvement purposes and to
plan future research.
Objective 2. Continue to use the emergency care visit registry to analyze and describe
processes of care and outcomes for injuries and illnesses of patients presenting to
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 8 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
participating hospital EDs.
Objective 3. Continue preparation and dissemination of clinical performance report
cards to assess quality improvement initiatives.
2 Background
Children account for over one quarter of the 114 million annual emergency department
(ED) visits in the US,1,2yet the needs of children in the ED have received relatively
small attention.3Recently, there has been increased attention to the unique needs of
children during emergencies. Among the areas in need of evaluation are the eectiveness
and quality of emergency care, outcomes of dierent congurations of EMSC, optimal
resource allocation and utilization, and cost-eectiveness of EMSC and its components.4
There has also been documentation of signicant variation in the quality of care provided
to children in EDs,5{11as well as recognition of racial and ethnic disparities in healthcare
delivery.12The Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network (PECARN) was
established in 2001 to address these needs and improve the quality of emergency care for
children through the performance of rigorous research.13,14
The network's rst project was to design and implement an administrative database of
all emergency department visits in PECARN hospitals, the PECARN Core Data Project
(PCDP).15The PCDP, which has been ongoing with Institutional Review Board (IRB)
approval at every PECARN hospital since 2002, uses data from billing and registration
systems at all participating hospitals, as well as electronic health record data from some
hospitals. The PCDP currently has nearly 15 million visits to the PECARN sites. The
project has been successful in providing basic demographic and injury or illness infor-
mation,15{18evaluation of methodology,19,20developing diagnosis grouping and severity
systems,21,22and providing limited benchmarking information.16{18, 23
In the rst year of the PCDP, investigators also collected detailed clinical information
for a sample of children seen in PECARN emergency departments by linked manual chart
review. Availability of clinical data, in addition to the administrative data available in
the overall PCDP database, allowed investigators to evaluate practice pattern variation
for asthma and long-bone fractures.10,24Pain was under-documented in children with
long bone fractures and only two-thirds of these patients received analgesics in the ED.24
More than one-third of patients treated for status asthmaticus received potentially un-
necessary ancillary testing and the risk for this testing was higher in children cared for
at non-children's hospitals and by clinicians without subspecialty training in pediatric
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 9 of 32
emergency medicine.10
This early experience led to funding from AHRQ (RO1HS020270) to build a medical
record registry, leveraging the availability of electronic health records (EHR) in selected
PECARN sites. The PECARN Emergency Care Registry has detailed information about
all children seen in the EDs in four PECARN hospitals as well as their satellite facilities.
The EHR vendors include Epic and Cerner. The Registry information from January 2012
through April 2016 is summarized in Table 1.
Encounters 1,943,607
Patients 819,665
Diagnoses 5,960,989
Lab Results 12,005,884
Medication Orders 2,542,557
Radiology Tests 685,515
Narrative Documents 12,226,548
Table 1: Summary of PECARN Registry as of April 2016.
The Registry provides a unique resource for understanding and improving pediatric
emergency care. The Registry has been used to create performance report cards for
participating sites as part of a quality improvement initiative, and to explore processes
of care associated with specic disorders, such as asthma, long bone fractures, and viral
infections. This has enabled measurements to determine the eectiveness of specic quality
improvement initiatives for these conditions. The narratives (over 12 million) provide a
valuable corpus upon which to improve natural language processing methods, critical to
deriving meaningful research results from EHRs over the next decade. Continuing the
Registry per the present protocol will increase the value of this resource, as additional
hospitals are added to the project, which will increase the generalizability of knowledge
based on the Registry. Finally, the Registry will provide a structure for development of
future research endeavors.
3 Study Population
The Registry will include all patients who are seen at participating PECARN hospitals
and satellite facilities. As funding becomes available, PECARN hospitals and satellites
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 10 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
will be added to the original sites, with the goal of including all PECARN centers that
have an accessible EHR. The project is anticipated to continue for at least ve years,
subject to annual Institutional Review Board (IRB) review and approval.
4 Study Procedures
4.1 Data Domains of Interest
The EHR contains a large number of data, including information required for auditing the
medical record, and it is not intended to extract all EHR information into the Registry.
For example, if a laboratory value is incorrectly entered, and then corrected, both values
are retained in the EHR for legal auditing purposes. The Registry will only receive the
value nal at the time of data transmission. The following data domains are extracted
from the EHR for inclusion in the Registry:
Demographic Data. For example, but not limited to: site of care, insurance type, race,
ethnicity, birthdate (age).
Clinician Data. For example, but not limited to: independent licensed provider.
Date and Time Data. For example, but not limited to: all date and time values relating
to the ED or hospital visit, as well as date and times of all events or ndings.
Diagnoses and Procedures. For example, but not limited to: all available diagnoses
codes, procedure codes, cause of injury codes, including ICD9 (when still available),
ICD10, and CPT.
Review of Systems. For example, but not limited to: review of physical systems as
recorded in specic elds, if available. Otherwise derived from narrative text data.
History of Illness. For example, but not limited to: history of illness as recorded in
specic elds, if available. Otherwise derived from narrative text data.
Physical Examination. For example, but not limited to: physical examination ndings
(including weight) and clinical scores (e.g. pain score, asthma scores, GCS scores)
as recorded in specic elds, if available, or in narrative text.
Laboratory Testing Data. For example, but not limited to: all laboratory tests sent
during the ED visit, including results that may be returned after the ED visit is
concluded.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 11 of 32
Medications. All medications reported as home medications, ordered or administered
in the ED, or ordered as discharge prescriptions, including dosage information.
Treatment Data. For example, but not limited to: radiology orders, EKG orders,
respiratory therapy orders.
Vital Sign Data. All vital signs as recorded in specic elds, if available. Otherwise
derived from narrative text data.
Narrative Text Data. All available narrative data related to the ED visit, including
potentially delayed radiologic dictation reports. Narrative or free text notes may be
created by physicians, nurses, or other clinicians, and the author of each narrative
will also be extracted.
ED Admission and Discharge Data. For example, but not limited to: Reason for
visit, chief complaint, triage category, mode of arrival, urgency, use of an interpreter,
discharge location, vital status.
Inpatient Admission and Discharge Data. For ED visits resulting in a hospital ad-
mission at the same hospital, the date and time of hospital discharge, vital status
at discharge, and hospital discharge summary.
4.2 Adding Hospitals to Registry
For hospitals already included in the Registry, the De-identication Procedures described
in Section 4.4and Data Submission procedures described in Section 4.3are already
optimized. For new hospitals, it is necessary to tailor these procedures to the specic
EHR vendor and to optimize the de-identication algorithm for the specic hospital and
its location. The steps required include the following general stages:
1.Identify potential sources of relevant data elements in the specic EHR at each site.
2. Finalize the types of data elements that will be extracted.
3. Extract data for one day of data at each clinical site.
4. Transmit one day identied data to the DCC for de-identication.
5. Establish de-identication procedure at each clinical site.
6.Extract and de-identify the same one day sample to verify that de-identication at
site works.
7. If site de-identication does not work, revise process and iterate until successful.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 12 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
8.Extract and de-identify at least two one-month data sets from between the rst
month of the previous 12 month period and the most recent complete month at
each site.
9. Transmit at least two one-month data sets to the DCC.
10. Finalize and test import procedures from two one-month extracts into Registry.
11.Analyze frequencies of missing, out of range, or unexpected values for key data
elements.
12.Extract, de-identify, and transmit entire previous 12 months (rolling) data from
each site to the DCC.
13. Integrate previous 12 month data (rolling) into existing Registry.
4.3 Database Extraction and Submission
Available data will be extracted from each site's EHR in an automated fashion that is
vendor-specic, and is likely to be installation specic (i.e. two dierent sites may have
the same vendor but dierent preferred extraction methods depending on the vendor
features that were purchased or updated). Currently the nal extraction format is plain
text formatted with extensive markup language (XML) tags. The XML format enables au-
tomatic validation of the extracted le. After de-identication procedures are established
at each site (Section 4.4 on the next page), these are applied to the extracted informa-
tion prior to encrypted transmission to the DCC and importing into the Registry database.
The precise manner of database extraction, XML formatting of variables, and technical
details of the steps required to accomplish this task are described here for information
purposes. The technical approach is likely to evolve in the future, and may be altered
without revising this protocol document.
Data that are not available at the time of data transfer, which typically will take place
30 days after the completion of the calendar month in which the ED visit occurred, will
be considered unavailable or missing, and no eort will be made to follow up for these
delayed data. For example, if a patient has a radiologic procedure but the dictation is
not in the EHR within 30 days of the visit, that dictation will not be incorporated into
the Registry. This time window is necessary because of the logistical issues of attempting
to follow up every potential result, as well as the time constraints relating to producing
timely provider-specic performance report cards for Objective Three.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 13 of 32
4.4 De-identication Procedures
The text le that is produced by automatic extraction will be fully identied, and sophis-
ticated algorithms will then be used to remove or recode essentially all HIPAA-dened
identifying information. There are only four potentially identifying data elements that
will remain in the study record after the de-identication procedure is carried out: the
site identication, the clinician identication, the month of the visit, and a one-way hash
encryption of the medical record number. The rst three data elements are needed in
order to provide feedback for specic months to specic sites and clinicians. The hash
encryption value of the medical record number is required to identify repeat visits by
the same patient, enabling longitudinal study of selected pediatric illnesses and injuries
seen in the ED setting. Other patient-related identiers are eectively removed by the de-
identication procedure (Fscore 98% to 99%, which is superior to manual de-identication
by humans).
The precise technology to be employed may be changed as this project moves forward
to re
ect improvements in available tools, without revision of this protocol. The purpose
of this section is not to constrain the use of state-of-the-art technologies, but rather to
describe the principles by which the process is currently implemented. For current sites in
the Registry, we will continue the current methods for de-identication. For new sites, it
is necessary to nalize and verify the eectiveness of the de-identication for each specic
site. In order to accomplish this, the DCC will have access to fully identied records from
each new site from a single day from the 12 months previous to implementation, the DCC
will de-identify the data, and verify that the de-identication was fully accomplished.
The process will then be implemented at each site and we will conrm that the process
was eective (for the same day of patient data). After the de-identication procedures
have been conrmed, all identiable records that are at the DCC will be removed from
production servers and will not be incorporated into the Registry.
The de-identication is done with software (De-Id) that was developed by other
investigators25to produce a de-identied public use intensive care database.26The DCC
has developed a software platform that includes De-Id as well as XML verication software.
After the initial de-identication process has been veried, this software will be installed
at each hospital, so that the hospital can verify its le structure (XML verication) and
execute the de-identication software on its own servers within its own rewall, prior to
encrypted transmission of the de-identied data to the DCC.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 14 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
4.4.1 General Algorithm
The software (De-Id) is a program script that uses multiple dictionaries to identify and
remove names and locations from text. A list of known patient names (at an individual
hospital) can be the rst dictionary used at the site by the script, and this will remove
patient names. The software then uses large dictionaries of rst and last names to identify
other potential names, such as relatives, nurses, doctors, or other clinicians. A similar
approach is used for locations | namely, a list of locations that are relevant to each
clinical site will be used as a location dictionary, and locations will be removed.
Dates and times present an interesting problem because it is necessary to preserve time
intervals and patient ages. The software will remove all dates and replace them with a
random patient-specic oset. This shifted date preserves the day of the week and the
season to prevent confusion due to free text phrases such as \next Wednesday". The
patient's date of birth is treated in the same manner, so that the correct age can be
calculated from the replaced dates. The random shift is patient specic and will be
consistent for the entire individual patient record and between subsequent visits for that
patient.
In order to preserve the month in which the data were submitted, the clinician identica-
tion,and site identication, separate database elds will be added to each record when
the le is sent to the DCC, so that month-specic feedback can be provided to sites and
providers, as already described.
Other identiers include telephone and fax numbers, Social Security numbers, medical
record numbers or other numeric identiers. The software will remove these throughout.
The medical record number will be one-way hash encrypted to allow identication of
repeat visits for patients.
4.4.2 Eectiveness of Algorithm
This software has been tested rigorously.25Three human de-identiers manually de-
identied text for comparison with the software. On test data consisting of nearly 2,000
free text nursing notes, the software performed better than the average individual human
de-identier, better than the best single human de-identier, and better than the average
consensus of two human de-identiers. The software has subsequently been used to
de-identify the MIMIC II intensive care database previously mentioned,26processing
approximately 700,000 nursing notes, 30,000 inpatient discharge summaries, and 300,000
radiology reports, containing a total of over 220 million words.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 15 of 32
During the AHRQ funded project, the DCC has regularly sampled de-identied
data submitted from sites to verify that the de-identication process is eective. This
review process has conrmed on-going eectiveness of the current procedures. A sample
de-identied attending physician narrative from the PECARN Registry is shown below:
History of Present Illness HPI [**2013-06-05**], 11:04 PM [**Known
patient rstname 1175**] [**Known patient lastname 458**] is a 11 y.o. male
brought to the ED by mother for right wrist pain and mild swelling that
began after falling and injurying the wrist while ice skating last night around
2130. Pt states another skater bumped into his shoulder and he 
ipped
over, landing with hyper
exion of the right wrist. Mom applied ice to the
wrist without relief. He took Ibuprofen last night before bed. The pain is
aggravtaed by movement and has no alleviating factors. He has fractured the
right wrist in the past. No changes in alertness, activity or appetite. Patient
is otherwise healthy with no other concerns or complaints at this time. HPI
Documentation is Complete History Review: PMH: No signicant problems
[**Name (NI) 17**]: Reviewed - no changes Social History: Attends school /
daycare and Exposure to tobacco / smoking Family History: Reviewed nursing
documentation - no changes Review of Systems Constitutional: Negative for
activity change, appetite change and fever. HENT: Negative. Eyes: Negative.
Respiratory: Negative. Musculoskeletal: Positive for injury (right wrist), pain
(right wrist) and swelling (mild swelling to right wrist). Gastrointestinal:
Negative. Neurological: Negative. Skin: Negative for rash.
4.5 Report Card Preparation
The performance report cards contain 20 to 30 pages of tabular and graphic data; examples
are provided in this section to illustrate the type of content in the reports. Performance
report cards are prepared on a monthly basis for each hospital (Figure 1 on the following
page) as well as for clinicians within the hospital (Figure 2 on page 17). In order to
make the data more easily interpretable, the report cards also include graphic displays
for each measure that include trend over time charts at the hospital level (Figure 3 on
page 18) and clinician level (Figure 4 on page 18). Each of these reports includes relevant
comparisons as well as the Achievable Benchmarks of Care (ABC)27derived from the
previous CY data. The ABC serves as the target for performance improvement.
The Data Coordinating Center creates a randomly generated study provider number
that links to the email address for each clinical provider. The clinician-specic report
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 16 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
Pediatric Emergency Medicine Quality of Care Update
PECARN RegistryFebruary 2016
CHCO Main
Performance Measure Your Site Network ABC
Time from ED arrival to being seen by any provider who can initiate care
(resident, NP, PA, fellow, or attending) for ESI 5 visits71 47 21
Length of stay (from ED arrival to ED departure time) for all visits 184 173 98
Length of stay (from ED arrival to ED departure time) for admit, obser-
vation or transfer disposition visits329 325 226
Length of stay (from ED arrival to ED departure time) for dischargedisposition visits169 159 96
Left without being seen: visits arrived in the ED but not seen by a
provider who can initiate care (resident, NP, PA, fellow, or attending)4.9% 2.8% †
Time interval between plain ﬁlm order and image available for viewingby ED sta ↵; may have more than one image per visit10 20 †
Time interval between CT test ordered and ﬁrst radiologist reading avail-
able to ED provider for all CT reports; may have more than one image
per visit70 100 †
Time interval between US test ordered and ﬁrst radiologist reading avail-
able to ED provider for all US reports; may have more than one image
per visit67 101 †
Quality and Safe Care Relevant to Every ED Patient ‡
ED Return visits within 48 hrs of prior ED departure 2.7% 2.7% 1.2%
ED Return visits within 48 hrs of prior ED departure resulting in admis-sion, observation, transfer or death on return visit0.6% 0.74% 0.05%
Childhood Infections
Visits with viral diagnoses (excluding visits with chronic care conditions
or bacterial infection diagnoses) for which antibiotics were given in the
ED or on discharge0.7% 1.4% 0.1%
Pain and Sedation (Long-bone Fracture)
Pain score documented at any time during the ED visit 96.4% 96.5% 100%
Patients with moderate or severe pain who had a reassessment of their
pain documented60.4% 73.2% 99.6%
ABC = Achievable Benchmark of Care (performance of the top providers in the network during 2013)Network = performance attributable to the 7 sites in the PECARN Registry networkPage 3
Figure 1: Hospital level tabular data from performance report card.
card is anonymized and emailed to the clinician, and is not sent to the hospital nor the
clinician's supervisors. The DCC maintains a list of coded clinician identiers that are
linked to the email address of the clinicians.
In order to fully understand the performance improvement measures on the report
cards, clinicians may request the Data Coordinating Center to provide encrypted study
identiers for patients included in a specic measure. The encrypted study identiers are
retained at the original hospital with the medical record, enabling the provider to review
the medical record to identify ways to improve future performance.
5 Statistical Analyses
Objective 1. Continue the PECARN electronic medical record registry for pediatric
patients by merging electronic health record (EHR) clinical data from participating
hospital emergency departments (ED) for quality improvement purposes and to
plan future research.
Process Measures. During the maintenance of the Registry for current sites, and
bringing on new sites to improve the Registry, we will track several process measures to
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 17 of 32
Pediatric Emergency Medicine Quality of Care Update
PECARN RegistryApril 2015
Performance Summary
Site Network
Performance Measure You Your Site Network ABC ABC
Respiratory Diseases (Asthma)
Systemic corticosteroids given in the ED 100% 95.2% 91.9% 98.2% 99%
Time (min) to ﬁrst beta-agonist treatment 36 39 47 32 32
Asthma score documented while in the ED 86.7% 89.3% 88.6% 94.9% 99.1%
Patients with moderate or severe asthma score with an im-proved asthma score documented (admit, observation, or
transfer disposition)50% 52.3% 65.6% 68.6% 92.9%
Patients with moderate or severe asthma score with an im-proved asthma score documented (discharge disposition)25% 46.5% 75% 59% 99.6%
Childhood Infections
Visits with viral diagnoses (excluding visits with chronic care
conditions or bacterial infection diagnoses) for which antibi-
otics were given in the ED or on discharge0% 1.7% 1.9% 0.2% 0.1%
Pain and Sedation (Long-bone Fracture)
Pain score documented at any time during the ED visit 92.3% 93.8% 95.8% 97.1% 100%
Patients with moderate or severe pain who had a reassessment
of their pain documented75% 56.8% 72.8% 80.1% 100%
Patients with moderate or severe pain who had a reassessment
and reduction of their pain by at least two points on the pain
scale25% 41.8% 63.3% 78% 90.6%
ED Flow
Time from ED arrival to being seen by any provider who can
initiate care (resident, NP, PA, fellow, or attending) for all
visits regardless of ESI29 32 38 18 20
ABC = Achievable Benchmark of Care (performance of the top providers in the network during 2013)
Network = performance attributable to the 7 sites in the PECARN Registry networkPage 2
Figure 2: Clinician specic tabular data from performance report card.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 18 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
Pediatric Emergency Medicine Quality of Care Update
PECARN RegistryFebruary 2016
CHCO Main
Performance Measure Comparison Trend
Time (min) to ﬁrst documentation of all vital signs for all visits
812162024
Sites within PECARN RegistryMar '15 Aug '15 Jan '160 5 10 15
●●●
●●●
●
●●
●●● Site (med[IQR]) 11 [7,20] (N=5167)
Network (med[IQR]) 15 [9,33]
ABC 10
ED Flow
Time from ED arrival to being seen by any provider who can initiate care (resident, NP, PA, fellow, or attending) for all visits
regardless of ESI
2030405060
Sites within PECARN Registry● ●Mar '15 Aug '15 Jan '160 20 40 60●
●●
●
●●●
●●
●●●
Site (med[IQR]) 61 [29,108] (N=6087)
Network (med[IQR]) 46 [21,88]
ABC 20
Time from ED arrival to being seen by any provider who can initiate care (resident, NP, PA, fellow, or attending) for ESI 2
visits
1015202530
Sites within PECARN RegistryMar '15 Aug '15 Jan '16010 20 30●
●●
●●●●
●●
●●● Site (med[IQR]) 29 [16,50] (N=1139)
Network (med[IQR]) 24 [13,45]
ABC 12
ABC = Achievable Benchmark of Care (performance of the top providers in the network during 2013)
Network = performance attributable to the 7 sites in the PECARN Registry networkPage 10
Figure 3: Hospital level graphic display from performance report card.
Pediatric Emergency Medicine Quality of Care Update
PECARN RegistryApril 2015
Performance Measure Comparison Trend
Childhood Infections
Visits with viral diagnoses (excluding visits with chronic care conditions or bacterial infection diagnoses) for which antibiotics
were given in the ED or on discharge
02468
Providers at Y our Site (Y ou=highlighted bar) May '14 Oct '14 Mar '15
0 5 10 15●●
●
●●●●●●
●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●You0% (N⇤=17)
Your Site 1.7%
Network 1.9%
Site ABC 0.2%
Network ABC 0.1%
Pain and Sedation (Long-bone Fracture): All pain and sedation performance measures include only visits with a long-
bone fracture in the diagnosis or on radiograph regardless of disposition of the patient
Pain score documented at any time during the ED visit
708090100
Providers at Y our Site (Y ou=highlighted bar) May '14 Oct '14 Mar '15
70 80 90 100●●
●●●●●● You 92.3% (N⇤=13)
Your Site 93.8%
Network 95.8%
Site ABC 97.1%
Network ABC 100%
ABC = Achievable Benchmark of Care (performance of the top providers in the network during 2013)
Network = performance attributable to the 7 sites in the PECARN Registry networkPage 6
Figure 4: Clinician specic graphic display from performance report card.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 19 of 32
assess improved eciency as technology evolves. For example, measures will include (but
are not limited to) the following:
Total time to generate the data upload for each site
Total time spent by the DCC and investigators examining and cleaning data
Number of discrete variables and free text (narrative) elds
Proportion of missing data for each variable
Proportion of impossible or nonsensical data for each variable
Proportion of outlier (out of range) data for each variable
Objective 2. Continue to use the emergency care visit registry to analyze and describe
processes of care and outcomes for injuries and illnesses of patients presenting to
participating hospital EDs.
Appropriate descriptive statistics and multivariable modeling methods will be used to
carry out this objective.
Objective 3. Continue preparation and dissemination of clinical performance report
cards to assess quality improvement initiatives.
Report card specic data extracts are created on a monthly basis, and the report
cards are generated on a monthly basis. The precise contents of the report cards may be
adjusted in accordance with the specic quality improvement initiatives that are being
undertaken by participating sites, but will be similar to existing report cards. The reports
are generated using SAS and R software.
6 Data Management
6.1 Data Coordinating Center
The Data Coordinating Center (DCC) in the Department of Pediatrics at the University
of Utah School of Medicine provides data coordination and management services for a
variety of national research networks. Anchoring these services is a state-of-the-art, energy
ecient data center completed in 2013. The data center facility supports more than 1200
users around the world and provides a secure, reliable, enterprise-wide infrastructure
for delivering critical DCC systems and services. The data center was built using high
industry standards and energy ecient cooling solutions. The data center is cooled by
Rittal's LCP inline cooling technology, providing eciency, redundancy and modularity.
Cooling is based upon a hot/cold aisle design that allows for even air distribution with
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 20 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
minimal hot spots. The data center electrical power system contains a redundant Mit-
subishi uninterruptible power system (UPS) with a diesel backup generator. The data
center is protected with a FM200 re suppression system, early warning smoke detectors
and a heat detection warning system to act as a secondary system to the smoke detectors.
Security guards are on-site conducting access control and rounds 24/7/365. Entry into
the data center is restricted by card access and layered security measures and controls.
The data center and external building access points are monitored with video surveillance.
In 2011 the data center began a large scale VMware server virtualization deployment.
Currently, the data center has virtualized about 95% of its environment. The virtual
environment consists of more than 160 virtual servers and nearly 20 physical servers. The
data center's virtualization solution provides key advantages:
high availability { in the event of hardware failure, virtual servers automatically go
back online in a seamless process.

exible infrastructure { disk storage, memory and processor capacity can be increased
or reallocated at any time.
rapid deployment { servers can be provisioned on-demand with minimal waiting on
hardware of software.
The data center has enhanced its storage resources by implementing a networked
storage system to support its virtualized environment. The data center currently manages
over 50 terabytes of data. The storage solution consists of Dell's EqualLogic PS Series
Storage system for providing a virtualized storage area network (SAN). Some of the
benets that are realized through this technology are:
storage architecture is not a bottleneck for IT services;
improved performance;
tiered storage;
provisioning and reclamation of SAN disk is ecient; and most important,
complete redundancy from the SAN fabric architecture.
Production servers running critical applications are clustered and congured for failover
events. Servers are backed up with encryption through a dedicated backup server that
connects across an internal 10 gigabit network to a tape drive. DCC storage area net-
working (SAN) applications, clusters, and switch-to-switch links are also on a 10 gigabit
network. Incremental backups occur hourly Monday through Friday from 6 am to 6 pm.
Incremental backups also are performed each night with full system backups occurring
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 21 of 32
every Friday. Tapes are stored in a reproof safe inside the data center facility, and full
backups are taken o site on a weekly basis to an o-site commercial storage facility.
In the event of catastrophic failure, such as a re in the server facility, daily backups
would probably survive because of the re suppression system and reproof safe, but there
would be obvious delay in re-establishing data center function because the servers will not
survive such a disaster. Total destruction of the data center facility could cause the loss
of up to one week's data. In future investments, the data center is making co-location,
disaster recovery and business continuity solutions a top priority.
DCC information systems are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to all users
unless a scheduled maintenance interruption is required. If this occurs, we notify all users
of the relevant systems, and data entry can be deferred until after the interruption is over.
Critical systems availability has exceeded 99.9% for the past two years, and there has
been no unscheduled downtime in over ve years.
6.2 Data Transmission
All data transmission to the DCC over public networks is encrypted with virtual point-to-
point sessions using secure socket layer (SSL) or virtual private network (VPN) technolo-
gies, both of which provide at least 128 bit encryption. No study data will be transferred
by email.
6.3 Data Security and Condentiality
The data center coordinates the network infrastructure and security with the Health
Sciences Campus (HSC) information systems at the University of Utah. This provides us
with eective rewall hardware, automatic network intrusion detection, and the expertise
of dedicated security experts working at the University. Network equipment includes four
high-speed switches. User authentication is centralized with two Windows 2008 domain
servers. Communication over public networks is encrypted with virtual point-to-point
sessions using secure socket layer (SSL) or virtual private network (VPN) technologies,
both of which provide at least 128 bit encryption. All of our Web-based systems use
the SSL protocol to transmit data securely over the Internet. Direct access to data cen-
ter machines is only available while physically located inside our oces, or via a VPN client.
All network trac is monitored for intrusion attempts, security scans are regularly run
against our servers, and our IT sta is notied of intrusion alerts. Security is maintained
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 22 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
with Windows 2008 user/group domain-level security. Users are required to change their
passwords every 90 days, and workstations time out after 5 minutes of inactivity. All les
are protected at group and user levels; database security is handled in a similar manner
with group-level access to databases, tables, and views in Microsoft SQL Server. Finally,
all laptop computers in use in the DCC or in the Department of Pediatrics are whole-disk
encrypted.
The data center uses control center tools to continuously monitor systems and failure
alerts. Environmental and network systems are also monitored to ensure up time. Highly
trained system administrators on sta are available to respond in high risk emergency
events.
All personnel involved with the DCC have signed condentiality agreements concerning
data encountered in the course of their daily work. All personnel (including administrative
sta) have received Human Subjects Protection and Health Information Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) education. We require all users to sign specic agreements
concerning security, condentiality, and use of our information systems, before access is
provided.
6.4 Data Sharing Plan
It is a Federal requirement to share research data in a project such as this one. When the
study is completed, the DCC will prepare a distributable database in compliance with
these Federal requirements. This database will be de-identied suciently that it will not
be subject to 45 CFR x46 nor the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA). Note that the limited PHI in the analysis database (month, year, clinician and
encrypted medical record number) is used in order to direct performance measure reports,
but these variables will not be included in the database produced for sharing with other
researchers.
Access to this research database will be managed in accordance with PECARN
data sharing policies and applicable Federal laws. Registry data in this study will
not be provided back to participating study sites except as outlined in the protocol
(specic performance report cards for quality improvement initiatives). Each site, of
course, has its own original data and can conduct its own quality improvement activities.
Individual clinicians may request the encrypted study identiers of patients included in
their performance report card, in order to enable their review of the medical record to
identify opportunities for future performance improvement.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 23 of 32
7 Protection of Human Subjects
7.1 Institutional Review Board Approval
Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval will be required from all sites participating
in this study, including the PECARN Data Coordinating Center (DCC). The DCC will
maintain documentation of initial and on-going approval at each site, and this documen-
tation will be required in order for a site to submit electronic data to the DCC.
7.1.1 Expedited IRB Approval
Expedited IRB approval is requested for this study. Expedited IRB approval procedures
are permissible when the research activities present no more than minimal risk to human
subjects, and only involve procedures listed in specic categories listed in the regulations
at Federal Register 63:29748, 1998, 21 CFR x56.110, and 45 CFR x46.110. For this project,
the procedures fall under Category 5, which is research that involves materials (data,
documents, records) that have been collected, or will be collected, solely for non-research
purposes (e.g., medical treatment, diagnosis). All data in this study are from the medical
records produced during the on-going clinical activities of the participating centers.
7.2 Waiver of Informed Consent and Assent
Waiver of informed consent and patient assent is requested for this study. As described
in Section 3 on page 9, the participating sites and their component clinicians are the
units of analyses in this study. The topic of study is the aggregate behavior of the emer-
gency departments and potential changes in clinician performance measures, and selective
consenting or assenting would destroy the scientic validity of the study. Performance
feedback, while studied as part of this proposal, will be directed at quality improvement.
Any practitioner or site specic feedback will be directed to that individual, identied
only by a randomly generated study provider number, or site so that there is minimal
risk of adverse nancial or professional consequences during the study. Feedback will be
provided so that the clinicians can better understand their own practice as a starting point
for practice improvement. Practitioners will have the option of not reviewing provided
feedback.
Waiver of informed consent from the clinicians is requested because risks to the
individual clinicians are minimal (Section 7.4.3 on page 25), the waiver will not adversely
aect the rights and welfare of the clinicians, uniform participation is necessary for the
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 24 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
scientic validity of the study, and the clinicians will receive information about their
performance during the study. These are the four requirements for waiver of informed
consent outlined in 45 CFR x46.116(d).
Waiver of informed consent and assent from patients is requested for this project.
Specic patients are not the subjects of study, but rather, their ED visit contributes infor-
mation about the sites and clinicians, which are the subjects of study. The requirements
of 45 CFRx46.116(d) are also met for the patient population, as the risk is minimal,
the rights and welfare of the patients are not being aected, and uniform inclusion of
all patients is necessary for the scientic validity of the study. There is no provision for
providing additional pertinent information to patients, as they are not the subjects of the
study.
7.3 Waiver of Written Authorization for HIPAA
Waiver of authorization for use and/or disclosure of protected health information under the
the Privacy Rule is requested for this study. Waiver of authorization for the use of patient
electronic health record data is permissible under x164.512(i)(2)(ii). The requirements
are that the use of the data involves no more than minimal risk to the privacy of the
patients, that the research could not practicably conducted without the waiver, and the
research cannot be conducted without access to the data. Written authorization is not
practicable in the urgent environment of the ED, data are being abstracted long after the
patient has departed the ED, and the scientic validity of the study would be destroyed
since all visits must be included in order to determine the performance measures. The
use or disclosure of the protected health information involves no more than minimal risk
to the individuals because:
There is an adequate plan to protect the identiers from improper use and disclosure.
The PECARN DCC has provided Business Associate Agreements for execution
by each participating site, and the security of its information systems has been
described in Section 6.3 on page 21.
There is provision to destroy identiers before integrating patient data into the
registry, and the de-identication procedures are thoroughly discussed in Section
??.
The protected health information will not be reused or disclosed to any other persons
or entities, except as required by law, or for authorized oversight of the research
project.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 25 of 32
7.4 Risks to Human Subjects
7.4.1 Research Participants and Characteristics
Number and characteristics of participants. This project will maintain and en-
large an existing registry of electronic health record data including all visits to the base
and satellite emergency departments (EDs) of the participating sites for all patients. The
registry currently contains data from seven hospitals in four health care systems since CY
2012, and will accrue records from participating sites for at least the next ve calendar
years.
Inclusion in the registry will be regardless of race, ethnicity, or gender. Inclusion will
be regardless of diagnosis or chronic health condition. Clinicians will be included in the
protocol regardless of race, ethnicity, or gender.
7.4.2 Sources of Materials
This project includes only data that will be obtained from already completed EHRs. No
prospective data will be collected solely for study purposes. Queries of the Pediatric
Emergency Care Registry will provide the data for analysis. At each site, the investigators
involved in the project, the site research coordinator and information technology contact
will have access to identiable private information about some or all subjects. After
de-identication procedures are nalized by the DCC (Section 4.4 on page 13), the
procedures will be carried out at each clinical site, on their servers within their rewall.
Then the encrypted components of the EHR will be submitted electronically using a
secure system hosted by the DCC. At the DCC, the DCC PI, data managers, statisticians,
and other sta may have access to a limited set of identiable information.
7.4.3 Potential Risks
This study is without direct patient contact and utilizes only existing electronic health
record data. Data will be acquired from hospital computer systems and the primary
potential risk to subjects is improper disclosure of medical information. This risk is
minimized by data management steps outlined above.
Provision of performance report cards is anticipated to improve the quality of care, and
there are no reasons to anticipate that such report cards will pose risks to patients. Risk to
the participating sites or practitioner is the disclosure that any one site or practitioner has
quality outcome patterns that greatly dier. This risk is mitigated by use of deidentied
practitioner and site study numbers assigned by the DCC for the Registry and report cards.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 26 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
The DCC maintains a study key to allow for appropriate identication of visits pertaining
to each practitioner and also to allow for distribution of the report cards. This decreases
the risk to practitioners as identication is not known by the hospital site administration.
All individual feedback reports are anonymized to protect the identication of clinicians,
and all published results will be presented in aggregate form.
7.5 Adequacy of Protection Against Risks
This project entails the continuation and expansion of an established emergency depart-
ment electronic health record registry for purposes of quality improvement and research
about processes of care for diseases and injuries seen in the pediatric emergency setting.
All data will be obtained from already completed electronic health records. We will collect
no prospective data solely for study purposes. In every case, nal decisions regarding
clinical care will have been made between patients, their parents, and clinicians at the
bedside, prior to the transmittal of data to the DCC or provision of performance measure
information to sites and clinicians. This intervention will in no way mandate clinicians
to pursue a specic treatment for a given patient. However, clinicians may be better
informed about their own prior performance and will have an opportunity to provide
evidence-based improvements in the quality of care they provide to future patients.
7.5.1 Protection Against Risks
Data will be acquired from hospital computer systems and the primary potential risk
to subjects is improper disclosure of medical information. Data analysis for this project
will be conducted using de-identied data. Data will be housed at the DCC, for which
security was previously described (Section 6.3 on page 21).
The performance measures involved in the current report cards have been carefully
developed to include only ones with a strong evidence base and endorsement by nationally
recognized experts and stakeholders. Audit and feedback concerning clinical care is a
regular activity in all health care organizations. All published results will be presented
in the aggregate and care will be taken to keep identication of sites and investigators
condential.
7.5.2 Human Subjects Protection Training
All key personnel have completed Human Subjects Protection Training as mandated by
involved Institutional Review Boards. This training involves an extensive, web-based,
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 27 of 32
curriculum emphasizing the safeguards necessary to conduct human subjects research,
particularly with children.
7.6 Potential Benet of Research
This project will continue using the Registry to enable quality performance measures of
emergency healthcare for children across participating EDs (base and satellite) in the
Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network. It compares quality performance
measures of emergency care provided to children across dierent institutions by using data
extracted from electronic health records, enabling hospitals to target best performance.
The Registry enables participating hospitals to evaluate the impact of providing provider-
specic feedback and benchmarks of care on quality measures that are within the locus of
control of the individual provider. The feedback may directly improve the quality of care
of future patients treated by the practitioners and the sites.
7.7 Importance of Knowledge to be Gained
In its 2006 report, \Emergency Care for Children: Growing Pains", the Institute of
Medicine recommended that pediatric emergency medical systems support the development
and measurement of standards for emergency care performance measurement. The ability
to accurately and comprehensively assess the process and outcomes of care in pediatric
emergency patients is imperative to the evaluation of the quality of care provided. Past
endeavors have been limited by the labor intensive nature of obtaining the information
needed to determine quality performance measures. The PECARN Registry has allowed
for the comprehensive and scalable determination of quality performance measures using
an electronic health record registry across multiple sites. It has enabled evaluation of
the impact of providing provider-specic feedback and benchmarks of care on quality
measures that are within the locus of control of the individual provider. In addition,
the systematic and widespread collection and reporting of performance and outcomes,
using the same operational denitions, is critical to allow clinicians and other emergency
care stakeholders to continue to work together to innovate and improve care beyond the
local level. The PECARN Registry has demonstrated potential to improve the care of
children in the emergency setting, and continuation of the Registry will enable continued
improvement of care to this vulnerable population.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 28 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
8 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act
All relevant data in the electronic health record is being collected in this study, including
potentially identifying information, because the entire project aims to create a registry
automatically from the medical record. Rigorous de-identication procedures will be
conducted to produce the analysis database with a minimum of Protected Health Infor-
mation (PHI). Specically, the analysis database will have the month and year of visit.
If unexpected additional PHI is detected in submitted data by the Data Coordinating
Center, it will be de-identied by the DCC, and feedback will be provided to the clinical
site(s) to further rene the de-identication procedures so that this does not recur.
Data elements for race, ethnicity, and gender of subjects will be preserved. These demo-
graphic data are required for Federal reporting purposes to delineate subject accrual by
race, ethnicity, and gender.
All study sites have been oered a Business Associate Agreement with the University of
Utah, which agrees to handle submitted data with the security precautions required for
PHI. Copies of executed Business Associate Agreements are maintained at the DCC.
9 Inclusion of Women and Minorities
Data from the emergency department (ED) electronic health record of all patients seen at
the protocol sites will be included. Visits will be included without regard to patient race
or ethnicity. A diversity of ethnic and racial backgrounds is represented at the selected
PECARN sites.
10 Inclusion of Children
Data from the emergency department electronic health record for all visits of patients
will be collected from the selected sites. ED visits will be included without regard to
age. Members of the investigative team are board certied in pediatrics and pediatric
emergency medicine and have extensive experience and expertise in caring for children in
this age range. The sites participating all have emergency departments dedicated to the
care of children.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 29 of 32
11 Access to and Retention of Records
For federally funded studies subject to the Common Rule, records relating to the research
conducted shall be retained for at least 3 years after completion of the research. Completion
of the research for this protocol should be anticipated to include planned primary and
secondary analyses, as well as subsequent derivative analyses. Completion of the research
also entails completion of all publications relating to the research. All records shall be
accessible for inspection and copying by authorized representatives of the regulatory
authorities at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner [45 CFR x46.115(b)].
Bibliography
[1]Health, United States, 2005: Chartbook on Trends in the Health of Americans.
Hyattsville, Maryland: National Center for Health Statistics; 2005.
[2]Health, United States, 2009: With Special Feature on Medical Technology. Hyattsville,
Maryland: National Center for Health Statistics; 2010.
[3]Institute of Medicine Committee on the Future of Emergency Care in the US Health
Care System. Emergency Care for Children: Growing Pains. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press; 2006.
[4]Seidel JS, Henderson D, Tittle S, Jae D, Spaite D, Dean JM, et al. Priorities for
research in emergency medical services for children: results of a consensus conference.
Pediatr Emerg Care. 1999 Feb;15(1):55{8.
[5]Chamberlain JM, Patel KM, Pollack MM. Association of emergency department
care factors with admission and discharge decisions for pediatric patients. J Pediatr.
2006 Nov;149(5):644{649.
[6]Crain EF, Weiss KB, Fagan MJ. Pediatric asthma care in US emergency departments.
Current practice in the context of the National Institutes of Health guidelines. Arch
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 1995 Aug;149(8):893{901.
[7]Crain EF, Mortimer KM, Bauman LJ, Kercsmar CM, Weiss KB, Wissow L, et al.
Pediatric asthma care in the emergency department: measuring the quality of
history-taking and discharge planning. J Asthma. 1999;36(1):129{38.
[8]Hampers LC, Trainor JL, Listernick R, Eddy JJ, Thompson DA, Sloan EP, et al.
Setting-based practice variation in the management of simple febrile seizure. Acad
Emerg Med. 2000 Jan;7(1):21{7.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 30 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
[9]Ramenofsky ML, Luterman A, Quindlen E, Riddick L, Curreri PW. Maximum
survival in pediatric trauma: the ideal system. J Trauma. 1984 Sep;24(9):818{23.
[10]Stanley RM, Teach SJ, Mann NC, Alpern ER, Gerardi MJ, Mahajan PV, et al.
Variation in ancillary testing among pediatric asthma patients seen in emergency
departments. Acad Emerg Med. 2007 Jun;14(6):532{8.
[11]Zerr DM, Del Beccaro MA, Cummings P. Predictors of physician compliance with
a published guideline on management of febrile infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1999
Mar;18(3):232{8.
[12]Cain VS, Kington RS. Investigating the role of racial/ethnic bias in health outcomes.
Am J Public Health. 2003 Feb;93(2):191{2.
[13]Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network. The Pediatric Emergency
Care Applied Research Network (PECARN): rationale, development, and rst steps.
Acad Emerg Med. 2003 Jun;10(6):661{8.
[14]Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network. The Pediatric Emergency
Care Applied Research Network (PECARN): rationale, development, and rst steps.
Pediatr Emerg Care. 2003 Jun;19(3):185{93.
[15]Alpern ER, Stanley RM, Gorelick MH, Donaldson A, Knight S, Teach SJ, et al.
Epidemiology of a pediatric emergency medicine research network: the PECARN
Core Data Project. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2006 Oct;22(10):689{99.
[16]Alpern ER, Donaldson AE, Alessandrini EA, Gorelick MH, Stanley RM, Teach SJ,
et al.; PAS. Epidemiology of pediatric emergency department recurrent visits. PAS.
2005;57:1862.
[17]Mahajan P, Alpern ER, Grupp-Phelan J, Chamberlain J, Dong L, Holubkov R,
et al. Epidemiology of psychiatric-related visits to emergency departments in a
multicenter collaborative research pediatric network. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2009
Nov;25(11):715{20.
[18]Timm N, McAneny C, Alpern E, Macy M, Ruddy RM. Is pediatric emergency
department utilization by pregnant teens on the rise? PAS. 2010;p. 20101494.434.
[19]Gorelick MH, Alpern ER, Singh T, Snowdon D, Holubkov R, Dean JM, et al.
Availability of pediatric emergency visit data from existing data sources. Acad Emerg
Med. 2005 Dec;12(12):1195{200.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Protocol 036 (Alpern) Page 31 of 32
[20]Gorelick MH, Knight S, Alessandrini EA, Stanley RM, Chamberlain JM, Kuppermann
N, et al. Lack of agreement in pediatric emergency department discharge diagnoses
from clinical and administrative data sources. Acad Emerg Med. 2007 Jul;14(7):646{
52.
[21]Alessandrini EA, Alpern ER, Chamberlain JM, Shea JA, Gorelick MH. A new
diagnosis grouping system for child emergency department visits. Acad Emerg Med.
2010 Feb;17(2):204{13.
[22]Alessandrini EA, Alpern ER, Chamberlain JM, Gorelick MH. Developing a diagnosis-
based severity classication system for use in emergency medical systems for children.
PAS. 2007;p. 61670.5.
[23]Dean JM, Chamberlain J, Gorelick MH, Stanley R, Snowdon D, Mahajan P, et al.
The PECARN Core Data Project: benchmarking hospitals in a pediatric emergency
medicine research network. Pediatr Res. 2004;55:119A.
[24]Stanley R, Alpern ER, Gerardi M, Mahajan P, Teach SJ, Chamberlain JM, et al.
Variations in diagnostic testing in the ED for pediatric non-urgent illnesses. PAS.
2005;57:2865.
[25]Neamatullah I, Douglass MM, Lehman LwH, Reisner A, Villarroel M, Long WJ,
et al. Automated de-identication of free-text medical records. BMC Med Inform
Decis Mak. 2008;8:32.
[26]Saeed M, Villarroel M, Reisner AT, Cliord G, Lehman LW, Moody G, et al.
Multiparameter Intelligent Monitoring in Intensive Care II: a public-access intensive
care unit database. Crit Care Med. 2011 May;39(5):952{60.
[27]Weissman NW, Allison JJ, Kiefe CI, Farmer RM, Weaver MT, Williams OD, et al.
Achievable benchmarks of care: the ABCs of benchmarking. J Eval Clin Pract. 1999
Aug;5(3):269{81.
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
Page 32 of 32 Protocol 036 (Alpern)
PECARN Medical Record Registry Protocol Version 1.00
Protocol Version Date: September 9, 2016
The EMSC Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network